=== EXTRACTED TEXT FROM: The-Edwin-Smith-Surgical-Papyrus-Published-in-v-3.pdf ===
Extraction Method: PyPDFLoader
Total Pages: 642
Timestamp: 2026-01-04T17:22:49.998450
================================================================================


--- PAGE 1 ---
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:04 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 2 ---
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:04 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 3 ---
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:04 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 4 ---
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:04 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 5 ---
THE UNIVERSITY OF CHICAGO
ORIENTAL INSTITUTE PUBLICATIONS
Edited by
JAMES HENRY BREASTED
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:04 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 6 ---
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:04 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 7 ---
THE UNIVERSITY OF CHICAGO
ORIENTAL INSTITUTE PUBLICATIONS
VOLUME III
THE EDWIN SMITH
SURGICAL PAPYRUS
PUBLISHED IN FACSIMILE AND HIERO-
GLYPHIC TRANSLITERATION WITH TRANS-
LATION AND COMMENTARY IN
TWO VOLUMES
Br
JAMES HENRY BREASTED
VOLUME ONE
HIEROGLYPHIC TRANSLITERATION
TRANSLATION AND COMMENTARY
WITH EIGHT PLATES
THE UNIVERSITY OF CHICAGO PRESS
CHICAGO, ILLINOIS
1930
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:04 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 8 ---
PRINTED IN OREAT BRITAIN AT THE UNIVERSITY PRESS, OXFORD
BY JOHN JOHNSON, PRINTER TO THE UNIVERSITY
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:04 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 9 ---
TO THE MEMORY OF
WILLIAM HARVEY
DIScOVEREB OF THE cIRcULATION OF THE BLOOD
AT THE THREE HUNDREDTH ANNIVERSARY
OF HIS GREAT DISCOVERY THIS
PUBLICATION OF THE EARLIEST KNOWN
SURGICAL TREATISE
IS
DEDICATED
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:04 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 10 ---
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:04 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 11 ---
TABLE OF CONTENTS
PAGE
FOREWORD xiii
GENERAL EXPLANATORY NOTES FOR PHYSICIANS AND OTHER
NON-EGYPTOLOGICAL READERS xxi
GENERAL INTRODUCTION 1-29
PART I. THE SURGICAL TREATISE (THE RECTO) . . . 31-466
Special Introduction 33-77
Translation and Commentary . 78-428
Case 1. A Wound in the Head, Penetrating to the Bone (incomplete) . 78
Case 2. A Gaping Wound in the Head Penetrating to the Bone . 118
Case 3. A Gaping Wound in the Head Penetrating to the Bone and
Perforating the Skull 125
Case 4. A Gaping Wound in the Head Penetrating to the Bone and
Splitting the Skull 139
Case 5. A Gaping Wound in the Head with Compound Comminuted
Fracture of the Skull 156
Case 6. A Gaping Wound in the Head with Compound Comminuted
Fracture of the Skull and Rupture of the Meningeal Membranes 164
Case 7. A Gaping Wound in the Head Penetrating to the Bone and
Perforating the Sutures ....... 175
Case 8. Compound Comminuted Fracture of the Skull Displaying no
Visible External Injury ....... 201
Case 9. Wound in the Forehead Producing a Compound Comminuted
Fracture of the Skull 217
Case 10. A Gaping Wound at the Top of the Eyebrow, Penetrating to
the Bone 225
Case 11. A Broken Nose 234
Case 12. A Break in-the Nasal Bone 244
Case 13. Compound Comminuted Fracture in the Side of the Nose . 252
Case 14. Flesh Wound in One Side of the Nose Penetrating to the Nostril 256
Case 15. Perforation of the Bone in the Region of the Maxilla and Zygoma 262
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:04 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 12 ---
x TABLE OF CONTENTS
Translation and Commentary (continued) page
Case 16. Split of the Bone in the Region of the Maxilla and the Zygoma 265
Case 17. Compound Comminuted Fracture of the Bone in the Region of
the Maxilla and the Zygoma ...... 267
Case 18. A Wound in the Soft Tissue of the Temple, the Bone being
Uninjured 270
Case 19. A Perforation in the Temple 278
Case 20. A Wound in the Temple Perforating the Bone . . . 283
Case 21. A Split in the Temporal Bone 287
Case 22. Compound Comminuted Fracture of the Temporal Bone . 289
Case 23. A Slit in the Outer Ear 297
Case 24. A Fracture of the Mandible 301
Case 25. A Dislocation of the Mandible ...... 303
Case 26. A Wound in the Upper Lip 306
Case 27. A Gaping Wound in the Chin 309
Case 28. A Gaping Wound in the Throat Penetrating to the Gullet . 312
Case 29. A Gaping Wound in a Cervical Vertebra .... 316
Case 30. Sprain in Cervical Vertebrae . . . . . . 319
Case 31. Dislocation of a Cervical Vertebra ..... 323
Case 32. Displacement of a Cervical Vertebra ..... 333
Case 33. A Crushed Cervical Vertebra 337
Case 34. Dislocation of the Two Clavicles ...... 342
Case 35. A Fracture of the Clavicle 350
Case 36. A Fracture of the Humerus ...... 354
Case 37. A Fracture of the Humerus with Rupture of Overlying Soft Tissue 357
Case 38. A Split in the Humerus 361
Case 39. Tumors or Ulcers in the Breast, perhaps Resulting from Injury 363
Case 40. A Wound in the Breast 369
Case 41. An Infected or possibly Necrotic Wound in the Breast . . 374
Case 42. A Sprain of the Sterno-Costal Articulations .... 391
Case 43. A Dislocation in the Sterno-Costal Articulations . . . 395
Case 44. Fractured Ribs 401
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:04 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 13 ---
TABLE OF CONTENTS xi
Translation and Commentary (continued) page
Case 45. Bulging Tumors on the Breast ...... 403
Case 46. Abscess with Prominent Head on the Breast.... 407
Case 47. A Gaping Wound in the Shoulder . . . . 415
Case 48. A Sprain in a Spinal Vertebra (incomplete) .... 425
Consecutive Translation ......... 429-466
PART n. THE INCANTATIONS AND RECIPES .... 467-507
Special Introduction ......... 469-471
Translation and Commentary ........ 472-500
Consecutive Translation 501-507
PART III. THE INDICES 509-592
Egyptian Glossary 511-576
General Index ........... 577-591
List of Abbreviated Book Titles 592
ADDENDA. 1. The Date of the Edwin Smith Papyrus .... 593
2. Additional Textual Notes ...... 595
3. Discovery of a Single Example of Ancient Egyptian
Trepanning ........ 596
CORRIGENDA 596
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:04 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 14 ---
LIST OF PLATES
Plate I, Fig. 1. Egyptian Mandible of the Old Kingdom
(about 8000-2500 b. c.) At end of Volume
Fig. 2. Middle Kingdom Egyptian Battle Axes
(about 2000 b. c.) „ „ „
Plate II, Figs. 8 and 4. Sword Cuts in Egyptian Skulls of
a Century or two before the Christian Era . ,, ,, ,,
Fig. 5. Wounded Skull of the Pharaoh Sekenenre
(Early Sixteenth Century b. c.) ,
Plate III, Figs. 6 and 7. Elaborate Mummy Bandages of
Roman Age
Plate IV, Figs. 8 to 10. Embalming Wounds of Twenty-
first Dynasty Mummies Sewn up with String
(Eleventh Century b. c.) . . . . ,, „ „ „
Plate V, Fig. 11. Ancient Egyptian Skull probably of the
Middle Kingdom (about 2000 b. c.) . „ „
Plate VI, Fig. 12. Reduction of a Dislocated Mandible by
a Greek Surgeon as shown in an Illustrated
Commentary on Hippocrates
Plate VII, Fig. 18. Wounded Skull of the Assassinated
High Priest of Amon, Harsiese (Ninth Cen-
tury b. c.) , ,.
Figs. 14 to 16. Skull Wounds of Eleventh Dyn-
asty Soldiers (Twenty-first Century b. c.) . ,, „ ,, „
Plate VIII, Figs. 17 and 18. Arrow Wounds of Eleventh Dyn-
asty Soldiers (Twenty-first Century b. c.) with
the Arrows still sticking in the Wounds . ., „ „ ,,
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:04 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 15 ---
FOREWORD
The science of surgery has made such revolutionary progress during the last two
generations that there might seem to be a greater gulf between the surgeons of the
American Civil War and those of the present than there ever was between the surgery
of the ancient world and that of the American Civil War. Nevertheless, the funda-
mental transformation in the field of surgery, as in medicine, resulting from the earliest
recognition of natural causes as distinguished from demoniacal possession, occurred in
ancient times. A superstitious view of the universe, involving belief in demoniacal
possession, especially among the ignorant, has persisted into modern times, as illus-
trated in the Salem witchcraft, or even in the case of an educated man like Increase
Mather, once president of Harvard University (see infra, p. 15). It is strikingly illus-
trated in the conditions among which Mormonism arose only a century ago in western
Pennsylvania and New York State. It is obvious, therefore, that the transition from
superstition to a scientific point of view cannot be placed at a fixed date.
In this document, therefore, we have disclosed to us for the first time the human
mind peering into the mysteries of the human body, and recognizing conditions and
processes there as due to intelligible physical causes. The facts in each given case of
injury are observed, listed, and marshaled before the mind of the observer, who then
makes rational conclusions based on the observed facts. Here then we find the first
scientific observer known to us, and in this papyrus we have the earliest known
scientific document.
While the copy of the document which has come down to us dates from the Seven-
teenth Century B.c., the original author's first manuscript was produced at least
a thousand years earlier, and was written some time in the Pyramid Age (about 8000
to 2500 B.c.). As preserved to us in a copy made when the Surgical Treatise was
a thousand years old or more, a copy in which both beginning and end have been
lost, the manuscript nowhere discloses the name of the unknown author. We may
be permitted the conjecture, and it is pure conjecture, that a surgical treatise of such
importance, appearing in the Pyramid Age, may possibly have been written by the
earliest known physician, Imhotep, the great architect-physician who flourished in the
Thirtieth Century B.c. In that case the original treatise would have been written
over thirteen hundred years before our copy of the Seventeenth Century B.C.was made.
We should mention in this connection the recent discovery of an Old Kingdom
palace physician's tombstone at Gizeh by H. Junker.1 This court physician, who bore
the name of Iry, lived and died some eight hundred years before the surviving copy
of our treatise was made, in an age when our unknown surgeon's autograph manuscript
may possibly have been still in existence. Iry was not only the Pharaoh's palace
1 See H. Junker,"Die Stele des Hofarztes Irj,"Zeitschr.fur aegyptische Sprache,(& (1927),pp.53-70.
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:04 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 16 ---
xiv
FOREWORD
physician, but he was also chief of the medical corps in which the court physicians
were organized. He was furthermore an important specialist, for he served also as
" palace eye-physician," and " palace stomach-bowel-physician," literally " palace
physician of the belly," in which capacity he bore the titles: " one understanding the
internal fluids," and " guardian of the anus," showing that he was particularly versed
in internal medicine, and that he specialized in diseases of the digestive organs. This
specialization in the Old Kingdom is further illustrated by the existence of the " palace
dentist," who might at the same time serve as " chief palace physician." The reader
will find an example of the remarkable work of the dental surgeon as far back as the
Fourth Dynasty (about 2900-2750 b.C.) in the extraordinary mandible showing the
alveolar process pierced to drain an abscess under the first molar (PI. I, Fig. 1). These
facts demonstrate the existence of a body of medical knowledge in the Old Kingdom
already so large and detailed as to require specialization.
Very few visible and unmistakable evidences of the surgeon's work, like this Fourth
Dynasty dental operation, however, have thus far been found in the large number of
Egyptian bodies recovered from the ancient cemeteries. Since this volume went to
press the Metropolitan Museum has published in photographs an extraordinary series
of wounds found in the bodies of a group of sixty Eleventh Dynasty soldiers, slain
in battle a generation or two before 2000 b.c, and buried together in one tomb dis-
covered by the Metropolitan Museum Expedition at Thebes.1 A series of five of these
interesting examples of injuries inflicted in ancient oriental warfare will be found on
Plates VII and VIII (Figs. 14-18) at the end of this volume.2 They arrived too late
to be mentioned in the text of the present volume or included in the references, but
besides two extraordinary arrow wounds (Plate VIII) they display especially injuries
to the skull fully described by our ancient surgeon in his discussion of head wounds.
These wounds convincingly justify the editor's surmise, in print before the photographs
were available, that our surgeon had followed an army in time of war (infra, p. 11).
Another interesting, although much later, wound in the skull was discovered at
Thebes last season by the Oriental Institute Expedition of the University of Chicago.
This skull, belonging to Harsiese, High Priest of Amon at Thebes in the reign of
Osorkon II (Ninth Century b.c), reveals for the first time the fact that the great man
was assassinated ; for he had received a mace wound in the forehead (Plate VII,
Fig. 18), which perforated the skull. Dr. D. E. Derry, who has kindly examined the
wound, concludes that it did not cause immediate death, but that some absorption of
the bone around the wound took place during an interval before the High Priest's
1 See H. E. Winlook, The Egyptian Expedition, Bulletin of the Metropolitan Museum of Art,
New York, Section II, Feb. 1928, pp. 11-17.
* The author is greatly indebted to Mr. A. M. Lythgoe and the Trustees of the Metropolitan
Museum for kind permission to publish these photographs.
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:04 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 17 ---
FOREWORD v; > / xv ^ / ' v '
death. Unfortunately the wound discloses no indications of any operation by the » r \
surgeon before death ensued. f i
Of all these cases, only the first (Plate I, Fig. 1) discloses clear evidence of the f ^
inscription, which demonstrates the existence of books on medical science in the age ^ ^ ^ f
surgeon's operation. This one, however, is the earliest in the series, and, as already
stated, it demonstrates that surgery had already reached an advanced stage in the
' o-j j o . r' I
Old Kingdom. A very interesting mention of medical treatises in an Old Kingdom ; x '"*
inscription, which demonstrates the existence of books on medical science in the age ^ »^|^
between 8000 and 2500 B.c., will be found in the present editor's Ancient Records p £- . .>v
(I, §§ 242-246).1 There is therefore no inherent impossibility in the above conjecture ' (. -
that our surgical treatise may have been the work of the great physician Imhotep. ^r* ' ty" ^
7 That our Surgical Treatise was a book already ancient in the Seventeenth ,-'1
Century B.c., when our copy was made, is further shown by the fact that the terms *
it employed were no longer clear to the ancient Egyptian reader of that remote day;
for after circulating presumably for some centuries, it was supplied with a com-
mentary, which in our ancient copy has already been incorporated into the text.
This commentary is to us a priceless revelation of the meaning of many words and
terms which would otherwise have remained hopelessly unintelligible, coming down
to us as they have done, from an age when surgery was first creating its technical
terms some five thousand years ago. The study of these terms is a fascinating
revelation of the human mind struggling with the first stages of science-building, when
even the terms it needed did not yet exist, but had to be created, and we watch the
process of their creation actually going on. Here we see the word " brain " occurring
for the first time in human speech, as far as it is known to us ; and in discussing
injuries affecting the brain, we note the surgeon's effort to delimit his terms as he
selects for specialization a series of common and current words to designate three
degrees of injury to the skull indicated in modern surgery by the terms " fracture,"
" compound fracture," and " compound comminuted fracture," all of which the
ancient commentator carefully explains. Like the modern scientist, he clarifies his
terms by comparison of the things they designate with more familiar objects : the
convolutions of the brain he likens to the corrugations on metallic slag, and the fork
at the head of the ramus in the human mandible he describes as like the claw of a two-
toed bird; a puncture of the cranium is like a hole broken in the side of a pottery jar, and
a segment of the skull is given the name of a turtle's shell. Here are the earliest known
anatomical, physiological, and pathological descriptions. The observation of effects on
the lower limbs of injuries to the skull and brain, noted by the ancient surgeon with
constant reference to that side of the head which has been injured, shows an astonishingly
early discernment of localization of function in the brain—an observation which has
been more fully developed by modern surgeons only within the present generation.
1 See also Quarterly Bulletin, New York Historical Society, Vol. VI, No. 1 (April, 1922), p. 1.
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:04 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 18 ---
xvi
FOREWORD
While this early surgeon undoubtedly gained much of his knowledge from injuries
incurred in civil life, it is highly probable, as already stated above, that he had
followed an army and had therefore treated wounds received in battle. It is in
treating such injuries that he makes the earliest known references to adhesive tape
and surgical stitching. At the same time injuries were obviously not the sole source
of the surgeon's knowledge. He practiced also dissection. He knew of a cardiac
system and was surprisingly near recognition of the circulation of the blood, for he
was already aware that the heart was the center and the pumping foice of a system
of distributing vessels. He was already conscious of the importance of the pulse,
and had probably already begun to count the pulse, a practice heretofore first found
among the Greek physicians of the Third Century b.C. in Alexandria. He had begun
an acquaintance with a muscular system, but he knew little more of the nerves than
the recognition of brain and spine as the important centers of nervous control. He
had, for example, made the remarkable observation that a dislocation of the cervical
vertebrae was accompanied by a seminal emission. His discussion of the digestive
system, if the treatise contained one, is unhappily not included in the preserved
portion of our document. In view of the titles of the court physician Iry, noted
above as a specialist in diseases of the digestive organs, it is probable that our
treatise did contain a discussion of the surgery of the digestive system, if not also
of the respiratory organs.
Such a loss fills us with the keenest regret. The present editor has endeavored to
indicate in the Introduction (pp. 9-18) the significance of such a mind as that of the
author of our Surgical Treatise in the history of human development, and to that
Introduction the reader must turn for fuller discussion. The scribe of over 8,500
years ago, to whom we owe our present manuscript, could have had little conscious-
ness of the momentous decision he, or possibly some one for him, was making when
he pushed aside the ancient Surgical Treatise, then already a thousand years old,
while his own copy was still incomplete. He had copied at least eighteen columns
of the venerable treatise and had reached the bottom of a column when, pausing in
the middle of a line, in the middle of a sentence, in the middle of a word, he raised his
pen, and ceased writing. After a pause, of which we cannot divine the cause, but
during which his well-filled reed pen nearly dried, he again applied it to the papyrus.
He made two more very faint strokes with the almost exhausted pen, which he
thereupon dipped deep into his ink pot. After heavily retracing the two pale strokes,
but so carelessly that the original faint lines are still visible, he laid down his pen
and pushed aside forever the great Surgical Treatise he had been copying, leaving
15| inches (89 cm.) bare and unwritten at the end of his roll.
When I reached this blank space in my first study of the document, I felt as if
I had been peering through a newly revealed window, opening upon the once impene-
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:04 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 19 ---
FOREWORD
xvii
trable gloom enveloping man's earliest endeavors to understand the world be hved in.
It was as if I had watched a hand slowly raising the curtain that covered this window,
and then suddenly that hand had refused to lift the curtain further. That provincial
scribe sitting over his roll, three thousand five hundred years ago, little dreamed that
every word he added would one day be hungrily pondered as the sole surviving copy
of the ancient treatise he was transcribing. He had reproduced at least eighteen
columns of the older original—something over four hundred lines.
Beginning at the top of the head, and proceeding systematically downward, the
treatise had marched on through carefully arranged discussions forming a series of
forty-eight cases. He had been none too careful in his copying, and he made many
errors. In two places he inserted on the margin unintentional omissions and indicated
their proper position in the text by a cross, the earliest known asterisk in the history
of books. He had industriously shifted from his black ink to his red, and had liberally
distributed his rubrics. He was much more interested in these matters than in the
content of the extraordinary treatise he was copying. He found his work somewhat
trying, for it contained unfamiliar terms, and unaccustomed signs like the human
mandible, which caused him difficulty and sometimes resulted in awkward, uncertain
characters. He had finished the cases on the thorax and had begun the first case
on the spinal column when he stopped. One can imagine him yawning, rising
indifferently and going home to his dinner, quite unconcerned, and altogether unaware
of the fact that he was leaving the future civilized world entirely without any know-
ledge of his great ancestor's cases on the surgery of the internal organs, which in all
likelihood followed immediately on that of the spine.
When our scribe returned to his task, he left blank the unwritten space following
his unfinished copy of the Surgical Treatise and turned it face down. Upon the
unoccupied back he began copying totally different material which he or his master
had meantime brought forth. On resuming his copying he left another blank space
of 1 fr| inches (89 cm.) at the beginning of the back, and hence the new material copied
on the back was separated from the Surgical Treatise not only by being placed on the
other side of the papyrus, but also by 81 inches (78 cm.) of unwritten space. This
was a wise separation, for the new material was merely a hodge-podge of the customary
magical recipes, drawn from the traditional folk medicine inherited from the super-
stition of a remote past. A later hand added some recipes for a youthful complexion,
including especially one for " Transforming an Old Man into a Youth."
Of the subsequent history of our document after it went forth from the hands of
the professional copyist we know nothing. For discussion of its character and
function, whether it was a physician's handbook, a medical professor's lecture out-
lines, or in its present form a medical student's notebook, the reader must be referred
to the Introduction (infra, pp. 72-78).
b
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:04 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 20 ---
xviii FOREWORD
Its more recent history is well known; for it was acquired by Mr. Edwin Smith
nearly two generations ago at Luxor during the American Civil War. It is of no little
interest to Americans to know that its discovery goes back to the earliest days of Oriental
science in the United States, and indeed to the first generation of Egyptology anywhere.
Edwin Smith, after whom the papyrus is named, was born in Connecticut in 1822,
the year that witnessed the first decipherment of Egyptian hieroglyphic by Cham-
pollion. Smith was one of the earliest students of Egyptian in any country. He
studied hieroglyphic in London and Paris when the science was only a quarter of a
century old, and was probably the first American to learn scientifically the little then
known about the Egyptian language. He then removed to Egypt and by 1858 was
living in Luxor, where he remained for nearly twenty years. He acquired the papyrus,
now bearing his name, at Luxor in 1862.1
Smith knew enough Egyptian to recognize its character as a medical treatise, and
must have devoted much time to its study, but he never made any effort to publish
it, although he showed it to several European scholars who visited him at Luxor.
Their vague references to it in their published notes in the early 70's (see infra,
pp. 22-24) gave no hint of its extraordinary character and importance. Thereupon
it seems to have been totally forgotten by the scientific world.
When we consider that the first university teaching of Egyptian in America began
in 1895, and that it was not until after this that the first professorship in Egyptology
was established in an American university, we can easily understand that Edwin
Smith's studies received little encouragement from his own country. The publication
of such a document, moreover, would have required a considerable subvention. On
the death of Edwin Smith, therefore, the papyrus was still unpublished, and it was
thereupon presented to the New York Historical Society by his daughter in 1906.
When in 1920 I was requested by the New York Historical Society to translate
and publish the papyrus, I was at first inclined to refuse, in view of heavy adminis-
trative responsibility for the affairs of the Oriental Institute. Imagine my surprise,
however, when I saw the splendid folio columns of this magnificent papyrus manu-
script ! And when I had examined its content even summarily, I was unable to refuse.
In palliation for the delay that has since ensued,3 I can only plead long absences
from America in the Near East, and other responsibilities on behalf of the Institute.
1 Further information regarding Edwin Smith will be found infra, pp. 20-24. See also the
literature cited there, especially Dr. Caroline Ransom Williams, " The Place of the New York Historical
Society in the growth of American Interest in Egyptology," in New York Historical Society Quarterly
Bulletin, Vol. IV, No. 1 (April, 1920), pp. 16-17; and the present editor's notes, ibid., Vol. VI,
No. 1 (April, 1922), pp. 6-9.
2 Based on a brief initial examination of the document, the editor published a preliminary account
of it in the spring of 1922. See " The Edwin Smith Papyrus," New York Historical Society Quarterly
Bulletin, Vol. VI, No. 1 (April, 1922), pp. 1-31. This was followed by a fuller and more technical
preliminary report for Egyptologists. See " The Edwin Smith Papyrus: Some Preliminary
\
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:04 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 21 ---
FOREWORD
xix
Moreover, the interpretation of the papyrus has required much study of the
medical papyri as a class, and such an effort has made the editor painfully aware of
the lack of any modern comprehensive treatment of the ancient Egyptian medical
documents. Especially troublesome has been the fact that no one has ever attempted
an inclusive treatment of the technical terms with which these medical papyri are
filled. There is no comprehensive glossary of the highly specialized words employed
by the ancient Egyptian in pathology, physiology, anatomy, surgery, etc. It is of
course needless to say that the present editor possesses no competence in these fields
of medical science. After interpreting the document as best I could with my limited
knowledge of the human body, I handed the manuscript to my medical colleague,
Dr. Arno B. Luckhardt, who very kindly undertook the burdensome task of looking
it through and appending his suggestions. I have acknowledged these notes in their
proper places, but I wish to express here my sincere appreciation of Dr. Luckhardt's
valuable assistance.
The editor would also acknowledge the co-operation of several other colleagues.
To my old friends Alan H. Gardiner and Kurt Sethe, I am indebted for valuable
suggestions on several difficult passages. In 1922, with the consent of the New York
Historical Society, I handed to the editors of the Berlin Worterbuch der aegyptischen
Sprache photographs of the Edwin Smith Papyrus, so that the light which it throws
on Egyptian knowledge of the human body might be incorporated into the Worter-
buch. I handed my transliteration of the text to Professor Grapow, one of the editors
of the Worterbuch, and he was kind enough to make several suggestions. At the same
time the editors generously permitted me to make full use of the Worterbuch files,
which were then available in alphabetic arrangement as far as the end of p. To
all of these colleagues I am very grateful, and additional acknowledgements will be
found in the text of the commentary.
The heavy task of verifying all references, and checking statistics, has been
carried out by Dr. Edith Williams Ware, Research Associate in the Oriental
Institute. She has been of constant assistance also in the reading of proofs through-
out the work To her likewise I am indebted for the compilation of the Egyptian
glossary, as well as the indices.
Dr. Caroline Ransom Williams, who first called my attention to this remarkable
papyrus, was kind enough to compare my set of large-scale photographs with the
original, and to add detailed red ink indications of the extent of the rubrics, thus
making the photographs a sufficient record which enabled me to dispense with the
original during most of the work on the text.
Observations," by James Henry Breasted, in Seeueil cCEtudes Egyptologiques didiees d la M&noire
de Jean-Francois Cham poll'ion. Paris 1922, pp. 385-429. The observations reported, and the views
expressed in these two introductory discussions, based as they were on a brief preliminary study of
the papyrus, have naturally undergone some modification in the present final publication.
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:04 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 22 ---
XX
FOREWORD
To the New York Historical Society, who are the fortunate possessors of the
Edwin Smith Papyrus, I wish to express my appreciation of their invitation to
interpret and publish this extraordinary document. At the same time I would also
thank their Executive Committee for permission to include these volumes in our
Oriental Institute Publications.
The cost of such a publication is very heavy, and these arrangements have been
made possible by the action of the General Education Board in voting a subvention
for carrying on the publication program of the Oriental Institute. For this generous
support the Institute is deeply indebted to t he members of the General Education Board.
The content of the Surgical Treatise is obviously of interest and importance to
many outside of the ranks of professional orientalists, especially to medical men and
historians of science. For this reason I hope that my colleagues in Egyptology will
recognize the necessity of some concessions obviously superfluous to us, but indispen-
sable to the outside reader. It is for such readers that practically all words cited in
the commentary have been followed by a transliteration in Italic letters ; and for
such readers also it has seemed indispensable to add a few hints regarding the nature
of Egyptian writing, in order to make the commentary more intelligible. To these
" Explanatory Notes " the professional orientalist will of course pay no attention, but
orientalists should read the introduction in Volume II before proceeding to the study
of the papyrus and the perusal of Volume I.
The manuscript of this work was already being put into type when Dr. Alan H.
Gardiner's invaluable Egyptian Grammar appeared. I regret, therefore, that the
commentary does not contain references to this important treatise beyond what
it was possible to insert in the proof. Examples from this papyrus found in
Dr. Gardiner's Grammar were not drawn from these volumes, but from photographs very
gladly loaned to Dr. Gardiner in advance of the present publication of the papyrus.
Finally, it is a pleasant duty to express here my sense of obligation to the University
Printer and his associates of the Oxford University Press for their constant and
invaluable co-operation in the production of these typographically difficult volumes,
and to Emery Walker, Ltd., for their admirable series of plates in Volume II.
Chicago House, The Colossi,
Luxor, Upper Egypt.
February, 1929.
James Henry Breasted.
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:04 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 23 ---
GENERAL EXPLANATORY NOTES
FOR PHYSICIANS AND OTHER NON-EGYPTOLOGICAL READERS
Readers who are not professional orientalists will find much in this book which is
unintelligible to the non-Egyptologist. This is unavoidable. The editor of such an
ancient document must bring to bear upon it all the available evidence necessary to
justify his interpretation,—a task especially complicated and laborious in the case of
a treatise like this, containing as it does a body of ancient technical terms which were
growing up in the infancy of a new science. Many of these words, like the term for
" brain," are totally new and unknown, or are old words with entirely unfamiliar
technical meanings. They have required much discussion. The editor hopes that
this discussion has not entirely submerged or made unintelligible to medical readers
the interpretation of the document as a whole.
The question may be raised why it was not possible to publish by itself a translation
of this document for medical readers, without burdening it with all this technical
apparatus of interpretation. A consecutive translation of the papyrus will indeed be
found at the end of the commentary in this volume ; but the editor strongly advises
medical readers not to try to read and understand it without first having read the
General Introduction (infra, pp. 1-29) and the Special Introduction (pp. 88-78),
omitting the conclusion (pp. 78 below, to W). The long lists in the Special Introduc-
tion are inserted only for convenience of reference and therefore need not be carefully
studied until later.
In using the commentary and the discussions of Egyptian words, the medical
reader will find some questions arising regarding the writing and language with which
we are dealing in this document. Egyptian writing was originally purely pictographic,
each picture signifying the thing it depicted or suggested. These pictures, which we
call hieroglyphs, were never relinquished by the Egyptians, who retained them, for all
monumental records inscribed on stone, long after they had become phonetic signs,
and throughout the independent history of Egypt. Strictly interpreted, the word
" inscription " as applied to an Egyptian record always indicates one written in
hieroglyphic. These hieroglyphic pictures were, however, slow and difficult to make.
The effort to make them rapidly with pen and ink on papyrus paper for the daily
affairs of business and government, resulted in a more rapid, cursive form of the
signs,—a hand which we call hieratic. This more rapid manuscript hand is, in origin
and character, exactly parallel with our own handwriting, which arose in the same
way from our carefully made uncials (capital letters). The efforts of our European
ancestors to write rapidly on papyrus or parchment the letters which we still print,
gave rise to our own handwriting. The origin of hand-written letters in the older
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:04 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 24 ---
xxii
GENERAL EXPLANATORY NOTES
forms which we still preserve as capitals, may in some cases still be observed. For
example, our letter " b " as we write it with the pen still contains the upper loop of
its ancestor, the capital B ; but the lower loop is imperfect because the hand of the
writer, running rapidly onward to the next letter without lifting the pen, did not stop
to return to the vertical line and complete the lower loop.
Long before 8000 b.C. the Egyptian scribes were keeping the records of business,
government, and society in their rapid hieratic handwriting on papyrus, and vast
quantities of manuscript documents were produced. Very few of them have survived.
Our surgical treatise, and the other material on the Edwin Smith Papyrus, were
likewise written in hieratic, which will be found reproduced in facsimile in Volume II
(Plates I to XXII). At the present day, if we were editing the manuscript diary of
some important ancestor, we would prepare for purposes of convenient study a type-
written copy, that is a copy in the letters out of which the handwriting used in the diary
originally developed. Similarly it is found practical and convenient to transliterate
an Egyptian hieratic writing into the hieroglyphic pictures from which the hieratic
signs originally developed, and which are thus seen to be roughly parallel with the
letters we still print. This hieroglyphic " transliteration," as it is called, will also be
found in Volume II (Plates I A to XXII A). Each column of hieroglyphic (on the
right) faces the corresponding column of hieratic (on the left). The two columns
correspond line for line, and also in the arrangement of the signs within the line. All
detailed correspondences may therefore be easily followed sign for sign, although this
arrangement of the signs is not characteristic of hieroglyphic. The words printed in
red in the hieroglyphic transliteration (Plates IA to XXII A) are those originally
written in red ink in the papyrus, where such rubrics-are easily recognizable on the
facsimile plates by their lighter colour, all the rest being in black ink.
It should be noted that like the hieratic original, the hieroglyphic version is written
from right to left, and the beginning of the lines is at the right. Hieratic was always
so written, but hieroglyphic, though prevailingly written from right to left, might be
written either way. For convenience in type-setting, hieroglyphic print reads from
left to right and does so in the text of the commentary.
For convenience of reference, the entire text of the papyrus is printed in hiero-
glyphic in Volume I, with all rubrics indicated by underscoring; the surgical treatise
is divided into cases, and these again subdivided into convenient, short sections, each
followed by translation and commentary. In this commentary, the Egyptian words
cited and explained are always transliterated into our own alphabet as far as possible.
The reader will observe that these transliterations are made up exclusively of con-
sonants, because Egyptian writing was a system of consonantal signs and possessed
no signs for the vowels. To indicate these unfamiliar consonants, it is customary to
employ (in all but two cases) our own consonants, with distinguishing marks attached.
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:04 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 25 ---
GENERAL EXPLANATORY NOTES
xxiii
In this way are indicated the consonants for which our alphabet possesses no letters.
These consonants were not all identical with ours. Otherwise all the English letters
used in transliteration indicate sounds approximating their sounds in English.
The other signs and modified letters are the following nine :
, A sound closely akin to the Hebrew N (Alef), a smooth breathing for which we
have no letter in our alphabet. It is like the initial breathing represented by the
unpronounced h in our " humble ".
c A guttural sound entirely foreign to English, and for which of course we have
no sign. It corresponds to the Semitic consonant cayin.
h An emphatic or explosive h.
h A deep guttural like German chin" Dach " or " Bach ".
h A deep h which early interchanged easily with S; and was therefore perhaps
like German ch in " ich ".
S Pronounced sh.
k A deep palatal lc.
t Like tsh, or th.
d Originally dj, but becoming an emphatic s approaching z.
In pronouncing the unvocalized forms of the transliterated words, it is customary
to insert arbitrarily as many e's as may be necessary to pronounce the word. Thus
for Egyptian mt, " canal, vessel ", etc., we say " met " ; for hsb, " a break, fracture ",
we say " heseb " ; for mrh-t, " grease ", we say " merhet ". For the two difficult
sounds: , (a breathing) and c (the guttural cayin), we usually use merely a vowel a,
e.g., rf, " penetrate," is commonly called " ar," and p'ht, " shell," is pronounced
" paket," with Italian a. We know that the above vocalizations do not remotely
resemble the actual pronunciations used by the ancient Egyptians themselves ; but
they are approximately correct as to the consonants, and the arbitrary vowels serve
to make Egyptian words pronounceable. It is unscientific to write such vowels
however, for a scientific transliteration must include only the sounds indicated by the
signs in the original text.
While individual Egyptian words have regularly been transliterated in the com-
mentary, considerations of space have deterred the editor from including translitera-
tions of entire passages or sentences quoted in Egyptian in the commentary ; but
they have always been accompanied by translations, in which the significant words
are followed by transliteration in parenthesis.
The following additional arbitrary typographical signs employed in the trans-
lation should be noted :
r or half-brackets, enclosing a word or words, indicate that everything
so enclosed is of uncertain translation. Thus the words " rshown exhaustion"1"
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:04 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 26 ---
xxiv
GENERAL EXPLANATORY NOTES
(p. 199) are a rendering of two Egyptian words of which the meaning is not entirely
certain.
[ ] indicate that words so enclosed are restored by the present editor, and though
not found in the original, are regarded by the editor as a probably correct restoration.
When only part of a word is so enclosed, it means that the word is mutilated, but
partially preserved ; thus " [like coujnting " (p. 104) means that the latter part of
the second word is visible in the original.
[r "1], a combination of brackets and half-brackets, indicates a restoration regarded
by the editor as uncertain. Thus "[Hike counting"1] " (p. 104) means that these two
words are not found in the original and are regarded by the editor as an uncertain
restoration.
- - -, three or more short dashes mean the loss of words, whose possible but not
certain number is indicated by the number of dashes. See examples on p. 104.
When enclosed in half-brackets, such dashes indicate fragmentary or uncertain words.
(), whenever employed in the translation, indicate that a word or words so enclosed
are editorial interpretations, not the restoration of a loss in the original text.
In the hieroglyphic text the following should be noted :
, employed as underscoring in the hieroglyphic text in Volume One,
indicates that words so underscored are written in red ink in the original manuscript.
In Volume Two, these rubrics will be found actually printed in red in the hieroglyphic
text on Plates IA to XXII A.
In the hieratic text (Volume Two, Plates I to XXII), the rubrics, although not in
red, are distinguishable by being slightly lighter in color than the text in black.
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:04 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 27 ---
■-
GENERAL INTRODUCTION
It has long been a matter of common knowledge that for many centuries before
the rise of Greek medicine, there was a considerable medical literature in the Ancient
Near East. The recognized social and legal position attained by medicine and surgery
in Western Asia before 2000 b. o. was revealed by the presence of a legally established
tariff for the services of both the physician and the surgeon in the Code of Hammurapi
(Twenty-first Century B.c.) when that extraordinary monument was discovered a
generation ago. These legal regulations of medical and surgical practice toward the
end of the Third Millennium b. c. would indicate that medicine in ancient Babylon
was already centuries old at that time, and that the beginning of medical knowledge
must reach back well toward 8000 B.c. The important social and official standing of
the physician in Assyria is also reflected to us in the Seventh Century b.o. in the
surviving cuneiform letters of the Assyrian Empire, which had inherited, seemingly
without much change, the medical lore of earlier Babylon. In these letters we find
Arad-Nanai, a famous medical man and royal court physician of Esarhaddon, the son
of Sennacherib, advising the king regarding an uncertain ailment, perhaps rheumatism,
and admonishing him besides washings to employ enchantments. On another
occasion Arad-Nanai felicitates the royal patient on his recovery from toothache.
He also sends the king several reports on the health of the monarch's younger brother,
a young prince in feeble health. Very interesting communications in the form of
letters report to the king the sickness of his mother. Arad-Nanai and one of his
medical colleagues, however, succeeded in restoring the queen-mother to health, so
that she survived her royal son. Her daughter-in-law, however, the queen-wife, was
less fortunate, and the physicians were unable to save her. Such letters, of which
there is a considerable series, make quite evident a recognized medical profession and
a body of medical knowledge in the Assyrian Empire.
Unfortunately the actual tablets on which was recorded the medical literature of
ancient Babylonia and which obviously must have existed in Hammurapi's day
have practically all perished, and the treatises which have survived to us are copies
made in the Assyrian Empire, chiefly the Seventh Century b. o. These copies, further-
more, are themselves in a very incomplete and fragmentary state. We may derive
from them, however, an impression of the range and character of medical treatises
in Western Asia for probably some 2,000 years before the Christian Era.1 They
cover a considerable series of ailments arranged roughly according to the part of the
body chiefly affected. The leading treatises deal with ailments of the head, including
1 For the best account of this literature see B. Meissner, Babylonien und Assyrien, Vol. II,
Heidelberg, 1925 (in Kulturgeschichtliche Bibliothek, edited by W. Foy).
B
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:04 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 28 ---
2
GENERAL INTRODUCTION
mental troubles, infections, baldness, and affections of the eyes, ears, and temples;
ailments of the respiratory and digestive organs, and of the muscles and ligaments,
as well as of particular parts of the feet; affections of the anus, including a good
description of haemorrhoids. It is possible that these and some related treatises
were combined in a general work on therapeutics but this is uncertain. There were,
besides, specialized tractates on pregnancy, child-birth, obstetrics, and diseases of
the genital organs. The materia medica employed in treatment of these ailments
included a long list of animal, vegetable, and mineral substances, most of which it is
still impossible to identify. A frequent method of use, after especial preparation,
was by direct application, that is " laying " the remedy on the affected part, or binding
it on ; but the commonest method of administering was internally through the mouth,
and occasionally by the insertion of a suppository into the anus.
There is slight indication that the physician discovered anything of the real nature
of the ailment or, except in the more obvious cases, the function of the organs affected.
Among the long list of available remedies, a few, like oil for stiff limbs, or milk for
stomach troubles, may have been beneficial, but most of the remedies employed were
entirely valueless, as is shown by the indifference with which the physician moved
through a long list of medicines, shifting from one to another for the same disease.
We see then that these fragmentary treatises surviving from ancient Babylonia
and Assyria reveal a wide range of observation of disease and an extensive list of
herbs and minerals in the physician's materia medica. There is, however, no systematic
knowledge or discussion of the human body, nor any rational consideration of disease.
The causes of disease and the operation of remedies, as conceived by the physician, are
so interfused with belief in supernatural forces, that a rational understanding of the
organs and functions of the human body, sick or well, or of the operation of remedies
when applied, was impossible. It is evident that primitive folk medicine, with all its
superstitions, completely dominated the medical teaching of the ancient Babylonians,
just as such superstitions also suffused their general outlook on the natural world,
with the possible exception of the latest developments in Babylonian astronomy, which
contributed much to the rise of astronomy in Greece.
Ancient Babylonian knowledge of anatomy, physiology, and pathology was there-
fore limited, and under these circumstances the contributions of Babylonian medicine
to later medical science are not likely to have been important. Our own knowledge
of Babylonian attainments, however, is unhappily limited by the fact that not a single
Babylonian treatise on surgery has descended to us. We cannot doubt the existence
of such treatises in early Babylonia in view of the legally recognized and regulated
position of the surgeon in Babylonian society in the Twenty-first Century b.c. already
mentioned. One of the most important discoveries of future excavation, to which
we may look hopefully forward, may sometime restore to the world one of the lost
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:04 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 29 ---
GENERAL INTRODUCTION
3
ancient Babylonian treatises on surgery. It is not impossible that such a discovery
may prove to be as unexpected a revelation as that of the Edwin Smith Surgical
Papyrus.
As we turn from the Assyro-Babylonian world to Egypt we enter both an earlier
and a higher civilization, and at the same time a cultural milieu which interfused with
that of the mainland and the islands forming the south-east extension of Europe.
The situation was one of intimate interpenetration between the Nile valley and
nearest Europe. Obvious geographical considerations demonstrate the truth of
tnese statements, and if any confirmation were needed it is amply furnished by the
history of civilization in the Eastern Mediterranean. In the history of medical
science in particular, it is no accident that the leading patron god of medicine in early
classical Europe—he who was called Asclepios by the Greeks and Aesculapius by
the Romans—was originally an historical personage, an ancient Egyptian wise man
and physician called Imhotep by the Egyptians, grand vizier, chief architect, and royal
medical advisor of the Pharaoh in the Thirtieth Century b.c, the earliest known
physician in history.1
In harmony with the high position of this venerable Egyptian physician of five
thousand years ago the historical documents of Egypt reveal to us the existence of
medical treatises early in the Third Millennium B.c. in the age which we call the
Old Kingdom (roughly 8000 to 2500 b.c).
In the middle of the Twenty-eighth Century before Christ the Pharaoh Neferirkere
was one day inspecting a new building in course of construction under the superin-
tendence of the chief architect Weshptah. The king and his court were all admiring
the work and the Pharaoh was turning with words of praise to his faithful minister,
when he suddenly noticed that Weshptah was unable to hear the words of royal favor.
The king's exclamation alarmed the courtiers. The stricken minister was quickly
carried to the court and the priests and the chief physicians were hurriedly summoned.
" His majesty had brought for him a case of writings.. . . They said to his majesty
that he was unconscious." Such are the words of the ancient inscription in which
the incident is recorded. The king, smitten with sorrow as the news of his favorite's
death reaches him, can only retire to his chamber in prayer and order sumptuous
arrangements for the great man's interment. The mortuary inscription of Weshptah
which thus narrates his death incidentally furnishes us, therefore, the earliest historical
reference to medical literature. There is conclusive evidence that in the Edwin Smith
Papyrus we have a later copy of one of the medical documents already in existence
1 See K. Sethe, Imhotep, der Askhpios der Aegypter: tin vergolterler ilensch aus der Ztit des
Konigs Doser. Untersuchungen zur Geschichle und Allertumskunde Aegyptens. Hinrichs, Leipsic, 1902,
Vol. II. For an interesting popular account of this earliest-known physician see J. B. Hurry, M.A.,
M.D., Imhotep, the Vizier and Physician of King Zoser. Oxford, 1926. On his place in history see
the present author's History of Egypt, pp. 112-114.
B2
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:04 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 30 ---
4
GENERAL INTRODUCTION
in the Old Kingdom, and it is not impossible that it lay with the others in the " case
of writings" brought in by the Pharaoh's command in an endeavour to save a court
favorite's life in the Twenty-eighth Century b. o.
Our knowledge of the character of these Egyptian medical treatises has heretofore
been based chiefly on few papyri: the famous Papyrus Ebers at the University of
Leipzig; the Berlin Medical Papyrus in the State Museum at Berlin (No. 8088) ;
the London Medical Papyrus (British Museum No. 10059), and the Papyrus Hearst,
now at the University of California.1
Besides the above longer documents only a few fragments of three other Egyptian
medical documents have survived. These are perhaps as old as about 2000 b.c.
They include the scanty remains of a treatise on diseases of women, and fragments
of a veterinary manual treating diseases of cattle, both of which have been published
by Griffith,2 and finally 29 lines of recipes for diseases of women and children, but
still unpublished.3 They will be edited later by Dr. Alan H. Gardiner.
It will be seen that all three of these earlier, incomplete documents are special
treatises, while the four large, post-Middle Kingdom papyri listed above are each
a compilation of a whole series of special treatises. These compilations were probably
all put together in the interval between the Middle Kingdom and the Empire, that is
in the period from the early Eighteenth to the early Sixteenth Century b. c.
In one important particular all of these medical rolls, early or late, are alike, in
that they all consist of recipes. They were lists of prescriptions, compiled for use by
the practicing physician, or possibly in one case for the instruction of medical students.
For the most part the diseases are not described, but each receives the vaguest designa-
tion, as an introduction to the recipe. In Papyrus Hearst we find one diagnosis, and
in the Berlin Papyrus (No. 8088) two ; in the London Papyrus none. Among these
recipe-papyri only the Papyrus Ebers shows any attention to a record of the examina-
tion and diagnosis of the case, and this almost exclusively in the concluding section
of the document. Papyrus Ebers records in all forty-seven diagnoses.
A careful study of these treatises has still to be made, but it is quite clear that they
treat disease as entirely due to demoniacal intrusions. They make constant use of
1 The sizes and dates of these ancient treatises are as follows :
Document. Columns. Lines. Recipes. Dale.
Papyrus Ebers 110 2,289 877 Early Sixteenth Cent. b. c.
Papyrus Hearst 16 (and frag- 273 (and frag- 260 Sixteenth Cent. b. o.
ments) ments)
Berlin Papyrus 24 279 204 Sixteenth Cent. b. c.
London Papyrus 19 (very frag- 253 63 Eleventh Cent. b. c.
mentary)
The dates given are those of the manuscripts. The materials themselves are obviously older.
* F. Ll. Griffith, The Kahun Papyri, London, 1898, pis. VI-VIII and pp. 5-14.
3 I am indebted to Dr. Gardiner for permission to make a copy of these recipes.
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:04 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 31 ---
GENERAL INTRODUCTION
5
spells and incantations combined with the remedies and are evidently the product
of a medical practice still dominated by primitive folk medicine. These recipe-
compihng physicians were magicians contending with a demon-infested world. Their
whole outlook on the world, like their conception of disease, was that of spiritistic
superstition, incapable of discerning the causes of disease as arising in a rationally
conceived world. They occupy the same point of view which we have found in
Babylonian medicine.
This attitude of the physician's mind toward disease is essentially the theological
outlook on nature which characterized the early Orient as a whole, and was never
discarded by ancient man until the rise of Greek thought. It is illustrated very clearly
by the conventional account of the divine origin of their medical documents commonly
found stated somewhere in these early treatises. Thus the Berlin Medical Papyrus
already mentioned above says that the roll was " found in ancient writings in a chest
containing documents under the feet of Anubis in Letopolis in the time of the majesty
of King Usephais, deceased; after his death it was brought to the majesty of King
Sened, deceased, because of its excellence. ... It was the scribe of sacred writing, the
chief of the excellent physicians, Neterhotep, [rwho made1] the book." 1
Similarly the London Medical Papyrus states: " This book was found in the
night, having fallen into the court of the temple in rKhemmis'1, as secret knowledge
of this goddess, by the hand of the lector of this temple. Lo, this land was in darkness,
and the moon shone on every side of this book. It was brought as a marvel to the
majesty of King Khufu." 2
In the Papyrus Ebers a recipe for " soothing the itch " is stated to have been
" found during an inspection in the house of Wennofer " (Osiris) (Papyrus Ebers,
column 75, lines 12-18) ; and the discussion of twenty-two canals of the body is said
to have been " among things found in writing under the feet of Anubis in Sekhem.
It was brought to King Usephais, deceased." (Papyrus Ebers, column 108, lines 1-2).
Such mythical origins not only attributed these documents to the gods, and gave them
a vast antiquity which added to their sacredness, but also placed medical lore outside
of human observation, as something of supernatural origin. As we shall now proceed
to illustrate, our new surgical papyrus must be placed in a different class.
The Edwin Smith Papyrus comprises twenty-one and a half columns of writing,
of which seventeen columns (877 lines) are on the front (recto) and four and a half
columns (92 lines) are on the back (verso). Owing to narrowing of the column width,
resulting in shortening of the lines, the writing on the back amounts in volume to less
than one-seventh of the entire document. This material on the verso consists exclu-
sively of recipes and incantations, identical in character with those of the other
1 Berlin Medical Papyrus 3038, column 15, lines 1 ff.
2 London Medical Papyrus, column 8, lines 8-13.
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:04 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 32 ---
0
GENERAL INTRODUCTION
Egyptian medical documents, the recipe-papyri which we have just discussed. The
first three and a half columns (65 lines) on the verso contain chiefly incantations
against pestilence, and the remainder, about a column (27 lines), in a different hand, is
devoted almost entirely to a long recipe for restoring youth to an old man. These
incantations and recipes on the back are a later addition having no relation with the
front, which is indeed separated from all connection with the back by a considerable
blank space following the end of the writing on the front. A full discussion of the
recipe material on the back will be found introducing Part II, The Incantations and
Recipes.
The seventeen columns (877 lines) on the recto, that is, about six-sevenths of the
document, are part of a treatise which is fundamentally different from any of the
surviving medical documents of the ancient Orient thus far discovered. These
differences are the following :
1. The seventeen columns on the recto comprise part of a surgical treatise, the first
thus far discovered in the ancient Orient, whether in Egypt or Asia. It is
therefore the oldest known surgical treatise.
2. This surgical treatise consists exclusively of cases, not recipes.
8. The treatise is systematically organized in an arrangement of cases, which begin
with injuries of the head and proceed downward through the body, like a
/ modern treatise on anatomy.
7\. 4. The treatment of these injuries is rational and chiefly surgical; there is resort
to magic in only one case out of the forty-eight cases preserved.
5. Each case is classified by one of three different verdicts : (1) favorable,
s (2) uncertain, or (8) unfavorable. The third verdict, expressed in the words,
" an ailment not to be treated," is found in no other Egyptian medical
treatise.
6. This unfavorable verdict occurring fourteen times in the Edwin Smith Papyrus
marks a group of cases (besides one more case) which the surgeon cannot cure
s ,and which he is led to discuss by his scientific interest in the phenomena
disclosed by his examination.
It will be seen that the above six points mark off this surgical treatise as disclosing
a point of view distinct from that which characterizes the other medical documents
of the Ancient East. A detailed discussion of its content will be found (pp. 33 ff.)
introducing the translation and commentary.
The forty-eight cases preserved in this treatise begin at the top of the head and
proceed downward to the thorax and spine, where the document unfortunately
breaks off. In each of these cases we see the surgeon first making his examination
of the patient and determining the character of the injury: whether the wound affects
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:04 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 33 ---
GENERAL INTRODUCTION
7
only the soft tissue or whether it has also reached the bone, or even penetrated the
bone to important internal organs; what are the physiological effects, etc. The
method of the examination sounds rational and modern. The information the surgeon
desires may be elicited by questioning the patient or directing him to attempt certain
movements or postures ; further it may be obtained by the surgeon's own observa-
tions, ocular, olfactory, or tactile. The last frequently include probing with the
fingers (palpation) or manipulation with the hand, and what is most important and
significant, observation of the action of the heart by means of the pulse, 2,500 years
before the pulse appears in Greek medical treatises. It is significant also to observe
that the surgeon's purely mechanical treatment of an injury is, in the majority of
cases, included in the examination, and not in the discussion of the treatment with
medicaments. We have here evidently an ancient distinction between surgery and
medicine (see p. 42).
On the basis of the examination the surgeon then pronounces his diagnosis, the
earliest such conclusions that have survived. The development of a full diagnosis
is a relatively recent matter. Even in European medicine it was customary to describe
only the conspicuous symptoms in a diagnosis until the advances made by Sydenham
in the Seventeenth Century.1 In view of the fact that the elaborate diagnosis of the
present day was so recently preceded by a simple description of the more noticeable
symptoms, we may not expect the surgeon of nearly five thousand years ago to have
gone very far in this direction. The most important thing for the ancient surgeon
was the effect of the examination on his immediate course of action toward the patient.
Hence he makes a diagnosis which always includes one of the three verdicts to which
we have already referred, and this is the surgeon's declaration that he (1) can treat
and cure ; (2) can treat and try to cure ; (8) cannot treat, the case being practically
hopeless. Three diagnoses consist of this final hopeless verdict and nothing more;
but in forty-nine diagnoses in our treatise the three verdicts are preceded by other
observations on the case. In thirty-six of these forty-nine diagnoses the other
observations are nothing more than a repetition of the title of the case, or of
observations already made in the examination; but in the remaining thirteen, the
diagnosis adds one or more conclusions based on the facts determined in the examina-
tion. These are the earliest surviving examples of observation and conclusion, the ,
oldest known evidences of an inductive process in the history of the human mind.
In taking up the treatment which the ancient surgeon applied, it is important to
notice that in sixteen instances out of fifty-eight examinations he attempted no treat-
ment. These untreated cases form a unique body of discussions to which we shall have
occasion to return (p. 52). There are forty-two examples of treatments out of the
forty-five injuries discussed. We find that in three instances the treatment is
1 See Knud Faber, Nosography in Modern Internal Medicine, Hoeber, New York, 1923.
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:04 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 34 ---
8 GENERAL INTRODUCTION
exclusively mechanical or surgical, while in twenty purely surgical treatment was
combined with external use of medicaments, and in the remaining nineteen the exter-
nal applications were employed alone.
The mechanical appliances or processes employed by our ancient surgeon, as
revealed by the new treatise, were not numerous, but some of them appear for the
first time in the history of medicine. He makes frequent use of absorbent lint, and
, in injuries to the nose or outer ear he employs plugs, swabs, or tampons of linen.
/ Among bandages, it is interesting to find that one variety was manufactured for the
\ surgeons by the most skillful bandagist of antiquity, the Egyptian embalmer. For
drawing together a gaping wound the surgeon might employ strips of adhesive plaster,
\ which was already known. More serious wounds, however, were closed by surgical
) stitching which here appears for the first time in the history of surgery although it
is known to have been used much later in sewing up the abdominal incision made for
\ the evisceration of a mummy1 in the Twenty-first Dynasty (Eleventh Century b. o.).
Splints of three different types were already in use. In a case of tetanus the
surgeon makes it possible to administer liquid food by holding the mouth open with
a " brace of wood padded with linen." A second type of splint said to be " of linen "
may possibly be a wooden splint wound with linen such as was found by Dr. G. Elliot
Smith on two Egyptian bodies of the Old Kingdom (8000-2500 b. c). They may also
be composed of layers of linen impregnated with glue and plaster and moulded while
soft to conform to the limb. This material, now called " cartonnage," and often
found shaped to the limbs of the mummy, is well known in mummy cases. It is
essentially identical with the modern surgical cast employed for the support of frac-
tured limbs. It has never been found still attached to a broken limb, for it should be
remembered that such an appliance would be buried with the deceased only in case
the sufferer died of his injuries, and the embalmer left the splints in place. This would
. be unlikely and indeed, as Elliot Smith has observed, only two ancient bodies still
C wearing splints have ever been found in Egypt.! This surgical use of the embalmer's
^ cartonnage becomes the more probable when we recall the fact revealed by our treatise
that the surgeon drew his supplies of a certain type of bandage from the embalmer.
A third type of splint was a stiff roll of linen, used apparently where a softer splint
was needed, as in the case of a fractured nasal bone. The Egyptian surgeon's treat-
ment of fractures was effective. Out of over a hundred ancient bodies showing healed
fractures, only one was observed to show any signs of suppuration by Dr. Elliot Smith
(see infra, p. 56). When a compound comminuted fracture of the skull made it
necessary, the patient was held upright by supports of sun-dried brick or adobe, pre-
sumably moulded to fit his figure on each side under his arms.
Of instruments the treatise mentions only the " fire-drill," employed when hot for
1 G. Elliot Smith and W. R. Dawson, Egyptian Mummies, London, 1924, Fig. 36, facing p. 96.
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:04 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 35 ---
GENERAL INTRODUCTION
0
cauterization. A mandible of the Fourth Dynasty (2900-2750 B.c.) disclosing a drill
hole in the mental foramen for the purpose of draining an abscess under a molar tooth
(see PI. I, Pig. 1) makes it evident that specialized surgical instruments of metal, pre-
sumably bronze, already existed in the age which produced our surgical treatise, but
they are taken for granted by the ancient author. It is noticeable, furthermore, how
often, in his directions to the practitioner, the probing of the wound is to be done with
the fingers. An instrument is never designated for this purpose. Unfortunately no
systematic study of the surviving Egyptian surgical instruments has ever been made
(see p. 58), although the museums of Europe and America contain a large number.
The injuries which the ancient surgeon is instructed to treat are fully discussed
in the special introduction to the treatise (pp. 43-45); but we may note here that his
therapeutic was primitive and simple, showing that surgery was far in advance of
medicine. After purely surgical measures the surgeon's favorite remedy for an injury
was " fresh meat " applied on the first day only. It was bound on and was usually
followed by an application of lint saturated with ointment composed of grease and
honey, also bound on. In the nineteen cases in which no specific surgical treatment
is prescribed we find the surgeon instructed to employ only medicaments externally
applied, and hkewise usually bound on. In symptoms of tetanus following serious
injury to the skull, the treatise suggests only hot applications to the constricted liga-
ments of the mandible. Among his materia medica it is interesting to find a decoction N|
of willow (salix), essentially salicin, employed as a disinfectant; an ammoniacal appli- .
cation for allaying inflammation; and for astringent purposes a solution containing salts ,.'
of copper and sodium.
Apart from purely surgical procedure, the treatise repeatedly instructs the practi- n.
tioner to let nature do the work, an attitude which reminds us of Hippocratic medicine. J
In critical cases the surgeon is admonished to adopt a waiting attitude, and uses a
formula " until thou knowest that he has reached a decisive point," recognizing that
the course of the case will not be settled until a point is reached which discloses pro-
gress or the reverse. This point reminds us strongly of the Hippocratic " crisis " (Kpiais). |
There is good evidence that this surgical treatise, as thus far discussed, was written
in the Old Kingdom (8000-2500 b. c.) and presumably, as we shall see, in the early
part of that remote age. The manuscript nowhere hints at the name or station of the
author. We are free to wonder whether the author of this earliest known investigation
of human anatomy and physiology could have been identical with our oldest-known
physician, the venerable Imhotep already mentioned above, who lived in the Thirtieth
Century b. c. However that may have been, it will probably have circulated as a book
on surgery when the Great Pyramid of Gizeh was being built. There may be a hint of
its title heading a quotation in the Papyrus Ebers ; for we find there an isolated
passage on the heart which is said to be quoted from another ancient medical book
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:04 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 36 ---
10
GENERAL INTRODUCTION
entitled " Secret Book of the Physician." Now this passage on the heart, quoted
in Papyrus Ebers, is also found in the Edwin Smith Papyrus, and has every appearance
of being original there. If so, then Papyrus Ebers is quoting from the Edwin Smith
Papyrus and the title of the source quoted is the ancient title of the Edwin Smith
Papyrus (see commentary, p. 108). It is not improbable, therefore, that our surgical
treatise was known to its ancient users as the " Secret Book of the Physician."
It is evident from his treatise that our ancient surgeon, whoever he may have been,
was a man of observant and discerning mind, with a wide outlook upon the life of
his time. The terms which he uses, to be sure, may have been already current in the
surgical jargon of his age, but to the present editor they convey the impression
of a man actually involved in the process of building up a terminology in a field of
observation not yet possessing a fund of current terms. He seems to be doing for
the first time in any field of science what has since happened in one area of scientific
observation after another. He draws his descriptive terms from nature, from the
mechanical arts, from architecture, and from many sides of daily experience. He has
observed the crucibles of the copper foundry and he compares the convolutions of
the brain to the corrugations on metallic slag. In describing the articulation of the
human mandible, he likens the fork at the head of the ramus to the claw of a two-toed
bird clasping the temporal bone. He applies the name of a certain water worm to
fibrous strings of coagulated blood ; the region of the frontal sinus is " the secret
chamber," as of a sanctuary; the bridge of the nose is for him " the column of the
nose ; " a puncture of the cranium is like a broken hole in a pottery jar. These terms
were, as we shall see, not always familiar to later readers and had to be explained—
a fact suggesting that they originated with our author.
After circulating for some generations, more probably for several centuries, it was
found that the book was antiquated in its terms. Not a few words and expressions
were evidently no longer wholly intelligible. In the latter part of the Old Kingdom,
probably not later than 2500 B.c., some " modern " surgeon, as unknown to us as the
original author, equipped the document with a commentary in the form of brief defini-
tions and explanations, which we term glosses, appended to each case. For example
when the original treatise directed the practitioner to " moor him (the patient) at his
mooring stakes," the commentator knows that this curious idiom is no longer intelli-
gible and appends the explanation, " It means put him on his accustomed diet and
do not administer to him any medicine." Thus he carefully explains all the terms
describing the various injuries, or designating the condition of the patient or his
symptoms. Similarly, the commentator added many descriptions of anatomical terms
and other designations drawn from nature or the arts: the corrugations, the water
worm, the " column of the nose," the " secret chamber," etc. In a total of sixty-nine
such brief discussions, forming a little dictionary of early Egyptian medical terms,
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:04 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 37 ---
GENERAL INTRODUCTION
11
this unknown ancient commentator has given us invaluable revelations of his know-
ledge of anatomy, physiology, pathology, surgery, and therapeutics; while at the
same time he has made clear many terms in the original treatise which would not have
been intelligible to us without his little dictionary.
This surgical treatise, as it has come down to us, is therefore a composite made
up of the original author's text and the ancient commentary.1 It is an original source
of absorbing interest as a unique document in the early history of civilization. Socially
considered it is an outgrowth of the earliest great age of civilization, the age that
saw the first civilized society of some millions of souls organized into a homogeneous
nation. It was only in such a situation that oriental medicine could develop and in
any aspect approximate the character of a science. We learn this fact when we
take up the study of the cemeteries where the Egyptian communities buried their
dead. A single campaign of excavation which exhumed between 5,000 and 6,000
bodies, disclosed one person with a fractured bone among every thirty-two people,
that is over three such injuries among every hundred persons. A broken neck is
stated by our treatise to have been caused by a fall on the head—evidently from some
elevation. Among the mechanics and workmen employed on the vast buildings of
Egypt, such as the Great Pyramid of Gizeh, there must have been many such accidents.
We can easily understand why there are thirty-three cases of injured bones among the
forty-eight cases in our treatise ; many, perhaps most, of these injuries were received
while the injured man was following the peaceful routine of civil life. No one can
read this treatise, however, without concluding that some of the wounds in the skull,
e. g., the " perforations " found in the skull, the temporal bone, the zygoma, and the
sternum—not to mention the gashes in the soft tissue of the nose, Hp, chin, outer ear,
neck, and shoulder—were spear and sword wounds received in war (compare Pl . I,
Figs. 3 and 4). Some of the experience and knowledge of the human body, which
the ancient author discloses, was therefore doubtless gained on the battlefield. In
harmony with this observation it should be noted that the patient is always a man.
-(- / There is other knowledge of organs and tissues which would indicate that our
' ancient surgeon practiced dissection of the human body. In this earliest known |
investigation of anatomy and physiology the surgeon gained knowledge which could
not have been acquired in the mere process of embalming.
We see that in the above situation the surgeon was daily called upon to deal with
human ills which were the obvious result of observable physical causes, having no
connection with the maligant demons of disease. For our treatise shows us the surgeon
examining case after case of organs and tissues injured by intelligible physical agencies
1 We shall refer to these two parts as " author's text" or merely " text", and " ancient com-
mentary " or " glosses." In order not to confuse the latter with the present author's modern com-
mentary the ancient commentary will usually be called " the glosses."
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:04 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 38 ---
12 GENERAL INTRODUCTION
( forming a realm of familiar forces, quite uninvaded by magical powers. In this realm
I the ancient surgeon was able to gather a considerable body of fact regarding human
( anatomy, physiology, and pathology—the earliest known recorded group of rational
\ observations in natural science. Indeed these two men, the surgeon who was the
| original author of the treatise, and his later successor, who wrote the glosses forming
:' the ancient commentary, both living in the first half of the third thousand years B.c.,
V were the earliest known natural scientists.fTn the long course of human development
they are the first men whom we can see confronting a great body of observable
phenomena, which they collected and stated, sometimes out of interest in the rescue of
the patient, sometimes out of pure interest in scientific truth, as inductive conclusions
which they drew from observed facti
If now we endeavor to summarize the knowledge of the human body discernible
in this ancient treatise, we discover that the inevitable and even childish limitations
to be expected in an age so remote are found side by side with observations and dis-
cernment penetrating in directions which we could hardly have anticipated. For the
first time in recorded human speech, our treatise contains the word " brain," which
is unknown in any other language in this age, or in any other treatise of the Third
Millennium b. c. The earliest discussions of the brain have hitherto been found in
Greek medical documents probably over two thousand years later than our Egyptian
treatise, which describes the external appearance of the brain as like the corrugations
arising in metallic slag—an apt description of the convolutions of the brain. In a case
of compound comminuted fracture of the skull, he discusses the rupture of the sack
containing the brain, an obvious reference to the meningeal membranes. The seat of
consciousness and intelligence was from the earliest times regarded by the Egyptians
as both the heart and the bowels or abdomen. Our surgeon, however, has observed
the fact that injuries to the brain affect other parts of the body, especially in his
experience the lower limbs. He notes the drag or shuffle of one foot, presumably the
partial paralysis, resulting from a cranial wound, and the ancient commentator care-
fully explains the meaning of the obsolete word used for " shuffle." In this connection
the surgeon has already made the extraordinary observation that the effects on the
extremities shift from side to side according to the side of the head which has received
the injury. This is a recognition of the localization of function in the brain, although
the ancient surgeon was apparently misled by a case of contre-coup regarding the side
of the lower limbs affected. Here then is discovery of the fact that the brain is the
source of control of the movements of the body. As another center of nervous control,
our surgeon had also recognized the spinal column, and he had observed the interesting
fact that after a dislocation of the neck the injured man suffered an erection and a
seminal emission, a phenomenon which has been observed in modern times in men
executed by hanging. These two centers of nervous control, the brain and the spinal
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:04 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 39 ---
GENERAL INTRODUCTION
13
column, are not correlated in our treatise. The means of that control in a system of
ramifying nerves is not mentioned and was evidently unknown, for the observation
and demonstration of the distinction between nerves and vessels was apparently the
work of Erasistratos at Alexandria in the Third Century B.c., while the connection
between the brain, the spinal cord, and the nervous system was first clearly demon-
strated by Herophilos, also in the Third Century b. c.
While our surgeon had made only prehminary observations which might eventually
contribute toward the recognition of a nervous system, he had, on the other hand,
already unmistakably recognized the heart as the center of a system of distributing |
vessels. The importance of observing the action of the heart in determining the con-
dition of a patient, appears here for the first time in medical history. The passage
containing these observations unfortunately falls in the only broken and fragmentary
column in our document, resulting in some uncertainty on the following important
point. j In spite of the imperfect condition of the text of this passage, there is much
probability that the surgeon counts the strokes of the pulse, and it is doubtless a
significant fact that the first physician who is known to have counted the pulse,
Herophilos of Alexandria (born 800 b. a), lived in Egypt. It will probably also not
have been wholly an accident that this was done in the land which produced the
earliest known time-pieces, for Herophilos used an Egyptian water-clock for timing his
count of the pulse. , Herophilos is well known to have been an investigator of much '
independence, and he was the one Greek physician who so nearly approached the
discovery of the circulation of the blood that there are historians of medicine who .
believe that he actually achieved this discovery. Before his time Greek medicine had \
been long misled by the dogma that a force resident in the arteries caused the pulse.
Our treatise, however, already knows that the pulse is due to the force and action ,
of the heart. Herophilos was the first Greek physician to recognize this fact.) That he J
should have lived in Egypt, where the cardiac system disclosing the heart as the central
force had already been known for perhaps 2,500 years, is hardly likely to have been
a pure coincidence. It should be made quite clear, however, that our treatise, while it
shows knowledge that the action of the heart affects and supplies all extremities and all
parts of the body with blood, does not indicate a recognition of the circulation of the blood.
The treatise discloses acquaintance, furthermore, with a system of muscles, tendons,
and ligaments. For example, it discusses in some detail the muscles of the human
mandible and their anchorage on the temporal bone. The Egyptian word for tendon,
however, in our treatise, is the same as that for " blood-vessel," and we recall the fact
already mentioned above, that the distinction between nerves and vessels was not
demonstrated until the Third Century B.c., when it was made clear by Erasistratos.
It is likely, therefore, that the three systems of nerves, muscles, and vessels, were
not yet clearly disengaged by our surgeon.
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:04 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 40 ---
14
GENERAL INTRODUCTION
If the treatise had anything to say on the digestive system, the discussion has been
lost owing to the fact that our ancient copy in the Edwin Smith Papyrus stops in its
progress downward at the thorax and upper part of the spinal column. Whatever
our surgeon has to say regarding any parts below these limits is suggested by symptoms,
such as those affecting the legs or the genital organ, induced by injuries of the brain
or a cervical vertebra, that is, injuries in the upper regions under discussion. It is
noticeable also that even in this upper region our ancient surgeon does not carry his
observations of detail far toward the interior. He discerns the " corrugations " on
the exterior of the brain, he discovers the meningeal sack containing it and knows
when it is ruptured ; he probes with his fingers to the interior and discovers cardiac
pulsations, or as he says the " fluttering and throbbing like that on the crown of an
infant's head before it has grown together; " but he goes no further toward the
interior of the head. We find him doing some investigation of the ear, but he gives
no attention to the eye, and we recall that the first detailed description of the eye,
and especially the connection of the optic nerve with the brain, was given by Herophilos
in his avarofiiKa.
Similarly, in the discussion of the shoulders and thorax, our treatise, as far as
preserved, does not carry its observations to the interior, with the exception of a
remark, doubtless intended as a caution, calling attention to the presence of two
vessels beneath the thorax, one leading to the lungs, and the other to the heart. This
restriction of recorded observations to external matters or conditions not far below
the surface, is obviously due to the fact that the treatise is a discussion of injuries,
and so largely injuries rupturing or otherwise affecting external tissue. It is not
a systematic treatise on the human body.
The most significant characteristic of the treatise is the ancient surgeon's attitude
in studying these injuries. He evidently is filled with desire to heal his patient when-
ever he concludes there is any possibility of doing so ; but he does not stop there.
One of the most important observations in appraising this surgical treatise is the
fact that out of 58 examinations the surgeon recommends treatment in 42 instances,
I leaving 16 without treatment. This latter group evinces the surgeon's interest in the
I human body quite apart from any thought of healing or treating it, and reminds us of
the Hippocratic treatises on epidemics in which, among 42 case-records, 25 were fatal
cases. This group of 16 injuries described but not treated in our surgical treatise is
without parallel in Egyptian medical literature, as we have already noticed above.
These discussions demonstrate the surgeon's scientific interest in the human body
as a field of observation, and disclose him to us as the earliest scientific mind which
we can discern in the surviving records of the past.
The current view, that in all cases Egyptian medical practice invariably employed
magic devices, a view in which I formerly also shared, is quite evidently wrong. There
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:04 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 41 ---
GENERAL INTRODUCTION
15
was, indeed, surviving from primitive times a large body of traditional practices in
medical treatment wholly or chiefly magical which never disappeared. Such practices,
universally and implicitly followed by the common people, forming what we may call
" demoniacal medicine," always had its devotees, the descendants of the old " medicine
men," with their rolls of ancient hocus-pocus, like the medical papyrus of the British
Museum, or the " Charms for Mother and Child " in the other well-known roll at
Berlin. Such primitive superstition dies hard. It lasted far down into the history of
our own land. Increase Mather, President of Harvard University, in his treatise on
Remarkable Providences, insists that the smell of herbs alarms the Devil and that
medicine expels him. Such beliefs have probably even now not wholly disappeared
from among us. We cannot wonder that this was the almost universal point of view
in the early world with which we are dealing.
The author of our treatise was one of a group of men who will likewise inevitably v
have been children of their time. We cannot conceive that they ever ceased to believe
in the power of magic ; but they had learned that in surgery and medicine they were
confronted by a great body of observable phenomena, which they systematically and
scientifically collected, sometimes out of interest in the salvation of the patient, I
sometimes out of pure interest in the scientific truth. The class of men thus revealed j
to us are the earliest natural scientists of whom we know anything, who, confronting
a world of objective phenomena, made and organized their observations and based
inductive conclusions upon bodies of observed fact.
The current conclusion regarding the mind of the ancient Egyptian, a-eoBelusion
jn nrH»n Ti-J«rCT»-«ayaQlf ngjojgfe™ nhiijedj-hflB been that he was interested in scientific
principles, if at all, solely because of the unavoidable necessity of applying them in
practical life—thatif ^n teaawwd mpariiauJ oanlaat at « many-giHad gonmflfripal
. j figato-ei: the cobieal content of a hemisphere it was because he was obliged to measure
fields for_taxation puinoae»-and to compute the content of granaries. In the field of
Egyptian mathematics Professor Karpinski of the University of Michigan has long
insisted that the surviving mathematical papyri clearly demonstrate the Egyptians'
scientific interest in pure mathematics for its own sake. I have now no doubt that
Professor Karpinski is right, for the evidence of interest in pure science, as such, is
v_perfectly conclusive in the Edwin Smith Surgical Papyrus.
Astronomy and medicine are the oldest sciences. Both arose, as we have seen, in
remote ages, still clouded by the darkest superstition, and in the closest association
with magic, religion, and theology, of which it may be said both astronomy and
medicine at first really formed a part. The complete dissociation of medicine from
magic and religion was the achievement of the Greeks. It was not an achievement
which they completed at one stroke, but a slow transition, a gradual process. The
Hippocratic School, in spite of notable ability in observation, and a spirit admirably
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:04 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 42 ---
16
GENERAL INTRODUCTION
rational in the main, did not succeed in wholly divesting themselves of superstition.
Even the vision of the intellectual colossus, Aristotle, was now and then obscured by
the mists of ancient superstition, and at the present day, one may still be surprised
by the lurking superstitions which persist and survive in out-of-the-way corners of some
modern mind, otherwise thoroughly emancipated and scientific in attitude and outlook.
In the history of Greek medicine there is still far too much obscurity to permit
a rapid survey such as might serve to furnish the connection between Greek medical
science and the earlier knowledge of medicine which arose and was in general use in
the ancient Near East at least 2,500years before the age of Hippocrates. Nor is a brief
introduction like this the place for such a comprehensive presentation.
Nevertheless we may here call attention to a few salient facts observable in any
consideration of the possible relation between early Greek medicine and that of Egypt.
In the first place we have already noticed that the greatest of the Greek medical
investigators, at the climax of Greek achievement in medical science in the Third
Century B.c., lived in Egypt, as so many of the intellectual men of Greece had for
centuries before that time traveled and studied in Egypt. The effect of this intimate
contact is visible at many points in Greek life and science, which cannot even be
summarized here. The contribution of Babylonian astronomy to the early develop-
ment of astronomy among the Greeks was not generally recognized until even the
names of the Babylonian astronomical observers, whose data were used by the Greeks,
were recently identified in the Babylonian astronomical records on surviving cuneiform
tablets, like the Greek Kidenas, Babylonian Kidinnu of the Fourth Century b. c, or
Greek Naburianos, Babylonian Nabu-rimannu of the Fifth Century b. c.1
In our surgical treatise the practitioner is instructed how to treat a dislocated
mandible. He is directed just how to place his hands, in reducing the dislocation.
The instructions are as follows :
" Thou shouldst put thy thumbs upon the ends of the rami of the mandible in the
inside of his mouth, and thy two claws (=two groups of four fingers) under his chin and
thou shouldst cause them to fall back so that they rest in their places."
Now it happens that the Greek physician, Apollonios, who lived at Kitium in
Cyprus in the First Century b. c, wrote an illustrated commentary on the Hippocratic
treatise nepl apdpwv " concerning the joints." This commentary has survived in
a late manuscript copy of the Ninth Century of our era, which is now preserved
at Florence as Codex Laurentius LXXIV.2
An examination of the illustration of Hippocratic practice in the case of a dislocated
mandible shows us (PI. VI) the patient seated, with head firmly held by an attendant
1 See Meissner, Babylonien und Assyrien, Vol. II, p. 416.
2 See H. SchSne, Apottonius von Kitium: IUuslrierter Kommentar zu der Hippokrateischen
Schrift IIEPI AP9PQN, Leipsic, 1896.
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:04 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 43 ---
GENERAL INTRODUCTION
17
while the surgeon, thrusting his thumbs into the patient's mouth, his fingers remaining
outside and beneath, grasps the mandible to restore it to its place. The text1 also refers
to the position of the surgeon's hands: XPV Y&P tov hw ko.t€X€IV ttjv Ke<f>a\rfv, tov he
■nepiXaflovra Trjv ko.tw yvddov Kal eocodev /cat e^audev rols SciktuAois Kara to yeveiov K.T.A.
These directions, prescribing that the surgeon's fingers shall be placed both inside and
outside, show much agreement with the above cited direction in the Edwin Smith
Papyrus. When clarified by the illustration (PI. VI) and by the fact that the Greek
baKTvXos, though commonly meaning " finger," was also applied to the thumb, the
Hippocratic method of reducing a dislocated mandible is seen to be identical with
that prescribed in the Edwin Smith Papyrus.
This identity of the Greek surgeon's practice in the third century b.c. with that of
our Egyptian surgeon of some 2,500 years earlier, establishes the existence of a certain
amount of old Egyptian influence on Greek medicine. Our treatise, or some other old
Egyptian book of surgery, containing our surgeon's directions for reducing a dislocated
mandible, must have been known to the early Hippocratic practitioners. In view of this
fact, we see more probability in the recognition of the Egyptian influences, suggested
above, as having had some effect on the great Greek medical investigators, Herophilos and
Erasistratos, residing as they did in Egypt where such influences were obviously possible.
The lapse of time between our latest Egyptian medical document and the rise of
Greek medical science at Alexandria was one of many centuries. But we have interest-
ing evidence of the continuance, during this interval, of Egyptian medical teaching
in the Sixth Century b.c. under the patronage of(Darius I of Persia, the greatest and
most enlightened administrator of the early world before the rise of the Romans.
Darius introduced into his administration the Egyptian calendar, restored the ancient
Egyptian " Suez canal," built a great Mediterranean fleet for commerce with
Persia, and although his people had been an illiterate and semi-barbarous group of
peasant and shepherd tribes only a generation before his reign, his statesmanlike
ability to discern the value of much which he could adopt from the civilization of the
conquered was perhaps his greatest quality. Among his foreign functionaries in Persia
was one Uzahor-resenet, an Egyptian ecclesiastic, who was High Priest of the goddess
Neith at her temple in the Delta city of Sais. A statue of this priestly aristocrat,
now in the Vatican at Rome, carries inscriptions giving some autobiographical details
of great importance in the history of medicine. Uzahor-resenet says :
"His Majesty King Darius commanded me to come to Egypt, while His Majesty was
in Elam as Great King of every country and Chief Prince of Egypt, in order to establi&h
the Hall of the House of Life,2 the house ... after their decay. The barbarians brought
1 Schone, ibid., p. 13.
1 The term " House of Life " was an old one applied to archive chambers, libraries, and the like.
It probably refers here to such a place, rather than to a hospital; and the following break in the
inscription probably contained the more specific name of the school.
C
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:04 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 44 ---
18
GENERAL INTRODUCTION
me from country to country, and conducted me to Egypt as the King had com-
manded."
" I did as His Majesty had commanded me. I equipped them (the two houses above)
with all their students from among sons of men of consequence, no sons of the poor were
among them. I placed them under the hand of every wise man . . . for all their work."
" His Majesty commanded to give them every good thing in order that they might
do all their work. I equipped them with all their needs, with all their instruments
which were in the writings, according to what was in them (the houses) aforetime."
" His Majesty did this because he knew the value of this art, in order to save the life
of every one having sickness, and in order to establish the names of all the gods, their
temples and their revenues, that their feasts might be celebrated forever." 1
In this remarkable inscription we find the earliest known mention of a medical
school as a royal foundation. It is important to note that this Egyptian medical school
at Sais was not being founded for the first time, but was being restored as the surviving
old writings in Uzahor-resenet's hands showed him it had been " aforetime." We
note with interest that the medical students of the Sixth Century b.c. in Egypt were
selected from families of good social station, and that as the last lines show, these young
physicians were evidently also priests in the temple of the goddess. Indeed the High
Priest himself, Uzahor-resenet, bore the title, " Chief Physician." Among the branches
of instruction the reference to " instruments " shows us that surgery was included.
Among these highly civilized cities of the Nile Delta, the first large cities the Greeks
had ever seen, the Macedonian kings of Egypt set up their enlightened scientific founda-
tions at Alexandria. We see now that in medicine at least Darius had anticipated
them. The important point to note is the fact that the support of old Egyptian
medical instruction was continued by the Persians after their conquest of Egypt
(525 b.c). When, two centuries later, the Alexandrian physicians began to enjoy
the princely support of the Ptolemies, they found themselves among the surviving
native Egyptian medical schools and medical libraries of the Delta, where such contacts
and influences as we have suggested could hardly have been escaped.
The Edwin Smith Papyrus has revealed to us an ancient Egyptian surgeon in
contrast with the physician, as a man with the ability to observe, to draw" conclusions
from his observations, and thus, within the limitations of his age, to maintain a scien-
tific attitude of mind. Such men will not have been numerous. The ancient com-
mentator is disclosed as another man of the same type, living probably some centuries
later. Our treatise and the commentary demonstrate the fact that such men produced
discussions of the human body which represent the beginning of scientific effort to
investigate and understand its innumerable problems and mysteries. The literature
which these men created, representing the earliest known chapter in science, has
perished, and there is small likelihood that we shall ever see any more of it.
1 See H. Schaefer, Zeitschrift fiir AegyptiscU Sprache, XXXVII (1899), pp. 72-74. Schaefer
was the first scholar to recognize the real meaning of this inscription.
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:04 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 45 ---
GENERAL INTRODUCTION
19
The ancient history of our document as a whole illustrates the hazards which
beset such records and their meager prospects of survival. It is now without doubt
thousands of years since the complete disappearance or destruction of the original
copy of this surgical treatise, as penned by the hand of the nameless author himself,
probably nearly 5000 years ago. In the same way, the copy to which the ancient
commentator appended his explanations, long ago perished. At least one copy of
treatise and commentary together, however, survived the fall of the Old Kingdom
(8000-2500 b.c.) and, as transmitted, probably through successive copies, survived
the fall of the Middle Kingdom (early Eighteenth Century b. c.) and the advent of the
Hyksos. The surviving copy of the great mathematical papyrus made under a Hyksos
king has revealed the fact that literary and learned activity still continued under these
foreign rulers of Egypt whom we call the Hyksos. It was at this time, in the late
Seventeenth Century b.c, when upper Egypt was striving to throw off the foreign
yoke of the Hyksos, that a Theban scribe sat down to copy our ancient treatise on
surgery. In content the book was then probably over a thousand years old. It was as
if a man sat down to-day to copy a manuscript written in the reign of Charlemagne.
It was full of old words, and archaic turns of speech, though some of its antique
spelling had been modernized. The scribe was master of a stately and beautiful book
hand, but he was totally ignorant of medicine and when confronted with some highly
specialized picture-sign, like that of the human mandible, he completely lost his ready
command of his usual graceful and running forms, and awkwardly smeared together
a blotted and angular picture. He was excessively inaccurate, but occasionally noticed
and corrected his errors—in one case placing an omitted word in the margin and calling
attention to it by a cross, the earliest known asterisk in the history of book-making.
He may have been an employe on the staff of some ancient copyist's office. In any
case when he had copied the old treatise on surgery from the beginning (the human
head) down to the thorax and the spine he stopped in the middle of a case, in the
middle of a line, in the middle of a sentence, and leaving the end of the long roll bare
of all writing for some space, he turned it over and copied on the unwritten back a
series of incantations against pestilence, to which he added three recipes, one for
female troubles and two for improving the complexion. It is possible that the first
purchaser, some local Theban practitioner who saw the unfinished treatise on surgery,
ordered the scribe to stop and to copy for him this unsavory magical hodge-podge
on the back.
Eventually this unknown owner probably handed on the roll to some later worthy
in the same craft. The last owner was much attracted by a roll containing a recipe
for " transforming an old man into a youth," and he, or some scribe for him, took pains
to copy this at the end of the older material collected by his predecessors, adding
a totally unrelated remedy for some ailment of the anus. Meantime much handling
C2
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:04 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 46 ---
20
GENERAL INTRODUCTION
and daily use of the document had frayed the beginning of the roll and at least one
column of the fine old Book of Surgery containing the title of the book (with perhaps
the name of the author) and the beginning of the first case dropped off in tatters.
When at last the village quack himself fell sick and found his art unable to exorcise the
demons of disease, his surviving relatives doubtless carried him up and laid him away
in a rock tomb in the great Theban cemetery. Luckily for us, they seem to have laid
his roll in his coffin with him; for it is hardly likely to have survived in any other
conceivable place. There in his tomb it reposed in perfect safety throughout a vast
sweep of human history for some three and a half millenniums, from the migrations
of the Hebrew patriarchs and the prehistoric wanderings of the Greek barbarians to
the American Civil War. The modern descendants of the old Egyptian quack, search-
ing the tombs for salable plunder, probably found the roll beside the body of their
Theban ancestor and saw in it prospects of gain. Unfortunately, however, as we shall
see, our information on this point is not conclusive. The modern vandals stripped off
the tatters of papyrus still hanging on the outside, to make it look more " ship-shape."
After selling this roll to Mr. Edwin Smith in January 1862, they patched up another
out of indiscriminate rubbish and gave it the appearance of a papyrus roll by wrapping
it and gluing in place the tattered fragments which they had stripped off the genuine
roll. Two months after the first sale they put this dummy roll also on the market
and sold it, likewise to Mr. Smith. Detecting the fraud, Mr. Smith recognized and
rescued the new fragments of the precious medical book, thus recovering for science
the extraordinary, even though fragmentary, discussion of the heart and its system
of canals, to which we have already referred.
The above discussion may serve to inform the non-Egyptological reader regarding
the place of our new document in the history of science ; but some further details in
the modern history of the document must be added, besides a fuller account of its
physical characteristics, the writing and age of the roll.
1. History of the Edurin Smith Surgical Papyrus
Mr. Edwin Smith, after whom the papyrus is named, went to Egypt about the
year 1858. He was at that time thirty-six years of age and had studied Egyptian in
both London and Paris before proceeding to Egypt. Although as far as I know he
never published anything, it is quite evident from his papers in New York that he
had become very fully grounded in the new science, which was then only a generation
old. His knowledge of hieratic is praised by the sagacious Goodwin, who says, with
reference to the date of the calendar on the verso of the Ebers Papyrus: " The
numeral attached to the name of the king is neither 8 nor 80—both of which numbers
have been suggested—but 9. It is due to Mr. Smith, whose acquaintance loith hieratic
texts is very extensive [italics mine], to mention that he pointed this out to me as long
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:04 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 47 ---
GENERAL INTRODUCTION
21
ago as 1864, when he communicated to me a copy of the endorsement upon his
papyrus." 1 It is evident from these remarks of Goodwin that Edwin Smith was the
first scholar to read correctly the date in this famous calendar.
Among Mr. Smith's meager papers handed to me by the New York Historical
Society I find a manuscript containing a remarkable attempt by Mr. Smith at a com-
plete translation of the papyrus which now bears his name. When we recall how
scanty was the knowledge of hieratic in the sixties of the last century, when this effort
at a translation was written out, not to mention also the very limited knowledge of
the Egyptian language itself available at so early a stage of Egyptian studies, it is
extraordinary how much of the document Mr. Smith has understood. It should be
mentioned here also that of the eight fragments of the papyrus which, as we shall
see, Mr. Smith rescued, he was able to place three with exactness and two more at
least in their approximate connection. Even as early as 1854 he " was able to read
correctly a name hitherto undeciphered on a wooden stamp in " 2 the Abbot Collec-
tion. In spite of the fact that he published nothing it is evident that he was one of the
pioneers of Egyptian science. By a curious coincidence the year of his birth—1822—
was likewise the memorable year in which Champollion deciphered and read Egyptian
hieroglyphic. It was very fitting, therefore, that some mention of this little-known
scholar and of the papyrus which bears his name should have found a place in a volume
which was intended to commemorate the centenary of Champollion's great achievement.8
During his residence in Luxor, from 1858 to 1876, Mr. Smith met a number of the
leading Egyptologists of the time and likewise many of the distinguished English
travelers who so frequently visited the Nile in those days. Dr. Caroline R. Williams
has noticed in a letter written by Lady Duff Gordon in October 1864 a reference to
him as " an American Egyptologist at Luxor, a friend of mine," for whom Lady
Gordon was securing books to be sent out by her husband.4 Birch refers to him as
having descended with the British Vice-Consul into a tomb shaft ninety feet deep to
bring up " thirty mummies and their coffins " for the entertainment of the Prince
of Wales during his visit to Egypt in 1868.6 In the documents still surviving Mr. Smith's
habitual intercourse with eminent scholars and distinguished visitors in Egypt, as
well as his scientific knowledge, are quite evident. The reasons for mention of these
matters will also be evident as we proceed.
In January 1862, during his stay at Thebes, Mr. Smith purchased the document
which is the subject of this book. The fragments of page one, which he put together,
are accompanied by a memorandum in his own handwriting which reads as follows :
1 Zeitsehrift fur Aegyptisehe Sprache, Sept.-Oct. 1873, p. 107.
* Dr. Caroline Ransom Williams, " The Place of The New York Historical Society in the Growth
of American Interest in Egyptology," in The New York Historical Society Quarterly Bulletin, April, 1920,
p. 16. ' See Recueil Champollion, Paris, 1922, pp. 385-429.
« Ibid., p. 16. ' Ibid., pp. 10-17.
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:04 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 48 ---
22
GENERAL INTRODUCTION
" These fragments were recovered from a factitious papyrus made up of the fragments
from 8 others March 17,1862, nearly 2 months after the original purchase, Jan. 20, both
from Mustapha Aga, and the fragments A and C were saturated with glue which was re-
moved by maceration and carefully scraping the glue away which had been used to seal
the factitious papyrus composed of these fragments." After his death in 1906 Mr. Smith's
daughter, Miss Leonora Smith, presented the document to the New York Historical
Society, to whose courtesy I owe the permission to publish the great papyrus.
The problem of the provenience of the Edwin Smith Papyrus unfortunately
involves us in some reference to the unjust reflections upon the character of Mr. Smith
contained in Ebers' introduction to his papyrus, and also makes it necessary to take
up at this point the connection between Papyrus Ebers and the Edwin Smith Papyrus.
I trust that the mention of the following facts will be understood only as an unavoid-
able fulfillment of duty in defending the reputation of Mr. Edwin Smith, and in no sense
as a reflection or an attack upon the memory of the gracious and kindly Ebers. It is
obvious, however, that Ebers was misled in allowing to escape his pen the reflections on
Mr. Smith which we find in his accounts of his purchase of Papyrus Ebers. He states:
" Er empfing meinen Namen gemass dem Herkommen, dass wichtige Papyrosrollen
nach denjenigen Gelehrten oder Freunden der Wissenschaft benannt werden, die sie
auf eigene Gefahr in Aegypten erwerben. Daher die Bezeichnung Papyros Salt, Pap.
Anastasi, Pap. d'Orbiney, Pap. Harris, etc." 1
As far as my knowledge of the early history of Egyptology goes the papyri which
Ebers mentions were not given these designations by the original first purchasers
themselves but by others, especially by scholars who later, designating them by the
names of their first European possessors, found it convenient to identify them in this
way. I do not know of another example in the whole range of Egyptological studies
in which a scholar has deliberately named an important papyrus after himself. In
this connection one may refer to the example of the high-minded Lepsius in naming
the Papyrus Westcar after the English lady who presented it to him. The evident
eagerness of Ebers to attach his name to the magnificent papyrus he had acquired,
betrayed him into unmistakable resentment toward Mr. Edwin Smith, whose name
had already become connected with the document. The source of this resentment is
thus obvious. As far back as December 1870 Lepsius had published some remarks
entitled : Einige Bemerkungen ueber denselben Papyrus Smith,2 and by " Papyrus
Smith " he designated the great papyrus which with pardonable pride its later pur-
chaser wished should bear the name of Ebers. Evidently without knowledge of Ebers'
purchase Goodwin as late as the summer of 1878 calls the document " the Smith
Papyrus." 3 It is quite evident that the great roll which we now know as Papyrus
1 See Georg Ebers, Papyros Ebers, Leipzig, 1875, p. 2.
2 ZeitschriftfurAegyptucheSprache.Dec. 1870, pp. 167 ff. 3 Ibid., Sept.-Oct, 1873, pp. 107-109.
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:04 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 49 ---
GENERAL INTRODUCTION
23
Ebers had already begun to be known in the early seventies as Papyrus Smith. When,
therefore, in the spring of 1878 Ebers handed Lepsius a manuscript account of the
new and splendid hieratic manuscript which he had so recently acquired, it was very
necessary that the name of Edwin Smith be completely dissociated from it. The
document which had been discussed by the editor of the Zeitschrift in December 1870
under the title " Papyrus Smith " was now announced by Ebers in an article entitled
" Papyrus Ebers," which appeared in the same Zeitschrift in May-June, 1878—too
late, unfortunately, to prevent Goodwin's reference to it as " the Smith Papyrus "
in the summer or autumn of the same year.
We are now in a position to understand why the otherwise always amiable Ebers
permitted himself to accuse Mr. Edwin Smith of having endeavoured to masquerade
as the owner of the great papyrus—an ownership which Ebers then emphatically
denies. And yet Ebers himself characterizes these reflections on Mr. Smith as merely
a " suspicion " (Vermuthung).1
As far back as 1864 Edwin Smith had already communicated to Goodwin the now
famous calendar from the verso of Papyrus Ebers and at that time, as we have shown
above, Smith was the first scholar to read the year date " 9 " correctly. The first
mention of the later Papyrus Ebers in scientific literature seems to have been in
connection with a hieroglyphic transliteration of the calendar published by Brugsch
in the summer of 1870 (Zeitschrift fur Aegyptische Sprache, July-Aug. 1870, pp. 108-111).
Brugsch says that it was from the " Riickseite eines Papyrus " and that he had
secured it from the papers of an Egyptological friend in Egypt during the winter of
1869-70. This friend was Eisenlohr who then sent in the hieratic text to Lepsius,
intimating that he had not given Brugsch permission to publish it. Lepsius published
Eisenlohr's note in December 1870 (Zeitschrift fiir Aegyptische Sprache, pp. 165-167).
Eisenlohr states that in February 1870 he visited Edwin Smith in Luxor and that
Smith showed him his collection, including " Zwei von ihm erworbene Papyrus-
rollen medicinischen Inhaltes, von welchen die eine iiber 100, die andere 19 Blatter
enth&lt." In Eisenlohr's above article Lepsius substituted his own more accurate
tracing (which he had received from Naville) in place of Eisenlohr's facsimile. Naville
had been allowed by Smith to make this tracing in the autumn of 1868 with permission
to publish, a permission later granted orally by Smith to Lepsius in person in Luxor.
Dr. Haigh next published a " note on the Calendar in Mr. Smith's Papyrus "
(Zeitschrift, May-June, 1871, pp. 72-78) which adds nothing to the above facts, and
Goodwin also wrote " Notes on the Calendar in Mr. Smith's Papyrus " (Zeitschrift,
Sept.-Oct. 1878, pp. 107-109). He refers to the document (Papyrus Ebers) as " the
medical papyrus in the possession of Mr. Edwin Smith of Luxor."
The outstanding facts discernible after a careful study of these earlier notices show
1 Ibid., 1873, p. 42, foot-note.
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:04 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 50 ---
24
GENERAL INTRODUCTION
clearly that at one time both the Papyrus Ebers and the Edwin Smith Papyrus were
in the physical possession of Mr. Edwin Smith, and they were seen in his possession
by Eisenlohr, who refers to them both in unmistakable terms. I have seen no evi-
dence in the contemporary documents that Mr. Edwin Smith anywhere stated that
he was the owner of Papyrus Ebers, except in the accounts given by .Professor Ebers,
who, as we have already seen, had very personal reasons for his conclusions. Under
these circumstances we can quite understand how Ebers might easily fall into the
error which led him to the unwarrantable reflections on Mr. Edwin Smith. Mr. Smith,
however, did own a large and important medical papyrus, next to the Papyrus Ebers
then and now the largest ancient Egyptian medical document in existence. The
casual use of the words " von ihm erworbene Papyrusrollen " by Eisenlohr are very
easily understood by any one who has purchased antiquities on the Nile and who may
have obvious reasons for desiring that the native owners of a valuable monument should
not become too well known to Europeans who might become competitive bidders.1
It would be quite comprehensible if Mr. Smith had made no reference whatever
to the ownership of the Papyrus Ebers, but the mere fact of its being in his physical
possession at the time might easily create the impression that he owned it, and as he
did own the smaller of the two papyri which he showed Eisenlohr it was always true
after January 1862 that he owned a large and important medical papyrus. Any
statements anywhere in the literature that he was the owner of a medical papyrus may,
therefore, be quite true and need not be interpreted as false statements referring to
the Papyrus Ebers.2
1 It is possible that the earliest reference to Papyrus Ebers in print was in a sales catalogue of
antiquities which I have never seen, but which is reported to have appeared in 1869 : "In 1869 there
appeared in a catalogue of antiquities an advertisement of a large medical papyrus in the possession
of Edwin Smith, an American fanner of Luxor near Thebes. This papyrus was said to be in excellent
preservation and dated about the middle of the sixteenth century before Christ. The advertisement
contained a reproduction of the calendar which was on the back of the papyrus. This calendar
aroused an unusual interest among Egyptologists. The first mention of this papyrus in the Egyptian
literature was by Birch of London. He was making some notes on the appearance of the name
Cheops in the London Papyrus, and incidentally mentioned the existence of the medical papyri of
Berlin and Turin and the advertised papyrus of Edwin Smith." (Bayard Holmes and P. Gad Kitter-
man, Medicine in Ancient Egypt, Cincinnati, The Lancet-Clinic Press, 1914, p. 14.) The authors just
quoted seem to be under a misapprehension as to the reference by Birch to an " advertised papyrus
of Edwin Smith." Birch's article appeared in the Zeitschrift, May-June, 1871, and he does indeed
refer there to a medical papyrus " in possession of Mr. Edwin Smith of Thebes " but he makes no
reference to on "advertised papyrus." Nor is this reference of Birch the first mention of this papyrus
in Egyptian literature. The calendar had been published by Brugsch a year earlier, as we have seen.
The curious reference to the learned Edwin Smith as " an American farmer " is, as we have seen,
decidedly misleading and is so recognized in a letter, included by the authors (ibid., p. 17), from an
American tourist who learned nothing regarding Mr. Smith except some vague reminiscences by a
person whom he calls the " German Consul at Luxor ... a Copt," who was, of course, Moharb
Todrous.
2 I have not overlooked Professor Ebers' very specific statement as to his " Vermuthung:"
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:04 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 51 ---
GENERAL INTRODUCTION
25
The fact that the Papyrus Ebers was so early connected with the Edwin Smith
Papyrus might be of some value in discussing the problem of the source and date of
the latter document. There is, unfortunately, nothing in Mr. Edwin Smith's papers
regarding the reports of the natives from whom he purchased his papyrus, nor any
conclusions of his own as to its origin. Ebers says that the native from whom he
secured the Papyrus Ebers affirmed that it had been found in a tomb in the Assassif,
between the legs of a mummy. The discoverer, however, was at the time of Eber's
purchase already dead and it was not possible to identify the tomb. Ebers likewise
refers to the possibility that his papyrus belonged to the considerable group purchased
by the British Consul Harris in 1857, a group reported to have been found in a " grotte,"
a rough shaft in the rocks some twenty feet deep by Deir el-Medineh. As to the date
when the Papyrus Ebers was discovered, Ebers says it was found " vor nunmehr
vierzehn Jahren." He does not date the introduction containing this remark, however,
and therefore he does not indicate clearly the terminus ad quern from which we should
reckon backward his fourteen years. If he means fourteen years before the date of
the publication of his papyrus (1875), the discovery would have been made in 1861.
This would bring the date fairly close to January 1862, when Edwin Smith purchased
the papyrus now bearing his name. This fact does not make it certain, however, that
the Edwin Smith Papyrus was found together with the Papyrus Ebers. In view of
the fact that the ancient houses and other buildings of Thebes have thus far yielded
so few papyri, there nevertheless is every probability that the Edwin Smith Papyrus
was found in a tomb, and in my prehminary account of the document in the Bulletin
of the New York Historical Society I have suggested this origin of the document. If
it was indeed found together with the Papyrus Ebers, the native story communicated
to Ebers might be regarded as external evidence, however unsatisfactory, that the
Edwin Smith Papyrus originally came out of a tomb.
* 2. Physical Condition, Writing and Date of the Manuscript
As at present unrolled and mounted between glass the Edwin Smith Papyrus has
a length of about 4-68 meters (about 15 ft. 8| in.). At least a column of writing has
been lost at the beginning, so that it originally had a minimum length of five meters
(about 16 ft. 4 in.). The roll has a height of 82| to 88 centimeters (about 18 in.),
corresponding to the usual full-height roll of the period from the Middle Kingdom
through the Hyksos Age to the early Empire. It is put together out of twelve sheets
of the usual size, about 40 cm. (about 15| in.) wide, the first now surviving being
" Ioh darf dieee Vermuthung kuhnlich aussprechen, da Mr. Smith meinem verehrten Collegcn und
Freund Prof. Eisenlohr und mir selbst erzahlte, neben dem grossen einen kleinen medicinischen Papyrus
zu besitzen." (Zeitsehrift., May-June, 1873, p. 42, foot-note.) Ebers, of course, translates " besitzen "
from some English word used by Smith, which may have been nothing more than the innocent word
" have," while the word " own," if used by Smith, may have applied exclusively to the smaller papyrus.
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:04 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 52 ---
IS
Afe-s.r V
Smith
xnrys.
15
Earl*
Ebers XVIII
26
It
IL
32
hiaWunJUl
*-
IX, 13..
33
*
xxi.i.
47
Ebei^Xvlil
It
y
Ebers XYfl
EarN
YTU.lf.
79
&
m.u
105
Mat*. H,k
_ Earlj
Ebers XVn
■sm.i«r.
138
W
<2
Ebers XVit
za.4.
r
160
Early
.bersXYM
165
Earls
EberS ATlli
tx.r
166
*
X
166
xn>.
MatK. rV,k
zn,u.
166
J.
JL
167
K
EbereXVli
XT, 5.
T
T
T
182
EbersXVff
1
f
188
B
SinuhtXl
XX,*.
198
r J
"HH, S.
p
215
Earl.
2S
*
224
1,11
fV,j»e XII
3ST
T
!
265
_ Ear lj
EbersXVlfl
xn,*
*
268
Eavlj
EhersXVlt
HTML
f
t
T
279
Rrissexn
2M
E»l«
Ebers XVM
XB.Si
294
B
J?
EbersXVff
Earl*
295
Eberfivfl
xn.Aj,.
i
3
}
296
EbersXVH
am*.
339
Whe'%,,
HuT.S
COMPARATIVE TABLE OF PALAEOGRAPHIC FORMS
First column hieroglyphic forms; second column hieratic forms from other papyri for comparison; third
column hieratic forms from the Edwin Smith Papyrus.
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:04 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 53 ---
3T4
a*
Smith
FV.we xii
ZEE, 7.
0
T
379
Lbtr>XVlf
r.i*
i
k
1
383
nr.ia
I
f-
402
EbtriXVlT
n.15.
12S
r
BulwjXlii
I.X*
430
IllahunXl
nr. xi.
»,*
459
/•
xn.il.
464
+
4
EbcnXWl
zz,fo.
411
Westc.HyK.
f
482
t
E berfxVIH
Smith
t
t
<
486
EbertXVB
xnn.y.
?
I
487
Earl*
ibereXV/l
a. ix.
510
B
O
XH.4.
Hi
tl
11
537
Earl*
TH.IO.
540
m«3-
B
Earlv
XT, 13.
m
ft
571
toterv My*
583
EarlH
:bersXV»
xnr.6.
«
1
596
Golen. fy*
xmis
i
X
S98
nr,7
Smith
MR
—J?
%
J
IX
&
I
XVII
ibertXV■
xm.il.
Early
ibersXVW
XDT.17.
Kl
1
XIV
»
Buk^xiu
XHKll
11
n
TT,8.
n.n.
LXUI
iff
t
i
UttlY
ItlahunXlf
Kl.
Math. HgK
&
rtatnub/<l
mi
•
>
li.
nx
fafih. Htf
COMPARATIVE TABLE OF PALAEOGRAPHIC FORMS
First column hieroglyphic forms; second column hieratic forms from other papyri for comparison; third
column hieratic forms from the Edwin Smith Papyrus.
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:04 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 54 ---
28
GENERAL INTRODUCTION
unfortunately fragmentary. The eleven joints are admirably done, and in its crafts-
manship the roll is an excellent piece of work. It now bears seventeen columns of
writing on the recto and five on the verso, all in horizontal lines. The columns are
about 28 to 29 cm. (about 11 in. to 11 | in.) in height and they vary in width from
18 to 27 cm. (about 7 in. to 10J in.). The number of lines in a column varies also, from
18 to 26 (in the fragmentary first column). The recto contains 877 lines, and the verso
92. The entire front, 17 columns, and the first 8| columns of the verso (XVIII—XXI
1-8) are the work of one hand.1 The concluding section (column XXI 9-21 and all of
XXII1-14: making 27 lines) is by a totally different and possibly somewhat later hand.
The first question which confronts us is the date of the document, and in taking
up first the palaeographic data I shall draw examples only from columns I—XXI1-8
(omitting the concluding section, XXI 9-21 and XXII). The general resemblance
of our scribe's hand to that of Papyri Ebers and Westcar is noticeable at the first
glance. This superficially probable, general date is confirmed at once by observing
that *—a is written both *—o and —o, a confusion characteristic of Middle Kingdom
and Hyksos documents, which, however, disappears after Amenhotep IV.2 Similarly
the ear (<*?) is used in our document with one stroke at the base both as a determinative
and for ydn, whereas in the Nineteenth Dynasty the form for ydn has two strokes and
the form for the determinative has but one.3 An examination of the accompanying
comparative tables 4 suggests that the Edwin Smith Papyrus is not far removed in
date from Papyrus Ebers. Nevertheless our document uses a group of forms distinctly
older than those of Ebers. Thus Nos. 26 and 82 carry us back to the Middle Kingdom
before we find complete parallels. No. 79 occurs very frequently in our document,
and the usual form (given second in the table) is that of the Hyksos Age (Mathematical
Papyrus). The same is true of two forms of No. 166, and a third form of the same
sign is that of the Thirteenth Dynasty. No. 279, without the oblique cross stroke
below, is a Middle Kingdom form. The same is true, though less decisively, of No. 874.
For a parallel to LI we must go back to the Thirteenth Dynasty, and LXIII likewise
is a Middle Kingdom form, while LXXIV is of Hyksos age.5
1 In the Bulletin article (pp. 11-12) above referred to I have attributed the three and a half columns
of the verso (XVIII—XXI 1-8) to a different hand from that of the recto. Further examination
indicates that Recto I—XVII and Verso XVIII-XXI 1-8 are by the same hand.
* See Moeller, ZeiUschrijt, Vol. 56, p. 40. 3 Ibid.
4 The first and second columns are drawn from Moeller's invaluable tables (Palaeographie I). I have
also retained his numbers for convenience of reference; but note correction of 49 B. The examples in
column 3 are traced from photographs not always on the same scale and here reduced in size (pp. 26-27).
5 It should be mentioned in this connection that among the papyrus fragments in the Edwin
Smith collection as handed to the New York Historical Society by Miss Leonora Smith, there was a small
fragment bearing but a word or two from each of six lines. Among these the fifth line contains the namo
of Thutmose I. Unfortunately this fragment cannot be joined up with our document and is clearly in
a different hand. It may serve, however, further to confirm the period of the early Empire as the one to
which the papyri of this collection are to be closely related.
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:04 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 55 ---
GENERAL INTRODUCTION 29
.
These Hyksos and Middle Kingdom forms might at first lead one to consider a late
Middle Kingdom or early Hyksos date for the document; but the large number of
signs identical with those of Ebers and Westcar are not in favor of such a date. It
cannot be doubted that our manuscript was written between the close of the Twelfth
Dynasty and the age of Papyrus Ebers. It shows some close resemblances to the
Mathematical Papyrus but I would be reluctant to decide whether it belongs before
or after the Mathematical Papyrus. It seems certainly to belong in the Hyksos Age.
How much weight in terms of time we should give to the early forms might possibly
be decided by a more adequate comparison with all the closely related manuscripts.
It would seem that the early forms, not found in Westcar or Ebers, could hardly have
been lost in less than a generation. We may conclude therefore that the Edwin
Smith Papyrus is not less than a generation older than the Papyrus Ebers, with the
possibility of a still earlier date by no means excluded. Whether we must push it
back of the latter part of the Seventeenth Century b.c. is a question then for further
study. It is quite evident that in content the document is older, as we shall see.
Our scribe, as already stated above, was master of a beautiful book hand (not
excluding some cursive forms), but shows evidence of the fact that he was not himself
a medical man. Schaefer 1 has called attention to corrected errors of omission in
Papyrus Ebers. The scribe of the Smith Papyrus has likewise made and sometimes,
but not always, corrected similar errors of omission. He was guilty of a surprisingly large
number of omissions, which he failed to notice. More often his mistakes require cancella-
tion or change. In almost all cases he has detected these errors and has made his correc-
tions in red ink over black, and in black ink over red. See Case 85 below. Similar
corrections, though not so frequently, are found in Papyrus Ebers (e.g. 60,10 and 70,8).
The scribe of the Edwin Smith Papyrus employs very plentiful rubrics, so plentiful
indeed that his discussion of a case may conclude with a remark in red, obliging the
scribe to begin the next case in black in order to secure his desired contrast.
In taking up the translation and detailed discussion the reader should note that
the materials fall into the following parts :
PART I
THE SURGICAL TREATISE (THE RECTO):
1. Special Introduction.
2. Translation and Commentary.
PART II
THE INCANTATIONS AND RECIPES (THE VERSO):
1. Special Introduction.
2. Translation and Commentary.
1 Zeitschrift, Vol. 31, 61-62 and 117.
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:04 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 56 ---
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:04 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 57 ---
PART I
THE SURGICAL TREATISE
(THE KECTO)
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:04 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 58 ---
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:04 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 59 ---
THE SURGICAL TREATISE
SPECIAL INTRODUCTION
I. Content and Character of the Treatise
The seventeen columns (877 lines), all that is preserved of this ancient treatise,
occupying the front of the Edwin Smith Papyrus, contain forty-eight cases, all
injuries, or induced by injuries (with two possible exceptions). The discussion begins
with the head and skull, proceeding thence downward by way of the nose, face and
ears, to the neck, clavicle, humerus, thorax, shoulders and spinal column, where the
text is discontinued, leaving the document incomplete. Without any external indica-
tion of the arrangement of the text, the content of the treatise is nevertheless carefully
disposed in groups of cases, each group being concerned with a certain region.
These groups are as follows :
A. Head (27 cases, the first incomplete):
Skull, overlying soft tissue and brain, Cases 1-10.
Nose, Cases 11-14.
Maxillary region, Cases 15-17.
Temporal region, Cases 18-22.
Ears, mandible, hps and chin, Cases 28-27.
B. Throat and Neck (Cervical Vertebrae), Cases 28-88.
C. Clavicle, Cases 84-85.
D. Humerus, Cases 86-88.
E. Sternum, Overlying Soft Tissue, and True Ribs, Cases 89-46.
F. Shoulders, Case 47.
6. Spinal Column, Case 48 (incomplete).
There is every probability that the complete treatise continued the discussion to
the lower parts of the body and concluded with the feet.
The complete list of cases by groups is as follows :
A. Head
Case 1. A Wound in the Head, Penetrating to the Bone (incomplete).
„ 2. A Gaping Wound in the Head, Penetrating to the Bone.
„ 8. A Gaping Wound in the Head, Penetrating to the Bone and Perforating
tne Skull.
„ 4. A Gaping Wound in the Head, Penetrating to the Bone and Splitting the
Skull.
„ 5. A Gaping Wound in the Head with Compound Comminuted Fracture of
the Skull.
D
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:04 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 60 ---
34 THE SURGICAL TREATISE
Case 6. A Gaping Wound in the Head with Compound Comminuted Fracture of
the Skull and Rupture of the Meningeal Membranes.
„ 7. A Gaping Wound in the Head, Penetrating to the Bone and Perforating
the Sutures.
,, 8. Compound Comminuted Fracture of the Skull Displaying no Visible
External Injury.
,, 9. Wound in the Forehead Producing Compound Comminuted Fracture of
the Skull.
„ 10. Gaping Wound at the Top of the Eyebrow, Penetrating to the Bone.
,, 11. A Broken Nose.
„ 12. A Break in the Nasal Bone.
„ 18. Compound Comminuted Fracture in the Side of the Nose.
„ 14. Flesh Wound in One Side of the Nose Penetrating to the Nostril.
„ 15. Perforation of the Bone in the Region of the Maxilla and Zygoma.
„ 16. Split of the Bone in the Region of the Maxilla and Zygoma.
„ 17. Compound Comminuted Fracture of the Bone in the Region of the Maxilla
and Zygoma.
„ 18. Wound in the Soft Tissue of the Temple, the Bone Being Uninjured.
,, 19. Perforation in the Temple.
„ 20. Wound in the Temple Perforating the Bone.
„ 21. A Split in the Temporal Bone.
„ 22. Compound Comminuted Fracture of the Temporal Bone.
„ 28. Slit in the Outer Ear.
„ 24. Fracture of the Mandible.
„ 25. Dislocation of the Mandible.
„ 26. Wound in the Upper Lip.
„ 27. Gaping Wound in the Chin.
B. Throat and Neck
Case 28. Gaping Wound in the Throat Penetrating to the Gullet.
„ 29. Gaping Wound in a Cervical Vertebra.
„ 80. Sprain in Cervical Vertebrae.
„ 81. Dislocation of a Cervical Vertebra.
„ 82. Displacement of a Cervical Vertebra.
„ 88. Crushed Cervical Vertebra.
C. Clavicle
Case 84. Dislocation of the Two Clavicles.
„ 85. Fracture of the two Clavicles.
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:04 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 61 ---
SPECIAL INTRODUCTION
35
D. Humerus
Case 86. Fracture of the Humerus.
„ 87. Fracture of the Humerus with Rupture of Overlying Soft Tissue.
„ 88. Split in the Humerus.
E. Sternum, Overlying Soft Tissue, and True Ribs
Case 89. Tumors or Ulcers in the Breast Perhaps Resulting from Injury.
40. Wound in the Breast.
41. Infected or Possibly Necrotic Wound in the Breast.
42. Sprain of the Sterno-Costal Articulations.
48. Dislocation of the Sterno-Costal Articulations.
44. Fractured Ribs.
45. Bulging Tumors on the Breast.
46. Abscess with Prominent Head on the Breast.
F. Shoulders
Case 47. Gaping Wound in the Shoulder.
G. Spinal Column
Case 48. Sprain in a Spinal Vertebra (incomplete).
As stated above, the arrangement of these groups with reference to each other
clearly discloses the ancient surgeon's organization of his discussion, beginning with
the head and proceeding downward presumably to the lower limbs and feet. References
to such an order of treatment are discernible in Papyrus Ebers, where we find on the
first page (I 4-5) that the ailments to be treated are " in this my head, in this my neck,
in these my shoulders, in this my flesh, in these my members." This list is referred
to again in the same page (I 7), but it has here fallen into confusion. In the actual
arrangement of his materials the compiler of the Papyrus Ebers followed no plan or
order of treatment, and it is difficult to imagine worse confusion than we find in the
magical hodge-podge of recipes (not cases) making up the Papyrus Ebers. The other
medical papyri display the same lack of any principle of arrangement. They are
simply miscellaneous lists of recipes. In the organization of its materials, therefore,
Papyrus Edwin Smith is unique. It is interesting to notice that this arrangement
and order of discussion from the head downward has survived into modern times.
Many modern surveys of human anatomy still follow this order of treatment, e. g.,
W. Spalteholz, Handatlas der Anatomie des Menschen (Leipzig, 1918).
It is observable also, that within each of the above groups there is likewise a definite
principle of arrangement. In general the surgeon obviously intends to arrange his
materials so as to pass from trifling to more serious or fatal cases. We see that he
D 2
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:04 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 62 ---
36
THE SURGICAL TREATISE
begins, in his treatment of each region, with slight superficial injuries involving only
the overlying soft tissues, and then proceeds gradually to more serious injuries affect-
ing the underlying bone. Thus in the first section in the treatise, the section dealing
with the head (A), the first case in the ancient book is a superficial scalp wound,
followed by a more gaping cut (Case 2). Both these wounds, while penetrating to
the bone, leave it uninjured. The next case, however (Case 8), begins a series of deeper
wounds affecting the skull, which suffers a " perforation " (Case 8), a " split " (Case 4),
a compound comminuted fracture (Case 5), the same with rupture of the meningeal
membranes (Case 6), and these are followed by similar, usually fatal, injuries of the
skull (Cases 7-9). As the discussion passes by way of the frontal bone and the nose,
to the maxillary and zygomatic regions, we again find first a flesh wound in the side
of the nose (Case 14), then injuries of the bone, passing from " perforation " (Case 15)
to a " split " (Case 16), and concluding with a compound comminuted fracture
(Case 17). Then five cases concerning the temple (Cases 18-22) proceed from an injury
of the soft tissue (Cases 18-19) through progressively more serious injuries of the
temporal bone (Cases 20-22). This arrangement is especially apparent in the group
of cases concerning the throat and neck (B), in which the surgeon again passes from
injuries of the soft tissue to a " sprain " in the cervical vertebrae (Case 80), a " dis-
location " (Case 81), a " displacement " (Case 82), and concludes with an obviously
fatal case of a crushed cervical vertebra (Case 88). The large group (E) of eight cases
in the region of the breast (Cases 89-46) quite clearly displays a similar arrangement;
but it has appended two cases on tumors and abscesses on the breast (Cases 45^16),
perhaps having no connection with injuries and presumably for this reason thrown
to the end of the section.
The discussion of each case within itself likewise discloses a systematic order of
materials and topics—an arrangement which, with the exception of some elaboration
in six cases, is always strictly followed. It is as follows :
1. Title.
2. Examination.
8. Diagnosis.
4. Treatment (unless a fatal case, considered untreatable).
5. Glosses (a little dictionary of obscure terms, if any, employed in the discussion
of the case).
The elaboration of the above scheme, found in six cases (7, 8, 28, 84, 87, and 47),
is due to the interesting fact that the surgeon's records disclosed an alternative group,
or even more than one alternative group of symptoms, requiring in each case a different
treatment, or demonstrating the certainty of a fatal outcome and hence followed by
no suggestions for treatment. Thus in Case 8, a compound comminuted fracture of
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:04 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 63 ---
SPECIAL INTRODUCTION
37
the skull, although there is little or no prospect of recovery, we first find all the above
subdivisions of the discussion, including treatment, followed by a description of a
second or alternative group of symptoms, which are regarded by the surgeon as cer-
tainly indicating a fatal issue of the case, and therefore not to be treated. (See same
arrangement in Cases 84 and 87). More elaborate is Case 7, the longest case in our
treatise, a gaping wound in the skull with perforation of the sutures. This case is
first discussed in accordance with the above scheme. An alternative group of unfavor-
able symptoms is then enumerated, with indication that the patient cannot recover
and hence suggesting no treatment. A second alternative set of symptoms (the third
set in the discussion of the case) is then recounted by the surgeon, who seems to imply
the possibility of recovery and therefore suggests a treatment. More elaborate, though
not so long, is Case 47, in which the surgeon's record of experience shows him that he
may normally expect a favorable development in two stages, each requiring its own
special treatment. An alternative second stage, however, may be unfavorable and
require a modification in treatment (the third in the discussion), followed by a favor-
able final (third) stage, with simple treatment (the fourth in the discussion).
The modern term available does not in every case correspond completely or
perfectly with the ancient Egyptian idea, and the designations of the above subdivi-
sions involve some accommodation—in one case, as we shall see, more than we should
wish. It will be necessary, therefore, to discuss these subdivisions before the reader
can understand their application in the present work.
1. The Title
The title consists of the word V£<? Sd'-w," Instructions," followed by the identify-
ing designation of the injury, together with indication of the region or organ affected,
and sometimes with additional details. Thus the title of Case 4 reads :
" Instructions concerning a gaping wound in his head, penetrating to the bone,
(and) splitting his skull."
In Case 6 the title is even fuller :
" Instructions concerning a gaping wound in his head, penetrating to the bone,
smashing his skull, (and) rending open the brain of his skull."
These titles often lack specific indications of the exact region which would be found
in a modern designation of such an injury. More specific in this particular is the title
of Case 9 :
" Instructions concerning a wound in his forehead, smashing the shell of his skull."
Or Case 10:
" Instructions concerning a wound in the top of his eyebrow."
In general it may be said that these titles are more accurate and specific in defining
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:04 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 64 ---
38
THE SURGICAL TREATISE
the nature of the injury than in indicating its exact position, although the latter
indications are sometimes very precise and specific. Usually the title indicates roughly
the position of the injury, leaving more accurate specification to the discussion;
e. g. Case 81, a dislocation of a cervical vertebra does not indicate in the title which
one is meant, but later discusses certain symptoms accompanying the dislocation of
the middle one.
2. The Examination
The examination is conceived as spoken by some one addressing a second person,
who is regularly designated by a pronoun in the second person singular. The form of
the examination therefore is that of a teacher instructing a pupil that he shall do so
and so. This fact raises the question whether this medical roll is not simply an in-
struction book. The indications are that the treatise has grown up as the product of
an effort to record the instructions of a master in the very words which he used in the
process of instruction, even including the person and number of the verbs addressed
to the pupil. The same question applies to the relatively brief portions of the other
ancient Egyptian medical rolls, which disclose the same form.
Logically the examination is a long protasis, of which the diagnosis forms the
apodosis; in other words, the examination is the first part of a long conditional
sentence comprising a recital of the symptoms which it is assumed the surgeon has
observed that the patient displays, and which form the basis of the resulting conclusions
expressed in the diagnosis. The examination therefore regularly begins thus :
(]^^^~~» " If thou examinest a man having ..." (see commentary in Case 1,18).
This formula is always followed by the name of the injury or ailment already placed
at the head of the discussion in the title of the case. It is probable that these words
designating the injury or ailment and following the introductory formula of the exami-
nation were drawn from the examination for the purpose of serving as a title at the
head of the discussion. The source of the title was, therefore, probably the examination.
The usual form and characteristics of the examination are most clearly observable
in the following frequently recurring clauses :
" If thou examinest a man having, etc
thou shouldst place thy hand upon him,"
or
" thou shouldst probe his wound,"
o1
" thou shouldst inspect his wound,"
or
" thou shouldst examine his wound."
" Shouldst thou find . . . "
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:04 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 65 ---
SPECIAL INTRODUCTION
39
These assumed conditions then are followed by the conclusions of the diagnosis,
introduced by the words, " Thou shouldst say concerning him : (see discussion
of diagnosis below, pp. 45 ff.).
In six different cases (7,8,28,84,87 and 47) the surgeon's information or experience
in each case have acquainted him with one or more alternative groups of symptoms.
These may be drawn from (a) two cases of the same injury, which nevertheless exhibited
different symptoms; or (b) they may refer to two or more successive stages of the
same case. Thus in Case 84, illustrating (a), the dislocation of the two clavicles is
examined and described, and the surgeon is instructed to reduce the dislocated bones
to their places. The treatise then adds :
M^^J^JJ^p^XP (XI 21>-
" If, however, thou shouldst find his two collar-bones having a rupture (of the
tissue) over it, etc." This second examination is then followed by a second diagnosis,
originally indicating that a fatal outcome is to be expected,1 and hence no treatment
is prescribed. In the parallel case (87) the surgeon introduces the second examination
with the same words (XII 19). That a second examination introduced in this way
really discusses a second case is demonstrated by the fact that the two cases of a
fractured humerus (Case 86 and 87) correspond exactly to two cases of a dislocated
clavicle discussed as a first and second examination in Case 84.
In Case 8 illustrating (b) the second examination probably discloses merely a further
or second stage of the same case. It is introduced by the words, I'^Jt'^J^^^P^n^.
meaning, " Now as soon as thou findest that smash " (compound comminuted fracture,
IV 10), in which we miss the adversative particle hot, " however," often indicat-
ing an alternative development of the case, e. g., the second examination in Case
28 (X 2).
In one case (7) we find after the first examination, a second and a third disclosing
two alternative groups of symptoms. Both are introduced by 1^^^^J^^jj"^
meaning : " If on the one hand thou findest that man ...; if on the other hand thou
findest that man ..." See the discussion in the introduction to Case 7. The
second examination (III 8 ff.) is followed by a diagnosis with the unfavorable verdict
8, after which, as usual, no treatment is suggested; the third (III 18) leads to no
diagnosis, but is followed at once by a treatment, suggesting possible recovery.
In Case 47 the first examination is even followed by four more, a second, third,
fourth, and fifth. The second examination simply records the progress of the ca&e
toward recovery. Hence it begins 1"=>,,S»J^="fi°<*IJ^ (XVII 8), " If thou findest
that wound," that is without any adversative particle, " however." On the other
1 Verdict 1, actually in the text, is an evident error of the ancient scribe for verdict 3. See Case 34,
commentary on XI 22.
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:04 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 66 ---
40
THE SURGICAL TREATISE
hand the third examination begins with the same words, but including the adversative
particle, " however " (XVII 6), and proceeds with unfavorable symptoms indicating
an alternative second stage, feverish and critical and hence followed by a diagnosis
concluding with the uncertain verdict 2, " An ailment with which I will contend."
The surgeon's experience has taught him to expect either of two different developments
following the stage just mentioned, and he therefore records a fourth and fifth examina-
tion. The first of these two final alternatives (the fourth examination) begins :
" If on the one hand thou shouldst find that man continuing to have fever " (XVII12).
The treatment which follows puts the man on normal diet without any medicine.
The second of the two final alternatives, that is the fifth examination, begins :
" If on the other hand his fever abates " (XVII18-14). It is followed by no diagnosis
but merges into suggestions for very simple treatment until the patient recovers.
Very often the text of the examination does not disclose the method by which the
surgeon makes a given observation, that is, the method is frequently taken for granted.
The following methods of observation, however, are either expressly stipulated in the
text, or are clearly implied.
(a) Answers elicited from the patient by questions which the surgeon addresses
to him. Regarding a man with a wound in the temple the surgeon says, " If thou
ask of him concerning his malady " (Case 20). Again of another man with a wound in
the same region it is stated, " It is painful when he hears speech " (or noise, Case 21),
an observation perhaps gained by questioning the sufferer.
(b) Ocular observations. In a case of a perforated temporal bone the surgeon is
charged, " Thou shouldst inspect his wound " (Case 19); the word rendered " inspect "
is the common verb " to see." Compare with this the injunction, " Thou shouldst
examine his wound " (Case 26), which without doubt implies more than visual observa-
tion. In a case of serious injury to the skull the surgeon observes facial distortion :
" both his eye-brows are drawn, while his face is as if he wept " (Case 7, III 11-12).
The color of the patient's face, or of a wound or swelling, is frequently mentioned as
a datum observed, e. g., ruddiness of the face (Case 7, III 10); paleness of the face
(Case 7, IV 4). In order to aid visual observation in Case 22 we find the following
directions regarding an ear affected by an injury in the temple, " Cleanse (the ear) for
him with a swab of linen until thou seest its fragments (of bone)." In order to aid
him in his observations the surgeon may also watch the effect or lack of effect when
he addresses a remark to the patient. Thus in Case 22, a compound comminuted
fracture of the temporal bone, the surgeon in this way demonstrates the patient's
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:04 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 67 ---
SPECIAL INTRODUCTION
41
speechlessness. In the case of an injury in the same region the surgeon discovers
that sound is painful to the patient's ear (Case 21), perhaps by watching some expres-
sion of pain on the patient's face, although it is possible that the patient actually
answers the surgeon's remark; see p. 40, (a).
(c) Olfactory observations. In a case of perforated sutures of the skull we find
that the surgeon observes that " the odor of the chest (crown) of his head is like the
urine of sheep " (Case 7, III 11).
(d) Tactile observations. Besides directions to probe, the surgeon is very often
charged, " Thou shouldst lay thy hand upon it " (the wound, Case 47). Again such an
application of the hand is often assumed, when a given condition is recorded as observable
" when thy hand touches him " (Case 89); " when thou pressest... with thy fingers "
(Case 40); " if thou puttest thy hand upon his breast upon these tumors, (and) thou
findest them very cool, there being no fever therein when thy hand touches him, . . .
and they are bulging to thy hand " (Case 45). Very often conditions are recorded as
observable " under thy fingers " (Case 4, II4 ; Case 6, II21 ; Case 8, IV 11, etc., etc.).
Among such observations it is important to notice that the pulsations of the human
heart are observed: " if... any physician put his hands (or) his fingers [upon the head,
upon the back of the] head, upon the two hands, upon the pulse, upon the two feet "
(Case 1, I 6-7). It is possible that this application of the hand or fingers is for the
purpose of enabling the surgeon to count the pulse. See commentary on Case I,
pp. 105-114. In the case of a dislocated mandible the surgeon is particularly in-
structed just how to place his fingers and his thumbs in order to force the bone back
into its place (Case 25), and we shall see that he was inclined to include this kind of
manipulation in the examination rather than in the treatment.
(e) Movements of parts of his body by the patient as directed by the surgeon. In
a serious injury of the skull the surgeon is instructed thus, " Thou shouldst cause him
(the patient) to lift his face " (Case 7, III 8). In examining injuries to the skull and
the cervical vertebrae, " he (the surgeon) says to him (the patient): - Look at thy two
shoulders ; ' should his doing so be painful (even though) his neck turns around (only)
a little, etc., etc." (Case 19). Similarly in treating a sprain in the cervical vertebrae
we find the surgeon charged thus, " Thou shouldst say to him : - Look at thy two
shoulders and thy breast;' when he does so the seeing possible to him is painful "
(Case 80). Again in a displacement of a cervical vertebra the same direction by the
surgeon to the patient is followed by the observation, " He is unable to turn his face
that he may look at his breast and his two shoulders" (Case 82). One of the most
interesting of these tests by the surgeon is in the last case in the treatise, a sprain in
the spinal vertebrae. The surgeon is directed as follows, " Thou shouldst say to him :
- Extend now thy two legs (and) contract them both (again).' When he extends them
both, he contracts them both immediately because of the pain, etc." (Case 48).
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:04 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 68 ---
42
THE SURGICAL TREATISE
We find that our ancient Egyptian practitioner was inclined to include some
things in the examination which the modern surgeon would obviously classify with
the treatment. It is quite natural that the cleansing of the ear to secure unobstructed
observation should be included in the examination (Case 22). On the other hand we
do not at first understand why our surgeon should include in the examination the
process of stitching a gaping flesh wound in six cases out of the seven in which this
mechanical process is prescribed (Cases 10, 14, 28, 26, 28, and 47). Similarly the
application of adhesive plaster to draw together a wound is placed by our treatise
in the examination (Case 47, XVII 8-4). We have already noted that the manipula-
tion of a dislocated mandible to force it back into its proper place is included in the
examination (Case 25). Over against these examples, however, it should be observed
that a replacement of dislocated clavicles (Case 84), the setting of a fractured clavicle
f (Case 85), and the setting of a dislocated humerus (Case 86) are all three included in
the treatment. Nevertheless it must be regarded as significant that eight out of
eleven surgical operations are classified by our treatise with the examination rather
than with the treatment. These facts suggest at least that what our ancient practi-
tioner regarded as constituting a proper treatment must include the use or application
of medicaments and recipes, the characteristic agencies of the physician, while the
operations of the surgeon, so often consisting exclusively of mechanical processes,
were not real treatment. He therefore placed the operation in the great majority
of cases in the examination, and reserved for his treatment the use or application of
alleviatory and curative medicaments, the recipes which so abound in all the other
medical documents of ancient Egypt, and are so few and unimportant in our surgical
treatise. There is here an intimation of a sharp distinction between the surgeon on
\\ the one hand and the physician on the other.
This distinction is illustrated by Case 9, the only case in our treatise, in which the
method is obviously that of the recipe-vending physician as distinguished from the
operating surgeon. The injury is a compound comminuted fracture of the frontal
bone. There is no examination at all, properly speaking, and the place of the examina-
tion has been filled up by the words : "If thou examinest a man having a wound
in his forehead, smashing the shell of his head." The introductory formula of the
examination is retained, but no observations of any kind are recorded, and even the
name of the injury is confusingly altered by the substitituon of the word " head " for
the word " skull" employed in the title. Immediately following the above alleged
examination is an absurd recipe for external application accompanied by a magical
charm to be repeated over it when it is applied. It is obviously not an accident that
the only typical case of the recipe-hawking physician in our treatise should contain
no other examination properly speaking than an inaccurately worded repetition of the
title. When we contrast this case and especially its lack of any observations in the
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:04 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 69 ---
SPECIAL INTRODUCTION
43
examination with the surgeon's careful observation whether a wound in the skull
is on the same side as the paralysis in the lower limbs (Case 8, IV 7), we cannot doubt
that a case from one of the recipe papyri has found its way into our surgical treatise.
Disregarding Case 9, we have in our treatise a series of fifty-seven examinations,
almost exclusively of injuries of the human body forming a group of observations
furnishing us with the earliest known nucleus of fact regarding the anatomy,
physiology, and pathology of the human body. Crude and elementary as they
are, the method by which they were collected was scientific, and these observa-
tions, together with the diagnoses and the explanatory commentary in the ancient
glosses, form the oldest body of science now extant.
Our treatise, then, is a series of discussions of injuries, not of diseases. In Case 89,
which discusses certain tumors or ulcers on the breast, we find that these may have
arisen from an injury ; and the only other instances of possible disease are two cases
of tumors or boils on the breast (Cases 45 and 46). The remaining forty-five cases are
all injuries. They range from slight flesh wounds to the gravest injuries to the bony
structure of the body—injuries from which the patient cannot possibly recover. Many
of these are such injuries as might have been incurred in the ordinary round of daily
civil life ; others were evidently the result of murderous attack, presumably in battle.
It is highly probably, if not certain, that our treatise is in part a record of surgical
experience in war. The word " wound " occurs no less than 142 times in the forty-
eight cases preserved. The reader should consult the commentary on the word
" wound " in Case 1 (pp. 81-84).
Omitting Cases 89, 45, and 46, a general list of the injuries described in the
remaining fifty-five examinations, arranged progressively from the less to the more
serious, is as follows :
Twelve Flesh Wounds .
Scalp wound ....
. Case
1
Gaping scalp wound
. Jl
2
Gaping wound in the eye-brow
,!
10
Wound in the nostril
. J)
14
Wound in the temple
,'
18
Perforation of the temple .
. J,
19
Slit in the outer ear ...
* ,,
28
Wound piercing the upper lip
* a
26
Gaping wound in the chin .
a
27
Wound in the throat piercing to the gullet .
. ''
28
Gaping wound in the shoulder
a
47
Infected wound in the breast
. 99
41
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:04 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 70 ---
44
THE SURGICAL TREATISE
Thirty-three Injuries to the Bones and Articulations :
Sprain of a cervical vertebra
„ „ the sterno-costal articulations
,, „ a spinal vertebra
Displacement of a cervical vertebra
Dislocation of the mandible
„ „ a cervical vertebra .
„ „ both clavicles
„ „ the ribs
Perforation of the skull
„ „ sutures of the skull
„ of bones of the maxillary-zygomatic
region
,, „ the temporal bone .
„ „ a cervical vertebra .
,, „ the sternum
Split in the skull .
„ „ maxilla
„ „ temporal bone
„ „ humerus
Fracture of the nose
nasal bone
mandible .
both clavicles
humerus .
„ with rupture of overlying
soft tissue
,, ribs
Compound comminuted fracture of the skull
Compound comminuted fracture of the skull with
rupture of meningeal membranes
Compound comminuted fracture of the skull dis
playing no external contusion .
Compound comminuted fracture of the frontal bone
,, „ ,, ,, nasal bone
„ „ „ „ temporal bone
Impacted fracture of a cervical vertebra .
Compound comminuted fracture of the maxilla
Case 80
42
48
82
25
81
84 (two examinations)
48
8
7 (three examinations)
15
20
29
40
4
16
21
88
11
12
24
85
30
37 (two examinations)
44
5
8 (two examinations)
9
18
22
88
17
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:04 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 71 ---
SPECIAL INTRODUCTION
45
Full discussion of the above injuries and ailments will be found in the commentary
accompanying the various cases. The range of these cases from the skull downward to the
thorax and spinal vertebrae but not further downward is of course due to the loss of the
continuation of the manuscript, which stops at the first case concerning the spinal ver-
tebrae. This is the more regrettable in view of the fact that the inclusion of injuries of
the brain (especially Case 6) would suggest that we might have expected in the lost portion
the consideration of injuries of the internal organs, like the heart, lungs, stomach, etc.
The most noticeable gap in the type of injury treated is the lack of simple and less
serious fracture of the skull. Simple fracture of a bone like the clavicle or the humerus is
duly included (Cases 85 and 86), but in discussing injuries of the head the surgeon passes
from scalp wounds directly to a perforation or split of the calvaria, and thence directly
to compound comminuted fractures of the skull, including rupture of the meningeal
membranes. It is possible that his use of the word " split" may have been loose enough
to include the simple fracture. The reader should consult the commentary on Case 4.
Besides the injuries listed above, there is of course a considerable list of accompany-
ing symptoms, local affections, and various pathological consequences noticed by the
ancient surgeon in discussing the successive cases. For these the reader is referred
to the text of the commentary on each case. It is needless to say that the present
editor does not possess the competence to put together a comprehensive discussion on
the pathological knowledge displayed in this ancient treatise. It is highly desirable
that this should be done. Probably the most important fact disclosed by our treatise
is the surgeon's discovery of the brain as the seat of nervous control of the body, and
his knowledge of the fact that such control in the brain was localized.
8. The Diagnosis
The diagnosis is always introduced by the words: " Thou shouldst
say concerning him " (the patient), addressed to the student or young surgeon by some
unknown speaker, presumably the unknown lecturer, or author of the treatise. As
we have found to be the case in the examination, the form of the diagnosis likewise
is that of the instruction of a master addressed to a pupil. The concluding statement
of the diagnosis, however, consists of an utterance very often in theirs* person, being
a statement placed in the mouth of the student or young surgeon by the instructor.
What the young practitioner or student is thus charged to say, therefore, consists of two
parts: first, " One having ... (followed by the description of the ailment); and second,
a concluding statement by the young surgeon himself in the first person, expressing his
coming course of action toward the case. The diagnosis thus has the following form :
" Thou shouldst say concerning him " (the patient):
a. " - One having . . . ' " (followed by the description of the ailment).
b. " - An ailment which I will treat'."
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:04 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 72 ---
46
THE SURGICAL TREATISE
The second part (b) of the above diagnosis is always one of three different state-
ments, varying according to the degree of seriousness disclosed by the symptoms in
the case. These three statements are as follows :
1. "An ailment which I will treat."
2. " An ailment with which I will contend."
8. " An ailment not to be treated."
It will be seen then, that on the basis of an examination, our treatise classifies all
cases under three categories, as: 1. Certainly successfully treatable; 2. possibly
curable ; and 8. untreatable. These three verdicts are not prognoses ; they are not
so much statements regarding the cases, as they are each the surgeon's declaration
of his own future course of procedure. Each verdict is simply a practical statement
of the course the surgeon proposes to follow toward a case disclosed by the examination
to be such and such.
The question might be raised as to whether the verdict belongs to the diagnosis
or to the treatment, for it follows the former and precedes the latter, and might be
considered as belonging to either. In two cases we have the verdict connected by
a preposition directly with the treatment. In Case 89 the surgeon says, " An ailment
which I will treat with the fire-drill; " and in Case 46 he says, " An ailment which
I will treat with cold applications." The same connection is found four times in
Papyrus Ebers, when the surgeon four times says, " An ailment which I will treat with
the lancet " (e. g. Pap. Ebers 106, 20). It is probable that these six occurrences of an
inseparable connection between verdict and treatment are simply illustrations of the
naturally close relation between the two in the mind of the Egyptian. Grammatically
we cannot doubt that the verdict is part of the diagnosis ; for being always expressed
in the first person it is obviously a part of the utterance of the surgeon following the
injunction, " Thou shouldst say," as already demonstrated in the above discussion.
In the cases where the verdict constitutes the entire diagnosis, the words " Thou
shouldst say concerning him " have not been prefixed. There are only three such
cases in the treatise. Of these, two (6 and 8, second diagnosis) have verdict 8, and in
the third (the second diagnosis of Case 84) it is obvious that verdict 1 is an error of
the ancient scribe for verdict 8. Disregarding the purely alleviatory measures in
Case 6, we find that no treatment follows any of these three verdicts, and we might
here understand that verdict 8 more or less fills the entire blank left by the lack of
diagnosis or treatment.
Logically the diagnosis as a whole is a conclusion based on conditions established
by the examination and stated there. The diagnosis is grammatically an apodosis,
of which the examination is the protasis. On this point the above discussion of the
examination should be compared. In the forty-eight cases discussed in our treatise
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:04 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 73 ---
SPECIAL INTRODUCTION
47
there are fifty-two of these verdicts. Five cases contain two verdicts, according as
the surgeon's findings vary (Cases 7, 8, 84, 87, and 47). As we have already noticed
in discussing the examination (pp. 42-48), Case 9 contains no such verdict. The lack
of this characteristic, together with the fact that the case contains no diagnosis of any
kind, relegates this case to the class of magical recipes drawn from the recipe papyri
employed by the recipe-vending physicians. Its presence does not alter the unique
character of our treatise, as an assemblage of over fifty groups of symptoms, each
group the result of an examination and followed by the surgeon's verdict in every
case. It should be noted that the word unique employed in the preceding statement
is applied with exactness. None of the other surviving medical papyri of ancient
Egypt contains such a body of case discussions, each one thus assigned to one of three
different classes. Indeed verdict No. 8, " an ailment not to be treated," is unknown
in any of the other Egyptian medical papyri, and is therefore one of the important
evidences of the unique character of the Edwin Smith Surgical Papyrus (see
commentary, Case 5, II 15). Verdict No. 2, " an ailment which I will contend
with," is found twice in Papyrus Ebers (105, 12, and 105, 19-20), but is unknown
otherwise outside of the Edwin Smith Papyrus (see commentary, Case 4, II 6).
As might be expected, verdict No. 1 is better known. It is found twice in the
Berlin Medical Papyrus (No. 8088, Nos. 154 and 161), once in the Hearst Papyrus
(No. 174; 12, 2) and sixteen times in Papyrus Ebers, fourteen of which are in
the concluding group of suppurating sores at the end of the papyrus (see com-
mentary herein on Case 1,12). In referring to these verdicts or statements by the
surgeon, it will be found convenient to designate them by the numbers already given
them above, and call them verdict 1, verdict 2 or verdict 8, as the case may require.
The most important among them, as we have already seen, is verdict 8. Although
unknown in any of the other ancient Egyptian medical papyri, it occurs, as already
stated above, no less than fourteen times in Papyrus Edwin Smith. In one of these
cases (Case 17), this verdict has been inserted by evident error of the scribe. Of the
remaining thirteen all but three are left without any suggestion of treatment, and in
the three exceptions the treatise suggests only slight alleviatory measures not expected
to cure. The inclusion of these thirteen hopeless cases (about one fourth of the material
in the treatise as preserved to us) is a remarkable evidence of the surgeon's scientific
interest in recording and discussing the observable facts in a group of cases for which
he could suggest no treatment. The papyri which contain nothing else but recipes,
that is treatments, have of course found no place for such discussions, and this fact
emphasizes the significance of our papyrus as consisting of a group of observed cases,
quite irrespective of the possibility of treatment, which in the majority of the cases
that he declines to treat is not even mentioned.
Parallel with the systematic use of these three verdicts is a similar series of temporal
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:04 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 74 ---
48
THE SURGICAL TREATISE
clauses bearing more directly on the condition of the patient, although not so regularly
employed, and placed at the end of the treatment. These read :
A. " Until he recovers."
B. " Until the period of his injury passes by."
C. " Until thou knowest that he has reached a decisive point."
Of these clauses A is commonly used with verdict 1, B is found with all three
verdicts, while C properly belongs to doubtful cases with verdict 2. See commentary
on these three clauses in Case 1 (18), Case 8 (I 28) and Case 4, Gloss C. They do not
add any precision to the verdict itself, except possibly in the case of A, which intimates
certain recovery.
To an understanding of the real significance of the ancient surgeon's diagnosis,
it is essential to observe that in the verdict, b, at the end of the diagnosis, we have a
statement invariably present, and fairly precise in its practical indications for the
surgeon. Indeed, as we have already noted, in three cases (6, 8, and 84), the verdict
constitutes the entire diagnosis. This is the more intelligible, when we note that in the
first two cases (6 and 8) it is verdict 8 which thus serves as the entire diagnosis. In
Case 84 likewise there can be no doubt that verdict 8 also served as the entire diagnosis,
although the notoriously inaccurate scribe has written verdict 1 (see commentary on
Case 84, second diagnosis, XI 22).1 The verdict, therefore, which might sometimes
stand alone as a sufficient diagnosis, might very naturally be accompanied, if at all, by
only a very brief additional description of the case in a. The following statistics
are instructive:
A. Diagnosis consists of b, that is, a verdict only . . . .8 cases
B. Diagnosis consists of a and b, thus :
1. a, a verbatim repetition of the title only, + b . . . 20 „
2. a, an abbreviated repetition of the examination, + b . . . 15 „
8. a, including conclusions based on observations stated in the
examination, + b . 12 „
It will be seen that the only indispensable part of the diagnosis is b, the verdict.
We observe also that the verdict may be preceded either, first, by a mere mention of
the name of the case, or second, by a repetition of some of the observations stated in
the examination, or third and finally, by a statement of conclusions based on the
observations brought out by the examination.2 This third group, consisting of thirteen
1 The lack of any diagnosis in Case 9 has been discussed above, p. 47. It is due to the fact
that Case 9 is not a case discussion, as are all the other 47 cases in our treatise, but simply a recipe.
In view of this fact the lack of a verdict has no significance.
* The above statistics are, by cases, as follows :
1. a is verbatim repetition of title only in Cases 2,10, 11,12, 13, 15,16, 18, 25, 30, 32, 34, 35, 36,
38, 42, 43, 45 (title even abbreviated in diagnosis), 46, 48 ; total 20 cases.
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:04 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 75 ---
SPECIAL INTRODUCTION
49
diagnoses containing conclusions drawn directly from observations recorded in the
examination, forms perhaps the most important body of materials in the whole treatise;
for they constitute the earliest existent evidences of an inductive process in the history
of the human mind, in so far as the surviving documents have revealed it to us. It
is interesting to note that such conclusions have been made in about one fourth of the
cases preserved to us in this document. It will be worth while, therefore, to enumerate
these twelve cases, and examine briefly the conclusions made in the diagnoses.
In the first case in the treatise, although its fragmentary condition requires much
restoration, a superficial wound in the head is found by the surgeon in the examination
to be a rupture of the overlying soft tissue, " not having a gash ; " and in the diagnosis
he concludes that " his wound does not have two lips."
In Case 7, a wound in the head, penetrating the skull, the surgeon's examination
discloses that "it is painful for him to open his mouth " (III 8). Thereupon the
surgeon states among other things in the diagnosis: " the cord of his mandible is
contracted," perhaps indicating that the patient is suffering from tetanus. Otherwise
the diagnosis is a repetition of the examination. On the basis of alternative symptoms
(III 8-12) the surgeon formulates a second diagnosis (III 12-18), but the only new
conclusion unfortunately contains an unintelligible term (°(] 3^<=, tJ/'). See commentary.
Case 8 contains the most important diagnosis in the treatise. The examination
has disclosed an unusual case : a compound comminuted fracture of the skull without
any visible external injury. As phrased in the examination the injury is " a smash
in his skull under the skin of his head, there being no wound at all upon it." This
is explained in a gloss as meaning, " a smash of the shell of his skull, the flesh of his
head being uninjured " (IV 12-18). It is obvious that the lack of any externally
visible trace of the injury might easily mislead the practitioner to conclude that the
patient's condition of partial paralysis of the lower limbs on the same side as the
injury, and distortion of the eye likewise on the same side as the injury, might be due
to disease. The ancient author was so keenly aware of the real nature of the facts in
the case and the character of the conclusion to be set forth in the diagnosis, that he
forgot entirely his otherwise invariable formula for introducing the diagnosis (" Thou
shouldst say concerning him," etc.), and began the warning diagnosis at once with the
admonishing words : " Thou shouldst account him one whom something entering
from the outside has smitten " (IV 7-8). This immediate insistence on the external
cause, as contrasted with some internal disease, is further interestingly explained in
a gloss which states, " As for - One whom something entering from the outside has
smitten,' ... it means one whom something entering from the outside presses, on
2. a is abbreviated repetition of examination in Cases 3, 4, 5, 14, 21, 23, 26, 27, 28, 33, 37 (twice),
40, 41, 44, 47 ; total 15 cases.
3. a includes conclusions based on observations stated in the examination in Cases 1, 7 (twice),
8, 17, 19, 20, 22, 24, 29, 31, 39, 47 ; total 12 cases.
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:04 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 76 ---
50
THE SURGICAL TREATISE
the side of him having this injury " (Gloss C, IV 15-16). The attention given to the
side of the head which has received the injury, in connection with a specific reference
to the side of the body nervously affected, is in itself evidence that in this case the
ancient surgeon was already beginning observations on the localization of functions
in the brain. We have here the earliest known observations on the connection between
the brain and the nervous system, disclosing to us man for the first time dimly aware
of the mysteries of his own body and its intelligent control. It was interest in this
problem which led our ancient surgeon to make these observations ; for he concludes
his diagnosis with verdict 8, and can suggest only attention to the sufferer's comfort,
without hope of his recovery. The entire extraordinary diagnosis is due to the surgeon's
scientific interest in the case. Detailed discussion of this case will be found in the
commentary on Case 8 below.
In Case 17, a compound comminuted fracture of the maxilla, the surgeon notes
in the examination : " it is painful when he opens his mouth because of it" (the injury).
The brief diagnosis is made up chiefly of repetition of the statements in the examina-
tion, but adds, " he is speechless." The inclusion of this observation in the diagnosis,
rather than in the examination, suggests that the surgeon has made the conclusion
that the patient is speechless from the observation that it is painful for him to open
his mouth. In Case 18 (VI 6), the observation, " he is speechless," is included in the
examination, where it would seem more properly to belong. The grammatical con-
struction of examination as a group of observed conditions, and of diagnosis as a group
of conclusions based on the observed conditions, is obvious, but the line drawn by
the surgeon between observation and conclusion was not always a sharp one, as this
example shows.
In this respect the next case (19) is much clearer. The patient has suffered a per-
foration of the temple, possibly affecting the bone. In the examination we find the
following: " Thou shouldst inspect his wound, saying to him, - Look at thy two
shoulders.' Should his doing so be painful, (even though) his neck turns around
(only) a little for him," etc., etc. Thereupon the diagnosis states : " He suffers with
stiffness in his neck ; " but otherwise contains only a repetition of the title.
In the next case, a wound in the temple perforating the bone (Case 20), the exami-
nation is one of the most interesting, and certainly the most picturesque in the whole
treatise. The diagnosis, as in Case 19, affirms stiffness in the neck, although the
examination does not refer to the matter at all, as in Case 19. Speechlessness, how-
ever, affirmed in the diagnosis, is carefully based on the facts of the examination, as
we see by rendering the statements concerned, just as they stand in examination and
diagnosis: "If thou examinest a man having a wound in his temple, . . .; if thou ask
of him concerning his malady and he speak not to thee ; . . .; thou shouldst say con-
cerning him,- One having a wound in his temple,.. . (and) he is speechless '."
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:04 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 77 ---
SPECIAL INTRODUCTION
51
In Case 22, a compound comminuted fracture of the temporal bone, we find in
the examination, " if thou callest to him (and) he is speechless and cannot speak."
Here the examination has included both the observation and the conclusion; and
in stating the conclusion as the diagnosis does (" he is speechless," VIII18), it simply
repeats the logical process already anticipated by the conclusion stated in the examina-
tion. The diagnosis concludes that there is a discharge of blood from the nostrils,
based on observations in the examination; but its statement that the patient suffers
with stiffness of the neck is not drawn from any observation in the examination.
The discussion of the fractured mandible in Case 24 does not exhibit a very clear
logical connection between examination and diagnosis, and suggests that the surgeon
in pronouncing such a diagnosis, was often drawing on experience tacitly assumed,
and nowhere expressed. We find in this diagnosis two statements which are really
new observations: "the wound over it (the fracture) being broken open, . . . (and) he
has fever from it." The examination does not contain any basis for these statements.
Case 29, a gaping wound in a cervical vertebra, furnishes a good illustration of
close connection between diagnosis and examination. The latter states, " he is unable
to look at his two shoulders and his breast," corresponding to which the diagnosis
concludes : " he suffers with stiffness in his neck." Otherwise the diagnosis is repeti-
tion of the examination.
In Case 81, a dislocation of a cervical vertebra, the examination discloses among
other interesting evidences of paralysis, the fact that " urine drops from his member
without his knowing it." The diagnosis then concludes " his urine dribbles." In
an explanatory gloss (X 21-22) we are told that this statement " his urine dribbles,"
means " that urine drops from his phallus, and cannot hold back for him," indicating
the paralysis of the controlling nerves concerned.
Case 89 concerning obscure ulcers or tumors on the breast, perhaps resulting from
some injury, is a difficult case to understand. The examination discloses that " swell-
ings have spread with pus over his breast," and the diagnosis concludes that the
patient has tumors on his breast which " produce feists1 of pus."
Finally in Case 47, a gaping wound in the shoulder, the mention of fever (XVII11)
is probably rather a new observation than a conclusion based on observations in the
examination.
4. The Treatment
In discussing the foregoing list of fifty-eight examinations, the ancient surgeon does
not always decide to treat. It is an important fact in properly appraising our treatise,
that out of fifty-eight examinations the surgeon omits all suggestion of treatment in
sixteen. These sixteen instances are an extraordinary evidence of the surgeon's interest
in the pathological conditions exhibited, as mere knowledge of the human body and
its workings. They form a unique group in Egyptian medicine ; for the other medical
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:04 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 78 ---
52
THE SURGICAL TREATISE
papyri known to us, made up as they are exclusively of recipes, by their very nature
constitute a series of treatments, whereas as we have stated, these sixteen instances
in Papyrus Edwin Smith consist of a body of observations which lead the surgeon to
the conclusion that no treatment is to be undertaken.
Twelve of these sixteen instances have the unfavorable verdict 8 appended, and of
these twelve, ten are followed by no suggested action of any kind; while of the
remaining two, one suggests a sitting posture for the patient (Case 8,1), and the other
(Case 5) warns against binding and prescribes a normal diet without any medicine.
Three of the sixteen have the uncertain verdict 2, for one of which (Case 21) the surgeon
can suggest only normal diet; for another (Case 45) he explicitly states, " There is no
treatment," while he makes no suggestion for Case 47, III. Finally one of the
sixteen (Case 47, II2), an unfavorable alternative development of the case, receives
no verdict at all, and suggests no treatment beyond the caution against binding, and
the admonition to normal diet without the use of any medicine.
List of cases omitting treatment, either by explicit instructions or by omission of
all reference to any treatment:
Case 45. Bulging tumors on the breast;
Case 47, II 1. Gaping flesh wound in shoulder
with inflammation and discharge ;
Case 47, II 2. Gaping flesh wound in shoulder
and persistent fever;
Case 31. Dislocation of a cervical vertebra ;
Case 34, II. Dislocation of both clavicles with
rupture of overlying soft tissue ;
Case 7, II. Perforation of sutures of the skull;
symptoms of tetanus;
Case 21. Split in the temporal bone ;
Case 24. Fracture of the mandible ;
Case 37, II. Fracture of the humerus; rupture
of overlying soft tissue ;
Case 44. Fractured ribs, overlying flesh wound,
ribs broken through (probably com-
pound fracture);
Case 5. Compound comminuted fracture of the
skull;
Case 8,1. Compound comminuted fracture of the
skull, no visible external contusion ;
Case 8,11. Same, with less favorable conditions;
Case 13. Compound comminuted fracture of the
nasal bone;
Case 22. Compound comminuted fracture of the
temporal bone;
Case 33. Impacted fracture of a cervical vertebra;
Verdict 2 ; statement: " There is no treatment."
Verdict 2; all reference to treatment omitted.
No verdict; binding forbidden ; normal diet,
without medicine.
Verdict 3 ; all reference to treatment omitted.
Verdict 31; „ „ „ „ „
Verdict 3; „ „ ,, ,,
Verdict 2 ; normal diet, no medicine.
Verdict 3 ; all reference to treatment omitted.
Verdict 3; „ „ „ „ „
Verdict 3; „ „ ,, „ „
Verdict 3; binding forbidden, normal diet,
without medicine.
Verdict 3 ; sitting posture till crisis.
Verdict 3 ; all reference to treatment omitted.
Verdict 3: „ „ „ „
Verdict 3; „ ,, „ ,, „
Verdict 3; „ „ ,, ,, —
It will be seen that in this group of almost exclusively very serious cases, if the
surgeon has any hope of recovery at all, he depends on nature to do its healing work.
1 Verdict 1 by error.
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:04 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 79 ---
SPECIAL INTRODUCTION
53
He may take precautions, like the sitting posture in Case 8.1, but the recovery is the
work of nature, not of any remedies the surgeon can offer. This is the doctrine which
is later so prominent in Hippocratic medicine.
Out of forty-five injuries in our treatise, there are forty-two instances in which
treatment is prescribed at some stage. This treatment may be :
(a) Exclusively mechanical or surgical (8 cases).
(b) A combination of purely surgical treatment with external use of medicaments
(20 cases).
(c) Exclusive use of medicaments externally applied (19 cases).
(a) Exclusively mechanical or surgical treatment
The mechanical appliances and processes upon which our surgeon relied do not
form a long list, but they are of interest in view of the fact that some of them appear
in our document for the first time in the literature of surgery. It is a remarkable
fact that actual physical survivals of evidence of surgical procedure in ancient Egypt,
as recovered by modern investigation, have been unexpectedly scanty. A systematic
study of the large number of hard bronze implements now preserved in our museums
would undoubtedly disclose a certain number which are demonstrably surgical in-
struments. The writer has himself noticed small knives which had every appearance
of being scalpels and lancets; but no thoroughgoing and exhaustive examination of all
such surviving implements by a surgeon or an archeologist familiar with ancient surgical
appliances has ever been made. We are still awaiting a final monograph on this subject .1
It has been stated that " there is a complete absence of evidence, in all bodies
[ancient burials] hitherto examined, of surgical procedure apart from splints." 2 It
is indeed true that the only additional evidence of surgical procedure disclosed by the
ancient bodies, besides Dr. G. Elliot Smith's discovery of splints, is Dr. Hooton's
observation of the boring of a Fourth Dynasty mandible for the purpose of draining
an abscess under a tooth.3 While very little evidence of the surgical processes employed
has survived in the ancient bodies, it is to be remarked, however, that the success of
Egyptian surgery in setting broken bones is very fully demonstrated in the large
number of well-joined fractures found in the ancient skeletons. Unfortunately these
do not reveal the method employed by the operator. Under these circumstances the
written evidence to be drawn from our papyrus is the more interesting.
List of surgical processes and devices in Pap. Edwin Smith :
Lint, made from a vegetable tissue, and frequently applied both as a vehicle for
1 Historians of medicine have taken casual notice of such instruments, and Egyptian surgical
instruments of bronze have been collected by Prof. Meyer-Steineg. See Meyer-Steineg and Sudhoff,
Geschichte der Medicin, Jena, 2d ed., 1922, p. 29, abb. 16.
* G. Elliot Smith and Warren R. Dawson, Egyptian Mummies, London, 1924, p. 161.
* See Harvard African Studies, I, Dr. E. A. Hooton, " Oral Surgery in Egypt during the Old
Empire," PI. I. See also infra, PI. I, Fig. 1.
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:04 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 80 ---
54
THE SURGICAL TREATISE
the medicaments externally used, and as an absorbent of blood, secretions, etc. It
was called ^Hhftt; see full commentary in Case 1 (I 8).
Plugs or swabs of linen usually in pairs, inserted into the nostrils in cases of injury
to the nose, both for the purpose of cleansing, and when saturated with a medicament,
for the purpose of applying the latter. They are called ^^^—cf1j " i$m-wy of
linen." See full commentary in Case 7 (III 18), Case 11 (V 11), and Case 14 (VI 9-11).
Bandages, made of linen and manufactured for surgical use by the embalmers, at
least in the case of a particular bandage known as " covering for physicians' use "
(Case 9, IV 21). The commonest Egyptian word for " bandage " is ^, although
this word occurs in only three cases in our document (Case 2, I 16, Case 9, V 5 and
Case 10, V 9 ; see commentary, V 5), for the probable reason that the discussion, in
its instructions to the surgeon, regularly employs the verb, that is wt, " to bind "
(see Case 1,12) or Q^wdy, "toapply" (see Case 11, V11-12). Medicaments applied
externally were almost always bandaged on. The art of mummification developed
surprising skill in bandaging.
Adhesive plaster, made of bands or strips of linen, always in pairs, especially applied
transversely across gaping flesh wounds, or as the ancient surgeon himself said, " to
the two hps of the gaping wound, in order to cause that one join to the other " (Case
10, V9). Such plaster was called —'j3! "two '-ivyoi linen." (See commentary
in Case 2, I 15 and Case 10, V 9). See also following paragraph.
Surgical stitching, for the first time in the history of ancient surgery, as far as
known to us. In a list of six " gaping wounds," all of them flesh wounds, the
surgeon is in each case charged, as for example in Case 10, a gaping wound over
the eye-brow, " Thou shouldst draw together for him his gash with stitching." The
new word designating the noun " stitching " or the verb " to stitch " is 1]^^ ydr.
See commentary on Case 10, V 6. At stages in these cases the surgeon used also his
adhesive plaster. Whether the surgeon is applying plaster, or using stitching, the result
of the process is in both cases designated by the verb ndry, " to draw together."
Cauterization, also for the first time in ancient medical literature as early as this.
It occurs in only one treatment, in a case of unidentified tumors or ulcers on the breast.
The verb is S'm, " to burn," and the instrument employed was the fire-stick or fire-
drill used by the Egyptians for kindling fire. See commentary in Case 89, XIII6 and 7.
Splints or braces of three different kinds were known to the practice of the
surgeons, as described in the Papyrus Edwin Smith :
(1) A " brace of wood padded with linen," for insertion in the mouth of a patient
suffering with constriction of ligaments controlling the mandible (tetanus ?), in
order to hold the mouth open and permit feeding with liquid food. It is called
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:04 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 81 ---
SPECIAL INTRODUCTION
55
(2) A kind of splint said to be " of linen " is applied in two different fractures of
the humerus (Cases 86 and 87) and one of the clavicle (Case 85). In view of the
ancient wooden splints, carefully wound or even padded with linen, as found by
Dr. Elliot Smith, this Egyptian term —c={Pj " sS of linen " may designate possibly
a wooden splint wound with linen, the modifier, " of linen " being loosely used. See
commentary on Case 7 (III 18). On the other hand it is conceivable that a " sS of
linen " may be a strip of stiff " cartonnage " moulded to the broken limb, and much
resembling the modern surgical cast in its physical make-up. See commentary on
Case 7 (III 18) and Case 12 (V 18).
(8) A stiff roll of linen, made by rolling a strip of linen into a more or less solid and
rigid post. It was used especially where a soft splint or support was needed, as applied
to a broken nose (Cases 11 and 12) or a dislocated clavicle (Case 84). See commentary
on Case 11 (V 18). They were called Ji^JJ—Yj literally " posts of linen."
Supports for maintaining a patient upright in a sitting posture, especially in cases
of injury to the skull producing a condition which makes motion dangerous and forbids
lying down. These supports are always in pairs and are made of sun-dried brick, or
adobe, probably moulded to fit the figure of the patient, on each side under his arms.
They were called ^U^^n~'^Jn " two supports of adobe." See commentary
on Case 4 (II 7).
Additions to this hst of surgical devices might be made from Papyrus Ebers.
List of cases prescribing exclusively mechanical or surgical treatment:
Case 39. Tumors or ulcers on the breast perhaps Verdict 1. Cauterization ; " wound treatment."
arising from an injury ;
Case 48. Sprain in spinal vertebra ; Verdict 1. Patient placed prostrate on his back.
N.B.: End of document leaves treatment
incomplete.
Case 7, III. Perforation of sutures of skull; No verdict. Linen-padded, wooden brace to hold
symptoms of tetanus; final more mouth open in order to feed liquid food;
favorable stage; sitting posture supported on adobe props.
(b) Combination of surgical treatment with external use of medicaments
In twenty cases we find a combination of purely surgical treatment with the
external application of medicaments. The simplest flesh wounds are drawn together
by adhesive plaster in strips, as in Case 2, a scalp wound, and Case 27, a flesh wound in
the chin. If the flesh wound is deeper or forms a yawning gash, and in one case even
though the bone beneath is injured, the surgeon resorts to stitching, which we find
in a list of seven cases (Cases 8,10,14, 28, 26, 28, and 47). Full discussion of stitching
will be found in Case 10 (V 6). In some cases both stitching and adhesive plaster
were employed in succession on the same wound.
Passing from flesh wounds to injuries to the bones we find the reduction of dis-
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:04 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 82 ---
56
THE SURGICAL TREATISE
locations carefully described, e. g., dislocated clavicle (Case 84). The reduction of
a dislocated mandible (Case 25) is described in terms showing that the position of the
surgeon's hands was identical with that depicted in the illustration of the same
operation in the commentary on Hippocrates by Apollonius of Kitium in the first
century B.c. (see PI. VI). The treatise describes also the reduction of a number of
broken bones. We find among others directions for setting a fracture of the clavicle (Case
85), and two different fractures of the humerus (Cases 86 and 87). When the injured
humerus is accompanied by a serious rupture of the overlying soft tissue the injury is
regarded as fatal. With each of these fractures two of the splints called J^^^^y3!
" sS of linen " were applied, as the Egyptian said " one of the two on the inside of his
arm (humerus), the other of the two on the underside of his arm " (XII18). This is
in contrast with the two cases of fracture (femur and forearm) which Elliot Smith
found still wrapped in the surgeon's splints. In the case of each fracture the splints
were three in number. The modern usage in native village practice is with two splints,
just as prescribed in our papyrus.1
The effectiveness of the Egyptian surgeon's methods in the use of such splints is
demonstrated by Elliot Smith's report on more than a hundred examples of fracture
of the forearm. He found among these only one example of ununited fracture of the
ulna, and, as he further says, " in spite of the fact that a certain proportion of the cases
of fracture (always due to direct violence) must have been compound, only one of my
series (of more than 100 examples) shows any signs of suppuration having occurred." 2
In view of the frequency of fracture of the forearm as found still visible in ancient
Egyptian bodies, it is remarkable that our treatise leaves the arm, after discussing two
cases of fracture of the humerus, without any reference to fracture of the forearm.
A broken nose, or a fractured nasal bone, or a dislocated clavicle, must be supported
in place by softer splints, stiff rolls of linen, called Jl^Jlj'—^pj " posts of linen."
See Cases 11 and 12 and Case 84.
The surgeon was evidently at a loss regarding the immediate mechanical manipula-
tion of a serious fracture of the skull. He recognized the imporjance of quiet, as we
have seen above (p. 55), combined with a sitting posture maintained by adobe piers
supporting the patient upright, with normal diet but with no binding of the injury
and no medicine (see Case 4). After initial probing, however, it would seem that no
direct manipulation of the wound was attempted. Neither do the surviving bodies
show any indications that the process of trepanning was practised by ancient Egyptian
surgeons.
It is an interesting fact that in our ancient treatise there is a sharp distinction
between such mechanical and surgical manipulations as we have been discussing and
the treatment with medicaments. In nearly all these cases of injury the surgeon is
1 Dr. G. Elliot Smith, The British Medical Journal, 1908, V. 1, p. 734. s Ibid., p. 733.
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:04 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 83 ---
SPECIAL INTRODUCTION 57
charged to probe the wound, a process carried out with the fingers in most instances,
that is, palpation. It is natural that the directions to probe should be included in
the examination, to which the probing would contribute essential information ; but
we would not expect that a process like the reduction of a dislocation or the stitching of
a flesh wound should be included in the text of the examination. Nevertheless such
is often the case in Papyrus Edwin Spnith. The directions for the reduction of the
dislocated mandible in Case 25 are all included in the examination. Of our seven
examples of surgical stitching, six include the directions to do so in the examination.
The distinction between surgical and medical practice here suggested has been
discussed above (p. 42).
In the therapeutic which the surgeon combined with the above purely surgical
procedures, he was still in an archaic stage, suggesting that surgery was far in advance
of medicine. In nearly all the cases which our surgeon regarded as at all treatable,
he followed up his surgery with the application of medicaments. These were for the
most part very primitive in character. His favorite remedy was " fresh meat "
regularly applied to a wound on the first day, but no longer, and usually followed by
a daily application of lint saturated with an ointment of grease and honey. In cases
of great soreness of the tissues, as after the reduction of a dislocated mandible, he
applied a mixture of honey and an unknown mineral called imru (ymrw). All of these
medicaments were regularly bound on. We shall later see that some of his materia
medica were useful agents.
List of cases combining surgery with external use of medicaments :
Flesh Wounds (except the last, Case 8)
Case 2. Flesh wound in the scalp ;
Case 27. Flesh wound in the chin ;
Case 10. Flesh wound in eye-brow ;
Case 14. Flesh wound in one side of nose ;
Case 23. Slit in outer ear ;
Case 26. Flesh wound in upper lip ;
Case 28. I. Wound in the throat penetrating to
the gullet;
Drawn together with adhesive plaster; fresh
meat bound on, first day; then honey-oint-
ment on lint, bound on.
Drawn together with adhesive plaster; fresh
meat bound on, first day; then honey-oint-
ment on lint, bound on.
Drawn together with stitching; fresh meat bound
on, first day; followed by adhesive plaster;
honey-ointment.
Drawn together with stitching; cleansed with
two swabs of linen ; fresh meat bound on, first
day ; honey-ointment on lint, bound on.
Drawn together with stitching ; stiff rolls of linen
as supports behind ear; honey-ointment on
lint, bound on.
Drawn together with stitching ; fresh meat bound
on, first day ; honey-ointment.
Drawn together with stitching ; fresh meat bound
on, first day; honey-ointment on lint, bound
on ; 28 II, dry lint; normal diet, no medicine.
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:04 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 84 ---
68
THE SURGICAL TREATISE
Case 47, II. Gaping flesh wound in the shoulder; Drawn together with stitching ; fresh meat bound
on, first day.
Case 47,1 2. Same, second stage; Adhesive plaster; honey-ointment on lint,
bound on.
Case 47, II 3. Same ; fever and inflammation Honey-ointment on lint, bound on.
abate;
Case 3. Perforation of the skull; Drawn together with stitching ; fresh meat
applied without binding, first day; normal
diet, no medicine; honey-ointment on lint,
bound on.
Case 34, I. Dislocation of both clavicles j
Case 25. Dislocated mandible ;
Case 35. Fracture of both clavicles ;
Case 36. Fracture of humerus ;
I. Fracture of humerus, with rupture of
overlying soft tissue ;
Case 37,
Case 11. Broken nose ;
Case 12. Fracture of nasal bone ;
Case 4. Split in the skull;
Bone injuries
Reduction of dislocated bones ; application of
stiff linen rolls as splints ; honey-ointment.
Reduction of dislocated bone; irnru and honey
bound on.
Reduction of fractured bones ; application of
«£-splinta ; imru bound on ; afterward honey
every day.
Reduction of fractured bone; application of
«i-splints ; imru bound on ; afterward honey
every day.
Reduction omitted; application of *s-splints;
imru bound on ; afterward honey-ointment
on lint every day.
Cleansing nostrils with two swabs of linen ; in-
sertion of two swabs of greased linen to reduce
swelling ; application of two stiff rolls of linen
as splints; honey-ointment on lint, bound on.
Reduction of fracture; cleansing nostrils with
two swabs of linen ; insertion of two plugs of
greased linen ; application of stiff rolls of linen
as splints ; honey-ointment on lint, bound on.
Warning against binding; sitting posture sup-
. ported on two adobe piers; normal diet, no
medicine; grease applied to head, neck, and
shoulders.
(c) Exclusive use of medicaments externally applied
In nineteen instances we find our surgeon suggests no treatment other than the ex-
ternal application of medicaments. This is not surprising in the treatment of a group
of flesh wounds, like a scalp wound (Case 1), a wound in the temple (Case 18), or a per-
foration in the temple (Case 19), an infected wound in the breast (Case 41), or finally
an abscess in the breast (Case 46). It is likewise to be expected in sprains, as of a
cervical vertebra (Case 80), or the sterno-costal articulations (Case 42); or even of
a perforation of the bone, e.g., in the region of the maxilla and zygoma (Case 15), the
temporal bone (Case 20), a cervical vertebra (Case 29), or the sternum (Case 40).
Perhaps it is a recognition of the surgeon's helplessness that in a case of perforation
of the sutures of the skull, with symptoms of tetanus (Case 7), the only suggestion he
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:04 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 85 ---
SPECIAL INTRODUCTION
59
makes is a hot application to the mandible to relieve the constricted ligaments, followed
by his inevitable honey-ointment on lint. Even a displacement of a cervical vertebra
(Case 82) receives an application of fresh meat on the first day, followed by imru and
honey, while the patient is carefully kept in a sitting posture.
A dislocation of the ribs (Case 48), omitting the fresh meat, is otherwise treated in
the same way. We find the fresh meat again, applied as usual for the first day only,
to a split in the maxilla (Case 16), with caution to keep the patient in a sitting position,
while continuing treatment with honey-ointment on lint. The same injury in the
humerus (Case 88) receives only the frequent imru followed by daily application of
honey.
Modern skull surgery has been so marvellously developed in the last few years
that we are not surprised to find our surgeon of three and a half millenniums ago offer-
ing the unfavorable verdict 8 in a case of compound comminuted fracture of the skull
with rupture of the meningeal membranes. He could suggest no more than an allevi-
ative application of grease, while cautioning against bandaging or adhesive plaster.
The same type of injury in the maxilla (Case 17) receives the unfavorable verdict 8 by
scribal error, whereas the surgeon has some hope of recovery and prescribes the same
treatment as for Case 16 above. Finally Case 9, a compound comminuted fracture of
the frontal bone, prescribes a treatment which is unique in our treatise. From some old
recipe papyrus, hke all the others preserved to us in Egyptian medicine, the surgeon
has culled the only magical treatment in our book of surgery and external medicine.
It is a well-known fact that, even in the mind of a modern man otherwise rational and
scientific, there may be found lurking surprising manifestations of superstition.
Undoubtedly our surgeon never more than partially escaped the current superstitions
of his age, even those which ran counter to his general attitude toward his craft or,
as here in the treatment of Case 9, to the rational views which he usually held regarding
each individual case.
While the general content of his materia medica would not commend itself to
modern surgery, it may be noted with interest that in the case of an infected or
necrotic wound in the breast (Case 41), he prescribes the earliest known external
application of salicin, in the form of a decoction of willow (salix) leaves, experience
having probably taught his ancestors centuries earlier the antiseptic effect of its use.
In the same case another application for allaying the inflammation contains dung and
is probably ammoniacal. His astringent application in this case, after he has reduced
the inflammation, is a solution containing copper and sodium salts.
List of cases prescribing exclusive use of medicaments externally applied :
Case 1. Flesh wound in the scalp ; Fresh meat bound on, first day only ; honey-
ointment on lint, bound on daily.
Cose 18. Flesh wound in the temple ; Fresh meat bound on, first day only ; honey-
ointment daily.
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:04 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 86 ---
60
THE SURGICAL TREATISE
Case 19. Perforation in the temple;
Case 41. Infected wound in the breast;
Case 46. Prominent abscess in the breast;
Case 30. Sprain in cervical vertebrae;
Case 42. Sprain in sterno-costal articulations ;
Case 15. Perforation of bone in region of maxilla
and zygoma;
Case 20. Perforation of temporal bone ;
Case 29. Wound in cervical vertebra ;
Case 40. Perforation of the sternum;
Case 7, I. Perforation of sutures of the scalp
with symptoms of tetanus ;
Case 32. Displacement of cervical vertebra ;
Case 43. Dislocation of the ribs ;
Case 16. Split in the maxilla ;
Case 38. Split in the humerus ;
Case 6. Compound comminuted fracture of the
skull with rupture of meningeal mem-
branes ;
Case 17. Compound comminuted fracture of the
maxilla ;
Case 9. Compound comminuted fracture of
frontal bone ;
Normal diet with no medicine ; honey-ointment
on lint, bound on daily.
Cooling application : decoction containing willow
leaves ; astringent application : solution con-
taining copper and sodium salts ; poultices of
unidentified herbs.
Two cooling applications, the second containing
" mason's mortar ; " decoction for allaying in-
flammation : sycamore leaves, acacia leaves,
and " ox dung ; " astringent applications :
solution containing copper and sodium salts ;
poultices of herbs.
Fresh meat, bound on, first day only ; imru and
honey daily.
Imru bound on ; afterward honey daily.
Imru bound on ; honey-ointment daily.
Sitting posture; constricted muscles of head
softened with grease ; uncertain fluid (milk ?)
in both ears.
Fresh meat, bound on, first day only; normal
diet, no medicine.
Fresh meat, bound on, first day only; honey-oint-
ment on lint, bound on daily.
Verdict 2 ; hot applications to ligaments of man-
dible ; honey-ointment on lint, bound on.
Fresh meat, bound on, first day only ; ointment
applied to head (sic !); imru bound on injury ;
afterward honey daily ; patient must maintain
sitting posture.
Imru, bound on ; afterward honey daily.
Fresh meat, bound on, first day only ; patient
must maintain sitting posture; honey-oint-
ment on lint, bound on daily.
Imru bound on ; afterward honey daily.
Verdict 3 ; application of ointment; caution
against binding; caution against application
of plaster.
Verdict 3; fresh meat, bound on, first day only ;
patient must maintain sitting posture ; honey-
ointment on lint, bound on daily.
Magical treatment; see commentary and transla-
tion.
This surgeon's general word for treatment is P<^* g drwh, the original meaning of
which is uncertain. See commentary in Case 1 (I 8). It is applied to all kinds of
treatment, so that the surgeon may be charged, " Treat (isrwh) according to these
directions" (e.g.,Case 41, XIV 7). Nevertheless,as used in our treatise srwh designates
the external application of medicaments in at least twenty-six cases, and possibly more,
out of thirty-three. In four cases it designates the maintenance of the patient in
a sitting posture, expressed in the words, " His treatment (&rwh) is sitting " (Case 4,
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:04 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 87 ---
SPECIAL INTRODUCTION
II 7 ; Case 7, III 15 ; Case 8, IV 9 ; Case 16, VI 20). There was a special course of
treatment for wounds (perhaps also including sores) evidently already long current,
or at least well known, called PT" * fim/*" drwh wbnw, " wound treatment," which is
twice mentioned in our document (Case 89, XIII 7-8, see commentary; and Case
46, XVI 7). Unfortunately we know nothing about this treatment. It was perhaps
contained in a surgical treatise already in circulation in our surgeon's day and pro-
bably already old, which bore the title, " Treatise on What Pertains to a Wound "
(see commentary on Case 5, II 17).
5. The Glosses Forming the Ancient Commentary
The sixty-nine glosses in our treatise form the most valuable body of materials which
it has brought to us. They constitute a little dictionary of terms distributed through
the treatise, which was already so old in the Twenty-sixth Century b. c. that it contained
numerous terms no longer current and requiring explanation. At the end of any case
containing such terms, or discussing any matters which needed explanation, a com-
mentator has added his definitions and explanatory comments. His identity is as totally
unknown to us as that of the author of the treatise himself. He cannot have been the
scribe who copied our papyrus. This worthy was far too careless, and betrays his ignor-
ance of medical science far too obviously to have been able to produce such a remarkable
little medical dictionary. It is evident then that this commentary was added at some
date not merely earlier than our surviving copy, but earlier even than the Middle
Kingdom, and doubtless toward the end of the Old Kingdom (see discussion, pp. 9-11).
In twenty-nine out of our forty-eight cases, it was found necessary to add one or
more of these explanatory glosses, making altogether a total of sixty-nine. The only
other ancient Egyptian medical papyrus containing this kind of commentary is the
Papyrus Ebers, which has twenty-six glosses.1 Unfortunately they are broken up
into groups by irrelevant matter which has been intruded by error of some scribe or
editor. None follows the case or prescription which it is supposed to explain, and the
entire body of glosses in Papyrus Ebers has thus been separated from the treatise
to which it belonged, an accident which has seriously limited their value.
In form each gloss is invariably introduced by IJ<=> yr, " as for " or "with regard
to," followed by a verbatim quotation of the word or phrase to be explained. The
term to be discussed or explained in the gloss is thus clearly brought before the
reader. The definition follows, usually marked by the copulative □<? pw, "it is,"
i.e., " it means." The whole gloss then has the following form :
1«=> (yr) (quoted words to be explained),
□ <? (pw) (explanatory proposition).
1 They were first noted by Schaefor in 1892. See Zeitechrift fiir Aegyplische Sprache, Vol. 30
(1892), pp. 107-109.
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:04 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 88 ---
62
THE SURGICAL TREATISE
The pw is of course postpositive, as usual, and does not stand at the head of the
explanatory proposition or phrase, but after the first word or two. The form of the
gloss in English is then :
As for: " " (quoted words to be explained),
it means (explanatory proposition or phrase).
Occasionally we find the definition introduced by "he (meaning the author of
the treatise) is speaking of" (four times, Cases 80, Gloss A ; 81, Gloss A ; 82, Gloss A ;
and 88, Gloss A). Twice we have the definition introduced by ^o<? " it says"
(Case 1, Glosses B and C). In five glosses there is no introduction of the definition at
all (Cases 6, Gloss A ; 11, Gloss B ; 81, Gloss B ; 40, Gloss A ; and 41, Gloss E).
In these glosses the commentator's chief purpose was first to ensure that the
terms designating and describing the injury should be understood. Accordingly in the
first eight cases concerning injuries of the skull, we find the following matters selected
first for explanation in the glosses :
Case 1, C. " Penetrating to the [bone of his skull, (but) not having a gash]."
„ 2, A. " A [gaping wound in his head, penetrating to the bone]."
„ 8, A. " [Perforating his skull]."
„ 4, A. " Splitting his skull."
„ 5, A. " Smashing his skull " (compound comminuted fracture).
„ 6, A. " Smashing his skull, (and) rending open the brain of his skull " (rupture
of meningeal membranes).
„ 7, A. " Perforating the sutures of [his skull]."
„ 8, A. " A smash in his skull under the skin of his head, there being no wound at
all upon it."
It will be noticed that the first gloss (designated A) under each case, except the
first case, regularly discusses and explains the nature of the injury. In the first case
some preliminary explanations have naturally been placed first; but after Case 1,
throughout the treatise this explanation of the nature of the injury appears as the
first gloss in every important case.1
These explanations of the nature of the injury deal chiefly with its physical and
mechanical character. They make clear to the ancient medical student what he should
understand by a " perforation," a " split," or a " smash " of the skull. Following
the discussion of a j^Jf thm, that is, a " perforation " of the skull, the commentator
explains that it means " a contracted smash, through his incurring a break like a
puncture of a (pottery) jar " (Case 8, Gloss A). Explaining lp$n, a " gp^t » of
the skull, the commentator says, " it means separating shell from shell of his skull,
while fragments remain sticking in the flesh of his head and do not come away " (Case
1 See Cases, 12, 14, 18, 22, 26, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 39, 41, 42, 43, 45, and 46.
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:04 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 89 ---
SPECIAL INTRODUCTION
63
4, Gloss A). Finally the commentator explains id, as meaning, " a smash of his
skull (such that) bones, getting into that smash, sink into the interior of his skull.
The - Treatise on What Pertains to His Wounds ' states : - It means a smash of his
skull into numerous fragments, which sink into the interior of his skull' " (Case 5,
Gloss A). The commentator draws upon another treatise on wounds for a description,
making it clear that the injury is a compound comminuted fracture-of the skull.
Similarly we find an injury of the neck called a wnh of the neck, regarding which
the commentator says, " He is speaking of a separation of one vertebra of his neck from
another, the flesh which is over it being uninjured ; as one says,- It is wnh,' concerning
things which had been joined together, when one has been severed from another "
(Case 81, Gloss A).
These examples may serve to illustrate this type of explanation added by the
commentator. Having thus explained the physical character of the injury, the
commentator also devotes much attention to the symptoms and the condition of the
patient, explaining all terms which he regards as needing some definition. For
example, he discusses the ancient word describing the shuffling motion of one foot in
walking, presumably an evidence of partial paralysis resulting from an injury to the
brain (Case 8, Gloss B), and in the same case he endeavors to explain the convulsive
motions of the hands and arms, which he intends to be distinguished from similar
symptoms accompanying some disease. One of the most interesting glosses in the
treatise is a discussion of the observation that a dislocation of the neck is accompanied
by an erection and seminal emission (Case 81, Gloss B). An ancient word for " speech-
less," designating a symptom accompanying a compound comminuted fracture of
the temporal bone, calls for explanation (Case 22, Gloss C). Along with these evidences
of paralysis resulting from injuries to the head and neck we find a whole series of
discussions explaining other symptoms, like stiffness of the neck (Case 8, Gloss C ;
Case 7, Gloss E), clammy countenance (Case 7, Gloss D), odor of the skull wound
(Case 7, G), facial distortion (Case 7,1), paleness (Case 7, J) and others. In the treat-
ment of these dangerous head wounds, and likewise in the case of a fracture of the
humerus with a wound over it (Case 87), the surgeon is charged to adopt a waiting
policy, " until thou knowest that he has reached something." This obscure clause is
explained in Gloss C (Case 4) as meaning " until thou knowest whether he will die or
he will live." This seems very much like an early recognition of the Hippocratic icplois
(" crisis "). The cases in which it appears will be found listed in the commentary on
Case 4, Gloss C.
The external source of the causes which induce all these symptoms is a matter
regarded by the commentator as a very important fact, which must be fully recognized.
A crushed cervical vertebra is discussed in the gloss (B, Case 88) and explained again
as due to a fall on the head, although the text had already stated this fact. In a case
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:04 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 90 ---
64
THE SURGICAL TREATISE
where a dangerous compound comminuted fracture of the skull has occurred without
leaving any externally visible contusion the commentator has repeated and further
explained the statement of the text that the patient must be regarded as " one whom
something entering from the outside has smitten " (Case 8, Gloss C). This term
" something entering from the outside " must also be further explained, and the
commentator takes it up in another gloss (D, Case 8), one of the most interesting
explanations in our treatise. Here he warns his reader that " something entering
from the outside " is " not the intrusion of something which his (the patient's) flesh
engenders," that is, the patient's condition is not due to disease, which is strikingly
recognized here as " something which his flesh engenders." On the contrary " some-
thing entering from the outside " means " the breath of an outside god or death,"
that is, the external casualty, the accident from the outside, the force majeure, which
was to the Egyptian as to later men an impenetrable mystery, and which in the
Papyrus Ebers is deified like a Fortuna or a Tvxq (see commentary on Case 8, Gloss D).
In the course of these sixty-nine short paragraphs of explanation a good deal of
light is thrown upon the Egyptian surgeon's knowledge of anatomy and physiology.
The first gloss in the treatise, which is also the longest in the entire series (Case 1,
Gloss A), deals with the meaning of " thou examinest a man." It takes up the pulse
in some detail, in a discussion which is the more remarkable in view of the fact that we
find no mention of the pulse in early Greek medicine until the observations of Demo-
critus regarding it. The earliest reference to it in Greek medical documents seems to
have been in a treatise entitled nepl rpodnjs, " On Nutrition." It has been stated that
Hippocratic medicine knew nothing of the pulse ;1 but the Hippocratic school cer-
tainly recognized tactile observations in examining a patient, and regarded touch as
a means of testing the pulse.2 In our treatise it is not improbable that the method of
employing the touch in observing the pulse was that of counting the strokes, a method
the more remarkable if really employed over twelve centuries before Hippocrates.
In observing the pulse our surgeon knows that he is examining the operation of the
heart, and he states that the observation of the pulse is undertaken " in order to know
the action of the heart." He also affirms that there is a canal leading from the heart
to every member of the body. He enumerates the extremities and other points where
the pulsations of the heart are discernible and adds that its " pulsation is in every
vessel of every member." It is clear, therefore, that he has recognized the existence
of a cardiac system, with which he is dealing, no matter what region may be affected
by the injury he is treating. He takes up this fact in connection with the very first
case under discussion, a wound in the head, as a matter of the first importance for the
surgeon. As he advances to injuries of the skull penetrating the brain, he finds
1 W. H. S. Jones, Hippocrates, V. 1, p. xx, foot-note.
2 See Meyer-Steineg and Sudhoff, Oeschichle der Medicin, 2d ed., p. 60.
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:04 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 91 ---
SPECIAL INTRODUCTION
65
within the brain itself the action of the heart evinced in what he calls " something throb-
bing and fluttering under thy fingers, like the weak place of an infant's crown before
it becomes whole " (Case 6, II 20-21). His recognition of a cardiac system therefore
is clearly demonstrated; we cannot affirm that he recognized the circulatory character
of that system. In any case, however, he was so near a discernment of the circulation
of the blood, that it will be necessary to re-examine the evidence regarding a possible
knowledge of the circulation of the blood by the Alexandrian physicians after 800 b. c.
This extraordinary account of the cardiac system introduced to explain the nature
of a surgical examination is quoted in the Papyrus Ebers (99,1-5), where it is preceded
by the title, " Beginning of the Secret Book of the Physician." It would seem,
therefore, that Papyrus Ebers drew the material from an ancient book of that name.
If Papyrus Ebers drew this discussion from our treatise, which is therefore cited by
its title, we have at the head of this citation in Papyrus Ebers the title of our treatise,
as we shall see in the commentary on Case 1 (Gloss A).
The human brain appears for the first time in medical literature in the text and
the glosses of our treatise. Our surgeon knows that the folds of the brain he in con-
volutions, which he says are " like those corrugations which form on molten copper."
He takes up this comparison in a gloss (Case 6, Gloss B), and explains that the refer-
ence is to the floating slag forming on molten copper, which the copper-smith rejects
before he pours the metal into the mould. Any one who has observed the convolutions
into which metallic slag forms itself will recognize the aptness of the ancient surgeon's
comparison. In another gloss (A) appended to the same case, the commentator
explains, that " rending open the brain," accompanying a compound comminuted
fracture of the skull, is a reference to " the membrane (or skin) enveloping his brain,"
which is rent, " so that it breaks open his fluid in the interior of his head." This is
the earliest known reference to the meningeal membranes.
The earliest observations showing that the brain is a center of nervous control
are likewise contained in the text and glosses which we are now discussing. The surgeon
has noticed that injuries to the skull and brain result in disturbing the normal control
of various parts of the body, even as far away as the feet. As the result of a perfora-
tion of the sutures of the skull (Case 7) he records extreme facial distortion, which
the commentator has explained in Gloss I. In the same case he also notes constric-
tion of the ligaments of the neck, and the commentator discusses this matter in Gloss E.
Similar effects in the temporal muscle controlling the mandible are likewise observed,
and in two interesting glosses (Case 7, Glosses B and C) the commentator explains the
anatomy and pathology involved. The most remarkable observation of this kind
is made in connection with a case of compound comminuted fracture of the skull
which however displays no visible external contusion (Case 8). The surgeon makes
the following note : " His eye is askew because of it, on the side of him having that
v
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:05 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 92 ---
66
THE SURGICAL TREATISE
injury which is in his skull; he walks shuffling with his sole, on the side of him having
that injury which is in his skull." The repetition of the words " that injury which
is in his skull " suggests that the surgeon is calling attention to the fact of the effects
of an injury in a situation which may be distant from the place of the observed effect.
Much more remarkable is the repetition of the detail, " on the side of him having that
injury which is in his skull," showing that the surgeon was already aware of the
importance of the relationship between the side of the brain which has suffered the
injury and the side of the body which is affected by the brain injury. The fact that
he distinctly specifies in both cases on which side the affected eye and foot are with
reference to the injured side of the brain is highly significant, and indicates that he
has already discerned the localization of control in the brain. All this raises the
question whether the absence of any visible external contusion may not have been
due to the fact that the actual fracture itself was a contre-coup, throwing the paralysis
of the foot over to the same side which had received the blow. In this case we must
suppose that the surgeon's term "injury" refers to the blow causing the contre-coup.
The commentator takes up this paralysis of one foot for discussion (Case 8, Gloss B),
but unfortunately goes no further than an explanation of the evidently archaic word
used for " shuffle."
There is no effort on the part of the commentator to correlate these evidences of
a nervous system centering in the brain, with similar effects arising from injuries of
the vertebrae. We find him adding two very interesting discussions of an emissio
seminis and inability to control the flow of urine, both due to a dislocation of a cervical
vertebra (Case 81, Glosses B and C); but he does not discuss the speechlessness
ensuing when a cervical vertebra has been crushed (Case 88, examination). In the
diagnosis of this case and also that of Case 81 (dislocated neck), the surgeon makes the
interesting observation that both arms and both legs are paralysed. In both cases
the commentator adds an excellent explanation of the mechanical processes which
have caused the fracture and the crushing of the cervical vertebra, but he leaves
without remark the observation of the paralysed limbs.
It will be seen then that our surgeon and the commentator had already observed
a series of effects arising in other parts of the body as a result of injuries to the brain
and the spine. They were furthermore already aware of the shift of these effects
from one side to the other, according as the injury to the brain was on one side or
the other, and in so doing had probably been misled by the contre-coup. These observa-
tions, however, had not been correlated into a system, nor connected with a complex
of ramifying nerves. Indeed our document, as far as preserved, discloses no word for
nerves, and there is no indication in any of the Egyptian documents that such a
designation existed at this remote stage of scientific knowledge of the human body.
As we shall see in the following paragraphs our Egyptian surgeon was still in a very
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:05 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 93 ---
SPECIAL INTRODUCTION
67
early stage of observation concerning such filaments and cord-like connections as the
nerves, and when he found them as disclosed by dissection, he was probably not aware
of their function. The clear correlation of brain and spine with the nervous system
was first achieved by Herophilos at Alexandria in the Third Century b.C.
While the ancient commentator was unaware of nerve filaments, he was acquainted
with the character and function of the muscles and ligaments, and was interested in
them. Case 7, a perforation of the sutures of the skull, records the surgeon's observa-
tion of a constriction of the " cord of his mandible; " also that " the ligaments
of his neck are tense." The commentator appends three discussions of these observa-
tions, two to explain the meaning of the ancient word for " contracted," " constricted "
or " tense " (Glosses B and E), and one to define the " cord of his mandible " (Gloss C).
In explaining the constriction of the " cord of his mandible," the commentator says
that it refers to " a stiffening on the part of the ligaments at the end of his ramus,
which are fastened to his temporal bone " (Gloss B). It is not likely that he had
already built up a complete catalogue of the muscles of the body, but the above
examples suffice to show that he had studied them in dissection and in the treatment
of wounds, and not merely casually as revealed in the course of embalming. It is
noticeable, however, that the surgeon says nothing of the muscles of the arms and
shoulders, although he was aware of their effects as he directs the practitioner how
to reduce a fractured humerus or clavicle, by prying on a fulcrum against the pull of
these muscles (Cases 85 and 86).
Before leaving the subject of the commentator's discussion of the soft tissues of
the body, especially the cardiac system, the nerves and the muscles, it should be
noted that our surgeon and the commentator likewise, both use the same word for
canal or vessel, and muscle or ligament. This word ^ *nt is employed throughout
the commentator's long discussion of the cardiac system as the word for " canal "
or " vessel " (Case 1, Gloss A). Again where the surgeon has used -£\^<=^ w'-t, an
old word for " cord " to designate the temporal muscle, the commentator explains
it as meaning the mt-w (plural), " ligaments " fastened to the temporal bone. It
is certain therefore that the same word served both for " vessel " and for " ligament "
or " sinew." Under these circumstances it would not be surprising if the Egyptian
had included also the nerves among these cord-like connections. The Egyptian
surgeon knew quite well that the vessels or canals of the cardiac system were hollow
and conveyed blood, but he nevertheless applied to them the word ^ mt, which must
have been a general term for any cord-like connection, which in external form might
not be so unlike a sinew or a nerve. In this use of a common designation for sinew
and canal, and perhaps also nerve, we doubtless have one of the reasons why the
three groups of such connections, namely nerves, blood-vessels, and muscles were not
clearly grouped as three separate systems.
F 3
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:05 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 94 ---
68
THE SURGICAL TREATISE
On the other hand the bony framework of the body must have been early familiar
to the Egyptian, in a climate where skeletons last so long. Even among the Greeks,
that is, in a climate less favorable to such preservation of the bones, the physicians
knew far more of the bones than of the soft tissues. The commentator's above dis-
cussion of the temporal muscle and the mandible connects very interestingly with his
explanations and descriptions of the anatomy of the mandible and the temporal bone.
In discussing a compound comminuted fracture of the temporal bone the surgeon
naturally is involved in a reference to " the end of his ramus " (condyle and coronoid
process). For ramus he uses a term derived from the name of a bird. The com-
mentator fears that this perhaps already ancient name is no longer familiar to the
reader, and he therefore adds a remark explaining " the end of his ramus " by saying
that " it means the end of his mandible. The ramus ('mr-t),—it is in his temporal
bone just as the claw of an 'awfe-bird (W) grasps an object " (Case 22, Gloss A).
The fork at the summit of the ramus is thus compared to the claw of a two-toed bird,
which grasps a thing as the bifurcating tip of the ramus engages with the temporal bone.
These anatomical explanations of the commentator thus make use of a variety
of objects from the world of nature or of the arts to suggest the shape or the function
of the parts to be described, just as modern science employs similar figures. We
have already seen how the surgeon likens the convolutions of the brain to slag forma-
tions floating on molten metal, and the commentator's discussion of the comparison.
In the same way, we have the dome of the skull designated as " the chest of his head,"
and the commentator thinks it wise to add an explanation here, saying " it means
the middle of his crown, next to his brain. The likening of it is to a chest " (Case 7,
Gloss H), a very common article of furniture in an Egyptian household. Similarly,
an architectural term is applied by the surgeon to the nose ; he deals in Case 11 with
a " break in the column of his nose." The commentator adds what is for us a confused
and difficult explanation of the exact limits of the portion of the nose included under
this term (Case 11, Gloss A). In Case 40 it is doubtless the appearance of the sternum,
with its bristling lines of ribs, which has suggested that the manubrium be called by
the name of an animal like a porcupine or hedgehog, having vigorous hair or spines.
This term likewise leads the commentator to add an explanation indicating what
animal has suggested the designation (Case 40, Gloss A).
In one case the commentator warns the reader against accepting such a descriptive
term too literally. In discussing a fracture of the nasal bone, the surgeon is in-
structed to cleanse both nostrils " until every worm of blood which coagulates in
the inside of his two nostrils comes forth." The commentator adds a gloss to this
case explaining that only a comparison is involved in the passage, which he says
designates merely " the clotting of blood in the inside of his two nostrils, likened to a
worm (^^Q *»- rnrr-t), which subsists in the water." The word " worm " was obviously
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:05 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 95 ---
SPECIAL INTRODUCTION
69
employed by the original writer of the treatise to designate the fibrous, stringy forma-
tions in coagulated blood (Case 12, Gloss C).
The interest of the commentator in the text he is explaining is both scientific and
pedagogic. With the gloss just discussed we have probably passed from the scientific
to the pedagogic. The same motive has led to the insertion of not a few of the com-
mentator's explanations, especially where the text contains an ancient word no longer
commonly current. Indeed he was so concerned lest the ancient word for " ruddy "
should not be understood, that he has inserted his explanation of the word in no less
than three different cases (Cases 7, Gloss F ; 41, Gloss C ; and 46, Gloss C). We find
him explaining the presumably old or unusual words for " shuffling " (Case 8, Gloss B),
" blood-shot " (Case 19, Gloss A), " piercing through " (Case 26, Gloss A), " dribbles "
(Case 81, Gloss C), or the word J^,^, bkn, a no longer current word for " urine "
of a sheep (Case 7, Gloss G). In one case it is an extraordinary and picturesque idiom
or figure of speech which the commentator explains to us, and which seems to have
been as enigmatic to the reader of the Third Millennium b. o. as it is to us. We
find the surgeon given the curious instructions " Moor him (the patient) at his mooring
stakes," or " Put him at his mooring stakes " in nine different cases. At the first
occurrence of this remarkable injunction (Case 8, I 22-28), the commentator has
added an explanation (Gloss D), which reads, " It means putting him on his customary
diet, without administering to him a prescription."
We are often at a loss to know exactly what kind of an appliance is intended when
the text of the case prescribes the use of some surgical device, and we are usually not
enlightened as to the character of the device or the manner of its use. We must
suppose that such information was a matter of common knowledge among surgeons.
Of adhesive plaster the commentator has thought it advisable to add an explanation
(Case 2, Gloss B); but by the time he reached Case 10 he had forgotten this fact and
he therefore inserted the same explanation again (Case 10, Gloss A). In explaining
a certain kind of bandage he also gives us the interesting information already men-
tioned above, that it was prepared by the embalmers (Case 9, Gloss A).
The full value of this ancient body of commentary can be understood only by
reading it in connection with the text of the treatise which it is intended to explain.
Preliminary to such a reading, it will be found useful to study the following com-
plete list of the passages which the commentator has selected for explanatory
discussion.
List of terms and expressions explained in the glosses in Papyrus Edwin Smith :
Case 1. A. " Thou examinest a man." The explanation contains a possible reference to counting
the pulse and also an account of the cardiac system.
B. " While his wound does not have [two lips]."
C. " Penetrating to the [bone of his skull, (but) not having a gash]." Compare Case 18, A.
Case 2. A. " A [gaping] wound [in his head penetrating to the bone]."
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:05 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 96 ---
70
THE SURGICAL TREATISE
Case 2. 8. " Two strips of linen," meaning adhesive tape or plaster.
C. " Not having a split, a perforation, (or) [a smash]."
Case 3. A. " [Perforating his skull]."
B. " Unable to look at his shoulders and his bre[ast]."
C. " Suffering with stiffness in his neck."
D. " Moor (him) at his mooring stakes : " an ancient idiom for " putting him on his
customary diet, without administering to him a prescription."
Case 4. A. " Splitting his skull."
B. " The swelling which is over it protrudes."
C. " Thou knowest he has reached a decisive point: " the crisis.
Case 5. A. " Smashing his skull," explaining a compound comminuted fracture.
Case 6. A. " Smashing his skull, (and) rending open the brain of his skull," explaining a rupture
of the meningeal membranes.
B. " Those corrugations which form on molten copper," used as illustrating the external
appearance of the convolutions of the brain.
Case 7. A. " Perforating the sutures of [his skull]," explaining " sutures " as " what is between
shell and shell of his skull."
B. " The cord of his mandible is contracted," explaining probable symptoms of tetanus,
and the anatomy of the mandible and its ligaments.
C. " The cord of his mandible."
D. " His countenance clammy with sweat."
E. " The ligaments of his neck are tense."
F. " His face is ruddy."
G. " The odor of the chest of his head is like the bkn of sheep," bkn being an ancient word
for urine.
H. " The chest of his head," this being an ancient term for the dome of the skull.
I. " His mouth is bound, (and) both his eye-brows are drawn, while his face is as if he wept:"
facial distortion accompanying an injury of the skull.
J. " He has become pale and has already rshown exhaustion1."
Case 8. A. " A smash in his skull under the skin of his head, there being no wound at all upon it:"
a compound comminuted fracture of the skull without visible external contusion.
B. "He walks shuffling with his sole:" partial paralysis of one foot resulting from an injury
to the brain.
C. " One whom something entering from outside has smitten," emphasized because of lack
of external contusion.
D. " Something entering from outside," outside destiny, the will of Providence, " not the
intrusion of anything which his flesh engenders."
E. " One who does not release the head of his shoulder-fork and who does not fall with his
nails in the palm of his hand:" obscure convulsive action like symptoms accompanying
injury to the brain.
Case 9. A. " Covering for physicians' use," explained as a bandage prepared by the embalmers.
Case 10. A. " Two strips of linen," repeating the explanation already given in Case 2, Gloss B.
Case 11. A. " The column of his nose," explained as the soft outer nose, including the septum.
B. " His two nostrils."
Case 12. A. " A break in the chamber of his nose."
B. " His nose is bent, his face disfigured."
C. " Every worm of blood which coagulates in the inside of his two nostrils."
Case 13. No glosses.
Case 14. A. " A wound in his nostril, piercing through."
Cases 15-17. No glosses.
Case 18. A. " A wound not having a gash, while it penetrates to the bone ; " compare Case 1, C.
B. " His gm'," explained as meaning his temple, and therefore evidently some old designa-
tion no longer current at the date of the insertion of this explanation.
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:05 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 97 ---
SPECIAL INTRODUCTION
71
Case 19. A. " His two eyes are blood-shot," the term for " blood-shot" being some old and un-
familiar term.
Cases 20-21. No glosses.
Case 22. A. " The end of his ramus," the term for " ramus " being an ancient word derived from
the name of a two-toed bird, whose forked claw suggested the fork at the head of the
ramus.
B. " Thou seest its fragments in the interior of his ear," the term for " fragments " being
an archaic word designating the fragments of bone visible in the inside of the ear after
a compound comminuted fracture of the temporal bone.
C. " He is speechless : " a symptom accompanying the compound comminuted fracture of
the temporal bone, but designated by an uncommon word.
Cases 23-25. No glosses.
Case 26. A. " A wound in his Up piercing through to the inside of his mouth," the term " piercing
through " being some old word requiring elucidation.
Cases 27-29. No glosses.
Case 30. A. " A sprain: " evidently an archaic word explained as meaning " a rending of two mem-
bers, (although) it (=each) is (still) in its place."
Case 31. A. "A dislocation in a vertebra of his neck," explained in the following words : " He is
speaking of a separation of one vertebra of his neck from another, the flesh which is
over it being uninjured ; as one says,- It is wnh ' (dislocated), concerning things which
had been joined together, when one has been severed from another."
B. " It is an emissio seminis which befalls his phallus : " a result of a broken neck.
C. " While his urine dribbles," the ancient word for " dribbles " requiring explanation.
Case 32. A. " A displacement in a vertebra of his neck."
Case 33. A. " A crushed vertebra in his neck."
B. " His falling head downward has caused one vertebra to crush into the next."
Case 34. A. " A dislocation in his two collar bones," with an interesting description of the anatomy
in this region.
Cases 35-38. No glosses.
Case 39. A. " Tumors with prominent head in his breast."
Case 40. A. " The manubrium of his sternum," named from a spiny animal like a porcupine.
Case 41. A. " A diseased wound in his breast, inflamed: " a wound sluggish in healing, persistently
remaining open, explained by quoting an ancient work called, " Treatise on what
Pertains to a Wound."
B. " A whirl of inflammation in his wound."
C. " Its two hps are ruddy," explaining the archaic term for ruddy which had been already
explained in Case 7, Gloss F.
D. " His flesh cannot receive a bandage."
E. " While heat continually issues from the mouth of his wound at thy touch," explaining
an archaic word for " issue " employed in the discussion.
Case 42. A. " Ribs of his breast," explaining the presumably archaic term for ribs.
Case 43. A. " A dislocation in the ribs of his breast," explained as meaning " a displacement of the
heads of the ribs of his sternum, which are articulated in his sternum."
B. " He suffers with swellings in his two sides."
C. " His two sides."
Case 44. No glosses.
Case 45. A. " Bulging tumors on his breast."
Case 46. A. " An abscess with prominent head on his breast."
B. " Clamminess of their surface."
C. " There is no ruddiness upon it," explaining the meaning of the term for ruddiness again,
after having explained the same term twice above, Case 7, Gloss F, and Case 41, Gloss C.
Case 47. No glosses.
Case 48. Glosses, if any, are lost.
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:05 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 98 ---
72
II. Fvnction and Age of the Treatise
In studying the surviving treatises of the Hippocratic school of medicine one is
struck by the fact that the physician of that school was far more interested in the
human body when it was sick than when it was well. His knowledge of anatomy and
physiology, therefore, as based on a study of the normal human body, was not extensive
or systematic. Hippocratic study of the human body when ailing, furthermore, was
evidently more often inspired by a desire for knowledge than by the hope of curing
the patient. Thus among the forty-two case-histories recorded in the Hippocratic
treatises on Epidemics I and III,1 twenty-five, that is considerably more than half,
end in death, and this group of case-histories may fairly be regarded as a body of
evidence collected by the methods of scientific investigation, rather than the casual
observations incident to the physician's daily practice. It may be for modern medical
men to decide whether this evidence might possess any value in a subsequent effort
to heal or cure; but such a conclusion would seem to be very doubtful.
In the same way the author of our surgical treatise was obviously interested in
the human body and the phenomena it exhibited, even though he could do nothing for
the patient. That the knowledge of the human organism which the ancient Egyptian
surgeons gained by this attitude of mind was laid down in systematic treatises, we
can hardly doubt. These treatises, if they really existed, have unhappily been lost.
It should therefore be clearly borne in mind when examining our treatise, that
while the observations on the structure and functions of the human organs here
recorded are not purely casual, nevertheless our treatise is not a systematic discussion
of the human body. In the systematic organization of the materials, beginning with
the head and proceeding downward, we note, however, that it has some outward
resemblance to an organized treatise on anatomy and physiology. It is nevertheless
a group of discussions of injuries, and not of organs and parts of the body.
We see then that the treatise may have served one or more of a number of different
functions. There were evidently at least three classes of surgical documents in ancient
Egypt. First, handbooks used by surgeons in their daily practice, just as the physi-
cians must have used the recipes collected in the Papyrus Ebers ; again, second, it is
obvious that there were outlines from which Egyptian surgeons, in those medical
schools which preceded the one founded by Darius, lectured to their students; for
we cannot suppose that the great mass of details discussed in the Edwin Smith
Papyrus was a matter of oral transmission. It was doubtless in the use of such lecture
outlines that the lecturer's comments on already ancient discussions, formulas and
directions would gradually accumulate. These explanations of all matters needing
elucidation would appear as the glosses which form the commentary in our treatise.
1 W. H. S. Jones, Hippocrates, London, 1923, V. 1, p. 144.
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:05 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 99 ---
SPECIAL INTRODUCTION
73
Finally, third, there must have been records of the instruction received by students
of medicine and surgery : lecture note-books and clinical note-books such as modern
students produce. Was our treatise any one of these three ?
In view of the magical recipes on the back of our papyrus, the probabilities are
* that its owner was a practicing physician, and that our treatise was a reference book
from his medical library. Even so, however, our treatise may likewise have partaken
of the nature both of the lecturer's outline and the student's note-book ; for the
student will have roughly reproduced the form and content of his instructor's
lecture notes and may afterward have continued to employ his note-book as a refer-
ence hand-book.
In this connection it is well to emphasize the memorandum character of our
treatise, which is very noticeable. Repeatedly a whole paragraph is merely suggested
by an introductory phrase or two, or merely a few catch words. Important surgical
processes are indicated by a short phrase. The surgeon is charged to apply this or
that method or process, without the slightest explanation of the details or the method
of procedure. Devices designated by a single word are in no way described, and terms
which are not explained are tacitly assumed to be understood. All these things may
have been matters which received full and sufficient oral explanation not included in
the present text of the treatise. As a whole therefore, the treatise is very much in
the nature of notes, whether those of lecturer or student. One is reminded of the
condition in which some of the treatises attributed to Aristotle have come down to us.
These notes originally took form and were recorded, whether by lecturer or student,
at a very early date. Both in vocabulary and grammar the language repeatedly
exhibits the characteristics of Old Kingdom speech, that is of the period between
8000 and 2500 B.c. The following is not a complete list of these evidences, but it
contains the more noticeable examples of these early words or forms. It is important
in this connection to note whether these archaisms are found in the original discussion
(called " text " below), or in the ancient glosses forming the commentary, which we
have discussed above (pp. 61-71).
List of archaisms in the language of the surgical treatise :
I. Text:
1. Grammar:
a. The ancient third person dual of the pseudo-participle, J^J^ phd-wy
(Case 84, XI18).
b. The archaic and very rare dual of the feminine genitive particle 2^ nty
(Case 4, II 7 ; Case 7, III 15 ; and Case 25, IX 4).
c. The ancient third person dual, P"^~ Any, " of them both " (Case 14, VI 8 ;
Case 86, XII18 bis); compare also the incorrect p* (Case 85, XII 7).
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:05 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 100 ---
THE SURGICAL TREATISE
d. The archaic construction in which we must probably recognize the pseudo-
participle preceding a nominal subject. See the discussion in Case 4, II 4.
c. The particle ny, " for it " or the like, in verdict 8 : f ^"^^-"-^^r-
See the commentary on Case 5, II15. This form, first noticed by Gardiner,
is regarded by him as already " moribund " in the Old Kingdom (Pro-
ceedings of the Society of Biblical Archaeology, 40 (1918), p. 7).
/. The uniformly archaic writing of the noun "5^^ hnw, "inside " or "interior,"
without the determinative of the house n, regularly appearing in the
Middle Kingdom and later. It occurs in our treatise twenty-two times
(see glossary), of which nine occurrences are in the text and thirteen
are in the ancient commentary (see below).
g. The archaic use of J*, dr, meaning " when " or " as soon as " (Case 4, II 6,
consult commentary).
h. Use of £ my with the phonetic value mr in (]^f*^ ymrw (Case 15,
VI17).
i. Omission of the preposition ^ m : before ydr, surgical " stitching"
(Case 26, IX 8) ; before ^*,8 (by-t " honey " (often, e. g., Case 82, XI 6 ;
Case 85, XII 8, etc.); before ^J^^, mrh-t, "grease," passim (e.g.,
Case 15, VI 17). The last case has been thought to be due to mergence
of the preposition m with the following initial m of the word. In view of
the other cases this is unlikely. Another explanation may be the memo-
randum character of the treatise, involving intentional abbreviation.
2. Dictionary :
a. The word J1$n, " split," found elsewhere only in the Pyramid Texts
and the Middle Kingdom Book of the Dead.
b. The archaic word *@Tj©Jx nhbhb, "break through," occurring elsewhere
only in the Pyramid Texts (three times) and once at Abydos (see com-
mentary on Case 18, VI 4-5). Besides the five occurrences in our papyrus
it is not found in the Egyptian medical documents.
c. The obsolete word w'-t, "cord," explained in Gloss C, Case 7,
III 18.
d. The obsolete word (][!<?o ySw, "protrude," found only in the Pyramid
Texts and its oldest derivatives.
e. The archaic word rr"t2/, " mandible," explained by the ancient com-
mentary as equivalent to the current word wgwt, "jaw" (Case 7,
Gloss C, III 18 ; compare III 7 and Gloss B, III 16-17).
/. The archaic word Mr, " contracted," explained in Gloss B, Case 7,
III 16-18.
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:05 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 101 ---
SPECIAL INTRODUCTION
75
II. Glosses Forming the Ancient Commentary :
1. Grammar:
a. The archaic writing h'ty, " heart," for the classic _£1^tt, in Gloss A
(Case 1,1 9).
b. The writing ^ | hnw, " inside " or " interior," without the determinative n.
Out of twenty-two examples, thirteen are found in the ancient com-
mentary (see above).
c. The archaic interchange of h and S in rift, " fluid," Gloss A (Case 6,
II24-25), and elsewhere in our treatise always written wit h <=,, $ (five times,
see glossary).
d. Indiscriminate use of and See discussion, Case 1, I 10, Gloss B.
e. Archaic writing +^0 for ymytw, " between " in Gloss A (Case 7, III 16).
2. Dictionary :
A number of the archaic words listed above as found in the text occur also in
the ancient commentary; but as quotations from the text they cannot
be called original to the glosses.
While the ancient commentary does not disclose as many archaic words as the text
of the discussions, nevertheless it is obvious that the glosses contain conclusive
evidence of their Old Kingdom origin. The alphabetic writing of h'ty, " heart," and
the exchange of A and <=' S; besides thirteen out of twenty-two examples of the
archaic writing of hnw, " interior " without a determinative, all in the glosses, are
very significant. It is hardly to be doubted, therefore, that the commentary is older
than the Middle Kingdom.
If an explanatory commentary on the text of the treatise was already necessary
before the end of the Old Kingdom, the treatise itself must be dated to the early
part of the Old Kingdom, and may therefore be an example of the medical learning
which made Imhotep, the earliest known physician, already famous in the Thirtieth
Century B.C. In that case our treatise would be some five thousand years old.
III. The Lost Beginning of the Treatise and the Reconstrvction of
Colvmn I from the Fragments
When the papyrus was placed in the present editor's hands, it consisted of twenty-
one complete columns and was accompanied by a group of seventeen fragments, pasted
mostly at random on a sheet of manila paper. The paper bore interesting notes in
ink in the hand-writing of Mr. Edwin Smith. The most important of these notes reads:
" These fragments were recovered from a factitious papyrus made up of the fragments
from 3 others March 17, 1862, nearly 2 months after the original purchase, Jan. 20,
both from Mustapha Aga, and the fragments A and C [our A and B] were saturated with
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:05 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 102 ---
76
THE SURGICAL TREATISE
glue which was removed by maceration and carefully scraping the glue away which had
been used to seal the factitious papyrus composed of these fragments."
It is obvious at the first glance that these fragments were written by the same
scribe who made our copy of the Surgical Treatise. When the native discoverer or
owner sold the main roll of the document to Mr. Smith on January 20th, 1862, he had
lying at home outer fragments of it, which he had removed, perhaps with the inten-
tion of producing the impression that the document proffered for sale to Smith was
complete and perfect. A cursory examination would have disclosed to Mr. Smith
the presence of the lower right hand corner of a column (our fragment E) preceding
Column II, and doubtless did betray to him the fact that a column preceding Column II
was lost.
Mustapha Aga on returning home took the fragments of the roll which he had
removed and pasted them around a dummy roll, as the modern natives very often
do. He waited two months and then took this dummy roll, looking very attractive
on the outside, to Mr. Smith, who forthwith purchased it, well knowing as the event
disclosed, the real character of his new roll. The methods of papyrus salvage as it
is now so skillfully practiced by such deft preparators as Ibscher, were of course
entirely unknown two generations ago ; and Mr. Smith deserves great credit for
rescuing these fragments as successfully as he has done.
Moreover Mr. Smith was not content with merely disengaging the fragments from
the bogus roll. He examined them with care, and recognizing that they were a part
of the papyrus which he had bought from Mustapha Aga two months previously, he
endeavored to put them together. I find the date " Dec. 10, 68 " written beside some
of the smaller fragments, showing that some twenty-one months after the purchase
of the fragments he was still engaged in trying to put them together. His efforts were
crowned with several successes. He recognized that fragments A and B (see Vol. II,
Plate I A) belong together, with B at the right, and an interval between them. He
discerned that C and D belong on the right edge of B and he had roughly added to
the right edge of B the readings from C and D. He had probably concluded that F
was from the lower half of the column and had continued the numbering of the lines
to include F (14-26). He knew also that G and I belong on the right edge of F, as his
memoranda show. That was as far as he had gone, but his progress shows him a keen
and penetrating student of the document.
The reader will find on Plate IA (Vol. II) the materials enabling him to follow the
process of reconstruction. The connection between fragments A and B is demonstrated
not only by the duplicate passage in Papyrus Ebers (see Case 1, Gloss A, pp. 106 f.),
but also by recurrences of the same passage from Pap. Smith, like l. 8 or l. 12. The
most difficult connection to establish was that between the group of fragments ABCD
forming the upper half of the column and the group FGHI forming part of the lower
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:05 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 103 ---
SPECIAL INTRODUCTION
77
half of the column. The connection is demonstrated in two ways. First by the
sequence of the content: the group ABCD ends with a diagnosis (1l. 18-14) and the
group PGHI begins with a verdict and a treatment. This is the correct order of
content of the cases throughout the treatise. Secondly the joint between A and F,
which is just at the level of l.18, can be reconstructed, notwithstanding the fact that
only a few traces of l. 18 have survived along the upper edge of fragment F. It is
possible to read along the lower edge of A the words 1*=>'*5r*^^^0>(f^. On the
left of the fragment A still preserves the upper part of the the small loop at the
upper end of the heavy oblique stroke, which will be found intruding into l. 14 on
fragment F. The short ^ above it on A will be found illustrated in gm in l. 25 of
the same column. Again, in the word the rent between A and F passes directly
along the second —, so that the lower edge of the horizontal stroke forming the
hieratic n is visible in the original along the upper edge of F. We thus have two
signs here part of each of which is visible on both A and F.
The fragments therefore belonged to a single column of which we have approxi-
mately the upper right and left, and the lower left-hand quarters. The greatest loss
is the lower right-hand quarter and a vertical strip along the right edge of the page
extending from top to bottom, some of which can be restored as on Plate IA (Vol. II),
from the surviving parallels.
The question now arises : where did this fragmentary column belong ? Did it
immediately precede the columns of the main roll, beginning with our Column II ?
These questions are easily answered. Fragment E, now inserted on Plate IA (Vol. II),
was still part of the main roll at the right of the foot of Column II when the papyrus
was handed to the present editor. It contains the ends of eight lines, and a study of
these shows that they are the ends of 1l.19-26 of our reconstructed column, which is
thus linked up with our main roll as Column I.
Of the seventeen fragments the reconstruction of Column I now disposes of all
the large ones and the most important of the small ones, or a total of nine. This
leaves eight very small pieces which have not been placed. The writing has faded
considerably, from the rough handling by the natives and the maceration to free them
from the glue used in patching up the dummy roll. These pieces have been assembled
on Plate I and lettered from K to R inclusive. They are so small and the ink so pale
that I have not been able to place them in the text of Column I.
Column I contains parts of three cases, of which the first is evidently the first case
in the treatise. Its beginning occupied the last few lines of the preceding column.
Unless the introduction preceding the cases was very long, the remainder of the lost
column, that is nearly all of it, would have furnished sufficient space for the introduc-
tion. In that case we have lost only one column at the beginning of the treatise,
preceding our present Column I.
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:05 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 104 ---
78
TRANSLATION AND COMMENTARY
CASE ONE
Bottom lines of lost column—I 12
A WOUND IN THE HEAD PENETRATING TO THE BONE
The beginning of this case is lost at the bottom of the last column preceding
Column I. Only a portion of the last twelve lines of the case is preserved at the top
of the fragmentary Column I. At the bottom of the preceding lost column the begin-
ning of Case 1 must have occupied at least nearly two lines, each about 28 cm. long,
for the restored text measured in hieratic of the proper scale is about 56 cm. long
(see Vol. II, lb). It is highly probable that no other case preceded our Case 1, as
we shall see. This observation shows us that the preceding portion of the lost
column, probably over twenty lines, was not devoted to the discussion of cases.
From the twelve lines of Case 1 which are preserved at the top of Column I, it is
quite evident that this case was arranged and organized as to subject matter in the
same way as all the others which follow. We must expect, therefore, that the diagnosis
will have been substantially a repetition of the examination, and that the title, with
which the case was introduced, consisted of the first part of observations recorded
in the examination. It is quite possible therefore to restore a large part of the beginning
of Case 1, now lost at the bottom of the lost column. There is unavoidable uncertainty
as to the length of the title, as it is impossible to establish with precision how much of
the examination was employed as title. The preserved portion, at the top of Column I,
begins in the diagnosis, in the middle of a word, after which nearly two-thirds of
the diagnosis is preserved. Combining the information disclosed by the glosses with
our knowledge of the stereotyped form of the diagnosis as found in other cases, it is
possible to restore the entire diagnosis with the exception of a lacuna of three or four
words. From the diagnosis thus restored, it is possible to work back in the same way
through the examination to the title, as already indicated.
Title
Bottom of lost column
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:05 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 105 ---
Case 1
79
TRANSLATION AND COMMENTARY
Translation
[Instructions concerning a wound in his head, penetrating to the bone of his skull.]
Of the forty-seven other cases preserved in Papyrus Smith, every one begins with
a title anticipating the examination, and employing its introductory words. It cannot
be doubted that like the remaining forty-seven, Case 1 also began with a title of the
same form.
^<?|7^ ^'w, " instructions, indications." This word is preserved as the first word
of the title in 46 out of the 48 cases in our treatise, and it was obviously present also
in Case 8 (as shown by the preserved portion of the title, I 18), giving us 47 cases
introduced by it, out of 48. We cannot doubt that it also introduced Case 1. The
word is written with the transferred sign V^, because of the word ^P^^^^j Si'w
" antelope," e. g., Davies, Deir el-Gebrmvi, I, pl. XI; Ptahhetep, II, pi. XIX ; Mariette,
Mastabas, D. 15, &c. It is construed with a following noun, either in the direct or
indirect genitive. In the earlier documents we find the direct genitive exclusively ;
e. g., throughout Pap. Smith, and the M.K. Kahun Medical Papyrus, 1, 15 ; 2, 18 ;
1, 28 ; 1, 27 ; et passim. Pap. Ebers also uses the direct genitive quite commonly
(100,15 with suffix pronoun; 109,2; 109,18; 108,19; etc.); but it at the same time
employs the indirect genitive (109, 11 ; 86, 4; 106, 18 ; 107, 5 ; 108, 17 ; etc.), as
does also the late Berlin Medical Papyrus 8088 (14, 8 ; 14, 6 ; 12, 12, three times in
all). SS'w does not occur in Pap. Hearst.
Outside of the medical treatises the meaning of the word is fairly clear. Thus in
a Hymn to Thoth the worshiper says :
" Come to me, (O Thoth), that thou mayest make regulations for me, and that thou
mayest make me instructed in thy office " (Pap. Anast. V, 9, 8). In the self-laudatory
phrases of oriental scribes and officials the term is frequently used to describe the
experienced or well-informed man.
In the medical literature the exact shade of meaning has still to be determined.
It is used in four of the medical treatises : Papyrus Ebers, Kahun Papyrus, Papyrus
Smith, and Berlin Medical Papyrus, to designate the entire discussion of the case. It
is not employed as a title of mere recipes, though it approaches this usage in the Kahun
Papyrus ; for this reason it does not appear at all in the exclusively magical documents
like Papyrus Hearst or the London Medical Papyrus, and is used only three times in
the Berlin Papyrus (8088). The chief question is whether the word designates the
objective indications observable in a given case, or the instructions based on these.
Commentary
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:05 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 106 ---
80
Case 1
THE SURGICAL TREATISE
A significant case in Pap. Ebers in the discussion of the heart might indicate the former.
The physician is discussing the meaning of a term indicating a symptom of the heart
and says : "It means the non-pulsating of the heart, or that the vessels of the heart
are silent (not pulsating), -*-^^'^^;71PiTiJLS11m iT there bein8 no in"
dications of them (the - vessels ') under thy two hands " (Ebers 100, 14-15). It is
highly probable that Sfrw here means the " indications " observable in the objective
situation, that is, that the physician laying his hands upon the vessels of the heart
is unable to discern any pulsations. It is conceivable also that we should render
Si'w here " instructions," understanding the statement to mean that the physician
will find at hand (" under thy two hands ") no available instructions compiled from
past experience ; but I am strongly inclined to the opinion that the former interpreta-
tion is the correct one. The word may therefore originally have meant the observable
" indications," and as the records of such indications accumulated and were accom-
panied also by the instructions to be followed by the practitioner, SS'w still continued
to appear in the title and thus came to cover both the " observations " of the surgeon
and the " directions " he was expected to follow. In such cases as those in the Kahun
Papyrus it is difficult to find any other rendering for the word than " instructions,"
and this is the rendering I have employed in the translation of Papyrus Smith. The
word is used in the plural throughout Our treatise, and is three times accompanied
by the plural demonstrative (]J^, " these " (XIV 7-8; XV 16; XVII 6). In these
three cases the physician is admonished to treat the patient "~-^?rTl^^ " according
to these instructions," and this passage favors the rendering " instructions " rather
than " indications."
While the restoration of the initial word " Instructions " in the title of Case 1 is
obviously correct, justification for the insertion of the next phrase is not so obvious
at first. Its correctness is demonstrable on the basis of an examination of the group
of cases in which it occurs, and especially of a comparison of this group with a later
analogous group. Reference to the index of titles (p. 88) makes it evident at once
that following upon Case 1 is a group of six cases each called " a wound in his head."
A similar group of five cases in the temporal region begins with Case 18. The first of
these five cases is designated merely as " a wound in his temple," and the subsequent
discussion shows that it is not a serious wound. The remaining four cases, however,
are much more serious, involving injury to the temporal bone beneath the fleshy
tissue which limited the injury in the first case. Examining again Cases 2 to 7 we
find that the last five involve injuries to the skull, while Case 2 preceding them is
a wound of the exterior overlying soft tissue, not involving injury to the bone. It
is evident then that Cases 2 to 7 form a group arranged like the group of Cases 18-22,
with the flesh wound placed first and injuries to the underlying bone following after.
If now we turn to the preserved text of Case 1 we find that it begins (I 1) with the
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:05 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 107 ---
Case 1
81
TRANSLATION AND COMMENTARY
words " his head," followed shortly by the words " his wound." The character of
" his wound " is also explained in Gloss B (I 9-10), and we learn that it has no gash.
We must conclude therefore that this group of seven cases of wounds in the head was
introduced by two so-called flesh wounds (Cases 1 and 2), after which the surgeon
continues with injuries to the skull (calvaria). As we are explicitly told that the wound
had no gash, the word " wound " in the title of Case 1 must be followed immediately
by the words " in his head " (see 11), just as in Case 18 we have : " a wound in his
temple." The " gash-wounds " or " gaping wounds" are then discussed in Cases 2-7.
The character of the wound is then further discussed, but it is impossible to
understand this discussion without further investigation of the use of the word
" wound " in our treatise.
^Jo?^ wbnw, " wound," is one of the commonest, if not the most common surgical
term in our treatise. It occurs 142 times. It is either written in full as above, or
with the determinative ; but it is often abbreviated to a varying extent, thus:
<?J%/+ (once only, VIII 18), aj/f,, fif/>, «ev** ; or this : fi^, fi|*, fios, A% or
even p (twice only, X 8 ; XII17). The plural strokes are rare and never appear with
the full phonetic writing. The gradual appearance of the abbreviated writings is
interesting and is an illustration of the fact that Case 1 is too near the beginning of
the document to have been preceded by many cases. Throughout the first three
cases (eight times preserved, several lost) the scribe carefully employs the full
phonetic writing, ?J^/>, but at the very beginning of Case 4 he drops into an easy
abbreviation, 80^ (II 2), although he at once returns to the full writing (twice).
With occasional reversions of this kind, he nevertheless reaches fi1^ at the bottom of
the fourth column (IV 21). Indeed, after a full writing in II18 and III 2 (Case 7), we
find prevailingly throughout the remainder of the treatise. It is reasonable
to conclude that this gradual resort to abbreviated writing on the part of the scribe
took place near the beginning of the document.
Wbnw designates the commonest form of injury treated in the document, as its
frequent occurrence demonstrates. It stands as the first word of the title in the
nineteen cases in which the injury is so designated in the diagnosis. These cases are
as follows : 1 (probable, though title is lost), 2, 8, 4, 5, 6, 7, 9, 10, 14, 18, 20, 28, 26,
27, 28, 29, 40, and 47. Although the word has long been known and rendered
" wound," the nature and character of the injury it might designate has not hereto-
fore been precisely determined, and it is the new material from Papyrus Smith which
now makes this possible. The word usually designates any injury to fleshy tissue,
which may be severed or gashed as with a knife or sword blade, or ruptured as with
the blow of a blunt weapon like a club, or rent as with the crushing action of some
heavy object, or laid open by any agency which might destroy the skin ; but more
rarely it may also indicate an injury to the bone.
G
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:05 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 108 ---
82
Case 1
THE SURGICAL TREATISE
A. Injuries of the Soft Tissue
A wbnw is often described or indicated as obviously in the fleshy tissue, e. g.,
Pap. Smith several times refers to " its (the wbnw's) flesh" (XVII1 and 5). In Pap.
Ebers there is a small group of " Recipes for healing a wbnw inflicted on the flesh "
(Ebers 70, 1). An interesting case in Pap. Smith deals with a fracture of the skull
incurred without injury to the overlying external tissue (Case 8). The surgeon states
that " there is no wound upon it (the wbnw) . . . the flesh of his head being uninjured "
(IV 18). The clear implication is that the wbnw would be in the " flesh " of the head.
There are frequent references in Pap. Smith to an injury to the bone (fracture, split,
perforation, etc.), having " a wbnw over it " (VII 15 ; IX 1 ; XII 15 ; XII 16-17 ;
etc.). Such a wbnw must necessarily be in the fleshy tissue. The same is true of a
wbnw in the chin (Case 27), the bone beneath which is " uninjured " (IX 14,15).
Papyrus Smith furnishes numerous important indications of the character of a
wbnw in the soft tissue overlying a bone, for in practically every case of wbnw in our
treatise, it is said to penetrate to the bone, or if there is no underlying bone, then to
the underlying organ. For the sake of completeness all important data from the other
Egyptian medical documents are also adduced in the following collection of materials.
1. Penetration. The wbnw treated in Pap. Smith, as we have already noted, is
usually described as ^fjfj (also <=>) ^ i " penetrating to the bone " (II 8 ; II 12 ; II
18: etc.). Of a wbnw where there is no immediately underlying bone, we have a
similar description (Case 28): (] P^JjJij^J J?^_ " piercing through to his gullet "
(IX 19). The reference is to a wound in the throat.
2. Gash produced by a sword, knife or battle axe. In an ironical catalogue of the
miseries of a military officer we find it stated that " his head is split with a wound
(wbn) " (Pap. Anast. IV, 9, 7 = Anast. Ill, 5, 8). This is a type of wound often dis-
cussed in Pap. Smith and called or " wbnw of a gash," meaning " a
gaping wound." It occurs thirty-one times in our treatise (II2; II11; III 2; etc.).
Such a wound may be called indifferently a wbnw, or a " gash ; " compare the two
following parallel passages :
Case 14 (VI 8-9)-
Case 47 ^-^J^Zw^UJW^tf (XVI 20).
The same variant, that is kf-t, " gash " for wbnw will be found by comparing
IX 8 (Case 26) with V 6 (Case 10). See the commentary on kf-t in Case 1 (examination,
pp. 90 ff). The character of this type of wound is very clearly indicated in several
cases, especially Case 10, in discussing which the surgeon is instructed to apply a
certain type of bandage " to the two hps of the gash-wound, in order to cause one to
join to the other " (V 9). The " two hps " of such a wound are referred to in
Pap. Smith a number of times, e. g.: II; VI 8 ; VI18 ; VIII 21 ; etc. Similarly
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:05 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 109 ---
Case 1
8.3
TRANSLATION AND COMMENTARY
the " gash " and the " two hps " are introduced to describe a wound of different
character of which it is said :
" It (the wbnw) has no gash . . . and his wbnw has not two hps " (VII 12-18).
The character of a " gash-wound " is also indicated in the directions to the surgeon
to " bring together his gash with stitching " (XVI 20). Such a wound may also be
described as having a " mouth " (IX 20 ; XVII 9) ; but this term is not decisive for
it is also employed of wounds which are not called " gash-wounds " (IV 20 ; VII 24-
VIII 1 ; or especially Case 41, which employs it five times !). The "mouth " of a
wound is also referred to in Pap. Ebers (70, 5 and 71,15), and in Pap. Hearst (XII11)
there is mention of a " wound (wbnw) having an open mouth."
8. Perforation produced by a pointed weapon like an arrow or spear. Such wounds
are not clearly and precisely defined in our treatise. The word Jf ° thm indicating
the verb " to perforate " or the noun " perforation " is usually applied to injuries to
the bone, as in Cases 8 (see commentary, 118), 7,15, etc. The verb P<=J| &db " to pene-
trate " or " perforate " is, however, employed to indicate that a perforating wound in
the fleshy tissue has penetrated through the lip to the interior of the mouth (Case 26),
or through the nose to the interior of the nostril (Case 14). See the discussion of these
two cases.
4. A contusion or a less clearly defined rupture of the tissue, produced by a blunt
weapon like a club. This is the type of wound referred to in the familiar apostrophe
to a drunkard: ^P^^^.T^X* "(People flee from thee, for) thou inflictest
wounds (wbri) on them " (Pap. Anast. IV, 11, 12). Such wounds are described in
Pap. Smith as having no gash and therefore lacking two lips (Case 18, VII 12-18,
cited above under 2).
5. Laceration and rupture of the soft tissue caused by the crushing action of a
heavy object which lays open the flesh. Papyrus Ebers refers to a " wound (wbnw)
of crushing " (Ebers 110, 4), and it may be that Case 18, just classified under 4, should
be placed here. The only direct reference to crushing in Pap. Smith is a case of a
crushed cervical vertebra (Case 88).
6. Burns. There is no reference to burns in Pap. Smith, but Pap. Ebers contains
a recipe for a " buni-wbnw " (Ebers 68,17-18), that is a " burn-wound," and it contains
other recipes for burns not designated as " wounds," e. g., 68, 20 ff.
B. Injuries of the Bones
Wbnw is not commonly applied to injuries of the bones. In Case 29, however,
Pap. Smith clearly defines a " gaping wound in the vertebra of his neck " (X 8 ff.).
More often the terms for injuries in the bones are not general like " wound," but
specific, like p^" id " smash " (compound comminuted fracture), i 0 " pSn, " split,"
ra^i° ^im, " perforation," or Po^^, shm, " crushing," etc. The range of our sur-
G 2
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:05 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 110 ---
84
Case 1
THE SURGICAL TREATISE
geon's knowledge and mention of wounds must include a study of such words, which
will be found in the index. Nor do these wholly exhaust the available materials, for
the surgeon deals with wounds of the brain (Cases 6 and 8) ; and the reference to
canals leading to the lungs (XII 2) would indicate that if our treatise were preserved
to the end, we would find injuries to the internal organs.
The observed symptoms of various types of wbnw and the surgeon's medicinal or
surgical treatment will be discussed in the commentary on the cases themselves.
C. Sores
Somewhat less common is the use of wbnw to designate a sore, the origin of which
may not have been a wound ; e.g., even in our treatise, written to discuss injuries,
wbnw appears in Case 89 (XIII 9) with the probable meaning " sore." Confer the
Greek IAko? which means both " wound " and " sore."
j^® , m tp-f, " in his head." Regarding the correctness of restoring these words
after " wound," there cannot be any doubt, as we have the injury called " a wound
in his head " in the diagnosis (11). The word for " head " demands some discussion,
partly grammatical, but chiefly anatomical. The scribe has used the word-sign, and
it is well known that in such cases we are often unable to determine which of the
two common Egyptian words for head we should read, tp or d'd\
Taking up first the word tp, it should be noted that it never occurs written with
phonetic complement in Pap. Smith. In my judgment we cannot be certain there-
fore that the reading tp is correct, although the employment of tp for the " head " as
a whole is in accordance with Egyptian usage. In view of the possibility that we should
read tp here, we must examine the anatomical meaning of the word as determined by
usage. The word originally meant the " tip, top," or " head " of a thing. This meaning
is very old. As far back as the Pyramid Texts we find " the tips of the two wings "
(Pyr. 2048b, 1122b pi.); " the tip[s] of their (female) breasts " (Pyr. 1282a); or in an
example very appropriate to our inquiry," the nW-tree inclines its head (©□ tp) to thee "
(Pyr. 808a). It is also used as far back as the Pyramid Texts for the human head as
a whole, e.g., " He has given to thee thy head " (©□ tp), said to the deceased king
(Pyr. 689b); or " Thy head (®o tp) is fastened on" (Pyr. 1262a, cf. 682e). References
to the detached head of the deceased with the word written phonetically tp continue
down into Greek times. Cf. de Morgan, Ombos, I, 89, 86, bis, and often at Ombos ;
likewise in Naville, Mythe d'Horus, XV. The severed head of Osiris at Dendera
(Mariette, Denderah, IV, 87, 66) is called ^j® tp ntr. The best anatomical evidence that
tp means the wholehead is perhaps the phrase JjC^1,1,"—m'i"~*0®^ "the seven
openings of the head " (read tp as shown by the Demotic, Bilingual Pap. Rhind, I,
8, 8). The " seven openings " are of course the ears, nostrils, eyes and mouth,—
a good indication of the anatomical meaning of tp, viz., the whole head.
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:05 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 111 ---
Case 1
85
TRANSLATION AND COMMENTARY
As we turn to the use of tp in the medical documents however, we meet with a
difficulty ; for they do not contain a single example of tp (caput) with a phonetic
writing ensuring the reading tp. Examples of anatomical usage of tp are common
in Pap. Smith, with the original meaning, " tip, top, head " of some other organ or
part of the body. The list is as follows :
®| W,e|JJ " tips of his toes " (IV 14-15).
V^T-fJ^ " tip of his shoulder-fork " (IV 17).
" top of his eye-brow " (V 6).
^XA.'—S^w " 14 is the upper tiP of his nose " (V 14).
®~JJ<^<- " the tip[s] of his two clavicles " (XI 18).
"ir-Io®! <??^^ J J^7 w "it means the displacement of the tips of his A'6-bone "
(XI 22-28).
as?iP.T^'XAT^Jw " the tips of them (clavicles) are fastened in the
upper bone of his breast " (XI 28).
^PiL-^^ " tP-Jfr in his sternum " (XIII 8).
" The uppermost tip of his sternum " (XIII17).
? ,?4J£ ®P,Ti " the ribs of his sternum ... and their heads [are
red] " (XIV 28-XV 1).
SrJLi®! <??!^<?, ?,?*\Jw " the heads of the ribs of his sternum are displaced "
(XV 4).
PJL^fPiL^k^ Jw " m his sternum " (XVI 12-18).
Tp is not phonetically written in any of these cases, but the reading tp cannot be
doubted in view of the meaning of the word and the context in the above examples.
The fact that these unquestionable examples of tp are all invariably written ® is
perhaps a fair reason for regarding this writing ® where it means " head (caput) "
as likewise intended for tp, and although this conclusion is not certain, the reading
tp has been adopted herein for all such writings, of which there are forty-seven
occurrences in our treatise.
The other word for " head," f^J,^© d'd', occurs only three times written out
phonetically in our text (IV 18 ; IV 20 ; XI 16). This word likewise indicates the
head as a whole. In Pap. Ebers it is used of the head of a fish (Ebers 52, 22), of an
ass (ibid., 25,15 ; cf. 91, 10 ; 88,15); and Pap. Westcar (8, 21-22) employs it of the
head of a goose cut off by the magician. The severed head of an ox written J_| appears
in a tomb relief at Leyden (Leemanns, Mon.fun., pll . XXIV ; cf. also Pap. judic. de
Turin, 8, 2 and Pap. Boulaq, 11, obverse). Similarly it is used of the human head in the
Book of the Dead (Naville, 18,81 Aa); also for the severed head of Osiris (ibid., 98,5 Ca).
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:05 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 112 ---
86
Cask 1
THE SURGICAL TREATISE
In Pap. Anastasi (III 5, 8) the well-known example : i^i^^S^C^^^J^
" His head is split with a wound," is a good illustration of our group of head
wounds, as well as a demonstration that it was customary to use d'd' in such con-
nections. A demonstration that d'd' designates anatomically the whole head is to
be found in the phrase : "^Vi'iTT—iJUL " seven openings of his head " (d'd')
(Pap. Leyden, 845, verso 5,5-6, from text prepared for Berlin Worterbuch by Gardiner).
This example demonstrates that the anatomical meaning of d'd' is essentially the same
as that of tp which, as we have seen above, likewise contains seven openings. When
used of the human head in the medical papyri and phonetically written out so as to be
unmistakable, the occurrences of the word d'd' are not numerous, e. g., Ebers 66.11 ;
86,15; 90,18; 109, 10 (probably) ; Kahun Med. Pap. 2, 26 ; Pap. Hearst, II, 1. In
the vast majority of cases in the medical papyri the word " head " is written © i,
which we may of course read either tp or d'd,', e.g., Ebers 1, 4.
An important variant in Pap. Smith illustrates the loose use of d'd' as " skull."
In discussing an injury of the forehead in Case 9, the surgeon twice refers to the injury
as follows :
^°2&\£°~Z^£L " fracture of the shell of his skull " (IV 19).
P^D^s/c£°TiLfL " fracture of the shell of his head " (IV 19-20).
It may be therefore that d'd' is more closely related to or connected with " skull "
than tp. In this connection the following list of phrases is important:
A fracture of the skull is under (]fJJ^JLiLl " the skin of his ®i " (IV 12-18).
Fragments (of bone) are embedded in j^'JJ®^ " the flesh of his ©i " (II 9).
" The odor of the crown (literally " chest ") of his ©< " (III 21).
" As for (the following statement of the text) - His countenance is wet with
sweat,' it means his ®i is a little moist " (III 18-19).
Whether we are to read tp or d'd' in the above list of passages it is evident that
© i means more than the calvaria.
The word ^J^S dnn-t, which we have rendered " skull " above should be carefully
examined in this connection. In the first place it should be noted that the serious
injuries of the skull, like " fracture " (II 11), " perforation " (I 19), and " splitting "
(II 5), are all said to be in the dnn-t. In describing different kinds of fracture of the
dnn-t, the surgeon mentions " bones that have got into this fracture and sunk deep
into the interior of his dnn-t" (II 16). Again a fracture is described as " large and
opening into the interior of his dnn-t " (II 24). Of a fracture in the forehead, the
surgeon says, " the shell of his dnn-t is fractured " (IV 19). In our own Case 1 the
surgeon mentions the " bone of his dnn-t" (111). Under these circumstances we cannot
doubt that the surgeon's technical use of the word identifies it with the calvaria. In
the other medical papyri the word occurs only in Pap. Ebers and Pap. Hearst, which
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:05 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 113 ---
Case 1
87
TRANSLATION AND COMMENTARY
do not employ it of the human body, except possibly Ebers 90, 16-17, where dnn-t
is significantly parallel with " bones." Otherwise Ebers and Hearst employ dnn-t only
for the head of a fish as a medicinal ingredient of a prescription (Ebers 47, 12 ; 47,
14-15 ; 88, 8 ; Hearst, VI, 4). Outside of the medical papyri the word does not
occur in the entire range of the older documents and is not found until Greek times,
e.g., Dumichen, Geogr. Inschr. Ill, 48 (Dendera) ; Piehl, Inscr. II, 68, 8 and 68, 4 =-
Rochem. I, 576, 5 (Edfu). The indications are that our document has taken a term
current, though not of common use, and has adopted it as the technical anatomical
term for skull.
The justification for the restoration —^ rr n hi " penetrating to the bone "
is the fact that the ancient commentary (Gloss C, 110-12) contains an explanation
of this phrase. The reason for the insertion of the phrase just at this point is its
occurrence after " his head " in all the other cases of this group, 1 to 7, except Case 5,
where its omission in the title is doubtless an oversight, for it is inserted in the
examination (II12).
rr, " to extend, penetrate." It appears twice in our document in the
archaic form 1|5s yr (XIII 18 ; XIII15); otherwise it is written with the greatest
regularity (twenty-nine times), and always without A. There is no trace or
indication of a third weak radical, as sometimes in the M.K., even where reduplica-
tion would be required by the form in case the root were III-inf. To the total of
thirty-one passages in which it occurs, we can add some others with certainty by
restoration of Case 1, which must have contained several more occurrences. It was
probably used at least 85 times in Papyrus Smith.
Its first occurrence in our treatise was in Case 1, for as already noted the com-
mentary on this case contains an explanation of it (Gloss C), which is unfortunately
very fragmentary. Before we undertake to discuss it, we should examine a cognate
gloss in Case 18 (Gloss A, VII12) in which we find the following parallelism :
Phrase to be explained : ^£^»-~^i =" rr to the bone."
Explanation : ^-A<^1 =" arriving at the bone."
It is obvious then that our word Cr means " to reach, to arrive " or with the
following preposition " to reach as far as," " to arrive at," for the explanation can
only be understood as meaning : " to arrive at," " to reach as far as " the bone.
We are now in a position to study the fragmentary gloss, explaining our word and
its context in Case 1 (Gloss C, 110-12). Accepting the restorations of the broken text
which will be further justified in the commentary (p. 117), the gloss may be rendered :
" As for (the quoted words) : - <*r to the bone of his skull, (but) not having a
gash,'—it means (literally,- it says'), there is a gaping of the flesh, although r—1.. .
(loss of several words) . . . I"—1 over the bone of his skull, without gaping of one (lip)
from the other, being narrow, not wide." The general sense of this fragmentary com-
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:05 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 114 ---
88
Case 1
THE SURGICAL TREATISE
ment is evidently that the exterior orifice of the wound, while gaping slightly, is not
large nor gaping like a gash with two lips ; but that in depth it penetrates through
the flesh to the bone.
The simplest meaning of rr as an anatomical term is to be found in its use to define
the extent of a region or organ. In Papyrus Smith we find the following examples
of this kind :
1. " The two sides of his nose " " extending fr) to his maxillary "
(V15).
2. "The chamber of his nose is the middle of his nose as far as the back" (or" end "),
J^I^I^'vr " extending (""r) to the region between his two eyebrows "(V21).
8. " It is a dislocation of the vertebra of his neck," ^f^J^1?,^. "extending
(rr) to his backbone, which causes him to be unconscious of his arms and his legs "
(X 15-16).
4. " In the upper bone of his breast," ^ff^jf,^. " extending (rr) to his throat"
(XI 28).
The examples of the anatomical use of the verb ^£^, rr certainly do not confirm
its usually accepted meaning " to ascend." Gardiner has made the same observation
regarding its meaning in other connections (Notes on Sinuhe, pp. 12-18). It is
obvious that the verb must mean " to pass on " in the first place, and then " to reach,"
" to pass by," or " pass through," or " pass beyond." For example, in the Book of
the Dead the deceased says: " I reach it (dung) not with
my two hands " (BD ed. Budge, 189, from Nu 19,18; six duplicates all with same text).
It is this meaning "reach," "penetrate to," which has led our surgeon to employ it to
indicate the passage of a wound rupturing the fleshy tissue, through that tissue to
the bone beneath. He employs it especially to describe deep wounds, both " gaping
wounds " (wbnw n kf't) and others with a smaller and more irregular orifice, described
as " having no gash " (nn kf-t or n wnt kf-t), in all twenty-seven times. In all of these
examples, rr, which in such cases we may render " penetrate," is followed by a preposi-
tion and the word " bone," thus : — (twenty-three times), or ^£^«=> (four
times, twice with archaic writing ^Hi).1
It is significant that this anatomical and surgical use of with the meaning
" extend " (anatomical), or " penetrate " (surgical) is unknown outside of our treatise.
It is evident that our Egyptian surgeon or his ancestors had built up a fist of words
with specialized medical or surgical meanings not occurring in other literature. As
we shall see, it is largely if not exclusively these terms which have gained a technical
1 The Berlin Woerterbuch has only six examples with the preposition »~™, and only four with «=>.
Our material in Papyrus Smith shows that *~« is the normal preposition. The phrase ^L—J^J^i
which Gardiner in his commentary on Sinuhe has shown to mean " in the vicinity of " or similar, is
of course related to the verb rr.
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:05 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 115 ---
Case 1
89
TRANSLATION AND COMMENTARY
or professional meaning, to which the ancient reader of the roll found it necessary to
append an explanatory commentary.
The inclusion of the phrase " of his skull " in the title may be open to question.
That it occurred in the examination and diagnosis cannot be doubted, for reasons
fully indicated in the discussion below. The commentary on dnn-t will be found above.
Examination
Bottom of lost column to I 1
L<0 * ^sa^ (WWW ^a.J
C^^a2>^^J7<? wl(from Case 18, vn ^; or
T^^^ '1 Case 2,118; cf. Case 7, III 9-10).
a This poeition of the beginning of I 1 is almost certain. See Vol. II, PI. I B, l. 1.
Translation
[If thou examinest a man having a wound in his head, penetrating to the bone of
his skull, (but) not having a gash, thou shouldst palpate his wound (or, thou shouldst
lay thy hand upon it); shouldst thou find his skull uninjured, not having a perfora-
tion, a split or a smash in it,] (conclusion in diagnosis).
Commentary
The restoration as a whole is drawn from Case 18, but also with the use of Case 7
and Case 2. In some minor points the restoration is uncertain, but in the main it
represents without doubt the general content of the examination as it was originally
written in the lost column. The following parallel between the group to which Case 1
belongs and the analogous group of injuries to the temporal region in Cases 18 to 22
will demonstrate the correctness of basing the restoration on Case 18.
Cases 1 & 2. Superficial wound ; bone Case 18. Superficial wound ; bone un-
uninjured. injured.
Case 8. Skull perforated. Cases 19 & 20. Temporal bone perforated.
Case 4. Skull split. Case 21. Temporal bone split.
Case 5. Skull fractured. Case 22. Temporal bone fractured.
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:05 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 116 ---
90
Case 1
THE SURGICAL TREATISE
An examination of the content of Case 1 as revealed in the partially preserved
diagnosis, and also in the glosses which quote from the discussion of the case, as we
shall see in discussing the diagnosis itself, demonstrates that Case 1 was closely
parallel in content and arrangement with Case 18. This is also true of Case 1 as
compared with Case 2, which was also a wound exposing but not injuring the calvaria,
and Case 2 furnishes a number of valuable hints for the recovery of the text of Case 1.
All these details will be noticed in the following commentary.
In the description of the wound there are two chief observations : it penetrates
to the bone ; and there is no gash (kf-t). In the diagnosis the observation regarding
the lack of a kf-t comes first, and penetration to the bone second, as shown by the
preserved text (12). In Gloss C however, in the quotation of the words to be explained,
the penetration to the bone comes first and the lack of a kf-t is second. Gloss C there-
fore did not quote from the diagnosis, and consequently must be quoting from the
examination. The examination therefore must have contained a statement having
the penetration of the bone mentioned first and the lack of a kf-t second. A variation
in arrangement as between examination and diagnosis is sometimes observable in
other cases of our treatise. The restoration of the two observations regarding the
wound in the examination is therefore drawn from the quotation in Gloss C (110-11,
p. 116).
In the opening words of the examination the word " examine " itself is an impor-
tant technical term, which will be found discussed in the commentary on Gloss A
(I 8-9, pp. 104-6), a long explanation of the meaning of the term by the ancient
practitioner himself.
kf-t, noun, "gash, cut." There was no inherited word-sign for the word
and it is therefore always written out phonetically, with a knife as the determinative.
It is hardly likely that this knife once served as the word-sign. The existence of no
word-sign may suggest that this exclusively surgical word did not find written form
until after the picture stage of writing had been left behind.
This surgical word is found only in Pap. Smith and the fact that it occurs there
no less than thirty-six times enables us to establish its meaning with certainty. The
ancient commentator found it necessary to explain the term wbnw n kf-t, " gash-
wound " (Case 2, Gloss A, I 15-16), but the entire explanation is lost in the lacuna
at the beginning of l.16, only its last words " his wound " being preserved. The knife-
determinative gives us a preliminary indication of the meaning, which is amply
corroborated by the use of the word. In Case 18 we have a wound in the temple
which is said to have no kf-t, and the ancient commentator explains in a gloss (VII18)
that this means " his wound has not two lips." " Two lips " are obviously the chief
characteristic of a gash. Concerning this wound of similar character Case 1 says in
Gloss B : " There is no gaping (kf-t) of one (lip) from the other "(110; again in l.11).
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:05 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 117 ---
Case 1
91
TRANSLATION AND COMMENTARY
Complete parallelism between " two lips " and kf-t is clear in the following two
examples (XVI 18-20 and VI 8-9):
i. ^kk-?CTH^M-r-1 X1* i.-Zl^^lSo
1. " Shouldst thou find its kf-t separated from r—1 . . . thou shouldst draw
together for him his kf-t with stitching " (Case 47 ; XVI18-20).
2. " Shouldst thou find the two lips of that wound separated from each other,
thou shouldst draw together for him that wound with stitching " (Case 14 ; VI 8-9).
In the second part of the above parallelism, it is important to note that "his kf-t "
(plur.) is parallel with " that wound " in the other text. In other words, the term " his
kf-t" (plur.) is simply a variant for " that wound." The same parallelism of " his kf-t"
(plur.) and " his wound " occurs again in Case 26 (IX 8) and Case 10 (V 6). See com-
mentary on Case 10 (treatment). Further examination shows that what is here
designated both by kf-t (plur.) and "wound" is the injury to the soft tissue. The
use of kf-t in the plural in the first example above (XVI19-20) is found also in V 6;
XVII 4 (bis). That the plural is meant is clearly shown by the use of the plural
demonstrative in XVII 4. This usage throws light on the origin of the word. It is
obvious that in the cases where this plural occurs, as shown by the above parallelism
with " his wound," only one gash is being discussed ; but such a gash is shown by
the discussion to be gaping, thus exposing two faces of gashed tissue, and it is these
which the surgeon is to draw together. Such gashed tissue is laid bare, and reminds
us at once of the well-known verb ^'y5 kfy, " to lay bare," of which our word must
be a regular feminine infinitive. It is highly probable that the term was consciously
devised by the surgeon to describe this particular kind of injury, in view of the facts
that the word is found nowhere else outside of our surgical treatise, and that it needed
an explanatory comment (Gloss A) in order to be understood.
Kfmt is used especially to add greater precision to the more general word wbnw,
" wound " (see p. 82), being appended as a genitive after wbnw. As we say " a thing
of beauty," so the Egyptian might say " wound of a gash," meaning a " gashed
wound." This phrase, <?J ^ wbnw n kf-t occurs thirty-one times (five restored
from context in Cases 2 and 8) in our treatise, and in all cases designates a deep and
dangerous wound. Although the table on p. 92 does not contain all the available data
for describing each case and the symptoms developed, the depth and serious nature
of the wound will be evident.
Out of the eleven cases the wbnw n kf-t (" gash-wound ") penetrates to the bone
in nine, while of the two remaining, it penetrates the throat to the gullet in one, and
the other (Case 47) is shown by the context to be a yawning wound. In six out of the
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:05 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 118 ---
92
Cask 1
THE SURGICAL TREATISE
eleven cases there is serious injury to the bone beneath the " gash-wound; " and
it is evident that the whole injury has been produced by a violent blow with a weapon
like a sword or battle axe (Cases 4, 5, 6) or a spear (Cases 8, 7, 29). Obviously such
wounds are those of battle, and we must conclude that the surgeon had gained know-
ledge of such injuries while following the Egyptian armies and treating the wounded
on the field—a fact of substantial historical importance, for the author of this treatise
on wounds is the earliest known surgeon in history to possess such experience. His
employment in such work denotes a high degree of civilization and of humanitarian
sentiment.
Case.
Injury to bone if any.
Depth of flesh wound.
Reference.
2
Head : skull uninjured
" penetrating to the bone "
112 ; I 12-13 ; I 14 ; I 15
3
„ „ perforated (thin)
a a 't a '»
I 18; I 19; I 21
4
„ split (pin)
»' j» a a a
112; 113; 115.
5
„ „ fractured (id)
't a a a a
II 11 ; H 12; II 14.
6
„ fractured (id) brain
ruptured
a a a a a
II 18 ; II 18-19.
7
Head : tp-w of skull perforated
»» a a a i'
in 2 ; III 5 ; III 12.
10
„ eyebrow ; no injury to bone
a a a a a
V9.
27
„ chin ; no injury to bone
a a a a a
IX 13 ; IX 13-14 ; IX 15.
28
Throat
" perforating to gullet"
IX 18-19.
29
Neck : " vertebra of his neck "
" penetrating to the bone "
X3; X4.
47
Shoulder
gaping wound
XVI 16 ; XVI17 ; XVII1 ;
XVII 10.
It will be obvious that the absence of kf-t was an important negative observation
in the description of the wound in our case as also in Case 18.
As the wound penetrates to the bone it is the duty of the surgeon to investigate
the injury and determine whether it not only " extends to " but also includes the bone.
This investigation is designated by the word ^V^-A drr, " to seek, search, search
out, investigate, probe, palpate." The word has long been known outside of the medical
papyri, where it is common ; but its surgical use has never been determined clearly,
for it occurs outside of Pap. Smith only in Pap. Ebers, and there only three times.
One of these passages is of importance for determining the surgical meaning of the
word. Itreads: H\3^1^f^^Zl1IJL1 ° JtlllS^ " If th7fin8er palpates and
it is like hf under thy fingers, ..." (Ebers 106, 18-19). The surgeon is investigating
a lanced boil or cyst, and the verb drr indicates his subsequent palpation with the
finger. This is quite in accord with the usage in Pap. Smith, where the word occurs
ten times besides the restored passage in our Case 1. The significant passages are as
follows:
" Thou shouldst palpate (drr) his wound, and if thou findest something disturbing
therein under thy fingers " (Case 4, II 8-4).
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:05 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 119 ---
Case 1
93
TRANSLATION AND COMMENTARY
" Thou shouldst palpate (drr) his wound, and if thou findest that smash (fracture)
which is in his skull deep and sunken under thy fingers " (Case 5, II 12-18).
" Thou shouldst palpate (drr) his wound and if thou findest that smash (fracture)
which is in his skull . . . and something therein throbbing and fluttering under thy
fingers " (Case 6, II19-21).
" Thou shouldst palpate his wound and if thou findest the temporal (bone) unin-
jured " (Case 18, VII 8-9 ; cf. Case 27, IX 14-15).
Besides the explicit statement that the surgeon palpates with his fingers, it is
interesting to note that it would only be in this way that he could feel the pulsations
in the brain. There is no reference in the surgery of our treatise to probing with an
instrument. Another evidence that such investigation is done with the fingers is
found in the fact that Case 2 and Case 7 display a variant but parallel text at this
point, which reads : " Thou shouldst lay thy hand upon it " (see text of examination
above). It should be noted also that our word " palpate " (drr), as found in Case 10
(V 6), is twice represented by the variant " examine " in Case 26 (IX 7) and Case 29
(X 5). See commentary on u_o h'y, " examine " in Case 1 (I 8). This would suggest
that " drr " may sometimes also connote the idea of making a more general examina-
tion. In this connection it is important to observe that in Case 8 (IV 5-6) the surgeon
is directed to " palpate " (drr) a serious fracture of the skull, when the overlying soft
tissue is uninjured. See commentary on Case 8, examination, IV 5-6.
^J^^s"^* g1nm'h "Shouldst thou find, etc.," is restored as in Case 18. Case 2
has a slightly different text at this point.
The list of three injuries to the bone : thm, pSn, and id (" perforation," " split,"
and " smash " (" fracture ")) are restored here in the order in which they are taken up
in Cases 8,4, and 5 respectively ; but Case 18 gives the list at this point in a different
order, viz., pSn, thm, Sd (VII 9 ; likewise Case 2,1 17), although the cases following
Case 18 take up the injuries in the order thm, p$n, ad.
Diagnosis
I 1-2
sir
a The amount of space lost here at the beginning of l. 2 may be seen by comparing the certain
restorations at the beginnings of the lines of this column on PI. I B and C.
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:05 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 120 ---
94
Case 1
THE SURGICAL TREATISE
a Part of this sign is preserved at the beginning of the lacuna ; see commentary.
Translation
[Thou shouldst say regarding him : " One having a woun]d in his head, while
his wound does [not] have two lips, - - -, nor a gash, although [it penetrates to the
bone of] his head. An ailment which I will treat."
Commentary
That Column I begins with the diagnosis is shown by the fact that the verdict is
in l. 2, and in all cases it is preceded by the diagnosis which makes the verdict possible.
It will not have differed in form from the other cases in the same group and throughout
the document. The beginning of the preserved text of Column I must be compared
with an analogous case to justify the restorations suggested. As we have already noted
Case 1 is the first of a group of cases chiefly concerned with grave injuries to the skull.
In the same way Case 18 is the first of a group of cases dealing chiefly with injuries
of the temporal bone. See comparative table in examination, p. 89. Case 1 and
Case 18 deal with flesh wounds over the bone, and they are parallel or analogous both
in position, each in its respective group, as well as in the character of the content of
the discussion. Like Case 1, Case 18 states that the wound has no gash, and a gloss
explains this statement as meaning that the wound does not have two lips (VII 18).
Placing the two statements together :
1P0Cl]PESN^Uoe£ "while his wound has [not] two lips" (I 1, from Case 1);
^£g"P£o>a°£ " and his wound has not two lips " (VII18, from Case 18),
we cannot doubt that the lacuna in Case 1 contained a negative, although it is difficult
to determine the exact word which will fit the fragmentary signs still visible on the
upper edge of the papyrus at this point. In view of the certainty that some negative
filled the lacuna in Case 1 at this point, it is remarkable to find the verb ^3&>» mn
preceding spt-wy in the repetition of this passage quoted for purposes of explanation
by the ancient editor in Gloss B (I 9-10). This difficulty will be found discussed in
the commentary on Gloss B (pp. 114-116).
Continuing the discussion of the restoration before taking up the commentary,
it is regrettable that the short lacuna at the beginning of l. 2 resists all efforts to
determine its former content. The only source for material is Case 18 and nothing
drawn thence seems to fit the sense, though it would be easy to fit the space. The
restoration in the last bracket is certain. In the first place the edge of the papyrus
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:05 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 121 ---
Case 1
95
TRANSLATION AND COMMENTARY
at the beginning of the lacuna has preserved the right end of the cross stroke of ^.
Turning now to Case 18 (VII 12) we find after n wn-t hf-t, the words yst aw rr n M.
This makes the correctness of our restoration quite certain.
P£w<=, dpt-wy, " two hps." This term is used eleven times in the Pap. Smith to
designate the two edges of a gaping gash-wound. This usage is peculiar to our treatise,
for it is not found in any of the other medical papyri. Pap. Ebers employs it once for
the " two lips of the vulva " (95, 22, correcting determinative), which is a similar
comparison ; but otherwise it is used only for the shores of a body of water.
The concluding statement of the diagnosis is the most important proposition it
contains. For lack of a modern equivalent, we call it the " verdict." The reader is
referred to the discussion in the introduction (pp. 46-48). As we have noticed in
the introduction, the verdict is the conclusion of the diagnosis, both together form-
ing an apodosis of which the examination is the protasis. It is quite certain that the
principal proposition of the apodosis is the statement " Thou shouldst say," at
the head of the diagnosis, and the verdict is simply a second direct object of the verb
" Thou shouldst say."
y^^"^, mr " hurt, injury, pain, ailment, disease." This word, used both as
verb and noun, evidently applied either to artificial and accidental injury, or to
natural suffering and disease. An old example of its use in connection with an artificial
case is found in the Fifth Dynasty tomb of f ^ ft V at Sakkara in a scene of manicure
and pedicure treatment in which the patient says to the man operating on his foot:
JC^Af0"^^ " Do not let it hurt " (mr) (from my own copy). Its use in our treatise
is exclusively confined to artificial injuries.
^Il)^ WV"y, " which I will treat " (literally " make ") is grammatically a fine
example of the new " prospective relative " form, of the existence of which Gunn has
recently given a brilliant demonstration in his Studies in Egyptian Syntax. See p. 8,
example No. (8) for the form Strong and unquestionable evidence as addi-
tional proof of the correctness of his recognition and identification of the new form
might have been adduced from Papyrus Ebers, where it occurs sixteen times in this
form of the physician's verdict.
Of the three forms of the verdict this one which we call verdict 1 is found outside
of our papyrus a total of nineteen times : twice in the Berlin Medical Papyrus (8088,
Nos. 154 and 161); once in the Hearst Papyrus (No. 174, 12, 2) and sixteen times
in Papyrus Ebers (fourteen times in the concluding group of suppurating sores and
the like, Nos. 857-860, 868-872, and twice elsewhere, Nos. 200 and 617). Among the
fourteen occurrences at the end of Papyrus Ebers are four in which this verdict receives
the addition thus: y^**^^^^^3,^ "An ailment (mr) which
I will treat with the lancet " (105, 4). In this connection one might conclude that
yr means " operate," but it is used so often in cases where no operation is involved
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:05 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 122 ---
96
Case 1
THE SURGICAL TREATISE
that one can hardly doubt the rendering " treat." In Pap. Smith this verdict occurs
thirty times, and in twenty-nine of these treatment is prescribed. The case lacking
treatment is the second group of symptoms in Case 84, where it is quite evident that
the scribe has inserted verdict 1 when he really intended verdict 8, a verdict indicating
treatment is useless. Compare his similar error in Case 85 (see list of titles). In these
thirty occurrences of verdict 1 the result of the treatment is given in twenty-five and
in all of these twenty-five it is continued " until he recovers " (r ndm-f). Of the five
cases in which no result (like r ndm-f) is given, one is due to the loss of the conclusion
(Case 48), one to the error of the scribe already noted (Case 84); and in only three is
there really no statement of the result, which, as we have seen, where given at all
is uniformly favorable. It is evident that verdict 1 suggests a favorable outcome
of a case easy to treat, although it is not evident that r ndm-f always indicates complete
recovery.
Treatment
I 2-8
a Written out fully as in XIII 16; the restoration then exactly fills the gap. Otherwise it is
taken from Case 18.
b Remains of a single sign in red ; the scribe has employed the red for the entire text of the
treatment. 0 Restored as in Case 18.
Translation
Thou shouldst bind it with [fresh] meat [the first day] (and) treat afterward with
grease, [honey] (and) lint every day until he recovers.
Commentary
2^ wt," to bind, to bandage." The Egyptian idiom seems to us curiously perverted.
It literally means " Thou shouldst bind it (the wound) upon fresh meat." Any one
who has visited a modern museum and seen a really good example of the Egyptian
embalmer's bandaging knows that he was a master in the art of applying and arrang-
ing bandages (see PI. Ill, Figs. 6-7). The same skill was available for the benefit
of a wounded patient. We therefore find bandaging occupying an important and
effective place in Egyptian surgery and medicine. Bandages were applied for two
purposes : for covering and keeping effectively in place the medicaments prescribed ;
or for mechanically retaining in position and protecting while healing the ruptured
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:05 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 123 ---
Case 1
97
TRANSLATION AND COMMENTARY
tissue or the broken bone of the injury. The first is a matter chiefly of medicine, the
second is purely a matter of surgery. We shall postpone the discussion of the second
until later (Case 7, Gloss C, III 18; Case 11, treatment, V 18), as we are concerned
here solely with the first.
The medicaments applied by being bound on are either simple remedies like the
fresh meat above, or a combination of two ingredients, especially grease and honey
applied with lint as above; or a more elaborate prescription of as many as five in-
gredients to be triturated together and bound on (Cases 41 and 46). There are in
our treatise thirty-three instances in which medicaments are externally applied in
this way. They are the following :
Fresh meat: Cases 1, 2 (restored), 8 (restored), 10,14,16, 17, 18, 26, 27, 28, 29,
80, 82, 40, and 47.
Grease, honey, and lint: Cases 7 and 14. These are the cases with our verb wt " to
bind"; but all the instances employing drwh "treat" with grease, honey, and some-
times lint, as shown in Case 1 (pp. 100-102), should also be added here. There are
nineteen of these instances, see drwh, below, p. 100.
With ymrw : Cases 15, 82, 85, 86, 87, 88, 42, 48.
With ymrw and honey : Case 25.
With a triturated prescription of several ingredients up to five: Cases 41 (three
prescriptions), and 46 (four prescriptions).
We will take up the discussion of these medicaments as we meet them in the course
of translating the document.
1nLmT*""l ywf to,-' " k69h meat-" 1n au of *ne sixteen cases in which meat is
employed in this way as an external medicament, it is carefully specified in fifteen
(omitting Case 2) that "fresh meat " shall be used, and that it shall be applied for the
first day only. It was a preparatory remedy, anticipating the application of other
medicaments. In only one case (Case 29) do we find " fresh meat " as the only
medicament employed. As a " folk remedy " it has survived down to the present day,
although modern scientific therapeusis would regard it with a smile. It has been suggested
that its use was purely magical. This suggestion is at once refuted by an examination
of the table below, showing that in the most dangerous cases where the assistance of
supernatural forces would be most needed, like Cases 4 and 5, it was not employed.
Cases in which " fresh meat " is bandaged on a wound the first day
Case 1. Flesh wound on head over calvaria, penetrating to bone (verdict 1,
treatment " till he recovers ").
„ 2. Flesh wound on head over calvaria, penetrating to bone (same).
„ 8. Wound on the head, puncturing the calvaria (same).
,, 10. Flesh wound in top of eyebrow, penetrating to bone (same).
H
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:05 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 124 ---
98
Case 1
THE SURGICAL TREATISE
Case 14. Flesh wound in nose (verdict 1, treatment " till he recovers ").
„ 16. " Split " ($Sn) in maxilla (verdict 1, treatment " till he recovers ").
„ 17. " Fracture " (id) in maxilla (verdict 8 by error, treatment " till he
recovers ").
„ 18. Flesh wound in temple (verdict 1, treatment " till he recovers ").
„ 26. Flesh wound in upper lip (verdict 1, treatment " till he recovers ").
„ 27. Flesh wound in chin (verdict 1, treatment " till he recovers ").
„ 28. Flesh wound in throat (verdict 2, treatment " till he recovers ").
„ 29. Wound in cervical vertebra (verdict 2, result doubtful).
„ 80. Sprain in cervical vertebra (verdict 1, treatment " till he recovers ").
„ 82. Displacement in cervical vertebra (verdict 1, treatment " till he re-
covers ").
„ 40. Wound in sternum (verdict 1, treatment " till he recovers ").
„ 47. Wound in shoulder (verdict 1, treatment " till he recovers ").
Out of the sixteen cases thirteen receive the favorable verdict 1, and there should
be fourteen including Case 17, q. v. In fifteen cases the verdict is followed by treat-
ment " until he recovers." This would indicate that the surgeon employs the applica-
tion of fresh meat almost exclusively in simple and less dangerous cases, in which
recovery is regarded as practically certain. It is significant that after having recom-
mended its use in two head wounds which penetrate to the calvaria without injury
to the bone (Cases 1 and 2), he also advises its employment when the calvaria itself
has suffered a perforation (Case 8), but not in the case of a more serious injury like
a split (Case 4), or a fracture (Case 5). On the other hand a split or a fracture of the
maxilla is not serious in our surgeon's opinion, and may wisely receive the application
of fresh meat.
In all but one (Case 29) of the sixteen cases employing the application of fresh meat,
it is introductory to further remedies. In seven cases (1, 2, 18, 26, 27, 28, and 40) it
is followed at once after the first day by an application of grease and honey sometimes
bandaged on with lint. In two cases (16 and 17) there is intervening treatment for
reducing the swelling before the application of the grease, honey, and lint. In one case
(14) there is special attention to the bandages holding together the wound in the nose,
before the grease, honey, and lint are to be bandaged on. This is also true of Case 10,
a wound in the eyebrow, of Case 47, a gaping wound in the shoulder, and of Case 82,
the only dangerous wound of the fifteen—a displacement of one of the cervical vertebrae.
In this case the final bandaging is with the problematical ymrw, which we find combined
with honey for the bandaging immediately after the fresh meat in one case (80).
In the other medical documents the use of an external application of " fresh meat
the first day " is not common. It occurs twice in Pap. Ebers, once for crocodile bite
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:05 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 125 ---
Case 1
99
TRANSLATION AND COMMENTARY
(64, 18) and again for human bite (64, 9). For the crocodile bite it is also employed
in Pap. Hearst (XVI5) and likewise for the bite of a swine (XVI6), but is limited to
these two cases. Pap. Ebers employs other kinds of meat in poultices and ointments,
especially for softening stiffness of the limbs (88, 9, where the meat is called " hving
flesh") or limbering the groin, etc. (77,7; 80,19; 81,1; 82,19, all employing "ox flesh;"
and 76, 20 employing "fat meat"; cf. also Pap. Hearst VIII16, and XV 5).1 It is
quite characteristic of the gross superstitions of the Ebers papyrus that it should
advocate the use even of decayed meat for application to an open wound (70,12-14);
but this has nothing to do with the use of fresh meat. As an ingredient in prescriptions
for internal use Pap. Ebers employs " fat meat " a number of times (50, 21 ; 51, 10 ;
51,14; 55,1 ; 88,1 ; 88, 21 ; likewise Pap. Hearst III 12) and once even " decayed
meat " (55,11). The London Medical Papyrus and the Berlin Medical Papyrus 8088
do not employ " fresh meat," but the Berlin Papyrus once advocates the use of " living
flesh " internally (18, 8-9); compare also " meat of living ox " (Ebers 28, 2).
Jfj, drwh, " to treat," " treatment." Usually with but again with —*
in II 7; the abbreviation *—o occurs twice (VI 17 and XV 16), —i once (XIV 7),
and ^ once (VIII 21). This word was long read Mwh, and is found in this form in
all the existent glossaries. In his transliteration of Pap. Hearst Wreszinski was the
first to be able to employ the correct reading, which had been communicated to him
by Devaud. The real reading srwh has, however, long been available in hieroglyphic
texts, e.g., Harhotep 887 (old 468); cf. 850 and 806-807 (old 476 and 482-488).
Gardiner calls my attention to its existence in Book of the Two Ways 11, 2 and 6
(Schack-Schackenburg, Das Buck von den Zwei Wegen, p. 82). An interesting example
is found also in Newberry, Bekhmara, pi. VII, 1l. 22-28 : j^P-=->JLIl
" I fostered my office " (as collated by Gardiner).
In meaning the word is a general term for " foster " or " cherish," and then in
a medical sense to "care for," or to "treat." It is employed in the medical papyri
with the widest and most inclusive meanings. In Pap. Hearst it is used only eleven
times, six of them for the treatment of diseased fingers or toes (Hearst XI 17; cf.
Ebers 78,16 ; Hearst XII 8, cf. Ebers 78,12-14 ; Hearst XII 7-8, cf. Ebers 78,10
and 18-19 ; Hearst XII 18 ; XIII 2, cf. Ebers 78, 10-12 ; Hearst XIII 4, cf. Ebers
78, 18). The remaining five uses are for the lungs (Hearst IV 8, cf. Ebers 6,17-18 ;
11, 19), blood (Hearst I 7), urinary affections (IV 12), the " left side " (II 12) and
an uncertain ailment (V 4). The four occurrences of the word in the Berlin Medical
Papyrus are instructive; among them are two treatments for the heart: one external
fumigation with incense, etc. (7, 5) and the other internal (10, 2), but both treat-
ments are called srwh. In Papyrus Ebers it appears forty-five times for both external
and internal treatments. It may take as its object (if a verb) either the patient, the
1 The use of " meat " without further qualification in Pap. Ebers 103, 13 is not clear.
H 2
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:05 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 126 ---
100
Case 1
THE SURGICAL TREATISE
organs to be affected, like the teeth (89,12-18), or the bowels and anus (80,18); or
the ailment itself (a wound, 107, 1) or the agent of the ailment (worms, 22, 16). In
the London papyrus it does not occur at all.
This highly promiscuous application of the term in the other medical documents
is confirmed by its use in Papyrus Smith. As a surgical treatise Pap. Smith employs
the term chiefly to designate external applications. It is used as in our passage above
nineteen times for the application of grease, honey, and sometimes lint, six times for
application of honey alone, and once for ymrw and honey, a total of twenty-six times
with the meaning treatment by external applications bandaged on. Again the treat-
ment is to be "according to these directions," whatever they may be (Cases 41 and 45).
In two cases the surgeon is to " treat with a wound treatment " (Cases 89 and 46,
as in Ebers 107,1). The troublesome PfJ^,*—g ? (sometimes without pw) "his
treatment is sitting," which occurs four times (Cases 4, 7, 8,16), will be taken up in
the discussion of these cases.
The omission of the object of srwh as in our passage is common.
SKo!h&ti ? i]^* mrh-l, by*' ftt, " grease, [honey], lint." The kind of mrh-t
" grease " intended, when the word is left without any further indication or qualifica-
tion, is unknown. It was made from the fat of various animals. For example, in
Pap. Hearst an ointment for making hair grow was made of gazelle fat, serpent
grease, crocodile grease, and hippopotamus grease (X 6-7). Even this relatively small
collection of recipes in Pap. Hearst contains, beside the above, four more kinds of
animal grease : ox, rpnn-t reptile, cat and fish grease. In Pap. Ebers, where it occurs
as an external remedy scores of times, we find the grease of the above-mentioned
animals and a number of others. Goose grease is very frequent (e. g., 11,18 et passim),
and the most grotesque animal grease is that of the hippo's foot (67, 6). An ointment
found in the tomb of Tutenkhamon yielded on analysis " 90 per cent, of neutral
animal fat and 10 per cent, of some sort of resin or balsam," of course of vegetable
origin.1 The surviving recipes likewise show that in making mrh-t, plants were also
employed, e.g., castor beans (Ebers 27, 11), and Q,^ (76,11-12), evidently the oil of
the castor bean (so Loret), and called mrh-t Q^. In such cases mrh-t might properly
be rendered " oil," as doubtless also occasionally elsewhere; but the occurrence of
Sl^i?(^ mrfy-t $u>("fy " dry mrh-t," would indicate the meaning grease very clearly
(Ebers 88, 14; 96, 14). Other sorts used medicinally are " new grease " (Ebers
78,15); " grease two days old " (Ebers 82, 7); " pure grease " (Ebers 26,4); " white
grease " (Ebers 26,12; also Hearst); "fuller's grease" (Ebers 85, 4-5); and "foreign
mrh-t (perhaps " oil," Ebers 22, 8). " Head grease " (Ebers 85, 10) is obscure in
1 Paper by A. Chaston Chapman and Dr. A. Plenderleith read at ninety-fourth meeting of British
Association for Advancement of Science, Oxford, 1926. See New York Times, Aug. 6, 1926,
p. 4, col. 6.
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:05 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 127 ---
Case 1
101
TRANSLATION AND COMMENTARY
meaning. Mrh-t as the designation of a fragrant toilet pomade is widely mentioned
outside of the medical papyri and constantly appears in tomb paintings and reliefs, for
it was a universal luxury of the toilet. Much additional information regarding it
might be added from such sources. See the useful essay by Chassinat on mrh-t
(Recueil Champollion, pp. 447-465).
The combination of mrh-t, " grease" with honey (byt), was evidently a recognized
standard mixture. The proportions are given in a prescription for ear trouble in
Ebers 91, 7. In Pap. Ebers in a case of internal ear trouble we find the instructions :
T^ZSIQi?i^"u i " Thou shouldst prepare for it grease and honey " (Ebers
92, 1-2) " applied in its interior with lint " and bandaged on. The combination was
a kind of honey ointment. In Pap. Smith we find mrh-t used alone only six times,
whereas the honey ointment (written simply " grease-honey ") is employed twenty-
two times. Besides this, mrh-t appears twice as the vehicle in an ointment prescrip-
tion (IV 20 ; XVI11).
In our treatise honey alone is applied externally to a wound in six cases. If bandaged
on, it might have been protected from the swarms of flies which otherwise would have
settled on it. More often, as noted in the preceding paragraph, honey is employed in an
ointment, by mixing it with mrh-t, or " grease." In two cases in Pap. Smith honey is
mixed with the problematical ymrw mineral for external application (IX 6 ; X 11).
Of the twenty-two cases in which honey ointment is employed in Pap. Smith, its
application is effected by means of absorbent lint in seventeen. This lint was called
^-WS ftt, a masculine noun in which the final t is not the feminine ending. It was
some kind of vegetable tissue obtained from a plant called «=J^(]o#f,,^li dbyt.
Three times in cases where ^-Mh is prescribed in Pap. Ebers it is said to be ^<?/^l!j5
^Jllwv^,/"™ nw %-MEbers 70, 4) or «*J^«ii?i f* n dbyT^bevs
70, 17 ; see variant in 78, 15-16). The plant dbyt has not yet been identified with
certainty. In these three passages in Pap. Ebers ftt is laid over an injury and bandaged
on. It occurs in four more cases in Pap. Ebers (seven in all), and these are very in-
structive as to the character of ftt. In a recipe for preventing conception ftt is impreg-
nated with the medicaments and inserted into the vulva (98, 8). Similarly it is dipped
into an ointment and inserted into the anus (Ebers 82, 2), and likewise into the ear
(Ebers 91, 7 and 92, 2). Medicated /M-lint was thus employed both for external
application and for insertion into the orifices of the body. Its preparation was under-
stood as a matter of course, as shown by one of the ear cases just cited :
" Thou shouldst prepare for him lint (ftt), grease (mrh-t) § and honey J, applied to it
frequently " (Ebers 91,7-8). In our treatise lint is used with honey ointment in seven-
teen instances out of a total of eighteen. In the one case (X 2) in which it is employed
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:05 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 128 ---
102
Case 1
THE SURGICAL TREATISE
alone "dry ftt" is prescribed to be applied to a wound in the throat in the secondary
stages of healing, and seemingly when the bandages had been removed because of
fever (Case 28).
«=>!j^J^ r ndm-f, " until he recovers." This phrase, which is common in the
medical papyri, has been of somewhat vague meaning heretofore. Its force is rendered
more definite by the use of it in Pap. Smith. It is never used with the untreatable or
hopeless cases, and its appearance in Case 17, seemingly after verdict 8, the hopeless
verdict, is an error. As shown in the commentary on that case verdict 8 is either an
error for verdict 1, or the insertion of r ndm-f is an error. With the doubtful
verdict 2, designating cases of uncertain outcome, the result " until he recovers "
occurs once (Case 28) in a total of eight cases. On the other hand we find it inserted
after the treatment in twenty-five out of thirty instances receiving verdict 1, the
favorable verdict (see p. 46). Of the five cases with verdict 1 not inserting " until
he recovers," the conclusion, where it should appear, is lost in one (Case 48); the
verdict itself is an error in one (Case 84, XI 22); and the conclusion " until he
recovers " is therefore really lacking in only three. It is certain then that this often
repeated result should be rendered by " until he recovers," " until he is well," or the
like, with perhaps some imcertainty as to the unqualified completeness of the recovery
from a scientific point of view.
Gloss A
I 8-9
Explaining : " Thou examinest a man "
a The right-hand ends of these two signs make their restoration certain.
b The restoration is based upon the certainty of the 8 and the preceding context.
c Part of the sign is preserved.
d The traces fit the restoration fairly well, but are hardly sufficient to make it certain.
e Fragments of three uncertain signs are visible. ' Remains of a vertical sign.
* The left-hand half of the sign is preserved; one expects something under it, see Vol. II, p. x,
col. 2.
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:05 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 129 ---
Cask 1 TRANSLATION AND COMMENTARY 103
¥1lui\Kz^ IT]
x
h Restored from Ebers 99, 1. 1 Restored from Ebers 99, 4.
J Restored from Ebers 99, 2.
k This sign in l. 0 might be read r, giving us dr-t; but in I. 7 it is clearly a hand.
1 Restored from Ebers 99, 3. m Restored from Ebers 99, 4.
n Restored from Ebers 99, 5. Left end of a short horizontal sign, which is certainly n is visible.
The length of these lacunae at the beginnings of all the lines in Gloss A may be seen on Pl. I B,
Vol. II, especially by examination of the certain restorations bridging the gaps.
0 This / is certain, although almost entirely gone, for the tail may be seen in l. 9 just at the left
of the middle lacuna of Column I.
p In all probability there is nothing lost at the end of this line.
o The word is fragmentary, but the restoration is certain, although not at first evident owing
to the distortion caused by the mounting of the papyrus on paper. See full discussion of this
reading in the Introduction, Vol. II, p. x.
r The right-hand half of these two signs is preserved.
■ In this group of four signs: f Q there is some displacement owing to distortion on the
edge of the papyrus fragment. For the writing with see l. 4 (p. 102) and PI. I, Vol. II.
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:05 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 130 ---
104
Case 1
THE SURGICAL TREATISE
Translation
As for: " Thou examinest a man," [it means] counting any one - - [rlike cou]ntingn
things with a bushel. (For) examining (h'-t, literally " measuring ") is [rlike"1] one's
[1"counting"1] a certain quantity with a bushel, (or) counting something with the fingers,
in order to [know] - - -. It is measuring (h'-t) things with a bushel which - - - one in
whom an ailment is [cou]nted, like measuring (h'-t) the ailment of a man ; [in order to
know the action] of the heart. There are canals (or vessels, mt) in it (the heart) to [every]
member. Now if the priests of Sekhmet or any physician a put his hands b (or) his fingers
[upon the head, upon the back of the] head, upon the two hands, upon the pulse, upon
the two feet, [he] measures (h'y) [to] the heart, because its vessels are inc the back of the
head and in the pulse; and because its [pulsation is in] every vessel of every member. He
says "measure" (h'-t) regarding his [rwound">] because of the vessels (mt-w) to his head
and to the back of his head and to his two feet - - - - his heart in order to recognize
the indications which have arisen therein; meaning [rto meas]ure it"1 in order to know
what is befalling therein.
a Pap. Ebers has a third investigator here, a j( ? ^ or " priest of a phyle; " see variant
text, p. 106. " Literally " two hands."
c The preposition m is omitted by an error common before another m.
Commentary
The words to be explained in Gloss A, form the first clause of the examina-
tion, which is itself always introduced by (]<=-. It might be at first supposed therefore
that our paragraph beginning f]"^*^^ *s an examination. Its position, however,
at the end of a case, that is, following upon the treatment, shows conclusively that we
are here dealing with a gloss, introduced as usual by the particle 1«=> yr and followed
by the quoted words to be explained : s, " thou examinest a man." With
regard to the restoration of ^ " man," it should be noted that the preceding word
" thou examinest " is certain. It is followed by the horizontal —- s at the top
of the line, leaving room below for the determinative and stroke as usual in forty-six
cases in our papyrus. Granted that the particle (]*=> yr must be followed by a quota-
tion from the preceding text of the case as reconstructed from other cases, it is obvious
that the quotation must read
The reading of *-j as h'y is not new. It was known from Ebers 86,4-5: (]<=>|^^J
°^J1T!as compared with 88,17 : ^v-ji^'^*™^."^*^. In Pap.
Smith the abbreviation *_o is used in all forty-eight cases (Cases 1 and 8 restored)
in the introductory formula of the examination : (]-^^ yr h'y-k ; but it occurs in
other connections in Pap. Smith written out: m\ (IX 7) and ©| ° (XVII 6).
The meaning " examine " or " investigate " drawn from the frequent use of the
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:05 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 131 ---
Case 1
105
TRANSLATION AND COMMENTARY
word in Pap. Ebers, is now confirmed by the variant drr, found in Pap. Smith in the
following two passages, which immediately precede the parallel passages exhibited
in the commentary on Case 10, treatment (V 7-8):
Case 26 ©2MJ^a<?,dl (IX
Case 10 ^Ha2.<=^J^£ (V 6).
From this parallelism it is evident that h'y must be very similar in meaning to
drr, " to seek, search, search out, investigate, probe." See commentary on this word
in Case 1 (examination, p. 92). Compare also h'y in Case 29 (X 4-5) in parallelism
with drr in Case 4 (II 8).
The word may be related to the well-known verb ©J]^/™ h'y " to measure," 1
used of grain or of the superficial area of land, or of weighing. Our treatise conceives
that the physician or surgeon " counts " or " measures " the symptoms observable
in a patient and as it were appraises his condition. It is with these parallels that this
explanatory gloss deals, when it states " - thou examinest' means counting any one
—, [rlike coujnting"1 things with a bushel." In the next comparison the short lacuna
after J^^,^ (middle of l. 4) perhaps requires a little more than the word Q ° yp
to fill it up, but it is obvious that he is here explaining h'-t as like or identical with
" measuring (or counting) a certain quantity with a bushel, (or) counting something
with the fingers." It is barely possible that the three uncertain signs at the end of
the lacuna at the beginning of l. 5 are part of the word h'ty " heart," for the long
narrow Fragment C bearing these traces is distorted (see Vol. II, PI. I A). It matches
badly with the lines on Fragment B. It might also be moved to the right a trifle,
for there is a slight loss of a narrow vertical splinter of papyrus between Fragment C
and Fragment B. Making these changes it is perhaps possible to reconstruct the word
" heart," although the determinative (see l. 6 directly under it) would be lacking. To
reconstruct here then ■=>["©>=ii='^f3^^s€'0'] " in order to know the action (lit. -going')
of the heart," is too hazardous ; but there can be no doubt about the correctness of
the restoration of the same phrase (from Ebers 99,1) at the beginning of l. 6.
When we note that the discussion in the next few lines (1l. 6-8) pictures the physi-
cian as placing his hands or fingers at various points along the body of the patient
and discerning the pulsations of the heart from one extremity to the other, the ques-
tion inevitably arises whether he is not discussing the counting of the pulse in making
these references to l)J^ yp, "counting." If so it is the earliest such reference in the
history of medicine, for the counting of the pulse was unknown to early Greek medicine
and is not mentioned until Democritus and the Hippocratic treatises. It first occurs
in the treatise nepl Tfxxfnjs about 400 B.c. It would be of especial interest as occurring
1 In discussing the meaning of h'y the possibility of some connection with ^^11of^ b'Vt
or hy-t " disease " may be disregarded as remote.
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:05 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 132 ---
106
Case 1
THE SURGICAL TREATISE
at this remote age, not only in the history of physiology, but also in the history of
the development of instruments for time measurement; for it would be impossible
to count the pulse without an instrument finely enough developed to measure small
intervals of time. The Egyptian water clocks or shadow clocks now known to us would
have been rather ill suited for use in accurate counting of pulse beats. The physician
would have needed a portable time measurer. Such an instrument was carried by
Thutmose III on his first campaign in Palestine in the Fifteenth Century B.c.; and
an actual example of such a portable shadow clock was found in Palestine at the
excavation of Gezer. It bears the name of the Pharaoh Merneptah (Thirteenth Cen-
tury b.C.).1 The earliest known counting of the pulse with a time measurer was done
by the distinguished Herophilos of Alexandria in the Third Century b.c.
On this whole point of counting the pulse the fragmentary condition of the text
unfortunately leaves us in some uncertainty. Beginning with " one in whom, etc."
it is perhaps possible that we should divide the text differently and render thus:
" Counting an ailment is like examining (h'-t, lit.- measuring ') the ailment of a man,
in order to know the action of the heart." Observing that the counting is done with
the fingers (l. 4) and that this counting is done " in order to know the action of
the heart," the conclusion that counting of the pulse is what is meant is very plausible.
It is in explanation of the term fc-t, " examine," literally " measure," that all
this obscure discussion of counting is introduced. Evidently the author of our
treatise considered that the origin of the term " measure " = " examine " was to be
found in an enumeration of some kind. In usage h'y (infinitive &'-t) may take as its
object either the ailment, the diseased organ, or the patient, the last being much
the most common. It would seem that the last is the only object which really suits
the explanation, although our surgeon uses the word " ailment " itself as the object
of both yp " count " and fr'-t " measure."
The correctness of the restorations based on the duplicate passage in Pap. Ebers
will be more evident if the two texts are placed parallel for comparison. The passage
paralleled in Pap. Ebers (99,1-5) extends from the beginning of l. 6 into l. 8.
Ebers Title T^^K^T^*
Smith -j[T^g&^]j>
smith H<?^<?\^(]&«—
Ebers 1-v;s£«5:*^t2\fl=l* rj iik
smith [M"S"«t;\fl=«*io; ^
1 See E. J. Piloher in Palestine Exploration Fund, LV (1923), pp. 85-88.
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:05 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 133 ---
Case 1
107
TRANSLATION AND COMMENTARY
Smith | ggtkgf ^]Q?^?J n? Til
smith la,^-]^
Ebers ?Z^,>,« "^LT
Smith Tg^.>,^t^Jn?
Smith7°j[j-iw^7]^^^^,Y
At the beginning of the parallel the question might be raised whether the
of Smith, l. 6, should correspond to the first or to the second ■^■o in the text of Ebers.
The question is easily settled. An examination of PI. I A (Vol. II) shows that the
lacuna at the beginning of l. 6 has the same length as the words : ^^""^.f^SJ
restored at the head of l.18. The length of this phrase in the original proportions
of our column will be found by measuring it in l. 18. This length carried over with
the dividers to our lacuna shows we have a liberal amount of room for the restoration of
'm^-jf'^A, but not for the restoration of "©"■^'jf^./l^tf ^he lacuna
in the middle of l. 6 cuts off the right end of the group SIT. At the end of the
lacuna beginning l. 8 the end of —« from the word tfffif^ is well preserved.
This extraordinary discussion of the action of the heart is preceded in Papyrus
Ebers by the title: jUTs!k^oT$' " Beginning of the Secret Book of the
Physician." The papers of the scribe who was copying Papyrus Ebers, however,
were in such confusion that his excerpt on the action of the heart is cut in two by
intrusive matter made up of glosses incorrectly introduced in the middle of the
excerpt.1 Must we conclude that this treatise has perished ? How far we have in
the material following this title in Pap. Ebers a trustworthy excerpt from it is a
doubtful question, and in view of demonstrably intrusive matter now appearing
embedded in it, we may seriously question whether it represents an unalloyed citation.
It is significant that the Ebers text is paralleled by Pap. Smith only from the begin-
ning of the " Secret Book," to the point where the latter leaves the heart and begins
a catalogue of the vessels or canals of the heart. It is highly probable that this
catalogue is from another source. It displays much less sane and intelligent command
of the scanty knowledge regarding the heart and its system than the preceding general
statements about it. We have indeed in the section placed in parallel lines from the
1 See Schaefer, Zeitschrifl, 30 (1892), pp. 107-108.
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:05 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 134 ---
108
Case 1
THE SURGICAL TREATISE
two papyri above (Ebers 99, 1-5 = Smith I 5-8), a little summary of the cardiac
system as known to the ancient physician. In Pap. Ebers this summary is obviously
a citation and its source is indicated. In Pap. Smith, however, there is no indication
that it is a citation. Indeed its beginning in Pap. Smith (I 5-6) appears as the com-
pletion of what would otherwise be an incomplete sentence, a fact which goes far to
show that the whole summary of the cardiac system is an integral part of the text
in Pap. Smith. If in Pap. Ebers it is quoted from Pap. Smith, then the title given
in Ebers is the title of our treatise. If this conclusion is correct, and I do not regard
it as wholly certain, the title of our book of surgery was : " The Secret Book of the
Physician." Quotation by Pap. Ebers directly from our copy of Pap. Smith is of
course impossible, in view of the difference in text. The scribe of Pap. Smith was
not an accurate copyist, and his text, at three points slightly less full than that of
Ebers, doubtless contains omissions ; or the transmitted text used by the scribe of
Pap. Smith was less full than that employed by the scribe of Pap. Ebers.
In any appraisal of this summary of the cardiac system two important questions
arise : has this ancient surgeon discerned the circulation of the blood ? and whatever
its meaning, why has this little account of the heart and its connections been inserted
in this place ? Taking up the first question, Dr. Luckhardt remarks that our surgeon
" must have noted that the apex beat and the pulsation of the peripheral arteries
were roughly synchronous and therefore that the rate, volume, and regularity of the
latter were roughly an index of the state of functional activity of the former." It
is then obvious that the ancient surgeon has discerned that the action and influence
of the heart are carried to all parts of the body by means of canals or vessels. From
the enumeration of these canals in Pap. Ebers it is also clear that he conceived these
vessels as supplying the organs they reached, some of them with blood, some with
water, some with air. With regard to the air we have the remarkable statement of the
physician: " As for the air that enters at the nose it enters to the heart and lungs,
and they convey to the whole body" (Ebers 99,12-18). He had thus recognized that
the heart was the center of a system which conveyed needed supplies from the heart
to all parts of the body. There is no intimation that these supplies came back to the
heart again, much less that they went through a process of oxygenation before being
again discharged into the system. Oxygenation involves a knowledge of chemistry
and of chemical elements which the world of science did not attain until thousands
of years after our Egyptian physician was dead. It would carry us much too far
afield to discuss the difficult question of whether the Hellenistic physicians of Alexandria
had gained a knowledge of the circulation of the blood. There are scholars who think
they did, and certainly our old Egyptian physicians of the Seventeenth Century B.c.,
nearly fifteen hundred years before the highest development of Hellenistic science,
had already summarized a knowledge of the cardiac system in a form very likely
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:05 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 135 ---
Case 1
109
TRANSLATION AND COMMENTARY
to suggest the circulation of the blood. They brought investigation to the point
where it would be obliged to meet the question of what happened to the blood and
water carried by the heart to all parts of the body. Under these circumstances it
would seem not at all unlikely that this question would be dealt with by the Alex-
andrians, and the mere fact of the circulation of the blood (leaving out the process of
oxygenation) is not a phenomenon so difficult of discernment that we must conclude
it was beyond the means of observation available by Alexandrian scientists.
We may take up now the second question, that of the physician's reason for intro-
ducing this brief summary of the cardiac system in discussing the word h'-t, " measure,
examine," incident to an injury in the head. It is clear from the remarks which follow
the discussion of the heart, that the physician regards the connection between the
injury or the injured region and the heart as of great importance. The injury has
an effect upon the heart, which he calls " the indications which have arisen therein,"
or " what is befalling therein " (l. 9), meaning in the heart. It is clear that he means
the heart is a gauge by means of which the patient's condition may be appraised.
This he recognizes, no matter where the injury may be located. When we consider
that all that the ancient physician could examine in the heart was the rate and power
of its pulsations, the probability that he counted the pulse is considerably increased.
One cannot but admire the physician's intelligence, which in an age of such limited
knowledge of the human body, discerned the vital importance of the heart's action
and endeavored to determine its condition as a gauge for establishing that of the patient.
In this connection we have no means of determining the extent of the Egyptian
physician's knowledge of the heart itself. Popular custom and belief, already ancient
in our ancient medical man's time, made the heart the seat of emotions and intelligence.
Philosophical theologians regarded it as the shrine of the god, whose very voice was
heard there.1 Over against these notions, and probably divesting himself of them to
no small extent, our physician endeavors to determine the anatomical and physio-
logical character of the heart. The fuller form of the text in Pap. Ebers gives as the
subject of the brief summary of the cardiac system this title : " Knowing the action
of the heart and knowing the heart." Here is a clear distinction between anatomy
(" the heart ") and physiology (" the action of the heart "). There is no reference to
inherited popular notions regarding the heart. The physician merely states his
observations regarding it, its connections, and its action discernible at the remotest
points in those connections.
Several terms in the discussion of the cardiac system require some commentary.
The first of these is mt, " canal, vessel, ligament, muscle." The plural is
mt-w. The meaning " canal, vessel " has long been recognized from its use in Pap.
1 See the present writer's essay in Zeitechtift, 39 (1901), pp. 45-50.
<
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:05 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 136 ---
110
Case 1
THE SURGICAL TREATISE
Ebers. The meaning " ligament, muscle," however, seems to have remained unnoticed.1
This meaning is perfectly clear from a number of passages in Pap. Smith, especially
the gloss in Case 7 (III 18), where mt is used to explain the word " cord." See the
discussion in the commentary on Case 7.
As canals or vessels of the cardiac system it is important to know to what organs and
parts of the body the mt-w lead. The following list makes no attempt at organization.
List of organs or parts of the body to which the " mt-w " lead :
Heart: their connection with the heart is shown by our Gloss A, now under
discussion and the corresponding passage in Pap. Ebers. The latter also states
(108, 2-8) that these canals are twelve in number, an error of the scribe for twenty-two,
as Schaefer has shown.2 See also Ebers 100,18 ; 100,21-101,1 ; and especially 100,
19-20 which states, " It is the heart which causes them to enter into his canals (mt-w)."
Two to the Srtyw of the two maxillae: Ebers 108, 8 (emended after Berlin
8088, 15, 6).
Two to the loins : Ebers 108, 6.
Two to the neck : Omitted in Ebers 108, 8 (see Schaefer, loc. cit.).
Two to the arms : Ebers 108, 11.
Two to the back of the head : Ebers 108,18-14.
Two to the forehead : Ebers 108,14.
Two to the eyes : Ebers 108, 14.
Two to the eyebrows : Ebers 108, 14-15.
Two to the nostrils : Ebers 108, 15.
Two to the right ear: Ebers 108,15.
Two to the left ear : Ebers 108, 16.
This completes the list of twenty-two.
Another list of fifty follows immediately upon the summary of the cardiac system
in Pap. Ebers. They are the following :
Four to the two nostrils (Ebers 99, 5-6).
Four to the two temples (? gmh-ty): Ebers 99, 6-7.
Four to the crown (read p$n ?) of the head : Ebers 99, 10.
Four to the two ears : Ebers 100, 2.
Two to the right shoulder: Ebers 100, 2.3
Two to the left shoulder : Ebers 100, 2-8.3
1 Stern has used the word " junctura " to define ml («. v. in Glossary of Pap. Ebers); but does
not indicate any such function of mt.
* See Schaefer, ZeiUchrift, 30 (1892), pp. 35-37.
3 Schaefer (Zeitschrift, 30, pp. 35-37) makes a total of forty-six mt-w by omitting these four which
are introduced by a different formula in connection with the four leading to the two ears ; but I see
no good reason for such omission.
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:05 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 137 ---
Case 1
111
TRANSLATION AND COMMENTARY
Three to the right arm : Ebers 100, 5.
Three to the left arm : Ebers 100, 5. These six lead also to the fingers.
Three to the right leg : Ebers 100, 6.
Three to the left leg : Ebers 100, 6. These six lead also to the bottom of the sole.
Two to the two testicles : Ebers 100, 7.
Two to the phd-w (kidneys ?): Ebers 100, 7-8. One to each of a pair.
Four to the liver: Ebers 100, 8.
Four to the lungs and spleen : Ebers 100, 10.
Two to the bladder : Ebers 100, 11.
Four to the anus : Ebers 100, 11-12, cf. 100, 18.
Not in connection with any list, Pap. Smith mentions two mt-w which are under
the thorax and lead to the lungs (XII 1-2), and Ebers and some other documents
make casual references to the mt-w as being in the groin (m'H, Ebers 79, 19); toes
(Ebers 81, 2 ; 81, 5 ; Hearst VIII15); lower legs or calves (yns-t, Pap. Berlin 8088,
10, 10-11); feet (Ebers 108, 18; Berlin 8088, 16, 5); "every member" (Ebers
81,14; 99,2; 99,4; Hearst XV 10; Ebers 108,18; Hearst XV12). IntheMetter-
nich Stela (l. 170) they are called the " mt-w of the flesh."
When we recall that the mi-w of the above lists are possibly not always canals, but
that some of them may be ligaments or nerves, the effort to identify them severally
and one by one with the various blood-vessels of modern science must proceed with
discretion. In so far as they are avenues conceived as conveying substances, the latter
are said to be: blood (Ebers 61, 8); nSw-t (Ebers 99, 5-6); water (Ebers
99, 19) ; air (Ebers 100, 9-10 ; and very clearly implied in 99, 12-18) ; and semen
(Ebers 100, 7). Popularly they seem to have been regarded as vital to health and
essentially contributing to it, so that a friend might be greeted with a wish for the
health of his mt-w, and such a wish was not infrequently placed on his tombstone.1
This popular notion is supported by the views of the physician. He regards the mt-w
as " taking up " (Sip) the remedies or the disease. There were recipes supposed to
accelerate the process of absorption by the mt-w of the remedies administered (Ebers
80, 15-81, 1) and the mt-w of an affected region are said to have " taken up " the
disease (Ebers 108, 6-7 ; cf. also Hearst VIII 12). In a document relying so largely
on magic as does Pap. Ebers, the mt-w are made to disgorge disease by magic (Ebers
1 On the wooden statue at Turin No. 176 we find "=>^<^J «*** ? i, " may his mt-w flourish "
(Recueilde trav., 2, p. 175; the same, Amon Ritual, Berlin, P 3055,12, 10 ; and tomb of Vizier Peser,
Sethe's copy 11, 23) and quite commonly. A similar good wish is jj jj]" may (his) mt-w be
comfortable " (Tomb of Paheri 9 in Taylor, Paheri, pi. XVI; Tomb of Nebamon, Bouriant, Rtcue.il
<U trav. 9, p. 96). Less common is ^^l^^^ " may *ny be sound " (Tomb of Vizier Peser,
Sethe's copy 11, 50). In Ptolemaic times we find once J, " may (his) mt-w be excellent" (Edfu,
Pvochem. I 192).
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:05 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 138 ---
112
Case 1
THE SURGICAL TREATISE
108, 14). They are addressed by the magician in the Metternich Stela (l. 170). It
is in accordance with magical notions that an ailment is conceived as an " enemy of
the mt " (Ebers 109,17).
Based on saner pathological conceptions, however, there are diseases of the mt-w
themselves as observed by the physician. It is obvious that some of these ailments
are those of the muscles and ligaments, as when they are said to be " stiff " (Ebers 85,
12 ; Hearst VIII 11), and probably also when they are said to " tremble " (Ebers
91, 6). Unfortunately it is impossible to determine with any degree of certainty what
the designations of the various diseases of the mt-w mean, or how they should be
rendered in the modern terminology of scientific pathology. We find the following
ailments of the mt-w in the medical papyri:
^DA nhp (Ebers 84,14 ; Hearst VIII 8 ; or ^0 Ebers 80,18).
*='\"2 (Pap- Anast. IV 18, 6).
~<?n^ nrw (Pap. Berlin 8088, 18, 7).
^ "4 (Ebers 106, 20 ; 108,8; 108,6; 108,9; 108,11-12).
9=4, *, wfr (Ebers 82, 21 = Hearst VIII17).
P"Ti?i (Ebers 109, 14 , m,11 , 106, 17-18).
PiL^v #r (Ebers 109, 14).
&p-t (Ebers 84, 19).
Sf-wt (Hearst VIII18). " Swellings " of some kind.
P7 Sw-t (Ebers 82, 16=Hearst VIII 14). The recipe is for the " softening of
the Swt of the mt."
The physician acquainted with a list of troubles like this, affecting the mt-w, of
course had treatments for these ailments. We find the following :
pjjL-^ " gi^g iife to the mt-w " (Ebers 81,17 = Hearst VIII 5 and IX 1).
P ^ | " making vigorous the mt-w " (Ebers 81,17 = Hearst VIII 5).
PS " making firm the mt-w " (Ebers 79, 5 ; 70, 18 ; 84, 21).
pj^-<- " making comfortable the mt-w" (Ebers 108, 2; 81, 20; 79, 5; 81, 10,14
= Hearst XV 6 ; VIII1 ; VIII 4 ; VIII 6 ; Berlin 8088, 4,12).
P4JJE "cooling the mt-w" (Ebers 85,10 = Hearst VIII18; XVI 8 ; VII16;
XVI 18).
P~~J^- "softening the mt-w" (Ebers 85, 8-4; 81, 7; 82, 10-11 ; 82, 22;
Hearst VII14).
P^ " quieting the mt-w " (Ebers 85, 2=Hearst VIII 7).
^3 " anointing the mt-w " (Hearst VIII 14).
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:05 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 139 ---
Case 1
113
TRANSLATION AND COMMENTARY
Some of these remedies, like the one for " softening the mt-w " doubtless refer to
affections of the muscles or ligaments, and have nothing to do with the circulatory-
system.
It will now be clear to the reader that the observations of the Egyptian physician
regarding the heart and its " canals " (mUw) had disclosed to him that the heart was
the center and active force in a system which conveyed the effects of both disease and
remedy to all parts of the body. It is on the basis of this knowledge that our surgeon
introduces a discussion of the cardiac system and the importance of examining the
heart and pulse in treating a wound in the head.
j i't-yb (or yH-yb), " pulse." Gardiner has remarked that the word j ^
(i-t) " when prefixed to words meaning some member of the body, . . . expresses the
activity of that member " (Proc. Soc. Bib. Arch., 85 (1912), p. 261). This state-
ment cannot be improved upon ; the " i-t of the heart " means the activity of the
heart, and in this case that activity as it is locally manifested at the pulse. Other-
wise the more inclusive term for the pulsation of the heart as a general and con-
tinuous activity, and not any local manifestation of it, is J^^J mdw, literally " to
speak."
flJJl"^* hnt, commonly "before." On the meaning "in," see Sethe, Zeitschrift, 44
(1907), Tafel II, l.12 and p. 82, n. 18.
^^^e mh? must be regarded as a scribal error for j^^f*^® rnkh?, in spite
of the fact that our copyist has written it twice in two successive lines. The omission
of m before this word is like the frequent omission of m before mrh-t (p. 74).
[<?Jo?£2 Uwbnw1]-/. The restoration is a guess based upon the preservation
of the /. It fits the requirements very well, but is not entirely certain.
^a^rTl^^ll^ yi/-wt hpr ym "indications having arisen therein" with the perfect
participle, seems to be explained by ^<=>11i7i1^ fapr-yt ym, " what is befalling
therein," with the imperfect participle. The physician recognizes that the effects
observable in the heart are a continuing process. It should be observed that the
technical medical use of hpr " to happen " very often includes an unfavorable im-
plication like that of our word " befall." The other technical meaning of hpr is
" arise, originate." Besides the two cases in our Gloss A, the verb hpr occurs fourteen
times in Pap. Smith. A typical example is :
aoe£$*=>&^j£^ " every wound that befalls in his breast" (XIII 9). See
also VII 12-18 ; X 16=X 19-20; XIII17; XIV 7; XIV 21 ; and further dis-
cussion in Case 80 (X 10). A similar usage of hpr occurs in Pap. Ebers, e. g.,
106, 6.
The question may arise whether 1^ ym may not be rendered " to it," the heart, as
in the Coptic ujuine Hxio- " happen to " (Zoega, p. 804). If so our phrases would mean
" the things that have befallen it " (the heart), and " what is befalling it." It is not
i
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:05 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 140 ---
114
Case 1
THE SURGICAL TREATISE
likely that the implied pronoun after ym could refer to anything else than the heart
which is the last noun mentioned in the preceding context. To happen in an unfavor-
able sense is expressed in the Pyramid Texts by hpr r (Pyr. 1654 c), and it occurs in
the Middle Kingdom with mf, e.g., Shipwreck, l. 22; and see also Case 80 (X 10).
On the translation of the final phrase see note s, p. 108.
Gloss B
I 9-10
Explaining: " While his wound does not have two hps."
>«S£«J«£[r:«ILLI
[/vww]^=*_ 1 m_II I —o—
a On the amount of space available see Vol. II, PI. IB. The restoration is certain ; see discussion,
p. 115.
b This sign /* is placed low in the line as in I. 12, Vol. n, PI. I B.
0 The space is sufficient for this restoration, as will be seen by measuring the same phrase
(nn wSh) in l. 12. Cf. Vol. II, Pl. I B.
d The word is fragmentary, but parts of each sign are preserved and the reading is certain.
Translation
As for: " While his [wou]nd does not have [two hps]," it means his wound is
narrow, [not wide] ; without gaping of one (hp) from the other.
Commentary
The chief difficulty in this passage is the word mn, " be ailing, sick," where
we expect a negative. This difficulty cannot be discussed until the restoration at the
head of line 10 is made certain. The restoration of the words " his wound " is shown
to be indubitably correct by the survival of the last three signs of the group wbnw-f,
discernible in red on the original. The preceding group, dpt-wy " two hps," is
demonstrated to have been present in the quoted statement by the phrase n 0
in-nw'S, " its (fem.) second " = " the other." The use of the numeral " second " proves
that a pair was mentioned in the lacuna. If it be argued that the feminine pronoun
s shows that this pair could not have been dpt-wy " hps," which is not feminine, it
may be replied that dpt is nevertheless treated unmistakably as a feminine noun in
Case 10 (V 9), which tells us of bandages "applied to the two lips of a gash-wound"
-=>Sd=£(]=ii=^i <=-]^'i " in order to make one join to the other." Here dpt is twice
resumed by the feminine substantive adjective vf-t, written with the feminine ending.
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:05 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 141 ---
Case 1
115
TRANSLATION AND COMMENTARY
Furthermore Gloss B introduces for explanation a quotation beginning with 0 Po yit.
In our case there are only two occurrences of this word, both in the diagnosis. Now the
clause introduced by the second occurrence of ydt is explained in Gloss C, leaving only
the first ydt clause as the one explained in Gloss B. On this basis alone we are entitled
to restore in Gloss B the quoted words ipt-uyy wbnw-f. Unfortunately there is in
the diagnosis a small lacuna preceding the word Spt-ury ; but it is obvious that this
lacuna contained the negative (see the discussion of the diagnosis, p. 94). We may
now place the two texts parallel: the phraseology of the diagnosis and the quotation
from it in the gloss :
Text of diagnosis : (] PQ[^]P£V":='eJ o?^-
Text of Gloss B : 1P^$>.[P><=' «J7>£.
Where the gloss has ™^«. mn the diagnosis has a negative. That the gloss is in
error is obvious. The error may have arisen from oral dictation at some stage in the
transmission of the text, the scribe hearing mn for nn; or he may have heard the
wrong mn, and while ^fT'iasI mn was read to ^m ^e WI0^6 mn " ^e sick" 5
although we must admit that this would be an early occurrence of the New Egyptian
negative. In any case our statement, quoted from the diagnosis, must mean " while
his wound does not have two hps," just as it does in the diagnosis itself. It may be
remarked here that a comparison of the quotations in the glosses with the texts from
which they quote discloses quite commonly gross carelessness and inaccuracy of the
scribe. Whether these are due to the copyist of Pap. Smith, or to some earlier scribe,
is not always to be determined, although our copyist is obviously very careless.
This gloss should be compared with Case 18, Gloss A.
^\d<? dd pw, literally " it says," is perhaps a fuller form of the simple pw, which
Ave found in Gloss A, and which is by far the more frequent. Dd pw is found in six
passages besides GlossB (111; II11; nil; X20; XIII11; XIV11, perhapsdd-tw).
nn w&k, " not wide." In view of the j^^.^1? P^ ^ nn v^b of Gloss C
(I 12), this restoration is highly probable, though perhaps not entirely certain. The
space available is probably sufficient, though not quite as long as that occupied by
the same words in l. 12. On the use of the negative nn as a conjunction see Gunn,
Syntax, pp. 162-168. In such cases it should be called an adversative conjunction.
Gunn also discusses its use with adjectival predicates as here (ibid., Chap. XXVII).
The phrase nds . . . nn wdh is curiously reminiscent of the well-known description of
the highway in the Peasant (R. 45).
[^j^^^ n [rn"1] kf-t. There is probably room for the insertion of the n, as in
nnkf-tin l.11 in the next gloss. The use of alone would be another evidence of
the antiquity of our text; for as Gunn has observed (Syntax, p. 195) the indiscriminate
use of n and nn is old and continued no later than the early Middle Kingdom. He
I 2
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:05 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 142 ---
116
Case 1
THE SURGICAL TREATISE
has an excellent discussion of the infinitive negatived by nn (Syntax, pp. 155-159)
and has organized all the cases of this infinitive with following modifiers. No case
of the negatived infinitive with following logical subject introduced by 1— seems
to have come under his notice. There is another case in the next line (l. 11) of
our text; but otherwise it does not occur again in Pap. Smith, and I do not recall
having met it elsewhere.
•^-<=> 11 0 uf r dn-nw-s, " one from the other." The text is inconsistent: it should
read either wf r Sn-nw-f, or uf-t r sn-nw-s. In the example above quoted (V 9) vf-t
(fem.) referring to " lip " appears twice. The phrase makes clear the meaning of
kf-t, which has been discussed fully above (pp. 90-92).
Gloss C
110-12
Explaining : " Penetrating to the bone of his skull but not having a gash."
<» I AVAVA JM|MU||lJ C
3
12
a The line division may have been before the n, but certainly not after dnn-t.
b An unmistakable part of the possessive / is preserved. The tail of it is visible on the original
crossing the doidd; see Vol. EE, p. x, col. 2. The remnant of another sign is doubtless the handle
of the knife.
0 The sign is unusually short for n and also rather thick ; but the right end of n preserved at
left end of l.11 is equally thick. The probabilities are in favor of n.
d The lacuna in the middle of the column begins to be wider at this point; see Vol. II, PI. I.
e Only half of the sign is preserved, but the reading is certain in view of the duplicate passage
in Gloss B.
' The restoration repeats the text of Gloss B without correcting the inconsistency in gender.
Translation
As for: " Penetrating to [the bone of his skull, (but) not having a gash]," it
means that there is a gaping of the flesh, although M . . . . r.l over the bone of
his skull, without gaping [of one (hp) from the other], being narrow, not wide.
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:05 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 143 ---
Case 1 TRANSLATION AND COMMENTARY 117
Commentary
As we have already noticed in discussing the examination itself, this gloss is an
explanation of words quoted from the examination. Unfortunately the quotation
is not perfectly preserved. Regarding the restoration of the loss at the end of l. 10
and beginning of l. 11, there can be no question, except the minor one : whether we
should restore the negative ^ nn, or ^ n wn-t. There is practically no difference
in the meaning of these two negatives in such a construction (see Gunn, Syntax,
p. 166, IX), and there is only room for nn. With reference to the order of the two
observations : " penetrating to the bone, &c." and " not having a gash," the fragments
at the end of the lacuna at the head of l.11 prove that the last of the lost words was
not dnn-t-f; but some other word with the possessive / written at the top of the line.
This is only possible when hieratic / is begun somewhat high along the back of some
sloping sign, that is in this case .*=■*. The dd pw immediately following this / shows
that the suffix " his " was the last sign in the quotation, and the quotation could end
only in dnwt-f " his skull," or kf-t-f " its gash." As it is not dnwt-f it must be kf-t-J.
In the explanation after the introductory dd pw the scribe inadvertently omitted
o ? (following kf) and inserted it afterward. The possible reading pw would seem
to require the infinitive kf-t, while yn permits a preceding passive. I am unable
to suggest any probable rendering as far as hr ks. This is the only passage in our
treatise in which " bone " is preceded by the preposition hr. The remainder of the
explanation is unfortunately practically a repetition of Gloss B. Gloss B deals with the
lateral dimensions of the wound, while we should expect Gloss C to discuss the depth of
the wound. The structure of the explanation therefore probably was: first a statement
of the depth of the wound (in the obscure first half of the gloss preceding hr M) pene-
trating to the bone, followed in the second half by a natural reference to the fact of the
narrow lateral extension of the wound, meaning that this lateral limitation is a fact
notwithstanding its depth; hence the repetition from Gloss B. See discussion of Gloss C
above in commentary on rr " penetrate " (p. 87), and compare Case 18, Gloss A.
Regarding the three glosses on this case together, it is obvious that they furnish
explanations of terms an understanding of which is a prerequisite to the compre-
hension of such cases as those discussed in our treatise. The term " examine,"
explained in the first gloss, is employed in all the cases in this document, without
reference to the nature of the case. It is quite evident that such a term would be
explained early in such a treatise as Pap. Smith. It is so unlikely that it would be
explained in connection with any other case than the first, that we must regard its
occurrence among the glosses of our first preserved case as satisfactory evidence that
it was in real fact originally the first case in Pap. Smith.
On J^j, hr-w (plural) meaning " flesh," see Montet, Sphinx, 18, pp. 1 ff., and
Gardiner, SinuJie, p. 111.
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:05 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 144 ---
118
CASE TWO
112-18
A GAPING WOUND IN THE HEAD PENETRATING TO THE BONE
Case 2 differs from Case 1 only in the addition of the word " gaping." In Case 1
the soft tissue overlying the bone has been ruptured as by some blunt weapon, leaving
an ill-defined and constricted orifice; in Case 2 on the other hand there is a well-
defined gash such as may be produced by a knife or a sword, with a resulting yawning
or gaping of the orifice.
Title
112
a The word kf-t itself, curiously enough, falls in a lacuna wherever it occurs in Case 2 ; but the
genitive n following wbnw both in the title and Gloss A make the restoration certain, cf. I 18.
b The left ends of the arm and the r are preserved.
Translation
Instructions concerning a [gaping] wound [in his head], penetrating to the bone.
Commentary
All the terms needing explanation will be found discussed in the commentary on
Case 1. It is noticeable tbat after the word " bone " the further defining words " of
his skull " are here omitted, probably because they have been used in Case 1, which is
regarded as making clear what bone is meant.
Examination
112-14
<? x ^^zn
a Traces of the determinative of wbnw are discernible.
b The tail of the / is preserved. The text is a repetition of the title, making the restoration
quite certain.
c The traces on left edge of fragment B might be the head and one foot (thrust forward) of
the gm-hird (following wd-hr-k r-k br-f here as in III 10, q. v.); these same traces also fit
a restoration which I rejected for reasons given on p. 119; but DeVaud again urges the correctness
of this restoration, and the <w at the end (tail crossing L 14 above tp-f on fragment F) is a strong
argument for restoring as above in accordance with IX 14 (q. v. p. 310), which is also followed by
yr gmy-k as here in I 13.
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:05 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 145 ---
Cask 2 TRANSLATION AND COMMENTARY 119
a For these words compare IX 14 in the same context. In our text the head of the jmi-bird is
a little thicker and shorter than normal, but the m is perfect. The k crosses the tear between fragment
A and fragment F, but the top of its loop is visible on fragment A and its heavy oblique stroke is
well preserved on fragment F. This is part of the proof that these two fragments belong together.
e This restoration is based on IX 14. The place of the line division is not quite certain, but the
w was certainly in l.13, for remains of it are visible above the tail of the/, just as in VII 9 in the same
context. In IX 15 wd' is the first word of the line and is therefore separated from the preceding
/ which is in l. 14.
' The nt preceding thm makes this restoration certain.
Translation
If thou examinest a man having a [gaping] wound [in] his [head], penetrating to
the bone, thou shouldst lay thy hand upon it (and) [thou shouldst] pal[pate hi]s
[wound]. If thou findest his skull [uninjured not hav]ing a perforation in it,
(conclusion in diagnosis).
Commentary
The examination repeats the title as usual. It might be concluded that the
laying of the hand on the wound means purely external examination, as opposed to
" palpation" (drr). Such is indeed the case in III 9-10 (Case 7), but the distinction
is not everywhere maintained.
The restoration dcr-lyr-h wbnw-f (l. 14) urged by Devaud is doubtless correct;
see note °, p. 118. There is nevertheless, besides the context in III 10, a gram-
matical argument in favor of gmm-k, etc., as a continuation of the condition.
In twenty-eight out of our forty-eight cases in Pap. Smith it is used as the continuation
of the examination. In the majority of the cases in which it appears it follows imme-
diately upon yr h'y-k " if thou examinest " (twenty-one times);1 but it occurs also
immediately after drr-hr-k," thou shouldst palpate" (seven times: Cases 8, as restored,
4, 5, 6, 8,18, 47), or wd-hr-k (sometimes wd-yn-k) r-k, "thou shouldst lay thy hand"
(four times: Cases 2,7,24, and 47). In only one case (27) do we find (^'"S*!^^ W
gmy-k," if thou findest" continuing the examination after drr. Pap. Smith evidently
throws light on the normal function of gmm-k as contrasted with yr gmy-k. When our
treatise desires to start afresh with a new condition observed, it does so with yr gmy-k,
as we observe immediately following the lacuna in the above examination.
The lacuna at the end of l.18 and beginning of l.14 may be restored with certainty
on the basis of the analogous text in Case 27 (IX 14-15). Allowing for a margin of
uncertainty in the length of l. 18, we may conclude with much probability that the
1 In Cases 12, 14, 15, 16, 21, 25, 31, 33 bis, 34, 35, 36, 37, 38, 39 bis, 43, 44, 45 5m, 46.
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:05 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 146 ---
120
Case 2
THE SURGICAL TREATISE
restoration completely fills the lacuna. The word rendered " uninjured " is more
literally " sound," that is, it is not a word indicating injury, to which a privative
syllable is prefixed to indicate freedom from injury. Hence our surgeon adds a negative
statement that a certain kind of injury to the skull is not present. He states that the
skull is sound and re-enforces this statement by also denying the opposite. The
injury declared to be not present, thm (" perforation "), is found in the next case, and
will be discussed there. We learn from Gloss C that the scribe has been guilty of an
omission here. He should have included besides a " perforation " also a " split " and
a " fracture." See Gloss C. As in Case 18 (VII 9), in order to make clear that there
is no injury to the bone, our surgeon should have stated that the entire list of bone
injuries known to him was not present.
Diagnosis
114
a The readings and restorations are based chiefly on the obvious fact that the observable fragments
and traces of signs show clearly that we have at this point the text of the diagnosis. The beginning
falls just at the lower edge of fragment B, and above this lower edge only the upper parts of signs are
preserved, like the head of the serpent, the top of y, and the upper part of k under a short n. As the
edge wanders we are able to see the end of r in rf; and just beyond it (at the left) the upper end of
the Ar-sign. Beyond hr the gap is complete.
b The words in this bracket are restored from the usual form of the diagnosis as regularly found
throughout the treatise, and the designation of the case as above in the title.
c The end of the knife handle is visible in front of m.
d The tail of the in kf-t is visible in l. 15 just over the determinative of fit. It is possible
that this <i— belongs to fit in l. 15, but the tail seems too high and not at the right angle for
joining with the / in fit.
Translation
Thou shouldst say regarding [him]: " One hav[ing a gaping woujnd in his head. An
ailment which I will treat."
Commentary
As noted in the introduction (pp. 48 ff.), the diagnosis often contains little more
than the title, as if it were simply a catch-word memorandum. For the practical
purposes of the surgeon the essential thing in such a diagnosis is the verdict at the
end. See the fuller discussion in Case 1 (I 1-2). As usual this favorable verdict is
followed by treatment and recovery, showing that the injury is not a serious one.
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:05 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 147 ---
Case 2
121
TRANSLATION AND COMMENTARY
Treatment
114-15
a Part of this A is preserved and recognizable.
b The place of the line division is not exactly determinable. At the bottom edge of fragment B
traces of the last signs visible on this fragment may be the tops of three signs at the end of the above
bracket or possibly at the beginning of the next bracket. The restoration in the two following
brackets is fully discussed in the commentary. On the amount of space see the discussion of column I
in volume II. • With m omitted as commonly before mrh-t.
Translation
[Thou] shouldst bind [fresh meat upon it the first day ; thou shouldst apply for
him two strips of linen, and treat afterward with grease, honey, (and) lin]t every day
until he recovers.
Commentary
Almost the entire treatment is lost in the large lacuna extending from a point
toward the end of l. 14 to beyond the middle of l. 15. Nothing has survived but
a few signs at the beginning and a few at the end. The beginning is marked by
°„ wt and the end by M\, the determinative of lint. The treatment therefore begins
with the usual binding with fresh meat and concludes with the customary application
of " grease, honey, and lint every day." But Gloss B shows that two 'u^-strips were
also applied, as we might expect in the case of a gaping wound. This application of
the two strips must have been mentioned in the lost middle portion of the treatment.
The treatment therefore consisted of three items :
(1) Binding with fresh meat.
(2) Application of the two '^-strips.
(8) Application of grease, honey, and lint every day.
The 'wj/-strips are used in only five cases (2, 6, 10, 27, and 47). An examination
of the other four reveals the fact that in one of them (Case 27) we find the same three
items of treatment, although in a different order, the 'wt/-strips being first and the
fresh meat application second. The limitation of the fresh meat application to the
first day however is a fair justification for questioning this order in Case 27 ; and it
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:05 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 148 ---
122
Case 2
THE SURGICAL TREATISE
should be noted that in Case 10 (which omits the lint), the order is as in Case 2, with
the fresh meat application the first and the 'wy-strips following (V 7-8). We are there-
fore safe in restoring from Case 27 (IX 16-17) with slight modification, chiefly in two
particulars. We must insert the binding with fresh meat first to connect with the
opening signs preserved in Case 2 (Jj^, wt); and we must insert in the text furnished
by Case 27 the words " of linen," which our Gloss B demonstrates were in the text of
the treatment. The available space will barely contain the long restoration, and it
helps in this direction to omit the ho after srwh-k, as in VII19, to omit hr kf-t yptf
after ,wy as in V 8, and to use the short writing of mrh-t.
8 8 'wy," two strips." It is unfortunate that we do not better understand these
surgical appliances. The word is unknown outside of our treatise and we are therefore
confined to the data obtainable from Pap. Smith for an understanding of the term.
It was not clear to the readers of the original treatise and fortunately for us the ancient
Egyptian commentator has added a gloss explaining it. Almost all of the gloss is
lost in the text of our case, but by a happy chance the commentator forgot that he
had once explained 'wy in Case 2, and he explained it again in Case 10 (V 9), evidently
in the identical words used in Case 2 (Gloss B, I 16-17). The explanation reads :
" - The two 'wy-strips of linen', it means two bands of linen, which one applies upon
the two hps of the gaping wound in order to cause that one (lip) join to the other."
Similarly in Case 10 we find the same function of the two 'wy-strips in the directions to
the surgeon: " Thou shouldst draw together (the wound) for him with two 'wy-strips "
(V 8). The injury is a wound in the eyebrow. In treating a gaping wound in the
shoulder (Case 47) the surgeon is directed " Thou shouldst draw together for him
its gash with two 'wy-strips of linen over that gash " (XVII 8-4). With regard
to the method of applying we find in Case 6 this significant hint. The patient has
a frightful wound in the skull which has laid bare the brain, and the directions
charge the surgeon: " Thou shalt not bind it (the wound); thou shalt not apply
two 'wy-strips upon it" (II 28). It is clear from the above cases that the 'wy-
strips are not ordinary bandages. They are always " applied," literally " laid on "
(J^u wd), and their effect is to " draw together " the gaping wound. The words
" lay on " certainly could not be applied to thread employed in stitching together the
wound. Thread and stitching being excluded the only other alternative is obviously
strips of linen plaster, a kind of adhesive tape, of which two pieces are " applied "
transversely across the gaping wound. It is noticeable that the word is always used
in the dual, " two 'wy-strips." The word is curiously written. In Case 10 we find
'toy (twice, V 8 and 9), Case 6 'ytoy (II 28), Case 47 also ^(]^ 'ywy
(XVII4), and Case 27 ^ l]<=>|$ 'ynoy (IX 16). The root is 'r or 'yr, which weakened
by " mouillirung " of the final r. Cf. the peculiar writings of words ending in 'r,
e.g., MVk, «"!kM, or even perhapS Our
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:05 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 149 ---
Case 2
123
TRANSLATION AND COMMENTARY
word is perhaps the source of the cord which is so commonly written after the con-
sonants ^<=* 'r thus 3^IT- -^ne incorrect writing in our passage |55 is due to the
preceding particle (]-=> yr, the two words 1-=-! 8 8 producing a combination very like
the writing in Case 27 : ^
The discussion of the final treatment with grease, honey, and lint will also be
found in the commentary on Case 1.
Gloss A
I 15-16.
Explaining : A gaping wound in his head, penetrating to the bone.
a The words immediately following wbnw n are quite certain from the parallel passages. The
exact place of the line division is uncertain. It would be possible to restore further into the following
lacuna, but the amount or extent of the quotation is uncertain.
Translation
As for: "A [gaping] wound [in his head penetrating to the bone," it means] his wound.
Commentary
The entire explanation of a " gaping wound " is lost. Its nature is, however,
recoverable from the observations regarding a wound which is not gaping, or as the
Egyptian puts it " has no kf-t" (gash). See the commentary onfc/*'in Casel (pp.90ff.).
Gloss B
116-17
Explaining : Two strips of linen
a Only the right end of this d is visible, but the duplicate from Case 10 makes the reading certain.
b The text of this restoration is drawn from the duplicate gloss in Case 10, V 9.
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:05 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 150 ---
124
Case 2
THE SURGICAL TREATISE
Translation
As for: " Two strips of linen," [it means] two bands [of linen which one applies
upon the two hps of the gaping wound in order to cause that one join] to the other.
Commentary
Fortunately for us the ancient commentator forgot that he had supplied this
explanation in Case 2, and inserted it again in Case 10 (V 9), where it begins with
dSd-wy and ends with r uf-t, as in Case 2, showing that both glosses undoubtedly read
alike. The curious use of the feminine uf-t " one " as a substantive resuming dpt
" hp," which is not feniinine, will be found discussed in Case 1 in the commentary on
the hps of a wound (pp. 114 f.).
(]=Mn dmy " join," with the preposition r, literally means " to stick to." In
surgical use it is applied e. g. to the " sticking " of a fragment of bone to a swab of
linen (VIII 16). In our gloss it is evidently used for " heal," and might have been
so rendered.
The explanation does not make clear by what physical arrangements the hps of
the wound are brought together, and therefore does not indicate unequivocally the
nature of the 'wy, " the two strips." See the discussion in the commentary on the
treatment above (p. 122), where it has been made practically certain that the strips
are employed as plaster or adhesive tape.
Gloss C
117-18
Explaining : Not having a split, a perforation or a smash in it.
a Restored from VII 9.
Translation
As for: " Not having a split, a perforation, (or) [a smash in it," it means]
Commentary
The three injuries here enumerated constitute the list recognized by our surgeon
as injuries of the bone. Undoubtedly the text of the examination (I 14) should
likewise have contained all three. The ancient commentator may have quoted from
memory without noticing the omission, or the omission was in the older original
from which our scribe copied, or he copied carelessly and skipped two words. It is
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:05 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 151 ---
Cask 2
125
TRANSLATION AND COMMENTARY
regrettable that the description of these three injuries, or the indication of what we
are to understand by the statement that they were not present, is lost. Fortunately
they occur frequently in the following cases, where full discussion of them will be found.
On pSn, " split," see Case 1 and Case 4 (II 2); on thm, " perforation," consult Case 1
under " wound," and Case 8 (I 18, pp. 125-126) ; and on id, " smash " ( = com-
pound comminuted fracture) see Case 1 under " wound," and Case 5 (II 11).
CASE THREE
118-112
A GAPING WOUND IN THE HEAD PENETRATING TO THE BONE AND PER-
FORATING THE SKULL
With Case 8 our treatise passes from the consideration of superficial wounds in-
volving only the soft tissue overlying the skull, to a series of wounds which involve
very serious injuries to the calvaria itself, as well as the internal organs of the head.
This series forms a group of seven cases (Case 8 to Case 9), which are perhaps the most
interesting in the whole treatise. They contain the first references to the brain now
accessible in the whole range of earliest oriental science, including extraordinary
descriptions of its appearance and even observations indicating some discernment of
the localization of functions in the brain.
Title
118
a This determinative and the preceding nw sign make the restoration of wbnw obvious. The first
word fi'w is restored from the customary form of the title, as 112, et passim.
b Only the foot is visible.
0 The tail of the / is preserved crossing l. 19 at the extreme end. Pnn-t is certain from the
examination (l. 10).
Translation
[Instructions concerning] a gaping [wo]und in his head, penetrating to the bone
(and) perforating his [skull].
Commentary
The title indicates that the injury is more than superficial and involves the skull.
The injury affecting the bone is designated by the word
ral^Jf ^im, " perforate." Several times we find the word written with
a circle as determinative to indicate more clearly the meaning of the term (VIII 8;
XIII18,15). It is written out fully with all three consonants throughout the calvaria
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:05 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 152 ---
126
Case 3
THE SURGICAL TREATISE
cases, but in the late cases it may be abbreviated, e.g., Jfo (Case 15, maxilla, VI14),
or even Jf (Case 20, VII 22).
Outside of the medical literature it was a not uncommon word meaning " to pass
over, pass through, penetrate, pierce, perforate." It is employed, in accordance with
the use of the legs as determinative, to express the idea of traversing a country.
Hence it is applied to the journey of the dead in the next world : " Thou passest
through (thm) the earth " (Berlin Pap. 8044,l. 20). Similarly the rebellious enemies
of the Pharaoh lament in their defeat: ratjFF*tlw!i"u " nre which we have
made penetrates (thm) to us " (Semneh Stela of Amenhotep III, Brit. Mus. 188, l.12).
It is this meaning " to pass over, through," which accounts for the determinative of
the leg. Blustrative of the meaning " perforate," even outside of the medical docu-
ments is the application of the word to the horn of a bull. Thus Ramses III is com-
pared to a bull " standing in the arena, ... his horns pointed, ready to pierce (thm)
his adversary with his head " (Medinet Habu, Rouge, Inscr. hier., 145,l. 57). Approach-
ing its medical meaning is its significance in charms against diseases, as in those for
mother and child, in which the mother says to the demon : " Fall not on his mouth,
beware of being concealed; fall not on his teeth, beware of penetrating (thm) "
(Mutter und Kind, Berlin Pap. 8027 E III, 10).
Our knowledge of the surgical use of the term is drawn exclusively from Pap. Smith,
where it is applied to wounds in the calvaria (Cases 8 and 7), maxilla (Case 15), temporal
region (Cases 19 and 20), cervical vertebra (Case 29), and ribs (Case 40). It was defined
and explained in Gloss A appended to our present case, but unfortunately the text
is fragmentary. One item of the explanation has however survived : "a contracted
smash, through his incurring a break like a puncture of a (pottery) jar." The surgeon
is here comparing the calvaria to a bulbous jar, in which a blow with some sharp
instrument has punctured a hole. Such an injury may be seen in the forehead of
King Sekenenre (PI. II, Fig. 5), who lived in the time when our medical treatise was
copied and in use. Such a wound may of course be very serious. In Case 7 the
symptoms it causes are very grave and the patient's condition regarded as hopeless,
as it was in the case of King Sekenenre. On the other hand the surgeon does not
hesitate to pronounce a verdict of successful treatment, as in our Case 8, or in a per-
foration (thm) of the maxilla (Case 15), a perforation of the temporal region (Case 19),
or of a rib (Case 40). A perforation of the temporal bone however (Case 20) may be
hopeless; and a perforation of a cervical vertebra very doubtful (Case 29). It is
obvious that a thm is customarily a perforation of the bone, but in Case 19 (q. v.)
there may be doubt about it. Such a wound is one chiefly occurring in battle, and
doubtless produced by a spear thrust; though now and again it may have occurred
in civil life.
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:05 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 153 ---
Case 3 TRANSLATION AND COMMENTARY 127
Examination
119-20
sic
a Restored from II 3 and the usual beginning of the examination ; also from the title above.
b The tail of the / is visible in l. 20 under the following r.
0 Only traces of this stroke.
d The left end of the head of the owl is preserved at the right-hand edge of fragment E, l. 19, and
just below it, and further to the left, as it should be, is the final stroke of the owl. By measuring the
length of gm as found in l. 25, it will be seen that this m in l. 19 is the first m in gmm-k ; the second
m therefore being the first sign of l. 20. The other material in this bracket is drawn from I 25 and
II 4-5. On the question of space available, see commentary.
Translation
[If thou examinest a man having a gaping wound in] his [head], penetrating to the
bone, (and) perforating his skull; thou shouldst palpate his wound ; [shouldst thou
find him unable to look at his two shoulders] and his [br]east, (and) suffering with
stiffness in his neck, (conclusion in diagnosis).
Commentary
Down to the end of l.19 the terms needing explanation will be found fully discussed
in the preceding commentary on Cases 1 and 2.
With regard to the restoration at the beginning of l. 19, there can be no question
regarding its correctness ; for it is obvious that l.18 contained the title of a new case.
The words " thou shouldst palpate, etc." (l. 19) show that the examination began
in l.19, and began without any doubt with the usual words as restored above. Com-
pare also the above notes on the restoration of l.19. Regarding the next bracket,
which begins at the end of l.19 and includes l. 20 as far as the right edge of fragment G
(where the text is preserved again), we should note that this bracket begins after
the injunction, "thou shouldst palpate his wound." This charge to the surgeon occurs
ten times in our document; in nine of these passages the following context is pre-
served, and it begins in six of them with gmm-k, and in one with yr gmy-k, " if thou
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:05 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 154 ---
128
Case 3
THE SURGICAL TREATISE
findest," which is the same thing. In seven out of nine passages then, the direction,
" thou shouldst palpate, etc." is followed by "shouldst thou find," or its equivalent,
" if thou findest," thus furnishing a satisfactory basis for the restoration "*S*^
gmm-k adopted above. There is hardly room for the restoration 1<=:"/,S*^'=;» yr
gmy-k, "if thou findest," as appears in Case 27 (IX 14), after "thou shouldst palpate,
etc.; " but this would not alter the meaning of the restoration. There is uncertainty
regarding the use of the pronoun ho, " him ; " but there is just enough space for
it in l. 20. There can be no doubt about the restoration of the text after gmm-k ho.
The data are these : 1. Gloss B (l. 25) shows that the discussion of the case contained
the words " unable to look at his two shoulders and his breast; " 2. At the end of
the lacuna in l. 20 we find the signs which are obviously the last four signs of
the words i'H-/, "his breast." By a curious coincidence the passage in
l. 25 breaks off at the end of the line at exactly the same place in the word 21^, J ^
at which the passage preserved in l. 20 begins. By measuring the length of the
preserved passage in l. 25 from to (the first two signs of k'b-t, " breast "),
we find by placing this measurement at the right end of l. 20 (before J^) that there
is just room for it, when we have prefixed to it the signs J^*=»^<?, continuing the
gm at the end of l. 19, in the words ^j^J^^^' gmm-k ho. We may therefore
regard the restoration of l. 20 as certain.
One further question, however, arises in view of our restoration of the treatment
(I 21-28). This restoration mentions the fact of the stitching of the wound as already
done, just as in Cases 10 and 26. Indeed all six cases which employ stitching in our
treatise, place the injunction to stitch in the examination, and then refer to it again
(if at all) in the treatment. We should therefore expect instructions to stitch in
our examination; but it is quite clear that there is no room for such instructions
in the second large lacuna above.
~^/kSt%sZl n 3TO!/"n"/, " he is not able," literally " he does not find." This
interesting idiom occurs in six cases in our treatise, each time with context indicating
physical inability to turn or drop the head (Cases 8, 4, 5, 7, 29, and 82). Gram-
matically this so-called gnomic use of the n-form in the negative is of course common,
but I do not recall a case in which it is employed attributively after a pronoun,
following the verb " find." This is clearly a construction parallel with the pseudo-
participle after " find," in the well-known example, " He found a man standing on
the dyke " (literally " a man, he was standing "). So in our treatise the surgeon is
addressed, " shouldst thou find him, being unable " (literally " he is not able "). Gunn
has discussed the negative n-form (Syntax, Chap. XII), but he too seems not to have
met this construction elsewhere in the available documents. Gmy and a negative,
with the meaning " be unable," seems to be construed in our passage with a finite
verb following it, literally meaning " that he should look," and really a substantive
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:05 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 155 ---
Case 3
129
TRANSLATION AND COMMENTARY
clause functioning as the direct object of " find." It is not impossible, however, that
we should regard the form (dg'-f) after " find " as an infinitive, literally meaning
" his looking."
It is assumed in this examination that the physician will make this observation
of the patient's inability to twist or drop his head without prescribing any means for
aiding such observation. In three other cases, however, the physician is charged to
say to the patient: " Look at thy two shoulders " (Case 19, VII 16), or " Look at
thy two shoulders and thy breast" (Case 80, X 9), or " Look at thy breast" (Snb-t,
Case 82, XI 2), and then to observe whether the effort causes pain or difficulty.
™^«.. The usage of this common verb mn, meaning " to be sick," " to suffer," has
not yet been precisely determined in the medical papyri. While it may be intransi-
tively used, e. g., -*-^^<-^ " you are not sick " (Eloquent Peasant 817) and
Metternioh Stela 68; Louvre Stela, C 26, l. 18 ; it is nevertheless commonly and
strongly transitive. In the Old Kingdom indeed it takes the neutral object " thing,
something," even when it is used to mean " be sick," or " be ailing." Thus a man
making his will says of himself : " who was not (yet) sick," ^(]l]^wf]j, literally
"who was not ailing (with) anything" (Gizeh, Tomb of Nekure,Lepsius, Denkmaeler,
II. 15 : cf. ™J also in Urk. I, 152). It is evident then that this verb means " to
suffer with " or " to be ailing with," without the interposition of a preposition, as
we say, " He suffered a stroke of paralysis." Until recently it was understood that
such transitive use of the verb is always followed by the name of the ailment, e. g.,
Ebers 82, 21; 49, 7; 89,21, etc. Such was the understanding of the character of the
object given in the Erman-Grapow Handworterbuch, p. 64. The word mn is, however,
constantly used in the Papyrus Ebers with some ailing member of the body immediately
following as a direct object, e.g., 1<=*^^^°!*— "if he is ailing in his groin "
(Ebers 108, 6). This usage, already noted by Stern in his vocabulary, is now in the
Wbrierbuch (see p. 66). We have then three uses of mn " to be sick : " (1) intran-
sitive ; (2) transitive followed by the name of the disease as a direct object;
(8) transitive followed by the name of the diseased part or member of the body
as direct object. These facts are of importance in the interpretation of the words
immediately following mn in our passage.
tsw, " stiffness, rigidity." The word occurs seventeen times in our treatise,
eight times written out fully as here, and nine times abbreviated either to \<S (114;
III 4; IV9,12; VII18; VIII4,18) or to \ \ (III 18; X 7). In all seventeen occurrences
it is immediately followed by the words " in his neck." At first glance, therefore, it
might easily be confused with the word ts, " vertebra," which occurs thirty-two
times in our document, and is twenty-five times followed by the genitive phrase " of
his neck," thus, e.g., in X 8,4, etc.: ""p—^| " vertebra of his neck." In every
case, however, "vertebra" is written with the single sign >—<, followed by the stroke,
K
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:05 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 156 ---
130
Case 3
THE SURGICAL TREATISE
and is modified by the following indirect genitive; whereas our word ^<?Aj is
followed by the adverbial phrase " in the neck." This distinction, combined with
the consistently different writing, clearly distinguishes the two words.
Ten cases exhibiting " tsw " in the neck
Case.
Injury.
Reference.
3
Cut in head with perforation of skull .....
120,21; 126-111.
4
,, „ „ „ split in skull ......
114, 6.
5
„ „ » » fracture of skull .....
II 13-14,15.
6
„ „ „ „ brain envelope broken open ....
II 22.
7
„ „ „ „ perforation of sutures of skull; various symptoms
incl. constriction of " ligament of his mandible; " mouth cannot be
opened ........
Ill 4, 6, 13.
S
Fracture of skull without visible injury to overlying external tissue
IV 9, 12.
19
Perforation of temporal bone (presumably); neighboring eye inflamed .
VII18.
20
Wound in temple with perforation of temporal bone
VHI4.
22
Fracture in temporal bone ......
VIII 13-14.
29
Cut in cervical vertebra and perforation of this vertebra
X7.
The meaning of our tsw is superficially clear. In Case 8 the statement that the
sufferer has a tsw in his neck immediately follows the observation that he is unable
to " look at his shoulders or his breast," meaning that he is unable to lower his head
either obliquely (toward the shoulders) or vertically (toward the breast). In Case 4,
however, the statement that the patient suffers with a tsw in his neck is followed by
what is essentially a clause of result stating that he is unable to " look at his shoulders
or his breast" (II 4-5). It is obvious that tsw must indicate some kind of inability
to operate the muscles and articulations of the neck. This conclusion is rendered
certain by the explanation of the symptom " he suffers with a tsw in his neck " in
Gloss C (I 26-111), which states, " it is a lifting up (ts-t), (resulting) from his having
incurred this injury which has shifted (lit., " wandered ") into his neck, so that his
neck (also) suffers with it." Our few is therefore a noun derived from the verb tsy " to
lift up," which is regularly employed of lifting or raising a member of the body,
especially in a middle voice, when the member lifts itself or rises (X 21). Tsw is
therefore a permanent or stationary uplift or elevation in the neck, which cannot be
bent downward. Obviously, as a rendering, the word "stiffness" is pathologically
very vague and unprecise. Nevertheless, Dr. Luckhardt states: " The physical
findings of inability to look at shoulders and breast and particularly the stiffness
of the neck are quite characteristic of a meningitis or meningeal involvement. The
stiffness of the neck really makes it difficult and painful for the patient to look at
the shoulders or bend the head enough to look at the chest : . . . I think the rendering
- stiffness ' (- rigidity ') is very good. It is so used daily in medical practice to-day.
It is due to reflex spasm of the musculature of the neck." It is to be noted that few
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:05 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 157 ---
Case 3
131
TRANSLATION AND COMMENTARY
in the neck in every case accompanies an injury in the head. Of the ten cases in which
it forms one of the symptoms, six are injuries of the skull approaching or penetrating
the brain. Of the other four cases three are injuries to the temporal bone, and the
last is a cut in one of the cervical vertebrae itself. The pathologist can best grasp
the nature of the evidence by an examination of the preceding conspectus of the ten
cases exhibiting tsw in the neck, but it should be noted that he will find in the text of
the cases themselves additional important symptoms accompanying tsw, which are
too bulky to be incorporated in the previous brief summary.
This effect of the injury in the head on another region differentiates this case from
the two preceding, which were superficial wounds leaving the bone uninjured.
Diagnosis
120-21
a Traces of the / are visible, especially the head on fragment F. See Vol. II, Pl. I.
b A fragment of this Bign is visible. The other restorations in' the diagnosis are obvious, being
mostly drawn from the title (I 18) and the examination (I 19).
Translation
Thou shouldst say [regarding] him : " One having [a gaping wound in his head,
penetrating to the bone, (and) perforating his skull, while he suffers with stiffness in
his neck. An ailment which I will treat."
Commentary
This is the first diagnosis recording symptoms or conditions elsewhere than in the
wound itself. See the discussion in the introduction (pp. 46-51). On the verdict form-
ing the conclusion see Case 1 (I 1-2). The surgeon now turns to the treatment,
which is the first in our treatise to make use of a surgical suture. It is
unfortunate that this important reference falls in a lacuna; but the restoration
including it (l. 22) is based on conclusive grounds.
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:05 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 158 ---
132 THE SURGICAL TREATISE Case 3
Treatment
I 21-28
22
* On this restoration and all the following restorations in the treatment, see the following
commentary and also Vol. II, Pl. I B and C.
Translation
Now [after thou hast stitched it, thou shouldst lay] fresh [meat] upon his wound
the first day. Thou shouldst not bind it. Moor (him) [at his mooring stakes until the
period of his injury passes by]. Thou shouldst [tre]at it afterward with grease, honey,
and lint every day, until he recovers.
Commentary
The restoration of this broken text at first presented some difficulty. The large
lacuna in l. 28 is easily filled by comparison with the parallel text in II 7 and in
XVII 12-18; but the long gap in l. 22 is not so easily restored. Luckily the first
word of the treatment is preserved at the end of l. 21. Now there are only two more
cases in our treatise in which the treatment begins with H<=> yr and continues with
an apodosis concluding with application of fresh meat, which we find immediately
after the lacuna in l. 22 above. These are Cases 10 (V 7) and 26 (IX 9-10). An
examination of these two cases shows that in both of them the treatment begins with
(]«=* yr and the following context concludes with the words H^_,^l'lfl=i:S=^.S®° ywf
w'd hrw tpy, " fresh meat the first day." We can hardly doubt therefore that our
text should be restored in conformity with Cases 10 and 26; at least this should be done
with the context immediately following !]<=> yr. The text in Case 26 is as follows :
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:05 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 159 ---
Case 3
133
TRANSLATION AND COMMENTARY
" Now after thou hast stitched it thou shouldst bind it with fresh meat the first
day. Thou shouldst treat it afterward [with] grease and honey every day until he
recovers."
The treatment in Case 10 even more closely resembles that in our Case 8, because
it likewise inserts an additional precaution between the application of the fresh meat
and the final treatment with grease and honey, see Case 10 (V 7-8).
Our treatment in Case 8 displays two noticeable differences as compared with
Cases 10 and 26. Case 8 has the words f ej^^ hr wbnw-f, " upon his wound,"
immediately following the words " fresh meat the first day." Furthermore Case 8
carefully enjoins the surgeon, " Thou shalt not bind it; " whereas Cases 10 and 26
charge him to bind the wound with fresh meat, or as the Egyptian text literally
rendered expresses it, " thou shouldst bind it upon fresh meat the first day," in which
the object of the binding is the wound, and the meat is an indirect object. In Case 8,
however, the preserved text with the phrase " upon his wound " (l. 22) shows that
the wound was the indirect object, and that consequently meat must have been the
direct object. The verb of which it was the direct object is lost, but this lost verb was
obviously not the verb " bind," because not only does the prohibition to bind forbid,
but also the words " upon his wound," a phrase never used with the verb " bind."
The lost verb was therefore probably wdy, " lay," as restored above.
With regard to the fitness of introducing stitching into the above restoration, it
should be noted that Case 8 is one exactly furnishing the conditions in which our
surgeon elsewhere prescribes stitching. An examination of the list of such cases in
which our treatise prescribes stitching (see Case 10, commentary on V 6) reveals the
fact that they are six in number, and that in all of them we are dealing in each case
with a wound in a thin stratum of soft tissue, just as in Case 8. We are therefore deal-
ing with a wound in Case 8, such as the surgeon would stitch. When therefore we
find that not only the characteristics of the wound, but likewise the preserved context
on both sides of the lacuna (l. 22) are identical with the parallels in Cases 10 and 26,
we may conclude that the evidence is fairly conclusive in favor of the restoration
above inserted.
I^T y^r, " stitch," see commentary in Case 10 (V 6).
<?*^3 wdy, " lay," used of medicaments in the directions, appears three times in
our document (Case 41 twice ; and Case 46) with the preposition <=> r, " to," and com-
monly in Pap. Ebers. With the preposition • hr, " upon," as above in our text of
Case 8, it is used twice in Pap. Smith, both times with plaster or adhesive tape as the
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:05 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 160 ---
134
Case 3
THE SURGICAL TREATISE
object (Case 6, II 28; Case 27, IX 16). See full commentary on this word in
Case 11 (V 11).
" Thou shouldst not bind it." This prohibition is found five times in our treatise.
In Case 47 (XVII12-18) this seems to be due to the appearance of feverishness in the
wound. Again the seriousness of the rupture of tissue in Cases 4 (II6-7) and 5 (II15),
perhaps causing the surgeon to apprehend displacement of the bone or soft tissue,
may have been the reason for the injunction not to bind. The same is true in Case 6
(II28), in which the surgeon is charged neither to bind nor to apply plaster or adhesive
tape. The case is one of a compound comminuted fracture. Just why the surgeon
should avoid binding on the fresh meat in Case 8 is not clear, but the prohibition is
followed by the same context in all the other three cases.
The extraordinary injunction, " Moor (him) at his mooring stakes," is fortunately
explained in Gloss D as meaning: " putting him on his customary diet without ad-
ministering to him a prescription " (II1-2). It is evidently an archaic idiom, not clear
even to the usual ancient reader of this treatise, as the presence of the explanatory
gloss shows. The idiom is amusingly suggestive of our western cowboy term " grub-
stake." We are aided in its analysis by the variant: ^x*o^<^ ] " Put
him at his mooring stakes," which occurs in three instances (V 12, though lacking ho;
VII18, and VIII 9). See commentary on e*^3 wdy in Case 11 (V 11-12). Of the ten
instances in which the idiom is found, the other seven employ the form wdy r f,
three times written d r P (I 22; X 8; XVII 18), three times written
(II 7 ; II 15 ; X 8), and once written ^-J>~ (II1).
The scribe has in all cases where this idiom is found abbreviated the writing of
" stakes " to \ j , (eight times) or ^ (once, X 8). The sign is quite different from
his writing of finger.1 He always makes mnyt, " stake," thus (, once three times
repeated for the plural as we have seen (X 8); whereas his writing of " finger " jj
(II18 ; VIII10; IX 8, etc.) or plural jjjjf (14; 16; II 4, and usually) always turns
the tips toward the left, that is, away from the beginning of the line, as we commonly
find them also in Middle Kingdom hieroglyphic, e. g., Tomb of Hepzefi, Siut). It is
clear therefore that we are to read here an abbreviated writing of the word (=(]^>|
￼
mnyt, " mooring stake."2
The regimen indicated by the injunction " Moor him at his mooring stakes " is
followed by three different results :
(1) <=>f " until he recovers " (once, Case 28, X 8).
1 The distinction was, I think, first noted by Gardiner.
1 Dr. Grapow makes the interesting suggestion that the passage in Shipwreck 53-54, literally :
" I put on the ground on account of the abundance in my hands," may be explained from our
above idiom. The lack of the phrase, " at his (my) mooring stakes," however, seems to destroy the
parallelism with the idiom of Pap. Smith.
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:05 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 161 ---
Case 3
135
TRANSLATION AND COMMENTARY
(2) 3^\f (]ra^ " until the period of his injury passes by " (six times, Cases
3 (restored), 4, 5,19, 29, 47).
(8) *=""©* ^^^.^fjYj " until thou knowest that he has reached a decisive
point " (literally, " he is arriving at something," once, VIII 9).
As we have learned from the discussion in Case 1, (1) is very common unfavorable
cases. (2) is used in favorable, doubtful, and hopeless cases ; see discussion in following
paragraph. (8) means a point just past the crisis, when the physician knows whether
the patient will " live or die." See Case 4, Gloss C, II10-11.
"^Ja^kxTl^w r yh-f, "until the period of his injury passes by." This
time limitation never occurs except after the curious idiom, " moor him at his mooring
stakes." The word '*t usually means a point of time, an instant; but is also
used for longer periods. Here it is obvious that it must designate a lapse of time
long enough to permit a resumption of normal diet continuing at least for a number
of meals, and probably longer. The interpretation of the clause depends largely upon
the meaning of 1ra^ yh-f, " his injury, ailing, pain," or the hke. Does the word
mean the concrete, specific wound or injury; or does it mean pain, suffering in general ?
Its medical or pathological use is very limited. It is found in the medical documents
only three times outside of Pap. Smith, and all these occurrences are in Pap. Ebers.
In each of these three passages (87, 15 ; 88, 15 ; 88, 16) the word is used to designate
a stomach trouble,1 that is, the ailment specifically and not pain or suffering in general.
In Pap. Smith the word occurs twelve times. Five of these are in the clause r sw'y
yh-f, and therefore do not aid us. Of the remaining seven cases, three designate the
specific wound or injury under discussion, e.g., ^J^w1m^y"^ " the side of him
having this injury " (viz., a fracture of the skull IV 15-16). See also TV 16 and XVI18,
which are not quite so certain. In four passages our word designates the source of
symptoms, e. g., " his neck is tense and stiff because of his injury " (yh, III 20); see
also III 17-18 and XIII10-11, but especially Gloss C (II1). The evidence therefore
favors understanding the word yh in our clause, r iw'y '-t yh-f, as the specific injury.
The phrase " period of his injury " would then mean the period during which his
injury continues, that is, until it can be said to have healed and thus " passes by."
This interpretation is favored by the fact that in Case 28 the instructions " Moor
him at his mooring stakes " are followed by the words " until he recovers " (X 8).
The fact that in one case the word yh receives the determinative of a typhonic animal
(XVII 18) does not aid us in a scientific determination of the pathological meaning
of the word, though it discloses the current superstitions of the age, in which our
scribe and our treatise of course both share.
1 The other, older form of the word, ,h, also occurs three times in Pap. Ebers : once in a magical
formula (57, 21) and again designating internal troubles (37, 16; 106, 14). These throw no' light on
the specific meaning of the word.
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:05 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 162 ---
136 THE SURGICAL TREATISE Case 3
Gloss A
124-25
Explaining : " Perforating his skull "
T[Hnkf=ftg]
a The original shows clearly a pair of legs ; hence we cannot read thm, as the following dnn-l would
suggest. There are no traces of a sign over the legs.
b The loss is some three-fifths of a line, the longest lacuna in this broken column. The tail
of at the end of the lacuna is visible in l. 26. See Vol. II, PI. I and I B.
Translation
[As for : " Perforating his skull," it means] - - - - his skull, a contracted smash,
through his incurring a break like a puncture of a (pottery) jar, which he
incurred."
Commentary
The other three glosses appended to this case explain all the symptoms and con-
ditions following thm, and we must conclude therefore that the first gloss contained
an explanation of this injury. The explanation itself makes this conclusion quite
certain ; hence the restoration. The beginning of the explanation is unfortunately
entirely lost and there is no source from which to recover it. It proceeds with a loose
application of the word " smash " (id), otherwise our surgeon's technical term for
a compound comminuted fracture (see Case 5). It is clear that it is applied here in
a loose and popular sense, in keeping with the character of the illustration, drawn as
it is from the incidents of every-day fife. The rendering of nds " small," as " con-
tracted," is justified by the surgeon's use of this word as the opposite of wih, " wide,"
e. g., in the head wound of Case 1. Compare Fig. 18, PI. VII, infra.
rpr-f, " his incurring" is evidently a surgical use of the word rpr, " to
acquire, gain," e.g., V^^^(](]^J^|^ "Thou gainest thy happiness"
(Letter from Ana, in Griffith, Papyri from Kahun, pl. 29).
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:05 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 163 ---
Case 3
137
TRANSLATION AND COMMENTARY
7*7cT W'i " puncture." This noun is unknown anywhere else. Whether it is
to be connected with the word " strong," or "terrible," is not clear. Nr$
does not aid us in the explanation therefore ; on the contrary it is the obvious meaning
of thm, which leads to the translation of as " puncture."
[ID^w rFr-n-f, " which he incurred." This restoration, while uncertain, is very
probable. We cannot restore hpr n-f, as in II21 and IV 11, for hpr never has a deter-
minative in our document, and seldom does elsewhere.
Gloss B
I 25-26
Explaining : " Unable to look at his two shoulders and his breast "
a Only the left-hand portions of these two signs are visible ; they make the restoration of the
preceding bracket quite certain. It is the preservation of fragment H which makes the gloss
intelligible. See Vol. II, Pl. I and IB.
Translation
As for: " Unable to look at his two shoulders and [his] bre[ast," it means it is not
easy for him to look at] his two shoulders (and) it is not easy for him to look at
his breast.
Commentary
The restoration of the first part of l. 26 as above can hardly be doubted. The
completion of the word &'M-/is obvious, and the preservation of " his two shoulders,"
plainly parallel with " his breast " (2nd time), makes equally obvious the completion
of the parallel statement preceding " his two shoulders " from the statement preceding
" his breast." It is clear also that we must insert the usual □ <? pw in the restored
parallel statement, although it is not present in the second. The silence of the explana-
tion regarding the cause of the difficulty is doubtless due to the writer's knowledge
of the coming explanation of the stiffness in the neck, which is to be inserted in the
next gloss. The explanation indicates not impossibility, but difficulty and probably
pain, caused by the effort to turn the face vertically or obliquely downward.
It is to be noted that Fragment H (PI. I, l. 26) must be moved slightly to the
right (as on PI. I B) to make room for as first observed by Devaud.
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:05 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 164 ---
138
Case 3
THE SURGICAL TREATISE
Gloss C
I 26-111
Explaining : " Suffering with stiffness in his neck "
Translation
As for : " Suffering with stiffness in his neck," it means a lifting up (resulting)
from his having incurred this injury, which has shifted into his neck, so that his
neck (also) suffers with it.
Commentary
The general meaning of the gloss has already been discussed in the commentary
on the examination (1. 20).
^^<«— p'w-f, " his having incurred " is an interpretation perhaps subject to
question. The auxiliary p'w, "to have done," is commonly followed by an
infinitive ; (] m yh, however, is known only as a noun. There may be some doubt
whether p'w yh may mean " to have incurred an injury." Nevertheless the context is
strongly in favor of this meaning ; for it is impossible to accept the form p'w-f as the
possessive demonstrative " his." There are two objections : the form is not normal;
and the entire treatise contains no other example of the possessive demonstrative, for
the document is not written in the Middle Kingdom koind. However, even if it were
accepted as the possessive demonstrative, the sense would not be essentially altered.
We could render: " (resulting) from this his injury," accepting the really redundant
second demonstrative as re-enforcing the first.
"~*J^&. nnm. This reading, correcting the old reading tnm first noticed by Devaud
(Maximes de Ptahhotep, p. 28), is corroborated by our text, which has pretty clearly
nn rather than tn. The word means " to go astray," " to turn aside " and the like,
as of a traveler who has missed the road and gone astray (Sinuhe, B 96 ; Pyr. 1695 c).
Its use by the surgeon in this connection is interesting, suggesting that as the injury
is in the head, any results of it found elsewhere must have gone astray or wandered !
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:05 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 165 ---
Case 3
139
TRANSLATION AND COMMENTARY
Globs D
ni-2
Explaining : " Moor (him) at his mooring stakes "
o
Translation
As for: " Moor (him) at his mooring stakes," it means putting him on his
customary diet, without administering to him a prescription.
Commentary
The meaning of this valuable gloss in general has been already discussed in the
commentary on the treatment (1l. 22-28).
m'r, " customary." This meaning of the word long awaited notice in the
dictionaries ; but there can be no question as to its correctness. From its use in the
historical inscriptions this meaning was established twenty years ago.1
There might be some discussion as to the more exact meaning of the last phrase
in the explanation, " without administering to him a prescription." The word
rendered "administering" literally means "making," and the word "make" has
in Egyptian a very wide range of meanings, such that it is possible the surgeon may
mean " prepare." PAri, like its English equivalent " prescription," means both the
actual medicine or the written recipe. Hence our final phrase may mean, either
" without administering to him any medicine; " " without writing for him any
recipe ; " or " without preparing for him any medicine."
CASE FOUR
112-11
A GAPING WOUND IN THE HEAD PENETRATING TO THE BONE AND
SPLITTING THE SKULL
This case is far more serious than those which preceded it. It illustrates the
organization of materials in the treatise in groups of cases beginning with the simpler
and easier injuries and passing then to more complicated and dangerous cases.
1 See Breasted, Ancient Records, Vol. Ill, p. 168, note b.
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:05 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 166 ---
140
Case 4
THE SURGICAL TREATISE
Title
112
Translation
Instructions concerning a gaping wound in his head, penetrating to the bone, (and)
splitting his skull.
Commentary
The terms employed in this title have all been explained in the commentary on
the preceding cases except the word a "T pSn, " splitting." It is an archaic word
found outside of Pap. Smith only in the Pyramid Texts and the Middle Kingdom
Coffin Texts. In the Pyramids it is found only in 805 a, 679 b, and 1968 b. One of
these passages is valuable for its graphic indication of the meaning of the word,
having as the determinative sCT, an axe actually splitting a billet of wood (Pyr. 805 a).
Valuable for our surgical use of the word is the phrase ^"^"©SS^^n^ " who splits
your heads, ye gods" (Pyr. 1968b). In chapter 17 of the Book of the Dead the
word is applied to the splitting of the ySd-t tree; cf. Harhotep 208 (old 108), and,
referring to same incident, Book of the Dead, ed. Naville, 125, final address, l.14.
PSn is used in four different cases in Pap. Smith as the technical surgical term for
designating an injury to the bone, and is not found elsewhere in the ancient medical
documents of Egypt. These four injuries are in the skull (Case 4), the maxilla (Case 16),
the temple (Case 21), and the arm (Case 88). It occurs as one of three different bone
injuries : p$n, " split; " thm, " perforation ; " and id, " fracture," the presence of
which may be denied to indicate that the bone under a flesh wound is uninjured,
e.g., Case 2, or Case 18. PSn is a kind of wound which would be produced especially
by the long-headed Egyptian battle axe (see Fig. 2), which may have an edge as
long as 16| inches, a type of battle axe especially common in the Middle Kingdom.
A sword might produce a similar wound in the skull, but the sword was little used in
Egyptian warfare in the age preceding our document, though the Egyptian armies
would probably have met some type of it in Asia. A wound in the skull to which the
term pSn would have been applied is shown in Fig. 8, which illustrates the difference
between a " split " (jp$n) and a " fracture " (id). The weight of the blow has fractured
the skull at both ends of the p$n, which is the actual cut produced by the edge of the
weapon. There are no traces of healing and it is evident that the injury produced
death before any healing had occurred. A similar injury, seemingly involving only
a pSn, is found in Fig. 4, a case with which the surgeon's art was able to deal; the
wound healed and the patient recovered. Our treatise regards such an injury as serious
and critical when it is in the skull (Cases 4, and 21); but when it is in the maxillary
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:05 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 167 ---
Case 4
141
TRANSLATION AND COMMENTARY
region (Case 16) or in the arm (Case 88), it is not considered serious. It is explained
in Gloss A of Case 4 as meaning the " separation of one shell from another shell of
his skull, while fragments (evidently of bone) remain sticking in the flesh of his head
and do not come away " (II 9). See the commentary on Gloss A.
Examination
II 8-5
.i
• This m is the first sign in l. 5 and is almost lost in the break between columns 1 and II; but
the remains make the reading certain.
Translation
If thou examinest a man having a gaping wound in his head, penetrating to the
bone, (and) splitting his skull, thou shouldst palpate his wound. Shouldst thou find
something disturbing therein under thy fingers, (and) he shudders exceedingly,
while the swelling which is over it protrudes, he discharges blood from both his
nostrils (and) from both his ears, he suffers with stiffness in his neck, so that he is
unable to look at his two shoulders and his breast, (conclusion in diagnosis).
Commentary
All terms preceding the results of the palpation have been discussed in the com-
mentary preceding Case 4.
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:05 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 168 ---
142
Case 4
THE SURGICAL TREATISE
*tT\ yb-t, " tnmf?," as used in Pap. Smith, appears in a range of usages which
require discussion. We find it used as follows :
1. Without a modifier, to designate some material object, e.g., to " measure some-
thing " in a bushel (I 5); to seize "something" (of a bird's claw, VIII15); a "thing "
is clammy (III 19), etc.
2. Without any qualitative modifier, and indicating something often immaterial,
neutral or unfavorable:
a. Neutral, as in the frequent expression " until thou knowest whether he (the
patient) is arriving at anything," meaning whether he is arriving at anything decisive,
either favorable or unfavorable (II 8,10, 28 ; III 8, 15 ; IV 9 ; VIII 9 ; XII18-19).
b. Unfavorable, as in the statement that the skin overlying a fracture of the skull
is uninjured, thus : " If thou examinest a man having a smash of (var. " in ")
his skull under the skin of his head, while there is nothing at all upon it " (the skin,
Case 8, IV 5), in which " nothing at all " (f ^7=J'^)1 clearly means an injury. Another
example will be found in VIII 18-19.
8. With a following modifier, especially the following :
a. An adjective, in cases where "thing" designates something purely material,
e-g- f^T^M Vb"t *». " something hot " (III 7); J^ZT^ 9nn, " some-
thing soft" (VI 14; IX 18); J^/ ^§ xjh-t sjw, "something swollen"
(XIII 10; XVI 18), although this last example may possibly belong under 8 c or
8 d below.
There are indications that in some such cases the two words merge together, if not
in pronunciation, at least in meaning, and serve as an abstract noun, e.g.,
yh-t ASr (XIII 11), " redness," literally " red things," in which " things " seems to
serve like an abstract prefix or termination such as -schaft or -keit in German. This
is a usage which is known in literary Egyptian, e.g., " Happy he who tells what he
has tasted (experienced), when the evil is passed " (Shipwreck 124), a passage in
which " evil " is expressed, Jj*^?^^ yb-t mr, " evu thing " (or " things ").
b. An adverb, especially (]^ ym, "therein," e.g., Pap. Ebers 108, 19. This
ym is not infrequently followed by a noun in the genitive, as in our text above,
SiTil^s—If"3^° yb* ym " something therein disturbing " (II 8-4); or it may
be that we must classify this modifier as a participle, as in the following cases.
c. A participle, e.g., •^21^J yh-t k% "something folded" (XII 5); tft*^!
yh-t pryt (XIV 16). A participle also sometimes follows the adverb ym of 8 b, e.g.,
SmiK7a^2,$&T2&\a%£\ I** 'Jm nMhd nPF, "something throbbing and
fluttering therein " (II 20).
1 The modifier rib-t is not to be classed as qualitative within my meaning in the above discussion,
and hence I have placed the example among those without qualitative modifiers above.
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:05 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 169 ---
Cask 4
143
TRANSLATION AND COMMENTARY
d. A noun, e.g.,f ^^ILJ Vb"t nrfc, (XVI1 with det- suppued 'rom XVI14),
" something of clamminess," probably meaning " some clamminess." We should
perhaps compare with this usage the use of " thing " with the meaning " portion,"
as in the archaic words for the morning and evening meal in the Pyramid Texts:
f "ra D^ nhpw, lit. " morning thing " and •|Jfl| yh-t wh', ht. " evening thing "
(Pyr. 978 d, e). It is quite clear that in such examples as these two yh-t designates
a material thing, and its use with a following modifier may originally have arisen in
cases of this kind. It is equally clear, however, that in some of these phrases " thing "
or " something " does not designate a material object. We may compare our English
" something " or " somewhat," employed to indicate a " measure of " or a " certain
amount of." This usage is closely allied to the Egyptian use of " thing " to mean
" manner " or " fashion," as in the well-known example in the Piankhi Stela ,i
" in the manner (ht. - thing') of women " (l. 68). Our papyrus has a related case
in the passage £1f |7!<=*i^2t mJ/ Vb* rm~f, " as & he were weeping " (III 12 ; IV 2),
literally " like the manner (- thing ') that he were weeping." Gunn has called my
attention to its occurrence also in the still unpublished tomb autobiography of
Gemnikai: ^So^^JL m mrr-^ ny-iwt, " in the manner (lit. - thing ') which
the king desired." These various usages and shades of meaning of yh-t must be re-
membered in interpreting the passage above (II 8-4).
The lack of agreement in gender between yh-t and its following modifier is of course
a well-known peculiarity. Yh't is in most of the above cases obviously not plural,
and it is possibly singular in all.
'—IH"!^0 n^, " disturbing," the modifier of yh-t, " thing," is a difficult word.
Although it is not uncommon it is applied with highly varied meanings. It is used
of a " terrible " face, of an " unfavorable " wind, of " dangerous " water, of a " terrify-
ing " voice ; it is applied to fire, and it appears parallel with, or in addition to f J^*—«
dhm, " mighty." In Egyptian medicine it is known in only four passages besides the
one we are discussing: one more in our papyrus (III 1) and three in Pap. Ebers. Of
these four the one in Pap. Smith is the most instructive : ®j7=j^—I'f^^S^l °, ,
" something foreign (or - disturbing ') upon it like r wrinkles1 (pyw)." We do not know
with certainty what these pyw are, but the context shows that the wrinkling surface
of slag floating on molten metal is meant, and this makes the rendering of nh' as
" foreign," " disturbing," or " rough " very probable. Such a meaning would also
suit Pap. Ebers 108, 18, a passage in which a cist or swelling or abscess is found to
be -—Ijf^^L In tne other two passages in Pap. Ebers the determinative of
nh' is ^ (Ebers 89, 9-10; 89,12) and the context does not fit the meaning "rough,"
nor suggest clearly any other meaning. It may indeed be that this nh, with ^jj is
a different word.
l^dll^S '"'"J/' "^e shudders" is not clear until it is compared with the five
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:05 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 170 ---
144
Case 4
THE SURGICAL TREATISE
other passages in which it occurs in our papyrus. These disclose the following five
variants :
X 5 (^» in red corrected in over <=> in black);
1$-^<? XIII14;
XIV18.
These variants disclose this curiously written word as a form of the verb
nry, " to be terrified," " to shudder," or the like. The prosthetic is once written
(]^, of which the ^ has been inserted in red ink by the scribe as a correction over
an <=> which is in black. This is an interesting suggestion of the weak pronunciation
of \\ in Hyksos times, and also of S\ <=> as '£.
The word is usually construed with the preposition n, introducing the cause of
the fright, but <=> is sometimes employed, e.g.,«— ^^^^^j—TH** " Offered
to thee is the Horus-eye at which (""*) the gods are terrified " (Abydos Ritual,
Mariette, tabl. 19, according to Amon). See also Lacau, Textes relig. "KVII = Becueil
de Trav. 27, p. 56. The ^ which immediately follows 'nry in all six passages of our
papyrus, however, is evidently not an example of <=> introducing the cause. The
phrase ^ is either the customary emphatic, or more probably its predecessor, in
which w is still felt to refer back to the subject and has not yet become impersonal.
It is probably much like the German " ihn " in " es schaudert ihn," an impersonal
reflexive not common in English. Our form, in which the ending appears as either
y or w, is probably a participle. It is noticeable that in all six passages containing
our word, it follows the surgeon's palpation or manipulation of the wound, except
one (XIV 18). In all cases it is followed not only by j^, but this ^ is also always
followed by wr-t, " exceedingly." Our word, therefore, evidently indicates the
patient's shrinking or shuddering as a result of the surgeon's palpation. But in the
case of XIV 18 it may refer to a shuddering or trembling caused by disease rather than
by a wound (see Case 42).
(](I|o ySw-w, "protrudes " occurs eleven times in Pap. Smith, with the following
variants:
P<??^s II10;
i]P??^j II 18; IV 6; V 10 ;
H«P?I1H V 17; VI 19;
H p 1 1 vii5;
IJp«|]H psd. ptcp., VIII 6 ; XV 21 ;
(]P?? psd. ptcp., XII22.
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:05 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 171 ---
Case 4
145
TRANSLATION AND COMMENTARY
It would seem from these examples that the root is ySw. Neither the verb ySS,
nor the noun ySw is known in the medical papyri elsewhere ; but comparing the noun
1=$*^* 1 "gpittle " (Pyr. 246 a, 850 a), with the verb H=/*1 ySS, " to spit,"
it is probable that our verb ySw is a cognate of ySS, " to spit," and might mean " to
spit," " to ooze," " to discharge," " to excrete," meanings which would fit very well
all the above passages in which ySw occurs. Besides these etymological and semantic
evidences, we have also to consider the evidences offered by Gloss B (II 10) which
contains the following interesting explanation of our passage : " As for: - the
swelling (thb) which is over it protrudes,' it means that the swelling which is over this
split is large, rising upward." From this explanation we must conclude that y$i6-w
means " protrude " or " project," a meaning closely allied to the root significance
of ySS, if we understand its fundamental meaning to be something like " exude." An
exuding substance of semi-fluid consistency might be said to protrude or project.
The same might doubtless be said of the bulging tissue which covers the injury. In
our treatise, however, ySw is used exclusively with thb as subject, and if thb means
" swelling," as the following commentary indicates, then it is evident that ySw must
mean " project," " protrude."
This rare word y$w is further evidence of the early date of the material in the
Edwin Smith Papyrus ; for both verb and noun, unknown as we have said to the other
medical documents of Egypt, occur elsewhere only in the oldest literature. The
appearance of ySw certainly supports the conclusion that our surgical treatise was
composed in an age far older than Hyksos times. The same is probably true of the
grammatical form of the word. In six of the eleven passages employing ySw (IV 6 ;
VI15,19; VIII6 ; XII22; XV 21) the subject thb precedes the verb, which is in the
pseudo-participle with the ending <? or (] f\ written out. The remaining five passages, of
which ours is one, place the verb first, but everywhere give it the ending <? (four times)
or 1 1 (once). It is true that the pseudo-participle when -preceding a nominal subject
does not customarily take any ending, and is therefore indistinguishable from a idm-f
form (see Sethe, Verbum II, § 8, 1); but the question arises, nevertheless, whether
ySww (and ySw-y) in these five passages where it precedes the subject, is not a
pseudo-participle. If so, we have in this form an additional indication of the great
age of our document; for the sentence with the pseudo-participle preceding a nominal
subject has survived only in the oldest texts (seeErman, Zeitschrift, 27 (1889), 78-76
and Sethe, op. tit.).
£Jx thb, " swelling " occurs fourteen times in our treatise : once written with
the determinative x as here, twice with o, five times with ^, and six times with tj.
It is evidently some cognate form of the well-known word $J{5 " to moisten,"
1 These highly specialized determinatives from the Pyramid Texts are not available in type.
The first one is three spewing mouths, the second one is a face with mouth spewing.
L
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:05 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 172 ---
146
Case 4
THE SURGICAL TREATISE
" to water," " to irrigate," e.g., of the effect of the Nile inundation in the great
Amama Sun hymn. In the medical literature the verb thh is used of moistening
the ingredients of a recipe for mixing, e.g., with oil (Pap. Ebers 18, 17-18), or with
honey (ibid., 69, 22; Hearst 12; I 8), or with honey as a real vehicle (Berlin
Papyrus 8088, 4, 48).
In all fourteen examples in Pap. Smith, however, thb is used as a noun exclusively,
and the verb employed with it is either ySw, "exude," "protrude;" or it is dt', "be
drawn off." The wound is in all cases an injury to the bone, which may or may not
involve an injury to the overlying soft tissue. It is used in the description of the
following eleven kinds of injury :
Cage.
Injury.
Remark abotU " thb."
Passage.
4
split in skull
thb exudes or protrudes (ySw)
II 4, 10.
5
smash in skull
thb exudes or protrudes (ySw)
II13.
8
smash in skull, but skin over
smash unbroken(Gloss, IV13)
thb exudes or protrudes (ySw) " on the out-
side of that smash."
IV 6.
11
break in bridge of nose
thb exudes or protrudes (ySw); treatment:
small plugs of linen soaked in ointment
inserted into nostrils, " until his thb is
drawn off " (or " reduced ")
V 10, 12.
12
break in inaccessible portion
of nose
thb exudes or protrudes (ySw)
V17.
15
perforation in maxillary
thb exudes or protrudes (ySw), obscure de-
tail added
VI15.
16
split in maxillary
" thou finde8t thb protruding and red on the
outside of that split" ; treatment" until
thb is drawn off " (or " reduced ")
VI18-19. 20-21.
17
smash in maxillary
treatment "until thb is drawn off" (or
"reduoed")
VII 6.
21
split in temporal bone
thb protrudes (ySw) "on outside of that
split"
VIII 6.
38
split in arm
thb protrudes (yaw) " on outside of that
" split"
XII 22.
46
uncertain injury in the breast
" thou findest thb very large, protruding on
his breast, oily, like fluid under thy hand"
XV 21-XVI1.
In addition to the above data it should be noted that the thb is, in four cases out
of the eleven, stated to be " on it " or " over it," namely the injury. In view of the
treatment for " drawing off " the thh, one might conclude that thb is a fluid, like pus ;
but it is conceivable that " draw off " or " draw out " may refer to the act of reducing
a swelling, as we say " to draw out the swelling," although the same verb, iV, is used
a number of times in Papyrus Ebers for drawing off pus. The problem of the meaning
of thb is evidently to be settled chiefly on the basis of the other data exhibited in the
above table. Five of the eleven cases (4, 5,11,12,15) simply refer to the thb as "pro-
truding or exuding " (ySw), while four more of them (8, 16, 21, 88) add the phrase
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:05 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 173 ---
Case 4
147
TRANSLATION AND COMMENTARY
" on the outside of that smash " (once, or " split," thrice). The first of these four
(8) is a compound comminuted fracture of the skull, the external tissue covering
which displays no injury. In this case it is a physical impossibility that the thb
should be a fluid exuding on the outside of an external wound. We might be led to
conclude that thb is therefore necessarily the bulge or swelling of the tissue covering
the fracture ; but it is nevertheless conceivable that thb is here under the covering
tissue, but " outside " of the fracture, and therefore might be a substance exuding
or protruding from the fracture. Another of these four cases (16) states that the " thb
protruding ... on the outside of this split " is red. The wound is a " split in the
maxillary," and the modern surgeon may be able to determine whether the redness
of the thb in this case is of value in identifying it. Finally in Case 46, that of a breast
injury of uncertain character, the thb is said to be " very large (possibly " very plenti-
ful "), protruding (or " exuding," yStc) on his breast, oily, like fluid under thy hand."
These last hints come very near giving us a decision as between " fluid " and " swell-
ing " for the meaning of thb. The phrase " very large " may mean " very plentiful "
in poetry, e.g., the description of Syria in the Tale of Sinuhe (B 82), but in a prosaic
description like Case 46 the meaning " very large " is almost certain. Accepting
this rendering, we must conclude that the thb is a swelling, the bulge of the tissue over
an injured bone. In Case 46 the content of this swelling is largely fluid, and under
the surgeon's hand is yielding and " oily, like fluid." This conclusion is confirmed by
Gloss B in II 10, which uses Sfwt, a common word for " swelling " in the medical
papyri, as the explanation of thb. In Ebers (110, 8-4) we find Vi^TT^?^ " "*J
swelling of a wound," precisely the kind of swelling discussed in our gloss (II 10),
and the word for swelling is Sfw-t. It would seem that thb was an ancient word for
" swelling," which, like our " gathering," arose from the thought of the collected
fluid within the swelling, and at the time when our treatise was written thb was
already sufficiently uncommon or unfamiliar to need explanation by the more familiar
word Sfwt, the only word employed in Papyrus Ebers and the other Egyptian medical
documents.
<^<^>^" Svty-fy, " both his nostrils." The reading Sr-t, " nostril " and not fnd,
" nose," is obvious from the occurrence of the word in the dual, which would be sense-
less with the word " nose." Moreover, when the discharge of blood is from one
nostril only, we find the word regularly written ^ Sr-t. See VI 5 ; VII 8 ; VII 4 ;
VIII 7 ; VIII 8. It is hardly likely that in such cases we are to read the unusual
word fHP^^ mid-t, "nostril" (which will be found discussed in Case 11, commentary
on Gloss A), a word so unfamiliar that when used in Case 11, we find Gloss B appended
as a necessary explanation of the term (V 15). The anatomical meaning of Sr-t,
which includes more than the mere orifice of the nares, will be found explained in
the introduction of Case 18. See also the commentary on VI 8.
L 2
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:05 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 174 ---
148
Case 4
THE SURGICAL TREATISE
44 midr-wy-fy, " both his ears." In the case of this dual noun we find the
same question arising as in the preceding phrase, " both his nostrils." The word is
nowhere written phonetically and we are at first uncertain whether to read rnh"wy or
mAdr-im). It should be remembered however that rnh, " ear " occurs only in the dual;
whereas the word is commonly employed in our document in the singular in the same
phrase, e.g., VI 5 ; VII 5 ; VII 14 ; VIII 7; etc. It is clear then that we must
read midr. It obviously designates the orifice of the ear in this case. For fuller
discussion see Case 28.
The commentary on the concluding symptoms of the examination will be found
in the preceding cases.
Diagnosis
II 5-6
\ I _ w /■t'-'-'■«■". I
www *S—■ —<x» A
Translation
Thou shouldst say regarding him: " One having a gaping wound in his head,
penetrating to the bone, (and) splitting his skull; while he discharges blood from
both his nostrils (and) from both his ears, (and) he suffers with stiffness in his neck.
An ailment with which I will contend."
Commentary
The terms used in this diagnosis have all been discussed in the preceding com-
mentary, except the physician's final conclusion, " An ailment with which I will
contend," which we call verdict 2. It will be found discussed in the introduction
(pp. 46-48); but the following facts about it should also be noted here. It indicates
a case too critical for prediction of the outcome. It is not found in any of the medical
papyri except Smith and Ebers, and in Ebers it occurs only twice (105, 12 and 105,
19-20). Some light on the meaning of 56^^ rh\ "contend " may be gained from
the following passage in Ebers : (ft^^JC*-"-^scT<? i i " You snould con-
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:05 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 175 ---
Case 4
149
TRANSLATION AND COMMENTARY
tend with him with ism-ic-prescriptions " (Ebers 41, 15-16). This verdict might
suggest demoniacal disease, with which the physician is obliged to " contend." This
interpretation is, however, obviously incorrect. In the Edwin Smith Papyrus it is
repeatedly the verdict in cases of wounds and injuries which have no possible connec-
tion with demoniacal causes. Such is our Case 4, a deep and dangerous cut penetrating
through the calvaria. Gloss C is quite specific in its statement of the condition of the
case denoted by this verdict; it says : " (until) thou knowest whether he will die
or he will live ; for he has - an ailment with which I will contend ' " (II11). Verdict 2
occurs in eight cases in Pap. Smith, as follows :
Case 4. Gaping wound, penetrating to the bone, splitting skull.
„ 7. Gaping wound, penetrating to the bone, perforating sutures of skull.
„ 21. Split in temporal bone.
„ 28. Gaping wound in throat.
„ 29. Gaping wound in cervical vertebra.
„ 87. Break in the arm, with wound over it.
„ 45. Bulging tumors on breast.
„ 47. (XVII11) Gaping wound in the shoulder.
Of these eight cases the surgeon expects a favorable outcome in only one (Case 28),
although another may show a fortunate turn (Case 47, fifth examination, XVII18-14).
All the remaining six cases are distinctly doubtful, and are accompanied by clauses
indicating what the surgeon is to do until the critical issue between life and death is
determined.
Treatment
II 6-8
7
8
^ — <=> J\ |
Ol I I
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:05 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 176 ---
150
Cass 4
THE SURGICAL TREATISE
Translation
Now when thou findest that the skull of that man is split, thou shouldst not bind
him, (but) moor (him) at his mooring stakes until the period of his injury passes by. His
treatment is sitting. Make for him two supports of brick, until thou knowest he has
reached a decisive point. Thou shouldst apply grease to his head, (and) soften his
neck therewith and both his shoulders. Thou shouldst do likewise for every man whom
thou findest having a split skull.
Commentary
yr dr. In view of the fact that the surgeon's examination and diagnosis
have already declared the presence of the " split " (j1Sn), it is clear that this clause
refers back to the previous establishment of this fact. Yr dr must therefore mean
" now as soon as," or " now when," introducing the observation already made.
Compare Case 8 (IV 10) and Case 20 (VIII 4). It is decidedly an archaic use of the
particle dr.
All terms following yr dr down to yh-f, " his injury " will be found discussed in
the commentary on the preceding cases.
-2.°^ hms-t, " sitting." This word is to be understood as comprising the treat-
ment. It does not mean that while being treated the patient is to occupy a sitting
posture ; it means that the treatment itself consists in the quiet and repose of sitting,
at the same time tacitly showing that the condition of the patient is regarded by the
surgeon as precluding a lying posture. The importance of the sitting position is
further indicated by the special mechanical contrivance prescribed for enabling the
patient to maintain it.1 The same is true in Case 7, in which " sitting " is also pre-
scribed. This treatment is found in seven cases in our treatise, all of them injuries of
the head : 4, 7, 8,16,17, 20, and 82. In four of these (4, 7, 8, and 20) little or nothing
in addition to " sitting " is prescribed ; in the remaining three the familiar " fresh
meat " or " grease, honey, and lint" appear. The significant fact seems to be that all
the cases employing " sitting " as treatment are injuries of the head.
J^LJ^^n mk'-ty, " two supports." This word is clearly J^Z^ mht, " place,
resting place, proper place," etc., as is shown by the fact that the word is written
J^S^Q Q m Case 7 (III 15). It is more commonly written with the determina-
1 Gardiner has suggested to me in conversation that " sit" may be used here in the sense of
" defer " or similar like bmsw in Sinuhe B 59. The suggestion is interesting, but would raise the
difficulty of explaining the purpose of the supports which clearly indicate literal sitting.
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:05 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 177 ---
Case 4
151
TRANSLATION AND COMMENTARY
tive of the book roll, but occurs twice elsewhere with ui : Book of the Dead 180,25 ;
and Stela of the Banishment, l . 21. The Pyramids write it but it occurs in
the Solar Litany and the Book of the Gates written 3,if m \0T e==U-T\- Outside
of the medical papyri the word means especially the proper place, or resting place for
a thing, particularly for parts of the body, e.g., Pyr. 286d, 896d ; especially the heart,
e. g., Stela of the Banishment, l.21; Lepsius, Denkmaeler, Text I, p. 8; Ctdte d'Atonou,
pp. 89, 68; and quite commonly. The gods and the dead are in their mfc'-t (Book of
the Gates, 6th hour, below ; also 8th hour; sometimes with the determinative ,/]).
The medical or surgical use of the word is confined entirely to Papyrus Smith,
where it is used to designate a " pair of supports " (dual), designed especially to
maintain in an upright sitting posture a patient having a serious wound in the skull,
which makes motion dangerous and forbids lying down. Its use is confined to two
cases of such injury (Case 4 and 7), in one of which (Case 7) the patient is said to be
" placed between two supports (mk-ty) of brick " (II 7). How these were made is not
indicated, but the word employed means sun-dried brick. It may be recalled that
a woman in child-birth among the common people sat on two bricks (see Spiegelberg,
Becueil de Trav., XXVI, p. 47); and the bed in houses of the poor might be a mere
bench of adobe. It may be of interest to note at this point that our Spanish-American
word " adobe " is the same word here employed in our medical text of 8,500 years ago
or more (see Wiesmann, Zeitschrift, 52 (1914), p. 180). The probability is that the clay
was moulded to fit the patient's figure, and that our word -^.J ^ db-t, " adobe," is
used rather for the whole mass than for a structure made of individual bricks.
The entire treatment of the patient consists in his resting quietly, sustained by the
two supports until the crisis is past. Thereupon the physician may attempt alleviation
by softening applications on the head, neck and shoulders. The frequent conclusion
of the treatment " until he recovers " is here conspicuously lacking. In its place
appears an injunction to treat all patients with a split skull in the same way.
The interesting grammar of the first and last sentences of the treatment is quite
in order. In both cases pSn is a passive, presumably a participial form :
" thou findest that man, his skull being split; " and
" every man whom thou findest, his skull being split."
It is interesting to observe that in the first case p$n is attached to the noun (" that
man "), while in the second case the relative form gmm-k functions as the substantive
to which p$n is attached.
The above interesting case contains a series of new and important terms,
difficult to understand. They were not clear without explanation, even to the
ancient Egyptian reader; hence the commentator has added three glosses
explaining: A, " Splitting his skull; " B, " The swelling which is over it pro-
trudes ;" and C, " (Until) thou knowest he has reached a decisive point."
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:05 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 178 ---
152
Case 4
THE SURGICAL TREATISE
Gloss A
II&-9
Explaining : Splitting his skull
-~~ O t^i 5k 8 D © I
□ <?i i i— J^X^iii w
< > www [ !SX
Translation
As for : " Splitting his skull," it means separating shell from shell of his skull,
while fragments remain sticking in the flesh of his head, and do not come away.
Commentary
It is important to determine at once the literal meaning of n^^o"eTs3w
p'k-t n-t dnn-t-f, " shell of his skull." P'ht originally means a " sherd." We find
it a number of times in Pap. Ebers as X!k*M=TJ!E«?a£ "Sherd (p'jyQ of
a new pot " (Ebers 61, 18 ; 78, 17 ; 94, 12); similarly Hearst XI 17 ; XIII 2 ;
Pap. Westcar 6, 10. As an anatomical term it is applied to the shell of a turtle
a number of times in Pap. Ebers (e. g., 67, 5-6 ; 86, 12-18, etc.), which even
writes the turtle quite clearly in the determinative (e.g., 71,15). As a term of the
human anatomy p'ht is found only in Pap. Smith, where it occurs in four cases
(4, 7, 8, and 9), all injuries of the skull. In all these cases it designates the squamae,
the shell-like segments of the skull. In our Case 4, the region of the skull is not
defined ; the same is true of Cases 7 and 8. In Case 9, however, the region is the
frontal bone, which is fractured. The case is called " a wound in his forehead,"
P^□^^f°T=l£2 "smashing the shell (p'i-t) of his skull" (IV 19). This
passage shows us that p'ht may designate the os frontale, and if so is likely to have
been limited by the sutures. Not only is this conclusion the correct one, but we even
find the word probably meaning sutures in Case 7, where Gloss A defines the
<?( ° & tpuw nw dnn-t-f, as " that which is between shell and shell of [his skull]."
See the discussion of Case 7, Gloss A. The question might arise whether in our phrase,
" separating shell from shell of his skull," the ancient surgeon might not be referring to
the separation of the outer table from the inner table of the same segment of the skull,
as for example of the os frontale. There seems to be no way to decide this question
from the statements contained in our Case 4. In Case 7, however, " that which is
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:05 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 179 ---
Case 4
153
TRANSLATION AND COMMENTARY
between shell and shell of his skull" is defined as <=»^.^ dhr, " hide " or " skin,"
obviously meaning the cartilaginous suture, and not designating the spongy bone
between the outer and inner tables of the skull.
° , spnc, " fragments." This meaning is not found in the dictionaries but is
quite evident from the inscriptions outside of the surgical use of the word. In the
Annals of Thutmose III we find —^7^7,—^fl."-^ " Fragments (sp-w) of wood
(and) much firewood " (Sethe, Urk., IV, 670, l . 106). Again in the Turin Papyri:
^Ol^^^J^fl. "fragments (sp-w) of firewood " ed. Pleyte and Rossi, VI, 4. With
reference to food, " my fragments " would make even better sense than " my
remainder " in the Book of the Dead (ed. Budge, 189, from Nu 19, 6). The same is
true in the Pyramid Texts (Pyr. 1674d; 551 e; cf. Book of the Dead, Chap. 52, 5).
The surgical meaning " fragments " is quite obvious in our passage in Gloss A, but
is even clearer in Case 5, where it is stated that his skull is in " numerous fragments
(sp-w) which sink into the interior of his skull " (II17).
The following discussion will show that the " fragments " referred to in our gloss
have been detached by the violence of the blow which inflicted the wound, and can
be nothing else but bone.
mn m," stick fast in," " be fixed in " is a phrase which the surgeon draws
from the common use of it to describe a foreign or intrusive body sticking in flesh. One
recalls at once the familiar words in the Tale of Sinuhe: (ft^ ——^ J(
" My arrow stuck fast in his neck " (Sinuhe, B 188-189). Similarly in the autobio-
graphy of Ahmose of El Kab: i_^^®=^ST^TJ>^w f His majesty
discharged) his first arrow, which stuck fast in the body of that foe " (Sethe, Urk., IV,
8, l. 88). The same is said of a spear in the hippo's legs (Naville, Mythe d'Horus,
PI. VI) or of a battle axe in the head of the foe (Abu Simbel, Ptah Stela, l.22). The
Berlin Worterbuch has nineteen examples of weapons " sticking fast in " (mn m) :
the crown, the head, the ribs, the dr-w, the loins (mn-t), buttocks, legs (ynd-t), belly,
neck, nose, and Ihnw. Besides our example in Gloss A, Pap. Smith has one more
example of a foreign substance or body which remains sticking fast in a wound.
Case 28 mentions an instance of surgical stitching which " remains sticking in (mn m)
the two hps of his wound " (VIII20-21). Parallel with this use of mn wi describing
a foreign substance " sticking in " tissue where it does not belong is its use elsewhere
to indicate the natural articulation and attachment of parts belonging to each other
anatomically and functioning together. Of this use of the words mn m there are three
very interesting cases in Pap. Smith.
(!) :?!<&1T1w7^&b;&<1 " Ligaments at the end of his ramus,
which are attached to (mn m) his temporal bone " (III 17).
(2) ^^®jP,T,kiX^~-"The heads of them (clavicles) are
attached to (mn m) the upper bone of his sternum " (XI 28).
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:05 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 180 ---
154
Case 4
THE SURGICAL TREATISE
(8) •! . . - . 7 J££-S-!^Sk JZl "thG . . . . of «* ribs
of his sternum, which were attached (mn m) to his sternum " (XV 4).
Case 28 (VIII 18-19) is difficult to place in the above classification.
The fragments which have been broken away by the blow and remain " sticking
fast" are said to be " in the flesh of his head." This last term means the tissue
exterior to the calvaria as is shown by Case 8, a fracture of the skull inflicted without
injury to the external tissue of the head, which is called " the flesh of his head "
(IV 18) in the commentary explaining " the skin of his head."
-^^S^r^ nbr-n r " (and) do not come away," literally " do not fall to the
earth." The same idiom is found also in Pap. Smith of spittle hanging at the hps of
an unconscious man (III 4), where it might possibly be taken literally, but more likely
means simply " does not come away." In Pap. Ebers a finger nail that is coming
off is said to be ^J^P^T^ " falling to the earth " (Ebers 78, 18). Similarly in
the Shipwreck (l. 58) the hero says of the superfluous food which he found on the
island : ^—iH^ITi " tnrew (some) away " (literally " to the ground," r t').
This use of -==7*^ r " to ^e earth " meaning " away," " off," may be connected with
the use of the same phrase as meaning " completely." See Ebers 91, 12 ; Mutter und
Kind, 1,8; 5, 7 (see also ibid. 8, 4, where the variant r hrw is instructive). In our
papyrus this use of r t ' is found three times (Case 4 as above, Case 7, III 4; and Case 47,
XVII14). This last example is significant for the verb is p ^ dty, "scatter, disappear "
or the like, which entirely precludes any local meaning in r t\ and shows conclusively
that it means " entirely." In Case 41 we find the variant hr t' instead of r t\
Gloss B
II10
Explaining : The swelling which is over it protrudes
B o\\, wr*tten very small, is a later correction inserted above O.
Translation
As for: " The swelling (thb) which is over it protrudes," it means that the
swelling (Sfwt) which is over this split is large, rising upward.
Commentary
This gloss has been fully discussed in the commentary on ySww and thb in the
examination above. It should be noticed that the explanation employs a different
word for " swelling " (Sfwt) from that (thb) found in the quotation to be explained.
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:05 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 181 ---
Case 4
155
TRANSLATION AND COMMENTARY
Gloss C
II10-11
Explaining : (Until) thou knowest he has reached a decisive point
n
Translation
As for: " (Until) thou knowest he has reached a decisive point," it means
(until) thou knowest whether he will die or he will live ; for he is (a case of) " an ail-
ment with which I will contend."
In our translation the clause " until he has reached a decisive point " is far clearer
than in the Egyptian, for we have translated it on the basis of the ancient com-
mentator's explanation. Literally rendered the clause runs : " until thou knowest
that he has reached something," to which our rendering above adds the idea " decisive."
Gloss C shows that all cases receiving the comment, which it explains, are doubtful
cases. It is employed in the following six cases :
Case 4. Gaping wound in his head .. . splitting his skull.
„ 6. Gaping wound in his head . . . smashing his skull.
„ 7. Gaping wound in his head . . . perforating the sutures of his skull.
„ 8. Compound comminuted fracture of the skull, without injury to external
tissue.
„ 21. Split in his temporal bone.
„ 87. Break in the arm, with external wound.
It is possible that the climate of Egypt with its frequent cases of blood poisoning
or infection, whenever an external wound is present, may account for the doubtful
character of a case of a broken arm (Case 87).
^■J^*— is undoubtedly the correct reading. The is joined in ligature with
~£ in a cursive form, but it is quite unmistakable (see Vol. II, Pl . II, l. 11). This
reading makes a good form; see Gardiner, Grammar, § 407.
Commentary
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:05 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 182 ---
156
Case 5
THE SURGICAL TREATISE
CASE FIVE
II11-17
A GAPING WOUND IN THE HEAD WITH COMPOUND COMMINUTED
FRACTURE OF THE SKULL
Just as Case 4 involved a more serious wound than the preceding cases, so Case 5
discusses an injury more dangerous than Case 4. The fracture is such that fragments
of bone have been driven deep into the interior of the skull. The surgeon is unable
to suggest any treatment, and evidently anticipates a fatal issue of the case.
Title
II 11
Translation
Instructions concerning a gaping wound in his head, smashing his skull.
Commentary
All the terms in this title have been discussed in the preceding commentary
on Cases 1 to 4, except the important word " smashing " which remains to be dis-
cussed here.
id, " smashing." This common word appears frequently in Egyptian as the
verb for " to smash," " break." In the Pyramid Texts its word sign, a pottery jar
with a hole smashed in it (Pyr. 491 a), and again a pair of crossed sticks either breaking
each other or the two parts of a broken stick, suggest its meaning very graphically.
The crossed sticks long survived as the graphic determinative of the word, as regularly
in our document. It is used of smashing or breaking the most varied objects, a board,
a pen-case, sealed bolts, a clay seal, or of breaching a city wall. Important for our
treatise are especially the determinative of the broken pot (gc), and the use of the
word for breaking an egg-shell (Pyr. 1969 c; Amarna Sun-Hymn, Da vies, Amarna,
Vol. VI, pll . XXVII). Outside of the medical papyri the word appears for breaking
a head, e.g., P^J^JjS^^dw* " Thy head is broken W) with that knife"
(Book of Apophis, Brit. Mus. Pap. 10188, 80, 1). Similarly it appears to express
the breaking of bones in general in the name of a weapon called : p^"^ i JJ " Bone-
breaker " (Zeitschrift, 18 (1880), 94-95, transliteration as emended for Berlin
Worterbueh). A mortuary demon hailing from Heracleopolis also bore the name
" Bone-breaker " (Book of the Dead, ed. Naville, 125, 9).
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:05 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 183 ---
Case 5
157
TRANSLATION AND COMMENTARY
Surgically the word may designate either (1) a fracture of a bone, (2) a rupture of
a membrane or of fleshy tissue, or (8) the opening of cists and the like by the external
application of medicaments causing the swelling to break and discharge pus.
(1) Fracture of the bone. The known cases are all in Pap. Smith. It is used of
fracture of the skull in all twenty-three times, of which twenty-one are in the four
following cases : 5, 6, 8, and 9 ; of the nose (Case 18) ; of the maxilla (Case 17) ; of
the temporal bone (Cases 18 and 22).
(2) Rupture of a membrane or of fleshy tissue. In Pap. Smith, Case 6, there is an
interesting use of the word to indicate a rupture of the meninges of the brain (II24-25).
Again it is used of the rupture of fleshy tissue overlying a fracture of the bone: in
the mandible (Case 24); in the clavicle (Case 84); in the arm (Case 87); and in the
ribs attached to the sternum (Case 44).
(8) Opening of cists and the like by external applications. In Pap. Ebers such
applications are called ° J^-fl^^?, " medicines for rupturing (id) swell-
ings (and drawing out the pus) " (Ebers 104, 10-11 ; similarly 105, 5 ; cf. also Ebers
28, 2 ; 24, 10; 80, 8 ; Hearst II 14 ; II 10 ; Pap. Berlin 8088, 5, 2 ; 5, 6 ; 5, 7 ;
5, 8 ; 5, 9; 12, 10 ; 18, 7 ; 18, 11-14, 1 ; 18, 8).
The only gloss appended to our case explains the simple term id dnn-t-f, " smashing
his skull," as meaning a fracture so extensive and serious that broken pieces of bone
have gotten into the break and have penetrated deep into the interior of the skull
(Gloss A, II16-17). Our ancient commentator quotes some old authority as affirming
that a id of the skull means that it is broken into many fragments (II 17). This
definition of a id of the skull is useful in aiding us to distinguish between a " split "
(pSn) and a id. It is quite evident that what we would call a fracture of the skull
might be called by the ancient Egyptian surgeon a " split; " while the injury which
he calls a id, literally a " fracture," is what modern surgery would term a " compound
comminuted fracture." In other words the Egyptian surgeon has given the common
word " smash" a specialized and technical meaning, " compound comminuted
fracture." It may be noted as without doubt more than an accident, that in our
treatise id is not applied to any injuries of the bones except those of the head. As we
shall see, when he wished to indicate a simple " break " or " fracture " elsewhere, as
of the arm, he uses a different word, viz., ° hib, " fracture." (See Cases 11, 12, 24,
85, 86, 87, 42, and 44). But as id could be used as a verb meaning " to produce com-
pound comminuted fracture," and we have no such single verb in English, the transla-
tion of id as a verb would involve an interpretation of the term rather than a transla-
tion. Under these circumstances the best rendering for the verb is evidently the
original meaning " to smash," which gives us also the noun " smash," employed above
for " compound comminuted fracture." The appropriation of this common word as
a technical term in surgery did not preclude its older loose or popular application. We
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:05 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 184 ---
158
Case 5
THE SURGICAL TREATISE
find the surgeon in one case calling a " perforation " or " puncture " (thm) of the
skull a id, or " smash " (Case 8, Gloss A, I 24). Grammatically considered id is
probably a participle in our title, parallel with j&n, " splitting " (in the title of Case 4),
and can then only be interpreted " producing compound comminuted fracture."
Examination
II12-14
sic
12
II ""■w-vs
13
Transition
If thou examinest a man having a gaping wound in his head, penetrating to the
bone, (and) smashing his skull; thou shouldst palpate his wound. Shouldst thou find
that smash which is in his skull deep (and) sunken under thy fingers, while the
swelling which is over it protrudes, he discharges blood from both his nostrils (and)
both his ears, (and) he suffers with stiffness in his neck, so that he is unable to look at
his two shoulders and his breast, (conclusion in diagnosis).
Commentary
All the terms employed above have been already discussed in the preceding com-
mentary except the following two :
^ md, " deep," an abbreviated writing as if the scribe was commonly employing
the word. This is, however, the sole occurrence of it in our document. A more
accurate transliteration into hieroglyphic will be found in Pl . II A, l.18 (Vol. II).
ra hrp," sunken " occurs only in this case and in Case 82, where it is explained
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:05 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 185 ---
Case 5
159
TRANSLATION AND COMMENTARY
by comparison with the sinking of a man's foot into plowed ground (XI 8), a graphic
and clear indication of its meaning. It is used twice also in a medical sense in Pap.
Ebers : once of the sinking of the heart from its proper position (Ebers 101, 14-15,
emend dhr to <=J|^«» dh, " sink "); and again of a swelling which sinks under the
fingers (Ebers 110, 5).
Diagnosis
II14-15
SI
J—rc—*■
1.")
gic
Translation
Thou shouldst say regarding him: " One having a gaping wound in his head,
penetrating to the bone, (and) smashing his skull, while he suffers with stiffness in
his neck. An ailment not to be treated."
Commentary
In this diagnosis, which contains only repetitions of the examination, the most
important part is the conclusion, " An ailment not to be treated," which is new. We
call it verdict 8, and a discussion of its significance in this treatise will be found in
the introduction (pp. 46-48). This remarkable verdict is not found in any of the
other medical documents of Egypt, although it occurs no less than fourteen times in
Papyrus Smith. One of these cases (17) has received this verdict by an evident error
of the scribe, as the commentary on Case 17 shows. We have left, therefore, thirteen
instances to which verdict 8 is correctly applied. Of these thirteen, ten contain
no therapeutic suggestions whatever; the remaining three commend certain precau-
tionary and alleviatory measures not intended to cure. Hence the outcome is referred
to in only two cases (6 and 8 a), in both of which it is indicated as entirely uncertain,
by the use of the above discussed clause, " until thou knowest he has reached a decisive
point " (see commentary on Case 4, Gloss C)—a clause which indicates that either
life or death may follow. In these two cases the possibility that the patient may live
is suggested ; in all the other (eleven) cases containing this verdict there is no sugges-
tion that the patient can survive. It may be said, therefore, that, with rare exceptions
verdict 8 indicates a hopeless case.
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:05 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 186 ---
160
Case 5
THE SURGICAL TREATISE
The cases containing verdict 8 are the following :
Case 5. Compound comminuted fracture of the skull.
„ 6. Compound comminuted fracture of the skull with rupture of meningeal
membranes.
„ 7. Perforation of sutures of the skull.
„ 8a. Compound comminuted fracture of the skull without visible external
injury.
8b. Same with rupture of meningeal membranes.
„ 18. Compound comminuted fracture of the bones of the nasal region.
„ 17. Compound comminuted fracture of the maxilla (verdict 8 scribal error).
„ 20. Perforation of the temporal bone.
„ 22. Compound comminuted fracture of the temporal bone.
„ 24. Fracture of the mandible.
„ 81. Dislocation of cervical vertebra.
„ 88. Crushing of cervical vertebra.
„ 87. Fracture of the arm with overlying wound.
„ 44. Fracture of the " ribs of the sternum."
Regarding these cases Dr.Luckhardt remarks: " Such cases were certainly hopeless
in those days, and most of them would be nearly so now." In view of the fact that the
surgeon discusses nine of these thirteen cases without recommending any treatment,
and that in four instances (Cases 5, 6, 8a, and 20) conditions seem to him to permit
only slight alleviatory measures, we can conclude that the inclusion of such a large
number of hopeless cases (about one fourth of the material in the treatise as preserved
to us) is due solely to scientific interest of the surgeon in the observed facts—an
interest which would not permit him to exclude his observations, in spite of the fact
that most of these cases were incurable and hopeless. Indeed at the time of the succes-
sive examinations of these cases it must often have been evident to the surgeon at
once that he could do nothing for the sufferer ; yet he nevertheless continued making
and recording his observations in the same form as for the more hopeful cases which
he could treat. There is here an interest in truth and in science for its own sake,
quite unprecedented and not observable elsewhere in any of the ancient documents
of Egypt whatever the character of their content.
Grammatically considered the words -^-"^""^ offer some uncertainty. ny is
without doubt the form ^\ discussed and first noticed by Gardiner (Proc. Soc. Bib.
Arch., 40 (1918), pp. 5-7). He concludes that it may " best be translated - through
which ' in a relative clause," and thinks that the word " will in itself mean something
like - thereby' or, if the expression be allowed,- therethrough.' " These observations,
based on only four Old Kingdom cases, are undoubtedly on the right track. There is
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:05 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 187 ---
Case 5
161
TRANSLATION AND COMMENTARY
an additional example of this curious ~ ny in the Misanthrope (l.104), where we find
unfaithful friends described as Jl|^pS$,$,7£T^Si9lT' " friends of to-day, not
to be loved." As in the Arabic the passive of even an intransitive verb may be used
to indicate that the action denoted by the verb does not take place, so here, if we
understand mr as a passive participle, we may gain a relative clause literally
meaning " for whom (or " through whom") the act of loving does not occur."
There can be no doubt that our n yrw ny is parallel with the n mr{w) ny of the
Misanthrope. The use of ny in our surgical treatise would indicate that we must
add to the meaning "through which," suggested by Gardiner, also the meaning "for
which " or "for whom." As Gardiner has noticed, in all four of his examples ny is
preceded by a nominal form of the verb. We may therefore look for such a form here,
and possibly regard yrw as a passive participle. In view of the fact that all four of his
examples were from Old Kingdom texts, Gardiner regarded the form ny as " probably
moribund even at the time of the Old Kingdom." This observation is undoubtedly
correct, and we have in our verdict mr n yrw ny a current expression surviving from
a very remote stage of Egyptian medical practice.
With regard to the increasing seriousness of the cases successively taken up by
our treatise, the following glimpse of the successive verdicts will indicate it clearly :
Cases 1, 2, and 8, verdict 1.
Case 4, verdict 2.
Cases 5 and 6, verdict 8.
Treatment
II15-16
Translation
Thou shalt not bind him, (but) moor (him) at his mooring stakes, until the period
of his injury passes by.
Commentary
The case is so serious that the surgeon can prescribe nothing, and makes no remark
suggesting his conclusions regarding the outcome. The gravity of the patient's situa-
tion is indicated in the following interesting gloss (A), which describes how the
fragments of the shattered skull have sunk into the interior of the brain. The
quotation of an old and authoritative surgical treatise by title is of importance in
the early history of medicine. Full commentary on the curious idiom, " moor him
etc.," will be found in the discussion of the treatment in Case 8.
M
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:05 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 188 ---
162
Case 5
THE SURGICAL TREATISE
Gloss A
II16-17
Explaining : Smashing his skull.
17
Translation
As for: "Smashing his skull," it means a smash of his skull (such that) bones,
getting into that smash, sink into the interior of his skull. The " Treatise on What
Pertains to His Wounds " states : "It means a smash of his skull into numerous
fragments, which sink into the interior of his skull."
Commentary
P"^ H, " smash." See commentary on the title of this case.
hnw, " inside, interior," occurs twelve times in our document, and is always
written without the later common determinative n. This is another evidence of the
very early origin of our treatise. Compounded with m, "in," we also find hnw
twelve times more in the recto, and in only two of these is it written with n. In
these two (Case 85, XII7 and Case 86, XII18) there is undoubtedly some difference in
meaning implied by n.
2£'3^ JL, t"w, perhaps meaning " book, roll, treatise, regulation " or the like, is
a rare word. In the well-known passage in the Installation of the Vizier : ^*-°°-a^D
^^^&^Z1^JD®^^^^ " Lo, ifc is a saving which was in the regulation
of Memphis ( = the Memphite ceremonial, t"w), as uttered by the king, etc." (Urk.
IV, 1089, l. 12), Sethe has suggested that t'w must be some long-accepted roll
containing the ancient ceremonial installation as practiced at Memphis (Sethe,
Einsetzung, pp. 14-15). Similarly the statues in crypt 8 at Dendera are made
£1E"=="&11°v*~~Cllli*S?'i " according to the book (t'w) of the sacred glyphs " (Mariette,
Denderah, III 80a ; Duemichen, Resultate, 87 ; Kalenderinschriften, pl. 60, c). Here
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:05 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 189 ---
Case 5
163
TRANSLATION AND COMMENTARY
V'y n mdw ntr must be an ancient " book of hieroglyphs " containing the forms of the
gods as traditionally established. Otherwise the word t'w is unknown outside of our
treatise, in which it occurs three times :
(1) As above in Gloss A.
(2) 1OHk^JL^O^Se^C!! " The - Treatise on What Pertains to
a Wound ' says concerning it " (Case 41, XIV 10).
(8) (]<?^—^-H^~""" The - Treatise on What Pertains to the
Embalmer ' (or " Bandager ") says concerning it " (Case 19, VII 20-21).
In view of the three passages in our papyrus it is highly probable that the word
means a book or treatise. In that case we find the author of our papyrus quoting from
two other treatises, which very interestingly suggest the existence of a literature of
medical science now totally lost to us. It should be noted that in our Gloss A the
possessive/, " his," at the end of the title (" his Wounds ") is very likely to be an
error of the scribe for ^ r-f " concerning it," as in the other two occurrences of the
same title just quoted above. " His wound " is such a common group in our text
that the mistake would be a very easy one.
1f* yry, probably meaning " what pertains to." The word is certainly to be read
yr, not yt. An examination of all three passages in which it occurs will leave no doubt
of the correct reading. It is each time followed by the determinative of the book-roll,
done with care and fullness, not in an abbreviated cursive form. In view of the great
age of our treatise we should consider whether the book roll in this group may not
be an Old Kingdom writing of the word ^ mcZ'-t, " letter," or " document," giving us
possibly the title yry md'-t, " keeper of letters," or " keeper of documents."
This title may be written that is without the determinative of the man. See
treatment of the word by Gunn, Annates du Service, XXV, pp. 251-252. The title
is not, however, written with the 1, as in our text. Moreover the acceptance of this
official title in our ancient book title would make nonsense. It is true that when it
means " what pertains to," our word yry is customarily in the feminine yry-t; but
masculine formations of this kind are not unknown. Compare -f^<?] ymyw,
" interior," literally " the things (masculine) that are in " (Case 12, V 18, and again
Case 22, VIII 11). It is doubtless a word of literary origin, being much like the de
and nepl of Latin and Greek essay titles.
(],— yn is several times employed in our treatise to introduce the subject after an
infinitive as so commonly elsewhere in Egyptian writings, but with modifications in
sense, due to the unusual surgical and physiological connections, to which we are
unaccustomed. For example :
" without a gaping of (yn) one (hp of a wound) away from the other (hp)" (110).
M 2
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:05 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 190 ---
164
Case 5
THE SURGICAL TREATISE
ii
" A rending apart of (yn) two members " (X 12). See also 111.
In the last two of these examples the word introduced by yn is obviously the
so-called " logical " object, whose place after yn is doubtless due to the lack of voice
characterizing the Egyptian infinitive, as it does likewise the Semitic infinitive. The
last two examples would be more intelligible to us if the noun had followed the
infinitive at once as an objective genitive.
A GAPING WOUND IN THE HEAD WITH COMPOUND COMMINUTED FRACTURE
OF THE SKULL AND RUPTURE OF THE MENINGEAL MEMBRANES
Of the five wounds of the head thus far taken up by the surgeon, this one is far the
most serious. It is in content also the most important we have met, revealing the
fact that the surgeons of this remote Egyptian age were acquainted with the appear-
ance and a number of important characteristics of the brain, which is mentioned in
this case for the first time in any ancient document. Its reference to the meningeal
membranes is also the earliest mention of this envelope of the brain. Unfortunately
it is not possible to determine the exact meaning of all the terms employed, although
the general sense of each section of the case is in the main intelligible.
CASE SIX
II 17-111 1
Title
II17-18
18
Translation
Instructions concerning a gaping wound in his head, penetrating to the bone,
smashing his skull, (and) rending open the brain of his skull.
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:05 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 191 ---
Case 6 TRANSLATION AND COMMENTARY 165
Commentary
The last clause contains important new terms involving the internal anatomy of the
head, which will be found discussed in the following commentary on the examination.
Examination
II18-22
19
/a
1-=—a \ £s
21
22
6 8*WP^"-"£as2
WAVA\ "> CT. A I -
a Inserted from the duplicate text (IV 10), which shows that the scribe has omitted it here.
» Compare IV 11.
Translation
If thou examinest a man having a gaping wound in his head, penetrating to the
bone, smashing his skull, (and) rending open the brain of his skull, thou shouldst
palpate his wound. Shouldst thou find that smash which is in his skull [like] those
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:05 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 192 ---
166
Case 6
THE SURGICAL TREATISE
corrugations which form in molten copper, (and) something therein throbbing (and)
fluttering under thy fingers, like the weak place of an infant's crown before it becomes
whole—when it has happened there is no throbbing (and) fluttering under thy fingers
until the brain of his (the patient's) skull is rent open—(and) he discharges blood from
both his nostrils, (and) he suffers with stiffness in his neck, (conclusion in diagnosis).
Commentary
IT 11 nflf'!/, "rending open," is a word of well-established meaning, although
the writing here employed is not the usual one. The reading is rendered certain by
the gloss (II 28) which furnishes the following parallelism :
Text of examination : Pt^^^TlllMP'0
undoubtedly ng' originally, and we have here the common word m ng', " to
open, break open " and the like. It is written in our treatise in three different forms :
(1) Y115 (2) sTM ! (8) Ux (same m Ebers 40, 14)- The change of ^ to 1H
seems to have produced a verb Illae Inf., making a feminine infinitive. Cf. "Jj^
ng-t, X 12; and ^^j^ ng-t " break," in a dam (Eloquent Peasant, 277) ; similarly,
Ebers 89, 7. The medical and surgical use of the word is confined to our treatise and
Pap. Ebers, where it is once employed to indicate an opening or discharge in a case
too obscure to assist us (Ebers 89, 7). It is again used for a similar internal trouble
in Ebers 40, 14. The meaning in Pap. Smith is quite obvious, and may be based on
the usual significance of the word outside of the medical documents.
^(] pts 'yd, " brain," is a word of extraordinary interest, being the earliest refer-
ence to the brain anywhere in human records. In the known documents of ancient
Egypt it occurs only eight times, seven of which are in Pap. Smith. The eighth case
is in Pap. Ebers (65, 18-14), which commends " the 'yd of many w^-fish " as a recipe
for preventing gray hair, when rubbed on the head. Preceding this delectable remedy
in the same document is a decoction of the horns of a black ox, made into an ointment
for the head, and likewise constituting a perfect preventive of gray hair. We may
conclude therefore that the whr-&sh was a black fish, whose head gear, like that of a
black ox, might furnish a powerful protector of black hair on the human head. This
sole occurrence of the word 'yd in Pap. Ebers did not, however, suggest to anyone that
the word meant " brain " and it remained for many years a unique occurrence of an
enigmatic word, or was understood as viscera—a common ingredient of recipes in
ancient medicine. Indeed it may designate organic substances of a viscous or semifluid
consistency like marrow; for in five out of the seven occurrences of the word in Pap.
Smith it is followed by the phrase " of his skull," as if to render the word 'yd more
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:05 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 193 ---
Case 6
167
TRANSLATION AND COMMENTARY
specific. " Marrow of the skull" would thus be the earliest designation of brain. It
occurs twice, however, in our treatise, without this modifying phrase (II24 and IV1).
There can be no doubt about the meaning " brain." It is a substance or an organ
disclosed and "rent open" (II18; II 19) beneath a compound comminuted fracture
of the skull. When the surgeon probes with the fingers he feels " a throbbing and
a fluttering,. . . like the weak place of an infant's crown before it becomes whole "
(II 20-21). In a gloss explaining the exposure of the 'yd, we are informed that " the
fracture is large, opening to the interior of his skull, (to) the membrane enveloping
the 'yd, so that it breaks open his fluid in the interior of his head " (II24-25). Perhaps
the most convincing item of the surgeon's description is his comparison of the con-
volutions of the 'yd with the rippling surface of metallic slag (II20). No one can doubt
that he means the convolutions of the brain. The word occutb in our treatise only
in Cases 6, 7, and 8.
^l^i m WB'w, "corrugations," belongs to that interesting class of words
drawn by our surgeon from the range of common observation, and employed as a
descriptive term intended to render outward and physical form and shape more clear
and vivid than would otherwise be possible. This is a method still employed in
description by modern science. Our word has various applications. In architecture
its feminine form means the crenellations along the top of a battlemented wall; e. g.,
Sethe, Urk. IV, 889 ; see also Mariette, Abydos, I, 52,17. In the Pyramid Texts it is
used of the ribs of a booth: ^J^fTimm (Pyr. 2100b), which of course produce
a rippling along the top of the roof. This meaning was already known to Brugsch,
W&rterbuch, II, pp. 885-886. See discussion of the word by Sethe, Gott. Toten-
buchstudien, in Zeitschrifl, 57 (1922), p. 82, commentary on III 22.
The gloss which explains this term (Gloss B, II 25-III 1) makes it quite clear that
it is employed to describe the convolutions of the brain, which are compared to the
rippled surface of metallic slag forming on the top of molten metal. It is a term drawn
from the craft of the coppersmith, and graphically suggests the external appearance
of the convolutions of the brain.
The passage fortunately occurs twice and the duplicate (IV 10) contains the
preposition £1] my before urnn-w, which in Case 6 has been omitted by error of the
scribe. The id itself is said to be " like those corrugations " found on the surface
of molten metal, meaning doubtless that the convolutions of the brain are exposed
at the bottom of the id, or within it.
\_*h rdn% with the determinative '-<-, is unfortunately an unknown word,
occurring, so far as I know, in no other document known to us. The Berlin Worter-
buch files contain no other examples. The Sign Papyrus gives —ff* rdn as the
value of —, which must equal -'-< or «=» having the related value rnd. The Middle
Kingdom Coffins contain ^~^v cdn-t, seemingly an armlet or collar (Cairo, 28024; in
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:05 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 194 ---
168
Case 6
THE SURGICAL TREATISE
Lacau, Sarcophages, Vol. 1, p. 58, and especially Lepsius, Denhnaeler, II 147b). The
determinative is probably an armlet or bracelet, but might possibly be confused with
a melting pot or crucible in the coppersmith's workshop. I have therefore conjectured
" crucible copper " meaning " molten copper " as the rendering of ^j^*^/-4--' It is
defined in Gloss B as " metal which the coppersmith pours off before it is Tforcedl into
the Tmouldl, because of something foreign upon it like Twrinkles.!" In spite of the three
uncertain words in this passage, it is evident that " <"dn-i-metal " is something that
gathers on the surface of molten copper. It has " corrugations," meaning the wrinkles
and folds which are characteristic of the appearance of slag, and whatever the exact
and specific meaning of rdn-t, it must in some way characterize the metal as molten.
The n before cdn-t is so high above its group that it was probably corrected in by
the scribe. At first sight it looks like the negative n owing to the fact that (] in the
line above it comes down into it. The lower end of this vertical stroke has been cut
off by the detachment of a surface fibre of the papyrus, producing the appearance
of the dot over the horizontal stroke of —. It is however the genitive —, as in IV 10,
where it is quite clear.
SrT^1^"ra«=ara'=,S yT>'t y™ nhdhd should be compared with ?;T;4&Hit&Q
yh-t ym nh, of II 8-4, on which see commentary s.v., Case 4, II 8-4.
To^^^i^T^^0^^ nhdhdnp'p', " throbbing (and) fluttering." Although
these two interesting words are peculiar to our treatise, and are found nowhere else,
the root meanings, the formation and the context combine to make them fairly clear
to us. Both verbs are of course the familiar formation displaying biconsonantal
reduplication with a prefixed n. As in the Semitic grammar the reduplication com-
monly indicates intensity and repetition. In Egyptian the formation is especially
common with verbs of motion. Np'p' is the easier of the two words. It is of course
built up on the root 31', " to fly," and np'p' obviously means " to flutter,"
describing the sensation experienced by the fingers of the surgeon as he lays them on
or even into the exposed brain which " flutters " with the pulsations received from the
heart—pulsations which Gloss A describes as identical with those discernible on
" the weak place of an infant's crown before it becomes whole " (II 21). Nhdhd is
built up on the root hd as in hd, " to thrust " and the like, which is used for
example of a bull, thrusting with his head. In the mastaba reliefs it appears over
two bulls fighting. There seems to have been a verb formed from hd by prefixing n,
which is used of a bull in the Pyramid Texts (897a) and similarly in the name of a bull
(Pyr. 1767b, cf. also London Med. Pap. 18, 8).1 The reduplicated form nhdhd of course
1 This nhd seems to have no connection with |-q "^Jjj nhd of our treatise (III 14), which appears
as a variant of ^'Pj^j) 'Ai, " weakness, feebleness, faintness" and the like. This is doubtless the
7a i of Berlin Pap. 3038,10, 1 ; or To<=»*—" London Med. Pap. 13, 3 and 13, 4-5 ; or
7^<=\5^ of Pap. Ebers 100, 21.
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:05 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 195 ---
Case 6
169
TRANSLATION AND COMMENTARY
signifies " to thrust repeatedly," and may be rendered by " throb." The use of the
determinative of speech is in accordance with the usage of the medical papyri in
terming the pulsation of the heart its " speaking " (mdw).
" weftk place." This word is peculiar to our treatise, and is not found in
any other known Egyptian document. Whether the final t is the feminine ending or the
third radical is uncertain. With regard to its use and meaning we note that it is used as
a variant of To n^ , for m Case 7 the text of the examination has 7a nhd
(III 14), while the quotation of the same passage in the gloss has (IV 4). In the
same way our text in Case 6 has 3^2^ (1 1 21), while the corresponding passage
in the duplicate text (Case 8) has ,2,^ hd, which is doubtless an error for nhd.
Evidently 'ht and nhd are synonyms. In the explanation (Case 7, Gloss J, IV 4) it is
pretty evident that 'ht must mean something like "weakness, feebleness, exhaustion."
This leads us to compare our word with ^,2,^]) " to ^e weak, feeble " or the like
in VII 21-22, q.v. If this comparison indicates actual root relationship, the t in our
word may be a weakening from d. On the basis of the meaning " weakness " for 'ht,
the rendering "weak place " for the fontanel of an infant would seem satisfactory.
?ra^® whnn, " crown of the head." This rare word is known only in a recipe for
the head in Papyrus Ebers and Hearst (Ebers 86,17,18 and 21 = Hearst II, 2 and 4).
These passages in Ebers and Hearst do not identify the portion of the head designated
by the word. It occurs only twice in Pap. Smith, both times to designate the region
of the fontanel of an infant's head, thus identifying with precision the portion of the
head included in the meaning of the word. In the Ebers and Hearst papyri the
determinative of whnn is always (5 times) ©; whereas in Pap. Smith it is once S
(II 21), and the other lime (IV 11) it is quite different from that used for tp, d'd',
or dnn-t, and may possibly be read t=], a chest. Indeed our word whnn is likely
to be connected with the term ra[=] hn, " chest," actually applied to the head
several times in our treatise (e.g. Ill 11, 21 and rV 1).
n rd-n-f (''nd-n-f), "before it becomes whole," more literally rendered,
means " it has not (yet) become whole." There is no temporal adverb " yet " in
Egyptian, and it must regularly be understood from the context (see my note in
Untersuchungen, II, Heft 2, p. 11, ed. Sethe). There is here what Gunn calls " an
implicit restriction of the time-field " (Syntax, p. Ill), although he does not cite
this particular construction in which has the force of " not yet."
The duplicate of our passage exhibits the interesting variant: — (for -a. ) ^j*J „*~.
"before it is knit together" (IV 11), where the verb " to knot, to jom to-
gether," appears instead of ^^s=," to be whole." It is possible in II 21 to trans-
literate ; but the «= and the lack of a cross stroke distinguishing «—< from
»=» in hieratic forbid transliterating ^ for ^ in II 21. Grammatically the form
(in IV 11) may be pass, in tw, or Mmt-f with negative = " not yet." See p. 208.
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:05 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 196 ---
170
Case 6
THE SURGICAL TREATISE
hpr-n-f. The connection and rendering of the following context is exceedingly-
difficult. The rendering "When it has happened," referring back to the completion
by the fontanel of the process of becoming whole, is perfectly good syntax, and the
interpretation of «-* n as the negative n is justified in our very passage in the
duplicate text which employs for -ju. in the temporal clause, »~~cy3Q r^n*°- n ls-tj,
" before it is knit together." We must also consider nhdhd and np'p' as impersonal
Sdm-f forms ; if they were nominal or substantive in character, the form of the negative
would be ^ nn; although Gunn notes the use of -a. n for *** nn in such sentences
as late as the Nineteenth Dynasty (Syntax, p. 195, 8). "As soon as" or "when" is
the usual meaning of dr in Pap. Smith. It occurs eight times, and in seven of these
it means "as soon as" or "when" (dr alone three times: II 21; IV 11 ; XIII 9:
yr dr four times : II 6 ; III 7 ; IV 10; VIII 4); but this "when" evidently has
the force of " until " when it is preceded by a negative (II 21 ; IV 11).
The meaning seems to be that " when it has happened," that is when the fontanel
has become whole, the throbbing and fluttering it displayed are no longer visible until
the skull is broken open. The ancient anatomist is calling attention to the fact that
the pulsations once visible in the fontanel, though they are no longer visible when it
grows over, are nevertheless still going on under the calvaria, and are disclosed when
it is ruptured.
Diagnosis
II 22
Translation
[Thou shouldst say]: " An ailment not to be treated."
Commentary
Full commentary will be found in Case 5, which contains the same verdict (II15),
and in the introduction (pp. 46-48).
The significance of the fact that the surgeon has entirely omitted any further
diagnosis than this unfavorable verdict, declaring the case untreatable, is, of course,
that for the practicing surgeon such a verdict serves alone as his diagnosis. It classifies
the case as belonging among those for which the surgeon can suggest no remedy, no
treatment; and such a classification is in itself a sufficient diagnosis. The long descrip-
tion and list of observations in the examination, however, show that the brief diagnosis
by no means ends the surgeon's interest in the case. Neither does this fatal verdict
necessarily end the surgeon's concern for the patient, nor his effort to alleviate the
injured man's sufferings. It is here followed by alleviatory measures.
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:05 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 197 ---
Case G
171
TRANSLATION AND COMMENTARY
Treatment
II 22-28
23
- I I I
_ _ SIC
Translation
Thou shouldst anoint that wound with grease. Thou shalt not bind it; thou
shalt not apply two strips upon it: until thou knowest that he has reached a decisive
point- Commentary
nsr, rendered above " anoint," is a word entirely unknown elsewhere. The
rendering " anoint " is a guess based on the context.
The other terms employed in the treatment have been discussed in the com-
mentary on Cases 1 to 5. It is evident that the treatment suggested is purely allevia-
tory. The injury is so serious that neither bandage nor strip (adhesive tape) shall be
applied to it, and the surgeon is simply to await the issue of a serious or hopeless case.
Gloss A
II28-25
Explaining : Smashing his skull (and) rending open the brain of his skull.
Translation
As for: " Smashing his skull, (and) rending open the brain of his skull," (it
means) the smash is large, opening to the interior of his skull, (to) the membrane
enveloping his brain, so that it breaks open his fluid in the interior of his head.
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:05 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 198 ---
172
Cash 6
THE SURGICAL TREATISE
Commentary
This extraordinary gloss discloses the fact that our ancient Egyptian surgeon had
already discovered the meningeal membranes of the brain. Two difficult words in
the explanation need more precise definition.
"membrane." The determinative is somewhat different in form
from the usual hieratic sign for a skin: but it is different from \ (bnr, see Moeller,
Palaeogr. I, 297 Illahun) and also from \ (rd, ibid., I, 298, Prisse). Hence there seems
to be no other possible transcription than the skin ^. When we reflect that ntn-t is
followed by the words " enveloping his brain," there can be little doubt that ntn-t
should be rendered " skin " or " membrane." Outside of our treatise the word is
found only once, in a list of parts of the body with the sternum and the breast
(mnd) and followed by " belly " and " navel " (Mutter und Kind, 4, 5). It is not
likely that it has any connection with the ~^~^^ ntnt, "filth" or similar. On
the determinative see (Annates du Service V, 284-285). Cf. also Blackman.
Zeitschrift, 47 (1910), 118 and Gardiner on Participial Formations in Rev. tig. 2 ser.,
2, pt. 1-2, p. 52. The t after rrf-t would indicate that ntn-t is a feminine noun from
a root ntn.
Z2£orii'," fluid " is evidently the same as 7"V nh (Pyr. 1965 a) and ^Z<=> (Pyr-
686b). The determinative of the latter example is the human mouth spitting or drooling.
Very important in this connection is the form " water " (Pyr. 25c). Compare
also the noun ^^?f (Pyr. 1965 a). Elsewhere this word occurs five times in our
papyrus (XIII 19 ; XIV 15, where m is an error for w ; XIV 16 ; XVII 9 ; X 20),
written with S instead of h, the interchange so often observable in the Pyramid Texts,
and another evidence of the great age of our treatise. It is explained in a gloss (XIV
15-16; consult commentary) as meaning to "issue,stream forth, flow out." As a noun
it means " exudation," " fluid," and the like. The noun ""^ ii found designating
some fluid secretion (in Mutter und Kind, 1,2: 8, 1 et passim) which is adjured to
"runout" (raj^T^ 1,2-8 or ra^^^e;^ 8, 4). Cf. Oefele, Zeitschrift, 89 (1901),
pp. 149 ff. The reference in our passage is possibly to the soft or viscous consistency
of the brain itself. Dr. Luckhardt remarks that this description " most certainly
refers to the cerebrospinal fluid by which the brain is surrounded." ,®. "his head "
is abbreviated to the determinative. It is impossible to determine whether the surgeon
means " head " (tp or d'd') or " skull " (dnn-t).
* The uncertain word-sign, possibly "<s=^, with pds-t-f, does not throw any light on the meaning.
Grammatically the verb is a idm-t-f form with preceding negative, meaning " not yet," " before."
I have rendered it as a passive although Gardiner notes lack of " certain examples with pronominal
subject" (Grammar, 404). Our pronoun may indeed refer to the smith and we might render
" before he TforcesT (it) into, etc.," but this leaves us without an object.
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:05 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 199 ---
Cask 6 TRANSLATION AND COMMENTARY 173
Gloss B
II 25-111 1
Explaining : Those corrugations which form in molten copper,
mi
Translation
As for : " Those corrugations which form on molten copper : " it means copper
which the coppersmith pours off (rejects) before it is rforcedn into the rmould1, because
of something foreign upon it like rwrinkles1. It is said : " It is like ripples of pus."
Commentary
This explanation makes it quite certain that the surgeon is comparing the convolu-
tions of the brain to the slag which gathers on molten copper. He employs some of
the terms of the coppersmith's craft, which, however clear they may have been to
medical students on the Nile 8,500 years ago, are far from clear to us. When we
recall that the technical terms employed in his autobiography by Benvenuto Cellini
to describe the successive steps of pouring the cast of a statue are very difficult to
understand, although written in a language of which we know more than we shall
ever know of Egyptian, it is to be expected that a comparison drawn from the ancient
coppersmith's processes will not be wholly clear to a modern reader. The first difficult
word is pds-t-f. The only verb pds now known is the one occurring five
times in our treatise and written JL}j e.g., V 10. It means "to stamp, trample,
knock in, smash in " and the like, and applies exclusively to injuries to the face,
especially the nose in Cases 11 and 12. It might conceivably designate here the act
of " forcing " the molten metal into the mould. See foot-note, preceding page.*
■=» r, " on " is a significant preposition in this connection. It is to be compared
with the use of the same preposition with members of the body, like " at (r) the
nose," or " at (r) the throat," meaning " near " or " upon," that is on the surface, as
of a piece of jewelry. The word here suggests the idea of something on the surface
of the copper, before it is poured off.
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:05 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 200 ---
174
Case 6
THE SURGICAL TREATISE
An examination of the gloss as a whole discloses two processes (1) the pouring
(wdh); (2) the act of pds, which is done with or into an ^\ n-t- This last is probably
an f-t, that is a "stone vessel," meaning a stone mould. It is well known that
the copperfounder's moulds in ancient Egypt were commonly of stone, as they were
likewise in early Europe. Pds m r'-t is therefore likely to be the term for " pouring
into," or " forcing into the mould." This would designate the final process with
the clean metal, from which the floating impurities have been separated. This act of
" forcing into the mould " is thrust into our text as a parenthesis, between the
" pouring off " (wdh), that is the rejection, of the slag, and the words indicating the
reasons for rejecting it (r yh-t hr-f nh'). These two stages of the process may be made
clear in the rendering thus : " It means copper
(1) which the coppersmith pours off (rejects) . . . because of something foreign
upon it;
(2) before it is forced into the mould."
The rendering of the preposition r should be more literally " against " in the
sense of " to avoid."
Dr. Grapow has suggested another rendering of interest, which connects r yh-t
with n pds-t-f m r^t, thus: " before it stiffens in the mould to (become) something
(a cast), its surface (hr-f) is rough likepyw." The existence of the inseparable phrase
yh-t ym nh,, however, indicates conclusively that we have a similar phrase here, thus :
ItT^-li\* (ni i)
The parallelism of the two phrases cannot be doubted, and it is therefore inadmis-
sible to separate hr-f from the preceding yh-t.
°1<?i m py-w, which has been rendered " wrinkles " above, is a word otherwise
unknown, unless it be connected with the feminine □QQq (Ebers 89, 9), employed in
very obscure context, of no value in determining the precise meaning.
"*=>11°i?i or 0|flQm' T* (or "pus." In our passage (III 1) the more
probable reading is decidedly ryt, but the word does not occur in hieroglyphic, and it
has always been read tyt in Pap. Ebers. The word occurs five times in our papyrus,
and with one exception (XIII12), one can hardly doubt the reading with r (see III 1 ;
XIII 4 ; XIII 6; XIII 11). A careful examination of the writing of the word in
Pap. Ebers leaves little if any doubt that we should always read r. Compare the form
of the first letter in Ebers 105, 9, with the r in "Y*□ <? r'-pw in the very next line (Ebers
105, 16). Very decisive in favor of r are the following : Ebers 104, 10; 104, 11 ;
104,14; 104,15; 104,16; 105,12; 105,19; 107,9; 107,10; 107,16. We shall
therefore read the word ryt. The reference must be to pus drying in ripples about a
suppurating wound or open sore.
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:05 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 201 ---
Case 7
175
TRANSLATION AND COMMENTARY
CASE SEVEN
III 2-IV 4
A GAPING WOUND IN THE HEAD PENETRATING TO THE BONE AND PER-
FORATING THE SUTURES
This interesting case is the longest in our treatise. The surgeon had met it a number
of times and had found that, following upon the conditions disclosed by the first exami-
nation, the case might further develop along two different lines, one favorable, the
other unfavorable. The discussion of the case therefore contains two examinations
following the first, that is, three in all. In construction the discussion is consequently
more complicated than any case we have yet met. The three examinations are
marked off and introduced as follows :
First Examination
The usual formula omitted by error of the ancient scribe. (Ill 2), " If thou examinest a man having, etc.
Second Examination
^^^^^"J^ (III 8), " If then, thou findest that man, etc."
Third Examination
(]<=4^'*S<'^<=*'5^ (III 18), " If however, thou findest that man, etc."
This arrangement shows us that (]^^^^, usually meaning " If however," is
employed as a correlative to introduce both the alternative groups of symptoms. The
same will be found at the end of Case 47. It is obvious that the two clauses : Yr hot
. . . Yr hot . . . must mean : " If on the one hand . . . ; if on the other hand . . ."
The correlative relationship of these two clauses is probably sufficiently well indicated
by the above rendering : "If then . . . ; if however, ..."
The arrangement of the discussion is as follows :
I
Title (III 2).
First Examination (III 2-5).
First Diagnosis (III 5-6) with verdict 2.
First Treatment (III 7-8).
II
Second Examination (III 8-12).
Second Diagnosis with verdict 8 (III 12-18).
No Treatment.
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:05 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 202 ---
176
Case 7
THE SURGICAL TREATISE
III
Third Examination (III 18-14).
No Diagnosis.
Third Treatment (III 14-15).
All three of these stages of the case exhibit symptoms which would suggest tetanus.
Dr. Simon Flexner informs me, however, that if the tetanus infection had reached the
brain, there was no possibility of recovery. In I, however, our surgeon regards the
conditions as indicating possible recovery; but his efforts to alleviate the patient's
suffering and to relieve the tensely drawn ligaments of the mandible by hot applica-
tions, while the wound in the skull receives no attention, would not essentially affect
the patient's condition. In II the case takes an unfavorable turn, the patient is
feverish, flushed or livid, and the only diagnosis offered by the surgeon is verdict 8,
followed by no suggestion of treatment. It is evident that if the symptoms set forth
in II follow upon the first examination, a fatal issue is inevitable. In III, however,
the surgeon finds the patient pale, as contrasted with the flushed or livid face in II,
and although exhaustion is noticeable, there is evident hope. The surgeon adds no
diagnosis or verdict after the third examination, but he proceeds at once with an effort
to feed the patient with liquid food, introduced through his clenched teeth by means
of a wooden device ; while the sufferer is to be maintained in an upright position upon
two supports of sun-dried brick until the doubtful outcome is decided. No attempt is
made to touch the wound.
The long discussion of the case is followed by no less than ten important glosses,
denning and explaining the various terms employed in the text. They take up what
seem to be the sutures, which are well defined (Gloss A); the rigidity of the liga-
ments of the mandible (Gloss B) ; these ligaments themselves (Gloss C) ; the patient's
perspiring face (Gloss D); the tense ligaments of the neck (Gloss E) ; the color terms
applied to the patient's face (Gloss F); the odor of the wounded crown (Gloss G);
the definition of " crown," literally " chest of the head " (Gloss H); description of
the distorted features (Gloss I); and the exhaustion of the patient (Gloss J).
Perhaps the most interesting item in this case is the description of the sutures,
which seem to appear here for the first time in the history of science.
Title
III 2
2
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:05 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 203 ---
Case 7
177
TRANSLATION AND COMMENTARY
Translation
Instructions concerning a gaping wound in his head, penetrating to the bone,
(and) perforating the sutures of his skull.
Commentary
The title introduces a new term, the " sutures " (tp'to), which will be found
explained in the commentary on Gloss A, pp. 185 f. All the other terms have been
explained in the discussion of the preceding cases.
Examination
III 2-5
■A
Translation
[If thou examinest a man having a gaping wound in his head, penetrating to the
bone, (and) perforating the sutures of his skull], thou shouldst palpate his wound,
(although) he shudders exceedingly. Thou shouldst cause him to lift his face ; if it is
painful for him to open his mouth, (and) his heart beats feebly; if thou observe
N
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:05 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 204 ---
178
Case 7
THE SURGICAL TREATISE
his spittle hanging at his two lips and not falling off, while he discharges blood from
both his nostrils (and) from both his ears ; he suffers with stiffness in his neck, (and)
is unable to look at his two shoulders and his breast, (conclusion in diagnosis).
Commentary
The surgeon's purpose in having the patient lift his face is probably to disclose
the stiffness in the neck, although this is not immediately mentioned. In view of the
hanging spittle it may be that we should separate wn r'-f from the preceding and
connect it with the following context thus : " his mouth being open, etc." Such
a rendering, however, would seem to require r'-f ten, with the verb in the pseudo-
participle.
" His heart beats feebly " is an interpretation of the literal meaning : " His heart
is weary to speak," or perhaps " too weary to speak." The use of the verb I^^J
md-t, " to speak," as a designation of the " beating " of the heart has been noted
already in Case 1. In view of the preceding reference to difficulty in opening the
mouth, we should perhaps render literally: "his heart ( = "his spirit" or "his
mind ") is too weary to speak," or " for speech."
(]^^ yS, " spittle," has been discussed in the examination of Case 4 in connection
with the word (] (5§ ySw. The scribe has written the suffix/ so far forward that it seems
at first sight to be in front of the determinative giving us a word ySf. In the
writing of /, however, the scribes are accustomed to use a good deal of latitude in
placing the letter, and the context shows clearly that we have here yS, " spittle," and
the suffix. It is followed by the verb " fall," but in view of the phrase " at his two
hps," which immediately follows " fall," accompanied by the statement that the
spittle does not fall, we must render here " hangs," that is " falling " but not com-
pletely. It may be that we should render -=>7^ r hterally here " to the ground,"
as this rendering quite fits the preceding context; but r f is often an idiom for
" completely," of which I have intended to bring out the force by the adverb " off."
It is quite clear that the surgeon means, as indeed he hterally says: " falling at his
two hps, but not falling completely."
All other terms will be found discussed in the preceding commentary on Cases 1
to 6.
The scribe, or possibly the surgeon himself, has omitted the usual introduction of
the examination, which we have placed in brackets and prefixed to the translation
above. In view of the fact that the text of the examination, which we have now gone
through, does not mention the perforation of the sutures of the skull, the most im-
portant feature of the injury, it is obvious that it must have been mentioned in the
omitted introduction. The omission in this case was the more easy in view of the
fact that the words omitted would have been a repetition of the title for the most part.
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:05 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 205 ---
Case 7 TRANSLATION AND COMMENTARY 179
First Diagnosis
III 6-6
mwm
I I
\\ \\
Translation
Thou shouldst say regarding him: " One having a gaping wound in his head,
penetrating to the bone, (and) perforating the sutures of his skull; the cord of his
mandible is contracted; he discharges blood from both his nostrils (and) from both
his ears, while he suffers with stiffness in his neck. An ailment with which I will
contend."
Commentary
The injury is shown to involve the anatomy and pathology of the sutures and the
mandible. The terms employed in these connections are explained by the ancient
surgeon in the glosses (A and B) and will be found fully discussed there. The surgeon's
statement, " the cord of his mandible is contracted," is based upon the observation
in the examination that the patient suffered pain when he opened his mouth, and
possibly indicates the presence of tetanus. This is a good example of induction. See
the introduction (pp. 49 ff.), and also the commentary on this verdict in Case 4 (II 6).
II-
Fibst Treatment
III 7-8
□
N 2
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:05 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 206 ---
180
Case 7
THE SURGICAL TREATISE
Translation
Now as soon as thou findest that the cord of that man's mandible, his jaw, is
contracted, thou shouldst have made for him something hot, until he is comfortable,
so that his mouth opens. Thou shouldst bind it with grease, honey, (and) lint, until
thou knowest that he has reached a decisive point.
Commentary
JLJL yr -r' "as soon as," see aDOve Case 4 (II 6), and below Case 20 (VIII 4).
The use of both words for " mandible " and " jaw " here would indicate that the
second word (read wgwt), which is a later and more common term, is an old gloss which
has crept into the text. It was intended to explain the other word cr-t, which, as we
shall see in Gloss C, was a very archaic term. On the use of the dual here see also
Gloss C.
SlTT^S^lJ. yh-t $m, " something hot " (compare commentary, Case 81, X 19),
is obviously a hot application, intended to relax the rigid muscle, " until he is com-
fortable so that his mouth opens." After this the surgeon is to bind on a softening
application as long as the case remains uncertain, or until the critical point is reached.
The anatomical terms will be found discussed in the glosses on this case, and
everything else in the commentary on the preceding cases (1-6).
Second Examination
III 8-12
m
10
9
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:05 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 207 ---
Case 7
181
TRANSLATION AND COMMENTARY
u
a This sign resembles r ; for similar writing of d see Moeller, Palaeogr. I, No. 115=Pap. Westcar,
6, 7. It is clearly d in our text, IV 2.
Translation
If, then, thou findest that the flesh of that man has developed fever from that wound
which is in the sutures of his skull, while that man has developed ty from that wound,
thou shouldst lay thy hand upon him. Shouldst thou find his countenance is clammy
with sweat, the ligaments of his neck are tense, his face is ruddy, his teeth and his
back [-], the odor of the chest of his head is like the bkn (urine) of sheep, his mouth
is bound, (and) both his eyebrows are drawn, while his face is as if he wept, (conclusion
in diagnosis).
Commentary
When a further examination discloses the persistent continuance of a fever already
discovered in a previous examination, the surgeon says :
" If, then, thou findest that man continuing to have fever " (Case 47, XVII 12);
whereas the disclosure of a fever for the first time as the result of a second or later
examination is expressed as above in our present case (III 8-9).
<*l\ ^"=3 ty'. As a symptom this word is known only in our Case 7 and does not
occur outside of Pap. Smith. The context is of little assistance in ascertaining its
meaning, and it will remain for the pathologists to suggest a guess. The Q(]^«—
or ty, and ^e,^, tyw of Pap. Ebers (55, 11 ; 88, 14; 88, 5), which is an
unknown ingredient of prescriptions, furnishes no help. This is probably the same
as -H^**- ty' in 24, 16. Cf. also ty"w m Kahun Med. Pap. 8, 26 ; 1, 16,
and 8, 8. Gardiner calls my attention to a passage in a magical text among the
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:05 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 208 ---
182
Case 7
THE SURGICAL TREATISE
unpublished Ramesseum papyri which refers to the birth of Set and then proceeds :
-A-^Ja*—TrZ^l^^l " before he comes forth (from the womb) to the world,
ty,-." Unfortunately the loss of the immediately following context leaves the mean-
ing of ty' obscure. Dr. Luckhardt queries " convulsions " or " delirium."
" His face livid " (" red " or " flushed ") is to be noted as a symptom differentiating
the patient's condition from the second group of alternative symptoms (III 18-14)
in which the patient is pale.
" His teeth and his back " are left without any observation of their condition
attached, and we can only suppose that the scribe has again been guilty of an omission.
£1Sm1 my yfy-t, " as tf," *s discussed in Case 4 in the commentary of the exami-
nation (II 8).
All the other terms will be found taken up in the commentary on the glosses attached
to this case.
Second Diagnosis
III 12-18
13
Translation
Thou shouldst say regarding him : " One having a gaping wound in his head,
penetrating to the bone, perforating the sutures of his skull; he has developed ty\ his
mouth is bound, (and) he suffers with stiffness in his neck. An ailment not to be
treated."
Commentary
All of the terms employed in this diagnosis have already been discussed in the
preceding commentary. It would seem that the essential item in the new diagnosis
is the enigmatic ty (see above, p. 49). The symptoms disclosed by this second exami-
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:05 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 209 ---
Case 7
183
TRANSLATION AND COMMENTARY
nation are so unfavorable that the case is regarded as hopeless, and the surgeon closes
his diagnosis with verdict 8. See full commentary on this verdict in Case 5 (II 14),
and also the discussion in the introduction to the treatise (pp. 46-48). A.s a result
no treatment is suggested.
Third Examination
III 18-14
Translation
If, however, thou findest that that man has become pale and has already rshown
exhaustion1.
Commentary
In these second alternative symptoms the patient displays paleness, as contrasted
with the first alternative symptoms in which he is hot, perspiring and flushed. There
is some uncertainty in the exact rendering of the second symptom " shown exhaus-
tion," which will be found discussed in Gloss J.
Following these symptoms the surgeon records no further diagnosis or verdict,
but proceeds at once to a treatment which would indicate that the second alternative
symptoms are somewhat more favorable than in the preceding (second) examination.
Third Treatment
III 14-15
J\ <=>OI I I
I
IS
<=> i| """^ ., On I
r> I «= J ^O
o fl <—> \ ^=^_ I ahmm I a o a
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:05 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 210 ---
184
Case 7
THE SURGICAL TREATISE
Translation
Thou shouldst have made for him a wooden brace padded with linen and put into
his mouth. Thou shouldst have made for him a draught of w/A-fruit. His treatment
is sitting, placed between two supports of brick, until thou knowest that he has reached
a decisive point.
Commentary
It is unfortunate that this interesting treatment is not taken up in the numerous
glosses appended to this case. The patient's mouth, it will be remembered, is " bound "
and difficult to open. Here we find he is to be fed on liquid food, and without doubt
for the purpose of introducing this food some kind of a wooden device is placed in his
mouth. Meantime he is to be kept quiet and remain sitting, as in Case 4. A number
of terms need explanation.
S^I^^-T^Ti rn$'-t n-t ¥, " a wooden brace," literally " a brace of wood." The
surgeon regards this term as in itself sufficient and furnishes no explanation of its
construction or method of use. We must conclude that it was sufficiently well known
to need no explanation. This is, however, the sole occurrence of the word in the
medical papyri, and as a result we must conjecture the exact character of the device,
and the manner in which it was applied. It is possible that the word is identical with
i^t md'-t, some kind of " chisel" or " graver " (Leyden, K 15, Leemans, Mon. fun.,
pl. XXIV; Schiaparelli, Libri dei funerali, T. 70, lowest row, No. 2; cf. also Griffith on
md'-t, in Proc. Soc. Bib. Arch., 21 (1899), p. 270). It is likely to be the same word
as """w md'-t, mentioned only in Book of the Dead (Budge, 158 A, from Nu 20, 80-81)
as part of a fowling net, and being made of wood is doubtless one of the posts or braces
which support the net. It is true that dmd-t is preferred by some as the reading of
(e.g., Sethe, in Borchardt, Sahure, Vol. II, p. 76). The question then arises : how
was the " wooden md'-t" used in our Case 7. It was padded or wrapped in linen for
some purpose—doubtless to make it less hard and harsh before insertion into the
mouth. Was it simply a wedge (cf. " chisel " above) or means of holding the mouth
open, like the modern surgeon's pieces of cork, while the liquid food was being
administered ? Dr. Grapow makes the interesting suggestion that it was a tube
intended for the introduction of food by suction on the patient's part. In Pap. Ebers
a tube used for inhalation is a hollow reed, which would seem much more suitable for
use in our case also. I am not sure that the preposition ® tp should be rendered
" into," as I have done. Its exact force is difficult to grasp, and much depends upon
understanding it correctly.
P^J 5EE ^M)," draught," is a rare word, found elsewhere only in Berlin Med. Pap.
3088, 9, 4, where it designates a draught employed in reducing fever.
/fs vfh is an unknown fruit or grain, which we see piled up in the granaries or
magazines of the Empire, e.g., in the tomb of Rekhmire (Newberry, Bekhmara,
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:05 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 211 ---
Case 7
185
TRANSLATION AND COMMENTARY
XII). It must have been a nutritious product, as it seems to be used in our Case 7
as food rather than as medicine. Cf. Oefele, Zeitschrijt, 89 (1901), p. 150.
The treatment " sitting, placed between two supports of brick " is found also in
Case 4, although with less precision regarding the manner of use. The two supports
evidently rose on each side of the patient, probably to the height of the arm-pits,
where they stopped, thus supporting the patient under his arms. In this case also,
as in Case 4, the treatment is quiet. The patient is to be given liquid nourishment
of the lightest character, and supported in an upright position until the critical point
is reached.
Gloss A
III 15-16
Explaining: Perforating the sutures of his skull.
16
Translation
As for: " Perforating the sutures of [his skull]," it means what is between shell
and shell of his skull; and that the sutures are (composed) of hide.
Commentary
This explanation probably discloses the earliest mention of the sutures in the
history of anatomy. What our surgeon calls " shell " is obviously the " squamae "
of the skull, as they are known to the modern anatomist. The original meaning of
the term (p'k-t), that is a " potsherd," or the "shell" of a turtle, will be found dis-
cussed above in the commentary on Case 4 (Gloss A, II 8-9). The □2SC]^<?I °, tp'no,
" sutures," are said to be "what is between squama and squama of his skull," a very
good identification of the suture joint. In view of the separative r it is evident that
should be read ymytw, " between," obviously an archaic writing of this pre-
position. The force of win with n is somewhat vague; whether we should render
" belong to" or "composed of" does not greatly modify the surgeon's obvious
intention of indicating that the sutures are not of the bone so much as something
between the bones in the nature of skin or hide, which is evidently the ancient surgeon's
designation of cartilage. The word dhr, " skin " or " hide " seems hke an
excellent designation of the tough, hide-like tissue which fills the sutures before
complete ossification has taken place. The term tp'-w, "suture," is probably itself
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:05 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 212 ---
186
Case 7
THE SURGICAL TREATISE
a word with some such meaning as " cartilage." In our treatise it is found only in
Case 7, where each time (six passages) it seems to designate the sutures; but it
occurs also five times in Pap. Ebers, where it probably designates : (a) " goat's
gristle " as an ingredient of prescriptions (Ebers 80, 11-12; 88, 17; 85, 9); (b) the
tough gristly rind of the iCn-tree (Ebers 82, 6 = Hearst IX, 4), and (c) some affection
of the head, perhaps a thick, tough dandruff (Ebers 86, 15 = Hearst II l).1 These are
probably special applications of a more general term with the meaning " cartilage "
or the like. When the limiting phrase " of the skull " is added, tp'to then designates
the cephalic sutures.
The only doubt or question about the identification of the sutures in this passage
lies in the interpretation of the phrase " between shell and shell of his skull." This
phrase may be understood as designating the meandering seam of the suture
separating one squama of the skull from another; but it might also be interpreted
as referring to the spongy bone which in places lies between the outer and inner
plates or tables of the skull. The objection to this latter interpretation lies in the
ancient commentator's final remark, namely, " the tp'-w are composed of skin "
(or hide), a statement hardly likely to be made regarding the spongy bone. We may
therefore regard the identification of the tp''w with the sutures as fairly certain.
The genitive & nw " of " after tp'tw in our gloss makes it quite clear that the
scribe has inadvertantly omitted dnn-t, " skull " in quoting from the diagnosis
Explaining : The cord of his mandible is contracted.
17
18
1 There is also a feminine of the word, tp'-wt, occurring four times in Ebers (32,20; 103, 5; 106,
1-2; and 42, 20). It is a botanical term, except possibly 42, 20.
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:05 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 213 ---
Case 7
187
TRANSLATION AND COMMENTARY
Translation
As for: " The cord of his mandible is contracted," it means a stiffening on the
part of the ligaments at the end of his ramus, which are fastened to his temporal bone,
that is at the end of his jaw, without moving to and fro, so that it is not easy for him
to open his mouth because of his pain.
Commentary
This remarkable discussion of the muscular articulation of mandible and temporal
bone should be compared with the related account of the articulation of the same
two bones in Case 22, Gloss A, and also with the ancient surgeon's indication of the
situation of the temporal region in Case 18, Gloss B. The statement which our gloss
is intended to explain contains only four words in the Egyptian, and of these, three
are archaic : " cord " (w'-t)," two jaws " (rr-ty), and " is contracted " (htr). The first
is explained in the next gloss (C); the other two in this one (B). „c
htr, "is contracted." The archaic noun from this root, ff-^^ htr-w,
" cords," is found in the Pyramid Texts referring to the cords with which a ladder
is bound (Pyr. 2080 b); but the verb is exceedingly rare and unknown before Greek
times when it appears as an archaic revival, e.g., PJj^$j,*i^*—"■fl^^E^'i^i
" The four courtiers twist (or bind, htr) a cord of reeds " (Mariette, Denderah, IV 20
= Duemichen, Kalenderiiischriften, pl. 104). The verb J^J^, htr, "to catch, seize,
bind," etc., used of already captured birds is probably the same verb as ours, cf.
Gauthier, Inscr. dddicatoire, 86.
^^^jf^ rr-ty-fy, " his mandible," is a very ancient and rare word of curious
application, architectural and anatomical, much like our words " buttocks " and
" buttress," both of which are covered by the single Egyptian word rr-ty. In a
developed form it meant one side, that is the doorpost and half of the lintel, of a door-
way. See for example the writing j^^^, with half the doorway as determinative
(Coptos Decree of Pepi II, Weill, Dfarets Royaux, p. 25). The same determinative
is found in the Pyramid Texts with rrw-t (Pyr. 292 d), and hence we find a right and
left rrw-t (Book of the Dead 125, Budge, from Nu 24, 28-29; cf. Gardiner, Journ. of
Egypt. Arch., TV, 1917, p. 147). Written ^^ff with the entire gateway as deter-
minative it occurs in the Pyramid Texts (1740 b). Designating the whole gateway
it was probably at first a dual, " two sides of the door." In this connection it passed
over, perhaps in a derived form, to designate the council that sat in the city gate.
Anatomically it appears already as early as the Pyramid Texts written «£4 to
designate the " buttocks " of an ox (Pyr. 1849 a) or other animal. Similarly it is
used of the buttocks of a man in the Coffin Texts with reference to the anus :
Vfl^^^^ "I defecate with my «W" (B 1, l. 850 = Lacau, Textes relig.,
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:05 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 214 ---
188
Case 7
THE SURGICAL TREATISE
p. 72 and p. 108). In the same age it was applied to the two arms of man or woman
in the Coffin Texts (ibid. I.e.; compare also ibid. p. 77, 81; p. 110, LXIII, 5 ; p. 78,
XXVII, 81, and pp. 186 and 209). In our treatise it is employed twelve times to
designate the mandible, and characteristically appears six times in the dual. This dual
does not mean the upper and lower jaw ; but refers to the two sides of the mandible,
as is demonstrated by the passages where the scribe has written the determinative of
the dual twice, both times depicting the mandible, for example in IX 4 and IX 5,
thus : ^J- IQ writing the dual determinative of dpt-wy, " two lips," however, the
scribe regularly indicates both the upper and lower lip, thus: <=>. If in the case of
our word rr-t he intended to designate the upper and lower jaw, he would have indi-
cated each in the determinative, just as in the case of the two lips. This employment
of a dual to indicate the mandible because of its two branches is known as early as
the Pyramid Texts, where we find ^^^J (^Jr- 80 a). In our gloss <W is explained
by the word <?^—<? wgwt, which is the common and current word for "jaw,"
meaning, as the determinative shows, the mandible. Wgwt " jaw " is likewise used
to explain rr-t in Gloss C (III 18). As we noticed above also (III 7), the scribe has
inserted the common current word wgwt " jaw " as an explanation after the archaic
rr-t, thus: ^^ZJ't" " his two rr-t, his jaw."
(]—" yn. See commentary on Gloss A, Case 5 (II17), pp. 168 f.
^Sj mt-w, " ligaments," is explained in the next gloss by the ancient commentator ;
for full discussion see commentary on Gloss A, Case 1. In our passage here it is
evident that the surgeon is referring to the musculus temporalis, which is attached to
" the end of his ramus " (coronoid process) and is " fastened to his temporal bone."
It has been customary to attribute the Egyptian's knowledge of human anatomy to
the familiarity of the embalmer with the bodies he was eviscerating and embalming.
Here, however, we find the surgeon familiar with a muscle of the head which was never
touched by the embalmer. His knowledge of it could have come only from dissection
and from treatment of wounds.
ph-wy, " end," is commonly employed in our treatise for the end of a bone,
or the limit or margin of a region or organ. The phrase " end of his ramus " occurs
in three other passages, Case 22 (VIII 10, 14) and Case 25 (IX 8). See the dis-
cussion of ph-wy in the commentary on Case 12, Gloss A (V 21).
l^K~°K!i> ^ " ramus." See full discussion in Case 22, Gloss A (VIII 14)
and compare Case 8 (IV 17).
~ ny. The force of this particle is not clear in this connection. See discussion
in Case 5, verdict (II15). If we render ny " thereby " (its usual literal meaning), we
must conclude that ph-wy is here not prepositional in force, and then translate:
" stiffening on the part of the ligaments, and (also of) the back (or end) of the ramus
thereby."
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:05 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 215 ---
Case 7
180
TRANSLATION AND COMMENTARY
mn m, " fastened in," has been explained in commentary on Case 4
(119).
H^<^ gm', " temporal bone." See full discussion in Case 18 (VII 9, and 18-14).
-^TJLJiT' Vi-t yn-t, " moving to and fro," literally " taking away, (or) carrying
to " has been discussed by Gardiner, Journ. of Egypt. Arch., I, p. 104, note 8.
(]ra^<. yh, " pain," has been discussed above in commentary on Case 8 (I 28). If
the patient is suffering from tetanus, which has infected the brain through the wound
in the skull, there is no possibility of recovery, as Dr. Simon Flexner informs me, and
the verdict which follows the observation of this symptom (III 6) should have been
the hopeless one (verdict 8).
Gloss C
III 18
Explaining : The cord of his mandible.
4-
O <=>i~Jj \\
Translation
As for: "The cord of his mandible," it means the ligaments which bind the end
of his jaw, as one says, " the cord " of a thing in (or as) a splint.
Commentary
«>,-t, " cord," is an archaic word of great rarity. It will be found in an
example from Greek times above in the commentary on Gloss B (III 16). In our
treatise it occurs only in Case 7. It is evidently a simpler form of the better known
w'w'-t, "cord," an ancient ceremonial word occurring only in the temple
foundation ceremony of " stretching the cord."
Both " mandible" and "jaw" are here written in the dual—a writing discussed
above in Gloss B (III 16). There is intelligible reason for its use here, because the
temporal muscles are indeed a pair, one on each side.
The colloquial phrase at the end for explaining w'-t does not make the matter
very clear to us. It was evidently some current expression, the full force of which
escapes us.
sS, " splint," is a new word, the correct understanding of which is at first not
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:05 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 216 ---
190
Case 7
THE SURGICAL TREATISE
easy. In three cases it is obviously an external appliance of linen for holding in place
the fractured bone. These cases are :
Case 85, broken clavicles ;
Case 86, a broken arm (humerus) ;
Case 87, the same with a wound over it.
It should be noted that in these three cases the surgeon is charged as follows:
" Thou shouldst make for him two sS of linen " (XII12). This linen device is therefore
something made by the surgeon himself. In all cases where the device is mentioned
it is in pairs. In the use of a pair of sS, the surgeon is charged as follows : " Thou
shouldst apply for him one of them both on the inside of his arm, (and) the other of
them both on the under side of his arm." The phrase " the inside of the arm "
C^nfr-j^J) is a common one meaning " embrace " (noun). We cannot doubt that
the two sS of linen were applied, one in the hollow of the elbow, the other on the
opposite side of the arm, and that they were long enough and rigid enough to serve as
splints. They are always said to be " of linen." The only ancient Egyptian splints
as yet recovered were excavated by A. C. Mace in a Fifth Dynasty cemetery at Naga
ed-Deir in Upper Egypt about a hundred miles north of Luxor. They have been
carefully examined by Dr. G. Elliot Smith and described by him in The British
Medical Journal, Vol. I (1908), pp. 782-784. These splints, in one case of wood, in
the other of bark, were bound about with linen before being applied. On the wooden
splints this bandaging is still preserved. Now the phrase " of linen " may conceivably
be loosely employed in our papyrus to designate wooden splints covered with linen ;
just as the Egyptians spoke of things in their inscriptions as being " of gold,"
when only overlaid with gold. Another possibility is conceivable, namely, that these
" splints of linen " were stiffened with plaster or gum, forming a cartonnage. The
mortuary craftsmen were accustomed to shaping masks, pectorals, and the like to
conform with the body. These craftsmen of the cemetery were moreover regularly
furnishing this kind of equipment to the surgeons (see Case 9, IV 21), and in view of the
fact that cartonnage was shaped to the human body when dead, it would have been
an easy step to apply it to the broken limb of a living patient. Hence our " two splints
of linen " may have been the earliest known casts, like those employed in modern
surgery. It is noticeable that our treatise prescribes only two splints, whereas Elliot
Smith found three on the forearm and four on the femur (op. cit.). Modern native
village practice still employs only two, continuing the tradition of 8,500 years ago.
Again our word appears in two other cases, where it would seem to designate
a tampon or swab for cleansing clotted blood from the interior of the nostrils (Cases
12 and 14). The difference between this usage and the one discussed above (Case
85-87) is evident. Obviously the two are quite different devices of linen. Both
are used in pairs ; but the first is made by the surgeon himself and applied externally to
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:05 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 217 ---
Case 7
191
TRANSLATION AND COMMENTARY
serve as a splint; while the other is a swab or plug for insertion into the nostrils.
We are dealing, therefore, with two different things. Moreover, it will be remembered
that in Case 11 the nostrils of the injured nose are cleansed, not with sS-wy,
but with d$m (?)-wy. Otherwise the treatment is identical with that in Cases 12
and 14. Note the following comparison :
Case 11
" Thou shouldst cleanse (it) for him [with] —epj. Thou shouldst place
two (other) —'j3! saturated with grease in the inside of his two nostrils "
(V11-12).
Case 12
" Thou shouldst clean out for him the interior of both his nostrils with —ep!
... Now afterward thou shouldst place "^j*^^-—'x'j saturated with grease and put
into his two nostrils " (V 18-19).
Case 14
" Thou shouldst make for him —ejr1j (and) thou shouldst clean out all
coagulation of the blood which has formed on the inside of his nostril " (VI 9-11).
In Case 41 (XIV 11-12) the form ho$, indicating some action of heat or
fever, has no connection with our word iSm. The text in Case 11 raises the ques-
tion whether the cleansing swab should not in all three cases be sSm, which
the scribe in Cases 12 and 14 has momentarily confused with the linen splint sS.
It is much to be doubted that there is any word sS, " swab," " plug," or " tampon."
In conclusion then, the two linen devices under discussion seem to be: (a) sS,
usually ~l\ sS-mj, " two splints ; " (b) > Urn (?), often »| &$m{?)-wy7" two
swabs."
Returning now to Oloss C, sS, if properly rendered " splint," is a perhaps better
designation of the broad, flat temporal muscle than " cord." On the other hand it
may be noted that our scribe seems to have trouble with the words for these linen
devices. He has inserted the word where it evidently does not belong in Case 12
quoted above, and we may raise the question whether he has not made a similar
mistake here, perhaps using sS, when he really meant p^^ iSd, " bandage,"
which suits the requirements of the passage here in our gloss very much better.
The surgeon employs the phrase " end of his jaw " here as about the same in mean-
ing as " the end of his ramus " in Gloss B (III 17).
The entire gloss is an illustration of how limited our knowledge of Egyptian
is, whenever we are called upon to deal with highly specialized terms; and even
when the ancient commentator has furnished us with a definition we are often
unable to understand the terms he uses in explanation.
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:05 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 218 ---
192
Case 7
THE SURGICAL TREATISE
Gloss D
III 18-19
Explaining : His countenance clammy with sweat.
Translation
As for: "His countenance clammy with sweat," it means that his head is a
little sweaty, as (we say), " A thing is clammy."
Commentary
[j5|"^<* is an error of the scribe in quoting ^(^l"^<#- (HI 10), mhnt, " counte-
nance," a rare and ancient word. In referring to the color of the face in III 10, the
surgeon employs the common J hr. The explanation of mhnt would indicate that it
might mean more than merely the face.
J^3k1?EE b'y-w, " clammy," is again a rare word of which the only related
example seems to be J ^^ (] b-y, " pool " or " body of water " (Golenischeff
Glossary =Pap. Hood, l. 10, in Maspero, Etudes egyptiennes, v. 2, pp. 1 ff.), which
may be connected with the well-known JJ^ by'," celestial ocean." It was a word
insufficiently familiar to the Egyptian reader of 8,500 years ago, and needed explana-
tion. Nevertheless it seems still to have been used in one current expression quoted
by the ancient commentator at the end.
Gloss E
III 19-20
Explaining : The ligaments of his neck are tense.
20
Translation
As for: " The ligaments of his neck are tense," it means that the ligaments of
his neck are stretched stiff by reason of his injury.
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:05 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 219 ---
Case 7
193
TRANSLATION AND COMMENTARY
Commentary
<=s=iSL1(]^ dwn-y, " tense " is a very common word, most often referring to the
human body and its parts. It is doubtless for this reason that the surgeon purposes
to indicate that in his use of the word it designates something special and abnormal
and not the usual dwn, so commonly applied to parts of the body. Hence in the
explanation he adds the word nht, " stiff," indicating an extreme stretching, like that
when the word dwn is employed for the stringing or stretching of a bow (e. g., Pyr. 678 b).
This was the more necessary in view of the fact that there was a medical use of
the word indicating the " stretching " of contracted muscles to a normal condi-
tion. Pap. Ebers contains a recipe entitled : ^"^^^-A.^,^", ] iP^^^iFE^
" Another (recipe) for the stretching (dwn) of contractions and the softening of stiffness "
(85, 5-6). Devaud also calls attention to ) °f (ibid. 87, 6).
All other terms will be found discussed in the preceding commentary.
Gloss F
III 20-21
Explaining : His face is ruddy.
Translation
As for : "His face is ruddy" (tm£), it means that the color of his face is red, like
the color of tw^*i-fruit.
Commentary
The significance of this passage turns on two color designations. It is well known
that ancient color names are exceedingly difficult to bring out with precision or to
render with exact modern equivalents. To this day the Arabs, for example, will
cover a wide range of colors with one term, and when an Arab guide tells you a hill
is /**\ you may think of it as being any color from green to black. Our treatise
furnishes valuable material for defining the two colors employed in the above
explanation.
o
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:05 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 220 ---
194
Case 7
THE SURGICAL TREATISE
^^J^ft tmi, " ruddy " is evidently a color, prevailingly red or reddish. This is
shown by a gloss in Case 46 :
" As for : - There is no ruddiness (tmi) upon it;' it means there is no redness upon it "
(XVI15-16). This conclusion is confirmed by another important gloss in Case 41 :
* \ p^<- «hh : ,-kP-fao,;,
" As for : - Its two lips are ruddy (tmi),' it means its two lips are red like the color of
the tmd-t-tiee " (XIV 12-18). We learn also from this example that tmi is a color
designation drawn from a tree of some kind, although it is impossible to identify it.
There seems to be no other occurrence of the tree in the Egyptian documents unless
we recognize it also in the «=|p^«- tmi of the Dream Stela (Urk. Ill, 68), but
this passage is of no assistance in identifying the tree. Besides the three glosses
above the word occurs eight times more in our treatise. It designates the colors of
the following:
the human face, Case 7 (III 10 ; III 20);
a swelling, Case 16 (VI19);
cists or the like on the breast, Case 89 (XIII 5) ;
the two hps of a wound, Case 41 (XIII20 ; XIV 12-18);
the "heads of the ribs of the sternum" when dislocated, Case 48 (XIV 22-XV 1);
absence of tm^-color in a swelling on the breast, Case 46 (XVI 2).
The emphasis on red in the first two glosses quoted above suggests " ruddy " as
an approximately correct rendering. Its use in Case 46, the last example cited in
the above list, would indicate that tmi sometimes is neutral, meaning simply " color ; "
and as we say of a pale face that it lacks color, so the Egyptian might say it had no
tmi. And when we say this we mean by " color " red ; but this negative meaning
of " color " will not fit our Gloss F, where some positive color designation must be
implied.
Dr. Luckhardt adds the following interesting remark :
" I am inclined to the view that the color meant is the one medical men have in
mind when they say that the person is - cyanotic '. It is a mixture of a red and a blue
with the blue more in evidence, particularly as the ' cyanosis ' increases in severity.
The purplish discoloration in this condition is due essentially to a deficient oxygenation
of the blood."
H""**^," , yrtyw " blue." Like tmi this color name is derived from a plant, more
specifically presumably from its fruit, as we say " orange; " or from its flower as we
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:05 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 221 ---
Case 7
195
TRANSLATION AND COMMENTARY
say " violet." We find it in festive garlands in the Mut Ritual (Pap. Berlin 8058,
18, 4). It is employed as an ingredient in recipes in Pap. Ebers 80, 5 ; Pap. Hearst
IX 5 ; and Pap. Berlin 8088, 5, 2.
As a color designation it appears as the name of colored linen as follows :
In addition to green linen at Dendera (Duemichen, Resultate, 26, XIII).
In addition to red (ydm) and an uncertain color at Edfu (Rochem. I, 126).
In addition to red (ydm) (ibid.).
In addition to white and red (ibid., I, 418).
In addition to red (ibid., I, 289).
In addition to white, green and red in Room 18 at Dendera (Duemichen, Resultate,
28 -=Mariette, Denderah, II 1 b).
All the above are from Greek times, but it is found in earlier examples of colored
linen, as follows :
In addition to green and red at Deir el-Bahri (Naville, Temple of Deir el-Bahari,
pl. 180, with five chests). The above examples alone would by comparison indi-
cate that yrtyw means " blue," notwithstanding its occurrence over red ^UJi in the
sarcophagus of Sebek-o (Berlin 45 ; Mitth. Orient. Samml. IX, p. 8).
In a relief at Dendera four calves led by Ptolemy IV are marked J (green), ^
(red), /3 (black), and f (white). In the accompanying text they are called f|J (white),
| (green), "5* (red) and • (yrtyw). Here yrtyw corresponds to the well-known word
for black in the preceding list, as dark blue much resembles black. The yrtyw-dye,
according to an inscription at Dendera in Room 6, was made of ^Q^^ Wn w'd,
" hesh wcn," which seems to have been a needle-wood, growing in Syria (Mariette,
Denderah, I 72 c - Duemichen, Tempelinschriften, Vol. 2, pll. XIX, 8); but this may
have been a blue dye called yrtyw with its color meaning, and therefore having no
botanical significance. Gardiner concludes that yrtyw may mean simply " color "
(Zeitschrifi, 47 (1910), p. 162).
In the medical papyri the use of the word to designate color is found only in our
treatise and in Pap. Ebers. It seems actually to designate the contents of a pus cist
of some kind (Ebers 105, 11 ; 105, 8), and again to call such content " like yrtyw "
(104, 7). This might refer to the cloudy bluish color of discolored pus. It is used
nine times in Pap. Smith, as follows :
To describe a hue mingled with the color of a ruddy, flushed or livid face, Case 7
(III 20-21).
To describe the hue of the two lips of a wound which are " like the color (yrtyw) of
the tm^-tree," Case 41 (XIV 18 ; see commentary on tmi above).
Yrtyw also appears in Pap. Smith in connections which would indicate that it
sometimes means simply "color," e.g.: ofo^^, ° ^Nl^jE^—^ " tbe
O 2
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:05 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 222 ---
196
Case 7
THE SURGICAL TREATISE
shell, the color being like the egg of an ostrich " (Case 9, V 1). Similarly in Case 19 (VII
20), the yrtyw of an inflamed eye is said to be like f]^"^, ° ,25^ P,^, " yrtyw of the
S'i-plant," evidently referring to the color of the fruit or flowers of some unidentified
plant. Again in Case 46 Gloss B contains the following explanation :
Ignoring the obscurities in the passage, it is obvious that " their yrtyw " is rendered
in the explanation by " their skin " or " their hue " (XVI 14-15). In such a con-
nection yrtyw must mean something like " tint." It is such a shade of meaning as
this which makes it possible to say : 3^^,(1. I^^^JfTi " their yrtyw is hot,"
where it must mean something like " surface " (Case 41, XIII 22).
To sum up in conclusion, yrtyw originally means a fruit or blossom of uncertain
identity, presumably bluish in color. It then became a color designation, indicating
a dark hue, verging into blue, and thus came to indicate blue linen. In some way it
also gained the meaning " color, hue, tint," or even " surface." We may compare it
with our use of " carnation," which may designate a flower, a color, the hue of flesh,
both the color laid on by an artist in painting flesh, and in art criticism sometimes
having a meaning not unlike " surface; " although the derivation of the term
" carnation " is not at all parallel with that of our Egyptian word.
^tfj pr-t, "fruit," lacks the phonetic complement; but we meet the same diffi-
culty if we read f^j rwt, perhaps the same as 7, T*, " pigment," " color,"
which occurs in hieroglyphic (e. g. Mariette, Abydos, I 81 a).
Gloss G
III 21-IV 1
Explaining : The odor of the chest of his head is like the bkn of sheep.
Translation
As for : " The odor of the chest of his head is like the bkn of sheep," it means
that the odor of his crown is like the urine of sheep.
Commentary
This gloss is intended to explain the unfamiliar word J^o bkn, which is unknown
anywhere in Egyptian documents outside of our treatise. The genitive after bkn
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:05 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 223 ---
Case 7
197
TRANSLATION AND COMMENTARY
has led to the omission of the final — of the word itself, as the scribe copied the
excerpt from III 11. Whether a wound of the head like this one customarily exhales
such an odor would be an interesting question for experienced surgeons of to-day.
It may be noted that the wordO/W, rendered " sheep " above, really means " small
cattle," including a number of varieties of both sheep and goats.
Gloss H
IV 1-2
Explaining : The chest of his head.
a In r A'w the scribe at first wrote r hw and then corrected the error by writing ^ over <?
and adding <?.
Translation
As for: " The chest of his head," it means the middle of his crown next to his
brain. The likening of it is to a chest.
Commentary
The explanation is intended to make clear the word j^=i " chest " as applied to
the head. This application of the word " chest " to the dome of the skull is exactly
parallel to the German " Gehirnkasten." Our own designation " chest " for the
region under the thorax is a similar example of the use of the word to indicate a
capacious container and protector of organs. The region of the head thus designated
in our treatise is defined as the V/ urpwt, " crown," the situation of which is graphi-
cally pictured in the writing of the word with the horns of an ox.
As in the case of whnn (IV 11), the hieratic determinative of hn is different from
that employed with tp and d'd' (" head ") or dnn-t (" skull "). This determinative
is consistently given this special form in all four passages where it occurs (III 11 ;
III 21 ; IV 1; TV 2). Furthermore, an examination of the above six passages shows
clearly that the determinative of hn is quite different from that of whnn. The deter-
minative of hn in our treatise is always (4 times) to be transliterated c=j; that of
whnn is once « and once probably c=3. See p. 169.
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:05 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 224 ---
198 THE SURGICAL TREATISE Case 7
Gloss I
IV 2-4
Explaining: His mouth is bound, both his eyebrows are drawn, while his face
is as if he wept.
□ ©
□ o— □
4
■ This sign is inserted above the line as a subsequent correction by the scribe in red ink.
Translation
As for: " His mouth is bound, (and) both his eyebrows are drawn, while his
face is as if he wept," it means that he does not open his mouth that he may speak,
both his eyebrows are distorted, one drawing upward, the other drooping downward,
like one who winks while his face weeps.
Commentary
P^IJ(]day Sdy, " distorted," or " drawn." In the list of symptoms from which
this is quoted, it is written with a sign which resembles r. Nevertheless we must
read d. It is written clearly d in our gloss, and the name of the god P<==4pK (Mariette,
Mastabas, D 19, and Palermo Stone, First dynasty, Year x + 11), also written with
a jackal as in our text above, likewise shows that we must read d. Such a verb is
unknown elsewhere, and its meaning is determined exclusively from this gloss, in which
the explanation renders the significance of the word sufficiently clear.
£1SiTi my yfy-t' " as wn^ ^e foun(i discussed in the examination in Case 4, II8.
\ l^T^k VH, " distorted." It occurs also in the form ]^<?^ H (Ebers 108, 7). The
verb originally means " to wound," or " to injure." It has also the meaning " to twist,"
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:05 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 225 ---
Case 7
109
TRANSLATION AND COMMENTARY
or "to distort," applying especially to facial distortion. In the Book of the Dead
we read that when Re addressed his followers f " his mouth was dis-
torted " (Budge, 115, from Nu 18, 5). Gardiner also calls my attention to Zeitschrift,
57 (1922), p. 8*, 14 for a further example of distortion of the mouth ; and to the
causative " i-yHy," " pervert," in Eloquent Peasant B 1, 99. A similar medical
meaning is evidently to be found in our treatise, in its only other use of the word,
to indicate the " diverting " of fever till it passes off (Case 47, XVII18-14).
■"*"□"©— . . . —' . * . ' kterally " making a case of (drawing upwards), (and)
a case of (drooping downwards)." Such a use of sp is common enough, e.g., the acts
of extortion forbidden in the laws of Harmhab.
P^^, dfft, "drawing." The meaning has been surmised from the context. No
such verb is known from any other example. Its opposite a k'p literally means
" to cover," referring to the covering of the eye by the drooping lid and eyebrow,
and hence the above rendering " drooping."
o j^*3*-" Irm, " to wink." The meaning of this word has been successfully cleared
up by Spiegelberg (Zeitschrift, 54 (1918), p. 184). The act involved unpleasant implica-
tions among the Egyptians and the deceased denies in the Book of the
Dead (Naville, 125, 26 Aa). Cf. also Coffin Texts (BecueU de Trav. 29, p. 145).
£V<=>^<L'ffi" " his face weeps." For another example of this see Newberry,
Rekhmara, pl. IV 5. The t is probably an error of the scribe. The form must be
a pseudo-participle, Sd masculine, singular.
Gloss J
IV 4
Explaining : He has become pale and has already shown exhaustion.
0 (•w^J&w^x.^'11^
a This ^ has been inserted in red ink as a subsequent correction, and a second ^ which had
been written incorrectly after h has been canceled with an oblique stroke of the pen.
Translation
As for: " He has become pale and has already Tshown exhaustion!," it means
becoming pale, because he is (a case of) " Undertake [rhim!], do not desert [Thiml],"
in view of the exhaustion.
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:05 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 226 ---
200
Case 7
THE SURGICAL TREATISE
Commentary
The scribe or commentator has again quoted inaccurately. At the end of the cita-
tion he has written ^1p^j 'ht, whereas the text excerpted has nhd. We may
conclude that the two words are approximately synonyms. The meaning " weakness "
rests on the use of the word 'ht to designate the " weak place," the fontanel on the
crown of an infant's head (see commentary on II 21, Case 6), and from this meaning
the rendering " exhaustion " is not far removed. Prom this rendering one may infer
that wd-t 'ht means "to show exhaustion." The use of the infinitive following fw,
" to have done " is common.
P f1^© d-hd-t, " to become pale," would be an intransitive use of an otherwise
transitive verb, but whatever the interpretation adopted, it is evidently left without
object, and therefore intransitive in our passage. Literally rendered, d-hd would
mean " to cause to be white," " to make white," and an intransitive use of a causative
transitive is a common phenomenon. " To become pale " is therefore a justifiable
rendering. It does not occur elsewhere in the medical papyri, and I do not know of
any other passage in which it has the meaning " to become pale."
2^<?o<? ntt ho pw, " in that he is." The proposition " he is, etc." is apparently
substantivized by the prefix of ntt, as commonly, and then left in an accusative case,
like the accusative infinitive in Arabic, indicating cause. More commonly in such
cases ntt is introduced by hr, or by dr, e. g., II 11.
^?2^7^ J^?inn- m^km btw. In all probability these words have suffered corrup-
tion at the hands of an inaccurate scribe. The original phraseology can be drawn from
the four occurrences of the same passage in Pap. Ebers. We find it there in two forms:
positive and negative, as follows :
Positive:
J^T-A}"5 r£r-/m Hw "Undertake him ; do not desert him" (Ebers
40,7; 41,20-2f; 42,5).
Negative:
^■^.-^^ J^<jiAn-□ <$mrk r-f btw pw, " Do not undertake him; he is an incurable "
(Ebers 41, 15).
The word j5T<?m«-, or in the Middle Kingdom Jg^T*- (e. g., Pap. Prisse 10, 2 ;
see also Kahun Med. Pap. 2,18 ; 1, 20), btw, literally means " one deserted," or " one
to be deserted," from the verb J" bt, " to desert, forsake." Gardiner also calls my
attention to examples in Urk. IV, 117 and 500. From meaning " an incurable,"
the noun is also employed with the meaning "incurable disease" (Metternich Stela
57) and related to this use of the word is doubtless its employment as the name of
a serpent in the so-called Book of Apophis (British Mus. Pap. 10188, 82, 45) and in
the Turin Pap. (ed. Pleyte and Rossi, recto, 181, 6, magical text of the Empire).
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:05 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 227 ---
Case 7 TRANSLATION AND COMMENTARY 201
In view of the above four passages from Pap. Ebers, in which rk precedes
btw, it can hardly be doubted that the doubtful word preceding btw in our gloss is to
be read rk. This word occurs six times in our treatise, and only twice is it written
with the usual bird In the other four cases it is each time written alphabetically
thus (IV 8; IV 15; IV 16, twice). In none of these four cases does the A form
a ligature with the —o; although in IV 16 the A is very small and hastily made.
Even if the reading ^ rk be accepted, our text would still be out of order as compared
with the four passages in Pap. Ebers, where rk is followed by and btw by Sw
or a? pw. Nevertheless the use of the passage in Ebers establishes it as a kind of
verdict characterizing the case and the physician's attitude toward it, like one of the
three verdicts in Pap. Smith. One of these verdicts in Pap. Smith is used to charac-
terize a patient thus : " Until thou knowest whether he will die or he will live,
JLII^l^^^I^^^xHIjfor he is (a case of)-an ailment witn which I will con-
tend' " (II11). With this our passage ^2^<?□<?^ST^^1J^^?"1'V,- is strikingly parallel,
in spite of the lack of dr before ntt.
The negative m before btw would indicate that we have here the positive form of
the admonition as above, that is : " Undertake him, do not desert him," and the m
before rk is doubtless the introduction to the quotation, like the m before mr in
verdict 2 (II 11) just quoted. We must also understand that a case receiving this
verdict ("Undertake him,do not desert him ") is a serious and doubtful case, involving
" exhaustion " ('ht). Emending the text as follows then : [^l^I^^^A^Cljk
J5T<?t/w-[^<?], we may render : " For he is (a case of)- Undertake [rhim1], do not desert
[/him1].' " The emendations are too extensive to make the result entirely certain.
^ra<^j§) 'ht, " exhaustion." See commentary on Case 6 (II 21).
CASE EIGHT
IV 5-18
COMPOUND COMMINUTED FRACTURE OF THE SKULL DISPLAYING NO VISIBLE
EXTERNAL INJURY
This case like Case 7 is one of unusual interest. Notwithstanding the terrible
blow which has shattered the skull like an egg-shell, there is no discernible external
contusion. The present editor would not of course feel competent to express any
opinion on the possibility of such a terrible fracture being produced without any
visible external mark, were it not for the fact that some years ago he lost a friend and
colleague whose skull was fractured in exactly this manner, though without any
visible external contusion. The injury was caused by a fall on an icy side-walk. In
our case a set of alternative symptoms (II) probably gives us really a second case.
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:05 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 228 ---
202
Case 8
THE SURGICAL TREATISE
The discussion is divided as follows :
I
Title (IV 5).
Examination (IV 5-7).
Diagnosis (TV 7-9), and Verdict 8 (IV 9).
Treatment, only complete rest and quiet (IV 9).
II
Second Examination (IV 10-12). (Duplicate of Examination, Case 6, II19-22).
Second Diagnosis (Verdict 8, TV 12).
No Treatment.
Ill
Five Glosses (IV 12-18).
In the first set of symptoms (I) the surgeon, for the first time in the history of science,
has noted the effect of the cranial injury on the lower limbs with reference to the side
of the skull which has received the injury. In other words the ancient Egyptian surgeon
has begun observations on the localization of functions in the brain. He carefully
notes that both an eye that is askew and a partially paralysed leg and foot are on
the same side as the injury in the skull. It would seem that contre-cowp must have
taken place in the case which he is reporting. He gives the unfavorable verdict 8 and
prescribes only quiet.
The second set of symptoms (II) involves laying open the injury and disclosing the
pulsating brain, which is described in the same terms as in Case 6 (II19-22). There-
upon the surgeon renders verdict 8, and evidently regards the case as hopeless, for
he suggests no treatment.
The five glosses (IIT) contain explanations of extraordinary interest. It is evident
that the lack of any visible external mark of the blow creates in the mind of the surgeon
the apprehension lest his readers, possibly his students, should in such a case conclude
that the observable symptoms may be due to disease, or what might be termed some
internal cause. In the diagnosis he cautions his reader to regard the patient as " one
whom something entering from outside has smitten." In the glosses he carefully
explains what this means, and warns his reader that he is not dealing with " the
intrusion of something which his (the patient's) flesh engenders," meaning some
seemingly spontaneous form of disease. In this connection the surgeon's point of
view toward the whole range of casualties afflicting humanity from outside reveals
a conception of an accident as due to the action of the gods, not unlike the notion of
" divine Providence " still widely current in our own day. It is evident that " some-
thing entering from outside " was actually personified and deified (see Gloss D).
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:05 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 229 ---
Case 8
203
TRANSLATION AND COMMENTARY
Title
IV 5
Translation
Instructions concerning a smash in his skull under the skin of his head.
Commentary
The meanings of the above terms describing this injury are taken up in Gloss A
by the ancient surgeon himself. It will be recalled that what the surgeon calls a
" smash " of the skull is a compound comminuted fracture, as shown by Gloss A in
Case 5 (II16-17). See also the discussion of the title of Case 5 (II 11).
Examination
IV 5-7
a For the correct form see Vol. II, PI. IV A, l. 7.
Translation
If thou examinest a man having a smash of his skull, under the skin of his head,
while there is nothing at all upon it, thou shouldst palpate his wound. Shouldst thou
find that there is a swelling protruding on the outside of that smash which is in his
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:05 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 230 ---
204
Case 8
THE SURGICAL TREATISE
skull, while his eye is askew because of it, on the side of him having that injury which
is in his skull; (and) he walks shuffling with his sole, on the side of him having that
injury which is in his skull, (conclusion in diagnosis).
Commentary
The slight variant id n dnn-t-f, " smash 0/ his skull," while the title has m " in "
his skull, is of no significance. As shown by the title and the repetition in Gloss A
(IV 12-18), the scribe has omitted (]jj^J, the first three signs of ynm, " skin."
The scribe's inability to copy an excerpt correctly is useful to us in the following :
Examination (IV 5): -^-^ttT^Zl
Quotation in Gloss A (IV 18): ^^^^o*.^'
The parallelism shows that yh-t, " thing " is equivalent to wbnw, " wound." See
the discussion of yh-t in Case 4 (examination, II 8).
^n<=>nAl#rr evidently means "palpate "here; but we know that at some stage of
his investigation the surgeon cuts through the unruptured tissue covering the fracture,
for it is evident in the following development of the discussion that the surgeon has
access to the brain. See the discussion of drr " palpate " in Case 1.
Thb ySw-w, " swelling protruding " has been discussed in Case 4 (examination, II4).
<f hr i', " on the outside of." This meaning is demonstrated by the use of this
compound preposition as the opposite of m hn, "on the inside of," e.g., Louvre Stela
C 12,l.8. Of its surgical use we have four examples in our document (Cases 8,16, 21,
and 88), all of which modify the phrase, thb ySw-w, " swelling protruding." See also
for the medical use of the preposition, Pap. Ebers 60,10, where it means " on the out-
side of" (both eyes).
^a<*»- gwS-t(y), " askew " is evidently the rare verb ffl^-f\^2S^^/N- g-w-S,
" to turn aside, diverge, be askew," or as an adjective, " crooked." See Pap. Anast.
IV 11, 10 ; de Rouge, Inscr. hier. 142 ; Papyrus of Nesikhonsu TV 22 ; rV 22-28 ;
IV 28 (Maspero, Momies royales, pll . XXVI); Papyrus judic. de Turin, 2, 9 ; Maximes
d'Ani (Pap. Boulaq 4), 9,18 ; 8,18-19. The determinative varies: (Anast. and
Pap. judic.) ; 3^, (de Roug6) ; and -A (Nesikhonsu and Ani).
P<£>^ " mJury," *s doubtless a derivative from the familiar verb ibr, " to
strike, to smite," written in the same way. It must mean " bruise," or " contusion,"
and this is doubtless its meaning in the two passages in which it occurs in Pap. Ebers
(109, 18 ; 109, 14). It is not known elsewhere in the medical papyri, and occurs
otherwise only in the Book of the Dead, referring to the injury to the eye of Horus,
which is called a P^,^ (ed. Naville, 112, 6 and 8Aa). In Pap. Smith it occurs
seven times as follows :
Case 8, as a designation of the compound comminuted fracture on the side of the
skull (IV 7, thrice ; IV 15) with \ra ^. yh as a variant (IV 15-16 twice).
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:05 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 231 ---
Case 8
205
TRANSLATION AND COMMENTARY
Case 17, as a designation of a compound comminuted fracture of the maxilla
(VII 8).
Case 19, as a designation of a perforation in the temporal bone (VII17).
Case 21, as a designation of a split in the temporal bone (VIII 8).
The surgeon notes that the affected eye is on the same side as the injury to the
skull. He also observes that the partially paralysed leg is on the same side as the
wound in the skull. It must be, therefore, that the case which he is recording was one
in which the contre-coup on the opposite side of the patient's skull resulted in paralysis
on the same side as that which had received the blow.
Since writing the above I have received the following interesting remark from
Dr. Luckhardt: " The interpretation of a contre-coup fracture is convincing. However,
the paragraph dealing with it is not quite clear. Early after such an injury there may
be a conjugate deviation of head and eyes to the side of lesion with a hemiplegia of
the opposite side because of weakness of the muscles which turn the head and eyes to
the hemiplegia side. But this does not fit this particular case. This case can be inter-
preted only as a contre-coup fracture since the hemiplegia is definitely stated to be
on the side of the injury."
fy, "shuffling" is probably an inaccurate writing, for the quotation in
Gloss B (IV 18) has dy-f. See commentary on Gloss B.
Diagnosis
IV7-9
-s
9
<? w
a Comparison with the same word in IV 15 shows that this sign is certainly t. The scribe evidently
made some other sign first, and then corrected it.
Translation
Thou shouldst account him one whom something entering from outside has smitten,
as one who does not release the head of his shoulder-fork, and one who does not fall
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:05 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 232 ---
206
Case 8
THE SURGICAL TREATISE
with his nails in the middle of his palm; while he discharges blood from both his
nostrils (and) from both his ears, (and) he suffers with stiffness in his neck. An ailment
not to be treated.
Commentary
This obscure diagnosis is almost unintelligible in the second and third items.
The first is fairly clear. It is intended to affirm that the symptoms observed are due to
an injury arising from an external cause, and by implication, as explained in Gloss D,
not due to the " penetration of something which his flesh engenders " (IV 17). This
distinction is obviously made in view of the fact that the absence of any visible
external injury might mislead the surgeon to conclude that the symptoms were due
to some internal disorder arising from disease " which his flesh engenders." It can
hardly be doubted that the second and third items of the diagnosis are similar indica-
tions of causes or symptoms affirmed not to be present, and evidently concerning the
shoulder and hand on the side affected. Apparently the condition of the patient is
similar to that resulting from some other injury or disease, producing the symptoms
noted in the second and third items, and the surgeon is warned against false conclusions
resulting from this similarity. These matters will be found discussed in Gloss E.
It should be noted here that items two and three of this diagnosis contain two
scribal errors. The initial —o of 'mr-t "fork," is an error for initial ^, which the scribe
has written correctly in Gloss E (IV 17) and elsewhere in our treatise. Again the ^
of the second item should be the negative as likewise shown by Gloss E (IV 17).
All other items of the diagnosis have occurred before and will be found discussed
above (I 20).
In spite of its obscurity this diagnosis is the most important one in our entire
treatise. It discloses its unique character in the first place, in the fact that it is not
in the usual form and is not introduced by the otherwise invariable formula, " Thou
shouldst say concerning him, etc." It is evident that this departure from the usual
form is due to the apprehension of the surgeon lest his reader should make the mistaken
conclusion that the symptoms are in any way due to internal causes, rather than to
the externally invisible injury, which nevertheless originated externally. In view of
the hopelessness of the case, this anxiety of the surgeon to ensure a right understanding
of it is a remarkable evidence of his scientific interest. Throughout the'treatise
he shows his understanding of the fact that the troubles he is treating are due to
intelligible physical causes, not to demoniacal invasion. In the discussion of this
case, however, the surgeon really makes some effort to define this distinction in
scientific terms, although undoubtedly hampered in this effort by the superstitions
of his age. See the discussion of this diagnosis in the Introduction, pp. 49-50.
The hopeless conclusion (verdict 8) will be found discussed in Case 5 (II15); see
also the introduction to the treatise (pp. 46-48).
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:05 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 233 ---
Case 8
207
TRANSLATION AND COMMENTARY
Treatment
IV 9
<=> «=^' ^ ,=^5=
<=> S Jl 1 I
TransZaiwm
His treatment is sitting, until he Tgains colorl, (and) until thou knowest he has
reached the decisive point.
Commentary
The treatment in this case consists simply in keeping the patient quiet, in a restful
posture. See discussion in Case 4 (II 7). The □<? pw employed in this sentence in
Cases 4 and 7 is omitted here.
Zj fJJ rWr, occurs here for the first time in such medical connection as a sympto-
matic indication, presumably of the patient's facial color. The word is used of
both natural and artificial coloring: of a cyst (Ebers 108, 20-109, 1); of a calf
(Newberry, Beni Hasan, Vol. II, pll. VII); of a woman (Tale of the Herdsman, Berlin
Pap. 8024, 160); wooden chariots (Annals of Thutmose III, Urk. IV, 690); a coffin
(Berlin Pap. 10496, verso 18); clothing (often in Papyrus Harris). It seems to mean
" brightly colored," or "parti-colored." It is doubtful whether the rendering "gain
color" as above is correct. The ancient commentator furnishes no explanatory gloss.
Second Examination
IV 10-12
Ql I I
a Compare II 21 where S> is certain.
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:05 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 234 ---
208 THE SURGICAL TREATISE Case 8
12
op,?.;
1 1 WWV\ MM
Translation
Now as soon as thou findest that smash which is in his skull like those corrugations
which form on molten copper, (and) something therein throbbing and fluttering under
thy fingers like the weak place of an infant's crown before it knits together—when it has
happened there is no throbbing and fluttering under thy fingers, until the brain of his
(the patient's) skull is rent open—(and) he discharges blood from both his nostrils and
both his ears, (and) he suffers with stiffness in his neck, (conclusion in second diagnosis).
Commentary
We have here a group of symptoms which are a duplicate of the examination
in Case 6 (II 19-22), and will be found fully discussed there. Some variants, etc.
should be noted.
()<=>J5. yr dr, " now as soon as," as in II 6 and III 7. Hence the symptoms are
probably those of a second stage of the same case.
j^^l hd, " weak place," is a variant quite different from 'ht of Case 6. It is
doubtless a scribal error for ^<=> ^ rihd, which will be found discussed in Case 7, Gloss
J (IV 4) and Case 6 (II 21).
~ts-t-f, " it is knit together." See variant in II 21 (p. 169). Gram-
matically it may be passive in tw, or sdm-t-f with negative = " not yet."
for the more common -a- is of course a well-known variant. See the same
writing in Case 20 (VIII 4).
The observation of the pulsations in the brain, beneath a fracture which has been
accompanied by no visible external injury or rupture of the soft tissue over the
fracture, would of course be impossible unless the surgeon operated and laid back
a flap of skin covering the fracture. It is strange that the ancient surgeon makes no
mention of this procedure ; but it is perhaps due to the fact that he regards the case
as hopeless and suggests no treatment. The omission of all reference to any possible
treatment may have resulted in the omission of any mention of the operation also ;
on the other hand the direction to " palpate " in the examination may have been
regarded by the surgeon as a sufficiently clear indication that the fracture was to be
rendered accessible.
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:05 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 235 ---
Case 8
209
TRANSLATION AND COMMENTARY
Second Diagnosis
IV 12
Translation
[Thou shouldst say]: " An ailment not to be treated."
Commentary
As in Case 6 the surgeon attempts no further diagnosis than the unfavorable
verdict. He evidently considers that the conditions disclosed by the second examina-
tion make the case hopeless. He therefore appends the unfavorable verdict 8 and
leaves the case without suggesting any treatment. Verdict 8 will be found discussed
in Case 5 (II15) and in the introduction (pp. 46-48).
Gloss A
IV 12-18
Explaining: A smash in his skull under the skin of his head, there being no
wound upon it.
Translation
As for : " A smash in his skull under the skin of his head, there being no wound
at all upon it," it means a smash of the shell of his skull, the flesh of his head being
uninjured.
Commentary
The gloss has misquoted the text of the case which reads : " there being nothing
at all upon it " (IV 5). This does indeed need some explanation, but when converted
into " there being no wound at all upon it," the misquotation furnishes a large part
of the explanation. One would like to know whether this inaccuracy in quotation
was due to the scribe or to the commenting surgeon himself. It is quite conceivable that
p
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:05 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 236 ---
210
Case 8
THE SURGICAL TREATISE
the scribe, reading " nothing at all," and knowing what it meant, thoughtlessly wrote
its meaning, viz. " no wound at all." See discussion of yh-t, " thing " in Case 4 (II 8).
D^^Fm P'w-t is obviously a scribal error for ° f p'k-t, "shell."
See Case 4 (II 9).
The negative statement that there is " no wound at all upon it " is followed by the
positive corollary that the flesh of his head is whole. The verb in the Egyptian <? J ^=sa=
wd' literally means " to be whole," not as I have rendered in English, " to be unin-
jured ; "■—that is, it does not have the force of a denial of injury (which is expressed
in the preceding denial of the existence of an external wound), but an assertion of
soundness.
Gloss B
IV 18-15
Explaining : He walks shuffling with Ins sole.
Translation
As for : " He walks shuffling with his sole," he (the surgeon) is speaking about his
walking with his sole dragging, so that it is not easy for him to walk, when it (the sole)
is feeble and turned over, while the tips of his toes are contracted to the ball of his sole,
and they (the toes) walk fumbling the ground. He (the surgeon) says : " He shuffles,"
concerning it.
Commentary
m
pl)^n—, dy-f. The quotation in the gloss inserts /, which is lacking in the text
of the case (IV 7). This word is probably different from p 1 .A of the Nastesen stela
(cf. Maspero, M&. d'archtol. Ill, p. 126, note 5; suggested to me by Devaud).
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:05 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 237 ---
Case 8
211
TRANSLATION AND COMMENTARY
Its meaning is sufficiently clear from its use in our Case 8, which is the only case
employing it in Papyrus Smith.
W'E"^. nmJ-ty< from tQe verD nny, means " to move feebly," " to drag sluggishly
along " as of slack inundation water, or of uncontrolled urine dribbling sluggishly
(see X 22). The <=> was inserted by the scribe in red.
D/^3?sJLilUI P'fyd-ty, "turned over," is known as early as the Pyramid Texts
(685 a). Besides this gloss it occurs once more in our treatise in Case 84 to describe
a dislocated clavicle (XI18), but it is there written phd. It is evidently identical
with the frequent verb ^J*** phd, employed especially in the hymns of victory in
the Eighteenth and Nineteenth Dynasties to describe the overthrow of the enemy.
In Greek times it is twice written with an overturned ship as determinative.
®l tp-w, " tips," literally " heads." On the anatomical use of the word to indicate
" ends " or " tips," see Case 1 (lost column, commentary on m tp-f, p. 85).
h-t, " ball " of the foot. I can find no other example for this meaning of the
word, but followed as it is by the words " of his sole " the usual meaning " belly "
can hardly be understood as anything else than " ball."
"f ^"flsSi-A " Iumble," is a rare word. It is known elsewhere in the medical
papyri only in the obscure passage in Ebers in which it designates some ailment of
the heart (Ebers 101, 8). Its ordinary meaning seems to be to " go astray, wander,
err," related doubtless to the common verb j[|^ hyhy, " to seek." The rare examples :
fi^£ W (Granite statue, Cairo Cat. 547 = Urfc. IV, 994) and ff (Theban
Tomb of Tomb No. 110) refer to loss of the mummy. Cf. Davies, Amarna,
Vol. V, pi. XXVIII. The rendering " fumble " seems to convey the idea intended
by the surgeon—the action of a partially paralysed and contracted foot, shuffling
along in the helpless effort to walk.
Gloss C
IV 15-16
Explaining:
One whom something entering from outside has smitten.
a This seeming «—» is obviously to be read <=>. See original in IV 7, and compare (IV 12) in
which «=> also appears as a straight line like hieratic ».
PS
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:05 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 238 ---
212
Case 8
THE SURGICAL TREATISE
Translation
As for : " One whom something entering from outside has smitten " on the side
of him having this injury, it means one whom something entering from outside presses,
on the side of him having this injury.
Commentary
The commentator has included in his quotation the words " on the side of him
having this injury," but this is an error, for they do not belong in the above context
(IV 7-8), but were used in the earlier discussion of the affected eye and the paralysed
foot " on the side of him having that injury " (IV 6-7). There is no relevancy in their
inclusion in the text to be explained in the above gloss. They present an interesting
variant, the use of the word (]in^ yh where the original phrase has P^^<. skr.
%^f^ mdd, " presses," is the important word of the explanation, and un-
doubtedly indicates that the chief cause of trouble from this injury is the intrusive
pressure on the brain from without.
Gloss D
IV 16-17
Explaining : Something entering from outside
^y3 <?□<?.—"^i-—IT^^-lV^CT1-1^
Translation
As for: " Something entering from outside," it means the breath of an outside
god or death ; not the intrusion of something which his flesh engenders.
Commentary
In the preceding gloss the surgeon shows a perfectly rational comprehension of
an external physical cause. In the last item of the above explanation : " not the
intrusion of something which his flesh engenders," there is again a clear distinction
between an internal affection, " something which his flesh engenders," arising as it
seems to the Egyptian surgeon from within, and the external physical cause of this
injury with its resulting internal disturbances. This rational distinction is unmis-
takable and demonstrates the surgeon's ability to discriminate judicially in the world
of objective phenomena and natural causes. But side by side with this scientific
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:05 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 239 ---
Case 8
213
TRANSLATION AND COMMENTARY
attitude of mind, we find equally unmistakable evidences of ancient superstition.
In the experience of early man the power of the gods impinged hourly upon the daily
life of man, and in the earliest scientific investigation of the human body the surgeon
could not entirely divest himself of such primitive prepossessions. Even in the
thought of a scientifically minded surgeon the accidental injury which he calls " some-
thing entering from outside " has not taken place without some relation to divine
decrees. I cannot find this phrase " something entering from outside " in any of the
other medical papyri, except in Papyrus Ebers, where it occurs only once, and in this
unique passage it is given a very interesting and unique writing (Ebers 102, 14-15).
It has heretofore been read ^f-A^J,,^!, rH m hr-t (e.g., Wreszinski, Der Papyrus
Ebers, p. 212); but there can be no doubt that the last word is not hr-t, but <f"'=' rwiy.
The group appears twice in our gloss (Pap. Smith IV 16) and the first writing of the
two is less cursive, disclosing the true reading rwty quite unmistakably. In Pap. Ebers
therefore the phrase is to be read: ^f-A^f"^"^^ . What makes this appearance
of the term in Pap. Ebers of especial interest and importance is the insertion after it
of the figure of a god as determinative. What god is meant is impossible to determine.1
The important point to notice is, that for the physician of Pap. Ebers, " something
entering from outside " is personified and deified. The accident from without, the
external casualty, is a Tvxq, a Fortuna, or rather a " Fortuitas," always unfavorable.
It is the surgeon's force majeure, always to him a mystery. A serious accident was
not thinkable without the decree of the controlling deity. And so our surgeon explains
" something entering from outside " as " the breath of an outside god," and possibly
alternative to this is " death." The two are set up here side by side : one the stroke
of the fatal accident; the other a casualty from which one may survive, if not assured
life, which would be the logical correlative of " death." Among the superstitions of
the Pap. Ebers is one which has bearing here. Its author in discussing the blood-vessels
says that there are four leading to the ears, two to each ear :
, V^^'tJA
" The breath of life enters at the right ear ; the breath of death enters at the left
ear " (Ebers 100, 8-4). The surgeon of Pap. Smith is pathologically more sound. In
the first place he recognizes that the accident may be on either side, and that on either
side " something entering from the outside " is either :
(1) " the breath of an outside god ; " or
(2) " death."
1 It is impossible to recognize this divine figure, although it may be that of a buck. Moeller has
included the figure in his list (I 75); but it is his only example, and he does not attempt to connect
it with any known hieroglyphic form.
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:05 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 240 ---
214
Cask 8
THE SURGICAL TREATISE
(1) corresponds to " the breath of life " in Pap. Ebers, and seems to mean possible
survival for the sufferer; (2) means a fatal accident and seems not to be personified
or deified. In our gloss a good deal turns on the interpretation of "^"o <? r'-pw, " or."
Does it in Egyptian always mean that something different is introduced as an alternative,
or something identical merely mentioned again under another name ; as we may say
" twenty shillings, or one pound." In this case the two terms on both sides of " or "
are identical in essential meaning. If we could so interpret our gloss, " death " would
be simply a synonym of " the breath of an outside god." In this case the force of r'-pw
would be simply " namely," or " that is," for which the Egyptian usually employed
j^, as is well known.
(]— yn, " not," is a rare negative. See Gunn, Syntax, pp. 89-90.
P2^»^L i-rk-t-n, literally rendered means " what (that which his flesh engenders)
brings in."
Gloss E
IV 17-18
Explaining: One who does not release the head of his shoulder-fork, and who
does not fall with his nails in the middle of his palm
a The scribe has omitted the u, of pw.
b This n was at first omitted by the scribe and corrected into the text in red ink above the line,
after the line was complete.
Translation
As for : " One who does not release the head of his shoulder-fork, and who does
not fall with his nails in the middle of his palm " it means that he says: " One to whom
the head of his shoulder-fork is not given, and one who does not fall with his nails in
the middle of his palm."
Commentary
This gloss, intended to explain the difficult statement of symptoms in the diagnosis
(IV 7-9), hardly accomplishes its purpose for a modern reader. In the first place the last
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:05 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 241 ---
Case 8
215
TRANSLATION AND COMMENTARY
item of the explanation merely repeats the text to be explained; and the first item is too
obscure to aid us. A number of errors in the original text of the diagnosis are corrected,
and these corrections are useful. The word W-t, written rnV-t in IV 8, is correctly
written here. We have here literally " the fork o/his shoulder," that is " his shoulder-
fork," while the diagnosis had less clearly " the fork in his shoulder " (IV 8). The
diagnosis has ^^.T^ nty br, " one wno falls," which is here corrected to ^IkS,?**'
ywty hr, " one who does not fall." In view of the explanation in the gloss which
uses ^^^5=1 tm hr, " one who does not fall," with the negative tm, duly spelled
out, it is evident that the ancient commentator accepted the negative force as the correct
one. Dr. Luckhardt's comment below indicates good internal reasons for not accepting
the negative reading.
As already noted above in the commentary on the diagnosis, the surgeon is warned
against mistaking the symptoms in Case 8 for those of a patient who exhibits some
affection of the shoulder and who falls down with his fist clenched and his finger nails
tight against the palm of his hand. It is important in this case to note that the word
" hand " or " palm " is not written in the dual. He is thinking of an injury which
affects only one side. The same is true of the word " shoulder." When the patient
with a stiff neck is told to look at " his shoulders," the dual indicating both shoulders
is regularly indicated by the scribe (see above Case 8). Here however we are dealing
with a symptom discernible in one shoulder only, and the word is correctly written
in the singular.
Turning now to the details of these similar symptoms, which however our
patient of Case 8 does not exhibit, we may note the following points.
11*5"^ d-fh literally means " to cause to be loose " or " to loosen," but its exact
surgical significance is not determinable. It is not the usual term for " dislocate,"
for which our treatise employs ^©"v wnh. I have supposed it indicated a stiff
joint due to contraction of the ligaments, which the patient is unable to " release "
l^i^^TAI^ tmr,t »'* Wi, literally " the fork of his shoulder." The rare
and interesting word w.i means a " two-toed claw " or a " fork," as is shown in Case
22, Gloss A (VIII14-15). It is primarily applied to the fork at the top of the ramus, and
must designate here some bone of the shoulder sufficiently double at the end to be
called a " fork," like the claw of a two-toed bird. It may be that the two projecting
processes at the top of the shoulder-blade (scapula) are meant; that is the acromion
and the coracoid process, which are not unsuggestive of a bird's claw. In view of the
other symptom affecting the hand, one would look for some bone of the arm as the
one affected. It may be therefore that the top of the ulna is meant, where the olecranon
and the coronoid process project to form, it is true, a much less pronounced fork. Here
then at the shoulder would be the articulation which the patient is said to be unable
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:05 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 242 ---
216
Case 8
THE SURGICAL TREATISE
to " release," or the " head " of which, according to the gloss, " is not given " to
the patient.
The other item of these symptoms consists of two observations : the patient does
or does not fall prostrate and lie with clenched fist so that his finger nails " are in the
middle of his palm." Two possible alternative renderings should be considered here.
It is possible that "finger nails" should be construed as the subject of " fall," in which
case we must render " one whose finger nails fall into the palm of his hand." This in
itself would eliminate the falling of the patient. It should be noticed that the word
"ZUL rn-t, " finger-nail," is written in the singular, both in the diagnosis (IV 8) and
in the gloss (IV 18 twice), so that we have it written three times, all in the singular.
rn-t designates the whole " claw " of a bird, as in VIII15, and the rendering " finger-
nails," meaning as it were the whole claw of the hand, has therefore been retained
as probable. On the basis of this rendering it remains for the pathologist to suggest
what ailment is indicated.
Dr. Luckhardt has kindly added the following important remarks on this diffi-
cult passage:
" My interpretation of this case is as follows : The surgeon sees this patient some
time after the injury. I base this statement on the stated fact that the patient - walks
shuffling with his sole.' Immediately after an injury to the brain involving the motor
cortex (or internal capsule) the opposite side of the body would be paralysed (hemi-
plegia) and walking would be impossible. However, the hemiplegic recovers the power
of walking even if, after a few months, the affected arm may at that time still remain
powerless. At this time the arm is particularly affected by what is termed - contracture.'
The upper arm is adducted (at the shoulder). This the scribe characterizes as - one who
does not release the head of his shoulder-fork.' The lower arm is bent at a right or
acute angle with a pronated and slightly flexed hand and with the proximal phalanges,
and particularly the terminal ones, quite flexed. Since the upper arm is adducted and
fingers flexed, such a patient would fall as - one who does not release the head of his
shoulder-fork,' and - who falls while the nails are in the palm of his hand.' What I
cannot understand is that the gloss reads - one who does not fall while his nails are in
the palm of his hand.' It would seem to me that one must accept the positive form as
given in the beginning of this history as the correct one. The negative form in the
gloss would seem to be an error of the scribe. When a normal person falls during walking
he involuntarily extends the hand at the wrist and extends and abducts his fingers. He
breaks the fall by extension of the upper arm (not abduction) and landing on the palm
of his hand, not< while his nails are in the middle of his palm.' "
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:05 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 243 ---
Case 9
217
TRANSLATION AND COMMENTARY
CASE NINE
IV 19-V 5
WOUND IN THE FOREHEAD PRODUCING A COMPOUND COMMINUTED
FRACTURE OF THE SKULL
The examination in this case contains only an inaccurate repetition of the title ;
the treatment which immediately follows this examination is a recipe, a grotesque
product of superstition and belief in magic, accompanied indeed by a magical charm
to be repeated over it in order to ensure its efficacy ! It is obviously not an accident
that a discussion containing a treatment of this character should at the same time not
only lack an examination containing any observations, but also contain no diagnosis
nor any verdict! Without these essentials of our surgeon's customary method, the
case becomes merely a recipe to which have been prefixed a title and the undeveloped
formula of examination introducing no observations. The entire discussion is without
any doubt a characteristic product of the recipe-hawking physician (as contrasted with
the surgeon). See the discussion of this case in the Introduction, pp. 42-48.
This case represents our surgeon's sole relapse into the superstition of his age, of
which he has elsewhere so surprisingly divested himself. It was doubtless the resem-
blance of the frontal bone to a segment of the shell of an ostrich's egg, which beguiled
some ancient physician into the belief that a paste made by triturating the shell of an
ostrich's egg would be efficacious in healing a shattered frontal bone ! Such a recipe
and such a method of treatment are obviously drawn from current folk medicine
universally practiced in ancient oriental lands. The recipe must have circulated in
one of the recipe-papyri which have hitherto constituted our sole inheritance from
ancient Egyptian medicine. We cannot but wonder whether our observant surgeon
could really have allowed himself to take over into his extraordinary treatise on cases,
a discussion which was such a typical product of the recipe-mongering physician of
the time. The character of our ancient book therefore raises the question whether
some later copyist is not to be held responsible for the insertion of this solitary
example of a folk-loristic recipe into his otherwise surprisingly rational treatise.
Title
IV 19
19
a The scribe wrote V1 yb, "heart" immediately after the word "instructions," but noticed
the error and canceled the word with an oblique stroke of black ink over the red of the rubric.
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:05 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 244 ---
218
Case 9
THE SURGICAL TREATISE
Translation
Instructions concerning a wound in his forehead, smashing the shell of his skull.
D 2i£ ^ £°"T £®. P'&-tnt dnn-t-f, " sneN of skull," is evidently here the frontal
bone, the squama frontalis. On our surgeon's use of the word p'JH, see above Case 4,
Gloss A.
id, " smashing," see Case 5, Gloss A.
dnn-t, " skull," see above, Case 1, title, commentary on ®.
Translation
If thou examinest a man having a wound in his forehead, smashing the shell of
his head, (conclusion in treatment).
This case exhibits the methods and the form of the great bulk of the materials in
Papyrus Ebers. There is no real examination, and its place is taken by a mere
repetition of the title. Even in this repetition the word " skull " of the title is replaced
by the vague and inexact word " head " (d'd'). There is no diagnosis, nor any verdict,
but after the suggestion of an examination, the discussion turns at once to a grossly
superstitious and unscientific treatment.
Commentary
Examination
IV 19-20
Commentary
Treatment
TV 20-V 4
21
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:05 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 245 ---
Case 9 TRANSLATION AND COMMENTARY 219
<=> o <=±
Ml ^111/
3
PJ
0 <?^\
a This word was at first omitted by the scribe and afterward inserted in red ink above the line.
Its exact position in the line was then indicated by a tiny x in red between gmm-k and p'k-t.
Translation
Thou shouldst prepare for him the egg of an ostrich, triturated with grease (and)
placed in the mouth of his wound. Now afterward thou shouldst prepare for him
the egg of an ostrich, triturated and made into poultices for drying up that wound.
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:05 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 246 ---
220
Cask 9
THE SURGICAL TREATISE
Thou shouldst apply to it for him a covering for physician's use; thou shouldst
uncover it the third day, (and) find it knitting together the shell, the color being like
the egg of an ostrich.
That which is to be said as a charm over this recipe :
Repelled is the enemy that is in the wound!
Cast out is the Tevil"1 that is in the blood,
The adversary of Horus, Ton every! side of the mouth of Isis.
This temple does not fall down ;
There is no enemy of the vessel therein.
I am under the protection of Isis ;
My rescue is the son of Osiris.
Now afterward thou shouldst cool [it] for him [with] a compress of figs, grease,
and honey, cooked, cooled and applied to it.
Commentary
This treatment is a curious hodge-podge of superstitions, without a suggestion of
the scientific attitude of mind which is so prominent in the ancient surgeon's discussion
of the other cases. As already stated, the significance of the " egg of an ostrich "
without doubt lies in its resemblance to the frontal bone. In some way the soundness
of the egg-shell, not vitiated by its being triturated, is conveyed to the fractured shell
of the skull. All this folk superstition is then reinforced by the recitation of a magical
charm. In the customary practice of medicine the procedure of the physician was
of course dictated by the current superstitions of the day, among which the mythical
story of the rivalry between Horus, the good and faithful son of Isis and Osiris, and
Set, the malicious and destroying enemy, played a great part. The wounds of the two
heroes in their combat with each other, and the maternal solicitude of Isis in caring
for the injury of her son Horus, constantly appear in the physician's charms. The
same means employed so successfully by Isis in relieving Horus are frequently referred
to in the spells uttered by the medical man. The patient becomes Horus; his ailment
is Set, the enemy of Horus and murderer of Osiris the father of Horus. Hence in
the above charm, " the enemy that is in the wound " and the " adversary of Horus "
are of course Set, while the patient enjoys the " protection of Isis " and of Horus, " the
son of Osiris " and Isis.
The following matters of detail require some explanation :
"j^^M°i tmt-w (or tm-wt), " poultices." The word occurs only in Pap. Ebers and
in our treatise. In Ebers it is written with the sign tm, showing that we must
read tm and not rm (see Ebers 78, 14 and 15). The form of the root is a little uncer-
tain. In Ebers it is written all four times tmt-w. Of the three passages in Pap. Smith
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:05 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 247 ---
Case 9
221
TRANSLATION AND COMMENTARY
two write tmt-w, and one (IV 21) tm'wt. It may therefore be a masculine noun tmt,
plural tmt-w ; or a feminine noun tm-t, plural tm-wt; but the genitive n in the masculine
(Ebers 91,8; though it should be nw) favors the masculine tmt-w. It is not to be con-
fused with ^Lj^110,^, tmyt, which is some sort of disease (e.g., Mutter und Kind,
I, 4, etc.). Our word tmt-w has commonly been translated " boluses." If bolus is
understood as a remedy administered internally (that is through the mouth), this
rendering is clearly incorrect. The word appears only four times in Pap. Ebers. It
is employed once for application to diseased toes, doubtless some rheumatoid or gouty
trouble, so commonly discernible in the feet of ancient Egyptian bodies from the
earliest times (Ebers 78,14; and 78,15). Again it is employed for a discharging ear:
"It^Z^l^^i ° i—PP£®®° "Thou shouldst make for him tmt-w for drying up
a wound" (Ebers 91, 8-9). Here the tmt-w are most probably poultices. The third
and last case in Pap. Ebers employs the tmt-w for treating pustules or sores in the anus,
perhaps piles. The remedies prescribed are to be made into tmt-w, obviously for local
application though this is not stated (Ebers 106, 2). In this case they might possibly
be suppositories. In Pap. Smith tmt-w are employed three times, that is twice besides
our Case 9. In both the other cases they are for external application : Case 41, which
instructs the physician, " Thou shouldst make for him tmt-w " . . . . °^^,P, wt hr-d,
" (and) bind upon it " (Smith XIV 6-7); and Case 46, which likewise directs : " Thou
shouldst make for him tmt-w "... *=<=>p wdy r-i, " and apply to it." The tmt-w
applications seem to have been designed especially to dry up a sore or wound, e.g.,
the above case in Pap. Ebers (91, 8-9); and again Pap. Smith Case 46 states that the
physician is to prepare remedies for " drying up his wound " (XVI 9-12). This leads
us to the discussion of:
^^R^°<?. The text is certainly corrupt. The most obvious corruption is the
omission of the determinative of the first word, viz., a, because it was identical with
the word-sign beginning the next word. The same error has occurred in XVI 9-10.
Compare the following passages :
"©"^ZZiTi?( ° u'dT"^0^ " Thou shouldst make for him remedies for drying
up the wound " (XrV4^5).
^(]^^^-^<jjjj^^Jc^ rpjtou ghouls make for him [remedies for]
drying up [the wound] in his sternum " (XVI9-10). And finally
^^a^n"? of Case 9 above (IV 21), in which we have a second stage of corruption,
the passage in XVI 9-10 representing the first stage. Obviously our text of Case 9
should be emended with the aid of XIV 4-5 as follows :
meaning "tmt-w for drying up that wound." The writing of the corrupt text (XVI
9-10), quoted above, might suggest that we should read here ^3^,°,—PP£®fi°
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:05 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 248 ---
222
Case 9
THE SURGICAL TREATISE
tmt-w n[w] s-Swt wbnw, literally " poultices for causing the wound to dry up " (Ebers
91, 8-9, cf. also P^©, Ebers 65,15), but the emendation on the basis of SmithXIV 4-5
is more probable.
f^ll^T1 TM^oe^ IPy* nthnswnw, " a covering for physician's
use," is a device found in the medical papyri only in this passage. The word
h'yt, "covering " is written exactly like the verb 'f'^11'j3 h'y, "to be naked," of
which the noun is "f ^ 1 1 ^cjP h'yt, " nakedness." There can be no doubt that our
word means " covering " however. In the first place it is something which the surgeon
is " to apply ... to it " (the wound); and in the second place the wound is there-
upon, after an interval of three days, to be " uncovered." Although no other case
of its medical use is known, our word h'yt, " covering " is doubtless to be connected
with the word ^^^Q^c^cf1 employed in the phrase tn h'-wt, which must mean
something like " in secret," literally " under cover," in the Pyramid Texts (808a).
hn, " use." The usual word for a " hide " or a leathern " (water)-skin " is
feminine, hn-t. Nevertheless there is a masculine word hnw, " skin." It
is used of goat skins and sheep skins ; cf. Spiegelberg, Bechnungen, taf. XV c, d, and
XIII (col. a, 5; col. b, 9,16, and 18). This masculine is also found in Pap. Mallet I 5:
M^5h*JL^l.l^t<rJLlIk ^ "hide (hn) made into a coat of mail" (in Becueil de trav.,
Vol. I). The transliteration is from Gardiner's copy, and he has written " sic!" before
the determinative of hn, to call attention to the lack of the expected feminine t.
It occurs again without t in the same document (14). A sack called ^ (Naville,
Festival-Hall, pl. 19 and 24) and the word ^Sf'y1 bn, " tent," are doubtless both
simply the word " skin " to designate something made of it, as we say " skin " for
a leathern water bottle, or " canvas " for a tent. In our passage hn is further given
a special meaning by an added genitive of specification. It is some kind of material
prepared especially for the use of physicians by the embalmers. The whole " covering,
etc." is explained in GIobs A as a " bandage," which the embalmers furnish. The first
difficulty in rendering our hn as " skin " lies in the determinative, which is, in both
passages where it occurs, a papyrus roll. Sethe therefore suggests to me the possibility
of connecting the word with the well-known verb 1jnf.A hn, " to approach, to near,"
making a noun " nearness, approach, association, use." Thus it is conceivable that
hn swnw might mean " physician's use." Then by construing the genitive nt as
meaning " for," a common meaning, we might render the whole " a covering for
physicians' use." See commentary on Gloss A.1
The subject of the verb following " find " (V 1) is masculine. It may therefore
1 Lacau has called attention to the fact that in the Middle Kingdom coffins the phrase
^i*^*— means " in his hand " (Recueil de trav. 35, 220, n. 1); that is, there is a rare word
or i>_w hn, meaning " hand ". Our word, with the determinative can hardly be identified with
this rare word hn, " hand."
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:05 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 249 ---
Case 9
223
TRANSLATION AND COMMENTARY
resume the noun " wound; " but not " covering " or " egg," both of which are
feminine. The word employed here for the knitting together of the wound is the same
as the surgeon used for the knitting together of the infant's fontanel in Case 8 (IV 11).
Grammatically our treatise more commonly follows the verb " find " with a noun,
which is then resumed by a pronoun as immediate subject of the verb following
" find ; " in other words Egyptian prefers to make a substantive the object of " find,"
rather than a proposition, such as we find here in V 1.
□£o pht, "shell" is of course the word p^k't, which we have met several times
before for the "shell," meaning one of the squamae of the human skull. It does not
here designate the " shell " of the egg, which we find called the (]^<=J ynr, " stone "
of the egg in the great Amarna Sun-hymn (Davies, Amarna, Vol. VI, pll. XXVII, l. 7).
° ( yrtyw, " color," see above, Case 7 : III, 20.
The charm is introduced by the usual formula often used in Pap. Ebers.
P"V?S *s new and not found elsewhere. It is parallel with dr, " repel " and
must have some similar meaning. It is possibly a causative derived from the verb
<vT<?S nwr, " to tremble " (Book of the Gates, 8rd Hour, Seti II, 12 = Ramses IV,
PI. 21).
w'-t is a little uncertain in the reading. The first sign has some resemblance
to the hieratic form of whr. The determinative is likewise questionable. The rendering
is based on the Middle Kingdom word -f \ ^ " w'-t in the laudatory phrase P -£\ ^ 7
Swy m w'-t, " free from in which the word must mean something evil.
^ rib n, is possibly a questionable reading. Dr. Grapow has suggested but
with entirely problematical meaning.
^ 'hd, literally the " splendid one " (feminine) is an epithet for Isis.
PJ^ ^yn, " fau down," " sink down," is common applied to serpent enemies in
the Pyramid Texts, where it is written —J —and appears in parallelism with J?,?**!
hr, " to fall." As for the fish, it must be employed here because of the iim-fish known
only in the Misanthrope 89. The " temple " of the patient is here identified with
the injured forehead, perhaps in reference to the fact that the dead sink down on one
temple as they lie with head northward and facing the rising sun.
^ npw, with crocodile determinative reminds one of the word ^ dpy,
" crocodile." It is quite evident, however, that the word here means something
hostile to the patient, and there is a word ^ np, which is an abusive epithet applied
to Apophis (Metternich Stela 1-2, twice ; and the Book of Apophis, British Mus. Pap.
10188, 29, 22, copy by Lange in Berlin Worierbtich).
^=9,^, md-t, " compress " is unknown elsewhere, unless the sole occurrence of the
masculine (Ebers 88, 5) is to be compared here. This is the reading of Wreszinski
(p. 179) and is questionable, as he has correctly recognized. The meaning "compress "
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:05 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 250 ---
224
Case 9
THE SURGICAL TREATISE
has been drawn from the root significance of the verb. The construction of md-t, as
a direct object of a seemingly intransitive form of kbb, " to be cool " indicates probably
corruption of the text. One expects d-kbb, "to cool," followed by an object such as
a pronoun referring to the wound, and a preposition " with " (^) before md-t.
Gloss A
V 4-5
Explaining : A covering for physician's use.
Translation
As for : " A covering for physician's use," it is a bandage which is in the hand
of the embalmer, and which he (the physician) applies to this remedy which is on this
wound which is in his forehead.
Commentary
This explanation has been partially discussed above in connection with the word
hn, " use." The " covering for physician's hn " is here explained as a P ^,
" bandage." The word is well known. It is found employed to designate the bandages
employed in wrapping the mummy, or as a fillet about the head ; as a New Year's
gift, or accompanying a charm (possibly tied with the customary seven magical
knots). All such " bandages " were without any doubt made of linen. We would
therefore expect that the " covering " explained in our gloss would necessarily be
made of linen; and this is probably the strongest argument against the translation
of hn as " skin." The embalmers must have required enormous quantities of linen
bandages for the practice of their profession. Any one who has examined their work
has been impressed with the extraordinary skill disclosed by it. It is the neatest and
most elaborate bandaging ever done anywhere. The embalmers therefore became
remarkably adept in the art of bandaging, and finally even practiced it as a decorative
art, skilfully manipulating the final outer wrappings of the mummy into elaborate
decorative designs (see Vol. I, Pl . III, Figs. 6 and 7). Their skill in producing bandages
made them the inevitable source for such materials, and our gloss above furnishes us
with the interesting fact that they manufactured bandages for the use of the physician.
The young practitioner is here told where he can secure his bandages, just as he is
to-day given the address of some manufacturer of proprietary preparations.
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:05 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 251 ---
Case 10
225
TRANSLATION AND COMMENTARY
CASE TEN
V5-9
A GAPING WOUND AT THE TOP OF THE EYEBROW, PENETRATING TO THE BONE
The surgeon's discussion of this case consists of a few hasty notes regarding a
flesh wound over the eyebrow. The diagnosis does not state as much as the title.
The treatment is, however, sound surgery, without any such relapse into superstition
as we found in the preceding case, and is of unusual interest as containing the earliest
known mention of surgical stitching of a wound.
Title
V 5-6
Translation
Instructions concerning a wound in the top of his eyebrow.
Commentary
^® m tp, " in the top." This rendering is the more probable one, but it should
not be forgotten that the anatomical meaning of ® tp is frequently the " end," or
" tip," of some other organ or part (see commentary on ® in Case 1). It may possibly
be that the inner or outer end of the eyebrow is meant. It should be noted also that
in the diagnosis (V 7), the text has only J^, " in " showing that the position of the
wound, "in" or " in the top of " the eyebrow, is not very precisely maintained. We
may compare : Pj^^J—•I^c^|?1f2!j(<?^'ls— " a splitting blow upon his two eye-
brows" (Pap. Anast. Ill, 5, 7-8), in which the preposition is "upon" (hr), and both
eyebrows seem to be involved.
Examination
V 6
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:05 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 252 ---
226
Case 10
THE SURGICAL TREATISE
Translation
If thou examinest a man having a wound in the top of his eyebrow, penetrating
to the bone, thou shouldst palpate his wound, (and) draw together for him his gash
with stitching.
Commentary
Important terms needing discussion will be found explained in the commentary
on the preceding cases, as follows :
^ h'y-k, " thou examinest," see Case 1, pp. 104-106.
wbnw, " wound," see Case 1, pp. 81-84.
rr, " penetrating," see Case 1, pp. 87-88.
^drr, " palpate," see Case 1, pp. 92-98.
The last item, the " stitching," is new and important. It seems to be regarded
as a kind of " first aid," and is included in the examination in all of the six cases in
which it occurs in our treatise—that is preceding the diagnosis and the verdict.
Apparently the surgeon is to lose no time in drawing together and closing up the gaping
wound, whatever the treatment that is to follow may be.
"eTIj n^ry, " draw together." In all of the' eight occurrences of this word in Pap.
Smith, it is written either ndr-hr-k, " thou shouldst draw together " (six times) or
ndr-yn-k, " thou shouldst draw together " (once XVII 8, written incorrectly ndr-n-k),
except our case above (V 6), where we should of course emend to ndr-hr-k. The word
is common and in current non-surgical usage means " to seize, grasp." It takes as
its object: inanimate objects, like weapons, fishing or fowling net, leg of a slaughtered
ox, etc.; persons or animals: enemies, arrested criminals, oxen, game, wild animals,
serpents ; or parts of the human body, the hand, or the breasts in mourning. It is
important for understanding our passage to notice that one of its non-surgical mean-
ings is to " close " (a door). The six cases in which it occurs in Pap. Smith will make
it quite clear that its surgical meaning is " to close up," " to draw together." Before
turning to these cases it should be noted that the surgical use of the word is found
elsewhere only in three cases, as follows : 1. An obscure passage probably prescribing
the bringing together (ndry) of the hps of the vagina (Kahun Med. Pap. 8, 19) ;
2. Description of the preparation of a lancet (Pap. Ebers 109, 6 and 7), very difficult
to understand ; and 8. Description of lancing or treating a swelling of some sort
(Ebers 109, 10), likewise very obscure. These materials outside of our treatise are
therefore of slight value in understanding the surgical meaning of ndry. See com-
mentary on ydr immediately below.
^ T i k/'*," gasn," has been fully discussed in Case 1, q.v., pp. 90-92. The surgeon's
notes on this case are so hasty that there has been no indication heretofore that the
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:05 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 253 ---
Case 10
227
TRANSLATION AND COMMENTARY
injury was a wbnw n kf-t, " gaping wound," but it is clearly so designated in the
gloss at the end of the case (V 9).
(]^<rf ydr, " stitching," is a new and difficult word. In seven different cases in
our treatise the surgeon is charged to " draw together the wound " " with ydr" or
to " ydr it." It is instructive to note where these wounds are, and their character :
Case 8. Gaping wound in the head, perforating skull (ydr in restored passage).
Case 10. Gaping flesh wound over the eyebrow.
Case 14. Gaping flesh wound in the nose, penetrating to the nostril.
Case 28. Gaping flesh wound in the auricula of the ear.
Case 26. Gaping flesh wound in the upper lip, penetrating into the mouth.
Case 28. Gaping flesh wound in the throat or neck, penetrating to the gullet.
Case 47. Gaping flesh wound in the shoulder.
It should be observed that six of these seven cases are flesh wounds. It is further
noticeable that, with the possible exception of the last case (47) the wound is in a
relatively thin stratum of soft tissue, through which it pierces, so that it is incon-
ceivable that a bandage which would " draw together " the wound could be applied.
In six cases, that is all but the last, no bandage could be applied at all, except by
winding it entirely around the head or neck. The pressure exerted upon the wound
by such a bandage could not possibly " draw together " the " two lips " of the wound.
Such "drawing together" requires two forces pulling toward each other, that is in
opposite directions, and as nearly as possible in the general plane of the surface around
the severed tissue, and not at right angles with this surface, as would certainly be the
case with a bandage passing entirely around the head. It is highly important to note
that in Case 8 the surgeon is charged not to bind the wound. Unfortunately this is
in a case in which ydr has been restored, though the correctness of the restoration of
the word can hardly be doubted. The only conceivable devices for meeting the
requirements and " drawing together " these wounds as described by the surgeon
are either plasters or stitching. We have already seen that adhesive plaster is called
'-wy, or ^(]-^^ "yr-wy, " two strips " (Case 2, commentary on treatment),
which are taken up also in Gloss A (V 9) appended to the present case. There is
strong a priori probability that we are dealing with surgical stitching in six of the
cases listed above ; but the question requires close examination of the context in all
six cases (omitting Case 8, because of the restoration of ydr and its context). The
material is arranged below.
Case 10 : Gaping flesh wound over the eyebrow
" Thou shouldst draw together for him his gash with ydr."
b. Diagnosis.
Q2
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:05 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 254 ---
228 THE SURGICAL TREATISE Case 10
c. Verdict 1.
"Now after thou hast ydr it,
e. [Thou shouldst bind it] with fresh meat the first day." See demonstration of
this restoration in commentary on V 7-8.
" If thou findest that the ydr of this wound is loose,
tic
thou shouldst draw (it) together for him with the two strips (of plaster)."
h. " Thou shouldst treat it with grease and honey every day until he recovers."
Case 14 : Gaping flesh wound in the nose
a, b, and c, as in Case 10; in place of d, Case 14 has directions for cleansing the
wound of coagulated blood ; e, as in Case 10.
" When its ydr loosens, thou shouldst take off for him the fresh meat " (VI11-12).
g. omitted.
h. " Thou shouldst bind grease, honey and lint upon it every day until he recovers."
Case 23: Gaping flesh wound in the auricula of the ear
" Thou shouldst draw (it) together for him with ydr behind the interior (of the
auricula) of his ear."
b and c as in Case 10.
d and e are omitted.
" If thou findest the ydr of that wound loose and sticking in the two lips of his
wound (VIII 20-21).
thou shouldst make for him stiff rolls of linen and pad the back of his ear there-
with " (VIII 21).
h as in Case 10, but with lint added.
Case 26 : Gaping flesh wound in the upper lip penetrating to the mouth
a, b, c, d, and e, as in Case 10.
/ and g are omitted.
h as in Case 10.
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:05 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 255 ---
Cask 10
229
TRANSLATION AND COMMENTARY
Case 28 : Gaping flesh wound in the throat penetrating to the gullet
a and b as in Case 10.
c. Verdict 2.
d of Case 10 omitted.
e as in Case 10.
/ and g of Case 10 omitted.
h as in Case 10, with lint added.
thou shouldst draw together for him his gash with two strips of linen (plaster)
upon that gash " (really plural, see commentary on kf-t, Case 1, examination).
h as in Case 10, with lint added.
Unlike any of the other cases, Case 47 at this point discusses alternative symptoms,
among which the wound is found " feverish, open and its ydr loose " as in the first
examination. No further light is thrown upon the meaning of the terms we are
examining, for the surgeon is then forbidden to bind the wound ; but if the fever
passes off he may treat with grease, honey and lint until recovery.
An examination of the procedure in the above six cases, in all of which the wound
is first " drawn together with ydr " (a), discloses the fact that in four of them (Cases
10, 14, 28, and 47) after an interval during which a fresh meat application may have
been used (e), the ydr is found " loose " (J), when the fresh meat (if used) has been
removed (Case 14)—a condition which in two (Cases 10 and 47) of these four so found
necessitates drawing together the wound again with two strips of plaster. In Case 28
on discovering the ydr loose, the surgeon puts supports of linen padding behind the
auricula, that is between the auricula and the skull of the patient. In Case 14, how-
ever, after finding the ydr loose the surgeon thinks it necessary only to proceed with
the customary bandaging with grease, honey and lint. In Cases 26 and 28, wounds
piercing the lip and the throat respectively, the surgeon does not anticipate that the
ydr will be found loose, and so does not prescribe any resulting precautions.
The nature of the ydr is unmistakably disclosed in Case 28, where the surgeon not
only mentions finding the ydr loose, but adds that they are found " sticking in the
two lips of his wound." The words for " sticking in " are mn m, the customary
phrase for describing weapons " sticking in " human or animal flesh, or fragments
Case 47 : Gaping flesh wound in the shoulder
a, b, and c as in Case 10.
d of Case 10 is omitted,
e as in Case 10.
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:05 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 256 ---
230
Case 10
THE SURGICAL TREATISE
of bone " sticking in " the fleshy tissue of a wound. Consult especially the com-
mentary on Case 4, Gloss A (II 9). In describing a foreign, intrusive substance
invading organs or tissues mn m always means " sticking in," not " adhering to."
In view of this fact there can be no doubt that ydr is a word for surgical " stitching "
or " stitches." We have here then a surgical suture, the earliest known reference to
sewing up a wound in the history of surgery.
We must next inquire what happens to this "stitching" when it is wnh
" loose." This term is explained in two different glosses (Case 81, Gloss A, X 17-19;
and Case 48, Gloss A, XV 8-4) q.v. In the first, where it refers to the dislocation of a
cervical vertebra, it is said to designate the separation of one vertebra from another,
and the commentator refers to the colloquial use of wnh to indicate the separation, or
loosening from each other of two things that had formerly been joined (see Case 81,
Gloss A). Applying this knowledge to wnh, used to describe the condition of a stitched
gash, we find that in Case 47, when the stitching is found " loose " (wnh), the wound is
" open " (pgy, see above summary, Case 47,/). We must conclude then that in the
four cases of stitched wounds which the surgeon finds with the stitching " loose," he
means that the wound has failed to close wholly by healing, and still gapes. In two of
these cases therefore (Cases 10 and 47), the surgeon is charged to draw together the
wound again with the " two strips," that is with plaster. Of the remaining two with
the stitching " loose," one (Case 28) is to be aided by appropriate supports of linen
pads behind the gashed auricula of the ear ; the other receives only the usual applica-
tion of grease, honey and lint, bandaged on (Case 14). Finally, in two of the cases
(26 and 28) as we have already noted, the surgeon does not apprehend and does not
provide for failure of the wound to heal after being stitched.
We may now return to consider further the word ydr itself, the meaning of which
has been drawn from its context in our treatise. It is used thirteen times in Pap. Smith
(exclusive of the restored passage in Case 8,1 22), and with the exception of an obscure
passage in Pap. Ebers (109, 9), it is otherwise unknown in the medical papyri. In the
thirteen passages employing it, it is eleven times a noun and twice a verb (Case 10,
V 7 and Case 26, IX 10). In this passage : (^^^I-A^^^e " Now after thou
hast stitched it," it is obvious that ydr must be rendered " to stitch " or " to sew."
Hence the noun must primarily mean " stitching, sewing, stitches, suture," rather than
" thread " or " gut " or the like. Curiously enough the Egyptian word for " to
stitch," " to sew," common as it must have been in every day life, is unknown to us.
It is not unlikely that we have recovered it in this surgical use of ydr.
We find it written very erratically. As to determinative, the writings fall into two
groups : a with 4 and b with O :
a. With ^ :
(]^tf (V6); H^Vj (VIll); H^"(V7; 1X10); (]^i (V8); in VI9 the scribe seems
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:05 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 257 ---
Case 10
231
TRANSLATION AND COMMENTARY
to have written 1'^V, having evidently raised his pen between<= and the seeming o ,
but in view of the unmistakable spellings with <=>, we cannot doubt that he intended
to write <=> here, just as he has intended to do in the writing of the ligatures for
^ dr in the next group, where the <=> looks exactly like o (compare hkr in XIII11-12),
as it often does in a ligature with some other sign above it, as in ™ nr or ^ rr (see
Moeller, Palaeogr. I, Anhang, I and XVII). It would seem that the r of ydr was pro-
nounced so much like I and n, as to suggest ydn and the use of the ear (ydn) as a
determinative.
b. With O :
(]^O (IX 21, clearly «=>, detached and not in ligature); (]^O (*=- in ligature,
VIIll9 ; IX 8 ; XVI 20); 1^O (-=> in ligature, VIII 20 ; XVII 8 ; XVII 8).
Diagnosis
V7
Translation
Thou shouldst say concerning him : " [One having] a wound in his eyebrow. An
ailment which I will treat."
Commentary
The omission of hry, " one having," is an obvious scribal error. The change
of ^® m tp " in the top," to ^ m, merely " in," may be due to the haste of the
surgeon himself, in making his notes.
The diagnosis is here reduced to the briefest terms, suggesting merely a few note-
book catch-words, containing even less than the title, to which is added the hopeful
verdict 1. See commentary on this verdict in Case 1 (I 2).
Treatment
V7-8
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:05 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 258 ---
232
Cask 10
THE SURGICAL TREATISE
a The scribe has canceled the three phonetic signs preceding © with a red stroke.
Translation
Now after thou hast stitched it, [thou shouldst bind] fresh meat upon [it] the first
day. If thou findest that the stitching of this wound is loose, thou shouldst draw (it)
together for him with two strips (of plaster), and thou shouldst treat it with grease
and honey every day until he recovers.
Commentary
The omission of the bracketed passage in the text is an obvious haplography due
to the occurrence of Sw twice in the same line ; the scribe having copied as far as
the first one jumped to the words following the second one. It is of great importance
to establish the fact of this error, for otherwise we would have a sentence : ydr-k iw
hr ywf w'd, which might be rendered : " thou hast bandaged (ydr!) it with fresh
meat," which would seem to give us the meaning " bandage " for ydr—a meaning
which has indeed already found its way into the dictionary from this very passage.1
It is important to demonstrate that there is no basis for the meaning " bandage,"
or " to bandage." This will be evident when we have placed our passage in Case 10
in parallelism with the corresponding passage in Case 26, thus :
Case 26 l^lt^^tM^O (IX 8).
Case 10 "£—-°[^)Z.^M^ (V6).
Case 26 followed by diagnosis and verdict (IX 8-9).
Case 10 followed by diagnosis and verdict (V 7).
Case 26 (j^S^f^ (IX 9-10).
Case 10 <Kkg>jg^4g (V 7>-
Case 26 o_J,^ ? J^|?® ° (IX 10).
CaselO^J,^^]?^,?,^^!'®" (V7).
The continuous parallelism between these two cases, extending from the examina-
tion, through the diagnosis, verdict and treatment, makes it perfectly certain that
the scribe has omitted the words °"©"^^, wt-hr-k ho, "thou shalt bind it," after
1 See Worterbuch der Aegyptischen Sprache, p. 154.
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:05 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 259 ---
Case 10
233
TRANSLATION AND COMMENTARY
{J^^^? ydr-k iw, "(after) thou hast stitched it." We must therefore insert these
omitted words and thus separate "thou hast stitched (ydr-k) it" from the following
words : "with fresh meat, etc." Ydr has therefore no connection with binding with
fresh meat in Case 10, and there is no other evidence that ydr has anything to do with
the idea of binding or a bandage. The above demonstration should be borne in mind
in reading the discussion of the meaning of ydr in the examination (V 6).
The application of " fresh meat " will be found discussed in Case 1 (I 2-8).
■jSjj^ wnh, " loose," is discussed in preceding examination.
*^"<=>^ ndry, " drawn together," is discussed above in V 6.
,"tt!/ (for 'fwy)' " two strips," will be found discussed in Case 2 (I 14-15),
and in Gloss A below.
The treatment with grease and honey is discussed in Case 1, treatment (I 8).
Gloss A
V 9
Explaining : Two strips of linen
l«=> . I
Translation
As for : " Two strips of linen," it means two bands of linen, which one applies
upon the two lips of the gaping wound, in order to cause that one (hp) join to the other.
Commentary
This gloss is a repetition of Gloss B in Case 2 (I 16-17), where it will be found
discussed, and the evidence adduced which shows that the " two strips " mean more
than ordinary bandages, being in reality strips of adhesive tape or plaster.
The curious resumption of the masculine word spt, " hp " by means of the feminine
substantive adjective uf-t, has already been discussed above, Gloss B, Case 1
(I 9-10).
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:05 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 260 ---
234
Case 11
THE SURGICAL TREATISE
CASE ELEVEN
V 10-15
A BROKEN NOSE
This case involves interpretation of local indications so limited in extent that it
is difficult to determine with precision exactly what parts of the nose the ancient
surgeon intends to define. It is highly probable that the injury is a rupture between
the cartilaginous tissue, especially the septum and the cartilagines laterales on the one
hand, and the nasal bone on the other. The process of setting seems to have been
no more than the insertion of soft plugs or tampons, saturated with ointment, into
the nostrils and the support of the nose in a normal position by binding on rolls of
linen, evidently sufficiently stiff to act as splints, and called indeed " spars " or
" posts " of linen.
Title
V 10
10
Translation
Instructions concerning a break in the column of his nose.
Commentary
The terms for the injury and the parts affected can be better explained in the
discussion of the examination, q.v.
Examination
V 10-11
i
Translation
If thou examinest a man having a break in the column of his nose, his nose being
disfigured, and a rdepression1 being in it, while the swelling that is on it protrudes,
(and) he has discharged blood from both his nostrils, (concluded in diagnosis).
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:05 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 261 ---
Case 11
235
TRANSLATION AND COMMENTARY
Commentary
^ Mb is a very ancient word for " break," graphically suggested by the word
sign, x, the pair of crossed sticks, just as in the case of id (see Sethe, Zdhlen, pp. 75 ff.;
and Grapow, Zeitschrifl, 49 (1911), pp. 116ff.). It is found as early as the Pyramid Texts
(e.g., 954b ; 1144c; 2080b). While it designated breakage of any ordinary object, it
already appears in the Pyramid Texts applied to the breakage of bones: 1^J(P Jj^^
gi-J-^S*^ "He bas broken the vertebrae of the back" (Pyr. 409b). Also
-^-iPJ^P^®!"A boneof N-is not broken" (pyr-1048b)- The identitvof our
word with this Mb is not to be doubted; for it is written out as |—Jo (V 11) and
fPJo (XIV 18). Should the identity of these words with our ° be doubted, the
following demonstration is complete:
Case 42 is an injury of the "ribs of the sternum" without wnh or JPjo Mb.
Case 48 is the same with wnh.
Case 44 is the same with ^.
The equivalence between JPJo Mb of Case 42 and O of Case 44 is obvious.
The surgical use of the word is unknown outside of our treatise, and the noun,
Mb, " fracture " has not yet been found in any connection elsewhere. The surgical
meaning of Mb has nowhere been defined for us in Pap. Smith, as the ancient com-
mentator has defined the meaning of p^ id, " smash " in Gloss A, Case 5 (II16-17).
Nevertheless the definition of id in the above gloss and the examples of its use enable
us, by a process of elimination, to determine the character of the injury designated
by Mb as the complementary term of id, " smash : " Mb being used for a simple
fracture, while id is applied to injuries so serious that they are even compound com-
minuted fractures ; see commentary above (Case 5, title, II11). Another distinction
is the fact that in our treatise Mb is always employed to designate an injury of the
bone, while id may also apply to a rupture of the fleshy tissue.
Hib is employed in our treatise in eight different cases, a total of twenty-nine times,
as follows :
Case 11. Fracture in the bridge of the nose (os nasale).
12 , glabella (?), or possibly spina frontalis (?).
24. „ „ „ mandible.
85. „ „ ,, clavicle.
86. „ „ „ arm (humerus).
87. „ „ „ fracture in the arm (humerus) with wound over it.
42. Sprain (nr-t without Mb) in the " ribs of the sternum."
44. Fracture in the " ribs of the sternum."
P.
ywnw, " column " (of the nose). This term is explained by the treatise itself in
Gloss A (V 14-15), pp. 240-242.
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:05 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 262 ---
236
Case 11
THE SURGICAL TREATISE
<£i fnd, " nose," is a common and current term which has hardly gained technical
anatomical meaning. It will be found discussed in connection with Gloss A, V 14.
J^Jjf pels', " crushed in " is explained in Gloss B, Case 12, q.v.
3k n<£,nl. fyr-f *s a vei7 difficult phrase. In the first place it is impossible
to determine whether hr-f is the prepositional phrase " upon it " or " in it " (the nose),
or the noun " his face." In the latter case mfe' would be some stative verb describing
the condition of his face ; in the former case mk' would be a noun designating some
injury or disfigurement of the nose, which has a " mfc, upon it." The determinative
makes the latter alternative more probable. Mfc' is probably to be connected with
mk'-t " support, resting place " (see above, Case 4, II 7). Considering that the bridge
of the nose is crushed in and flattened, the lower fleshy and cartilaginous portions
might abruptly project, suggesting a support or notch or depression. In a situation
of such detail, however, guesses like this are very hazardous.
The last two items will be found discussed above, especially Case 4.
Diagnosis
V 11
a The scribe at first omitted this a and afterward inserted it as a correction.
Translation
Thou shouldst say concerning him : " One having a break in the column of his
nose. An ailment which I will treat."
Commentary
This diagnosis is again a mere memorandum—a catch-word or two actually con-
taining only the title of the case. It produces the impression which we have often
gained before, that in such places the text is a hasty record of memorandum notes.
As in the preceding case its practical value lies in the concluding verdict 1 which will
be found discussed in Case 1 (I 2). Such brief notes serving as a diagnosis raise the
question whether the gradually developing diagnosis was not originally merely what
we find here, that is a repetition of the title to which was appended the practical
direction furnished to the surgeon by the verdict. Out of such a beginning the
more fully developed and logical diagnosis, of which our treatise furnishes a number
of examples, may then have gradually evolved. See also the Introduction (p. 78).
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:05 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 263 ---
Case 11
237
TRANSLATION AND COMMENTARY
Treatment
V 11-14
TransZaiiore
Thou shouldst cleanse (it) for him [with] two plugs of linen. Thou shouldst place
two (other) plugs of linen saturated with grease in the inside of his two nostrils. Thou
shouldst put [him] at his mooring stakes until the swelling is reduced (lit. drawn out).
Thou shouldst apply for him stiff rolls of linen by which his nose is held fast. Thou
shouldst treat him afterward [with] grease, honey (and) lint, every day until he recovers.
Commentary
P X^3*^ " cleanse," a rare word, originally written with a broom as deter-
minative. It seems in this passage at first sight to take " the two plugs " as its
object, but we must recall here the frequency with which this document omits the
^ m, " with," even when the following instrument or remedy does not begin with
m; e.g., "honey" (byt) in XI 6; XII 8; XII 14 ; XIII 2 ; XIV 20 ; XV 8. In
fact in every case in which treatment " with honey " is prescribed in Papyrus Smith,
the " with" (m) is regularly omitted. The following passage: Pf^^^"^—cp
" Cleanse for him with a swab of linen " (VIII 11-12), clearly shows that the normal
construction of ik followed by " swab " is with an m, " with," between dk and " swab."
In these cases ik is left without a direct object (cf. also VIII 16). Otherwise it takes
a direct object designating the organ or region to be cleansed (V 18); or the impurity
which is to be removed (VI 10). In the latter case ik means to " clean off," or
" clean out." The only surgical occurrences of the word are the five passages above
cited.
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:05 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 264 ---
238
Case 11
THE SURGICAL TREATISE
^^^.~~e|P! &Sm(y)-wy n hbi," two plugs of linen." This surgical device, a tampon,
occurs only in our treatise, and is never written out phonetically. Hence the reading
may be a little uncertain; but the sign in its hieratic form is quite clear and seems
to be the well-known ^ sSm. It should be noted that in Case 12 (V 18) the two
plugs or swabs employed in cleansing the nostril before insertion of the two tampons
are called See commentary, Case 7, Gloss C, III 18. It designates a device
made of linen, and employed in every case for the cleansing of an internal passage:
twice of the nostrils (Cases 11 and 12) and once of the ear (Case 22). There is no
indication of its form or construction further than the genitive of material, " of linen,"
which follows it in four out of the five passages in which it occurs. The fact that it
could be inserted into the nostrils and left there would indicate that it was probably
a small and soft mass or wad. It was also employed for the application of remedies.
In our case above (V 11), in which the surgeon first cleanses the nostrils with the
two tampons, it is obvious that (as in Case 12) he is then to take two fresh ones
which he is to saturate with fat and insert into the nostrils until the swelling is
reduced.
e"^3 wdy, " put" is an important surgical word. It is employed in our treatise
with five different meanings, or at least in five different connections :
a. With the preposition * hr, " upon," in directions to the surgeon for " placing "
his hand or fingers in examination or operation, for example in the manipulation of
the mandible in the treatment of a wound in the temporal bone in Case 22 (VIII 10).
Its force in this connection is suggested by the fact that it is exactly parallel with ^
rdy " put " (literally " give ") in the setting of a dislocated mandible in Case 25 :
Case 22: «T^HiT1S^
" Place (wdy) thy thumb upon his chin " (VIII10).
" Place (rdy) thy thumb (s) on the ends of the two rami " (IX 3).
The other passages containing this usage of wdy are : 118; III 9-10 ; VI 4 ;
VIII 28; and XVII 8-9.
b. With the meaning " apply " a bandage or remedy, with or without a preposi-
tion. In the case of a remedy, if it is external, the preposition in our treatise is <=> r,
" to " (XIV 8 ; XIV 4 ; XVI 12), and once ♦ hr, " upon " (I 22 where wdy is a
restoration). In the case of a bandage it is of course an external matter and the
preposition is * hr, " upon." If the remedy is to be absorbed by a " tampon " or
" plug " of linen as in our treatment above, and inserted into a passage, wdy must be
supplemented by a very specific preposition, like m hnw (V 12), literally " in the inside
of." It is interesting to note that in the two similar Cases 11 and 12, one (Case 11)
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:05 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 265 ---
Case 11
239
TRANSLATION AND COMMENTARY
employs m hnw, " in the inside of," after wdy, and the other (Case 12) has rdy m, " put
into," in place of m hnw, after wdy, thus :
Case 11 : <?TJ,^»*—Tl&S°^T
Case 12: „ „ „ Z^^t"
" Thou shouldst place two plugs of linen ... in the inside of (so Case 11, but
Case 12, " put into," passive participle modifying " plugs ") his two nostrils."
Similar usage of m hnw with wdy will be found in Case 85 (XII 7) and Case 86
(XII12-18).
c. To indicate the position of the patient during examination or treatment, accom-
panied by the words " stretched prone " (XII 4-5; XII 10-11 ; XVII 18-19) or
" between two supports " (III 15).
d. To indicate the return of a broken or dislocated bone, which is " put (wdy) into
its place : " of the nose (Case 12, V 18); dislocated jaw (Case 25, IX 5) ; dislocated
scapula (Case 84, XI 19).
e. In the phrase w^ r *', literally " put to land," that is " moor," with the
addition " at his mooring stakes," the whole already explained in Gloss D, Case 8
(II 1-2), and especially in the commentary on I 22-28, in the treatment in Case 8.
In our passage (V 12) the phrase r t', " to land," is omitted, as also in Cases 19
and 21. It may be noted that two of these cases furnish us the correct reading with
}=<? ho, " him " after wd-hr-k, " thou shouldst put," which our scribe has incorrectly
omitted in Case 11.
©J/** Qfit " swelling," has been treated in Case 4, commentary on II 4.
Ji^^ITi bd'-w, " stiff rolls," is a difficult term to define with exactness. It is
a rare and archaic word otherwise found only in the oldest religious texts, where it
twice occurs as a "spar" of a ship (Book of the Dead, Naville, 99, 20 Aa and Lacau,
Recu&il de trav. 80, 67, No. 15a). This second passage is a Coffin Text list of parts of
a ship, which are identified by the ancient text with the various members of Osiris, or
some other divinity. Bd'-w is identified with the phallus of Osiris, which is so often
shown in reliefs during erection. This doubtless indicates the shape of the bd'-w. We
must conclude that it means a post-like roll of linen, of sufficient stiffness to hold the
broken nose in its proper or normal position. It is unknown in the medical papyri
elsewhere, and besides its use in our Case 11 the surgeon employs it also in Case 12 in
the identical manner; in Case 28 for supporting the slit auricula of the ear; and
finally in Case 84 for the support of a dislocated clavicle. It should be noted that
even in hieratic the determinative is a narrow, elongated rectangle made with notice-
able care. This is doubtless a side view of the roll, seen across its axis.
The word is written in the plural and is resumed by a plural pronoun in the imme-
diately following context, notwithstanding the fact that it is construed with the
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:05 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 266 ---
240
Case 11
THE SURGICAL TREATISE
genitive n in the singular. In case 84 the plural is followed by ®, and in Case 12 we
have the dual (bd'-wy) followed by —* ; while in Case 28 the writing of both the noun
and the genitive is again exactly as in Case 11, with <->» in the singular. These facts
raise the question whether we have in Cases 11 and 28 defectively written duals, in
which case the pronoun (V 18) would be a plural resuming a dual, just as in IX 4.
m-f\ gw, is another difficult word. It is as old as the Pyramid Texts where it
occurs once in a very obscure passage (Pyr. 709 d). Its one occurrence in the Book of
the Dead is very instructive for our text. The passage(Urk. V, p. 176, Spruch 99) reads:
" I bring to thee this serpent ... I put him for thee in it (the barque), with his head
in thy hand, (and) his tail in my hand," S^^^rMpTiP1'F^^'TrM "tnat we
may gw' him between us for ourselves." Here the meaning " pull him out straight "
or " straighten him out " would fit the passage and furnish us with exactly the mean-
ing we need for our passage. Other uses of the word must, however, be considered.
Construed with the preposition <=> before the object it means to " besiege " (a city,
Piankhi Stela, 1l. 5, 7, 9, 82, 91). It appears over people drawing in a full net, and
explaining their action (Davies, Deir el-Gebram, I, PI. IV). It occurs in three passages,
unfortunately much too fragmentary to be understood, in the London Medical Papyrus,
and it is found once indicating some obscure action of the heart in Pap. Ebers (101, 5).
Finally the Coffin Texts employ it twice (Reoueil de trav. 29, p. 157 ; and 29, p. 158).
In reduplicated form it is also found in the Biography of Ahmose, l. 25 (Urk. IV, p. 7).
The meaning most probably to be drawn from these passages is something like " hold
firmly." Grammatically grto" is probably a passive participle of which " his nose " is the
subject in a relative sentence: "held fast by which is his nose." The interpretation
of the participle as a purposive gerund is justified by common usage in Egyptian.
The subsequent treatment with grease, honey, and lint has been discussed above,
Case 1 (I 8).
The surgeon takes it for granted that the practitioner is acquainted with the method
of making and using this device. In Case 12, an injury to the upper part of the nose,
and in Case 84, dislocation of the clavicle, these " rolls " are " bound " on. In Case 28,
a slit of the outer ear, the " rolls " are used for padding the " back of the auricula,"
presumably with a bandage to hold everything in place.
Gloss A
V 14-15
Explaining : Column of his nose
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:05 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 267 ---
Case 11
241
TRANSLATION AND COMMENTARY
1 This 6 was omitted by the scribe in copying and was afterward inserted in the much too narrow
space between mi and d.
Translation
As for : " The column of his nose," it means the outer edge of his nose as far
as its side(s) on the top of his nose, being the inside of his nose in the middle of his
two nostrils.
Commentary
£'i fnd, " nose," is carefully spelled out by the commentator as ~g<^ fnd, and is
evidently to be so read throughout our treatise wherever it means the nose as a whole,
as distinguished from the nostrils. We find the writing ^ i twenty-one times in our
treatise as against only two alphabetic spellings. One of the latter, however, is
significant. It occurs in V 21 in a quotation from V 16, where, however, the scribe
had written ^i. This is a good demonstration that is everywhere to be read
-jjg^i fnd. The dual found so frequently in our treatise is obviously a word for
" nostrils " (nares), and is undoubtedly to be read Sr-ty (see commentary on Case 18,
VI 8). Anatomically fnd (originally fnd) means the entire nose, that is at least the
nasus externus, which includes the ossa nasalia, and how far back into the cavum nasi
our surgeon would have carried its limits is nowhere indicated.
® ,2>(==i . . . fry interpreted by itself would be rendered " the upper
head." Tp is used anatomically to designate the " heads," " tips," or " ends " of
various bones (see commentary on ® in Case 1, p. 85), and this might lead us to
conclude that our gloss intends to designate the radix nasi and the upper end of the
ossa nasalia. Gloss A in Case 12, however, quite precisely defines the Styt of the nose
as " the middle of the nose, as far as the back, extending to the region between the
eyebrows " (V 21). This is surely the ossa nasalia, leaving us only the lower and outer
part of the nose as the part concerned in Case 11. These considerations lead us to
conclude that tp . . . hry, if rendered the " upper tip " or " upper head " must refer
exclusively to the soft or cartilaginous tissues of the flexible outer nose, where it
articulates with the ossa nasalia.
should evidently be read "^"^ gi-wy-fy, " its two sides." The scribe has
certainly omitted the * under for the following context leaves no doubt that
the two sides of the nose are included. " The two sides on the top of his nose " must
designate the two lateral cartilagines. To these soft tissues of the nose the explanation
now adds also the soft central portion of the interior, the septum.
1^S<?<^1_ m bnw fnd-ft " being the inside of his nose." With these words the
B
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:05 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 268 ---
242
Case 11
THE SURGICAL TREATISE
commentator passes from his indication of the external limits of the " column of the
nose " to define its internal situation and limits. It should be noted that m hnw might
of course be understood here as the common preposition " in the inside of," without
seriously altering the sense: but the interpretation of m as meaning " being," or
" even," a very common use of it, makes the discussion much more clear.
-S.^fUP'^^^'vr ^ry-yb m^d-ty-fy, " the middle of his two nostrils," is not clear
without defining the meaning of mid-ty " the two nostrils " beyond cavil. The word
is rare, and sufficiently unfamiliar, even to the ancient reader, to require definition
in the next gloss, q. v. The word hry-yb, " middle " is used anatomically by our treatise
to indicate the " middle region," like the " middle of the crown " (of the head, IV 1)
or the " middle of the palm " (IV 8) ; or a middle member of some kind like the
" middle of the nose " (V 21) in the next case ; or, as an adjective, the " middle "
vertebra of the neck (X 16). The last example resembles the use of the word in our
passage, except that, having no single word for the body of tissue which he is here
discussing (like " vertebra "), the surgeon simply calls it the " middle." Indeed
the m here, in m hry-yb, might be considered as meaning, "even," "being," or
"to wit,' giving us the rendering " being the middle," as in m hnw just discussed
above. The tissue intended is of course the septum nasi, the wall between the two
nostrils (nares).
Our ancient commentator does not define any of the tissue he is discussing as bone
or cartilage, but it is highly probable that he is exclusively describing what a layman
might call the soft nose, that is, all of the external nose except the ossa nasalia. If
this conclusion is correct, then the " break " which Case 11 treats is a rupture between
the nasal bones and the cartilage which impinges upon them—a very common type of
broken nose at the present day. In that case the Egyptian surgeon intended only the
cartilaginous portions of the nose to be designated by the term " column of the nose."
Nevertheless, like our colloquial term " bridge of the nose," the designation " column
of the nose " may have been sufficiently loose in its application to include enough
of the nasal bone to enable the surgeon to speak of the injury as a " break in the column
of the nose."
Gloss B
V 15
Explaining : His two nostrils
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:05 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 269 ---
Case 11
243
TRANSLATION AND COMMENTARY
a This / is placed low in the line and there are above it and below it traces of erasures. As
Smith himself noticed (Vol. II, p. ix, 2nd col.), the scribe originally wrote *§J<^ and corrected it
to fh. See commentary.
Translation
As for: " His two nostrils," [it means] the two sides of his nose extending to
his [two] cheek[s], as far as the back of his nose; the top of his nose is loosened.
Commentary
™1Tw mr>d'§_y\-f[y\, " ms two cheeks " should obviously be in the dual, as is
shown by the dual of dr-wy, " the two sides." It is a word which has been little under-
stood. In the first place it has been frequently confused with the common word
mnd, " breast " (mamma). It has also been confused with the eye, or some
part of the eye; for it appears in lists of members of the body associated with the
eyes, Book of the Dead, (Budge, 172, from Nebseni 82-88, 15 and 18). In the
common phrase i-hb mnd-ty, "to make festive (meaning "to paint") the two mnd-t"
(Hymn to Amon 11, 2 and also of other divinities), it is obvious the reference must
be to painting the eyes or the region of the eyes. It must be recalled, however, that
eye-paint extends down upon the cheeks. The general situation of the mnd-t is
indicated by the position it occupies in the list of cases in our treatise, which takes
up injuries to the head in the following order: calvaria, forehead, eyebrows, nose,
nostrils, mnd-t (three cases: 15, 16, and 17), temporal region, ear, mandible, lips,
and chin. The mnd-t, therefore, is taken up between the nose and nostrils on the
one hand, and the temporal region and ear on the other. In the transition from
the nose and nostrils to the temporal region and the ear, we of course pass over the
cheek, the maxilla and zygoma; and this is certainly the meaning of mnd-t. More-
over the injuries of the mnd-t (Cases 15, 16 and 17) are such as could not possibly
occur to the eye or the nostril, both of which meanings have been wrongly assigned
to mnd-t. These injuries are a " perforation" (thm), a " split " (j)Sn), and a " smash "
(id). The first two are never found in our treatise in anything but bone. While we
may render mnd-t therefore " cheek," we must understand that it may also mean
the maxilla and the adjoining portion of the zygoma as far back as the temporal bone.
This accords with the passage in the Coffin Texts ; "Re rises in the east of the sky,
he shines thence ^™1^(\\t?e= (hr mnd-ty-t) upon thy two cheeks," meaning " thy
face " (Recueil de trav. 27, p. 282). This must be the word which occurs in the
singular as far back as the Old Kingdom in the mastabas, e. g., ^^^Afl (Tomb of
Mereruka A 8, East wall). See also Mutter und Kind, III 9.
K2
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:05 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 270 ---
244
Case 11
THE SURGICAL TREATISE
fh, the well-known word " to loosen," is a scribal correction. There is evi-
dently a statement here that it is the top of the nose which is broken, or fh " loosened;"
and the traces of the erased signs support Smith's conclusion that the scribe
originally wrote wrih, " dislocate," although this would of course be incorrect,
for our surgeon carefully distinguishes between hib, " break," and wnh, " dislocate."
We are now in a position to understand the ancient commentator's explanation of
mid-ty, " the two nostrils." The " two sides of his nose " may be understood as
including the alae nasi, the cartilaginous wings of the nose, together with the adjoining
lateral cartilage above. The remainder of the explanation would seem to indicate
the other tissue surrounding and forming the nares, the limit on either side being the
cheeks. These indications correspond with those which may be drawn from the scanty
sources elsewhere. In Pap. Ebers (99, 5-6) the list of canals or vessels includes four
in the (P^fi^ mid-ty, the " two mid-t," two of which conduct an exudation and two
blood. The exudation ^ nSw-t is obviously the secretions of the nose. At
Edfu the air and again the incense enters the jfj^,^, (mid-t) " nostrils " of the god
(Rochem, Edfou, I, 569 and 571). See also Book of Breathings (British Mus. Pap.
9995, II 1 in Budge, Book of the Dead, Vol. Ill, p. 186). Finally it should be noted
that our word seems to have nothing to do with ffiP^ " leg," or " thigh " or the
like used both of men and of cattle in food lists, unless we consider the possibility
that the alae nasi were conceivably regarded as the " thighs " of the nose.
CASE TWELVE
V 16-VI 8
A BREAK IN THE NASAL BONE
This injury, while confined to the external bone, is certainly higher up than the
preceding case, and in contrast with it quite certainly affects the bone. Thus these
two cases of nose injuries are arranged like the wounds of the head in our treatise,
which discussed first the injuries which were confined to overlying fleshy tissue
without affecting the bones, and thereafter proceeded to fractures and similar injuries
of the bones themselves. The case is interesting in that it is the first one we have
met which involves setting the bone. The term for " set " is literally " cause to
fall," followed by the words " so that it is placed in its position," or, more freely,
" lying in its place." Not until after the nose is set does the surgeon cleanse the nostrils
of the coagulated blood, called " every worm of blood." After the insertion into the
nostrils of tampons of linen saturated with grease, this internal packing is externally
reinforced by two stiff splint-like rolls, literally " posts " or " spars " of linen, pro-
bably laid one on each side, and " bound on." The three glosses are very instructive,
especially the quietly rational explanation of " every worm of blood " as the coagulated
blood " likened to a worm which subsists in the water."
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:05 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 271 ---
Casb 12
245
TRANSLATION AND COMMENTARY
Title
V16
Translation
Instructions concerning a break in the chamber of his nose.
Commentary
As we shall see in the course of the treatment (V 17-20), our surgeon means the
nasal bone by his curious designation " chamber."
Examination
V1&-17
Translation
If thou examinest a man having a break in the chamber of his nose, (and) thou
findest his nose bent, while his face is disfigured, (and) the swelling which is over it is
protruding, (conclusion in diagnosis).
Commentary
The terms are all discussed in the glosses, except the last remark, which has been
explained in the commentary on Case 4, examination, II 8-5 (pp. 144-147).
Diagnosis
V17
Translation
Thou shouldst say concerning him : " One having a break in the chamber of his
nose. An ailment which I will treat."
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:05 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 272 ---
24G
Case 12
THE SURGICAL TREATISE
Commentary
The terms will be found discussed in the treatment and in Gloss A. The diagnosis
is again a mere memorandum of a cue-word or two, as in the two preceding cases, to
which the favourable verdict 1 is appended. See commentary in Case 1 (I 2) and
discussion in the introduction (pp. 46 ff. and 78).
Treatment
V 17-20
SIC
a This word was omitted by the scribe, but the omission was discovered and the word subsequently
inserted in the space over k, in red ink.
Translation
Thou shouldst force it to fall in, so that it is lying in its place, (and) clean out for
him the interior of both his nostrils with two swabs of linen until every worm of blood
which coagulates in the inside of his two nostrils comes forth. Now afterward thou
shouldst place two plugs of linen saturated with grease and put into his two nostrils.
Thou shouldst place for him two stiff rolls of linen, bound on. Thou shouldst treat
him afterward with grease, honey, (and) lint every day until he recovers.
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:05 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 273 ---
Case 12
247
TRANSLATION AND COMMENTARY
Commentary
The surgeon is charged to set the fracture as the first step in the treatment. It is
quite clear that he is dealing with a dislodged portion of bone which must be forced
back into position. As the region where the break has occurred extends, according to
Gloss A, as far up as the area between the eyebrows, it is obvious that the break is either
in the nasal bone, or has ruptured the suture between the os nasale and the frontal
bone. In view of this description of the setting of the fracture, we cannot doubt that
the " chamber " (%-t) of the nose is the nasal bone. See discussion of Gloss A.
"f"3^i f i ymyw, " interior," which occurs in only one other passage in our papyrus,
will be found discussed in Case 22 (VIII 11).
sS-ury, " two swabs." The corresponding passage in Case 11 has ^jf»^f»^.
It might at first be concluded that the text in Case 12 should be accepted as the
correct reading and that we should understand Case 12 as furnishing the alphabetic
writing of "3f». It should be recalled, however, that the word sS properly means
" splint'' and that there is no word sS, " swab," outside of Case 12, unless we
except the incorrect dw$ of Case 14. See full discussion in Case 7, Gloss C, III 18.
r'nri"t, " worm," see Gloss C.
ts, " coagulate," is a derived meaning. The common meaning of the word
is " to tie," " to knot." It is used physiologically to designate the growing together
of the fontanel on the crown of an infant's head in Case 8 (IV 11), and its use in our
case quite appropriately suggests the knotting together, as it were, of stringy coagula-
tions, looking like worms.
»£#m(0-«#. "two Bwabs." See Case 11 (V 11-12) and Case 7, Gloss C
(III 18).
The final treatment with grease, honey, and lint has been discussed in Case 1,18.
Gloss A
V 20-21
Explaining : Break in the chamber of his nose
21
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:05 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 274 ---
248
Case 12
THE SURGICAL TREATISE
Translation
As for : " A break in the chamber of his nose," it means the middle of his nose
as far as the back, extending to the region between his two eyebrows.
Commentary
^111^0 Styt, " chamber." This is the word really explained in the gloss, which
does not take up the word " break " at all. Throughout the literature of ancient
Egypt Styt is a religious word, and its appearance in our case is certainly its only
medical or surgical use, if not its sole occurrence in a secular document. It is com-
monly employed to designate any sacred chamber. Hence we find it applied to the
tomb (Pap. Boulaq 10, verso, 5, 10,10-11,18), or even to the world of the dead, as in
the Book of the Gates ; but it was especially a general term for any sacred room,
chamber, or building. Thus the room for the mourning women at Dendera and at
Edfu is called Styt. Likewise the crypts in the temple of Dendera are so called, and
similarly an outlying chapel by the temple of Ombos. It is incessantly applied to the
dwellings of the gods, especially to that of Sokar, or of the mortuary gods like
Osiris and Anubis, but also of Ptah. In the papyri of the Nineteenth and Twentieth
Dynasties it is commonly written ^'2/"^ and was evidently connected by
the scribes of that age with the word ^§3^^ " to ^e secret, inaccessible." It
appeared, however, in the form SH as early as the Old Kingdom, and the t was
certainly originally t. Hence the connection with Sf, " to be secret, inaccessible,"
which had t, is doubtful. Our surgeon writes the word in every case with the deter-
minative of a house, and must be comparing the upper bony portion of the nose with
a building, just as he designated the rest of it a " column." That he had any esoteric
suggestion in mind is highly improbable. The less accessible portion of the external
nose, the remotest from the entrance to the nares, suggests to the surgeon the barred
and less accessible chamber of a sanctuary or temple. The term " chamber " at once
raises the question whether the surgeon was not thinking of the frontal sinus, especially
in view of the extension of the Styt to " the region between his eyebrows." The
instructions given the physician for setting the broken Styt, however, show quite
clearly that it was a bone which might be forced from its normal position, to which
the surgeon must restore it, and if so it is difficult to see how it could include the
chamber of the frontal sinus. See commentary on treatment (V 17-18).
ph-wy, " the back " or " end," has anatomical meanings which are not always
clear in the case of a short organ like the nose. It is used repeatedly to designate the
" end " of the ramus (Case 7, III 17 ; Case 22, VIII 10 ; VIII 14 twice ; Case 25,
IX 8), which is said to be the " end " (jph-wy) of the mandible. Three times it means
the " end " of the mandible (wgw-t, Case 7, III 17 ; III 18 ; Case 18, VII 14 ; and
rft, Case 22, VIII 14), and once it is used of the end of the phallus (Case 81, X 20).
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:05 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 275 ---
Case 12
249
TRANSLATION AND COMMENTARY
We have already had the ph-wy of the nose in Case 11 (V 15), and in our Gloss A,
although not followed by the words " of his nose " (as in V 15), ph-wy obviously
designates a part of the nose. In these two passages where it refers to the nose, it can
hardly refer to the outer end of the nose in Case 11, and certainly does not do so in
Case 12. It seems required then to render the word in accordance with its original
meaning " back," literally " buttocks." This rendering would indicate that the
phtvy of the nose extends at least somewhat toward the interior. It is conceivable,
however, that the surgeon is thinking of an " end " of the nose toward the frontal
bone, at the point where the nose does actually come to an end and the frontal bone
begins. This view becomes more plausible if the phrase " extending etc." is regarded
as modifying ph-wy, with some such meaning as " the end that extends to the middle
of the eyebrows." There is nothing in the grammar to exclude this rendering. See
the discussion of ^^s5 rr, " extend," " penetrate," etc. in Case 1, pp. 87-88.
Gloss B
V 21-VI1
Explaining: His nose bent, while his face is disfigured
22
tic
<? I □
VII
Translation
As for : " His nose bent, while his face is disfigured," it means his nose is crooked
and greatly swollen throughout; his two cheeks likewise, so that his face is disfigured
by it, not being in its customary form, because all the depressions are clothed with
swellings, so that his face looks disfigured by it.
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:05 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 276 ---
250
Case 12
THE SURGICAL TREATISE
Commentary
J—0 b^t " bent." There is no such verb known outside of our treatise,
but its meaning is determinable. The bent spiral wire * on the crown of Lower Egypt
y is called J Qt h'b-t, as is well known. There is a designation of a sickle with
bent blade likewise b'0- Cf. also h'bb with determinative of two sickles
in the Eloquent Peasant, 107 ; and hb with a bent arm in Pyr. 1041 d, which may be
added to Sethe's discussion in Zeitschrift, 57 (1922), p. 17. Besides the above evidence
we have now the indications of the gloss, which explains h'b by the word J—" dnb,
" crooked." The few known examples of this word are fortunately sufficient to deter-
mine its meaning. A dwarf with feet turned inward is called ^} J dnb (Newberry,
Beni Hasan, Vol. II, pl. XVI). Another with crooked feet has the same inscription
(ibid., pl. XXXII). On a Middle Kingdom stela in Leyden (V 89, Boeser, Beschreibung
der Aegyptischen Sammlung, Vol. II, pll . XXVII) a man is named " crooked Kheti,"
that is ^11^njjf, My dnb. With these examples may be compared the Middle
Kingdom passage : ^^¥^^^^3 J A " wno foUows m *ne way without deflect-
ing (dnb, British Mus. Stela No. 572,l.18 in Hieroglyphic Texts from Egyptian Stelae,
pt. II, pl. 22).
Jf^^^"^" mnd-ty-fy, "his two cheeks." Mnd-ty has been discussed in Case 11,
Gloss B,Y 15.
JLJ_£ pdi, " disfigured," is of course one of the well-known examples of a word
built up by adding i to the root, here the word °| pd, " foot." It means originally
to " trample," " lay waste," especially of fields or landscape, as in Uni's wasting of
the fields of the Asiatics (Urk. I, p. 108, l. 28). Cf. also the obscure incantation in
Ebers 80, 7, in which pdi indicates the destruction of a city. With reference to the
face or head the only other known passage describes a lion as JLJjf ® pdi tp, " with
head bruised " or " disfigured," Book of the Dead (Naville, 17, 100 and 106-107).
This is exactly parallel with our pdi hr-f, " his face is disfigured." The writing
•=" his face " (instead of ^«~-) is also found in III 20.
I^I^w^ax m fcd"f mty, " *n ^s customary form." In this phrase m is really
equivalent to " possess " (" be in possession of "), to " have." See the bull " in "
a certain color (Pap. D'Orbigny, XIV, 5), meaning that he " had " such and such
a color.
kr-wt, "depressions," literally "holes," is a word otherwise entirely
unknown. There can be no doubt, however, that it is a form related to the familiar
word £>~^l • , krr-t, " hole."
• hr can hardly be rendered otherwise than above ; but it is not the customary
meaning. In the above two passages its syntax seems to be related to that of the
Ar-form in clauses of result, e. g., above, Case 7 (III 7-8).
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:05 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 277 ---
Cask 12
251
TRANSLATION AND COMMENTARY
Gloss C
VI1-8
Explaining: Every worm of blood which coagulates in the inside of his
two nostrils
2
Translation
As for : " Every worm of blood which coagulates in the inside of his two nostrils,"
it means the clotting of blood in the inside of his two nostrils, likened to the rnrr-t-
worm, which subsists in the water.
Commentary
'(J, kfn, " clotting," is doubtless some word for " thickening," but elsewhere
usually meaning " to bake." Its meaning here can hardly be questioned. See also
Kahun Papyri (7, 29), where it is once likewise connected with blood.
-Jj^}^ twt, "hkened," is more than the mere preposition my, "like." See the
same use in Case 45, XV 18 ; and the causative d-twt in Case 7, IV 2.
^""""^Dta- rnrr-t is an unknown worm occurring elsewhere than in our treatise
only once, as an ingredient of a prescription for exterminating the hair of a rival
beauty, called the " hated one " (Pap. Ebers, 67, 8-4). It is evidently some slender
and slimy worm thought to resemble the fibrous, stringy formations in coagulated
blood. Some one familiar with the life in the pools of the Nile inundation might be
able to identify it.
jS"^"" wnn-t, " which subsists," is an interesting example of the verb wnn in its
ancient meaning, that is, indicating far more than merely " to be," the meaning to
which it finally weakened. Our example may be compared with the admonition in the
Proverbs of Ptahhotep to cherish a wife as long as thou " livest" (wnn-t-k, Pap. Prisse,
10,10).
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:05 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 278 ---
252
Case 13
THE SURGICAL TREATISE
CASE THIRTEEN
VI 8-7
COMPOUND COMMINUTED FRACTURE IN THE SIDE OF THE NOSE
In Cases 11 and 12 the injured part is " the middle of his nose " (Case 11, V 14-15 ;
Case 12, V 21). Case 18 is followed by a case of injury affecting only one nostril
(Case 14) and Case 15 shifts completely over to one cheek. In the diagnosis of
Case 18 the injury is said to be " in his nostril; " he bleeds from only one nostril and
one ear; and the bleeding is distinctly stated, in this connection (VI5), to be " on the
side of him having this smash." The injury is sufficiently far over on one side to affect
the ear, and we must conclude from all these facts that the use of " nose " (fnd) in
the title and its first occurrence in the examination (twice in all), is unquestionably
in both cases an error for " nostril " (Sr-t). While we render the Egyptian word Sr-t
as " nostril," it is obvious from such a case as this that it means far more than the
orifice. It includes also the surrounding tissue extending far enough laterally to
include some of the bony tissue on each side of the nose, the uppermost part of the
maxilla, known as the " frontal process," which rises almost as high as the root or
top of the os nasale. Along the sides of the latter this frontal process of the maxilla
adjoining the nasal bone might very easily be included by our surgeon in his notion
of the structure of the nose. This may explain why the injury in our case is regarded
as hopeless, and the surgeon prescribes no treatment. The fracture has burst through
into the cavum nasi, so that the surface over it yields or " breaks through " like an
opening door, under the fingers of the surgeon, and he records the unfavorable verdict
without suggesting any treatment. The injury must be very much like the compound
comminuted fracture (id) of the maxilla and zygoma in Case 17, to which the surgeon
also appends the unfavorable verdict 8 (VII 5), although he does follow it with
suggestions of rest and simple remedies in hope of possible survival.
Instructions concerning a smash in his nostril.
Commentary
On the surgical meaning of " smash " (id) as a compound comminuted fracture,
see commentary on Case 5 (II11).
Title
VIS
Translation
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:05 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 279 ---
Case 13
253
TRANSLATION AND COMMENTARY
<^7*"~ Sr-t-f, " his nostril." The demonstration that we are to read Sr-t, " nostril,"
and not fnd, " nose," as written by the scribe, has already been given in the
introduction to this case. It occurs four times in this case, and in only two out of the
four has the scribe written the word correctly (VI 5 and 6). It is instructive to
compare the next case (14), where the same word occurs five times, each time written
correctly. This abbreviated writing ^ is found outside our document only from
the Eighteenth Dynasty on ; hence its earliest appearance is here in this case. In
all earlier texts the word is written alphabetically Sr-t. Its anatomical meaning
has been unavoidably touched upon in the introduction to this case. It should be
further noted that the word is distinguished from fnd, " nose " in such passages as
the following :
" The sweet North Wind for thy nose (fnd), the wind for thy nostril (Sr-t)." (Tomb of
Rekhmire, Urk. IV, p. 1166, l. 1 ; cf. Petrie, Medum, pl. XXIV ; Book of the Dead,
Naville, 172,14 and 46). Nevertheless it is commonly used in the singular for " nose;"
e.g., in the well-known list of parts of the body in Pap. Ebers 108, 17 ( = Pap.
Berlin 8088, 16, 4) ; but it should be noted that in this list all other double parts of
the body are also in the singular, as also in Pap. Berlin 8088, 16, 2 ; and Mutter und
Kind III 9. Very important for the anatomical meaning of the word is the phrase
J V1'—" two smes of k*s nose " (Pap- Leyden 848, verso 5, 4-5,
in Gardiner's copy for the Worterbuch). It is quite clear here that the singular of
the word must indicate the nose, while the meaning " nostrils " is equally evident for
the dual in such a passage as " Give me this sweet breath 1 -J-.^1N\^^^S^'^* that is
in thy two nostrils " (Book of the Dead, Naville, 56,8 Aa). We must conclude, therefore,
that in the twelve passages in our papyrus stating that as a result of an injury in the
head the patient is discharging blood J^^*^", " from his two nostrils," we are to
read Sr-ty. There are seven more examples of the writing fifi which we are to
read Sr-ty in Papyrus Smith, which furnish the best evidence on this point. They are
as follows: Case 11 (V12), Case 12 (V18,19 bis, VI2, and VI8), and Case 22 (VIII11).
To sum up : Sr-t is used for " nose," or for " nostril," and anatomically, especially
as shown by Pap. Smith, e.g., Case 14, it includes the tissue surrounding the nostril
and adjacent to it as already shown in the introduction to Case 18.
This word Sr-t is a good example of the difficulties experienced by our surgeon due
to the complete lack of technically precise terms for designating organs and parts of the
body. He is here, as quite commonly elsewhere, obliged to take over into his scientific
workshop a term which formerly served only as a loose popular designation such as
the modern surgeon has displaced by exact terms created by adaptation of Latin.
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:05 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 280 ---
254
Case 13
THE SURGICAL TREATISE
Examination
VI 4-6
a The text has <y", but the parallels elsewhere show clearly that the correct reading is as
given above. See commentary below.
Translation
If thou examinest a man having a smash in his nostril, thou shouldst place thy
hand upon his nose at the point of this smash. Should it crepitate under thy fingers,
while at the same time he discharges blood from his nostril (and) from his ear, on the
side of him having that smash ; it is painful when he opens his mouth because of it;
(and) he is speechless, (conclusion in diagnosis).
Commentary
P^jT.^s.^'feL m ^T"'"/" That we are to read £H, " nostril," in this phrase, and
not/nd, " nose," has been demonstrated in the introduction to this case.
?^<vi. ^r /n^"/, " upon his nose," on the other hand, is not to be altered to
hr Sr-t-f; for the phrase which follows it, m h'w id pf, " at the point of that smash,"
would in that case be superfluous. It is probably the correct use of the word fnd,
" nose," in this passage which has misled the scribe to write " nose " twice incorrectly
in the preceding context, that is, title and beginning of examination.
*©"J©J x nhbhb, " break through " or " crepitate." This rare word is not found in
any of the medical documents outside of our treatise. It is an archaic word found
otherwise only in religious texts of great age: three times in the Pyramid Texts and
once at Abydos. It appears in the Pyramid Texts parallel with the word ion, " open,"
with reference to bolts (Pyr. 194a), to doors (Pyr. 1861b), and to a coffin (Pyr. 2009a).
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:05 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 281 ---
Case 13
255
TRANSLATION AND COMMENTARY
At Abydos it is said of doors (Mariette, Abydos, I, 40 a, 11). It should be noted that
the Pyramid passage applying nhbhb to the coffin has been restored with his customary
sagacity by Sethe; and one cannot doubt the correctness of the restoration.
This passage indicates that the word means somewhat more than " open," and
suggests the idea of violent opening. It probably means something like " break open."
In our papyrus we find it employed five times as a technical surgical term, applied
in each case to a fracture and indicating some kind of movement of the fracture under
the surgeon's fingers. The cases are as follows :
Case 18, a compound comminuted fracture at one side of the nose. " It nhbhb
under thy fingers " (VI 4-5).
Case 17, a compound comminuted fracture in the maxilla. "It nhbhb under thy
fingers " (VII 2).
Case 24, a break in the mandible. " It nhbhb under thy fingers " (VIII 28).
Case 87, a break in the arm. " It nhbhb under thy fingers " (XII16).
Case 44, a " break in the ribs of his sternum." " They nhbhb under thy fingers "
(XV 7-8).
With the above material before him the modern surgeon is better able to determine
the meaning of nhbhb than the orientalist, and Dr. Luckhardt, after examination of
the above evidence, confirms my conjecture, that it means " crepitate."
(]P^^PD^^^,^, ySk ho hm dy-f snf, " while at the same time he discharges
blood." A first glance at this passage might lead one to conclude that we have here
an unusual verb oj^^ hm-f, " he discharges," as if it were a surgical specialization
of the verb or O^fN., " to repel, turn back," or the like. The same text occurs
again in Case 17 (VII 8). Nevertheless it would be an error to accept this verb. We
have here undoubtedly the particle hm, written without determinative as
frequently. The after it is not a determinative, but must be read t_o, giving us
the customary statement , dy-f snf, " he discharges blood," as in the duplicate
passage (VII 2-8) cited below (see also VIII 7). I am unable to cite another example
of ydk ho hm followed by a verb in the idm-f form, but essentially the same construc-
tion with hm is found in the Sinuhe passage : J^SCjJf""1^ (Smune R 15), which
Gardiner renders " Even now he was returning " (see his Notes on the Story of Sinuhe,
p. 168), the force of the ty ho hm being very well brought out by " Even now," as
I have tried to render our ydk ho hm by " while at the same time." See also the follow-
ing paragraph.
j^^*— (corrected from ^"T""—), m 9^-f, " on the side of him." The evidence
for this correction is as follows. The phrase : ^^"--^.^P^^,^ m 9&-f b^Ti tfr pf,
" on the side of him having that injury," occurs six times in our treatise (twice with
the variant 1w". yh pn, IV 15-16, for ibr pf). Indeed one of these six passages is
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:05 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 282 ---
256
Case 13
THE SURGICAL TREATISE
very similar to our passage in VI 5 (except for the omission of the particle hm and the
parallel term ikr " injury," in place of our id " smash "). It reads :
(VII 2-8) and contains ^s'^='^, where our text has j^"^*^. The source of the error
is moreover evident. The combination "^"w.jj^fl occurs in the next line and without
doubt the scribe's eye fell upon it in the original from which he was copying.
HTl^11.4$k ^9,m"J/' " ne *s speechless," is explained by our ancient author himself
in Case 22, Gloss C.
Diagnosis
VI 6-7
Translation
Thou shouldst say concerning him : " One having a smash in his nostril. An ail-
ment not to be treated."
Commentary
As in the preceding three cases we have the diagnosis again reduced to a mere catch-
word, probably serving only as a memorandum, or possibly a student's note, to which
the essential item, verdict 8, has been appended. See commentary on Case 5 (II 15)
and discussion in the Introduction (pp. 46-48 and 78). The injury is so serious that
it is regarded as fatal and no treatment is added.
CASE FOURTEEN
VI 7-14
FLESH WOUND IN ONE SIDE OF THE NOSE PENETRATING
TO THE NOSTRIL
As an examination of the introduction to Case 18 will show, Case 14 is the last
of the cases discussing injuries to the nose. Like Case 18 it carries the place of the
injury toward one side, that is away from the middle of the nose (Cases 11 and 12),
so that in Case 15 we leave the nose entirely and deal with the maxillary region.
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:05 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 283 ---
Case 14
257
TRANSLATION AND COMMENTARY
Title
VI 7
Translation
Instructions concerning a wound in his nostril.
Examination
VI 7-9
3 S <^7*'
Translation
If thou examinest a man having a wound in his nostril, piercing through, shouldst
thou find the two lips of that wound separated from each other, thou shouldst draw
together for him that wound with stitching.
Commentary
This examination makes it clear that we are dealing with an injury which affects
only the soft tissue. It has pierced from the outside into the interior of the nostril,
a condition indicated by the rare word 1P<=J}.'*" yddb, which is explained by the
surgeon in a gloss (VI18-14). See Gloss A at end of case. The inclusion of the stitch-
ing in the examination is our surgeon's usual custom ; see commentary on Case 10,
V 6. Dr. Luckhardt remarks : " Again a good indication in favor of stitching, since
such a wound is likely to lead to a retraction of the wound edges, because of severance
of the underlying cutaneous muscles."
P ^ 3^ ^'t, " separated," is again a new word. It occurs four times in our papyrus,
once with the determinative as above, twice with (XII 4; XII 10), and once
followed by corrupt text which contains (XVI 18-19). It always occurs as pre-
dicate of a noun following gmy " find," and is obviously a form of the pseudo-participle.
It has nothing to do with the noun P^^^ dH, " filth," which appears from the
Empire on, especially in the rituals. It may be identical with the verb P<^3^^
i% " to damage" or the like, which is found from the Book of the Dead onward, e.g.,
Naville, 125, Introduction, 9-10 ; 125, 42; 17, 80. It is always construed in our
document with the preposition <=>, a construction which I have not been able to
s
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:05 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 284 ---
258
Case 14
THE SURGICAL TREATISE
find elsewhere. This may be due to its specialized surgical meaning, for it does not
occur in any of the other medical papyri. The translation suggested above is based
largely on our passage in Case 14, which states that " the two lips of that wound are
dH from each other," whereupon the surgeon is charged to " draw together that wound
with stitching." The implication is certainly strongly in favor of the meaning
" separated " for dH. There is a similar implication in Case 47 regarding the gaping
gash which is stated to be dH, and must then be drawn together with stitching (XVI
18-20). In Case 86, a broken arm, the surgeon finds the arm " hanging down and
dH-y from its fellow " (XII 9-10). A similar statement is made in Case 85 in which
the surgeon finds a broken clavicle " short and s't from its fellow " (XII 8-4). If
" fellow " means the other arm and the other clavicle respectively in these last two
cases, dH cannot of course mean " separated." But " fellow " in these two passages
probably refers to the other piece of bone which has been separated by the fracture,
and such an interpretation will permit us to render " separated " in all the cases
employing dH.
P"^* dny, " each other," is a dual of the pronoun dn, " they, their," and literally
means " they (or them) both." It is found also referring to two bandages in Case 85
(XII 7, corrupt) and Case 86 (XII 18, bis), where we have mention of " one of them
both " fc^P^, slight correction) and " the other of them both " (^^P"7). It is
well known that this dual form of the pronoun disappeared at an early date, giving
place to the plural form which supplanted it. Its appearance in our treatise is another
evidence of its great age.
(]^y ydr, " stitching." See commentary on Case 10, V 6, pp. 227-281.
Translation
Thou shouldst say concerning him : " One having a wound in his nostril, piercing
through. An ailment which I will treat."
Commentary
The diagnosis is again merely a catchword as so often in the preceding cases. The
commentary on " wound " will be found in Case 1, lost introductory column (pp. 82-84).
On " nostril " see Case 18, VI 8.
Diagnosis
VI 9
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:05 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 285 ---
Case 14
259
TRANSLATION AND COMMENTARY
(] p<=J|,> ysdb, " piercing through " will be found discussed in Gloss A of this case.
On the concluding verdict 1, see commentary in Case 1 (I 2) and consult also the
introduction (pp. 46 ff.).
Treatment
VI 9-12
^ T!
pi
Transition
Thou shouldst make for him two swabs of linen, (and) thou shouldst clean out every
worm of blood which has coagulated in the inside of his nostril. Thou shouldst bind it
with fresh meat the first day. When its stitching loosens, thou shouldst take off for
him the fresh meat, (and) thou shouldst bind it with grease, honey (and) lint every
day until he recovers.
Commentary
P<?"^ dwS-wy is without doubt a scribal error for ^f»"3f»^ " two swabs." See
the discussion of the parallel in Case 12 (V 18), and especially the full treatment in
Case 7, Gloss C (III 18).
The interesting term " every worm of blood " has been treated in Case 12, Gloss C
(VI 1-8), and the use of is, literally " to knot," with the meaning " coagulate," is
taken up in Case 12 (V 19).
On the use of " fresh meat " see Case 1 (I 2-8).
jS&cJ^ wnh, " loosens," is fully discussed in Case 10, V 6 under ydr. The query
arises whether wnh in our passage may not refer to the expected and harmless absorp-
tion and loosening of gut stitching, for the reason that it is not followed by any further
efforts to draw together the gash such as are made in Cases 10, 28, and 47. But
such absorption could not occur within a day. See the discussion in Case 10.
b 2
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:05 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 286 ---
260 THE SURGICAL TREATISE Case 14
H^i^i is doubtless to be read ydr as elsewhere, not yd-t. See full discussion of the
word, including our passage, in Case 10 (V 6).
^Jln^ *s probably to be read Ssp-yn-k, as a prescriptive form, but the dative
after the imperative, especially with hp, is of course common.
On the use of " grease, honey, and lint " see Case 1 (I 2-8).
Gloss A
VI12-14
Explaining : A wound in his nostril piercing through
13
Translation
As for : " A wound in his nostril, piercing through," it means that the two lips
of his wound are soft, opening to the inside of his nose, as one says: " Pierced
through " concerning soft things.
Commentary
This explanation is curiously enough repeated in another case, Gloss A, Case 26,
which contains some interesting variants noted below. The word which the com-
mentator is specifically explaining is
(] P<='J[/*■ yddb, " piercing through." The explanation is not particularly successful
in making clear the meaning of yddb. Besides the four occurrences of the word in
Case 14, it is further found nine times in our treatise, four of which are in Case 26.
These passages are really more valuable in determining the meaning of the word than
any other source, for the word is unknown outside of our document.1 In Case 26,
1 It is evidently not related to the well-known } idb of the Book of the Dead, which appears
as f1-\ J| in the Pyramid Texts (1340b, etc.) and means " damage " or the like. Nor has it any
discernible connection with P*~^_J regularly occurring in the Pyramid Texts in parallelism with
rnh, "life" (Pyr. 167a; 168a; 176-178). We cannot suppose that it is related to P^Jj idb,
" instruments," or the like, e. g., Naophoric Statue in the Vatican, 2. See infra, p. 18,7th line from top.
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:05 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 287 ---
Case 14
2fil
TRANSLATION AND COMMENTARY
a wound in the lip, the injury is described as " piercing through (yidb) to the inside
of his mouth " (IX 7 ; IX 9 ; IX 11-12). Similarly in Case 28 a wound in the throat
is described as " piercing through (yidb) to his gullet " (IX 19 ; IX 22). Helpful light
on the meaning of this passage is thrown by a detailed comparison with Case 27,
a " gaping wound in the chin." The parallel passages are as follows :
Case 27. " If thou examinest a man having a gaping wound in his chin," 1.
Case 28. " If thou examinest a man having a gaping wound in his throat," I] p<==J|x
Except for the two different parts of the body concerned, the two passages are
identical until we reach the final descriptive phrase, where Case 27 has " penetrating
to the bone," and Case 28 has " piercing through (yidb) to his gullet." Thus it would
seem highly probable that yidb is nearly synonomous with rr, " penetrate,"
the latter being here used where the penetration reaches a solid body, the former
(yidb) where it comes through into a void. In Case 84 the surgeon likewise describes
a rupture of overlying soft tissue which he finds accompanying a dislocation of the
clavicle, as " piercing through (yidb) to the inside " (XI 21), meaning, of course, the
interior of the trunk. In Case 87, a broken arm with a rupture of the overlying soft
tissue, the meaning of yidb is not so clear (XII20; XII21). The surgeon first describes
a fracture " having a wound over it " and regards this injury as one with which he
can deal (verdict 2). He then adds : "If, however, thou findest that wound which
is over the fracture with blood issuing from it, piercing through (yidb) to the interior
of his injury, thou shouldst say -. . . A case not treatable'" (Verdict 8,XII19-21).
See commentary on Case 87.
The form of the verb is interesting. With one exception (our gloss above), the
word is always written (]p(-ajj[/*' yidb, with initial (] in all the thirteen passages in
which it occurs: and it should be noted with reference to the sole occurrence of
P<=»JJ[^ idb, that the parallel text (IX 12) has yddb. The context would indicate
that we have in this word in every passage a participial form. In our Case 14 yidb
occurs three times in the phrase " a wound in his nostril, piercing through." In none
of these three passages does yidb take a feminine t, which would show agreement with
Srt (feminine), " nostril." It must qualify wbnw, " wound," which is masculine,
and we must therefore regard yidb as an active participle, describing the condition
of the wound. It is evidently then an imperfect active participle, having the vowel
after the second radical, and therefore taking a prosthetic (] before the double
consonance at the beginning of the word. Confirming this identification is the
occurrence of the form 1P^J<?]^ yidb-w (XI 21), with the ending <$. See Erman,
Grammatik3, par. 890, p. 208. The form idb in our gloss (VI 14), which seems to
make a sentence by itself, might be a perfect passive participle, and has been so
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:05 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 288 ---
21)2
Case 14
THE SURGICAL TREATISE
considered in the translation, notwithstanding the occurrence of yddb in the parallel
gloss (IX 12).
IJ^*^^ w^ n might possibly be considered as an n-form of the verb, with
hnw fnd-f (" the inside of his nose ") as the subject, giving us the sentence: " The
inside of his nose has opened." The surgical and anatomical conditions in these
cases, however, are not described by the use of the n-form (except with the negative,
e. g., II 14). It seems to me certain that we have here the common phrase —^rcl^
n hnw, " to the inside," found also in Case 5 (II16 ; II17) with hrp, " sink;" Case 6
(II 24) with wb' " open ; " Case 26 (IX 9 ; IX 11) with yddb, and (IX 12) with wb\
" open ; " Case 82 (XI 8) with hrp, " sink " (n omitted by error of scribe); Case 84
(XI 21) with yddb, " piercing through ; " and Case 87 (XII 20), the same. We must
regard wb' n, "opening to," as exactly parallel with ^ffj rr n, "penetrating to," so
common in the cranial cases in this treatise.
my dd, " as one says," perhaps literally a passive participle, " like what is
said," or better an impersonal passive, " as is said," is represented by ^(*—, literally
" he says " in the repetition of this gloss in Case 26, Gloss A.
The plural of yh-t, " things," is treated as usual as a masculine, gnn following with-
out any indication of agreement in gender. See Case 81, commentary on X 19.
CASE FIFTEEN
VI14-17
PERFORATION OF THE BONE IN THE REGION OF THE MAXILLA AND
THE ZYGOMA
With Case 15 we pass from injuries of the nose to those in the maxillary region,
including likewise injuries to the zygoma in all probability. Injuries in this region
are treated in the three cases 15, 16, and 17 : Case 15 discussing a " perforation "
(Qim), Case 16 a "split" (j)8n), and Case 17 a "smash" (id) or compound comminuted
fracture. The arrangement of these cases of injuries in the region mentioned is the
same as that which we have found in the discussion of injuries of the skull: Case 8
treating a " perforation," Case 4a" split," and Case 5a" smash."
Our surgeon regards a perforation of the bone in this region as an injury which he
can cure, notwithstanding the fact that there is possibly a diseased condition of the
wound. The remedy which he applies, a mineral called ymrw, which cannot be identi-
fied, would be interesting if it were safe to conclude that it was a mineral poison acting
as a disinfectant, but the reader should be warned that this is pure conjecture. Our
inability to identify this mineral is another illustration of our lack of information
regarding the terms belonging to the ancient Egyptian materia medica.
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:05 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 289 ---
Case 15
263
TRANSLATION AND COMMENTARY
Title
VI14
Translation
Instructions concerning a perforation in his cheek.
Commentary
Jo The reading thm is clear from the examination (VI15). For full commentary-
see Case 8 (118).
mnd-t, " cheek," is used here as a designation of the maxilla and the con-
tiguous portions of the zygoma, even as far back as the temporal bone. See com-
mentary in Case 11 (V 15).
Examination
VI15-16
Translation
If thou examinest a man having a perforation in his cheek, shouldst thou find
there is a swelling, protruding and black, (and) diseased tissue upon his cheek,
(conclusion in diagnosis).
Commentary
On thm m mnd-t-f, " a perforation in his cheek," see title above. Commentary
on thb ySw-y, " the swelling protruding," will be found in Case 4 (II 4).
/□^rffe km may mean " black " here, although with this meaning it usually has
the determinative while its meaning with the determinative ^ is usually " to
be complete." It should be noted, however, that in the following case (VI 18-19),
the wording of the examination of which is exactly parallel to our passage, we find :
" If thou examinest a man having a split (jpSn) in his cheek, shouldst thou find there
is a swelling, protruding and red, on the outside of that split, etc.;" that is, we have
a color designation immediately following the observation regarding the swelling.
>=^^H1 Sm'y. This term is the same as ==^^^$2, $m'yot Case 41, see Gloss A.
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:05 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 290 ---
264
Case 15
THE SURGICAL TREATISE
Diagnosis
VI 16
Translation
Thou shouldst say concerning him : " One having a perforation in his cheek.
An ailment which I will treat."
Commentary
Again, as so often, the diagnosis is merely a hasty memorandum, omitting all that
should follow the introductory catchwords. On the meaning of these see commentary
on the title. On the significance of the concluding verdict, see commentary on Case 1
(I 2) and also the introduction (pp. 46 ff.).
Treatment
VI16-17
Translation
Thou shouldst bind it with ymrw and treat it afterward [with] grease (and) honey
every day until he recovers.
Commentary
1£T>iTi ymrw, which we may call imru, must be identical with (]^<?,^, ymrw,
which occurs seven times in our treatise. The writing with £ = mr, which is found
in two other passages (IX 6 and X 11), is further evidence of the archaic origin of our
treatise, for it is known only in the Old Kingdom, or in religious texts retaining the
old orthography. The determinative shows that it is a mineral, which, however, we
are unable to identify, as it is entirely unknown outside of Pap. Smith. It can hardly
be the same as the like-sounding 1P^IJ, ° , y&nry, commonly guessed at as " emery,"
which appears for example in Asiatic tribute (Sethe, Urk. IV, p. 686). If we really
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:05 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 291 ---
Case 15
265
TRANSLATION AND COMMENTARY
have in our case here an example of gangrene, one would like to see in imru some
poisonous mineral which would act as a disinfectant; though, if so, it is obvious that
the nature of its effects would not have been understood by the ancient surgeon.
^ drwh-k, " thou shouldst treat." Although the customary determinative of
srwh is the book roll, nevertheless we cannot doubt that we should read *_j as frwh
in this passage, as a comparison of the corresponding passage in Case 16 immediately
following will show.
The omission of ^ m " with " before mrh-t, " grease," is frequent in Pap. Smith;
but it is not due to the fact that mrh-t begins with m, for it is also often found omitted
before by-t, " honey," and even ydr, " stitching " (Case 26, IX 8).
On the use of grease and honey see commentary on Case 1 (I 2-8).
CASE SIXTEEN
VI17-21
SPLIT OF THE BONE IN THE REGION OF THE MAXILLA AND
THE ZYGOMA
This case is the second of the group of three (Cases 15,16, and 17) treating injuries
of the maxillary region. See the introduction to Case 15. The case is regarded as one
quite curable.
Title
VI 17-18
I I III 1 X
Translation
Instructions concerning a split in his cheek.
Commentary
On the surgical meaning of " split " (pSn), see commentary, Case 4 (II 2). See
also preceding Case 15 (VI 14).
Examination
VI 18-19
1-
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:05 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 292 ---
266 THE SURGICAL TREATISE Case 16
Translation
If thou examinest a man having a split in his cheek, shouldst thou find that there
is a swelling, protruding and red, on the outside of that split, (conclusion in diagnosis).
Commentary
" Shouldst thou find . . . that split" is found also in Case 8 (IV 6), referring to
a fracture of the skull (except that our passage in Case 16 has inserted the additional
detail " red "). Consult commentary on Case 8 (IV 6), and, on " swelling protruding,"
see also Case 4 (examination), II 4.
Diagnosis
VI19-20
WWW ^ Q WAWA n t | j.tt^-, ^
20
Translation
Thou shouldst say concerning him: " One having a split in his cheek. An
ailment which [I] will treat."
Commentary
As in a number of the preceding cases the diagnosis contains only a memorandum
repeating the title, the verdict at the end forming the important item. On this verdict
consult commentary on Case 1 (I 2) and the introduction (pp. 46 ff.).
Treatment
VI 20-21
Translation
Thou shouldst bind it with fresh meat the first day. His treatment is sitting
until its swelling is reduced (lit. drawn out). Thou shalt treat it afterward [with]
grease, honey, (and) lint every day until he recovers.
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:05 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 293 ---
Case 16
TRANSLATION AND COMMENTARY
Commentary
On the treatment with " fresh meat," see commentary on Case 1 (I 2-8); and on
" grease, honey, and lint " see Case 1 (I 2-8). The term " swelling " (thb) is discussed
in full in Case 4 (II 4). The chief item in the treatment is " sitting," that is quiet
and rest; see Case 4 (II 7).
CASE SEVENTEEN
VII1-7
COMPOUND COMMINUTED FRACTURE OF THE BONE IN THE REGION
OF THE MAXILLA AND THE ZYGOMA
This is the third in the series of three progressively more serious injuries to the
bone in the maxillary region, beginning with Case 15. As in the case of a similar
injury to the skull (Case 5), to the nasal bone (Case 18), and to the temporal bone
(Case 22) the surgeon appends the fatal verdict 8, " An ailment not to be treated."
In view of these analogous cases just cited (5, 18, and 22), our verdict in Case 17 is
probably correct, and the stereotyped words, following the conventional treatment
with grease, honey, and lint, " until he recovers," are doubtless to be regarded as
a scribal error. See discussion of these passages below, and see PI. VII, Fig. 14.
Title
VII1
Translation
Instructions concerning a smash in his cheek.
Commentary
On the surgical meaning of id "smash," really a compound comminuted fracture,
see commentary on Case 5 (II 11).
Examination
VII1-4
tic
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:05 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 294 ---
268
Case 17
THE SURGICAL TREATISE
4
Translation
If thou examinest a man having a smash in his cheek, thou shouldst place thy
hand on his cheek at the point of that smash. Should it crepitate under thy fingers,
while he discharges blood from his nostril, (and) from his ear on the side of him having
that injury ; (and) at the same time he discharges blood from his mouth, while it is
painful when he opens his mouth because of it, (conclusion in diagnosis).
The parallel passage in Case 18 (VI 4-6) has interesting variants. The surgeon
uses wdy "put, place " interchangeably with rdy, literally "give," when the object is
the hand placed on the injury.
M h'w, which I have rendered "at the point of," probably suggests some local
refinement which may not have been sufficiently suggested by this rendering. See
parallel in Case 18.
On nhbhb, " crepitate," see commentary on Case 18 (VI 4-5).
On ydk ho in l. 2 and y£k ho hm in l. 8 see commentary on Case 18 (VI 5).
Both the nostril and the ear on the side which has suffered the injury are affected.
The apparent writing ikn, as in IV 15 (see also original, IV 7), is to be read Air.
The discharge of blood from the mouth, as well as from the nostril and the ear,
shows that the wound has broken through and ruptured the tissue in the oral cavity.
Naturally the facial muscles are effected, making it painful to open the mouth, just
as in Case 18.
a The scribe wrote by error immediately after a. He then wrote over this and
added >w at the end.
Commentary
Diagnosis
VII 4-5
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:05 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 295 ---
Case 17
201)
TRANSLATION AND COMMENTARY
Translation
Thou shouldst say concerning him : " One having a smash in his cheek, while he
discharges blood from his nostril, from his ear, (and) from his mouth, (and) he is
speechless. An ailment not to be treated."
Commentary
The diagnosis is fuller than in the two preceding cases, in which it offers only a
repetition of the title. It adds also the interesting circumstance that the patient is
speechless. This word, dgmy, " he is speechless," is explained by the surgeon himself
in Case 22, Gloss C, q. v. This remark regarding speechlessness is dropped in here as
a single word in Egyptian, whereas in Case 18, where it has been properly inserted as
part of the examination, the same Egyptian verb has been introduced by a preceding
auxiliary verb yw-f, " he is " (VI 6). See discussion of this diagnosis in the Intro-
duction (p. 50).
This verdict, regularly used of fatal cases, will be found discussed in Case 5 (II15).
I formerly regarded it in our case as an obvious error of the scribe, in view of the phrase
" until he recovers," at the end of the case. Indeed the scribe has made the same
error and corrected it back to verdict 1, " a case which I will treat," in Case 85. An
examination of Case 18, however, makes it quite possible that the verdict is correct
and the conclusion (VII 7) an error. See Case 18, introduction.
Treatment
VII 5-7
Translation
Thou shouldst bind with fresh meat the first day. His rrelief1 is sitting until its
swelling is reduced (lit. drawn out). Thou shalt treat it afterward [with] grease, honey
(and) lint every day, until he recovers.
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:05 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 296 ---
270
Case 17
THE SURGICAL TREATISE
Commentary
This treatment is identical with that in the preceding case, but we cannot suppose
that the scribe has absentmindedly raised his eyes to the treatment in the preceding
case (immediately above our case in his original roll), and thus copied the wrong treat-
ment; for he has written the extraordinary ^(] (]<<■— for p*J* g w srwh-f, " his treat-
ment " (VI 20), and he has written the variant ^|Q9 for ^ ^ of VI 21, besides the
cursive "^^5° for the fuller ^^o^o by-t, "honey," of VI 21. As for the conclusion,
" until he recovers," it is so frequent in our treatise after the treatment with "grease,
honey and lint," that the scribe may have written it quite thoughtlessly, without
having seen it in the original before him. It is quite possible therefore that this con-
clusion is an error and that the fatal verdict above is correct.
sry-f, " his rrelieF," is not an error, for it is found in two other passages
in our treatise, three in all. In each case it is written exactly as above, without any
determinative, in a verbless sentence with " sitting " as the predicate noun. In both
the other cases it is followed by the copulative ^ pw (Case 20, VIII 5 ; and Case 82,
XI 6-7). In our Case 17 it may be used in connection with a fatal condition of the
patient; in Case 20 it is certainly so used ; but in Case 82 it is immediately followed
by the clause " until he recovers." If the meaning above suggested is correct, it is
applied both to relief in a favorable, as well as in a hopeless case, in which temporary
alleviation is all that can be expected. The rendering hazarded is based on a very un-
certain identification of our word with the causative p-=*^.(]-A i-rwy, "to cause to flee,"
used of exorcising spirits, and as a legal term, of " transferring " a person or pro-
perty levied for tax payments, a term which might possibly be applied by our
surgeon to relief from physical suffering. In all three occurrences of the word we
find — s instead of the p d needed to justify the etymology suggested. In any case it
should be noted that our puzzling word is found in all three cases in a context which
elsewhere repeatedly has irwh-f, " his treatment," in place of our sry-f—a fact which
shows that sry-f must have some meaning which will make sense when substituted for
srwh-f, " his treatment."
CASE EIGHTEEN
VII 7-14
A WOUND IN THE SOFT TISSUE OF THE TEMPLE, THE BONE
BEING UNINJURED
This case is the first of a group of five cases of injuries affecting the temporal region
between the eye and the ear. The surgeon has thus been passing from the nose back-
ward towards the ear, which follows this group of five cases. Like the first eight cases
in the treatise, discussing injuries to the head, our group begins with a flesh wound
affecting only the overlying soft tissue (Case 18) and passes then to deeper and more
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:05 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 297 ---
Case 18
271
TRANSLATION AND COMMENTARY
serious wounds affecting the bone : a perforation (thm, Cases 19 and 20), a split
(p$n, Case 21), and a compound comminuted fracture (id, Case 22).
The discussion includes two interesting glosses, the first explaining the size and
nature of the flesh wound, the second defining the new term gm', and showing that it
was closely equivalent to our modern popular word " temple."
Title
VII 7
Translation
Instructions concerning a wound in his temple.
Commentary
The important new word gm', " temple," or " temporal bone," is explained by
the surgeon himself at the end of this case in Gloss B, q. v.
Examination
VII 7-9
8
£7£* J K
■ The scribe has apparently written r, at least it is unusually large for t. Such a large t is however
occasionally found, and the gloss in l.12, quoting this passage, writes t.
Translation
If thou examinest a man having a wound in his temple, it not having a gash,
while that wound penetrates to the bone, thou shouldst palpate his wound. Shouldst
thou find his temporal bone uninjured, there being no split, (or) perforation, (or) smash
in it, (conclusion in diagnosis).
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:05 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 298 ---
272
Case 18
THE SURGICAL TREATISE
Commentary
The parallel passage in Case 27 (IX14-15) offers interesting and important variants.
Grammatically it is interesting to find above gmm-k, " shouldst thou find," parallel with
yr gmy-k, " If thou shouldst find " in Case 27. More important is the following variant :
Casel8:^^^s>^|^
" Shouldst thou find his gm' uninjured."
Case 27 : 1—^VHw'iSk-*1
" If thou shouldst find his bone uninjured " (IX 14-15).
The full discussion of gm', " temple," will be found in Gloss B, in connection with
the surgeon's own explanation of the word; but the point to be made here is the evident
application of the word both to a bone and to the soft tissue lying over it. We observe
that the injury is assumed both by the title and the first clause of the examination
to be in the patient's gm', whereas the latter part of the examination (beginning l. 9)
states quite clearly that the gm7 is " uninjured " and has no " split, perforation, (or)
smash in it." The specified injuries are those of the bone (j1$n and thm are used ex-
clusively of bone, id primarily) and the parallel passage above cited, referring to the
chin, actually employs the word " bone " where our case has gm'. It is obvious there-
fore that our surgeon is describing an injury which has penetrated the soft tissue over-
lying the bone and exposing it, but without inflicting any injury upon it. We find,
therefore, wide latitude in the anatomical meaning of gm', here rendered " temple "
and " temporal bone," which will be found discussed in the commentary on Gloss B,
where the Egyptian surgeon is noticeably vague in his definition of gm', and is probably
intentionally so ; for he calls it " the region thereof between the corner of his eye and
the Torifice"1 of his ear, at the end of his mandible " (p. 275). His terms leave it quite
uncertain, therefore, whether the designation gm' includes the bone or refers exclusively
to the overlying soft tissue. The superficial area included is indicated with fair pre-
cision, but like our own word " temple ", the Egyptian gm' does not suggest what
is included below the surface (see pp. 275-277 and PI. V, Fig. 11).
On the meaning of the term kf-t, " gash," see commentary on Case 1, pp. 90-92.
On " palpate " (drr) consult commentary on Case 1, pp. 92-98.
On " penetrates to the bone " (rr n ki) see Case 1, pp. 87-89.
PSn, " split," confined to injuries of the bone, has been discussed in Case 4 (II 2).
Thm, " perforation," also confined to injuries of the bone, has been discussed in
Case 8 (118).
3d, " smash," primarily used of injuries to the bone, but sometimes of soft tissue,
is discussed in Case 5 (II11).
The order of the three injuries excluded from this case is different from that of the
following four cases (19-22), in which they are taken up, viz., thm, p$n, id.
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:05 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 299 ---
Case 18 TRANSLATION AND COMMENTARY 273
Diagnosis
VII 9-10
Translation
Thou shouldst say concerning him : " One having a wound in his temple. An
ailment which I will treat."
Commentary
Considering the surgeon's vague use of gm', " temple," in this case (see commentary
on examination), this memorandum serving in the place of the diagnosis is singularly
insufficient. It merely repeats the title, as in the cases on the maxillary region (Cases
15-17). For the practical surgeon, however, the line of action he is to follow is in-
troduced in the favorable verdict 1, which is explained in Case 1 (I 2) and discussed
also in the introduction (pp. 46 ff.).
Treatment
VII10-11
8 Preposition m, " with " omitted as commonly.
Translation
Thou shouldst bind it with fresh meat the first day, (and) thou shouldst treat
afterward [with] grease, (and) honey every day, until he recovers.
Commentary
On this frequent remedy, fresh meat followed by grease and honey, often with lint
added, see Case 1, treatment (12-8). The case is evidently a simple one, and recovery
is regarded as certain.
T
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:05 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 300 ---
274 THE SURGICAL TREATISE Case 18
Gloss A
VII11-18
Explaining : A wound, not having a gash, while it penetrates to the bone.
XI c
a The scribe at first wrote " its two lips," and then discovered that his original had " his wound "
instead of the pronoun " its." He therefore canceled " its " ("^") with a vertical stroke of red ink
over the black. Wn-t and I of kf-t (l. 12) are also corrections entered in black in the rubric.
Translation
As for: " A wound, not having a gash, while it penetrates to the bone," it means
that the wound is contracted, reaching as far as the bone, (though) there is no gash in
it. He speaks of (its) narrowness, his wound not having two hps.
Commentary
The scribe again demonstrates his carelessness in quoting an excerpt from the text
of the case, which has " that wound " (VII 8) instead of " it " as quoted (VII12).
This wound in the temple is of the same kind as that in the head, described in
Case 1, where much the same terms are employed to indicate the character of the
wound as a small rupture of the soft tissue, such as would be produced by falling and
striking the head on a stone, or such as would result from the blow of a club. Compare
Case 1, diagnosis (11-2) and Gloss B (I 9-10). This gloss explains the phrase in the
text " while his wound does not have two lips " and states the meaning as : " his
wound is narrow; without gaping of one (lip) from the other." Compare also Case 1,
Gloss C. The gloss is of interest as showing the surgeon's intention to create precise
terms for flesh wounds just as he does for injuries to the bone. This gloss, further-
more, correlates well with the term gm' as sometimes designating the soft tissue of
the temple.
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:05 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 301 ---
Case 18
275
TRANSLATION AND COMMENTARY
Gloss B
VII18-14
Explaining: His gm'
a The two signs have been canceled by two oblique strokes in red ink over the black.
Translation
As for: " His gm'," it means the region thereof between the corner of his eye and
the 1"orifice1 of his ear, at the end of his mandible.
Commentary
-|-.1^1? ymytw (or ymywty) literally means " between." It is, however, twice used
elsewhere in our document to designate the " region between " or the " tissue between,"
that is, it becomes a substantive meaning " what is between." The two examples are :
" It means what is between shell and shell of the skull," a description of the sutures
(Case 7, III 16, Gloss A); and
-vM :^2+JH£I ~ ^
" it means the middle of his nose , extending to the region between his two
eyebrows " (Case 12, Gloss A, V 21). These two passages quite justify our rendering
" region between " in Case 18.
~ ny. The force of the particle is not wholly clear here, although it can be under-
stood as meaning " thereto " or " therefor," somewhat in the sense of " thereof."
See commentary on verdict 8, Case 5 (II15).
Pn!^ &nd, corrected to id. The two signs ^ rn have been canceled by the
scribe with two oblique strokes of red ink over the black. Such a word as id, with
determinative of the evil bird, is however unknown ; whereas the word frnd, although
corrected by the scribe, is a perfectly good word with the right meaning for this
passage. The correction is therefore in all probability an error by the scribe.
&nd is employed as the opposite of i-wih, " make broad " (Lepsius, Denkmaeler,
III, 18, 7) ; as the opposite of i-c$', " make numerous " (Pap. Leyden 847, 8, 8); and
as the opposite of i-c', "make great" (Tomb of Neferhotep, Duemichen, Hist. Inschr.
X 2
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:05 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 302 ---
276
Case 18
THE SURGICAL TREATISE
II 40a, 11). It is clear from these examples that i-cnd means " to diminish"
(transitive), or more specifically in the three cases cited, " to make narrow," " to make
few," " to make small." Confirmatory examples will be found in Edfu (Rochem. I
294 ; I 429 = Piehl, Inscr. II 8 Da); Gardiner, Admonitions, p. 80 ; D6vaud, Maximes
de Ptahhotep, p. 19; and Gunn, Syntax, p. 15, example 89. The meaning " to make
narrow " fits our passage very well. It must indicate the narrow end of the eye, as
distinguished from the broad end, a difference accentuated very strongly by Egyptian
eye-paint. Our surgeon is designating the outside corner of the eye.
iWt " 1orifice"1 " is possibly to be transliterated J^J]^ ffry-t. It is a new
and unknown anatomical term, not found in any other ancient document. As a part
of the ear, it renders a little more definite one limit or boundary of the region which
the surgeon is defining. Whether it designates a portion of the auricle or outer ear,
or indicates the orifice itself, we cannot decide on the basis of this passage, the only
occurrence of the word thus far known.
" At the end of his mandible." The preposition r is the usual one indicating prox-
imity to a member of the body ; compare such well-known phrases as r hh, " at the
throat " (used of a necklace); or rfnd, " at the nose " (used of a flower, or the symbol
of life). It is grammatically possible, however, that r, the regular preposition introduc-
ing the other limit after the word " between," is to be so construed here. This would
give us " the corner of his eye " as one limit, while the other limit would be double,
" the '"orifice1 of his ear " and " the end of his mandible." An examination of the
actual anatomy of the head, however, is conclusive in excluding this rendering. We
must understand r as meaning " at."
s gm'-f. The region connoted by this word, as defined in our gloss therefore,
is that between the eye and the ear, at the end of the mandible, and this conclusion is
clearly confirmed by the other evidence in our document. It is interesting to observe
that the ancient surgeon finds it necessary to define the term gm', as if it were un-
familiar to his generation. It is certainly so to ours, for the word is entirely new
to us, and is not found in any other document. Fortunately it occurs no less than
twenty-two times in the Edwin Smith Papyrus. Of these, three passages are very
helpful in determining its meaning. One of them is our Gloss B, just discussed. Before
taking up the other two, we should note the position of our case with reference to
what has preceded and what follows. After discussing wounds of the skull, including
the frontal bone and eyebrows, the surgeon has proceeded to take up injuries to the
bridge of the nose, to one nostril, to the cheek and maxillary region. He then takes
up the gm', and follows it with a discussion of the ear. He thus proceeds from the nose,
through the maxilla and the gm? to the ear. The order and sequence of his discussion,
therefore, would suggest that in taking up the am" he is proceeding through the tem-
poral region to the ear. Gloss B has just confirmed this conclusion, and we may now
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:05 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 303 ---
Case 18
277
TRANSLATION AND COMMENTARY
proceed to examine the other two instructive occurrences of the word grm' in our
papyrus.
We find symptoms arising from a gaping wound in the skull, partially described as
follows : "Stiffening on the part of the ligaments at the end of his ramus,"
" which are fastened to his gm', that is at the end of his jaw, without moving to
and fro, so that it is not easy for him to open his mouth because of his pain " (Case 7,
Gloss B, III 17-18). The ligaments which operate the mandible are here said to be
" fastened to his gm\" making the identification of gm' as "temporal bone " quite
certain. The reference is of course to the temporal muscle, which is attached to the
coronoid process and to the temporal bone.
The third instructive example is found in a discussion of the ramus, the inner or
upper end of the mandible. It defines the ramus as follows :
" as for the ramus, its end is in his gm' as the claw of an 'mr-bird grasps an object "
(Case 22, Gloss A, VIII 14-15 q. v.). We have here a very interesting description of
the forked upper end of the ramus as engaging in the gm', just as the claw of an
W-bird (obviously some two-toed bird) clutches a thing. The reference is of course
to the fossa temporalis, the depression in the lower part of the temporal bone, into which
the condyle is articulated, while the coronoid process, together with the incisura
mandibulae between it and the condyle, passes around to the inner side of the zygo-
matic process, which it clasps, as it were, like the claw of a two-toed bird. See PI. V.
It is quite clear then, that the ancient term gm' refers to the temporal bone, but
certainly not to the whole of it. The limits defined in our Gloss B confine it to the
region between the outer corner of the eye and the ear " at the end of his mandible."
These limits would include only the outer and anterior portions of the temporal bone,
especially the zygomatic process, and also the portion of the zygoma lying between
the eye and the ear. It should be further noted that gm' defines a region, and hence,
as we have already seen in the examination, it may designate either the underlying
bone or the soft tissue lying over it. It would seem therefore that our surgeon in
developing his terminology for the parts of the human skull did not strictly follow the
natural divisions suggested by the sutures, but was doubtless somewhat governed by
the popular designations available, just as we employ a term " temple " to designate
the flat area between the forehead and the ear, which does not at all correspond in
extent to the temporal bone, and might include both the bone in this region and the
overlying soft tissue. Our popular term " temple ", therefore, is a very satisfactory
modern equivalent of the ancient Egyptian gm'.
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:05 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 304 ---
278
Case 19
THE SURGICAL TREATISE
CASE NINETEEN
VII14-22
A PERFORATION IN THE TEMPLE
This case is the second in the group of five cases of wounds in the temple (Cases
18-22). It is also the first of two which deal with a " perforation," possibly of the
bone in the first case, and certainly so in the second (Case 20). Full discussion of the
term thm, " perforation," will be found in Case 8 (I 18). The difference between the
two cases of " perforation " (19 and 20) is unmistakable as far as the patient's con-
dition is concerned. Case 19 is curable by simple treatment; Case 20 is incurable
and only alleviatory measures are suggested. In Case 19 the patient's eye on the
injured side is " blood-shot " and his neck is stiff; in Case 20 both eyes are blood-shot
and both are discharging, while blood also issues from both nostrils, and the patient
is unable to speak. It is possible that in Case 20 the perforation has been so deep that
the rupture of internal tissues has affected both the eye and the nostril on the opposite
side from the wound, as well as the eye and the nostril on the injured side of the head.
The weapon which presumably caused the injury has perhaps thrust more deeply in
Case 20 than in Case 19, but the use of the dual " two eyes," " two nostrils " in Case
20 may be a scribal error in writing (see commentary).
Some further indication of this difference, included in the actual descriptions of the
two wounds themselves, might therefore be expected, and it is possible that we have
this indication suggested by the surgeon in the examination (VII15) in Case 19 in the
words, " a perforation in his temple, a wound being upon it; " for it is conceivable
that we should render " the wound being over it " (the temporal bone), and therefore
perhaps confined to the overlying soft tissue. Indeed it is difficult to find any other
satisfactory explanation of the little circumstantial verbless sentence, "a (or the)
wound being upon it."
Title
VII 14-15
15
Translation
Instructions concerning a perforation in his temple.
Commentary
Full commentary on this injury, a " perforation " (thm) of the skull, will be found in
Case 8 (118). On the term " temple" (gm') see the preceding case, Gloss B (VII18-14).
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:05 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 305 ---
Case 19
279
TRANSLATION AND COMMENTARY
Examination
VII15-17
tic
sic
?. ^ ^ ...»
a The scribe has omitted the preposition " in " (m).
b The scribe has corrected out this stroke, canceling it with an oblique cross stroke in red ink over
the black.
Translation
If thou examinest a man having a perforation (thm) [in] his temple, a wound being
upon it, thou shouldst inspect his wound, saying to him: " Look at thy two shoulders."
Should his doing so be painful (even though) his neck turns around (only) a little for
him, while his eye on the side of him having that injury is blood-shot, (conclusion
follows in diagnosis).
Commentary
This is one of the examinations in which a certain capability or function of a part
of the body is tested by the physician by means of directions given to the patient.
™^ Sry, " little," is in a position which makes it somewhat uncertain whether we
should connect it with the preceding or the following context. Normally, as an adverb,
it should follow the proposition to which it belongs, and we should render " should his
doing so a little be painful; " but this leaves the following proposition without much
force, as a weak circumstantial clause, " when he has turned his neck around." In
the above translation I have understood Sry as a predicate adjective in a sentence of
which the following proposition is the subject, thus : " even though little be that his
neck turns for him." The proposition phr n:/ nhb-t-f, " his neck turns for him "
(regarding n-f as a dative), may quite properly serve as the subject of Sry, " little."
To accept an n-form, unless it were nominal, as the subject of Sry, would not be so easy.
^ J^I1 1 ^swl"'j/, " blood-shot," found only in the medical papyri, is fully explained
by the surgeon in a gloss at the end of this case. The grammatical form with the
double (} (] for y, is of course wrong, but occurs several times in our treatise, see especially
Case 81 (X15).
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:05 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 306 ---
280 THE SURGICAL TREATISE Case 19
P<£>^ dkr, " injury," seemingly written ihn, occurs so written in Case 8 (IV 15)
and also in Case 17 (VII 8).
On the force of " a wound being upon it," see the introduction to this case.
Diagnosis
VII17-18
18
a The scribe made an erasure here while the ink was wet, and made a subsequent alteration now
indistinct and uncertain. Below is evidently a w; but the traces above it show two indistinct
oblique strokes over a horizontal stroke: hardly ph, which moreover makes no sense.
Translation
Thou shouldst say concerning him : " One having a perforation in his temple r-1,
while he suffers with stiffness in his neck. An ailment which I will treat."
Commentary
The symptom " he suffers with stiffness in his neck " occurs seventeen times in
our papyrus, and never elsewhere with the introduction yw-f, " he is." Hence it
is unlikely that the scribe intended to use this auxiliary verb here ; nor do the visible
traces in the lacuna favor such a reading. Hence the uncertain word must belong to
the preceding gm'-f. No probable restoration of the word suggests itself.
Full commentary on the phrase, " he suffers, etc." will be found in Case 8 (I 20).
It is a symptom which the surgeon recognizes especially as accompanying injuries to
the skull, and is therefore recorded in each of the group of six such cases (three to eight
inclusive). It is interesting to notice that the surgeon established the presence of this
symptom by experiment with the patient's ability to turn his neck and look at either
shoulder. In Case 5, a very serious compound fracture of the skull, the surgeon records
the symptom (II 18-14), but it is not stated that he directed the patient to make an
effort to look at his shoulders. We have there the simple statement that he could not
do so. The point here is that the stiffness was discovered by actual experiment in the
examination, and then recorded in the diagnosis. Here then is a case of sound in-
ductive reasoning after experiment—a method in no wise different from that of the
modern surgeon, but appearing here for the first time in the history of science as
known to us. (See introduction, pp. 48-51). On the favorable verdict 1, see
Case 1 (I 2).
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:05 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 307 ---
Cask 19
281
TRANSLATION AND COMMENTARY
Treatment
VII 18-19
Translation
Thou shouldst put him at his mooring stakes until the period of his injury passes
by, (and) thou shouldst treat with grease, honey, (and) lint every day until he recovers.
Commentary
On the extraordinary figure of speech, " put him at his mooring stakes," see Case 8
(122—28). The obscure phrase " until the period of his injury passes by " is discussed
in Case 8 (I 28). The nominal form of the verb here (&o'-i) is unusual; the other four
cases containing this passage have ho'y. On the familiar treatment, see Case 1 (I 8).
Gloss A
VII 19-22
Explaining : His two eyes are blood-shot.
Translation
As for : " His two eyes are blood-shot," it means that the color of his two eyes is
red like the color of W-flowers. The " Treatise on What Pertains to the Embalmer "
says concerning it: " His two eyes are red rwith1 disease like an eye at the end of its
weakness."
Commentary
The inaccuracy of the scribe in quoting " his two eyes," whereas the text of the
case (VII 17) has " his eye," and expressly stipulates that it is the eye on the injured
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:05 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 308 ---
282
Case 19
THE SURGICAL TREATISE
side which is meant, is an outstanding example of the carelessness with which he has
copied our treatise. In the explanation he continues the dual as is evident especially
from the writing
£^ must certainly be read yr-ty-f(y), as shown by the following feminine verbal
form Ssm-ty ; for the other word for eye, of uncertain spelling, is masculine.
JLS^JI Ssm-ty, " is blood-shot " is really a color designation. As a verb it is found
elsewhere only twice, where it is also applied to the color of the eyes : Pap. Ebers 88;
18 and 109, 20. As a substantive it occurs as a designation of bandages as far back as
the Pyramid Texts (2114b) and of a kind of stone in the Annals of Thutmose III
(Sethe, Urk. IV, p. 706,l.12), and probably designated reddish or red-streaked objects.
Perhaps with such a meaning as a masculine noun in Pap. Ebers 87, 7 ; 41, 8 ;
41, 16 ; 41, 2; it is evidently so in the case of the feminine noun Ssm-t where it
is used together with dsr, "red, inflamed" (Pap. Ebers, 62, 9). No other examples
of the word are known.
Yrtyw as a color designation, especially as a word for " color," is discussed in Case 7
(III 21). At the same time, in our gloss it is possible that this puzzling word may have
its older more original meaning " blue," and be intended to designate the white of the
eye, which so often has a bluish cast, especially when an eye is blood-shot. The objec-
tion to this interpretation is the repetition of the word with the W-blossoms, where it
would seem to be superfluous if it designated some particular color of the blossoms.
On the other hand the phrase " like the color of W-blossoms " would be expected.
^^PiTi *s a plant or blossom otherwise found only in the Berlin Medical
Papyrus (8088), 9, 8. It is impossible to identify it here.
T'w, " book," or " treatise " is discussed in Case 5 (II17). It would seem
that some current treatise on the practice of the embalmer is cited by the surgeon.
The quotation from this book confirms the meaning of Ssm as " red," or " blood-shot,"
but is otherwise obscure.
|^<? d D'w is a very general word for " ailing," or " affected," and is applied to
diseased eyes in the case of a woman in the Kahun Medical Papyrus (8, 10), where it
is written |^(](]o d'y. In the Pyramid Texts (1658b) d'w is contrasted with
m'cw, " straight, right, correct." Devaud suggests that |3^1<? Q (in Mutter und Kind)
is the ancestor of the Coptic *so (Kvpros), " crooked," or " hump-backed " and would
make |^ (] d'yt mean " something crooked " as opposed to m'c-t, " some-
thing straight." The feminine 1^^* -'-*, meanuig " sickness, wretchedness," is very
common. Compare both masc. and fem, in Pap. Ebers 1,15. All this is of slight value
in determining the specific force of d'w in the quotation from the Treatise on What
Pertains to the Embalmer.
The comparison " like an eye at the end of its weakness " eludes explanation. The
verb 'hd, meaning " to be weak " or the like is rare. It is found in Medinet
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:05 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 309 ---
Case 19
283
TRANSLATION AND COMMENTARY
Habu referring to the limbs (de Rouge, Inscr. hier. 145, 56) and also in the Book of the
Sky Cow (29), where it is written j^JB,^- See an uncertain example in Pap. Ebers
102, 7. Consult commentary on Case 6 (II 21).
CASE TWENTY
VII 22-VIII 5
A WOUND IN THE TEMPLE PERFORATING THE BONE
This case is the third in the group of five cases of wounds in the temple (Cases
18-22). It is also the second of two which deal with a " perforation " of the temple
(Cases 19 and 20), and as we have seen in the introduction of Case 19, is much the more
serious of the two. Our case illustrates the progressively increasing seriousness of the
cases in this group of five. The introductions to Cases 18 and 19 should be read before
undertaking the study of this case. The reader will find it instructive also to examine
Case 8 in the course of studying Cases 19 and 20.
The description of symptoms in Case 20 is among the most vivid and picturesque
paragraphs in the entire papyrus.
Title
VII 22
Translation
Instructions concerning a wound in his temple, penetrating to the bone, (and)
perforating his temporal bone.
Commentary
The discussion of gm', " temple," will be found in Case 18, Gloss B (VII 18-14).
The injury, though consisting chiefly of a " perforation " (thm), is evidently much more
serious than in Case 19, which also deals with a " perforation." This injury is dis-
cussed in Case 8 (I 18), where this abbreviated writing of the word, J thm, is also
taken up.
Examination
VII 22-VIII 8
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:05 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 310 ---
284
Case 20
THE SURGICAL TREATISE
Translation
If thou examinest a man having a wound in his temple, penetrating to the bone,
(and) perforating his temporal bone, while his two eyes are blood-shot, he discharges
blood from both his nostrils, and a little drops ; if thou puttest thy fingers on the
mouth of that wound (and) he shudder exceedingly ; if thou ask of him concerning
his malady and he speak not to thee ; while copious tears fall from both his eyes, so
that he thrusts his hand often to his face that he may wipe both his eyes with the back
of his hand as a child does, and knows not that he does so, (conclusion follows in
diagnosis).
Commentary
The term " blood-shot " (Ssm-ty) has been discussed in the preceding case.
^^»» rn ^ \a $r h», " a little drops." Here we have the use of h'y, " to fall," in
the very specific application to falling drops, as in this same examination, referring
to falling tears (VIII 1-2). It occurs with the same meaning in our document in
VIII 11 (of blood from the nostrils), X 22 (of urine from the male member), and
XVI 6-7 (of water). A good parallel is found in Case 41 : fVAl^^^^^
" secretions drop therefrom " (XIII 22-XIV 1 ; same in Case 47, XVII 9-10).
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:05 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 311 ---
Case 20
285
TRANSLATION AND COMMENTARY
These usages of the word, which have arisen directly from its meaning " to
fall," have resulted in a further series of medical applications of it. It is applied
to various discharges, excretions, outflows and the like in Papyrus Ebers (48, 1 ;
41, 4 ; 42, 15 ; 96, 17 ; 42, 16 ; 91, 16 ; 88, 19 ; 56, 9 ; 106, 14 ; 51, 18 ; 87, 4),
in Papyrus Hearst (III 6), and the Kahun Medical Papyrus (2, 27 ; 2, 29 ; 2, 80). In
a highly specialized application, the word designates a miscarriage (Turin, Papyri,
ed. Pleyte et Rossi LV, 1), and in an interesting passage it is used in the phrase
J^oS^—ro^1flJ^^&a^^ls^ meaning "death by miscarriage" (Magical Texts of
the Empire, transcribed by Gardiner for the Berlin Dictionary, 121). In the well-
known passages in Charms for Mother and Child (Mutter und Kind) it is applied to the
expulsion of disease, and so in the idiom rdy h"y, " cause to go forth," it is applied to
the effect of remedies on disease in the medical papyri (Pap. Ebers 89, 14-15 ; 51,
19 ; 94, 11 ; 78, 20-21 ; Hearst III 4 (corrupt, comp. Ebers 51, 19) ; Pap. Berlin
in our papyrus. See full commentary in Case 4 (II 4).
If we accept the text as we find it, this examination reveals a more serious condi-
tion of the patient than in the preceding case, in which only the eye on the injured side
of the head was blood-shot and there is no mention of a discharge of blood from the
nose. In Case 20, however, both eyes are blood-shot and discharge, while blood issues
from both nostrils. These symptoms would indicate rupture of internal tissue so deep
as to affect even the eye and the nostril on the opposite side of the head from the
injury. It should not be forgotten, however, that owing to the ease with which the
words " his eye " may be transformed in Egyptian to " his two eyes " by the addition
of two tiny strokes of the pen, our scribe has repeatedly written the dual out of habit,
where only the singular was intended. Compare for example four occurrences of this
error in Case 22. Admitting this possible correction however, the symptoms of speech-
lessness and the dazed, half unconscious manner in which the patient continually
wipes the exudations from his eye, would suggest a more serious injury than in the
preceding case.
8088,11,7).
"If
he shudder exceedingly" is a description of a symptom found six times
Diagnosis
VIII 8-4
4
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:05 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 312 ---
28G
Case 20
THE SURGICAL TREATISE
Translation
Thou shouldst say concerning him : " One having a wound in his temple, penetrat-
ing to the bone, (and) perforating his temporal bone ; while he discharges blood from
both his nostrils, he suffers with stiffness in his neck, (and) he is speechless. An
ailment not to be treated."
Commentary
" Penetrating to the bone " (<V n ks) will be found discussed in Case 1 (12).
" Perforating " (thm), see Case 8 (118).
" Temple " and " temporal bone " (gm'), see Case 18, Gloss B.
" Stiffness in his neck " (tew m nhb-t-f), see Case 8 (I 20).
" He is speechless " (dgm-y), see Case 22, Gloss C, where the surgeon himself ex-
plains the word.
The first half of the diagnosis was already contained in the title, the discharge of
blood from the nostrils was observed in the examination, the stiffness of the neck
new and is rather a symptom, as in the preceding case, than a particular in a diagnosis.
Finally the surgeon repeats, seemingly by the use of a technical term (for he later thinks
it necessary to explain it in a gloss, Case 22, Gloss C), the fact that the patient is
speechless. On the hopeless verdict see Case 5 (II15). This is another evidence of the
very serious character of Case 20 as contrasted with Case 19.
See another example of —»for in Case 8 (IV 11).
Treatment
VIII 4-5
a The scribe has left an empty space here, as if he intended it for the determinative of wdh, "pour,"
which, however, he has failed to insert.
Translation
Now when thou findest that man speechless, his '"relief1 shall be sitting; soften
his head with grease, (and) pour rmilk1 into both his ears.
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:05 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 313 ---
Case 20
287
TRANSLATION AND COMMENTARY
Commentary
(]«=> ° yr dr again introduces a reference to an observation already made in the
examination and diagnosis, and dr must therefore have some such force here as " at
the beginning," or " above," which is perhaps sufficiently suggested by simply render-
ing " Now when." Compare Case 4 (II6) and Case 8 (IV 10).
On " his rreliefi " (sry-J) see Case 17, VII 6.
^"ra^ ,s (mhwy," rmilk1" is not the usual word. It occurs in the Middle Kingdom
in the Kahun Medical Papyrus (2, 10) written and in Papyrus Ebers
essentially as here : ^ra^,^,. It is not a common term. As an ingredient in pre-
scriptions it is found in Pap. Hearst IX 2 ; Pap. Ebers 88,10 ; 88, 7; 49, 7 (emend) ;
82, 2-8. As produced by or made of fat, ointment, or grease, it occurs in the mhwy n
mrh-t of Kahun Med. Pap. 2, 10 and Berlin Med. Pap. 8088, 16, 8 ; 18, 8 ; 18, 6 ;
19, 4. It is perhaps employed as a verb in the Kahun Med. Pap. (8, 4). It is possible
that it means cream.
The omission of the frequent clause " until he recovers " after the treatment is
noticeable. The treatment is evidently only alleviatory until the patient is released
by death.
CASE TWENTY-ONE
VIII 6-9
A SPLIT IN THE TEMPORAL BONE
This case is the fourth in a series of five dealing with injuries to the temple (Cases
18-22). The surgeon's memoranda on the case are very brief, and he seems to regard
it as an injury rather less serious than the " perforation " in Case 20. It will be found
instructive to read at the same time Case 4 discussing a similar injury in the skull.
Title
VIII 6
Translation
Instructions concerning a split in his temple.
Commentary
The nature of the injury which our surgeon calls a " split " (pSn) will be found dis-
cussed in Case 4 (II 2).
On the meaning of" temple " (gwi') see Case 18, Gloss B.
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:05 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 314 ---
288
Case 21
THE SURGICAL TREATISE
I □ □
MM I I X
Examination
VIII 6-8
Translation
If thou examinest a man having a split in his temple, shouldst thou find a
swelling protruding on the outside of that split, while he discharges blood from his
nostril and from his one ear having that split, (and) it is painful when he hears speech,
because of it, (conclusion follows in diagnosis).
Commentary
" Swelling " (thb) will be found discussed in Case 4 (II 4), which must be carefully
studied in order to understand our case.
It is interesting to observe that the injury is so close to the neighboring ear that
this " his one ear " is spoken of as " having that split; " and the ear is furthermore so
close to the wound that hearing sound is painful. We should perhaps render md-t as
" sound " rather than as literally " speech."
Diagnosis
VIII 8-9
Translation
Thou shouldst say concerning him: " One having a split in his temple, while he
discharges blood from his nostril and his ear having that injury. An ailment with
which I will contend."
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:05 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 315 ---
Case 21
280
TRANSLATION AND COMMENTARY
Commentary
On ikr, " injury," see Case 8 (IV 7). For the other terms see the references in the
examination.
The diagnosis merely repeats the observations already noted in the examination
and adds no new conclusions.
On the doubtful verdict 2, indicating a case too doubtful for prediction of the
outcome, see Case 4 (II 6), and consult the introduction (pp. 45-47).
Treatment
VIII 9
Translation
Thou shouldst put him at his mooring stakes, until thou knowest he has reached
a decisive point.
Commentary
On the meaning of this extraordinary treatment, see Case 8, Gloss D (II 1-2),
where the ancient commentator found it necessary to include an explanation.
The meaning of " reach a decisive point " is discussed in Case 4, Gloss C.
CASE TWENTY-TWO
VIII 9-17
COMPOUND COMMINUTED FRACTURE OF THE TEMPORAL BONE
This case is the last of five injuries of the temporal region and the temporal bone.
The nature of the injury, which our surgeon calls id, is discussed by him in Case 5
(II11). It is the most serious case in the group, and includes the neighbouring ear in
the area of the injury, so that in the course of his examination the surgeon is charged
to probe the ear and seemingly to remove splinters of bone. The examination is
followed by Verdict 8, the hopeless verdict, and no treatment is suggested.
Some interesting anatomy is included in the discussion. The word " chin " occurs
for the first time in the medical papyri. The three explanatory glosses are instructive,
especially Gloss A, where the word w-i, " ramus," thus far found only in our papyrus,
is interestingly compared with the claw of a two-toed bird, which engages in the tem-
poral bone as the bird's two-toed claw clutches an object. It is another striking
u
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:05 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 316 ---
290
Case 22
THE SURGICAL TREATISE
example of our surgeon's ability to find familiar objects in the material world surround-
ing his readers by which to describe the shape of the organs or parts which he is
explaining,—a method still practiced in all branches of natural science at the present
day.
Title
VIII 9
Translation
Instructions concerning a smash in his temple.
Commentary
The surgeon's understanding of a " smash " (id) will be found discussed in Case 5
(II 11); and a gloss explaining gm', " temple," has been included by the ancient
commentator in Case 18 (VII18-14).
Examination
VIII 10-12
10
Translation
If thou examinest a man having a smash in his temple, thou shouldst place thy
thumb upon his chin (and) thy finger upon the end of his ramus, so that the blood will
flow from his two nostrils (and) from the interior of his ear having that smash. Cleanse
(it) for him with a swab of linen until thou seest its fragments (of bone) in the interior
of his ear. If thou callest to him (and) he is speechless (and) cannot speak, (conclusion
follows in diagnosis).
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:05 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 317 ---
Case 22
291
TRANSLATION AND COMMENTARY
Commentary
This interesting examination involves the surgeon in cleansing the nostrils and
the ear on the injured side. The detailed instructions for placing the thumb and finger
are presumably for applying pressure and inducing a flow of blood.
The question might arise whether we are to understand that the first ! ' " thy
finger " was intended to designate the thumb. The spreading and stretching of the
other fingers from the chin to the head of the mandible would result in a rather
ineffective and cramped position of the hand. In Case 25 (IX 4) the surgeon uses
°Q rn-i " claw " for the entire group of four fingers, and then unmistakably
designates the thumb by J^. We are therefore entitled to conclude that he would
employ dbc " finger " to mean thumb in Case 22.
IfE^T"^ ync't, "chin," is a very rare word. Ember suggests a relationship with
Hebrew j|i> (Oriens, No. 1, vol. I, Jan. 1926, p. 7, No. 10). The word is not found in
any of the Egyptian medical papyri, and occurs outside of Papyrus Smith only in a
masculine form employed once in the Pyramid Texts (1808a), where it is written Q*~*. i.
The chin beard seems to be the significant thing about the determinative. In our
papyrus it is employed five times, that is in four more examples besides Case 22. In
Case 25, a dislocation of the mandible, the surgeon is to put his two " claws " (cn-ty,
meaning two groups of four fingers each) " under the ynf-t " of the patient. The
remaining three examples are all in Case 27. The position of this case in the treatise
leaves little doubt as to the region designated by ynr-t. Case 28 carries us from the
temple to the ear, Cases 24 and 25 are injuries of the mandible, Case 26 is a wound
in the hp and the context shows that the upper lip is meant, while Case 27 deals with
a wound in the ynf-t, which must be the lower part of the front of the face, having
bone underlying the soft tissue. The meaning " chin " is obvious.
The anatomical term " end of his ramus " is interestingly explained in Gloss A
(VIII 14-15).
The doubled form of the verb h" in h"-hr is also found in the Mathematical
Papyrus. On the medical use of /i" see Case 20 (VII 24).
" His two nostrils." The scribe's unfortunate habit of writing any paired member
or organ in the dual, even when it is obvious and important that only one should be
designated, should be remembered here. It may be that he intended to write " his
nostril." Compare the next paragraph.
"his two ears " is of course an obvious error for mddr-f, " his ear," as the
following phrase " having that smash " shows. The ear next to the injured temple is
so close that it is referred to as " having " or " carrying," or " bearing " (hr) the
injury, and this fact makes it certain that only one ear, the one on the injured side, is
here designated. Compare the same mistake in the next sentence.
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:05 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 318 ---
292
Case 22
THE SURGICAL TREATISE
PTZji ^, " cleanse," will be found explained in Case 11 (V 11), where the omis-
sion of the object " it " is also discussed. The " swab (or - plug ') of linen " will also
be found discussed in the commentary on Case 11 (V 11).
e^lJJ wS-t-f, " his wS-t," is a difficult term which is explained in Gloss B at the
end of our case (VIII15-16).
■J-^? ymyw, " interior," literally " that which is in," probably designates here the
inside of the ear, not the exudation which is to be cleaned out. In Case 12 (V 18)
ymyw might designate the " content " of the nostrils, in view of the fact that it is the
direct object of the verb ik " clean out." In both passages however it is more pro-
bably a variant of hnw, " interior."
The syntax of the conditional sentence at the end of the examination is unusual,
beginning with the employment of the n-form after the conditional particle yr—a
combination which is rare. The pseudo-participle (dgm-y) followed by a +rt-form for
the imperfect is of course common (cf. Gunn, Syntax, Chap. XII) ; but the two clauses
here belong to the protasis after yr, continuing the description of the symptoms on
the basis of which the surgeon makes the diagnosis which is really the apodosis. It
is also true that the two clauses, yw-f dgm-y n mdw-n-f, form an apodosis after " If
thou callest to him," but the experimental calling and the observed result together
form a composite protasis leading to the conclusion expressed in the diagnosis.
Diagnosis
VIII 18-14
13
Translation
Thou shouldst say concerning him : " One having a smash in his temple; he
discharges blood from his two nostrils and from his ear ; he is speechless ; (and) he
suffers with stiffness in his neck. An ailment not to be treated."
Commentary
All of the terms employed have already been discussed above. The dual " two
ears " is undoubtedly an error as in two places in the examination. " He is speechless "
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:05 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 319 ---
Case 22
293
TRANSLATION AND COMMENTARY
(dgm-y) is explained by the surgeon at the end of the case in Gloss C (VIII 16-17),
and the final item, stiffness in the neck, has been discussed in Case 8 (I 20). See the
discussion of this diagnosis in the introduction (p. 51). The unfavorable verdict 8
has been explained in Case 5 (II 15) and also in the introduction (pp. 45-47). It is
a case so serious that the surgeon cannot deal with it, and therefore follows the
diagnosis by no suggested treatment.
GLOSS A
VIII14-15
Explaining : The end of his ramus.
Translation
As for: " The end of his ramus," it means the end of his mandible. The ramus (w-f),
the end of it is in his temple just as the claw of an 'amce-bird (W) grasps an object.
Commentary
S&f^ ph-wy, " end," as an anatomical term is discussed in Case 7 (III 17) and Case
12 (V 21).
^jkHj ,wlr'', " ramus," is evidently a technical anatomical term. Our papyrus
contains the only known examples, of which there are eight. It is twice written with
a w, as the fourth radical (III 17 and IX 8). It is likely to have been a word mean-
ing " fork " or something similar, and this would explain its application (in the
masculine W) to a two-toed bird. In Case 8 it is employed to describe a forked bone
in the shoulder (IV 17-18), and that is obviously its application here. In our gloss
we have the following parallelism :
" the end of his 'mr-t."
" the end of his mandible."
The second phrase is used by the commentator as the equivalent of the first. This
might lead us to the conclusion that the W-i is merely another term for mandible.
This conclusion would be wrong however. In Case 25 (IX 8—4) we have the phrase :
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:05 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 320 ---
294
Case 22
THE SURGICAL TREATISE
" the end of the two Wwvt of the two (sides of the) mandible." This not only shows
that the W-i is part of the mandible, but also that there were two of them, one on
each side of the mandible. The other indications of the position of the 'mc-t in Papyrus
Smith confirm and amplify what we have just learned. In Case 7 (III 17) the liga-
ments which operate the mandible are referred to as " the ligaments at the end of his
'mcwt, which are fastened to his temporal bone, that is at the end of his jaw " (see
commentary on III 17). In treating a case of dislocation of the mandible (Case 25),
the surgeon is directed to place his thumbs " on the two Wrt of the two (sides of) the
mandible in the inside of his mouth " and his " two claws ( = groups of fingers) under
his chin." Finally our own gloss (VIII14-15) states that the end of the W-t is " in his
temple,"—a statement which can leave no doubt that 'mf-t designates the ramus. The
articulation of the ramus with the bones of the skull is then very interestingly compared
with the grasp of a bird's claw. Before discussing the possible identity of this bird, we
should note that the phrase ^^^^'v'a. " c^aw of ,aWe" is treated as a single
word, to which is appended the determinative ^. This is obviously the claw of some
two-toed bird, inserted here more or less as a drawing, or sketch of the bird's claw.
It is of course an otherwise entirely unknown hieratic sign. To this two-toed bird's
claw the ramus is appropriately compared, for its familiar forked head, terminating
in the condyle and coronoid process, readily suggests such a forked or two-toed
claw. See PI. V, Fig. 11.
The identity of the 'awfe-bird is a difficult problem. He does not occur in any
other scientific document of Ancient Egypt; but he is depicted once in a Twelfth
Dynasty tomb at Benihasan1 and both Rosellini and Champollion reproduce his colors.
It should be borne in mind, however, that both in the colors themselves and in the
distribution of the colors to form the markings distinguishing a given bird, the
Egyptian painter allowed himself wide latitude. The old publications of nearly a
century ago were likewise very inaccurate in such matters.
I have submitted these Benihasan paintings to the specialists at the Gizeh Zoo-
logical Gardens near Cairo and also to the eminent ornithologist Professor Dr. A.
Koenig of Mecklenburg who has made a special study of African birds. Professor
Koenig has kindly informed me that the only known two-toed bird is the ostrich, and
has taken the trouble to study the paintings in detail. They are obviously not the
ostrich, but the ancient painter's colors, if at all in harmony with those of the bird
himself, do not, in Professor Koenig's opinion, permit identification with any African
bird known at the present day. This was also the opinion of Major Borman, Director
of the Gizeh Zoological Gardens.
1 No. 15, Newberry, Vol. II, pi. IV = Lepsius, Denkmaeler, Text II, p. 98 = Rosellini, Mon. civ.,
IX = Champollion, Monuments TV, pi. CCCL = Champollion, Notices descr., II, p. 366.
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:06 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 321 ---
Cask 22 TRANSLATION AND COMMENTARY 295
Gloss B
VIII 15-16
Explaining : Thou seest his wS-t in the interior of his ear.
Translation
As for : " Thou seest its fragments (wS-t) in the interior of his ear," it means that
some of the fragments (wS-t) of the bone come away to adhere to the swab which was
introduced to cleanse the interior of his ear.
Commentary
<?" wS-t, " fragments." The ancient commentator's practice of not infrequently
including the word to be explained as an essential part of the explanation sometimes
makes his commentary difficult to understand. We note in the first place that in the
explanation the wH (plural) are said to be " of the bone," and that they can further-
more " come away " adhering to the cleaning swab introduced into the inner ear. If
now we recall the nature of the injury as defined by the ancient surgeon himself, we
find that a id, " smash," is stated in Case 5 to be " a smash of his skull (such that)
bones, getting into that smash, sink into the interior of his skull " (II 16). A similar
injury of the skull in Case 4 results in carrying splinters of bone inward so that " frag-
ments remain sticking in the flesh of his head and do not come away " (II 9). The
word employed for fragments is ^ ° t sp-w. It is highly probable that our word wS-t
is simply a synonym of sp-w, " fragments." The origin of this meaning for the other-
wise entirely unknown word wH may possibly be the familiar word wS, " to be
empty, to be bare, to be destroyed." The last meaning might conceivably be applied
to fragments of shattered bone.1
The dual, " his two ears," is again twice written by the scribe incorrectly for the
singular " his ear." M hnw after ik, " cleanse," may possibly be a noun formation
with m, i. e. mhnw, meaning " interior " rather than " in the interior," which leaves
ik without an object. See another possible example in Case 26 (IX 7).
1 The word ^' ^ (for ,*=^)' occurring twice in the Empire (Pap. Ebers 14, 11 and Pap.
Leyden 345, verso 2, 9-10) is very unlikely to have any connection with our word tvS-t.
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:06 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 322 ---
29f,
Case 22
THE SURGICAL TREATISE
Gloss C
VIII 16-17
Explaining : He is speechless.
17
t=3
a This is an error of the scribe which he has corrected by a cross inserted afterward in red ink
over the black and intended to cancel the The word is therefore to be read -k-t, not -kt-f.
As for : " He is speechless," it means that he is silent in sadness, without speaking,
like one suffering with rfeeblenessl (dgy) because of something that has entered from
our papyrus the word is known only twice : once applied to a sick ox in the Kahun
Veterinary Papyrus (l. 59) and again in a very obscure passage in the Metternich
Stela (l. 202). These throw no light on its meaning. It is used in five different cases
in Papyrus Edwin Smith, where it occurs nine times as follows :
Case 18, Compound Comminuted Fracture in the Side of the Nose. The patient
is unable to open his mouth except with much pain and he is dgm.
Case 17, Compound Comminuted Fracture of the Bone in the Region of the Maxilla
and the Zygoma. The patient is unable to open his mouth except with much pain,
and he is dgm.
Case 20, Wound in the Temple, the Bone Being Perforated. The patient is semi-
unconscious, makes no reply when questioned as to his condition, and is dgm.
Case 22, Compound Comminuted Fracture in the Temple. According to the ex-
amination (VIII 12), " if thou callest to him, he is dgm, and he cannot speak,"
while according to the above gloss, dgm means " his being silent in sadness, without
speaking."
Case 88, Broken Neck, One Vertebra of the Neck Being Crushed into the Next.
The patient's arms and legs are paralysed, he is dgm and unable to speak.
In view of this evidence it can hardly be doubted that dgm means "to be speech-
less," so widely interpreted, however, that it could also designate the inability of an
Translation
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:06 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 323 ---
Case 22
297
TRANSLATION AND COMMENTARY
ox to use his voice ; that is, it had originally some such meaning as " to be voiceless."
The root is doubtless triliteral, and the at the end is of course the ending of the
third masculine singular of the pseudo-participle.
m]^<?^ 9mw is a rare word meaning " mourning, sadness " or " to mourn."
During the Seven Years' Famine recounted in the Famine Stela (1-2), the king says,
" I mourn (^f^^) in the great seat in the palace." The noun "S*]^<?^ gmw,
" mourning, sadness," is found in the Tale of Sinuhe (R, l. 9). A feminine noun,
seemingly with the same meaning, is found in the Book of the Dead (ed. Naville,
7, 8 Ca) and in the Book of Apophis (Brit. Mus. Pap. 10188, 26, 18).
^9y, r" feebleness,"1 is not a rare word, but its medical or pathological
significance is difficult to determine. It is obviously something undesirable, and may
mean something like " be feeble " or " feebleness," " be paralysed " or " paralysis."
In the description of the fleeing king of the Libyans on the Israel Stela it is said of
him : ^Ji-w-ITM^ " ms two feet we % " 0- 6)'
" Something that has entered from the outside " is our surgeon's designation of
an external physical cause. See full commentary in Case 8, Glosses C and D.
CASE TWENTY-THREE
VIII18-22
A SLIT IN THE OUTER EAR
This is the only case in our treatise which deals exclusively with the ear, although
a number of injuries to the head have involved the ear. It is a very simple case of a
wound by which the outer ear has been slit, and furnishes one of the clearest of this
earliest known group of cases which obliged the surgeon to resort to sewing up the
wound. According to his custom the ancient surgeon has here included the instructions
to stitch up the wound in his paragraph on the examination, preceding the diagnosis.
The treatment therefore begins with the wound already stitched, and concerns itself
with what is to happen after that point has been reached, especially with the con-
tingency that the wound does not heal and that the stitching loosens. The " lips of
his wound " are then to be kept together with linen rolls placed as pads behind the
auricle, until with the application of the inevitable " grease, honey (and) lint," the
wound finally heals.
Title
VIII 18
Translation
Instructions concerning a wound in his ear.
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:06 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 324 ---
208
Case 23
THE SURGICAL TREATISE
Commentary
The surgeon's understanding of the word wbnw, " wound," will be found discussed
in Case 1 (pp. 81-84). "Ear" has been treated in Case 4 (II 4). It is to be read mkdr
here, and its anatomical meaning in this case will appear as the discussion proceeds.
Examination
VIII 18-19
19
Translation
If thou examinest a man having a wound in his ear, cutting through its flesh, the
injury being in the lower part of his ear, (and) confined to the flesh, thou shouldst draw
(it) together for him with stitching behind the hollow of his ear.
Commentary
mAdr, " ear," has been discussed as to the reading in Case 4 (II4). Anatomically
its range of meaning in Egyptian is wide, as it is in English. It occurs twenty-five
times in Papyrus Smith, and of these examples six are in our Case 28. Of the remaining
nineteen examples, thirteen occur in the statement that the patient discharges blood
from his ear, meaning of course the orifice of the ear. In Case 22 the ear is mentioned
four times in the phrase " interior of his ear ; " in Case 20 a medicament is " poured
into his two ears " (VIII 5). In all these cases the orifice or the inner ear is the
meaning of midr. The anatomical description in Case 18, locating the gm' as between
the corner of the eye and the (yjj possibly " 1"orifice1 of his ear,"
may be dealing with the outer or the inner ear, or both. In our Case 28, however, it is
obvious that the surgeon is discussing an injury of the outer ear, the auricle.
1yfy, " cutting," is a new word, of which only one other occurrence is known,
if we may accept its probable identity with the similar word found in a descriptive
phrase inscribed over a man working with mallet and chisel in an Old Kingdom relief
scene : I^C (Davies, Deir el-Gebrdwi, I, pll. XVI). Here ysp evidently designates
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:06 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 325 ---
Case 23
299
TRANSLATION AND COMMENTARY
the act of chiseling or cutting, and its determinative of an axe is doubtless a variant
of the knife appearing in the Smith Papyrus.
r-r\ " through," literally " into the mouth of," is a compound preposition
not very well understood. It is not certain that the rendering " through " adequately
represents its meaning here. The prepositions in our papyrus are employed to desig-
nate positions, situations and local relations confined within such narrow local and
physical limits, that the traditional renderings applying to more spacious situations
are insufficient or even incorrect.
1*^LL! br-w-f, " it9 flesh." It is obvious that the pronoun here does not refer to
the patient (" his flesh "), but to the masculine " ear," that is, " its flesh," meaning
of course the flesh or soft tissue of the outer ear.
a\Ti yh-t' " mjury " (literally " thing ") will be found discussed in the commentaiy
on Case 4 ; see II 8 (2 b).
^-^^ mn m, " confined to," is a rather free rendering of one of the anatomical
meanings of this phrase, when it may be rendered " attached to." See Case 4, Gloss A
(II 9). Reverting to its original meaning " remaining in," we see that its significance
here, " confined to," is not at all unnatural.
^J"-=-^ ndry, " draw together," as employed surgically will be found discussed in
Case 10 (V 6).
!]^C5 ydr, " stitching," one of the six earliest known examples of surgical stitch-
ing, has been fully treated in Case 10 (V 6). The modifications following " stitching "
are not easy to understand. As rendered above they seem to be intended to indicate
the side on which the surgeon will stitch the wound, suggesting that he will work
on the convex side of the auricle, the side next to the head. We are again confronted
by the difficulty in rendering our old and familiar prepositions when applied within very
restricted local limits. ff,, " behind," often means " around " or " beside." Hnty,
rendered "hollow" is otherwise unknown, and the meaning "hollow," which doubt-
less refers to the concave side of the auricle, is based on the common and related word
hnw, " interior, inside." If now we accept the rendering " with stitching behind the
hollow of his ear " as containing a correct interpretation of the local terms h' and
hnty, we have still to interpret these instructions in terms of the surgeon's actual
manual and physical procedure. The wound has slit the auricle from front to back,
and the surgeon might therefore pass the needle back and forth between back and
front of the auricle. It would seem, however, that these directions are so phrased as
to instruct the surgeon to work exclusively from the back of the auricle, that is, to
keep his needle there, thrusting it both in and out again from the back of the auricle.
In this examination our surgeon has included the directions to stitch the wound
together, in accordance with his custom of inserting instructions regarding purely
physical manipulation in the examination rather than in the treatment.
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:06 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 326 ---
300
Case 23
THE SURGICAL TREATISE
Diagnosis
VIII 19-20
□ .=> 9,—Dl I I
Translation
Thou shouldst say concerning him : " One having a wound in his ear, cutting
through its flesh. An ailment which I will treat."
Commentary
These words are only a repetition of the beginning of the examination to which
the favorable verdict has been appended. On this verdict see the commentary in
Case 1 (I 2), and the discussion in the introduction (pp. 45 ff.).
Treatment
VIII 20-22
.Ml
mi r i
sic 22
a The scribe has inserted a small globular object under the hand. See Vol. II, pi. VIII, l. 21.
Translation
If thou findest the stitching of that wound loose (and) sticking in the two lips of
his wound, thou shouldst make for him stiff rolls of linen (and) pad the back of his
ear therewith. Thou shouldst treat it afterward [with] grease, honey (and) lint every
day until he recovers.
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:06 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 327 ---
Case 23
;wi
TRANSLATION AND COMMENTARY
Commentary
The initial condition literally reads " If thou findest that wound, its stitching
loosened,"—a common participial construction. Full commentary on ydr, " stitch-
ing," will be found in Case 10 (V 6), and mn m, " sticking in," has been treated in
Case 4 (II 9). " Rolls " (bd'-w) or " plugs " of linen have been taken up in Case 11
(V18).
^© h' is not the preposition here. It is followed by the genitive n, which never
appears with the preposition and hence must be a noun, here meaning " back."
Grammatically it is probably the subject: " wherewith the back of his ear is to be
padded." The question arises whether the loosening of the stitching is due to tho
absorption of surgical gut or the like, used in the stitching, a result desired and in-
tended by the surgeon ; or due to failure of the wound to heal, so that the rolls of
linen placed behind the auricula are a substitute intended to accomplish the healing
together, which the surgeon's stitching failed to do. An examination of the related
material discloses four cases (10, 14, 28, and 47) in which the stitching is found loose.
They have been discussed in Case 10 (V 6), and the loose stitching found to be due to
failure to heal (see p. 280). On " grease, honey (and) lint," see Case 1 (I 8).
CASE TWENTY-FOUR
VIII 22-IX 2
A FRACTURE OF THE MANDIBLE
This case is the first of two concerning injuries to the mandible. Although the
surgeon calls the injury Mb, not so serious a type of fracture as id, a compound com-
minuted fracture, it is nevertheless a case which he regards as fatal, and he suggests
no treatment.
Title
VIII 22
Translation
Instructions concerning a fracture in his mandible.
Commentary
o Mb, " fracture," has been fully treated in Case 11 (V 10).
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:06 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 328 ---
302
Case 24
THE SURGICAL TREATISE
1-
Examination
VIII 22-28
i i
i
a The demonstrative was at first omitted by the scribe and afterward inserted.
Translation
If thou examinest a man having a fracture in his mandible, thou shouldst place
thy hand upon it. Shouldst thou find that fracture crepitating under thy fingers,
(conclusion follows in diagnosis).
Commentary
The surgical meaning of nhbhb, "crepitate," lit. " break open," "break through "
will be found discussed in Case 18 (VI 4-5).
Diagnosis
VIII 28-IX 2
IX 1
2 /&
Translation
Thou shouldst say concerning him : " One having a fracture in his mandible, over
which a wound has been inflicted, r- - - -1 (and) he has fever from it. An ailment
not to be treated."
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:06 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 329 ---
Case 24
303
TRANSLATION AND COMMENTARY
Commentary
P*^" sd, " inflicted," lit. " broken open," as used of soft tissue overlying an injured
bone, is discussed in Case 5 (II11).
\J<*UZL7^'*is totaUy ^intelligible.
The injury is here shown to be a fracture of the mandible such that the soft tissue
overlying the fracture has been ruptured. The three or four unintelligible words
following this observation probably described further the injury to the soft tissue.
The injury is serious enough to cause fever, and permit no hope of the patient's
recovery. The unfavorable verdict is followed by no treatment. See the discussion
of this verdict in Case 5 (II15) and in the introduction (pp. 46-47), The diagnosis as
a whole will be found discussed in the introduction (pp. 45-51).
This case is of unusual interest. The surgeon's directions for the reduction of the
dislocated mandible, with the " thumbs upon the ends of the two rami of the mandible
in the inside of his mouth," while the fingers of both hands are clutching the mandible
below, that is on the outside, are so detailed as to the position of the surgeon's hands
that the manipulation can be compared with that shown in the drawing of the process
by Apollonios of Kitium in his commentary on Hippocrates. See introduction above,
pp. 16-17 and PI. VI, Fig. 12. There can be no doubt but that the Hippocratic
manipulation was identical with that of our treatise, and Dr. Luckhardt informs me
that the modern manipulation is also still the same as described in our papyrus.
According to his custom our surgeon has included his instructions for the physical
manipulation of the injury in the examination. The treatment which follows is evi-
dently intended merely to soothe the strained muscles and irritated tissues after the
surgeon has restored the dislocated mandible to its proper place.
CASE TWENTY-FIVE
IX 2-6
A DISLOCATION OF THE MANDIBLE
Title
IX 2
Translation
Instructions concerning a dislocation in his mandible
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:06 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 330 ---
304
Case 25
THE SURGICAL TREATISE
Commentary
Wnh, " dislocation," has been treated in Case 10 (under ydr, V 6). cr-t, " mandible,"
is fully discussed in Case 7 (III 16).
Examination
IX 2-5
WMW <f ' ' < > I /WWW ^Zi
Translation
If thou examinest a man having a dislocation in his mandible, shouldst thou find
his mouth open (and) his mouth cannot close for him, thou shouldst put thy thumb(s)
upon the ends of the two rami of the mandible in the inside of his mouth, (and) thy
two claws (meaning two groups of fingers) under his chin, (and) thou shouldst cause
them to fall back bo that they rest in their places.
Commentary
'mfwty, " the two rami," written in the dual, has been discussed in
Case 22, Gloss A (VIII14). The feminine dual of the following genitive ^ n-ty is an
archaic survival almost unknown outside of Papyrus Edwin Smith, and an important
evidence of the early date of the text.
In accordance with our ancient surgeon's custom we find the physical manipulation
of the injury included in the examination and not in the treatment.
rn-ty, literally " two claws," means of course the two groups of fingers of
both hands exclusive of the thumbs. See discussion in Case 8, Gloss E.
jj i although written in the singular, must be dual, as the connection clearly shows ;
for the surgeon is to put his jj i on each of the two rami. The use of cn-ty for the fingers
also shows that jji must designate the thumb. It is also used for the thumb in
Case 22, q.v.
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:06 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 331 ---
Case 25
305
TRANSLATION AND COMMENTARY
<= d, " so that they rest " (from wdy), is of course a pseudo-participle of resulting
condition, as long ago recognized by Erman (Grammatik3, § 882, p. 175). The subject
of this verbal form is a pronoun, of which the antecedent is the same as that of in.
The latter must be either the two rami, or the mandible itself considered as a dual.
P[~j~"( rfn is not written as a dual; another example perhaps in Case 11 (V 18). The
disregard of the fact that the subject of c== d is & feminine noun in the dual is also to
be expected after the pronoun p~.
Diagnosis
IX 5
Translation
Thou shouldst say concerning him : " One having a dislocation in his mandible.
An ailment which I will treat."
Commentary
The diagnosis is, as so frequently, merely a repetition of the title (q. v. for refer-
ences to the commentary), to which the favorable verdict 1 has been appended. On
this verdict see the commentary in Case 1 (I 2) and in the introduction (pp. 45 ff.).
Treatment
1X5-6
Translation
Thou shouldst bind it with ymrw, (and) honey every day until he recovers.
Commentary
On ymrw see Case 15 (VI17) and for treatment with honey see Case 1 (18). The
treatment is evidently intended merely to soothe the strained ligaments and tissues.
x
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:06 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 332 ---
306
Case 26
THE SURGICAL TREATISE
CASE TWENTY-SIX
IX 6-18
A WOUND IN THE UPPER LIP
This case is another convincing example of the ancient surgeon's employment of
stitching to draw together a wound in the soft tissue. He does not state anywhere that
the wound is in the upper hp, but the instructions are to probe " as far as the column
of the nose," indicating clearly that the wound is in the upper hp. The discussion is
accompanied by a single gloss, explaining the meaning of a rare word (yddb) for
" piercing through." This gloss furnishes an interesting example of the ancient com-
mentator's carelessness in collecting his materials, for in inserting this gloss he forgot
that he had already included it once in Case 14 (VI12-14), in explaining the character
of a wound in the nostril.
Title
1X6
Translation
Instructions concerning a wound in his hp.
Commentary
Wbnw, " wound," wiU be found discussed in Case 1 (pp. 81-84).
Examination
1X6-8
7
□
fe^i . . A I ^ I
Translation
If thou examinest a man having a wound in his hp, piercing through to the inside
of his mouth, thou shouldst examine his wound as far as the column of his nose. Thou
shouldst draw together that wound [with] stitching.
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:06 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 333 ---
Case 26
307
TRANSLATION AND COMMENTARY
Commentary
(] p<==J |x y&db," piercing through," has been treated in Case 14, Gloss A (VI12-14).
1^,!M° mbnw," the inside," is a noun formation of hnw with m. Compare Case 22,
Gloss B (VIII16), which perhaps contains a similar example ; but it should be noted
that the text of our case in the parallel passages in the diagnosis and in Gloss A writes
n hnw not n mhnw.
0 J^^xL. ywnw nfnd-ft " column of his nose," will be found discussed in Case 11
(V 14), Gloss A.
*^<=>^ ndry, " draw together," has been treated in Case 10 (V 6).
ydr, " stitching," is also discussed in the same connection. The omission
of the preposition m, " with," is very common in our treatise, especially before the
names of medicaments. This peculiarity suggests for the document the character of
rapid memoranda. It may also raise the question whether these omissions are possibly
survivals from an archaic stage which practiced the omission of prepositions, as for
example on the Palermo Stone.
Diagnosis
1X8-9
a The scribe wrote (10 and then covered one stroke of w with the head of «,
other stroke visible.
Translation
Thou shouldst say concerning him: " One having a wound in his
through to the inside of his mouth. An ailment which I will treat."
Commentary
See commentary on the examination, of which this diagnosis is a partial repetition,
to which the favorable verdict 1 has been added. On this verdict see commentary on
Case 1 (I 2) and the introduction (pp. 45 ff.).
This diagnosis is another good illustration of the fact that the diagnosis is often
regarded as not necessarily containing any other conclusion than the statement of
the practical course of procedure which the surgeon is to follow, that is, the verdict.
See Introduction, p. 48.
__, leaving the
lip, piercing
X2
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:06 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 334 ---
308
Case 26
THE SURGICAL TREATISE
10
Treatment
IX 9-11
a This word was at first omitted by the scribe and afterward inserted in red ink in a passage written
in black.
Translation
Now after thou hast stitched it thou shouldst bind it with fresh meat the first
day. Thou shouldst treat it afterward [with] grease (and) honey every day until he
recovers.
Commentary
\1o y^r, " stitch," is one of only two cases in our treatise, in which it is employed
as a verb. See Case 10 (V 6) where it is fully discussed.
On the treatment with fresh meat, followed by grease and honey, see Case 1 (12-8).
We notice that as usual the surgeon places the stitching of the wound in the
examination, and that the treatment is a matter of medicaments. His reversion
to the stitching at the beginning of the treatment is not usual. It is found also in
Case 10 (V 7). In Case 10, however, he provides for the possibility that the wound
may not heal after stitching. In our case he does not apprehend any such contingency.
Dr. Luckhardt remarks : " Because of the high vascularity of the lips, wounds in
them heal with great rapidity and by primary intention (per primam intentionem), i. e.,
without infection, in spite of the fact that neck wounds may be infected. But a stitch
in the lip, especially if the cut is deep and at right angles to it, is important to prevent
gaping and subsequent healing with a separation of the cut edges (because of the
transection of the m. orbicularis oris)."
Gloss A
IX 11-18
Explaining : A wound in his lip piercing through to the inside of his mouth.
-Jl
12
X
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:06 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 335 ---
Case 26
309
TRANSLATION AND COMMENTARY
a The scribe at first incorrectly omitted the «>-«, and afterward inserted it in red ink in a passage
written in black.
Translation
As for: " A wound in his lip, piercing through to the inside of his mouth ;" it
means that the two hps of his wound are soft, opening to the inside of his mouth. One
says : " Pierced through " (yidb) concerning soft things.
Commentary
This explanation of the meaning of yddb, " piercing through," has already been
given by the ancient commentator in discussing a wound in the nostril (Case 14, VI
12-14). The text in our gloss is a little fuller than in Case 14, and the variant" he says,"
where Case 14 has " as is said " or " as one says " is of slight consequence. By 371," soft,"
the commentator doubtless means " permeable," or " penetrable." See commentary
on Case 14, Gloss A.
CASE TWENTY-SEVEN
IX 18-18
A GAPING WOUND IN THE CHIN
This case is the last in the series discussing injuries to the head (caput). The pre-
ceding case dealt with a wound in the upper lip, and in Case 27 the discussion passes to
the region below the mouth, which the surgeon calls 1f^"]^ ync-t, " chin." It is
interesting to observe that in Case 26, a wound in the upper hp, we are informed that
the wound has " two hps " (IX 12), and that the surgeon is to close it with stitching ;
whereas in Case 27, a similar wound as the description shows, he employs the " two
strips," doubtless adhesive tape, to accomplish the same purpose, as will be seen by
an examination of the discussion of " two strips " in Case 2 (115). The explanation
is perhaps to be found in the different situation of the two wounds.
Title
IX 18
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:06 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 336 ---
310
Case 27
THE SURGICAL TREATISE
Translation
Instructions concerning a gaping wound in his chin.
Commentary
8^*.—wbnw n kf-t, " gaping wound," is fully discussed in Case 1 (ex-
amination), pp. 91-92.
42"^ V^-t' " chin " is treated in Case 22 (VIII10).
Examination
IX 18-15
15
Q - ra
Transition
If thou examinest a man having a gaping wound in his chin, penetrating to the
bone, thou shouldst palpate his wound. If thou shouldst find his bone uninjured, not
having a split, (or) a perforation in it, (conclusion follows in diagnosis).
Commentary
" Penetrating to the bone " (rr n ki) has been discussed in Case 1, pp. 87-88.
Drr, " probe," or " palpate," see Case 1 (pp. 92-98) and Case 8 (IV 5).
On uninjured bone under the wounded tissue, and the list of possible injuries to
the bone enumerated as not present, see Case 2 (118-14, and Gloss C, 117) and especi-
ally Case 18 (VII9), from which it will be seen that our text has omitted one (id, " com-
pound comminuted fracture ") of the three injuries to the bone usually enumerated
by our ancient author in such cases. Commentary on these injuries will be found in
Case 4 (jpSn, " split," II 2) and Case 8 (thm, " perforate," I 18). It is at this point,
at the conclusion of the examination, that this treatise is inclined to insert instructions
for the physical manipulation of the injury, which in this present case, however, are
included in the treatment. See Introduction, p. 42.
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:06 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 337 ---
Cask 27 TRANSLATION AND COMMENTARY 31)
Diagnosis
IX 15-16
16
1 u 1
Translation
Thou shouldst say concerning him : " One having a gaping wound in his chin,
penetrating to the bone. An ailment which I will treat."
Commentary
See examination above (IX 18-15), of which the diagnosis is a partial repetition,
followed by the favorable verdict 1. See the discussion of this verdict in the com-
mentary on Case 1 (I 2) and in the introduction (pp. 45 ff.).
Treatment
IX 16-18
*'c tic 18
a The knife drips blood, but the character is not available in the fount.
Translation
Thou shouldst apply for him two strips on that gash. Thou shouldst bind it with
fresh meat the first day, (and) thou shouldst treat it afterward [with] grease, honey
(and) lint every day until he recovers.
Commentary
On the meaning of the " two strips," probably adhesive tape, see Case 2 (I 15).
Our example is a significant indication of the function of the " two strips," for they
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:06 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 338 ---
312
Case 27
THE SURGICAL TREATISE
are employed here on the chin for the same kind of injury, which in the preceding case,
a wound in the upper lip, required surgical stitching.
On this difference in treatment between this and the preceding case Dr. Luckhardt
remarks : " Wounds of the chin are likely to gape less than wounds of the hp, particu-
larly if the wound of the chin is parallel with the course of the fibers of the m. trian-
gularis and platysma. Hence we have stitching in the preceding case as against taping
in Case 27."
The use of the plural of the word " gash " (kf-t), which cannot be brought out in
the translation, is discussed in the commentary on kf-t in Case 1. On the treatment
with fresh meat, followed by grease, honey, and lint, see also Case 1. The meaning of
" until he recovers " is likewise discussed under Case 1.
CASE TWENTY-EIGHT
IX18-X8
A GAPING WOUND IN THE THROAT PENETRATING TO THE GULLET
After the discussion of twenty-seven miscellaneous injuries in various parts of
the head, the surgeon now moves downward and in Case 28 takes up an injury in the
throat. It is a gaping knife wound which penetrates to the gullet, so that if the injured
man drinks water it issues from the mouth of the wound. Included in the examina-
tion is the stitching of the wound, a physical manipulation such as our surgeon
customarily inserts in his examination, confining the treatment to the external
application of medicaments. Such a classification of the surgical operation suggests
that as a mechanical manipulation it was not regarded by ancient Egyptian medicine
as properly belonging to the treatment, which was a matter of recipes and medicinal
applications. We have here a suggestion of specialization. See Introduction, p. 42.
If a second examination discloses that the fever persists, a second treatment is pre-
scribed, and it is interesting to observe that in spite of the persistent fever, the patient
is placed on his normal diet, or as the Egyptian surgeon phrases it, he is moored at
his mooring stakes (compare Case 8, Gloss D).
The organization of the discussion is as follows :
I
Title (IX 18)
First examination and instructions to stitch (IX 18-21),
Diagnosis and verdict 2 (IX 21-22).
First treatment (X 1-2).
II
Second examination (X 2).
Second treatment (X 2-8).
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:06 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 339 ---
Cask 28 TRANSLATION AND COMMENTARY
313
Title
IX 18
Translation
Instructions concerning a wound in his throat.
Commentary
On "wound" see Case 1 (pp. 81-84). The anatomical meaning of hfm, "throat,"
will be found discussed immediately below.
Examination
IX 18-21
Translation
If thou examinest a man having a gaping wound in his throat, piercing through
to his gullet; if he drinks water he fchokes"1 (and) it comes out of the mouth of his
wound ; it is greatly inflamed, so that he develops fever from it; thou shouldst draw
together that wound with stitching.
Commentary
" Gaping wound" (wbnw n kf-t) has been fully discussed in Case 1 (pp. 90-92).
JjS^?^ fycm' or brmw, " throat," is a rare word the anatomical meaning of which
has never been studied or determined. In Papyrus Ebers there is a case of fatty
swellings on the hfm, which require lancing, but the text does not contain any
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:06 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 340 ---
314
Case 28
THE SURGICAL TREATISE
intimation of the meaning of tym (Pap. Ebers 105,1-8). The only other case (Ebers
76, 8) in the medical papyri is likewise of no assistance. Outside of the medical papyri
only two examples of the word are known (Petrie, Dendereh, pl. XXXVII G, l. 686
and Lacau, Sarcophages, Vol. I, p. 144 = Cairo 28052), both of which are in hopelessly
obscure passages. We are therefore dependent on Papyrus Edwin Smith for the
meaning of the word. It is not found in our document outside of Case 28, which,
however, fairly well discloses its meaning. We are told in the above examination
that the wound in the hcm penetrates to the gullet (Sbb). Hcm therefore means
"throat " rather than "neck," for which our surgeon regularly employs nhb-t.
Yidb, " piercing through," has been discussed in Case 14 (VI14).
<^JJ^jf Sbb, " gullet," is not a common word. The following parallel passages in
the Book of the Dead, however, determine its meaning:
1!aJJ?^^T&$ Book of the Dead, ed- Naville, 172, 22 (Aa).
4>HW£W7>d J"*. 172,19 (Aa)-
It will be seen in these two passages that Sbb is used as a variant of htyt, a well-
known word for " throat."
PniS-S-*^ dtp-hr-f " he chokes," is really a guess. The hr-tona of the verb indi-
cates that it expresses the result which follows upon the act of drinking. We should
possibly regard this choking or gasping as the cause for the issuance of the water from
the mouth of the wound, and render, " so that it comes out, etc." Stp is seemingly a
a7ra£ Xeyofievov.
nsr-y, " it is inflamed," is explained in Case 41, Gloss A, q. v. The masculine
pronoun might be taken here as designating the patient. A study of the parallel
cases, however, shows that nsr is employed to describe the local inflammation; its
subject is often the wound. The result for the patient is fever as here.
Pwtt ^rf, " fever," WH1 De found discussed in Case 41, Gloss B, where the ancient
commentator has thrown some light on it.
On surgical stitching see ndry, " draw together," and ydr, " stitching," in Case
10 (V 6).
Diagnosis
IX 21-22
a Probable traces of the first word of the treatment, afterward smeared out.
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:06 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 341 ---
Case 28
315
TRANSLATION AND COMMENTARY
Translation
Thou shouldst say concerning him : " One having a wound in his throat, piercing
through to his gullet. An ailment with which I will contend."
Commentary
The terms will be found discussed in the preceding examination, of which the
diagnosis is an incomplete repetition of the first part. The omission of " gaping "
(n kf-t) is probably a scribal error. The doubtful verdict 2 will be found discussed in
Case 4 (II 6). See also the introduction (pp. 45 ff.).
First Treatment
X 1-2
sic
Translation
Thou shouldst bind it with fresh meat the first day. Thou shouldst treat it after-
ward [with] grease, honey (and) lint every day, until he recovers.
Commentary
On the treatment with fresh meat followed by grease, honey and lint, see Case 1
(12-8).
Second Examination
X 2
a This word rfui was omitted by the scribe and was afterward inserted as a correction in red
ink over black.
Translation
If, however, thou findest him continuing to have fever from that wound, (con-
clusion in following second treatment).
Commentary
In view of the fact that the first treatment deals with the fever arising from the
inflammation in the wound, we expect some other symptom to be disclosed from the
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:06 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 342 ---
316
Case 28
THE SURGICAL TREATISE
second examination, which necessitates additional treatment. We must conclude
therefore that $mm, " to be hot, feverish " in the second examination, either means a
greater degree of fever than srf, the synonym employed in the first examination
(IX 21) ; or the verbal form Smm-f in the second examination indicates continuance,
perhaps persistent continuance of the fever. The latter is the more probable con-
clusion. In Case 47 the fourth examination employs Smm-f in precisely the same con-
nection. On the other hand when a case has not yet disclosed any fever and it is
discovered in a second examination, the surgeon says, " If, then, thou findest that
man, his flesh having developed (n-form) fever," as we find it in Case 7, second
examination (III 8-9). See also the discussion of the words for fever in our treatise,
in Case 41, Gloss A.
Second Treatment
X 2-8
Translation
Thou shouldst apply for him dry lint in the mouth of his wound, (and) moor (him)
at his mooring stakes until he recovers.
Commentary
Regarding the application of " dry lint," apparently without a bandage, Dr. Luck-
hardt remarks : " In a case of high fever because of infection, the dry lint was perhaps
indicated to promote drainage in place of the usual grease and honey ointment. By
capillary attraction it would hasten the absorption of the wound secretion and the pus."
The discussion of fit, " lint," will be found in Case 1 (18).
The strange figure of speech " moor him at his mooring stakes " is explained in
Case 8, Gloss D (II1-2).
CASE TWENTY-NINE
X 8-8
A GAPING WOUND IN A CERVICAL VERTEBRA
The preceding case concerning an injury which must have been located somewhere
in the general anterior portion of the neck involved only soft tissue. The surgeon now
proceeds to the back of the neck and takes up five cases of injuries to the cervical
vertebrae (Cases 29-88). In only one of these (Case 81, X 16) does he designate which
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:06 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 343 ---
Case 29
317
TRANSLATION AND COMMENTARY
of the cervical vertebrae he means. In Case 81 he refers to the possible extension of
the injury further down to affect the spine, and also the peculiar character of the
symptoms when the " middle " cervical vertebra is the one affected.
The injury in Case 29 is one most likely incurred in battle. It not only left a
yawning gash in the overlying soft tissue but also " perforated " one of the cervical
vertebrae. It caused stiffness of the neck, but was not deep enough to induce paralysis
of any of the limbs, as we find happening in other cases of this group. The surgeon
returns the doubtful verdict, and probably regards a cure as possible.
Title
X8
Translation
Instructions concerning a gaping wound in a vertebra of his neck.
Commentary
On the terms employed see the examination below.
Examination
X 8-6
4
a In this space the scribe at first wrote r with black ink. He afterward came back and with red
ink inserted the uvbird directly on the r. There is possibly an intimation here that yw and yr were
almost identical in pronunciation, either being used as the prosthetic vowel.
Translation
If thou examinest a man having a gaping wound in a vertebra of his neck, penetrat-
ing to the bone, (and) perforating a vertebra of his neck; if thou examinest that
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:06 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 344 ---
318
Case 29
THE SURGICAL TREATISE
wound, (and) he shudders exceedingly, (and) he is unable to look at his two shoulders
and his breast, (conclusion follows in diagnosis).
Commentary
The discussion of " gaping wound " will be found in Case 1 (pp. 91-92).
ts, " vertebra " is treated under Case 81, Gloss A.
m%>l 0im' " perforating." See Case 8 (118), and consult p. 272.
<?©23k*_fl w&' *s obviously an error for the usual h'y, " examine." The corre-
sponding context in Case 4 (examination, II 8-5) has drr, " probe," at this point.
A V 'nrw rf, " he shudders," see Case 4 (II 4).
-JL-'*S*^r" » groj/-n-/, " he is unable," has been explained in Case 8, examination
(119-20) and Gloss B (I 25-26). Dg'-n-f is an error for dg'-f, see Case 8, ibid.
Diagnosis
X 6-7
1^
a The scribe at first wrote ? here, and no plural strokes. He afterward inserted the plural strokes
in black ink over the u, which was in red.
Translation
Thou shouldst say concerning him : " [One having] a wound in his neck, penetrat-
ing to the bone, perforating a vertebra of his neck, (and) he suffers with stiffness in his
neck. An ailment with which I will contend."
Commentary
The word " gaping " (n kf-t) found even in the brief title has been omitted, doubt-
less by scribal error, in the diagnosis. It is noticeable also that the situation of the
wound "in a vertebra " is likewise omitted in the diagnosis, though included in
both title and examination. Except for the addition of the words " perforating a
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:06 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 345 ---
Case 29
319
TRANSLATION AND COMMENTARY
vertebra " we would not know from the diagnosis that a vertebra had been injured.
This is perhaps the worst case of scribal carelessness in the whole document.
The last symptom, " stiffness in his neck," has been treated in Case 8 (I 20). On
mn, " to suffer," see Case 8 (I 20). On the uncertain verdict 2 see Case 4 (II 6) and the
introduction (pp. 45 ff.). This diagnosis is also discussed in the introduction (p. 51).
Treatment
X 7-8
Translation
Thou shouldst bind it with fresh meat the first day. Now afterward moor (him)
at his mooring stakes until the period of his injury passes by.
Commentary
On the treatment with fresh meat see Case 1 (I 2-8).
The remainder of the treatment will be found discussed in the commentary on the
treatment in Case 8 (I 21-28).
CASE THIRTY
X8-12
SPRAIN IN A CERVICAL VERTEBRA "
The term employed by the ancient surgeon to designate this injury (nrw-t) is
unknown elsewhere, and indeed was not clear even to the ancient reader without ex-
planation (Gloss A). It is from this explanation that the rendering " sprain " has
been derived. There is no mention of any wound in the overlying tissue, and it was
not regarded as serious ; the surgeon expected to effect a cure.
Title
X 8
Translation
Instructions concerning a sprain in a vertebra of his neck.
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:06 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 346 ---
320
Case 30
THE SURGICAL TREATISE
Commentary
The terms will be found discussed in the commentary below.
Examination
X 9-10
10
Translation
If thou examinest a man having a sprain in a vertebra of his neck, thou shouldst
say to him : " Look at thy two shoulders and thy breast." When he does so, the
seeing possible to him is painful.
Commentary
^^(\ nrwt, " sprain," is explained in Gloss A below.
On the surgeon's test of the patient's ability to twist his head to either side or to
drop his face, see Case 8, examination (I 20).
yrr-f, " when he does so," is doubtless a conditional use of the so-called
emphatic form, like gmm-k, " when thou findest," so common in this papyrus. The
<=> is written rather small; to read t is grammatically possible, but we find «=> occa-
sionally written as small as this, e.g., twice in this very case (1l. 11-12), in which <=>
is even smaller than in our yrr-f. See also yr as compared with yst (VIII18).
Jt^s*l! ^2"" mr-f, hterally means " done by him." So we find hpr mc-y ds-y,
" done by me myself " (Shipwreck, 22-28). A similar example is in Gesprach eines
Lebensmilden, p. 21 ; Semneh Stela of Sesostris III, l. 6 ; and finally in Papyrus Ebers
(21,14-15) we have the title of a remedy for expelling ?^Ti^$TK~S'lM-
ments arising from the pwZ-worm," more literally " done by " this worm. In this last
example the feminine t shows that hpr-t is an attributive participle belonging to mr-wt,
" ailments," the immediately preceding noun. This is likely to be the construction
of hpr mc-J (literally " done by him ") in our passage. That is, hpr is an attributive
modifier of the infinitive m", " to see," so that we may render literally " the seeing done
by him; " or including the potential element sometimes implied by the participle,
we may render, " the seeing which may be done by him," or more freely " the seeing
possible to him." It is, of course, obvious that it is not the " seeing " itself which is
the source or cause of the pain, but rather the movement making the seeing possible.
This movement, however, is sufficiently indicated by the preceding words " When he
does so."
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:06 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 347 ---
Case 30
321
TRANSLATION AND COMMENTARY
The reader will find the surgeon's methods of making his observations discussed
on pp. 40-41, (a) to (e); see especially (e). The patient must have turned his face
downward and then to right and left alternately, so that he looked obliquely down-
ward, in a position somewhat cramped even for a sound neck, and sure to cause
pain in a sprained one. We are not informed whether in our Case 80, the surgeon
noted the patient's distress (resulting from the movement of his head) by ocular
observation, or by further questioning of the patient.
Diagnosis
X 10
Translation
Thou shouldst say concerning him : " One having a sprain in a vertebra of his
neck. An ailment which I will treat."
Commentary
On nrwt, " sprain," see commentary on Gloss A.
"Vertebra" will be found discussed in Case 81, Gloss A (p. 828). The diagnosis is
again only a repetition of the title, to which the favorable verdict 1 has been appended.
See Case 1 (I 2) and consult the introduction (pp. 45 ff.).
Treatment
X 10-12
12
Translation
Thou shouldst bind it with fresh meat the first day. Now afterward thou shouldst
treat [with] ymrw (and) honey every day until he recovers.
Commentary
The second occurrence of mht, "afterward" is an error due to the fact that the
word is sometimes inserted at this point (after srwh-k) e. g., VIII 21-22. On the treat-
ment with fresh meat followed by ymrw see Case 1 (I 2-8) and Case 15 (VI17).
Y
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:06 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 348 ---
322
Case 30
THE SURGICAL TREATISE
Gloss A
X 12
Explaining : A sprain.
Tra?isiaiton
As for: " A sprain," he is speaking of a rending of two members, (although) it
(= each) is (still) in its place.
Commentary
H&Cji nS't, " break " or " rend apart," is discussed in Case 6 (II19).
('ty, " two members," is a word applied to limbs, members, organs, etc., and
designating almost any part of the body. It must here be employed by the surgeon
with reference to two neighbouring vertebrae which have been forced apart. Gram-
matically '-ty is the subject of the infinitive ng-t, and introduced by the particle yn.
This construction will be found discussed in Case 5, Gloss A (II16-17).
In the clause " it (each) is in its place," the antecedent of " it" (an Egyptian
feminine) is evidently '-i, " member," meaning one of the two separated vertebrae.
The only other feminine noun in the passage, the infinitive ng-t " rending apart," is
not likely to be the antecedent. It can hardly be said to have a " place." The
meaning obviously is, that the two members are wrenched apart, although each (the
text actually reads " it ") still remains " in its place." The remark is intended to
indicate that no actual dislocation has taken place.
nrw-t, "sprain," occurs in the medical papyri only in our treatise, where
it is found in three cases (80, 42 and 48). In Cases 80 and 48 it designates a trouble in
a vertebra of the spinal column ; in Case 42 it affects the thoracic ribs. Judging from
the above gloss, nrw-t concerns the articulation of one vertebra with another, or of the
thoracic ribs with the sternum. This articulation has suffered sufficient strain so that
a rending or wrenching (ng-t) has occurred ; but the vertebra or rib (referred to in the
gloss above as " member," '-t) is still " in its place." This is in accord with what we
find in Case 42, where the thoracic ribs are affected by nrw-t, and it is distinctly stated
that there is no " dislocation " (wnh), " nor is it broken " (hib). An injury which has
produced a rending of an articulation without a dislocation or an actual break is
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:06 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 349 ---
Case 30
323
TRANSLATION AND COMMENTARY
evidently what we would call a " sprain." It is difficult to trace the origin of the word
to any known root. It is a feminine noun formed from a third weak root, for it is
written three times in Case 48, or It may have some connection
with the verb nry, meaning " to shrink," " to shudder," or the like, as used in our
document and discussed in Case 4 (II 4). It evidently has inclined in its semantic
history in a different direction from the other feminine noun nr-t, " fright, terror "
(Pyr. 1488 a; Louvre C, 87, an Empire tomb stela), or still another feminine noun
or ^ nr-t, " neck " in the phrase r nr-t-f, " at his neck," said of a collar
(Tomb of Senebtisi, p. 66).
CASE THIRTY-ONE
X 12-22
DISLOCATION OF A CERVICAL VERTEBRA
This is one of the most interesting cases in the papyrus, especially in the patho-
logical details, but also in the knowledge of anatomy revealed. The surgeon has
observed that the dislocation of a cervical vertebra causes paralysis of arms and legs,
or as the Egyptian idiom expresses it, the patient "is unconscious of his two arms and
his two legs." He has n„oted that the patient exhibits an erection of the phallus and
has no control over the discharge of urine. He differentiates between a dislocation
of a lower cervical vertebra near the backbone, which causes paralysis of the arms and
legs, and dislocation of the middle cervical vertebra which causes an emissio seminis,
a phenomenon observed in modern times in the case of a criminal whose neck has been
broken by hanging. Dr. Luckhardt remarks : " Priapism is certainly a characteristic
sign of cord involvement in the cervico-dorsal region. In this case the lesion must
have been below the fourth cervical vertebra, since the patient was still breathing."
The examination (X 18-16) yields the surgeon an unusually long and interesting
list of symptoms. The diagnosis, however, is scanty and merely lists the paralysis of
arms and legs, and the escape of urine. The verdict is of course unfavorable. No
treatment of any kind is suggested. It is evident that the case is one which excites
the surgeon's interest,—an interest which we may properly term scientific. He records
the phenomena observed with no hope of being able to treat or assist the injured man,
but obviously solely from his interest in the facts observable.
The three glosses are important, and doubtless indicate that the words explained
were already old and no longer fully understood. The explanation of wnh,
" dislocation " is very valuable, because the ancient commentator uses two different
words to elucidate the meaning of wnh, whereas he elsewhere often makes the word
to be defined itself the chief defining term. The discussion of ^P^^i*"a mn&',
"emissio seminis" and nny, "dribble" also enrich our knowledge of the
Egyptian dictionary.
y 2
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:06 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 350 ---
324
Case 31
THE SURGICAL TREATISE
Title
X 12-18
Translation
Instructions concerning a dislocation in a vertebra of [his] neck.
Commentary
The terms will be found discussed below.
Examination
X 18-16
f=e>
^^^^^ i <^>—^Usw
Translation
If thou examinest a man having a dislocation in a vertebra of his neck, shouldst
thou find him unconscious of his two arms (and) his two legs on account of it, while
his phallus is erected on account of it, (and) urine drops from his member without
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:06 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 351 ---
Case 31
325
TRANSLATION AND COMMENTARY
his knowing it; his flesh has received wind; his two eyes are blood-shot; it is a disloca-
tion of a vertebra of his neck extending to his backbone which causes him to be un-
conscious of his two arms (and) his two legs. If, however, the middle vertebra of his
neck is dislocated, it is an emissio seminis which befalls his phallus.
Commentary
" Dislocation " and " vertebra " will be found discussed in Gloss A.
®1C" &my, " to De unconscious of," literally " not to know," occurs only in Cases 81
and 88 in a pathological sense. It evidently means " both to lose control of," and
" to have no feeling in " either the arms or legs. A similar use of this verb applied to
the entire person or the entire body, first understood by Gardiner, occurs in the Tale
of Sinuhe where the hero says : ©j^^^i^j^-J^h^lS*"*- " * Decame unconscious
in his presence," literally, " I knew not myself etc." See Gardiner, Notes on the Story
of Sinuhe, p. 96 (B. 258).
nht is already known with the pathological meaning, " to be stiff," e. g.
Case 7 (III 17). It is here applied to an erection of the phallus.
mlb>]k h", " fall, drop, dribble " has been discussed in Case 20 (VII 24).
"*"* " member " is without doubt some special word for the phallus written here
with the word-sign. The determinative is not wholly clear in l. 14, but there can be
no doubt about it in l. 22, where it is obviously a papyrus roll. The question of the
phonetic reading is difficult. The most probable reading is b'h, as in the common
preposition m b'h. Written out J^^fi*"^ b'h, it occurs in Pap. Ebers 49, 14 and
98, 2; likewise in Naville, La Litanie du Soleil, pl. XIV, 1l. 87-88 and spelled
(where it is distinguished from hnn); and again Theban Table of Hours C^^) II16,7,
written J^hlT^P "her phallus "(!), and showing that the word originally meant
sexual organ without distinction of sex (see the variant in Tomb 6 which has j"^*—
though rr-t is the female hippo) ; ibid., 17, 6; 18, 5 ; 20, 2, and written once -
(as if to be read mt?). Compare Champollion, Monuments, pl. 272. No example of
a word mt, " phallus," has yet been found, but we may compare 1T6 mi, " suppository "
(Pap. Ebers 9, 8 ; 81,11 ; 81, 18 ; 81,15 ; 88, 8 ; 88, 16 ; 88,19) and for the vulva
also (ibid., 94, 17 ; 94, 21). Mt meaning " man " is found only in the Pyramid Texts
(510 c, 601 b). The evidence is therefore in favor of the reading b'h.
^m^j—IJLm,*—3TI* literally "his flesh has received wind" or "breath."
On this curious statement Dr. Luckhardt remarks : " One of the early signs of severe
spinal cord involvement or actual transection is meteorism. The normal movements
of the intestine are interfered with ; gases develop in the bowel and are not discharged.
As a result there is great distension of the abdomen." This observation by modern
medical science seems to explain what our ancient surgeon had in mind in this case.
8 ^J^-"3*- Ssm-ty, "are blood-shot," has been discussed in Case 19 (VII 19-20),
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:06 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 352 ---
326
Case 31
THE SURGICAL TREATISE
Gloss A. The incorrect | (] (] instead of J (] might be regarded as an effort to write the
dual, but we find the same writing with a singular subject, e.g., Case 19 (VII 17).
rr n, " extending to," in an anatomical sense, will be found discussed in
Case 1 (title).
J/]^<?^ bk&w, "backbone," is an ancient word, found several times in the Pyramid
Texts. Its meaning " backbone " is fairly evident. In the first place we find vertebra or
vertebrae of the bkho (e.g. Pyr. 229b and 409b). The determinative in the Pyramid
Texts is several times written thus: evidently three vertebrae seen from the
front or back and showing the connections of the ribs; or c^igngj, seen from above
or below, and showing the articular surfaces and the round foramina of three of the
twelve thoracic vertebrae. Finally the passage of Pap. Smith which we are discussing
shows that the bkho approaches near the cervical vertebrae, but does not include
them. The chief occurrences of bkho, which is probably a plural (see e.g., the plural
genitive *p nw used with it in Pap. Ebers 65,16) are the following : applied to animals
(serpent, grasshopper (!), bird, etc.), Pyr. 1772 b ; Great " Amduat," twelfth hour ;
Ebers 65, 10 ; 65, 16 ; a vertebra or vertebrae of bkho, besides two Pyr. references
above, Lacau, Textes Religieux, p. 78 (XXVII), l. 47 b ; Book of the Dead, Naville,
81, 5 ; in list of parts of the body of a giant in Theban Table of Hours G~ IX, Tomb 6,
Tomb 9, etc. (written with e eight times); miscellaneous, Naville, La Litanie du
Soleil, pls. XIII, l. 26; XXXI, l . 25; XIV, l . 87, and XLVII, l. 47; Great " Amduat,"
tenth hour (Leyden, Turin, Seti II); same in seventh hour; Book of the Dead, Naville,
149, 5 (determinative of balances evidently wrong); ibid., Chap, 188, 2 ; Pyr. 284 c.
While the title and the beginning of the examination do not localize the injury
further than to place it somewhere in the cervical vertebrae, the conclusion of the
examination proceeds to assume two different and more precise localizations of the
dislocation : first one near or extending to the thoracic vertebrae, that is at the lower
end of the cervical vertebrae ; the other higher up and affecting only the " middle
vertebra of his neck." The surgeon seems to indicate that in these two cases the
symptoms vary : in the first case he finds paralysis of arms and legs ; in the second
there is loss of control of the sexual organ, and an emissio seminis results. The word
for this phenomenon (mnd') is explained by the ancient commentator in Gloss B.
Diagnosis
X 16-17
17
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:06 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 353 ---
Case 31
327
TRANSLATION AND COMMENTARY
Translation
Thou shouldst say concerning him : " One having a dislocation in a vertebra of
his neck while he is unconscious of his two legs and his two arms, and his urine
dribbles. An ailment not to be treated."
Commentary
The last symptom is explained by the ancient commentator in Gloss C below. The
other matters requiring comment have already been discussed. This diagnosis is
interesting in its connection with the examination; see introduction (p. 51). The
unfavorable verdict 8 has been discussed fully in the commentary on Case 5 (II 15) ;
see also the introduction (pp. 46-48). As usual when this verdict appears, the surgeon
does not venture to suggest any treatment.
Gloss A
X 17-19
Explaining : A dislocation in a vertebra of his neck.
a In writing these two words phd-t vf-i, the scribe made some error, which he erased by smearing
it out while still wet, producing a smudge. He then inserted in red ink the following corrections :
the last three signs of phd-t, and a '-■ which he crowded in between the —_o and the stroke. Compare
vf-i in V 9 (bis).
Translation
As for: " A dislocation (wnh) in a vertebra of his neck," he is speaking of a
separation of one vertebra of his neck from another, the flesh which is over it being
uninjured ; as one says, "It is wnh," concerning things which had been joined
together, when one has been severed from another.
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:06 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 354 ---
328
Case 31
THE SURGICAL TREATISE
Commentary
"J" ts, " vertebra." The evidence in our papyrus, especially in this case, con-
clusively shows that " vertebra " is the correct rendering for this word. It is a render-
ing which has long been common, although anatomically it has not hitherto been
wholly certain. The word occurs thirty-two times in our document. Of these, twenty-
five are accompanied by the following genitive, " of his neck," and four by " of his
backbone." Only thrice (XI 10, 11 and 15) does it occur in Payyrus Smith without
one or the other of these modifiers. The examination (X 15-16) shows that there are
ts, which are lower down in the neck near the " backbone," and that there is a " middle
ts of his neck." It can hardly be doubted that ts is here the middle one of the seven
cervical vertebrae. The recognition of a middle ts in the neck also shows that there
is a series of ts. According to our Gloss A these ts are attached each to the next, and
a forcible separation may take place in case of a dislocation (wnh). On the other hand,
in Case 88 we learn that when a man falls head foremost and strikes violently on his
head, it " causes that one ts (of the neck) crush into the next one " (XI 11). The
correctness of " vertebra " as the meaning of ts is therefore evident.
Amy, " join," as the two lips of a wound are joined by healing (Case 10,
V 9), is evidently here the word describing the relation of two ts, or " vertebrae "
before they have been separated by the " dislocation " {wnh).
wnh, " dislocation," is the word which the commentator especially intends
that this gloss shall explain. In this purpose he has been unusually successful. In
the first place he does not, as so often in other glosses, employ the word he desires to
explain as the most important designating term in the explanation itself. On the
contrary he gives us two different words as suggesting the meaning of wnh : one being
" separation " (ywd) and the other " severance, detachment " (phd) or the like. The
first refers to a " separation " between two contiguous vertebrae, the second to the
" severance " from each other of two things which had been joined together. It will
be seen then that a wnh takes place between two things, each of which has an identity
of its own. Although joined together they did not at first form one thing, like a single
bone, which is broken into two pieces. An important differentiation between wnh and
a " fracture " (Mb) is found in Case 42 (XIV 18), where an injury of the " ribs of his
thorax " is said to be neither a wnh nor a " fracture " (Mb). Wnh therefore does not
mean a fracture of any kind (id or hsb) ; it quite evidently designates something that
happens to the articulation between two bones, and must mean " dislocation." This
meaning which emerges so clearly from the ancient commentator's explanation in
Gloss A is interestingly confirmed by a study of the further use of the word in our
document.
In Case 25 it designates a dislocation of the mandible, and the surgeon is directed
how to apply his fingers so that the displaced mandible may fall back into its proper
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:06 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 355 ---
Case 31
329
TRANSLATION AND COMMENTARY
position. Similarly in Case 84 wnh is applied to a dislocation of the two clavicles or
collar-bones, and in this case, too, the surgeon is charged to force them back into their
places. A wnh " in the ribs of his breast " in Case 48 is described in Gloss A as a
" displacement of the heads of the ribs of his breast " (XV 8-4). This word " dis-
placement " (nft) is also applied to the wnh of the clavicles in Case 84.
The use of wnh to describe the condition of surgical stitching that has become
" loose " is discussed in Case 10 (under ydr in V 6). The only other occurrence of
wnh in the medical papyri is in Pap. Ebers (81, 20), where it designates an ailment or
condition in the anus which is treated with ointment applied on lint. What this ail-
ment called wnh may be is entirely problematical.
SrTl yfy-t' " things," must be a plural here (possibly a dual), in view of the following
phrase, " one .... from another." The lack of any feminine sign of agreement, as in
the form of wnn, is common with the noun yh-t in our document, as indeed also else-
where, especially when yh-t is in the plural. The following are the examples in Papyrus
Smith : III 1 ; VI14 ; IX 18 ; XII 5 and 11 ; XIII10 and 11 ; XVI1,18 and 16 ;
some of the preceding may be singular; the following are certainly singular : II 8
and 20; IV 10.
Wnn is of course common with the force of a past tense ; its use here to throw the
following participle dmy into a pluperfect is interesting.
D12x\ phd-t(w), " has Deen severed," is a rare word which seems to be used only
in the medical papyri. It is used of the dismembering and cutting up of animals for
external medical application : of a bird (Pap. Ebers, 76, 9) ; of a lizard (Berlin
Medical Pap., 8088,8,2). It is also employed of the cutting open of tissue with a lancet
over a swelling or cist (Pap. Ebers 109, 6). Similarly it even appears as an intransitive
verb to designate the rending or breaking of tissue over a pus cist (ibid., 91, 18 ;
91, 18). In all these examples the word denotes the severance of animal tissue, but
our gloss would indicate that it had a wider usage to indicate severance or detachment
of any object from another to which it had been attached (dmy).
1, wc-t, feminine, is of course out of agreement with the in r in-nw-f. Compare
the same incongruity in V 9 and conversely in I 10 and consult commentary, pp. 114
and 116.
Gloss B
X 19-21
Explaining : It is an emissio seminis which befalls his phallus.
■20
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:06 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 356 ---
330
Case 31
THE SURGICAL TREATISE
a This word yw-f was at first inadvertently omitted by the scribe, and was afterward inserted
in red in the space at the end of line 20.
Translation
As for: " It is an emissio seminis which befalls his phallus," (it means) that his
phallus is erected (and) has a discharge from the end of his phallus. It is said : "It
remains stationary " (mn s'w), when it cannot sink downward (and) it cannot lift
upward.
Commentary
™P^^f=m mud', "emissio seminis," is a rare word which has been shown by
Kees to mean onanism, self-pollution (Zeitschr. fur Aegypt. Sprache 57, p. 110). The
ancient commentator makes it clear that he is using the word for an involuntary
emission. This meaning is even suggested in the text to be explained, by the use of
hpr r, " happen to," which frequently is used in an unfavorable sense like our " befall."
The determinative of a jar employed in the text (X 16) is due to the fact that there
is a word mnd', meaning " jar." Gloss B has the correct text with the determinative
of a phallus.
~?(°n&, " discharge," is fully explained in Case 41, Gloss E (XIV 15-16). The
interpretation of hr, the preposition so often used by our surgeon to introduce the causo
of a symptom, is difficult. It follows directly after " phallus " (hnn) in the examina-
tion (X 14), to introduce the cause, that is, the injury. It is possible that we should
understand our gloss as meaning that the phallus is erected as a result of the emission.
Hr is, however, employed so often with the meaning " possess " that this meaning
seems not improbable here.
Having quite adequately explained mnd', the commentator proceeds with a second
explanation, perhaps led to do so by an idiom or proverb, yw-f mn s'w, " It remains
stationary," in which the occurrence of mn and s\ one following the other, have
suggested to the commentator some connection with mnd', "emissio." It would seem
highly improbable that the two words mn "remain" and "5"^<?^ s'w'
" protect " (rendered above " be stationary ") should have any etymological con-
nection with mnd', " emissio." The commentator has either been misled by the simple
paronomasia, or found it too attractive to be resisted.
In the translation of this idiom or proverb, the rendering of ^T^<?^5| s'w as " be
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:06 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 357 ---
Case 31
331
TRANSLATION AND COMMENTARY
stationary " is based entirely upon the explanatory statements which follow, and
which clearly indicate that the member is stationary. Whether we should understand
s'w to be the common verb " protect " or the less common Empire word ^^^J^s'w,
" break, fracture," or the like, applied to members of the body, may be left uncertain.
fflP^]k^j 9^', "sink," is a relatively rare word, not otherwise found in the
medical papyri. Its meaning is established by its use in the Eloquent Peasant where
it occurs six times. Of these, five (77 (B 2) = 812 (B 1); 87 (B 2) = 822-828 (B 1); 96 ;
162 and 168) are employed to indicate the incorrect deflection of a pair of balances by
which the peasant suggests divergence from justice, symbolized by the balances. In
the sixth example (92) gd' designates the collapse of a timber or support and is parallel
with PJ"^ ibn, which is the "j"—' of the Pyramid Texts, used to designate the " fall"
of a serpent. Any one who has seen an upreared cobra in Egypt will understand at
once the meaning of ibn, employed so regularly in serpent charms in the Pyramid
Texts, adjuring the serpent to " fall" or " sink down." In this passage then
(Peasant 92), gd', parallel with ibn, evidently means " to sink " or " to sink down."
In Pap. Prisse it is used once figuratively to indicate the " yielding " of an opponent
(18, 4).
An interesting parallel between our opposed tsy n hrw, " lift upward " and gd' n hrw,
" sink downward " is furnished in a different pathological connection concerning an
ailment of the heart in Pap. Ebers (101,16-17):
" It does not rise upward,
it does not fall downward."
The potential meaning of the negatived n-fonn is highly probable here. The use
of the negative for the usual —»is made certain by the parallel — in the preceding
proposition. Compare Case 82 (XI 8).
Gloss C
X 21-22
Explaining : While his urine dribbles.
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:06 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 358 ---
332
Case 31
THE SURGICAL TREATISE
Translation
As for : " While his urine dribbles," it means that urine drops from his phallus
and cannot hold back for him.
Commentary
WZZ^J^ nny, rendered " dribble " above is a common word but is unknown
as applied to human physiology outside of our treatise. Its commonest meaning is
" to be weary." It is sometimes applied to the slow movement of the back-water
of the inundation, e. g.,
tic
" Thou art the great flood, settling itself upon the fields " (Brugsch, Reise nach der
Grossen Oase, Tafel XXVII, 40-41). This and other such examples indicate con-
clusively that a slow; sluggish movement of water is implied. The corresponding
noun for sluggishness of food movement ^^1?^, nnw, which is a word for "weari-
ness, laziness " is twice employed in Pap. Ebers in a case of digestive trouble (86,21 ;
87, 8). It is employed in Case 8 (IV 14) to describe the motion of half paralysed
limbs. Our commentator explains nny in Gloss C by the word raj^^-A h", which
in its medical applications means "to fall, to drop," and is the verb employed when
the quantity of fluid is small. See e.g., Case 20, VII 24, where h" is discussed in the
passage " a little (of the fluid) drops " (h"). " Dribble " is evidently, therefore, a
fair rendering of our verb nny. In quoting from the text in X 17 the commentator
has misspelled the word, using the noun form nnw. The text, though lacking a deter-
minative, has the correct form nny.
t?, probably to be read b'h, is discussed above, in the examination (X 14).
P^^^3, is obviously a scribal error for P^^^'s® d'k, "draw together, pull to-
gether, contract " and the like. In medical usage it is found with the direct object
" vulva " (Ebers 96, 9-10; 96, 6-7); and with the direct object ^^—^7
" pupil of the eye " (Ebers 57,2-8, see Loret, Recueilde Trav. l,p. 182). In these passages
it must mean " contract the vulva (or vagina)," or " contract the pupil of the eye."
Besides such examples, with an organ of the body as the direct object, we find it also
with E^,^ " urine " as the direct object (Ebers 50, 18 = Hearst V 2), where its
meaning is probably " restrain, withhold, control, hold back " or the like. The occur-
rence of this phrase P^^^^^EE11r^o ^ mwU't, "control (or hold back) tho
urine " (Ebers 50, 18), makes our restoration of the verb d'h in Pap. Smith quite
certain. It should be noted, however, that in our passage, mwy-t, " urine " is the
subject, whereas in Pap. Ebers it is the object of d'k, " restrain, hold back." The
potential meaning of the negatived n-form is again quite probable.
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:06 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 359 ---
Case 32
333
TRANSLATION AND COMMENTARY
CASE THIRTY-TWO
XI1-9
DISPLACEMENT OF A CERVICAL VERTEBRA
This is the fourth of the group of five cases (29 to 88) treating injuries of the
cervical vertebrae. In such groups the surgeon has usually proceeded from less to
more serious cases. Case 82 however, which is regarded as an injury quite capable of
successful treatment, has been placed after a dislocation of a cervical vertebra (Case
81). It deals with a displacement of one of the cervical vertebrae, an injury which we
would be inclined to regard as serious but to which the ancient surgeon appends
verdict 1. He also adds to the treatment of the patient the clause " until he recovers."
The gloss at the end, explaining the term " displacement " (nsw-t), is one of the best
and clearest in our papyrus.
It is in this case that the ancient scribe has made use of a scribal device of great
interest. At the beginning of line four he unintentionally omitted the words " Thou
shouldst say concerning him," the opening formula of the diagnosis. Having later
noticed the omission, however, he inserted the lacking words at the top of the column
(see Plate XI), and then called attention to the insertion by means of a red cross (see
end of line three, Plate XI). This cross is the lineal ancestor of our asterisk.
Title
XI-1
Translation
Instructions concerning a displacement in a vertebra of his neck.
Commentary
The terms will be found discussed below, especially in the gloss.
Examination
XI1-8
2
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:06 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 360 ---
334
Case 32
THE SURGICAL TREATISE
ft This cross inserted in red is the ancient scribe's asterisk, explained in footnote a under diagnosis
(XI 3-4, p. 335).
Translation
If thou examinest a man having a displacement in a vertebra of his neck, whose
face is fixed, whose neck cannot turn for him, (and) thou shouldst say to him : " Look
at thy breast (and) thy two shoulders," (and) he is unable to turn his face that he may
look at his breast (and) his two shoulders, (conclusion follows in diagnosis).
Commentary
nswt, " displacement," is explained in Gloss A, q. v.
mn, " fixed," has a number of interesting anatomical uses in our document,
which have been discussed in Case 4 (II 9). It is here used pathologically to indicate
that owing to an injury of a cervical vertebra the neck cannot turn and the face remains
" fixed " as it were, looking in one direction.
We have here another good case of the potential force of the negatived n-form.
!ZTJ^ ^1'', " breast," is a word that has commonly been rendered " body, surface
of the body, skin," etc. Its real meaning is, however, " breast." See for example the
epithet ^^^J^^ meaning " big-breast " as a designation of a hawk or falcon
in the Pyramid Texts (1048c). The phrase (IJ^tJ Snb-t, " make festive ( = adorn) the
breast" in the Empire tomb scenes is another example in point. See Davies-Gardiner,
Tomb of Amentmhet, pl. XXX, l. G, and p. 48, n. 18, where he also renders " breast."
Our case above is a clear demonstration of this meaning, for a comparison with other
cases shows that they employ the well-known word k'b-t, " breast," where our case
has Snb-t. For example, Case 80 (X 9) has
in the directions for testing the patient's ability to turn his neck, where Case 82
(XI 2-8) has
Case 80 puts " shoulders " first and " breast " second, while Case 82 reverses this
order ; but otherwise the two texts are strictly parallel and the equivalence between
Snb-t and k'b-t is obvious. The anatomy of k'b-t is explained by the ancient com-
mentator in Case 40, Gloss A (XIII17) and in Case 48, Gloss A (XV 8-4).
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:06 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 361 ---
Case 32 TRANSLATION AND COMMENTARY 335
*s obviously an error for ""S*
for the usual — is found also in the preceding case (X 21).
Diagnosis
XI 8-4
a These words dd-yn-k r-f, " Thou shouldst say concerning him," were unintentionally omitted
by the scribe in the text at the beginning of l. 4. It was an omission too large to be inserted above
the line in the text, as he sometimes did. He therefore wrote the missing words in red at the top of
the column of text and called attention to the omission in the text at the proper point by a cross,
likewise in red. He inserted the cross at the end of l. 3 however, not wishing to break the smooth
right-hand edge of his column with anything added at the beginning of l. 4. This red cross is of course
the ancestor of our asterisk.
Translation
Thou shouldst say concerning him : " One having a displacement in a vertebra of
his neck. An ailment which I will treat."
Commentary
The diagnosis again consists only of the title with the favorable verdict 1 added,
as noted in the introduction (pp. 48 ff.). On verdict 1 see Case 1 (I 2), and the intro-
duction (pp. 46 ff.). The terms employed in the diagnosis will be found discussed below.
Treatment
XI 4-7
o <=> TV I 1WI I 11) I \\
a It is possible that the scribe wrote <Z>
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:06 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 362 ---
336
Case 32
THE SURGICAL TREATISE
Translation
Thou shouldst bind it with fresh meat the first day. Thou shouldst loose his
bandages and apply grease to his head ras far as1 his neck, (and) thou shouldst bind
it with ymnc. Thou shouldst treat it afterward [with] honey every day, (and) his
rrelief is sitting until he recovers.
Commentary
On the treatment with fresh meat see the discussion in Case 1 (I 2-8).
is doubtless a sportive writing of the verb P f J-A d'by, " to traverse," especially
in the phrase P?J-A^| " to traverse the marshes " in hunting. See Mariette, Abydos
I49e; 49 f; Newberry, El-Bersheh, pt. I, XX. It perhaps originally meant " to jackal
the marshes," ignoring the confusion between — and p. I do not know of any other
example of our phrase here, r s'by r, literally "to traverse as far as " which probably
means simply " as far as." It would be analogous with r mn m, " to remain with," the
well-known compound preposition for " as far as."
On bandaging with ymrw see Case 15 (VI 17).
The word by-t, " honey " written with a sign like the flying bird instead of the bee
is common in our document, e. g., VII6.
^(]w sry-f, " his rrelief " is discussed in Case 17 (VII 6).
" Sitting " as used in treatment in Papyrus Smith will be found discussed in Case 4
(II 7).
Gloss A
XI 7-9
Explaining : A displacement in a vertebra of his neck.
ari>~l4s
a The scribe at first wrote J 1, and then corrected the ^ to 1 simply by drawing the oblique cross
stroke in hieratic (] through the ]. It is practically certain that he intended to write dfy-t, not dfty-t.
Translation
As for : " A displacement in a vertebra of his neck," he is speaking concerning
a sinking of a vertebra of his neck [to] the interior of his neck, as a foot settles into
cultivated ground. It is a penetration downward.
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:06 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 363 ---
Case 32
337
TRANSLATION AND COMMENTARY
Commentary
This gloss is one of the most successful discussions appended by the ancient com-
mentator. He first explains the meaning of nsw-t, which we have rendered
" displacement " by the use of the word hrp, " to sink " (see commentary on Case 5,
II18), before he employs the related verb nsy, " go, lead, introduce." His use of this
related verb is wisely combined with the subject " foot " and the phrase " into (or
- in ') cultivated ground," so that there can be no doubt of its meaning. The picture
is that of a foot sinking into soft, plowed ground.
The omission of the preposition before hnw, " interior " is probably a scribal error.
We have the combination of n hnw with hrp, " sink," twice in Case 5.
j^-A nsy is a verb of going, otherwise known only in late texts like those of Edfu
and Dendera. It is possible that the word is used here only with the meaning " go,
walk " in soft soil, and that the added idea of sinking into the soft soil is contained
solely in the verb dfy-t; but it is more probable that the verb nsy means "to sink"
or " to settle," and that our word nswt is derived from the verb nsy.
^111.2 $fyt, " penetration," is a rare word. The verb, with the obvious meaning
" penetrate," is found in the following passage :
" O ye who pass by, if ye wish to live, etc.
sic
so shall ye penetrate the stela of this tomb, and enter into the writings that are in it "
(Theban tomb of H J (],Mission archeohgique franqaise, Vol. V, Aba, pl. VI, left, 1l.9-10).
Here dfy, rendered above " penetrate," is parallel with rk m, " enter into." This
meaning fits our context in Gloss A perfectly.
In view of the ancient commentator's explanation therefore, it is clear that the
injury assumed in Case 82 is a displacement of one of the cervical vertebrae, it being
understood that the vertebra has been displaced directly toward the inside, that is
toward the front of the injured man. It is a question for the pathologists to decide
whether an injury of this kind would so easily respond to external treatment as our
surgeon assumes, for in neither verdict nor treatment does the surgeon regard it as
a serious case.
CASE THIRTY-THREE
XI 9-17
A CRUSHED CERVICAL VERTEBRA
This case is the last of the group of five treating injuries of the cervical vertebrae.
It is the most serious probably in the entire group. The surgeon is at pains to explain
just how the injury occurred, and this makes the case one of the most interesting in our
z
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:06 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 364 ---
338
Case 33
THE SURGICAL TREATISE
treatise. Many of the injuries it discusses are such as could be expected only in war,
or in a case of murderous assault. It is explained in Case 88, however, that the injured
man has fallen headlong and has struck on his head, driving a vertebra of his neck with
such violence into the next that the first vertebra is crushed into the other, the two
remaining jammed thus together, and forming what modern surgeons call an " im-
pacted fracture " as Dr. Luckhardt informs me. This is such an accident as might
happen any day in civil life in ancient Egypt, especially among workmen who were
employed in such great numbers on the vast buildings of the Pharaohs, like the
pyramids and temples. The surgeon appends verdict 8, the fatal verdict, and makes
no reference to any treatment.
It is quite clear that the presence of this case in our document is due to scientific
interest in the symptoms displayed and the nature of the injury. The account contains
some old terms which the commentator considers it wise to explain in two interesting
glosses.
Translation
Instructions concerning a crushed vertebra in his neck.
Commentary
The title literally reads " a crush in a vertebra of his neck." The noun " crush "
(ihm) will be found discussed below in Gloss A, p. 840.
Title
XI 9
Examination
XI 9-12
10
J\
1:!
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:06 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 365 ---
Case 33
33!)
TRANSLATION AND COMMENTARY
Translation
If thou examinest a man having a crushed vertebra in his neck (and) thou findest
that one vertebra has fallen into the next one, while he is voiceless and cannot speak ;
his falling head downward has caused that one vertebra crush into the next one; (and)
shouldst thou find that he is unconscious of his two arms and his two legs because of
it, (conclusion follows in diagnosis).
Commentary
PD^»1 " crusn " ig explained in Gloss A.
^,5*^ hr, "has fallen," is an unusual application of the common verb " fall," and
is perhaps peculiar to surgery. The explanation in Gloss A shows that it means
" penetrate," the force of the man's fall driving one vertebra into the next.
HT^11^- ^m-y, " speechless, voiceless," has been explained in Case 22, Gloss C
(VIII 16-17).
IP^^I ythdhd, " be head downward," is discussed in Gloss B (XI15-17).
&my, " De unconscious," literally " not to know," employed to indicate
paralysis of arms and legs, has been discussed in Case 81 (X 18).
Diagnosis
XI 12-18
Translation
Thou shouldst say concerning him: " One having a crushed vertebra in his neck;
he is unconscious of his two arms (and) his two legs, (and) he is speechless. An
ailment not to be treated."
Commentary
The terms will all be found discussed above, except ihm, which is treated in Gloss A.
It is interesting, and grammatically important to notice that the n-form of the verb,
&my-n-f, is employed with a permansive meaning parallel with that of the following
pseudo-participle (dgm-y).
Verdict 8 indicates that there is no hope of recovery. See Case 5 (II 15). It is
therefore, as usual, followed by no directions for treatment.
Z2
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:06 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 366 ---
340
Case 33
THE SURGICAL TREATISE
Gloss A
XI 18-15
Explaining : A crushed vertebra in his neck.
a This <=> was at first omitted by the scribe and afterward inserted above the line in red.
Translation
As for : " A crushed vertebra in his neck," he is speaking of the fact that one
vertebra of his neok has fallen into the next, one penetrating into the other, there being
no movement to and fro.
Commentary
PDJ^i dhm, "to crush," is a very old word appearing in the Pyramid Age -written
though it is otherwise mostly written with p. It means "to crush," especially
with blows, as with a pestle. Two men pounding with large pestles are depicted in a
tomb painting at Benihasan and the accompanying inscription calls their work PoJ^
ihm (Tomb 15, Newberry, Vol. II, pi. VI). A small stela in the Cairo Museum has the
word ihm written with the determinative of a man pounding with a pestle in a mortar.
This writing suggests that the determinative of slim, \ (XI15) is intended to represent
a pestle in a mortar. Indeed in Papyrus Hearst (X 6), in the next example quoted, the
determinative of the word $d, "mortar " in hieratic is exactly like the curved line at
the bottom of ^ which is therefore probably a mortar. The ingredients of a prescription
in Papyrus Hearst are Po^^J1^^JSLl^iTi "crushed (ihm-ty) in a stone mortar "
(Pap. Hearst X 5-6; compare Pap. Ebers 77, 8). In the model kitchens sometimes
placed in tombs, grain is both crushed in a mortar and ground in a hand mill. These
two processes applied to ajar of grain are designated in Pap. Ebers (75,15) J^tJ^
" crushed (ihm) and ground." The trampling and crushing by oxen on a threshing
floor is called ihm in the tomb of Sennofer (Sethe's copy). In the medical papyri a
noun ihm, meaning " a trituration " is derived from the verb ihm, " to crush." Thus
in the Kahun Medical Papyrus (8, 7) we have P^——IP™1, ° ," a trituration (ihm)
of natron;" and in Papyrus Ebers (86,10) Po^}^!^*^",^, "trituration (ihm) of
d'r t " (some kind of fruit). Related to this noun, a crushed substance, a triturated
drug, is our word shm in Case 88. Literally rendered the injury is " a crush in a ver-
tebra of the neck ; " that is, the crushed vertebra is called " a crush." This is perhaps
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:06 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 367 ---
Case 33
341
TRANSLATION AND COMMENTARY
what is meant in Papyrus Ebers in a recipe intended to prevent Po abrasions "
(dhm-w) occasioned by some ailment in the teeth (Pap. Ebers 72, 18).
Hr, " fall " in this unusual connection, is discussed above (l. 10).
The gloss indicates that one vertebra has been driven so firmly against and into the
next that the two are adhering and preventing all independent motion of either.
Gloss B
XI15-17
Explaining : His falling head downward has caused that one vertebra
crush into the next.
16
Translation
As for : " His falling head downward has caused that one vertebra crush into the
next," it means that he has fallen head downward upon his head, driving one vertebra
of his neck into the next.
Commentary
The repetition of r in hrr-f, after the determinative, is an obvious scribal error,
suggestive of oral diotation. The text in XI 11, from which the scribe is quoting is
correctly written hr-f.
^<S=y Q)d, an(l reduplicated P^^J, dhdM, are probably derived from the
simplex hdy, " to stream, to flow," most familiar to us in the common verb ^-^aii hdy,
" to float down stream." The causative d-hd is used originally of clothing with the
meaning "hang down." This is especially true when the hanging object is inverted, as
when a goddess lets her breasts hang down. For this idea of hanging inverted, the
Pyramid Texts employ the determinative ns\ (Pyr. 2171a). Similarly the stars hang
from the sky (Pyr. 1516 b). See also Pyr. 2155 b. Finally the dead are said to walk
dhdhd (see Lacau, Textes relig., Chap. XXIII, A, p. 67 = Recueil de trav., 29, p. 151,
l. 59, compare determinative in B. Confer also Zeitschrift, 49 (1911), p. 58) and the
determinative is that of a man with head down and feet up. The word is sufficiently
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:06 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 368 ---
342
Case 33
THE SURGICAL TREATISE
old and unfamiliar to lead our commentator to explain it by the phrase hr d'd'-/,
"upon his head."
P^lk^J- 6'$' " driving," is an otherwise unknown word, and the meaning given
has been derived from the context in this case.
CASE THIRTY-FOUR
XI17-XII 2
DISLOCATION OF THE TWO CLAVICLES
In this case we have two examinations, the first of which discloses only a dislocation
without other injury ; the second an injury of the overlying soft tissue, an injury
which penetrates to the interior. These are conditions which the surgeon found in
two different cases, as our text shows clearly enough. This conclusion is further
corroborated by the fact that Case 86, a fracture of the humerus corresponding to our
first examination in Case 84, is discussed by itself as a complete case, while the condi-
tions corresponding to the second examination in Case 84 have become a new case
(Case 87). Dr. Luckhardt here makes the important observation : "In the second
case it is plain that the surgeon is discussing a backward dislocation, the first case
being probably a forward dislocation of the collar-bone. In a so-called backward
dislocation of the collar-bone the head of the bone lies behind the upper end of the
sternum. This head presses on the trachea, esophagus, and larger vessels of the neck,
causing difficulty in breathing and swallowing. Because of such pressure a semi-
comatose condition may supervene. In modern surgery the head of the bone is ex-
cised if ordinary methods of reduction fail."
In the first case (84, first examination) the surgeon first prescribes the reduction of
the dislocated bones to their sockets, together with proper adjustment of pads and
bandages to hold them in place, and soothing applications. After the second case,
however, the surgeon offers no diagnosis, and no treatment. The injury to the soft
tissue is described in the same terms as in the alternative examination in Case 87
(XII 19-20), where verdict 8 follows, and there can be no doubt that the second
examination in Case 84 is regarded as having disclosed a hopeless case, notwithstand-
ing verdict 1, which follows it (see commentary below).
The case closes with an interesting explanation of the term " a dislocation in his
two clavicles " by the ancient commentator, which demonstrates his knowledge of the
bones of the thorax, contains an unusual excursion into the internal anatomy beneath
this region, and furnishes us with a number of new anatomical terms.
The question arises whether the consistent writing of the dual " his two collar-
bones " throughout this case is due to a common scribal habit in writing the dual
when mentioning members which are in pairs, and therefore possibly an error for the
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:06 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 369 ---
Case 34
343
TRANSLATION AND COMMENTARY
singular. It is important to note that the treatment twice uses " it " (" bind it " and
"treat it," XI19-20) to designate the injury; while the second examination mentions
finding a " rupture (of the soft tissue) over it " (the dislocation, XI 21). In this case
only one collar-bone would be dislocated. In the first treatment (XI19), however, the
surgeon returns the dislocated bone(s ?) to "their" place ; while in Gloss A the dis-
location is described as affecting " the heads " (plural) of the bones concerned, and the
articulation of " their heads " is further explained. The rendering " his two collar-
bones " seems therefore to be justified.
Title
XI17
Translation
Instructions concerning a dislocation in his two collar-bones.
Commentary
The terms are discussed below.
First Examination
XI 17-18
18 sic
Translation
If thou examinest a man having a dislocation in his two collar-bones, shouldst thou
find his two shoulders turned over, (and) the head(s) of his two collar-bones turned
toward his face, (conclusion follows in diagnosis).
Commentary
gmm is an error for gmm-k. See the same context in Case 85, after yr h'y-k
(XII 8).
2=3,^ phd-wy, " turned over," is discussed in Case VIII (IV 14). The form is
evidently a pseudo-participle, and as one of the rare duals of this verbal form another
evidence of the early age of our document.
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:06 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 370 ---
344
Case 34
THE SURGICAL TREATISE
" The head(s) of his two collar-bones " is explained in Gloss A. The remark seems
to indicate that the S-shaped clavicle, when dislocated, twists or turns somewhat, so
that the " head," the end next the sternum, turns upward toward the patient's face.
Translation
Thou shouldst say concerning him : " One having a dislocation in his two collar-
bones. An ailment which I will treat."
Commentary
The terms will be found discussed below. The diagnosis again consists of the verdict
appended to a repetition of the title of the case. This verdict is explained in Case 1
(I 2). See also the introduction (pp. 46 ff.).
First Treatment
XI 19-21
tic
nl'i i i
sic
21
Translation
Thou shouldst cause (them) to fall back, so that they rest in their places. Thou
shouldst bind it with stiff rolls of linen; thou shouldst treat it afterward [with] grease
(and) honsy every day, until he recovers.
Commentary
The surgeon has here placed the physical manipulation of the injury in the treat-
ment, where it really belongs, and not in the examination, where he has customarily
placed it (compare Case 25). The slight error in the writing of i-hr-yn-k may be
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:06 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 371 ---
Case 34
345
TRANSLATION AND COMMENTARY
corrected by comparison with the surgeon's account of a dislocated mandible, where
he uses verbatim the same language (IX 4-5). The omission of all directions for mani-
pulating the dislocation, such as we find so carefully given in Case 25 (IX 8-4), and
such as he gives in the next case, a fracture of the clavicle, is noteworthy. It may well
be due to inadvertent omission by our notoriously inaccurate scribe.
Ji^eIT! bd'-w, " stiff rolls," is explained in Case 11 (V 18).
On the use of grease and honey see Case 1 (I 8).
Second Examination
XI 21
Translation
If, however, thou shouldst find his two collar-bones having a rupture (of the tissue)
over it, penetrating to the interior, (conclusion in second diagnosis).
Commentary
id, " rupture," will be found discussed in Case 5 (II 11). It refers here to a
rupture of the soft tissue over the dislocation and penetrating the wall of the thorax
to the interior. The first examination assumes that the overlying soft tissue is un-
injured ; The second examination discloses an injury of this tissue, which constitutes
a new case, to which a new verdict is appended. Dr. Luckhardt raises the question :
" Does not the rupture here refer to most of the ligaments about the clavicular manu-
brium joints ? "
Second Diagnosis
XI 22
Translation
(Thou shouldst say) : " An ailment which I will treat."
Commentary
The diagnosis consists only of the favorable verdict (see Case 1,1 2), which after
declaring " I will treat," is curiously enough followed by no treatment. There are
thirty cases in our treatise containing this favorable verdict. In twenty-nine of these
cases this verdict is immediately followed by a description of the treatment. The only
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:06 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 372 ---
346
Case 34
THE SURGICAL TREATISE
exception is the above example in our present case (84). It should be noted further-
more that in all other cases prescribing no treatment, the verdict is regularly verdict 8
(e.g., Case 7, III 18 ; Case 8, IV 12 ; Case 87, XII 21). In this particular, Case 87
throws important light on Case 84. Turning to Case 87 we find that it falls into two
parts exactly parallel with the two parts of our Case 84. The second part in both
cases (87 and 84) is an alternative condition of the soft tissue overlying a dislocation
or fracture, the soft tissue having suffered a dangerous rupture which pierces entirely
through. Nowin Case 87 the description of this injury to the soft tissue in the examina-
tion is followed by a diagnosis concluding with the unfavorable verdict 8. The parallel
second examination in Case 84, describing the injury to the soft tissue in the same terms
as in Case 87, should therefore likewise be followed by a diagnosis including verdict 8.
This will be clear if we place the corresponding portions of the two cases parallel:
Case 84. H^-^ V^J J^P^XP (XI 21)'
„ 87. <M^^k&~a^,L~?o (XII 19).
„ 84. HP«»J«l.l]gt! (XI 21).
» 87- 1MUlISa?£ (xii 20).
» 84. Mft(XI82).
» 87. f^<=>(XII 21).
In view of the above evidence we can hardly doubt that in Case 84, our second
diagnosis (XI 22) should contain verdict 8 in place of verdict 1.
It may be objected that a scribal copyist would not copy so important a remark as
the verdict incorrectly. In the very next case (85), however, it will be found that he
has done this very thing. He at first wrote verdict 8, although his original from which
he was copying undoubtedly contained verdict 1. To be sure he noticed his error
before he finished and corrected it by inserting verdict 1 over verdict 8. In our case
we must conclude that he not only made the error, but also that he failed to notice it.
The probability is that the cases of dislocation of the clavicle known to our surgeon, in
which there was also injury of the overlying soft tissue, had been fatal oases. It is
perhaps significant that in the only gloss appended to our case, the commentator calls
attention to the " two canals " underlying the region of the injury, canals which lead
to the lungs. It may have been an injury in close proximity to these canals which the
surgeon's experience had led him to think was too dangerous to be treated. The mere
physical difficulties involved in reducing a backward dislocation were probably beyond
the skill of the ancient surgeon. He had not yet learned to excise the head of the
bone (see Dr. Luckhardt's remark, p. 842); he had no treatment for such disloca-
tions and he probably lost most of them.
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:06 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 373 ---
Case 34
347
TRANSLATION AND COMMENTARY
Gloss A
XI 22-XII 2
Explaining : A dislocation in his two collar-bones.
d m C
XII 1
111
Translation
As for : " A dislocation in his two collar-bones," it means a displacement of the
heads of his sickle-bone(s). Their heads are attached to the upper bone of his breast,
extending to his throat, over which is the flesh of his gorget, that is the flesh that is
over his bosom. Two canals are under it: one on the right and (one) on the left of his
throat (and) of his bosom ; they lead to his lungs.
Commentary
sgL.^ wnh, " dislocation " is discussed in Case 10 under ydr (V 6) and Case 14
(VI 11).
J J^T\~ bb-wy-fy, " his two collar-bones " is a new word, the meaning of which is
derived from this gloss. It is not found in any other Egyptian document now known
to us. It is doubtless related to the rare word J J®; bb, " collar " (Piankhi Stela,
l.112), otherwise known only in Ptolemaic inscriptions. The word J? J<?, ° , bwbw, the
material for a chain or necklace (Pap. Harris 52 b, 2), is perhaps related. We learn
from the ancient surgeon's interesting description in this gloss, that the heads of the
two bb-wy are attached to, or articulated with the upper bone of the breast (manubrium
sterni) " extending to his throat." There can be no doubt therefore that the two
bb'ury are the collar-bones.
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:06 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 374 ---
THE SURGICAL TREATISE
Case 34
Cl^n nft, " displacement," is a new word, at least in this form. We may compare
the Coptic tio*YqT, " turn around, draw aside, to let out." See also HoyTq in Spiegel-
berg, Koptisches Handworterbuch, p. 81, and his The determinative of a cord,
and the use of nft to explain wnh, suggest that it means " detachment, loosening,
displacement." The special application in this case to the displacement of the heads
of the clavicles from their articulation with the sternum is paralleled by the use of the
same word to describe the dislocation of the heads of the ribs which articulate with
the sternum in Case 48 (XV 4).
JJ^ ifb, "sickle-bone," is a rare word not otherwise known in the medical
papyri. It occurs once in the Book of the Gates and Coffin Texts (Grapow, Urk. V,
p. 161) where it means simply " sickle." There is dear parallelism between wnh,
"dislocation" with nft, "displacement," as one pair, and bb-wy-fy, "his two collar-
bones " with h'b-f, " his sickle-bone(s) " as the other pair. That is to say, h'b is a word
meaning " sickle," which is applied to the collar-bone, and is a more popular designa-
tion of that bone than bb, which needed explanation. The slightly S-shaped form of
the clavicle probably gave rise to the suggestion that it resembled an Egyptian sickle,
so that it was finally termed a sickle, just as the modern term clavicle is the old Latin
word "a little key." Thence came the application of the word h'b, "sickle" to the
neck ; see J]<?, ^, h'b, "neck" in Kahun Medical Pap. 1,19 as the opposite of
^, hpd-w, " buttocks." It also appears as part of the body of the constellation,
the Giant (^), listed between Sw-ty, " two sides " and mnd-t, "cheek," an
order of parts which does not aid us much. In the Theban Table of Hours it appears
with the Giant (£~) in II, III, IV, and VI, with the writing (see Cham-
pollion, Monuments, pll . CCLXXII, 17). In our text h'b should be plural, for the word
" heads " immediately preceding is in the plural; and the words " their heads " in
the next sentence must refer back to h'b as a plural (" their "). See below.
™^ ^ mn m, " attached to," meaning " articulated with " is
discussed in Case 4 (II 9).
" Their heads " is probably intended to refer back to h'b, " sickle-bone," which
should be written in the plural (or dual). Otherwise the only other noun to which
" their " can refer is bb-wy-fy, " his two collar-bones."
^'<2.p^i—fry r1 Jpb'tff "upper bone of his breast," is quite clearly, as
shown by this gloss, the topmost bone of the sternum, the manubrium sterni, the bone
with which the heads or inner ends of the two clavicles are articulated.
&\ fc'H " breast," will be found discussed in Case 40, Gloss A (XIII17).
hty-t," throat,"is a very old word,already found in the Pyramid Texts, which
also employ a masculine f^^f (Pyr. 606d). The general meaning "throat" is well
established, e. g., as the seat of thirst in Sethe, Urk. IV, p. 482. As we have shown
above, it occurs as the variant of <=,J Sbb, " gullet" in the Book of the Dead
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:06 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 375 ---
Case 34
349
TRANSLATION AND COMMENTARY
(Naville, 172,19 Aa = 172,22 Aa). See Case 28 (IX 19). Its mention here is useful
as aiding to define the upper limit of the region concerned in the injury.
JJII^ bby-t, "gorget, "is a very rare word. It is doubtless a derivative from J J<^
bb, " collar-bone," already discussed above. Gardiner tells me that it occurs in the
unpublished Ramesseum Glossary papyrus, following k'b-t, " breast." Unfortunately
this list observes no orderly arrangement, and no safe conclusion oan be drawn from
the juxtaposition of bby-t and k'b-t. In our gloss, however, the flesh of the bbyt is said
to be " over it," that is over the throat (hty-t). The bbyt is therefore evidently the soft
tissue covering the general region of the front of the throat extending downward
toward the top of the sternum (manubrium), for this tissue is at once explained by the
ancient commentator as that of the bosom also. No common English word for this
region seems to exist, and the little current designation " gorget " may perhaps serve
to suggest the meaning of the Egyptian word.
255^J55^^ S'S'-t," bosom," is likewise a very rare word, and heretofore of quite
uncertain meaning. It occurs twice as the seat of an uncertain disease, a swelling
appearing on the S'S'y-t (Pap. Ebers 104, 14 and 104, 17). Neither these two nor the
only other known example of the word (Mariette, Denderah, I 78 a) throw any useful
light on its meaning. Our passage shows clearly that it means the region of the lower
throat extending downward to the upper part of the sternum. We can hardly doubt
therefore that it is related to the word JSS^ffS^QI© S'S'y t, "necklace," which
hangs down from the neck over this region. The somewhat vague word " bosom "
would seem to be a fair rendering.
The item with which the gloss closes is of unusual interest, for the surgeon here
turns to the internal anatomy beneath the region he is discussing, and makes a remark
possibly explaining why a rupture of the tissue in this region was so dangerous. When
we recall that the surgeon suggests no treatment for the case disclosed in the second
examination, we may raise the question whether he had not had experience with some
case, in which a dislocation of the clavicle was accompanied by a rupture not only of
the overlying soft tissue but also of one of the large blood-vessels beneath,—an injury
from which the patient rapidly bled to death. The vessels of which the commentator
is speaking he calls mt, and it should be remembered that this term mt means not only
" canal," but also " ligament, tendon." See Case 1 (I 6) and Case 7 (III 17). Since
writing the above I have received Dr. Luckhardt's important remark inserted in the
introduction to this case, in view of which he adds the following observation : " There
is therefore a direct relation between the description of the dislocated clavicle and the
structure beneath the sternum. Of course the canals mentioned may be the bronchi
(left and right) and not blood-vessels, particularly in view of the commentator's state-
ment that they lead to the lungs." Dr. Luckhardt also mentions the fact that the
branching of the trachea into the bronchi ocours at the level of the third and fourth ribs.
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:06 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 376 ---
350
Case 35
THE SURGICAL TREATISE
CASE THIRTY-FIVE
XII 8-8
A FRACTURE OF THE CLAVICLE
The surgical procedure prescribed in this case, having, even in the Seventeenth
Century B.c., evidently developed from long experience, is very interesting. The
patient is laid prostrate on his back, with some object placed under him between his
shoulder blades, of such a height that the shoulders are somewhat raised from the
bed or floor, permitting the surgeon to spread the shoulders, probably by pressing
down, so that the fractured bone is longitudinally stretched, and the fractured ends
can be fitted together. It is unfortunate that the two bandages which are then applied,
presumably to prevent disturbance of the fracture, are so described that their position,
as affecting the fractured clavicle, is not clear.
o Mb," break " or " fracture," is explained in Case 11 (V 10). It is quite clear that
there is only one " break " discussed in this case. The scribe's writing of the dual
bfrwy, " two collar-bones," is either an error from the habit of writing the word so
often in the dual, or is a loose form of expression, employing " his two collar-bones "
with the meaning " either one of the two."
Title
XII 8
3
Translation
Instructions concerning a break in his collar-bone.
Commentary
Examination
XII 8^
4
Translation
If thou examinest a man having a break in his collar-bone, (and) thou shouldst
find his collar-bone short and separated from its fellow, (conclusion follows in diagnosis).
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:06 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 377 ---
Case 35
351
TRANSLATION AND COMMENTARY
Commentary
On the nature of the injury see commentary under title.
1^^. huf, "short." This meaning has been demonstrated by Gunn, Beoueil
de trav., 89, p. 101. See especially |^—o"j} hicr, "dwarf" (determinative inexact
in type). It is here a verb in pseudo-participle.
P^^^L &H, "separated " is discussed in Case 14 (VI 8). The physical situation
here described is due to a single break in one clavicle ; the other clavicle must not
be considered as playing any part in the situation. In view of these facts we must
conclude that the separation referred to is between the two pieces of the broken
clavicle. As the text stands the description is obviously incomplete ; before " separ-
ated " we expect the words " one piece," that is, " (one piece) separated from its
fellow."
Diagnosis
XII 4
["anciently
i corrected J_A_fc
Lfrom ^ \\
a The scribe at first wrote verdict 3, five signs all in red. He then corrected the error and con-
verted the text into verdict 1. He canceled the red with a cross stroke in black, and the red \\ in
the same way. He inserted (] I] in black so that one (] was over <? and the other over «—». The insertion
of ^ at the end completed the reading of verdict 1. The was left in red unaltered. Cf. Vol. II,
Pl. XII.
Translation
Thou shouldst say concerning him : " One having a break in his collar-bone. An
ailment which I will treat."
Commentary
The diagnosis is again a repetition of the title, followed by the verdict (see intro-
duction, pp. 48 ff.). On the favorable verdict 1 see commentary on Case 1 (I 2) and
introduction (pp. 46 ff.).
Treatment
XII 4-8
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:06 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 378 ---
352 THE SURGICAL TREATISE Case 35
7
-S2>- (I a ^ S .—.ni 1
]o„, •
PTi
HI*
a The scribe has omitted the two cross-strokes on s.
Translation
Thou shouldst place him prostrate on his back, with something folded between
his two shoulder-blades ; thou shouldst spread out with his two shoulders in order to
stretch apart his collar-bone until that break falls into its place. Thou shouldst make
for him two splints of linen, (and) thou shouldst apply one of them both on the inside
of his upper arm and the other on the under side of his upper arm. Thou shouldst
bind it with ymrw, (and) treat it afterward [with] honey every day, until he recovers.
Commentary
P^|^J dtsw, " prostrate on his back," is otherwise known in the medical papyri
in Pap. Ebers (86, 7), in which a man suffering with digestive trouble is to be examined
by the physician, p1=' (] (]jjnd dtsy, " prostrate on his back." The determinative is a man
lying prostrate with face up, and with both arms down toward the waist, not up, as in
the only available type. It is important for our case to demonstrate that the word
indicates this posture, particularly the detail, that the patient lies with face up.
The evidence for this is conclusive. Fallen enemies are said to lie " dtsy," and the
determinative is that of a human figure prone, with face up (Annals of Thutmose III,
Urk. TV, p. 659 ; see also Becueil de trav., 2, p. 148). Swimmers in the celestial ocean
are depicted in the water face up and are said to be Msyw (Great " Amduat,"
10th Hour, Seti II, Turin and Leiden). The dead, being embalmed and lying as
a mummy does, face up, is called dtsy (Ritual of Embalmment, Pap. Boulaq 8,1,19),
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:06 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 379 ---
Case 35
353
TRANSLATION AND COMMENTARY
and the embalmed dead are referred to in the same way [Buck vom Durchwandeln
der Eurigkeit, Berlin Pap. 8044, l. 28). The indications from sources outside of
Papyrus Smith are quite conclusive on this point. In our document also, even in
the hieratic, the determinative is clearly that of a prone human figure, lying face
up, as shown by the feet in both cases, and in XII 11 also by the arms which are
thrown upward. The root is probably IV-lit. with a fourth weak radical, and in our
passage the form is a pseudo-partioiple, as likewise in Pyr. 685a (noted by D6vaud).
A^J k'b," folded," which occurs only here and in the duplicate passage (XII11)
is in both oases left without a determinative. It may be that we should ignore this
extraordinary lack of the determinative, and that we should accept the writing as it
is, and understand the word .a3^ k'b, " to double, to fold over, be folded,"
meaning a piece of linen or the like folded to give it thickness and height, as required
by this situation. It is conceivable also that the J is possibly an error for ^ and that
we have here the well-known word /l^^f k'y, "high." It is evident that the object
here designated is intended to be placed between the prostrate patient's shoulder
blades, supporting him and lifting the shoulders from the bed or the floor. The lack
of any sign of agreement in gender between k'b and yh t, " thing " is common in our
document throughout.
mfrhty-fy, "his two shoulder-blades," literally "his two razor-
blades," is discussed in Case 47 (XVI18).
~~ ^ sny (s$?), " spread out," evidently designates the act of spreading the shoulder
apart. Compare the discussion of this procedure in the next case where it is repeated
for a fractured humerus.
^gi.^ dwn, " stretch apart," is discussed in Case 7 (III 19-20).
" Until that break falls into its place " is an inexact expression doubtless meaning
until the bones or pieces of bone on each side of the break fall into their places, so that
the fractured ends fit together.
sS-wy, " two splints," has been discussed in Case 7, Gloss C (III 18).
^p\\ snould be read tec-Sny kyy-Sny, in accordance
with the repetition of these directions in the next case (XII18), which has :
^"^PTT ^IIP'vC' "one 01 them both, the other of them
both." The genitive Sny after kyy shows clearly that we must also expect a genitive
iny after uf, and the «=> appearing after uf (before sny) is obviously a scribal error.
J—' g'b, " arm" or " upper arm," see next case. An indication of what the
Egyptian meant by the phrase " inside of the arm " is doubtless to be found in the
expression ^fn^. lit. " inside of the two arms," a term meaning " embrace." The
application of the two splints is quite clear, and indeed this description of their applica-
tion is the best evidence of the nature of the two as splints, which would not
otherwise have been certain. One of them is applied to the anterior surface of the arm,
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:06 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 380 ---
354
Case 35
THE SURGICAL TREATISE
which the papyrus calls the " inside of the arm," and the other to the opposite side,
which, especially when the arm is crooked, is naturally described by the Egyptian as
the " under side of the arm." The effect of this position on the fractured bone is
not clear, but is clearer in the next case, a fracture of the humerus, in which the
positions of the two splints are identical with those in Case 85.
Ymrw will be found discussed in Case 15 (VI17). On the use of honey for wounds
and injuries see Case 1 (18).
This process of setting and treating a fractured claviole is repeated verbatim for
a broken humerus in the next case, in which the physical relationships involved are
somewhat clearer than in Case 85. The two cases should be studied together.
The ancient surgeon's discussion of this case closely resembles that of the fractured
clavicle in Case 85. It is obvious from these two cases that a fracture of this nature,
if free from complications, was regarded by the surgeon of the Third Millennium b. c.
as an injury with which he was quite able to cope. He appends to both cases verdict 1,
and proceeds to prescribe the treatment for both fractures in the same language.
We cannot doubt that our surgeon was acquainted with dislocation of the humerus,
which is probably more common than dislocation of the ribs, discussed in this treatise
(Case 48). His two cases of injury of the clavicles are : first a dislocation (Case 84)
and second a fracture (Case 85). One would therefore expect that the first case of
injury of the humerus would be a dislocation and the second a fracture, rather than
two kinds of fracture. There is indication here that a case has been omitted at some
time in course of copying. One's first thought is that Case 86 may be an error for
a dislocation instead of a fracture ; for the two subdivisions of Case 87 are exactly
parallel with those of Case 85, and similarly we expect Case 86 to be parallel with 84,
a dislocation, but the treatment in Case 86 is too closely parallel to the fracture treat-
ment in Case 85 to be applied to a dislocation.
CASE THIRTY-SIX
XII 8-14
A FRACTURE OF THE HUMERUS
Title
XII 8-9
9
Translation
Instructions concerning a break in his upper arm.
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:06 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 381 ---
Case 36
355
TRANSLATION AND COMMENTARY
Commentary
o Mb, " break " or " fracture," is explained in Case 11 (V 10).
g'b, " upper arm," is discussed in Case 85 ; further discussion will be found
in the treatment below (XII 12), showing that it means " upper arm," and here of
course the bone (humerus) of the upper arm.
Examination
XII 9-10
10
Translation
If thou examinest a man having a break in his upper arm, (and) thou findest his
upper arm hanging down, separated from its fellow, (conclusion follows in diagnosis).
Commentary
dh, "hang down," see Devaud, Zeitschrift, 49 (1911), p. 182. It is not
found elsewhere in the medical papyri. More literally it means simply to " be low,
sink down," as shown for example in the following antithetic use with k'y, " be high:"
^^T0j9'==af,^^kPJl?S^! "Re is niBh, the enemies are low (dh')" (Hymn to
Re-Harmakhis, Berlin Pap. 8050, Col. 4, l. 4). It is also written <=|^ where the
determinative suggests a sinking of the arm. In our passage it evidently describes
the helpless hanging of the broken arm.
P^^ll^* ^"y, " separated," is discussed in Case 14 (VI 8). As only one arm is
discussed here, it is clear that the separation mentioned is that between the two
pieces of bone produced by the fracture. As in Case 85 (XII 4) the description is
incomplete ; before " separated " we expect the words " one piece ; " that is " (one
piece) separated from its fellow."
Diagnosis
XII10
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:06 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 382 ---
35C
Case 36
THE SURGICAL TREATISE
Translation
Thou shouldst say concerning him : " One having a break in his upper arm. An
ailment which I will treat."
Commentary
The terms have all been discussed above. The diagnosis, as so often in this treatise,
is simply a memorandum,—nothing more indeed than the title itself, with the essential
note, the favorable verdict 1 appended. See Case 1 (12) and introduction (pp. 48 ff.).
Verdict 1 ; see Case 1 (I 2).
Treatment
XII 10-14
a The — in ^ looks like <=-, but is doubtless only an unusually thick —«.
Translation
Thou shouldst place him prostrate on his back, with something folded between
his two shoulder-blades ; thou shouldst spread out with his two shoulders, in order
to stretch apart his upper arm until that break falls into its place. Thou shouldst
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:06 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 383 ---
Case 36
357
TRANSLATION AND COMMENTARY
make for him two splints of linen, (and) thou shouldst apply for him one of them both
on the inside of his arm, (and) the other of them both on the under side of his arm.
Thou shouldst bind it with ymrw, (and) treat afterward [with] honey every day until
he recovers.
Commentary
This treatment is verbatim a repetition of that in the preceding case, except that
the stretching apart here affects the upper arm ((fb), whereas in Case 85 it affected
the collar-bone (bb). The terms are all treated in the commentary on Case 85, but
there are some variants in Case 86 which should be noticed. The use of g'b, " upper
arm," just noted, is of value in explaining " spread out with his two shoulders." Such
a procedure would have no effect upon the upper arm unless two persons on opposite
sides of the patient should each grasp an arm and pull against each other, thus
stretching the fractured arm, and permitting the surgeon to fit together the fractured
ends of the humerus.
ffij—* g'b, " upper arm," is commonly used as a loose designation of the arm, and
its Coptic descendant tyfcoi also seems to mean " arm," without suggesting upper arm
or forearm. Nevertheless the physical situation above described makes it probable
that g'b is used by our surgeon to designate the upper arm. If he is speaking of a break
in the forearm, we miss any indication whether it is in the ulna or the radius. More-
over, he speaks of " that break," with the demonstrative in the singular, showing that
he has but one fracture in mind. Still more important is the fact that to stretch the
forearm it would not be necessary to involve both shoulders ; whereas the stretching
of the humerus is much more naturally accomplished in the manner above described
by pulling from both shoulders. The application of the bandages to the fractured
humerus is prescribed in the same terms as for the fractured collar-bone in Case 85.
The correction of the superfluous «=> in ufrdny, has been explained above in Case 85.
CASE THIRTY-SEVEN
XII 14^21
A FRACTURE OF THE HUMERUS WITH RUPTURE OF OVERLYING SOFT TISSUE
The sole difference between this and the preceding case of fracture of the humerus
lies in the injury to the overlying soft tissue. The surgeon has met two different
cases of this kind. In the first the tissue is not deeply ruptured, and apparently does
not bleed, at least not outwardly ; in the second the wound bleeds and the rupture
of the tissue penetrates clear through to the fracture itself. The surgeon regards the
first case as doubtful, and appends the verdict 2, followed by treatment; but the
second case is hopeless, and received verdict 8, followed by no treatment. It would
seem then that the laceration of the soft tissue overlying a fracture of the humerus
was regarded in ancient Egyptian surgery as a fatal injury.
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:06 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 384 ---
358
Case 37
THE SURGICAL TREATISE
Title
XII 14-15
15
Translation
Instructions concerning a break in his upper arm, with a wound over it.
Commentary
° hsb, " break," and EJ—* g'b, " upper arm," see Case 86. On " wound," see
Case 1 (title).
First Examination
XII 15-16
Translation
If thou examinest a man having a break in his upper arm, over which a wound
has been inflicted, (and) thou findest that that break crepitates under thy fingers,
(conclusion follows in diagnosis).
Commentary
P^x^Jo?'* ^ wbnw, "a wound has been inflicted," is an idiom more literally
meaning " a wound has been smashed " over it (the fracture). See Case 1, discus-
sion of wbnw, " wound," A 4.
"©"J ©J x nhbhb, " crepitates," see Case 18 (VI 4-5).
First Diagnosis
XII 16-17
17
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:06 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 385 ---
Case 37
359
TRANSLATION AND COMMENTARY
Translation
Thou shouldst say concerning him : " One having a break in his upper arm, over
whioh a wound has been inflicted. An ailment with which I will contend."
Commentary
The terms have all been discussed above. The diagnosis consists only of the title,
with the doubtful verdiot 2 appended. See Case 4 (II6), and introduction (pp. 46-48).
First Treatment
XII17-19
^ AVAVA j| |
18
l<l
© ^=701 J\ <=>a\ I I
Translation
Thou shouldst make for him two splints of linen ; thou shouldst bind it with
ymrw ; (and) thou shouldst treat it afterward [with] grease, honey and lint every day
until thou knowest that he has reached a decisive point.
Commentary
It is very extraordinary that we have here no instructions for setting the broken
bone. In the preceding case the measures for bringing together again the two pieces
of bone are carefully described, and only after this difficult operation are the two
linen splints mentioned. The position of each is then carefully indicated. All this
is taken for granted in Case 87, where the treatment consists chiefly of catch-
words suggesting measures which are doubtless quite familiar to the surgeon. It
is only on this supposition that we can understand the omission of all directions for
the application of the " two bandages." The setting of the bone itself must be
implied in the mere injunction to make the bandages
(V 18). _
Binding with ymrw is discussed in Case 15 (VI17).
Treatment with " grease, honey and lint " has been explained in Case 1 (I 8).
" Until thou knowest that he has reached a decisive point " has been treated in
Case 4, Gloss C. Compare also Case 8 (I 28).
sS-wy, "two splints," will be found discussed in Case 7 (III 18) and Case 12
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:06 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 386 ---
360
Case 37
THE SURGICAL TREATISE
Second Examination
XII 19-20
20
||)P^JIix^8S,£
Translation
If, however, thou findest that wound which is over the break, with blood issuing
from it, and piercing through to the interior of his injury, (conclusion in second
diagnosis).
The second examination discloses two new particulars : the bleeding of the over-
lying wound ; and the rupture of the tissue inward to what the surgeon calls " the
interior of his injury (wbnw) " indicating that the wound is not merely an abrasion
but a rupture of the tissue, presumably right down to the fracture itself. It is probable
therefore that the meaning of wound in this last phrase is the " injury " as a whole,
a meaning which the use of the term wbnw, " wound " in our document quite justifies
our assuming in this case. See commentary on wbnw in Case 1.
HP<=J|x yidb, "piercing through," is discussed in Case 14, Gloss A (VI 18-14),
where this passage in Case 87 has received some attention. This example again
illustrates the Egyptian surgeon's experience that a serious rupture of the soft tissue
over a fracture creates a condition which he cannot hope to treat successfully.
Commentary
Second Diagnosis
XII 20-21
21
Translation
Thou shouldst say concerning him: " One having a break in his upper arm, over
which a wound has been inflicted, piercing through. An ailment not to be treated."
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:06 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 387 ---
Case 37
301
TRANSLATION AND COMMENTARY
Commentary
The terms have all been discussed above.
The conclusion is the unfavorable verdict 8 ; see commentary on Case 5 (II 15),
and especially the introduction (pp. 46-48). This verdict is, as usual, not followed
by any treatment. The difference between this fracture and that of the preceding
case (86) consists solely in the existence of a penetrating wound in the overlying soft
tissue in the latter case, which is regarded by the surgeon as a situation too serious
to be treated.
This is the last of the three cases concerned with injuries of the humerus. Contrary
to the custom of the ancient author he has placed at the end of the group a case which
he regards as relatively simple and to which he appends verdict 1. It is the shortest
case in the entire treatise, occupying only a scant four lines.
The seriousness of a " split " (p$n) depends upon its situation. If it is in the skull
(calvaria), it may be a serious and doubtful case (see Case 4). The same is true if it
is in the temple (Case 21) ; but if it is in the maxillary region (Case 16), or in the
humerus as in our case, it is not a serious injury. See the discussion in Case 4 (II 2,
and Gloss A, II 8-9).
CASE THIRTY-EIGHT
XII 21-XIII 2
A SPLIT IN THE HUMERUS
Title
XII 21
Translation
Instructions concerning a split in his upper arm.
Commentary
pSn, " split," has been discussed in Case 4 (II 2). It is an injury occurring
only in bones, and hence g'b must here designate the humerus itself.
Examination
XII 22-XIII 1
x
ii i
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:06 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 388 ---
362
Case 38
THE SURGICAL TREATISE
Translation
If thou examinest a man having a split in his upper arm, (and) thou shouldst find
the swelling protruding, on the outside of that split, which is in his upper arm, (con-
clusion follows in diagnosis).
Commentary
thb, " swelling," has been fully discussed in Case 4 (II 4).
M% ykow, " protruding," is explained ibid.
J^hr i\ " on the outside of," see Case 8 (IV 6).
Diagnosis
XIII 1
Translation
Thou shouldst say concerning him : " One having a split in his upper arm. An
ailment which I will treat."
Commentary
The terms have all been discussed above. As so frequently before, the diagnosis
consists merely of the subject followed by the verdict, in this case favorable. See
Case 1 (I 2) and introduction (pp. 46 ff.).
Treatment
XIII 2
2
'I I I
\i 11
Translation
Thou shouldst bind it with ymrw ; thou shouldst treat it afterward [with] honey
every day until he recovers.
Commentary
On binding with ymrw see the discussion of Case 15 (VI 17). The treatment with
honey is discussed in Case 1 (18).
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:06 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 389 ---
Case 39
303
TRANSLATION AND COMMENTARY
CASE THIRTY-NINE
XIII 8-12
TUMORS OR ULCERS IN THE BREAST PERHAPS RESULTING FROM INJURY
This case is the first of a series of eight (89 to 46) concerned with ailments of the
breast, by which is meant both the sternum and the soft tissue overlying it (see Case 40,
Gloss A). The nature of the ailment (called bn-wt) is not wholly clear, but the available
evidence adduced below would indicate some kind of tumors, or possible ulcers. The
occurrence of such a case of disease after a series of thirty-eight cases of injuries
requiring surgical treatment raises the question whether it is introduced into this
treatise because it required cauterization, essentially a minor surgical operation ; or
because the bn-wt were superinduced by some antecedent injury. There is perhaps
some reference to this injury in the phrase m' yh-f, "because of his yh," in which yh
may mean " injury," and probably does so in our case (see Case 8, I 28). It should
be noticed also that the text refers to a wbnw, possibly " wound," as designating one
of the bn-wt (XIII 9). The only other case of bn~wt in our papyrus, however, contains
no such hints of any connected injury or wound (Case 45).
The treatment by cauterization is the oldest known reference to this practice.
Title
XIII 8
Translation
Instructions concerning tumors with prominent head in his breast.
Commentary
Discussion of all terms will be found below.
Examination
XIII 8-5
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:06 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 390 ---
3G4 THE SURGICAL TREATISE Case 39
Translation
If thou examinest a man having tumors with prominent head in his breast, (and)
thou findest that the swellings have spread with pus over his breast, (and) have pro-
duced redness, while it is very hot therein, when thy hand touches him, (conclusion
follows in diagnosis).
Commentary
On " tumors with prominent head " see Gloss A.
Q"A3k?i?i tw'-w, "swellings," is a rare word. It is not found again in our treatise,
and is otherwise known only in four passages in Pap. Ebers. In the treatment of some
uncertain kind of tumor or pustule (\\\ \^ hnhn-t), the physician is enjoined as
follows:
" Thou shouldst make for her applications for breaking open the swellings (tw,-w)
and drawing off the pus" (Pap. Ebers 104, 10-11).
B. Ebbell has recently suggested with much probability that hnhn-t in Pap.
Ebers and also in Mutter und Kind means " Lymphdriisenschwellung" or swelling
of the lymphatic glands (Zeitschrift fur aegyptische Sprache 68 (1927), pp. 78 f.). See
also Pap. Ebers 105, 5, a case in which the " swellings " (fco'nc) in the fat of the
throat are to be "broken open" (id) by applications. Again in the same ailment
the physician shall " make for it applications for drawing off the Bwellings (tw'-w)
in his throat" (Pap. Ebers 105,18). The fourth example (Pap. Ebers 105,18) is not
so clear. In our case (Smith XIII, 4), the tw'"W are likewise clearly accompanied
by pus. The word may possibly be connected in origin with tw,) " lift."
P|^%~= Skd, "spread," may perhaps be cognate with pi^^ ikd, "slope,
deflection " (of a pyramid), with a meaning verging toward " divergence, spread ; "
but no other occurrence of the word in the medical papyri is known.
"H'H'?i r2/'*t, " pus'" often read ty'*' but see Case 6 (m
Q^P<?$j}j! tmi-w, "redness." It is well known that ancient color designations
are loose, indefinite, and greatly lacking in precision; but the root tmd is known to
designate red in general. The form tmd'w is doubtless a formation like nfr-w,
" beauty." On the color tmJ, see Case 7, Gloss F (III 20-21).
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:06 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 391 ---
Case 39 TRANSLATION AND COMMENTARY 365
Diagnosis
XIII 5-6
a The scribe at first wrote the plural form yry-n-fa, all in red like the rest of the context. He
afterward canceled the fa with an oblique stroke through the 6 and a vertical stroko through the
n and plural strokes, and inserted / before the fa. All these alterations were inserted in black on
the red.
Translation
Thou shouldst say concerning him : " One having tumors with prominent head
in his breast, (and) they produce rcists1 of pus. An ailment which I will treat with
the fire-drill."
Commentary
" Tumors with prominent head " will be found discussed in the gloss. There can
be no doubt that bn-wt, " tumors " is in the plural, for it is followed by the plural
demonstrative in XIII 7. Hence the ancient scribe's correction from yry-n-dn, " they
produce " to yry-f, " it produces," or " he produces " is probably wrong. If the
antecedent is bn-wt, the correction is obviously wrong, and to understand /, " he " as
referring to the patient is hardly permissible.
On ryt, " pus " see Case 6 (III 1).
On the favorable verdict 1, see commentary on Case 1 (I 2), and introduction
(pp. 45-47).
11 d', " fire-stick " or " fire-drill " is the well-known Egyptian device for kindling
fire. The hieroglyph is a good representation of the implement. It doubtless furnished
the surgeon with the most convenient means of procuring a hot point for application
to the tumors. The pointed top of the stick was whirled between the palms, while
the thicker lower end revolved in a hollow in a block of wood. The friction quickly
produced fire, and when the end of the fire-stick was glowing, the surgeon could apply
it to the tumor. There is a reference to a " hot lancet " in Pap. Ebers 108, 8. It is
not usual to connect the verdict directly with the device to be employed ; but it occurs
again in Case 46 (XVI 8) and five times in Pap. Ebers (Wreszinski's 860, 866, 869,
and 870 " with lancet " ; and 200 " with applications "). See further discussion
below.
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:06 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 392 ---
366 THE SURGICAL TREATISE Case 39
Treatment
XIII 6-9
Translation
Thou shouldst burn for him over his breast (and) over those tumors which are on
his breast. Thou shouldst treat him with wound treatment. Thou shouldst not
prevent its opening of itself, that there may be no mnhyw in his wound (sore?). Every
wound (sore?) that arises in his breast dries up as soon as it opens of itself.
Commentary
2533^.1^, (J. S'm, " burn," is a rare word, of which there is only one other medical
example known, viz., Pap. Ebers (109,15): es^^fl. J^-MTotl " Thou shouldst
burn it over fire." In this passage S'm, " burn " has heretofore been read £3]^ <? Q, $'w,
with final <? w. In our text a careful examination of the word leaves no doubt that it
is written S'm. When the scribe makes the uppermost hook of the hieratic m hastily
it sometimes almost disappears, leaving a sign that can with difficulty be distinguished
from w; e. g. in the word trm (IV 8, end of line), the m is scarcely distinguishable
from w. In view of S'm in XIII6-7, we can hardly doubt that we are to read $'m also
in Pap. Ebers 109,15. See also the incorrect for ^?^» (XIV15). Devaud notes
S'm in hieroglyphic (Quibell-Lacau, Saqqara (1906-07), p. 58), parallel with ^^SS.
The use of cauterization, for which the glowing tip of a fire-drill seems to have
been employed, is interesting. In Pap. Ebers (109, 15) there may be some question
whether the burning applies to the reed knife or lancet, which the surgeon is to harden
by heating ; or to the cauterization of the lanced cist . Cf. Ebers 108, 8.
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:06 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 393 ---
Case 39
367
TRANSLATION AND COMMENTARY
? iiie/^ srwh wbnw, " treatment of a wound " or " wound treatment," is
rendered according to the prevailing meaning of wbnw in our treatise ; but it should
be recalled that the term wbnw is sometimes loosely applied to a sore, as indeed it
seems to be in the immediately following context in this treatment (XIII 9). The
term " wound treatment " is employed in only one other passage in our treatise, where
it designates an externally applied remedy for allaying inflammation. See Case 46,
XVI7-8.
The «<-* n preceding the subjunctive verb after s'w, " prevent," is unusual and
superfluous, and must be regarded as a scribal error.
™© V 1 (] ?^ mnhy-w is otherwise unknown and its meaning cannot be established.
Globs A
XIII 9-12
Explaining : Tumors with prominent head in his breast.
III 11 I I It^l I l[=1 V I
© 12
<=±\ I I'
a The scribe omitted (] by mistake and afterward inserted it in red ink.
Translation
As for : " Tumors with prominent head in his breast," it means that there are
swellings spreading over his breast because of his injury ; they produce pus and
redness on his breast; (as) it is said : " It is like rparti-colored1 things," whose pro-
duct is pus.
Commentary
J"^^",^, bn-wt, "tumors," is a difficult word, of which the suggested rendering
is doubtless only a very rough approximation. We learn at once that the bn-wt have
tp dkr, which as we shall indicate below means " a prominent head." The examina-
tion (XIII 4) informs us that the physician finds " swellings " (tw'-w), which spread
over the breast, accompanied by pus, redness, and a very fevered surface (XIII 5).
These observations are confirmed by our gloss, which explains that bn-wt tp ikr means
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:06 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 394 ---
368
Case 39
THE SURGICAL TREATISE
swellings spreading over his breast, producing redness and pus. The allusion at the
end of the gloss is, as we shall see, unfortunately not clear. The rendering " tumors "
is further confirmed by Case 45, in which another variety of bn-wt are treated. In the
examination (XV, 9-14) they are said to be cool, without fever, with no granulation
or fluid (mw, literally " water "). In Gloss A Case 45 further explains that this
second type of bn-wt is swellings spreading on the breast, having a touch or surface like
that of a kind of ball, and they are likened to an unripe Am'j/t-fruit, which is described
as hard and cool to the touch (XV 18-19). Bn-wt may occur, according to Case 45
(XV 15) " in every member " (m r-t rib-t), and this remark is confirmed by Papyrus
Ebers, which states that bn-wt may be found j^l^'JJ ^j^"]^, ^ ^ " in the flesh of
a man in any member " (Pap. Ebers 72, 10-11). The other examples in Papyrus
Ebers are important. In one case the bn-wt are hr k'bt, " on the breast " (Pap. Ebers
71, 2). Again we find the case of a woman suffering from a " devouring (wnm-t,
" cancer "?) in the vulva, producing bn-wt in her vagina " (Pap. Ebers 95, 17), or
from " kmy-t (leucorrhea ?) in the vulva, producing bn-wt in her vagina " (Pap. Ebers
96,2-8). In three cases we find bn-wt in the teeth, which must of course mean in the
contiguous gums. The physician has a recipe for " preventing crumbling (dhm)
arising from bn-wt in the teeth " (Pap. Ebers 72,18), and also for " preventing bn-wt
in the teeth and restoring the gums " (hf-w, literally " flesh," Pap. Ebers 72, 14-15,
repeated in 89,10). Twice in Pap. Ebers the bn-wt are said to be in a wbnw (Ebers
70, 24-71, 1), as above in Pap. Smith (XIII 9), raising the question of rendering
" sore " or " wound." The above examples comprise all the occurrences of the word
in the medical papyri. Elsewhere it is known only onoe, in the Book of the Dead,
in a passage where the deceased says : " When I am led to the fields where the gods
cut their food, then may the horns of Khepri be turned aside, and may bn-wt arise in
the eye of Atum " (Naville, 98, 1l. 5-6). Summarizing this material it may be said
that the hard bn-wt of Case 45 may have been boils, while their occurrence in the teeth
in Papyrus Ebers suggests ulcers. The rendering " tumors " may serve at least as
approximating the ancient meaning of the word.
Since writing the above comments and since they have been in proof, I find that
B. Ebbell has recently discussed the nature of these bn-wt (Zeitschrift fur aegyptische
Sprache, 68 (1927), pp. 71-78). He concludes that the word designates a " gangra-
noses Geschwiir," that is a gangrenous ulcer or sore. He regards the masculine word
bnw (Mutter und Kind, III 4), which I had relegated to a footnote, as identical with
our bn-wt, and quotes the instructive charm addressed to it as an exorcism :
" Thou bnw, brother of blood,
Friend of pus,
Father of hnhn-t,
Jackal of Upper Egypt,"
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:06 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 395 ---
Case 39
369
TRANSLATION AND COMMENTARY
which associates the bnw with blood, pus, swellings of the lymphatic glands (according
to Ebbell), and the evil odor of the Upper Egyptian jackal.1
®P tp ikr, " prominent head " refers to the point at which, as we also say, the
tumor " comes to a head." The word ® tp, " head," used in this sense is found in
Papyrus Ebers in the description of a suppurating tumor, of which it is said :
" Thou findest its head (tp) sharp and elevated like a breast " (mamma ; Pap. Ebers
104,15-16). On the further anatomical or medical use of tp, " head " see Case 1 (title),
and Case 10 (V 5). P.^—-" ikr "prominent, elevated " is a rare and unusual term,
which seems to have no connection with the well-known word P.£.^ ikr, " strike."
The rendering suggested is supported by the fact that in Case 46 the Gloss writes
tp ikr, while the text of the case writes ^ and P^^ (XV 20 and XVI 2). See
Case 46. Dr. Ware has suggested to me the well-known parallel use of ikr meaning
" to raise, lift, set up " as of a ladder in the Pyramid Texts (e. g. Pyr., 1481c).
f fiMi modifiers, consult Case 4 (II 8), p. 142. It is probably plural
here, though singular in Case 46 (XVI 18).
rn^ mf yh-f, " because of his injury." It is not quite certain that yh always
means an " injury," as contrasted with a disease ; otherwise we might conclude
that the bwwt in this case were due to an injury, and the reference to a wbnw (XIII 9)
would indicate a wound.
<H<Kryt, " pus," see Case 6 (III 1).
• JTi^^ yh t $kr, " rparti-colored1 ", literally " adorned," if this hkr, with the
determinative is to be identified with the common hkr, " adorn." The
Afcr-ornament is sometimes gayly colored. The text refers to matters for comparison,
which elude the present editor.
CASE FORTY
XIII 12-17
A WOUND IN THE BREAST
This is the second of the group of eight cases discussing ailments of the breast.
The wound is one which penetrates the soft tissue and perforates the upper part of the
sternum (k'b-t), which the surgeon calls hnt', meaning the manubrium, as he explains
in a gloss at the end. Ancient methods of warfare made wounds of this kind common ;
a wound " perforating the manubrium " is likely to have been inflicted by a spear.
Presumably none of the underlying organs was injured, for the treatise appends the
hopeful verdict and prescribes simple external applications, leading to recovery.
1 Bnw was discussed many years ago by Oefele, Zeitschrift fur aegyptische Sprache, 39 (1901),
p. 149.
b b
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:06 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 396 ---
370
Case 40
THE SURGICAL TREATISE
The gloss at the end is another illustration of the origin of anatomical terms in
natural objects, and combined with the other references to k'bt in our papyrus makes
it possible to determine the Egyptian names both for the sternum and the manubrium.
Title
XIII 12
Translation
Instructions concerning a wound in his breast.
Commentary
"Wound" will be found discussed in Case 1 (title), "breast" is explained in Gloss
A at the end of our case.
Examination
XIII 12-14
13
Translation
If thou examinest a man having a wound in his breast, penetrating to the bone,
perforating the manubrium of his sternum, thou shouldst press the manubrium of his
sternum with thy fingers, (although) he shudders exceedingly, (conclusion follows in
diagnosis).
Commentary
(]lEs y, " penetrating," is the same as cr, " penetrating," discussed in Case 1
(title), q. v.
rnl^Jf ° "im, " per^orating," is discussed in Case 1 (under icbnw) and Case 8 (118).
1^4^^ hnt\ " manubrium," is explained in Gloss A at the end of this case.
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:06 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 397 ---
Case 40
371
TRANSLATION AND COMMENTARY
^^s= mn, " press," is doubtless a transitive or pic el form of the common verb
mn, " abide, endure, be firm, etc.," with a causative meaning, " to make firm, to press."
As the second main verb after the conditional particle yr, it is parallel with the common
gmm-k, which we have found so often as the second conditional verb.
1^!^lc4e^ ynrw r-f, " ne shudders," is explained in Case 4 (II 4).
DlAGNOsIS
XIII 14-15
Translation
Thou shouldst say concerning him : " One having a wound in his breast, penetrat-
ing to the bone, perforating the manubrium of his sternum. An ailment which I will
treat."
Commentary
The diagnosis repeats only the terms of the examination, where the discussion
will be found. The favorable verdict 1 forming the conclusion will be found discussed
in the commentary on Case 1 (I 2) ; see also introduction (pp. 45-47).
Treatment
XIII 15-16
Translation
Thou shouldst bind it with fresh meat the first day ; thou shouldst treat it after-
ward [with] grease, honey, and lint every day, until he recovers.
b b 2
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:06 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 398 ---
372
Cask 40
THE SURGICAL TREATISE
Commentary
Treatment with fresh meat followed by the application of grease, honey and lint,
will be found discussed in Case 1 (I 2-8). See the commentary on " until he recovers "
in the same connection.
Gloss A
XIII17
Explaining : The manubrium of his sternum.
Translation
As for: " The manubrium of his sternum," (it means) the upper head of his sternum;
it is like as it were a porcupine.
Commentary
We have in this gloss another explanation of the designation of a bone of the human
skeleton which is drawn from its resemblance to some animal or part of an animal,
like the w-{, " ramus," so called because of its resemblance to the two-toed claw of
the W-bird (pp. 215, 298-294). The animal in our case is called f^,"^1^' hnt',
and very little is known about him. A recipe for a hair tonic in Papyrus Ebers
has as its chief ingredient the hair of $3^2^ ^ni' (Pap-Ebers 66,12), from which
it is obvious that the animal must have vigorous and robust hair. Another recipe
prescribes P^ATl-^v^ fir-' n'' ^ntV, " ^e spine of a hnty " (Pap. Ebers 92, 7),
which is doubtless the same animal as the hnt', and seems probably to be a hedgehog
or porcupine. The latter animal is depicted on the ancient Egyptian monuments.
No other evidence for the identity of the hnt ' is available. The appearance of the
thorax seen from in front, especially the sternum with the spreading ribs which diverge
from it like the legs of an insect, strongly suggests an animal, and the comparison with
a porcupine is quite possible. The difficulty lies in the further limitation of the hnt'
by our surgeon as being the " upper head " of the breast (sternum), as we shall see
below. If we limit hnt' to the manubrium, as our gloss clearly does, the resemblance
to a porcupine is far from obvious, though it might still suggest an animal.
k'b t, " breast," is a word of which the meaning has been commonly mis-
understood as the " nipple " of the mamma. It occurs sixty-five times in Pap. Smith
in sufficiently varied use to indicate its meaning with some precision. In eight passages,
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:06 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 399 ---
Case 40
373
TRANSLATION AND COMMENTARY
where the surgeon desires to ascertain the patient's ability to use the muscles and
vertebrae of the neck, he directs the patient to look " at his two shoulders and his
breast (k'b-t)." See Cases 8, 4, 5, 7, 29 and 80. In these cases k'bt obviously means
the breast in general. It is used in thirty-four passages to locate swellings, tumors,
or abscesses, some of which secrete pus and have to be drained (Cases 89 and 46) or
are so described as to show that they are in the soft tissue (Case 45) ; and wounds in
the soft tissue (Case 41), which may penetrate to and include the bone (Case 40).
The remaining twenty-three passages containing the word use it in a more limited
sense, designating bone. They are very instructive. In Case 84, a dislocation of the
clavicles, these bones are described as follows :
" Their heads are attached to (articulated in) the upper bone of his k'bt " (XI 28).
Here k'bt is clearly the sternum, and its " upper bone " is of course the manubrium
sterni. The explanation of the hnt' in our Gloss A as ^^,^,~2^ " tne upper
head of his k'bt," is obviously a variant of the term " upper bone of his k'b t" in
Case 84. The use of k'b t to designate the sternum is corroborated by Gloss A in Case 48,
which refers to the thoracic ribs as
" the ribs of his k'b t, which are attached to (articulated in) his k'b-t " (XV 4). In the
same case the patient suffers with pains in his sides, which the surgeon explains in
Gloss B as follows :
"It means: he suffers in the articulations thereof (viz., of his two sides, including
their ribs) in his k'b t " (XV 5). In accordance with this evidence there are fourteen
passages mentioning the true ribs (costae verae) as l^^i^il^J^ "the ribs of
his k'b t" in Cases 42, 48 and 44.
Summarizing the evidence for the meaning of k'b t in our papyrus, we find it used
as a designation for the breast in general, for the soft tissue overlying the bony
structure, and finally quite specifically for the sternum. It nowhere means the mamma
in particular or any part of it, and the Coptic ckiAc, mamma is evidently a later and
secondary development.
tp hry, " upper head," employing " head " in an anatomical sense to
designate the end of a bone, will be found discussed in Case 1 (title).
£1$"Z"^, my hpr t m, literally "like what happens (or what has happened) in,"
or " like what is " (with porcupine as predicate introduced by m), which occurs also
in Case 42 (XIV 21), is perhaps only a circumlocution for " as it were," meaning
simply " like."
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:06 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 400 ---
374
Cask 41
THE SURGICAL TREATISE
CASE FORTY-ONE
XIII18-XIV 16
AN INFECTED OR POSSIBLY NECROTIC WOUND IN THE BREAST
This is one of the most completely discussed cases in the papyrus. It is the third
in the group of eight cases concerned with the breast. The examination is one of
the most detailed presentations of the pathological conditions which we find in our
treatise, and the interesting glosses add much to this description. Gloss A especially
explains the sluggish character of the wound, its refusal to heal, and quotes from the
venerable " Treatise on What Pertains to a Wound," which we find quoted also in
Case 5, Gloss A. The data seem hardly sufficient, however, to determine whether the
wound is infected or in a necrotic condition.
The treatment is medicinally very elaborate. It consists of external local applica-
tions, which are systematically arranged in a succession of three stages :
1. Cooling applications for drawing out the inflammation :
a. Various leaves, etc., bandaged on.
b. The same.
2. Astringent applications for drying up the wound :
a. Ointment of mineral salts bandaged on.
b. The same.
8. Poultices :
a. Various herbs bandaged on.
Unfortunately the drugs employed cannot be identified in more than a few cases.
It is of interest to note that in the first recipe for allaying the inflammation (1, a and b)
there seems to be salicin or salicylic acid, in the form of willow (salix) leaves, although
in modern times before its synthetic production, salicin was obtained from willow bark
rather than the leaves. The astringent applications (2, a and b) contain copper and
sodium salts; the only constituent of the poultices which can be identified is sycamore
leaves. The surgeon was evidently accustomed to find these agencies effective, for
he gives the case the hopeful verdict, and adds to the treatment the injunction to
treat the same trouble in any part of the body in the same way.
At the end the commentator has added five important explanations of terms not
otherwise clear, including an already ancient color designation (tmi), which he had
once before explained in Case 7, Gloss F (III 20-21). In the other four glosses the
commentator is especially interested in the discussion of the feverish and inflamed
condition of the wound and in explaining the terms involved. In so doing he quotes
from the already ancient and now lost " Treatise on What Pertains to a Wound."
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:06 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 401 ---
Case 41 TRANSLATION AND COMMENTARY 375
Title
XIII 18
Translation
Instructions concerning a diseased wound in his breast.
Commentary
The terms will be found discussed below.
Examination
XIII 18-XIV 1
19
XIV 1
Translation
If thou examinest a man having a diseased wound in his breast, while that wound
is inflamed and a whirl of inflammation continually issues from the mouth of that
wound at thy touch ; the two lips of that wound are ruddy, while that man continues
to be feverish from it; his flesh cannot receive a bandage, that wound cannot take a
margin of skin ; the rgranulation1 which is in the mouth of that wound is watery, their
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:06 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 402 ---
376
Case 41
THE SURGICAL TREATISE
surface is hot and secretions drop therefrom in an oily state, (conclusion follows in
diagnosis).
Commentary
$m'"y, " diseased," see Gloss A.
a\ Jt £'H " breast." see above, Case 40, Gloss A (XIII17).
SrHIk nsr-y, " inflamed," see Gloss A (XIV 8).
"""*/» n-Sw, " issue," see below, Gloss E.
q (H P |Ql d-s=, tmJ, " ruddy," see below, Gloss C.
P?1^3 dw$, " whirl," see below, Gloss B.
sr/, " beat, inflammation," see below, Gloss B.
1<=aj«a3 ydb, "margin," is really a topographical term meaning "shore." Its
medical or surgical use here is quite parallel with P£—- dpt "lip," which is also a word
for " shore." The reference is to the contracting margin of newly forming skin around
a healing wound.
D^3^1 p'ys-t, r" granulation""1, is an otherwise entirely unknown word. The
translation is a suggestion by Dr. Luckhardt. The word lacks any indication of the
plural, but it is resumed by a plural pronoun in the next clause.
—<?11 mwy, " be watery," is a rare verb, of course cognate with the noun «~ mw,
" water." It occurs in the same connection in Papyrus Ebers (91, 8); 1^EJ11EECl
"if its (the ear's) mouth is watery." There seems to be a non-medical use of the verb
in the obscure passage ^—E^IIEE^^* (Eloquent Peasant B 1, 258).
^S^J^ll ren<iered above " be hot," is a transitive verb in Case 89 (XIII 6-7).
The meaning is obviously that of an intransitive verb here. The reading £'m, rather
than is here quite certain.
IT^i?i yrty'10' " surface," see Case 7 (III 20).
fVAl r^r"w, "secretions," is the word originally meaning a "pile" of grain or
goods, then a " measure " or a " quantity," as in mathematics. Its medical applica-
tion is known chiefly from our papyrus, where it occurs three times as follows :
I £\A !ra3^^-A1^J^Ji"3^/1011 " Secretions (rhr-w) drop therefrom in an oily state
(Case 41, XIII 22-XIV 1). f7*!ra^^ja^««~/j = " Secretions (rhr-w) dropping
therefromare cool (Case47, XVII9-10). — £>^ jkl^tfV i?Er " They generate
no secretions of fluid " (Case 45, XV 18). With this we may compare ^PfVV? ,?«==>
H" It forms secretions of pus " (Pap. Ebers 105, 19).
J ^"3^011 k'£-2/, "in an oily state," is doubtless a verb derived from the
noun b'k, " oil." It may be compared with the verb mwy, " be watery " used imme-
diately above (XIII 22). Grammatically it is parallel in construction with kbb,
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:06 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 403 ---
Case 41
377
TRANSLATION AND COMMENTARY
"be cool," occupying an analogous position in the example quoted above from Case 47
(XVII9-10). It may of course be derived from the verb J ^ Q b'k, " to be clear,"
and the only other example of our word in the medical literature would at first sight
seem to support this meaning. In Case 46 we find J^3k^Q£1E5 " ^ ^e nu^
under thy hand " (XV 21-XVI 1). The reference is to a " swelling (thb) very large,
protruding on his breast." We have only to understand " protruding " (ySw-y) as
meaning " discharging " and we obtain an excellent rendering for b'k etc., namely
" clear like water under thy hand." Against this interpretation, however, there are
conclusive objections. In the first place the touch of the hand is obviously not the
means for observing clearness, a quality appreciable only by the eyes. The very fact
that the quality here observed is one appreciable by the touch of the hand shows
that it must belong to the order of physical qualities like hot or cold, hard or soft
and the like. Furthermore a study of all the cases in which the above " swelling "
(thb) and " protrude " (ySw) occur, makes it highly improbable that a fluid exudation
is here meant. The reference is to a protruding swelling which is here discerned by
the fingers to be soft or " oily like fluid under thy hand." See the commentary
on thb and ySw in Case 4 (II 4).
Diagnosis
XIV 1-2
Translation
Thou shouldst say concerning him: " One having a diseased wound in [his] breast,
it being inflamed, (and) he continues to have fever from it. An ailment which I
will treat."
Commentary
The terms have all been discussed in the preceding commentary on this case, or in
the glosses which follow. On the favorable verdict 1 see Case 1 (I 2) and the introduc-
tion (pp. 45-47). Since rendering Smm-f, " he continues to have fever," I note that
Gardiner in his new Grammar (pp. 852 f.) especially emphasizes " repetition or con-
tinuity " as implied in the geminated form. This is good Semitic as well as Egyptian
usage, as noted above, supra, pp. 815-816.
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:06 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 404 ---
378
Case 41
THE SURGICAL TREATISE
Treatment
XIV a-8
' O
-,cA\l I I
O f\ « o
I Xt O O O—CB-^WI I I
y I op n Q t¥?' * o *—=1
Ql £2, I I 11 ooolll Qoo»n I
o
I I I
D AVAVA I I It. I
\ I I ll t"l„ocJJ& O ...... fO^'
* 0 ^ ^37
Q I I IQ
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:06 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 405 ---
Case 41
379
TRANSLATION AND COMMENTARY
Translation
Thou shalt make for him cool applications for drawing out the inflammation from
the mouth of the wound :
a. Leaves of willow,
nM-tree,
ksnty.
Apply to it.
b. Leaves of 2/m'-tree,
dung,
hny-t\
ksnty.
Apply to it.
Thou shalt make for him applications for drying up the wound :
a. rPowder" 1 of green pigment
wSb-t,
thn-t
grease.
Triturate ; bind upon it.
b. Northern salt,
ibex grease.
Triturate ; bind upon it.
Thou shalt make for him poultices :
Red Span,
garden tongue,
d'rt,
sycamore leaves.
Bind upon it.
If the like befalls in any member, thou shalt treat him according to these instruc-
tions.
Commentary
The following notes contain the little that is known regarding the character and
identity of the herbs, minerals, and other constituents of the five recipes above pre-
scribed, and the form in which they are employed.
□"<?„!. sP*w, " applications," is a word of varied meanings. The meaning " frag-
ments " has been discussed in Case 4 (II 9). Its more common meaning is " remedy "
in a very general sense. It is usually used in the plural as in our text, though referring
to a single recipe, e.g., Pap. Ebers 40, 7 ; 40, 21 ; 89, 10 ; and is quite commonly
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:06 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 406 ---
380
Case 41
THE SURGICAL TREATISE
introduced by the injunction ^©"^^2^,,°,, " Thou shalt make for him remedies,"
followed by the genitive & nw with the effect of the remedy, the name of the ailment
or the ailing organ, or by the content of the prescription, e.g., Pap. Hearst III 17 ;
IV 9 = Ebers 2, 7 b ; Hearst IV 14 = Ebers 50, 6-9 ; Hearst I 1 = Ebers 11,8;
Ebers 78,18 ; etc. Very much less commonly it occurs in the singular, e.g., Ebers
89, 17 ; 7, 11; Kahun Medical Pap. 8, 19 ; 8, 15 ; 8, 17 ; 8, 20 ; Ebers 89, 17, 19 ;
42, 11 ; 86, 9. Cooling applications as in our case are found also in Pap. Ebers :
d7.!.P-4IJE (Ebers 48, *)and o7i i iffi?E: (Ebers 91,5_6)- 11 may finaHybe
noted that while sp almost invariably designates a medicinal remedy, it may, though
very rarely, also indicate a magical remedy, e.g. Kahun Medical Pap. 8, 28 ; Mutter
und Kind, VIII 8-4.
yth, " draw out," is a verb primarily designating the application of physical
power in drawing a heavy object like a monument, and hence the determinative of
a coil of rope. Its use in the medical papyri elsewhere is limited to three examples in
Pap. Ebers, in which the remedy acts to " draw out " (yth) " blood " (Ebers 70, 4-5 ;
and 96,18) or a " swelling " (tw'-w) (Ebers 105,18), meaning in the latter case doubtless
the content of the swelling, so that in these cases the object of the verb is material
substance. In the two cases employing this word in Pap. Edwin Smith however, the
object of the verb is the word drf, " heat, inflammation " (Pap. Smith XIV 8 ; XVI 8),
an intangible thing, which could be allayed to be sure, but only figuratively " drawn
off," although even among us the phrase " draw out inflammation " is not unusual.
f drd, " leaves," is a difficult word. It is universally written with the ear, 4, and
the reading drd is known only from a single passage where it is written out J5, J57t i m
the Berlin Medical Papyrus 8088 (Verso 8, 7). It is a part of various trees (Hearst
XV, 4 ; XVI, 8) of which the following are known :
rro jtq
and once "f !^j^ " divine drd," which are explained as —^AiBerlin Med. Pap.
8088,10, 5). The rendering " leaves " is not wholly certain ; the word might possibly
mean " bark " (cortex), and indeed in the case of willow, the bark is medicinally more
efficacious than the leaves.
*j" p A j nbd, a tree mentioned as far back as the Old Kingdom, and occurring in
Greek as -vovip, but not yet identified with certainty. The word drd, (" leaves," or
" bark ") may possibly be understood also with ribi.
h Zvj ° i fenty' occurring at the conclusion of each of the first two recipes, may
possiblyrefer to some form of preparing the preceding ingredients. It is more probably,
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:06 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 407 ---
Case 41
381
TRANSLATION AND COMMENTARY
however, an additional ingredient, an herb which is written <|~i ° ( kdnty (Pap. Ebers
45, 4) and ° (in the corresponding passage in Hearst (VII2). This is probably the
same as ^2i\ (EDers 46,18 and 78,2; see variants in Hearst X 1 and V 8). It has not
yet been identified.
1^3^0 i 2/m' 1S an unidentified fruit tree.
J bnf, as used in the medical papyri, is, with the exception of one passage,
always followed by the name of some animal. We have the bnf of cattle (Ebers 87,10;
104, 5 ; Berlin Med. Pap. 8088, verso, 2, 8) ; of an ox (Ebers 22, 7) ; of a fish (Ebers
62, 6; 65, 6). It appears outside the medical papyri probably as early as the Pyramid
Texts (1464 b, doubtful). In our papyrus, where it is used twice, the other passage has
" the bnf of an ox " or " bull " (XVI 9). Judging from this passage our recipe in
Case 41 has probably omitted the word ox by error. One might be tempted to read
bnf hny-t', and interpret hny-t' as the animal hnt', " porcupine," which we met in
Case 40. This supposition is rendered improbable by the fact that we find hny-t',
written | \ ° : occurring twice in Pap. Ebers (79, 21 ; and 96,1) as an ingredient
by itself. In Pap. Smith (XVI 9), furthermore, the word is written JJS^TL^i w*tn
the determinative of a plant. We must conclude then that it is an herb, the name
of which terminates in ■"* t', " earth, ground." Compare the plant name " ground-
hair " written also with in Pap. Ebers (48, 16). It cannot be identified with any
known plant. These considerations make it highly probable that our scribe has unin-
tentionally omitted the word ox after bnf. The determinative in the Pyramid Texts
suggests that bnf means " excrement " or " dung."
~~<^*ft s-Srt, "drying up," is evidently derived from the verb f^'^od-wSr,
occurring so written only once (Pap. Ebers 40, 4). Otherwise, without the e w, it
occurs seven times in Pap. Ebers (62, 21 ; 65, 15 ; 82, 21 ; 95, 8 ; 95, 15 ; 92, 5 and
70, 18). Of these passages five are pharmaceutical and refer to the drying of drugs
(62, 21 ; 65, 15 ; 82, 21 ; 95, 8 ; 95, 15). The other two refer to treatment : one to
the drying up of a running ear (92, 5, read d-Srt as in Smith XIV 4) and the other to
the drying up of a wound (70, 18) as in our Case 41. A case quite parallel to ours is
found in Pap. Ebers (91, 5 ff.) prescribing the treatment of an ear. After the use of
cooling applications to reduce the inflammation, combined with absorbents, the text
prescribes: =M=T^7^C>k«u .—PP*®«5 " H its (the ear's) mouth
is watery, thou shouldst make for him poultices for drying a wound " (Ebers 91, 8-9).
In our case the process of drying up the wound is accomplished by two prescriptions,
both of which are ointments. The basis of the first is merely called " fat " or " grease "
('dy), while the second prescribes " ibex grease." The remedies carried by these bases
are the following minerals, two of which cannot be identified :
8! SH, is a difficult word, which probably indicates the form in which the mineral
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:06 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 408 ---
382
Case 41
THE SURGICAL TREATISE
is used, like powder, crystals, or the like ; but its occurrence in a single passage as an
ingredient of a prescription (Ebers 56, 12) without the name of a mineral following
would indicate that it must be used exclusively in connection with one mineral, the
name of which might therefore on occasion be omitted. The only other known occur-
rences of the word (see next paragraph) combine it with w'dw, " green pigment " as in
our case.
i^M, ° , w'dw, " green pigment," is given an eccentric writing, which is doubtless
archaic. The sign dw, is found at the end of the word in the Pyramid Texts (1681 a),
but outside of our papyrus no other example is known with the sign *^ w'. There can
be no doubt about the reading w'dw, however, for the combination 5 (]f]^, ° J<?, °,
Ssy-t n-t w'dw, " powder of green pigment " is found in Pap. Ebers (78, 5-6), and again
with exactly the same writing as in Ebers in Pap. Hearst (XII 1). The word w,dw,
really meaning simply " green " is applied especially to the green pigment used as
a cosmetic for painting the eyes ; but also designates a green pigment employed by
Egyptian artists in painting. It consisted of copper salts (chiefly basic carbonate
according to Lucas), which the physicians had discovered were astringent. It is
employed for drying a wound in the same way in Case 46 (XVI10), written £^m?, ,
5 Jo?o w$b-t i9 an entirely unidentifiable mineral, known elsewhere in the Egyptian
documents only in two passages, both in Pap. Ebers. The first is a recipe for softening
hard or stiffened tissues (Ebers 80, 9-10) and the other is a recipe for the treatment of
a wbnw (" wound " or " sore ") in the breast, which is evidently a case like ours. In
this recipe (Ebers 70,1-8) wSb-t is employed along with " northern salt " just as in the
two astringent recipes of Pap. Smith (XIV 4-6), and applied in the form of an oint-
ment. As a medicinal agent it was also doubtless an astringent.
Ifi"!*.!. thn-t is another unknown mineral, which is not unlikely some form of
mineral glass, in view of the word thn employed by the Egyptians both for glaze
or glazed ware, and glass. It is not elsewhere found in our papyrus, and is known
otherwise only in four passages in Pap. Ebers (49, 21 ; 80, 6 ; 105,15 ; 108,16), where
the usual reading is an error for jjj (see Moeller, Palaeogr. I, No. 504, where the
hieratic sign for {Jj No. 417 has been mistaken for It is employed once internally
for urinary troubles, but otherwise in an ointment externally for softening hard or
stiffened tissues or for drawing off the content of a swelling ; and once in a magical
charm (Ebers 108, 16).
~ j has been given the determinative of a stone by our scribe, but the prescription
is obviously an ointment like the next one and we must conclude that the scribe has
written ~Tj in error for ~e j 'dy " fat, grease."
e-* nd, " triturate," has been graphically abbreviated by our scribe who has drawn
a hand and arm over a mortar. A comparison with the directions following the next
prescription shows that this abbreviation stands for "L^j nd, " triturate."
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:06 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 409 ---
Case 41
383
TRANSLATION AND COMMENTARY
1—° hm't mht, "northern salt" is evidently one of the salt minerals from
the northern desert along the west side of the Delta, chiefly chloride of sodium. It is
commonly used in Pap. Ebers in recipes for the same purpose.
—/^(p^i is a defective writing for Ij"/**^^ ny'w, also written
nr'w (XVI 11) the name of Ibex Nubiana. See Gaillard, Revue d'Ethnogr. et de
Social, 1912, p. 888.
° i im^w, " poultices," is fully discussed in Case 9 (IV 21).
ITU! i ° i $Pnn is an unidentified drug, presumably an herb. It is once called
^cTZI?( ° m^cT^ i &Pnn-w nw $l1n "Spnn (pi-) of Spn " (Pap. Ebers 98, 8), indicating
that Spn is an herb, as shown by its determinative, of which the Spnn (pl.) are parts,
like blossoms, leaves, petals or the like. On the other hand Spnn has identity of its
own to stand alone in all other known examples, namely three passages in Pap. Ebers
(64,17 ; 64, 21 ; 65,1) and one more in our papyrus (XVI12). It is employed intern-
ally to quiet a crying child (Ebers 98, 8), and in ointments and poultices for scalp
troubles (Ebers 64,17 ; 64, 21 ; and 65,1). Whether ° , dSr, " red " is a designa-
tion of some drug, or merely a modifier of Spnn, is not wholly certain.
■-t^ ns-S', "garden tongue," is evidently the same botanical term as °
found in Pap. Ebers (81,12), in which the determinatives of ns and S' show that we are
dealing with the words ^\ " tongue " and ^ " garden." It is an unidentified plant
employed in Pap. Ebers in a recipe for allaying inflammation in the anus. It occurs
twice also in the London Medical Papyrus (6,8 and 6,6) where it is written *1 " , and
seems to be employed in external applications for allaying inflammation.
i 3^T.!. ^'r' *s a occurring very commonly in the medical papyri, which
nevertheless cannot be conclusively identified. It is very common without any pre-
ceding or following modifiers in the following papyri: Ebers, Hearst, London, and
Berlin 8088. It occurs also with various modifiers, as follows :
P'r i . . ■ TSS d'r-t n-t w^-t' " d'rt of the oasis " (Ebers 48, 16).
D'rt fij^ " fresh (or " green ") d'r t" (Ebers 14, 12 ; 58, 1 ; 54, 17 ; 65, 7).
d'r-t, "insideo1 d'rt-hmt" (Ebers47,10,etc.,Pap. Berlin 8088,19,11, etc.).
^— d'r t, " fruit of the d'r t " (Ebers passim, Hearst XVI, 11 ; also Pap. Berlin
8088).
^T, ° i d'r t, " fruit o1 the d'r t " (Hearst XIII 7).
V\\"t ? 72d'r t' " rfiberl (or something similar) of the d'r t " (Ebers 69, 8-9).
E^JATPm "J'uice o1 the d'r t" (Ebers 62' 1, etc-; Pap- Berlin 8088, 4, 4 ; etc.)
i i— d,r-t' "^°Ps"1 of the d'rt" (Hearst IX 2). Munier, Deux recettes
medicales coptes (in Annates, XVIII, 285-286) identifies our d'r t with the Coptic
'xicipe, which he believes is the " caroube."
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:06 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 410 ---
384
Case 41
THE SURGICAL TREATISE
Gloss A
XIV 8-11
Explaining : A diseased wound in his breast, inflamed.
1!
°=<? Q <=>—
JO
As for : " A diseased wound in his breast, inflamed," it means that the wound
which is in his breast is sluggish, without closing up ; high fever comes forth from it,
its two lips are red, (and) its mouth is open. The " Treatise on What Pertains to a
Wound " says concerning it : " It means that there is very great swelling ; (and)
- inflamed ' is said concerning the height " (of the fever).
Commentary
!3,^NN&^ Sm'y, "diseased," is a word not otherwise known in the medical papyri.
It is probably a different word from .=^"^, an epithet applied to the Asiatics in the
Eighteenth Dynasty (Vrk. IV 890 and 740). It seems to be found elsewhere only in
the following late texts of Ptolemaic date. In the Edfu temple we find the words :
Z^^^^^SiHI6^! "protecting thy body against Sm'y" (Ptolemy IV,
Rochemonteix, Edfou, I, 287); and again £1H£-=-=lt-=!]1$j "They (the gods)
protect thee against Sm'y " (Ibid., 278). At Philae the goddess Wosret is called
"J^q^j^^^I "Wosret, mistress of Sm'y" (Philae, Berlin Dictionary photograph
No. 505, reign of Neos Dionysos). At Kom Ombo the temple inscriptions have
TT3mI " Exorcising (Hr) the Sm'y " (Do Morgan, Ombos I, pp. 44, 45, 8-9). From
these examples we would conclude that Sm'y must mean some form of disease or decay,
and in the last example the demons of disease. It is therefore probably some general
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:06 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 411 ---
Case 41
385
TRANSLATION AND COMMENTARY
word for disease. Applied to a wound which refuses to heal, as in the present case, it
would be difficult to decide whether the ancient surgeon means some form of infection,
or a gangrenous condition of the tissue—necrosis. The grammatical construction in
which the term is here used literally " disease (decay?) of a wound," is that " wound "
really has the force of an adjective, "wound disease," like " house of stone," meaning
" stone house." What is intended is doubtless the disease or decay that arises in a
wound. In Case 15 the noun hn?ij seems to be used for " diseased tissue." It was not
considered dangerous, for Case 15, the only other case in which it is known, a perfora-
tion of the bone in the region of the maxilla and zygoma, also receives the favorable
verdict and the patient recovers (Case 15, VI 15-16). The curious writing of the last
radical, with seemingly after the determinative, occurs four times in Case 41, but
in Case 15 the last radical is written DO, and there is no determinative. In all
probability the * should be written above the determinative in a hieroglyphic trans-
literation. We should without doubt recognize l^*"*^! ^'mw (^ap- Edwin
Smith XX 1 ; XX 9), meaning " demons of disease," as another form of our
word Sm'y.
-E?"=>11d nsr-y<" inflamed," is of course derived from the common verb nsr, " to
burn," with its nouns nsr and nsr-t, " flame." It is not common in a pathological
sense, for it is not otherwise found with the above meaning " inflamed " in the medical
papyri. It occurs in an Empire magical text with this meaning :
" Another spell (sn-t) for inflammation arising on the rleg1" (Leyden Pap. 845, Leemans,
Monuments dgyptiens, pll. CXXXI, I, II, l. r12"1). In our papyrus, however, it is
employed eight times in a pathological sense. These passages are important for
determining whether the word means local inflammation, or designates a general
condition of fever, affecting the patient's whole body. As we have just seen in the
examination in Case 41 (XIII 19), the wound itself is nsr-y : 1PQ8°,J!_3^<=>11&
"while that wound is nsr-y" (XIII19). The same description is repeated verbatim in
Case 47 (XVII 8) and again in the same case, with a slight variant (XVII 12). In
view of these examples it is obvious in Case 28 that 1J^5[<=>11 following as it
does directly upon the words " his wound," (wbnw-f), must be rendered " it (the
wound) is inflamed," and not " he (the patient) has fever." This conclusion har-
monizes perfectly with the fact that when the wound is nsr-y, the 'patient develops
fever ; so in Case 28 : ^S^^^^SS Pwli^J "*t (Rewound) is greatly
inflamed (nsr-y), so that he (the patient) develops fever from it " (IX 20-21).
This is paralleled by a variant, and hence strongly confirmatory, description of
the same phenomenon in Case 41 : " a diseased wound in his breast,
S?<^IH^^l^d"—JLP "innamed, (and) he continues to have fever (fatm-f) from
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:06 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 412 ---
386
Case 41
THE SURGICAL TREATISE
it " (XIV 2). This wording is repeated verbatim in Case 47 (XVII11). The same case
describes this situation further on in very explicit terms which cannot be mistaken :
" If, then, thou findest that man continuing to have fever (Smm-f), while that
wound is inflamed (nsr-y) " (XVII12).
It is obvious, therefore, that the verb nsr is employed to describe local inflamma-
tion, rather than a general condition of fever involving the whole system.
c=ij^ j^^&nwt, "fever," is derived from an old intransitive verb, Smm,
" be hot," which was later used transitively, but was originally intransitive as the old
causative cognate form p«-=^^ [J. ^-Amm and faj^ j^[|s-£mm,"to heaf'shows. The
verb is employed pathologically six times in our treatise. In two of these passages the
patient is unmistakably the subject: (] P^J^.0^^^—J^J " while that man con-
tinues to be feverish from it " (Case 41, XIII20). The second case has just been quoted
above (Case 47, XVII12). In the other four cases (Case 24, IX1; Case 28, X 2; Case 41,
XIV 2; Case 47, XVII 11, repetition of XIV 2) the subject is the pronoun and might
refer either to the wound or the patient, but the context is decisive in indicating the
patient. We may therefore conclude that in our papyrus the verb always indicates general
fever of the patient and not local inflammation. The noun, Smm-t, however, is not so
decisive. In our gloss above (XIV 9) Smm-tis said to come forth from it (the wound). This
must refer to local inflammation. The adjective "high" applied to it is interesting,
and seemingly exactly parallel with our use of " high " in the common phrase " high
fever." It is superfluous to state that it obviously does not refer to the thermometer, an
instrument unknown to the ancient world. Even our own use of "high" to describe
a fever is probably far older than the introduction of the bedside thermometer.
Literally rendered the Egyptian Smm-t k'-t means " high heat," which is said to come
forth from it (the wound). The reference is to the physical sensation of heat affecting
the hand when it is laid on the wound, as the explanation in Gloss E discloses. The
Egyptian thinks of such heat as streaming from a wound. In this case the heat is
extreme, and " high " used thus to describe it is doubtless-equivalent to " exceed-
ingly," or "extremely." As we shall see in Gloss D Smm-t is probably used there also
to designate local inflammation. In the third and last passage employing the noun
(Case 47, XVII 18-14) it probably means " fever," describing the patient's general
condition. Summarizing the evidence in our papyrus we may say that the verb Smm
regularly means " to be feverish," but this precise use of the verb is probably an acci-
dent in view of the employment of the cognate noun Smm-t to designate either " fever "
or " inflammation " of a local character. It should be noted that the verb Smm in
Case 28 (X 2) is introduced in a second treatment after drf has been employed to de-
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:06 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 413 ---
Case 41
387
TRANSLATION AND COMMENTARY
scribe the patient's condition in the examination. It may be therefore that Smm
indicates a greater degree of fever than drf. In that case the three words for an ab-
normal degree of heat in a patient would be distinguished as follows. Nsr is employed
exclusively to designate local inflammation as just demonstrated above ; Smm perhaps
implies an extreme degree of fever but may also (at least in the noun form) describe
local inflammation ; while drf possibly indicates a milder degree of fever but usually
designates local inflammation. On srf see Gloss B (XIV 11-12).
The venerable book on wounds, here called " Treatise on What Pertains to a
Wound," from which our ancient commentator quotes, is cited also in Case 5, Gloss A
(II 16-17). See commentary ibid.
Gloss B
XIV 11-12
Explaining : A whirl of inflammation in his wound.
Translation
As for : " A whirl of inflammation in his wound," it means a whirl of inflammation
which circulates through the interior of his entire wound.
Commentary
hoS, "whirl," is derived from the verb P?1^ hoS, meaning "to twist cord "
or similar (see Great " Amduat," 10th Hour) and it occurs in connection with spinning
in Mutter und Kind (verso), 11,1. The noun used in a pathological sense is confined to
Case 41. With the meaning " coil, bandage, wrapping," the noun is used once in
Papyrus Ebers (95,11), and this meaning in our treatise is discussed in Case 7 (III 18)
and Case 11 (V 11). Its pathological meaning is obscure. In Papyrus Ebers we find
a recipe for treating a P<?<^1—03^<?Q.! ho$ n t'w, " iwS of heat " in the heart (Pap.
Ebers 44,8). Among the glosses in the papyrus we find explained ^jt** P <?T'?^v^'w
" the fall of a SwS on his heart," which is defined by the gloss in the following words :
J^PeTS?"—fl$k*fti?Z? tf*— " li means the fal1 of a of heat uP°n his heart "
(Pap. Ebers 102, 6-7). Among recipes for the eyes is one for the treatment of
P?™—a^?^!^^; "a Ac* of heat in the two eyes" (Pap. Ebers 57,18). These are
the only pathological examples known in the medical papyri besides its occurrence above
in Case 41. It can hardly be doubted that the " hoS of heat (t'm>) " occurring three
times in Papyrus Ebers is parallel with our " hoS of inflammation (irf) " in Case 41.
c c 2
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:06 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 414 ---
388
Case 41
THE SURGICAL TREATISE
In our gloss the dies' is explained as one which " circulates " throughout the entire
interior of the wound, and the meaning of going around, whirling, twisting is evidently
inherent in the verb, employed as it is to designate the twisting of cord. The thought
suggested by ho$ seems to be a twisting, whirling circulation of the heat. This is no
more remarkable than our use of the Greek word paroxysm, derived from a verb
meaning " to sharpen " (6£vvcd).
P^d ^rf, "innammation," is not common as a pathological term in the medical
papyri. It is more usually employed of artificial heat. In the preparation of prescrip-
tions and of kyphi-incense we find it in Berlin Papyrus 8088 (7,12) and Papyrus Ebers
(76,14). Prescriptions are brought to the warmth (srf) of the finger (Ebers 76,1; 8, 2;
9,14; 10,6; 4,10; 89,17; 54,16-17; 94,18-14; 69,21; 81,6; and confer 66, 5);
to an agreeable warmth (Ebers 28, 19 ; 58, 9 ; 24, 8; 71, 12-18) ; between two
warmths (tepid ?, Ebers 46, 10 ; 24, 6 ; Berlin 8088, 12, 12); or merely warmed up
(only medical, Ebers 12, 8 ; 85, 20). Outside of our treatise the use of the noun
" fever, feverish heat " is not frequent (Berlin 8088, 8, 7 ; Hieratic Writing Tablet,
Brit. Museum 5645, verso, l. 9, see Gardiner, Admonitions of an Egyptian Sage,
p. 100). It is employed 14 times in Papyrus Edwin Smith if we include XIV 16 where
the writing jj, is without doubt to be read drf. In all of these cases it is possible to
render " inflammation ; " of these it must mean local inflammation in ten passages
(Case 41, XIII 19, XIV 8, 11, 12, 15, 16 ; Case 45, XV 12 ; Case 46, XVI 8 ; Case 47,
XVII 9, and 14). This meaning is also quite probable in Case 89, XIII 5. Neverthe-
less, being a word originally meaning "to heat," or "heat," srf may mean " fever."
It is quite clear that it means " fever " in the three following interesting cases (7,
28, 47) in which it indicates the first appearance of fever (A) disclosed by examina-
tion, as contrasted with a second examination revealing persistence of fever (B)
already noted in the first examination :
(A) ^W^^J.Z.
(B) „ „ „ \*
(A) 2~fcnM~lli.8?/\L
(B) =kM«-£ai'\L
(A) " If then, thou findest that the flesh of that man has developed fever from that
wound " (Case 7, III 8-9) employs srf, " fever;" while (B), " If, however, thou findest
him continuing to have fever " (Case 28, X 2) uses the verb Smm, " to be hot, have
fever." See also Case 28 (IX 21) and Case 47 (XVII 6-7).
^a<?,^L m f&ntc-/, " m ms wound," are words which have been inserted in the
quotation and are not to be found in the text, where they would be quite superfluous
in view of the following phrase " from the mouth of that wound."
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:06 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 415 ---
Case 41
389
TRANSLATION AND COMMENTARY
Gloss C
XIV 12-18
Explaining : Its two lips are ruddy
Translation
As for : " Its two lips are ruddy," it means that its two lips are red like the color
of the tm^-i-tree.
^^P^Q)«fe tmi, "ruddy," is evidently an archaic color designation which had
become more or less unfamiliar to the reader of the Seventeenth Century B.c. ; for
after applying the term to a patient's face in Case 7, our treatise appended an explana-
tion, using the same term d$r, " red " to describe the hue indicated by tmi. See Case
7, Gloss F (III 20-21) where full discussion will be found. The surgeon then repeated
this explanation in our Case 41, Gloss C.
Commentary
Gloss D
XIV 18-15
Explaining : His flesh cannot receive a bandage.
14
o □
I l<?.
4>
15
ait
Translation
As for : " His flesh cannot receive a bandage," it means that his flesh will not
receive the remedies because of the inflammation which is in his flesh.
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:06 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 416 ---
390
Case 41
THE SURGICAL TREATISE
Commentary
The surgeon identifies " bandage " with the remedies bandaged on, and explains
that the inflammation (smm-t, possibly " fever "), prevents the patient's flesh from
absorbing these remedies. The repetition of ntt hr is obviously a scribal error.
Gloss E
XIV 15-16
Explaining: While heat continually issues from the mouth of his wound at thy touch.
> V St
a\ I \<=>J1 I I H
Translation
As for : " While heat continually issues (nsw) from the mouth of his wound at thy
touch," (it means) that heat comes forth from the mouth of his wound at thy touch;
as it is said that a thing which has come forth entirely, has issued (nSw)."
Commentary
This gloss covers some material already explained in Gloss B; that is they both
include the word drf. Hence the quotation from the text of the case has, probably
intentionally, omitted everything between (]p^ yit and drf (XIII 19), which
would have included p?^^ hoS n (before srf) already explained in Gloss B.
^ J^/*" is obviously an error by the scribe who has mistaken the w in nho for m
and read nsm instead of nsw. This is an error sometimes made by modern scholars
in reading hieratic. See for example the word ffSj^^fJ. S'm, usually misread $'w in
Pap. Ebers (109,15). Cf. commentary on Case 89 (XIII 6-7). The scribe has written
the word correctly in l. 16. ^<?^ nSw, " issue " is a rare word derived from the
uncommon verb *™"jfi nS, " drive out." This transitive verb is found as far back as the
Old Kingdom; compare " I drove out (^"^ «•">', nS-n-y) the domain officials who were
there " (Uni, l. 9, Urk. I, p. 100). In the Pyramid Texts we find J"*Y nhy, designating
the treatment of a new-born child (Pyr. 1965 a, infinitive nhw-t, ibid.). This nhy must be
a variant form of nsw. The explanation in Gloss E above shows that nSw is equivalent
in meaning to pry, " go forth." We have here therefore an intransitive verb nSw
meaning " to issue," the use of which is confined to our treatise where it occurs four
times, three times in Case 41 and once in Case 47. The curious writing in Case 47
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:06 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 417 ---
Case 41
391
TRANSLATION AND COMMENTARY
(XVII 9) is of course an abbreviation, writing the word with the determinative, or
word-sign already found in the Old Kingdom in the form (see Uni above). The word
has been discussed by Sethe in Zeitschrift, 57 (1922), p. 21 (Gott. Totenbuchstudien).
We have already met the noun ^<?,^, nSw, " issue, discharge " in Case 81 (X 20).
It must be related to the word H^*1 (Pyr. 199 a) and ^z*"1 (Pyr. 1270 b), which
must mean something like " emanation." Compare also " water " (Pyr. 25 c)
in the term nS-rnpw, " fresh water." In the Middle Kingdom the noun """^^j5, nSw
is used as a designation of an uncertain disease (Mutter und Kind, 1,2; 8,1 et passim).2
See Case 6, Gloss A (II24-25). Cf. ~ <?<Vj an exudation of the nose (Pap. Ebers 99,6).
jj. is evidently an abbreviated writing of P^(J., drf, discussed above under Gloss B.
^r liter&lly " upon the ground ; " see Case 4 (II 9), p. 154.
CASE FORTY-TWO
XIV 16-22
A SPRAIN OF THE STERNO-COSTAL ARTICULATIONS
This case is the fourth in the group of eight cases concerning the breast, and the
first in a smaller group of three dealing with the ribs. These three cases are as follows :
Case 42, sprain of the sterno-costal articulations.
„ 48, dislocation of the true libs.
„ 44, break in the true ribs.
We meet with the Egyptian word ^, hn-w, " ribs " for the first time in these
three cases, and it does not occur in any other oriental document of this remote age.
In the above cases the word is always followed by the qualification ^j5/)^ J ^ nw k'b t,
" of the sternum " in a total of fourteen passages. Our surgeon's term for the true
ribs (costae verae) is therefore evidently ,7^^, J ^ fyn-w nw k'bt, " ribs of the
sternum; " but the designation was not sufficiently clear to the reader of the Seven-
teenth Century b. c. and the commentator has added a gloss to explain it.
Title
XIV16-17
1 There are no exact hieroglyphic types for these highly specialized determinatives.
* This word has been discussed from the medical point of view by Oefele, who suggests that it
means Pemphigus {Zeitschrift, 39 (1901), pp. 149 f.).
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:06 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 418 ---
392
Cask 42
THE SURGICAL TREATISE
Translation
Instructions concerning a sprain in the ribs of his breast.
Commentary
Full discussion of the terms will be found below.
Examination
XIV 17-18
Translation
If thou examinest [a man having a sprain in the ribs of his breast], (and) he suffers
in the ribs of his breast, not having a dislocation, (and) it is not broken, while that
man continues to suffer with it and shudders exceedingly, (conclusion follows in
diagnosis).
Commentary
The usual form of the examination runs : " If thou examinest a man having,"
followed by the name of the trouble or ailment already mentioned in the title. It is
clear therefore that our scribe has here omitted the words which are inserted within
brackets in the above translation.
The exclusion of a dislocation and a broken bone by means of the negative n wnt
is customarily indicated in our document by the mere enumeration of the injuries not
found, which follow the negative n wnt as nouns ; e. g.:
" Not having a split, a perforation (or) a smash in it " (Case 18, VII 9). N Mb-f
therefore, following n wnt wnh, is unusual, and the question might arise whether
in n Mb-f is not possibly the preposition *—', giving us the rendering " because of his
break " or the like. This possibility is, however, excluded by the fact that the next
case (48) is a " dislocation " (wnh) and the next (44) is a " break " (Mb). It is clear
that we have a group of three cases of injuries to the ribs, the first being a " sprain,"
without a dislocation or a fracture ; the second being a dislocation (wnh); and the
third a break or fracture (Mb). The three cases are arranged in a succession of increas-
ing seriousness, like the first five cases in the treatise.
-J1-iPJ'(2- n " it *s not broken," is perhaps to be understood as a predicative
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:06 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 419 ---
Case 42
303
TRANSLATION AND COMMENTARY
negative n + infinitive with sufiix, where we more commonly have ^ nn. See Gunn,
Syntax, Chaps. XXV and XVII. The identification of the antecedent of the pronoun
is important. The meaning of the verb is such that the pronoun must refer to a bone,
and the only masculine noun preceding is either the patient or one of the ribs (hn).
It is obvious therefore that the surgeon desires to state that the rib is not broken,
although the wrench or sprain is exceedingly painful.
mn, " suffer," see the discussion in Case 1 (I 9) and Case 8 (I 20).
liSX^ 'nr, " sLudder " or the like; see Case 4 (n 4)-
Diagnosis
XIV 19
hkZZ^Z-1 Mil IHJ^
■ The scribe intended to write nrw-t, with 5 written, as he has done throughout Case 48 ; but he
changed his mind at once and having written <? he inserted over the <?, both being in red ink.
Both signs are still legible.
Translation
Thou shouldst say concerning him : " One having a sprain in the ribs of his breast.
An ailment which I will treat."
Commentary
\ nrw-t, " sprain," is explained in Case 80. On the remaining terms, see below.
On Verdict 1, the favorable verdict, see Case 1 (I 2).
The diagnosis is again a repetition of the title followed by the verdict. See
introduction (pp. 48 ff.).
Treatment
XIV 19-20
20
Translation
Thou shouldst bind it with ymrio ; thou shouldst treat it afterward [with] honey
every day until he recovers.
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:06 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 420 ---
394 THE SURGICAL TREATISE Case 42
Commentary
On treatment with ymrw, see Case 15 (VI17); and with honey, Case 1 (I 8).
Gloss A
XIV 20-22
Explaining : Ribs of his breast.
Translation
As for : " Ribs of his breast," it means the bones of his sternum ; being spine(s)
like as it were a spine-roast.
Commentary
1^.? m i fyn-w, " ribs," is a word which we meet in this case for the first time ; for
it is unknown outside of Papyrus Edwin Smith. In this gloss the ancient commentator
has given a colloquial explanation, drawn from the daily familiarity of his readers
with meats served as household food. It is not as good an explanation as we find in
the next case (48, Gloss A), where a dislocation of the hn-w is explained as " a displace-
ment of the heads of the hn-w of his breast, which are fastened to (articulated in) his
sternum (k'b-t-f)." It is clear then that the hn-w, on the basis of Case 48 (Gloss A)
alone, are the seven (sometimes eight) true ribs which are articulated in the sternum
on each side (fourteen in all), and our case is therefore a sprain or wrenching of the
sterno-costal articulations, while Case 48 is that of an actual rending of these articula-
tions, producing a dislocation. Our gloss is evidently using the word " breast " with
the meaning " sternum " (see Case 40, Gloss A, XIII 17). The commentator does
not mean, however, that " the bones of his sternum " are the parts of the sternum
itself, like the manubrium ; he means the bones attached to the sternum, as is shown
by Gloss A in Case 48, that is, the true ribs.
sr-t, " spine " or " thorn." The hieratic writing is misleading, and seems at
first sight to be almost certainly P£j^ ^wt, which is the more tempting in view of P£o
swt, " grain" or §\hoy-t " bead" (Berlin, Mittheilungen aus den Or. Samml., VIII,
p. 29). Compare La,ca,u,Sarcophages, vol. 2, p. 22 (Cairo, 28089). This last word,hoy-t,is
used to designate a pill, bolus, or suppository in Pap. Ebers (14,9; 4,20; 22,4; 81,20;
84, 2). In all likelihood, however, we should not read in this gloss any of the words
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:06 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 421 ---
Case 42
395
TRANSLATION AND COMMENTARY
just cited. We recall that in Case 40 the manubrium is called l,^,"]^ hnt', and in
the accompanying explanation (Case 40, Gloss A, XIII17), this word is identified with
IJ^lk^1 ^nt', "porcupine." Now in Pap. Ebers we find that the "spine of a
porcupine " is called P^ATl^v^ n-' ^n'f Cabers 92, 7). The sternum, with the
ribs diverging from it, was therefore thought to look roughly like a porcupine with
his bristling spines. It is highly probable, therefore, that in our gloss above the com-
mentator is talking about the diverging ribs as " spines." The hieratic ligatures
wt and rt are often practically identical. Compare the ligature wt (Moeller, Palaeogr. I,
p. 68, IV, Sinuhe, 87) and rt (ibid., p. 71, XXIX, Sinuhe h, 182). Notwithstanding the
high top of our ligature (XIV 21 and 22), so characteristic of the ligature wt (see bn-wt,
XV 10), it seems much more probable that we should read rt, and translate "spine."
Any explanation of the word requires that it should be in the plural. Such abrupt
changes from plural to singular are not rare in oriental documents ; compare Case 80,
Gloss A (last clause, X 12). It has therefore been rendered "spines " in the translation.
21$"^*^ my hpr t m has already been discussed in Case 40, Gloss A, where it
cannot mean " like what is in," as it might very well be rendered here. In view of
the unlikelihood of this meaning in Case 40, it has not been employed here in Case 42.
hwn, "roast" or the like, is a meat dish ready for the table. A picture of it,
§ lying in a bowl, is often shown as the determinative of the word hwn in the food lists
displayed on tomb chapel walls, at the end of the series of meat dishes, e.g., Newberry,
Beni Hasan, Vol. I, Tomb 2, PI. XVIII; Cairo, Tomb-stela 20057 ; Mariette, Abydos,
I, 88, 29. The earliest examples are from the Middle Kngdom. It is evidently a cut
of meat containing ribs, which seems to have been colloquially called a " spine cut,"
or a " spine roast," from the ribs still in it, as our housekeepers say, " a rib-roast."
Other orientalists may be able to offer some other explanation of this gloss, but it is
very improbable that any intelligible explanation can be derived from the reading sw-t.
CASE FORTY-THREE
XIV 22-XV 6
A DISLOCATION IN THE STERNO-COSTAL ARTICULATIONS
This case is the fifth in the group of eight cases concerning the breast and the
second in the smaller series of three having to do with the ribs. The cause of the
dislocation is not stated but the surgeon finds redness over the " heads " of the ribs
and there is pain in the sides, where swellings appear.
The discussion says nothing of any surgical effort to reduce the dislocated bones,
but proceeds at once to alleviatory remedies externally applied, and the patient is
expected to recover. The case is followed by three instructive glosses giving us valuable
surgical and anatomical data.
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:06 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 422 ---
396
Case 43
THE SURGICAL TREATISE
Title
XIV 22
Translation
Instructions concerning a dislocation of the ribs of his breast.
Commentary
The terms will be found discussed below. The genitive ® nw between wnh and
hn-w is a scribal error ; see examination and diagnosis.
Examination
XIV 22-XV 1
XV 1
Translation
If thou examinest a man having a dislocation of the ribs of his breast, (and) thou
findest that the ribs of his breast are Tprojecting1, and their heads are ruddy, while
that man suffers continually with swellings in his two sides, (conclusion follows in
diagnosis).
Commentary
s5|»cJ^ wnh, " dislocation," has been discussed in Case 10 (V 6 under ydr) ; also in
Case 14 (VI11), and especially in Case 81 (X 17-19).
? i hn-w, " ribs," has been discussed under Gloss A of the preceding case.
^ Ik J ^ " breast," is here a designation of the sternum. It has been discussed
in Case 40 (XIII 17).
®2^P^ fy'd' " rprojectingV is a new word unknown anywhere else in Egyptian
documents. A word written ©| ^ p h'd, occurring in the Amon Ritual (Berlin Pap.
8055, 84,1-2) designates some action connected with the face, but is otherwise entirely
obscure. It may have some connection with our word, which has the determinative
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:06 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 423 ---
Case 43
397
TRANSLATION AND COMMENTARY
of face. The meaning "to project " is a conjecture, suggested by the following state-
ment, " their heads are ruddy." The dislocation is of course due to an injury ; but
the surgeon does not state that the overlying tissue covering the dislocation has been
ruptured. In stating that the heads of the ribs are ruddy, he can hardly mean that
they are projecting through the overlying soft tissue, and are visible. What he pro-
bably means is that the soft tissue over the dislocation is bruised and congested, while
the heads of the ribs in a forward dislocation, though invisible, are projecting.
PL ? i dt-wt, " swellings," is without doubt the familiar word "f*^, °, it-t, " swelling,"
though written without for the phrase "f-t^li^J^PP^". a repetition of our
passage, except for "Y*, is known (Pap. Berlin 8088, 4, 9).
p[S Sw-ty, " two sides," is discussed in Gloss C (p. 400).
Diagnosis
XV 1-2
Translation
Thou shouldst say concerning him : " One having a dislocation in the ribs of his
breast. An ailment which I will treat."
Commentary
Tne terms will be found discussed above, and in the glosses. The insertion of
^ m, " in," is a variant not found in the preceding text. We again find the diagnosis
consisting of a repetition of the title with the verdict added. See introduction
(pp. 48 ff.). On the favorable verdict 1 see Case 1 (I 2) and introduction (pp. 46 ff.).
Treatment
XV 2-8
Translation
Thou shouldst bind it with ymrw ; thou shouldst treat afterward [with] honey
every day, until he recovers.
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:06 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 424 ---
398
Case 43
THE SURGICAL TREATISE
Commentary
Treatment with ymrw has been discussed in Case 15 (VI17), and the use of honey
has been taken up in Case 1 (18).
Gloss A
XV 8-4
Explaining : A dislocation in the ribs of his breast.
Translation
As for : " A dislocation in the ribs of his breast," it means a displacement of the
heads of the ribs of his breast (sternum), which are fastened to his breast (sternum).
Commentary
ZI^JL> nft' " displacement," is discussed in Case 84, Gloss A (XI 22), where it is
applied to the heads of the dislocated clavicles, as here to the heads of the dislocated
ribs.
tp-w' " heads," applied to the sterno-costal tips of the ribs by the ancient
surgeon is interesting, in view of the fact that modern anatomy designates these tips
as " capitulae," or " little heads." It is applied by our surgeon also to the heads of
the clavicles in Case 84. See the discussion of ® as an anatomical term in our docu-
ment in Case 1 (pp. 84-87) and Case 10 (V 5).
Sj^ mn m, " fastened to," literally " being fast in," meaning " articulated in,"
as an anatomical term has been discussed in Case 4 (II 9).
■^3^ J ^ " breast," is obviously used here to designate the sternum ; see the
discussion in Case 40, Gloss A (XIII17).
Gloss B
XV 4-5
Explaining : He suffers with swellings in his two sides.
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:06 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 425 ---
Case 43
399
TRANSLATION AND COMMENTARY
Translation
As for : " He suffers with swellings in his two sides," it means that he suffers in
the articulations thereof in his breast (sternum) rspreading1 in his two sides.
Commentary
PP Sw-ty, " two sides," is discussed in the next gloss.
wd-t, " articulations," is a new word, not found elsewhere in our document,
nor indeed in any other Egyptian document. The meaning above suggested is derived
from the technical and surgical use of the verb <i£3*—° wdy, " put, place," to designate
the return of a dislocated bone to its socket, e. g., a dislocated mandible in Case 25
(IX 5), or dislocated clavicles in Case 84 (XI 19). The feminine noun wd t, in the
plural, might therefore mean " puttings," or " placings," and designate the point
where one bone is put or placed into another, that is, the articulation.
P "?*r-t,^w, " spreading," is a very uncertain guess based on the use of the verb
P^Y" tty, to describe the scattering of inflammation or fever in Case 47 (XVII 14).
We have here in our case, however, an unusual writing, and one gains the impression
that the text is not correct. The determinative suggests that it may be connected
with the verb use1^ ^ ^ap- ^bers (91, 12) to describe the discharge of secretion
in the ear. It is not at all impossible that the scribe was intending to write dt-wt,
" swellings," in which case it would be construed as parallel with " articulations,"
giving us the rendering: " he suffers in the articulations thereof in his breast, and
(in) the swellings in his two sides."
Gloss C
XV 5-6
Explaining : His two sides.
Translation
As for : " His two sides," it means his two flanks.
Commentary
^r""^ dpty, " two flanks," is a rare word, of which the exact anatomical applica-
tion is still to be better determined. It seems to be the ancestor of the Coptic *^ne
" groin," used in the Coptic version of the Old Testament to render the Greek 6cr<f>vs,
" hip " and Hebrew tFjfyn, (dual) " two loins," " two hips." It has been treated by
Devaud (Etymologie Copte, pp. 18-20). His oldest example (Middle Kingdom
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:06 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 426 ---
400
Case 43
THE SURGICAL TREATISE
Glossary from the Ramesseum) lists three different internal parts possessing a dp-t.
The first two are anatomically unidentified; the third is called " dp-t of the anus."
In its earlier history the word evidently was very general, requiring some identifying
modifier. It had therefore some range of application, like rr-ty, meaning " buttocks "
or " two sides of the mandible " (see pp. 187 f.), and was probably an imprecise
designation like our " flanks " for sides. In the Golenischeff Glossary (7, 10, con-
tinuation of Pap. Hood) there is a list of parts of the body which has: " back, ribs,
loins, buttocks " and then ^^J^ ££\ dp and knkn-t. A list of members of the body
in a papyrus in Turin (ed. Pleyte-Rossi, 125, 8; magical texts of the Empire copied
by Gardiner) contains °^t*nrKf>Mi'u- " the dP-t of his back," and
Pap. Ebers (40, 20) mentions dp in connection with an ailment in the right
side. In our case the swelling evidently extended beyond the area over the dis-
located ribs and over the patient's sides.
P(I StO'ty, " two sides," is hardly a specific anatomical term, for it may mean " side "
with reference even to the head ; e. g., f'jj^^TP PiTi " ^e placed (his) eye(s) in their
sides," viz. one on each side of the head (Rochem, Edfou, I, 417=Piehl, Inscr. II, 20g).
In the lists of the parts of the body in the Tables of Hours we find p p occurring after
" cheek " (mnd-t) and tongue, and again on both sides of ® \ (in ^ I) ; the same order
is found in £~ II, III (before neck), IV, V, VI, examples which indicate that the two
sides of the head are meant. Again (in ^~ III) Sw-ty is found after " buttocks " (hpd)
and mnd-t, an order indicating great confusion. The Berlin Medical Papyrus 8088
(4, 8-9) contains a prescription for removing "^[^^i^PPI"^" " swellings in his two
sides," presumably the two sides of the body. In a case of heart trouble of some kind
Pap. Ebers states 1J^^^P P*vT " ne suffers continually in his two sides " (Pap. Ebers
41,14), a statement which must refer to the two sides of the body. In Leyden papyrus
848 (verso 5, 7) Sw-ty is listed between the arm and fingers and the back, a placing
which is evidently significant.1 The word is usually in the dual, but among the eight
examples of it in our treatise there are four in the plural in Case 47. One of these
possibly refers to the " sides " of a wound, a use of the word which is parallel with the
" side of a ligament " (Pap. Ebers 82, 16). The only other example of the singular of
Sw-t is in the case of a patient with heart trouble, who suffers some displacement of
the heart due to fatty growths J^Pt^fJJl "m ms ^ s^e (Sw-t) " (Pap. Ebers
101, 14). In this case Sw-t obviously designates the left side of the body in the
general region overlying the heart. This passage in Papyrus Ebers illustrates a use
of the word closely analogous to our case where the swellings in question occupy the
region over the kidneys.
1 Incidentally it may be mentioned that this passage compares the word Sw ty with the two
feathers of Min, and thus determines the correctness of the reading Hw-ty. I owe this remark to
Gardiner.
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:06 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 427 ---
Case 44
401
TRANSLATION AND COMMENTARY
CASE FORTY-FOUR
XV 6-9
FRACTURED RIBS
This case is the sixth in the group of eight cases concerning the breast, and the
third of the smaller series of three dealing with the ribs. The examination shows that
the injury is more than a fracture of the true ribs (" ribs of his breast "), for the soft
tissue overlying the fractured ribs has been ruptured, and the shattered ribs give way
under the pressure of the surgeon's fingers. The fatal verdict 8 is appended, and is
followed by no treatment, showing that the surgeon had no expectation of the patient's
recovery. We cannot but wonder whether the surgeon had never met a case of
fracture of the ribs without a serious rupture of the overlying soft tissue, as in Case 86,
a fractured humerus, which the surgeon is able to cure ; whereas in Case 87 when he
finds a serious flesh wound overlying the fracture, he regards it as a fatal case just
like our Case 44. We would like to know whether our surgeon had never successfully
treated a case of fractured ribs. It is possible that we have a scribal omission here,
and that an entire case has fallen out by carelessness of the scribe.
Title
XV 6
*
Translation
Instructions concerning a break in the ribs of his breast.
Commentary
^ Mb, " break," has been discussed in Case 11 (V 10). On hn-w, "ribs " see
Case 42 (XIV 20-21); k'b-t, " breast " has been explained in Case 40 (XIII 17).
Examination
XV 6-8
jfiJ4*7,^t!H
Dd
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:06 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 428 ---
402
Case 44
THE SURGICAL TREATISE
Translation
If thou examinest a man having a break in the ribs of his breast, over which a
wound has been inflicted; (and) thou findest that the ribs of his breast crepitate under
thy fingers, (conclusion follows in diagnosis).
Commentary
The word Mb, " break," is in the singular, but it is stated to be " in the ribs,"
suggesting that the expression " break in the ribs " indicates that several ribs are
broken. This indication is rendered certain by the fact that the surgeon's fingers find
the " ribs " (plural) yielding to pressure and giving way, so that " they crepitate " (lit.
" break through "). In addition to this situation, the soft tissue overlying the fractures
has been ruptured forming an open wound.
id, " inflicted," will be found discussed in Case 5 (II11). Compare Case 87 for
a similar wound over a fractured bone.
S^/* wbnw, " wound," has been discussed in Case 1 (pp. 81-84).
"©"J"©"J x nhbnhb is an error for "J^J©J x nhbhb, " crepitate," which will be found
discussed in Case 18 (VI 4-5).
Diagnosis
XV 8-9
Translation
Thou shouldst say concerning him : " One having a break in the ribs of his breast,
over which a wound has been inflicted. An ailment not to be treated."
Commentary
The terms have all been discussed above, especially under the examination.
On the unfavorable verdict 8 see Case 5 (II15) and also the introduction (pp.46ff.).
In view of this verdict the surgeon considers the case hopeless and hence adds no treat-
ment.
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:06 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 429 ---
Case 45
403
TRANSLATION AND COMMENTARY
CASE FORTY-FIVE
XV 9-19
BULGING TUMORS ON THE BREAST
This case is the seventh in a group of eight concerning ailments of the breast. The
tumors described differ essentially from those treated in Case 89. It is clear further-
more that these bulging tumors result from a disease and not from an injury which
may be the source of the tumors of Case 89. There seems to have been no treatment
known to the physician, either for these tumors or for the same trouble appearing
anywhere on the body. It is possible that the detailed description devoted to them
both in the text and in the interesting gloss at the end of the case may enable the
modern pathologist to determine the nature of the disease described.
Commentary
2 bn-wt, " tumors," is discussed in Case 89, Gloss A (XIII 9-12). On " bulging "
see the explanation in the gloss on this case (45).
^ J* £'H " breast " is treated in Case 40 (XIII17).
Title
XV 9
Translation
Instructions concerning bulging tumors on his breast.
Examination
XV 9-14
10
12
D d 2
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:06 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 430 ---
404
Case 45
THE SURGICAL TREATISE
Translation
If thou examinest a man having bulging tumors on his breast, (and) thou findest
that [swellings] have spread over his breast; if thou puttest thy hand upon his breast
upon these tumors, (and) thou findest them very cool, there being no fever at all
therein when thy hand touches him ; they have no granulation, they form no fluid,
they do not generate secretions of fluid, and they are bulging to thy hand, (conclusion
follows in diagnosis).
Commentary
The description of these tumors on the breast has some resemblances in form to the
description of a different variety of tumor in Case 89. We find there, however, that the
subject of the verb " they have spread " is the noun ^-fl!^<?,5]3, tw'-w, " swellings "
(XIII 4). It is obvious that the scribe has omitted the word in Case 45 (XV 10,
between gmm-k and ikd-n-Sn) by error.
J"o"^r?i bn-wt, "tumors," is discussed in Case 89, Gloss A (XIII 9-12), where
a totally different variety of bn-wt is described.
!J^3kl11 'O fymHy is discussed in the gloss at the end of the case.
The three negative statements all seem to be in the same form, raising the question
whether °; fr, " sand," known hitherto only as a noun, may not here be used as a
verb, meaning " to be sandy," that is " to be granulated," just as the noun «~» mw,
" water " is used by our surgeon as a verb meaning " to be watery " (Case 41, XIII22).
f-^j rhr-w, " secretions," is discussed in Case 41 (XIII 22-XIV 1).
— mw, " fluid," literally " water " is an elastic word widely applied in medicine
and botany to the juices of fruits and plants, or the secretion of a sore, ulcer or wound.
Diagnosis
XV 14-15
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:06 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 431 ---
Case 45
405
TRANSLATION AND COMMENTARY
Translation
Thou shouldst say concerning him : " One having bulging tumors. An ailment
with which I will contend."
Commentary
The terms are all discussed above or in the gloss at the end of the case.
Verdict 2, the doubtful verdict, has been discussed in Case 4 (II 6).
Treatment
w XV 15-16
^^^1 i J\ —
Translation
There is no r treatment1. If thou findest bulging tumors in any member of a man,
thou shalt treat him according to these directions.
Commentary
^®tT\a? n lib-t Pw, " tnere is no rtreatment!," literally means "there is nothing."
It stands immediately after the verdict, that is, in the position usually occupied by the
treatment. In view of the fact that all treatment is lacking, the terse statement " there
is nothing " probably means " there is no treatment." On the highly varied use of
Si"Ti yfy't, " thing," see ^ase ^ (II8). The curious injunction " thou shalt treat him,"
when no treatment is offered in the discussion, must mean that the treatment is omis-
sion of treatment.
Gloss A
XV 16-19
Explaining : Bulging tumours on his breast.
a This □ has been inserted as a correction over some earlier incorrect sign.
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:06 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 432 ---
406
Case 45
THE SURGICAL TREATISE
•, This "«~' was at first omitted by error of the scribe and he afterward inserted it in red ink.
Translation
As for " Bulging tumors on his breast," it means the existence of swellings on his
breast, large, spreading and hard ; touching them is like touching a ball of wrappings ;
the comparison is to a green Ziemai-fruit, which is hard and cool under thy hand, like
touching those swellings which are on his breast.
Commentary
J "cT^T !"m bn-wt," tumors," a variety quite different from those treated in Case 89,
Gloss A (XIII 9-12).
L^iy 11m\ bmHy, " bulging," is without doubt connected with JOl^f]^, ° ,
hm'yt, a fruit of unknown identity occurring only in our treatise. From l. 18 of this
gloss we learn that when this fruit is green it is hard and cool to the touch. In the
magical treatise on the verso of our papyrus the preparation of this fruit for use in
a recipe required that it be bruised, dried, husked, winnowed, and the " fruit " (pr-t)
sifted (XXI9-18). In this recipe the determinative is not ^ as in our gloss. This is
the common writing of hm'y-t, " salt " from the XVIIIth Dynasty on ; but the de-
scription of the preparation of the hm'yt-iiuit leaves no doubt whatever that it is to
be distinguished from salt, and regarded as a vegetable product. It may have been
a rotund fruit, much like a ball, and hence possibly given a name derived from |Jfc' ^ Q
Am', " ball' (l. 18). It is possible that |^3s^ hm' means " to be round, rotund,"
from which we have the masculine noun hm', " ball," the feminine noun hm'y-t,
" rotund," meaning the fruit; while the form following bn-wt, "tumors," might be
a pseudo-participle modifying bn-wt, and meaning " swelling like a ball," rendered
above " bulging."
dmy is a familiar verb meaning " to reach, touch, arrive at, adhere, join,
attach " and the like ; e. g., to touch the ground in obeisance in Shipwreck, 1l.187-188
and Sinuhe, B 200-201. It is not common in medical or surgical use and is known in
the medical papyri elsewhere only in Pap. Ebers where it occurs twice in rather obscure
connections (Pap. Ebers 91, 14-15 and 109, 9-10). In our papyrus it is used of the
adhesion of one lip of a wound to the other in healing (Case 10, V 9), of the adhesion
of a fragment of bone to a cleansing swab of linen (Case 22, VIII16), of the cohesion of
two parts of a thing afterward separated by breakage (Case 81, X 19), and finally of
the touching of the tumor or the fruit by the surgeon's fingers in our gloss.
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:06 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 433 ---
Case 46
407
TRANSLATION AND COMMENTARY
CASE FORTY-SIX
XV 20-XVI 16
AN ABSCESS WITH PROMINENT HEAD ON THE BREAST
This case is the last in a group of eight concerning ailments in the breast. The
abscess which it discusses is not very definitely defined beyond the facts that it is soft
and secretes pus, that it protrudes, has a prominent head, is cool or clammy and with-
out redness. It is several times called a wbnw, " wound " or " sore," and once a yh,
" injury," or " ailment," leaving open the possibility that a wound or injury may have
been the origin of it, just as in Case 89. Dr. Luckhardt remarks : " I wonder if he is
treating a so-called - cold abscess.' It would certainly fit the description. An abscess
which is cold to the touch and not ruddy or inflamed is of a tuberculous nature."
The treatment resembles that in Case 41, but is slightly more elaborate, containing
four stages, whereas Case 41 contains but three. These four stages are :
1. Cool applications, which seem incompatible with the symptom of a cool or
clammy surface of the abscess. One of these two apphcations contains mason's
mortar, the only ingredient besides water, identifiable.
2. " Wound-treatment," which is to be employed only if the preceding treatment
has failed. It consists of an application containing acacia and sycamore leaves, ox
dung, and two more unidentified ingredients, and was intended to allay inflammation,
which we must conclude has succeeded the " clamminess of surface " observable before
treatment began.
8. An astringent application including the copper salts employed for the same
purpose in Case 41, and the other ingredients included there.
4. Poultices also like those which concluded the treatment in Case 41.
Three glosses at the end discuss the terms needing explanation.
Title
XV 20
Translation
Instructions concerning an abscess with prominent head in his breast .
Commentary
All the terms will be found discussed below, especially in connection with the
three glosses at the end (pp. 418-415).
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:06 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 434 ---
408
Case 46
THE SURGICAL TREATISE
Examination
XV 20-XVI 2
Translation
If thou examinest a man having an abscess with prominent head in his breast, (and)
thou findest a very large swelling protruding on his breast, oily, like fluid under thy
hand, while they produce some clamminess of the surface, (and) their faces have no
ruddiness, (conclusion follows in diagnosis).
Commentary
P jlj^ep^^ ihr tp irr (var. dkr), see Gloss A.
gJ/Q thb, " swelling," see Case 4 (II 4).
Hp<? () I] y&wy, " protruding," see Case 4 (II 4).
a\J% k'b-t, " breast," see Case 40 (XIII17).
J^*!k^0 h'b" oily'"see Case 41 (XIY !)-
yb t (lit- " thing "), see Case 4 (II 8).
ZJ^]k nrb', " pallor," see Gloss B.
"j^sP^Q]^ tmJ, " ruddiness," see Gloss C.
It is important to note that while the title and the examination seem to refer to
a single " abscess " (iAr), the description suggests that there is a group of abscesses.
" They " (XVI 1) and " their faces " (XVI 2) can refer to nothing other than ihr,
" abscess," which is treated as in the plural. On the other hand the occurrence of
wr' n wbnw m k'b t-f, " from the mouth of the wound (sore ?) in his breast " (XVI 8)
again indicates that the trouble is a single abscess, although the text further on (XVI
15) again employs the plural pronoun, " their " (in " their skin ") in referring to the
ailment. The question arises whether n tmi n may not be regarded as a negative
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:06 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 435 ---
Case 46
409
TRANSLATION AND COMMENTARY
followed by the n-form of a verb tmi, " to be red," the subject being " their faces,"
giving us the meaning, " their faces are not red." See further discussion of Gloss C
below.
Diagnosis
XVI 2-4
Translation
Thou shouldst say concerning him: " One having an abscess with prominent
head in his breast. An ailment which I will treat with cold applications to that
abscess which is in his breast."
Commentary
See commentary below, especially Gloss A. In this diagnosis the verdict conclud-
ing it at the same time connects with the treatment as in Case 89, q. v. and it is at this
point difficult to make any separation between diagnosis and treatment. See intro-
duction (p. 46).
Treatment
XVI 4-12
|e=> o ci o 2] o
I a I I I I C± I I I—0'-O\\l I I
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:06 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 436 ---
410 THE SURGICAL TREATISE Case 46
12
□ 1 I lr 1 \ I I I IT] °V
to^—P
2Va?tsZaiion
a. $At-fruit,
ntr-t,
ksnty,
Triturate, bind upon it.
b. Fruit of ft,
ksnty,
mason's mortar,
water,
Triturate, bind upon it.
If there is resistance to these cooling applications, thou shouldst avoid those
remedies until all fluid which is in the abscess with a head exudes.
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:06 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 437 ---
Case 46
411
TRANSLATION AND COMMENTARY
Thou shouldst treat him with wound-treatment, with applications for drawing out
the inflammation from the mouth of the wound (sore ?) in his breast :
Leaves of acacia,
sycamore,
juice of j/m'-leaves,
ox dung,
hny-t',
Bind upon it.
Thou shouldst make for him astringents, in his breast:
a. Towderl of green pigment,
d'r-t of cedar,
ointment fat,
northern salt,
ibex grease,
Bind upon it.
Thou shouldst make for him poultices :
Red Spun,
sycamore,
Triturate, apply to it.
Commentary
The verdict is immediately connected with the treatment, an arrangement found
also in Papyrus Ebers in several cases (see p. 865).
°( sp"w, " applications," see Case 41 (XIV 2), where the purpose of the " cool
applications " is stated to be " drawing out the inflammation from the mouth of the
wound " (XIV 2-8). In our Case 46 we have the same statement of the purpose of
a certain " treatment," called " wound-treatment " (XVI 7-8), which is, however,
the second stage of the entire treatment (see introduction to Case 46). The word
" applications " (sp-w) seems to be sufficiently verbal in force to take the preposition
r, literally "at the abscess," like rfnd, "at the nose" or r hh, "at the throat," well-
known uses of the preposition r with parts of the body.
PT"i °( %-t is a frequently recurring fruit, from the Old Kingdom on. The
Pyramids write P^^ (or o), and the Old Kingdom p "**»»». It was gained by a process
of pounding, doubtless to free it from husks (see Newberry, El Bersheh, pt. 1, pl. XXXT)
and was obtained in two varieties j and J, that is "white " and " green." It is
common in the offering lists beginning as far back as the Pyramid Texts (108 b and c,
96 b); see also Mariette, Mastabas, D 16, p. 215 and D 88, p. 269. It was so plentiful
that it was kept in granaries, e.g., Tomb of Kagemni (Sixth Dynasty). It continued
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:06 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 438 ---
412
Case 46
THE SURGICAL TREATISE
in very common use, appearing regularly in the offering lists, e. g., in the great Medinet
Habu calendar, down to Saitic times. In medicine its use has hitherto been known
only in Pap. Ebers and Pap. Hearst; see Ebers 10, 21; 87,14 = duplicate 88,14); 41,
4 ; 48, 5 (twice); 82, 21 (= Hearst VIII17); 89/20-21 (Hearst XIII12); 90, 9 and 10
(twice). A drink known only in Pap. Ebers (90, 6) called P^*,7i was probably
prepared from this fruit. Its use in our Case 46 as an externally applied, local febrifuge
is an added datum to be noted in identifying this drug, but no satisfactory identifica-
tion has yet been offered.
1^°( ntr-t is an unidentified drug, otherwise known only in Pap. Ebers (48,16 ;
48, 18 ; 79, 1), in prescriptions which do not enable us to identify it. It is possibly
a preparation of natron, the native sesquicarbonate of sodium, found in great quantities
in the Egyptian deserts, especially on the west side of the Nile valley, and known to
the Egyptians at a very early date under the name ^ wiry, a designation from which
our word nitre has descended through Greek vlrpov and our word natron likewise
through Arabic a)J^ " natrun," which reached us through the Spanish and French.
jtIZ, ° i ^n^, see Case 41 (XIV 8)-
The first " application," consisting of the above three drugs, is dry ; the second
" application " was mixed with water and must have been a soft paste.
*"? dk(r), " fruit," has been hastily written by the scribe, or was perhaps an in-
tentional abbreviation. The lack of the determinative is noticeable, but the spelling
with omission of the r is common. Compare the frequent form , or ^ate
form as ™ ^ap* Harris frequently.
5 ( ° , is is an unknown plant or tree, not occurring elsewhere as a botanical name,
and hardly to be connected with the Empire word 8.-™ is, " grain."
™, ° , dbn, " mortar," is not a common medicament. It is otherwise known only
in two cases in Pap. Ebers where it appears as an ingredient in an externally applied
remedy for a pus-secreting sore (75, 1). In this recipe it is triturated with a juice
(as in our Case 46 with water) and the word ^ °, stands alone without the mason.
In Ebers 48, 17, however, we find ^i^i~""^5^ a^1n n Vlpdw, with genitive n con-
necting the two words. (Cf. Pap. Hearst XIV 17). In this second recipe the mortar,
together with the other remedies, is triturated with water, just as in our Case 46,
and is externally applied " for cooling a head, when it is ailing," perhaps headache.
is of course a scribal error for nn, " these."
" These cooling applications " (XVI5-6) of course refers back to the two preceding
prescriptions. If they are ineffective the physician is to resort to " wound-treat-
ment," for allaying the inflammation, a treatment here consisting of a long prescrip-
tion containing much the same ingredients which we find employed for the same
purpose in Case 41 (XIV 2-4), where the discussion of these drugs will be found. The
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:06 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 439 ---
Case 46
413
TRANSLATION AND COMMENTARY
term " wound treatment " is otherwise found in our treatise only in Case 89, where
it is employed after cauterization. See Case 89, XIII 7-8.
The third stage of treatment consists of an astringent prescription for drying up
the abscess (or abscesses ?) of much the same content as we found employed for the
same purpose in Case 41 (XIV 4-6).
The fourth stage repeats the poultices found in Case 41 (XIV 6-7), though with two
ingredients omitted.
Gloss A
XVI 12-14
Explaining : An abscess with prominent head in his breast.
13
Translation
As for : " An abscess with prominent head in his breast," it means that there
is a large swelling due to the injury which is in his breast, soft like a fluid under
the hand.
Commentary
P| * f^a ihr, " abscess," is an entirely new word, unknown in any other Egyptian
document. We learn from this gloss that it is a soft swelling, and the treatment
(XVI 6-7) states that it contains pus. On these two data rest the justification for
translating the term " abscess."
®(l_£_^v tp ikr, " prominent head," is written in the title (XV 20) and in
the examination ®P^^< (see also tp T in XVI 2). We can hardly assume that the
occurrence of cr twice and ifr once, is due to incorrect writing by the scribe. It seems
probable that we have here the familiar verb rr, " rise, ascend," suggesting the idea of
a " rising," that is a " prominent head." See commentary on the same term applied
to a tumor in Case 89 (XIII 10).
*tTi yb-t, " tkmS'" *s seemingly rather superfluous here. See discussion, p. 142.
*Hn]^ hr yh, " due to the injury," literally " on account of the injury." One
is tempted to see a local meaning in the preposition, and to render " over the injury,"
meaning on the spot or place of the injury. This rendering is unlikely in view of the
variant text in Case 89 which reads: ^.Hf lTi?^Oaja?^^ J^^^s—"QraJ-*
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:06 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 440 ---
414
Case 46
THE SURGICAL TREATISE
" It means that there are swellings spreading over his breast because of his injury "
(XIII10-11). Yh may, as in Case 89, designate disease, rather than injury, and there
is no way of settling this uncertain point.
SLJk 9*' " sofV of course refers back to the swelling.
Gloss B
XVI14-15
Explaining : Clamminess of their surface.
Translation
As for : " Clamminess of their surface," it means their skin is not hot.
Commentary
ZjJ^^t nr^', "clamminess," is a word entirely unknown outside of this
Case (46). It is here parallel with ribybyw, " be hot," preceded by a negative, and
must therefore contain the idea of being cool.
(]^a>-'^,, ° ( yrtyw, " surface," is discussed in Case 7 (III 20). It is here parallel with
IfSlJ^ ynm, " skin," which also has the well-established meaning " surface."
—J1J 1 ? d n^3/^J/u', " be hot," is derived from the simplex —J (] (J, nby, a well-
known verb meaning " to burn, be hot." No other example of the reduplicated verb
is known.
It may be noted that the quotation of the text of the case in the gloss is inaccurate ;
• before ncb' has been omitted and the suffix sn, " their " is not in the original
text of the case (XVI1).
Gloss C
XVI 15-16
Explaining : There is no ruddiness upon it.
Translation
As for : " There is no ruddiness upon it," it means that there is no redness upon it.
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:06 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 441 ---
Case 46
415
TRANSLATION AND COMMENTARY
Commentary
The quotation varies essentially from the original text of the case (XVI 2), which
has : " their faces have no ruddiness," or more literally " there is no ruddiness to
their faces," in which the phrase " to their faces " has become " upon it " (singular),
giving us an interesting suggestion of the meaning of the words " to their faces."
"J^P^^ tmd, "ruddiness," must be an archaic word which aroused special
apprehension that it would not be understood, for this is the third time that the
commentator has explained it as " redness." See commentary on Case 7 (III 20,
Gloss F).
J[Ti yb-t, literally " thing," employed as here with a following adjective, is
discussed in Case 4 (II 8), p. 142.
CASE FORTY-SEVEN
XVI 16-XVII15
A GAPING WOUND IN THE SHOULDER
This case deals with the soft tissue enveloping the articulation of the shoulder.
Although not as long as Case 7, the discussion of Case 47 is very intelligently and
systematically organized, and is more complicated indeed than that of Case 7. It
first follows the case through two stages of progress toward recovery. It then takes
up an alternative second stage (third examination) which is unfavorable. It is
attended with inflammation of the wound and with fever, which the modern surgeon
would presumably consider due to infection. The patient's condition is declared
critical (verdict 2). Two different developments may follow this stage : one unfavor-
able with continuance of the fever (fourth examination); the other with abatement
of the fever (fifth examination) and presumable recovery.
These five examinations are introduced as follows :
First Examination
With the customary formula, " If thou examinest a man having etc."
Second Examination
H^^HjCi " H thou findest that wound et0-" (XVn 8)-
Third Examination
(]^l^^j^flS^^, "If, however, thou findest that wound etc." (XVII
6-7).
Fourth Examination
(]*=-}■ 5^^^^^^^^^sli^, " If, then, thou findest that man continuing
to have fever " (XVII 12).
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:06 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 442 ---
416
Case 47
THE SURGICAL TREATISE
Fifth Examination
H—HTIIT*™^!^?"If. however, his fever abates, etc." (XVII18-14).
On the correlation of the last two examinations by means of the introductory
(]<=>^^T " If however," compare the same correlation of two alternative examinations
in Case 7, introduction to case (p. 175).
The organization of the discussion may be outlined as follows :
I. Normally Favorable Development :
1. First Stage :
First Examination, stitching of wound, verdict 1, simple first treatment.
2. Second Stage :
Second Examination, stitching loose (possibly absorbed), open wound drawn
together with plaster, simple treatment and recovery.
II. Doubtful Development :
1. Alternative Second Stage :
Third Examination, inflammation of wound, stitching loose (possibly absorbed),
wound open and suppurating, fever, patient's condition critical, verdict 2.
Leading either to :
2. Final unfavorable condition :
Fourth Examination, disclosing inflammation and continued fever, no applica-
tions, normal diet, no medicine ; outcome uncertain.
Or to :
8. Final favorable condition :
Fifth Examination, fever abates, inflammation disappears, simple treatment,
patient recovers.
A point concerning which there is some doubt is the interpretation of the state-
ment that the surgeon finds the wound with " its stitching loose." This question has
been discussed in Case 10 (V 6). While the indications are that the wound has failed
to close wholly by healing, and has still to be drawn together by plaster, the fact that
it at once enters the second stage and heals, would indicate the possibility that the
loose stitching had simply been absorbed. If not, however, then we must consider
that the stitching proved insufficient, obliging the surgeon to resort to plaster for
drawing the gash together.
Title
XVI16
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:06 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 443 ---
Case 47
417
TRANSLATION AND COMMENTARY
Translation
Instructions concerning a gaping wound in his shoulder.
Commentary
The terms are all discussed in the examination below.
First Examination
XVI 16-20
OH
a Tho scribe wrote rfd wbnw-f, which is nonsense. He then inserted in red ink, in the insufficient
space between dd and wbnw-f, the three letters, hr-k, making dd-hr-k. On the meaning see com-
mentary.
Translation
If thou examinest a man having a gaping wound in his shoulder, its flesh being laid
back and its sides separated, while he suffers with swelling (in) his shoulder blade, thou
shouldst palpate his wound. Shouldst thou find its gash separated from r-"1 its sides
in his wound, as a roll of linen is unrolled, (and) it is painful when he raises his arm
on account of it, thou shouldst draw together for him his gash with stitching.
Commentary
8<? JL^"^ wbnw n Hf't, "gapm8 wound," is an injury treated in Cases 2 to 7, as
found in the head. On kf-t see Case 1, pp. 90-92.
f[Z^ htt-t, " shoulder," a meaning long ago demonstrated by D6vaud. It is not
a common word, see Pap. Ebers 110,2 and confer the verb | hit, " to carry on the
shoulder " (Pyr. 2171 b ; determinative in type inexact) or as in English " to shoulder."
e e
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:06 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 444 ---
418
Case 47
THE SURGICAL TREATISE
^l^'o* £,r, "kid back." Devaud calls my attention to an example of h'c with
as a variant of h'c with a, in Lacau, Textes religieux, p. 49. A parallel passage
in Pap. Ebers (64, 12) shows that we have here the familiar verb ; compare :
In this passage the variant ywf, " flesh " for J^j is very instructive.
wdr, "separate," is not a word with an established surgical or anatomical
meaning. It is in this passage however, as in the parallel from Pap. Ebers just cited
above, intended to be understood in its original meaning, " separate," from which its
more common meaning, " distinguish," " judge " is derived.
PTLL! "^s sides," while written with the plural strokes is obviously a dual
in sense, and is written in the dual in the Ebers parallel. The pronoun, both here and
with " flesh," may of course be rendered " his " and might be referred to the patient.
A comparison of the parallel in XVII 5-6 in our Case 47, however, shows that it must
refer to the wound and not to the patient.
P2i?i &t-wt, " swelling " or " swellings," has been discussed in Case 48, XV 1.
J^^f^*- mfrk-t," shoulder-blade," is a feminine noun derived from the rare word
rrihrk (m$ck), " razor," known from the following three examples :
j^^^^^ mhrJc (British Museum Inscr. in the Hieratw Character, pi. XVI, 5688
verso, left l. 5, in a list).
<p^i( mhrk-w (Merneptah Libyan War, Mariette, Karnak, 55, 61, in list of
spoil).
^^0^ nihrk (Sign Papyrus X, l. 5, explaining ).
These examples are all sufficiently late to contain only h, and include no writing with
S, so commonly alternating with h in the Pyramid Texts. In Papyrus Edwin Smith,
however, all four occurrences of the word have $ (Case 85, XII 5 ; Case 86, XII 11 ;
Case 47, XVI 18, XVII 2), furnishing another indication of the great age of our
document, for this interchange of h and £ had ceased by the end of the Old Kingdom,
let us say about 2500 b.c. The shape of the shoulder-blade suggested to the Egyptian
surgeon the bronze razor, of which the hieratic determinative furnishes one form, and
the first example above discloses another. It is a curious coincidence that the phonetic
history of the Germanic " Schulterblatt " (literally " shoulder-leaf ") has resulted in
the English " shoulder-blade," so closely parallel to the ancient Egyptian " razor-
blade " for the same bone. The term is otherwise unknown in the medical papyri, or
in any early Egyptian document before the Ptolemaic Age, when it is found in five
passages in the Dendera temple, in a list of the parts of the body of Osiris (Mariette,
Deader ah, IV 42 =Dumichen, Geographische Inschr. I 82; III 1; III 48, three times).
In all these passages it is written with h, with one exception which has A.
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:06 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 445 ---
Case 47
419
TRANSLATION AND COMMENTARY
^ dd-hr-k is obviously an error for ^C\A .S,^ dfr-hr-k, " thou shouldst
palpate ; " compare Case 4, II 8, where we have drr-hr-k in the same context.
M^I1"==>*?~^<. evidently contains a corruption of the text after dHy. The dis-
cussion of dHy in Case 14 (VI8) shows that it means " separated," especially if followed
by r. It is obvious that we should read the r in the text immediately after dHy, leaving
the enigmatic *5-^<» before Sw-t-J. The phrase " in his wound," directly following,
introduces a reference to the patient, and it may be that we should understand the
immediately preceding /, in Swt-J, as referring to the patient, not to the wound, and
thus giving us " his side " not " its side." If we disregard the plural strokes, so often
superfluous, we then have a reference here to the side of the patient. If the wound
were not on the top of the shoulder, the surgeon might mean that a portion of the
severed tissue was thrown back like a flap, and separated from the side of the patient.
This leaves unexplained the enigmatic for the text really reads "separated
from the "^^>. of his side." This explanation is in close agreement with the probable
meaning of the following comparison, " as a roll of linen is unrolled." The inner face
of the flap of severed tissue would then be designated by kf-wt-f, ht. " its
gashes," as demonstrated in the commentary on Case 1, examination (pp. 90-91),
where the " two lips " of the wound are exactly parallel with the plural kf wt, literally
" gashes," not meaning more than one gash, but designating the two surfaces of
severed tissue which are to be drawn together by the surgical stitching.
"^"-^H*.lo nfnfn," unrolled," is a new word, unknown outside of this passage. The
meaning proposed above is a guess, suggested by the context, and in harmony with the
determinative, a coil.
rw t, "roll of linen," is a very ancient word, found for example in the rehefs of
Hesire, and occurring also in the tomb lists.
JU^ n^ry, " draw together," will be found discussed in Case 10 (V 6).
flc=="c5 ydr, " stitching," see commentary ibid.
First Diagnosis
XVI 20-XVII 2
XVll 1
e e 2
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:06 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 446 ---
420
Case 47
THE SURGICAL TREATISE
Translation
Thou shouldst say concerning him : " One having a gaping wound in his shoulder,
its flesh being laid back and its sides separated, while he suffers with swelling (in) his
shoulder blade. An ailment which I will treat."
Commentary
All the terms have been discussed above in the commentary on the examination.
The favorable verdict at the end is explained in Case 1 (I 2) ; see also introduction
(pp.46ff.).
First Treatment
XVII 2-8
Translation
Thou shouldst bind it with fresh meat the first day.
Commentary
On the treatment with fresh meat see Case 1 (I 2-8).
This treatment is assumed by the surgeon to be successful and leads to a second
examination disclosing normal progress of the patient toward a second favorable stage
which, in the judgement of the surgeon, does not require a second diagnosis. The
following account of the new conditions therefore passes naturally over any diagnosis
directly to the concluding treatment as the patient advances to complete recovery.
Second Examination and Treatment
XVII 8-6
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:06 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 447 ---
Case 47
421
TRANSLATION AND COMMENTARY
p^~~7 CD
Transiaiion
If thou findest that wound open and its stitching loose, thou shouldst draw together
for him its gash with two strips of linen over that gash ; thou shouldst treat it after-
ward [with] grease, honey, (and) lint every day until he recovers.
If thou findest a wound, its flesh laid back, its sides separated, in any member of
a man, thou shouldst treat it according to these directions.
Commentary
(]!]/> pgy," open, "is without doubt a form of the verb pg' "to spread out,
to open." The determinative /*. is employed to indicate its surgical use, just as we
find #13^*0" ™ our treatise, which a parallel passage in Pap. Ebers shows is the com-
mon verb |*^^~' (see above commentary on XVI17). A suggestive derivative from
our verb pg' is the noun pg, " bowl," or flat open vessel, spreading and opening as
a wound might do. The verbal form pgy is probably a pseudo-participle.
On the loosening of the stitching, see Case 10 (V 6).
3^1^ 'V'wy, " two strips," doubtless adhesive tape, see Case 2 (115) and Case 10
(V 9). It is important to note that " gash " is here in the plural, designating the two
faces of the gash, which are to be drawn together by the plaster. See commentary, ibid.
On treatment with grease, honey, and lint see Case 1 (I 8).
Third Examination
XVII 6-10
n'c
Will
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:06 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 448 ---
422
Case 47
THE SURGICAL TREATISE
Translation
If, however, thou findest that his flesh has developed inflammation from that wound
which is in his shoulder, while that wound is inflamed, open, and its stitching loose,
thou shouldst lay thy hand upon it. Shouldst thou find inflammation issuing from the
mouth of his wound at thy touch, and secretions discharging therefrom are cool like
wenesh-jmce, (conclusion follows in second diagnosis).
Commentary
While the second stage of the treatment led to uninterrupted recovery, an alter-
native development of the case disclosed in this third examination shows the presence
of infection and the discharge of pus. The contrast is marked. The surgeon's
observation that he finds " that wound open and its stitching loose," already con-
tained in the second examination (pp. 420-421), was not followed by unfavorable
results (see Case 10, p. 280). Here in our third examination however, the " open "
wound, with " its stitching loose," is found to be " inflamed" and discharging
" secretions." While the second examination, omitting any diagnosis, proceeds
directly to treatment with favorable result, this third examination discloses a con-
dition so questionable that the surgeon appends the uncertain verdict 2 (p. 248).
The beginning of the third examination really reads, more literally rendered :
" If, however, thou findest that wound, his flesh has developed inflammation from that
wound which is in his shoulder," in which the first " that wound " would have been
resumed by a pronoun, except for the fact that a relative clause (" which is in his
shoulder ") followed, and it could not be appended to a pronoun.
[ir*tl drf, " inflammation," has been discussed in Case 41 (XIV 12).
jEv^lltl nsr-y, " inflamed," is taken up in Case 41 (XIV 8).
On the loosening of the stitching see Case 10 (V 6 under ydr).
nSw, "issue," is of course an abbreviated writing of """"*<> nSw, discussed in
Case 41 (XIV 15).
r¥'w, " secretions," will be found discussed in Case 41 (XIII 22-XIV 1,
p. 876). The question may arise whether secretion discharging from a feverish and
inflamed wound would be cool.
wnSy, " wenesh-jmce," is a substance not yet satisfactorily identified.
The plant is referred to as far back as the Old Kingdom; see wnS in Berlin
18466. See also Griffith, Hieratic Papyri from Kahun and Gurob, pl. XXVII,
l. 21, which mentions wnS-huit. It occurs frequently in Pap. Ebers and also Berlin
8088. In later times it occurs in the Dendera temple (Mariette, Denderah, 117),
where it is parallel with wine; and three times in the same temple, for wine (ibid.
II 76 ; III 16 c, and III 19 p). Loret has suggested that it is to be identified with
coriander (see Recueil de trav. 15, p. 105); but this identification seems uncertain.
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:06 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 449 ---
Case 47 TRANSLATION AND COMMENTARY 423
Diagnosis Following Third Examination
XVII10-11
Translation
Thou shouldst say concerning him : " One having a gaping wound in his shoulder,
it being inflamed, and he continues to have fever from it. An ailment with which I
will contend."
Commentary
Although this diagnosis follows the third examination it is not the third diagnosis,
for the second examination revealed normal progress toward recovery and was there-
fore followed by no diagnosis. The insertion of a diagnosis with a different verdict
after the third examination shows that we have disclosed by it an alternative second
stage of the case.
The terms have all been discussed above. It is important to note that nsr-y, " it
being inflamed," refers to the wound; while Smm-f, " he has fever," refers to the
patient. See the discussion in Case 41 (XIV 8-9). The doubtful verdict 2 has been
discussed in Case 4 (II 6). See also introduction (pp. 46 ff.).
Fourth Examination
XVII 12
Translation
If, then, thou findest that man continuing to have fever, while that wound is in-
flamed, (conclusion in following treatment).
Commentary
On the distinction between "fever" and "inflammation " see Case 41 (XIV 8-9).
No treatment follows the above diagnosis because the surgeon evidently desires first to
introduce one of the two alternative stages which he knows will follow the condition
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:06 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 450 ---
424
Case 47
THE SURGICAL TREATISE
revealed by the third examination. He therefore passes at once to the unfavorable
persistence of the inflammation and fever, for which the following treatment can do
nothing. Like English " as," which may mean either " while " or " because," yik here
has much of the force of " because." This is demonstrated by the parallel passage in
Case 28 (X 2), which in place of this yik clause has hr wbnw pf, " on account of (or,
because of) that wound."
Treatment Following Fourth Examination
XVII12-18
Translation
Thou shalt not bind it ; thou shalt moor (him) at his mooring stakes, until the
period of his injury passes by.
Commentary
On the meaning of the extraordinary injunction, " moor (him) at his mooring
stakes," see Case 8 (122-28) and ibid., Gloss D (II1-2). It is obvious that the surgeon
can do nothing but await the course of nature, meantime feeding the patient a normal
diet. Discussion of the concluding temporal clause and the unusual determinative
of yh, " injury," will be found on p. 185.
Fifth Examination
XVII 18-14
Translation
If, however, his fever abates and the inflammation in the mouth of his wound dis-
sipates entirely, (conclusion in following treatment).
Commentary
We have here disclosed a final favorable outcome, which, as after the second
examination, is followed by no diagnosis.
On 1^^^\ yH, " abates," more literally " is diverted " or " turned aside," see
commentary on Case 7 (IV 8).
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:06 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 451 ---
Case 47 TRANSLATION AND COMMENTARY 425
P^"^* Sty, " dissipates," means more literally "scatters," as for example in the
scattering of seed-grain.
<=>™ r t', " entirely," literally " to the ground," is discussed in Case 4, Gloss A
(119).
Treatment Following Fifth Examination
XVII14-15
Translation
Thou shouldst treat him afterward [with] grease, honey, (and) lint every day, until
he recovers.
Commentary
We find here the final favorable outcome possible after the disclosure of the un-
favorable conditions listed in the third examination. On the simple treatment with
grease, honey, and lint, see Case 1 (I 8).
CASE FORTY-EIGHT
XVII15-19
A SPRAIN IN A SPINAL VERTEBRA (INCOMPLETE)
This, the last case in our treatise, is the first of what was doubtless a series of dis-
cussions of injuries to the spine, beginning with the less serious, an arrangement which
we have found was likewise that of similar groups of cases, like the series of five cases
of injuries to the temple (Cases 18 to 22). The case is a simple one, unfortunately
incomplete, breaking off abruptly at the beginning of an interesting treatment by
manipulation. Inspection of the original or the facsimile of Plate XVII discloses the
fact that the scribe stopped in the middle of a line, in the middle of a sentence, in the
middle of a case. With his pen full of ink and with space on the papyrus sheet before
him for several columns more, he laid down his pen and never copied any more of the
remarkable surgical treatise we have been studying. See Introduction, Vol. II, p. xii.
Title
XVII15
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:06 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 452 ---
426
Case 48
THE SURGICAL TREATISE
Translation
Instructions concerning a sprain [in] a vertebra of his spinal column.
Commentary
The terms will be found discussed below. It is obvious that our scribe has omitted
the preposition " in ". See commentary below.
Examination
XVII15-18
16 tic
n :ek —_ □ d=* ^
Translation
If thou examinest [a man having] a sprain in a vertebra of his spinal column, thou
shouldst say to him : " Extend now thy two legs (and) contract them both (again)."
When he extends them both he contracts them both immediately because of the pain
he causes in the vertebra of his spinal column in which he suffers.
Commentary
The form of the examination is always : "If thou examinest a man having; "
hence it is clear that the scribe has omitted by error the words " a man having."
nrw't, " sprain," is discussed in Case 80, Gloss A (X 12). It is regularly
followed by the preposition m, "in," as here, and hence it is clear that this ^
has been omitted by scribal error in the title.
*y ts, " vertebra," has been discussed in Case 81, Gloss A (X 18).
° psd, originally pdd, has long been known to mean " back," but primarily
" spine " or " spinal column."
sS7^" m'c, "extend," is evidently an anatomical or physiological use of the
verb m'r, " send, dispatch, lead." A very apt illustration of its meaning in our
passage is found in the Great " Amduat" 10th Hour, where Horus says to
swimmers: ^—"i^^J^^JfJf" Stroke (or paddle) the Celestial Ocean with
your feet" (Leyden, Turin and Seti, II 19). This is exactly the motion which is
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:06 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 453 ---
Case 48
427
TRANSLATION AND COMMENTARY
required of our patient with the injured spine. Dr. Grapow calls my attention to
a similar use of the word in the Book of the Dead (ed. Budge, Chap. 11,8, cf. Pap.
of ooo^/^ not in Naville): ^^$~7*$^^1^>^ " I extended my arm as lord
of the wrrt-crown."
-o mr, " now," presumably the rather rare particle ; it is written with a ligature
which might possibly be read rd, the phonetic writing of " foot " before the
determinatives jfjf. Compare the similar writing of the ligature oin XIII 11.
<£>"^" krf, " contract " or " draw in," is a rare verb, and, with one exception,
unknown in the medical papyri. Its meaning however can be determined from two
passages in the Book of the Dead. We find the deceased saying: " Geb has
opened my two jaws, he opens my blind eyes, and ^^^Jfjfj^ !]1*—* he
stretches out my two contracted legs " (ed. Naville, 26, 7, Pb). Again the deceased
is addressed as follows :
" Geb opens for thee thy two blind eyes ; he stretches out thy two contracted legs "
(ed. Budge, 169, 2-8). In this example it is important to note that Geb's action
in the first line is one which reverses and overcomes blindness ; that is, the condition
indicated by the word after " eyes " is more or less the opposite of that resulting from
the god's action. In the second line therefore the word after legs must denote a condi-
tion rather the opposite of that produced by the god when he " stretches out " the
legs of the deceased. They are therefore in a condition of contraction or constriction.
These examples enable us also to understand a passage in an obscure case in the Berlin
Medical Papyrus (8088, verso I H):<£.*-0,-J1^T'L " Thou shalt con<-ract her arm."
An example in Mutter und Kind (8, 7) is not clear. On the other hand, in connection
with cases of stiffness and rheumatoid troubles, Papyrus Ebers contains the following
instructive example of the noun derived from our verb, in the title of a recipe for
^^^«W|^iPiiA^w<-0L^i " stretching out the contractions (krf-wt) and soften-
ing the stiffness" (Pap. Ebers 85, 5-6). Here again the noun krfwt, "contractions "
is opposed to the verb dwn, " stretch out," as is the verb krf, "contract" in the two
examples from the Book of the Dead. In our treatise the verb krf occurs only in the
above examination, where it twice appears opposed to the verb m'r, " extend."
The meaning " contract " or " constrict " would seem to be established.
yrr-f, " (which) he causes," literally " he makes," may also be rendered
" when he does (so)," as a parenthesis, before " in the vertebra."
^11^ mn"y-f, " m which he suffers," literally, " his made-to-suffer," seemingly
a passive participle ; for mn, " to suffer " is a transitive verb in Egyptian. See dis-
cussion in Case 8 (I 20).
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:06 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 454 ---
428 THE SURGICAL TREATISE Case 48
Diagnosis
XVII18
11:
Translation
Thou shouldst say concerning him : " One having a sprain in a vertebra of his
spinal column. An ailment which I will treat."
Commentary
The terms have all been discussed above. This diagnosis, as so commonly, consists
only of the title, followed by the verdict. On this verdict see Case 1 (I 2) and the
introduction (pp. 46 £f.).
Treatment
XVII 18-19
JS2>-
a The scribe wrote the preceding diagnosis in red ink. On resuming the black ink pen he filled
it very full and when he stopped as indicated above in the middle of l. 19, his pen was still flooded
with ink producing broad and intensely black lines. The interruption, whatever it may have been,
therefore appears to have been a sudden one, unexpected by the scribe. See Vol. I, p. xv;
Vol. II, p. xii.
Translation
Thou shouldst place him prostrate on his back ; thou shouldst make for him
Commentary
l<?g=d fasw, " prostrate on his back," is usually written dts(y), without the
^ appearing here. See discussion in Case 85 (XII 5).
The last sentence has been left incomplete by the scribe, and the discussion of the
case remained unfinished. See full discussion in the introduction to Volume II, p. xii.
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:06 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 455 ---
CONSECUTIVE TRANSLATION OF THE SURGICAL TREATISE
NOTES FOR THE GUIDANCE OF THE READER
The reader should note that the introduction to this treatise has been lost, and
hence the abruptness of the beginning. Furthermore, no modern reader will be able
to understand this ancient surgical treatise as presented in the following consecutive
translation unless he consults the introductory material at the beginning of this
volume. In order to gain a general knowledge of the background necessary to an
understanding of the document, pages 1 to 25 of the General Introduction should be
carefully read. Equally or even more indispensable is an acquaintance with pages
88 to 78 of the Special Introduction.
In the long section called Translation and Commentary, which begins on page 78,
and forms the bulk of the volume, the discussion of each separate case is introduced
by explanatory material. In attempting to read any particular case in the following
consecutive translation, therefore, the reader should turn back to the case in question
in the Translation and Commentary, which he will find it very easy to do because the
case numbers are inserted as running heads at the top of the page. He should then
read the introduction to each case before attempting to read the translation in the
following consecutive rendering. The introduction to Case 1 will be found on page 78 ;
the introduction to Case 2 will be found on page 118 ; Case 8 on page 125, etc.
Some few technical terms, names of medicaments, etc., of which we do not know
the meaning, have been carried over in the form of transliterations in italics, even in
this consecutive translation. They will be found explained in the Commentary.
It should be noted that the case numbers and the titles of the case subdivisions are
insertions of the modern editor.
CASE ONE
Bottom lines of lost column to I 12
A WOUND IN THE HEAD PENETRATING TO THE BONE
Title
[Instructions concerning a wound in his head, penetrating to the bone of his skull.]
Examination
[If thou examinest a man having a wound in his head, penetrating to the bone of
his skull, (but) not having a gash, thou shouldst palpate his wound (or, thou shouldst
lay thy hand upon it); shouldst thou find his skull uninjured, not having a perforation,
a split, or a smash in it,] (conclusion in diagnosis).
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:06 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 456 ---
430
Cases 1, 2
THE SURGICAL TREATISE
Diagnosis
[Thou shouldst say regarding him : " One having a woun]d in his head, while his
wound does [not] have two hps, - - -, nor a gash, although [it penetrates to the bone
of] his head. An ailment which I will treat."
Treatment
Thou shouldst bind it with [fresh] meat [the first day] (and) treat afterward with
grease, [honey] (and) lint every day until he recovers.
Gloss A
As for: " Thou examinest a man," [it means] counting any one - - [rhke cou]nting"
1
things with a bushel. (For) exaroining (A'-t, literally " measuring ") is [rlike"1] one's
[rcounting1] a certain quantity with a bushel, (or) counting something with the fingers,
in order to [know] - - -. It is measuring (h'-t) things with a bushel which - - - one in
whom an ailment is [cou]nted, like measuring (h'-t) the ailment of a man; [in order to
know the action] of the heart. There are canals (or vessels, mt) in it (the heart) to [every]
member. Now if the priests of Sekhmet or any physician put his hands (or) his
fingers [upon the head, upon the back of the] head, upon the two hands, upon the
pulse, upon the two feet, [he] measures (h'y) [to] the heart, because its vessels are in
the back of the head and in the pulse; and because its [pulsation is in] every vessel
of every member. He says " measure " (h,-t) regarding his [rwound"1] because of the
vessels (mt-w) to his head and to the back of his head and to his two feet - - - - his
heart in order to recognize the indications which have arisen therein; meaning
[rto meas]ure it"1 in order to know what is befalling therein.
Gloss B
As for: " While his [wou]nd does not have [two lips]," it means his wound is
narrow, [not wide] ; without gaping of one (lip) from the other.
Gloss C
As for : " Penetrating to [the bone of his skull, (but) not having a gash]," it
means that there is a gaping of the flesh, although r-" 1 - - - - r--1 over the bone of his
skull, without gaping [of one (hp) from the other], being narrow, not wide.
CASE TWO
112-18
A GAPING WOUND IN THE HEAD PENETRATING TO THE BONE
Title
Instructions concerning a [gaping] wound [in his head], penetrating to the bone.
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:06 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 457 ---
Cases 2,3 CONSECUTIVE TRANSLATION 431
Examination
If thou examinest a man having a [gaping] wound [in] his [head], penetrating to
the bone, thou shouldst lay thy hand upon it (and) [thou shouldst] pal[pate hi]s
[wound]. If thou findest his skull [uninjured, not hav]ing a perforation in it,
(conclusion in diagnosis).
Diagnosis
Thou shouldst say regarding [him] : " One hav[ing a gaping wou]nd in his head.
An ailment which I will treat."
Treatment
[Thou] shouldst bind [fresh meat upon it the first day ; thou shouldst apply for
him two strips of linen, and treat afterward with grease, honey, (and) lin]t every day
until he recovers.
Gloss A
As for: " A [gaping] wound [in his head penetrating to the bone," it means] his wound.
Gloss B
As for : " Two strips of linen," [it means] two bands [of linen which one applies
upon the two lips of the gaping wound in order to cause that one join] to the other.
Gloss C
As for: " Not having a split, a perforation, (or) [a smash in it," it means]
CASE THREE
118-11 2
A GAPING WOUND IN THE HEAD PENETRATING TO THE BONE AND PERFORATING
THE SKULL
Title
[Instructions concerning] a gaping [wo]und in his head, penetrating to the bone
(and) perforating his [skull].
Examination
[If thou examinest a man having a gaping wound in] his [head], penetrating to the
bone, (and) perforating his skull; thou shouldst palpate his wound; [shouldst thou
find him unable to look at his two shoulders] and his [br]east, (and) suffering with
stiffness in his neck, (conclusion in diagnosis).
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:06 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 458 ---
432
Cases 3, 4
THE SURGICAL TREATISE
Diagnosis
Thou shouldst say [regarding] him : " One having [a gaping wound in his head,
penetrating to the bone, (and) perforating his skull, while he suffers with stiffness
in his neck. An ailment which I will treat."
Treatment
Now [after thou has stitched it, thou shouldst lay] fresh [meat] upon his wound
the first day. Thou shouldst not bind it. Moor (him) [at his mooring stakes until the
period of his injury passes by]. Thou shouldst [tre]at it afterward with grease, honey,
and lint every day, until he recovers.
Gloss A
[As for: "Perforating his skull," it means] - - - - his skull, a contracted smash,
through his incurring a break like a puncture of a (pottery) jar, which
he incurred.
Gloss B
As for : " Unable to look at his two shoulders and [his] bre[ast," it means it is
not easy for him to look at] his two shoulders (and) it is not easy for him to look at
his breast.
Gloss C
As for: " Suffering with stiffness in his neck," it means a lifting up (resulting)
from his having incurred this injury, which has shifted into his neck, so that his
neck (also) suffers with it.
Gloss D
As for : " Moor (him) at his mooring stakes," it means putting him on his
customary diet, without administering to him a prescription.
CASE FOUR
112-11
A GAPING WOUND IN THE HEAD PENETRATING TO THE BONE AND
SPLITTING THE SKULL
Title
Instructions concerning a gaping wound in his head, penetrating to the bone,
(and) splitting his skull.
Examination
If thou examinest a man having a gaping wound in his head, penetrating to the
bone, (and) splitting his skull, thou shouldst palpate his wound. Shouldst thou find
something disturbing therein under thy fingers, (and) he shudders exceedingly, while
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:06 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 459 ---
Cases 4, 5
433
CONSECUTIVE TRANSLATION
the swelling which is over it protrudes, he discharges blood from both his nostrils (and)
from both his ears, he suffers with stiffness in his neck, so that he is unable to look at
his two shoulders and his breast, (conclusion in diagnosis).
Diagnosis
Thou shouldst say regarding him : " One having a gaping wound in his head,
penetrating to the bone, (and) splitting his skull; while he discharges blood from
both his nostrils (and) from both his ears, (and) he suffers with stiffness in his neck.
An ailment with which I will contend."
Treatment
Now when thou findest that the skull of that man is split, thou shouldst not bind
him, (but) moor (him) at his mooring stakes until the period of his injury passes by.
His treatment is sitting. Make for him two supports of brick, until thou knowest he
has reached a decisive point. Thou shouldst apply grease to his head, (and) soften
his neck therewith and both his shoulders. Thou shouldst do likewise for every man
whom thou findest having a split skull.
Gloss A
As for : " Splitting his skull," it means separating shell from shell of his skull,
while fragments remain sticking in the flesh of his head, and do not come away.
Gloss B
As for : " The swelling (thb) which is over it protrudes," it means that the
swelling (Sfwt) which is over this split is large, rising upward.
Gloss C
As for : " (Until) thou knowest he has reached a decisive point," it means (until)
thou knowest whether he will die or he will live ; for he is (a case of) " an ailment with
which I will contend."
CASE FIVE
II 11-17
A GAPING WOUND IN THE HEAD WITH COMPOUND COMMINUTED FRACTURE
OF THE SKULL
Title
Instructions concerning a gaping wound in his head, smashing his skull.
Examination
If thou examinest a man having a gaping wound in his head, penetrating to the
bone, (and) smashing his skull; thou shouldst palpate his wound. Shouldst thou find
f f
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:06 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 460 ---
434
Cases 5, 6
THE SURGICAL TREATISE
that smash which is in his skull deep (and) sunken under thy fingers, while the
swelling which is over it protrudes, he discharges blood from both his nostrils (and)
both his ears, (and) he suffers with stiffness in his neck, so that he is unable to look at
his two shoulders and his breast, (conclusion in diagnosis).
Diagnosis
Thou shouldst say regarding him: " One having a gaping wound in his head,
penetrating to the bone, (and) smashing his skull, while he suffers with stiffness in
his neck. An ailment not to be treated."
Treatment
Thou shalt not bind him, (but) moor (him) at his mooring stakes, until the period
of his injury passes by.
Gloss A
As for : " Smashing his skull," it means a smash of his skull (such that) bones,
getting into that smash, sink into the interior of his skull. The " Treatise on What
Pertains to His Wounds " states : " It means a smash of his skull into numerous
fragments, which sink into the interior of his skull."
CASE SIX
II17-1111
A GAPING WOUND IN THE HEAD WITH COMPOUND COMMINUTED FRACTURE
OF THE SKULL AND RUPTURE OF THE MENINGEAL MEMBRANES
Title
Instructions concerning a gaping wound in his head, penetrating to the bone,
smashing his skull, (and) rending open the brain of his skull.
Examination
If thou examinest a man having a gaping wound in his head, penetrating to the
bone, smashing his skull, (and) rending open the brain of his skull, thou shouldst
palpate his wound. Shouldst thou find that smash which is in his skull [like] those
corrugations which form in molten copper, (and) something therein throbbing (and)
fluttering under thy fingers, like the weak place of an infant's crown before it becomes
whole—when it has happened there is no throbbing (and) fluttering under thy fingers
until the brain of his (the patient's) skull is rent open—(and) he discharges blood
from both his nostrils, (and) he suffers with stiffness in his neck, (conclusion in
diagnosis).
Diagnosis
[Thou shouldst say concerning him] : " An ailment not to be treated."
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:06 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 461 ---
Cases 6, 7
435
CONSECUTIVE TRANSLATION
Treatment
Thou shouldst anoint that wound with grease. Thou shalt not bind it; thou shalt
not apply two strips upon it: until thou knowest that he has reached a decisive
point.
Gloss A
As for : " Smashing his skull, (and) rending open the brain of his skull," (it
means) the smash is large, opening to the interior of his skull, (to) the membrane
enveloping his brain, so that it breaks open his fluid in the interior of his head.
Gloss B
As for : " Those corrugations which form on molten copper," it means copper
which the coppersmith pours off (rejects) before it is forced"1 into the fmould1, because
of something foreign upon it like '"wrinkles"1. It is said : " It is like ripples of pus."
CASE SEVEN
III 2-IV 4
A GAPING WOUND IN THE HEAD PENETRATING TO THE BONE AND
PERFORATING THE SUTURES
Title
Instructions concerning a gaping wound in his head, penetrating to the bone,
(and) perforating the sutures of his skull.
Examination
[If thou examinest a man having a gaping wound in his head, penetrating to the
bone, (and) perforating the sutures of his skull], thou shouldst palpate his wound,
(although) he shudders exceedingly. Thou shouldst cause him to lift his face ; if it
is painful for him to open his mouth, (and) his heart beats feebly; if thou observe
his spittle hanging at his two lips and not falling off, while he discharges blood from
both his nostrils (and) from both his ears ; he suffers with stiffness in his neck, (and)
is unable to look at his two shoulders and his breast, (conclusion in diagnosis).
First Diagnosis
Thou shouldst say regarding him: " One having a gaping wound in his head,
penetrating to the bone, (and) perforating the sutures of his skull; the cord of his
mandible is contracted ; he discharges blood from both his nostrils (and) from both his
ears, while he suffers with stiffness in his neck. An ailment with which I will contend."
First Treatment
Now as soon as thou findest that the cord of that man's mandible, his jaw, is con-
tracted, thou shouldst have made for him something hot, until he is comfortable, so
F f 2
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:06 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 462 ---
436
Case 7
THE SURGICAL TREATISE
that his mouth opens. Thou shouldst bind it with grease, honey, (and) lint, until
thou knowest that he has reached a decisive point.
Second Examination
If, then, thou findest that the flesh of that man has developed fever from that
wound which is in the sutures of his skull, while that man has developed ty, from
that wound, thou shouldst lay thy hand upon him. Shouldst thou find his counten-
ance is clammy with sweat, the ligaments of his neck are tense, his face is ruddy, his
teeth and his back [-], the odor of the chest of his head is like the Men (urine) of sheep,
his mouth is bound, (and) both his eyebrows are drawn, while his face is as if he wept,
(conclusion in diagnosis).
Second Diagnosis
Thou shouldst say regarding him: " One having a gaping wound in his head,
penetrating to the bone, perforating the sutures of his skull; he has developed tyy,
his mouth is bound, (and) he suffers with stiffness in his neck. An ailment not to be
treated."
Third Examination
If, however, thou findest that that man has become pale and has already rshown
exhaustion"1.
Third Treatment
Thou shouldst have made for him a wooden brace padded with linen and put into
his mouth. Thou shouldst have made for him a draught of wA-fruit. His treatment
is sitting, placed between two supports of brick, until thou knowest he has reached
a decisive point.
Gloss A
As for : " Perforating the sutures of [his skull]," it means what is between shell
and shell of his skull; and that the sutures are (composed) of hide.
Gloss B
As for : " The cord of his mandible is contracted," it means a stiffening on the
part of the ligaments at the end of his ramus, which are fastened to his temporal bone,
that is at the end of his jaw, without moving to and fro, so that it is not easy for him
to open his mouth because of his pain.
Gloss C
As for : " The cord of his mandible," it means the ligaments which bind the end
of his jaw, as one says, " the cord " of a thing in (or as) a splint.
Gloss D
As for : " His countenance clammy with sweat," it means that his head is
a little sweaty, as (we say), " A thing is clammy."
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:06 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 463 ---
Cases 7, 8
437
CONSECUTIVE TRANSLATION
Gloss E
As for : " The ligaments of his neck are tense," it means that the ligaments of
his neck are stretched stiff by reason of his injury.
Gloss F
As for : " His face is ruddy " (tmi), it means that the color of his face is red,
like the color of tm^-t-pigment.
Gloss G
As for : " The odor of the chest of his head is like the bkn of sheep," it means
that the odor of his crown is like the urine of sheep.
Gloss H
As for : " The chest of his head," it means the middle of his crown next to his
brain. The likening of it is to a chest.
Gloss I
As for : " His mouth is bound, (and) both his eyebrows are drawn, while his
face is as if he wept," it means that he does not open his mouth that he may speak,
both his eyebrows are distorted, one drawing upward, the other drooping downward,
like one who winks while his face weeps.
Gloss J
As for : " He has become pale and has already rshown exhaustion1," it means
becoming pale, because he is (a case of) " Undertake [fhim"1], do not desert [rhim1],"
in view of the exhaustion.
CASE EIGHT
IV 5-18
COMPOUND COMMINUTED FRACTURE OP THE SKULL DISPLAYING NO
VISIBLE EXTERNAL INJURY
Title
Instructions concerning a smash in his skull under the skin of his head.
Examination
If thou examinest a man having a smash of his skull, under the skin of his head,
while there is nothing at all upon it, thou shouldst palpate his wound. Shouldst thou
find that there is a swelling protruding on the outside of that smash which is in his
skull, while his eye is askew because of it, on the side of him having that injury which
is in his skull; (and) he walks shuffling with his sole, on the side of him having that
injury which is in his skull, (conclusion in diagnosis).
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:06 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 464 ---
438
Case 8
THE SURGICAL TREATISE
Diagnosis
Thou shouldst account him one whom something entering from outside has smitten,
as one who does not release the head of his shoulder-fork, and one who does not fall
with his nails in the middle of his palm; while he discharges blood from both his
nostrils (and) from both his ears, (and) he suffers with stiffness in his neck. An
ailment not to be treated.
Treatment
His treatment is sitting, until he rgains color"1, (and) until thou knowest he has
reached the decisive point.
Second Examination
Now as soon as thou findest that smash which is in his skull like those corruga-
tions which form on molten copper, (and) something therein throbbing and fluttering
under thy fingers like the weak place of an infant's crown before it knits together—
when it has happened there is no throbbing and fluttering under thy fingers, until
the brain of his (the patient's) skull is rent open—(and) he discharges blood from
both his nostrils and both his ears, (and) he suffers with stiffness in his neck, (conclu-
sion in second diagnosis).
Second Diagnosis
[Thou shouldst say concerning him]: " An ailment not to be treated."
Gloss A
As for : " A smash in his skull under the skin of his head, there being no wound
at all upon it," it means a smash of the shell of his skull, the flesh of his head being
uninjured.
Gloss B
As for : " He walks shuffling with his sole," he (the surgeon) is speaking about
his walking with his sole dragging, so that it is not easy for him to walk, when it
(the sole) is feeble and turned over, while the tips of his toes are contracted to the ball
of his sole, and they (the toes) walk fumbling the ground. He (the surgeon) says :
" He shuffles," concerning it.
Gloss C
As for : " One whom something entering from outside has smitten " on the side
of him having this injury, it means one whom something entering from outside presses,
on the side of him having this injury.
Gloss D
As for : " Something entering from outside," it means the breath of an outside
god or death ; not the intrusion of something which his flesh engenders.
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:06 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 465 ---
Cases 8,9
439
CONSECUTIVE TRANSLATION
Gloss E
As for : " One who does not release the head of his shoulder-fork, and who does
not fall with his nails in the middle of his palm," it means that he says : " One to
whom the head of his shoulder-fork is not given, and one who does not fall with his
nails in the middle of his palm."
CASE NINE
IV19-V5
WOUND IN THE FOREHEAD PRODUCING A COMPOUND COMMINUTED FRACTURE
OF THE SKULL
Title
Instructions concerning a wound in his forehead, smashing the shell of his skull.
Examination
If thou examinest a man having a wound in his forehead, smashing the shell of
his head, (conclusion in treatment).
Treatment
Thou shouldst prepare for him the egg of an ostrich, triturated with grease (and)
placed in the mouth of his wound. Now afterward thou shouldst prepare for him the
egg of an ostrich, triturated and made into poultices for drying up that wound. Thou
shouldst apply to it for him a covering for physician's use ; thou shouldst uncover
it the third day, (and) find it knitting together the shell, the color being like the egg
of an ostrich.
That which is to be said as a charm over this recipe :
Repelled is the enemy that is in the wound !
Cast out is the revil1 that is in the blood,
The adversary of Horus, ron every1 side of the mouth of Isis.
This temple does not fall down ;
There is no enemy of the vessel therein.
I am under the protection of Isis ;
My rescue is the son of Osiris.
Now afterward thou shouldst cool [it] for him [with] a compress of figs, grease,
and honey, cooked, cooled, and applied to it.
Gloss A
As for : " A covering for physician's use," it is a bandage which is in the hand of
the embalmer, and which he (the physician) applies to this remedy which is on this
wound which is in his forehead.
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:06 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 466 ---
440
Cases 10,11
THE SURGICAL TREATISE
CASE TEN
V5-9
A GAPING WOUND AT THE TOP OF THE EYEBROW, PENETRATING TO THE BONE
Title
Instructions concerning a wound in the top of his eyebrow.
Examination
If thou examinest a man having a wound in the top of his eyebrow, penetrating
to the bone, thou shouldst palpate his wound, (and) draw together for him his gash
with stitching.
Diagnosis
Thou shouldst say concerning him: " [One having] a wound in his eyebrow.
An ailment which I will treat."
Treatment
Now after thou hast stitched it, [thou shouldst bind] fresh meat upon [it] the first
day. If thou findest that the stitching of this wound is loose, thou shouldst draw (it)
together for him with two strips (of plaster), and thou shouldst treat it with grease and
honey every day until he recovers.
Gloss A
As for : " Two strips of linen," it means two bands of linen, which one applies
upon the two lips of the gaping wound, in order to cause that one (lip) join to the other.
CASE ELEVEN
V 10-15
A BROKEN NOSE
Title
Instructions concerning a break in the column of his nose.
Examination
If thou examinest a man having a break in the column of his nose, his nose being
disfigured, and a 1"depression"1 being in it, while the swelling that is on it protrudes,
(and) he has discharged blood from both his nostrils, (conclusion in diagnosis).
Diagnosis
Thou shouldst say concerning him: " One having a break in the column of his
nose. An ailment which I will treat."
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:06 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 467 ---
Cases 11,12
441
CONSECUTIVE TRANSLATION
Treatment
Thou shouldst cleanse (it) for him [with] two plugs of linen. Thou shouldst place
two (other) plugs of linen saturated with grease in the inside of his two nostrils. Thou
shouldst put [him] at his mooring stakes until the swelling is reduced (lit. drawn out).
Thou shouldst apply for him stiff rolls of linen by which his nose is held fast. Thou
shouldst treat him afterward [with] grease, honey, (and) lint, every day until he
recovers.
Gloss A
As for : " The column of his nose," it means the outer edge of his nose as far as
its side(s) on the top of his nose, being the inside of his nose in the middle of his two
nostrils.
Gloss B
As for : " His two nostrils," [it means] the two sides of his nose extending to
his [two] cheek[s], as far as the back of his nose ; the top of bis nose is loosened.
CASE TWELVE
V 16-VI 8
A BREAK IN THE NASAL BONE
Title
Instructions concerning a break in the chamber of his nose.
Examination
If thou examinest a man having a break in the chamber of his nose, (and) thou
findest his nose bent, while his face is disfigured, (and) the swelling which is over it is
protruding, (conclusion in diagnosis).
Diagnosis
Thou shouldst say concerning him : " One having a break in the chamber of his
nose. An ailment which I will treat."
Treatment
Thou shouldst force it to fall in, so that it is lying in its place, (and) clean out for
him the interior of both his nostrils with two swabs of linen until every worm of blood
which coagulates in the inside of his two nostrils comes forth. Now afterward thou
shouldst place two plugs of linen saturated with grease and put into his two nostrils.
Thou shouldst place for him two stiff rolls of linen, bound on. Thou shouldst treat
him afterward with grease, honey, (and) lint every day until he recovers.
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:06 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 468 ---
442
Cases 12-14
THE SURGICAL TREATISE
Gloss A
As for : " A break in the chamber of his nose," it means the middle of his nose
as far as the back, extending to the region between his two eyebrows.
Gloss B
As for : " His nose bent, while his face is disfigured," it means his nose is
crooked and greatly swollen throughout; his two cheeks likewise, so that his face
is disfigured by it, not being in its customary form, because all the depressions are
clothed with swellings, so that his face looks disfigured by it.
Gloss C
As for : " Every worm of blood which coagulates in the inside of his two nostrils,"
it means the clotting of blood in the inside of his two nostrils, likened to the cncr-t-
worm, which subsists in the water.
CASE THIRTEEN
VI 8-7
COMPOUND COMMINUTED FRACTURE IN THE SIDE OF THE NOSE
Title
Instructions concerning a smash in his nostril.
Examination
If thou examinest a man having a smash in his nostril, thou shouldst place thy
hand upon his nose at the point of this smash. Should it crepitate under thy
fingers, while at the game time he discharges blood from his nostril (and) from his ear,
on the side of him having that smash ; it is painful when he opens his mouth because
of it ; (and) he is speechless, (conclusion in diagnosis).
Diagnosis
Thou shouldst say concerning him : " One having a smash in his nostril. An
ailment not to be treated."
CASE FOURTEEN
VI 7-14
FLESH WOUND IN ONE SIDE OF THE NOSE PENETRATING TO THE NOSTRIL
Title
Instructions concerning a wound in his nostril.
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:06 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 469 ---
Cases 14,15
443
CONSECUTIVE TRANSLATION
Examination
If thou examinest a man having a wound in his nostril, piercing through, shouldst
thou find the two lips of that wound separated from each other, thou shouldst draw
together for him that wound with stitching.
Diagnosis
Thou shouldst say concerning him : " One having a wound in his nostril, piercing
through. An ailment which I will treat."
Treatment
Thou shouldst make for him two swabs of linen, (and) thou shouldst clean out every
worm of blood which has coagulated in the inside of his nostril. Thou shouldst bind
(it) with fresh meat the first day. When its stitching loosens, thou shouldst take off
for him the fresh meat, (and) thou shouldst bind it with grease, honey (and) lint every
day until he recovers.
Gloss A
As for : " A wound in his nostril, piercing through," it means that the two lips
of his wound are soft, opening to the inside of his nose, as one says : " Pierced
through " concerning soft things.
CASE FIFTEEN
VI 14-17
PERFORATION OF THE BONE IN THE REGION OF THE MAXILLA AND THE ZYGOMA
Title
Instructions concerning a perforation in his cheek.
Examination
If thou examinest a man having a perforation in his cheek, shouldst thou find there
is a swelling, protruding and black, (and) diseased tissue upon his cheek, (conclusion
in diagnosis).
Diagnosis
Thou shouldst say concerning him : " One having a perforation in his cheek. An
ailment which I will treat."
Treatment
Thou shouldst bind it with ymrw and treat it afterward [with] grease (and) honey
every day until he recovers.
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:06 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 470 ---
444
Case 16, 17
THE SURGICAL TREATISE
CASE SIXTEEN
VI17-21
SPLIT OF THE BONE IN THE REGION OP THE MAXILLA AND THE ZYGOMA
Title
Instructions concerning a split in his cheek.
Examination
If thou examinest a man having a split in his cheek, shouldst thou find that there
is a swelling, protruding and red, on the outside of that split, (conclusion in diagnosis).
Diagnosis
Thou shouldst say concerning him : " One having a split in his cheek. An ail-
ment which [I] will treat."
Treatment
Thou shouldst bind it with fresh meat the first day. His treatment is sitting until
its swelling is reduced (lit. drawn out). Thou shalt treat it afterward [with] grease,
honey, (and) lint every day until he recovers.
CASE SEVENTEEN
VII1-7
COMPOUND COMMINUTED FRACTURE OF THE BONE IN THE REGION OF THE
MAXILLA AND THE ZYGOMA
Title
Instructions concerning a smash in his cheek.
Examination
If thou examinest a man having a smash in his cheek, thou shouldst place thy
hand on his cheek at the point of that smash. Should it crepitate under thy fingers,
while he discharges blood from his nostril, (and) from his ear on the side of him having
that injury ; (and) at the same time he discharges blood from his mouth, while it is
painful when he opens his mouth because of it, (conclusion in diagnosis).
Diagnosis
Thou shouldst say concerning him : " One having a smash in his cheek, while he
discharges blood from his nostril, from his ear, (and) from his mouth, (and) he is
speechless. An ailment not to be treated."
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:06 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 471 ---
Cases 17-19
445
CONSECUTIVE TRANSLATION
Treatment
Thou shouldst bind with fresh meat the first day. His belief1 is sitting until its
swelling is reduced (lit. drawn out). Thou shalt treat it afterward [with] grease, honey,
(and) lint every day until he recovers.
CASE EIGHTEEN
VII 7-14
A WOUND IN THE SOFT TISSUE OF THE TEMPLE, THE BONE BEING UNINJURED
Title
Instructions concerning a wound in his temple.
Examination
If thou examinest a man having a wound in his temple, it not having a gash,
while that wound penetrates to the bone, thou shouldst palpate his wound. Shouldst
thou find his temporal bone uninjured, there being no split, (or) perforation, (or)
smash in it, (conclusion in diagnosis).
Diagnosis
Thou shouldst say concerning him : " One having a wound in his temple. An
ailment which I will treat."
Treatment
Thou shouldst bind it with fresh meat the first day, (and) thou shouldst treat
afterward [with] grease, (and) honey every day until he recovers.
Gloss A
As for : " A wound, not having a gash, while it penetrates to the bone," it means
that the wound is contracted, reaching as far as the bone, (though) there is no gash
in it. He speaks of (its) narrowness, his wound not having two lips.
Gloss B
As for: " His gm' (temple)," it means the region thereof between the corner
of his eye and the rorifice1 of his ear, at the end of his mandible.
CASE NINETEEN
VII14-22
A PERFORATION IN THE TEMPLE
Title
Instructions concerning a perforation in his temple.
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:06 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 472 ---
446
Cases 19, 20
THE SURGICAL TREATISE
Examination
If thou examinest a man having a perforation (thm) [in] his temple, a wound being
upon it, thou shouldst inspect his wound, saying to him : " Look at thy two shoulders."
Should his doing so be painful (even though) his neck turns around (only) a little for
him, while his eye on the side of him having that injury is blood-shot, (conclusion
follows in diagnosis).
Diagnosis
Thou shouldst say concerning him : " One having a perforation in his temple r-1,
while he suffers with stiffness in his neck. An ailment which I will treat."
Treatment
Thou shouldst put him at his mooring stakes until the period of his injury passes
by, (and) thou shouldst treat with grease, honey, (and) lint every day until he recovers.
Gloss A
As for : " His two eyes are blood-shot," it means that the color of his two eyes
is red like the color of ^-flowers. The " Treatise on What Pertains to the Embalmer "
says concerning it: " His two eyes are red Twith1 disease like an eye at the end of
its weakness."
CASE TWENTY
VII 22-VIH 5
A WOUND IN THE TEMPLE PERFORATING THE BONE
Title
Instructions concerning a wound in his temple, penetrating to the bone, (and)
perforating his temporal bone.
Examination
If thou examinest a man having a wound in his temple, penetrating to the bone,
(and) perforating his temporal bone, while his two eyes are blood-shot, he discharges
blood from both his nostrils, and a little drops ; if thou puttest thy fingers on the
mouth of that wound (and) he shudder exceedingly; if thou ask of him concerning
his malady and he speak not to thee; while copious tears fall from both his eyes,so that
he thrusts his hand often to his face that he may wipe both his eyes with the back of his
hand as a child does, and knows not that he does so, (conclusion follows in diagnosis).
Diagnosis
Thou shouldst say concerning him : " One having a wound in his temple, penetrat-
ing to the bone, (and) perforating his temporal bone ; while he discharges blood from
both his nostrils, he suffers with stiffness in his neck, (and) he is speechless. An ailment
not to be treated."
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:06 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 473 ---
Cases 20-22
447
CONSECUTIVE TRANSLATION
Treatment
Now when thou findest that man speechless, his 1"relief1 shall be sitting ; soften
his head with grease, (and) pour rmilk1 into both his ears.
CASE TWENTY-ONE
VIII 6-9
A SPLIT IN THE TEMPORAL BONE
Title
Instructions concerning a split in his temple.
Examination
If thou examinest a man having a split in his temple, shouldst thou find a
swelling protruding on the outside of that split, while he discharges blood from his
nostril and from his one ear having that split, (and) it is painful when he hears speech,
because of it, (conclusion follows in diagnosis).
Diagnosis
Thou shouldst say concerning him : " One having a split in his temple, while he
discharges blood from his nostril and his ear having that injury. An ailment with
which I will contend."
Treatment
Thou shouldst put him at his mooring stakes, until thou knowest he has reached
a decisive point.
CASE TWENTY-TWO
VIII 9-17
COMPOUND COMMINUTED FRACTURE OF THE TEMPORAL BONE
Title
Instructions concerning a smash in his temple.
Examination
If thou examinest a man having a smash in his temple, thou shouldst place thy
thumb upon his chin (and) thy finger upon the end of his ramus, so that the blood will
flow from his two nostrils (and) from the interior of his ear having that smash. Cleanse
(it) for him with a swab of linen until thou seest its fragments (of bone) in the interior
of his ear. If thou callest to him (and) he is speechless (and) cannot speak, (con-
clusion follows in diagnosis).
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:06 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 474 ---
448
Cases 22, 23
THE SURGICAL TREATISE
Diagnosis
Thou shouldst say concerning him : " One having a smash in his temple; he
discharges blood from his two nostrils and from his ear; he is speechless ; (and) he
suffers with stiffness in his neck. An ailment not to be treated."
Gloss A
As for : " The end of his ramus," it means the end of his mandible. The ramus
('mM), the end of it is in his temple just as the claw of an 'amre-bird (W) grasps an
object.
Gloss B
As for: " Thou seest its fragments (wS-t) in the interior of his ear," it means
that some of the fragments (voS-t) of the bone come away to adhere to the swab which
was introduced to cleanse the interior of his ear.
Gloss C
As for : " He is speechless," it means that he is silent in sadness, without speak-
ing, like one suffering with 1"feebleness1 (dgy) because of something that has entered
from outside.
CASE TWENTY-THREE
VHI18-22
A SLIT IN THE OUTER EAR
Title
Instructions concerning a wound in his ear.
Examination
If thou examinest a man having a wound in his ear, cutting through its flesh,
the injury being in the lower part of his ear, (and) confined to the flesh, thou shouldst
draw (it) together for him with stitching behind the hollow of his ear.
Diagnosis
Thou shouldst say concerning him: " One having a wound in his ear, cutting
through its flesh. An ailment which I will treat."
Treatment
If thou findest the stitching of that wound loose (and) sticking in the two lips of
his wound, thou shouldst make for him stiff rolls of linen (and) pad the back of his
ear therewith. Thou shouldst treat it afterward [with] grease, honey, (and) lint every
day until he recovers.
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:06 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 475 ---
Cases 24-26
449
CONSECUTIVE TRANSLATION
CASE TWENTY-FOUR
VIII 22-IX 2
A FRACTURE OF THE MANDIBLE
Title
Instructions concerning a fracture in his mandible.
Examination
If thou examinest a man having a fracture in his mandible, thou shouldst place
thy hand upon it. Shouldst thou find that fracture crepitating under thy fingers,
(conclusion follows in diagnosis).
Diagnosis
Thou shouldst say concerning him : " One having a fracture in his mandible, over
which a wound has been inflicted, r- - - -1 (and) he has fever from it. An ailment not
to be treated."
CASE TWENTY-FIVE
IX2-6
A DISLOCATION OF THE MANDIBLE
Title
Instructions concerning a dislocation in his mandible.
Examination
If thou examinest a man having a dislocation in his mandible, shouldst thou find
his mouth open (and) his mouth cannot close for him, thou shouldst put thy thumb(s)
upon the ends of the two rami of the mandible in the inside of his mouth, (and) thy
two claws (meaning two groups of fingers) under his chin, (and) thou shouldst cause
them to fall back so that they rest in their places.
Diagnosis
Thou shouldst say concerning him: "One having a dislocation in his mandible.
An ailment which I will treat."
Treatment
Thou shouldst bind it with ymrw, (and) honey every day until he recovers.
CASE TWENTY-SIX
1X6-18
A WOUND IN THE UPPER LIP
Title
Instructions concerning a wound in his lip.
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:06 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 476 ---
450
Cases 26, 27
THE SURGICAL TREATISE
Examination
If thou examinest a man having a wound in his hp, piercing through to the inside
of his mouth, thou shouldst examine his wound as far as the column of his nose. Thou
shouldst draw together that wound [with] stitching.
Diagnosis
Thou shouldst say concerning him : " One having a wound in his hp, piercing
through to the inside of his mouth. An ailment which I will treat."
Treatment
Now after thou hast stitched it thou shouldst bind it with fresh meat the first day.
Thou shouldst treat it afterward [with] grease (and) honey every day until he recovers.
Gloss A
As for: " A wound in his hp, piercing through to the inside of his mouth," it
means that the two lips of his wound are soft, opening to the inside of his mouth. One
says : " Pierced through " (yidb) concerning soft things.
CASE TWENTY-SEVEN
IX 18-18
A GAPING WOUND IN THE CHIN
Title
Instructions concerning a gaping wound in his chin.
Examination
If thou examinest a man having a gaping wound in his chin, penetrating to the
bone, thou shouldst palpate his wound. If thou shouldst find his bone uninjured,
not having a split, (or) a perforation in it, (conclusion follows in diagnosis).
Diagnosis
Thou shouldst say concerning him: " One having a gaping wound in his chin,
penetrating to the bone. An ailment which I will treat."
Treatment
Thou shouldst apply for him two strips on that gash. Thou shouldst bind it
with fresh meat the first day, (and) thou shouldst treat it afterward [with] grease,
honey (and) lint every day until he recovers.
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:06 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 477 ---
Cases 28, 29
451
CONSECUTIVE TRANSLATION
CASE TWENTY-EIGHT
IX 18-X 8
A GAPING WOUND IN THE THROAT PENETRATING TO THE GULLET
Title
Instructions concerning a wound in his throat.
Examination
If thou examinest a man having a gaping wound in his throat, piercing through
to his gullet; if he drinks water he rchokes1 (and) it comes out of the mouth of his
wound; it is greatly inflamed, so that he develops fever from it; thou shouldst
draw together that wound with stitching.
Diagnosis
Thou shouldst say concerning him : " One having a wound in his throat, piercing
through to his gullet. An ailment with which I will contend."
First Treatment
Thou shouldst bind it with fresh meat the first day. Thou shouldst treat it
afterward [with] grease, honey, (and) lint every day, until he recovers.
Second Examination
If, however, thou findest him continuing to have fever from that wound, (con-
clusion in following second treatment).
Second Treatment
Thou shouldst apply for him dry lint in the mouth of his wound, (and) moor
(him) at his mooring stakes until he recovers.
CASE TWENTY-NINE
X 8-8
A GAPING WOUND IN A CERVICAL VERTEBRA
Title
Instructions concerning a gaping wound in a vertebra of his neck.
Examination
If thou examinest a man having a gaping wound in a vertebra of his neck, penetrat-
ing to the bone, (and) perforating a vertebra of his neck; if thou examinest that wound,
(and) he shudders exceedingly, (and) he is unable to look at his two shoulders and his
breast, (conclusion follows in diagnosis).
Gg2
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:06 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 478 ---
452
Cases 29-31
THE SURGICAL TREATISE
Diagnosis
Thou shouldst say concerning him : " [One having] a wound in his neck, penetrat-
ing to the bone, perforating a vertebra of his neck, (and) he suffers with stiffness in his
neck. An ailment with which I will contend."
Treatment
Thou shouldst bind it with fresh meat the first day. Now afterward moor (him) at
his mooring stakes until the period of his injury passes by.
CASE THIRTY
X 8-12
SPRAIN IN A CERVICAL VERTEBRA
Title
Instructions concerning a sprain in a vertebra of his neck.
Examination
If thou examinest a man having a sprain in a vertebra of his neck, thou shouldst say
to him : " Look at thy two shoulders and thy breast." When he does so, the seeing
possible to him is painful.
Diagnosis
Thou shouldst say concerning him: " One having a sprain in a vertebra of his
neck. An ailment which I will treat."
Treatment
Thou shouldst bind it with fresh meat the first day. Now afterward thou shouldst
treat [with] ymrw (and) honey every day until he recovers.
Gloss A
As for: " A sprain," he is speaking of a rending of two members, (although) it
(=each) is (still) in its place.
CASE THIRTY-ONE
X 12-22
DISLOCATION OF A CERVICAL VERTEBRA
Title
Instructions concerning a dislocation in a vertebra of [his] neck.
Examination
If thou examinest a man having a dislocation in a vertebra of his neck, shouldst
thou find him unconscious of his two arms (and) his two legs on account of it, while his
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:06 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 479 ---
Oases 31, 32
453
CONSECUTIVE TRANSLATION
phallus is erected on account of it, (and) urine drops from his member without his know-
ing it; his flesh has received wind ; his two eyes are blood-shot; it is a dislocation
of a vertebra of his neck extending to his backbone which causes him to be unconscious
of his two arms (and) his two legs. If, however, the middle vertebra of his neck is
dislocated, it is an emissio seminis which befalls his phallus.
Diagnosis
Thou shouldst say concerning him : " One having a dislocation in a vertebra of his
neck, while he is unconscious of his two legs and his two arms, and his urine dribbles.
An ailment not to be treated."
Gloss A
As for: " A dislocation (wnh) in a vertebra of his neck," he is speaking of a separa-
tion of one vertebra of his neck from another, the flesh which is over it being uninjured ;
as one says, " It is wnh," concerning things which had been joined together, when one
has been severed from another.
Gloss B
As for : " It is an emissio seminis which befalls his phallus," (it means) that his
phallus is erected (and) has a discharge from the end of his phallus. It is said : " It
remains stationary " (mn s'w), when it cannot sink downward (and) it cannot lift up-
ward.
Gloss C
As for : " While his urine dribbles," it means that urine drops from his phallus
and cannot hold back for him.
CASE THIRTY TWO
XI1-9
DISPLACEMENT OP A CERVICAL VERTEBRA
Title
Instructions concerning a displacement in a vertebra of his neck. .
Examination
If thou examinest a man having a displacement in a vertebra of his neck, whose
face is fixed, whose neck cannot turn for him, (and) thou shouldst say to him : " Look
at thy breast (and) thy two shoulders," (and) he is unable to turn his face that he may
look at his breast (and) his two shoulders, (conclusion follows in diagnosis).
Diagnosis
Thou shouldst say concerning him : " One having a displacement in a vertebra of
his neck. An ailment which I will treat."
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:06 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 480 ---
454 THE SURGICAL TREATISE Cases 32,33
Treatment
Thou shouldst bind it with fresh meat the first day. Thou shouldst loose his
bandages and apply grease to his head ras far as1 his neck, (and) thou shouldst bind
it with ymrw. Thou shouldst treat it afterward [with] honey every day, (and) his
1"relief1 is sitting until he recovers.
Gloss A
As for : " A displacement in a vertebra of his neck," he is speaking concerning a
sinking of a vertebra of his neck [to] the interior of his neck, as a foot settles into
cultivated ground. It is a penetration downward.
CASE THIRTY-THREE
XI 9-17
A CRUSHED CERVICAL VERTEBRA
Title
Instructions concerning a crushed vertebra in his neck.
Examination
If thou examinest a man having a crushed vertebra in his neck (and) thou findest
that one vertebra has fallen into the next one, while he is voiceless and cannot speak ;
his falling head downward has caused that one vertebra crush into the next one; (and)
shouldst thou find that he is unconscious of his two arms and his two legs because of
it, (conclusion follows in diagnosis).
Diagnosis
Thou shouldst say concerning him : " One having a crushed vertebra in his neck ;
he is unconscious of his two arms (and) his two legs, (and) he is speechless. An ailment
not to be treated."
Gloss A
As for: "A crushed vertebra in his neck," he is speaking of the fact that one
vertebra of his neck has fallen into the next, one penetrating into the other, there being
no movement to and fro.
Gloss B
As for : " His falling head downward has caused that one vertebra crush into the
next," it means that he has fallen head downward upon his head, driving one vertebra
of his neck into the next.
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:06 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 481 ---
Cases 34, 35
455
CONSECUTIVE TRANSLATION
CASE THIRTY-FOUR
XI17-XII 2
DISLOCATION OP THE TWO CLAVICLES
Title
Instructions concerning a dislocation in his two collar-bones.
First Examination
If thou examinest a man having a dislocation in his two collar-bones, shouldst thou
find his two shoulders turned over, (and) the head(s) of his two collar-bones turned
toward his face, (conclusion follows in diagnosis).
First Diagnosis
Thou shouldst say concerning him : " One having a dislocation in his two collar-
bones. An ailment which I will treat."
First Treatment
Thou shouldst cause (them) to fall back, so that they rest in their places. Thou
shouldst bind it with stiff rolls of linen ; thou shouldst treat it afterward [with] grease
(and) honey every day, until he recovers.
Second Examination
If, however, thou shouldst find his two collar-bones having a rupture (of the tissue)
over it, penetrating to the interior, (conclusion in second diagnosis).
Second Diagnosis
[Thou shouldst say concerning him]: " An ailment which I will treat." (Scribal
error, cf. pp. 845 f.)
Gloss A
As for : " A dislocation in his two collar-bones," it means a displacement of the
heads of his sickle-bone(s). Their heads are attached to the upper bone of his breast,
extending to his throat, over which is the flesh of his gorget, that is the flesh that is
over his bosom. Two canals are under it: one on the right and (one) on the left
of his throat (and) of his bosom ; they lead to his lungs.
CASE THIRTY-FIVE
XII 8-8
A FRACTURE OF THE CLAVICLE
Title
Instructions concerning a break in his collar-bone.
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:06 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 482 ---
456
Cases 35, 36
THE SURGICAL TREATISE
Examination
If thou examinest a man having a break in his collar-bone, (and) thou shouldst
find his collar-bone short and separated from its fellow, (conclusion follows in diagnosis).
Diagnosis
Thou shouldst say concerning him : " One having a break in his collar-bone. An
ailment which I will treat."
Treatment
Thou shouldst place him prostrate on his back, with something folded between his
two shoulder-blades ; thou shouldst spread out with his two shoulders in order to
stretch apart his collar-bone until that break falls into its place. Thou shouldst make
for him two splints of linen, (and) thou shouldst apply one of them both on the inside
of his upper arm and the other on the under side of his upper arm. Thou shouldst
bind it with ymrw, (and) treat it afterward with honey every day, until he recovers.
CASE THIRTY-SIX
XII 8-14
A FRACTURE OF THE HUMERUS
Title
Instructions concerning a break in his upper arm.
Examination
If thou examinest a man having a break in his upper arm, (and) thou findest his
upper arm hanging down, separated from its fellow, (conclusion follows in diagnosis).
Diagnosis
Thou shouldst say concerning him : " One having a break in his upper arm. An
ailment which I will treat."
Treatment
Thou shouldst place him prostrate on his back, with something folded between his
two shoulder-blades; thou shouldst spread out with his two shoulders, in order to
stretch apart his upper arm until that break falls into its place. Thou shouldst make
for him two splints of linen, (and) thou shouldst apply for him one of them both on the
inside of his arm, (and) the other of them both on the under side of his arm. Thou
shouldst bind it with ymrw, (and) treat afterward [with] honey every day until he
recovers.
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:06 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 483 ---
Cases 37, 38
457
CONSECUTIVE TRANSLATION
CASE THIRTY-SEVEN
XII14-21
A FRACTURE OP THE HUMERUS WITH RUPTURE OF OVERLYING SOFT TISSUE
Title
Instructions concerning a break in his upper arm, with a wound over it.
First Examination
If thou examinest a man having a break in his upper arm, over which a wound has
been inflicted, (and) thou findest that that break crepitates under thy fingers, (con-
clusion follows in diagnosis).
First Diagnosis
Thou shouldst say concerning him : " One having a break in his upper arm, over
which a wound has been inflicted. An ailment with which I will contend."
First Treatment
Thou shouldst make for him two splints of linen ; thou shouldst bind it with ymrw ;
(and) thou shouldst treat it afterward [with] grease, honey, (and) lint every day until
thou knowest that he has reached a decisive point.
Second Examination
If, however, thou findest that wound which is over the break, with blood issuing
from it, and piercing through to the interior of his injury, (conclusion in second
diagnosis).
Second Diagnosis
Thou shouldst say concerning him : " One having a break in his upper arm, over
which a wound has been inflicted, piercing through. An ailment not to be treated."
CASE THIRTY-EIGHT
XII 21-XIII 2
A SPLIT IN THE HUMERUS
Title
Instructions concerning a split in his upper arm.
Examination
If thou examinest a man having a split in his upper arm, (and) thou shouldst find
the swelling protruding, on the outside of that split, which is in his upper arm, (con-
clusion follows in diagnosis).
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:06 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 484 ---
458
Cases 38^0
THE SURGICAL TREATISE
Diagnosis
Thou shouldst say concerning him : " One having a split in his upper arm. An
ailment which I will treat."
Treatment
Thou shouldst bind it with ymrw ; thou shouldst treat it afterward [with] honey
every day until he recovers.
CASE THIRTY-NINE
XIII 8-12
TUMORS OR ULCERS IN THE BREAST PERHAPS RESULTING FROM INJURY
Title
Instructions concerning tumors with prominent head in his breast.
Examination
If thou examinest a man having tumors with prominent head in his breast, (and)
thou findest that the swellings have spread with pus over his breast, (and) have pro-
duced redness, while it is very hot therein, when thy hand touches him, (conclusion
follows in diagnosis).
Diagnosis
Thou shouldst say concerning him : " One having tumors with prominent head in
his breast, (and) they produce feists1 of pus. An ailment which I will treat with the
fire-drill."
Treatment
Thou shouldst burn for him over his breast (and) over those tumors which are on his
breast. Thou shouldst treat him with wound treatment. Thou shouldst not prevent
its opening of itself, that there may be no mnhyw in his wound (sore ?). Every wound
(sore ?) that arises in his breast dries up as soon as it opens of itself.
Gloss A
As for: " Tumors with prominent head in his breast," it means that there are
swellings spreading over his breast because of his injury; they produce pus and redness
on his breast; (as) it is said : " It is like rparti-coloredn things," whose product is pus.
CASE FORTY
XIII12-17
A WOUND IN THE BREAST
Title
Instructions concerning a wound in his breast.
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:06 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 485 ---
Cases 40,41
459
CONSECUTIVE TRANSLATION
Examination
If thou examinest a man having a wound in his breast, penetrating to the bone,
perforating the manubrium of his sternum, thou shouldst press the manubrium of his
sternum with thy fingers, (although) he shudders exceedingly, (conclusion follows in
diagnosis).
Diagnosis
Thou shouldst say concerning him : " One having a wound in his breast, penetrat-
ing to the bone, perforating the manubrium of his sternum. An ailment which I will
treat."
Treatment
Thou shouldst bind it with fresh meat the first day; thou shouldst treat it after-
ward [with] grease, honey, (and) lint every day, until he recovers.
Gloss A
As for : " The manubrium of his sternum," (it means) the upper head of his ster-
num ; it is like as it were a porcupine.
CASE FORTY-ONE
XIII 1&-XIV 16
AN INFECTED OR POSSIBLY NECROTIC WOUND IN THE BREAST
Title
Instructions concerning a diseased wound in his breast.
Examination
If thou examinest a man having a diseased wound in his breast, while that wound is
inflamed and a whirl of inflammation continually issues from the mouth of that wound
at thy touch ; the two lips of that wound are ruddy, while that man continues to be
feverish from it; his flesh cannot receive a bandage, that wound cannot take a margin
of skin; the 1"granulation"1 which is in the mouth of that wound is watery, their surface
is hot and secretions drop therefrom in an oily state, (conclusion follows in diagnosis).
Diagnosis
Thou shouldst say concerning him: " One having a diseased wound in [his] breast,
it being inflamed, (and) he continues to have fever from it. An ailment which I
will treat."
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:06 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 486 ---
460
Case 41
THE SURGICAL TREATISE
Treatment
Thou shalt make for him cool applications for drawing out the inflammation from
the mouth of the wound :
a. Leaves of willow,
nW-tree
ksnty.
Apply to it.
b. Leaves of j/m'-tree,
dung,
hny-f,
ksnty.
Apply to it.
Thou shalt make for him applications for drying up the wound :
a. TowderT of green pigment
wSb-t,
thn-t
grease.
Triturate ; bind upon it.
b. Northern salt,
ibex grease.
Triturate ; bind upon it.
Thou shalt make for him poultices :
Red 8pnn,
garden tongue,
d'rt,
sycamore leaves.
Bind upon it.
If the like befalls in any member, thou shalt treat him according to these instruc-
tions.
Gloss A
As for: "A diseased wound in his breast, inflamed," it means that the wound
which is in his breast is sluggish, without closing up ; high fever comes forth from it,
its two hps are red, (and) its mouth is open. The " Treatise on What Pertains to a
Wound " says concerning it: "It means that there is very great swelling; (and)
- inflamed ' is said concerning the height " (of the fever).
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:06 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 487 ---
Cases 41-43
461
CONSECUTIVE TRANSLATION
Gloss B
As for : " A whirl of inflammation in his wound," it means a whirl of inflammation
which circulates through the interior of his entire wound.
Gloss C
As for : " Its two hps are ruddy," it means that its two hps are red like the color
of the tmJ-t-tiee. ~
Gloss D
As for : " His flesh cannot receive a bandage," it means that his flesh will not
receive the remedies because of the inflammation which is in his flesh.
Gloss E
As for : " While heat continually issues (nSw) from the mouth of his wound at thy
touch," (it means) that heat comes forth from his wound at thy touch ; as it is said
that a thing which has come forth entirely, has issued (nho)."
CASE FORTY-TWO
XIV 16-22
A SPRAIN OF THE STERNO-COSTAL ARTICULATIONS
Title
Instructions concerning a sprain in the ribs of his breast.
Examination
If thou examinest [a man having a sprain in the ribs of his breast], (and) he suffers
in the ribs of his breast, not having a dislocation, (and) it is not broken, while that man
continues to suffer with it and shudders exceedingly, (conclusion follows in diagnosis).
Diagnosis
Thou shouldst say concerning him : " One having a sprain in the ribs of his breast.
An ailment which I will treat."
Treatment
Thou shouldst bind it with ymrw ; thou shouldst treat it afterward [with] honey
every day until he recovers. Gloss A
As for : " Ribs of his breast," it means the bones of his sternum ; being spine(s)
like as it were a spine-roast.
CASE FORTY-THREE
XIV 22-XV 6
A DISLOCATION IN THE STERNO-COSTAL ARTICULATIONS
Title
Instructions concerning a dislocation of the ribs of his breast.
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:06 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 488 ---
462
Cases 43, 44
THE SURGICAL TREATISE
Examination
If thou examinest a man having a dislocation of the ribs of his breast, (and) thou
findest that the ribs of his breast are rprojecting"1, and their heads are ruddy, while
that man suffers continually with swellings in his two sides, (conclusion follows in
diagnosis).
Diagnosis
Thou shouldst say concerning him : " One having a dislocation in the ribs of his
breast. An ailment which I will treat."
Treatment
Thou shouldst bind it with ymrw; thou shouldst treat afterward [with] honey
every day, until he recovers.
Gloss A
As for : " A dislocation in the ribs of his breast," it means a displacement of the
heads of the ribs of his breast (sternum), which are fastened to his breast (sternum).
Gloss B
As for : " He suffers with swellings in his two sides," it means that he suffers in
the articulations thereof in his breast (sternum) rspreadingl in his two sides.
Gloss C
As for: " His two sides," it means his two flanks.
CASE FORTY-FOUR
XV 6-9
FRACTURED RIBS
Title
Instructions concerning a break in the ribs of his breast.
Examination
If thou examinest a man having a break in the ribs of his breast, over which a
wound has been inflicted ; (and) thou findest that the ribs of his breast crepitate
under thy fingers, (conclusion follows in diagnosis).
Diagnosis
Thou shouldst say concerning him : " One having a break in the ribs of his breast,
over which a wound has been inflicted. An ailment not to be treated."
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:06 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 489 ---
Cases 45,46
463
CONSECUTIVE TRANSLATION
CASE FORTY-FIVE
XV 9-19
BULGING TUMORS ON THE BREAST
Title
Instructions concerning bulging tumors on his breast.
Examination
If thou examinest a man having bulging tumors on his breast, (and) thou findest
that [swellings] have spread over his breast; if thou puttest thy hand upon his breast
upon these tumors, (and) thou findest them very cool, there being no fever at all
therein when thy hand touches him ; they have no granulation, they form no fluid,
they do not generate secretions of fluid, and they are bulging to thy hand, (conclusion
follows in diagnosis).
Diagnosis
Thou shouldst say concerning him : " One having bulging tumors. An ailment
with which I will contend."
Treatment
There is no rtreatmenf. If thou findest bulging tumors in any member of a man,
thou shalt treat him according to these directions.
Gloss A
As for: " Bulging tumors on his breast," it means the existence of swellings on
his breast, large, spreading and hard ; touching them is like touching a ball of wrap-
pings ; the comparison is to a green hemat-huit, which is hard and cool under thy
hand, like touching those swellings which are on his breast.
CASE FORTY-SIX
XV 20-XVI16
AN ABSCESS WITH PROMINENT HEAD ON THE BREAST
Title
Instructions concerning an abscess with prominent head in his breast.
Examination
If thou examinest a man having an abscess with prominent head in his breast, (and)
thou findest a very large swelling protruding on his breast, oily, like fluid under thy
hand, while they produce some clamminess of the surface, (and) their faces have no
ruddiness, (conclusion follows in diagnosis).
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:06 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 490 ---
464
Case 46
THE SURGICAL TREATISE
Diagnosis
Thou shouldst say concerning him : " One having an abscess with prominent head
in his breast. An ailment which I will treat with cold applications to that abscess
which is in his breast."
Treatment
a. &h-t-iiwt,
ntr-t,
ksnly,
Triturate, bind upon it.
b. Fruit of $s,
ksnty,
mason's mortar,
water,
Triturate, bind upon it.
If there is resistance to these cooling applications, thou shouldst avoid those
remedies until all fluid which is in the abscess with a head exudes.
Thou shouldst treat him with wound-treatment, with applications for drawing out
the inflammation from the mouth of the wound (sore ?) in his breast:
Leaves of acacia,
sycamore,
juice of 2/m'-leaves,
ox dung,
hny-t',
Bind upon it.
Thou shouldst make for him astringents, in his breast:
a. HPowder1 of green pigment,
d'r t of cedar,
ointment fat,
northern salt,
ibex grease.
Bind upon it.
Thou shouldst make for him poultices :
Red 8pnn,
sycamore.
Triturate, apply to it.
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:06 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 491 ---
Cases 46, 47
4G5
CONSECUTIVE TRANSLATION
Gloss A
As for: " An abscess with prominent head in his breast," it means that there is
a large swelling due to the injury which is in his breast, soft like a fluid under the
an(*' Gloss B
As for : " Clamminess of their surface," it means their skin is not hot.
Gloss C
As for : " There is no ruddiness upon it," it means that there is no redness upon it.
CASE FORTY-SEVEN
XVI16-XVII15
A GAPING WOUND IN THE SHOULDER
Title
Instructions concerning a gaping wound in his shoulder.
First Examination
If thou examinest a man having a gaping wound in his shoulder, its flesh being laid
back and its sides separated, while he suffers with swelling (in) his shoulder blade, thou
shouldst palpate his wound. Shouldst thou find its gash separated from M its sides
in his wound, as a roll of linen is unrolled, (and) it is painful when he raises his arm
on account of it, thou shouldst draw together for him his gash with stitching.
First Diagnosis
Thou shouldst say concerning him : " One having a gaping wound in his shoulder,
its flesh being laid back and its sides separated, while he suffers with swelling in his
shoulder blade. An ailment which I will treat."
First Treatment
Thou shouldst bind it with fresh meat the first day.
Second Examination and Treatment
If thou findest that wound open and its stitching loose, thou shouldst draw together
for him its gash with two strips of linen over that gash ; thou shouldst treat it after-
ward [with] grease, honey, (and) lint every day until he recovers.
If thou findest a wound, its flesh laid back, its sides separated, in any member of a
man, thou shouldst treat it according to these directions.
Third Examination
If, however, thou findest that his flesh has developed inflammation from that
wound which is in his shoulder, while that wound is inflamed, open, and its stitching
loose, thou shouldst lay thy hand upon it. Shouldst thou find inflammation issuing
Hh
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:06 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 492 ---
466
Cases 47, 48
THE SURGICAL TREATISE
from the mouth of his wound at thy touch, and secretions discharging therefrom are
cool like wenesh-jnice, (conclusion follows in second diagnosis).
Diagnosis Following Third Examination
Thou shouldst say concerning him : " One having a gaping wound in his shoulder,
it being inflamed, and he continues to have fever from it. An ailment with which I
will contend."
Fourth Examination
If then, thou findest that man continuing to have fever, while that wound is
inflamed, (conclusion in following treatment).
Treatment Following Fourth Examination
Thou shalt not bind it; thou shalt moor (him) at his mooring stakes, until the
period of his injury passes by.
Fifth Examination
If, however, his fever abates and the inflammation in the mouth of his wound
dissipates entirely, (conclusion in following treatment).
Treatment Following Fifth Examination
Thou shouldst treat him afterward [with] grease, honey, (and) lint every day, until
he recovers.
CASE FORTY-EIGHT
XVII15-19
A SPRAIN LN A SPINAL VERTEBRA (INCOMPLETE)
Title
Instructions concerning a sprain of a vertebra [in] his spinal column.
Examination
If thou examinest [a man having] a sprain in a vertebra of his spinal column, thou
shouldst say to him : "Extend now thy two legs (and) contract them both (again)."
When he extends them both he contracts them both immediately because of the pain
he causes in the vertebra of his spinal column in which he suffers.
Diagnosis
Thou shouldst say concerning him : " One having a sprain in a vertebra of his
spinal column. An ailment which I will treat."
Treatment
Thou shouldst place him prostrate on his back; thou shouldst make for him
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:06 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 493 ---
PART II
THE INCANTATIONS AND RECIPES
(THE VEKSO)
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:06 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 494 ---
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:06 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 495 ---
THE INCANTATIONS AND RECIPES
(The Verso)
SPECIAL INTRODUCTION
The group of texts to which we have prefixed the title: "The Incantations and
Recipes " has no internal connection whatever with the Surgical Treatise. These
texts are like stray and disconnected memoranda which a modern reader might write
on the fly-leaf of a book. In the first place they are physically separated from the
Surgical Treatise by two things : (1) a blank space at the end of Case 48, with which
the Surgical Treatise stops ; (2) by the fact that they occupy four and a half
columns on the back of the papyrus which bears the Surgical Treatise on the front.
Furthermore, they are in subject-matter a totally different body of writings as a glance
at the table of contents will demonstrate. Their method, their purpose, and their
conception of disease are identical with those of the well-known recipe papyri like
Papyrus Ebers or Hearst, and in sharp contrast with that of the Surgical Treatise.
They form a magical hodge-podge, without plan or arrangement, and we must regard
these incantations and recipes on the verso of the Edwin Smith Papyrus as in no
conceivable respect a continuation of the Surgical Treatise. This obvious fact is
emphasized here, even at the risk of being repetitious, because some readers of the
present writer's preliminary reports on the new papyrus seem to have gained the im-
pression that the group of magical texts on the back form part of the Surgical Treatise.^
As already remarked in the general introduction, the same scribe who wrote the
seventeen columns of the Surgical Treatise on the front of the papyrus abruptly
abandoned the copying of that important document in the middle of a case, and,
much to our regret, never completed the copy. Presumably at a later date, he turned
over the roll, then not less than sixteen feet long, and leaving a blank and unwritten
space at the end of the front, and a second such space at the beginning of the back,
he began to write on the back the miscellaneous group of incantations and recipes,
a list of which is as follows :
Eight Incantations against Pest ;
Title of the First Incantation
First Incantation .....
Conclusion of the First Incantation
Directions for Pronouncing the First Incantation
Title of the Second Incantation
Second Incantation ....
Directions for pronouncing the Second Incantation
XVIII1
XVIII1-8
XVIII 8-9
XVIII 9-11
XVIII 11-12
XVIII18-15
XVIII 15-16
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:06 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 496 ---
470
THE INCANTATIONS AND RECIPES
Title of the Third Incantation
Third Incantation ....
Fourth Incantation
Fifth Incantation ....
Directions for Pronouncing the Fifth Incantation
Title of the Sixth Incantation
Sixth Incantation ....
Title of the Seventh Incantation
Seventh Incantation
Directions for Pronouncing the Seventh Incantation
Eighth Incantation .....
Directions for Pronouncing the Eighth Incantation
Recipe for Female Troubles
Two Recipes for the Complexion :
Recipe for Transforming the Skin
Recipe for Beautifying the Face
Recipe for Transforming an Old Man into a Youth
Recipe for some Ailment of the Anus and Vicinity
XVIII17
XVIII17-19
XVIII19-XIX 2
XIX 2-9
XIX 9-14
XIX 14
XIX 14-18
XIX 18-19
XIX 19-XX 5
XX 5-8
XX 8-11
XX 11-12
XX 18-XXI 8
XXI 8-6
XXI 6-8
XXI 9-XXII10
XXII 11-14
This list at once discloses the fact that these writings on the back do not form an
organized or coherent treatise like that on the front. A more grotesquely incoherent
hodge-podge could hardly be conceived. Of the four and a half columns, nearly
three are devoted to incantations exorcising some form of annual epidemic or pest, and
to these the copyist appends a column and a half containing five recipes : one for
female troubles, three for improving the complexion, and the fifth for some ailment of
the anus.
'/The animistic conception of disease is interestingly illustrated. The bearers of the
pest are not only malignant divinities, genii, and demons of disease, but also the dis-
embodied dead, male and female, both human and animal. It is of interest, and pos-
sibly of scientific importance to note that the pest might be borne by other agencies,
notably the wind. We have here doubtless the earliest occurrence of the belief in
pest-laden winds. Again we find an entire incantation devoted to the unfortunate who
has accidently swallowed a fly..
In view of modern knowledge of the fly as a carrier of diseases like dysentery, this
early example of similar experience is notable. Similarly we observe that the pest
must be exorcised from food, bedding, and household articles. The process is so strik-
ingly suggestive of the modern practice of disinfection, that the reader should be
warned against any such conclusion. It is barely possible that the ancient Egyptian
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:06 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 497 ---
SPECIAL INTRODUCTION
471
physicians had noticed that this unidentified disease had been communicated through
bedding or food, but the method of rendering these things innocuous, as prescribed on
the back of our papyrus, is magical incantation pure and simple, and has not the re-
motest resemblance to the modern processes of disinfection. Microscopic life was
entirely unknown to medical practice throughout the ancient world, and must have
remained unknown until the introduction of lenses and the microscope in the Seven-
teenth Century of our era.//
It is unnecessary to devote further space to the discussion of the five recipes
occupying the last two columns of the verso. The " Recipe for Transforming an Old
Man into a Youth " (XXI 9-XXII 10) is a very interesting example of the apothe-
cary's art, furnishing, as it does, full directions how to make an aqueous solid extract;
but as a remedy it proves to be nothing more than a face paste believed to be efficacious
in removing wrinkles and other facial evidences of old age.
These last two recipes, copied by a different scribe from the one who copied the
Surgical Papyrus and all the preceding material on the verso, bear on the question
of the date of our copy. The writing of this latter scribe is small, crabbed, and ungrace-
ful. It makes the impression of being later than the time of the first scribe. It is
possible that our roll, bearing all that the first scribe had written (11-XXI 8) was in
Use for a generation before the second scribe added the last two recipes (XXI 9-XXII
14). The final owner or user, for whom the second scribe copied the last two recipes,
may have been contemporary with the scribe of Papyrus Ebers. He may indeed have
been the owner both of our document and Papyrus Ebers, thus making it quite possible
that the two papyri were found together by the modern natives, and brought to Edwin
Smith together.
Regarding the age of these incantations and recipes on the verso, there is little to
establish a precise date. The section XVIII1 to XXI 8 shows some indications of an
earlier date than our copy, but the last two recipes, written by the second scribe, are
probably not equally old.
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:06 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 498 ---
TRANSLATION AND COMMENTARY
EIGHT INCANTATIONS AGAINST PEST
XVIII 1-XX 12
These interesting exorcisms are directed against some form of annually recurring
disease called " the pest of the year " or even merely " this year," an epidemic which
cannot be identified. Various divinities and disease demons are regarded as bearing
this pest,—and the charms are accordingly addressed to these maligant beings. The
most prominent among these is Sekhmet, a goddess often associated with war and
destruction. In one charm the hostile beings are enumerated as men, gods, spirits,
and the dead (XVIII 18). Again they are summarized as " every male spirit, every
female spirit, every male dead, every female dead, the form of every animal, the one
(fem.) which the crocodile has taken, the one which the serpent has stung, the one which
has perished by the knife, (or) the one who has died in his bed." It will be seen that
the dead, both of men and animals, occupy a prominent place among malignant
beings who afflict the living. The charms operate not merely to banish the hostile
powers, but also to call in beneficient divinities and spirits to aid in the protection of
the patient. All these divinities, spirits, genii, or demons are introduced with allusions,
usually very obscure, to incidents in the sacred myths now largely lost, producing
a magical hocus-pocus difficult to understand at best, and sometimes quite unin-
telligible.
The manner of uttering these charms is carefully prescribed and was evidently
considered important, for five of the incantations are followed by full directions for
pronouncing them in connection with certain acts and equipment. Thus the man to
be protected by the first incantation must wear two vulture feathers while the charm
is pronounced over him; the beneficiary of the second incantation must pronounce
it himself while carrying a piece of des-wood around the outside of his house ; again
everything in a man's house may be protected from pest if he says the seventh incanta-
tion, while he has before him a ne/rei-flower, bound with a strip of linen to a piece of
des-wood, which he passes over the food, the bed, and other objects in the house.
The bearers of the pest are any of the malicious beings listed above, as those against
which the exorcisms are employed ; but there may also be some other sources. It
is interesting to note that the bearer of the pest may be the wind (XVIII 8-9 ; and
12-18). It enters at the mouth and throat, and to prevent this a man should wear
about his neck a band of linen bearing written upon it the words of the fifth incanta-
tion. Even asses, " the besbes-goose," and " the green-breasted goose " may enter
his throat unless prevented by this charm (XIX 12). Again the bearer of the pest is
a fly which a man may accidentally swallow, and the sixth incantation is entirely
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:06 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 499 ---
TRANSLATION AND COMMENTARY
473
devoted to such a case. It raises an interesting question of possible knowledge of the
fact that the fly is a bearer of disease. In this connection it is important to observe
that the seventh charm is directed against the possible lurking of the pest in food,
bedding, or any of the articles in the house.
Title of the First Incantation
XVIII 1
XVIII I
Translation
Incantation for exorcising the wind of the pest of the year.
Commentary
" The pest of the year " presumably designates an annual epidemic of some kind.
There is no indication of the character of the disease anywhere in the following text.
It is characteristic of these magical exorcisms, which are both exorcisms and recipes,
that there should be no proper examination, and no conclusions regarding the seat
and the nature of the disease. The word f]^<^fmf y'd-t, rendered above as " pest,"
has been touched upon by Gardiner in his Admonitions of an Egyptian Sage (p. 25),
where the common application of the word as a term of opprobrium is mentioned,
and especially the frequent occurrence of the term " y'd-t of the year " in magical
texts. The medical significance of y'd t still remains to be cleared up. The genitive
rnp-t " year," apparently adjectival, would be more in accordance with common
usage if joined by the genitive n-t "of;" but the direct genitive does not preclude
understanding rnpt as adjectival in force, and equivalent to " annual."
First Incantation
XVIII1-8
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:06 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 500 ---
474
THE INCANTATIONS AND RECIPES
Translation
O Flame-in-His-Face! Presider over the horizon, speak thou to the chief of the
Hemesut-house, who makes Osiris, first of the land, to flourish. O Nekhbet, lifting the
earth to the sky for her father, come thou, bind the two feathers around me, around
me, that I may five and flourish because I possess this White One. The first is the
Great One dwelling in Heliopolis; the second is Isis ; the third is Nephthys ; while
I am subject to thee (fem.).
O Seizer-of-the-Great-One, son of Sekhmet, mightiest of the mighty, son of the
Disease-Demon, Dened, son of Hathor, mistress of the crown (nt), and flooder of the
streams ; when thou voyagest in the Celestial Ocean, when thou sailest in the morning
barque, thou hast saved me from every sickness.
Commentary
The incantation consists of adjurations addressed to hostile demons, as well as to
protecting divinities, and filled with obscure epithets and allusions.
X® Hm& wt are personifications of graces and good qualities who appear at royal
births, as in the birth scenes of Hatshepsut at Deir el-Bahari, and of Amenhotep III
at Luxor. Isis and Nephthys are familiar as beneficent goddesses, but Sekhmet is
a goddess of terror and destruction, and throughout these incantations is closely
connected with the pest.
^^^•^ D?uZ is the name of a demon doubtless derived from the old word
zrl^, rfnd, " anger, wrath " (Pyr. 68 b and 2072 d). Compare also dndn and dndn ;
likewise the barque called Dnd-dndrw. ^"""l ^ $^4 is an ailment in Pap. Ebers 102, 7
(compare also ibid. 102, 10). As a god Dnd appears as one of the four ram-headed
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:06 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 501 ---
TRANSLATION AND COMMENTARY
475
divinities in the Book of the Portals, 12th hour, upper row (Ramses VI, Tausert,
Ramses III, but not Seti II). Written Dndn this god appears as early as the Pyramid
Texts (200d), and as Dndnw, Pyr. 1254 b. In late times he still survives as tx- ^
or ^^^tjv'- Dndn in Edfu and Dendera (Rochem. I, p. 525 and II, p. 25 ; Mariette,
Denderah, I 28).
1^11^"^ fy'yty, " Disease-Demon," is evidently a derivative from 23^11o^h
h'yt, " disease," but seems to be a rather rare word. It appears in the plural in the
Book of the Dead, Chapter CXLIX (ed. Budge, 1898, Text, p. 872), as a designation
of malignant demons.
w-*_\E: hfhft, " flooder," or " Hooding " (fem.) is rare. See Pyr. 295 c where it
is parallel with —P"=>(j.. Compare also Pyr. 298 a.
"^.^/^ ?fr ^r'*, " sickness," is common in the medical papyri. See Pap. Hearst
IX 10; Pap'. Ebers 41, 20; 52, 20; 89, 16; 89, 18; 101, 1-2 (twice); 100, 18-20
where it is explained in a gloss. A charm against snake-poison adjures the vessels
of the body not to take up ($sp) ^Oi"T'==:'«2>10^<,i "^e excret*on of sickness "
(Pap. Turin, ed. Pleyte-Rossi, 181,l.11, magical text of the Empire, copied by Gardiner,
1l. 10-11).
Conclusion of the First Incantation
XVIII 8-9
Translation
Incantation against this year, with the breath of every evil wind.
Horus, Horus, healthy despite Sekhmet, is around all my flesh for life.
Commentary
The point of this conclusion is of course a mythological reference to the success of
the youthful Horus against his enemies. The flesh of the speaker of the charm is
perhaps parallel with the flesh of Osiris, the father of Horus, who shielded his father's
body. The same charm is found again in XIX 9 and XX 11.
This final charm introduced at the end is preceded by what appears to be a con-
cluding title, such as are so commonly found at the end of a charm in the Coffin Texts.
The determinative of nf-t " breath," is incorrectly written, by habit of the scribe,
with following w, as in the common word Vw " wind," always written with the sail
and io. See following context.
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:06 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 502 ---
476 THE INCANTATIONS AND RECIPES
Directions for Pronouncing the First Incantation
XVIII 9-11
i
Translation
Speak the words over two vulture feathers, with which a man has covered himself,
placed as his protection in every place where he goes. It is a protection against
the year, expelling sickness in the year of pest.
Commentary
The two feathers here used in pronouncing the spell are of course applied to the
man to be protected, while uttering the passage (XVIII 8-4) of the spell referring to
the two feathers. It would seem that any person not yet suffering from disease, who
assumes the two feathers, and pronounces the incantation, is assured of protection
against the pest.
Title of the Second Incantation
XVIII 11-12
Translation
Another (incantation) for exorcising the plague-bearing wind, the demons of disease,
the malignant spirits, messengers of Sekhmet.
Commentary
<=*\\ ty, " another," is a common introduction in the medical papyri for a new
recipe for the same purpose as the last. It passed on into Greek treatises as aAAwj
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:06 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 503 ---
TRANSLATION AND COMMENTARY
477
or aAAo. See Wessely's publication of the Greek magical Papyri in Paris and London
in Denkschriften der Wiener Akademie, 1888. We have in this fact a clear indication
of the use of the old Egyptian papyri in Greek times.
S\^,"^i nds-tyw, "malignant spirits," is a rare word of vague meaning not closely
determined. I find no other example of its appearance outside of our papyrus, except
in a copy of a Karnak inscription made by Sethe for the Berlin Worterbuch, in a text
of Graeco-Roman age, which suggests that nds-tyw are genii or semi-divine beings of
some kind (Wbrterbuch copies by Sethe, 4, 44).
Second Incantation
XVIII 18-15
Translation
Withdraw, ye disease demons. The wind shall not reach me, that those who pass
by may pass by to work disaster against me. I am Horus who passes by the diseased
ones of Sekhmet, (even) Horus, Horus, healthy despite Sekhmet. I am the unique
one, son of Bastet. I die not through thee (fem.)
Commentary
In these incantations, " those who pass by " is a designation of all the hostile,
disease-bearing demons or beings against whom the charms are directed. The picture
seems to be that these malignant spirits pass by on the wind, as if borne by it. We
notice that this incantation is to be uttered while the man pronouncing it goes
around the outside of " his house," thus evidently preventing the dangerous winds
from entering the house. We have here doubtless the earliest occurrence of the
notion of pestilential or disease-bearing winds.
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:06 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 504 ---
478
THE INCANTATIONS AND RECIPES
Directions for Pronouncing! the Second Incantation
XVIII15-16
^1,! A—*
TransZaiion
Let the words be spoken by a man having a stick of des-wood in his hand, while
he conies forth into the open and goes around his house. He cannot die by the pest
of the year.
Commentary
The alleged power of the incantation is doubtless due to the unidentifiable wood
which the man pronouncing the charm carries in his hand as he makes the circuit of
his house, walking around the outside, and thus preventing the winds from entering.
Title of the Third Incantation
XVIII17
Translation
Another protection against the pest of the year.
Third Incantation
XVIII17-19
18 ^
I I I
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:06 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 505 ---
TRANSLATION AND COMMENTARY
479
Translation
I am the abomination that came forth out of Buto. O Meskhenet, that came forth
out of Heliopolis; O men, O gods, O spirits, O dead, be ye far from me. I am the
abomination.
Commentary
The protection consists in becoming something abhorred which the spirits dare
not approach. The form hr-tywny, a plural pseudo-participle, is found again in the
singular with the same meaning in the next charm (XIX 2). Its optative force is
unusual. Gardiner calls my attention to its similar use in Mutter und Kind (8, 6-8,
several times).
Fourth Incantation
XVIII19-XIX 2
H1
Translation
Another (incantation). I am the healthy one in the way of the passer by. Shall
I be smitten, while I am healthy ? I have seen the great disaster. O this fever, do
not assail me, (for) I am the one who has come forth out of the disaster. Be thou far
from me.
Commentary
A charm the effectiveness of which consists in its asseverations of safety and
escape, a common device in Egyptian magic.
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:06 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 506 ---
480
THE INCANTATIONS AND RECIPES
Fifth Incantation
XIX 2-9
Translation
Copy of another (incantation). O Jubilation, Jubilation, take not this my heart,
nor this my breast for Sekhmet. Take not my liver for Osiris, in order that the
hidden things that are in Buto may not, shall not enter into my seat on the morning
of counting the Horus-eye, even every male spirit, every female spirit, every male
dead, every female dead, the form of every animal, the one (fem.) which the crocodile
has taken, the one (masc.) which the serpent has stung, the one which has 1"perished1
by the knife, (or) the one who has died in his bed. Ye demons of disease, of the
followers of the year and its yield, lo, Horus, even Horus, healthy despite Sekhmet, is
[around] all my flesh for life.
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:06 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 507 ---
TRANSLATION AND COMMENTARY
481
Commentary
The force of the charm seems to be exerted against a group of the dead, both men
and animals residing in Buto, and who are first called, therefore, " the hidden things
that are in Buto," as a kind of group designation followed by a list of the members of
the group. They belong in the innermost center of Buto, for the unusual phrase
"f j^S?**^' ^terally " dwelling in the inside of," must have some special significance
here.
The two negatives together, 1j^J^*13^, are probably a double negative for the
sake of emphasis ; the verb to which they most probably belong is ^^cn, where we
would expect hn, "approach." oi^ literally means "my mat," here used for
" my seat." The verb before " knife " has been smeared by the scribe's finger and
is illegible ; but the context and parallelism show clearly that it must mean something
like " perish." Presumably the slaughter of an animal with the knife is the form
of death here intended. hp, rendered above " die," is doubtless connected with
the verb *J\ hpy, " to go " or " depart." The final statement of the charm is found
also in XVIII 9 and XX 11, and from these parallels we are able to supply the word
If* 3^® " around," omitted by error of the scribe.
Directions for Pronouncing the Fifth Incantation
XIX 9-14
10
I i
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:06 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 508 ---
482
THE INCANTATIONS AND RECIPES
Translation
Speak the words over (images of) Sekhmet, Bastet, Osiris, and Neheb-kau,
written with frankincense on a band of fine linen and attached to a man at his throat.
It will prevent asses from entering, - - the besbes-goose to me, and the green-breasted
goose. The protection of the life of Neit is around me, (even of) her who is over the
escaped of the sower. Bastet is repelled from the house of a man. A man shall say
(it) at the life of the year.
Commentary
The mention of the asses and the geese is of course in harmony with the inclusion
of the animals in the charm in l. 6. There is apparently corruption of the text in the
passage — J<=-(]^k which remains unintelligible. The besbes-goose is rare and found
only in the mastaba tomb of Manofer (Sakkara Tomb 17, Lepsius, Denkmaler, II
70 = Berlin 1108). It is evidently an old word. The "green-breast" is better
known and occurs in the Middle Kingdom a number of times, and once in the Empire.
Neither variety can be identified with exactness. The obscure epithet after Neit (or
should we render "crown" as in XVIII 6?) is quite unintelligible. Bastet as an un-
friendly goddess is also found in XIX 20. The " life of the year " perhaps means the
" yield of the year," that is, at harvest time ; but this is uncertain.
Title of the Sixth Incantation
XIX 14
Translation
Incantation for cleansing a fly.
Commentary
Although not clear in this title, the case is one of a man who accidentally swallowed
a fly, thought to be a bearer of disease, here presumably the pest.
Sixth Incantation
XIX 14-18
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:06 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 509 ---
TRANSLATION AND COMMENTARY 483
17
Translation
The mouth of this man who is under my fingers, and so forth, is the mouth of
a Hhungryl calf, when he comes forth from his mother's womb. This insect which has
entered into this his belly, (although) he has entered, shall come forth alive, issuing
to the ground as earth or as excrement, without injuring his belly, (but) coming forth
as his excrement from him, having been assigned to Akeru.
Commentary
As literally stated in the title the charm is for cleansing the fly, not for cleansing
the man of the fly. Nevertheless the first statement of the incantation is that the
mouth of the man who has swallowed the fly is as the mouth of a new-born calf, that
is, entirely clean. It is evidently considered highly important that the stomach and
intestines should be relieved of the fly.
Jex h'bw, rendered above " Qmngryl calf " is a rare term of great
age. It is known elsewhere only in the Pyramid Texts (225 b). The difficulty is the
word h'bw, which is of uncertain meaning. Important for our passage is a similar
statement in the Pyramid Texts. The dead king is purified, and one says to him:
^^JiZI^ni1ir^0[ti'w1^ " Thy mouth is the mouth of a milk-calf on the day
on which he is born " (Pyr. 27 d). The parallelism would suggest that h'bw might
possibly mean " sucking " or the like. " Akeru " is an earth-god, to whom the
excrement is here consigned.
Title of the Seventh Incantation
XIX 18-19
19
Translation
Incantation for cleansing everything from pest.
I i 2
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:06 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 510 ---
484
THE INCANTATIONS AND RECIPES
Seventh Incantation
XIX 19-XX 5
XX 1
VJ I i T , , I f=q ill L
0
o
5
Translation
Thy messengers are consumed, O Sekhmet; thy demons of disease retreat, 0
Bastet. The Year does not pass by to work disaster against me. Thy breath does
not reach me. I am Horus over the diseased ones of Sekhmet, I am thy Horus,
O Sekhmet; I am thy unique one, O Buto. I die not by thee; I die not by thee.
1 am the rejoicing one, I am the jubilating one. O son of Bastet, descend not upon
me; O Dweller in the Sepsepu, approach me not, draw not near me. I am the king in
the midst of his '"shelter'1.
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:06 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 511 ---
TRANSLATION AND COMMENTARY
485
Commentary
The charm is full of obscure allusions, jj^ 23 [1 ndsds, probably meaning to " burn,
consume," is a rare word occurring elsewhere seemingly only in the Book of the Dead,
ed. Naville, 78, 82. The obscure " sepsepu " may possibly be connected with the
Ptolemaic word ~ spsp, "to rob" or similar. The older word popo*—n
dpdp, " to tousle, disarrange, pull, drag " (Carter-Newberry, Tomb of Thoutmdsis,
TV, 46042) makes little or no sense here. The last word, J't^HI^. ^y-t, rendered
with uncertainty " fshelter"1," is unknown elsewhere.
Directions for Pronouncing the Seventh Incantation
XX 5-8
6
I I I
Translation
Let a man say this incantation before a ne/rei-flower, bound to a piece of des-wood,
and tied with a strip of linen. Let them be passed over the things ; the pest will be
exorcised, (and) the passage of the disease-demons by everything that is eaten, like-
wise by the beds, will be prevented.
Commentary
nfr-t is a still unidentified flower, and ties-wood is likewise uncertain. The
latter was used against the pest in the Second Incantation (XVIII 15). 'f'^^'T1
h'-tyw is commonly considered to mean " clothing," as in the Pyramid Texts (787 b)
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:06 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 512 ---
486 THE INCANTATIONS AND RECIPES
or later, Gayet, Le Temple de Louxor, pl. 12, 4 (Eighteenth Dynasty) and Diimichen,
Historische Inschriften, II 86 d (Medinet Habu, Eighteenth Dynasty) ; but it seems
obvious that we must render linen in our incantation.
Eighth Incantation
XX 8-11
l I
10
a <? -n Q .9 | | |
A—a I
TransZaiion
Another (incantation). A shames-flower is on me, the abomination of thy followers.
Thy diseased ones avoid me, the stretching of thy snare avoids me ; I am the escaped
one of thy birds. Horus, Horus, healthy despite Sekhmet, is around all my flesh for life.
Commentary
The identity of the ffi^fP,"^-, S'mi or " shames-flower " is unknown. It is
evidently some flower supposed to be effective in warding off pest, and may have been
some marsh flower growing like a thicket and thus furnishing a refuge for birds in
escaping the snare of the fowler.
Directions for Pronouncing the Eighth Incantation
XX 11-12
> □
l l
Translation
Let a man say this incantation when a shames-flower has been given to him in
his hand.
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:06 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 513 ---
TRANSLATION AND COMMENTARY
487
Commentary
This is in accordance with the statement in the charm, " A s/tames-flower is on me."
This eighth incantation concludes the series employed in exorcising the pest. The
following recipe is for a female trouble and has no connection with the pest series.
RECIPE FOR FEMALE TROUBLES
XX 18-XXI 8
This case, like those in the latter part of Papyrus Ebers, begins with an examina-
tion. No title is prefixed. The diagnosis clearly indicates suspension or interruption
of the menses. The treatment consists of three recipes : one internal and two external.
The composition of the internal remedy is too uncertain to permit any opinion regard-
ing its efficacy ; while the ointments applied externally were quite obviously of no
value. The final fumigation was rather a matter of toilet than of medical treatment.
Examination
XX 18-14
IS
Translation
If thou examinest a woman suffering in her abdomen, so that the menstrual
discharge cannot come away for her; and thou findest trouble in the upper part of
her vulva, (conclusion follows in diagnosis).
Commentary
It is obvious that in this recipe the word r'-yb, commonly meaning "stomach,"
is applied here to the female organs, especially the uterus, and as doubtless loosely
used to designate this region, perhaps best rendered by " abdomen," as above. The
most common term, usually employed by the Egyptians for this region, is the more
general designation h-t, " belly, womb." See XIX 15, 16, and 17.
The word rendered " vulva " ^ is written with the determinative only, and should
perhaps be otherwise interpreted. See the word vulva in the diagnosis.
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:06 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 514 ---
488
THE INCANTATIONS AND RECIPES
Diagnosis
XX 14-15
15
Translation
Thou shouldst say concerning her : " It is obstruction of the blood in her vulva.
First Treatment, Internal and External
XX 15-17
° !>■
mi l
i i i
Ql I I
16
.©
UN
Transition
Thou shouldst prepare for her :
Wam, ^
Grease, f
Sweet beer |
Cooked and drunk for four days.
Besides preparing for her (the prescription called) " Discharge of the blood " (as
follows): Oil, tejmenet, eye-paint, sweet frankincense. Mix, (and) anoint the organ
therewith very frequently.
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:06 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 515 ---
TRANSLATION AND COMMENTARY
489
Commentary
The first drug in the internal prescription, which was to be carried by the beer as
a solvent, is unfortunately entirely unknown and cannot be identified. A plant of
this name occurs twice in Pap. Ebers (92,17 and 69,11), and once in the Berlin Medical
Papyrus (8088, 5, 12); and the fruit of this plant is employed in recipes in Hearst
(VIII 6; IX 6-7 ; V 8 and duplicates in Ebers). See also Ebers 18, 8; 21, 22 ; 22,
8 ; 22, 5 ; 5, 1 ; 50, 15 ; 18, 14; and Pap. Berlin (8088, 1, 2). Presumably it is
this unidentified fruit which is employed here.
As commonly in the Egyptian medical papyri, the solids are enumerated first and
the solvent which is to carry them is placed at the end. The measures of parts seem
to be in two different series. Wam is measured by the heket, a common grain measure
containing almost 800 cubic inches. Our common bushel contains about 7| heket.
Roughly a heket was a little more than half a peck, that is a little more than four
quarts, and a sixteenth of a heket would therefore have been a trifle over half a pint of
the warn fruit, of which the patient is to take a decoction. The grease is followed by
the fraction J which does not imply any unit of measure ; but the sign after the sweet
beer indicates J of a heket which would be a little over a pint.
The external remedy also begins with an unknown drug. The eye-paint was black
antimony. Its Egyptian name [fj P<==J^t! m^^m^ has Deen corrupted into Coptic cthju.
Greek em/x/n, and finally Latin stibium. Whether the ingredients when mixed formed
a powder or an ointment is uncertain without knowing more about tejmenet, but the
verb " anoint " suggests ointment.
The word employed for the female organ here, ks, is not known elsewhere.
Alternative External Treatment
XX 18-XXI 8
XXI 1
2
3
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:06 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 516 ---
490
THE INCANTATIONS AND RECIPES
Translation
Thou shouldst put hezret-e&rs into ointment. If afterward she has an evil odor,
wipe her off and anoint her two labia therewith very frequently. Thou shouldst apply
frankincense and incense between her two loins, (and) cause the smoke thereof to
enter her flesh.
Commentary
The active agency in the ointment prescribed is a plant evidently having leaves
which resemble the ears of an animal. This animal, J 8=^ hdr-t, is known from a list
of villages in an Old Kingdom mastaba (No. 45, Lepsius, Denkmaler, II 29), in which
the determinative looks something like a hyena. See also Cairo 20066 and 20055, both
from the Middle Kingdom. In the storming of Dapur (Lepsius, ibid. Ill 166), Sethe,
collating the original, suggests a Springmaus or some similar creature. It must have
been some animal not distasteful to the Egyptians, for the word occurs as the name
of both men and women.
nphtoy (dual) is anatomically uncertain, but occurs with meanings which
must be connected with the lower part of the trunk; hence the rendering above, which
may be too much localized. The purpose of the incense burning is of course obvious.
TWO RECIPES FOR THE COMPLEXION
XXI 8-8
These are obviously toilet preparations having no place among medical recipes,
although a number of recipes for such preparations are included in the Papyrus Ebers.
The ingredients are again of too uncertain identity for us to say much regarding the
virtue of these two preparations for the complexion.
I. Recipe foe Transforming the Skin
XXI 8-6
4
i n I □ —a
:iPllvi12llr&
on^-v o |5c!=^<=> O
Xl ill I I 11 1 \ I I I
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:06 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 517 ---
TRANSLATION AND COMMENTARY
491
Translation
A recipe for transforming the skin :
Honey, 1
Red natron, 1
Northern salt, 1
Triturate together (and) anoint therewith.
Commentary
If the natron here called JP™^,, ° , Mmn is the same as the other variety ^° ntry,
discussed above in Case 46, its chief ingredient was a sesquicarbonate of sodium. See
commentary on XVI 4. " Northern salt " will be found discussed in Case 41 (XIV
5-6) and was chiefly chloride of sodium.
II. Recipe for Beautifying the Face
XXI 6-8
A <?li i i AT— iii i i
Translation
Another (recipe) for beautifying the face :
Alabaster rkernels1, 1
Natron kernels1, 1
Northern salt, 1
Honey, 1
Mix together, (and) anoint therewith.
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:06 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 518 ---
492
THE INCANTATIONS AND RECIPES
Commentary
The uncertain word <^30^ll dkw, rendered " rkernelsV is elsewhere a designation for
a preparation of grain. It may here possibly designate the physical form in which the
alabaster and the natron were employed.
RECIPE FOR TRANSFORMING AN OLD MAN INTO A YOUTH
XXI 9-XXII10
Thus far the writing of the Papyrus Edwin Smith was the work of a single scribal
hand, which copied all the material on the recto (seventeen columns) and three columns
and eight lines on the verso. The last twenty-six lines (XXI 9-XXII 14) were added
by a different hand at some later date. The two recipes added by this second scribe
have no relation to each other whatsoever ; but it is obvious that the first of the two,
which we are now taking up, was suggested by the preceding recipes for the com-
plexion ; this recipe for transforming an old man into a youth being simply another
face ointment designed to banish the traces of age from the face.
As an illustration of the apothecary's art in the Sixteenth Century B.c., this recipe
is of unusual interest. It describes in great detail the preparation of an aqueous solid
extract of an unidentified fruit, and the successive stages of the process are fully ex-
plained. The resulting paste or ointment is externally applied, and the directions for
use assure us that the result is complete removal of all signs of age. It will be seen
then that what we have in this early oriental predecessor of the elixir of fife is simply
a face paste which will remove wrinkles. It seems to have claimed no effect upon the
waning vitality of an old man. It is of interest to note that like the later elixir of life
it was to be kept in a precious vase or flask of semi-precious stone.
Title
XXI 9
Translation
Beginning of the Book of Transforming an Old Man into a Youth.
Commentary
While the meaning of this title is perfectly clear, a slight verbal modification of the
rendering proposed is possible. The idiom ^ yr-t m, meaning " to
transform into," literally to " make into " is well known. In
oriental hyperbole, when a boastful official digs a well in the desert he says : " I made
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:06 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 519 ---
TRANSLATION AND COMMENTARY
493
the highlands a river, and the upper valleys a water way " (see Lepsius, DenkmiUer, II
149, e, 1l.10-11, and the author's Ancient Records, I, paragr. 447). My friend Professor
Golenischeff suggests that we should find here two other idiomatic uses of yr-t, " to
make," which are also well established, viz. " to pass " (time), or again " to make "
an official, meaning " to be " such an official. He quotes the well-known passage from
Papyrus Prisse (5, 2) :
and renders, " To be an old man is evil for people in every respect " (or " to pass old
age is evil etc."). While we may object to render the form S as an infinitive in Papy-
rus Prisse, Professor Golenischeff's suggestion seems to be perfectly possible in our
passage. It would not essentially alter the meaning of the title, which in either case
signifies much the same thing, whether we render as above or call it with Professor
Golenischeff " the Book of Passing Old Age as a Youth."
Directions for Making the Recipe
XXI 9-XXII 7
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:06 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 520 ---
saaioan cenv snoixvxnvoni am,
M11
Q I Q
I 1IXX
C7
l WWW S W~*« TT- I
>* ,<=>d _ —\v~0
C7 ©
I) I
□
iii.-
'I l l^
HI
Vl7
<f> VWMV
v.'iiiiiT^ I
: I
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:06 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 521 ---
TRANSLATION AND COMMENTARY
495
Trarwtoion
Let there be brought a large quantity of Tiema2/et-fruit, about two khar. It
should be bruised and placed in the sun. Then when it is entirely dry let it be rhusked1
as grain is rhusked'1, and it should be winnowed until (only) the fruit thereof remains.
Everything that comes therefrom shall be measured, (and) let it be sifted after the
manner of the rthreshing floor1 with the sieve. Measure likewise everything that
comes from these fruits and make them into two portions: one consisting of these
fruits and the other even so. Treat one like the other.
(First Process)
Let it be set aside, mixed with water. Make into a soft mass and let it be placed
in a new jar over the fire (and) cooked very thoroughly, making sure that they boil,
evaporating the juice thereof and drying them, until it is like dry, without moisture
therein. Let it be dug out (of the jar). Now when it is cool, let it be put into (another)
jar in order to wash it in the river. Let it be washed thoroughly, making sure that
they are washed by tasting the taste of this water that is in the jar (until) there is no
bitterness at all therein. It should be placed in the sun, spread out on launderer's
linen. Now when it is dry, it should be ground upon a grinding mill-stone.
(Second Process)
Let it be set aside in water. Make like a soft mass and let it be placed in a jar
over the fire and cooked thoroughly, making sure that it boils, that the fluids of the
mass may go forth therefrom. A man shall dip out the mass that has come of it with
a dipper. Put into a Jim-jar after it is rof the consistency! of clay. Rub and make
thick its rconsistency">. Dip out this mass and put upon a linen cover on the top of
this fcin-jar. Now afterward it should be put into a vase of costly stone.
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:06 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 522 ---
496
THE INCANTATIONS AND RECIPES
Commentary
There is much that is not clear in this interesting account of the processes for
making an aqueous extract. In the first place the fruit from which it is made cannot
be identified. It will be found discussed in Case 45 (XV 15). It evidently had a hard
husk or shell, which suggests that it might even have been a variety of nut.
^fr b'r must be a loose use of the term here as " measure." It can hardly be
1\ bushels, making a total of 5 bushels, as computed by Griffith in his excellent article
(Proceedings of the Socy. of Biblical Archaeol., 14 (1892), p. 421).
dn, " thresh," or possibly rnd], perhaps meaning " to husk," is slightly
uncertain in the reading. The «•—' is thrown back under the so that one is
uncertain whether the n or the d is to be read first. It may possibly be an alphabetic
writing of —0 nd, " grind," although if so, it would be the only example of this
writing in our papyrus.
In favor of the reading dn, Devaud recalls ^o^^, (Sail. I 4, 12 and
Amenemope 19, 9), probably meaning " threshing floor "; compare S. -snoo'Y:
B. s'luoof. This etymology would indicate the meaning " thresh" for our
verb dn.
The meaning of " everything that comes therefrom " is not wholly clear. It might
mean exclusively the kernel or meat extracted from the husk ; it might also include
the husk which in the immediately following instructions might form the second
portion.
°'n is a word of uncertain reading, and the meaning furthermore is also un-
settled. It might also be read ® cn.
Very important for an understanding of these directions is the meaning of the
" two portions." As noted just above, it might at first be supposed to mean the husks
as one portion and the fruits or kernels as the other. This would seem to be involved
in the phrase " one consisting of these fruits ; " but the other portion is not sufficiently
described in the following directions to make its character unequivocal. In any case
we must conclude that the " two portions " are both subjected to the same two
processes for making an aqueous extract. These two processes are identical in the
beginning stages. They both begin as follows :
First Process: ^l^^M^^E^^ = (XXI15-16)'
Second Process : f=J-i,J2.= (XXII 2-8),
the second being somewhat shortened. They then proceed with the steps for producing
a thick decoction by boiling and evaporation. The language of the two shows interest-
ing variants, important for our knowledge of the Egyptian dictionary. The first
process concludes with the production of a dry powder, while the second results in
a mass obviously of thick consistency, which is kept in a vase.
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:06 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 523 ---
TRANSLATION AND COMMENTARY
497
The relation of the two processes is obscure. There is no explicit indication in the
text where the directions for the second process begin. Furthermore the product
resulting from the first process is never mentioned again. Indeed the directions for
using the preparation (XXII 7) clearly show that the finished preparation is a soft
mass with which the user can " anoint " himself. These facts seem to show that the
dry powder produced by the first process (and otherwise dropped in XXII 2, without
further reference being made to it) is again placed to soak in water (XXII 2) just as
at first (XXI 15-16), and is then boiled and evaporated a second time, to form at
last a thick paste. In that case we must suppose that the directions to make two
portions simply indicate that the quantity of the fruit taken was too large to be made
up in one lot, and that the apothecary is therefore to divide it up into two lots merely
for making.
^[o^( Sd-t, meaning "mass" or similar, I was at first inclined to read *p cd-t
" fat," used like mrh-t, " grease," in this passage for designating a soft mass; but
D6vaud calls my attention to the Coptic a/yoa ncei,lA'^-g&£ AUtocy epoc
eTpenujioTe <S\\on (Zoega, Cat., p. 562, 14), which makes the reading Sd-t per-
fectly certain. For the £d-sign see also XXI 18.
PJ©^ Sbh, " jar," is a new word, seemingly unknown elsewhere.
^^EE n¥w't, " moisture," is also an unknown word, but the context here renders
this translation fairly certain. See Coptic etymologies, pp. 595 f.
The curious use of * before finite forms of the verb in l.17 and again in l. 21 raises
a question of syntax. Sethe suggests that it simply means " and " as sometimes
between two nouns.
"J1©^ "evaporate," is not known elsewhere with this meaning. In the
examples known (Daressy, Recueil de trav. 16, 125 and Dumichen, Geogr. Inschr.,
IV, 118) it means " consume."
P —d hogm," grinding," is not otherwise known with the causative d with the
following <? preserved. The simplex occurs in an interesting Old Kingdom relief
scene showing two women grinding. One says : ^fflj^™© " Grind thoroughly,"
and the other replies : l]^s^(]>=-Dfl0"Iam grinding as hard as I can " (Erman,
Reden, pp. 18-19, from Cairo 1584). The causative with loss of the 9 is found in
Pap. Ebers (21, 12), where a recipe is to be triturated in ^J^1^113 " in a stone
mortar" -==>P'*Si^!l^P0" until you pulverize it." ^.'*S*.1^,-'^31 wgm as a kind of grain,
evidently from the root " to grind," occurs in the Ramesseum List Papyrus 261,
and again Urk. IV 687.
□ P^j pni-t is otherwise unknown except in two passages in Pap. Ebers, which
do not aid us as to the meaning. An examination of the parallel passage in the first
process (XXI 17) shows that our pni-t is parallel with " the juice thereof." PnSt
must therefore mean something like " fluids."
k k
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:06 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 524 ---
498
THE INCANTATIONS AND RECIPES
IbsSLiTi (possibly to be read : 3^SI.Ej) *a an entirely unknown word. The
rendering above is a guess. Just what happens to the mass placed in the hin-j&T is
not at all clear. At the end of the hin-j&r stage the soft mass is spread on a piece of
linen stretched over the top of the jar, seemingly as old-fashioned cottage cheese
is so placed in order to drain it, the fluid draining back into the jar. It was at this
stage still fluid enough to be " dipped."
At the close of the second process the resulting paste is ready for use, and is
therefore placed in a toilet vase of some costly stone like lapis lazuli, jasper, or
possibly alabaster or aragonite.
Directions for Use
XXII 7-10
8
Translation
Anoint a man therewith. It is a remover of 1"wrinkles'1 from the head. When
the flesh is smeared therewith, it becomes a beautifier of the skin, a remover of
rblemishes1, of all 1"disfigurements'1, of all signs of age, of all rweaknesses"1 which are
in the flesh. Found effective myriads of times.
Commentary
The passage contains a series of uncertain words which are not found elsewhere.
These are all enclosed in half-brackets. The word 1, °, tnV is evidently a derivative
of the familiar word 43 IJft tny " grow old," and must mean something like " signs of
old age." The other words undoubtedly list some of the unsightly external indications
of advanced age, but it is impossible to determine their specific meanings.
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:06 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 525 ---
TRANSLATION AND COMMENTARY 499
RECIPE FOR SOME AILMENT OF THE ANUS AND VICINITY
XXII 11-14
The examination, introduced by the verb " inspect " (m") in place of the usual
" examine " (h*y), is hardly worthy of the name, and recalls the lack of a full examina-
tion so usual in the recipe papyri. As there is no diagnosis, the recipe follows directly
upon the brief examination, the whole case occupying only a little over three lines.
Examination
XXII11-12
12
Translation
If thou inspectest a man ailing in his anus, (and) whether standing or sitting,
suffering very greatly with seizures in both his legs, (conclusion in treatment).
Commentary
i nir-wt, " seizures," is a word not found elsewhere in Egyptian documents.
It may possibly be derived from the well-known word ndry, " to seize," and
hence the rendering above.
Treatment
XXII12-14
■ n<=> s=^«=» i i i<=>X i i lA i i i<=>i i i
X i i iA i i i<=>i i
<0 X &A 0 I f 0 —"tflrisfa
i i i — q Vi i ill = a—o aPB
K k 2
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:06 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 526 ---
500
THE INCANTATIONS AND RECIPES
Translation
Thou shouldst give to him a recipe, an ointment of great protection (as follows) :
Acacia leaves, ground, triturated and cooked together. Smear a strip of fine linen
therewith and place in the anus, that he may recover immediately.
Commentary
■r^cp dtp, " strip," is not a common word. It is found made of " fine linen "
(pht) as here, in Turin Papyri, ed. Pleyte and Rossi, 81, 8 and 77, 17 ; and in Pap.
Leyden I 846, 2, 8. Gardiner calls my attention to it also in his transcription of Pap.
Leyden 947, 12, 9. As a magical bandage it is also mentioned in Mutter und Kind
VIII 8; the London Medical Papyrus 14, 8-9. Made of I" 3^ HIT hHy it appears
in the Kahun Medical Papyrus 2, 8 and in Pap. Hearst 116; and without indication
of the material it appears again in Pap. Hearst X 8-9.
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:06 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 527 ---
CONSECUTIVE TRANSLATION OF THE
INCANTATIONS AND RECIPES
N.B. The sub-titles have all been inserted by the modern editor and are not found
in the original text. Each of the ancient titles has likewise been introduced by a title
inserted by the present editor.
EIGHT INCANTATIONS AGAINST PEST
Title of the First Incantation
XVIII 1
Incantation for exorcising the wind of the pest of the year.
First Incantation
XVIII 1-8
O Flame-in-His-Face ! Presider over the horizon, speak thou to the chief of the
Hemesut-house, who makes Osiris, first of the land, to flourish. O Nekhbet, lifting the
earth to the sky for her father, come thou, bind the two feathers around me, around
me, that I may live and flourish because I possess this White One. The first is the
Great One dwelling in Heliopolis ; the second is Isis ; the third is Nephthys ; while
I am subject to thee (fem.).
O Seizer-of-the-Great-One, son of Sekhmet, mightiest of the mighty, son of the
Disease-Demon, Dened, son of Hathor, mistress of the crown (nt), and flooder of the
streams ; when thou voyagest in the Celestial Ocean, when thou sailest in the morning
barque, thou hast saved me from every sickness.
Conclusion of the First Incantation
XVIII 8-9
Incantation against this year, with the breath of every evil wind.
Horus, Horus, healthy despite Sekhmet, is around all my flesh for life.
Directions for Pronouncing the First Incantation
XVIII 9-11
Speak the words over two vulture feathers, with which a man has covered himself,
placed as his protection in every place where he goes. It is a protection against the
year, expelling sickness in the year of pest.
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:06 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 528 ---
502
THE INCANTATIONS AND RECIPES
Title of the Second Incantation
XVIII 11-12
Another (incantation) for exorcising the plague-bearing wind, the demons of dis-
ease, the malignant spirits, messengers of Sekhmet.
Second Incantation
XVIII 18-15
Withdraw, ye disease demons. The wind shall not reach me, that those who pass
by may pass by to work disaster against me. I am Horus who passes by the diseased
ones of'Sekhmet, (even) Horus, Horus, healthy despite Sekhmet. I am the unique
one, son of Bastet. I die not through thee (fem.).
Directions for Pronouncing the Second Incantation
XVIII 15-16
Let the words be spoken by a man having a stick of des-wood in his hand, while he
comes forth into the open and goes around his house. He cannot die by the pest of the
year.
Title of the Third Incantation
XVIII 17
Another protection against the pest of the year.
Third Incantation
XVIII 17-19
I am the abomination that came forth out of Buto. O Meskhenet, that came forth
out of Heliopolis ; O men, O gods, O spirits, O dead, be ye far from me. I am the
abomination.
Fourth Incantation
xvm 19-xrx 2
Another (incantation). I am the healthy one in the way of the passer by. Shall I
be smitten, while I am healthy ? I have seen the great disaster. O this fever, do not
assail me, (for) I am the one who has come forth out of the disaster. Be thou far
from me.
Fifth Incantation
XIX 2-9
Copy of another (incantation). 0 Jubilation, Jubilation, take not this my heart,
nor this my breast for Sekhmet. Take not my liver for Osiris, in order that the
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:06 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 529 ---
CONSECUTIVE TRANSLATION
503
hidden things that are in Buto may not, shall not enter into my seat on the morning
of counting the Horus-eye, even every male spirit, every female spirit, every male dead,
every female dead, the form of every animal, the one (fem.) which the crocodile has
taken, the one (masc.) which the serpent has stung, the one which has 1"perished"1 by the
knife, (or) the one who has died in his bed. Ye demons of disease, of the followers of
the year and its yield, lo, Horus, even Horus, healthy despite Sekhmet, is [around] all
my flesh for life.
Directions for Pronouncing the Fifth Incantation
XIX 9-14
Speak the words over (images of) Sekhmet, Bastet, Osiris, and Neheb-kau,
written with frankincense on a band of fine linen and attached to a man at his throat.
It will prevent asses from entering, - - the besbes-gooae to me, and the green-breasted
goose. The protection of the life of Neit is around me, (even of) her who is over the
escaped of the sower. Bastet is repelled from the house of a man. A man shall say
(it) at the life of the year.
Title of the Sixth Incantation
XIX 14
Incantation for cleansing a fly.
Sixth Incantation
XIX 14-18
The mouth of this man who is under my fingers, and so forth, is the mouth of a
1"hungry1 calf, when he comes forth from his mother's womb. This insect which has
entered into this his belly, (although) he has entered, shall come forth alive, issuing to
the ground as earth or as excrement, without injuring his belly, (but) coming forth as
his excrement from him, having been assigned to Akeru.
Title of the Seventh Incantation
XIX 18-19
Incantation for cleansing everything from pest.
Seventh Incantation
XIX 19-XX 5
Thy messengers are consumed, O Sekhmet; thy demons of disease retreat, O
Bastet. The Year does not pass by to work disaster against me. Thy breath
does not reach me. I am Horus over the diseased ones of Sekhmet, I am thy Horus,
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:06 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 530 ---
504
THE INCANTATIONS AND RECIPES
O Sekhmet; I am thy unique one, O Buto. I die not by thee; I die not by thee.
1 am the rejoicing one, I am the jubilating one. O son of Bastet, descend not upon me;
0 Dweller in the Sepsepu, approach me not, draw not near me. I am the king in the
midst of his rshelter!.
Directions for Pronouncing the Seventh Incantation
XX 5-8
Let a man say this incantation before a ne/rei-flower, bound to a piece of des-wood,
and tied with a strip of linen. Let them be passed over the things; the pest will be
exorcised, (and) the passage of the disease-demons by everything that is eaten, like-
wise by the beds, will be prevented.
Eighth Incantation
XX 8-11
Another (incantation). A s/iames-flower is on me, the abomination of thy followers.
Thy diseased ones avoid me, the stretching of thy snare avoids me ; I am the escaped
one of thy birds. Horus, Horus, healthy despite Sekhmet, is around all my flesh for
life.
Directions for Pronouncing the Eighth Incantation
XX 11-12
Let a man say this incantation when a shames-flower has been given to him in
his hand.
RECIPE FOR FEMALE TROUBLES
XX 18-XXI 8
Examination
XX 18-14
If thou examinest a woman suffering in her abdomen, so that the menstrual dis-
charge cannot come away for her ; and thou findest trouble in the upper part of her
vulva, (conclusion follows in diagnosis).
Diagnosis
XX 14-15
Thou shouldst say concerning her : " It is obstruction of the blood in her vulva."
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:06 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 531 ---
CONSECUTIVE TRANSLATION
505
First Treatment, Internal and External
XX 15-17
Thou shouldst prepare for her :
Wam, £
Grease, J
Sweet beer, £
Cooked and drunk for four days.
Besides preparing for her (the prescription called) " Discharge of the blood " (as
follows): Oil, tepnenet, eye-paint, sweet frankincense. Mix, (and) anoint the organ
therewith very frequently.
Alternative External Treatment
XX 18-XXI 8
Thou shouldst put hezret-e&rs into ointment. If afterward she has an evil odor,
wipe her off and anoint her two labia therewith very frequently. Thou shouldst apply
frankincense and incense between her two loins, (and) cause the smoke thereof to enter
her flesh.
TWO RECIPES FOR THE COMPLEXION
XXI 8-8
I. Recipe for Transforming the Skin
XXI 8-6
A recipe for transforming the skin :
Honey, 1
Red natron, 1
Northern salt, 1
Triturate together (and) anoint therewith.
II. Recipe for Beautifying the Face
XXI 6-8
Another (recipe) for beautifying the face :
Alabaster Tkernelsl, 1
Natron rkernels"l, 1
Northern salt, 1
Honey, 1
Mix together, (and) anoint therewith.
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:06 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 532 ---
506
THE INCANTATIONS AND RECIPES
RECIPE FOR TRANSFORMING AN OLD MAN INTO A YOUTH
XXI 9-XXII10
Title
XXI 9
Beginning of the Book of Transforming an Old Man into a Youth.
Directions for Making the Recipe
XXI 9-XXII 7
Let there be brought a large quantity of 7imat/et-fruit, about two khar. It should
be bruised and placed in the sun. Then when it is entirely dry let it be Omsked1 as
grain is Trusked1, and it should be winnowed" until (only) the fruit thereof remains.
Everything that comes therefrom shall be measured, (and) let it be sifted after the
manner of the rthreshing floor1 with the sieve. Measure likewise everything that
comes from these fruits and make them into two portions : one consisting of these
fruits and the other even so. Treat one like the other.
(First Process)
Let it be set aside, mixed with water. Make into a soft mass and let it be placed
in a new jar over the fire (and) cooked very thoroughly, making sure that they boil,
evaporating the juice thereof and drying them, until it is like dry, without moisture
therein. Let it be dug out (of the jar). Now when it is cool, let it be put into (another)
jar in order to wash it in the river. Let it be washed thoroughly, making sure that they
are washed by tasting the taste of this water that is in the jar (until) there is no bitter-
ness at all therein. It should be placed in the sun, spread out on launderer's linen.
Now when it is dry, it should be ground upon a grinding mill-stone.
(Second Process)
Let it be set aside in water. Make like a soft mass and let it be placed in a jar over
the fire and cooked thoroughly, making sure that it boils, that the fluids of the mass
may go forth therefrom. A man shall dip out the mass that has come of it with a
dipper. Put into a hin-jar after it is rof the consistency! of clay. Rub and make thick
its rconsistency\ Dip out this mass and put upon a linen cover on the top of this
hin-j&r. Now afterward it should be put into a vase of costly stone.
Directions for Use
XXII 7-10
Anoint a man therewith. It is a remover of l"wrinklesT from the head. When the
flesh is smeared therewith, it becomes a beautifier of the skin, a remover of rblemishes"1,
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:06 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 533 ---
CONSECUTIVE TRANSLATION
507
of all fdisfigurements"1, of all signs of age, of all 1"weaknesses1 which are in the flesh.
Found effective myriads of times.
RECIPE FOR SOME AILMENT OF THE ANUS AND VICINITY
XXII 11-14
Examination
XXII11-12
If thou inspectest a man ailing in his anus, (and) whether standing or sitting,
suffering very greatly with seizures in both his legs, (conclusion in treatment).
Treatment
XXII12-14
Thou shouldst give to him a recipe, an ointment of great protection (as follows) :
Acacia leaves, ground, triturated and cooked together. Smear a strip of fine linen
therewith and place in the anus, that he may recover immediately.
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:06 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 534 ---
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:06 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 535 ---
PART III
THE INDICES
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:06 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 536 ---
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:06 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 537 ---
EGYPTIAN GLOSSARY
EXPLANATIONS AND ABBREVIATIONS
References to Part I, the Surgical Treatise on the recto, are all double, that is, first by case and
second by column and line. Thus, C. = " Case ", that is, one of the forty-eight cases of the Surgical
Treatise ; the number is that of the case ; thus " C. 25 " = Case 25. In the second reference the
Roman numerals designate the columns of the original manuscript; while the following Arabic
numerals designate the lines of the original manuscript. The numbering of the lines is not consecu-
tive throughout the document, but begins anew with each column.
Eeferences to Part II, the Incantations and Recipes, the magical material on the verso (which
has nothing to do with the Surgical Treatise), are, in the case of an incantation, double; that is,
first by incantation, and second by column and line. Thus "I. 4 " = Incantation No. 4.
A reference in black letter thus : C. 18, VII 13, indicates the particular passage in the com-
mentary where full discussion of a word or passage will be found. Occasionally more than one such
black letter reference indicates that the discussion was necessarily divided. All other references
indicate merely the occurrence of the word.
The half-brackets (r "1) indicate that the word so enclosed is of uncertain meaning. If they
enclose hieroglyphs or a transliteration, the half-brackets indicate an uncertain reading or uncertain
restoration.
" g." after a proper name = god or goddess.
A brief explanation of the transliteration of hieroglyphic into Roman letters will be found
on pp. xxi and xxii, and should be consulted by non-Egyptologists.
,
O!: I.1, XVIII1.
'.T
period: C. 3,123 restored; C.4,II7; C. 5, II16; C. 19,VII18;
C.29, X8; C. 47, XVII18.
'YS
brain; also with plural strokes: C. 6, II 18, 19, 22, 28-24, 24;
C. 7, IV 1; C. 8, IV 12.
,B
u
of uncertain meaning: C. 24, IX 1.
'PD
bird: I. 8, XX 10.
'MY
un
mix: XXI 8.
'Mr
an unidentified two-toed bird, C. 22, VIII15.
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:06 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 538 ---
512 EGYPTIAN GLOSSARY
,Mc-T ^ S^"^—^0T^, ramVLS, or with det. u_n, or ^; also ^ ^—^^*—" (once
(,M'W-T) only m 17), ^^-^ (once only IX 8), -j^-^-j (once
only IV 8): C. 7, III 17; C. 8, IV 8,17,18; C. 22, Vm 10-11,
14 bis; C. 25,IX8.
'MM-WR-T ^^k^S,^-> Seizer-of-the-Great-One (a hostile demon): I. 1, XVIII 5.
,NRY liOM shudder; also 1fi~<)1\fl (HI 8), (VHI 1),
*\ (X 5), He (XIII14), (]^ (XIV18): C.4,114;
C. 7, III 8; C. 20, VIII1; C. 29, X 5; C. 40, XIII14; C. 42,
XIV 18.
,[R]-WY two strips; also \M\ (once only XVII 4), (once only
or YR-WY n 28), ^1<^ (once only IX 16), |g 5 (once only I 16);
C. 2,115, restored, 16; C. 6, II28; C. 10, V 8, 9; C. 27, IX 16;
C. 47, XVII 4.
'HT
weakness, exhaustion, weak place: C. 6, II 21; C. 7, IV 4 bis.
See also NHD and HD.
'HD
be weak: C. 19, VII 21-22.
,H-T
cultivated ground: C. 82, XI 8.
'HW
%*$
spirit, also (XIX 6): I. 8, XVIII18; I. 5, XIX 6.
,H-T CVf^), female " spirit ": I. 5, XIX 6.
•H-T
cQi
horizon: I. 1, XVIII1.
,H-T
on
Isis: C. 9.V2.8.
,KR
is*
Akeru: I. 6, XIX 18.
,D
rto be of the consistency"1: XXII 5.
^ = ^
1"consistency"1: XXII 6.
Ja^i i i
Y'BY
+J-
left: C. 84, XII 2.
Y'W
old man: XXI 9.
Y'T
distort, turn aside: C. 7, IV 3; C. 47, XVII 18.
Y'D-T
at?
snare: I. 8, XX 10.
Y'D-T
pest; also with det. \: I. 1, XVIII11; 1. 7, XIX 19, XX 7.
Y'D-T-RNP-T
pest of the year; also l]^^^! (XVIII1): LI, XVIII1
I. 2, XVIII16; I. 8, XVIII 17.
YY
%u
come away; also (XX 18): C. 22, VIII16; XX 18.
Yr
Is
see rR.
YrY
1—"^
wash, or with further det. ^ ; also (] —(XXI 20): XXI
19, 20 bis.
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:06 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 539 ---
EGYPTIAN GLOSSARY
513
YW (] ? Used as main verb:
YW+subject-fprepositional phrase: C. 1, I 6; C. 7,
11ill; C. 9,V8; C. 80, X12; C. 81.X19; I.1, XVIII 5;
I. 5, XIX 18.
YW without subject+prepositional phrase: C. 6, III 1;
C. 89, XIII 11.
YW+subject+predicate noun: C. 9, V 8.
YW+predicate adjective+subject: C. 7, III 3; C. 18,
VI 5; C. 17, VII 8; C. 19, VII 16; C. 21, VIII 7; C. 47,
XVI 19.
Used as auxiliary verb:
YW+main verb in n-form: C. 5, II 16; C. 19, VII 20;
C. 81.X 14; C. 41, XIV 10; LI, XVIII 8; I. 4, XIX 1.
YW+main verb in simple form: C.89,XIII9; I.8,XX11.
YW+subject+qualitative: C. 7, III 20; C. 8, IV 6;
C.11.V10; CIS, VI 6; C. 19, VII16; C. 20, VII28; C. 22,
VIII12, 16; C. 28, IX 20; C. 81, X 18, 15, 20; C. 82, XI 2;
C. 41, XIII 21; C. 45, XV 18.
rYW'1 ox: C. 46, XVI9.
YWF flesh, meat:
YWF of the patient: C. 81, X 14; C. 41, XIII 21,
XIV 14 bis, 15; XXI 8.
YWF as a medicament:
WT-HR-K 6W HR YWF W,D the first day, followed
immediately by use of grease, honey and sometimes lint:
C. 1,1 2; C. 2, I 14 restored; C. 18, VII 10; C. 26, IX 10;
C. 27, IX 17; C.28.X1; C. 40, XIII16.
WT-HR-K &W HR YWF W'D the first day, followed by
SRWH-F HMS(Y)-T R ST' THB-F and then use of grease,
honey and lint: C. 16, VI 20; C. 17, VII 5.
WT-HR-K &W HR YWF W'D the first day; intervening
attention to bandages and removal of meat, then use of grease,
honey and lint: C. 14, VI11, 12.
WT-HR-K (restored in C. 10) SW HR YWF W'D the
first day, followed by attention to bandages, then use of grease
and honey with sometimes lint (C. 47) or YMRW (C. 82):
C. 10, V 7; C. 82, XI 4; C. 47, XVII 2.
hi
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:06 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 540 ---
514
EGYPTIAN GLOSSARY
YWF (cont.)
YWNW
YWNW
YWH
YWTY
YWD
YB
YP
YP-T
YPW
YPN
YPTF
YF
YM
YMY
9'
82
I
1i!
+K' (fem-)
YMYW
111
WT-HR-K SW HR YWF W'D the first day, followed
immediately by YMRW and honey: C. 80, X 11.
WT-HR-K SW HR YWF W'D the first day with no
additional medicaments: C. 29, X 7.
WD-HR-K YWF . . . HR WBNW: C. 8,1 22 restored.
YWF in incantations: I. 1, XVIII 9; L 5, XIX 9;
I. 8, XX 11.
column: C. 11, V 10 bis, 11,14; C. 26, IX 8.
Heliopolis: I. 1, XVIII 5; I. 8, XVIII18.
saturate: C. 11,V12; C. 12, V 19.
one who does not; also (IV 8): C. 8, IV 8, 17 bis.
See also NTY, C. 8,"lV 8.
separate: C. 4,119; C. 81.X18.
heart: C. 7, III 8; I. 5, XIX 8.
S-TYB, "pulse": C. 1,1 7 bis.
to count: C. 1,18,4 ter (twice restored), 5; I. 5, XIX 5.
bushel: C. 1, I 4 bis, 5.
those: C. 6, II 25.
these, those: C. 6, II 20; C. 8, IV 10; C. 41, XIV 8; C. 45,
XV 16; C. 47, XVII 6.
those: C. 27, IX 17; C. 89, XIII 7; C. 45, XV 11; C. 47,
XVII 4.
injuring: I. 6, XIX 17.
there: I. 1, XVIII11.
therein: C. 1, I 5, 9 bis; C. 4, II 8; C. 6, II 20; C. 8, IV 10;
C.9.V8; C. 89, XIII 5.
therewith: C. 4,118; C. 28, VIII 21; I. 1, XVIII10; XX 17,
XXII; XXI 6; XXI8; XXII 7, 8, 18.
therefrom: C. 41, XIV 1; XXI12, XXII 4 bis.
that is in: C. 9, V 2 bis.
YMY-T HNW: I. 5, XIX 5.
one dwelling in: I. 1, XVIII 4. Dweller in (-f^f»: I. 7,
XX 4.
YMY-W HT, " followers ": I. 5, XIX 8.
that which is in (the "interior"), or without plural strokes:
C. 12, V18; C. 22,Vmil.
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:06 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 541 ---
EGYPTIAN GLOSSARY
515
between; also +J^£ (once only XII 11): C. 7, III 15; C. 85,
XII 5; C. 86, XII 11; XXI 2.
the region between (lit. " what is between "); also (twice
III 16, V 21): C. 7, III 16; C. 12, V 21; C. 18, VH 13.
Verb of negation.
Negative commands: C. 8,1 22; C. 4, II 6; C. 5, II 15;
C. 6, II28bis; C. 89, XIII8; C. 47, XVII12; I. 5, XIX8bis.
Negative purpose clause: C. 89, XIII 8; I.5, XIX 4.
an unidentified fruit tree: C. 41, XIV 4; C. 46, XVI 9.
the hidden things: I. 5, XIX 4.
unidentified mineral; also ^f^, (three times only VI 17,
IX 6, X 11).
YMRW used alone: C. 15, VI17; C. 82, XI6; C. 85,XII8;
C. 86, XII14; C. 87, XII17-18; C. 88, XIII 2; C. 42, XIV
20; C. 48, XV 2.
YMRW with honey: C. 25,1X6; C. 80, X 11.
rdisfigurements"1: XXII 9.
by: C. 8, IV 18; I. 2, XVIII15.
YN at head of sentence, introducing subject: C. 1, I 5;
C. 81.X IS; C. 88, XI11,15.
YN after infinitive, introducing so-called " logical subject":
C. 1,110,11 bis; C. 5,1117; C. 7, III 17; C. 80, X 12.
negative: C. 8, IV 17.
bring, carry to: C. 88, XI15; XXI 9.
5fJ^jj ~ " moving to and fro " (C. 7, HI 17).
chin :"c. 22, Vm 10; C. 25, IX 4; C. 27, IX18,14,16.
skin, or with det. ^i, "%,or~^d&,; also (once only IV 5):
C.8,IV5bis, 12-18; C.41.XIII21; C.46,XVI15; XXI4;
XXII8-9.
eyebrow, or with det. C. 7, III 11, IV 2, 8; C. 10, V 6 bis,
7; C. 12,V21.
first person pronoun " I ", emphatic: I. 2, XVIII 14,15; I. 3,
XVIII 17, 19; I. 4, XVIII 19, XIX 2; I. 7, XX 1, 2 bis,
8 bis, 4; I. 8, XX 10.
mine, belonging to me: I.1, XVIII 4.
L 1 2
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:06 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 542 ---
EGYPTIAN GLOSSARY
if, as for :
YR H'Y-K: C. 1, lost column restored; C. 2,1 12; C. 8,
119 restored; C. 4, II 8, C. 5, II12; C. 6, II18; C. 7, III 8;
C.8.IV5; C. 9, IV 19; C.10,V6; C.11,V10; C.12,V16;
C. 18, VI 4; C. 14, VI 7; C. 15, VI 15; C. 16, VI18; C. 17,
VII 1; C. 18, VII 7; C. 19, VII 15; C. 20, VII 22; C. 21,
VIII 6; C. 22, VIII 10; C. 28, VIII 18; C. 24, VIII 22;
C. 25, IX 2; C. 26, IX 6; C. 27, IX 18; C. 28, IX 18; C. 29,
X8; C.80.X9; C.81.X18; C. 82, XII; C.88,XI9; C. 84,
XI 17; C. 85, XII 8; C. 86, XII 9; C. 87, XII 15; C. 88,
XII22; C. 89, XIII8; C. 40, XIII12; C. 41, XIII18; C.42,
XIV 17; C. 48, XIV 22; C. 44, XV 6; C. 45, XV 9; C. 46,
XV 20; C. 47, XVI16; C. 48, XVII15; XX18.
YR introducing miscellaneous verbs: C. 2, I 18; C. 10,
V 7; C. 14, VI 11; C. 20, VII 24, VIII 1; C. 22, VHI 12;
C. 28, VIII20; C. 27, IX14; C. 28, IX 19; C.29,X4; C.41,
XIV 7; C. 45, XV 11, 15; C. 46, XVI 5; C. 47, XVII 8, 5;
XXII 8; XXII11.
YR SWT followed by verb: C. 7, III 8, 18; C. 28, X 2;
C. 81, X 16; C. 84, XI 21; C. 87, XII 19; C. 47, XVII 6,
12,18.
YR DR followed by GMM-K: C. 4, II 6; C. 7, III 7; C. 8,
IV 10; C. 20, VIII 4.
YRNW: C. 1,1 6 restored.
YR YSK or YST: XXI19, XXII1.
YRMHT: C. 8,121; C.9,IV20,V8; C.10.V7; C. 12,
V19; C. 26,IX9; C. 29, X7; C. 80, X 11; XXI11,XXII7.
YRRS,: XX 18.
YR introducing glosses: C. 1,13, 9,10; C. 2,115,16, 17;
C. 8,124 restored, 25, 26, II1; C. 4, II 8,10 bis; C. 5, II16;
C. 6, II 28, 25; C. 7, III 15, 16, 18 bis, 19, 20, 21, IV 1, 2, 4;
C. 8, IV 12,18,15,16,17; C.9,V4; C. 10, V 9; C. 11,V14,
15; C. 12, V 20, 21, VI 1; C. 14, VI 12; C. 18, VII11, 18;
C. 19, VII 19; C. 22, VIII 14, 15, 16; C. 26, IX 11; C. 80,
X 12; C. 81, X 17, 19, 21; C. 82, XI 7; C. 88, XI 18,15;
C. 84, XI 22; C. 89, XIII 9; C. 40, XIII 17; C. 41, XIV 8,
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:06 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 543 ---
EGYPTIAN GLOSSARY
517
YR (cont.) 11, 12, 18, 15; C. 42, XIV 20; C. 48, XV 8, 4, 5; C. 45, XV
16; C. 46, XVI12, 14, 15.
YR miscellaneous: C. 1,1 2; XXI12.
YRY ^ thereof: C. 48, XV 5; XXI 8; XXI 12, 17.
YR ^ what pertains to: C. 5, H 17; C. 19, VII 21; C. 41, XIV 10.
YR-T ^ eye; also ^ (dual), oo (dual VII19): C. 8, IV 6; C. 18, VII14;
C. 19, VII17,19, 20, 21 bis; C. 20, VII 28, VIII 2 bis; C.81,
X15; I. 5, XIX 5.
YRY ^ to make.
Used in prescriptions with the meaning " prepare ": C. 4,
II 7; C. 7, III 7,14 bis; C. 9, IV 20 bis, 21; C. 14, VI 9;
C. 28, VIII 21; C. 85, XII 6; C. 86, XII12; C. 87, XII17;
C. 41, XIV 2, 4, 6; C. 46, XVI 9,11; C. 48, XVII19; XX 15,
16; XXI14,15,16, XXII 2.
Used in descriptions of symptoms with the meaning " pro-
duce": C. 7, IV 3; C. 89, XIII 5, 6, 11; C. 45, XV 18;
C. 46, XVI1; C. 48, XVII17.
to do: C.4,118; C. 19, VII16; C. 20, VIII2, 8; C.30.X10.
to treat, as used in verdicts: C. 1,1 2; C. 2,1 14; C. 8, I 21;
C. 5, II 15; C. 6, II 22; C. 7,11118; C. 8, IV 9, 12; C. 10,
V7; C. 11, V 11; C. 12, V17; C. 18, VI 7; C. 14, VI 9;
C. 15, VI 16; C. 16, VI 20; C. 17, VII 5; C. 18, VII 10;
C. 19, VII18; C. 20, VIII 4; C. 22, VIII14; C. 28, VIII 20;
C. 24, IX 2; C. 25,IX 5; C. 26, IX 9; C. 27, IX 16; C. 80,
X10; C. 81.X 17; C. 82, XI 4; C. 88, XI18; C. 84, XI19,
22; C. 85, XII 4; C. 86, XII 10; C. 87, XII 21; C. 88,
XIII1; C. 89, XIII 6; C. 40, XIII15; C. 41, XIV 2; C. 42,
XIV 19; C. 48, XV 2; C. 44, XV 9; C. 46, XVI 8; C. 47,
XVII 2; C. 48, XVII18.
to administer: C. 3, II 2.
YRY M, " to transform into ": XXI 9.
YRY M YH-T Wr-T, " to mix ": XX 17; XXI15.
YRTYW H«^,°, color; also °,: C. 7, m 20, 21; C. 9, V 1; C. 19, VII
20bis; C. 41, XIV 18.
surface (of a wound), or with det. o: C. 41, XIII 22; C. 46,
XVI1,14.
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:06 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 544 ---
EGYPTIAN GLOSSARY
injury, pain, or with det. 3 (XVII18).
YH to designate a specific wound or injury under discus-
sion: C. 8, IV 15-16,16; C. 46, XVI13.
YH as source of symptoms: C. 8, II 1; C. 7, III 18, 20;
C. 89, XIII 11.
R SW'Y ,-T YH-F: C. 3,1 23 restored; C. 4, II 7; C. 5,
II16; C. 19, VII19; C.29.X8; C. 47, XVII18.
the jubilating one: I. 7, XX 8.
thing
YH-T used without a qualitative modifier:
Designating some material object: C. 1,1 4 bis, 5; C. 7,
11118,19; C. 22, VIII15; I. 7, XIX 18, XX 7, 8.
Indicating something immaterial but neutral: C. 45,
XV 15.
SPR-F R YH-T: C. 4, II 8, 10; C. 6, II 28; C. 7, III 8,
15; C.8.IV9; C. 21, VIII 9; C. 87, XII19.
Indicating something immaterial and unfavorable as
shown by further definition meaning " injury ", " disease ",
etc.: C. 8, IV 5; C. 28, VIII18; XX 14.
YH-T with a following modifier:
With adjective: C. 7, m 7; C. 14, VI14; C. 26, IX 18;
C. 89, XIII11; C. 46, XVI16.
With adverb YM, or adverbial phrase, followed by noun
or participle: C. 4, H 3; C. 6, II 20, III 1; C. 8, IV 10.
With participle: C. 81, X 19; C. 85, XII 5; C. 86,
XII 11; C. 39, XIII 10, 11; C. 41, XIV 16; C. 46, XVI18;
I. 5, XIX 4.
With noun: C. 46, XVI1.
MY YH-T: C. 7, III 12, IV 2.
YRY M YH-T Wr-T, " to mix ": XX 17; XXI 15.
M YH-T Wr-T, " together ": XXI 5; XXI, 8; XXII 18.
I. 5, XIX 9.
to cut: C. 23, Vm 18, 20.
also (]^ (once only III 9).
Introducing circumstantial clause; " while ": C. 7, III 9;
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:06 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 545 ---
EGYPTIAN GLOSSARY
519
YSK (cont.)
YST
YS[W]
YSW-W
YKDW
YT
YTF
YTRW
YTH
YTY
YDB
YDR
^ 11
/CD
C. 17, VII 2; C. 21, VIII 7; C. 88, XI 10; C. 89, XIII 5;
C. 42, XIV 18; C. 48, XV 1; C. 47, XVII12.
YSK SW HM, " while at the same time ": C. 13, VI 5;
C. 17, VII8.
YR YSK, " now when '*: XXI19.
also (] "J" (once only VII8).
Introducing circumstantial clauses; "while": C. 1, I, 9;
C. 18, VII 8, 12; C. 28, VIII18; C. 41, XIII19, 20, XIV 15;
C. 47, XVII 8.
Introducing a parenthetical clause; "although": C. 1,
111.
YST YR, " although " : C. 1,1 2.
YR YST, " now when " : XXII 1.
Y&T miscellaneous: I. 5, XIX 9.
spittle: C. 7,1113-4.
protrude; or with det. <tj; also (Jee'O (once only II 10),
(]<?(!<?11 (twice only V 17; VI 19), (once only VI 15),
(]P<?11 (twice only VIII 6; XV 21), 1(!ee (once only XII 22):
C. 4,114,10; C. 5, II 18; C. 8, IV 6; C. 11.V10; C. 12,
V 17; C. 15, VI 15; C. 16, VI 19; C. 21, VIII 6; C. 88,
XII 22; C. 46, XV 21.
a mason: C. 46, XVI 5.
grain: XXI11.
father: I. 1, XVIII 8.
river : XXI 20.
streams: I. 1, XVIII 7.
draw out; C. 41, XIV 3 ; C. 46, XVI 8.
take, take away; also !^—n (twice only III 17; XIX 7): C. 20,
VIII 2; C. 88, XI15? I. 5, XIX 8, 4, 7.
~ " moving to and fro " (C. 7, HI 17).
margin: C. 41, XIII 21.
stitching (noun,surgical suture); or with det. ; also
l^ifi (once onlv V1 H)' IT1 1 1 (once onlv V 8): C-10^- 6,
87c. 14, VI 9, 11; C. 28, VIII 19, 20; C. 26, IX 8; C. 28,
1X21; C. 47, XVI 20; XVII 8, 8.
to stitch: C. 8,1 22 restored; C. 10, V 7; C.26,1X10.
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:06 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 546 ---
EGYPTIAN GLOSSARY
r-T
r,
<—
rJ-T
r,
r,-T
r'-T
o\
r'-T
"v
rW-T
rW[,]TYW
r\
rPR
rFF
rMr-T
rN-T
rNrR-T Zl^Z
rNH ^7
rNTYW
rNDW
rR
Yr[R] (older form)
arm: C. 47, XVI 20.
Patient unconscious of his r-WY: C. 81, X 18, 15, 17;
C. 88, XI12, 18.
hand: C. 9, V 5; C. 20, VIII2; I. 2, XVIII15.
r of surgeon used in examination: C. 1, lost column re-
stored; C. 2,1 18; C. 7, III 10; C. 18, VI 4; C. 17, VII1;
C. 24, VIII 28; C. 47, XVII 8.
HR r-WY, " immediately ": C. 48, XVII17; XXII14.
member: C. 1,16,8; C.30.X12; C. 41, XIV 7; C. 45, XV15;
C. 47, XVII 6.
many, great, greatly; also 233^^ (once onty XXII12): C. 20,
VIII1; C. 46, XV 21; I. 4, XIX 1; XXII12.
greatness.
Rr'-TWR-T: C. 41, XIV 11; XXI10.
ass: I.5, XIX12.
costly stone: XXII 7.
rmould"1: C. 6, m 1.
roll of linen: C. 47, XVI19.
sheep: C. 7, III 11, 21,IV 1.
animal: I. 5, XIX 6.
adversary: C. 9, V 2.
incur (lit. " acquire "): C. 3,1 24, r25">.
a fly; also ^. (XIX 16): I. 6, XIX 14,16.
see 'Mr-T.
claw, finger-nails: C. 8, IV 8, 18 bis; dual =" two claws,"
indicating the two groups of four fingers of the surgeon's two
hands, in setting dislocated mandible, C. 25, IX 4.
rN-T-'Mr, " claw of the 'awe-bird": C. 22, Vm 15.
a kind of worm: C. 12, V 18, VI1-2, 3; C. 14, VI10.
live: C. 4, II11; I. 1, XVIII 4; I. 6, XIX 16.
hfe; also (once only XIX 14): I.1, XVIII 9; I. 5, XIX 9,
18, 14; I. 8, XX 11.
frankincense. or with det. o: I. 5, XIX 10; XX 17, XXI 2.
jar: XXI 19, 21.
to extend, to penetrate; also 1=; (C. 40, XIII18, 15).
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:06 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 547 ---
EGYPTIAN GLOSSARY
521
rR N, employed with other things than the terra "bone":
C.11,V15; C. 12,V21; C.81,X15; C. 84, XI 28.
rR N KS: C. 1, lost column bis restored, I 2 restored, 10;
C. 2, I 12, 18, 16 restored; C. 4, II 2, 8, 5; C. 5, II 12, 14;
C. 6, II 18, 19; C. 7, III 2, 5,12; C. 10, V 6; C. 18, VII 8,
12; C. 20, VII 22, 28, VIII8; C. 27, IX14,16; C.29,X4,6.
rR R KS: C. 8,118, 19, 21 restored.
Yr[R] R KS: C. 40, XIII18,15.
elevated, prominent: C. 46, XV 20, XVI 2.
See also SrR and SKR.
mandible, or with det. <^; also -=? (once only IX 2): C. 7,
m 6, 7, 16, 18; C. 22, VIII 14; C. 24, VIII 22, 28, IX 1;
C. 25, IX 2 bis, 4, 5.
to envelope: C. 6, II 24.
contend, or with det. u or—a: C. 4,116,11; C. 7, III 6; C. 21,
VIII 9; C. 28, IX 22; C. 29, X 7; C. 87, XII 17; C. 45,
XV 14-15; C. 47, XVII11.
to stand: XXII11.
secretions, or without det.: C. 41, Xm 22—XIV 1; C. 45,
XV 18; C. 47, XVII 9.
evaporate: XXI17.
cedar, or the like: C. 46, XVI10.
numerous (adjective): C. 5, II17.
often, greatly (adverbs); written C. 20, VIII 2;
C. 28, IX20; XX 17, XXI1.
enter; also ^ C - 8, IV 8, 15, 16 bis; C. 22, VIII 17; C. 88,
XI14; I. 5, XIX 12; I. 6, XIX 16 bis; XXI 8.
Idiomatic with possible meaning of " undertake ": C. 7,
IV 4.
to be whole: C. 6, H 21.
grease, fat, or with det. o, also ~j (once only XIV 5): C. 41,
XIV 5, 6; C.46, XVI10,11.
1"crucible"1: C. 6,II20, 25; C. 8, IV 10.
cord; also (once only III 16): C. 7, HI 6, 7, 16,18 bis.
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:06 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 548 ---
522
EGYPTIAN GLOSSARY
W"T
£^
c 1
way: I. 4, XVIII 19.
W'-T
alll
evil: C. 9, V 2.
WBW
of uncertain meaning: C. 24, IX 1.
W'M
an unidentified drug: XX 15.
W'H
apply: C. 28, X 2.
WD
fresh; also J^, J^' J (once only XI).
WT-HR-K 6W HR YWF W'D HRW TPY (YDR instead
of WT by ancient error of omission V 7): C. 1,1 3 restored;
C. 2, I 14 restored; C. 10, V. 7; C. 14, VI 11, 12; C. 16,
VI 20; C. 17, VII 5; C. 18, VII 10; C. 26, IX 10; C. 27,
IX 17; C. 28, X 1; C. 29, X 7; C. 80, X 11; C. 82, XI 4;
C. 40, XIII16; C. 47, XVII 2.
[YWF] W'D HRW TPY HR WBNW-F: C. 8,1 22.
green; |^ (once only XV 18).
W'D-T: C. 45, XV 18.
W'D to be healthy: I.1, XVIII9; I. 2, XVIII14; I. 5, XIX 9; 1.8,
XX 11.
W'DW ° , green pigment; also fjs^, ° ,: C. 41, XIV 5; C. 46, XVI10.
W'DY-T Buto: I. 7, XX2.
W'D-H'-T 't^V " green-breasted " (goose): I. 5, XIX 12.
WY (dependent pronoun, first person, common, singular): I. 1,
XVIII 8; 1.2, XVIII18; I. 7, XX 1; I. 8, XX 10.
Wr ^ one: C. 1,110,12 restored; C. 21, VIII 7; C. 81, X 19; C. 84,
XII1; XX 17; XXI5; XXI8; XXI14,15; XXII18.
Wr, numeral, written i: XXI 4, 5 bis; XXI 6, 7 ter.
Wr Wr (also the fem.), " one . . . the other ": C. 2,
I 17 bis (once restored); C. 10, V 9 bis; C. 88, XI 14 bis;
XXI 15 bis.
Wr-SNY, " one of them both ": C. 35, XH 7; C. 86, XII18.
Wr-TY the unique one; also ^<?\^ (XX 2): I. 2, XVIII15; I. 7,
XX 2.
WrB flzE^! priests: C. 1,16.
WrF 0 to contract: C. 8, IV 15.
WrH an unidentified fruit or grain: C. 7, III 15.
WB' U^!k— toopen: C.6,II24; C.14.VI13; C.26.IX12; C.89,XIII8,9.
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:06 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 549 ---
EGYPTIAN GLOSSARY
523
WBNW ^Jo<?^ wound, or with det. or (once only VIII 18); also fi £/*",,
SO/*, a|,^,. «o% «% « (twice only X 8, XII17).
General: C. 1,1 8 restored; C. 2, I 13 restored, 16; C. 8,
122; C. 9,V2; C. 10, V 5, 7; C. 14, VI 7; C. 18, VII 7,10;
C. 28, VIII18; C. 26, IX 6; C. 28, IX 18; C. 40, XIII12.
WBNW N KF-T, " gaping wound ": C. 2, I 12 bis, 14 re-
stored, 15,17 restored; C. 8,118 partly restored, 19 restored,
20-21 partly restored; C. 4, II 2, 8, 5; C. 5, II 11,12, 14;
C. 6, II 18, 18-19; C. 7, III 2, 5, 12; C. 10, V 9; C. 27,
IX 18 bis, 15; C.28,IX18; C. 29,X8,4; C. 47, XVI16,17,
XVII 10.
WBNW said to be without KF-T (" a gash "): C. 1, I 10;
C. 18, VII 7, 11, 12.
WBNW N KF-T H'r Hr-F, WDr SW-WT-F: C. 47,
XVII1, 5.
Also SW-WT-F M WBNW-F: C. 47, XVI19.
Miscellaneous characteristics:
Perforating, piercing (HP<=»JJ[/»): C. 14, VI 7, 9, 18;
C.26,IX7,9,11; C.28,1X21.
Penetrating without KF-T or without mention
of KF-T: C. 1, lost column bis restored, 11 restored; C. 10,
V 6; C. 18, VII 8; C. 20, VII 22, 28, VIII 8; C. 29, X 6;
C. 40, XIII12-18, 14.
Cutting (H p^J: C. 28, VIII18,19.
Smashing (p^): C. 9, IV 19 bis.
SPT-WY WBNW-F, " two lips of his wound ": C. 1,
I 1, 10 restored; C. 14, VI 8, 18; C. 18, VII 18; C. 28,
VIII 21; C 26,IX12; C. 41, XIII 20; see also C. 10, V 9.
R, N WBNW-F, " mouth of his wound ": C. 9, IV 20;
C. 20, VII 24-VIII 1; C. 28, IX 20, X 8; C. 41, XIII 19,
22, XIV 8,15,16; C. 46, XVI 8; C. 47, XVII 9,14.
HNW WBNW-F: C. 87, XII 20; C. 41, XIV 12.
WBNWPG[,]-Y: C. 47, XVII 8.
WBNW HR-F (or -&): C. 8, IV 18; C. 19, VII 15;
C. 24, IX 1; C. 87, XII 15 bis, 17, 21; C. 44, XV 7, 8.
WBNW PF NTY HR: C. 87, XII19.
WBNW, symptoms resulting from: C. 7, III 9 bis;
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:06 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 550 ---
524
EGYPTIAN GLOSSARY
WBNW (cont.) <?j;^>
WP-T
WPY
WPW-TYW
WNN
V
V
□ x
WNT
WN
WNM-T
WNMY
C. 28, X 2; C. 41, XIII19, XIV 12; C. 47, XVII 7 bis, 8,
12; see also TSW, " stiffness," etc.
WBNW, surgical and medical treatment of:
Palpation (]^| js) : C. 1, lost column restored; C. 2,
I 18; C. 8, I 19; C. 4, II 8; C. 5, II12; C. 6, II 19; C. 7,
III 2; C. 8, IV 6; C. 10, V 6; C. 18, VII 8; C. 27, IX 14;
C. 47, XVI18 £l by error).
Inspecting (^&): C. 19, VII15.
Examining (©£\$): C. 26,IX7; C. 29, X 5.
Healing or drying: C. 9, IV 21; C. 89, XIII 9; C. 41,
XIII 21, XIV 5, 8.
Miscellaneous treatment: C. 6, II 22; C. 9, V 5; C. 10,
V8,9; C. 14, VI8; C. 28, VIII20; C. 26, IX 8; C. 28, IX 21;
C. 89, XIII 8; C. 46, XVI 7.
WBNW obscure: C. 5, II 17; C. 89, XIII 9; C. 41,
XIII18 bis, XIV 1, 8, 10.
crown (of the head): C. 7, IV 1 bis.
to account: C. 8, IV 7.
messengers; also Y<?l^>j (XIX 19): I. 2, XVIII12; 1.7,
XIX 19.
subsist: C. 12, VI 3.
to be; also 4L (XVI 16): C. 7, III 16, 21; C. 9, V 5; C. 84,
XII 1 bis; C. 40, XIII 17; C. 42, XIV 21; C. 45, XV 17;
C. 46, XVI18,16; XXI18, XXII10.
WNN+qualitative: C. 7, III 19, 20; C. 14, VI10; C. 19,
VII 21; C. 22, VIII 17; C. 81, X 19, 20; C. 89, XIII 10;
C. 41, XIV 8,10; C. 48, XV 4; C. 45, XV 18.
WNN+HR with infinitive: C. 22, VIII15; XXII 4.
only with negative N WNT: C. 1,11 restored, 12; C. 2,114,
17; C. 8, IV 5, 18; C. 18, VII 8, 9, 12, 18; C. 27, IX 15;
C. 42, XIV 18; C. 45, XV 12.
open: C. 7, III 8, 7,17, IV 2; C. 18, VI 6; C. 17, VII 4; C. 25,
1X8; C. 41, XIV 10.
diet: C. 8, II 2.
right: C. 84, XII 2.
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:06 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 551 ---
EGYPTIAN GLOSSARY
525
WNH dislocation: C. 25, IX 2 bis, 5; C. 31, X 12, 18, 15, 16, 17, 18,
19; C.84,XI17bis, 19,22; C.42,XIV18; C.48,XIV22bis,
XV 2, 8.
loosen, be loose (of surgical stitching): C. 10, V8; C. 14, VI11;
C. 28, VIII 20; C. 47, XVII 8, 8. See also V 15.
WNSY *5Tmi "wenesfc-juice": C. 47, XVII10.
WR ^ large, great, greatly, very; also (once only XXII 12),
(thrice only XV 12, XXI 10, XXII 12): C. 4, II 10;
C. 6,1124; C.12.V22; C.89,XIII5; C. 41,XIV 11; C. 45,
XV 12,17; C. 46, XV 21, XVI18; XXI10; XXII12 bis.
WR-T (or WR) with the meaning " exceedingly " in the
phrase " he shudders exceedingly ": C. 4, EE 4; C. 7, III 8;
C. 20, Villi; C.29.X5; C. 40, XIII14; C. 42, XIV 18.
WR
the great one: I. 1, XVIII 4.
WRM-W
corrugations, ripples: C. 6, II20, 25, III 1; C. 8, IV 10.
WRH
°
anoint, smear: XXII 7; XXII 18.
WRD
«=> A—D
to be feeble: C. 7, m 3.
WHY
to escape: I. 5, XIX 18.
WHNN
<?rai ©
crown of the head; or with determinative c=g: C. 6, II 21; C. 8,
IV 11.
WHr
m—a. a
to loose: C. 82, XI 5.
WSS-T
ol 1 1
urine: C. 7, IV 1.
WSYR
Osiris; also j © ^ (once only XVIII 2): C. 9, V 8; I.1, XVIII2;
I. 5, XIX 4, 10.
WSH
wide: C. 1,110 restored, 12.
WS-T
(? 1 1 1
fragments; C. 22, VHI 12, 15, 16.
WSrK-T
O
scribal error for m$rk-t, q. v.
WSB-T
4J,?,
an unidentified mineral: C. 41, XIV 5.
WSR
i=i ©
to dry up: C. 89, XIII 9.
WGW-T
jaw; also ^ (in dual, once only III 7), seI]!]^,^ (once only
VII14): C. 7, m 7,17,18; C. 18, VII14.
WT
to bind; also o (three times only I 14, XVI 11, XVII 2),
o (two times only VI 20; IX 10).
WT in applying a medicament:
WTfreshmeat: C. 1,12; C. 2,114; [C. 10,V7restored];
C. 14, VI 11; C. 16, VI 20; C. 17, VII 5; C. 18, VII 10;
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:06 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 552 ---
EGYPTIAN GLOSSARY
C. 26, IX 10; C. 27, IX 17; C. 28, X 1; C. 29, X 7; C. 80,
X10-11; C. 82, XI4; C. 40, XIII15; C. 47, XVII2.
WT grease, honey and lint: C. 7, III 8; C. 14, VI12.
WT YMRW (or YMRW and honey): C. 15, VI 16-17;
C. 25, IX 5; C. 82, XI 5; C. 85, XII 8; C. 86, XII18; C. 87,
XII17; C. 88, XIII 2; C. 42, XIV 19; C. 48, XV 2.
After a recipe, WT HR-S: C. 41, XIV 5, 6, 7; C. 46,
XVI 4, 5, 9,11.
WT in applying a surgical bandage for purely mechanical
purposes, such as support, compression, etc.: C. 12, V 20;
C. 84, XI19.
Do not WT: C. 8, I 22; C. 4, II 6; C. 5, II15; C. 6,
II 28; C. 47, XVII 18.
bandage; also (once only XI 5): C. 82, XI5; C.41, XIII 21,
XIV 14.
WT-W " wrappings ": C. 45, XV 18.
embalmer, professional bandager, or with det. —a: C. 9, V 5;
C. 19, VII 21.
to escape: I. 8, XX 10.
put; also <=, 4—a (three times only II 7, 15; X8), ^ (once
only II 1).
WDY the surgeon's hand or finger: C. 1, lost column re-
stored; C. 2,1 18; C. 7, III 9; C. 18, VI 4; C. 22, VIII 10;
C. 24, VIII 28; C. 47, XVII 8.
WDY a bandage, a surgical device or a medicament:
WDY with meaning " apply " used with bandage or other
surgical device: C. 2, I 15 restored; C. 11, V 11-12; C. 12,
V20.
WDY.... M HNW: C. 85, XII7; C. 86, XII12-18.
WDY...RDYM: C. 12, V 19.
WDY with meaning "apply" used with the remedy:
C. 41, XIV 8, 4; C. 46, XVI12.
WDY, " apply " with HR, " upon," " to ": C. 8, I 22
restored; C. 6, II 28; C. 27, IX 16.
WDY, " place," to indicate the position of patient during
examination or treatment: C. 7, III 15; C. 85, XII 4-5;
C. 86, XII 10; C. 48, XVII18-19.
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:06 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 553 ---
EGYPTIAN GLOSSARY
527
WDY, " put " a fractured or dislocated bone " into its
place ": C. 12, V 18; C. 25, IX 5; C. 84, XI19.
WDY HR MNY-WT-F in diet directions: C. 3,122,
II 1; C. 4, II 7; C. 5, II 15; C. 11, V 12; C. 19, VII 18;
C. 21, VIII 9; C.28,X8; C. 29, X 8; C. 47, XVII18.
WDY miscellaneous:
WD-T NHD and WD-T 'HT meaning to rshow ex-
haustion"1: C. 7, III 14, IV 4.
WD-T, " articulations," lit. " puttings ": C. 43, XV 5.
WDY M, " assail ": I. 4, XIX 1-2.
pour, pour off, C. 6, II 25; C. 20, VIII 5 (with gap where deter-
minative should be),
to be whole, uninjured: C. 1, lost column restored; C. 2,118-14
restored; C. 8, IV 13; C. 18, VII 9; C. 27, IX 15; C. 81,
X18.
to be healthy, to nourish: I. 1, XVIII 4; I. 4, XVIII 19,
XVIII 19-XIX 1.
separate: C. 47, XVI17, XVII1, 6.
cists: C. 89, XIII 6.
to be sluggish: C. 41, XIV 9.
clammy; also J^^s— (once only III 19), J^l^E:
(once only III 19): C. 7, HI 10,19 bis.
phallus, member; also (twice only X 14, 22): C. 31, X 14,
16, 20, 22.
Bastet: I. 2, XVIII15; I. 5, XIX 10,18; I. 7, XIX 20, XX 8.
to be in an oily condition; also J^^-dQ11 (XIV 1): C. 41,
XIV 1; C. 46, XV 21-XVI1.
dipper: XXII 5.
honey; or with det. o, also seemingly ? , (although seem-
ing may be cursive form of ■^Q.
BY-T used alone: C. 82, XI6; C.85,XII8; C. 86, XII14;
C.88, XIII 2; C. 42, XIV 20; C. 48, XV 8; XXI 4; XXI 7.
Grease and BY-T: C. 9, V 4; C. 10, V 8; C. 15, VI 17;
C. 18, VII11; C. 26, IX 11; C. 84, XI 20.
Grease, BY-T and lint: C. 1,1 3 restored; C. 2, I 15 re-
stored; C. 8,128; C. 7,1118; C.11.V18; C.12,V20; C. 14,
VI 12; C. 16, VI 21; C. 17, VII 6; C. 19, VII 19; C. 28,
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:06 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 554 ---
528
EGYPTIAN GLOSSARY
BY-T (cont.)
VIII 22; C. 27, IX 17; C. 28, X 1; C. 87, XII 18; C. 40,
XIII16; C. 47, XVII 5,15.
YMRW and BY-T: C. 25, IX 6; C. 80, X 11.
BW
place: I. 1, XVIII10.
BW-T
abomination; also J^<*^j (once only XVIII 17): L 8,
XVIII 17,19; I. 8, XX 9.
BB-WY
J Jw5
collar-bones; also J J<?^: C. 34, XI 17 bis, 18, 19, 21, 22;
C. 85, XII 8 ter, 4, 6.
BBY-T
gorget: C. 84, XII1.
BN-WT
tumors, or with det. o; also ^ °, (once only XIII5-6), J ^fpj
(once only XIII 8), r^°—» (once only XV 9), ^ (once only
XIII 8): C. 39, Xm8 bis, 5-6, 7, 10; C. 45, XV 9, 10, 11,
14, 15, 16.
BNW-T
Jo<?
mill-stone: XXII 2.
BNF
excrement, dung: C. 41, XIV 4; C. 46, XVI 9.
BHS
calf: I. 6, XIX 15.
BSBg
a species of goose: I. 5, XIX 12.
BKSW
backbone: C. 31, X 15.
BKN
1 ^ a
urine; also J ^ (III 21): C. 7, mil, 21.
BTW
desert; forsake: C. 7, IV 4.
BD'-W
stiff rolls; also Jj|^^ (V 20): C. 11, V 13; C. 12, V 20;
C. 28, VIII 21; C. 84, XI 20.
P
I1
1
mat, seat: I. 5, XIX 5.
P
>
Buto: I. 5, XIX 5.
P,
this, the; also □^SC^ (once only II 10): C. 1, I 11 (partly
restored); C. 4, II10; C. 9, V5 bis; XXI 21.
P'W
to have done, rto have incurred"1; also ^ (once only III 18):
C. 3,111; C. 7, III 18, IV 4.
p'Y&-T
1scabs'1: C. 41, XHI 21-22.
P'HD
to turn over; also ^J, (once only XI18): C. 8, IV 14; C. 34,
XI18.
P'K-T
TAT
fine linen; or without \: I. 5, XIX 11; XXII18.
P'K-T
shell (or squama of the skull); also affi^o (once only IV 19-20),
□ £o (once only V 1), °%\$a°t (once only IV 18): C. 4,
H 9 bis; C. 7, m 16 bis; C. 8, IV 18; C. 9, IV 19,19-20, V1.
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:07 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 555 ---
EGYPTIAN GLOSSARY
529
PY-W □(}<?, 1wrinkles-1: C. 6, m 1.
PW a<? also o (once only IV 18).
Demonstrative adjective with meaning "this": C. 9,
IV 81.
Used in nominal sentences as subject or copula: C. 1, I
11; C. 4, II 7; C. 5, II 17; C. 6, III 1; C. 7, III 15, 17,
IV 2; C. 20, VIII 5; C. 81, X 16, 20 bis; C. 82, XI 6, 8
C. 84, XII1; C. 89, XIII11; C. 41, XIV 11; C. 45, XV 15
I.1, XVIII11 bis; XX 14; XXII 8.
Subject of apodosis in a gloss with the sense of" it means "
C. 1,1 4 restored, 10, 11; C. 2, 116 restored; C. 8, I 24 re
stored, 26 restored, II 1, 2; C. 4, II 9, 10, 11; C. 5, II 16
C. 6, II 25; C. 7, III 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, IV 1 bis, 8, 4
C. 8, IV 18, 16 bis, 18; C. 9, V 5; C. 10, V 9; C. 11, V 14
C.12, V21,22, VI2; C. 14, VI18; C. 18, VII 12,14; C. 19
VII 20; C. 22, VIII 14, 16, 17; C. 26, IX 12; C. 81, X 22
C. 88, XI16; C. 84, XI 22; C. 89, XIII10; t). 41, XIV 9,12
18, 14; C. 42, XIV 21; C. 48, XV 4, 5, 6; C. 45, XV 17
C. 46, XVI18,15,16.
R'PW, "or": C. 8, IV 16.
NT[T] PW, " because " : C 1, I 7 bis.
PP that: C. 4, II 6; C. 5, II12,16; C. 6, II20, 28; C. 7, III 7, 8,
9ter,18; C. 8, IV 6,7 bis, 10; C. 18, VI 4, 5; C. 14, VI8 bis;
C. 16, VI 19; C. 17, VII 2, 8; C. 18, VII 8; C. 19, VII 17;
C. 20, VIII 1,4; C. 21, VIII 7 bis, 8; C. 22, VIII11; C. 28,
VIII 20; C. 24, VIII 28; C. 26, IX 8; C. 28, IX 21, X 2;
C. 29, X 5; C. 85, XII 6; C. 86, XII12; C. 87, XII 16,19;
C. 88, XIII 1; C. 41, XIII 19 bis, 20 bis, 21, 22; C. 42,
XIV 18; C. 48, XV 1; C. 46, XVI 8; C. 47, XVII 8, 7 bis,
8, 12 bis.
PN this: C. 8, IV 16 bis; C. 9, V 8; C. 10, V 8; I. 5, XIX 8 bis,
I. 6, XIX 14,16; I. 7, XX 5; I. 8, XX 11; XXII 7.
PN&-T JIP^I fluids: XXII4.
PNK dip out: XXII 4, 6.
PR " house: I. 2, XVIII16; I. 5, XIX 14. PR-HMS-WT, XVIII 2.
PRY come forth: C. 12, V 18; C. 28, IX 20; C. 87, XII19; C. 41,
m m
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:07 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 556 ---
EGYPTIAN GLOSSARY
XIV 9-10, 15, 16; I. 2, XVIII15; I. 8, XVIII17, 18; I. 4,
XIX 2; I. 6, XIX 15,16,17; XXII 4 bis.
become: XXII8.
fruit: XXI12,14 bis; III 21, see p. 196.
reach: I. 2, XVIII18; I. 7, XXI.
end, back.
PH-WY of the ramus: C. 7, m 17; C. 22, VIII10,14 bis;
C. 25, IX 8.
PH-WY of the mandible: C. 7, III 17,18; C. 18, VII 14;
C. 22, VIII14.
PH-WY of the nose: C. 11.V15; C.12.V21.
PH-WY of miscellaneous: C. 19, VII 21; C. 81, X 20.
anus; written Si: XXII 11.
anus: XXII18.
detach, sever: C. 31, X 19.
turn, turn around, circulate; also JL2>^ (once only XI 8):
C. 19, VII16; C. 82, XI2, 8; C. 41, XIV 12; I. 2, XVIII16.
prescription, recipe, remedy: C. 3, II 2; C. 9, V 2, 5; C. 41,
XIV 14; C. 46, XVI 6; XXI 8; XXII12.
sting: I. 5, XIX 7.
spinal column, back; or without C. 7, III 11; C. 48, XVII
15,16, 17, 18.
to cook; also [j. (three times V 4; XX 16; XXII 18): C. 9,
V4; XX 16; XXI17 bis, XXII8 bis; XXII18.
split.
PSN of the skull: C. 1,11 restored; C. 2,117; C. 4, U 2,
8, 5, 6, 8 bis, 10.
PSN in maxilla: C. 16, VI 18 bis, 19 bis.
PSN in the temple: C. 18, VII 9; C. 21, VIII 6 bis, 7 bis, 8.
PSN in the chin: C. 27, IX 15.
PSN in the arm: C. 88, XII 21, 22, XIII1 bis.
open: C. 47, XVII 3, 8.
some process in metal working: C. 6, m 1.
disfigured, bruised: C.11.V10; C. 12, V 17, 21-22, 22, VI1.
to rise, lift; also (III 8, with 'w. across ^): C. 4,
II10; C. 7, III 8; C. 47, XVI 19-20.
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:07 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 557 ---
EGYPTIAN GLOSSARY
531
of unknown meaning: C. 47 XVI19.
nose; also Sg<f (twice only V 14, 21): C. 11, V 10 ter, 11, 18,
14 quater, 15 ter; C. 12, V 16 ter, 17, 21 ter, 22; C. 18, VI 4;
C. 14, VI14; C. 26, 1X8.
to loosen: C. 11, V 15.
lint.
Dry FTT alone: C. 28, X 2.
Oil, honey, and FTT: C. 1,13; C.2,I15; C.8,128; C. 7,
III 8; C. 11.V18; C. 12.V20; C. 14, VI 12; C. 16, VI 21;
C. 17, VII 7; C. 19, VII 19; C. 28, VIII 22; C. 27, IX 18;
C.28.X1; C. 87, XII18; C. 40, XIII16; C. 47, XVII 5,15.
to sweat: C. 7, III 19.
sweat: C. 7, III 10, 19.
four: XX 16.
in, on, to, etc. (indicating place where); also 1^ before suffix
pronouns: C. 1, lost column bis restored, I 1 bis (once re-
stored), 6, 7; C. 2, I 12 restored, 18 restored, 14 bin, 15 re-
stored, 17 restored; C. 8, I 18, 19 restored, 20, 21 bis (once
restored), II 1; C. 4, II 2, 8, 4, 5, 6, 8, 9; C. 5, II 11, 12,
18 bis, 14,15; C. 6, II18,19, 20 bis, 22, 25; C. 7, III 2, 4, 5,
6, 9,12,18,17,18; C. 8, IV 5, 6 bis, 7 ter, 8, 9,10,12 bis, 15,
16, 18 bis; C. 9, IV 19 bis, 20, V 8, 5; C. 10, V 5, 6, 7; C. 11,
V 10 bis, 11,12,14; C. 12, V 16 bis, 17,18,19 bis, 21, VI 2,
8 bis; C. 18, VI 8, 4 bis, 5, 6; C. 14, VI7 bis, 9,11,18; C. 15,
VI14, 15, 16; C. 16, VI18 bis, 19; C. 17, VII1 bis, 2, 8, 4;
C. 18, VII 7 bis, 9, 10, 18; C. 19, VII 15, 17 bis, 18; C. 20,
VII 22, 28, VIII 8, 4; C. 21, VIII 6 bis, 8; C. 22, VIII 9,
10, 12, 18 bis, 14, 15; C. 28, VIII 18 ter, 19, 20, 21; C. 24,
VIII 22, 28, IX 1; C. 25, IX 2 bis, 4, 5 bis; C. 26, IX 6, 7,
9. 11; C. 27, IX 18, 14, 15, 16; C. 28, IX 18, 19, 22, X 2;
C. 29, X 8, 4, 6, 7; C. 80, X 8, 9,10,12; C. 81, X 12,18,17,
18; C. 82, XI 1 bis, 4, 5, 7; C. 88, XI 9 bis, 12, 18; C. 84,
XI17 bis, 19 bis, 22, 28; C. 85, XII 8 bis, 4, 6, 7 bis; C. 86,
XII 9 bis, 10, 12, 18 bis; C. 87, XII 15 bis, 16, 20; C. 88,
XII 21, 22, XIII1 bis; C. 89, XIII 8, 4, 6, 9 bis, 10; C. 40,
XIII12,18,14; C. 41, XIII18 bis, 22, XIV1,7,8,12; C. 42,
m m 2
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:07 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 558 ---
EGYPTIAN GLOSSARY
XIV 17, 19; C. 48, XV 1, 2, 8, 4, 5 ter; C. 44, XV 6 bis, 8;
C. 45, XV 12,15; C. 46, XV 20, 21, XVI2, 8, 7, 8,10,18 bis;
C. 47, XVI16, 17, 19, XVII1, 6, 7,11, 14; C. 48, XVII16,
17, 18; I. 1, XVIII 7; I. 2, XVIII15; I. 4, XVIII19; I. 7,
XX 5; I. 8, XX 12; XX 14; XXI 9, 16, 21, XXII 8, 5, 6,
10; XXII11, 18.
M, "in," introducing state or condition: C. 12, V 22;
C. 22, VIII17; C. 41, XIV 1.
M, " into," introducing limit of motion: C. 8, II 1; C. 5,
II 16; C. 6, III 1; C. 82, XI 8; C. 88, XI 10, 11, 14 bis,
16 bis.
M, "into," introducing a change of state or condition: C. 5,
11 17; C. 9, IV 21; XX 17; XXI 5; XXI 8; XXI 9, 14,
15, 16; XXII18.
M, " from," indicating source: C. 4, II 4 bis, 6 bis; C. 5,
II18 bis; C. 6, II 22; C. 7, III 4 bis, 6 bis; C. 8, IV 8, 9 bis,
12 bis, 15,16 bis; C. 11, V 11; C. 18, VI 5 bis; C. 17, VII
8 ter, 4, 5 bis; C. 20, VII 24, VIII 2, 4; C. 21, VIII 7 bis,
8 bis; C. 22, VIII 11 bis, 18 bis, 17; C. 28, IX 20; C. 81, X
14, 20, 22; C. 87, XII19; C. 41, XIII19, XIV 8,10,15,16;
C. 46, XVI 8; C. 47, XVII 9,10; I. 8, XVIII 17,18; I. 4,
XIX 2; I. 6, XIX 15; XXI14.
M, " from," indicating separation: I. 7, XIX 19; XXII 8.
M, " resulting from ": C. 8, II1.
M, "with," indicating means: C. 1, I 8, 4 ter, 5; C. 8,
I 28; C. 6, II 28; C. 7, III 14; C. 8, IV 7, 18; C. 10, V 6,
8 bis; C. 11, V 12; C. 12, V 18, 19, 20, VI1; C. 14, VI 9;
C. 19, VII19; C. 20, VIII2,5; C. 22, VIII11; C. 28, VIII19;
C. 28.IX21; C. 85, XII 5; C. 86, XII11; C. 89, XIII6, 7;
C. 40, XIII14; C. 46, XVI 8, 7 bis; C. 47, XVI 20, XVII 4;
I. 5, XIX 10; I. 7, XX 6; XXI18, XXII 5.
M, "with," introducing the cause of state or condition:
C. 7, III 10,19.
M, " with," giving further description: C. 88, XI 11, 15;
C. 89, XIII 4; I.1, XVIII 8.
M, " as," indicating purpose: C. 9, V 1; I.1, XVIII10.
M, " as," meaning " in form of ": I. 6, XIX 17 ter.
WPY....M: C.8,IV8.
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:07 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 559 ---
EGYPTIAN GLOSSARY
533
M (coni.) ^ M, indicating time when: I.1, XVIII11; I. 5, XIX 14.
M, "consisting of ": XXI14, XXII 5.
M with copulative force: C. 4, II 11; C. 7, IV 4; C. 11,
V 14.
M HT, " after," " afterward," " when ": C. 1, I 8; C. 2,
I 15 restored; C. 8, I 22 restored, 28; C. 9, IV 20, V 8;
C. 10, V 7; C. 11, VIS; C. 12, V 19, 20; C. 15, VI17; C. 16,
VI 21; C. 17, VII 6; C. 18, VII11; C. 28, VIII 21; C. 26,
IX9,10; C.27,IX17; C.28,X1; C.29.X8; C.80,Xllbis;
C. 82, XI 6; C. 84, XI 20; C. 85, XII 8; C. 86, XII 14;
C. 87, XII18; C. 88, XIII 2; C. 40, XIII16; C. 42, XIV 20;
C. 48, XV 8; C. 47, XVII 4, 14; XXI11, XXII 7.
M, idiomatic:
MY HPR-T M, "like as it were": C. 40, XIH 17;
C. 42, XIV 21.
MH M, " grasp ": C. 22, VIII 15.
WDY M, " assail ": I. 4, XIX 2.
TKN M, " draw near to ": I. 7, XX 4.
M HT N, " subject to ": I.1, XVIII 5.
MSHR, "even so": XXI15.
R MN M, " as far as ": C. 26, IX 8.
M MYT-T, " likewise ": C. 12, V 22.
M, partitive: XX 18.
M, used erroneously for NT: C. 8, IV 8.
M, scribal error: C. 8, IV 17; C. 89, XIII 8.
M ^ ancient verb used to negative a command: C. 7, IV 4; I. 4,
XIX 1; I. 7, XX 8, 4 bis.
M" ^3^3^ tosee, inspect,look (with meaning "appear"); also (twice
only VI 1, XIX 1): C. 12, VI 1; C. 19, VII 15; C. 22,
VIII12,15; C.80,X10; I. 4, XIX 1; XXII11.
to extend: C. 48, XVH 16,17.
temple (of the head): C. 9, V 8.
new: XXI 16.
come (imperative): I.1, XVIII 8.
water: C. 12, VI 8.
like, as: C. 1.1 4 bis restored: C. 8.124; [C. 6, II 20 restored],
M'r
M*
M'[W]
MY
MY
MY
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:07 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 560 ---
EGYPTIAN GLOSSARY
21, III 1 bis; C. 7, III 11, 18, 19, 21 bis, IV 1, 8; C. 8,
IV 10,11; C. 9, VI; C. 14, VI14; C. 19, VII 20, 21; C. 20,
VIII 2; C. 22, VIII15,17; C.81, X19; C. 82, XI 8; C. 89,
XIII11; C. 40, Xm 17; C. 41, XIV 18, 16; C. 42, XIV 21;
C. 45, XV 17-18, 19; C. 46, XVI 1, 14; C. 47, XVI 19,
XVII 10; XXI 11, 15; XXII 2.
MY SHR, "like": XXI 18.
MY YH-T, " as if ": C. 7, III 12, IV 2.
likewise: C. 4, II 8.
the like, a copy: C. 41, XIV 7; I. 5, XIX 2.
MYT-T, "about": XXI 10.
M MYT-T, " likewise ": C. 12, V 22.
MYT-T, "like," "likewise": C. 1, I 5; I. 7, XX 8;
XXI14.
liver: I. 5, XIX 4.
because of: C. 7, III 18, 20; C. 89, XIII11; C. 41, XIV 14.
Mr NTT: C. 12, V 22.
from, indicating place: I. 6, XIX 18.
HPR Mr, " done by ": C. 30, X 10.
NHM Mr, - save from ": I. 1, XVIII 8.
now: C. 48, XVII16.
morning barque: I. 1, XVIII 7.
water, fluid (secretion), juice: C. 28, IX 19; C. 45, XV 13 bis;
C. 46, XVI 1, 5, 7, 8, 14; C. 47, XVII 10; XXI 16, 17, 21,
XXII 2.
be watery: C. 41, XHI22.
urine: C. 81, X 14,17, 22 bis.
mother: I. 6, XIX 16.
to die, death: C. 4, II 11; C. 8, IV 16; I. 2, XVIII 15, 16;
I. 7, XX 2.
a dead person, or with ^ in fem.; also ^^$2,1 (XVIII 18):
I. 8, XVIII18; I. 5, XIX 6 bis.
MN M, " fixed in," " attached to " (used anatomically): C. 7,
III 17; C. 84, XI 28; C. 48, XV 4.
MN M, " confined to ": C. 23, Vm 19.
MN M, "sticking in" (used of a foreign substance sticking
in a wound): C. 4,119; C. 28, VIII 20.
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:07 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 561 ---
EGYPTIAN GLOSSARY
535
MN (cont.)
MN
MN-T
MN
MN-T
MN-TY
MNY-WT
MNH
MNHY-W
MNS,
MND-T
MR
t 9c
fixed, rigid, stiff (as a symptom): C. 32, XI 2.
to press firmly (in feeling an injury): C. 40, XIQ 13.
MNS'W: C. 31, X 21.
RMNM: C. 26,IX8.
someone: C. 1, I 8.
something: C. 1, I 4 bis.
to be sick, to suffer with; also ni» (once only XVI18).
MN TSW: C. 3,1 20, 21, 26; C. 4, II 4, 6; C. 5, II18,15;
C. 6, II 22; C. 7, III 4, 6, 18; C. 8, IV 9, 12; C. 19, VII 18;
C. 20, VIII4; C. 22, VIII18; C. 29, X6-7.
MN miscellaneous: C. 8, II 1; C. 42, XIV 17, 18; C. 48,
XV 1, 4, 5; C. 47, XVI18, XVII1; C. 48, XVII18; XX 18;
XXII11 bis.
MN by error: C. 1,1 9.
ailment: C. 1,1 5 bis; C. 20, VIII1.
the two loins: XXI 2.
mooring stakes: also Y)f\ (once only X 8).
WDY (or RDY) R T' HR MNY-WT-F: C. 3,1 23 restored,
II 2; C. 4, II 7; C. 5, II15; C. 28, X 8; C. 29, X 8; C. 47,
XVII18.
WDY-HR-K SW HR MNY-WT-F: C. 19, VII 18; C. 21,
VIII 9.
WDY-HR-K HR MNY-WT-F: C. 11, V 12.
R MNH, " thoroughly ": XXI17, 20, XXII 8.
of unknown meaning: C. 89, XIII 8.
emissio seminis; or with det. e: C. 31, X 16,19.
cheek; or without <?: C. 11, V 15; C. 12, V 22; C. 15, VI 14,
15,16 bis; C. 16, VI18 bis, 19; C. 17, VII1 bis, 2,4.
ailment, hurt, once without det. (Ill 18).
MR in verdict 1: C. 1,1 2; C. 2, I 14; C. 8, I 21; C. 10,
V 7; C. 11, V 11; C. 12, V 17; C. 14, VI 9; C. 15, VI 16;
C. 16, VI 20; C. 18, VII 10; C. 19, VII18; C. 28, VIII 20;
C. 25,IX5; C. 26,IX9; C.27,1X16; C. 80, X 10; C. 82,
XI 4; C. 84, XI19, 22; C. 85, XII 4; C. 86, XII10; C. 88,
XIII1; C. 89, XIII 6; C. 40, XIII15; C. 41, XIV 2; C. 42,
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:07 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 562 ---
536
EGYPTIAN GLOSSARY
MR (cont.)
MR
MRH-T
MHWY
MH
MH-T
MHNT
MHNW
MSH
M&EN-T
MSD-TY
MSDM-T
MSDR
f.Ti
ID \\i ii
3Km i
.0
i
XIV 19; C. 48, XV 2; C. 46, XVI 8; C. 47, XVII 2; C. 48,
XVII18.
MR in verdict 2: C. 4, H 6,11; C. 7, III 6; C. 21, VIII8-9;
C. 28, IX 22; C. 29, X 7; C. 87, XII 17; C. 45, XV 14;
C. 47, XVII11.
MR in verdict 8: C. 5, H 15; C. 6, II 22; C. 7, III 18;
C. 8, IV 9, 12; C. 18, VI 6-7; C. 17, VII 5; C. 20, VIII 4;
C. 22, VIII14; C.24,IX2; C.81,X17; C. 88, XI18; C.87,
XII 21; C. 44, XV 9.
bind; also (once only III 18): C. 7, III 11, 18, 18, IV 2.
grease; also ^1°,°, or with ej, or ^j, (once only I 28),
(once only VII 6), ff j (once only II 8).
MRH-T used alone: C. 4, II 8; C. 6, II 28; C. 11, V 12;
C. 12, V 19; C. 20, VIII 5; C. 82, XI 5.
MRH-T and honey: C. 9, V 4; C. 10, V 8; C. 15, VI17;
C. 18, VII11; C. 26, IX10; C. 84, XI20.
MRH-T with honey and lint: C. 1,13; C. 2,115 restored;
C.8,I28; C. 7, III 8; C. 11, VIS; C.12,V20; C. 14, VI12;
C. 16, VI 21; C. 17, VII 6; C. 19, VII 19; C. 28, VIII 22;
C. 27, IX 17; C. 28, X 1; C. 87, XII 18; C. 40, XIII 16;
C. 47, XVII 4,14.
MRH-T in prescription: C. 9, IV 20; C. 46, XVI 11;
XX 15.
ointment: XX 18; XXII 12.
mass: XXII 4 bis, 6.
rmilk"1: C. 20,Vm5.
to grasp: C. 22, VIII15.
see HM'-T MH-T.
countenance; also ^fZ<f (III 18-19): C. 7, III 10, 18-19.
interior: C. 22, VIII16; C. 26, IX 7.
crocodile: I. 5, XIX 7.
Meskhenet, g.: I. 8, XVIII 18.
two nostrils: C. 11, V 14-15, 15.
eye paint: XX 17.
ear: C. 18, VI 5; C. 17, VII 8, 5; C. 18, VII14; C. 21, VIII 7,
8; C. 23, Vm 18 bis, 19 bis, 20, 21.
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:07 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 563 ---
EGYPTIAN GLOSSARY
537
M&DR (cont.)
<£>
MgDR-WY (^): C. 4, H 4, 6; C. 5, II18; C. 7, III 4, 6;
C. 8, IV 9,12; C. 20, VIII 5; C. 22, VIII11,12,18,15,16.
MSDR-W-
i
" Hezret-e&ia " (leaves of some plant); or with det....: XX 18.
HDR-T
MS>K-T
shoulder-blade; also <?™£\ (once only XII 5, scribal error of
hieratic w for m; cf. $*m in XIII 6 where w has been corrected
torn): C. 85, XII 5; C. 86, XII11; C. 47, XVI18, XVII2.
MK-T
protection: C. 9, V 8.
MK'
kn
rdepression"1: C. 11, V 10.
MK'-TY
two supports; also ^^"Q0 (III 15): C. 4, H 7; C. 7, III 15.
M[K]H'
Mi
back of the head: C. 1,1 7 bis (once restored), 8.
MT
vessel, canal: C. 1,1 6, 7, 8 bis; C. 9, V 8; C. 84, XII1.
muscle, ligament, without det. \: C. 7, HI 10,17,18, 19, 20.
MTR
customary; also ^ (V 22): C. 3, H 2; C. 12, V 22.
MDW
speak: C. 7, IV 8; C. 20, VIII 1; C. 22, VIII 12, 17; C. 88,
XI10-11.
MDW as designation of " beating" of heart: C. 1, I 8
restored; C. 7, m 3.
MDW
I
word: I. 1, XVIII 9; I. 2, XVIII 15; I. 5, XIX 9.
MD-T
speech: C. 21, VIII 8.
MD
ft
deep: C. 5, II13.
MD-T
n?,
compress: C. 9, V 4.
MD'-T
brace: C. 7, HI 14.
MD'-T
book: XXI 9.
MDD
to press: C. 8,1V 16.
N
also (ten times X 21; XI 8; XII 2; XVIII 2, 8, 9, 16;
XIX 8, 4,18).
N, " to," " for," dative of reference or indirect object:
C. 2,115 restored; C. 8,1 26 bis (once restored), II 2; C. 4
II 7, 8; C. 5, II17; C. 7, III 7, 14 bis, 17; C. 8, IV 14, 18
C. 9, IV 20 bis, 21, V 4; C. 10, V 6, 8; C. 11, V 11, 18;
C. 12, V 18, 20; C. 14, VI 8, 10, 12; C. 19, VII 16 bis, 21
C. 20, Villi; C. 22, VIII11,12; C. 28, VIII19, 21; C. 25
IX 8; C. 27, IX 16; C. 28, X 2; C. 80, X 9; C. 81, X 22
C. 82, XI2 bis; C. 85, XII6; C. 86, XII12,18; C. 87, XII17
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:07 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 564 ---
538
EGYPTIAN GLOSSARY
N (cont.)
N[Y]
Q (feminine)
C. 89, XIII7; C. 41, XIV 2, 4, 6,10; C. 46, XVI9,11; C. 47,
XVI 20, XVII 4; C. 48, XVII 16, 19; I. 1, XVIII 2, 8;
I. 5, XIX 8, 4; I. 6, XIX 18; I. 8, XX 12; XX 18, 15, 16;
XXII12.
N, " to," indicating place to which: C. 1, lost column bis
restored, I 2 restored, 6, 7 restored, 8 ter, 10; C. 2,112, 18,
16 restored; C. 4, II 2, 8, 5; C. 5, II12,14,15 (dittography),
16, 17; C. 6, II 18, 19, 24; C. 7, III 2, 5, 12; C. 8, IV 15;
C. 10, V 6; C. 11, V 15; C. 12, V 21; C. 14, VI 13; C. 18,
VII 8, 12; C. 20, VII 22, 28, VIII 8; C. 26, IX 7, 9, 11, 12;
C. 27, IX 14, 16; C. 29, X 4, 6; C. 81, X 15; C. 84, XI 21,
28, XII 2; C. 87, XII 20.
N, " for," indicating duration of time: LI, XVIII 9; I.5,
XIX 9; I.8, XX 11.
N," despite ": I.1, XVIII9; I. 2, XVIII14.; I.5, XIX 9;
I. 8, XX 11.
DG' N, " look at ": C. 8, I 20 restored, 25, 26 bis (once
restored); C. 4,115; C. 5, II14; C. 7, III 5; C. 19, VII16;
C. 29, X 5; C. 80, X 9; C. 32, XI 2, 3.
N, indicating possession: C. 46, XVI 2.
N miscellaneous:
RDY N, " apply to ": C. 9, V 4; " attach to ": I. 5,
XIX 11; "put in": XXI10, XXII1.
DMY N, " touch," C. 45, XV 17,18.
TWT N, " liken to ": C. 7, IV 2; C. 12, VI 8; C. 45,
XV 18.
N HRW, " upward ": C. 7, IV 8; C. 31, X 21.
N HRW, " downward ": C. 7, IV 8; C. 81, X 21; C. 82,
XI 8.
G& N HRY, "top": XXII 6.
M HT N, " subject to ": I. 1, XVIII 5.
N, scribal error: C. 89, XIII 8.
N, used for negative particle: C. 6, II 21; C. 8, IV 11 bis;
C. 20, VIII 4.
because of: C. 8,1 24; C. 22, VIII 17; C. 48, XVII17; I.2,
XVIII15,16; I.7, XX 2.
genitival adjective; also once ->~ (XIX 5), ^ (IV 18): C. 1,
lost column ter restored, I 2 restored, 8,10 restored, 11; C. 2,
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:07 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 565 ---
EGYPTIAN GLOSSARY
539
xmn / i\ — it ■ - j in I 12 ter (once restored), 14 restored, 15 bis (once restored),
N|Y| (cont.) „ (feminine dual) v ' ' v "
L J Q" v '16 bis (once restored), 17 restored; C. 8, I 18, 19 bis
o (plural) restored, 21 restored; C. 4, II 2, 8 bis, 5, 7, 9 bis; C. 5, II11,
12 bis, 14, 17; C. 6, II 18 ter, 19 bis, 20, 21, 22, 24, 25,
III 1; C. 7, III 2 bis, 5, 6 bis, 7, 9, 10, 11 bis, 12 bis, 14,
15 bis, 16 quater, 18, 19, 20, 21 bis, IV 1 ter, 8 bis; C. 8,
IV 5 quater, 6, 8 ter, 10, 12, 18 ter, 15, 16 bis, 17 ter, 18 ter;
C. 9, IV 19 bis, 20 ter, 21 bis, V 1, 2 bis, 4 bis; C. 10, V 5,
6 bis, 9 ter; C. 11, V 10 ter, 11 bis, 12, 18, 14 bis, 15; C. 12,
V 16 ter, 17,18 bis, 19, 20, 21 bis, VI 2; C. 18, VI 4; C. 14,
VI 7, 10 bis; C. 15, VI 15; C. 16, VI 18, 19; C. 17, VII 1;
C. 18, VII 7, 14 bis; C. 19, VII 21; C. 20, VII28,24, VIII 2;
C. 21, VIII 6, 7; C. 22, VIII 10, 11, 16 bis; C. 28, VIII18,
19 bis, 21 bis; C. 24, VIII 22; C. 25, IX 4; C. 26, IX 6, 8;
C. 27, IX 18 bis, 14, 15; C. 28, IX 18, 19, 20, X 2; C. 29,
X 8 bis,4quater,6; C.80,X8,9 bis, 10; C.81,X 12,18 bis,
15,16,17,18 bis; C. 82, XI1 ter, 4, 7 bis, 8; C. 88, XI 9 ter,
12, 18, 14, 16; C. 84, XI 17, 18, 20, 22, 28, XII 1, 2 bis;
C. 85, XII 8, 7; C. 86, XII 9, 12; C. 87, XII15, 17; C. 88,
XII 22 bis; C. 89, XIII 8; C. 40, XIII12,18, 14,15,17 bis;
C. 41, XIII 18 ter, 19 bis, 21, 22, XIV 1, 8 bis, 4, 5, 8, 10,
11, 15, 16; C. 42, XIV 17 bis, 19, 21 ter; C. 48, XIV 22 bis,
28 bis, XV 2, 8, 4 bis; C. 48, XIV 22 (nw, scribal error);
C. 44, XV 6 bis, 7 bis, 8; C. 45, XV 9, 18, 15, 18, 19; C. 46,
XV 20, XVI 8, 9, 10, 14; C. 47, XVI 16, 17 bis, XVII 1, 4,
6, 9, 10 bis, 14; C. 48, XVII 15, 16, 17, 18; I. 1, XVIII
1 bis, 8 bis, 10; I. 2, XVIII 11, 12; I. 8, XVIII 17; I. 5,
XIX 5, 6, 8; I. 6, XIX 14 bis, 15 bis; I. 7, XIX 18, XX 5,
6, 7; I. 8, XX 10 bis; XX 14; XXI 7; XXI 9,18,14 bis,
21, XXII 1, 4, 7, 8, 9, 10; XXII 12, 18.
N T crown (of Lower Egypt): I.1, XVIII 6.
N-T rNeitT g.: I.5,XIX18.
N, j£ these: C. 45, XV 19; XXI14 bis, 21.
NY ~ for which, or, for whom.
NY in verdict 8: C. 5, H 15; C. 6, II 22; C. 7, 111 18;
C. 8, IV 9, 12; C. 18, VI 7; C. 17, VII 5; C. 20, VIII 4;
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:07 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 566 ---
540 EGYPTIAN GLOSSARY
NY-SWT
NY'W
NYW
NYS
Nrr
3ft-
NrB'
Nrg
—i
_0 Q
rNWNW
ooo ■ ^
NW
v<?
NW
\?
NB
NY (cont.) "7 C. 22, VIII14; C. 24, IX 2; C. 81, X17; C. 88, XI18; C. 87,
XII21; C. 44, XV 9.
NY with obscure meaning: C. 7, III 17; C. 18, VII14.
king: I. 7, XX 4.
ibex; also^/S^i! (XVI11): C. 41, XIV 6; C. 46, XVI11.
ostrich: C. 9, IV 20, 21, V. 1.
to call: C. 22, VIII12.
rto gain color"1: C. 8, IV 9.
clamminess; also ~ J^'& (XVI J): c- *•, XVI1, XVI14.
puncture: C. 3,124.
the Celestial Ocean: I. 1, XVIII 7.
this: C. 8, II1.
weak particle in YR NW, " now if ": C. 1,1 6.
every, all, any: C. 1,1 8, 6 bis (once restored), 8 bis; C. 2,1 15;
C. 8, 128; C. 4, 118; C. 8, IV 5, 18; C. 9, V2; C. 10, V8;
C. 11,V18; C. 12, V 18,20, VI 1,2; C. 14, VI10,12; C. 15,
VI 17; C. 16, VI 21; C. 17, VII 7; C. 18, VII 11; C. 19,
VII 19; C. 28, VIII 22; C. 25, IX 6; C. 26, IX 11; C. 27,
IX 18; C. 28, X 1; C. 80, X 11; C. 82, XI 6; C. 84, XI 20;
C. 85, XII 8; C. 86, XII 14; C. 37, XII 18; C. 88, XIII 2;
C. 89, XIII 9; C. 40, XIII16; C. 41, XIV 7; C. 42, XIV 20;
C. 48, XV 8; C. 45, XV 12,15; C. 46, XVI 7; C. 47, XVII 5,
6, 15; I. 1 XVIII 8 bis, 10; I. 5, XIX 6 quinquies; I. 7,
XIX 18, XX 8; XXI12,14, XXII1, 9 ter.
NB-T Y mistress: I.1, XVIII6.
NB-T-H-T YQ\^ Nephthys, g.: I. 1, XVIII5.
NB jfJL tie: I. 7, XX 6.
NBY-M-HR-F 1[J.^£^ Flame-in-His-Face (a hostile demon): I.1, XVIII1.
NBYBYW —JUHeQ. be hot: C. 46, XVI 15.
NBS —jPOi a kind of tree: C. 41, XIV 3.
NP,P, T2£^D2£!k to flutter: C. 6,0 20, 21; C. 8, IV 10-11, 11.
NPW enemy: C. 9, V 3.
NPH-WY "7Jtwo labia: XXII.
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:07 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 567 ---
EGYPTIAN GLOSSARY
541
breath, wind; also ^3^! (XVIII 18), Zll^l (XX !): L 1.
XVIII 8; I. 2, XVIII18; I. 7, XX 1.
those: C. 46, XVI 6.
unroll: C. 47, XVI19.
of unknown meaning: L 5, XIX12.
unidentified flower: I. 7, XX 5.
as far as: C. 11, V 14, 15; C. 12.V21.
displacement: C. 34, XI 22; C. 48, XV 4.
negative particle; also — (II 21; IV 11 bis; VIII 4).
-^sgU: C. 1, I 1 restored, 2; C. 2, I 14 restored, 17;
C. 8, IV 5, 18; C. 18, VII 8, 9, 12, 18; C. 27, IX 15; C. 42,
XIV 18; C. 45, XV 12.
-*-TT: C. 5,1115; C. 6,1122; C. 7,11118; C. 8, IV 9,
12; C. 18, VI 7; C. 17, VII 5; C. 20, VIII 4; C. 22, VIII14;
C. 24, IX 2; C.81,X17; C. 88, XI18; C. 87, XII21; C. 44,
XV 9.
With infinitive: C. 1, I 10, 11; C. 8, II 2; C. 7, III 17;
C. 22, VIII 17; C. 88, XI 15; C. 41, XIV 9; C. 42, XIV 18;
I. 6, XIX 17.
With Mm-f form: C. 6, II 21, III 1; C. 8, IV 11 bis;
C. 9, V 8; C. 18, VII 12; C. 20, VIII 2; C. 81, X 14; I. 2,
XVIII18, 15; I. 7, XIX 20, XX 1, 2.
With N-form: C. 3,120 restored, 25, 26 bis (once restored);
C. 4, II 4, 9; C. 5, II 14; C. 6, II 21; C. 7, III 4 bis, 17;
C. 8, IV 14; C. 20, VIII 1; C. 22, VIII 12; C. 25, IX 8;
C. 29, X 5; C. 81, X 21 bis, 22; C. 82, XI 2, 8; C. 83, XI10
C. 41, XIII 20, 21, XIV 18; C. 45, XV 12, 18 bis; I. 2,
XVIII 16; XX 18.
With noun: C. 1, lost column restored, I 1 1"restored"1,
11 restored; C. 9, V 8; C. 45, XV 15; C. 46, XVI 15; XXI
18; XXII 1.
With pronoun: C. 12, V 22.
With adjectival predicates: C. 1,110 restored, 12.
Used for dative N or genitival adjective N[Y]: C. 31, X 21;
C. 82, XI8; C. 84, XII2; I.1, XVIII2, 8, 9; I. 2, XVIII16;
I. 5, XIX 8, 4, 5,7; I. 6, XIX 18.
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:07 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 568 ---
542
EGYPTIAN GLOSSARY
NN
these, this; also (XXH 6): C- 46, XVI 5-6? XXII 6.
NNY
to move feebly, drag: C. 8, IV14.
to dribble; also ^~|i4(X22), (X17): C.31,X17,22.
NNM
to wander: C. 3, II1.
NR'W
See NY'W.
NR-T
vulture: I. 1, XVIII 10.
NRW-T
sprain; or with det. \; also j (twice only XVII15,16), or
with det. \ (once only XVII 18): C. 30, X 8, 9, 10, 12;
C. 42, XIV 17,19; C. 48, XVII15,16,18.
NH-T
sycamore: C. 46, XVI12.
DRD NH-T (,f ,~0i 1 i,X1V 7; or without °). "sycamore
leaves": C.41,XIV7; C. 46, XVI 8.
NHD
exhaustion: C. 7, III 14.
See also ,HT and HD.
NHDHD
to throb: C. 6, II20, 21; C. 8, IV 10,11.
NH'
disturbing, foreign; or with det. ts: C. 4, II 3-4; C. 6, III 1.
NHB-[T]-K'W
*JLI*Mi*
Neheb-kau,g.: I. 5, XIX 10.
NHB-T
neck: C. 8,1 20, 21; II1 ter; C. 4, II 4, 6, 8; C. 5, II14, 15;
C. 6, II22; C. 7, III 4, 6,10,18,19, 20; C. 8, IV 9,12; C. 19,
VII16, 18; C. 20, VIII 4; C. 22, VIII14; C. 29, X 8, 4 bis,
6 bis, 7; C. 80, X 8, 9, 10; C. 81, X 12-18, 18, 15, 16, 17,
18 bis; C. 82, XI1 bis, 2, 4, 5, 7, 7-8, 8; C. 88, XI 9,10,12,
14 bis, 16.
NHM
oM
to save: I.1, XVIII 8.
NHM-T
rescue (noun): C. 9, V 8.
NHD-WT
teeth: C. 7, III 10-11.
NHB-T
Nekhbet, g.: I.1, XVIII 8.
NHBHB
•»
to break through, crepitate; also *^J"J*Jx (once only XV 7-8):
C. 13, VI 4-5; C. 17, VII 2; C. 24, VIII 28; C. 87, XII 16;
C. 44, XV 7-8.
NHT
to be stiff, or with det. -j (twice III 17, 20): C. 7, III 17, 20.
HNN NHT (applied to erection of phallus): C. 31, X 14, 20.
NH
fluid: C. 6, H 24-25.
See also NSW.
NSY
to settle: C. 32, XI 8.
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:07 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 569 ---
EGYPTIAN GLOSSARY
543
displacement: C. 32, XI1 bis, 4, 7.
"garden tongue," a plant: C. 41, XIV 7.
to burn, to be inflamed: C. 28, IX 20; C. 41, XIII 19, XIV 2,
8,11; G. 47, XVII8,11 12.
fever: I. 4, XIX 1.
anoint: C. 6,1122.
issue (verb); also /» (once only XIII 19), (once only
XVII 9), ^^/* (scribal error, once only XIV 15): C. 41,
XIII19, XTV 15,16; C. 47, XVII 9.
issue, discharge (noun): C. 31, X 20.
See also NH.
disaster, to work disaster; or with det. &s/: I. 2, XVIII18-14;
I. 4, XIX 1,2; I. 7, XIX 20-XX 1.
moisture: XXI18.
to sift: XXI 18.
sieve: XXI18.
some, also a piece (XX 5): C. 22, VIII15; I. 7, XX 5.
to rend open: also ^^11 (once only II 28), (once only
X 12), ggx (twice only II 22, IV 11): C. 6, H 18,19, 22, 28;
C. 8, IV 11; C. 80, X12.
which, also (twice only I 7 bis): C. 1, I 7 bis; C. 4, II 4,
10 bis; C. 5, II18 bis; C. 6, II 20; C. 7, III 9; C. 8, IV 6,
7 bis, 10; C. 9, V 5 bis; C. 11, V 10; C. 12, V 17, 19, VI 2;
C. 81, X 18; C. 87, XII 19; C. 88, XIII 1; C. 89, XIII 7;
C. 41, XIII 22, XIV 9, 14, 15 (dittography); C. 45, XV 19;
C. 46, XVI 8, 7, 18; C. 47, XVII 7; XXI 21.
one who: C. 7, IV 8.
NTT introducing proposition after particles meaning
" because ": C. 7, IV 4.
DR NTT: C. 4, II11.
Mr NTT: C. 12, V 22.
HRNTT: I. 1, XVIII 4.
NTY used erroneously for YWTY: C. 8, IV 8.
NTY used for N[Y]: C. 8, IV 18.
membrane; C. 6, II 24.
god: C. 8, IV 16; 1.8, XVIII18.
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:07 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 570 ---
EGYPTIAN GLOSSARY
an unidentified drug: C. 46, XVI 4.
rto husk"1: XXI11 bis; more probably to be read q. v.
to ask: C. 20, VIII 1.
'triturate, grind; or with det. —o; also £r° (once only XIV 5):
C. 9, IV 20, 21; C. 41, XIV 5, 6; C. 46, XVI 4, 5,12; XXI 5;
XXII 2; XXII 18.
to be easy, comfortable; also ^J^^ (I 26, twice, once
restored; III 17; IV 14): C. 8, I 26 bis (once restored);
C. 7,1117,17; C. 8, IV 14.
to recover.
R NDM-F (" until he recovers "): C. 1, I 8; C. 2, I 15;
C.8,I28; C. 10, V 8; C. 11.V14; C. 12, V 20; C. 14, VI12;
C. 15, VI 17; C. 16, VI 21; C. 17, VII 7; C. 18, VII 11;
C. 19, VII 19; C. 28, VIII 22; C. 25, IX 6; C. 26, IX 11;
C. 27, IX 18; C.28,X2,8; C.80,X12; C. 82, XI 7; C. 84,
XI 21; C. 85, XII 8; C. 86, XII 14; C. 88, XIII 2; C. 40,
XIII16; C. 42, XIV 20; C. 48, XV 8; C. 47, XVII 5,15.
sweet: XX 15,17.
to draw together, or with det. —o; also (twice only VI 8,
IX 21): C. 10, V 6, 8; C. 14, VI 8; C. 28, VIII 19; C. 26,
IX8; C. 28, IX 21; C. 47, XVI 20, XVII 8.
seizures: XXII 11.
little, contracted, narrow; also ^P^. (once only VII12): C. 1,
110,12; C.3,124; C. 7, III 19; C. 18, VII12.
malignant spirits: I. 2, XVJii 12.
consume: I. 7, XIX 19.
or 1«=- before suffix pronouns.
R, " to," showing direction of motion: C. 2, I 17; C. 4,
II 10; C. 10, V 9; C. 20, VIII 2, 5; C. 84, XI 18; I. 1,
XVIII 8; I. 2, XVIII16; L 5, XIX 12"1; I. 6, XIX 17.
R, " to," with meaning " as far as ": C. 8, I 18, 19, 21
restored; C. 12, V 22; C. 18, VII 12, 14; C. 28, IX 19, 22;
C. 40, XIII18,15; C. 41, XIV 11,12; XXI10.
&PR R YH-T, " to reach a decisive point": C. 4, II 8, 10;
C. 6, II 28; C. 7, III 8,15; C. 8, IV 9; C. 21, VIII 9; C. 87,
XII19.
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:07 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 571 ---
EGYPTIAN GLOSSARY
545
R, "to," used of application of medicaments: C. 41,
XIV 8, 4; C. 46, XVI 8,12.
R, " to," dative of reference: C. 7, III 8; C. 81, X 16,
20; C. 41, XIII 19, XIV 15, 16; C. 45, XV 14, 19; C. 46,
XVI 5; C. 47, XVII 9.
R, indicating place into which: I.5, XIX 5; I. 6, XIX 16;
XXI 8; XXI19, XXII 7.
R, indicating place at which (especially of parts of the
body): C. 6, H 25; C. 7, III 4; C. 8, IV 10; C. 18, VII14;
C. 22, VIII16; I.1, XVIII10; I. 5, XIX 11; I. 8, XX 9.
R, " concerning ": C. 1, I 1 restored, 8; C. 2, I 14; C. 8,
I 20 restored; C. 4, II 5; C. 5, II 14; C. 7, III 5, 12; C. 8,
IV 14,15; C. 10, V 7; C. ll.Vll; C. 12,V17; C. 18, VI 6;
C. 14, VI 9, 14; C. 15, VI 16; C. 16, VI 19; C. 17, VII 4;
C. 18, VII 10, 18; C. 19, VII 17, 21; C. 20, VIII 8; C. 21,
VIII 8; C. 22, VIII 18; C. 28, VIII 19; C. 24, VIII 28;
C. 25, IX 5; C. 26, IX 8, 18; C. 27, IX 15; C. 28, IX 21;
C. 29, X6; C. 80, X 10,12; C. 81, X 17,18,19; C. 82, XI8,
7; C. 88, XI 12, 14; C. 84, XI 18; C. 85, XII 4; C. 86,
XII 10; C. 87, XII 16, 20; C. 88, XIII 1; C. 89, XIII 5;
C. 40, XIII14; C. 41, XIV 1,10, 11; C. 42, XIV 19; C. 48,
XV 1; C. 44, XV 8; C. 45, XV 14; C. 46, XVI 2; C. 47,
XVI 20, XVII 10; C. 48, XVII18; XX 14.
R, " to," before infinitives: C. 7, III 8; C. 8, IV 14; C. 22,
VIII 16.
R, " until ": C. 4, II 7; C. 6, II 28; C. 7, III 8, 15; C. 8,
IV 9 bis; C.11.V12; C.12.V18; C. 16, VI20; C. 17, VII6;
C. 21, VIII 9; C. 22, VIII12; C. 85, XII 6; C. 86, XII12;
C. 87, XII18; C. 46, XVI 6; XXI12, 18.
R NDM-F: C. 1, I 8; C. 2, I 15; C. 8, I 28; C. 7, III 7;
C. 10, V 8; C. 11, V 14; C. 12, V 20; C. 14, VI 12; C. 15,
VI 17; C. 16, VI 21; C. 17, VII 7; C. 18, VII 11; C. 19,
VII 19; C. 28, VIII 22; C. 25, IX 6; C. 26, IX 11; C. 27,
1X18; C.28, X2,8; C.80,X12; C. 82, XI 7; C. 84, XI21;
C. 85, XII 8; C. 86, XII14; C. 88, XIII 2; C. 40, XIII16;
C. 42, XIV 20; C. 48, XV 8; C. 47, XVII 5,15.
R SW'Y '-T YH-F: C. 8, I 28 restored; C. 4, II 7;
C. 5, II15; C. 19, VII18; C. 29, X 8; C. 47, XVII18.
n n
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:07 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 572 ---
EGYPTIAN GLOSSARY
R, " in order to ": C. 1, I 4, 5, 9 bis; C. 2, I 17 restored;
C.10,V9; C. 22, VIII16; C. 85, XII 6; C. 86, XII12; I.2,
XVIII18; I. 7, XIX 20; XXI19.
R, " in order that ": I. 2, XVIII18; XXII14.
R, "from," expressing separation: C. 1,110, 12 restored;
C.4,II9; C. 7, III 16; C. 81, X 18,19; I. 8, XVIII19; I.4,
XIX 2; I. 5, XIX 14.
g'TR: C. 14, VI 8; C. 85, XII 4; C. 86, XII10; C. 47,
XVI19.
R, with suffix pronoun, as emphatic or impersonal re-
flexive: C. 86, XII9; I.1, XVIII 2, 8; I. 4, XVIII19; I. 5,
XIX 4.
,NRY R-F: C. 4, H 4; C. 7, III 8; C. 20, VIII 1;
C. 29, X 5; C. 40, XIII14; C. 42, XIV 18.
R miscellaneous:
R, "as": C. 8, IV 7.
R, " because of ": C. 6, III 1.
R, "or": C. 4, II11.
R, " for " (duration of time): XX 16.
R-S\ " therein ": XXI18, XXII1.
R idiomatic:
WDY R T,, "moor": C. 8, I 22, II 1; C. 4, II 7;
C. 5,1115; C. 28, X 8; C. 29, X8; C. 47, XVII18.
R T,, "off," "away," "entirely": C. 4, II 9; C. 7,
III 4; C. 47, XVII 14.
RH'W,"nextto": C. 7, IV 1.
R " afterward," " after ": XX 18; XXII 5.
R MNH, " thoroughly ": XXI17, 20, XXII 8.
R HR, " against ": I. 2, XVIII14; I. 7, XX 1.
R R', " through ": C. 23, VTH 18, 20.
R MN M, " as far as ": C. 26, IX 7.
R S'BY R, r" as far as 'n: C. 32, XI 5.
NFRY-T R, " as far as ": C. II, V 14, 15; C. 12, V 21.
R, scribal errors: C. 88, XI 15; C. 86, XII 18.
the mouth: C. 9,V2; I. 6, XIX 14, 15.
R, of the patient: C. 7, III 8, 8, 11, 18, 14, 18, IV 2, 8;
C. IS, VI 6; C. 17, VII 8, 4, 5; C. 25, IX 8 bis, 4; C. 26,
IX 7, 9, 12 bis.
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:07 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 573 ---
EGYPTIAN GLOSSARY
547
R, (cont.) "7 R, of the wound: C. 9, IV 20; C. 20, VII 24; C. 28, IX
20, X 2; C. 41, XIII 19, 22, XIV 8,10,15,16; C. 46, XVI8;
C. 47, XVII9, 14.
incantation: I.1, XVIII1; I.6, XIX14; I. 7, XIX 18, XX 5;
I. 8, XX 11.
R'PW, "or": C. 8, IV 16.
R R,, " through '*: C. 23, VHI18, 20.
R' used erroneously for G&: C. 13, VI5.
See also HMW-T-R'.
R'-YB
*=»0
i
abdomen: XX 13.
R'-HMN(W)
rm
J: XX 15.
RY-T
Hh?,
pus, or with det. 'e>: C. 6, m 1; C. 89, XIII 4, 6, 11, 12.
Formerly read TY-T.
RW-T (RY-T)
ia o i
pigment, color, is possible in C. 7, III 21, see p. 196.
RWTY
<?
outside: C. 8, IV 8,15,16 ter; C. 22, VIII17.
the open: I. 2, XVIII16.
RWD
hard: C. 45, XV 17,18.
RMY
to weep: C. 7, III 12, IV 2, 4.
RMY-T
2^
tears: C. 20, Villi.
RMT-T
men: I. 8, XVIII 18.
RNP-T
ft
year; or with det. ^: I. 1, XVIII 8, 11 bis; I. 5, XIX 8, 14;
I 7, XIX 20.
RNPY
a youth: XXI 9.
RH
to know, recognize: C. 1,1 5 restored, 6 restored, 9 bis; C. 4,
11 7, 10, 11; C. 6, II 28; C. 7, III 8, 15; C. 8, IV 9; C. 20,
VIII 8; C. 21, VIII 9; C. 81, X 14; C. 87, XII18; XXI17,
20, XXII 8.
RHTY
launderer: XXII1.
RD
J'
foot, leg; also ^jfj (as dual, once only 18): C. 1,17, 8; C. 81,
X 18,16,17; C. 82, XI 8; C. 88, XI12,18; C. 48, XVII16;
XXII11.
RDY
give: C. 8, IV 18; I. 8, XX 12; XXII 12.
cause that; also ^: C. 2, I 17 restored; C. 7, III 8, 7,
14 bis; C. 10, V 9; C. 22, VIII 16; C. 81, X 15; C. 88,
XI11, 15; I. 7, XX 6; XXI 8; XXI18.
TM RDY, " prevent "; I. 5, XIX 11.
n n 2
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:07 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 574 ---
548
RDY (cont.) ^
RDW
H'Y
H'W
HN
HNY
HNW
HRW
ra
rn
©
i
I*
EGYPTIAN GLOSSARY
discharge; written t—o, also —o, DY: C. 4, II 4, 5; C. 5, II18;
C. 6,1122; C. 7, III 4, 6; C. 8, IV 8,12; C.ll.Vll; C. 18,
VI 5; C. 17, VII 2, 8, 4; C. 20, VII 24, VIII 8; C. 21, VIII 7,
8; C. 22, VIII18.
put (patient on normal diet): C. 8, II2.
apply; also
RDY the hand or finger: C. 1, I 6; C. 17, VII 1; C. 20,
VII 24; C. 25, IX 8; C. 45, XV 11.
RDY the remedy: C. 4, II 8; C. 9, IV 20, V 4; C. 82,
XI 5; XXII.
RDY a bandage or similar: C. 2,117 restored; C. 7, III 14;
C. 9, IV 21, V 5; C. 10, V 9; C. 12, V 19.
lead; written^: C. 84, XII2.
put, place; also t-t (XXII6): I.1, XVIII10; XX18; XXI10,
16, 19, XXII1, 8, 5, 6, 7; XXII18.
RDY N, " attach to ": I. 5, XIX 11.
excrement: I. 6, XIX 17, 18.
enter, descend: C. 22, VIII16; I. 7, XX 8,4.
fall, drop, exude, discharge; also ra^Ti (once only VIII 2):
C.20,Vn24, VIII 2; C. 22, VIE 11; C.81,X14,22; C. 41,
XIV 1; C. 46, XVI 6-7; C. 47, XVII 9.
vicinity, neighbourhood, or with det.
RH'W, "next to": C. 7, IV 1.
M H'W, " at the point of ": C. 18, VI 4; C. 17, VII 2.
chest: C. 7, III 11, 21, IV1, 2.
the rejoicing one: I. 7, XX 8.
ftin-jar: XXII 5, 6-7.
day; also .3.<?®: C. 1, I 8 bis (once restored); C. 2, I 14
restored, 15; C. 8,1 22,28; C.9.V1; C. 10, V 7, 8; C. 11,
V 18; C. 12, V 20; C. 14, VI 11, 12; C. 15, VI 17; C. 16,
VI 20, 21; C. 17, VII 5, 7; C. 18, VII 11 bis; C. 19, VII19;
C. 28, VIII 22; C. 25, IX 6; C. 26, IX 10, 11; C. 27, IX 17,
18; C. 28, X 1 bis; C. 29, X 7; C. 80, X 11 bis; C. 82, XI 4,
6; C. 84, XI 20; C. 85, XII 8; C. 86, XII14; C. 87, XII18;
C. 88, XIII 2; C. 40, XIII 16 bis; C. 42, XIV 20; C. 48,
XV 8; C. 47, XVII 2, 5,15; XX 16.
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:07 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 575 ---
EGYPTIAN GLOSSARY
549
HRP
nil o~~«
to sink: C. 5, H 13, 16, 17; C. 82, XI 7.
HHNW
rara^
jubilation: I. 5, XIX 2-8.
HD
weak place: C. 8, IV 11.
See also 'HT and NHD.
H-T-HB
Hathor, g.: I. 1, XVIII 6.
H'
behind: C. 23,VIII19.
around: I.1, XVIII 4, 9; I. 5, XIX 18; I. 8, XX 11.
back (noun): C. 23,Vm21.
H'-TYW
=jp
linen: I. 7, XX 6.
H'Y-T
covering: C. 9, IV 21, V 4.
H'Y-T
1"shelter"1: L 7, XX 5.
H-T
the front:
H-T HR, " forehead ": C. 9, IV 19 bis, V 5.
HR H-T, "before": I. 7, XX 5.
H,TY-r
beginning: XXI 9.
H'TY
heart; also J^^tt (once only 19): C. 1,1 6, 7, 9.
breast: I. 5, XIX 8.
H'H'
fumble: C. 8, IV 15.
Hr-W
1^
flesh (plural): C. 1,1 11; C. 4, II 9; C. 7, III 8; C. 8, IV 18,
17; C. 28, VIII 18, 19, 20; C. 81, X 18; C. 84, XII 1 bis;
C. 47, XVI17, XVII1, 5, 7; XXII 8, 10.
HWY
M
to smite: I. 4, XVIII19.
HW,
to have an evil odor: XX 18.
HWr
L!>
short : C. 35, XII 4.
HWN
roast: C. 42, XIV 21.
HBS
Ti
linen; or without plural strokes.
Used in surgical dressings:
Strips of linen: C. 2, I 15 restored, 16; C. 10, V 9;
C. 47, XVII 4.
Bands of linen: C. 2, 117 restored; C. 10, V 9.
Swabs, plugs, or tampons of linen: C. 11, V 11, 12;
C. 12, V 18,19; C. 14, VI10.
Stiff rolls of linen: C. 11, V 18; C. 12, V 20; C. 28,
VIII 21; C. 84, XI 20.
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:07 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 576 ---
550 EGYPTIAN GLOSSARY
HBS (cont.)
Ti
Splints of linen: C. 85, XII 7; C. 86, XII 12; C. 87,
XII 17.
Padded with linen: C. 7, III 14.
HF'W
IX^
serpent: I. 5, XIX 7.
HM-T
vulva; also 0 (XX 14): XX14,15.
HM
weak temporal particle.
Y&K SW HM, " while at the same time ": C. 13, VI 5;
C. 17, VII 8.
HMW-T-R'
rrr
incantation: I.1, XVIII 8.
and so forth: I. 6, XIX 15.
HM'
ball: C. 45, XV 18.
HM'-T-MH-T
northern salt; also jO^^V^, ? ( (XXI 5): C- 41' 37 M'>
C. 46, XVI 11; XXI 5; XXI7.
HM'Y'T
an unidentified fruit; or with dets. \t °,: C. 45, XV 18; XXI
9-10.
HM'TY
bulging; or with plural strokes: C. 45, XV 9, 10, 18-14, 14,
15,16.
HMSY
5^
to sit; or with det. fi: C. 4, H 7; C. 7, III 15; C. 8, IV 9;
C. 16, VI 20; C. 17, VII 6; C. 20, VIII 5; C. 82, XI 6;
XXII 11.
HMT
copper: C. 6, II 20, 25 bis; C. 8, IV 10.
HMT-Y
coppersmith: C. 6, II 25.
HN-W
ribs: C. 42, XIV 17 bis, 19, 20-21; C. 48, XIV 22, 22-28, 28,
XV 2, 8, 4; C. 44, XV 6, 6-7, 7, 8.
HNY-T'
i\— °
a kind of herb; also j| ^t,: C. 41, XIV 4; C. 46, XVI9.
HNW
laalS 1 1 1
jar, vase: C. 8,124; XXII 7.
HNr
and, with: C. 8, I 20 restored, 25; C. 4, II 5, 8; C. 5, II 14;
C. 7, III 5; C.8,IV8,17,18; C.29.X5; C.80,X9; C. 82,
XI 2, 8; XXII; XXI18.
rH' HNr, " contend with ": C. 4, II 6, 11; C. 7, III 6;
C.21, VIII9; C.28,1X22; C.29.X7; C.87,XII17; C.45,
XV 15; C. 47, XVII 11.
HNr, "besides": XX 16.
HNN
phallus: C. 81, X 14, 20 bis.
HNS
HP*.
narrowness: C. 18, VII 18.
HNKY-T
bed; or with plural strokes: L 5, XIX 8; I. 7, XX 8.
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:07 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 577 ---
EGYPTIAN GLOSSARY
551
porcupine: C. 40, XIII17.
manubrium: C. 40, XIII 18 bis, 15, 17.
Horus, g.: C. 9, V 2; I. 1, XVIII 9; I. 2, XVIII14 bis; I. 5,
XIX 5, 9; I. 7, XX 1, 2; I. 8, XX 10.
face: C. 7, III 8, 10, 12, 20, 21, IV 2, 8; C. 12, V 17, 22 bis,
VI 1; C. 20, VIII 2; C. 82, XI 2, 8; C. 84, XI 18; C. 46,
XVI 2; XXI 6.
H'-T HR, " forehead ": C. 9, IV 19 bis, V 5.
R HR, " against ": I. 2, XVIII14; I. 7, XX 1.
See also HFT-HR.
upon, on, in, into, etc. (indicating place where or place to which);
also ^ : C. 1, lost column restored, I 7 quinquiens (twice
restored); C. 2, I 18, 15 restored, 17 restored; C. 8, I 22;
C. 6, II 28, III 1; C. 7, III 10; C. 8, IV 5, 18; C. 9, IV 21,
V5bis; C.10.V9; C. 11,V10bis,14; C.12.V20; C.18.VI4;
C. 15, VI16; C. 17, VII 2; C. 19, VII15, 21; C. 20, VII 24;
C. 22, VIII10 bis; C. 24, VIII 28; C. 25, IX 8; C.27,1X16;
C. 88, XI 16; C. 89, XIII 4, 7 ter, 10, 11; C. 41, XIV 5, 6,
7, 9,15 bis (dittography); C. 45, XV 9, 10 bis, 11 bis, 16,17,
19; C. 46, XV 21, XVI 4, 5,9,11, 15,16; C. 47, XVII 4, 9;
I. 5, XIX 8, 11; I. 7, XX 4 bis; XX 15, 18; XXI 20,
XXII 1, 2 bis, 6.
HR N: C. 8, IV 6; C. 16, VI 19; C. 21, VIII 6; C. 88,
XII 22.
HRY,BY: C. 84, XII2.
HRWNMY: C. 84, XII 2.
HR, " on " (figurative): C. 8, II 2.
HR, " over " meaning " above ": C. 1,111; C. 4, II 4,
10 bis; C. 5, II 18; C. 11, V 10; C. 12, V 17; C. 24, IX 1;
C. 81, X 18; C. 84, XI 21, XII1 bis; C. 87, XII15 bis, 17,
19, 21; C. 44, XV 7, 9; XXI16, XXII 8.
HR, " over " in the expression " to say a charm over ":
C. 9, V 2; I.1, XVIII 9; I. 5, XIX 10.
HR, " over " (" in charge of "): I. 7, XX 1.
HR in the phrase HR MNY-WT-F, "at his mooring
stakes ": C. 8, I 28 restored II 2; C. 4, II 7; C. 5, II 15;
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:07 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 578 ---
EGYPTIAN GLOSSARY
C. 11,V12; C. 19, VII18; C. 21, VIII 9; C.28.X8; C. 29,
X8; C. 47, XVII18.
HR in WT HR, " to bind with ": C. 1, I 2; C. 2, I 14
restored; C. 7, III 8; C. 10, V 7; C. 14, VI 11, 12; C. 15,
VI 17; C. 16, VI 20; C. 17, VII 5; C. 18, VII 10; C. 25,
IX6; C. 26, IX 10; C. 27, IX 17; C. 28, XI; C. 29, X7;
C. 80, X 11; C. 82, XI 4, 6; C. 84, XI 20; C. 85, XII 8;
C. 86, XII14; C. 87, XII17; C. 88, XIII 2; C. 40, XIII15;
C. 42, XIV 20; C. 48, XV 2; C. 47, XVII2.
HR, " with," used in " to mix or triturate with ": C. 9,
IV 20; XXI 16.
HR, " because of ": C. 1,1 8; C. 46, XVI13.
HR NTT: I. 1, XVIII 4.
HR, "in act of," "by" before infinitives: C. 7, IV 8;
C. 8, IV15; C. 22, VIII16; C. 41, XIV 9; XX 18; XXI17,
18, 21, XXII 4; XXII11 bis.
HR miscellaneous: XXI 2; XXII 4.
SW'YHR: I. 7, XX 6,8 bis.
HR idiomatic:
ND HR-F, " ask him ": C. 20, VIII 1.
HRfWY, "immediately ": C. 48, XVII17; XXII14.
HR T', " entirely ": C. 41, XIV 16.
HR KD, " entirely ": XXI11, 17.
HR H"T, " before ": I. 7, XX 5.
upper: C. 84, XI 28; C. 40, XIII 17; XX 14.
TP ... . HRY, "outer edge" (lit. the "upper tip"):
C. 11.V14.
M GS N HRY, " on the top ": XXII 6.
top: C. 11, V 14,15.
up; or without plural strokes; also ^f=i (XVIII 8).
R HRW, "upward," "on high": C. 4, II 10; I. 1,
XVIII 8.
N HRW," upward": C.7.IV8; C.81.X21.
middle; also * tf.
Used, as noun: C. 7, IV 1; C. 8, IV 8, 18 bis; C. 11, V 14
C. 12, V 21.
Used as adjective: C. 81, X 16.
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:07 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 579 ---
EGYPTIAN GLOSSARY
553
HRY Jss* be far away: HR-TY (2nd pers. sing., XIX 2); HR-
TYWNY (2nd pers. pl., XVIII 18); I. 8, XVIII 18; I. 4,
XIX 2.
HH 5^1 myriad: XXII10.
H&B O a break, fracture (noun); also o, $-J~0 (once only V 11):
C. 11, V 10 bis, 11; C. 12, V 16 bis, 17, 20; C. 24, VIII 22 bis,
28, IX 1; C. 85, XII 8 bis, 4, 6; C. 86, XII 9 bis, 10, 12;
C. 87, XII14,15,16 bis, 19, 20; C. 44, XV 6 bis, 8.
to break (verb); jpjo: C. 42, XIV 18.
HSMN IP^Im, natron: XXI 4; XXI 7.
HgMN lEltfi menstrual discharge: XX 18.
HK-T 14° beer: XX 15.
HK'-T grain measure.
<— J heket (a little over one pint): XX 15.
j> heket (a little over | pint): XX 15.
HK'-W iU]^<?|j)i charm, incantation: C. 9, V 1.
HTY smoke: XXI8.
HTY-T JQs throat: C. 34, XI 23, XII 2.
HTR to be contracted: C. 7, m 6, 7,16.
HTT-T |™ shoulder: C. 47, XVI16,17, XVII 1, 7, 11.
HD become light, bright.
HD T', " the morning ": I. 5, XIX 5.
HD-T ^ White One (name of goddess): I. 1, XVIII 4.
H-T f[J. fire: XXI16, XXII8.
H'Y ^1^*-" measure, examine, treat; also *—», ©^^^ (once only IX 7),
Ior with det. I\— $ (14; var. ^,19),^^
(once only X 4-5, error), (once only XXI18).
H'Y in the formula YR H'Y-K (IJ-=>^): C. 1, lost column
restored, 13; C. 2,112; C. 8,119 restored; C. 4,118; C. 5,
1112; C. 6, II18; C. 7, III 8; C.8.IV5; C. 9, IV 19; C. 10,
V 6; C. 11, V 10; C. 12, V 16; C. 18, VI 4; C. 14, VI 7;
C. 15, VI15; C. 16, VI18; C. 17, VIII; C. 18, VII 7; C.19,
VII15; C. 20, VII 22; C. 21, VIII 6; C. 22, VIII10; C. 28,
VIII 18; C. 24, VIII 22; C. 25, IX 2; C. 26, IX 6; C. 27,
IX 18; C. 28, IX 18; C. 29, X 8; C. 80, X 9; C. 81, X 18;
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:07 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 580 ---
554
EGYPTIAN GLOSSARY
H'Y (cont.)
H'Y-TY
Hv
H'BW
H'H'
H'S
HrM
HWY
HP
HPR
HPRW
HFHF-T
HFT
HFT-HR
HFTY
HMY
HMT-NW
HNT
HNT
HNT
mm*
#1
ft
8
© ©
C. 82, XI1; C. 88, XI 9; C. 84, XI17; C. 85, XII8; C. 86,
XII 9; C. 87, XII 15; C. 88, XII 22; C. 89, XIII 8; C. 40,
XIII 12; C. 41, XIII 18; C. 42, XIV 17; C. 48, XIV 22;
C. 44, XV 6; C. 45, XV 9; C. 46, XV 20; C. 47, XVI 16;
C. 48, XVII 16; XX 18.
H'Y miscellaneous: C. 1, I 4, 5 bis, 7, 8, 9; C. 26, IX 7;
C. 29, X 4-5; C. 47, XVII 6; XXI18 bis.
Disease-Demon; also J^\^=^j (plural XIX 20): I.l.XVm
6; I. 2, XVIII12,18; I. 5, XIX 8; I. 7, XIX 20, XX 7.
to lay back; also ^—a (once only XVII 5): C. 47, XVI 17,
XVII 1, 5.
rhungry"1: 1.6, XIX15.
winnow: XXI11-12.
to rprojecti: C. 43, XIV 23.
throat; also J^<?^ (once only IX 22): C. 28, IX 18,19, 22.
avoid: I. 8, XX 9, 9-10.
to die: I. 5, XIX 7.
arise, originate: CI, I 9; C. 5, II16; 0.6,0 20,21,25; C. 8,
IV 10,11; XXI12, 14.
befall (in unfavorable sense): C. 1,1 9; C. 18, VII 12; C. 81,
X16.20; C. 89, XIII 9; C. 41, XIV 7.
exist (as in MY HPR-T = " what is "): C. 40, Xm 17; C. 42,
XIV 21.
HPR participle with meaning " done ": C. 30, X 10.
form: I. 5, XIX 6.
theflooder: 1.1, XVm 7.
according to: C. 41, XIV 8; C. 45, XV 16; C. 47, XVII 6.
when: C. 81.X19.
in view of: C. 7, IV 4.
enemy: C. 9, V 2.
to be unconscious of: C. 31, X 13,15, 17; C. 88, XI12, 18.
third: C. 9, VI; I. 1, XVIII 5.
in: C. 1,18 restored.
^wrinkles"1: XXII 8.
see MHNT.
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:07 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 581 ---
EGYPTIAN GLOSSARY
555
Y iffli ^ one who is over.the first: L1.xvm 1.2; L 5'XIX18-
iffil n X®-^ chief of the Hemesut-house: L 1, XVm 2.
HR J,5«, fall (literal): C. 8, IV 8,17,18; C. 88, XI11,15,16.
HR indicating physiological or anatomical shift or move-
ment: C. 33, XI10,14; C. 85, XII 6; C. 86, XII12.
HR R T, (" come off," " come away " and similar): C. 4,
H 9; C. 7, III 4.
HR J, so that: C. 12, V 22, VI1.
HH throat: I. 5, XIX 11.
HSF 4-^ prevent, exorcise: I.1, XVIII1; I. 2, XVIII11; I. 7, XX 7.
HSF 4-^ resistance: C. 46, XVI5.
HSFY 4$ HSFY R," to turn toward": C. 84, XI18.
HT ^ wood: C. 7, III 14; I. 2, XVIII15; I. 7, XX 6.
HT ml^ after, afterward.
SRWH-K (SW) M HT: C. 1,1 8; C. 2,115 restored; C. 8,
I 28; C. 11, V 18; C. 12, V 20; C. 15, VI17; C. 16, VI 21;
C. 17, VII 6; C. 18, VII 11; C. 28, VIII 22; C. 26, IX 10;
C. 27, IX 17; C. 28, X 1; C. 80, X 11; C. 82, XI 6; C. 84,
XI 20; C. 85, XII 8; C. 86, XII14; C. 87, XII 18; C. 88,
XIII 2; C. 40, XIII 16; C. 42, XIV 20; C. 48, XV 8;
C. 47, XVII 4,14.
YR M HT: C. 8,1 22 restored; C. 9, IV 20, V 8; C. 10,
V 7; C. 12, V 19; C. 26, IX 9; C. 29, X 8; C. 80, X 11;
XXI11, XXII 7.
M HT N, " subject to ": I.1, XVIII 5.
YMY-W HT, " followers ": I. 5, XIX 8.
HTY
retreat; also (^J^, (imperative XVIII18): I. 2, XVIII18;
I. 7, XIX 20.
HTM
to close: C. 25,1X8.
H-T
ball (of the foot): C. 8, IV 15.
Q 1
belly, womb: 1. 6, XIX 15, 16, 17.
H'B
to bend: C. 12, V 16, 21.
H'B
sickle-bone: C. 34, XI 22-23.
H'R
khar (unit of measure): XXI10.
HN
use (noun): C. 9, IV 21, V 4.
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:07 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 582 ---
EGYPTIAN GLOSSARY
interior, inside; also 1n?o (twice only V 12, VI 11); usually
without ui, but see (twice only XII 7, 18).
HNW as noun: C. 5, H 16, 17; C. 6, II 24; C. 11, V 14;
C. 14, VI 18-14; C. 26, IX 9, 11, 12; C. 82, XI 8; C. 84,
XI 21; C. 87, XII 20; C. 41, XIV 12.
M HNW (^H«?): C- 6, 11 25; C- U, V 12'> °- 12, V 19,
VI 2, 8; C. 14, VI11; C. 22, VIII12,15; C. 25, IX 4.
M HNW (^Jg£n) before G,B ("arm "): C. 35, XII 7;
C. 86, XII18.
MHNW: I. 7, XX 5.
YMY-THNW: I. 5, XIX 5.
See also MHNW.
enter: L 5, XIX 5.
to voyage: 1.1, XVIII 7.
rhollow"1 (of the ear): C. 23, VHI19.
under: C. 4, II 4; C. 5, II 18; C. 6, II 21 bis; C. 8, IV 5 bis,
II bis, 12; C. 9, V 5; C. 18, VI 5; C. 17, VII 2; C. 24, VIII
28; C. 25, IX 4; C. 84, XII 1; C. 87, XII16; C. 44, XV 8;
C. 46, XVI1, 14.
HR, " because of " or " from " (source): C. 8, II 1; C. 7,
III 9 bis; C.8, IV 6; C. 12, V 22, VI1; C. 18, VI 6; C. 17,
VII 4; C. 21, VIII 8; C. 24, IX 2; C. 28, IX 21, X 2;
C. 81, X 18,14; C. 88, XI 12; C. 41, XIII 20, XIV 2; C. 47,
XV120,XVII7,11.
HR with meaning " possess ": C. 21, VIII 7, 8; C. 22,
VIII 11; C.81.X20.
HR erroneously used for HRY: C. 7, III 5,12; C. 18, VI 5,
6; C. 14, VI9; C. 22, VIII18; C. 46, XVI 2.
HR scribal error: C. 45, XV 19.
one having, one who has; also (seven times only, III 5,12;
VI 5, 6, 9; VIII18; XVI 2)7*C. 1,11 restored; C. 2,114;
C.8,1 20; C.4,115; C. 5,1114; C. 7, III 5,12; C. 8, IV 6,
7, 15, 16; C. 11, V 11; C. 12, V 17; C. 18, VI 5, 6; C. 14,
VI 9; C. 15, VI 16; C. 16, VI 19; C. 17, VII 8, 4; C. 18,
VII 10; C. 19, VII 17 bis; C. 20, VIII 8; C. 21, VIII 8;
C. 22, VIII 18, 17; C. 28, VIII 19; C. 24, IX 1; C. 25,
IX5; C. 26, IX 8; C.27,1X15; C.28,IX21; C. 80, X 10;
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:07 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 583 ---
EGYPTIAN GLOSSARY
557
HRY (cont.) J* C. 81, X 17; C. 82, XI 4; C. 88, XI12; C. 84, XI19; C. 85,
XII 4; C. 86, XII 10; C. 87, XII 16, 20; C. 88, XIII 1
C. 89, XIII5; C. 40, XIII14; C.41, XIV1; C. 42, XIV 19
C. 48, XV 2; C. 44, XV 8; C. 45, XV 14; C. 46, XVI 2
C. 47, XVII1,10; C. 48, XVII18.
one who is under: I. 6, XIX 15.
HRY lower part (of the ear): C. 28, VIII18.
underside (of the arm): C. 85, XII 7; C. 86, XII18.
HRW J^<? or with det. n or ™(.
N HRW, "downward": C. 7, IV 8; C. 81.X21; C. 82,
XI 9.
HR-T ajj yield, production: I. 5, XIX 9.
HKR 1"parti-colored"1: C. 39, XIII11-12.
HRD child, infant: C. 6, II21; C. 8, IV 11; C. 20, VIII2.
S XJ man: C. 1, lost column restored, I 8 restored, 5; C. 2, I 12
C. 8,1 19 restored; C. 4, 118, 6, 8; C. 5, II12; C. 6, II18
C. 7, III 7,8, 9,18; C.8,IV5; C. 9, IV 19; C.10,V6; C.ll
V 10; C. 12, V 16; C. 18, VI 4; C. 14, VI 7; C. 15, VI 15
C. 16, VI18; C. 17, VIII; C. 18, VII 7; C. 19, VII15; C. 20
VII 22, VIII 4; C. 21, VIII 6; C. 22, VIII 10; C. 28, VIII
18; C. 24, VIII 22; C. 25, IX 2; C. 26, IX 6; C. 27, IX 18
C. 28, IX 18; C. 29, X 8; C. 80, X 9; C. 81, X 18; C. 82
XII; C. 88, XI 9; C. 84, XI17; C. 85, XII 8; C. 86, XII 9
C. 87, XII15; C. 88, XII 22; C. 89, XIII 8; C. 40, XIII12
C. 41, XIII 18, 20; C. 42, XIV 18; C. 48, XIV 22, XV 1
C. 44, XV 6; C. 45, XV 9,16; C. 46, XV 20; C. 47, XVI17
XVII 6, 12; I. 1, XVIII 10; I. 2, XVIII 15; I. 5, XIX 11
14bis; I.6, XIX14; I. 7, XX5; I. 8, XX11; XXII4, 7,11
S-T "Js3 woman: XX18.
S' ^ son; also or without det,: C. 9, V 8; I. 1, XVIII 5, 6 bis;
I.2,XV1II15; I. 7, XX 8.
S'BY R S'BY R, r" as far as ,r1: C. 32, XI 5.
S' protection: I. 1, XVIII10, 11; I. 8, XVIII 17; I. 5, XIX 18;
XXII 12.
s,w "^1^13 prevent: C. 89, XIII8.
avoid; written "gT^W^: C. 46, XVI 6.
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:07 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 584 ---
558 EGYPTIAN GLOSSARY
S'W to issue: I. 6, XIX 17.
S'W "S^^ to be stationary: C. 31, X 21.
S'TW ground: C. 8, IV 15.
SWNW physician; also ~ (once only 16): C.1,1 6; C. 9, IV 21, V 4.
SP ^ time, instance; C. 7, IV 3 bis; XXII10.
SP SN-WY: I. 1, XVIII 4, 9; I. 2, XVIII 14; I. 5, XIX 8,
9; I.7, XX 2; I. 8, XX 10; XX 17, XXII.
SPY remain: XXI 12.
SP ~ portion: XXI 14.
SP-W ° , fragments: C. 4, U 9; C. 5, II17.
applications; or without <?: C. 41, XIV 2, 4; C. 46, XVI 8, 6, 7.
SP qo/* meaning uncertain: C. 24, IX 1.
SM, J]^<* lungs: C. 84, XII 2.
SNY ~x spread, spread out; also "^\a (once only XV 17), or with det.
\ (XXII 1): C. 85, Xlf5; C. 86, XII 11; C. 89, XIII 10;
C. 45, XV 17; XXII 1.
SNrr Hljlft-^ rub, triturate: XXII5; XXII18.
SNP = /* blood: C. 4, II 4, 5; C. 5, II 18; C. 6, II 22; C. 7, III 4, 6;
C. 8, IV 8,12; C. 9, V 2; C. 11, V 11; C. 12, V 18, VI 2 bis;
C. 18, VI 5; C. 14, VI 10; C. 17, VII 2, 8, 4; C. 20, VII 24,
VIII 8; C. 21, VIII 7, 8; C. 22, VIII11, 18; C. 87, XII19;
XX 14-15,16.
SRY ~1 \ rreiiefT. C. 17, vn 6; C. 20, VIII 5; C. 82, XI 6.
SS splint, or with det. °v (once only V 18); also (once only
VI 10).
SS and SS-WY (two splints): C. 7, m 18; C. 85, XII 6;
0. 86, XII 12; C. 87, XII 17.
SS-WY probably error for SSM-WY: C.12.V 18; C. 14,
VI 10.
SS %^ write: I. 5, XIX 10.
SSR-T ~"^a drying up; also (XVI 9-10), ~f (IV 21): C. 9, IV 21;
C. 41, XIV 4; C. 46, XVI9-10.
S-T place: C. 12, V 18; C. 25, IX 5; C. 80, X 12; C. 84, XI 19;
C. 85, XII 6; C. 86, XII 12.
S-TYB, "pulse": C. 1,1 7 bis.
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:07 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 585 ---
EGYPTIAN GLOSSARY
559
Isis: I. 1, XVIII 5.
back.
HR S'N," on outside of ": C.8.IV6; C. 16, VI19; C.21,
VIII 6-7; C. 88, XII 22.
M &, N, " with the back of ": C. 20, VIII 2.
R 6'. " after," " afterward ": XX 18; XXII 5.
toes: C. 8, IV 14-15.
to drive (meaning to" force "): C. 33, XI16.
to hold back: C. 31, X22.
fseparatei.orwithdet.^XIU); also (XVI 18-19),
or with det. ^ (XII 10): C. 14, VI 8; C. 85, XII 4; C. 86,
XII10; C. 47, XVI18-19.
(dependent pronoun, third person, feminine, singular; also
used impersonally): C. 45, XV 11; C. 48, XVII 16, 17 bis;
XXI1.
to shuffle: C. 8, IV 7,13,15.
assign: I. 6, XIX 18.
wipe, wipe off; also P1f^ (XX 18): C. 20, VIII 2; XX 18.
clay: XXII 5.
corner: C. 18, VII14.
elevated, prominent: C. 46, XV 20.
See also rR and &KR.
to bring in, intrude: C. 8, IV 17.
(dependent pronoun, third person, masculine, singular).
As object of verb: C. 1, I 2; C. 2, I 14 restored; C. 8,
I 20 restored, 22 bis (once restored), 28; C. 4, II 7; C. 5,
II 15; C. 6, II 28; C. 7, III 8; C. 8, IV 7; C. 9, VI; C. 10,
V 7 bis (once restored), 8; C. 11, V 18; C. 12, V 18, 20;
C. 14, VI11, 12; C. 15, VI17 bis; C. 16, VI 20, 21; C. 17,
VII 6; C. 18, VII 10; C. 19, VII 18; C. 21, VIII 9; C. 28,
VIII 21; C. 25, IX 5; C. 26, IX 10 ter; C. 27, IX 17 bis;
C. 28, XI bis, 2; C.29,X7; C.80,X11; C.81,X18; C. 82,
XI 4, 6 bis; C. 88, XI 10; C. 84, XI 20 bis; C. 85, XII 5,
8 bis; C. 86, XII10,14; C. 87, XII17,18; C. 88, XIII2 bis;
C. 89, XIII 5, 7; C. 40, XIII 15, 16; C. 41, XIV 7; C. 42,
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:07 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 586 ---
EGYPTIAN GLOSSARY
6w (com.) },<?
SW'Y
X
SWrB
SWMT
SWR
m&
SWH-T
Ml
SWS
P*T
SWGM
P^K^
SWT
sbn
PJ^
sbh
SPNr
SPR
spspw pDpD?^^
SPT P°-—
XIV 18, 20 bis; C. 48, XV 2; C. 45, XV 12, 16; C. 46,
XVI 7; C. 47, XVII 2, 4, 6,18, 14; C. 48, XVII19.
YSK SW: C. 17, VII 2; C. 21, VIII 7; C. 88, XI10.
YSK SW HM, " while at the same time ": C. 13, VI 5;
C.17, VII8.
YSTSW: C. 18, VII12.
YST YR &W: C. 1,1 2 restored.
NNSWM: C. 12, V22.
DRNTTSWM: C. 4, II11.
NTTSW...M: C. 7, IV 4.
to pass by; also p-f^e^yi (once only XX 7), (once
only XX 6): C. 3,123 restored; C.4,II7; C. 5, II15; C. 19,
VII18; C. 29, X 8; C. 47, XVII18; I. 2, XVIII 18 bis, 14;
I. 7, XIX 20, XX 6, 7.
the passer by: I. 4, XVIII19.
cleanse: I. 6, XIX 14; I. 7, XIX 18.
to make thick: XXII 6.
to drink; or with det. C. 28, IX 19; XX 16.
egg: C. 9, IV 20, 21, V. 1.
a whirl: C. 41, XIII19, XIV 11,12.
to grind: XXII 2.
weak adversative particle.
YR SWT, " if then " or " if however ": C. 7, III 8, 18;
C.28.X2; C.81.X16; C. 84, XI 21; G. 87, XII19; C. 47,
xvn 6, 12, 18.
to fall down: C. 9.V3.
jar: XXI16, XXII 8.
transform: XXI 8-4.
reach; also J^"^* (once only II 7), jT>i (once only II 10):
C. 18, VII12.""*
SPR R YH-T (" reach decisive point "): C. 4, H 7, 10;
C. 6, II 28; G. 7, III 8,15; C. 8, IV 9; C. 21, VIII 9; C. 87,
XII19.
of uncertain meaning, probably disease-demons: I. 7, XX 4.
lip; also (twice only V 9, VI 18).
SPTofthe human mouth: C. 7, III 4; C.26,1X6,7,9,11.
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:07 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 587 ---
EGYPTIAN GLOSSARY
561
SPT (cord.)
SPT-WY (" two lips ") of a wound: C. 1,11,10 restored;
C. 2, I 17 restored; C. 10, V 9; C. 14, VI 8, 18; C. 18,
VII 18; C. 28, VIII 21; C. 26, IX 12; C. 41, XIII 20,
XIV 10, 18 bis.
SFHY
to release: C. 8, IV 8,17.
gFR-T
P^
drawing or similar (of movement of an eyebrow): C. 7, IV 3.
SFT
PT,?,
oil: XX 16.
SMN
pa—
to set aside: XXI15, XXII 2.
SN
Pi i I
(dependent pronoun, third person, common, plural): XXI 18.
SNW(Y)
II
two: C. 84, XIII; XXI10.
SN-NW
No
the second, the other: C. 1,110,12 restored; C. 81, X 18, 19;
112 (fem-)
C. 88, XI 10, 11, 14, 16, 17; C. 85, XII 4; C. 86, XII 10;
I.1, XVIII 5.
6ny
P w
them both (dependent pronoun, third person common, dual);
also by error (once only XII 7): C. 14, VI 8; C. 35,
XH 7; C. 86, XII18 bis.
r&NWRi
n ******* o < .
rcastout"1: C. 9,V2.
PT-
recover: XXII 14.
Snfr
Pi^
beautify: XXI 6; XXII 8.
SNTR
incense: XXI 2.
sr-t
PTA
spine, thorn: C. 42, XIV 21, 22.
SRWH
PTi
treat, or with det. —o (once only II 7); also *—o (twice only
VI17, XV 16), — (once only VIII 21), —«(once only XIV 7).
SRWH as a noun: C. 39, M 7-8; C. 46, XVI 7; see also
&RWH-F PW HMS(Y)-T.
&RWH with medicaments:
SRWH with grease, honey and lint, with M (^): C. 1,
13; C. 8, 128; C. 10, V 8 (without lint); C. 12, V20; C. 19,
VII 19.
&RWH with grease, honey and sometimes lint, without
M (&): C. 2,115 restored; C. 11, V 18; C. 15, VI17; C. 16,
VI 21; C. 17, VII 6; C. 18, VII 11; C. 28, VIII 21; C. 26,
IX 10; C. 27, IX 17; C. 28, X 1; C. 84, XI 20; C. 87, XII
18; C. 40, XIII16; C. 47, XVII 4, 14.
&RWHwith honey, without M (^): C. 82, XI 6; C. 85,
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:07 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 588 ---
562 EGYPTIAN GLOSSARY
6RW9(«m*.) Pl*^ XII 8; C. 86, XII14; C. 88, XIII 2; C. 42, XIV 20; C. 48,
XV 8.
SRWH with YMRW and honey without M C. 80,
Xll.
SRWH, manner of:
SRWH "according to these SS'W": C. 41, XIV 7;
C. 45, XV 16.
SRWH with SRWH WBNW: C. 89, XIII 7; C. 46,
XVI7.
SRWH-F HMS(Y)-T: C. 4, II 7; C. 7, III 15;
C.8,IV9; C. 16, VI20.
SRWD
PTT-
to make flourish: L 1, XVIII 2.
SRF
P3
inflammation, fever; also «=>(J, (once only XIII 19), Q, (once
only XIV 16): C. 7, III 9; C. 28, IX 21; C. 89, XIII 5;
C. 41, XIII 19, XIV 8, 11-12, 12, 15, 16; C. 45, XV 12;
C. 46, XVI8; C. 47, XVII7, 9,14.
Srf-wt
fweaknesses1: XXII 9.
SH'-T
discharge: XX 16.
SHM
to crush; also "cT^Q (once only XI 15): C. 33, XI 9 bis, 11,
12,13,15.
SHR
PIX^
abscess; also -\ (once only XV 20): C. 46, XV 20 bis, XVI 2,
8, 7,12.
SHRY
PX4*
exorcise: I. 7, XX 7 (causative of HRY " be far away ").
gHD
Pl^
to become pale: C. 7, III 18, IV 4 bis.
SHM
!(
mighty one; or with det. ^: LI, XVIII 6 bis.
&HM-T
t£
Sekhmet, g.; or with det. ^: C. 1,1 6; L 1, XVIII 6, 9; I.2,
XVIII 12, 14, 15; I. 5, XIX 8, 9, 10; I. 7, XIX 19, XX 2
bis; I. 8, XX 11.
SHR
p<t~
&HR N, " after the manner of ": XXI18.
MY SHR, "like": XXI 18.
M SHR, "even so": XXI15.
SHR
force to fall in, cause to fall back: C. 12, V 17; C. 25, IX 4;
C. 84, XI19.
SHT
to stretch: I. 8, XX 10.
SHD
to be head downward: C. 33, XI16.
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:07 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 589 ---
EGYPTIAN GLOSSARY
503
Shdhd
SH-T
Shbw
She
rSSir
>
SSD
PS?
Skbb
UJJfiE
Skr
Skr p^
Skd p^-
SKDY
Sgnn
P=J
St
P-
Sty
h?
Stw
P-TA
st[W]
P-f
st-wt
p:,?,
Sty
PS
Stwt
stp
Stp
St'
P-t
Stsw
p^«e
to be head downward:
M SHDHD, " head downward ": C. 33, XI11,15.
an unidentified fruit: C. 46, XVI 4.
draught, a drink: C. 7, HI 14.
to cover: I. 1, XVIII10.
swab, tampon, plug; also >i (VIII16): C. 11, V 11,12; C. 12,
V19; C. 22, VIII11, 16.
band, bandage; or without stroke, also ^"^j" (116): C. 2,116;
C. 9, V 5; C. 10, V 9; I.5, XIX 11.
to cause to be cool; also aJ J/S~~* by error: C. 9, V 4 bis.
prominent, elevated; or with det. ^=v or ^: C. 39, XIII 8 bis,
6,10; C. 46, XVI13.
See also SrR and rR.
to smite, injury, or with det. «-j: C. 8, IV 7 ter, 15; C. 17,
VII 8; C. 19, VII17; C. 21, VIII 8.
to spread: C. 39, Xm 4; C. 45, XV 10.
sail: I. 1, XVIII 7.
to cleanse, or with det. ^: C. 11, V 11; C. 12, V 18; C. 14,
VI10; C. 22, VIII11,16.
to smear: XXII8.
to soften: C.4,I18; C. 20, VIII 5.
(dependent pronoun, third person, feminine, singular): C. 81,
X14; XXI 19 bis; XXII1.
dissipate, scatter: C. 47, XV1114.
1"spreading"1: C. 43, XV 5.
sower: I. 5, XIX 18.
swellings: C. 43, XV 1,5; C. 47, XVI18, XVII 2.
odor: C. 7, III 11, 21, IV 1.
see TWT.
to rchoke"1: C. 28, IX19-20.
strip: I. 7, XX 6; XXII13.
reduce (lit. draw out); also (once on'y V 12): C. 11,
V 12; C. 16, VI20; C. 17, VII6.
be prostrate on the back; also P=^ PgLi (once only XVII19):
C. 35, XH 5; C. 86, XII11; C. 48, XVII19.
O O 2
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:07 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 590 ---
564 EGYPTIAN GLOSSARY
SD |1^ fracture, rupture, break open, inflict: also p^°, p*^3.
of the bone (compound comminuted fracture):
SD of the skull: C. 1, 11 restored; C. 2, I 17 restored;
C. 8,1 24 bis; C. 5, II11,12 bis, 15,16 ter, 17; C. 6, II18,19,
20, 28, 24; C. 8, IV 5 bis, 6,10,12,18; C. 9, IV 19 bis.
SD in his nostril: C. 18, VI8, 4 bis, 5, 6.
SD in his maxilla (MND-T-F): C. 17, VII1 bis, 2, 4.
SD in his temple (GM'-F): C. 18, VII 9; C. 22, VIII 9,
10, 11, 18.
SD in the flesh (rupture):
SD of the meninges of the brain: C. 6, II 24.
SD of fleshy tissue overlying a fracture of the bone: C. 24,
IX1; C. 84, XI21; C. 87, XII15,16,20-21; C. 44, XV 7,8.
distorted, drawn, or with det. ^: C. 7, III 11, IV 2.
to pierce through, without det. or with det. x; the participle
with prosthetic Y occurs 12 times: C. 14, VI 7-8, 9,18, 14;
C. 26, IX 7, 9,11,12; C. 28, IX 19, 22; C. 84, XI 21; C. 87,
XII 20, 21.
to hear: C. 21, VIII 7.
to burn: C. 39, XJ.il 6-7 (where m is corrected from w; cf.
MSrK-T s.v.).
to be hot: C. 41, XHl 22.
an unidentified flower: I. 8, XX 8-9,12.
an unidentified flower: C. 19, VII 20.
bosom: C. 34, XIII, 2.
to be sandy, to be granulated: C. 45, XV 12-13.
sun: XXI10, XXII1.
dry, be dry: C. 28, X 2; XXI 11, 18 bis, XXII1.
two feathers: I. 1, XVIII 8, 10.
two sides, usually dual, but also p"! (quater); [5[I^ (once only
XV 5): C. 43, XV 1, 5 bis, 6; C. 47, XVI 17,19, XVII 1, 6.
see YSW-W
gullet; also =JJ<* (IX 22): C. 28, IX 19, 22.
an unidentified drug: C. 41, XIV 6; C. 46, XVI 12.
to swell; also =<?,° (XIV 11): C. 12, V22; C. 89, XIII 10;
C. 41, XIV 11; C. 46, XVI18.
SDY
SDB
sdm
S'M
S'MS
S'S"
S'S-T
SrY
1 lo
•
SW
n
SWY
pi
SW-TY
SW-TY
n
SW
SBB
zJJT
SPNN
O immw 1 1 1
SFW
1=) (3
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:07 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 591 ---
EGYPTIAN GLOSSARY
5C5
SND-T
SFW-T swelling: C. 4, II10; C. 12, VI1; C. 45, XV 17,19.
SM "^^^ to walk, to go; or without det.: C. 8, IV 7,18,14 bis, 15; I.1,
XVIII10.
SM-T, " action " (of the heart): C. 1,1 6 restored.
SM = hot (adjective): C. 7, HI 7.
SMM to have fever: C. 24, IX 1; C. 28, X 2; C. 41, XIII 20, XIV 2;
C. 47, XVII11,12.
SMM-T ^J^SCd heat, inflammation, fever; or with plural strokes (mi): C. 41,
XIV 9,14; C. 47, XVII18-14.
SM'Y 3^8*, disease; also C. 15, VI 15-16; C. 41, XIII 18 bis,
XIV 1,8.
SM'-W 3^&<?W^! diseased ones: I. 2, XVIII14; I. 7, XXI; I. 8, XX 9.
SMSW jjp^l followers: I. 8, XX 9.
SNrW JLV^ obstruction: XX 14.
SNB-T breast: C. 32, XI 2, 8.
acacia:
DRD of SND-T, "acacia leaves;" also with det., ' , (XXII
12): C. 46, XVI 8; XXII12.
SR-T ^7 nostril; also <f (twice only VIS, 4).
SR-T used in the singular: C. 13, VI 3, 4, 5, 6; C. 14,
VI 7 bis, 9,11,18; C. 17, VII 8, 4; C. 21, VIII 7, 8.
DY-F SNF M SR-TY-FY (his two nostrils): C. 4, H 4, 6;
C. 5, II 18; C. 6, II 22; C. 7, III 4, 6; C. 8, IV 9, 12; C. 11,
Vll; C.20, VII 24, VIII 4; C. 22, VIII18.
Proof passages that the writing (SR-TY) designates the
nostrils: C. 11, V 12; C. 12, V 18, 19 bis, VI 2, 8; C. 22,
VIII11.
SRY to be little: C. 19, VII16.
a little: C. 20, VII 24.
SSP m^j receive, take; or without det.: C. 31, X 14; C. 41, XIII 20-21,
21, XIV 14 bis.
takeoff, remove: C. 14, VI11-12.
SS 5^ found effective: XXII 10.
SS" alabaster: XXI 6.
SS & 0 an unidentified plant or tree: C. 46, XVI 4.
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:07 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 592 ---
EGYPTIAN GLOSSARY
rpowder"1; also » I (XIV 5): C. 41, XIV 5; C. 46, XVI10.
instructions; also and i^^j (once only I 12).
S&'W in titles of cases: C. 1, lost column restored; C. 2,
112; C. 8,118restored; C. 4,112; C. 5,1111; C. 6,1117-18;
C. 7, III 2; C. 8, IV 5; C. 9, IV 19; C. 10, V 5; C. II, V 10;
C. 12, V 16; C. 18, VI 8; C. 14, VI 7; C. 15, VI14; C. 16,
VI 17; C. 17, VII 1; C. 18, VII 7; C. 19, VII 14; C. 20,
VII 22; C. 21, VIII 6; C. 22, VIII 9; C. 28, VIII18; C. 24,
VIII 22; C. 25, IX 2; C. 26, IX 6; C. 27, IX 18; C. 28,
IX 18; C. 29, X 8; C. 80, X 8; C. 81, X 12; C. 82, XI 1;
C. 88, XI 9; C. 84, XI17; C. 85, XII 8; C. 86, XII 8; C. 87,
XII14; C. 88, XII21; C. 89, XIII 8; C. 40, XIII12; C.41,
XIII18; C. 42, XIV 16; C. 48, XIV 22; C. 44, XV 6; C. 45,
XV 9; C. 46, XV 20; C. 47, XVI16; C. 48, XVII15.
S&'W with plural demonstrative: C. 41, XIV 8; C. 45,
XV 16.; C. 47, XVII 6.
indications : C. 1, I 9.
to be bloodshot; or with det. C. 19, VII17, 19-20; C. 20,
VII28; C.81,X15.
chamber; also =J!](Hfl (V 16 bis): C- V 16 bis, 17, 21-
develop, or with det. *_o: C. 7, III 8, 9, 18; C. 28, IX 20-21;
C. 47, XVII 7; dig out: XXI18.
mass: XXI16; XXII 2.
high: C.41, XIV 9.
K'-T, height (noun): C. 41, XIV 11.
to be folded: C. 35, XII 5; C. 86, XII11.
breast.
K'B*T as designation for the breast in general, shown in the
test of ability of patient to turn the face downward: C. 8,
I 20, 25-26, 26; C. 4, II 5; C. 5, II 14; C. 7, III 5; C. 29,
X6; C. 80, X9.
K'B-T as designation for the soft tissue overlying the bony
structure of the breast:
Swellings, tumors or abscesses in or on K>B-T: C. 89,
XIII8,4 bis, 6, 7 bis, 9,10 bis, 11; C. 45, XV 9,10,11 bis,
16,17,19; C. 46, XV 20, 21 bis, XVI 2-8, 4, 8, 10, 18,14.
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:07 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 593 ---
EGYPTIAN GLOSSARY
567
K'B-T (cont.) a\J% WBNW M K'B-T: C. 40, XIII 12, 18, 14-15; C. 41,
XIII18,18-19, XIV 2, 8, 9.
K'B-T as designation for the sternum:
The manubrium of the K'B-T:
Kg HRY N K'B-T-F: C. 34, XI23.
TP HRY N K'B-T-F: C. 40, XIH 17.
HNT' N K'B-T-F: C. 40, XIH 18, 14, 15,17.
Articulations in the K'B-T:
MNM K'B-T-F: C. 48, XV 4.
WD-T M K'B-T-F: C. 48, XV 5.
HN-W (ribs) NW K'B-T-F: C. 42, XIV 17 bis, 19,
21 bis; C. 48, XIV 22, 28 bis, XV 2, 8, 4; C. 44, XV 6,
7 bis, 8.
KrH
Air
shoulder; also dual ~^ (five times 1 20 restored, 25, 26,11 5,
XII 11): C. 8, I 20 restored, 25, 26; C. 4, II 5, 8; C. 5,
II 14; C. 7, III 5; C. 8, IV 8, 17, 18; C. 19, VII 16; C. 29,
X 5; C. 80, X 9; C. 82, XI 8 bis; C. 84, XI 18; C. 85,
XII 5-6; C. 86, XII11.
KBB
*J/S=
to cool, to be cool, cool; cold; also aJ(1 (XIV 2), J$~~
(twice XV 11-12, XVI 8), ff= (XVII 10): C. 41, XIV 2;
C. 45, XV 11-12, 18-19; C. 46, XVI 8, 6; C. 47, XVII 10;
XXI19.
See also SKBB.
KFN
to clot: C. 12, VI2.
KM'
to engender, produce, generate; also (once only XIII
12): C.8,1V 17; C. 89, XIII12; C. 45, XV 18.
KNKN
bruise: XXI10.
KR-WT
A Q °
<=- i i i
depressions: C. 12, VI1.
KRF
J.Y
contract: C.48,XVII16,17.
KSNTY
n — 0
possibly an unidentified herb: C. 41, XIV 3, 4; C. 46, XVI 4, 5.
— o\M 1 1
KS
\
bone.
rE N KS: C. 1, lost column bis, restored, I 2 restored, 10
restored; C. 2, I 12, 18, 16 restored; C. 4, II 2, 8, 5; C. 5,
1112,15; C. 6, II18,19; C. 7, III 2, 5,12; C. 10, V 6; C. 18,
VII 8, 12; C. 20, VII 22, 28, VIII 8; C. 27, IX 14, 16;
C. 29, X 4, 6.
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:07 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 594 ---
EGYPTIAN GLOSSARY
rR (or Yr[R]) R K&: C. 8, I 18, 19, 21 restored; G. 40,
XIII 18, 15.
SPR R K&: C. 18, VII12.
Miscellaneous uses of KS: C. 1, 1 11; C. 5, II 16; C. 22,
VIII16; C.27,1X14; C. 84, XI 28; C. 42, XIV 21.
to be painful, painful: C. 7, III 8; C. 18, VI 6; C. 17, VII 8;
C. 19, VII 16; C. 21, VIII 7; C. 80, X 10; C. 47, XVI 19;
C. 48, XVII17.
form: C.12.V22.
HR KD, entirely: XXI 11, 17.
droop: C. 7, IV 3.
linen cover: XXII 6.
the other, another: C.35.XII7; I.2,XVIII11; I.8,XVIII17;
I. 4, XVIII19; I. 5, XIX 2; I. 8, XX 8; XXI 6; XXI15.
KYY-SNY: C. 86, XII 18.
uncover: C. 9, V 1.
gash, cut, to gape; or without det., also (once only 111).
WBNW N KF-T: C. 2, I 12 restored, 18 restored, 14
restored, 15 restored, 17 restored; C. 8, I 18, 19 restored,
21 restored; C. 4, II 2, 8, 5; C. 5, II11, 12, 14; C. 6, II18,
19; C. 7, III 2, 5,12; C. 10, V 9; C.27,IX18,14,15; C. 28,
IX 19; C. 29, X 8, 4; C. 47, XVI16,17; XVII1, 10.
KF-T with negative: C. 1, lost column restored, 1 2, 10,
11 bis (once restored); C. 18, VII 8, 12, 12-18.
Drawing together the KF-WT with bandages or thread:
C. 10, V 6; C. 27, IX 16; C. 47, XVI 20, XVII 4 bis.
Uncertain uses: C. 1,111; C. 47, XVI18.
black: C. 15,VI15.
the female organ: XX 17.
arm, upper arm; also S^J—* (once only XII 7): C. 35, XII
7 bis; C. 36, XH 9 ter, 10, 12,18 bis; C. 87, XII15 bis, 16,
20; C. 88, XII 21, 22, XIII1 bis.
to hold firmly: C. 11.V13.
to be askew: C. 8, IV 6.
temple (of human head); also ffi^7^^.
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:07 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 595 ---
EGYPTIAN GLOSSARY
509
GM, (cont.) Proof passages of the meaning of GM': C. 7, III 17; C. 18,
VII9,13; C. 22, VIII15.
General: C. 18, VII 7, 7-8, 10.
Cases involving THM, PSN or &D M GM': C. 19, VII
15 bis, 17; C. 20, VII 22 bis, 28 bis, VIII 8 bis; C. 21, VIII
6 bis, 8; C. 22, VIII 9, 10,18.
GMY "S*^ find.
GMM-K, conditional:
After WD-HR-K (or WD-YN-K) r-K: C. 1, lost column
restored; C. 7, III 10; C. 24, VIII 28; C. 47, XVII 9.
After YR H'Y-K (sometimes with intervening condi-
tions): C. 12.V16; C. 14, VI 8; C. 15, VI15; C. 16, VI18;
C. 21, VIII 6; C. 25, IX 8; C. 81, X 18; C. 88, XI 10, 11;
C. 84, XI 17-18; C. 85, XII 8; C. 86, XII 9; C. 87, XII16;
C. 88, XII22; C. 89, XIII4, 5; C. 48, XIV 28; C. 44, XV 7;
C. 45, XV 10,11; C. 46, XV 21; XX 14.
After DrR-HR-K: C. 8, I 19-20 restored; C. 4, II 8;
C. 5, II 12; C. 6, II 19; C. 8, IV 6; C. 18, VII 9; C. 47,
XVI18.
YRGMY-K: C.2,I18; C.10.V7; C. 28, VIII20; C.27,
IX 14; C. 45, XV 15; C. 47, XVII 8, 5.
YR SWT GMM-K: C. 84, XI21; C. 87, XII19.
YR SWT GMY-K: C. 7, III 8, 18; C. 28, X 2; C. 47,
XVII 7, 12.
YR DR GMM-K: C. 4, II 6; C. 7, III 7; C. 8, IV 10;
C. 20, VIII 4.
N GMY-N-F (" he is not able "): C. 3,1 20 restored, 25;
C. 4, II 4-5; C. 5,1114; C. 7,1114; C.29, X5; C. 82, XI 8.
GMM-[W]-K, relative form: C. 4, II 8.
GMM-K continuing treatment: C. 9, V 1.
GMW ffl^<?i4 sadness: C. 22, Vm 17.
GN £^ soft; also-ffl=: C.26.IX13; C.46.XVI14; XXI16; XXII8.
GNY-T JO !\ |]° rorince"1. C. 18, yn 14.
GNN fflZi& to be feeble: C. 8, IV 14.
to be soft: C. 14, VI 18, 14; C. 26, IX 12.
GR to be silent: C. 22, VIII 17.
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:07 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 596 ---
570 EGYPTIAN GLOSSARY
GRT ®" weak particle.
NGRT: C. 81.X 21.
GS ^ side.
M GS-F HRY followed by SD, SKR or YH; C. 8, IV 6,
7,15,16; C. 17, VII 8; C. 19, VII17.
G&miscellaneous: C. 9, V2; C. 11, V14; XX14; XXII6.
G& anoint: XX 17; XXII; XXI 6; XXI 8.
GS' ffiP^M^ to sink: C. 31, X 21.
T, ^ this: C. 9, V 5.
T' ~ land, earth: I. 1, XVIII 2, 8; I. 6, XIX 17 bis.
R T, and HR T', " away " or " off," with meaning of
" entirely," " completely ":
After HR (" fall "): C. 4, II9; C, 7, III 4.
After PRY (" issue "): C. 41, XIV 16.
After gTY (" scatter "): C. 47, XVH 14.
WDY R T, meaning " to moor " or " to land " (figurative):
C. 3, I 22, II 1; C. 4, II 7; C. 5, II 15; C. 28, X 8; C. 29,
X8; C. 47, XVII18.
HDT,: I. 5, XIX 5.
TY-T see RY-T.
TY, of unknown meaning: C. 7, m 9, 18.
TWY fl]H this: 1.1, XVIII 4; I. 4, XIX 1.
TW'-W °fl^^M, swellings: C. 39, XIH 4.
TWT ^f}^. liken; also (XV 18): C. 12, VI 3; C. 45, XV 18.
STWT fll^f-*.): C. 7, IV 2.
TB-T -J|g sole; also »J«g (IV 14), $" (IV 15): C. 8, IV 7,14 bis, 15.
rTP1 ® head; also ©(three times only II 8, 25, IV 17).
Proof passages that ® (rTP"1) means more than the
calvaria:
" Skin " of TP-F: C. 8, IV 5 bis, 18.
" Flesh " of TP-F: C. 4, II 9.
" Chest " of TP-F: C. 7, III 11, 21, IV 1.
" Interior " of TP-F: C. 6, II 25.
TP used in gloss relating to [M]HNT (" countenance "):
C. 7, III 19.
NHB-T (neck) as part of TP: C. 82, XI 5.
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:07 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 597 ---
EGYPTIAN GLOSSARY
571
rTP1 (cont.) ® TP meaning caput in general: C. 1, lost column bis
restored, 11, 2, 7 restored, 8; C. 2,1 12 restored, 18 restored,
14, 15 restored; C. 8, I 18, 19 restored, 21 restored; C. 4,
112,8,5,8; C. 5, II 11, 12, 14; C. 6, II 18, 19; C. 7, III 2,
5,12; C. 20, VIII 5; XXII 8.
TP, " head " of organs or parts of body:
TP as head or end of bone: C. 8, IV 8, 17, 18; C. 84,
XI 18, 22, 28; C. 40, XIII17; C. 48, XV 1, 4.
TP meaning " tip " of the toes: C. 8, IV 14.
TP meaning " top " of the eyebrow: C. 10, V 5, 6.
TP ... HRY N[Y] FND: C. 11, V14.
TP, " head " of tumors or abscesses: C. 39, XHI8 bis, 6,10;
C. 46, XV 20 bis, XVI2, 7 12.
TP ® used as preposition: C. 7, HI 14.
TPY ®* first (adjective): C. 1, I 8 restored; C 2, I 14 restored; C. 8,
(fem.) I 22; C. 10, V 7; C. 14, VI11; C. 16, VI 20; C. 17, VII 6;
C. 18, VII 11; C. 26, IX 10; C. 27, IX 17; C. 28, X 1;
C.29.X7; C. 80.X 11; C. 82, XI 4; C. 40, XIII16; C. 47,
XVII 8.
the first (pronoun): I. 1, XVIII 4.
TP'-W n2&\<?i°, sutures: C. 7, m 2, 5, 9, 12,15-16, 16.
TPNN-T an unidentified drug: XX16.
TM-W all; also £^: I. 1, XVIII 9; I. 5, XIX 9; I. 8, XX 11.
TM £^ negative verb; also (once only XIV 14): C. 7, IV 2;
C. 8, IV 18 bis; C. 41, XIV 14; C. 46, XVI 15, 15-16; I. 5,
XIX 4, 11.
TMS p% ^ ruddy; also fl^ P f| (once only III 10), «flj p j^^> (once only
XIII20).
TM& referring to inflamed or feverish condition of parts of
body: C. 7, m 10,20; C. 16, VI19; C. 41, XIII20, XIV 12;
C. 48, XIV 28-XV 1.
redness, ruddiness (noun); also "^P^^Qil (XIII 5): C. 89,
XIII 5; C. 46, XVI2.
Proof passages of meaning of TMS:
Defining TMfi as DSR: C. 46, XVI15.
Red like the color of TMS-T-fruit: C. 7, HI 21.
Red like the color of the TMS-T-tree: C. 41, XIV13.
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:07 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 598 ---
EGYPTIAN GLOSSARY
poultices; also <^|, ° , (once only IV 21): C. 9, IV 21; C. 41,
XIV 6; C.46,Xvll2.
this: C.9.V2; I.1, XVIII 8; I. 6, XIX 16.
signs of old age: XXII 9.
willow; C. 41, XIV 8.
to perforate, perforation; also fgj^jfo (three times only
VIII 8, XIII 18, 15), Jo (once only VI 14), jf (once only
VII 22).
THM in the skull: C. 1,1 1 restored; C. 2,1 14, 17; C. 3,
118,19, 21, 24 restored; C. 7, III 2, 5,12,15.
THM in the maxilla: C. 15, VI14,15,16.
THM in the temporal bone: C. 18, VII9; C. 19, VII14-15,
15,17; C. 20, VII 22, 28, VIII 8.
THM in the chin: C. 27, IX 15.
THM in cervical vertebra: C. 29, X 4, 6.
THM in the HNT, (manubrium) of the sternum: C. 40,
XIII 18, 15.
swelling, or with det. o (twice only II 10, 18), x (once only
114): C. 4,114,10; C. 5,1118; C.8.1V6; C. 11, V 10, 12;
C. 12, V 17; C. 15, VI 15; C. 16, VI 18, 21; C. 17, VII 6;
C. 21, VIII6; C. 88, XII22; C. 46, XV 21.
draw near: I. 7, XX 4.
treatise: C. 5,1117; C. 19, VII 20-21; C. 41, XIV 10.
breath, wind: C. 8, IV 16; C. 31, X 14; I. 1, XVIII 1, 8;
I. 2, XVIII12.
to close up: C. 41, XIV 9.
to wink: C. 7, IV 3.
kind of mineral: C. 41, XIV 5.
to knot, knit, join, to coagulate, or with det. *—a: C. 8, IV11;
C.9,V1; C.12.V19.VI2; C. 14, VI10.
to bind; or with det. uj: I. 1, XVIII 8; I. 7, XX 5.
vertebra.
TS N NHB-T-P (vertebra of his neck): C. 29, X 8, 4 bis,
6; C.80, X8,9,10; C. 31, X12,18,15,16,17,18bis; C. 82,
XI1 bis, 4, 7 bis; C. 88, XI 9 bis, 12, 18, 14,16.
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:07 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 599 ---
EGYPTIAN GLOSSARY 573
TS (cont.)
i
TS N PSD-F (vertebra of his spinal column): C. 48, XVII
15, 16, 17,18.
TS without modifier but referring to TS N NHB-T-F:
C. 88, XI10, 11, 15.
TSY
to lift, to hold up, or with det. —o: C. 8,111; C. 81, X 21.
TSW
stiffness, also \<s, \ j (twice only III 18, X 7): C. 3, I 20, 21,
I 26-11 1; C. 4, II 4, 6; C. 5, II 18, 15; C. 6, II 22; C. 7,
III 4, 6, 18; C. 8, IV 9, 12; C. 19, VII 18; C. 20, VIII 4;
C. 22, VIII18; C.29.X7.
D[']B-W
e, 1^
figs: C.9,V4.
DWN
-cjolll
to stretch, stretch apart, be tense; or with dets. a or =:
C. 7, m 10,19-20, 20; C. 85, XII 6; C. 86, XII12.
DBN
S 0
mortar: C. 46, XVI 5.
DP
to taste: XXI 21.
DP-T
taste (noun): XXI 21.
DP
^®
Buto: I.8,XVII117.
DP-TY
0
two flanks: C. 43, XV 6.
DM-T
knife: I. 5, XIX 7.
DMY
to touch, join: C. 2, 117 restored; C. 10, V 9; C. 31, X 19;
C. 45, XV 17,18,19.
DMY R, " adhere to," with det. _j: C. 22, VIII16.
DND
the name of a demon: 1.1, XVIII6.
DR
repel, expel; also _» (XIX 18): C.9,V2; I.1, XVIII11; I.5,
XIX18.
remove; with det. ^: XXII 8, 9.
DH
hang down: C. 36, XII 9.
DHR
skin: C. 7, m 16.
DHR
bitterness: XXII 1.
DHR-T
sickness, plague; or without det. ^: L 1, XVm 8, 11; I. 2,
XVIII 12.
DS
an unidentified wood; also (XX 6): L 2, xvni 15; I.
7, XX 6.
DSR
red; or with det. ^ (VII 21),, ° , (XIV 6; XVI 12; XXI 5):
C. 7, III 20; C. 19, VII 20, 21; C. 89, XIII11; C. 41, XIV 6,
10,18; C. 46, XVI12, 16; XXI 5.
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:07 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 600 ---
574
EGYPTIAN GLOSSARY
DKW
Mi i i
rkernels"1: XXI 6, 6-7.
DK[R]
I—-a
fruit: C. 46, XVI4.
A
DG'
IT 3^
to look at (with preposition N): C. 8, I 20 restored, 25, 26 bis
(once restored); C. 4, II 5; C. 5, II 14; C. 7, III 5; C. 19,
VII16; C. 29, X 5; C. 80, X 9; C. 82, XI 2, 8.
DGY
rfeebleness"1: C. 22, Vm 17.
DGM
be speechless; or with dets. -a*-, or without det.: C. 18, VI 6;
C. 17, VII 5; C. 20, VIII 4, 5; C. 22, Vm 12, 18, 17; C. 88,
XI 10, 18.
D'
1'
fire-drill: C. 89, XIII6.
D'W
disease: C. 19, VII 21.
D'R-T
an unidentified fruit: C. 41, XIV 7.
IT.? i
P'R-Trg: C. 46, XVI10.
D'P,
ii®
head: C. 8, IV18; C. 9, IV 20; C. 88, XI16.
Dr-W
rblemishes^: XXII 9.
DrR
probe, palpate; also 2r\ (IV 5), (1 19), ^ scribal error
(XVI18): C. 1, lost column restored; C. 2,118 restored; C. 8,
119; C. 4, II 8; C. 5, II 12; C. 6, II 19; C. 7, III 2; C. 8,
IV 5-6; C.10,V6; C. 18, VII 8; C. 27,1X14; C. 47, XVI18.
pw
evil: I.1, XVIII 9.
DWY
lift: I. 1, XVIII 8.
DB-T
brick: C. 4, U 7; C. 7, III 15.
PB,
to clothe, pad: C. 7, III 14; C. 12, VI1; C. 28, VIII 21.
DBr
finger, thumb: C. 1,14,6; C.4,II4; C. 5, II18; C. 6, II21 bis;
C. 8, IV 11 bis; C. 18, VI 5; C. 17, VII 2; C. 20, VII 24;
C. 22, VIII10 bis; C. 24, VIII 28; C. 25, IX 8; C. 87, XII
16; C. 40, XIII14; C. 44, XV 8; I. 6, XIX 15.
DFY-T
penetration: C. 32, XI 8.
DN
to thresh : XXI11 bis.
DNB
crooked: C. 12, V 22.
DNN-T
=1©
skull (meaning the calvaria); also with stroke (II 12, 17, 24):
C. 1, lost column ter, restored, 1, 11 bis (once restored); C. 2,
118; C. 8,118 restored, 19, 21, 24 bis (once restored); C. 4,
II 2, 8, 5, 6, 8, 9 bis; C. 5, II 11, 12, 18, 15, 16 ter, 17 bis;
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:07 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 601 ---
EGYPTIAN GLOSSARY
575
DNN-T (cont.) ^ C. 6, II 18 bis, 19 bis, 20, 22, 28, 24 bis; C. 7, III 2, 6, 9,
12-18, 16 bis (once restored); C. 8, IV 5 bis, 6, 7 bis, 10,
12 bis, 18; C. 9, IV 19.
DR J^. R DR-F, " entire," " throughout" (literally " to its limit"):
C. 12, V22; C. 41, XIV 12.
DR-WY two sides: C. 11, V15.
DR B until: C. 6,1121; C. 8, IV 11.
as soon as: C. 89, XIII 9.
YR DR, " now when," " now as soon as ": C. 4, II 6;
C. 7, III 7; C. 8, IV 10; C. 20, VDI4.
DR NTT, " because," " for ": C. 4, II 11.
DR-T ^ hand, touch; also dual , (twice only I 6, 7): C. 1,1 6, 7;
C. 8, IV 8,18 bis; C. 20, VIII 2; C. 89, XIII 5; C. 41, XIII
20, XIV 15, 16; C. 45, XV 11, 12, 14, 19; C. 46, XVI 1,
14; C. 47, XVII 9; I. 8, XX 12.
DRD-W ,f, leaves: C. 41, XIV 8 bis, 7; C. 46, XVI 8 bis, 9; XXII12.
DS- 23 self: C. 89, XIII 8, 9.
DD 23 sav, speak.
DD-YN-K in diagnosis: C. 1, I 1 restored; C. 2, I 14;
C. 8,1 20; C. 4, II 5; C. 5, II14; C. 7, III 5,12; C. 10, V 7;
C. 11, V 11; C. 12, V 17; C. 18, VI 6; C. 14, VI 9; C. 15,
VI16; C. 16, VI19; C. 17, VII4; C. 18, VII9; C. 19, VII17;
C. 20, VIII 8; C. 21, VIII 8; C. 22, VIII18; C. 28, VIII19;
C. 24, VIII 28; C. 25, IX 5; C. 26, IX 8; C. 27, IX 15;
C.28,IX21; C. 29, X 6; C.80, X10; C. 81, X 16; C. 82,
XI 8; C. 88, XI12; C. 84, XI18; C. 85, XII 4; C. 86, XII
10; C. 87, XII16, 20; C. 88, XIII 1; C. 89, XIII 5; C. 40,
XIII14; C. 41, XIV 1; C. 42, XIV 19; C. 48, XV 1; C. 44,
XV 8; C. 45, XV 14; C. 46, XVI 2; C. 47, XVI 20, XVII10;
C. 48, XVII18.
DD-HR-K in diagnosis: XX 14.
YW DD-N, quoting a book: C. 5, II 17; C. 19, VII 20;
C. 41, XIV 10.
MY DD in explanation in gloss: C. 7, III 18; C. 14, VI14;
C.81.X19; C. 41, XIV16.
DD-F, introducing explanation in ancient gloss or citation
in gloss from surgical treatise: C. 1,1 8; C. 8, IV 14, 15, 18;
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:07 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 602 ---
EGYPTIAN GLOSSARY
C. 18, VII 18; C. 26, IX 12; C. 80, X 12; C. 81, X 18;
C. 82, XI7; C. 88, XI14.
DD PW in glosses: C. 1,110,11; C. 4, II11; C. 6, III 1;
C. 81, X20; C. 89, XIII11.
DD introducing surgeon's directions to patients in ex-
amination: C. 19, VII 16; C. 80, X 9; C. 82, XI 2; C. 48,
XVII16.
DD in directions for saying a charm or incantation: C. 9,
VI; I. 5, XIX 14; I. 7, XX 5; I. 8, XX 11.
DDMDW: I.1, XVIII9; I.2, XVIII15; I. 5, XIX 9.
DD miscellaneous: a 1,19; C. 41, XIV 11; LI, XVIII 2.
DD used erroneously for DrR: C. 47, XVI18.
of Uncertain Phonetic Reading
threshing-floor: XXI18.
linen: XXII1.
rperish"1: L 5, XIX 7.
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:07 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 603 ---
GENERAL INDEX
Abbot Collection, 21
Abdomen, 487
seat of consciousness, 12
Abscess, 36, 60, 407-109, 410, 413-114
of a tooth, 9, 53
Absorbents, 381
Absorption, 111
Acacia leaves, 60, 407, 411, 500
Accidents, 11, 213
occupational, 11, 338
Acromion, 215
Adducted arm, 216
Adhesive plaster, 8, 54, 55, 57-58, 60, 69, 121,
122-123, 124, 171, 227, 228, 229, 230, 232,
233,309,311-312,416,421
Adobe, 8, 55,56, 58,151
Aesculapius, see Asclepios
Age, signs of, 492, 498
Ailments, 95, 112
Air, 108, 111
Akeru, 483
Alabaster, 491
Alae nasi, 244
Alexandria, 13, 17
Alleviatory measures, 159, 160, 161, 170, 171,
270, 287
Amenhotep IV, 28
America, 9
Ammoniacal application, 9, 59
Anatomical terms, 10, 84-87, 88, 147, 152-
153, 185-186, 187-188, 189, 225, 241, 242,
243, 248-249, 253, 272, 275, 276-277, 291,
293-294, 313-314, 326, 328, 334, 347-349,
353, 372-373, 394-395, 399-400, 417, 418,
487
Anatomy, 2, 9, 10, 11-14
of Smith Papyrus, 64,68,72,108-10,152,164-
170, 171-172, 179, 185-186, 188, 241, 242,
243, 244, 252, 253, 272, 276-277, 289,
293-294, 313-314, 323, 334, 342, 347-349,
372-373, 391, 394-395, 398, 399-100
Animals, malignant dead, 472, 480, 482
Animism, 470, 472
Annual epidemic, 470, 472, 473, 475, 476, 478
Antimony, 489
Antiseptic, 59
Anubis, 5
Anus, 19, 100, 101, 111, 187, 221, 329, 383, 470,
499-500
Apex beat, 108
Apollonios of Kitium, 16, 56, 303
Apothecary, 471, 492, 497
Applications
hot, 9, 60, 176, 180
for allaying inflammation, 9, 59, 60, 374, 383,
407
P
cooling, 60, 220, 374, 379, 380, 381, 407, 410
of salicin, 59, 374
ammoniacal, 9, 59
astringent, 9, 59, 60, 374, 379, 382, 407, 411
softening, 151, 180, 286, 382
Aqueous solid extract, 471, 492
preparation of, 495-498
Arad-Nanai, 1
Archaisms, 73-75
Aristotle, 16, 73
Arm, 110-111
split in, 140, 361-362
fracture of, 52, 56, 58, 149, 155, 160, 235, 255,
261, 354-360
splints on, 190, 352, 353-354, 357
" contracture " of, 216
Arrow,
wounds made by, 83
Arteries, 13
peripheral, 108
Articulation of bones, 10, 60, 153-154, 187, 215-
216, 277, 293-294, 322, 328, 348, 394, 398,
399
Asclepios, 3
Asses,
malignant dead, 482
Assyria, 1
Asterisk, 19, 333, 335
Astringent application, 9, 59, 60, 374, 379, 382,
407, 411
Astronomy, 2,15,16
Auricle of ear, 276, 298, 299
Auricula,
of ear, 227, 228, 229, 301
Author,
of Smith Papyrus, 9. 10
Babylon, 1
Back (of patient), 181, 182
Backbone, 88, 325, 326, 425
Backward dislocation, 342
Ball (of foot), 210, 211
Bandages, 8, 54, 69, 70, 96-97, 114, 171, 222,
224, 227, 238, 240, 336, 350, 359, 375, 389-
390
Bastet, 477, 482, 484
Battle axe,
wounds made by, 82, 92, 140
Beat,
of heart, 108, 177, 178
Beer, as solvent, 488, 489
Belly, 483
Beneficent divinities, 472,474,475,477,480
Berlin Medical Papyrus, 4, 5, 47, 95
See also Medical Papyri
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:07 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 604 ---
578
GENERAL INDEX
Berlin State Museum No. 3038, see Berlin Medical
Papyrus
Binding, 96-97, 121, 133, 180, 232-233, 246, 259,
264, 266, 269, 273, 305, 308, 311, 315, 319,
321, 336, 344, 352, 357, 359, 362, 371, 379,
393, 397, 410, 411, 420
forbidden, 132, 134, 150, 161, 171, 227, 229,
424
Birch, 21, 24
Bird,
two-toed, 10, 277, 293-294
Birth, 151, 182
Bitterness, 495
Bladder, 111
rBlemishes,1 498
Blood, 99, 368-369
Circulation of, 13, 65, 108-109
-vessels, 111, 244, 349
discharge of, 141, 158, 166, 178, 206, 208, 234,
254,268,284,285,286,288,290,292,360,488
poisoning, 155
clotted, 10, 68-69,190,191,228,244,246,247,
251, 259
-shot, 279, 281-282, 284, 325
obstruction of, 488
Boiling, 495, 496, 497
Boils, 43, 92, 368
Bolus, 221, 394
Bones,
reduction of, 16-17, 53, 55-56, 58, 234, 238,
239, 244, 246-247, 303, 304, 342, 344, 350,
352-354, 356-357
articulation of, 10, 60, 153-154, 187, 215-216,
277, 293-294, 322, 328, 348, 394, 398, 399
injuries to, 44, 58, 82, 83, 92-93, 120,124-125,
126, 136, 140-141, 146, 152, 157, 262, 263,
265-266, 278-279, 283, 284, 287-288, 289-
290, 301-302, 303-304, 316-317, 319-320,
322, 323-326, 327-329, 333-334, 337-339,
340-341, 342-344, 347-349, 350-351, 352,
354-358, 361, 391-393, 401-402, 425-427
See also Fractures
fragments of, 141, 152, 153, 162, 295
anatomical knowledge of, 68, 152-153, 169-
170, 185-186, 187-188, 277, 293-294, 372-
373, 391, 394-395, 398
uninjured, 270-271, 310
" Book of Transforming an Old Man into a
Youth," 492
Bosom, 347, 349
Bouriant, U., Ill
Bowels, 100
seat of consciousness, 12
Brace,
Wooden, 8, 54, 55, 184
Brain, 172, 197
convolutions of, 10, 12, 65, 166, 167,173, 208
word for, 12. 166
in Greek medical documents, 12
in Smith Papyrus:
injuries to, 12, 164, 165, 166, 171, 208
localization of function in, 12, 45, 50, 125, 202
source of control of movements, 12,45,50, 65-
66
connexion with nervous system, 13,45,50,66-
67
infected, 189
Break, see Fracture
Breast, 88, 334, 347, 348, 349, 372-373, 399, 480
injuries to, 36,146, 363, 369-370, 374-375
" diseased " or infected wound in, 59,60,374,
375, 384-385
tumors or abscesses on, 52, 55, 60, 71, 149,
363-369, 403-404, 406, 407-409, 413-414
cists on, 194, 365
swelling on, 194, 364, 367
ribs of, 373, 392, 394, 396, 398, 401-402
Brick, see Supports of brick
British Museum No. 10059, see London Medical
Papyrus
Bronchi, 349
Brugsch, 23, 24
Burns, 83
Bushel, 104, 489, 496
Buto, 484
abomination out of, 479
hidden things in 480, 481
Calf, 483
Calvaria, 86, 97, 98, 125, 170
Canals of the body, 5, 104, 107, 108, 109-113,
244, 346, 347, 349
Cancer, 368
Capillary attraction, 316
Cardiac system, 64-65, 69, 108-110, 113
Caroube, 383
Carriers of disease, 472-473,475,476,477,482-483
Cartilage, 185, 186, 242, 244
Cartilagines laterales, 234, 241, 244
Cartilaginous suture, 153
Cartilaginous tissue, 234, 241
Cartonnage, see Splints
Cases, Cross references to
Case one, 41, 49, 59, 64, 65, 69
Case two, 57, 69-70, 89-90, 92, 93, 97
Case three, 58, 62, 69, 70, 83, 89, 92, 97, 126,
130, 227
Case four, 56, 58, 62-63, 63, 70, 89, 92, 130,
140, 146, 149,150,155,184,185
Case five, 52, 63, 70, 89, 92, 93, 130, 146
Case six, 37, 45, 46, 60, 65, 70, 84, 92, 93, 122,
130,134,155,157,159,160
Case seven, 37, 39, 40, 41, 49, 52, 60, 63, 65,
67, 68, 70,83,92,93,110,126,130,149,150,
152, 155, 160, 277, 388
Case eight, 36-37, 39,46, 49, 52,63,64, 66, 70,
82, 84, 93, 130, 146, 150, 152, 155, 157, 159,
160,204
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:07 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 605 ---
GENERAL INDEX
579
Cases, Cross references to (ami.)
Case nine, 37, 42, 47, 59, 60, 70, 152, 157
Case ten, 37, 57, 70, 82, 91, 92, 93,98,122, 124,
132-133
Case eleven, 56, 58, 68, 70,146, 157,191, 235
Case twelve, 56, 58, 69, 70, 146, 157, 191, 235,
239
Case thirteen, 52, 157, 160, 296
Case fourteen, 57, 70, 83, 91, 98, 191, 227, 228
Case fifteen, 60, 83, 126, 146, 385
Case sixteen, 60, 98, 140, 146, 150, 194, 263
Case seventeen, 47, 50, 60, 98, 146, 150, 157,
159, 160, 205, 255, 296
Case eighteen, 59, 70, 89, 93, 94, 98, 157, 298
Case nineteen, 40, 41, 50, 60, 71, 89, 126, 130,
205
Case twenty, 40, 50, 60, 89, 126, 130, 150, 160,
296, 298
Case twenty-one, 41, 52, 89, 140, 146,149,155,
205
Case twenty-two, 40, 51, 52, 63, 68, 71, 89,
130, 157, 160, 187, 238, 277, 296, 298
Case twenty-three, 57, 153, 227, 228, 229, 239
Case twenty-four, 51, 52, 157, 160, 235, 255
Case twenty-five, 41, 56, 58, 238, 239, 291, 328
Case twenty-six, 40, 57, 71, 83, 91, 93, 98, 132-
133, 227, 228, 232, 260-261
Case twenty-seven, 57, 82, 92, 93, 98, 121-122,
134, 261, 291
Case twenty-eight, 39, 57, 82, 92, 98, 149, 227,
229, 261, 385-386, 388
Case twenty-nine, 51, 60, 92, 93, 98, 126, 130,
149
Case thirty, 41, 60, 71, 98
Case thirty-one, 38, 51, 52, 63, 66, 71, 160
Case thirty-two, 41, 60, 71, 98, 150
Case thirty-three, 52, 63, 71, 83, 160, 296, 328
Case thirty-four, 37, 39, 46, 52, 56, 58, 71, 96,
239, 261, 329
Case thirty-five, 45, 56, 58, 67, 96, 157, 190,
235, 346, 357
Case thirty-six, 39, 45, 56, 58, 67, 157, 190,
235, 342, 377
Case thirty-seven, 37, 39, 52, 56, 58, 63, 149,
155, 157, 160, 190, 235, 255, 261, 342, 346
Case thirty-eight, 60, 140, 146
Case thirty-nine, 41, 43, 46, 51, 71, 194
Case forty, 41, 60, 68, 71, 98, 126
Case forty-one, 59, 60, 71, 133, 194, 407, 411
Case forty-two, 60, 71, 157, 235, 322, 328
Case forty-three, 60, 71, 194, 329, 394
Case forty-four, 52, 157, 160, 235, 255
Case forty-five, 41, 43, 52, 71, 149, 368, 376
Case forty-six, 43, 46, 60, 71, 133, 146, 194,
369
Case forty-seven, 37, 39-40, 41, 51, 52, 58, 91,
92,98,122,149, 227,229, 258, 376, 385-386,
388
Case forty-eight, 41, 322-323
P
Cases, surgical, 6
order of topics, 36-37
Casts, 190
Cauterization, 8-9, 54, 363, 365-366
Cavum nasi, 241, 252
Cedar, 411
Celestial Ocean, 474
Cemeteries,
Egyptian, 11
Cerebrospinal fluid, 171-172
Champollion, 21
Charms,
magical, 220, 472-478
Cheeks, 243, 263, 265, 266, 267, 268
See also Maxilla
Chemistry, 108
Chest of head, 181, 196, 197
Child-birth, 151
Chin, 57, 98, 261, 289, 291, 309-310
Chloride of sodium, 491
Choking, 313, 314
Circulation of blood, 13, 65, 108-109
Cists, 92, 157, 194, 195, 329, 365, 366
Clamminess, 407, 408, 414
Clammy, 181, 192, 407
Clavicles, 85, 153, 347, 348
injuries to, 34
dislocation of, 52, 56, 58, 239, 261, 342-349
fracture of, 56, 58, 235, 350-351, 352, 354
splints for, 190, 352
Clavicular manubrium joints, 345
Cleansing from pest, 483, 485
Clocks, 13, 106
Coagulation, 10, 68-69, 190, 191, 228, 244, 246,
247, 251, 259
Code of Hammurapi, 1
Codex Laurentius LXX1V, 16
Cold abscess, 407
Collar-bones, «ee Clavicles
Column, lost,
reconstruction of, 78-79, 80-81, 84, 87, 89-90
Column I
reconstruction of, 76-77, 89-90, 93-95, 103,
105-107, 113, 114-115, 117, 121-122, 127-
128, 132-133
Commentary,
ancient, 10, 61-71
author of, 10, 61
Complexion,
recipes for, 470, 471, 490-498
Compress, 220, 223-224
Conception, 101
Condyle, 68, 277, 294
Conjugate deviation, 205
Consciousness,
seat of, 12
Constriction of ligaments, 65, 67, 179, 180, 187,
192
Contractions, 427
p2
i
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:07 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 606 ---
580
GENERAL INDEX
" Contracture " of arm, 216
Centre-coup, 12, 66, 202, 205
Contusion, 70, 83, 201, 204
Convolutions of brain, 10, 12, 65, 166, 167, 173,
208
Convulsions, 182
Cook (recipes), 220, 488, 495, 500
Cooling applications, 60, 220, 374, 379, 380, 381,
407,410
Copper,
salts, 9, 59, 60, 374, 379, 382
foundry, 10
slag, 10, 65, 167-168, 174
molten, 166, 168, 173, 208
Coracoid process, 215
Cord, 74
of mandible, 179, 180, 187, 189
See also Ligament
Coriander, 422
Coronoid process, 68, 188, 215, 277, 294
Corrugations, 166, 167, 168, 173, 208
Costae verae, 373, 391
Countenance, 181,192
Crepitate, 254-255, 268, 302, 358, 402
" Crisis," the, 9, 63, 70, 135, 151, 155, 171, 180,
184, 207, 289, 359
Critical injury, 140
Critical point, 185
See also Decisive point
Crocodile, 480
Crocodile bite, 98-99
Crown (of head), 110,166,168,169,181,196,197,
200, 208
Crucible, 10,168
Crushing,
wound caused by, 83, 337-342
Cubic inches, 489
Cutaneous muscles, 257
Cyanosis, 194
Dandruff, 186
Darius I, 17, 72
Dawson, W. R., 8, 53
Dead,
malignant, 470, 472, 479, 480, 481
Death, 64, 212, 213
forms of, 480, 481
Decisive point, 9, 135, 150, 155, 171, 180, 184,
207, 289, 359
Delirium, 182
Democritus, 64, 105
Demoniacal medicine, 15, 206
Demons of disease, 385, 470, 472, 474, 475, 476,
477, 480, 484, 485
Dened, 474, 475
Devaud, E., 118, 119, 193, 417, 497, 593-595
Diagnosis,
in recipe-papyri, 4
in European medicine, 7
in Smith Papyrus, 7, 45-51, 93-96, 120, 131,
148-149, 159-161, 170, 179, 182-183, 205-
206, 209, 217, 231, 236, 245, 256, 258, 264,
266, 268-269, 273, 280, 285-286, 292-293,
300, 302-303, 305, 307, 311, 314-315, 318-
319, 321, 326-327, 335, 339, 344, 345, 351,
355-356, 358-359, 360-361, 362, 365, 371,
377, 393, 397, 402, 404-405, 409, 419-420,
423, 428, 488
Dictionary,
of medical terms, 10, 61-71
Diet, normal, 10,52, 57, 58, 60, 69,132,134-135,
139, 150, 161, 237, 281, 289, 316, 319, 424
liquid, 184
Digestive system, 14
trouble, 332, 352
Directions for use, 498
Disaster, 477, 479, 484
Discharge, 141, 158, 166, 178, 206, 208, 234, 254,
268, 284, 285, 286, 288, 290, 292, 330, 360,
422
menstrual, 487
" Discharge of the blood," 488
Discoloration of wounds, 263, 266
Disease, 43, 49, 64, 95, 111, 112, 113, 126, 202,
206, 281, 285, 384-385, 403, 414, 470, 472
-demons, 385, 470, 472, 474, 475, 476, 477,
480, 484, 485
carriers of, 470, 472-473, 475, 476, 477, 482-
483
" Diseased ones," 486
" Diseased ones " of Sekhmet, 484
" Diseased " wound, 71, 262, 263, 375, 384-385
Disease of women, 4, 470, 487-488
" Disfigurements," 498
Disinfectant, 9, 262, 265
Disinfection, 470-471
Dislocation, 44, 244, 322, 328-329, 392, 394
of cervical vertebra, 12, 52, 66, 160, 323, 324-
327
of mandible 16-17, 56, 294, 303, 304
reduction of, 16-17, 41, 56, 294, 303, 304, 342,
344
of clavicles, 52, 56, 58, 239, 261, 342-349
of ribs, 395-398
Displacement, 44, 60, 71, 98, 333, 334, 336-337,
347, 348, 398
Dissection, 11, 67, 188
Drainage, 316
Draining,
an abscess, 9, 53
Draught,
for reducing fever, 184
Drills, 9, see Fire-drill
Drink (medicinal), 184, 412
Drugs, 374, 381, 383, 412, 489
Drying up wounds, 366, 379, 381, 382
Duff Gordon, Lady, 21
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:07 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 607 ---
GENERAL INDEX
581
Dung, 59, 60, 379, 381, 407, 411
Dweller in the sepsepu, 484
Dysentery, 470
Ear, 14, 110, 148, 238, 239, 286, 289, 295, 381
slit in auricle, 57, 227, 228, 229, 297-298
-trouble, 101
discharge from, 141, 158, 178, 206, 208, 221,
254,268,288,290,292, 381, 399
orifice of, 275, 276, 298, 299
" hollow " of, 298, 299
EbbeU, B., 368
Ebers, Georg, 22-25
Ebers papyrus, 4, 5, 9-10, 22-25, 35, 47, 61, 65,
72, 92, 95, 101, 106-108, 110-111, 148, 157,
159, 166, 186, 195, 200-201, 213, 220-221,
244, 282, 285, 314, 325, 329, 332, 341, 352,
364, 365, 366, 368, 369, 372, 376, 380, 381,
382, 383, 387, 388, 394, 399, 400, 412, 427,
475, 593-595
Egypt, 3, 11, 13
Eisenlohr, 23-24, 25
Elixir of life, 492
Embalmer, 8, 69, 188, 222, 224, 281, 282
Embalming, 11, 188
Emissio seminis, 66, 71, 323, 325, 326, 329-
330
Epidemic
annual, 470,472,473,475,476, 478
Epidemics,
treatises on, 72
Erasistratos, 13, 17
Erection
of phallus, 12, 63, 323, 324, 330
Esarhaddon, 1
Europe, 3, 9
Evaporation, 495, 496, 497
Eviscerate, 188
Examination, 64, 102-106
in recipe papyri, 4,42
in Smith papyrus, 6-7, 38-45, 49-51, 57, 89-
93, 118-120, 127-131, 141-148, 158, 165-
170, 175, 177-178, 180-182, 183, 203-205,
207-208, 217, 218, 225-231, 234-236, 238,
245, 254-256, 257-258, 263, 265-266, 267-
268, 271-272, 279, 283-285, 288, 290-292,
298-299, 302, 304-305, 306-307, 310, 313-
314, 315, 317-318, 320, 324-326, 333-334,
338-339, 343-344, 345, 350-351, 355, 358,
360, 361-362, 363-364, 370, 375-377, 392-
393, 396-397, 401^02, 403-404, 408, 415-
416, 417-419, 420-421, 421^22, 423-424,
424-425,426-427,487,499
Excrement, 483
Excretions, see Discharge
Exhaustion, 183, 199, 200
Exorcisms, 472-487
Exudation, 244, 285, 377, 410
Eye, 14, 110, 282, 387
askew, 202, 204, 205
corner of, 275, 276
blood-shot, 279, 281-282, 284, 325
diseased, 282
discharge from, 284-285
pupil of, 332
-paint, 488, 489
Eyebrow, 57,85, 98,110,181,198,225,226, 227-
228, 248
Faber, Knud, 7
Face,
flushed, 181, 182, 193-194, 195
distorted, 181, 198
pale, 183, 199, 200
color of, 207
disfigured, 245, 249
fixed, 334
beautifying, 491
ointment, 492
Fatal cases, 159,160,189,208,209,256,269, 286,
292, 302, 327, 339, 360, 402
Fatty growths, 400
Feathers (in exorcisms), 472, 474, 476
Febrifuge, 412
TFeebleness,1 296, 297
Feet, 111
rheumatoid, 221
Female troubles, 470, 487
organ, 489
Fever, 40, 58, 102, 181, 302, 312, 313, 315-316,
375, 384, 385-388, 404, 415, 416, 423, 424,
479
Figs, 220
Finger-nails, 206, 214, 216
Fingers, 99
" Fire-drill," 8, 54, 365
Flame-in-His-Face, 474
Flanks, 399
Flesh,
of ox, 99
" living," 99
of patient, 86, 116, 141, 152, 154, 181, 209,
212, 298, 325, 327, 347, 375, 389, 422, 475,
480, 486, 490, 498
of wound, 417, 421
Flesh wounds, 43, 52, 54, 55, 57, 58, 59, 81, 82-
83, 88, 97-98, 118, 227-229, 256, 257, 270,
271, 272, 297-298, 306, 308-309, 310, 415,
417-425
Flexed hand, 216
Flexner, S., 176, 189
Flies, 101
Flooder of the streams, 474
Flowers (in exorcism), 485, 486
Fluid, 408, 410, 413, 495
cerebrospinal, 171-172
secretions of, 404
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:07 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 608 ---
582
GENERAL INDEX
Fluttering, 166, 168, 170, 208
Fly,
as carrier of disease, 470, 472-173, 482-483
Folk medicine, 2, 5, 217, 220
Fontanel, 166, 168, 169, 170, 200, 208
Food, liquid, 55, 184, 185
Foot,
paralysis of, 12, 63, 70, 202, 204, 210-211
sole of, 204, 210
ball of, 210, 211
Force majeure, 64, 213
Forehead, 110, 218, 224
Fortuitas, 213
Fortuna, 64, 213
Forward dislocation, 342, 343, 344
Fosaa temporalis, 277
Fractures, 8, 11, 44-45, 53, 56
Simple, 52, 146, 149, 155, 157, 160, 234, 235,
244, 245, 247, 255, 301, 302, 322, 328, 350-
351, 352, 354-360, 392-393, 401-402
compound comminuted, 12, 49, 50, 51, 52, 60,
63, 86, 89, 98, 124-125, 130, 140, 146, 147,
155, 156-158, 160, 162, 164, 165, 171, 203,
204, 205, 208, 209, 218, 235, 252, 254, 255,
267, 268, 271, 289, 290, 295, 296
impacted, 52, 71, 160, 296, 337-339, 340-341
Frankincense, 482, 488
Frontal bone, 247
compound comminuted fracture of, 60, 218
Frontal process, 252
Fruit in prescriptions, 183-184, 220, 383, 410,
411, 412, 489
in recipes, 406, 492, 495-497
Fumigation, 99, 487
Function,
localization in brain, 12
Gangrene, 265, 385
Gangrenous sore, 368
Gaping wound, 82-83, 88, 90-92, 95, 114, 118,
123, 124, 125, 127, 140, 141, 149, 155, 156,
158, 164, 165, 177, 227-229, 233, 261, 309-
310, 312-313, 316-317,415, 417-419
-i Garden tongue," 379, 383
Gardiner, A. H., 4, 88, 134, 150, 172, 349, 400
Gases, 325
Gash, 89, 90-91, 94, 116, 121, 226, 229, 271, 274,
417, 419, 421
-wounds, 82-83, 88, 90-92, 95, 114, 118, 123,
124, 125, 127, 140, 141, 149, 155, 156, 158,
164, 165, 177, 227-229, 233, 261, 309-310,
312-313, 316-317, 415, 417-419
Geese,
malignant dead, 482
Genital organ, 14
Glabella, 235
Glosses, 10, 11, 61-71, 72, 176
of case one, (1), 102-117
of case two (2), 123-125
of case three (3), 136-139
of case four (4), 152-155
of case five (5), 162-164
of case six (6), 171-174
of case seven (7), 185-201
of case eight (8), 209-216
of case ten (10), 233
of case eleven (11), 240-244
of case twelve (12), 247-251
of case fourteen (14), 260-262
of case eighteen (18), 274-277
of case nineteen (19), 281-283
of case twenty-two (22), 293-297
of case twenty-six (26), 308-309
of case thirty (30), 322-323
of case thirty-one (31), 327-332
of case thirty-two (32), 336-337
of case thirty-three (33), 340-342
of case thirty-four (34), 347-349
of esse thirty-nine (39), 367-369
of case forty (40), 372-373
of case forty-one (41), 384-391
of case forty-two (42), 394-395
of case forty-three (43), 398-400
of case forty-five (45), 405-406
of case forty-six (46), 413-415
Golenischeff, W., 493
Goodwin, C. W., 20-21, 22-23
Gorget, 347, 349
Gout, 221
Grain measure, 489
Grammar,
archaic forms of, 73-74, 75
rGranulation,1 376, 404
Grapow, H., 134, 184
Grease, as medicament, 57, 58, 60, 96, 97, 98,
100-101, 121, 132, 150, 171, 180, 191, 219,
220, 228, 229, 232, 237, 238, 246, 259, 264,
266, 269, 273, 281, 286, 300, 308, 311, 315,
316, 336, 344, 359, 371, 379, 381, 411, 421,
425, 488, 489
Great One dwelling in Heliopolis, 474
Great Pyramid, 9, 11
Greek medicine, 3, 5, 7, 9, 12, 13, 14, 15-17
Green pigment, 379, 382, 411
Griffith, F. LI., 4
Grinding (in recipes), 495, 500
Gristle, 186
Groin, 99, 111
Growths,
fatty, 400
Gullet, 57, 82, 92, 227, 229, 261, 312, 313, 314,
348
Gums of teeth, 368
Gut stitching, 259, 301
Haigh, D. H., 23
Hammurapi, see Code of Hammurapi
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:07 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 609 ---
GENERAL INDEX
583
Hand,
palm of, 206, 214, 216
pronated, 216
Harvest time, 482
Hathor, 474
Head (caput), 84-86
injuries to, 33-34, 36, 79, 89, 94, 97, 118, 125,
127, 130, 131, 140, 141, 155, 156, 158, 164,
165, 177
back of, 104, 110
crown of, 110, 166,168,169,181,196,197, 200,
208
flesh of, 141, 152, 154, 209
softening applications on, 151, 286
odor of, 181, 196
sweaty, 192
skin of, 203, 209
Head (= end) of a bone, 85, 194, 205, 343, 344,
347,348,372,373, 396, 398
Head of tumor or abscess, 363, 364, 367-369,
407^08, 410, 413
Headache, 412
Healthy, 475, 477, 479, 480, 486
Hearing,
painful, 288
Hearst Papyrus, 4, 47, 95
See also Medical Papyri
Heart, 480
in Ebers Papyrus, 9-10, 65, 80, 106-108, 159,
387, 400
in Smith Papyrus, 10, 14, 64
seat of consciousness, 12, 109
in cardiac system, 13, 64, 104, 108-109,
113
treatments for, 99
vessels of, 104, 108, 110
beat of, 108, 177, 178
Heat, 386, 390
Heliopolis, 479
Great One dwelling in, 474
Hemesut- house,
chief of the, 474
Hemiplegia, 205, 216
Herbs, 60, 379, 381, 383
Herophilos, 13, 14, 17, 67, 106
Hippocrates, 9, 14, 16, 56, 64, 303
Hippocratic medicine, 9, 14, 15, 16-17, 64, 72,
105
the " crisis," 9, 63
Holmes, Bayard, 24
Honey, as medicament, 57, 58, 60, 96, 97, 98,
100, 101, 121, 132, 146, 180, 220, 228, 229,
232, 237, 246, 259, 264, 266, 269, 273, 281,
300, 305, 308, 311, 315, 321, 336, 344, 352,
357, 359, 362, 371, 393, 397, 421, 425, 491
Ointment, 57-58,59-60, 101, 316
Hooton, E. A., 53
Hopeless cases, 159, 160, 189, 208, 209, 256, 269,
286, 292, 302, 327, 339, 360, 402
Horus, 220, 475,477, 480, 484, 486
-eye, 480
Hot applications, 9, 60, 176, 180
" House of Life," 17-18
Humerus,
injuries to, 35
fracture of, 52, 56, 58, 235, 354-360
split in, 60, 361-362
dislocation of, 354
Hurry, J. B., 3
Husk, 495, 496
Hyksos, 19
Ibex grease, 379, 381, 411
Ibscher, 76
Images (in exorcisms), 482
Imhotep, 3, 9, 75
lmru, 57, 58, 60, 97, 98, 100, 101, 262, 264-265,
305, 321, 336, 352, 357, 359, 362, 393, 397
Incantations,
in recipe-papyri, 5
Smith Papyrus, 5-6, 19, 469-470, 472-487
Incense, 490
Incisura mandibulae, 277
Incurable, 200
" Indications," 79-80
Inductive process,
oldest known evidences, 7, 49-51, 179, 269,
280, 286
Infected wound, 59, 60, 262, 263, 374
Infection, 155, 308, 316, 385, 415, 422
Inflammation, 9, 58, 59, 60, 313, 314, 367, 374,
375, 379, 380, 381, 383, 384, 385-388, 389,
407,412, 415, 416, 422, 423,424
whirl of, 375, 387-388
Injuries, 11
causes of, 11-12, 63-64, 92, 317, 337-338
in Smith Papyrus, 14, 33-35, 43-45, 62-63, 95
" Injury," 135, 138, 150,161, 192, 204-205, 211-
212, 268, 279, 281, 288, 319, 367, 369, 407,
413-414, 424
" Instructions," 79-80
Instruments, see Surgical instruments
Intestines, 325, 483
Isis, 220, 474
Itch, 5
Jackal, 368, 369
Jaw, 180, 187, 188, 189, 277
-See also Mandible
Joint,
stiff, 215
manubrium,
clavicular, 345
Jones, W. H. S., 64, 72
Jubilation, 480
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:07 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 610 ---
584
GENERAL INDEX
Juice, 411, 412, 422, 495, 497
Junctura, 110
Kahun Papyri, 4
See also Medical Papyri
Karpinski, L. C, 15
kernel,1 491, 496
rKhemmis,1 5
Khufu, 5
Kidenas, 16
Kidinnu, see Kidenas
Kidneys, 111
Kitterman, P. Gad, 24
Knife wounds, 82, 118
Koenig, A., 294
Labia, 490
Laceration, 83
Lancet, 53, 96, 226, 329, 365, 366
Lancing, 92, 226
Laurentius, see Codex Laurentius
Leaves as medicament, 374, 379, 380, 411, 500
Leg, 111
paralysis of, 12, 49, 66, 202, 205
" seizures " in, 499
Lepsius, 22-23
Letopolis, 5
Leucorrhea, 368
Life, 213-214
Ligaments, 13, 67, 111, 112, 113, 345, 349
of mandible, 9, 60,130,153,176,179,180,187,
188, 189, 277, 294
of neck, 65, 181, 192
contraction of, 215
Linen,
two strips of, 8,54,55,57-58,60,69, 121,122-
123, 124, 171, 227, 228, 229, 230, 232, 233,
309,311-312,416,421
splints of, 8, 55, 56, 57, 58, 190-191, 229, 234,
237,239,244,352,353-354,357, 359
stiff rolls of, 8, 55, 56, 57, 58, 228, 229, 234,
237,239-240,244,246, 300, 301, 344
swabs of, 8, 54, 57, 58, 124, 190-191, 237, 246,
247, 259, 290
tampons of, 8, 54, 190-191, 234, 237, 238, 244
plugs of, 8, 54, 58, 191, 237, 238, 246
padded with, 8, 54, 55, 184
bandages, 224
band of, 482
strip of, 485, 500
launderer's, 495
Lint, 8, 53-4, 57-58, 60,96,97, 98, 100, 101-102,
121, 132, 180, 228, 229, 237, 246, 259, 266,
269, 281, 300, 311, 315, 316, 359, 371, 421,
425
Lip, 178
flesh wound in, 57, 98, 227, 228, 306, 308, 309
Lips of wound, 82-83, 90-91, 94, 95, 114, 116,
124, 194, 195, 227, 228, 233, 257, 260, 274,
300, 309, 375, 384, 389
Liquid food, 184, 185
Liver, 111,480
Loins, 110, 490
London Medical Papyrus, 4, 5
See also Medical Papyri
Luckhardt. A. B., 108,130,160,172,182,194,205,
215, 216, 255, 257, 303, 308, 312, 316, 323,
325, 338, 342, 345, 349, 376, 407
Lungs, 14, 84, 99, 108, 111, 346, 347, 349
Lymphatic glands, 364, 369
Magic, 6,14-15, 111-112, 126, 217, 219-220,469,
470, 472-487
Magical treatment, 59, 60, 218-220
devices, 479, 485, 486
Malignant beings, 470, 472, 474, 476, 477, 479,
480
Mandible, 68, 74,187-188,275
drill-hole in mental foramen of, 9
ligaments of, 9, 70, 130, 176,179, 180,187,189
articulation of, 10, 187, 293-294
dislocation of, 16-17, 41, 56, 57, 58, 238, 239,
303-304
fracture of, 52, 160, 235, 255, 301, 302
manipulation of, 238, 303, 304
Manicure, 95
Manipulation, 238, 303, 304, 310, 312, 344-345
Manubrium, 68, 71, 348, 349, 369, 370, 372, 373
joints,
clavicular, 345
" Mason's mortar," 60, 407, 410, 412
Materia medica,
Assyrian, 2
of Smith Papyrus, 9, 57, 59, 60,374, 379-383,
410-412, 488-489
Mathematics,
Egyptian, 15
Mather, Increase, 15
Maxilla, 110, 243, 252
perforation in, 60, 126, 262
split in, 60, 98, 140, 265, 266
compound comminuted fracture of, 60, 98,
157, 160, 205, 255, 267, 296
Measures, 489, 495, 496
Meat as medicament
fresh, 9, 57-58, 59-60, 96,97-99,121,132,228,
229, 232, 259, 266, 269, 273, 308, 311, 315,
319, 321, 336, 371, 420
fat, 99
decayed, 99
Mechanical appliances, 8, 53-56
Medical literature, 1-5, 7, 9-10, 12
Babylonian, 1
Assyrian, 1-2
earliest reference to, 3
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:07 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 611 ---
GENERAL INDEX
585
Medical literature (cont.)
Egyptian, 3, 4
divine origin, 5
Greek, 7, 12
" Secret Book of the Physician," possibly name
of Edwin Smith Surgical Papyrus, 9-10
Two early medical books quoted in Smith
Papyrus:
"Treatise on What Pertains to his Wounds,"
162 f.; with variant title, "Treatise on
What Pertains to a Wound," 384, 387
'- Treatise on What Pertains to the Embalmer''
(or Bandager), 281 f.
Medical papyri, 4, 79, 86-87,95, 98-99,112, 129,
135, 146, 148, 169, 285, 287, 329, 332, 340,
368, 380, 381, 383, 387, 388, 412, 427, 475,
489
See also Smith Papyrus, Ebers Papyrus,
Hearst Papyrus, Berlin Medical Papyrus,
London Medical Papyrus, Kahun Papyri
Medical terms, 10, 61-71, 88-89
See also Surgical terms
Medicaments, 9, 54, 55-61, 97, 133, 374, 379-
383
Medicine,
ancient, 1
Babylonian, 1, 2
Assyrian, 1-2
legal regulations of, 1
god of, 3
Egyptian, 3, 4
relation to Greek, 16, 17
European, 7
distinction between surgery and, 7, 9, 18, 42_
43 57 97
Greek, 3^ 5, 7, 9,12,13,14,15-17, 64, 105
demoniacal, 15
oldest science, 15
schools of, 17-18, 72
Medicine (medicaments), 139
external,55-61,97, 374,379-383,410-412,488,
500
internal, 99, 184-185, 488^89
" Medicine men," 15
Meissner, B., 1, 16
Membranes
meningeal, 12, 60, 65, 70, 130, 157, 160, 164,
171, 172
Meningeal involvement, 130
Meningeal membranes, 164, 172
rupture of, 12, 60, 65, 70, 130, 157, 160, 171
Meningitis, 130
Menses,
suspension of, 487
Menstrual discharge, 487
Merneptah, 106
Meskhenet, 479
Messengers of Sekhmet, 476, 484
Meteorism, 325
Meyer-Steineg, 53, 64
Microscope, 471
Milk, as medicament, 286, 287
Mill-stone, 495
Mineral salts, 374, 379, 382
Mineral, as disinfectant, 57, 262, 264-265
Miscarriage, 285
" Mistress of the crown," 474
" Mix " (prescriptions), 488, 491, 495
Moeller, G., 28
Moharb Todrous, 24
"Mooring stakes," 10, 69, 132, 134-135, 139,
150, 161, 237, 239, 281, 289, 316, 319, 424
Morning barque, 474
Mortar,
mason's, 60, 407, 410, 412
Motor cortex, 216
Mouth,
painful to open, 177, 180, 184, 187, 254, 268
bound, 181, 198
wound penetrating to, 227, 228
discharge from, 268
clean (exorcism), 483
Mouth of wound, 219, 284, 313, 316, 375, 376,
379, 384, 390, 411, 422, 424
Movements of body,
source of control of, 12
Mummy, 8
Muscles, 13, 67, 112, 113, 268, 303
temporal, 65, 67, 188, 189, 191, 277
rigid, 180
cutaneous, 257
M. orbicularis oris, 308
M. triangularis, 312
Muscular articulation, 187
Musculature,
of neck, 130
Musculus temporalis, 188
Mustapha Aga, 22, 75, 76
Naburianos, 16
Nabu-rimannu, see Naburianos
Nares, 244, 248
Nasal bone, 241, 242
fracture of, 52, 56, 58, 146, 157, 160, 234,
235
reduction of, 239, 244, 246-247
Nasus externus, 241
Natron, 412, 491
Natural science,
earliest recorded observations in, 12, 15, 18
Naville, E., 23
Neck, 110
injuries to, 12, 34, 36
stiffness in, 50, 51, 127,129-131, 137, 138,141,
158, 166, 178, 206, 208, 279, 280, 286, 292,
317, 318
softening applications on, 151
ligaments of, 181, 192
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:07 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 612 ---
586
GENERAL INDEX
Neck (cont.)
vertebra of, 52, 60, 71, 88, 98, 126, 130, 149,
160, 296, 316-317, 319, 320, 323, 324-325,
326, 327, 328, 333, 334, 336-337, 338, 339,
340, 341
Necrosis, 385
Necrotic wound, 59, 374
See also Infected wound
Neferirkere, 3
Neheb-kau, 482
Neit, 482
Nekhbet, 474
Nephthys, 474
Nerves, 13, 66-67, 111
Nervous control,
center of, 12-13, 45, 50, 65-67
Nervous system, 12-13, 50, 66-67
Neterhotep, 5
New York Historical Society, 21, 22, 25, 28
Nitre, 412
" Northern salt," 379, 383, 411, 491
Nose, 70, 85, 88, 237, 239, 241, 248, 249, 253,
260
bridge of, 10, 146, 235, 242
" column " of, 10, 70, 234, 241-242, 306
flesh wound in, 57, 98, 227, 228, 257
fracture in, 58, 146, 234-235, 245
compound comminuted fracture in, 52, 157,
160, 252, 254, 296
chamber of, 245, 248
Nostrils, 70, 110, 147, 190-191, 227, 234, 237,
238, 241, 243, 244, 246, 251, 252, 253, 254,
257, 259, 260
discharge from, 141, 158, 166, 178, 206, 208,
234, 268, 284, 288, 290, 292
secretions of, 244
Nourishment, liquid, 184, 185
Ocular observations, 40
Odor,
of head, 181, 196
evil, 369, 490
Oil, 146, 488
" Oily," 376-377, 408
Ointment, 489, 490, 492, 500
Ointment fat, 411
Olecranon, 215
Olfactory observations, 41
Onanism, 330
Opening of tumors, 366
Operation, 96, 208, 238
Optic nerve, 14
Oral cavity, 268
Osfrontale, 152
Osiris, 84, 220, 474, 475, 480, 482
Ossa nasalia, 235, 241, 242, 247, 252
Ossification, 185
Oxygenation, 108, 194
" Pain," 135, 187, 189, 426
" Painful," 177, 254, 268, 279, 288, 320, 417
Pale,
of face, 182, 183, 199, 200
Palpation, 38,41,56-57,89,92-93,119,127,141,
144, 158, 165, 177, 203, 204, 208, 226, 271
310, 417
Papyrus Ebers, see Ebers Papyrus
Papyrus Hearst, see Hearst Papyrus.
Paralysis, 12, 49, 51, 63, 70, 202, 205, 210-211,
216, 297, 317, 323, 324, 325, 326, 339
Past© 492 497
Pathology' 2,11-12, 112,130-131,146-147, 179,
181, 189, 204-205, 206, 216, 263, 284-285,
296-297, 316, 322-323, 324-330, 332, 336-
337, 349, 363, 364, 367-369, 374, 376-377,
384-388, 399-400, 403-404, 406, 407
Peck (measure), 489
Pedicure, 95
Penetration,
of wounds, 82, 87-89, 91-92, 94, 116, 118, 123,
125, 127, 140, 141, 149, 158, 164, 165, 177,
226, 227, 229, 257, 260-261, 271, 274, 283,
284, 298-299, 306-307, 309, 310, 313, 317,
345, 360-361, 370
Perforation, 11, 44, 60, 62, 83, 89, 119, 124-125,
125-126, 127, 130, 136, 146, 155, 160, 177,
227, 262, 263, 271, 278, 279, 284, 296, 310,
317, 369, 370
Pest,
incantations against, 469-470, 472-487
bearers of, 470, 472, 473, 475, 476, 477
cleansing from, 483, 485
Phalanges,
proximal, 216
Phallus, 51, 71, 323, 324, 325, 330, 332
Pharmaceutical, 381
Physician, 5, 70, 72, 73, 104
in Babylonia, 1
in Assyria, 1, 2
Arad-Nanai, 1
Egyptian, 3, 5, 9, 18
earliest known, 3, 9, 75
Imhotep, 3, 9, 75
Neterhotep, 5
" Secret Book of the," 10
Greek, 3, 9, 13
Asclepios, 3
Sydenham, 7
Hippocrates, 9, 14, 16, 56, 64, 303
Erasistratos, 13, 17
Herophilos, 13, 14, 17, 67, 106
Apollonios, 16, 56, 303
Uzahor-resenet, 17-18
distinction between surgeon and, 18, 42, 217
Alexandrian, 65, 108-109
Democritus, 64, 105
Physiology, 2, 9, 11-14, 72, 106, 109, 169, 170,
251
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:07 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 613 ---
GENERAL INDEX
587
Pigment,
green, 379, 382, 411
Pilcher, E. J., 106
Piles (haemorrhoids), 2, 221
Pill, 394
Pint, 489
Plague-bearing wind, 476
Plants in prescriptions, 379, 381, 383, 410, 411,
489,490
Plaster, see Adhesive plaster
Platysma, 312
Plugs, surgical, 8, 54, 58, 191, 237, 238, 246
Poison,
of snake, 475
Pomade, 101
Porcupine, 68, 372
Position of patient, 52-53, 55, 56, 58, 60, 150-
151, 184, 185, 207, 239, 266, 269, 286, 336,
352-353, 356, 428
Poultises, 60, 219, 220-222, 374, 379, 381, 383,
407, 411
Powder, 489, 496
Preparation of aqueous extract, 495-498
Prescriptions, 87, 97, 139, 181, 186, 251, 340,
379-383, 388, 410-413, 488, 489, 490
Priapism, 323
Primary intention, 308
Probing
see Palpation
Pronated hand, 216
Protection against pest, 472, 474, 476, 479, 482
Providence, 70, 202
Ptolemies, 18
Pulsation, 14, 64, 80, 93, 104, 105, 109, 113, 166,
169, 170, 208
Pulse, 7, 13, 41, 64, 69, 104, 113
counting, 105, 106, 109
Puncture, 136, 137
Pus, 51, 173, 174, 195, 316, 364, 365, 367, 368,
369, 376, 407, 412, 422
drawing out, 157
Pustules, 221
Quart, 489
Quiet, 185
Radius (bone), 357
Radix nasi, 241
Ramus, 10, 16, 68, 71, 153, 187, 188, 191, 238,
277, 289, 293-294, 304
Recipe-papyri, 4-5, 35, 59, 217
Smith Papyrus, 5-6, 42-43, 59, 217, 220, 469-
471
Recipes, 4, 35, 47, 111, 146, 166, 193
in Smith Papyri, 5-6,42,59,217,219-220,379,
470, 471, 487-500
Recovery, 96, 98, 102, 121, 132, 134, 232, 237,
246, 259, 264, 269, 270, 273, 281, 300, 305,
308, 311, 315, 316, 321, 336, 344, 352, 357,
362, 371, 393, 397, 420, 421, 425, 500
" Redness," 364, 367, 368, 408, 414
Reduction
of bones, 16-17, 53, 55-56, 58, 234, 238, 239,
244, 246-247, 303, 304, 342, 344, 350, 352-
354, 356-357, 359
Reflex spasm, 130
" Relief," 269, 270, 286, 336
Remedies, 111, 113, 221, 224, 238, 285, 379-380,
389-390, 410
Retraction of wound edges, 257
Rheumatism, 1, 221, 427
Ribs, 71, 154, 194, 373, 394-395
fracture of, 52, 160, 235, 255, 401-402
dislocation of, 60, 395-397, 398
perforation of, 126
sprain in, 235, 391-393, 394-395
Rochemonteix, M. de C, 111
Rolls of linen, 8, 55, 56, 57, 58, 228, 229, 234,
237, 239-240, 244, 246, 300, 301, 344
Rubrics, 29
Rupture,
of tissue, 52, 58, 83, 157, 235, 261, 268, 274,
278, 285, 342, 345-346, 349, 357-358, 360-
361,401, 402
of meningeal membranes, 12, 60, 65, 70, 130,
157, 160, 171
Sais
Medical schools at, 17-18
Salicin, 9, 59, 374
Salix, 59, 374
Scalp trouble, 383
Scalp wounds, 57, 59
Scalpels, 53
Scapula, 215
Schaefer, H., 18, 29, 61, 107, 110
Schone, H., 16
Schools of medicine, 17-18, 72
Science,
in Egypt, 15
Scientific foundations, 17-18
Scientific observation, 7, 10, 12, 14-15, 18, 43,
47, 49-51, 52, 72, 160, 206, 212, 323, 338
" Secret Book of the Physician," 10, 65, 107-108
" Secret chamber," 10
Secretions, 244, 316, 376, 399, 404, 422
Seeing,
painful, 320
Seizer-of-the-Great-One, 474
" Seizures " in legs, 499
Sekenenre, 126
Sekhem, 5
Sekhmet, 472, 474, 477, 480, 482, 484, 486
priests of, 104
messengers of, 476, 484
diseased ones of, 484
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:07 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 614 ---
588
GENERAL INDEX
Self-pollution, 330
Semen, 111
Seminal emission, 12, 63
See also emissio gem in it
Sened, 5
Sennacherib, 1
Septum, 70, 234, 242
Serpent, 480
Sesquicarbonate of sodium, 412, 491
Sethe, K., 3, 111
Setting of bones, see Reduction of bones
Sexual organ, 326
Shoulder, 110
flesh wound in, 35, 52, 58, 98, 149, 227, 229,
415-123
-fork, 85, 205, 214, 215, 216
manipulation with, 350, 352, 353, 356, 357
-blades, 352, 356, 417, 418
Shrine
of god, 109
Shudder, 141, 144, 177, 284, 318, 370, 392
" Sick," 129
" Sickle-bone," 347-348
Sickness, 474, 475, 476
Sieve, 495
Sinew, 67
Sinus, 10, 248
Sitting posture (as treatment), 52-53, 55, 56, 58,
60, 150-151, 184, 185, 207, 266, 269, 286,
336
Skin, 86, 185-186, 203, 376, 414, 491, 498
Skull, 70, 86-87, 92
Compound comminuted fracture of, 12, 52, 56,
60, 70, 92, 130, 146, 155, 156, 157, 160, 162,
164,165, 171, 203, 204, 208, 209
perforation of, 58, 70, 92, 119, 125-126, 127,
130, 136, 227
split in, 58, 70, 92, 130,140-141,146,149,150,
152-153, 155
bones of, 79, 89, 116
sutures of, 52, 55, 60, 70, 130, 149, 155, 160,
177, 181, 185-186
shell of, 141,152-153,185,186,218
meningeal membranes of, 12, 60, 65, 70, 130,
157, 160,164,171,172
brain of, 164, 165, 171
Smash, 136
See also Fractures, compound comminuted
Smith, Edwin, 20-25, 28, 75-76
Smith, 6. Elliot, 8, 53, 56
Smith, Leonora, 22, 28
Smith Papyrus,
organization of material, 5-6, 19, 29, 469-471,
492
date of, 19, 26-29, 593-595
history of, 19-25
provenience of, 25
connection between Ebers Papyrus and, 22-
25,106-108,471
physical condition of, 20, 25, 28, 75-77
handwriting of, 19, 28-29, 492
incantations and recipes, 5-6, 19, 469-507
surgical treatise, 6-9,10, 11-14, 19, 28-29, 33-
466
Snake-poison, 475
Sodium, 9, 59, 60, 374, 379, 411, 412, 491
Softening applications, 151, 180, 286, 382
Sole (of foot), 204, 210
Solvent, 489
Sores, 84, 221, 366, 367, 368, 404, 407, 412
" Sower,"
" the escaped of the," 482
Spalteholz, W., 35
Spear, wounds made by, 11, 83, 92, 126, 369
Speechlessness, 50-51,63,254,269,286,290,292,
296-297, 339
Spina frontalis, 235
Spinal column, 426
center of nervous control, 12-13, 66-67
injury to, 35, 425-426
Spinal cord
involvement, 323, 325
Spinal vertebra, 425-426
Spine (of patient), 66, 67, 425,427
Spine-roast, 394-395
Spittle, 178
Spleen, 111
Splints, 8, 54-55, 190-191
" of linen," 8,55,56, 57,58,190-191, 229, 234,
237, 239, 244, 352, 353-354, 357, 359
cartonage, 8, 55, 190
bodies wearing, 8, 53, 190
soft, 8, 55, 56, 57, 58, 228, 229, 234, 237, 239-
240, 244, 246, 300, 301, 344
See, also Brace
Split, 44-45,52,58,60, 62, 89,124-125,130,157,
271, 310, 361
in maxilla, 60, 98, 146, 263, 265, 266
in skull, 58,70,92,130,140-141,146,150,152-
153, 155
in temporal bone, 146, 155, 287, 288
in arm, 146, 361-362
Sprain, 60, 71, 98, 319, 320, 322-323, 391-393,
394, 425-426
Squama, 152, 185, 223
frontalis, 218
Stern, L., 110
Sterno-costal articulations,
sprain in, 60, 391-393, 394
dislocation in, 395-397, 398
Sternum, 68, 71, 85, 153-154, 342, 344, 349, 373
injuries to, 35, 36
perforation of, 60, 369, 370
ribs of, 71, 154, 160, 194, 235, 255, 391-395,
395-397, 398, 399
articulation with, 348
manubrium of, 369, 370, 372, 373
Stibium, 489
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:07 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 615 ---
GENERAL INDEX
589
Stiffness, 427
in neck, 50, 51, 127, 129-131, 137, 138, 141,
158, 166, 178, 206, 208, 279, 280, 286, 292,
317, 318
of limbs, 99
of muscles, 112
of ligaments, 187,192-193, 277
of joints, 215
Stitching, surgical, 8, 54, 55, 57-58, 83, 132, 133,
226-231, 232-233, 257, 258, 259, 297, 298,
299, 200, 301, 306, 308, 309, 312, 313, 416,
417, 421, 422
used on mummy, 8
Stomach, 483
Suction, 184
Sudhoff, 53, 64
"Suffer" with (or "in"), 127, 129, 138, 141,
158, 166, 178, 182, 206, 208, 280, 286, 292,
318, 392, 396, 399, 417, 426, 487, 499
Superstition, 59, 213, 217, 220
Supports of brick, 8, 55, 150-151, 184, 185
of linen padding, 229
Suppositories, 221, 325, 394
Suppurating tumor, 369
Suppuration, 8, 56, 174, 416
Surgeon, 72, 73, 190
in Babylonia, 1, 2
in Assyria, 1
as natural scientist, 12, 18
see Physician
Surgery,
ancient, 1
Babylonian, 2
Egyptian,
see Smith Papyrus
distinction between medicine and, 7,9,18,42-
43,57,97
legal regulations of, 1
history of, 230
Surgical devices, 8, 53-56, 69, 184, 189-191,
222, 224, 238, 239, 240, 316, 352-353, 365,
366
Surgical instruments, 8-9, 18, 53
Surgical terms, 92-93, 140-141, 156-158, 204,
211, 226-230, 235, 237, 238-239, 254-255,
257-258, 274, 322, 328-329, 336-337, 340,
396-397
Surgical treatise, 6, 9-10, 72
see Smith Papyrus
Surgical treatment, 53-57
Suture, surgical,
see Stitching, surgical
Sutures of skull, 70, 152, 176, 185-186, 247
perforation of, 52, 55, 60, 130, 149, 155, 160,
177, 181, 185
Swabs, surgical, 8, 54, 57, 58, 124, 190-191, 237,
246, 247, 259, 290, 295
Sweat, 70,181, 192
Swelling, 112, 141, 145-147, 154, 157, 158, 159,
194, 203, 226, 234, 237, 245, 249, 263, 266,
269, 288, 314, 329, 349, 362, 364, 367, 368,
369, 377, 382, 384, 395, 396, 399, 404, 406,
408, 413, 417
Sword wounds, 11, 82, 92, 118, 140
Sycamore leaves, 60, 374, 407, 411
Sydenham, 7
Symptoms, 38-39, 63
Tactile observations, 41, 64
Tampons, 8, 54, 190-191, 234, 237, 238, 244
Tears, 284
Teeth, 1, 9, 53, 100, 181, 182, 341, 368
Temple, 70, 110, 223, 272, 275-277, 293
perforation in, 50, 60, 126, 130, 160, 205, 278,
279, 283, 284
flesh wound in, 59, 98, 271
split in, 52, 140, 146, 149, 155, 205, 287, 288
compound comminuted fracture in, 51, 52,
130, 157, 160, 238, 290
Temporal bone, 10, 68, 71, 153, 187, 188, 271,
277
perforation of, 50, 60, 126, 130, 160, 205, 278,
279, 283, 284, 296
compound comminuted fracture of, 51,52,130,
157,160, 238, 289-290, 296
split in, 52, 140, 146, 149, 155, 205, 287, 288
Temporal muscle, 65, 67, 188, 189, 191, 277
Tendons, 13, 349
Terminology, 10, 62-71, 88-89
archaic, 74
Testicles, 111
Tetanus, 9, 49, 52, 54, 55, 60, 70,176, 179, 189
Therapeutic, 9, 57-60
Thermometer, 386
Thorax, 111, 342, 345, 372
Throat, 88, 347, 348-349
injuries to, 34, 36, 57, 98, 149, 227, 229, 261,
312-313, 314
Throbbing, 166, 168-169, 170, 208
Thutmose I, 28
Thutmose III, 106
Time measurer, 106
Tip of an organ, 85, 211
Tissue, 253
soft, 67, 82, 91, 133, 257, 270, 272, 277, 299,
317, 342, 349, 357, 360, 361, 363, 373, 397,
400,415
soreness of, 57
swelling of, 147
rupture of, 52, 58, 83, 157, 235, 261, 268, 274,
278, 285, 342, 345-346, 349, 357-358, 360-
361, 401, 402
cartilaginous, 234, 241
bony, 252
diseased, 263, 385
stiffened, 382
Title, 9-10
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:07 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 616 ---
590
GENERAL INDEX
Titles of cases, 37-38, 78-89, 118, 125-126, 140,
156-158, 164, 176-177, 203, 217-218, 225,
234, 245, 252-253, 257, 263, 265, 267, 271,
278, 283, 287, 290, 297, 301, 303, 306, 309-
310, 313, 317, 319, 324, 333, 338, 343, 350,
354, 358, 361, 363, 370, 375, 391-392, 396,
401,403,407,416-417,425-426
Toes, 99, 111, 221
tips of, 85, 210
Toilet, 487
pomade, 101
preparations, 490-498
Toothache, 1
Top of an organ, 85
Trachea, 349
Treat, 95-96, 99-100
" Treatise on What Pertains to the Embalmer,"
163, 281
" Treatise on What Pertains to His Wounds,"
61, 63, 162-163, 384
Treatment, 6, 7-9, 51-61, 96-102,112, 121-123,
132-135, 149-151, 161, 171, 179-180, 183-
185, 207, 218-224, 231-233, 237-240, 246-
247, 248, 259, 264-265, 266, 269-270, 273,
281, 286-287, 289, 300, 305, 308, 311-312,
315, 316, 319, 321, 335-336, 344-345, 351-
354, 356-357, 359, 362, 366-367, 371, 374,
378-383, 393, 397, 405, 407, 409—113, 420-
421, 424, 425, 428, 488-490, 499-500
in examination, 7,42,57
mechanical, 7, 8, 150-151
magical, 59, 60, 218-220
" wound treatment," 61, 100, 366, 367, 407,
412-413
for swelling, 146
Tremble, 112
Trepanning, 56
Trituration, 219, 340, 379, 410, 411, 412, 491,
500
Tube,
for feeding, 184
Tuberculous, 407
Tumors, 36,43,52,54, 55, 71,149, 363-369,403-
406
Ulcers, 43, 54, 55, 363, 368
Ulna, 215, 357
Unconsciousness, 3, 88, 323, 325, 339
Urinary troubles, 99, 382
Urine
of patient, 66, 71, 323, 324, 327, 331-332
of sheep, 70, 181, 196
Usephais, 5
Uzahor-resenet, 17-18
Vagina, 226, 332, 368
Verdict
one (1), 47, 55, 94, 95-96, 102, 120, 131, 231,
236, 245, 258, 264, 266, 273, 280, 300, 305,
307, 311, 321, 335, 344, 345-346, 351, 356,
362, 365, 371, 377, 393, 397, 409, 420, 428
two (2) 47, 52, 60, 102, 148-149,155, 179, 201,
288, 315, 318, 359, 405, 423
three (3), 6, 47, 52, 60,102, 159-161, 170,182,
189, 206, 209, 256, 267, 269, 286, 292, 302,
327, 339,346, 360,402
in Smith Papyrus, 46-48,95-96,148-149,159-
160, 217, 365
in other medical papyri, 47, 95, 148, 210, 365
Vertebra, 328
cervical, 88
dislocation of, 52,71,160,323,324-325,326,
327
impacted fracture of, 52, 71, 160, 296, 337-
339, 340-341
sprain in, 60, 98, 319, 320
perforation of, 60, 98,126,130,149, 316-317
displacement of, 60,71,98,333,334,336-337
spinal
sprain in, 55, 425-426
Vessels
of body, 13, 14, 104, 108, 109-113, 244, 349,
475
Veterinary papyrus, 4, 296
Vulture feathers (in exorcisms), 472, 476
Vulva, 101, 332, 368, 487, 488
Walk,
shufflingly, 204, 210-211, 216
War,
Wounds received in, 11, 82, 92, 126, 140, 338,
369
Water, 108, 111, 407, 410, 495, 497
Watery, 376, 381
Weak place, see Fontanel
r Weaknesses,"1 498
Wennofer, 5
Weshptah, 3
Westcar papyrus, 22, 29
White One, 474
Williams, Caroline Ransom, 21
Willow bark, 9, 374, 380
leaves, 59, 60, 374, 379, 380
Wind,
pest-laden, 470, 472, 473, 475, 476, 477
(in meteorism), 325
Winnow, 495
Womb, 182
Wood (in exorcisms), 478, 485
Worm,
existing in water, 10, 251
" of blood," 246, 251, 259
Worms, 100
Wounds, 81-84,274, 279, 360, 366, 367, 368, 407,
causes of, 11, 43, 92, 126, 140, 212-213, 317,
337-338, 339, 369
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:07 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 617 ---
GENERAL INDEX
591
Wounds (coni.)
infected, 59, 60, 262, 263, 374
" diseased," 71, 262, 263, 375, 384-385
gaping, 82-83, 88, 90-92, 95, 114, 118, 123,
124, 125, 127, 140, 141, 149, 155, 156, 158,
164, 165, 177, 227-229, 233, 261, 309-310,
312-313, 316-317, 415, 417-119, 421
flesh, 43, 52, 54, 55, 57, 58, 59, 81, 82-83, 88,
97-98,118, 227-229,256,257,271,272, 297-
298, 306, 308-309, 310, 415, 417-425
mouth of, 219, 284, 313, 316, 375, 376, 379,
384, 390, 411, 422, 424
lips of, 82-83,90-91,94, 95,114, 116,124,194,
195, 227, 228, 233, 257, 260, 274, 300, 309,
375, 384, 389
no external evidence of, 209
discolorations of, 263, 266
secretion, 316
"Wound treatment," 61, 100, 366, 367, 407,
412-413
Wrinkles, 173, 174, 492, 498
Year, 484
pest of, 470, 472, 473, 475, 476, 478
" yield of," 480, 482
" followers of," 480
" life of," 482
Yield of year, 480, 482
Ymrw, same as imru, q. v.
I Zygoma, 60, 243, 263, 265, 267, 277, 296
Zygomatic process, 277
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:07 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 618 ---
LIST OF ABBREVIATED BOOK TITLES
Dumichen. Geogr. Inschr.
Diimichen. Hist. Inschr.
Erman. Reden.
Gauthier. Inscr. dedicatoire.
Leemans. Mon. fun.
Mitth. Orient. Samml.
Pap. Anast. Ill and IV.
Pap. judic. de Turin.
Piehl. Inscr.
Pyr.
Recueil de trav.
Rochem. Edfou.
Pvosellini. Mon. civ.
de Rouge. Inscr. hiir.
Urk.
Zeilschrifl.
Geographische Inschriften altdgyptischer DenkmcUer.
Historische Inschriften altdgyptischer Denkmdler.
Reden, Rufe und Lieder auf Graberbildern des alien
Reiches. (Akad. d. Wiss., Berlin. Phil.-hist. Klasse.
Abhandlungen. 1918, no. 15.)
La grande inscription dedicatoire d'Abydos.
Monumens igyptiens du Musie d'antiquites des Pays-Bas
a Leide. III. Monumens funiraires.
Berlin, Staatliche Museen. Mittheilungen aus den orien-
talischen Sammlungen. IX. Steindorff. Grabfunde des
MitUeren Reichs. II. Der Sarg des Sebk-o.
Papyrus Anastasi III and IV. Select papyri in the
hieratic character from the collections of the British
Museum. [Part 1, No. 2] 1842.
Deveria, Theodule. Le papyrus judiciaire de Turin.
(Extrait de la Bibliotheque egyptologique, t. V.)
Inscriptions hiiroglyphiques recueiUies en Europe et en
Egypte.
Sethe, K. H. Die altagyplischen Pyramidentexte.
Recueil de travaux relatifs a la philologie et a Varcheologie
igyptiennes et assyriennes.
Rochemonteix, M. de. Le temple d'Edfou. (Memoires
publies par les membres de la Mission archeologique
francaise au Caire, t. 10-11.)
/ monumenti dell' Egitto e delta Nubia, t. 2: Monu-
ments civili.
Inscriptions hiiroglyphiques copiees en Egypte.
Urkunden des dgyptischen Altertums, hrsg. von Georg
Steindorff.
I. Sethe, K. H. " Urkunden des alten Reichs."
III. Schafer, H. " Urkunden der alteren Athiopen-
konige."
IV. Sethe, K. H. " Urkunden der 18. Dynastie."
V. Grapow, H. " Rehgiose Urkunden."
Zeitschrift fur dgyptische Sprache und Altertumskunde.
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:07 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 619 ---
ADDENDA
1. The Date of the Edwin Smith Surgical Papyrus.
After the discussion of the date of this surgical treatise was in print (pp. 28-29),
my friend Professor Devaud has recalled my attention to the question of the date of
this papyrus as a manuscript, especially in view of the orthographic criteria which he
published in his recent valuable treatise1 on the dating of Egyptian papyri, and which
had unfortunately escaped my notice. The orthography of Late Egyptian writing has
long been used as a basis for recognizing the late date of Nineteenth- and Twentieth-
Dynasty papyri. In this useful essay of Professor Devaud he has carried the study of
such orthographic indications back through the Eighteenth to the Twelfth Dynasty.
By a careful examination of the writing of fifty-six selected words in thirty papyri,
forming a chronological sequence from the Twelfth to the Eighteenth Dynasty, he has
furnished new criteria for dating hieratic documents belonging to this general period—
the period of our papyrus.
It is interesting to notice that these new orthographic criteria at once place our
papyrus in the same general period indicated by the palaeographic evidence, as already
discussed above (pp. 25-29),—that is, in the Westcar-Ebers-Hearst group of papyri.
For the assignment of the Edwin Smith Papyrus to this general group, the palaeo-
graphic and orthographic evidence are therefore in complete agreement. The question
at once arises, however, whether the new orthographic criteria will enable us to determine
the date of the Edwin Smith Papyrus within narrower limits and to place it with certainty
before or after the Papyrus Ebers. The evidence follows.
Of Professor Devaud's fifty-six test words only a little over one-fourth are found in
the Edwin Smith Papyrus, and unfortunately only a small proportion of these furnish
any indications regarding the narrower limits just mentioned. These words are :
No. 50,2 ^Zo't *s a ^ua,l writing occurring only subsequent to Papyrus Ebers. It
occurs but once in the Smith Papyrus (X 18). Of the other six occurrences of this
dual, two are written —j, J (XVII 17 ; XXII14) in the adverb hr 'wy, which Devaud
writes me is not to be included in these dating criteria. The remaining four have ^~"„,
which is an archaic writing not included in Devaud's list. Against four archaic writings
the sole occurrence of one post-Ebers writing has little weight.
No. 51,3 ^ i, so written very often in Papyrus Smith. In Ebers and earlier it is
usually written without \. This might indicate that our papyrus follows Ebers, were
1 Eugene Devaud : L'dge des papyri egyptwns hieraliques. Paris, 1924.
2 The numbers are those of Devaud's publication.
3 The use of a hieratic sign resembling for the bee in byt " honey " is common in both Ebers
and Smith, and has no bearing on the date. This bird-like sign may be another hieratic form for ^ ;
but for the sake of distinction it has been transliterated as ^ in these volumes.
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:07 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 620 ---
594
ADDENDA
it not for the fact that \ in this word does occur also before Ebers, as cited by Devaud
from the Carnarvon Tablet (o. c, p. 8*).
No. 52, "j J^«^,f, ° , , occurs once in Papyrus Smith. The use of £ in this word is not
habitual until post-Ebers documents ; but it is found as early as the Middle Kingdom
in one document, viz., the Shipwreck (see Devaud, o. c, p. 8*).
No. 54, (]|E=^, with the determinative ^ is unknown before Papyrus Hearst. It
is significant that its sole occurrence in Papyrus Smith (XXI 20) is not in the Surgical
Treatise but in the recipes on the verso, in the appendix by a second scribe, presumably
later. Otherwise Papyrus Smith employs the form appearing in Papyrus Ebers
and earlier, or the exceptional form 1—(once).
The above four writings comprise all the orthographic evidence pointing towards
a post-Ebers date. We must place with the above evidence the following counter-
indications.
No. 5, ^|5}^, found once in Papyrus Smith (XVIII4), occurs only in the Twelfth
Dynasty or earlier. Otherwise, in Papyrus Prisse and later, the phonetic elements
before J^j are not employed, and had begun to disappear as early as Ptahhotep, L 1
(see Devaud, o. c, pp. 7-8 and 1*). Ebers uses |^ without the phonetic elements preceding.
No. 15, ^3 (a^so "ith appearmg twice in Papyrus Smith, is an early form,
like No. 5 just cited, written with phonetic elements first. This form is found only in
Papyrus Prisse and earlier. After Prisse, beginning with the Thirteenth Dynasty
(Kahun Papyri), the word is written ^ ^ <? ^ with the ideogram first and the phonetic
elements following. Ebers has this form, and the earlier form in Papyrus Smith (as
also in the case of No. 5 above) indicates that Smith is earlier than Ebers.
No. 88, P^(] ^J, is a form occurring once in Papyrus Smith (IX 19), and again written
with ^ (XX 16). The form without ~~» is the invariable writing in the Thirteenth
Dynasty Kahun Papyri and earlier. In Papyrus Westcar and later it is habitually
written P^1— This is also the usual writing in Papyrus Ebers, although the form
without — is not entirely unknown in Ebers.
Summing up the orthographic evidence, we find seven out of Devaud's convenient
list of words which have some significance for the date of our papyrus. Turning first to
the possible indications of post-Ebers date, we find that two of the seven words listed
above exhibit writings which are tisually post-Ebers (Nos. 51 and 52); but occurrences
of both of these forms are found earlier, as shown in Devaud's table (o. c, p. 8*). They
are therefore not unequivocally post-Ebers forms. Two more of the above list of seven
are actually found only in post-Ebers manuscripts : one occurrence of the determinative
^ with (] 2= (XXI20) and one occurrence of the dual writing v The single occurrence
of the former is in the (presumably later) magical mdlanges on the verso, and the latter
is one writing among seven occurrences of the word, the remaining six being either as
in Ebers or archaic and older than Ebers.
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:07 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 621 ---
ADDENDA
595
Over against this equivocal orthographic evidence for a post-Ebers date, we find
three writings of words in the above list of seven (Nos. 5, once; 15, twice; and 88,
once), two of which are not only older than Ebers, but are not found later than the
Middle Kingdom. The scantiness of this orthographic evidence as a whole weakens
its force, but if it is of any weight at all it points rather towards a pre-Ebers date and
two of the last three writings would even fit a pre-Westcar date. In any case these
slight orthographic data do not weaken the palaeographic evidence discussed above
(pp. 25-29) that the Edwin Smith Papyrus was written somewhat earlier than the
Papyrus Ebers, and possibly earlier than the Papyrus Westcar.
2. Additional Textual Notes.
I 9, J^^tt hHy (p. 108). This writing with |^ instead of is of course not
customary in hieratic, but a comparison of the first preserved sign in l. 9 (Vol. II, PI. I)
with the A'-sign as found close by in l. 7 and (directly under this example) again in l. 8,
shows clearly that we cannot regard the first preserved sign in l.9 as "|'^. The top of
h' in 1l. 7 and 8 is totally different from that of the sign in l. 9. On the other hand
this first preserved sign in l.9 has the exact form of J, for example in I"""*, in II11 (see
Vol. II, PI. II, l.11). The evidence for the reading J^^tf, therefore, seems to be good.
On the reading hHy for see Sethe, Zeitschrift, 89 (1901), p. 185; and Devaud
(Sphinx, XIII, pp. 98-100).
The following notes and references are due to Devaud:
II 22, g"g x (pp. 165 and 166). On the reading, Devaud calls attention to the
proper name written (Eleventh Dynasty Stela in the British Museum,
Am. Journal of Semitic Lang., XXXII, 17) and also J^es(]j§ (Middle Kingdom
Stela, Mus. Guimet C 6).
III 16, tr * (pp* 186, 187 f.). An interesting new example of the meaning
" anus " is found in a Middle Kingdom Assiut text: " I eat with my mouth, I defecate
with my 'r t" (Chassinat-Palanque, Fouilles d'Assiout, p. 100). It is important to
note that V-t is here written with animal buttocks as determinative.
£s o
III 17, ^J^, jj ™ (p. 189). Devaud states that he has a number of examples of this
idiom in which it often seems to mean " change, modify, alter." These references are :
de Morgan, Catalogue des Monuments, III, 245 (Ombos); ibid., Ill, 19 (Ombos);
Rochem., Edfou, II, 260,11; Lepsius, Denkmaler, Text IV, p. 118 ; Mariette, Denderah,
II, 25 ; Ny Carlsberg E 70 ; Amelineau, Nouvelles fouilles, pp. 161 and 292 ; Berlin
6910 (Zeitschrift, II, 68, 27). The references have not been verified.
IV 2, (p. 197). Compare the French " boite du crdne," and possibly
Coptic *>.n in ^hthAju. " skull," e. g., Judges, 9, 58.
VIII 10 (p. 291). Compare also the obviously related noun (Zauber-
spriiche 4, 1; Pap. Mag. Vatican 4, 7; Pap. Leide 848, v°. 2, 4; 11, 10) and
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:07 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 622 ---
596 ADDENDA
" (Pap. Boulaq 7, 2, 2; cf. Maspero, Pap. Louvre, p. 60), which also means
" chin ".
XI 22 and XV 4, CIJ^ (p. 848). Compare also (Sinuhe, B. 274), presumably the
same as the later ntf of Israel Stela 6; Pap. Anast. I, 24, 5; Magical Pap. Harris,
verso, A, 6; etc. Important is Devaud's observation, that in Proverbs 6, 85, cpxe
K«eqn«yyTq is parallel with cyie qn&.feuj\*ktt in the liturgic text. nofTq is
thus identical with fctoA. " loosen," exactly the meaning also disclosed in Pap. Smith.
XXI 18 (p- 497). Note also the contrast between "moist grapes",
(B) 0"YaAo\i MgH rwVoK, and " dried grapes", o,y&Au|(00,y, in Numbers 6, 8;
and likewise between "the green (juicy, moist) tree" muje ctA.hr, and "the
dried" neTttjo'Yuio-Y, in Luke 28, 81. In these two passages Acok and \hh
evidently represent the same root as our nhwt, " moisture ", and Horner renders
€t\hr, " ht. moist". The Old Egyptian verb corresponding to our noun nhwt
seems to have been lost, or has escaped notice.
8. Discovery of a Single Example of Ancient Egyptian Trepanning.
The statement (p. 56) that no Egyptian bodies thus far exhumed show any traces of
the practice of trepanning must now be modified. Dr. Ales HrdliCka of the United
States National Museum, in a letter dated May 22nd, 1929, has kindly reported to me
the discovery of a trepanned skull taken from one of the "deep pits at Lisht". He
further states that it " belonged undoubtedly to one of the nobler families of the Xllth
Dynasty". I am greatly indebted to the kindness of Dr. Hrdliiika for a photograph of
this unique specimen. It would seem, therefore, that trepanning was known to the
ancient Egyptians, but was apparently very rarely practised, if we may judge by the
i. rarity of surviving examples.
CORRIGENDA
P. 76, last paragraph, l. 1. For " Plate IA ", read " Plate I".
P. 77, third paragraph, l. 8. For " Plate IA ", read " Plate II".
P. 78, first paragraph, line 5. For " 56 cm.", read " 48 to 45 cm."
P. 78, first paragraph, line 6. For " Vol. II, 1 b ", read " Vol. II, pp. xif."
P. 81, third paragraph, head of fourth line, insert alphabetic n in wbnw (VIII18).
P. 181 (I 21), in the verdict. Enclose the first (] in brackets.
P. 182, (I 28), in mht, enclose m in brackets.
P. 158 (II18). For *w read J^.
P. 162 (II 17). In dnn-t (first time), insert stroke after © and before 'w.
ADDITIONAL CORRIGENDA
May 25, 1930
P. 11, for "PI. I," read "Vol. I, PI. II."
P. 475, in hieroglyphic text of XVIII 9, in "cnft," delete
second "n."
P. 493, in hieroglyphic text XXI 14, in "pr%" third
plural stroke, broken off in press, should be inserted.
!
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:07 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 623 ---
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:07 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 624 ---
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:07 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 625 ---
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:07 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 626 ---
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:07 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 627 ---
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:07 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 628 ---
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:07 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 629 ---
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:07 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 630 ---
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:07 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 631 ---
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:07 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 632 ---
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:07 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 633 ---
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:07 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 634 ---
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:07 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 635 ---
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:07 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 636 ---
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:07 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 637 ---
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:07 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 638 ---
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:07 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 639 ---
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:07 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 640 ---
THE UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
DATE DUE
JUN
7200^
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:07 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 641 ---
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:07 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google


--- PAGE 642 ---
Generated for member@iu.edu (Indiana University) on 2012-03-14 15:07 GMT  /  http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015027232282
Public Domain, Google-digitized  /  http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google

