=== EXTRACTED TEXT FROM: The-Dialectics-of-Black-Revolution-by-Chairman-Omali-Yeshitela.pdf ===
Extraction Method: PyPDFLoader
Total Pages: 27
Timestamp: 2026-01-04T17:23:24.490923
================================================================================


--- PAGE 1 ---



--- PAGE 2 ---
Inlroduclion 10 Ihe Second Edition 
"The Dialectics of Black Revolution: The Struggle to Defeat the 
Counterinsurgency in the U.S." by Omali Yeshitela, Chairman of the 
African People s Socialist Party, has proved to be one of the most popular 
pamphlets of the Uhuru Movement. With a constant demand for more 
copies, this second edition is wen overdue. 
"Dialectics of Black Revolution" is an easy-to-read. concise, though pro­
found presentation of the theory of Yeshitelism. It combines breakthrough 
understandings of political theory from the point of view of African work­
ers, with an excellent summation of the forces that gave rise to the Black 
Power Movement of the 1960s. It takes a deep look at the U.S. governments 
counterinsurgency which defeated that movement and which continues to 
terrorize and criminalize the African community in this country today in 
an effort to keep black people from ever rising up again. 
The ideas in this pamphlet are exciting and innovative. Discarding the 
white-nationalist, Euro-centric concepts which have dominated socialist 
thought for so long, Yeshitela offers a refreshing vision which points the way


--- PAGE 3 ---
.. ".,,_,,_"'.," •• ~._ ................ , ... ' _OiIiiiiIiIIiiiliiillliIIIIIIIlfIIIIII ___________________ ~----------.... -----------------
Tbe Dlalecllcs 01 Blacll Revolullon 
II 
for the success of the movement for the liberation of Africa and her people 
here and around the world 
Chairman Omali gave this presentation at Freedom Weekend held by the 
Party in St. Petersburg, Florida in January of 1990. As the Chairman 
explains in his introduction to the first edition, Freedom Weekt{nd was part 
of a strategy waged by the Party since the mid-'80s to expose and defeat the 
counterinsurgency war against the African community in this country. His 
presentation has a prophetic quality. It is just as remarkable and timely 
today in this new period of resurgent African resistance as it was eight years 
ago. 
Until the Uhuru Movement led the struggle to define the conditions fac­
ing African people today as counterinsurgency. the US. government's crim­
inalization of the whole African community was widely accepted. As part 
of this strategy the Party had long exposed things that are only now being 
admitted by the white ruling class and media. 
Recent revelations that the us. government is responsible for imposing 
deadly drugs, creating a dependent drug economy in the African communi­
~ or that sen~ncing for African people is far greater than for white people 
on the same charges, or that the majority of people stuffed into the prisons 
and on death row are African, have long been exposed by the Party. 
The Freedom Weekend mobilization itself was prophetic, taking place in 
St. Petersburg, Florida, which is today the forefront of African resistance in 
the Us. and perhaps the world. The national office of the Aftican People's 
Socialist Party operates from the Uhuru House in the heart of the African 
community on the city's south side. 
For more than ayear the African People's Socialist Party and the Uhuru 
Movement, representing thousands of African people in the Florida town, 
have successfolly engaged the city government in struggle and won powerfol 
concessions to the just and previously dismissed demands of the African 
working class. 
On October 24, 1996, two white police shot and killed I8-year-old 
1JRon Lewis during a traffic stop. This murder of another young African 
man took place just three blocks from the Uhuru House and in foil view of 
• 
Oman Yeshllela 
scores of African people who had gathered around. African People's Socialist 
Party organizers were on the scene. In response to this brutality the African 
community rose up in a conscious, highly politicized rebellion which an 
article in the Party's newspaper. The Burning Spear, describes: 
''Hundreds of courageous young Aftican workers were immediately trans­
formed into fearless freedom fighters who fought police in pitched battles in 
the streets, reduced sections of the city owned by parasitic merchants to ashes 
and strategically targeted South St. Petersburg police substations and com­
mand centers for destruction. " 
Following the police killing, the Party and its mass organization, the 
National People s Democratic Uhuru Movement, formed to expose and 
defeat the counterinsurgency. went into immediate action. The Uhuru 
Movement held vigils, demonstrations, community meetings and a tribunal 
which put the killer police on trial by the people. The rebellion came after 
30 years of consistent work in the African community by the Uhuru 
Movement tirelessly defending the rights of black working class and poor 
people. Yeshitela himself is known and loved by young and old alike in the 
African community. and because of his unwavering commitment to struggle 
is widely accepted as a genuine leader of the African community in the city. 
On November 13, the city of St. Petersburg attacked the Uhuru 
Movement, tear gassing over a hundred community people of all ages who 
had gathered in the Uhuru House for a regularly scheduled meeting. 
According to The Burning Spear, " .. . following the grand jury's exonera­
tion of killer cop James Knight and the assault by the police against the 
Uhuru House, African workers again rose up with brilliance and courage. " 
The community brought down a police helicopter and pushed back the 
militarized police presence of over 300 highly armed cops in riot gear. 
In the period since the rebellion Chairman Omali and the Uhuru 
Movement have moved brilliantly to deepen the struggle. The Uhuru 
Movement has forced the city to meet the just demand for economic devel­
opment in the hands of the African working class as the solution for social 
justice, as opposed to the usual government imposition of increased police 
repression which typically follows just African rebellions. 
ill


--- PAGE 4 ---
The Dialectics of Black Revolution 
'1 
Due to the leadership of the Uhuru Movement, the African working class 
community of St. Petersburg has a taste of real power for the first time in a 
long time. Truly the masses are mobilized and the south side of St. 
Petersburg more closely resembles "liberated territory" than any other place 
in the us. The government is now forced to recognize that the African 
working class has a voice and it is indeed very articulate. Tha,t voice is the 
organized Uhuru Movement. 
More details about the struggle in St. Petersburg, Florida are available else­
where, epecially on the pages offhe Burning Spear newspaper. However, it 
is clear that the understandings which the Chairman put forward in this pre­
sentation in 1990 reveal a deep internalization of the true nature of "the 
dialectics of Black Revolution. " These understandings provide the basis for 
the success of the movement in St. Petersburg today, which is indeed a model 
for the struggle of oppressed and colonized people everywhere. 
Burning Spear Uhuru Publications 
December, 1997 
Introduction 
This pamphlet consists of a presentation that I made in St. Petersburg, 
Florida on January 14, 1990 at a conference sponsored by the African People s 
Socialist Party (APSP). The conference was the key part of a series of APSP­
sponsored events that occurred over two days under the theme of Freedom 
Weekend. 
In attendance at the Freedom Weekend events and conference were Africans 
from throughout our domestically colonized communities of the US. front of 
the African Revolution, as well as representatives of movements in Guyana. 
South America, The Gambia, West Africa, and Azania, commonly known by 
the white settler-colonial name of South Africa. Also present was a member of 
the American Indian Movement. 
North Americans associated with the APSP-led Uhuru Movement from 
Oakland and Santa Cruz, California, St. Petersburg and Philadelphia, were 
the only whites to accept an invitation to participate in Freedom Weekend. 
In one sense Freedom Weekend was part of a more than five-year effort by 
the Party to expose and defeat the US. counterinsurgency used to undermine ,


--- PAGE 5 ---
'he Dialectics of Black Revolution 
II 
our struggle for national liberation. This counterinsurgency has its immedi­
ate origin in the u.s. colonial government program used to defeat the Black 
Revolution of the Sixties. Since a revolution is led by specific organizations 
and personalities-as scattered, undeveloped, and disconnected as they were 
during the sixties-the main, strategic targets of the counterinsurgency were 
these organizations and personalities. 
With the defeat of the Black Revolution of the Sixties, the strategic target 
of the counterinsurgency shifted to include the entire African population, 
with emphasis on the African working class-employed and the increasing­
ly enlarged unemployed An essential component of this counterinsurgency is 
a drug economy, imposed upon our economically dependent colonized com­
munity by the U.S. government. Accompanying this is the cynically deployed 
"war on drugs" used to justifY a near-total abrogation of the national demo­
cratic rights of African people that we fought and died for. 
To facilitate the criminalization of the African community, the coun­
terinsurgency also utilizes a neo-colonial policy which elevated thousands of 
Africans as elec!ed officials and administrators. This has served to deflect 
consciousness of a defeated black revolution and gives a false sense of African 
''progress. " ' 
Neo-colonialism also acts as a cover for the counterinsurgency either 
through the silence of these officials or through their actual hands-on par­
ticipation in the attack on our people. Such was the case with the 1985 
bombing of an African community in Philadelphia under the direction of 
an African mayor, Wilson Goode. 
For years the African People s Socialist Party has been struggling with the 
anti-colonial tendency of our movement to recognize the significance of the 
counterinsurgency. The wretchedly oppressed colonized African masses may 
rise up in spontaneous rebellion or may be otherwise mobilized by specific 
events. However, it is our contention that our movement to overthrow the 
foreign and alien rule of u.s. colonialism cannot grow and progress with­
out an awareness of and a conscious attack on this counterinsurgency. This 
is because the counterinsurgency is a development of the very same conscious 
program that defeated the Black Revolution of the Sixties, now transformed 
to meet the changed circumstances the counterinsurgency created by our 
defeat. 
Om all Yeshltela 
However, Freedom Weekend had an immediate context as well. We were 
also in St. Petersburg, Florida because all the work the Party has been doing 
to defeat the counterinsurgency and to mount a defense of the' national 
democratic rights of African people had led the u.s. government to initiate 
increased counterinsurgent activity directed at our Party and the Uhuru 
Movement under our leadership and influence. 
Two years prior to Freedom Weekend 1 was arrested in St. Petersburg, 
Florida after intervening in a situation where a special weapons, ski mask­
wearing group of police thugs deployed in the African community had 
stopped a carload of young Africans. The young men were beingforced to sit 
on the rear bumper of the car they were driving to be photographed by the 
police. 1 was subsequently tried but through political mobilization was able 
to win acquittaL ' 
Approximately one year prior to Freedom Weekend, four Party members 
and supporters were arrested in neighboring Tampa, Florida, charged with 
inciting to riot and held under a bail of more than $100,000 each. Through 
political mobilization the bail was reduced and charges were dropped This 
was after it was learned that the arrests and bail came as a consequence of a 
conspiratorial agreement between the St. Petersburg and Tampa police 
departments, the mayor of Tampa and the judge who set the bail Nor was 
the presence of FBI agents at the arrest scene without significance. 
Immediately following Freedom Weekend a member of the Uhuru 
Movement was to go to trial on a politically-motivated charge that could 
have resulted in a lifo sentence without parole. This was based on Florida s 
notorious anti-black Habitual Offender law which allows for the abrogation 
of the U.S. constitutionally protected prohibition against double jeopardy. 
Freedom Weekend, then, was also partially motivated by this attack on 
our mov~ment and Party, and we were particularly intent on defeating the 
effort to imprison a movement supporter for lifo. . 
Freedom Weekend began with a militant march through the African com­
munity on January 13. Among the issues on the banners carried in the march 
was the demand for the release of Black Liberation Army prisoners of war, as 
we." as Mafondi Lake, Geronimo Pratt, Leonard Peltier and other political 
przsoners. The march was followed by a political rally in a local park. 
Vi


--- PAGE 6 ---
", ........ 
~,.:.w\~' .. 
~~ __ ...... _______________________ ...... 
-----------~--
---------------
The Dialecllcs 01 Black Revolullon 
rill 
The Freedom Weekend conference was on January 14. This pamphlet con­
sists of the opening statement made by me at the conference which estab­
lished a political overview and the general context within which the confer­
ence occurred 
The conference included important, high quality workshops 1fith panelists 
from throughout the u.s. and various parts of the African world. The work­
shops dealt with: "The State, Repression and Counterinsurgency; " 
"Prison, Political Prisoners and Prisoners of war and the Use of the 
Habitual Offender Law in Counterinsurgency;" and ''Africa and 
Counterinsurgency." These workshops produced resolutions which were 
adopted by the wide range of conference participants, and which are includ­
ed in this pamphlet. 
The significance of this pamphlet, then, can be found in the significance 
of Freedom Weekend, the event that spawned the presentation. However, the 
decision to publish this presentation was made by the Party because we think 
it does three thingr better than any other critical analysis we are aware of by 
any other political formation. Further, it is one of the better instances where 
it does all three in a single Party document. 
The first thing this presentation does is give a historical materialist theo­
retical basis for the rise of capitalism as white power and the concomitant 
decline in fortune of the majority of the world's peoples. It d~arts from the 
usual white-nationalist bias of the left in such discussions. This view chal­
lenges the traditional white capitalist explanation for the development of 
human society as well as the traditional Marxist view which relies on the 
same basic philosophic assumption of white supremacy as the capitalists, 
though it chooses a different road to the achievement of this supremacy. 
Secondly, this presentation gives a historical materialist analysis of the 
Black Revolution of the Sixties. It removes the intent of its leaders and other 
subjective foctors from an exaggerated primacy. It clearly establishes the 
material forces in the world which actually gave rise to the movement and 
conditioned the consciousness and intent of its leaders and the masses who 
participated in and were affected by the Black Revolution of the Sixties. 
And finally, this presentation gives a rather comprehensive overview of 
counterinsurgency--as it has impacted on our movement during the last 
Omall Yeshilell 
period of struggle up to now, and counterinsurgency as it is understood the­
oretically by at least one arm of the U.S. colonial State. 
As always we welcome comments and criticisms. 
Omali Yeshitela 
October, 1991 
II


--- PAGE 7 ---
CHAPTER I 
Dialectics From the Point of View of the Slave 
There's something happening in the world and in this country that 
needs to be summed up. We need to know how to do our work better 
throughout this country to make the revolution happen here. 
That's what we're talking about-making a revolution happen. If it 
were simply a matter of trying to integrate our way into the so-called 
American mainstream, we wouldn't need to have this meeting. 
We recognize that it takes a revolution to free our people, and to 
transform the world economy that oppresses the vast majority of the 
people on the planet Earth for the benefit of Europe and North 
America. We have to recognize that we're involved in a movement that 
is designed to free our people. 
Our people do not just suffer because of some kind of historical acci­
dent. We don't have a problem-as one group defined it in a newspa­
per of theirs--<iue to the "ills that beset" us as a people. They described 
our problems as having to do with teenage pregnancy. They put forth 
this premise of African people being some kind of "permanent under­
class. " 
These are terms and concepts which are used to undermine our sig­
nificance as a people and our right to set our own terms for how we live. 
These are definitions that are designed to impose upon our conscious­
ness a kind of marginalization that will not allow us to recognize our 
ow~ significance as a people. 
The truth of the matter is that the problems that we have as a people, 
like the problems of the vast majority of the peoples on the planet Earth, 
are due to the fact that we are dominated by a world economy and social 
system which exist and were given birth by the slave trade. 
I am not speaking figuratively or for the purpose of generating some 
kind of emotional response from African people. I am attempting to 
engage us in a discussion about political economy. We have to look at 
1


--- PAGE 8 ---
The Dlaleclics 01 Black Revolullon 
2 
the origin of a world in which the majority of the people have suffered 
enslavement, impoverishment and deprivation on the one hand, while 
white people in Europe, North America and other places enjoy enor­
mous wealth, on the other hand. 
There is a dialectical relationship between our own imppverishment 
and the wealth and well-being of white people on the planet Earth. 
We've heard different explanations for these phenomena. We've been 
told by the white ruling class that the current structure of the world has 
to do with the fact that Mrican people are less civilized. They put forward 
a stair-step view of civilization with white people on the top and Mrican 
people on the bottom and various other peoples some place in between. 
We've been told that it is because of this that white people enjoy the 
resources of the planet Earth and African people enjoy less than any­
body else. It is because we are the lowest stage of human civilization. 
That is one line that explains the way things are in the world. 
There's another line that we think is similar. This is the line put for­
ward by the white left. This line says that human society developed ver­
tically, starting from primitive communalism where everybody shared 
everything equally and there were no classes, no oppression of people in 
society. However, according to this theory, there is nevertheless an ongo­
ing transformation which takes us to a "higher" level of human devel­
opment. Supposedly we continued to "develop" from primitive com­
munalism, where people shared things in common, where women were 
not treated like house pets as they are throughout Europe and North 
America, where there was no oppression of peoples by peoples and class­
es by classes-in fact there were no classes. 
Contradictions somehow emerge that take us to the higher level called 
slavery. This is not the slavery that everybody thinks of automatically 
when they think of slavery today, because now slavery has come to mean 
what happened to African people. We are talking about slavery defined 
as a mode of production, a whole new social system that emerged in 
ancient times. According to this theory, slavery had various kinds of 
contradictions in and of itself that gave birth, again vertically to a high­
er level of human society and development. 
Dlalecllcs· From the Point 01 View 01 the Slave 
The next stage is called feudalism. Feudalism of course is what you see 
on television with King Arthur and Robin Hood and people running 
around in Sherwood Forest and other places throughout England. The 
fundamental contradiction that existed in this society was between the 
nobility and the peasants, the people who lived on the land and func­
tioned pretty much as we function in the South as sharecroppers. You 
work on land that you don't own. Part of the work that you do is for 
yourself, but most of the work that you do is for the one who owns the 
land. That was the basic relationship and contradiction of feudal soci­
ety, which according to them led to the development of capitalism. 
The problem is that their explanation of the vertical development of 
human society can, in fact, go no further than this without stepping 
outside of the process itself. In reality, the leap from feudalism to capi­
talism cannot be explained without a concept that's referred to as the 
"primitive accumulation of capital," the pre-condition for the develop­
ment of capitalism. Capitalism did not develop out of the contradic­
tions inherent to feudalism. 
We started with communalism where everything was cool, it seems. 
Yet there's this mysterious contradiction that comes up that takes us 
from communalism to a "higher" level of development. The higher level 
of development is slavery! The contradictions therein lead to another 
level of development that's called feudalism. 
The basic contradictions that exist during communalism are the con­
tradictions between the people and nature: how to transform nature so 
that it serves us; how to protect ourselves from the elements; how to get 
clothing and the rest of it that takes care of us. But people are not 
oppressing people. Men are not dogging women. Classes don't even 
exist. 
Then there's this new situation that's called slavery where the funda­
mental contradiction is between the people who have to labor and the 
slave master who owns the people like property. Then, according to this 
theory, we see the emergence of feudalism where the fundamental contra­
diction is between the people and the nobility. According to this philoso­
phy, we have seen change, transformation occurring because of the con­
tradictions in the society itself But in order to explain the transformation, 
3


--- PAGE 9 ---
The Dialectics 01 Black Revolution 
4 
the great leap from feudalism to capitalism, it's necessary to introduce a 
new concept. This concept is referred to as "primitive accumulation." 
Primitive accumulation is not a contradiction inside the society. It is 
a pre-condition for the development from feudalism to capitalism. 
Primitive accumulation is defined by Karl Marx, who was pretty knowl­
edgeable about this matter, as the transformation of Africa into a "war­
ren for the hunting of black skins." It was defined as "interring the 
Native people into the mines of the Americas" as they were bringing up 
the resources. 
The primitive accumulation was seen also in the war that was fought 
against the Chinese people by the British in the 1840s, called the 
Opium War. This attack resulted in the Chinese people being trans­
formed into a nation of junkies for the welfare of Britain and the devel­
opment of the rest of Europe. 
For primitive accumulation Viet Nam was held for 100 years by the 
French, who turned that whole country into a dope den with more than 
3,000 opium dens. 
The slave trade, according to Karl Marx, was the precondition for the 
emergence of capitalism itsel£ It was the thing that created the world 
economy. There was no world economy prior to the slave trade. 
That's not to say that people around the world did not trade with 
each other. When Columbus and other European explorers came to the 
Americas and when they stopped killing Native people long enough to 
talk to them, the Indigenous people told them that Africans used to 
travel here. 
There has been world trade for a long time, but there has not been a 
world economy. By "world economy" we mean an economy throughout 
the world that's hooked together. 
Before the slave trade there was no such place as Nicaragua, or Cuba, 
Argentina, Brazil or the other States. These are all creations of a slave 
trade. It was the slave trade that gave the so-called colonies in the New 
World their value. Most of us who went to school within North 
Dialectics from the Point 01 View 01 the Slave 
America learned that the slave trade constituted the so-called "triangu-
lar trade." It was the thing that gave birth to the world economy, that 
was a pre-condition for the existence of capitalism. 
This so-called primitive accumulation has also served to undermine 
the consciousness of the victims, of those people who are now being 
defined as "primitive accumulation." We have become objects of histo­
ry as opposed to subjects of history. Our value is now defined by how 
we impact on the development of Europe and white people in general. 
Even Marxists have learned world history in a way that liquidates the 
significance of black people by talking about the development of human 
history going through these phases. 
Obviously human history as a whole did not develop from primitive 
communalism to so-called slavery to so-called feudalism and then to 
capitalism. Capitalism emerged in the world as white power. Capitalism 
was born as white power at the expense of the freedom, liberty, and 
resources of African people as well as those of other peoples on the plan­
et Earth. 
We want to remove ourselves from these fallacies and superstitions 
which have posed as history for too long, pretending to be political 
economy. 
There are several fallacious explanations that wrongly define how and 
why things are as they are in the world. One definition comes right up 
front and says things are as they are in the world because white people 
are smarter and more civilized. The other one is not so up front when it 
says the same thing. It creates this fanciful notion about vertical devel­
opment of human society that actually does not encompass all of 
human society as it claims to. 
African scientists such as Cheikh Anta Diop have said that, indeed, 
there is no evidence in Europe of a communalism where there were not 
classes and where women were not mistreated. Diop said that all the evi­
dence shows that historically in Europe women have always been mis­
treated and, in fact, treated as house pets. 
It is in what Diop calls the Southern Cradle where this oppression did 
5


--- PAGE 10 ---
The DIalectics 01 Black Revolution 
6 
not exist. It was in the Southern Cradle where we saw the absence or 
near absence of certain harsh forms of state power that resulted in the 
oppression and suppression of human beings. In fact it was the absence 
of such consolidated state power in Africa and other places, that made 
us so vulnerable to that power from Europe. 
Marx himself and all the communists have agreed that the State itself 
represents a problem in human society. It is something that is given 
birth to at that time in human society when society is riven into classes. 
That is when you see the emergence of the State. It's not something 
that's desirable, although the existence of the State in Europe has been 
used to prove to us that what white people were superior because there 
did not seem to be such a strong consolidated State in Africa. This is the 
same thing as saying there did not seem to be such strong consolidated 
class divisions in Africa, with oppressors and oppressed. 
We've got the same fallacious explanations for why North Americans 
and Europeans are located at the top of human society, while Africans 
and other peoples are at the bottom or near the bottom of human soci­
ety. One theory says that African people are incapable and shiftless and 
the other says that African people simply haven't developed to the 
extent that white people have. 
In our view both explanations are more or less the same. Neither is 
acceptable. Both are obviously fallacious. 
These theories cannot explain in any kind of meaningfUl terms why a 
minority of the people on the planet Earth seem to have everything, 
including that which is produced by the majority of the people on the 
planet Earth who don't have anything. It seems to us to be a totally irra­
tional assumption that this handful of people somehow would have 
developed naturally and be more civilized and better off than the rest of 
the people. 
If we examine history we see that the people who seem to be so well 
off also have a history of brigandage, rape and enslavement of all the 
other people who seem not to be doing so well. The question then is, 
"What came first, the chicken or the egg?" Is the pillage and the enslave­
ment the consequence of the superiority of white people and the inferi-
DIalectics From the Point 01 View 01 the Slave 
ority of the other peoples of the world? Or is the inferiority of the rest 
of the people in the world and the superiority of white people the con­
sequence of this pillage and enslavement? 
The point is that we can no longer accept any explanation of human 
society that ignores all of the evidence of how things got to be as they are. 
Look at what is happening in the world. If oppressed people are mar­
ginal, then how do we explain Viet Nam where U.S. imperialism 
expended tremendous resources and terror after the French were defeat­
ed by the Vietnamese? White left theories could not give meaningful 
evidence as to why that happened, and would naturally suggest that Viet 
Nam can't be that important. 
They can't answer why in December of 1989 there was the invasion 
of Panama, an artificially created country of 2.5 million people-with 
possibly 50,000 U.S. troops and the carpet bombing of entire impover­
ished communities. 
Are we looking at marginal forces in history when we look at the sig­
nificance of 2.5 million people to an imperialism that's the greatest 
that's ever been seen on the planet Earth? Are the Panamanians just 
marginal forces? 
What about Nicaragua? If Nicaragua is so marginal to history, then 
why is U.S. imperialism making sure that it does everything that it can 
to cripple and maim the people and make it impossible for them to be 
free? 
Are Salvadorans just marginal people? Are African people in West 
Philadelphia just marginal? If we're so marginal, why are there eight vol­
umes of documentation that's been done by the police department of 
St. Petersburg alone on the African People's Socialist Party? 
It's not our marginality that is a factor here. The factor is that 
oppressed people have always been key to the economy of the world. 
Capitalism was born as white power, as a parasitic social system. It is 
parasitic. There is nothing engendered inside the capitalist social system 
1


--- PAGE 11 ---
The Dialectics 01 Black Revolution 
8 
that makes it what it is. What it sucks from other people is what gives 
it the power that it's got. That is the significance of Panama, Nicaragua, 
Africa and African people throughout the world. 
We want to initiate a discussion that is designed to disclose to us how 
the world and the world economy really function, and reveals to us the 
basis of the social relationships that we see in the world. 
Revolution is the basis for changing this relationship. It has to be rev­
olution because capitalism was born parasitic. 
A man named Y.1. Lenin wrote early in the 20th century about what 
he called imperialism. He said imperialism is capitalism developed to a 
higher level and it has certain features, among which is parasitism. 
But we say capitalism was always parasitic. It didn't just become par­
asitic in a certain period when Lenin was able to view it from where he 
was located in Europe. It was born parasitic. 
Marx had already said it when he said that capitalism was given birth 
by primitive accumulation. He said that in order to have capitalist pro­
duction there must first be capitalist accumulation. But in order for 
there to be capitalist accumulation, there must be capitalist production. 
He said therefore we presuppose an accumulation that is not the conse­
quence of capitalist production, but its starting point. He said that's the 
only way we can get out of this vicious circle. 
To understand how capitalism happened we must presuppose that 
there was an accumulation that was not the consequence of capitalist 
production, but its starting point. He called that starting point "primi­
tive accumulation." 
Marx defined the relationships that the people who got paid for their 
labor had with the boutgeoisie as "wage slavery." He said wage slavery 
in Europe needed as a pre-condition "slavery pure and simple in the 
New World." That to us meant clearly that the fundamental contradic­
tion in the world is not the contradiction that occurred between white 
workers and their bosses. Rather it was the contradiction that existed 
between slavery pure and simple-the pedestal of capitalism-and wage 
Dialectics trom Ihe polnl of view 01 the slave 
slavery or the capitalist production and all the capitalist relationships 
that rested on this pedestal of slavery. 
We have said all along that the class question is concentrated in the 
colonial question. That is the only explanation of why the European 
revolution has never happened. Even the existence of what they call the 
Soviet Union had to be explained by Lenin in retrospect. Before the 
Russian revolution, all the communists throughout Europe and even the 
Bolsheviks had said that socialist revolution would happen in Western 
Europe first. They believed that the revolution in Russia was to get rid 
of the Czar, to overthrow feudalism. Since according to their theory feu­
dalism led to capitalism, it would have to be a revolution ushering in 
capitalism. Even after the February revolution in 1917, most of the 
Bolsheviks refused to try to make a socialist revolution because it defied 
everything that they said was supposed to happen. 
It was only after Lenin struggled within the organization he created, 
the Bolsheviks, that the Bolsheviks did seize power. Lenin then had to 
give an explanation for why the so-called socialist revolution happened 
in Russia instead of where it was supposed to happen. He came up with 
a theory of Russia being the weak link. 
But Russia wasn't the weak link theoretically until after the revolu­
tion. The weak link theory came about to try to define why it was pos­
sible to have a socialist revolution in Russia. This is why subsequently 
we haven't seen anything in Europe that even comes close to socialist 
revolution. Although the political basis for socialists to seize power has 
existed in Russia, in China and elsewhere, the historical basis for the rise 
of socialism is only now upon us. That is also the significance of what is 
happening in Eastern Europe. 
We have to mention what's happening in Eastern Europe. Otherwise 
many people who struggle against capitalism, struggle for communism, 
can be demoralized because they see all these white people, wearing 
designer-clothes, saying that communism didn't work and now they are 
opting for capitalism. 
What then is the historical basis for the rise of socialism? The histor­
ical basis for the rise of socialism is the destruction of the pedestal upon 
9


--- PAGE 12 ---
The Dlalecllcs 01 Black Revolullon 
which the whole capitalist edifice rests. The historical basis for the rise 
of socialism is revolutionary activity throughout Africa, and among the 
African communities of the U.S., throughout Asia and Latin America. 
This ongoing process becoming deeper with every go around is what 
has been consistently undermining capitalism and imperialism, and 
therefore bringing us closer and closer to a period where s9cialist revo­
lution on a world scale is finally a real possibiliry. That is what we are 
dealing with. 
Chapter II 
The Black Revolution of the Sixties 
In the 1960s we saw black revolution in this country. I mean that lit­
erally. There was a real revolution that occurred in this country and if 
anybody can call what happened in Russia in 1905 a revolution, then 
clearly what happened in this country in the Sixties was a real revolution. 
It came close to overturning U.S. imperialism. The only things lack­
ing were ideological clarity on our part, and organization. The sponta­
neous and not always absolutely spontaneous rising of the masses of 
African people in this country almost overturned U.S. imperialism. I 
want to be clear on that because there's a historical revisionism that 
attempts to explain away what happened in the Sixties. 
We're now told that what happened in the Sixties had to do with 
Flower Children on Haight Street in San Francisco, with hippies, with 
Tom Hayden, with the anti-war movement, white people. The real deal 
is that African people in this country, starting from 1954 or '55 and last­
ing through 1969 or '70, fought U.S. imperialism tooth and nail almost 
by ourselves. There was not a day for more than 14 years in this coun­
try that they had peace from social instability caused by the true pedestal 
upon which this whole rotten edifice rests. 
It is critical to understand this. Every day now they bring up some­
body like Bobby Seale who's selling cookbooks or Eldridge Cleaver 
who's saying, "I'm sorry." Every day they bring up something like this 
to undermine the consciousness of African people. They want to under­
mine the significance of what happened and to continuously convince 
African people that we are so insignificant a social force that what hap­
pened in the Sixties couldn't possibly have happened. 
The fact of the matter is that they had tanks surrounding the White 
House in April of 1968 after they murdered Martin Luther King 
because they thought that we might have an organization that had the 
possibility of taking the White House. They could smell the smoke right 
there in D.C. They could see the city burning. 
11


--- PAGE 13 ---
The Dlaleclics of Black Revolullon 
12 
The truth of the matter is that almost every day you picked up the 
newspaper to read about what was burning today. I mean that literally! 
You wanted to get the newspaper to find out what was burning today. 
It was the most powerful occurrence inside this country. 
We are talking about counterinsurgency that put down this 
Revolution and it's fundamentally important for us to understand it. 
Let me say some things about the counterinsurgency as it developed 
inside this country. 
Our Revolution got its impetus as a consequence of an alliance that 
had developed between the liberal sector of the white ruling class and 
the liberal sector of the black petty bourgeoisie. I want to say this 
because we get explanations for social phenomena that require us to be 
religious, to believe that things happen because God-Jehovah, God­
Allah, God-Jah, God-Libra, or some other phenomenon impacted on 
things. 
They say the Black Revolution came about because Martin Luther 
King made speeches, but there was a historical basis for revolutionary 
struggle inside this country. The impetus for our Revolution was mater­
ial. It was the thing that gave rise, for example, to Willie Ricks, the 
Student Non-violent Coordinating Committee (SNCC) organizer who 
coined the term "Black Power," and who was the best organizer in the 
country. 
It wasn't just that all of a sudden Willie Ricks woke up and had a good 
idea. Struggle was happening in the world. What was happening was 
that Europe and the u.s. were changing places. Now the U.S. was 
becoming the central imperialist force controlling the world economy. 
Before the second imperialist war, Europe, collectively, was the central 
force controlling the world economy. Europe controlled Africa, Asia and 
even portions of Latin America. The second imperialist war was like the 
first imperialist war. It was like most of the wars which occurred in 
Europe since the 12th or 13th century. They have been wars to redivide 
the world. They were wars over who was going to possess what belonged 
to us. They were wars to get primitive accumulation, if you will. 
} 
j 
, i 
The Black Revolulion of the Sixlies 
So, the second imperialist war was a war to redivide the world. This 
war resulted in most of Europe being devastated and its economic infra­
structure wiped out. 
Japan fought in that war too, for hegemony over Asia. It was a nation­
alist stance. The Japanese had decided that Europeans should not con­
trol, oppress and exploit Asians. The Japanese should control, oppress 
and exploit Asians. 
As a consequence of the second imperialist war and the devastation 
that was left in Europe and in Japan, the U.S. imperialists, who went 
into the war late and never fought on their own territory, came out as 
the most powerful country in the world. 
You hear in your political science classes about how the U.S. was such 
a wonderful country because when Europe and Japan were in bad shape 
after the war, the U.S. went and built them all up with the Marshall 
Plan, and now these ingrates won't return the favors. 
The plan was named after General George Marshall, who at the time 
was U.S. Secretary of State. The Marshall Plan put forth the program 
for the economic recovery of Europe and Japan. This was part of the 
thing that gave the U.S. control over much of Africa, Asia and Latin 
America. It was part of a process that allowed for U.S. capital to rebuild 
the economic infrastructure of Europe and ofJapan and which raised up 
the U.S. as the most powerful country in the whole world at the time. 
At this time the U.S. also instigated counterinsurgency efforts 
throughout Africa, Asia and Latin America, intervening and creating 
so-called anti-colonial movements that would oppose the interests of 
the British and the French in Africa and other places. They would say 
it was about democracy. Of course it was really about the U.S. pene­
trating into those markets and controlling them to the extent that it 
was possible. 
The British used to control Nigeria, but now the Nigerian constitu­
tion and form of government is based on the U.S. constitution and form 
of government. 
13


--- PAGE 14 ---
The Dialectics 01 Black Revolution 
14 
As a consequence of the second imperialist war, great resources began 
to flow into the u.s. Thus we saw a requirement inside this country for 
labor, for mor~ workers to transform the raw materials coming from 
Africa, Asia and Latin America into finished products. Workers were no 
longer available from what was called Eastern Europe as they had been 
in the past. 
Africans thought we created the word "honkey." But "honkey" was 
something that white people used to call Hungarians who were being 
brought into this country and taking away other white people's "good 
jobs." It used to be that white workers were brought in from Eastern 
Europe to do the extra work that was required and then they integrated 
into the American mainstream. But now the U.S. could no longer get 
workers from Eastern Europe because Eastern Europe was a part of the 
so-called Soviet Bloc. So in order to get workers they went down South. 
In order to get workers from down South they had to destroy the 
relations of production which existed down South, which were based 
on labor-intensive capitalist production. By "labor intensive" we mean 
production that requires many people working real hard: digging 
holes, picking cotton, picking oranges, laying railroad ties, etc. In the 
North, production was capital-intensive. It was based in factories and 
machinery. 
We had a situation where the liberal sector of the bourgeoisie then 
acquired its definition as "liberal" based solely on the fact that it need­
ed black workers in the factories. It had to bust up the traditional rela­
tions of production. 
To do that required struggle and it required black people having the abil­
ity to go to school. To participate in capital-intensive production you've 
got to know how to operate the machines, you've got to know how to 
function in factories, and you've got to have a minimum level of literacy. 
Therefore you see the emergence of people like Hubert Humphrey 
and other liberals championing the needs and the rights of black peo­
ple. They were struggling to stop the exploitation in the South so that 
we could be exploited in the North as well as in the factories which were 
going to develop in the South itself 
I 
. \ 
The Black Revolution 01 the Sixties 
I know you don't believe that. You think that one night Hubert 
Humphrey went to sleep and woke up and Jesus told him, "Don't kick 
black people's ass no more." 
So this is the basis of the transformation that was about to happen. 
They needed to bust up the relations of production that existed. 
The last time that we were such a central force it created a civil war. 
So they had to bust it up short of civil war. The liberal sector of the 
bourgeoisie championed a process in which the liberal sector of the 
black petty bourgeoisie would lead a movement for limited revolution 
among black people ourselves. 
This movement for limited revolution was to meet the requirements 
of the liberal sector of the white bourgeoisie who needed to be in charge 
of black people in the interests of capital. There were black preachers 
and the like in the South who recognized that the red neck mayors and 
sheriffs definitely were no smarter than the black people. 
Most of the white people who held offices throughout the South were 
uneducated and backwards. Africans who had escaped long enough to 
go to Tuskegee, Alabama or Hampton or other black colleges came back 
having to be subservient to these tobacco-chewing backwoodsmen. 
They resented that in a serious way. These were the African forces who 
had connections with the liberal bourgeoisie. 
We need this understanding to explain certain characteristics of the 
Civil Rights Movement. You have heard Malcolm X talk about how the 
Civil Rights Movement was funded by the liberal sector of the white 
ruling class. Even certain agents of the U.S. government itself funded 
sectors of the Civil Rights Movement at different times. 
Why did they fund it? Obviously they aren't going to fund the 
Revolution-at least not on purpose. They funded it because it met cer­
tain objectives that they had. Now we begin to understand concretely 
that Martin Luther King had to lead a movement that was based on 
philosophical non-violence, because it was funded by the liberal sector 
of the bourgeoisie. 
15


--- PAGE 15 ---
rhe Dlalecllcs oJ Black Revolution 
.16, 
The Civil Rights Movement represented an alliance between the liber­
al sector of the white ruling class and the liberal sector of the black petty 
bourgeoisie. Some people would say Martin Luther King was non-violent 
because, "he was Christian," or because "Martin Luther King read books 
by Ghandi." Well hell, the Ku Klux Klan is a Christian organization! 
The books that Martin Luther King read about Ghandi ~ere printed 
in English. Whether they were printed by Americans that were lynching 
black people at the time or by the British who were killing Indians at 
that time in India, it obviously didn't have the same effect on the white 
people who wrote and read the books as it was having on Martin Luther 
King! 
The reason it had a different effect on Martin Luther King than it had 
on these white people is because the liberal sector of the ruling class 
required that black people take a stance that was totally opposed to vio­
lence as a pre-requisite for the funding of this movement. No sector of 
the bourgeoisie is going to fund a revolution that's going to buy an Uzi, 
or an AK-47 or even a "Saturday night special" to use against it. There's 
no way that's going to happen. This is the basis for the philosophical 
non-violence of the Civil Rights Movement. 
The point is that the Movement gc;t out of hand. That was a problem. 
This movement began to sweep up the masses of people and it busted 
loose from people like King. They couldn't control it anymore. 
The truth though is that there never was a time in the Civil Rights 
Movement when everybody said, "Okay, Martin, we're just going to be 
non-violent. " 
This question of philosophical non-violence was so serious that they 
even had a school in the Civil Rights Movement to teach you how to 
get beaten. They still have them. We're experts at that. They'd teach 
you, "If they hit you like this, turn." They even practiced hitting you 
and spitting on you to make sure that you were going to act the right 
way. 
You must understand that there was never universal acceptance of 
philosophical non-violence by African people. All down the line there 
.. 
The Black Revolution 01 Ihe Sixties 
was a fierce struggle around this question. It busted loose in 1966 
around the time of the Meredith March. James Meredith was going to 
have this "March Against Fear" in 1966. He was going to prove that a 
black man could walk across Mississippi without something happening 
to him. 
He got about 30 feet and a white man shot him with a shot gun. In 
many ways this rescued the Civil Rights Movement because with 
Meredith's shooting the Civil Rights Movement appeared for a second 
to be getting a new shot in the arm. 
Black civil rights leaders from throughout the country flew into 
Mississippi and said they were going to finish the march. Meredith said, 
"I don't want you to finish the march." Meredith was an interesting 
kind of brother. He didn't want anybody to come in. They met with 
Meredith and I think chilled him out and then started the march. 
On this march, the great televised debate happened· between then­
Stokely Carmichael and Martin Luther King on the virtues of philo­
sophical non-violence. 
It was also on this march that Willie Ricks went into a small commu­
nity in SNCC territory preceding the arrival of the march. He came back 
and said, "Hey man, I started chanting 'Black Power' and these young­
sters really ate it up. I said 'Black Power' and everyone said, 'Right on.'" 
People in SNCC were saying, "Willie, you're exaggerating, shucking 
and jiving." He said, "I'm telling' you. You go there. You say 'Black 
Power,' and see what happens." He did and the rest is history! Willie 
Ricks jumped on that flatbed truck in Greenwood, Mississippi and 
started leading that chant. 
I lost my job because of that march, by the way. I was working right 
here at the St. Petersburg Times. I was a young up-coming Negro on the 
way-quick smile and a firm handshake, "Got plans for you boy." I 
said, "I got to join that march, boss." He said, "That isn't the way to do 
it. The way to do it is to lead your people. You stay right here and work 
real !tard and set a good example for your people." I said, "I can't do 
that." They said, "If you leave, don't come back." I said, "Bye." 
, trim t 
11


--- PAGE 16 ---
The Dialectics of Black Revolullon 
18 
The consequences of raising the Black Power slogan transformed 
everything. It immediately separated from this whole concept of civil 
rights and the concept that the solution was to integrate into America. 
Instead it put the struggle on an anti-colonial plane, regardless of 
whether or not the forces in SNCC were conscious of it. Now we were 
saying we're not trying to integrate-we want our own power. We want 
Black Power. . 
Even if we weren't saying we wanted African power, we understood 
that as a people we had to have our own power. That's what the slogan 
represented. We had people like Walter Cronkite saying "We don't 
understand what Black Power means." 
You walked down to the corner and all the young bloods who were 
never interested in the movement before, knew what Black Power meant. 
You saw people struggling to acquire it allover the country. In Watts in 
'65, people were chanting slogans like "Burn, baby, burn," but after May 
of 1968 the slogan became "Black Power." This real clear political 
demand was put out at every engagement we had with the bourgeoisie. 
People began to shoot at the police. People began to fight back. It 
took the struggle away from that non-violent "love your enemy" stuff. 
Willie Ricks, who is now called Mukassa, likes to talk about an inci­
dent on the Meredith march. The white people used to line up at 
marches and when you came in they'd just jump on you and beat you 
up and you just practiced getting hit. But during the Meredith march 
this white boy from the Klan jumped off the top of a car on a sister, and 
he got beat up under the car with a lug wrench. He was begging people, 
"Please, stop and I'll leave here running." 
The Black Power demand transformed things almost overnight. All 
over the world, African people were chanting "Black Power." In 
England, a Black Power Movement developed. It was a profound thing. 
» 
Chapter III 
COunlerinsurgencv: Ihe u.s. 
War Againsl Ihe Black Revolulion 
As the Black Power Movement rose up, counterinsurgency became a 
real important question for the bourgeoisie, as it was in the 1920s with 
the Garvey Movement. J. Edgar Hoover built his career by crushing 
Garvey. In the 1960s they brought counterinsurgency against us again 
in a real way. 
Malcolm X was a problem for the bourgeoisie because Malcolm's under­
standings represent the African working class. So they killed Malcolm, but 
it was too late. The bourgeoisie had to fight a catch-up struggle. 
It's interesting because the 1963 March on Washington resulted in 
passage of the Civil Rights Bill in 1964. Then in 1965 the Voting Rights 
Act was passed. That was supposed to mean that it was over because 
that's what the struggle was supposed to have been about--civil rights 
and voting rights. But in 1966, when it should have been over, the Black 
Power demand was put forward saying, "Civil rights won't do. It's about 
black power, having our own power. 
In 1967, they began passing laws like the Rap Brown Bill which made 
it a crime to cross state lines in order to "incite a riot." In Florida they 
created the inciting to riot act, called the "Joe Waller Bill." They creat­
ed a law against verbal abuse of the police and all kinds of madness. 
In 1966 we had the founding of the second Black Panther Party. The 
first was the Lowndes County Freedom Organization in Lowndes 
County, Alabama which raised up the panther and also raised up the 
gun. In 1966 we see the organization founded in Oakland, California 
under Huey P. Newton and Bobby Seale. 
Then in 1967 J. Edgar Hoover put into motion the Counter­
Intelligence Program (COINTELPRO). That is the first consolidated 
program that we know of to bust up and destroy the Black Revolution. 
I'm sure that COINTELPRO was not the only counterinsurgency pro­
gram in 1967. 
19


--- PAGE 17 ---
The Dialectics 01 Black Revolution 
20 
The COINTELPRO strategy was put forward in a memo on August 
25, 1967. It stated among other things that they had to prevent the rise 
of a black messiah who could unify and lead the revolution. 
It speculated that Malcolm X could have been that messiah if they 
hadn't already gotten him. Martin Luther King could be if he should 
ever turn from his allegiance to non-violence and liberal whites. It spec­
ulated that Stokely Carmichael could be the leader if he weren't so 
young; Elijah Muhammad ifhe weren't so old. 
At the same time the movement was leaving King behind. But King 
had always been conscious of his place in history and he wouldn't be left 
easily. In May 1967 at Riverside ~hurch in a speech that he made, he 
wondered aloud about his ability to maintain his commitment to non­
violence, especially with these young Africans talking about the violence 
of the U.S. government in places like Viet Nam. He was wondering 
aloud whether he could be committed to non-violence any longer. 
The key thing that you really must understand is that the movement 
had broken away from the leadership of the black petty bourgeoisie. 
They didn't control it any more. They could no longer make any pre­
dictions about what was going to happen in any community around this 
country. As Malcolm X said, these groups were doing things on their 
own by now. 
The masses had begun to raise up critical forces like Fannie Lou 
Hamer. Brothers and sisters in the projects were now in the Black 
Panther Party and Junta of Militant Organizations OOMO, founded by 
Omali Yeshitela in 1968), and before JOMO, SNCC. They began to 
rise up and take the struggle out of the hands of the black petty bour­
geoisie. So the black petty bourgeoisie was no longer in control of its 
part of the bargain with the bourgeoisie. 
The depth of this is represented in the way that Martin Luther King 
died, where he died and under what circumstances. Before, it was always 
the preachers who called the demonstrations and had the people come 
out, but King died in Memphis, Tennessee. It was the black sanitation 
workers who had told King to come on down and participate in the 
march. 
-
Counterinsurgencv: the U.S. War Against the Black Revolution 
The movement had transformed from a place where the petty bour­
geoisie told the people what to do. The people were now assuming con­
trol and leadership of their own movement. This represented a violation 
of the alliance between the black petty bourgeoisie and the white liber­
al sector of the ruling class. This is the point when the counterinsur­
gency took us. 
In April, seven months after the COINTELPRO document was put in 
place by the FBI, King was assassinated. The counterinsurgency didn't 
stop there of course. Members of SNCC were being framed up. Insidious 
things were happening. They said that somebody had a package of dyna­
mite in the SNCC office in Philadelphia. I was being arrested through­
out the state of Florida. 
Other people were being killed and arrested. There's the murder of 
Martin and the assassinations of members of the Black Panther Party. 
Splits were happening in our organizations from infiltrators coming up 
into them. In effect, splits were wiping out the movement. 
A real counterinsurgency was put in place and it was wreaking havoc 
throughout the country. A revolutionary movement that had not been 
around long enough to develop certain skills, to deepen its own ideo­
logical understanding, to develop a certain political sophistication, was 
being eaten up by the bourgeoisie. The movement was put down. 
The counterinsurgency was effective to the extent that it broke the 
back of the Black Liberation Movement in the 1960s. However, despite 
the military defeat of our movement, the bourgeoisie had and still does 
have a problem. The U.S. government has not recovered even now from 
the Black Revolution of the Sixties. 
That's why it was necessary for them to kill Huey P. Newton who was 
not in the movement any longer. Huey was in circumstances like a lot 
of the brothers and sisters out there in the projects right now. But he still 
represented a symbol from the Sixties. 
They still have deep problems that they have not solved subsequent to 
the Black Revolution of the Sixties. They used to call it the "Viet Nam 
Syndrome." They wouldn't say the "Black People Syndrome." They


--- PAGE 18 ---
The Dialectics 01 Black Revolution 
22 
called it the Viet Nam Syndrome. There was a whole period of struggle 
and resistance inside this country. They still have not recovered 
absolutely from that. 
On the back of this military aggression of COINTELPRO, we had 
people like Richard Nixon talking about a counterinsurgengr. He didn't 
call it counterinsurgency. He talked about black capitalism. He talked 
about developing a so-called black middle class that could act as a buffer 
between the bourgeoisie and the masses of oppressed African people. 
They would act as an ideological transmission line from the white ruling 
class to the masses of the people. The governmerit consciously created 
this black middle class. 
They also consciously brought in to our communities heroin that was 
coming from Southeast Asia where they were in the process of murder­
ing poor people in places like Viet Nam, Kampuchea and Burma. That's 
when we saw poor communities throughout the country addicted to 
heroin. That's the first time we ever saw street walkers in this city [St. 
Petersburg, Florida]' black women supporting their own heroin habits 
and the habits of their boyfriends. It was a part of the counterinsurgency. 
They killed the Black Revolution, then they raised up the black petty 
bourgeoisie and began to implement neo-colonialism as a part of a 
counterinsurgency inside our communities. They had to do this. 
Even to meet its own objectives the black petty bourgeoisie had to 
help push back the Black Revolution. The black petty bourgeoisie was 
not interested in the real revolution. In fact, the real revolution was 
against the interests of the black petty bourgeoisie as it understood them 
because the black petty bourgeoisie was fighting for a piece of the pie. 
If we're trying to get the whole damn kitchen, then they wouldn't be 
allowed to get the pie. In order for them to get the pie, they had to stop 
what we were doing. 
That's why [NAACP leader] Roy Wilkins and all those other suckers 
were out there trying to push back the Black Revolution just as serious­
ly as the white ruling class was. In fact they represented in many ways a 
vanguard in attacking what we were trying to do. 
Counterlnsurgencv: the U.S. War Against the Black Revolution 
The ruling class raised up the black petty bourgeoisie, brought in 
heroin and then initiated a "war on crime." It was no longer a "war on 
niggers," but a "war on crime.;' They instituted such things as the Law 
Enforcement Assistance Administration (LEAA). Special organizations 
of police forces emerged throughout this country. 
Then, in the '80s, on the back of the attack going down against 
Central America, after the defeat of the Black Revolution, they began to 
target the general black community. After Martin is dead and Malcolm 
is dead and Bobby Hutton is dead and our organizations have been 
destroyed, the focal point becomes the masses of Mrican people. 
Because of the ideas coming from the transformation in our conscious­
ness, the masses become the focal point. But now they can't simply say 
they're doing it because we're black or because of the struggle that we've 
made. Instead they say, "I'm doing this because you're doing dope." 
You can even get the victim to be convinced that his situation is self­
inflicted. They keep all the people from having jobs within the capitalist 
system and then impose another illegitimate capitalist economy on the 
community, a drug economy. 
The rent gets paid in the projects from dope. The phone bill gets paid in 
the projects from dope. How does the light bill get paid? From the dope. 
If there wasn't dope money in the black community, there wouldn't be any 
money in the black community. That's the way it is in the real world. 
Everybody knows the dope money is there. Since the dope money is 
there, the police say they're coming to get the dope man. Because the 
dope money is here and the dope is here, the police are here. Of course 
there isn't as much dope money there as they say, because black people 
aren't making any money from the dope. These suckers who you see run­
ning around with gold chains around their necks and the gold on their 
hands are wearing everything they own. The little knot in their pocket 
and the car they're riding in--that's all they've got in the whole world. 
It's easy for the ruling class therefore to plant this fallacy about the 
rich Mricans in the projects-as if that's where we live when we get rich. 
We find the first vacant joint in the projects. 
23


--- PAGE 19 ---
The Dialectics of Black Revolution 
24 
Part of the purpose of this drug economy is to deal with the deficit­
ridden capitalist economy. There are hundreds of billions of dollars tied 
into the drug trade, which is part of a counterinsurgency. They even had 
articles in the newspaper here in St. Petersburg saying that if the drugs 
disappeared from the state of Florida, the economy would fall apart. 
, 
That makes me believe that the state of Florida has got a stake in 
drugs. An article written in the St. Petersburg Times says that if drugs 
were to disappear, the economy would sink into the water. Do you think 
that's what the police are doing in the projects, trying to destroy the 
economy of the state of Florida? No, it has nothing to do with that. It's 
a part of the counterinsurgency. The counterinsurgency was generalized 
against our people. 
You have people like William Bennett who pulled a legal coup d'etat in 
Washington, D.C. that took over the whole State apparatus. He brought 
in the National Guard and police from about seven different agencies. 
Black people elected that boot-licking, dope-snorting crook Marion Berry 
who's in power in D.C. and who used to be in SNCC. Black people elect­
ed him, but Bennett totally disregarded and overturned that. 
They're putting barbed-wire fences around projects throughout the 
country. They're forcing black people in projects to have passes. They 
are putting together laws that abrogate any kind of democratic rights 
that black people should have. They've created a consciousness among 
the North American population and the black population itself that the 
black community is a criminal community. That justifies everything 
that they do to us. It is a counterinsurgency. 
The African People's Socialist Party has been saying that for a long 
time and fighting against it. It's important to understand this because 
the counterinsurgency has worked relatively effectively to the extent that 
even organizations which are supposed to be for the Revolution, find 
themselves working for George Bush and the police. 
For example, there are so-called anti-colonial groups which have 
decided that they have to be "dope busters." They never see the need for 
slumlord busters. They never are the police busters. None of them has 
ever been the rotten boss busters or anything like that. They're the dope 
Counterlnsurgencv: the U.S. War Against the Black Revolution 
busters. In other words, Nancy Reagan and George Bush have defined 
what the agenda has to be for so-called revolutionaries. 
They are running around in the projects now attacking black people 
who are involved in the dope trade. They say they're "taking back the 
streets." I want to know from whom and for whom. 
We've got a real serious situation. Many forces in our communities 
have been misinformed about what the contradiction is and they play 
right into the counterinsurgency. You read it in the newspaper every day. 
You read about "crack babies." You don't read in the newspaper about 
babies violated by homelessness or about black people who don't have a 
dime and don't have heat in the winter. 
You don't read in the paper everyday, "Police violate another black 
person." Instead we are constantly bombarded with something about 
dope problems or crack problems. That's been transformed into the 
fundamental contradiction. 
The crack problem isn't even as bad as the educational problem. If 
every black person in the country was employed selling dope, it 
wouldn't do the harm in a year that the school system does in a day 
to us. That's the real deal. 
The problem is that the Revolution has not been able to define what 
the contradiction has been in the last period, so that's what the Party has 
been about in part. 
When we say we have to struggle to bust up the counterinsurgency, 
you must recognize what's happening now is a part of a long continu­
um of warfare, of counterinsurgency. When you bust up the counterin­
surgency, you don't do it by acting like the police against yourself. What 
you do is wage the struggle that defends the national democratic rights 
of the African population and fights for the democratic space to make 
the revolution. 
When we talk about struggling for national democratic rights, we are 
not talking about fighting for democracy as an end unto itself. We are 
talking about fighting for the democratic space to continue the process 
25


--- PAGE 20 ---
The Dialectics of Black Revolution 
26 
to make a revolution. A revolution is the only thing that will free us. We 
have to be really clear on that matter. Chapter IV 
The Theon of Counterlnsurgencv 
I have a copy of a manual put out in 1979. Its cover reads: "The 
Extension Course, the Education Center for the Marine Corps, 
Development and Education Command, Quantico, Virginia, Marine 
Corps Amphibious Warfare, School Extension Course on 
Counterinsurgency. " 
The bourgeoisie is operating from its own assumptions about what we 
are about. We're about a struggle for our happiness and for control of 
the resources that we produce. As much work as African people have 
done, we should be the wealthiest people on the planet Earth. 
All of our resources have been stolen. Everything we've ever had con­
tinues to be stolen. We are an impoverished people around the planet 
Earth. We fight for our happiness and the return of ou'r resources and 
they define us as a problem. It is important and necessary for them to 
do so because everything they've got depends upon their continuing 
ability to take everything we've got. 
We talk about counterinsurgency and we talk about revolution. They 
define revolution as an insurgency. They say what they have to do is 
counter this insurgency. This manual defines what they call "forms of 
overthrow" in three different ways. 
One is conventional warfare. In this form of overthrow an army has 
to be defeated. As a consequence of defeating a conventional army you 
take over the government and then take over the people. 
There are certain people in our own movement who see what we are 
about as a war, which is really a misunderstanding, because a war is just 
a conflict between armies. Essentially a war is a conflict between con­
tending military forces. What we are talking about is a conflict between 
contending social forces. So we're not just talking about a war where 
they've got an army and we've got an army and you just go to battle 
. with each other. The bourgeoisie understands the difference. 
21


--- PAGE 21 ---
The Dialectics Of Black Revolution 
28 
They define another form of overthrow as the coup. They say this 
happens generally in the highest echelons of the government itself with 
rapid overthrow of the government by another sector which allows them 
to take over the army which then subdues the people. 
They then talk about the insurgency. In an insurgency, the starting 
point is winning the people. You win the people and as a consequence 
of winning the people you initiate a process where you defeat the army 
and then set up your own government. That's how they define the 
insurgency. That's not too bad a definition. 
Part of the reason that I wanted to mention this is because there's 
been a transformation in the counterinsurgency. The counterinsurgency 
that the ruling class and the State has initiated is changing again. It start­
ed off as being something that targeted our organizations and political 
leaders. Having defeated those, then it generalized the oppression 
against the masses of people because effectively there was no revolu­
tionary organization it had to concentrate on anymore. 
Now, as a consequence of a lot of the work that we've been doing 
throughout the country and in many other places, we see the coun­
terinsurgency beginning to target the Party. I would imagine it's begin­
ning to target other organizations as well. 
One of the reasons we're here in St. Petersburg, Florida as opposed 
to some other places is because of how the counterinsurgency has been 
waged against us here. We've got people who have been awakened at 
6 a.m. by 14 carloads of policemen using axes to kick and tear their 
doors down for a traffic ticket. This is unheard of. 
We've got one brother who's facing a life sentence without possibility 
of parole. We've got masses of people around the country who are 
increasingly being faced with these kinds of charges, which is a total 
abrogation of democratic rights even according to the U.S. constitution. 
We have the Habitual Offender Law which usually says that if you've 
been convicted of a felony twice, then you can be tried the third time as 
a habitual offender. The weight that the charge usually carries is 
increased so that they can put you away for life without any possibility 
The Theory Of Counterinsurgency 
of parole. But the U.S. constitution says that a person can't be tried 
more than once for the same crime. If you can't be tried more than once 
for the same crime, how on the third time do you end up being sen­
tenced for the things that you did two times ago? 
It is a total abrogation of even the bourgeois constitution. It is a part of 
a counterinsurgency. It is designed to put the people up against the wall 
and to take away any possibility of our being able to fight for freedom. 
This is how this manual says an insurgency works strategically. They 
say, "The mass strategy envisions a protracted conflict against the gov­
ernment in power. In its initial step toward organization, the mass strat­
egy emphasizes a complicated party structure which utilizes mass civil 
organizations. " 
They have this counterinsurgency program that includes such things as 
"population and resource control." Their first objective is, "strengthen or 
establish a government authority. The second objective is to sever the 
links between the guerrillas and the people. Third, the insurgency orga­
nization within the community must be identified and neutralized." 
The manual talks about the "hard-core cadre ... He is a member of the 
party core dedicated, devoted to the cause, a highly disciplined revolu­
tionary. He's a card-carrying insurgency party member." 
They said that this guy "perhaps originally from the local area, may be 
formally trained outside the country. He is normally a master at psycho­
logical operations and a master at recruiting people, getting people, 
regardless of their affiliation, to support his cause in one fashion or anoth­
er, directly or indirectly, actively or passively, knowingly or unknowingly. 
"He is a strong believer and extremely difficult to convert through 
psychological warfare. Identification and elimination of this element of 
the insurgency apparatus is the most difficult, but is the most important 
task of the population and resource control." 
Here's how they define other forces: "The sympathizer is not as 
staunch as the hard-core cadre, but he nevertheless believes strongly in 
the insurgent's cause and is a very solid supporter. He believes perhaps 
29


--- PAGE 22 ---
The Dialectics of Black Revolution 
30 
that the political, economic and social reforms professed by the move­
ment are to his benefit and that of his country. His ties with the insur­
gents are primarily religious or racial. Perhaps he has an unusual hatred 
for the existing government. He's a little more lucrative target for psy­
chological operations than the cadre. 
"The marginal follower has no great intellectual attach~ent to the 
insurgent's cause. His connection is usually some type of a personal link 
through friends, relatives, customs or just plain fear. He is a good psy­
chological operations target. 
"The final category is that of the supporter which is sort of a catch-all 
for all others who frequently support or contribute to the insurgent's 
cause in some way or another, either voluntarily or involuntarily. 
Supporters are ideal psychological operational targets and are subject to 
persuasion and conversion." 
They say another objective of the population and resource control is to 
p.rovide security for the population. Then they say, "We're referring espe­
Cially to that day-to-day, night-to-night low level protection against ter­
rorism, coercion, sabotage, or intimidation by the insurgent, that which 
i~ pr.ovided by the police or perhaps paramilitary unit. The final objec­
ttve IS to prevent civilian interference with counterinsurgent operations. 
"Hence we are concerned not only with civilian interference as it per­
tains to their safety, but also with the civilian population adversely inter­
fering with or affecting our various population and resource control 
internal development and counter-guerrilla programs. This may neces­
sitate such things as temporary evacuation from an area to prevent civil­
ian casualties or perhaps settlement and re-settlement in order to main­
tain better populace control." 
They are defining concentration camps, or housing projects, which 
are concentration camps. 
I wanted to share some of this as a part of initiating the discussion so 
that we can get a sense of what counterinsurgency is about or what they 
call counterinsurgency. It is essentially a military concept. It is some­
thing that generally the whole movement has not been aware of. 
I. 
The Theory of Counterinsurgency 
The counterinsurgency is not something that's been summed up by 
the Black Revolution. The Black Revolution and the struggles of the 
indigenous and colonized peoples here are the only forces targeted for 
counterinsurgency. 
This manual identifies three kinds of societies that have to be con­
tended with. It identifies a "traditional society." That's what they call an 
agricultural society where they've pushed us back to the Stone Age so 
that we're just farming and that kind of thing. Then they refer to a 
"transitional society." And then they characterize the so-called "indus­
trial society." It's the transitional society that they say is the big prob­
lem, that's moving from traditional to an industrial society. 
The point is that they don't identify the counterinsurgency as some­
thing waged against white people anywhere. They say counterinsur­
gency is something that Kennedy began to really develop in 1961 on a 
worldwide level. They say it was something that was done previously, 
but that it was Kennedy who really kicked off the counterinsurgency 
process inside this country. 
They identify it as something that has come subsequent to the failure 
of Marx's predictions about industrial societies having revolutions. They 
identify it as a failure that's based on the fact that essentially the indus­
trial societies have been able to payoff their populations. They don't say 
it exactly like that, but they do say that industrial societies provide the 
things that white people want. 
They give other kinds of examples around the world, from Mao Ze 
Dong in China to Brazil to Viet Nam to the Philippines, as well as the 
rest of the places where counterinsurgency has occurred, and of course 
in Africa. 
The point that I want to make is that counterinsurgency is something 
that essentially victimizes African and other colonial peoples. We have a 
particular kind of relationship to it, and if you don't have a certain the­
oretical grounding, if you don't have a certain ideological base, then you 
can't even know that this thing is happening to you! 
If you think that somehow we're involved in some kind of struggle for 
31


--- PAGE 23 ---
The Dialectics of Black Revolullon 
32 
black and white to unite and fight, then you can't protect yourself from 
the counterinsurgency. If you don't understand that the u.s. govern­
ment and bourgeoisie clearly have been able to recognize the special 
character and features of the struggle for national liberation that we are 
involved in, then you can't protect yourself from counterinsurgency. 
If you think that you are about the same thing as the Spartacist League 
is about or the Socialist Workers Party or the last organization that Le Roi 
Jones was in, then you can't protect yourself from the counterinsurgency. 
It requires understanding that the bourgeoisie recognizes that we have 
a stake in our liberation. Most North Americans usually don't even 
believe the u.s. government wages counterinsurgency inside this coun­
try. They are so far removed-and this includes so-called leftist revolu­
tionaries-from what the real deal is in the real world. The real world is 
always outside of Europe, always outside of the North American com­
munities. After all, only a few people live in Europe and the North 
American community. Everybody else lives somewhere else, and that's 
the real world. 
An artificial world for white people has been created because of this 
life that we have in the real world. North Americans are so distanced 
from the real world, it's a struggle for them to join with the rest of the 
people on the planet Earth. 
Instead, because of where they are located in relation to the whole 
world economy, they are constantly demanding to be able to set the 
terms for how revolution and everything in the whole world is supposed 
to look. What we're saying, of course, is that it can't be that way! 
So we want to deal with the question of counterinsurgency. We want to 
be able to have this discussion so that our whole movement, wherever we 
are located, can be informed about what it is that we are contending with. 
When we see William Bennett talking about some kind of ove~all pro­
gram called "the war on drugs," when we see Jack Kemp putting barbed 
wire fences around our projects, when we see George Herbert Walker 
Bush attacking Panama, talking about Noriega being a drug agent, 
when we see people like Oliver North and John Hull in Costa Rica who 
The Theon of Counlerlnsurgency 
ran a dope-running, gun-running ring for the CIA, with planes landing 
at Homestead Air Force Base in Florida-we know what we're looking 
at! We know that we're involved in a certain feature of the social system 
that's used to hold us down as a people. 
We have to sum that up. If we don't sum it up, we can't move for­
ward. That's what we're struggling for. The whole movement must rec­
ognize this. We say that the counterinsurgency must be defeated, t~at 
we are involved in a counterinsurgency, the immediate essence of whIch 
came about during the Sixties. 
We're talking about the fact that the counterinsurgency has raised up 
a sector of the African population, neo-colonial forces, that act as a 
cover and sometimes lead the police into the community or tell them to 
drop the bomb over there, as was done in Philadelphia. 
We're talking about a counterinsurgency that has created a situation 
where there's public approval for the total abrogation' of democratic 
rights to the black community. It uses various kinds of code words like 
"drugs" and "crime" as the basis for attacking black people who they 
used to attack, right up front because we're black. 
We say that the response to this must be a conscious effort by the rev­
olution throughout this country to push back the counterinsurgency. In 
the process of so doing, we must also raise up the struggle for the 
national democratic rights of African people. 
I want to tell you why we're doing this. We are clear that the debate can­
not be made with this system around the validity of the struggle for Black 
Power or for the African Revolution. We're not interested in arguing with 
a judge or a policeman about whether or not the revolution is good or bad. 
What we have to do is deepen the crisis for the social system itself This 
social system, at this time and place in history, has a contradiction in 
that, on the one hand, it is absolutely necessary for it to repress the 
African masses, while on the other hand, it is necessary for it to pose as 
a beacon of democracy. 
,;~' So what we want to do is make it have to deal with the qu~stion of 
33 . "\~:~


--- PAGE 24 ---
The Dlalecllcs of Black Revolullon 
democracy, not the question of revolution. It is our responsibility to 
make the revolution, to win revolutionary forces throughout the com­
munity, while at the same time posing for the whole social system and 
everybody in it the question of democracy. Make them have to deal with 
democracy. 
, 
When I go to court, I'm not arguing about whether the Black 
Revolution is fine. I'm arguing that I have a right to be a revolutionary 
because they said in their constitution that it's permitted. We're not try­
ing to win judges. We're trying to win the masses. We're not trying to 
win the State to agree that Revolution is good. We're trying to present 
it with a contradiction that is inherent in itself. 
At some juncture the system has to say that democracy is just good for 
white people. That's all right. The masses need to hear that. If you clar­
ifY that, then it changes the conditions all down the line. The system 
must say that or continue to pretend, as they do right now, that democ­
racy's for everybody. 
What I want them to do is deal with democracy. Don't deal with the 
revolution. We'll handle that. 
Uhuru! 
Chapter V 
Freedom Weekend Resolutions 
Counterinsurgency Workshop Resolutions 
1. We recognize the elevation of the traitor sector of the African population 
as leaders, administrators and government employees as a part of the 
neo-colonialist counterinsurgency used to deny colonized African peo­
ple our freedom and the resources stolen from us over the last 400 years. 
We recognize further that the North American white nationalist left, 
including that sector of the feminist movement that generally sup­
ports neo-colonialism at the expense of the general national libera­
tion struggle, are active collaborators in the counterinsurgency used 
to deny African people our freedom. 
2. We make a commitment to endorse, support and at'tend the mobi­
lization on April 7. 1990 in Oakland, CA, organized by the People's 
Democratic Uhuru Movement designed to expose the counterinsur­
gency against African people and other oppressed peoples. 
3. We understand that the future of African' people lies in our ability to 
organize the African Socialist International and work in solidarity 
with other colonized and oppressed people of the world to expose 
and defeat u.s. and Western imperialism around the world:' 
4. We unite with the CiJrrent understanding that drugs and the war on 
drugs are a continuing U.S. counterinsurgency war on African people, 
having their immediate origin as COINTELPRO some 22 years ago. 
5. We understand neo-colonialism, military occupation. curfews, mar­
tial law, on the spot strip searches, well-armed hostile paramilitary 
forces, special legislation and laws, and attacks on the national 
democratic rights are all features of the U.S. government counterin­
surgency attacks on African people. 
), 6. We understand that the security of our Movement against U.S. 
domestic colonialism depends on our ability to combatthe u.S. cap-
34 35


--- PAGE 25 ---
---~~-~ -~ -~-
The Dialectics of Black Revolution 
36 
italist-colonial State, repression and secret political police, in defense 
of the national democratic rights of Mrican and other subject and 
colonized peoples within the U.S. 
7. This conference mandates the Mrican People's Socialist Party to start 
initiating efforts as soon as possible to establish contact with revolu­
tionary organizations and individuals allover the world ~ a first step 
towards the realization of the goal of an Mrican Socialist International. 
8. We resolve to combat the counterinsurgency program and its tactics 
of disinformation which include rumors, gossip, slander, lies and 
half-truths by insisting on the highest level of principled political 
discourse, criticism and self-criticism between and among all anti­
colonial organizations. This high level of open public communica­
tion and criticism will serve the needs of all colonized and subject 
peoples to objectively compare, understand and unite with the orga­
nizations which represent the best interests of the working classes of 
the African and other subject peoples. 
9. We resolve to combat the counterinsurgency program and its target­
ing of Mrican youth for particularly harsh terror. We recognize our 
Mrican youth as the concrete expression of our people's future and 
the most vibrant, energetic and uncompromising sector of our whole 
people demanding self-determination and freedom. 
We further recognize as traitorous counterinsurgency stooges the 
representatives of any organization that insists on identifying .our 
African youth as criminals, incorrigibles, delinquents, drug kingpins, 
habitual offenders, gang members or gang leaders, . while leaving 
unstained the character and reputation of the U.S. terroristic brutal 
government which has over 400 years of organizing crime in North 
America, beginning with the biggest crime of all-slavery. We 
demand that the national democratic rights of our Mrican youth and 
entire people be defended. 
10. We resolve to combat the counterinsurgency intelligence gathering 
apparatus by calling on all African and subject nationals to partici­
pate in non-collaboration campaigns that will resist cooperating with 
police drug information hot lines, police town watch organizing, 
Freedom Weekend Resolullons 
police athletic leagues, police explorer scouts, police recruitment in 
high schools and colleges, street conversations with police, police 
supported and protected "dope busting" and "take back the streets" 
rallies and marches, and police investigations. 
A non-collaborationist stance with the police and its neo-colonial fronts 
will further draw the line between those who are for our people being 
free, and those who will unite with our communities' and people's class 
enemy; the U.S government. We further encourage all freedom-loving 
people to join an organization led by principled revolutionary cadre to 
fulfill the dream of a safe, liberated, clean, drug-free community. 
Prison Workshop Resolutions 
1. Whereas the U.S. prison system is being used as a primary instrument 
for political repression in the so-called "war on drugs," and that Mricans 
in the U.S. are being confined in the prisons in record numbers; 
Whereas this incarceration is accompanied by wholesale stripping 
away and disregard of the so-called "constitutional rights" of African 
people in military-style attacks in African communities, and strip 
searches, behavior modification, and techniques of torture inside the 
concentration camps; 
We resolve to work to defeat this "drug" counterinsurgency, expose 
it as political repression, and call for the destruction of the U.S. 
prison system and the freeing of all Mrican prisoners. 
2. Whereas the U.S. prison system is full of Mrican political prisoners 
and prisoners of war, many of whom have been confined since the 
Black Revolution of the Sixties, this conference resolves to support 
the struggles of said prisoners and work to secure their freedom. 
Whereas African people colonized within the U.S. are victims of foreign 
and alien domination, subjected to over 400 years of white colonial terror; 
We believe any acts on the part of African people against the colo­
nial government and ruling class are not criminal but are justified 
heroic acts in the defense of the rights of African people; 
31


--- PAGE 26 ---
The Dialectics 01 Black Revolution 
38 
We therefore resolve that the African National Prison Organization 
and other democratic forces in solidarity with the struggle of African 
people initiate campaigns to defend and liberate those Africans who 
become political prisoners and prisoners of war in the struggle for 
national liberation and socialism. 
3. Whereas the U.S. government has historically used the death penal­
ty as an act of murder and terrorism against African and other colo­
nized peoples; 
Whereas the death penalty today in the form of electrocution, lethal 
injection, and gas represent the same act of government murder as 
the lynch rope; 
Therefore; be it resolved that this conference calls for the rescinding 
of the death penalty. 
4. Whereas the Habitual Offender Act represents the continued use of 
bourgeois constitutional law as a tool to deny African people and 
Indio-Mexicano people our national democratic rights by unjustly 
sentencing oppressed people to life in colonial prison camps; 
Whereas the Habitual Offender Act is in violation of previously 
stated white ruling class legal codes of the constitution which pro­
hibit double jeopardy and cruel and unusual punishment; 
Whereas the U.S. criminal justice system represents a tool for the 
continued oppression of African, Indio-Mexicano, and other colo­
nized peoples of the world; 
Therefore be it resolved that this national conference to defend the 
national democratic rights of the colonized and oppressed peoples 
calls for the abolishment of the Habitual Offender Act. 
5. Be it resolved that members of the African People's Socialist Party 
and its mass organizations will struggle for Africans locked down to 
be able to receive literature and visitors. 
6. We demand an end to the physical, mental and sexual abuse of youth 
Freedom Weellend Resolutions 
in placement facilities, and to the unlawful kidnapping of African 
youth from the African community; 
We demand that youth being held hostage in youth facilities have 
direct contact with siblings, parents, friends and offspring. 
We calion all progressive groups to organize youth contingents to 
speak at youth facilities with the goal of politically educating 
hostages about the system and its attack on African people. 
7. We move that the African National Prison Organization (ANPO) 
compile a detailed and graphic list of biographies of prisoners of war 
and political prisoners incarcerated by the North American State for 
widest distribution and publicity internationally. This is part of the 
process to rebuild and strengthen ANPO organizations nationally. 
Resolution on the Party 
Whereas, the African People's Socialist Party has led struggles to 
expose the current character of the counterinsurgency used to frus­
trate the liberation struggle of African people; 
Whereas, in the process of struggle the African People's Socialist 
Party has initiated a mass campaign for the defense of the national 
democratic rights of African people; 
Whereas, this struggle in the defense of the national democratic 
rights of African people and to expose the counterinsurgency is part 
and parcel of the effort led by the African People's Socialist Party to 
complete the Black Revolution of the Sixties; 
Whereas, such an effort by the Party has been met by counterinsur­
gencY attack by the U.S. colonizing government; 
Be it resolved that defense of the African People's Socialist Party, its 
membership and organizations and their membership is crucial to 
the struggle to defeat the U.S. counterinsurgency. 
Uhuru! 39


--- PAGE 27 ---
THE DIALECTICS 
OF BLACK REVOLUTION 
The Struggle to Defeat the 
Counterinsurgency in the U.S. 
Omali Yeshitela, Chairman of the African People's Socialist Party, leader of 
the Uhuru Movement , political theoretician and unwavering black 
revolutionary leader since the I 960s attempts to: 
" ... engage us in a discussion about political economy ... 
There is a dialectical relationship between our own 
impoverishment and the wealth and well -being of wh ite 
people on the planet Earth." 
In this remarkable pamphlet which is concise yet profound , theoretical yet 
practical ,Yeshitela presents exciting breakthrough understandings of political 
theory from the point of view of African people . He also gives an insightful 
historical analysis of the Black Revolution of the I 960s as well as the U.S. 
government 's brutal counterinsurgency war which defeated it and continues 
to terrorize the African community today.

