=== EXTRACTED TEXT FROM: The-Black-Revolt-and-the-End-of-the-War-Against-Viet-Nam-Reprint-from-Spark-1990.pdf ===
Extraction Method: PyPDFLoader
Total Pages: 5
Timestamp: 2026-01-04T17:21:14.661062
================================================================================


--- PAGE 1 ---
Reprinted from the Spark                                                                                                         Page 1 of 5 
 
The Black Revolt and the End of the War Against Viet Nam (1990) 
 
 
The Black Revolt and the End of the War Against Viet Nam 
Source: http://the-spark.net/o_blackevn.html  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Editor’s Insert: In the Introduction of “Message to the Black Movement: A Political Statement from 
the Black Underground” Nyurba states the following:  
“…The tool of analysis is for us a further development of the h istorical materialist method, the 
dialectical method. We will not even waste our time debating the values of Marxism with those who 
are emotionally hung up on white people, hung up to the point of ideological blindness. We understand 
the process of revolution, and fundamental to this understanding is this fact: Marxism is developed to a 
higher level when it is scientifically adapted to a peoples' unique national condition, becoming a new 
ideology altogether…” BLA (Black Liberation Army) Co-Ordinating Committee, pg.i,  
RBG Communiversity National Strategy of the Front for the Liberation of the New Afrikan Nation 
 
Los Angeles during the Watts Riots, August 1965. New York World-Telegram photo


--- PAGE 2 ---
Reprinted from the Spark                                                                                                         Page 2 of 5 
 
The Black Revolt and the End of the War Against Viet Nam (1990) 
 
 
The fight of the American black population against racism and poverty escalated during the 
1960s to become a huge social movement, which finally culminated in urban insurrections. 
The movement of the black population changed the whole face of society. It forced the American 
bourgeoisie to do what it would not willingly have done: to junk the apartheid -like Jim Crow 
laws in the South and to get rid of the most openly discriminatory practices in both No rth and 
South. It opened many jobs to black people for the first time. It forced an increase in social 
programs, which helped the poor of the black communities, and the poor whites, as well. 
At the same time, the black movement also played the major role i nside this country, forcing 
American imperialism to give up its war against the Vietnamese people. 
The black mobilization could do that only because broad layers of the black population had 
given up fighting for reforms within the framework of this system;  they were not afraid to 
confront and threaten the social order of the American bourgeoisie, the class that rules this 
society. 
The discussions revealed by the "Pentagon Papers"  showed that, in 1968, the political 
representatives of the American bourgeoisi e were debating whether to send the additional troops 
that General Westmoreland wanted in Viet Nam: 200,000 more soldiers. The most influential 
"presidential advisers", according to the report, said, "The growing disaffection, accompanied as 
it certainly will be by increased defiance of the draft and growing unrest in the cities because of 
the belief that we are neglecting domestic problems, runs great risks of provoking a domestic 
crisis of unprecedented proportions." The growing unrest in the cities? This  was a polite way of 
saying rebellion and uprisings, like the one in Detroit in 1967. By early spring of 1968 (when 
Westmoreland’s request to expand the war was turned down) there had been open rebellion in 
the black communities for almost five years. 
The Black Revolt and the End of the War 
Johnson’s decision to not send more troops to Viet Nam, to slow down the war and bombing, to 
pull back from the war in Viet Nam came because black people had taken over the streets in the 
urban areas. 
Of course, the Viet namese themselves, by their decades of determined fighting, were the main 
factor which forced the U.S. to decide to pull back from the war. 
Obviously, other layers of the population were also active against the war, and even more 
consciously with the aim o f stopping the war. There were student demonstrations on and off the 
campuses. But this "recognized" anti -war movement, which was always a petty -bourgeois 
movement, stopped short of the kinds of actions needed to have stopped the war. In fact, it 
couldn’t have been otherwise, because the students as a class do not have the power to force the 
ruling class to give up something basic to the functioning of its system, as war is.


--- PAGE 3 ---
Reprinted from the Spark                                                                                                         Page 3 of 5 
 
The Black Revolt and the End of the War Against Viet Nam (1990) 
 
Of course, this movement was important. First of all, it was better for the student s themselves 
that they took part in a movement. Moreover, their activity helped to break the country out of the 
many social limits on the population and on people’s behavior which the repression of the 
McCarthy period had imposed. But this movement alone w ould not have had much impact; in 
fact, it could probably not have existed alone. 
The black movement did not start out with the goal of contesting with the American bourgeoisie 
for power, but its social base, which came from the poorest and most oppressed layers of 
American society, gave it the possibility to do so. At the beginning, the civil rights fights were 
led by organizations and leaders, usually ministers, who were also extremely cautious and 
emphasized moderation and non -violence that is, the passi ve acceptance of the oppressors’ 
violence by the oppressed at every step. But by the 1960s, the movement had become more 
widespread and deeper in the population. People were insisting that they would have changes 
and quickly. The cry became "Freedom NOW!" and then "Black Power!" At that moment in the 
mid-1960s, as the war in Viet Nam was raging, a much broader section of the black population 
began to act, and even out of frustration, to revolt. The uprisings began to make the ministers 
irrelevant, and, in many cases, despised. 
In the summer of 1963, Birmingham was swept by rebellion after the bombing of King’s 
headquarters. In 1964 there was a rebellion in Harlem, which spread to Bedford -Stuyvesant in 
Brooklyn and to several New Jersey towns. In 1965, with W atts, the insurrections grew much 
more massive and powerful. 
By 1966 things were heating up in a big way, with many, many people refusing to accept the 
usual insults of daily life, refusing to accept the lack of prospects for their lives. Look at the 
statistics: in 1966, there were black urban revolts in almost 100 cities including Chicago, 
Cleveland and a range of smaller Midwestern cities like Dayton, Des Moines and Omaha. There 
were several hundred more revolts in 1967 with major insurrections taking pla ce in Newark and 
Detroit, and almost all the towns connected to these cities. Black populations rebelled, ready to 
take on not only the cops, but also the National Guard and the paratroopers. 
When Martin Luther King, Jr. was murdered in April 1968, insurre ctions brought business to a 
halt in practically every major city and town. This revolt, by a population in the midst of the 
main bastion of imperialism, loosened the grip of the rulers of this country on the black 
population and over the people of Viet Nam. 
The black urban insurrections of the 1960s were fought in exactly the same way masses of 
people have always prepared to make revolutions on the basis of their own conditions. In the 
1960s, black people in this country carried out the kind of fight which  had not been seen in an 
industrial country for almost 50 years: urban street warfare. It was their capacity to fight, their 
courage, their readiness to stand up to the repressive state apparatus which maintains both racist 
oppression and class oppression,  which forced the American ruling class, the most powerful 
ruling class in the world, to back down. 
The black movement had the potential to bring down American capitalism at its very core. And 
by so doing, it could free the whole world.


--- PAGE 4 ---
Reprinted from the Spark                                                                                                         Page 4 of 5 
 
The Black Revolt and the End of the War Against Viet Nam (1990) 
 
The movement did ma ke the American bourgeoisie, which before had been moving with "all 
deliberate speed" to alleviate the situation (emphasis on the "deliberate"), now begin to hurry to 
impose vast changes on recalcitrant parts of its own state apparatus. At the same time, t he ruling 
class set up COINTELPRO, targeting the most militant of black leaders for elimination, and 
offering positions to buy off the more "responsible" leaders. 
Of course, there were always some leaders like Malcolm X and H. Rap Brown who made the 
connection between their struggles and those of other oppressed and exploited people, like the 
people of Viet Nam. Many black people understood that their allies were other people struggling 
against their enemies. There were some leaders like Malcolm X and H. Ra p Brown who said, as 
a threat, "If the man does not give us what we need, we will burn it down." And they were 
serious. They were willing to risk their lives. And because leaders like this existed, the 
movement was able to go much further than it otherwise would have. 
But something was lacking, nonetheless. There were no organizations at the time with the ear of 
the people who said, "You must end capitalism; it must be destroyed to get what we need." 
While some leaders spoke against the system, none said cl early that there was no other way than 
a complete and total revolution against this capitalist system. 
The war was stopped. Jim Crow was junked. But something much more important was lost. The 
opening for revolution, which existed in the late 1960s, was lo st. No one moved to take 
advantage of that opening. 
The movement of that time should have argued to take the struggle all the way through to the 
end, to squash capitalism once and for all. 
If the movement in the 1960s had gone up to the revolution, we woul d not be looking at war in 
the Middle East today. It’s very likely that revolution could have happened without the loss of 
much more life or even with less loss of life than what the fights to reform the system cost. It 
certainly would have spared how many  future generations the wars they will undergo, the 
hunger, the violence, etc., which are the marks of capitalist society. 
Revolution is not the most costly alternative. It is the least costly. 
We can’t know what might have happened in the 1960s if there h ad been an attempt at 
revolution. No organization with credibility in front of the masses stood up and argued for such a 
position. What’s worse, no revolutionary party was created during that time. Was revolution 
possible in the 1960s? We don’t know. But i t would have been possible to have created a 
revolutionary party, one starting from a base in the black working class, which by fighting for the 
interests of working people, could have brought white workers along also above all, on the 
question of the war against Viet Nam, which the white workers also resented. 
In any case, that revolutionary party was not built because the militants of the time, both in the 
black movement and in the anti -war movement, did not put that as their goal. Their goal was to 
fight against racism or against war or poverty, etc.


--- PAGE 5 ---
Reprinted from the Spark                                                                                                         Page 5 of 5 
 
The Black Revolt and the End of the War Against Viet Nam (1990) 
 
And so, as the black struggles and revolts receded, the ruling class, exploitative and racist, 
reasserted itself. Its economy continues to attack and rain down even more devastation on the 
black community, an d on the working class as a whole. And today, there is no revolutionary 
party which could centralize a fight of resistance among the working people. It’s one big reason 
that people hold back. The organizations which fight for reforms are not able to mount a fight in 
a time period like this. Just as they were not able to mount the kind of fight which would have 
been necessary to stop the U.S. war on Iraq. 
We still need a fight made against racism today. Racism still destroys lives and dreams to put an 
extra dollar in the boss’s pocket and keeps his foot on our necks. We still need a fight against the 
exploitation of the whole working class by American capitalism. It is obvious that we still need a 
fight against war to day war, which is the inevitable product of capitalism’s drive for profits 
around the world. 
The fight for those things can only be won by people ready for social revolution. When we see 
what happened to Iraq, we understand that the problems of the world w ill not be addressed if the 
working class of this country does not prepare to get rid of the American bourgeoisie. The power 
to make war on the whole world is centered here. It can only be brought down here. 
A movement in the center of American imperialism ’s stronghold has the means to take away the 
rule of capital, that is, to end the cause of war and of racist oppression forever. 
Reprinted from the Spark 
1990

