=== EXTRACTED TEXT FROM: The-Deacons-for-Defense-Armed-Resistance-the-Civil-Rights-Movement.pdf ===
Extraction Method: PyPDFLoader
Total Pages: 371
Timestamp: 2026-01-04T17:23:14.388103
================================================================================


--- PAGE 1 ---



--- PAGE 2 ---
The Deacons for Defense


--- PAGE 3 ---
The Deacons
armed
resistance
and the
civil rights
movement
Lance Hill


--- PAGE 4 ---
for Defense
The University of North Carolina Press Chapel Hill and London


--- PAGE 5 ---
∫ 2004 The University of North Carolina Press
All rights reserved
Manufactured in the United States of America
Designed by Jacquline Johnson
Set in Charter by Keystone Typesetting, Inc.
The paper in this book meets the guidelines for
permanence and durability of the Committee on
Production Guidelines for Book Longevity of the
Council on Library Resources.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Hill, Lance E. (Lance Edward), 1950–
The Deacons for Defense : armed resistance and
the civil rights movement / Lance Hill.
p. cm.
Includes bibliographical references and index.
isbn 0-8078-2847-5 (alk. paper)
1. Deacons for Defense and Justice—History.
2. African American civil rights workers—
Louisiana—Jonesboro—History—20th century.
3. Self-defense—Political aspects—Southern
States—History—20th century. 4. Political
violence—Southern States—History—20th century.
5. Ku Klux Klan (1915– )—History—20th century.
6. African Americans—Civil rights—Southern
States—History—20th century. 7. Civil rights
movements—Southern States—History—20th
century. 8. Southern States—Race relations.
9. Louisiana—Race relations. 10. Mississippi—Race
relations. I. Title.
e185.615.h47 2004
323.1196%073%009046—dc22 2003021779
0 80 70 60 50 4 54321


--- PAGE 6 ---
For Eileen


--- PAGE 7 ---
Contents
Acknowledgments ix
Introduction 1
1 Beginnings 10
2 The Deacons Are Born 30
3 In the New York Times 52
4 Not Selma 63
5 On to Bogalusa 78
6 The Bogalusa Chapter 96
7 The Spring Campaign 108
8 With a Single Bullet 129
9 Victory 150
10 Expanding in the Bayou State 165
11 Mississippi Chapters 184
12 Heading North 216
13 Black Power—Last Days 234
Conclusion: The Myth of Nonviolence 258
Notes 275
Bibliography 335
Index 353
A section of photographs appears after p. 107.


--- PAGE 8 ---
Acknowledgments
i first learned of the Deacons for Defense and Justice
while attending a meeting of activists in Plaquemines Parish, Louisiana, in
1984. I had moved to rural Louisiana in 1979 and initially worked not far
from Bogalusa as a welder and an industrial organizer. At the meeting in
Plaquemines Parish—once the stronghold of arch-racist Leander Perez—I
met one of the founders of the Deacons, Frederick Douglas Kirkpatrick.
From my ﬁrst meeting with Kirkpatrick, I decided that the history of this
remarkable group of courageous men needed to be told.
Several people offered thoughtful and stimulating reactions to this book
and deserve a great deal of thanks. Foremost is Lawrence N. Powell, for his
indispensable advice, perceptive criticism, and steadfast encouragement.
Adam Fairclough, Michael Honey, and Tim Tyson provided challenging criti-
cisms and invaluable advice, which greatly beneﬁted the ﬁnal manuscript.
Patrick Maney, Rosanne Adderley, and Kim Harris all read earlier drafts and
offered many useful and illuminating insights. I have also learned much
from long conversations over the years with my colleague Plater Robinson.
Tulane University’s History Department made my research possible
through several teaching assistantships and travel and research grants. I am
especially indebted to Gwendolyn Midlo Hall for her professional assistance
and expansive generosity. Gwen allowed me to consult her research papers
on the Deacons for Defense and Justice at the Amistad Research Center, and
has been an endless source of information on the left and black nationalist
movements. Many friends and archivists aided me in obtaining materials,
among them Tyler Bridges, Katherine Nachod, Annie Purnell Johnson, and
Brenda Square. David Perry, Paula Wald, and Stevie Champion at the Uni-
versity of North Carolina Press made this book possible through their wise
advice and skillful editing.
Writing a book about a semiclandestine organization poses some unique
problems. The Deacons left no written records, and save for the fbi ﬁles and
news reports, the real history of the organization resides in the collective


--- PAGE 9 ---
x Acknowledgments
memories of its members. This book would not have been possible had it not
been for the members of the Deacons for Defense and Justice who shared
with me their stories and wisdom.
My three children, Lisa, John, and Joel, admirably suffered a father who
spent too many sunny days hunched over a dimly lit keyboard. My grandson
Cody Robertson was an inspiration through his love of history—and diesel
trucks. And my parents, Herbert and Gaye Hill, have always been accepting
and supportive through trying times. Finally, I am deeply grateful to my
wife, Eileen San Juan, who has provided years of intellectual companionship
and moral support, and lent her critical eye to reading this manuscript. I
have dedicated the book to her, though such a symbolic act is a pittance for
her love and encouragement.


--- PAGE 10 ---
The Deacons for Defense


--- PAGE 11 ---
Introduction
paul farmer had  brought his pistol. The president of
the Washington Parish White Citizens Council was standing in the middle of
the street along with several other members of the council and the local Ku
Klux Klan. It was the autumn of 1966 in the small paper mill town of Boga-
lusa, Louisiana.
Royan Burris, a black barber and civil rights leader, knew why the Klans-
men were there. They were waiting for the doors to open at Bogalusa Junior
High. The school had recently been integrated, and white students had been
harassing and brutalizing black students with impunity. ‘‘They were just
stepping on them, and spitting on them and hitting them,’’ recalled Burris,
and the black students ‘‘wasn’t doing anything back.’’ In the past Burris had
counseled the black students to remain nonviolent. Now he advised a new
approach. ‘‘I said anybody hit you, hit back. Anybody step on your feet, step
back. Anybody spit on you, spit back.’’
∞
The young black students heeded Burris’s advice. Fights between black
and white students erupted at the school throughout the day. Now Paul
Farmer and his band of Klansmen had arrived with guns, prepared to inter-
vene. Their presence was no idle threat; whites had murdered two black
men in the mill town in the past two years, including a sheriff ’s deputy.
But Farmer had a problem. Standing in the street, only a few feet from the
Klan, was a line of grim, unyielding black men. They were members of the
Deacons for Defense and Justice, a black self-defense organization that had
already engaged the Klan in several shooting skirmishes. The two groups
faced off: the Klansmen on one side, the Deacons on the other.
After a few tense moments the police arrived and attempted to defuse the
volatile situation. They asked the Deacons to leave ﬁrst, but the black men
refused. Burris recalled the Deacons’ terse response to the police request.
‘‘We been leaving ﬁrst all of our lives,’’ said Burris. ‘‘This time we not going in
peace.’’ Infuriated by the Deacons’ deﬁance, Farmer suddenly pulled his
pistol. In a reﬂex response, one of the Deacons drew his revolver, and in an


--- PAGE 12 ---
2 Introduction
instant half a dozen pistols were waving menacingly in the air. Surveying the
weapons arrayed against them, the Klansmen grudgingly pocketed their
own guns and departed.
≤
The Deacons for Defense and Justice had faced death and never ﬂinched.
‘‘From that day forward,’’ said Burris, ‘‘we didn’t have too many more
problems.’’
≥
In 1964 a clandestine armed self-defense organization formed in the black
community in Jonesboro, Louisiana, with the goal of protecting civil rights
activists from the Ku Klux Klan and other racist vigilantes. After several
months of relatively secret operations, the group publicly surfaced in Febru-
ary 1965 under the name ‘‘Deacons for Defense and Justice.’’ By the end of
1966, the Deacons had grown to twenty-one chapters with several hundred
members concentrated in Louisiana and Mississippi. The Deacons guarded
marches, patrolled the black community to ward off night riders, engaged
in shoot-outs with Klansmen, and even deﬁed local police in armed con-
frontations. When the u.s. Justice Department faltered in enforcing the
Civil Rights Act, the Deacons’ militant politics and armed actions forced
a pivotal showdown in Bogalusa between the government and southern
segregationists.
Although the Deacons began as a simple self-defense guard to compensate
for the lack of police protection, they soon developed into a highly visible
political organization with a clear and compelling alternative to the paciﬁst
strategies promoted by national civil rights organizations. They were not the
ﬁrst blacks to practice or advocate armed self-defense. Throughout the civil
rights movement, African Americans frequently guarded themselves and
their communities against vigilante assaults. But until the Deacons emerged,
these armed self-defense efforts were almost always conducted by informal
and disconnected covert groups that avoided open confrontations with au-
thority and purposefully eschewed publicity—in part because they feared
retaliation and in part because they wanted to maintain the illusion of non-
violence in the movement. It was this public image of a nonviolent move-
ment that ensured white liberal support in the North. Civil rights leaders and
activists also concealed armed self-defense for the same reasons. During the
Montgomery Bus Boycott, one visitor to Martin Luther King’s home was
alarmed to ﬁnd an ‘‘arsenal’’ of weapons and discovered that King himself
had requested gun permits for his bodyguards. Yet publicly King adamantly
opposed any open, organized armed self-defense activity. Similarly, Sally
Belfrage, a northern volunteer in the Mississippi movement, deliberately
omitted reference to armed self-defense in her memoir Freedom Summer


--- PAGE 13 ---
Introduction 3
(1965). One local black activist in Mississippi had bluntly warned her, ‘‘If you
write about the guns, we’ll kill you.’’ She took his advice.∂
Invisible to the broader public, clandestine self-defense groups had little
effect on the Ku Klux Klan or federal policy in the South. The Deacons, in
contrast, consciously built a highly public, regional organization that openly
deﬁed local authorities and challenged the Klan—something that neither
the Klan nor Washington could ignore. The Deacons boldly ﬂouted the age-
old southern code that denied blacks the right of open and collective self-
defense, and by doing so they made an implicit claim to social and civil
equality. By the summer of 1965 the Deacons for Defense had developed
chapters throughout the South and generated considerable national pub-
licity through major news stories in Life magazine, the New York Times, the
Wall Street Journal , and the Los Angeles Times . Stories in Newsweek, Time,
Nation, and Business Week followed in 1966. Inﬂuential black publications
like Ebony carried the Deacons’ story into thousands of black households,
along with a widely read series of articles that appeared in Jet magazine—
the premier weekly for the African American working class. Within a few
months of their birth, the Deacons had become the talk of the movement
and folk heroes to legions of African Americans in the Deep South. The
publicity propelled the Deacons into the center of a national debate on the
effectiveness of nonviolent direct action, and very soon they were at logger-
heads with Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. and the mainstream nonviolent civil
rights organizations.
∑
Not alone in their disenchantment with passive resistance, the Deacons
reﬂected a growing disillusionment of working-class blacks with the paci-
ﬁstic, legalistic, and legislative strategies proffered by national organiza-
tions. Many African Americans, men in particular, refused to participate in
nonviolent protests because they believed that passive resistance to white
violence simply reproduced the same degrading rituals of domination and
submission that suffused the master/slave relationship. Moreover, many
African Americans regarded passive resistance and love for one’s oppressor
as dubious antidotes for immobilizing fear and resignation. The ﬁssure be-
tween civil rights leaders and their rank and ﬁle loomed large: by the sum-
mer of 1963 a Louis Harris poll showed that 22 percent of black respondents
said that they thought they would have to resort to violence to win their
rights—ﬁve times the percentage of black leaders polled. Moreover, a major-
ity of those surveyed believed that blacks would win in this violent show-
down with whites.
∏
The Deacons were a unique phenomenon among civil rights groups—the
only independent working-class–controlled organization with national aspi-


--- PAGE 14 ---
4 Introduction
rations to emerge during the civil rights movement in the Deep South and
the only indigenous African American organization in the South to pose a
visible challenge to Martin Luther King and the nonviolent movement ortho-
doxy.
π The Deacons were not the ﬁrst organization to publicly defy the
strictures of nonviolence—Robert F. Williams had pioneered the strategy
several years earlier in Monroe, North Carolina, when he converted a local
National Association for the Advancement of Colored People ( naacp) chap-
ter into a redoubt for armed self-defense. But when the national naacp
drummed Williams out of the organization—with the help of Martin Luther
King—he was left without an organizing framework. A riot in Monroe in 1961
caused Williams to ﬂee to Cuba and ended his organizing days inside the
United States. The Deacons took a different tact: they formed their own
organization outside the mainstream nonviolent groups and mounted a vig-
orous campaign to expand it throughout the South.
∫
Reﬂecting class tensions within the African American community, the
Deacons spearheaded a working-class revolt against the entrenched black
middle-class leadership and its nonviolent reform ideology. In small towns
throughout Louisiana, the Deacons assailed the traditional naacp leaders, a
social stratum forged in the old economic order of agricultural dependency
and habituated to the politics of accommodation and tactical legalism. They
were emblematic of the newly industrialized southern economy that had
called into existence a black working class that was no longer the captive of
sharecropper servitude. Their political strategy was confrontational, dis-
dainful of nonviolence, and independent of white liberal control.
The Deacons were born in response to two signiﬁcant developments in
1964: the emergence of a well-organized racist militia—the Ku Klux Klan—
and the federal government’s appalling failure to enforce the Civil Rights Act
and uphold basic constitutional rights and liberties in the South. The Klan’s
resurgence in 1964 was a direct result of the failure of the Citizens Councils
of America. Beginning with the u.s. Supreme Court’s 1954 school desegrega-
tion decision, the Citizens Councils, dominated by respectable white civic
and business leaders, led the opposition to integration efforts across the
South. The Councils preferred legal and legislative strategies to violence and
terror. But by the 1960s many ardent segregationists regarded the Councils’
law-abiding and electoral strategy as an ignominious defeat; the Councils
had failed to hold the line against the Yankee invaders.
Ω
By 1964 the deteriorating position of the Councils and other old-line
segregationists, coupled with the implementation of the Civil Rights Act,
sparked a spectacular growth of Klan organizations that advocated terrorist
violence and direct action to thwart enforcement of the new law.
∞≠ In towns


--- PAGE 15 ---
Introduction 5
with large black working-class communities—independent of the old agri-
cultural elite—terrorist violence replaced economic threats as the princi-
pal means of social control over blacks. Throughout slavery and Jim Crow,
violence had been a major coercive instrument for maintaining white su-
premacy, and there was little reason to expect that African Americans could
successfully avail themselves of the new civil rights laws as long as white
violence went unchecked.
The rise of white supremacist violence in response to desegregation made
armed self-defense a paramount goal for many local black organizing ef-
forts. Beginning in 1960, the Deep South states blatantly ignored federal
authority and openly ﬂouted the Constitution and Bill of Rights. Civil rights
activists were routinely beaten and illegally imprisoned with impunity. The
First Amendment right of free expression disappeared into the smoke of
burning crosses. By 1965 the Ku Klux Klan had, through a well-organized
terrorist war, carved out a virtual ‘‘Klan nation’’ in southwestern Mississippi
and neighboring southeastern Louisiana—often with the complicity of state
and local law enforcement agencies. Within this territory a highly organized
and well-disciplined Klan organization fought a successful guerrilla war to
defend white caste privilege. The Klan governed the territory on all matters
of race. They mobilized thousands of supporters, conducted scores of suc-
cessful boycotts, published their own newspapers, and staged coups against
recalcitrant local governments. It was manifest that there would be no racial
progress in this region unless African Americans could devise a stratagem to
break the back of white terror.
∞∞
A full year after passage of the 1964 Civil Rights Act, the Klan’s terror
campaign had succeeded in preventing enforcement of the law in the Deep
South, and most small communities remained rigidly segregated in all pub-
lic accommodations. President Lyndon Johnson, fearing a political backlash
in the South, had avoided a showdown with southern law enforcement and
the Klan. ‘‘Covenants, without the Sword, are but Words,’’ said Thomas
Hobbes, ‘‘and of no strength to compel a man at all.’’ The Sword of the
Covenant was nowhere to be found in the Deep South. And so the ﬁnal act
of the civil rights movement had been written, complete with a cast of
menacing night riders, derelict sheriffs, dawdling federal authorities, and
vulnerable African Americans. The fatal limits of nonviolence would soon
become clear.
∞≤
Nonviolence is at the center of the Deacons’ story. Much of the popular
history of the civil rights era rests on the myth of nonviolence: the percep-
tion that the movement achieved its goals through nonviolent direct action.
The myth posits that racial inequality was dismantled by a nonviolent move-


--- PAGE 16 ---
6 Introduction
ment that awakened the moral conscience of white America. In this narra-
tive Martin Luther King Jr. serves as the ‘‘moral metaphor’’ of the age while
black militants—advocates of racial pride and coercive force—are dismissed
as ineffective rebels who alienated whites with Black Power rhetoric and
violence.
∞≥
Recent accounts take issue with the idea that the movement relied on
moral suasion, instead arguing that King and other civil rights leaders never
placed much stock in Mohandas Gandhi’s theory of redemptive suffering—
the idea that if one suffered racist violence through nonviolent resistance,
one could eventually change the hearts and minds of racists. These narra-
tives argue that, even if King began his career believing that black suffering
would awaken a sense of ‘‘moral shame’’ in white southern racists, he quickly
came to terms with the political limitations of nonviolence and abandoned
the strategy. The idealistic paciﬁst became a hard-nosed pragmatist and
turned to a strategy that combined nonviolent tactics with direct action
protest—winning reforms through coercion rather than persuasion.
∞∂
The truth is that King never abandoned his overriding strategy of moral
suasion: he did, however, change his target audience. By 1963 King had
given up any hope of appealing to the conscience of the white South and
instead turned exclusively to the North for his moral appeals. This strategic
course placed white liberals and armed self-defense at the center of a con-
ﬂict that would deeply affect the evolution of the Deacons for Defense.
From the beginning of the modern civil rights movement, opposition to
black armed self-defense was an article of faith for national organizations,
including King’s Southern Christian Leadership Conference ( sclc), the
naacp, the Congress on Racial Equality ( core) and the Student Nonviolent
Coordinating Committee ( sncc)—though sncc and core moderated their
ofﬁcial positions near the end of the movement. By opposing armed self-
defense, the national civil rights organizations often placed themselves
on a collision course with local movements. There were signiﬁcant differ-
ences between the goals and strategies of national and local organizations
and campaigns. Locally controlled movements frequently focused on imme-
diate efforts to gain power over segregation, economic needs, and govern-
ment services. And unrelenting police and vigilante terror compelled local
movements to give substantial time and resources to counter violence and
intimidation.
∞∑
In contrast, the national organizations were guided by the thinking that
racial inequality—social, economic, and political—could be remedied only
by national legislation that removed the civil barriers of segregation and
discrimination. This civil rights legislation would be won by coalescing


--- PAGE 17 ---
Introduction 7
with northern liberals and applying pressure on Congress and the president.
White liberals became an indispensable ally for the national civil rights
organizations—for legislative reform as well as movement funding. King
held to his belief that northern white liberals (and, to some degree, trade
union leaders) could be morally persuaded to support the civil rights move-
ment. Toward this end, he sought to gain their sympathy by employing
tactics that provoked and exposed the raw white violence that lay under the
surface of southern life. The strategy wielded both coercion and moral sua-
sion: coercion against southern whites to create the circumstances for moral
suasion in the North.
∞∏
But winning the sympathy of whites unavoidably meant appeasing white
fears of black violence. In the 1950s many northern whites retained old ste-
reotypes of blacks as violent, vengeful, and impulsive. They believed that
blacks lacked internal psychological constraints and self-discipline, and that
they were incapable of forgiveness and generosity. King was acutely aware of
these white fears of violence, and in his ﬁrst and most important book, Stride
toward Freedom, published in 1958, he adamantly argued that the civil rights
movement had to adopt nonviolence if it wanted to win over northern
whites. ‘‘Only through a nonviolent approach can the fears of the white
community be mitigated,’’ argued King. ‘‘A guilt-ridden white minority lives
in fear that if the Negro should ever attain power, he would act without
restraint or pity to revenge the injustices and brutality. . . . Many white men
fear retaliation. The job of the Negro is to show them that they have nothing
to fear, that the Negro understands and forgives and is ready to forget the
past.’’ To underscore his point, King counseled blacks not to defend them-
selves against Klan assaults and bombings, but to wear down whites through
redemptive suffering: ‘‘Bomb our homes and threaten our children; send
your hooded perpetrators of violence into our communities and drag us out
on some wayside road, beating us half dead, and we will still love you. But
we will soon wear you down by our capacity to suffer.’’ If the Klan bombed
one home, King urged blacks to submit themselves by the hundreds to more
bombings until the terrorists, ‘‘forced to stand before the world and his God
splattered with the blood of his brother . . . will call an end to his self-
defeating massacre.’’
∞π
Sadly, that day of penitence never came for the inveterate racists. But
King’s early pronouncements on the importance of nonviolence in maintain-
ing the black/liberal coalition set the course for the national movement in
the years that followed. King continued to rely on a strategy that required
blacks to suffer white violence to win liberal sympathy. During the 1965
Selma campaign King said that the movement was forcing its ‘‘oppressor to


--- PAGE 18 ---
8 Introduction
commit brutality openly—in the light of day—with the rest of the world
looking on’’ and that white violence in Selma would lead ‘‘Americans of
conscience in the name of decency [to] demand federal intervention and
legislation.’’ The movement could not afford to alienate whites. ‘‘We can’t
win our struggle with nonviolence and...  cloak it under the name of defen-
sive violence,’’ King said in criticizing the Deacons. ‘‘The Negro must have
allies to win his struggle for equality, and our allies will not surround a
violent movement.’’ Using force against the Klan ‘‘would only alienate our
allies and lose sympathy for our cause.’’
∞∫
The position of a civil rights organization on armed self-defense became
the litmus test for white liberal support. For an organization to embrace
collective self-defense—a right that was taken for granted by whites—was
to risk losing critically needed liberal funds and jeopardize the tenuous
coalition with northern whites. Not surprisingly, the task of moral suasion
ultimately determined the overarching strategy of the national civil rights
movement. Major strategic initiatives were measured against the ability to
win or retain white northern allies. It was a strategy that had its detractors in
the African American community from the beginning. In the 1930s black
moderates and conservatives ﬁrst trumpeted Gandhian nonviolence in an
effort to undermine the considerable appeal of Marxism among young
blacks.
∞Ω In the 1960s many critics suspected that the partisans of non-
violence once again had ulterior motives; that the exotic philosophical im-
port from the East was merely a method of candy-coating the black revo-
lution to make it palatable to white liberals. Noted black writer Lerone
Bennett was among the skeptics. The dilemma for blacks, according to Ben-
nett, was to oppose power but not appear to be rebelling against the status
quo. ‘‘The history of the Negro in America,’’ wrote Bennett in 1964, ‘‘. . . has
been a quest for a revolt that was not a revolt—a revolt, in other words, that
did not seem to the white power structure as a revolt.’’ Martin Luther King
had solved the dilemma, Bennett said, by ‘‘clothing a resistance movement in
the comforting garb of love and forgiveness.’’
≤≠
Nonviolence was ultimately a coalition-based legislative strategy cloaked
as religion. In their attempt to assuage white fears of black violence, the
national organizations took a stand against self-defense that placed them at
odds with local movements besieged by police and Klan violence and hob-
bled by passive stereotypes. By giving the luster of religious precept to a
pragmatic stratagem to attract white liberals—while accommodating liberal
fears of black violence—the national civil rights leadership took the high
moral ground and made their critics look like nihilistic advocates of vio-
lence. In truth, defense groups like the Deacons used weapons to avoid


--- PAGE 19 ---
Introduction 9
violence. And they raised important and legitimate questions about a strat-
egy that pinned its hopes on liberals, organized labor and the federal govern-
ment. core activist Lincoln Lynch summed up the doubts of the dissenters
from nonviolence: ‘‘History has shown that if you’re really depending on the
vast majority of whites to help, you’re leaning on a very broken reed.’’
≤∞
The Deacons came to see nonviolence as a ‘‘broken reed’’ strategy that
offered little support or protection. The nonviolent strategy had its strengths
and made enormous accomplishments, but they came at a high price for
many African American men in the South. This is not to second-guess the
choices made by national civil rights organizations, but to understand the
limitations of nonviolence and how it shaped the ultimate outcome of the
movement—and continues to affect American racial politics to this day.
≤≤
The escalating attacks by the Ku Klux Klan in 1964 thrust the Deacons for
Defense and Justice into the middle of a national debate on nonviolence.
More than a defense group, the Deacons grew into a symbolic political orga-
nization that played a key role in the battle against nonviolent movement
orthodoxy. They represented the black working class’s ﬂedgling attempt to
create a new black consciousness. They preached self-reliance rather than
dependence on the government for rights and freedom; they sought reform
by force and coercion rather than by paciﬁsm and moral suasion; and they
repudiated the strategy of winning white approbation through suffering.
Freedom was to be won through fear and respect, rather than guilt and pity.
In short, they believed that to be free blacks had to act free.
≤≥


--- PAGE 20 ---
chapter
1
Beginnings
earnest thomas had been a ﬁghter all his life. Born in
Jonesboro, Louisiana, on 20 November 1935, Thomas was descended from a
long line of independent tradesmen and farmers. He came of age in the Deep
South under the system of segregation, yet he knew white people as well as
his own folk. Racial segregation fought a relentless battle against human
nature—against the instinctual longing for companionship and shared joy
among members of the human race. The intimacy of everyday life tempted
people to disregard the awkward rituals of segregation. In his youth Thomas
had frequented the local swimming hole in Jonesboro, a gentle creek that
wound its way through the pines. Its tranquil waters welcomed children of
all colors. Here black and white children innocently played together, splash-
ing and dunking. At a distance, colors disappeared into a shadow silhouette
of bobbing heads, the languid summer air disturbed only by occasional
shrieks of joy.
∞
Yet inevitably nature surrendered to the mean habits of adult society.
Thomas recalled that sometimes the whites would band together and swoop
down on a handful of frolicking blacks, claiming the waters as the spoils of
war. On other occasions, Thomas would join a charging army of whooping
black warriors as they descended on the stream, scattering a gaggle of un-
suspecting white boys. The swimming hole wars of his youth provided Ear-
nest Thomas with one enduring lesson: rights were secured by force more
often than by appeals to reason and moral argument.
In the summer of 1964 Thomas was swept up in a new phase of the
civil rights movement and became a leader of the founding chapter of the
Deacons for Defense and Justice. How the most widely known armed self-
defense organization in the Deep South came into existence in a remote
Louisiana town, far removed from the movement centers and media lime-


--- PAGE 21 ---
Beginnings 11
light, in itself speaks volumes about a largely invisible conﬂict within the
civil rights movement between the partisans of nonviolence that descended
on the South and an emerging working-class movement that resisted paci-
ﬁsm in the face of police and vigilante terror.
In the nineteenth century the pine hills of North Louisiana were a hostile
refuge for the poor and dispossessed. Following the Civil War, legions of
starving and desperate whites were driven into the pine hills by destruction,
drought, and depleted soil in the Southeast. They arrived to ﬁnd the best
alluvial land controlled by large landowners and speculators. The remaining
soil was poorly suited for farming, rendered haggard and sallow by millen-
nia of acidic pine needles deposited on the forest ﬂoor. The lean migrants
scratched the worthless sandy soil, shook their heads, and resigned them-
selves to the unhappy fate of subsistence farming.
Upcountry whites eked out a living with a dozen acres of ‘‘corn and
’taters,’’ a few hogs for fatback, trapping and hunting for game, and occa-
sionally logging for local markets. Not until the turn of the century, when the
large-scale lumber industry invaded the pines, did their hopes and prospects
change. Even then, prosperity was ﬂeeting. By the 1930s the lumber levia-
thans had stripped the pine woods bare, leaving a residue of a few paper and
lumber mills. Those fortunate enough to ﬁnd work in the pulp and paper
industry watched helplessly in the 1950s and 1960s as even these remaining
jobs were threatened by shrinking reserves and automation.
≤
These Protestant descendants of the British Isles were the latest in several
generations of whites forced west by a slave-based economy that rapidly
expended the very soil it arose from. With the end of the Civil War their
plight was compounded by more than three million black freedmen surging
across the South in search of work and land. Emancipation thrust blacks into
merciless competition with whites for the dearth of work, land, and credit.
The freedmen also looked to the pines for deliverance. Blacks who re-
mained on plantations lived in constant fear of new forms of bondage such
as gang labor and sharecropping. Thousands of dusty, tattered black families
packed their belongings and trekked into the hills to escape the indignities of
debt peonage. Like their white competitors, the freedmen sought the dignity
and independence conferred by a few acres of land and the freedom to sell
their labor.
The pine hills were soon peopled by the most independent and self-
sufﬁcient African Americans: those willing to risk everything to escape eco-
nomic bondage. Their passionate independence ﬂourished in the hills
as they worked as self-employed timber cutters and log haulers. By the


--- PAGE 22 ---
12 Beginnings
middle of the twentieth century many of their descendants had left the land,
drawn to the small industrial towns that offered decent wages in lumber and
paper mills.
From the end of the Civil War through the 1960s these two ﬁercely inde-
pendent communities, black and white, traveled separate yet parallel paths
in the pine hills of North Louisiana. In the summer of 1964, in the small town
of Jonesboro, these two worlds would ﬁnally cross paths—as well as swords.
Jonesboro was one of dozens of makeshift mill towns that sprang up as
eastern businesses rushed to mine the vast timber spreads of Louisiana.
Incorporated in 1903, the town was little more than an appendage to a
sawmill—crude shacks storing the human machinery of industry.
By the 1960s Jonesboro lived in the shadow of the enormous Continental
Can Company paper mill located in Hodge, a small town on the outskirts
of Jonesboro. The New York–based company produced container board
and kraft paper at the Hodge facility and employed more than 1,500 whites
and 200 blacks. In addition, many blacks found employment at the Olin Ma-
thieson Chemical Company. Those blacks who were not fortunate enough to
ﬁnd work in the paper mill labored as destitute woodcutters and log haulers
on the immense timber landholdings owned by Continental Can.
≥
Almost one-third of Jonesboro’s 3,848 residents were black. Though by
southern standards Jonesboro’s black community was prosperous, poverty
and ignorance were still rampant. Nearly eight out of every ten black fami-
lies lived in poverty. Ninety-seven percent of blacks over the age of twenty-
ﬁve had never completed a high school education. The ‘‘black quarters’’
in Jonesboro and Hodge consisted of dilapidated clapboard shacks, with
cracks in the walls that whistled in the bitter winter wind. Human waste
ran into the dirt streets for want of a sewerage system. Unpaved streets
with exotic names like ‘‘Congo’’ and ‘‘Tarbottom’’ served alternately as dust
storms and impassable rivers of mud.
∂
Daily life in Jonesboro painstakingly followed the rituals and conventions
of Jim Crow segregation. A white person walking downtown could expect
blacks to obsequiously avert their eyes and step off the sidewalk in defer-
ence. Jobs were strictly segregated, with blacks allotted positions no higher
than ‘‘broom and mop’’ occupations. The local hospital had an all-white
staff, and the paper mill segregated both jobs and toilets. Blacks were even
denied the simple right to walk into the public library.
∑
On the surface there appeared to be few diversions from the tedium and
poverty. The ramshackle ‘‘Minute Spot’’ tavern served as the only legal drink-
ing establishment for blacks. To Danny Mitchell, a black student organizer
who arrived in Jonesboro in 1964, Jonesboro’s African Americans appeared


--- PAGE 23 ---
Beginnings 13
to take refuge in gambling and other unseemly pastimes. Mitchell, with
a note of youthful piety, once reported to his superiors in New York that
most of Jonesboro’s black community ‘‘seeks enjoyment and relief from the
frustrating life they endure through marital, extramarital, and inter-marital
relationships.’’
∏
But there was more to Jonesboro than sex and dice. Indeed, segregation
had produced a complex labyrinth of social networks and organizations in
the black community. The relatively large industrial working class preserved
the independent spirit that characterized blacks in the pine woods. As in
many other small mill towns, blacks in Jonesboro had created a tightly knit
community that revolved around the institutions of church and fraternal
orders. In the post–World War II era, black men in the South frequently
belonged to several fraternal orders and social clubs, such as the Prince Hall
Masons and the Brotherhood for the Protection of Elks. These formal and
informal organizations provided a respite from the oppressive white culture.
They offered status, nurtured mutual bonds of trust, and served as schools
for leadership for Jonesboro’s black working and middle classes.
π
In the period of increased activism following World War II, most of Jones-
boro’s civil rights leadership emerged from the small yet signiﬁcant middle
class of educators, self-employed craftsmen, and independent business peo-
ple (religious leaders were conspicuously absent from the ranks of the re-
formers). While segregation denied blacks many opportunities, it also cre-
ated captive markets for some enterprising blacks, particularly in services
that whites refused to provide them. There were twenty-one black-owned
businesses in Jonesboro in 1964, including taxi companies, gas stations, and
a popular skating rink.
∫
The black Voters League of Jonesboro drew its leadership primarily from
the ranks of businessmen and educators, such as W. C. Flannagan, E. N.
Francis, J. W. Dade, and Fred Hearn. Flannagan, who led the league in the
early 1960s, was a self-employed handyman who also published a small
newsletter. Francis owned several businesses, including a funeral home,
grocery store, barber shop, and dry-cleaning store. Dade was, by local stan-
dards, a man of considerable wealth. He taught mathematics at Jackson
High School and supplemented his teaching salary with income from a
dozen rental houses. Hearn was also a teacher and worked as a farmer and
installed and cleaned water wells.
Ω
Jackson Parish (county), where Jonesboro is located, had had a small but
well-organized chapter of the National Association for the Advancement of
Colored People ( naacp) since the 1940s. In 1956 the Louisiana naacp was
gravely damaged by a state law that required disclosure of membership.


--- PAGE 24 ---
14 Beginnings
Rather than divulge members’ names and expose them to harassment, many
chapters replaced the naacp with ‘‘civic and voters leagues.’’ Such was the
case in Jackson Parish, where the naacp became the ‘‘Jackson Parish Pro-
gressive Voters League.’’ From its inception, the Voters League concentrated
on voter registration and enjoyed some success. When the White Citizens
Council and the Registrar of Voters conspired to purge blacks from the
registration rolls in 1956, the Voters League retaliated with a voting rights
suit initiated by the Justice Department. The Voters League prevailed and
federal courts eventually forced the registrar to cease discriminating against
blacks, to report records to the federal judiciary, and to assist black appli-
cants in registering to vote. By 1964 nearly 18 percent of the parish voters
were black, a remarkably high percentage for the rural South.
∞≠
The Voters League never commanded enough votes to win elective ofﬁce
for a black candidate. For the most part, the league was limited to delivering
the black vote to white candidates in exchange for political favors. Although
political patronage offered some beneﬁts to the black community at large, it
more frequently created opportunities for personal aggrandizement. At its
worse, patronage disguised greed as public service. Some Voters League
critics felt that its leaders were principally interested in gaining personal
favors from politicians, and there was credence to the charge.
∞∞
In truth, the white political establishment offered a tempting assortment
of patronage rewards to compliant black leaders in an effort to discourage
them from conducting disruptive civil rights protests. Inducements included
positions in government and public education, ranging from school bus driv-
ers to school administrators. White political patronage bought inﬂuence and
loyalty in the black community. The practice testiﬁed to the fact that white
domination rested on more than repression and fear: it depended on consent
by a segment of the black middle class. Conﬂicts over segregation were to be
resolved by gentlemen behind closed doors. Time and again, civil rights
activists in Louisiana found the black middle class and clergy to be sig-
niﬁcant obstacles to organizing. One activist in East Felicana Parish reported
that the lack of interest in voter registration in 1964 could be attributed to,
among other things, the ‘‘general fear-inducing activity of the very active
community of Toms. Every move we make is broadcast by them to the whole
town.’’
∞≤
Indeed, the ‘‘mass meeting’’ technique represented a rudimentary form of
working-class control over the black middle class and redeﬁned the political
decision-making process in the black community. Prior to the civil rights
movement, racial conﬂicts and issues were normally negotiated by inter-
mediaries: middle-class power brokers, the naacp, or the Voters Leagues.


--- PAGE 25 ---
Beginnings 15
During the civil rights movement direct democracy mass meetings assem-
bled the black community to make decisions by consensus, a process that
functioned not only to build community support for the leaders’ decisions,
but also to prevent middle-class leaders from making secret agreements and
compromises with the white power structure. Plebiscitary democracy guar-
anteed that all agreements had to pass muster with the black rank and ﬁle:
the working class, the poor, and the youth.
∞≥
There were good reasons for the suspicions exhibited by the rank and ﬁle.
Black leadership was more complex and divided than the undifferentiated,
united image reﬂected in the popular historical myth of the civil rights move-
ment. The movement did not march in unison and speak with one voice. The
black community had its share of traitors, rascals, and ordinary fools. In
general, though, the leaders of the Voters League in Jonesboro were honor-
able men who had the community’s interests at heart. Nonetheless, it was
difﬁcult for the league to generate enthusiasm for voting rights when the
ballot beneﬁted only a handful of elite blacks. For most black voters in
Jonesboro, elections offered little more than a Hobson’s choice between
racism and more racism.
Deep divisions existed between the black clergy and the movement in
Jonesboro. Only one church, Pleasant Grove Baptist Church, initially sup-
ported the movement. Pleasant Grove had a highly active and concerned
membership, led by Henry and Ruth Amos who operated a gas station and
Percy Lee Bradford, a cab driver and mill worker. The dearth of civil rights
church leaders in Jonesboro was no anomaly. In both large cities and small
towns in the South, the attitude of black clergy toward the movement gener-
ally ranged from indifference to outright hostility. Medgar Evers, the mar-
tyred Mississippi naacp leader, once grumbled that the ministers ‘‘won’t give
us 50 cents for fear of losing face with the white man.’’ Martin Luther King
did not mince words about the complacency of his brothers of the collar in
Birmingham: ‘‘I’m tired of preachers riding around in big cars, living in ﬁne
homes, but not willing to ﬁght their part,’’ said King. ‘‘If you can’t stand up
with your own people, you are not ﬁt to be a leader.’’
∞∂
The conservative character of rural black clergy was owing to several fac-
tors. Church buildings were vulnerable to arson in retaliation for civil rights
activities (black churches in the South were frequently located outside of
town in remote, unguarded areas). It was common for insurance companies
to cancel insurance on churches that had been active in the movement.
Moreover, black ministers depended on good relationships with whites to
obtain loans for the all-important brick-and-mortar building projects.
But the clergy’s conservatism was also emblematic of the contradictory


--- PAGE 26 ---
16 Beginnings
character of the black church. On the one hand, the church was a force for
change. It provided a safe and nurturing sanctuary in a hostile, oppressive
world. In the midst of despair, it forged a new community, nourished racial
solidarity, deﬁned community values, and provided pride and hope. And
when it adopted the twentieth-century ‘‘social gospel’’ theology, as practiced
by Martin Luther King, the black church could even be a powerful vehicle for
social justice and national redemption.
In contrast to this uplifting role, though, the black church could also lapse
into a fatalistic outlook that bred passivity and political cynicism. Fatalism is
a rational and effective adaptation in reactionary times when people live on
hope alone. Some of the black clergy preached the gospel of resignation—
extolling the glories of heaven and eschewing social and political reform—
and, worse yet, honored the color line and its attendant traditions of defer-
ence. During the Montgomery Bus Boycott, black leader E. D. Nixon gave
voice to the frustration that many felt with the black clergy. ‘‘Let me tell
you gentlemen one thing,’’ Nixon told a group of ministers he had gathered
to organize the boycott. ‘‘You ministers have lived off of these wash-women
for the last hundred years and ain’t never done nothing for them.’’ Nixon
scolded that it was shameful that women were leading the boycott while the
ministers were afraid to even have their names published as supporters.
‘‘We’ve worn aprons all our lives. It’s time to take the aprons off . . . if we’re
gonna be mens, now’s the time to be mens.’’
∞∑
In contrast to the spotty record of the black church in the rural movement,
the black fraternal orders were frequently the backbone of resistance. Fra-
ternal orders such as the black Masons (e.g., Prince Hall) and Elks were
woven into the fabric of rural southern black life in the early 1950s and
1960s. Fraternal halls frequently served as meeting spaces for civil rights
activities and self-organized fraternal institutions—free of the constraints of
Christian paciﬁsm promulgated by the church—were one of the primary
cultural mechanisms for sustaining black masculine ideals of honor, physical
courage, and protection of family and community. Nearly all of the male civil
rights activists in Jonesboro belonged to one or more of these orders.
∞∏
There were exceptions to the conservative churches, and the Pleasant
Grove Baptist Church in Jonesboro was one of them. The church had at-
tracted several ﬁrm civil rights advocates and in late 1963 members of Pleas-
ant Grove, along with the Voters League, invited the Congress of Racial
Equality ( core) to initiate voter registration activities in Jonesboro and
Jackson Parish. Well known in the Louisiana movement, core was preparing
a major summer project in 1964. Part of the new breed of national civil rights
organizations, it was young, energetic, and committed to nonviolent direct


--- PAGE 27 ---
Beginnings 17
action. At the height of the modern civil rights movement in 1960–65, four
national organizations led organizing efforts in the South. The two largest
and best ﬁnanced were the venerable naacp, working primarily through its
local chapters and state ofﬁces, and the smaller but higher-proﬁle Southern
Christian Leadership Conference ( sclc), organized by Martin Luther King.
The Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee (sncc), which grew out of
the 1960s sit-in movement, was also initiated by King’s organization, but it
soon took on a life of its own and became the dominant national organiza-
tion in Mississippi. core worked throughout the South but Louisiana was
one of its strongholds; the group had been active in the state since the 1960
sit-ins.
∞π
Formed in 1942, core originated as a predominantly white paciﬁst organi-
zation, emerging out of the Fellowship of Reconciliation, a Christian paciﬁst
group that had been active since World War I. The early leaders of core were
profoundly inﬂuenced by the nonviolent teachings of Mohandas Gandhi. At
the center of their strategy was the concept of nonviolent direct action:
moral conversion through nonviolent protest. core advocated direct action
and militant protest without violence or hatred against the opponent. Its
principles prohibited members from retaliating against violence inﬂicted on
them. Nonviolence would convert their enemies through ‘‘love and suffer-
ing.’’ The organization had pragmatic as well as philosophical reasons for
advocating nonviolence in the South: core’s black leaders, such as James
Farmer and Bayard Rustin, feared a brutal white backlash if blacks engaged
in retaliatory violence.
∞∫
Despite its strong commitment to racial justice and community activism,
core had made only modest progress in the black community in the 1940s
and 1950s. Its greatest achievement was the 1947 Journey of Reconciliation,
a desegregation test of a Supreme Court decision that banned segregated
seating in interstate travel. Interracial testing teams attempted to integrate
buses in the upper South but encountered strong opposition and failed to
galvanize a broader movement. But in 1961 core catapulted into the ranks of
national civil rights organizations through its role in the electrifying Free-
dom Rides. Courageous core activists led integrated groups on bus rides
through the South in a campaign to integrate interstate travel facilities. They
braved mobs, beatings, ﬁrebombs, and jails. By 1962 they had triumphed in
integrating most bus travel and terminal accommodations.
∞Ω
In the early years of the movement the membership of both core and sncc
took their paciﬁsm seriously. core’s roots were in ecumenical religious paci-
ﬁsm, whereas sncc’s drew on philosophy and modern religion—ﬁnding its
moorings in Gandhi, the reform-minded social gospel, and existentialism.


--- PAGE 28 ---
18 Beginnings
Nonviolence and its faith in moral suasion were embedded in the genetic
material of sncc at its founding Raleigh Conference, in 1960, where King
proclaimed that the ‘‘philosophy of nonviolence’’ was a central theme of the
conference and the idea of ‘‘reconciliation’’ with one’s enemies—in this case,
he meant white southerners—was paramount. ‘‘Our ultimate end must be the
creation of the beloved community,’’ declared King. ‘‘The tactics of nonvio-
lence without the spirit of nonviolence may indeed become a new kind of vio-
lence.’’ Later, when the organizers were drafting sncc’s goals, Nashville sit-in
leader James Lawson opposed making ‘‘integration’’ the ﬁrst and foremost
goal; instead, he insisted that it should be nonviolence. He won the day.
≤≠
sncc activists attempted to apply their Gandhian strategy in Greenwood,
Mississippi, the ﬁrst major sncc project launched in 1961. Bob Moses, sncc’s
most inﬂuential leader, initially attempted to persuade local blacks not to
take up weapons in self-defense. As time went on and the hope for federal
protection waned, for many sncc and core activists nonviolence became
more a political tactic than a universal imperative. By 1963 and the Bir-
mingham campaign, even Martin Luther King had abandoned hope of win-
ning the hearts of white southerners; he opted for a strategy of confrontation
with the white South to gain sympathy from the white North. Some sncc
activists turned a blind eye to local armed self-defense, and by 1964 many
sncc staffers carried weapons themselves. But whatever misgivings sncc
activists had about pious nonviolence, they kept their concerns to them-
selves. From 1960 to 1965 sncc consistently and assiduously cultivated a
public image as a devoutly nonviolent organization. As late as the spring of
1964, when many black intellectuals and activists were questioning the ef-
fectiveness of nonviolence, sncc leader John Lewis told Dialogue Magazine
that although sncc was reexamining its paciﬁst doctrine, ‘‘The shedding of
blood is not part of our framework; it’s not a part of our philosophy,’’ and he
personally accepted ‘‘the philosophy of nonviolence.’’ When asked if this
doctrinaire commitment to paciﬁsm was at odds with the mass movement’s
growing dissatisfaction with nonviolence, Lewis admitted that sncc had a
problem. ‘‘I’m not sure whether sncc as an organization is ready and pre-
pared to catch up with the masses,’’ he said.
≤∞
Indeed, the debate on armed self-defense did not make its way onto
sncc’s national agenda until near the end of the movement, when the orga-
nization ﬁnally supported the right of local people to defend themselves—
something black Mississippians had been doing all along. At a national staff
meeting in Atlanta on 10 June 1964, the issue emerged when the sncc
leadership learned that Greenwood sncc staff were arming themselves. Re-


--- PAGE 29 ---
Beginnings 19
ports during the meeting left little doubt that guns in the sncc Freedom
Houses were the least of their concerns; local people everywhere in Mis-
sissippi were arming themselves and encouraging sncc to arm as well—
much to the consternation of many sncc staff members. Hollis Watkins
noted that although local people had always kept guns in their homes for
protection, the mood had changed. ‘‘There was a nonviolent attitude then,’’
said Watkins. Charles McLaurin reported that members of the Revolutionary
Action Movement ( ram), a black Marxist nationalist group, were success-
fully promoting armed self-defense among black farmers in the Mississippi
Delta, despite the best efforts of sncc staffer James Jones to ‘‘stamp out the
ideas brought in by outside groups’’ that were ‘‘killing formerly workable
ways.’’ Some staff wondered aloud if armed self-defense might lead to a
bloody pogrom against blacks. The dangers posed by the upcoming Freedom
Summer were undeniable, but black staff member Prathia Hall reminded
the group of its nonviolent faith in redemptive suffering and how, as Martin
Luther King had argued in the early days of the movement, white violence
that met no resistance would eventually shame the federal government into
intervening. ‘‘We must bring the reality of our situation to the nation,’’ said
Hall. ‘‘Bring the blood onto the white house door. If we die here it’s the
whole society that has pulled the trigger by its silence.’’ Hall’s comments
reﬂected the prevailing attitude among the devotees of nonviolence: the
blood of the persecuted, not the persecutor, was the only blood of salvation.
Still, many staff members were reluctant to not accept the protection prof-
fered by local people. After intense debate, sncc passed a resolution that
local people had the right to defend themselves and sncc would not disci-
pline staffers who local people happened to protect. sncc then reafﬁrmed its
policy that no weapons were allowed in the Freedom Houses or in any sncc
ofﬁce or project; nor would sncc staff or volunteers be allowed to carry
weapons; if volunteers were caught with guns, they would be expelled from
the organization. Moses dispatched Stokely Carmichael to Greenwood to
squelch the armed self-defense project. sncc continued to proselytize for
nonviolence during the 1964 Freedom Summer, and its training programs
ﬂooded the South with hundreds of new idealistic adherents of nonviolence.
At the Freedom Summer volunteer training center in Oxford, Ohio, more
than nine hundred volunteers went through nonviolent training led by de-
vout paciﬁst ideologues like James Lawson. And in most projects, local Afri-
can Americans drawn into the movement were required to undergo non-
violence training in preparation for attacks by police or vigilantes. So even as
sncc activists became disillusioned with nonviolence and the black/liberal


--- PAGE 30 ---
20 Beginnings
coalition, particularly after the disappointing 1964 Democratic National
Convention, the public image of sncc and the national civil rights move-
ment, for friends and foes alike, remained a nonviolent one.≤≤
core in Louisiana began with the same kind of commitment to nonviolent
idealism as sncc. Dave Dennis, who later became a major movement leader,
recalled that members of the New Orleans core chapter engaged in fasts
and vows of silence to prepare themselves for the discipline of nonviolence.
core volunteers were required to take an oath that they would ‘‘meet the
anger of any individual or group in the spirit of good will’’ and ‘‘submit to
assault and will not retaliate in kind by act or word.’’ The young white core
workers tended to be the more devout paciﬁsts, according to core leader
Ronnie Moore, a black native-born Louisianan, and there was always a divi-
sion between the national core leadership based in New York and the chap-
ters in the South. Moore’s introduction to the movement occurred when he
attended a workshop on nonviolence in the fall of 1961 while a student at
Southern University in Baton Rouge. But after two years in the trenches—
including ﬁfty-seven days in solitary conﬁnement for a charge of ‘‘criminal
anarchy’’ (attempting to overthrow the government of Louisiana)—Moore
regarded nonviolence as more of a tactic than a philosophical precept. Civil
rights workers had varying levels of commitment to the principle of non-
violence: some were ‘‘philosophical’’ Gandhians who believed that nonvio-
lence was a universal moral imperative; that it was the only path to lasting
peace; that redemptive suffering could indeed transform enemies. Other
activists fell within the ‘‘strategic nonviolence’’ category: they felt that there
were occasions when defensive violence was necessary and acceptable, but
that by refraining from violence, the movement could assert moral superi-
ority over racists and win sympathy from liberals and the world community.
Still to others, nonviolence was merely ‘‘tactical’’; they held no illusions
about converting enemies. For them, nonviolence was an expedient protest
method, valued because it won sympathy for the movement; more impor-
tant, it deprived racists of an excuse to escalate their violence during an
encounter. Movement people were constantly cautioning community mem-
bers that defensive violence would invite a ‘‘bloodbath.’’ One young black
volunteer from Tallulah, Louisiana, told an interviewer that, although he
was not a paciﬁst, he accepted the doctrine because core had told him that
‘‘all the southern white man wants is for the Negro to hit him so he can kill
him.’’ The volunteers streaming into the South for the 1964 summer projects
reﬂected all these viewpoints, often with overlaps, but most agreed on one
thing: nonviolence was the most effective way to appeal to the conscience of
northerners and encourage federal intervention.
≤≥


--- PAGE 31 ---
Beginnings 21
Ronnie Moore clearly ﬁt into the tactical nonviolence category. In 1963
he caused a minor controversy when he publicly suggested that armed self-
defense was justiﬁed in core’s campaign in St. Francisville, Louisiana. But, as
in the case of sncc, Moore remained discreet about the armed self-defense
activities around core projects, primarily to assuage the national ofﬁce’s fear
of losing white liberal support. Moore kept his silence on armed activities
even during the rise of the Deacons. ‘‘So I guess the deepest prayer in the
[national ofﬁce] was that whatever comments that we make in support of the
Deacons, that they would never hit the New York Times,’’ recalled Moore with
a laugh. ‘‘And so we didn’t make too many public statements.’’ Local blacks
also guarded several core Freedom Houses in the Deep South as early as
1962, according to movement veteran Michael Flug, but even the black de-
fenders ‘‘were not interested in publicly advocating armed self-defense.’’ The
movement was ‘‘playing to the media,’’ recalled Flug, and publicizing armed
self-defense ‘‘tactically . . . wasn’t a good idea.’’
≤∂
In 1964 core planned an ambitious ‘‘Louisiana Summer 1964’’ project,
core’s counterpart of the Mississippi Freedom Summer. The Louisiana proj-
ect was to focus on voter registration and desegregation of public facilities
and public accommodations. core had already established several local
projects in the state, including a beachhead in North Louisiana in Monroe,
about sixty miles east of Jonesboro. Monroe’s moderate naacp leadership
had invited core to organize the community, but core had little success
until it linked up with more militant working-class union leaders at the Olin-
Mathieson paper plant. Police harassment and an uncooperative registrar of
voters seriously hampered core’s efforts. From the outset, the civil rights
group’s presence rankled the Ku Klux Klan, and it was not long before the
Klan burned crosses on the lawn of the house where two core workers were
staying.
≤∑
The ﬁrst core organizers to visit Jonesboro were representative of the
social mix of core’s ﬁeld staff. Mike Lesser was a white northerner with no
experience in organizing in the South; in contrast, his black colleague Ron-
nie Moore was a seasoned organizer with eighteen arrests. Beginning in
January 1964, Lesser and Moore made several trips to Jonesboro to assist the
Voters League and local high school students in launching a voter registra-
tion campaign. Their initial success prompted core to assign several task
force workers to Jonesboro in the late spring of 1964 in preparation for the
summer project.
≤∏
One of the ﬁrst arrivals for the summer project was Catherine (Cathy)
Patterson, a young African American from Birmingham. Patterson had been
deeply moved by an experience at the George Washington Carver High


--- PAGE 32 ---
22 Beginnings
School, in Birmingham, where she was a classmate of Fred Shuttlesworth
Jr., the son of Birmingham’s ﬁrebrand civil rights leader, the Reverend Fred
Shuttlesworth. One day young Shuttlesworth arrived at school with his face
badly bruised and swollen. A racist mob had mercilessly beaten him and his
father during a demonstration. ‘‘When I heard about that, it just moved me
to action,’’ recalled Patterson. ‘‘I guess I was outraged. It’s one thing to hear
about it, and it’s another thing to see it on television. But to see someone that
you are sitting next to in class severely beaten . . . he was a child, just like
I was.’’
≤π
The incident inspired Patterson to plunge into political activism, ﬁrst lead-
ing demonstrations in Birmingham and later joining core after graduating
from high school in January 1963. She was ﬁrst sent to Gadsden, Alabama,
for nine months of organizing and then on to Atlanta for nonviolence train-
ing. At the training session, Patterson met most of the team that would be as-
signed to the summer project in Jonesboro. Among them was Ruthie Wells, a
young black from Baton Rouge, and the two white activists: William ‘‘Bill’’
Yates, a Cornell University English professor, and Mike Weaver.
≤∫
After completing her training, Patterson was dispatched to Jonesboro in
the spring of 1964, joining Danny Mitchell, a Syracuse University graduate
student. Eventually the Jonesboro summer project contingent comprised
half a dozen activists; four blacks and two whites. Fear in the black commu-
nity was so acute in Jonesboro that no local black family offered to house the
core activists. The task force workers had to settle for a small house on
Cedar Street in the black community, lent to them by a sympathetic black
woman who had moved to California. The core workers christened the
small home ‘‘Freedom House’’ and set about organizing voter registration.
The young Jonesboro activists took seriously the idea that their enemies
could be converted by the moral strength of nonviolence. As one core volun-
teer in Bogalusa put it, they felt that if there was violence against the move-
ment, ‘‘the good people, who have a good conscience, will recognize the
brutalities, and it will work on their conscience.’’ In this sense, they were
more idealistic than most of the Freedom Summer volunteers, the majority
of whom probably regarded nonviolence as a path to hearts in the North—
not the South. Nonetheless, Cathy Patterson had been schooled in non-
violence by devoted Gandhians like James Bevel, and when she arrived in
Jonesboro she immediately began earnestly searching for sympathetic white
supporters among town locals. It was a short search. Virtually all the town’s
leaders were segregationists, including Sheriff Newt T. Loe (a ‘‘rabid segre-
gationist,’’ noted Danny Mitchell) and Police Chief Adrian Peevy. core dis-


--- PAGE 33 ---
Beginnings 23
covered only one sympathetic white person, the town pharmacist, but this
lone convert preferred to keep his conscience to himself.≤Ω
The new core activists were undeterred by these failures, remaining con-
ﬁdent in their nonviolent faith and secure in the knowledge that history was
on their side. For the young crusaders, nonviolence seemed to be sweeping
the world, drawing sustenance from Gandhi’s success in India—one of the
ﬁrst fruitful anticolonial revolutions following World War II.
But theirs was a misplaced conﬁdence, rooted in a limited—if not naive—
understanding of southern history. Gandhi’s strategy would be difﬁcult to
transfer to the United States: ‘‘Bombingham’’ was not Bombay. There were
critical differences between India’s anticolonial struggle and the black liber-
ation struggle unfolding in the Deep South. East Indians were the vast ma-
jority in their homeland, far outnumbering their oppressors, who consti-
tuted little more than a tiny occupying army. Support for colonialism by the
British people was waning in the postwar years. In general, British workers
did not believe that their social and economic status depended on the con-
tinued exploitation of Indians. Cold War rhetoric exalting democracy and
freedom made it difﬁcult for the British to use force to suppress the re-
bellion. Thus, Gandhi had the advantage of engaging a distant enemy that
was constrained from using violence by domestic indifference and inter-
national opinion.
The United States was a different matter. In contrast to East Indians,
blacks were a tiny minority surrounded by a white majority. And unlike the
British working class, white southerners were invested in domination. Slav-
ery protected whites from the most degrading forms of labor and provided
them with relative economic security, status, and privilege. The slave system
had transformed poor whites into gendarmes for white supremacy. Time and
again, whites demonstrated that they were willing and eager to defend their
caste position at the expense of black life and freedom. Moreover, the geo-
graphic proximity of whites facilitated their use of terror as a political tool.
And use it they did. Emancipation made little difference. Whites resorted to
wholesale violence to overthrow the biracial Reconstruction governments.
In the years of de jure segregation that followed, white social and economic
status continued to be predicated on black subjugation. The beneﬁts of
segregation constantly reinforced white loyalty to racism and violence.
While international opinion may have inﬂuenced the British peerage, it
meant nothing to planters in the Mississippi Delta, let alone ‘‘corn and ’tater’’
whites in the piney woods.
It was these underlying material and social interests that made segrega-


--- PAGE 34 ---
24 Beginnings
tion resistant to moral appeal. Few in the United Kingdom believed that
Indian independence betokened the end of British economic security or
culture. But southern society rested on white supremacy. The death of segre-
gation meant the death of the old social order. Segregationists were not far
from the truth when they charged that integration was revolution. The new
abolitionists were asking southern whites for more than their hearts and
minds: they were demanding their caste status and the privileges pertaining
thereto. It is little mystery, then, why nonviolence failed to evoke love and
compassion in the hearts of southern whites.
≥≠
The old social order was not going to relent without battle in Jonesboro,
and the reality of violence soon became a concern for the core task force.
Police harassment had always been troublesome for civil rights activists
in the South, and the Jonesboro police did occasionally tail activists dur-
ing their voter registration visits in the countryside. But by southern stan-
dards, Jonesboro’s police department treated core reasonably well. Danny
Mitchell described the police chief ’s policy toward core as ‘‘I’m here to
protect you . . . but we don’t want any demonstrations.’’
≥∞
The Klan and other racist vigilantes posed a graver danger. From the
outset, menacing carloads of young whites targeted the Freedom House as
they cruised through the black community and shouted obscenities and
threats. This type of harassment was not new. For years, whites, acting with
impunity, would drive through the black ‘‘quarters’’ verbally harassing and
physically assaulting residents. The practice, referred to as ‘‘nigger knock-
ing,’’ was a time-honored tradition among whites in the rural South. But the
presence of black and white civil rights activists in the community added a
frenzied intensity to the ritual. It was not long before verbal assaults turned
to violence. In one foreboding incident, a gang of young whites broke several
windows at the Freedom House. The black community responded to the
attacks with a mix of concern and uncertainty. They had never been con-
fronted with the challenge of defending strangers in their midst. Caution
was the order of the day. A reckless display of armed self-defense might
provoke whites to retaliate with deadly force.
The unwritten racial code of conduct in the South forbade blacks from
using collective forms of self-defense, a prohibition that stemmed from an-
cient fears of bloody slave rebellions. The black community in Jonesboro
anxiously searched for a way to defend their charges without violating the
racial code, but the imminent threat of violence left few alternatives. Within
a few days, a small number of local black men began to quietly guard the
core activists. Slowly they appeared, unarmed sentinels, silent and watch-
ful. At ﬁrst they did nothing more than sit on the porch of the Freedom


--- PAGE 35 ---
Beginnings 25
House or follow the activists like quiet shadows as they went about their
organizing work.≥≤
Among this initial group of guards was Earnest Thomas. The short, power-
fully built twenty-nine-year-old supported his ﬁve children as a paper mill
worker, mason, and handyman. His life centered on the institutions and
amusements of small-town African American life: he was an occasional
churchgoer, a member of the black Scottish Rite Masons, and a devotee of
barroom dice games. Held at arms length by the ‘‘respectable’’ black middle
class, Thomas nonetheless commanded community respect for his courage
and martial skills. His street savvy and cool, intimidating demeanor earned
him the nickname ‘‘Chilly Willy.’’ ‘‘Chilly was very ﬁrm,’’ recalled Annie Pur-
nell Johnson, a local core volunteer. ‘‘He didn’t care. Whatever he said he
was going to do, he did it.’’ His determination was accented by his penchant
for force. ‘‘He was violent too,’’ said Johnson. ‘‘He could be very violent if he
wanted to be. If you pushed his button, he would deliver.’’
≥≥
Thomas attended high school in Jonesboro through the eleventh grade,
then dropped out and served a stint in the air force during the Korean War.
Like many young blacks in the South, military service dramatically changed
his attitude toward Jim Crow. Three years and eight months as an airborne
radio operator had afforded him brief and seductive glimpses of a world
free of segregation. He met northern blacks who, with a better education
and more opportunities, were increasingly impatient with the slow pace of
change. Thomas absorbed their restless craving for freedom. The military
also provided him, and thousands of other southern blacks, with the tools to
realize this dream of freedom: leadership skills and an appreciation of the
power of disciplined collective action. Discharged from the service, Thomas
spurned the South and journeyed northward to Chicago. He worked for one
year at International Harvester but soon returned to Jonesboro to raise
a family.
Thomas was eager to work with core, but he had serious reservations
about the nonviolent terms imposed by the young activists. He admired their
devotion and energy, but the college students seemed dangerously naive
about the potential for terrorist violence. core made it clear to Thomas that
it was unwilling to compromise its stand on nonviolence. It had a long-
standing policy that activists should not accept armed protection from lo-
cal people. In Gulfport, Mississippi, one Freedom Summer participant re-
counted how the volunteers had rebuffed offers of protection, much to the
dismay of local residents. ‘‘We had a problem with a man . . . who took it
upon himself to protect us from the white men who visited us yesterday,’’ the
volunteer wrote. ‘‘He came over at night with his friends and brought along a


--- PAGE 36 ---
26 Beginnings
machine gun and ammunition and told us not to worry. But he ﬁnally got
ticked off at us, because we got ticked off at him. That machine gun had
us edgy.’’
≥∂
If the core activists sounded like missionaries, there was a good reason.
Theirs was a religious style of organizing, characterized by an evangelical
faith in doctrine and an unswerving belief in a bipolar world of good and
evil. Religious doctrine, as immutable truth, could not be compromised to
suit the sinner. One either accepted or rejected the divinely inspired word.
One was either saint or sinner.
≥∑
Like most black men in the South, however, Earnest Thomas thought it
better to be damned than dead. He and the other men in the defense group
politely resisted core’s attempt to dictate the terms of the local movement.
Indeed, there was little support for the nonviolence that core was advo-
cating among black southerners. Even James Lawson, the movement’s fore-
most spokesperson for Gandhian nonviolence, admitted later that there
‘‘never has been an acceptance of the nonviolent approach’’ in the South and
the idea that blacks had initially accepted nonviolence and then became
disillusioned was ‘‘nonsense.’’
≥∏
Thomas quickly emerged as the leader of the defense group. No doubt his
military training had accustomed him to organization. While other men
would come and go, Thomas made it his responsibility to elevate the level of
organization and instill discipline and order. During the day, the guards
simply watched and kept their weapons concealed. But at night the veil of
darkness provided cover for hooded terrorists. The guards knew that a show
of weapons would discourage Klan violence. So the night brought the moon,
the stars, and the guns.
Guns posed a dilemma for core from the very beginning. The defense
group had no difﬁculty in accepting core’s right to determine its own non-
violent strategy and, on the whole, thought it an effective one. But its mem-
bers were not prepared to abdicate their responsibility to defend their com-
munity. They were unwilling to extend nonviolence to all aspects of the
black freedom movement, particularly in the center of a Klan stronghold.
That would be suicide. They were outnumbered two-to-one, and the police
offered no protection.
Underlying the conﬂict over nonviolence was a deeper issue of autonomy.
Who would determine the local organizing strategy for the black move-
ment? Should it be the national organizations, with their imported strategy,
dominated by a coalition of middle-class blacks, organized labor, and white
paciﬁsts and liberals? Or would the local community, with its own strategy
determined by local experience, prevail? core initially won the philosophi-


--- PAGE 37 ---
Beginnings 27
cal argument, overcoming locals with superior debating skills and the force
of a coherent worldview and strategy. But slowly ‘‘Chilly Willy’’ and his
working-class colleagues began to ﬁnd words for their thoughts and gain
conﬁdence in their own judgments and opinions.
Thomas’s quest for autonomy was not self-conscious and deliberate. But
instinctively he and the defense group began to assert their authority over
local matters. They wanted the right to defend their community with force if
necessary. core had balked at these terms and suggested a compromise in
which the guards concealed their weapons during the day. The debate found
its way into many late-night discussions around the kitchen table in the
Freedom House. Cathy Patterson remembered the activists admonishing
Thomas, ‘‘Chilly, if you guys are going to be out there with guns, you have to
hide them.’’ Thomas would ask why. ‘‘Because you’re going to invoke vio-
lence,’’ replied the activists. ‘‘If you have a gun, you have to be prepared to use
it. And we don’t want people to get hurt.’’ Thomas patiently listened to their
arguments and then answered ﬁrmly, ‘‘You’re stepping on my toes. We’re
doing this. We know this town. We know these people. Just let us do it.’’
≥π
core relented. ‘‘What happened was that Chilly Willy and them started
going out with us,’’ recalled Ronnie Moore, ‘‘and their position was, ‘O.K.,
you guys can be nonviolent if you want to . . . and we appreciate you being
nonviolent. But we are not going to stand by and let these guys kill you.’ ’’
≥∫
The defense group’s objection to the nonviolent code went beyond the
issue of guard duty. Many of the men, including Thomas, declined to partici-
pate in any nonviolent direct action, including pickets and marches, because
of the rules of engagement set by core. ‘‘If you were attacked, if you were
spat upon, if you were kicked or jeered, we were very clear that we were not
to respond to that,’’ noted Cathy Patterson. core quickly discovered that the
black men of Jonesboro were unwilling to endure the humiliation attending
these restrictions. ‘‘There was too much pride to do that,’’ said Patterson.
Nonviolence required black men to passively endure humiliation and physi-
cal abuse—a bitter elixir for a group struggling to overcome the southern
white stereotype of black men as servile and cowardly. For the black men of
Jonesboro, nonviolence appeared to ask them to sacriﬁce their manhood
and honor in order to acquire it.
≥Ω
Nonviolence also demanded that black men forego their right to defend
family members who joined nonviolent protests. This tested the limits of
their forbearance. The institution of white supremacy was a complex web of
social and political customs, proscribed behaviors, government policies, and
laws. Some aspects of racism were more endurable than others. At its most
innocuous, segregation was little more than demeaning symbolism. For the


--- PAGE 38 ---
28 Beginnings
most part, blacks and whites drank the same water, ate the same foods, and
rode the same buses. But some racist practices were intolerable insults to
black manhood. Compromising the sanctity of family was one of those trans-
gressions. ‘‘The things that go with racial segregation . . . you lived with
that,’’ said Cathy Patterson of separate seating and other peculiarities of
physical segregation. ‘‘They were things you just had to accept.’’ But violence
against family and home violated the ancient right to a safe hearth and
home. ‘‘When they saw their own children get hit or beaten,’’ the men ‘‘re-
acted very differently.’’ Nonviolence obliged black men to stand idly by as
their children and wives were savagely beaten, a debasement that most
black men would not tolerate. They clung tenaciously to their claims to
manhood and honor. Ultimately, nonviolence discouraged black men from
participating in civil rights protests in the South and turned the movement
into a campaign of women and children.
∂≠
The precepts of nonviolence clashed with black men’s notions of self-
respect and honor. At times this conﬂict placed black men in painful quan-
daries, as when women activists called men to task, questioning their man-
hood if they refused to walk the picket line. In nearby Natchez, Mississippi,
where another Deacons chapter would soon emerge, Jesse Bernard, a young
naacp worker, stood before a mass meeting and challenged black men to rise
to the occasion. ‘‘If the children walk the line, you can protect them,’’ Ber-
nard admonished the men. ‘‘All I want to say is every man in here with idle
time, if you can’t walk the picket line from tomorrow on, won’t you come by
and sit on the side somewhere and see what’s happening, so that if some of
those people come up to hurt some of your children, your heart will be
right. . . . I want to see every man who stood up and said he was a man be out
on that picket line.’’
∂∞
Things were not that simple. African American men stayed off the picket
lines for good reason: the physical and emotional risks that black men as-
sumed when they joined a nonviolent protest far outweighed what black
women and children suffered. In the moving short documentary Panola by
Ed Pincus, the ﬁlm’s subject, an African American man named Panola from
Natchez, ends the ﬁlm with a stunning soliloquy in his one-room shack. As
he delivers his angst-ﬁlled words, Panola constantly returns to the theme of
‘‘kill or be killed.’’ For Panola, the choice on the picket line was ‘‘kill or be
killed.’’ Bound by notions of masculine honor, black men had much more to
lose than women and children: what was at stake was their pride, manhood,
and, very likely, their life. Not only were men more likely to be attacked—
witness that black men were virtually the only victims of lynching—but if
attacked, many believed that upholding their dignity left but two choices:


--- PAGE 39 ---
Beginnings 29
kill or be killed. Nor would their sense of honor allow them to sit idly and
watch their families be brutalized. From the perspective of most African
American men, walking the picket line meant making a choice between life
and death. James Jackson, a Deacons leader from Natchez, summed up the
dilemma: ‘‘When I grab that sign and get on the picket line, I couldn’t say
that I’m not afraid, man . . . I still have fear, you know, but I’d stay right there
and die before I turned around.’’
∂≤
The core activists in Jonesboro began to slowly grasp the predicament
they had created for black men. The compromise with armed self-defense
provoked ‘‘intense philosophical discussion and debates’’ within the core
summer task force. The controversy eventually led some activists, like Mike
Lesser, to leave core. But for most activists, the palpable fear in Jonesboro
gradually eroded their faith in the grand intellectual theories. There was a
conﬂict over the issue of nonviolence, observed Cathy Patterson, but ‘‘there
also was enough fear that the conﬂict was more intellectual than it was real.’’
Patterson herself arrived at what she considered a principled compromise:
‘‘During the day I thought it was inappropriate to have anyone with us
bearing weapons. But when it got dark, we were in a great deal of danger. I
had no objections to their presence at night. We were defenseless at night.’’
∂≥
Self-defense became an immediate concern as the movement shifted from
voter registration to direct action desegregation demonstrations. core’s ini-
tial voter registration drive provoked some harassment—generally limited to
white teenagers driving through the community and shouting taunts. Most
whites regarded core’s presence as a nuisance more than a menace. Voter
registration organizing conﬁned core activists to the black community, so
the organizers seldom crossed paths with local whites. The subdued re-
sponse by whites was understandable. Despite its symbolism, black voter
registration posed little threat to white supremacy and the segregated caste
system. Even if all blacks in Jonesboro were registered, they would comprise
only one-third of the vote. At best, the black vote could be bartered for
inﬂuence, but it would not fundamentally alter social relationships. White
businesses would continue to thrive on segregated labor, white jobs would
remain secure, and life would amble along as usual in the little mill town.
∂∂
But desegregation was another matter. Segregation was the foundation of
the social and labor systems of the South. Desegregation challenged the
system of privilege that ensured whites the best jobs, housing, education,
and government services. If the segregation barriers fell, white workers
lost substantially more than a separate toilet. The conﬂict over segregation
was ultimately a deadly contest for power—as Jonesboro blacks would soon
discover.


--- PAGE 40 ---
chapter
2
The Deacons Are Born
one sweltering evening in late July, only a few weeks
after core had arrived in Jonesboro, electricity to the black quarters was
suddenly cut off, plunging the community into an eerie darkness. In the dim
shadows, Earnest Thomas joined a few friends in front of a hotel, assuming
that the local power company was conducting line repairs. The men talked
and joked in the pitch-black street, the glowing tips of their cigarettes bob-
bing in the dark. Suddenly Thomas noticed a ﬂashing red light in the dis-
tance. As it grew nearer, it became apparent that a police car was leading a
caravan of more than ﬁfty vehicles into the black community. Children ran
yelling with excitement to greet the parade. But as the convoy grew nearer,
Thomas caught his ﬁrst glimpse of the hooded men who ﬁlled each car,
tossing leaﬂets into the street. Thomas was dumbstruck: the assistant chief
of police was in the lead car escorting the Klan. As each car passed, Thomas
noticed that the license tags had been covered to conceal the identity of the
Klansmen. But it was a small town, and Thomas and others easily recognized
many of the cars as belonging to Jonesboro residents, including several
upstanding white businessmen and even the owner of a grocery store in
the black community. The sight of the hooded convoy sent a shudder of
fear through many older blacks. But the children, oblivious to the danger,
grabbed the swirling leaﬂets and brought them to their anxious parents. The
leaﬂets warned blacks to stay away from core and the civil rights move-
ment. Though the Klan convoy frightened the old, the invasion only further
incensed Thomas and his friends. Little did the Klansmen realize that their
act of provocation would, in a matter of weeks, give rise to a well-organized
and public black militia dedicated to ending Klan terror, and that the armed
self-defense group would spread through the Deep South to more than
twenty-one cities and recruit hundreds of members—and become the bane
of the Ku Klux Klan.
∞


--- PAGE 41 ---
The Deacons Are Born 31
The Klan caravan was a direct response to the desegregation campaign ini-
tiated by core in June. While in Mississippi, Freedom Summer volunteers
were explicitly instructed to restrict their activities to voter registration and
avoid direct action desegregation protests, core had given the local chapters
in Louisiana more latitude to test the new civil rights bill that would become
effective in July. The prospect of a militant desegregation campaign similar to
Birmingham provoked considerable anxiety in the black community. Many
blacks feared that Jonesboro’s tiny six-man police department would prove
unwilling or incapable of protecting the activists. Moreover, it was becoming
increasingly clear that Earnest Thomas’s informal defense group formed in
the spring of 1964 was an insufﬁcient substitute for police protection.
Taking the initiative to avert a disaster was a newcomer to the black
community, Frederick Douglas Kirkpatrick. At six feet four inches, Kirk-
patrick was an imposing ﬁgure. He had been a Grambling University stand-
out athlete and brieﬂy played professional football. A stern visage and sten-
torian basso voice gave him a commanding presence and natural leadership
qualities. Kirkpatrick arrived in Jonesboro in 1963, an ambitious young high
school athletics coach from nearby Homer in Claiborne Parish. In Homer,
Kirkpatrick had led his teams to two state championships. Now he had ad-
vanced his career as the new physical education teacher and athletics coach
at Jackson High School, the black high school in Jonesboro. Though he had
no formal religious training, Kirkpatrick had assumed the title of ‘‘Rever-
end,’’ a common practice in his day. His father had provided him with a re-
ligious upbringing, and the elder Kirkpatrick himself was a staunch Church
of God in Christ preacher who had built an impressive ministry of three
churches in Claiborne Parish.
≤
Kirkpatrick’s optimism about his new position quickly gave way to dis-
appointment. The conditions at Jackson High were abominable. The school
offered no foreign languages. A new library was ﬁlled with empty shelves.
Textbooks were tattered hand-me-downs from the white schools. Students
were routinely dispatched as gardeners to maintain the superintendent’s
personal lawn. The only vocational offerings were home economics and
agriculture, a curriculum that condemned blacks to live as maids and share-
croppers.
≥
With core coming to Jonesboro, Kirkpatrick and other black leaders be-
gan discussing the idea of a black volunteer auxiliary police squad that
would assist the established police force in monitoring Klan harassment in
the black community. Unlike Thomas’s informal self-defense group, the aux-
iliary police unit would be ofﬁcially sanctioned, providing legitimacy and
respect. Kirkpatrick approached Chief of Police Adrian Peevy with the re-


--- PAGE 42 ---
32 The Deacons Are Born
quest for a volunteer black patrol, and much to everyone’s surprise, Peevy
accepted the proposal and promptly deputized Kirkpatrick and several other
blacks, including Henry Amos, Percy Lee Bradford, Ceola Quals, and Eland
Harris.
Peevy issued the squad an old police car with radio, guns, clubs, and
handcuffs, and local white merchants donated money to outﬁt the men in
crisp new uniforms. The police chief assured them that their police powers
extended to whites as well as blacks and that they could arrest whites if
necessary. Peevy’s decision to form the squad appeared uncharacteristically
enlightened for a white lawman in North Louisiana, and many in the black
community questioned his motives. Some, like Earnest Thomas, suspected
that he planned to use the squad as a convenient and politic way to discipline
and control the civil rights movement: ‘‘They were looking for some black
policemen to do their dirty work,’’ scoffed Thomas.
∂
Kirkpatrick understood the dilemma confronting him. He knew that Peevy
expected the black squad to discourage demonstrations and arrest civil
rights workers. But he thought that, despite these limitations, the squad
could provide a modicum of protection for the black community and core. It
was not his only concern. Though a respected community leader, he also
occupied jobs that obligated him to the white power structure. Kirkpatrick
was employed by the public schools as a teacher-coach and by the town as a
part-time manager of the public swimming pool. His position as de facto
chief of the black police placed him in a potentially compromising position.
Local laws and courts mandated segregation and gave police the power to
disrupt civil rights protests. In his new role, Kirkpatrick would be thrust in
the embarrassing position of enforcing segregation laws and thwarting law-
ful protests. Many agreed with Thomas’s observation that Kirkpatrick was
wearing ‘‘too many hats.’’
∑
Among the members of the new police squad were several men who had
already worked with Thomas in the informal defense group. They were
mature and respected community leaders, like Bradford and Amos, who had
been active in the Voters League. All of the volunteers were relatively inde-
pendent of the white power structure. Amos owned a gas station, Harris was
a barber, and Bradford owned a cab service and also worked at the mill. The
black squad began patrolling the community at night in June 1964, assuming
many of the duties of the informal defense group. The patrol appeared to
deter harassment, and aside from a few incidents, June was relatively quiet.
At the beginning of the summer, Cathy Patterson and Danny Mitchell
were joined by two more black core task force organizers, Fred Brooks, a
black college student from Tennessee, and Willie Mellion, a young black


--- PAGE 43 ---
The Deacons Are Born 33
recruit from Plaquemine, Louisiana. The expanded task force continued its
work with the Voters League, concentrating on voter registration. But the
implementation of the Civil Rights Act’s public accommodations provisions
in July 1964 radically changed the strategy of the civil rights movement.
Previously core’s summer project had centered on voter registration, which
liberal contributors and foundations had supported ﬁnancially. Liberals
viewed the vote as key to transforming the South; they also hoped that
new black voters would strengthen the Democratic Party in the upcoming
fall presidential race. But for most blacks in Jonesboro, voter registration
seemed more like vacant symbolism. Archie Hunter, an African American
core volunteer from New York, summed up how many poor blacks felt about
voting: ‘‘It’s only a ballot he’s putting in the box, and he wants food. He
wants a ballot put in his stomach.’’ It was difﬁcult for civil rights workers to
tell someone who had ‘‘12 children, living in a shack, working for, say, $12 a
week. . . . ‘You should get out and vote. This will make your condition
better.’ ’’
∏
It made even less sense for teenagers who were years from voting age. As
July drew near, young people in particular grew impatient with the racial
barriers to education, public accommodations, and employment. They im-
portuned the core activists with demands for direct action protest to test the
public accommodations provisions of the Civil Rights Act. In Mississippi, the
Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee ( sncc, pronounced ‘‘Snick’’)
was encountering the same community restlessness to test the desegrega-
tion laws, as the Freedom Summer activists continued to focus on voter
registration.
π
Local people were not the only impatient ones. On 22 June Fred Brooks,
the irrepressible young core organizer from Tennessee, daringly ﬂaunted
segregation laws by drinking from the ‘‘whites only’’ water fountain in the
Jackson Parish Court House. Deputy W. D. McBride hustled Brooks into
Sheriff Newt T. Loe’s ofﬁce and ordered him not to repeat the offense.
Brooks spun on his heels, headed toward the fountain, and deﬁantly drank
from it again.
∫
Deputy McBride, ﬂustered and seething, ordered Brooks back into his
ofﬁce and hastily summoned Kirkpatrick in his capacity as a police deputy. It
was the ﬁrst test of the black police. When Kirkpatrick arrived, a furious
Sheriff Loe cornered Kirkpatrick. ‘‘You’d better tell this boy something about
drinking from these white water fountains,’’ steamed the sheriff. ‘‘I’m not
gonna have this. I’m gonna peel his damn head.’’ The incident ended without
an arrest.
Ω
Relations with law enforcement continued to deteriorate as core stepped


--- PAGE 44 ---
34 The Deacons Are Born
up its desegregation protests. On 4 July, a sheriff ’s deputy detained Robert
Weaver, a core task force worker, and took him to the police station for
interrogation and ﬁngerprinting. Sheriff Loe lectured Weaver that blacks did
not need core since they could register to vote in Jackson Parish. The sheriff
warned Weaver to leave town by morning, and one deputy threatened to
‘‘bust his head’’ if he saw Weaver again.
∞≠
Ronnie Moore and Mike Lesser became the next victims of the terror
campaign. On 8 July the two core organizers left Jonesboro for the one-
hour trip to Monroe. As they drove out of town, they noticed three carloads
of whites abruptly pull onto the highway behind them. Lesser nervously
watched in the rearview mirror as the cars trailed behind. He and Moore
were seasoned activists who understood the danger posed by the stalking
caravan. The two tensely discussed their predicament. With rugged terrain
skirting both sides of the road, their only option was to stay on the blacktop.
Lesser pushed the accelerator in an effort to outrun the pursuers, but one car
in the caravan suddenly passed them, blocking their escape. Moore and
Lesser frantically debated whether to ram the car from behind. As the sec-
onds ticked away the two continued to speed deeper into the pine forest and
farther away from the relative security of Jonesboro. Moore decided that
they had to turn around. He ordered Lesser to execute a quick U-turn in the
middle of the road.
∞∞
Lesser slammed the breaks and wheeled the car around, placing the vehi-
cle on a collision course with the two remaining pursuers who were blocking
both lanes. Moore recalled their fatalistic mood. ‘‘We decided at that mo-
ment that we were going back to the freedom house, either in one piece or
with one of those cars.’’ Lesser dropped the accelerator to the ﬂoor and
streaked toward the oncoming cars. At the last moment one of the cars
veered to the side and was sideswiped as Lesser and Moore sped by. ‘‘That
was the ﬁrst game of chicken that I probably ever played,’’ remembered
Moore.
∞≤
The two organizers raced back to Jonesboro, reaching speeds of one hun-
dred miles an hour. From the safety of the Freedom House, they called the
sheriff ’s ofﬁce to ﬁle a complaint. Within minutes, Loe and members of the
black police squad arrived. Loe had already received a complaint from the
whites Moore and Lesser had eluded. To their amazement, Loe ordered the
black deputy to arrest them for reckless driving and leaving the scene of an
accident. The deputy refused and Loe eventually departed. Fearing another
attack on Lesser and Moore, the black squad provided them with an armed
escort to Monroe that evening. The black deputy’s refusal to arrest the activ-
ists was the ﬁrst time that the black police failed to perform according to


--- PAGE 45 ---
The Deacons Are Born 35
Loe’s expectations. It was clear that the squad was not going to be willing
accomplices in repression.
The campaign of harassment against core increased in the days following
the implementation of the Civil Rights Act. On 11 July, six core task force
members including Brooks, Weaver, Yates, and Patterson were stopped by
Jackson and Lincoln Parish law enforcement ofﬁcials along with the Loui-
siana State Police. Under the pretext of investigating a robbery, police pho-
tographed and physically threatened the core workers and searched and
impounded their car.
∞≥
Emboldened by the conduct of police ofﬁcials, racist vigilantes also esca-
lated their attacks on the movement. On 13 July, three whites in a car con-
fronted core workers in the front yard of the Freedom House. Harassing the
paciﬁsts had become routine for the young hooligans, but on this occasion
they were startled by their reception. In a matter of minutes, three black
policemen—Kirkpatrick, Eland Harris, and Henry Amos—arrived and or-
dered the whites to leave. The young men bristled at the command coming
from the black ofﬁcers but eventually retreated, punctuating their depar-
ture with a threat to return with 125 whites to ‘‘make trouble.’’ As word of
the threat spread in the black community, dozens of volunteers with guns
ﬂooded into the streets. The show of force deterred additional attacks for
the day.
∞∂
The spontaneous show of armed support for the black policemen re-
assured them that they could rely on a substantial body of men to comple-
ment their ranks when necessary. Ironically, by refusing to protect the black
community, the white establishment had inadvertently forced the black
community to arm itself and assume responsibility for its own defense. If the
harassment was intended to dissuade core and the community from dem-
onstrating, the strategy failed woefully. Young blacks were even more deter-
mined to test the Civil Rights Act through direct action. The shift from voter
registration was reﬂected in Jonesboro core’s decision to reorganize into
two sections: a direct action program, coordinated by Fred Brooks, and a
voter registration section, supervised by Cathy Patterson. Two principal tar-
gets for desegregation were selected in July: the public library and the town
swimming pool.
∞∑
The segregation practices at the public library particularly vexed young
blacks. Although their tax dollars supported the library, blacks were pro-
hibited from using the library building and obtaining library loan cards.
Their only access to books was the periodic visit by the bookmobile. The
library test began with a letter to the head librarian from the Voters League
requesting access to library cards. When there was no response, a group of


--- PAGE 46 ---
36 The Deacons Are Born
young protesters led by core entered the library and attempted to obtain
cards on 22 July. Within minutes, Sheriff Loe arrived and ordered the pro-
testers out of the library and the doors locked. The protesters left peaceably
but renewed their efforts the next day, this time picketing outside the li-
brary. Once again law enforcement ofﬁcials were summoned and promptly
arrested twenty-four people for parading without a permit.
∞∏
Police told the protesters that they were being arrested in response to a
complaint lodged by a mortuary business located across the street from the
library. The proprietor had claimed that the chanting protesters were ‘‘of-
fending’’ his deceased clients. The protesters would later muse that it was
the ﬁrst time in history that someone had been arrested for ‘‘disturbing
the dead.’’
∞π
The direct action demonstrations increasingly posed problems for Kirk-
patrick’s black police squad. Town authorities were determined to use the
squad to enforce the illegal segregation laws. The situation came to a head
on 29 July. As part of the ﬁrst concerted public accommodations tests, a
group of young protesters converged on the M & D Restaurant and Cafeteria
in downtown Jonesboro. The restaurant owner, Margaret Temple, refused
service to the testers at the front entrance, ordering them to purchase their
food at the back door, as was the custom. When the testers refused, Temple
angrily shouted, ‘‘Y’all damn niggers ought to be out trying to ﬁnd work to
do, because ain’t no damn nigger coming through my front door as long as
I’m running this place.’’
∞∫
The protesters and cafe owner were at a standoff until Kirkpatrick and
another black ofﬁcer arrived. Temple demanded that Kirkpatrick ‘‘come get
these damn niggers,’’ but he ignored her order and, instead, turned to the
protesters and asked if they were disturbing the peace. The group responded
in unison with a resounding ‘‘No!’’ The commotion quickly attracted a crowd
of whites, including an angry elderly man wielding a stick. Kirkpatrick con-
fronted the white man and stood his ground. The standoff lasted several
minutes until a second black ofﬁcer intervened and abruptly ordered the
protesters to ‘‘move out.’’
∞Ω
Within a few hours, the black police faced another test. core moved to its
next target of the day, the ‘‘whites-only’’ municipal swimming pool. Testers
arrived at 2:00 p.m. and found the pool locked and several parish deputies
and town police ofﬁcers waiting beside the street. When the pool opened
shortly thereafter, the testers attempted to enter but were turned away.
Several police ofﬁcers gathered at the pool entrance, including Kirkpatrick.
Police Chief Peevy commanded him to order the protesters to leave. Kirk-
patrick complied, twice asking the protesters to disperse. The protesters


--- PAGE 47 ---
The Deacons Are Born 37
refused to budge. Peevy grew irritated and, as Kirkpatrick watched help-
lessly, ordered the white police to arrest ﬁfteen protesters, ten of whom were
juveniles. Peevy also had two mothers of the juveniles arrested on charges of
‘‘contributing to the delinquency of a minor’’ by allowing their children to
participate in the protest. The ‘‘contributing’’ charge was subsequently used
to arrest virtually the entire core staff in the days that followed. During the
next three days of protest police arrested a total of thirty-nine protesters.
≤≠
The black police had not fared well in their ﬁrst outing. They had been
forced to disband a lawful protest at the M & D Restaurant and then to as-
sist Sheriff Loe in breaking up the swimming pool demonstration. The pro-
tests underscored the squad’s contradictory and untenable position in the
community. Some blacks in Jonesboro began to wonder if they had merely
traded vigilante repression for black police repression.
The wave of protests and arrests quickly brought the Ku Klux Klan into the
fray. It was on the evening of protests that the Jonesboro assistant police
chief had led the Klan caravan of ﬁfty cars through the black community. As
soon as the caravan passed, Thomas joined a delegation of black men, in-
cluding some of the black police, and drove directly to Police Chief Peevy’s
house to await his return. When Peevy arrived, the delegation demanded to
know why the police department had escorted the Klan through the black
community. Peevy responded stifﬂy that his department routinely escorted
funerals and he considered the Klan parade the same thing. The black men
were not persuaded. Thomas recalled that they bluntly informed Peevy that
it would not happen again, ‘‘because we won’t allow that to happen again.
We told him straight up that there would not ever be a passing through the
community like that.’’ If it did happen again, ‘‘there was going to be some
killing going on.’’ The police chief listened stoically in his yard. If he did not
respond in word, he did in action; Peevy never again provided an escort for
the Klan.
≤∞
The Klan’s convoy was only the beginning of its well-planned night of
terror. The night riders spread across Jackson Parish and dotted the land-
scape with a score of blazing crosses. A frightening situation was also unfold-
ing at the courthouse. Under the cloak of darkness, approximately one hun-
dred armed whites with riﬂes had converged on the parish jail and were
threatening the civil rights protesters held there as prisoners.
≤≤
Local core activists hastily called Marvin Rich, core’s attorney in New
York, and apprised him of the dangerous mob scene at the jail. Rich imme-
diately called Lee White, a presidential assistant, and roused him from his
slumber. White, in turn, contacted the Justice Department and arranged for
the fbi to intervene. The mob was soon dispersed, and several armed black


--- PAGE 48 ---
38 The Deacons Are Born
men surreptitiously stood guard for the rest of the night from adjacent
rooftops.
The Klan convoy and the mob scene at the parish jail were the last straw.
Whatever trust the Jonesboro black community once had for local law en-
forcement had been extinguished by the recent police harassment and col-
lusion with the Klan. These were dark days for the civil rights movement
across the South. In nearby Philadelphia, Mississippi, the National Guard
was combing the woods for James Chaney, Andrew Goodman, and Michael
Schwerner, the civil rights workers murdered by the Klan with police com-
plicity. John Doar of the Justice Department had told the Freedom Summer
volunteers that because of the doctrine of federalism and states’ rights, fbi
agents could only observe and investigate incidents of police or vigilante
harassment and violence; they could not make an arrest unless a federal law
was violated. If the local police and federal government would not protect
the Bill of Rights, who was left? The black police squad had been helpless
against the mob action and the Klan caravan. Despite their efforts to the
contrary, the squad had become the unwitting tool of the white power struc-
ture in neutralizing the protest movement. Kirkpatrick had managed to ﬁ-
nesse several encounters, but he could not overcome problems posed by the
contradictory role of the squad: in the ﬁnal analysis, the white establishment
was the squad’s source of authority, and the custodians of white supremacy
were not about to arm their own grave diggers. The only reliable means of
defense would be an independent self-defense organization, exclusively ac-
countable to the black community. Power had to be seized, not bequeathed.
The arrogant and insulting intrusion of the Klan in the black community
had left many black men angry and eager for action. The practical issue of
protecting the community was paramount, but the Klansmen’s caravan was
more symbol than substance. For most of the black men, the issue was
honor, not safety.
Within a few days, a determined group of approximately twenty black
men met at the union hall to discuss forming a self-defense group. The
meeting brought together the two groups that had been active in armed
defense: Kirkpatrick’s black police squad and Thomas’s informal defense
group. The two groups had overlapping membership and essentially the
same goals of community protection.
≤≥
The black police had not been a complete failure. They had kept night
riders out of the black community and had probably deterred police bru-
tality during arrests that they witnessed. The community understood Kirk-
patrick’s dilemma. Annie Johnson remembered Kirkpatrick as an activist
who ‘‘could get something started if you listened to him,’’ but also someone


--- PAGE 49 ---
The Deacons Are Born 39
who had conﬂicting roles that placed him between the community and the
white elite. ‘‘But he still took care of his people.’’≤∂
Forming the squad had raised community expectations about its rights.
That Jonesboro had acceded to the request for black police appeared to
validate the black community’s claim for the right of self-defense. Once
conceded, a right is difﬁcult to revoke. Whatever its limitations, the black
police squad had consolidated a group of leaders committed to self-defense,
and in effect, the town had inadvertently provided blacks with an oppor-
tunity for training in leadership and self-defense. In its effort to subordinate
the black community, the white power structure had helped sow the seeds of
independence.
At the meeting following the Klan caravan, chaired by Kirkpatrick, the
most pressing item on the agenda was arranging for increased patrols and co-
ordinating assignments and communications. The Klan parade had caught
the black community unprepared. Protecting the Freedom House and the
community would no longer be left to an informal decision-making pro-
cess. The primary outcome of the meeting was an organized self-defense
group to complement the black police. Unlike the black police, this group
would be free to operate as it pleased and beholden to no government
agency. Several developments would have to transpire before the organi-
zation crystallized, and it would be another six months before the group
agreed on a name, the Deacons for Defense and Justice, and adopted a
formal leadership structure.
≤∑
By the beginning of August, Jonesboro’s black community had two se-
curity units working closely together: the black police squad and the new
self-defense group. The police squad continued to patrol the community as
the new defense group tightened security measures, organizing sentries at
the Freedom House, escorting core workers as they registered voters, and
patrolling the community as well. Volunteers had conducted similar ac-
tivities in the past, but now security was better organized and more dili-
gently attended to. The defense group posted guards at key community
entrances and used cb radios to coordinate security. Earnest Thomas made
regular guard duty assignments, recruiting from the shift workers at the
paper mill.
Armed with the new defense group and a renewed sense of determina-
tion, the community launched a second desegregation offensive in early
August. Fred Brooks led a group of ﬁve protesters in an assault on the
Jonesboro Public Library. The testers were nervous given that the previous
library protest had resulted in twenty-four arrests. Within minutes sher-
iff ’s deputy James Van Beasley and another deputy arrived on the scene,


--- PAGE 50 ---
40 The Deacons Are Born
demanding that the group ‘‘move out.’’ When the protesters stood their
ground, Van Beasley returned with a menacing police dog and forced the
group to hastily retreat across the street, where they stood quietly. Van
Beasley followed the protesters and ordered them to ‘‘scatter.’’ Kirkpatrick
and Eland Harris arrived shortly and began negotiating with Brooks and Van
Beasley. They were soon joined by Danny Mitchell. Unable to reach an agree-
ment, the protesters, many of them children, returned to the library with the
deputies in pursuit with snarling police dogs. Kirkpatrick stopped the depu-
ties and warned them not to use the dogs on the children. The deputies
hesitated. Finally, Van Beasley retreated with the dogs, but he later arrested
several protesters for disturbing the peace. Unlike in previous encounters, at
the library protest Kirkpatrick and the black police stood ﬁrm against the
white deputies.
≤∏
The formation of the defense group reﬂected a profound change in the
thinking of African Americans in Jackson Parish. A new sense of entitlement
and a new combativeness were emerging in the black consciousness. These
changes were evident in men and women alike. Shortly after the defense
unit formed, the Klan attempted to light a cross at the home of the Reverend
Y. D. Jackson in rural Jackson Parish. As soon as the torch touched the cross,
shots rang out. Jackson’s wife had unloaded her gun at the startled Klans-
men. The frightened night riders beat a hasty retreat. The white robe and
hood were losing their mystique in Jonesboro.
≤π
At the end of August core’s summer project closed and the Jonesboro task
force disbanded. Danny Mitchell left for his graduate studies at Syracuse
University. Cathy Patterson headed for Florida A&M; she eventually trans-
ferred to Syracuse, where she and Mitchell were married in 1965. Those who
decided to stay with core, like Bill Yates and Ruthie Wells, were dispersed
around the state. The only organizer who remained in Jonesboro was the
energetic young Fred Brooks. Brooks was a bright and eager organizer, but
sustaining the Jonesboro campaign was a daunting task for the inexperi-
enced teenager.
By most standards, the summer project had been a failure. Though voter
registration had increased, the task force had been unable to desegregate
the library, swimming pool, and almost all public accommodations. Neither
had it built a community organization that could survive core’s departure.
Thirty years later Cathy Patterson Mitchell expressed her disappointment
tersely: ‘‘I think we left Jonesboro a worse place.’’
≤∫
Her verdict was probably too harsh. Thrust into the heart of Klan country,
the young activists were forced to overcome the formidable organizing bar-
riers of fear and terror—with little support or protection from the federal


--- PAGE 51 ---
The Deacons Are Born 41
government. By the summer’s end, core had ﬁled more than ﬁfty complaints
with the fbi regarding intimidations, threats, and denial of service, with
virtually no response from Washington.≤Ω Despite their failures in Jonesboro,
the core volunteers had inadvertently made one signiﬁcant accomplish-
ment: they had helped bring about an armed self-defense organization that
would soon capture national attention.
≥≠
As Fred Brooks took the leadership reins in September, his biggest prob-
lem was that core’s national leadership had backed away from desegrega-
tion and once again made voter registration a priority, hoping to gain more
Democratic Party voters for the upcoming presidential election. Brooks was
left with a program that had little appeal in Jonesboro. Then he received
orders to set up a kindergarten and freedom school, but the community
displayed even less interest in these self-help projects. In truth, segregation
and discrimination remained the paramount issue for local blacks. In Jones-
boro, as in thousands of other small southern towns, the Civil Rights Act had
done little to end Jim Crow.
Why did core continue to pursue voter registration and self-help projects
despite local indifference? In part, it did so because both core and sncc had
emphasized voter registration ever since they had accepted funding in 1961
from the Voter Education Project (vep)—created by the Kennedy administra-
tion explicitly to divert civil rights groups from direct action organizing.
≥∞
Moreover, in 1964 the eyes of the nation were focused on the heated presi-
dential race between liberal Democrat Lyndon Johnson and conservative
Republican Barry Goldwater. Goldwater had opposed the Civil Rights Act,
and many black leaders believed that the presidential contest was critical to
the future of the black movement. There was also widespread fear of a white
backlash against the civil rights protests, a development that could only
beneﬁt the Republicans. With these problems weighing heavily on their
minds, the national civil rights organizations subordinated local struggles to
the new national agenda. Black salvation would now be found in the Oval
Ofﬁce—not in the streets.
≥≤
But resistance to desegregation in the South created a different strate-
gic imperative for local movements, and Jonesboro was no exception. On
9 October 1964 Chief Peevy announced that the town of Jonesboro was
dismantling the black police squad. Peevy explained that since core had
departed and the demonstrations had subsided, the black deputies were no
longer needed. The black community responded to the announcement with
a sense of betrayal and anger.
Many blacks believed that Peevy had capitulated to pressure from the
white community. They knew that most whites disapproved of black men


--- PAGE 52 ---
42 The Deacons Are Born
armed with guns and badges. The black police had not proved to be depend-
able minions of the police chief either, having refused to arrest and intimi-
date black protesters. Whites were also incensed when Kirkpatrick had used
his police powers to defy white racists and chastise white ofﬁcers for using
racist language on their radios.
≥≥
The black community responded quickly to Chief Peevy’s announcement,
circulating a petition and organizing a march demanding that the black
police squad be reinstated. But their protests were to no avail. Kirkpatrick
and his fellow deputies found themselves without an organization. With the
squad disbanded, the community turned to the defense group for protection.
An informant would later tell the fbi that the primary catalyst for the Dea-
cons for Defense and Justice was the town government’s decision to disband
the black police.
≥∂
Yet the Deacons did not take form overnight. There were formidable ob-
stacles to converting the defense group into a viable organization. Foremost
were complacency and individualism. Creating a new organization required
effort. It upset old routines, disturbed the comfortable anonymity of every-
day life, and called on individuals to subordinate personal needs to commu-
nity interests. Any new organization could upset the social and political
arrangements in the community. Leaders had to be chosen, inspiring jeal-
ousy and factionalizing.
There were also vexing political concerns. An armed self-defense organi-
zation was clearly at odds with the orthodox creed of nonviolence. There was
a hint of blasphemy in elevating self-defense to an organizational form. Like
sin, armed self-defense was practiced more than it was confessed. Through
an unspoken agreement, black leaders had protected the movement’s non-
violent image by downplaying armed self-defense activities. Better that pro-
tection be left to silent men in the shadows of the movement.
But it was primarily the lack of organizing skills that prevented the de-
fense group from becoming a viable enterprise. Most of the group’s members
were in the habit of joining organizations, not forming them. The group had
met throughout the summer but had failed to develop an organizational and
funding structure that could sustain it through the inevitable hardships of
the movement—a structure that would also provide the wherewithal to ex-
pand to other communities. The men were understandably wary of collect-
ing dues, electing ofﬁcers, and taking responsibility for a new organization.
They had the will but not the way. The solution to their dilemma would
shortly arrive from Nyack, New York.
Charlie Fenton was a twenty-three-year-old white activist who had de-
scended from two generations of policemen in Nyack. An authoritarian up-


--- PAGE 53 ---
The Deacons Are Born 43
bringing only succeeded in exciting a rebellious spirit in the young Fenton.
Iconoclastic, even as a teenager, Fenton had converted to paciﬁsm by the
time he was sixteen—for no particular religious or philosophical reasons—
and dropped out of high school. To escape from home, Fenton joined the
navy on his seventeenth birthday in 1958. He volunteered for the Hospital
Corp, assuming that he would be armed with nothing more dangerous than
a bedpan. He had not anticipated that even corpsmen were required to com-
plete boot camp. When handed a riﬂe and ordered to ﬁre, Fenton balked. His
protest cost him fourteen days in the brig.
≥∑
After four years of service as a medical corpsman, the navy discharged
Fenton and he decided to live in San Francisco. The bay area was a core
stronghold, and Fenton soon joined the organization and volunteered for
core’s 1964 summer project. The nonviolence training and the Bay City’s
contagious political ferment had transformed him, in his own words, into a
‘‘a real gung-ho revolutionary.’’
≥∏
Fenton completed a month of training at the core center in Plaquemine,
Louisiana, in May 1964 and then was assigned to the Monroe project in the
northern part of the state. He was arrested and spent most of the summer in
the Monroe city jail, where white inmates tortured him mercilessly; they
beat him so severely that he had to be hospitalized. They forced him to eat
soap and to take scalding showers that blistered his skin. When he was
released from jail, Fenton returned to San Francisco to recuperate, but testi-
fying to his remarkable courage and determination, he soon returned to
Louisiana to help revive the Jonesboro project. By the ﬁrst week of Novem-
ber 1964 he had joined Mike Lesser in Monroe. With the Philadelphia, Mis-
sissippi, murders fresh in their minds, Lesser and Fenton waited for nightfall
to make the journey to Jonesboro. They wove through back roads and soon
pulled into the backyard of core’s little Freedom House on Cedar Street.
≥π
Fenton was both startled and distressed by what he saw. ‘‘I got out of the
car and realized that I was surrounded, absolutely surrounded in an armed
camp. They were on top of the roofs, they were under the building . . . they
were all around the buildings.’’ The defense group had turned out in full
force to welcome Fenton. He perused the scene and slowly walked around
the front of the building and onto the porch. The men warmly greeted him
with shotguns and riﬂes in tow. Inside the door Fenton spied several addi-
tional riﬂes leaning against the wall. The effervescent Fred Brooks explained
that the men had heard that Fenton was arriving and wanted to honor him
by organizing the best protection that they could offer. ‘‘I was impressed,’’
said Fenton, ‘‘but I was not very happy.’’
≥∫
Fenton wasted little time expressing his dissatisfaction. ‘‘Well, the very


--- PAGE 54 ---
44 The Deacons Are Born
ﬁrst night I was there I told them that I didn’t like the guns in the house,’’ he
recalled. Somewhat bewildered and dismayed, the men honored his request
and slowly left the house. Some never returned. Fenton wondered if he had
made the right decision. Years later he acknowledged the impertinence of
his edict to the townspeople. ‘‘Here was this snotty nose white boy,’’ Fenton
recalled wistfully, ‘‘coming to the middle of their war and telling them that I
didn’t like their weapon of choice.’’
≥Ω
Within a few days Fenton realized that his strict adherence to paciﬁsm was
hindering his organizational efforts. The men were not going to subject
themselves to humiliation and physical abuse simply to conform to his phi-
losophy. And without the men, Fenton’s frontline protest troops would be
women and children. The use of children on marches, some as young as six
years old, had stirred controversy during the Birmingham campaign of 1963,
but the practice had become widely accepted in the movement by 1965.
Fenton deeply opposed the tactic. He was unwilling to use children as shock
troops against the police and Klan.
Fenton’s change of heart was also spurred on by local black leaders. Dur-
ing his ﬁrst days in Jonesboro, several black leaders had pulled him aside
and implored him to be more ﬂexible on the issue of weapons. The men felt
naked without their guns and helpless to assist him ‘‘the way they want to be
able to do.’’ Fenton was discovering that the black community had its own
strategy, inchoate and expressed in action more than in word, but neverthe-
less a strategy. Local African Americans wanted the right to control their
movement, even if it contradicted core’s precepts.
During the civil rights movement, two strategies invariably competed for
the loyalty of the community: an explicit nonviolent strategy imported by
national organizations and an implicit unarticulated strategy revealed in the
attitudes and behaviors of the community itself. With the Deacons the com-
munity had found a voice for its own feelings about armed self-defense.
Fenton found himself in the dilemma of choosing between democracy and
principle: he quickly chose democracy.
Fenton did not abandon his initial goal to form a nonviolent civic group in
Jonesboro. Instead, he opted for a two-phased plan. In the ﬁrst phase, he
would assist in forming a formal self-defense organization. This involved
helping the local defense group structure its organization and clarify its
goals and program. Once he had gained the conﬁdence of the group, Fenton
planned a second phase in which he would gently move the group toward
nonviolent community organizing. He hoped that the members would ‘‘ﬁg-
ure out things they could do for me that didn’t have to have a gun.’’ In the


--- PAGE 55 ---
The Deacons Are Born 45
interim, Fenton would maintain the appearance of nonviolence by request-
ing that the men not carry their weapons inside the Freedom House.∂≠
Fenton eagerly set out to organize a ‘‘protective association’’ that com-
bined activism with self-defense. He arranged a meeting at the Masonic
Hall, where the men would ‘‘feel comfortable with their guns.’’ They gath-
ered on a crisp Tuesday night in November 1964.
∂∞
The meeting proved chaotic and tense. The gathering brought together
a broad range of people with conﬂicting strategies and political tempera-
ments. There was, as always, the element of fear. Some participants worried
that their names might be leaked to the police or the Klan. Others questioned
whether the community really needed another organization: Weren’t things
ﬁne as they were? Some objected that ‘‘as soon as we call ourselves some-
thing, then somebody will say that we’ll have to have dues.’’ And so it went.
But there were strong advocates for action, like Thomas and Kirkpatrick.
After vacillation and substantial quibbling, the meeting ﬁnally turned the
corner. ‘‘All of a sudden they were saying ‘well let’s meet here again next
week,’ ’’ recalled Fenton. The enthusiasm for the self-defense group was
infectious. There was no turning back.
∂≤
The meeting at the Masonic Hall represented a watershed in the history of
the Deacons. On that night the Deacons were born as a political organiza-
tion. Previously the defense group had only been a patrol, a secret auxiliary
to the nonviolent movement. Now it was on its way to becoming its own
movement.
Within the next few weeks the Deacons for Defense and Justice quickly
took form through a series of Tuesday night meetings at the Masonic Hall.
The Deacons successfully coalesced the defense group and the veterans of
the black police squad, combining into one organization all the men com-
mitted to armed self-defense.
The role of women in the new organization was problematic. Tradition-
ally, women were excluded from organized self-defense activities in the
black community, although they defended themselves and their community
when necessary. Throughout the movement, large numbers of women re-
fused to participate in nonviolent activities for some of the same reasons as
men, among them the belief that self-respect depended on the ability to
defend oneself and the notion that nonviolence was ineffective against white
supremacy. Gender divisions also reﬂected the fact that the Deacons had
borrowed many of its practices from black fraternal orders, including male
exclusiveness. Typically, if women participated in fraternal orders, they did
so in separate ‘‘auxiliaries.’’
∂≥


--- PAGE 56 ---
46 The Deacons Are Born
No women had taken part in the Jonesboro patrols during the summer of
1964, but now the defense group was becoming a community organization,
and the same gender roles that had encouraged male participation were
limiting the role of women. Several women, including Ruth Amos, did at-
tend meetings and play an active role in the Deacons. It was difﬁcult to
exclude activist women like Amos because, although self-defense was the
male prerogative, civil rights activities were not considered the sole province
of men. There were rumors of women in other Deacons chapters organizing
target practice. At one point the Deacons attempted to reconcile the gender
conﬂict by forming a women’s auxiliary entitled the ‘‘Deaconesses,’’ but the
effort apparently never took root.
∂∂
It was several weeks before the group formally adopted the name ‘‘Dea-
cons for Defense and Justice,’’ and the origins of the name remain enigmatic.
Initially the group referred to itself as the ‘‘Jonesboro Legal and Defense
Association’’ and later, the ‘‘Justice and Defense Club’’ or ‘‘J & D Club.’’ In
memorandums to the regional ofﬁce, Fenton euphemistically described the
new group as a ‘‘home owners protective association.’’ Several years after the
Deacons disbanded, Kirkpatrick published and recorded a song, ‘‘Deacons
for Defense and Justice,’’ that offered one explanation for the name:
∂∑
Then what shall we call ourselves
And still keep our right to be a man
For the time has surely come for us
To take our stand
The man that asked the question threw out an idea:
Let’s call ourselves the Deacons and never have no fear,
They will think we are from the church
Which has never done much
And gee, to our surprise it really worked.
∂∏
Kirkpatrick’s lyrics suggest that the term ‘‘deacons’’ was selected to be-
guile local whites by portraying the organization as an innocent church
group, an account he proffered in at least one interview as well. But there
are other more convincing explanations. Harvey Johnson said that the group
chose the name because the role of the self-defense group was comparable
to church deacons ‘‘who took care of business in the church.’’ Cathy Patter-
son recalled that in the summer of 1964 the core staff began referring to
their guards as the ‘‘deacons,’’ because core had ﬁrst worked with them in
their capacity as church deacons. When a core staff person needed an
escort, he or she would summon ‘‘the deacons,’’ and the name stuck. The


--- PAGE 57 ---
The Deacons Are Born 47
most plausible explanation is that the name was a portmanteau that evolved
over a period of time, combining the core staff ’s ﬁrst appellation of ‘‘dea-
cons’’ with the tentative name chosen in November 1964: ‘‘Justice and De-
fense Club.’’ By January 1965 the group had arrived at its permanent name,
‘‘Deacons for Defense and Justice.’’
∂π
The name reﬂected the group’s desire to identify with traditionally re-
spected symbols of authority, peace, and moral order in the black com-
munity. By combining the terms ‘‘Deacons’’ and ‘‘Defense,’’ the name also
embodied a political paradox that bedeviled the Deacons throughout their
organizational life. The Deacons were attempting to wed two contradictory
symbols: Christian paciﬁsm and violence. They hoped to identify with Chris-
tianity while defying its paciﬁst teachings. For the time being, the Deacons
turned their attention to more practical matters.
One of the group’s ﬁrst challenges was raising funds. It was difﬁcult for an
organization like the Deacons to survive without adequate funds to free up
members for organizational duties. The defense group had been limited by
lack of funds in the past; the men used their own money to purchase weap-
ons, ammunition, gasoline, and communication equipment. Chief Peevy had
reclaimed the black police squad’s radios in October, so the black commu-
nity lacked even rudimentary communication equipment to monitor Klan
and police activities. The Deacons took to fund-raising with remarkable
enthusiasm and success, taking in $437 in the ﬁrst two meetings—a substan-
tial sum for a poor community. They used it to purchase two citizen band
radios and four walkie-talkies.
∂∫
The presence of the militant organization infused the movement with a
new spirit. In contrast to the moribund voter registration campaign, core
had discovered in the Deacons a strategy that captured the imagination and
support of the community and, for the ﬁrst time, attracted men to the move-
ment. Fenton was ecstatic, reporting back to core’s regional ofﬁce in New
Orleans that the new organization was responsible for the increase in ‘‘com-
munity morale, programming, [and] fund raising.’’ Fenton believed that he
had stumbled on an organizing strategy that could revitalize core: create
hybrid organizations that combined self-defense with community organiz-
ing. He boasted that ‘‘the community of Jonesboro is probably the best
organized Negro community’’ in Louisiana and recommended that core
organize similar ‘‘home owners protective associations’’ around the state.
The defense group was already energetically recruiting other Jackson Parish
communities. ‘‘We have arranged for the Jonesboro association to invite a
few leaders from the towns of Chatham, Eros, Hodge, North Hodge, [and]
Quitman, to attend the meetings of the Jonesboro association,’’ reported


--- PAGE 58 ---
48 The Deacons Are Born
Fenton and Willie Green, ‘‘to ﬁrst, show these invited guests how a commu-
nity operates when they get organized and secondly, try to establish a home
owners protective association, incorporating the entire parish.’’
∂Ω
Jonesboro was pioneering a new strategy for the movement; but why was
this remote mill town the birthplace for the ﬁrst public armed self-defense
organization in the Deep South? Informal and clandestine defense groups
had sprung up intermittently over the years, but the Deacons for Defense
and Justice quickly acquired the hallmarks of a political organization—a
public presence in the political debate and a desire to expand organiza-
tionally. Several factors came together to give birth to the new group. First
was the unique character of the Jonesboro community: a large, working
class relatively insulated from economic reprisals. There was also the ex-
ceptional and charismatic leadership of Frederick Kirkpatrick and Earnest
Thomas. Then there was Ronnie Moore, an early convert to clandestine self-
defense, having publicly supported self-defense in 1963 long before any
other leader in core or sncc, who oversaw Fenton’s work. Moore could have
squelched Fenton’s self-defense project—a fate that Fenton would have en-
countered in most other national civil rights organizations—but he did not.
It may have been inevitable that the dynamics of the movement would have
pushed core in the Deacons’ direction. The working class in the Deep South
was beginning to realize its own political agenda, and no civil rights organi-
zation could oppose that agenda and maintain credibility at the grass roots.
One crucial factor contributing to the Deacons’ birth was core’s strategic
shift to community organizing. core played a key role in garnering publicity
for the Deacons and helping them organize, but it would have never lent its
support had core adhered to its earlier strategy emphasizing preconceived
programs like voter registration. core and sncc had both wrestled with the
tension between voter registration, which fulﬁlled a national agenda, and
community organizing, which was intended to promote grassroots ‘‘par-
ticipatory democracy’’ and develop the capacity of local communities to lead
their own movements. By the end of the 1964 Freedom Summer, many
activists had concluded that the voter registration strategy came at the ex-
pense of addressing the felt needs and interests of southern blacks or, at
worse, was simply another case of patronizing outsiders telling blacks what
was best for them. The Congress of Federated Organizations ( cofo), the
umbrella organization in Mississippi, had prohibited demonstrations and
desegregation tests during the Freedom Summer project, instead concen-
trating on voter registration, freedom schools, and enrollment in the Free-
dom Democratic Party (to challenge the white Mississippi delegation at the
Democratic National Convention). But voter registration was meeting with


--- PAGE 59 ---
The Deacons Are Born 49
less enthusiasm day by day in Mississippi as in Louisiana. Young people in
Greenwood ‘‘were quite unmoved by the idea of registering to vote,’’ said
Sally Belfrage, a Freedom Summer volunteer. One young girl spoke out at a
meeting against the embargo on desegregation tests. ‘‘You say that we have
to wait until we get the vote. But you know, by the time that happens the
younger people are going to be too old to enjoy the bowling alley and the
swimming pool.’’
∑≠
Both core and sncc were sensitive to the problem and following the
1964 presidential election had deemphasized voter registration and rallied
around the slogan ‘‘Let the People Decide.’’ core had moved more decisively
in the direction of community control.
∑∞ Dave Dennis, a major ﬁgure in core
and cofo, succinctly summarized core’s evolution in a 1965 interview. ‘‘We
found last summer that, when the volunteers left, a lot of things collapsed,
because volunteers were doing all the work and the local people themselves
had nothing to do,’’ said Dennis. ‘‘There wasn’t any real basic attempt to get
them involved, beyond just participants, that is, as an audience.’’ In the past
the movement had believed that there was a ‘‘federal intervention and cen-
tral solution to the problem. Now we ﬁnd out that it is not the solution to the
problem, because those things are not really speaking to those problems . . .
that people are having.’’ The challenge of participatory democracy was com-
pounded by the white northern volunteers who invaded Louisiana and Mis-
sissippi in 1964. Mike Lesser, a veteran activist and core’s Louisiana state
program director, thought that most volunteers paid little heed to the wishes
of local blacks. When asked if he thought that the volunteers came to ‘‘work
on what they want rather than what the communities need,’’ Lesser’s re-
sponse was to the point: ‘‘I really say that out of the whites that come to work
in the South, maybe 10% of those people really are sensitive to what their
role is and really contribute something—the others don’t.’’
∑≤
By the time Charlie Fenton arrived in Jonesboro in the fall of 1964, he was
already inclined to let democracy have its way. When the community pushed
for an armed self-defense organization that combined defense with com-
munity organizing, Fenton facilitated the process. Only one year before, it
would have been movement sacrilege to suggest that a Gandhian organiza-
tion should help build an armed self-defense group. As the Deacons were
ﬁrst taking form in Jonesboro, across the state line in Mississippi sncc had
moved quickly to prevent a group of teenagers from defending themselves
against shooting attacks in Greenwood. A sncc staffer told a hastily called
meeting of teenagers, ‘‘We don’t have the strength, even if we wanted to, to
carry guns and ﬁght back.’’ One young girl asked, ‘‘Yeah, and do you mean
we jus’ s’pose to let the Man beat in our head?’’
∑≥


--- PAGE 60 ---
50 The Deacons Are Born
Fenton had taken a different tack in Jonesboro. He could be proud of the
Deacons, for he had played a role in forming the group. A middle-class, self-
educated activist, Fenton had contributed skills that helped transform the
defense group into a formal organization. In the new spirit of community
organizing, he had placed his talent in the service of the community, allow-
ing the community to settle on its own strategy and goals rather than impos-
ing a predetermined program. Still, Fenton never abandoned his commit-
ment to nonviolence while he worked with the Deacons. He continued to
have faith that the Deacons would eventually gravitate toward nonviolent
community organizing. A few months later Fenton told reporters that he
hoped the Deacons would ‘‘become a civic organization bettering the com-
munity and eventually making the defense part of it obsolete.’’ In the ﬁnal
analysis, an organization like the Deacons would have eventually developed
somewhere in the South, if not in Jonesboro. The Ku Klux Klan drew its
strength from its regionalism, and it was inevitable, given the lack of police
and federal protection, that a regional black militia like the Deacons would
emerge to oppose it.
∑∂
The Deacons set about creating a formal command structure of elected
ofﬁcers. Percy Lee Bradford, a mill worker and cab owner, was elected the
ﬁrst president of the Deacons. One of the community’s most respected lead-
ers, Bradford was a longtime member of the Voters League and had served
on the black police squad. Henry Amos, another veteran of the civil rights
movement and member of the police squad, was elected vice president.
Bradford and Amos were representative of the social milieu that comprised
the Deacons: mature, sober and industrious men, deeply religious and well
respected in the community.
Though the Deacons never adopted formal membership rules, they did
adhere to strict recruiting standards. Members had to be u.s. citizens, at
least twenty-one years old, preferably registered voters, and of good moral
character. In contrast to the Black Panthers, who recruited from the unem-
ployed and the margins of society, the Deacons screened prospective mem-
bers to exclude people with ‘‘criminal tendencies’’ and quick tempers. Indi-
viduals of poor reputation and troublemakers were unacceptable.
∑∑
The Deacons continued to meet regularly on Tuesdays at the Masonic
Hall. Attendance varied from twenty to more than seventy-ﬁve people, de-
pending on the level of activity. The membership fee was ten dollars, and
monthly dues were two dollars; only dues-paying members could vote. The
group adopted a standard meeting format using parliamentary procedure,
with the reading of minutes and committee reports. All major decisions were


--- PAGE 61 ---
The Deacons Are Born 51
made democratically, while day-to-day patrolling and monitoring duties
were mainly directed by Earnest Thomas.
Meetings primarily focused on defense logistics. The daily routine of
guarding core workers and the community required decisions on assign-
ments, patrol schedules, and equipment purchases. Although their mission
was principally defense, the Deacons soon found that they were also the
leading civil rights group in Jonesboro, and their meetings expanded to
address political questions regarding the ongoing desegregation campaign.
In addition to planning defense, the Deacons’ meetings provided moral
support for new recruits. The gatherings became a pulpit for the new creed
of manhood, a crusade against passivity and fear. The Deacons implored,
bullied, and shamed potential recruits into accepting their role as defenders
of the black community. Charlie White, a young mill worker who had pa-
trolled with the black police squad, recalled that the meetings were intended
to instill pride and conﬁdence in a new recruit, and ‘‘to get the man to stand
up’’ for the community.
∑∏
Like many of his fellow Deacons, White believed that the mere presence of
black men in the movement deterred Klan and police terrorism. According to
White, women and children alone on the protest lines actually encouraged
Klan harassment. When black men joined the line, the Klan and police acted
with restraint. ‘‘You had some people who respect you for being nonviolent,’’
said White. ‘‘Then on the other side, you had your people that were trying to
run over you because they could. That’s where the Deacons come in. When
the radicals from the other side came up, we had somebody to take care
of them.’’
∑π
Taking a name for their organization broke with the tradition of self-
defense groups remaining anonymous and informal. The next step—the one
that other groups had balked at in the past—was going public. The New York
Times would make quick work of this task.


--- PAGE 62 ---
chapter
3
In the New York Times
by the end of November 1964 the Jonesboro Deacons,
equipped with their new walkie-talkies and citizen band ( cb) radios, were
patrolling regularly. The movement drew inspiration from the new organiza-
tion: during the previous summer the Jonesboro core would have been
fortunate to attract twenty people to a desegregation protest—yet on 16
December a massive display of 236 protesters arrived at the Jonesboro li-
brary to integrate it. Overwhelmed, town ofﬁcials quickly conceded and
opened the library to blacks, but not before removing all tables and chairs to
prevent ‘‘race mixing.’’ The furniture embargo did not last long. The black
movement in Jonesboro had scored its ﬁrst major victory.
∞
Buoyed by the successful library campaign, activists ushered in the new
year by renewing the campaign to desegregate public accommodations. On
New Year’s Day 1965 Deacons leader Earnest Thomas boldly led three other
blacks into the M & D Restaurant. In June 1964 the black police squad had
been forced to scuttle the ﬁrst integration attempt at the M & D. This time
the outcome was quite different. With the Deacons leading the protest,
the owner grudgingly served the testers. More restaurant tests occurred
on 2 and 4 January, meeting with mixed success. One restaurant resisted
integration by closing its doors and ﬁring its black employees. A few restau-
rants would later circumvent desegregation laws by becoming nominally
‘‘private clubs.’’
≤
The desegregation protests spread to nearby Hodge, where Fenton and
the Deacons led another mass meeting. The increased pace of desegregation
activities was lifting morale, and on 4 January 1965 Jonesboro community
leaders assembled to plan an expanded desegregation campaign. The pres-
ence of the Deacons was clearly helping to overcome fear and passivity: In
contrast to their past timorousness, three ministers came forward and of-
fered their churches for voter registration.


--- PAGE 63 ---
In the New York Times 53
Local police monitoring cb radio communications soon learned of the exis-
tence of the Deacons but apparently made no effort to harass or intimidate
them at this stage. The fbi ﬁrst took notice of the group in early January 1965.
On 6 January the New Orleans fbi ﬁeld ofﬁce sent a coded radio message and
letterhead memorandum to J. Edgar Hoover concerning the ‘‘Deacons for
Defense and Justice.’’ An unidentiﬁed source—probably local or state law
enforcement ofﬁcials—informed the fbi that a self-defense unit had been
formed in Jonesboro. The memorandum noted that, although the Deacons’
aims were ‘‘much the same as those of the Congress of Racial Equality
(core),’’ the new organization was ‘‘more militant than core and . . . would
be more inclined to use violence in dealing with any violent opposition
encountered in civil rights matters.’’
≥
The fbi had little difﬁculty obtaining detailed information on the new
group. In the years to follow, the bureau produced more than 1,500 pages of
comprehensive and relatively accurate records on the Deacons’ activities,
largely through numerous informants close to or even inside the organiza-
tion. It does not appear that any of the informants were exchanging informa-
tion for money or personal beneﬁt. An overall reading of the fbi documents
suggests that most people on the inside provided information to the fbi in an
effort to assuage fears that the Deacons were a violent or revolutionary
organization.
Percy Lee Bradford, the Deacons’ president, was one of those who cooper-
ated with law enforcement ofﬁcials in the belief that he was protecting the
group. In an interview with an unidentiﬁed agent on 5 January 1965, Brad-
ford went to great lengths to emphasize that the Deacons were strictly defen-
sive in nature and would use violence only if attacked. Bradford volunteered
that they had cb radios and walkie-talkies and that they routinely patrolled
the black community. He went so far as to provide names of ofﬁcers and
leaders in the new group and estimated the Jonesboro group’s size at 250–
300 members.
∂
It is doubtful that there were three hundred dues-paying members in the
Jonesboro organization. Bradford was using a tactic with the fbi that be-
came standard practice for the Deacons: exaggerating the group’s size to
deter Klan and police harassment. The Deacons’ leadership in other chapters
continued this practice throughout the life of the organization. The only
exception was when, in an effort to reduce pressure and attention from law
enforcement, informants occasionally downplayed membership ﬁgures.
Still, the ﬁgure of three hundred members was not altogether inaccurate.
The deﬁnition of the term ‘‘membership’’ may vary depending on one’s race,
culture, and class. The Deacons employed a criterion for membership far


--- PAGE 64 ---
54 In the New York Times
different from that used by white middle-class civic groups. In black political
organizations like the Deacons, a person might be regarded as a member for
simply expressing support for their goals and activities. In the ﬂuid world of
social movements, an organization may have a small formal membership but
be capable of commanding a large number of supporters.
∑
The Deacons were evolving from a secret society into a political movement
for self-defense. As they grew, the terms of membership became more ﬂex-
ible and inclusive. Membership was not restricted to those who paid dues
and carried a membership card. The term ‘‘Deacon’’ began to denote a new
militant political outlook. At a certain point in the organization’s evolu-
tion, simple agreement with its principles was sufﬁcient to be considered a
member.
∏
There were, in effect, four tiers of membership in the Jonesboro Dea-
cons—a structure that would be reproduced in other chapters. The ﬁrst tier,
the ‘‘activist core,’’ comprised approximately 20 members who paid dues and
regularly attended meetings and participated in patrols. The second tier,
‘‘active members,’’ consisted of about 100 men who occasionally paid dues
and attended meetings but usually took part in activities only when neces-
sary. The third tier, the ‘‘reinforcements,’’ comprised roughly 100–200 men
who did not pay dues or attend meetings but agreed with the Deacons’
strategy and could be depended on to volunteer if needed. The fourth, and
most amorphous, tier contained the ‘‘self-proclaimed’’ Deacons: those indi-
viduals who, without ofﬁcial sanction, declared themselves to be Deacons.
Though lacking formal ties to the organization, this fourth tier helped popu-
larize the Deacons and their self-defense strategy. In Jonesboro, total dues-
paying members never exceeded 150, but an additional 100 ‘‘reinforcements’’
could be counted on to support and defend the organization. So Bradford’s
ﬁgure of 300 ‘‘members’’ was not far off the mark.
π
Bradford’s 5 January interview with the fbi was the ﬁrst time the Deacons
were forced to explain their philosophy to the outside world. After two
months of life, they still had no written statement of purpose expressing
their goals and strategy. The Deacons had been called into existence by the
exigencies of survival: the Ku Klux Klan had left little time to contemplate
organizational philosophy. Born out of the nonviolent movement, the Dea-
cons now found themselves in the awkward position of challenging the
movement orthodoxy on nonviolence. Their initial efforts were halting, con-
fused, and frequently contradictory.
In the fbi interview, Bradford attempted to allay the bureau’s concerns by
emphasizing that the new group was loyal to the precepts of nonviolence. He
stressed that the Deacons were a peaceful organization whose goals were


--- PAGE 65 ---
In the New York Times 55
similar to those of core. This was certainly true with regard to core’s civil
rights objectives, but there was, of course, a crucial difference between the
two organizations: unlike core, the Deacons were armed and prepared to
kill in self-defense. Bradford tried to distinguish the Deacons from vigilante
organizations by stressing that the Deacons were committed to self-defense,
as opposed to retaliatory violence. The challenge for Bradford was to recon-
cile self-defense with nonviolence. It was a difﬁcult, if not impossible, task.
The fbi found Bradford’s characterization of the Deacons as a peace-
ful group unconvincing. The New Orleans ﬁeld ofﬁce promptly reported to
J. Edgar Hoover that the group was ‘‘more militant than core and that it
would be more inclined to use violence in dealing with any violent opposi-
tion encountered in civil rights matters.’’ If Hoover was alarmed by this new
armed organization, he showed no sign of it. The New Orleans memo to
Washington went unanswered for the time being.
∫
But the growing movement in Jonesboro did not escape the attention of
the Klan. Under the cloak of darkness on Sunday morning, 17 January 1965,
arsonists struck at two Jackson Parish churches that had been active in the
movement. Pleasant Grove Baptist Church, whose members included Dea-
cons leader Henry Amos, was burned to the ground. Bethany Baptist Church
also went up in black smoke. Both churches were located in remote rural
areas that were difﬁcult for the Deacons to protect. The churches continued
to be a target of Klan terror after they were rebuilt. Arsonists returned and
burned down Bethany Baptist a second time in November 1965, and both
churches remained frequent targets of gunﬁre.
Ω
In addition to Klan assaults, law enforcement agencies launched a harass-
ment campaign against the Deacons. On 30 January Percy Lee Bradford and
Earnest Thomas had been patrolling during the day and guarding a group of
college students who were in town to help rebuild the burned churches. The
two Deacons stopped around midnight at the Minute Spot Cafe. Bradford
and Thomas stood in front of the cafe talking, with Bradford cradling a
twelve-gauge shotgun. Police stopped and arrested Bradford, charging him
with displaying a dangerous weapon in a public place while under the inﬂu-
ence of an intoxicant.
∞≠
The white community was growing alarmed by this new organization.
After living in fear for generations, black community morale was buoyed by
the sight of deﬁant black men, armed and ready to die for their community.
Much to the consternation of whites, the Deacons were everywhere: stand-
ing guard on the rooftops of the Freedom House, patrolling the streets with
guns at their sides, marching into segregated cafes. They had reclaimed their
community and whites could no longer ignore their existence. The tables


--- PAGE 66 ---
56 In the New York Times
had turned. ‘‘I know the whites, they were kind of afraid, those that had
[black] women working for them back then,’’ remembered Annie Johnson.
‘‘A lot of them were afraid to come and get their day workers.’’ Some whites
demanded that their domestic workers ﬁnd their own way to work. Also
inspired by the the new militancy, many domestics refused to endure the
racial insults that went with the job. ‘‘Then a lot of the women quit because
of different things that was said in the homes while they was there. Remarks
and things,’’ said Johnson. ‘‘They quit.’’
∞∞
The Deacons did not hesitate to play on white fears. The group produced a
leaﬂet threatening to kill anyone caught burning a cross in the black commu-
nity and then arranged to have black domestic workers leave the leaﬂets at
the homes of their white employers. The Deacons ‘‘weren’t violent people,’’
maintained Johnson, ‘‘but I think the whites knew that whatever they said
they were going to do, they did it.’’
∞≤
Until February 1965 the Deacons had remained a clandestine organiza-
tion. People in the community and law enforcement ofﬁcials were aware of
their presence, as were the handful of core staffers around the state, but
the Deacons had been content with relative anonymity. They still regarded
themselves as merely the defense arm of public civil rights organizations.
They had no reason to go public. Secrecy was the best way to protect their
membership.
On 21 February 1965, however, the Deacons made the irreversible leap
into public life. It was inevitable that they would attract national media
attention. Violence against the movement had been a mainstay of reporting
in the South. Now the story was violence by the movement. Veteran re-
porters were familiar with informal self-defense groups, but the Deacons
were different. They were willing to openly extol the virtues of armed self-
defense. By combining self-defense with political organizing, they repre-
sented an intriguing new direction for the movement.
The Deacons’ story broke prominently in the 21 February Sunday edition
of the prestigious New York Times: the headline read ‘‘Armed Negroes Make
Jonesboro Unusual Town.’’ The article, penned by Fred Powledge, described
Jonesboro as an ordinary southern community, relatively untouched by civil
rights legislation. He noted that ‘‘Whites Only’’ signs were still posted, sev-
eral restaurants continued to segregate, and blacks ‘‘edge toward the curb
when they pass a white man, and their heads bow ever so slightly.’’ But there
was one thing different about this secluded redoubt of segregation: ‘‘Here
the Negroes . . . have organized themselves into a mutual protection associa-
tion,’’ reported Powledge, ‘‘employing guns and shortwave radios.’’
∞≥
The story painted a sympathetic portrait of the Deacons, focusing on


--- PAGE 67 ---
In the New York Times 57
their defensive philosophy and characterizing them as a stabilizing inﬂuence
against white terror and police violence. There was no smell of gunpowder
and blood here. Indeed, the portrayal of the Deacons as a ‘‘mutual protection
association,’’ a term Fenton favored, suggested something closer to a genteel
civic club. Powledge highlighted the group’s strong religious convictions,
citing Bradford’s description of its philosophy: ‘‘We pray a lot, but we stay
alert too.’’
∞∂
Powledge let the story unfold through the voices of the members them-
selves. The Deacons told him that they deterred, rather than provoked,
violence. Their presence had already ‘‘kept Jonesboro from developing into a
civil rights battleground’’ and had discouraged police from brutalizing activ-
ists. They had even rescued a young black man from a possible lynching after
he was accused of kissing a white girl. Powledge estimated the organiza-
tion’s size ‘‘between 45 and 150 active members.’’ Sheriff Newt Loe declined
to comment, telling the New York Times reporter that if he had anything to
say, he would ‘‘give it to my newspaper boys around here.’’ ‘‘We got boys in
Shreveport and Monroe who see things the way we do,’’ said the sheriff.
∞∑
The article quoted Charlie Fenton at length attempting to justify core’s
cooperation with a group that advocated armed self-defense. Powledge ob-
served that Fenton was accompanied by his personal bodyguard, Elmo
Jacobs, a former platoon army sergeant and Deacons member. Fenton de-
fended core’s policy by pointing out that the Deacons were not allowed to
bring guns to the Freedom House. They represented the kind of ‘‘indigenous
organization’’ that core desired to work with. Fenton wanted to cut back his
leadership role and become more of a ‘‘liaison and helper.’’ ‘‘Hopefully I will
be able to help them translate their power into political terms as this thing
progresses,’’ he said. He also hoped that the Deacons would ‘‘become a civic
organization bettering the community and eventually making the defense
part of it obsolete.’’ Powledge expanded on this theme, noting that the Dea-
cons wanted to extend ‘‘their efforts to include other things—negotiating
with downtown, becoming more active in Jonesboro politics.’’
∞∏
Despite Fenton’s openness to the new group, the Deacons would even-
tually pose problems for core. ‘‘Now you have to deal with the non-violent
movement and the self-defense movement,’’ observed Ronnie Moore years
later. ‘‘And it’s more than what you have to say to the press. You really have to
monitor so that one movement would not undercut the other movement and
wouldn’t get out of hand. I mean, what stops self-defense from turning into a
violent movement against an act of aggression?’’
∞π
The Times article was an auspicious debut for the Deacons. Powledge had
not suggested that they might escalate violence, nor had he highlighted the


--- PAGE 68 ---
58 In the New York Times
obvious strategic differences between the Deacons and core. Future media
coverage would not be as charitable. In the Times article, the Deacons had
convincingly portrayed themselves as moderates adapting to the realities of
white terrorism. They posed no threat to the established organizations. They
downplayed strategic differences with the rest of the movement, claiming
that they had the same objectives: equality and justice. But underneath the
carefully crafted image was a profound difference. The national civil rights
organizations sought equality by shaming the nation with nonviolence. The
Deacons sought equality through force and self-reliance.
The Times story accelerated the Deacons’ transformation from a vigilance
group into a political challenge to nonviolence. For the most part, the earlier
self-defense groups viewed themselves as apolitical auxiliaries to political
organizations. They advanced no strategic vision distinct from the exist-
ing civil rights organizations. Moreover, they avoided publicity to protect
themselves—and to preserve the myth of a nonviolent movement.
∞∫
The Deacons broke from this tradition in two important ways. First, they
fused self-defense with politics, thrusting themselves into the public arena to
compete for political legitimacy, resources, and the loyalty of movement
activists. They had transformed self-defense from the movement’s ‘‘family
secret’’ into a principled challenge to nonviolence. They gave explicit politics
to what had been implicit in the actions of working-class men and women
for years.
Second, the Deacons developed an autonomous, locally controlled organi-
zation that could survive without external leadership and funding from
white liberals and national paciﬁst organizations. The Deacons’ staff, fund-
ing, and political legitimacy ﬂowed from the local community. They ﬂour-
ished or foundered depending on the level of local support. In contrast,
projects sponsored and funded by national civil rights organizations could
continue to operate regardless of community support—or even despite local
opposition.
In truth, core, along with the Student Nonviolent Coordinating Commit-
tee (sncc) and most other national civil rights groups, had great difﬁculty
creating community organizations that could survive the departure of the
national organization’s staff. The 1961 McComb, Mississippi, project, which
became sncc’s template for organizing in the Deep South, managed to regis-
ter only six voters during a six-month campaign. When sncc left in Decem-
ber 1961, its local structure collapsed. Most local projects sponsored by na-
tional civil rights organizations employed strategies that depended on the
skills and resources of the educated and middle-class staff and volunteers.
Although this led to short-term successes, it also left local communities


--- PAGE 69 ---
In the New York Times 59
dependent on external resources. Public relations, fund-raising, paid staffs,
and legal strategies all required skills and resources that normally did not
exist among poor, less-educated blacks in the rural South. Indeed, the sncc
staff members who opposed the Freedom Summer project were primarily
concerned that local organizations would become dependent on the young
white volunteers—as they had seen occur in other projects in Mississippi.
∞Ω
In contrast, the Deacons adopted an organizational model that built on
existing skills and resources. Most local men were comfortable with the Dea-
cons’ structure, based on familiar organizational forms (e.g., the military,
fraternal orders, and social and benevolent clubs). Nor were the group’s
goals and strategies an exotic import; black men had been defending them-
selves and their communities for decades, albeit clandestinely. The Deacons
had created an organization that comported with the community’s political
goals and resources. It did not require members to write press releases,
develop legal strategies, and negotiate with the Justice Department.
More signiﬁcantly, the Deacons’ program of self-defensive violence en-
sured their independence from mainstream civil rights groups and the black
middle class in general. Since liberals and paciﬁsts opposed armed self-
defense, the command of self-defense organizations fell to indigenous black
leaders. This organizational distance from middle-class groups permitted
the Deacons to develop an independent political strategy that more accu-
rately expressed the interests of the black working class. Indeed, the Dea-
cons constituted the only regional civil rights organization in the South that
was completely controlled by black workers.
≤≠
The 21 February New York Times  article had overlooked these unique
features of the Deacons, although subsequent coverage did recognize their
signiﬁcance. The twenty-ﬁrst of February emerged as a watershed date for
the Deacons by ushering in three simultaneous events, each event connected
to the other like three heavenly bodies aligning to cast a portentous shadow.
First, 21 February was the day that the Times article made the Deacons a
political reality by thrusting them into the national arena. It was, for political
purposes, the Deacons’ birth date. Second, it was the day that the Jonesboro
Deacons established a chapter in Bogalusa, Louisiana, taking the ﬁrst step
toward converting the Deacons from a local group to a regional organiza-
tion. And third, 21 February was the day Malcolm X was gunned down in
Harlem. The foremost critic of nonviolence had fallen victim to enemies
willing to silence him ‘‘by any means necessary.’’ On the day that Malcolm X
perished, the Deacons were born. Violence had been both executioner and
midwife.
Malcolm X’s death also led to the Deacons’ ﬁrst contact with the revolu-


--- PAGE 70 ---
60 In the New York Times
tionary wing of the black movement. Earnest Thomas was troubled by the
news that rival Black Muslims had murdered Malcolm, and he persuaded
the Deacons to underwrite an investigative trip to New York. Thomas arrived
a few days after the assassination and immediately plunged into the heady
world of New York’s black nationalist community. Unlike in Jonesboro, the
black activists in New York were heavily inﬂuenced by revolutionary na-
tionalist ideologies and Marxist-Leninist doctrine. Black nationalism in New
York comprised many currents. There were the Black Muslims, who repre-
sented a mixture of black separatism and religious fundamentalism. There
were Garveyites, the ideological heirs of black nationalist Marcus Garvey,
who electriﬁed the black community in the 1920s. There were community
and labor activists who identiﬁed with the pro-Soviet Communist Party usa
(cpusa) and dissident communists who had left the cpusa for the revolu-
tionary Maoist sects. And there were young veterans of the civil rights move-
ment who had been radicalized by their experience in the South and deeply
impressed by the revolutionary nationalism of the emerging Third World
African nations.
≤∞
Thomas drank in this exciting underworld, which, for the most part,
viewed the Deacons as brethren in the armed revolution. One introduction
led to another, and Thomas was quickly exposed to a wide variety of critics of
nonviolence and reformism. He met with Malcolm X’s colleagues and later
with Leroi Jones (Amiri Baraka), the nationalist writer and playwright. The
New York trip set a leftward political course for Thomas, though he was still
far from a Marxist convert.
Thomas also made contact with members of the Revolutionary Action
Movement (ram). Headed by Max Stanford, ram was a small national net-
work of Marxist-Leninist black revolutionaries. ram had been a stalwart
supporter of Robert F. Williams, the naacp leader who had ﬂed to Cuba to
avoid criminal charges arising from his armed self-defense organizing in
Monroe, North Carolina. In the coming months, the connection between the
Deacons and ram would spark considerable attention from the fbi.
≤≤
Thomas returned to Jonesboro and within a few weeks the Deacons
had consolidated their organizational strength by legally incorporating the
group. On 8 March James Sharp, a black attorney from Monroe, ﬁled incor-
poration papers with the Louisiana secretary of state. To incorporate an
armed black organization in Louisiana during the height of the civil rights
movement required a good measure of subterfuge. The Articles of Incorpora-
tion buried the Deacons’ true objectives beneath several paragraphs of plati-
tudes about good citizenship and democracy. Their stated purpose was to
‘‘instruct, train, teach and educate Citizens of the United States and espe-


--- PAGE 71 ---
In the New York Times 61
cially minority groups in the fundamental principles of the republican form
of government and our democratic way of life.’’ ≤≥ In addition, the Deacons
would educate persons about voting rights, citizenship, economic security,
and the ‘‘effective use of their spending power.’’ Not until the end of the
purpose section does the document mention defense: ‘‘This corporation has
for its further purpose, and is dedicated to, the defense of the civil rights,
property rights and personal rights of said people and will defend said rights
by any and all honorable and legal means to the end that justice may be ob-
tained.’’
≤∂ The charter conveniently omitted mention of weapons and armed
self-defense.≤∑
The charter did not change the attitude of law enforcement toward the
Deacons, but it did carry a special signiﬁcance for the group’s members.
Many blacks in the South in the early 1960s believed that while they could
possess a weapon in their home, they could not legally carry weapons on
their person or in their vehicle. ‘‘We weren’t allowed to carry ’em,’’ one
Deacon told an interviewer. ‘‘Not even in our cars, loaded. Most of us only
had ’em loaded since we joined the Deacons.’’ There was good reason for
this misunderstanding of the law. There had been a long history of white
attempts to limit the availability of weapons to blacks. Most nineteenth-
century ﬁrearm statutes in the South were intended to prevent free blacks
from obtaining ﬁrearms. Louisiana slaves were denied ﬁrearms unless they
had written permission to hunt within the plantation boundaries, and ante-
bellum laws in both Louisiana and Mississippi banned freedmen and free
people of color from carrying a pistol. Most concealed weapon laws in the
South originated as attempts to limit black access. The discriminatory na-
ture of these laws was so ﬂagrant that a Florida Supreme Court judge was
moved to comment that the 1893 Florida act that prohibited carrying a gun
on one’s person was ‘‘never intended to be applied to the white population.’’
Similar concealed weapons laws in Alabama, Arkansas, Georgia, and Ken-
tucky were primarily designed to disarm blacks. Because of these laws and
their discriminatory applications, many African Americans understandably
thought that they could not carry a weapon. This put them at a distinct
disadvantage with the Klan, since whites carried weapons with impunity. If
blacks could not transport weapons, they were limited to defending their
homes; they could not defend civil rights activists as they escorted them in
the community, nor could they effectively guard protest marches and other
civil rights events. The Deacons were convinced that their charter gave ofﬁ-
cial sanction to their right to bear arms in defense of their community, and
that it prohibited law enforcement ofﬁcials from interfering with the exer-
cise of this right. ‘‘In the charter, we had to protect people’s property and


--- PAGE 72 ---
62 In the New York Times
churches and so forth,’’ recalled James Stokes, a Deacons leader in Natchez.
‘‘And therefore couldn’t no one take our weapons from us. So we could carry
our weapons just like the local law enforcement ofﬁcers carry theirs.’’ If a
policeman stopped Stokes and objected to his weapon, Stokes would simply
produce the charter and insist that it entitled him to carry a weapon.
≤∏
Rather than legitimate their claim on the Fourth Amendment, the Dea-
cons invoked a higher authority: the ancient natural right of a man to defend
hearth and home against attack. This was a right that whites found more
difﬁcult to dispute—even under segregation laws. On one occasion when the
Jonesboro Town Council chastised the Deacons for turning to weapons, the
Deacons argued that they were living by the same customs as white men.
‘‘We weren’t trying to do nothing out of order,’’ remembered Harvey John-
son, a Deacons leader. ‘‘But we told them: ‘It’s just like if someone is going to
come over and run us out of our house. We not going to put up with that.’ ’’
≤π
By asserting their natural right to self-defense, the Deacons seized their
rights by force rather than have them conferred by a beneﬁcent elite. Rights
conferred from above—as if a reward for good behavior—are fragile liber-
ties. More a privilege than a right, they depend on the continuing goodwill
of the dominant group. In contrast, inalienable and natural rights, seized
from below by force, are as strong as the subordinate group’s will to defend
them. Nonviolence had made blacks dependent on the sympathy of a ﬁckle
white conscience in the North. Civil rights were awarded on the condition
that blacks complied with white expectations of appropriate behavior: that
is, refrain from using the same methods of force that whites had employed to
gain their own rights. If black behavior ceased to meet with white approba-
tion, then whites could withdraw the right.
In the coming months, as the Deacons confronted the Klan and police
violence, it would become clear that they were not afraid of offending white
sensibilities. The national civil rights organizations had been waiting for
years for a mythical guardian angel to descend from Washington and van-
quish their tormentors. The Deacons waited no more.


--- PAGE 73 ---
chapter
4
Not Selma
real victories for  the civil rights movement at the
local level were scarce in the Deep South and virtually nonexistent in Loui-
siana up through 1964. Severe repression by local authorities and the Klan,
combined with economic pressure by white business elites, made it difﬁcult
to end segregation and discrimination even after the passage of the Civil
Rights Act. But at the beginning of 1965 the Deacons and the Jonesboro
movement stood poised to accomplish something that no other local or na-
tional organization had done before in the Deep South: force a segregationist
governor to directly intervene to the beneﬁt of the civil rights movement.
Although the February New York Times  article sparked some national
interest in the Deacons and the Jonesboro campaign, the nation’s attention
was still riveted on the unfolding drama in Selma, Alabama, where Martin
Luther King had launched a voting rights campaign. While the Jonesboro
movement, like most local movements in the South, was attempting to win
freedom by coercing change in local power relations, King was explicit about
his strategy of relying on the federal government for relief. King exhorted
blacks to ‘‘ﬁll the jails and ‘arouse the federal government’ to assure the bal-
lot.’’ The Deacons took a different tact. Emboldened by their successes, the
Deacons and the local movement began to deﬁne equal rights as more than
civil rights: they wanted equality as consumers and beneﬁciaries of govern-
ment services. Their focus would soon shift from desegregation to education
and city services, and as it did, they would lock horns with middle-class
members of the black community who propped up the status quo system.
∞
Frederick Kirkpatrick was not only a leader in the Deacons, but also a
popular physical education teacher at Jackson High School. Kirkpatrick car-
ried his activism into the school by quietly discussing school conditions with
students and encouraging them to participate in the desegregation protests.
Some of his teaching colleagues rebuked him for his actions, and he soon


--- PAGE 74 ---
64 Not Selma
received a visit by the black principal of Jackson High. Was it true that he
had encouraged students to join in the protests? asked the principal. Kirk-
patrick admitted that he had. The principal ended the inquiry without tak-
ing action against Kirkpatrick, but news of the confrontation soon spread
though the school, fueling rumors that he might be ﬁred.
Kirkpatrick’s problem with his black colleagues at Jackson High was not
unusual. In small southern communities, many black teachers and school
administrators were indifferent, if not hostile, to the civil rights movement.
This varied within regions and was more pronounced in rural areas. There
were many causes of this conservatism, including economic dependency and
fear. Black teachers and school administrators served at the pleasure of
white school boards—boards that did not hesitate to ﬁre teachers whom
they suspected of supporting the civil rights movement. The few teachers
who did openly support the movement were often pressured to moderate
their activities by colleagues who feared that activism would bring reprisals
against the entire faculty. Black administrators were not above discharging
an activist teacher to preserve their standing in the white community or
simply save their own careers.
≤
Fear and economic insecurity were not the only obstacles to teacher ac-
tivism. Many teachers thought that civil rights protests undermined self-
reliance and violated the creed of self-help. These educators were the politi-
cal heirs of Booker T. Washington, the nineteenth-century African American
reformer who popularized a strategy of black uplift that subordinated social
protest to self-help. Teachers who subscribed to Washington’s views often
disdained protest as vulgar and déclassé. Their high status and relative afﬂu-
ence had bred elitism, individualism, and complacency.
≥
It is understandable that black professionals who had overcome the con-
straints of Jim Crow would have little sympathy for a movement that rep-
resented segregation as an insurmountable barrier to personal progress.
Success fostered an individualistic mentality among teachers that was oc-
casionally mixed with a genteel condescension toward the working-class
‘‘rabble’’ and street element that comprised the protest front lines. The class
divisions within the black community were clear to the activists who felt
the sting of condescension. ‘‘I think they [teachers] feel that they’ve gone
through too much to get the job . . . to throw it away behind a movement,’’
said David Whatley, a militant from Ferriday, La. ‘‘If they would get ﬁred or
something, then they would come. But as long as things were going well for
them, they made no waves. They would sit in their ﬁne homes, and they
would drive their new cars. They didn’t feel that they could dirty their
reputations.’’
∂


--- PAGE 75 ---
Not Selma 65
School boards expected black principals to maintain discipline and pre-
vent civil rights protests in the schools, a task that grew increasingly difﬁcult
as students became more active in the movement outside the classroom. At
Jackson High, students were coming to resent the servile way that some
administrators accommodated segregationist forces. They were impatient
with the slow pace of change and were primed for battle. The opportunity
soon presented itself.
On Sunday, 7 March 1965, hundreds of families in Jonesboro sat in stunned
silence as they watched news accounts of the ‘‘Bloody Sunday’’ police attack
on marchers on the Edmund Pettus Bridge in Selma, Alabama. With the
images of the Selma attack still swimming in their heads, students returned
to Jackson High the next morning. As the day progressed, the rumor spread
that administrators planned to ﬁre Kirkpatrick. He added momentum to the
rumor by discussing his possible termination with students in his physical
education class. ‘‘Kirk kind of just put a little icing on it and stirred it up a
little bit,’’ recalled Annie Johnson, a Jackson High student at the time. The
rumored ﬁring infuriated the students. ‘‘The kids went nuts over it,’’ said
Johnson.
∑
As the rumor swept through the school, the students abandoned their
classrooms and ﬂooded into the halls. Local authorities would later, with
characteristic hyperbole, describe the walkout as a ‘‘riot.’’ In truth, it never
reached the fever pitch of a full-scale revolt, but students did enjoy a few
unsupervised hours of protest ﬂavored by juvenile mischief.
Commandeering the halls, the students vented their anger on symbols of
white authority and black collaboration. At one point some of them broke
the glass frames of wall photographs of the black principal, J. R. Wash-
ington, and the white Jackson Parish School superintendent, J. D. Koonce.
Another group hurled bottles and smashed the glass on the school trophy
case. By noon, school authorities realized that they had lost control of the
situation and decided to cancel classes for the balance of the day.
∏
The reason for the walkout quickly expanded beyond the issue of Kirk-
patrick’s rumored discharge. Within days, the protest developed into a full-
ﬂedged school boycott, with students demanding parity with whites and
black control of the schools. The Kirkpatrick incident became a catalyst for
all the grievances of a lifetime. With assistance from Charlie Fenton and
other adults, the students drew up a list of demands to present to the school
board. Most of the demands centered on long-standing grievances of un-
equal distribution of resources. The students called for improvements at
the school, including rebuilding the gymnasium, adding an auditorium, and
expanding the ‘‘woefully inadequate’’ library that consisted of a handful


--- PAGE 76 ---
66 Not Selma
of books. A demand to integrate the schools was added—almost as an
afterthought.π
Control of the curriculum was an issue as well. Jackson High offered black
students only two vocational tracks: agriculture or domestic service. The
students insisted that the administration expand the curriculum to include
training in auto mechanics and clerical skills; they also wanted ‘‘Negro his-
tory courses.’’
∫
The students organized the boycott with imagination and verve. The Dea-
cons’ direct link to the protest was through Glenn Johnson, student body
president and leader of the student protest. Glenn was the son of Har-
vey Johnson, a founding member of the Deacons. Every day, hundreds of
students would rise before dawn, prepare for school, and rush to catch
the school bus. But instead of attending class, they armed themselves with
picket signs and freedom songs and jubilantly protested outside the school
throughout the day. When they were not picketing, they organized spir-
ited marches through the community to the school board ofﬁces. They fre-
quently directed their ire at ‘‘Uncle Toms’’ in the black community, marching
on black churches that refused to host civil rights activities. At the end of the
day, tired but in high spirits, the students ﬁled back into the buses and
returned home. The picket line had become their school.
Ω
By the third day of the boycott the halls of Jackson High were virtually
deserted. Police, the sheriff ’s department, and segregationists joined forces
in a futile attempt to destroy the boycott. They harassed students and ar-
rested several picketers, including Charlie Fenton. But the students had the
momentum. On Wednesday, 11 March, the school board closed Jackson High
in an effort to deter further protests. They announced that the school would
reopen the following Monday, at which time all students would be expected
to return.
∞≠
The school closure was a stunning setback for Jonesboro’s white commu-
nity. They watched in humiliation as power slipped into the hands of deﬁant
black children. Desperate and angry, the white power elite quickly decided
to take drastic action to suppress the rebellion.
On Thursday, 12 March, the students returned to picket and march. As
they paraded around the school singing and chanting boisterously, an omi-
nous drama was unfolding beyond their vision. Several carloads of police
quietly converged on the perimeter of the black community. The police
quickly set up roadblocks at all the principal arteries into the ‘‘black quar-
ters,’’ effectively cordoning off the students from the rest of the community.
They were assisted by an odd group of volunteers, identiﬁed only as the


--- PAGE 77 ---
Not Selma 67
‘‘Citizens Highway Patrol.’’ The motley group was little more than a depu-
tized posse of white segregationists and Klan members recruited especially
for the blockades. The sentries refused to explain the reason for the bar-
ricades, saying only that they were containing a ‘‘disturbance’’ at the high
school.
∞∞
The cordon caught the Deacons by surprise. They had not expected the
city to resort to such extreme measures. Thomas and a small group of Dea-
cons immediately began to drive from street to street, frantically searching
for an unguarded entry point. They feared that the police and Klan were
planning violent reprisals against the children at the school, and their ap-
prehension intensiﬁed when they learned that the deputies had even refused
entry to white journalists and ofﬁcials of the Justice Department.
The Deacons’ fears were justiﬁed. Inside the cordon, the police and posse
were acting with impunity. Deacon Olin ‘‘Satch’’ Satcher was already inside
the black quarters when the roadblocks were erected. Satcher stepped out of
his car and coolly began to walk toward his house, a .22 caliber riﬂe cradled
in his arm. Within seconds a squad of police and posse members descended
on him. One of the posse, a member of the Jackson Parish School Board,
violently assaulted Satcher, clubbing him on the head. After the beating,
police arrested Satcher and shuttled him off to the parish jail.
Sealed off from the students and the black community, Thomas vainly
searched for an opening in the cordon. He tried a back road but was stopped
by a deputy and two posse members. Thomas recognized one of the posse as
a Klansman who had participated in the Klan parade through the black
community the previous summer.
One of the posse members commanded Thomas to leave, punctuating his
order by cocking his gun in Thomas’s face. Thomas reluctantly retreated but
soon renewed his efforts, this time accompanied by two Deacons, Henry
Amos and Charles White. The group probed the perimeter but still found all
entries guarded. They decided to return to the barricade where Thomas had
been turned back and threatened earlier. The Deacons stopped their car ﬁfty
feet from the barricade.
As White watched, Thomas and Amos left the car and marched toward the
makeshift sentinels. Thomas was mad. He was unaccustomed to having a
gun shoved in his face, and he was determined to set things straight with the
sheriff ’s deputy who had watched the incident. Thomas confronted the
deputy and demanded to know what they were doing: ‘‘You got the road
blocked,’’ he protested bitterly, ‘‘you can’t get in and out of town.’’ The dep-
uty ignored him. Thomas then asked the deputy for his name. Why did he


--- PAGE 78 ---
68 Not Selma
want to know? asked the deputy testily. Because he intended to ﬁle a com-
plaint, replied Thomas, to ﬁnd out who deputized the posse member who
had cocked a gun in his face at the roadblock earlier in the day.
∞≤
Thomas’s audacity sent the deputy into a ﬁt of rage. ‘‘Who in the god
damn hell do you think you are?’’ bellowed the deputy. Thomas sensed the
situation was reeling out of control, so he turned away and began to calmly
walk back to the car with Amos. He had taken only a few steps when he
heard the click of a shotgun cocking. ‘‘Get them up,’’ growled the voice from
behind.
∞≥
The deputies handcuffed Thomas so tightly that the steel cut into his ﬂesh.
As one deputy twisted the cuffs, the other two slapped Thomas and jabbed at
his ribs and kidneys with a shotgun and nightstick. One deputy stuck a pistol
in Thomas’s nose and taunted him. ‘‘Smell out of this, you black son-of-
a-bitch,’’ barked the deputy. ‘‘You better not move or I’ll have hair ﬂying
everywhere.’’
∞∂
Thomas knew that his life hung in the balance. Glancing up, he spied a
knot of black bystanders atop a nearby hill who were watching the scene
unfold. Thomas pointed out the witnesses to the deputy. The deputy sur-
veyed the situation, then holstered his gun and loosened the painful hand-
cuffs. The deputies searched the Deacons’ car and found two pistols and a
shotgun. Thomas was arrested for threatening a police ofﬁcer and resisting
arrest. One ofﬁcer claimed that Thomas had threatened him with a pen
knife, which was seized as evidence. Later that night Deputy James Van
Beasley came by Thomas’s cell. ‘‘God damn it,’’ gloated Van Beasley, ‘‘you
won’t be at that meeting tonight to raise hell.’’ Thomas was held incom-
municado for twenty-four hours, refused water, and ﬁnally released on bond
the next day. The charges were eventually dropped, but one small injustice
still bothered Thomas thirty years later. ‘‘I never did get that pen knife back,’’
he said wistfully.
∞∑
By the end of the day, police had jailed several Deacons who had at-
tempted to reach the students inside the cordon. But the Deacons’ sacriﬁces
had been rewarded; by acting quickly and resolutely, they had averted major
bloodshed like the movement had experienced in Selma. Their presence,
armed and willing to challenge the authorities, had deterred police ofﬁcers
and vigilantes from attacking the defenseless students. The day’s events
must have confounded the police and the Klan, accustomed to black men
deferring to authority. The police could ignore the Civil Rights Act and all
the blustering threats of enforcement from the North, but the Deacons were
something very different. New laws changed nothing in Jonesboro, but new
men were changing everything. Just how dramatically life had altered was


--- PAGE 79 ---
Not Selma 69
borne out by a harrowing confrontation that occurred a few days later. On a
bracingly cold March morning the students had gathered for their daily
picket at the high school. As soon as they arrived, the police on the scene
summoned a ﬁre truck. When the ﬁre truck arrived, the police ordered the
ﬁremen to prepare to open their hoses on the children in the wintry cold.
Fred Brooks, the young core activist, had accompanied the children to the
picket line and now watched helplessly as the crisis deepened. Suddenly a
car pulled in front of the school. The doors swung open and four Deacons,
led by Thomas, stepped out and began calmly loading their shotguns in plain
view of the police. Brooks and the students watched the Deacons in stunned
silence.
∞∏
The ﬁremen walked toward the students with their hoses in tow. Then
Brooks heard one of the Deacons say, ‘‘Here he comes. O.K., get ready.’’
Brooks was speechless. ‘‘I was scared as shit. It looked like all hell was going
to break loose.’’ He remembered one of the Deacons giving the order: ‘‘When
you see the ﬁrst water, we gonna open up on them. We gonna open up on all
of them.’’ The Deacons then turned to the police and issued a deadly serious
ultimatum. ‘‘If you turn that water hose on those kids, there’s going to be
some blood out here today.’’
∞π
The police ofﬁcers warily eyed the four Deacons standing before them,
shotguns loaded and readied, faces grim and determined. Prudence pre-
vailed. The law enforcers retreated and ordered the ﬁre trucks to roll up the
hoses and depart.
Although it never found its way into the history of the civil rights move-
ment, the Jonesboro showdown was a historical marker in the emergence of
the new black political consciousness in the South. For the ﬁrst time in the
twentieth century, an armed black organization had successfully used weap-
ons to defend a lawful protest against an attack by law enforcement. Pre-
viously, the Deacons had claimed only the right to self-defense against racist
terror. Now they asserted their right to defend themselves against govern-
ment violence as well.
In Selma, march leaders were regrouping after the brutal Bloody Sunday
attack. Organizers failed a second attempt to cross the Pettus Bridge on 9
March, the same day white vigilantes attacked and viciously bludgeoned one
of the marchers, Boston minister James Reeb. Reeb died two days later. As
the confrontation escalated in Selma, suddenly the Jackson High School
boycott came to national attention. On Sunday, 14 March—one week after
Bloody Sunday— core director James Farmer appeared on abc’s Issues and
Answers news program. Farmer unexpectedly announced that the civil rights
campaigns in Jonesboro and Bogalusa would be the focus of core’s next


--- PAGE 80 ---
70 Not Selma
‘‘major project.’’ He recited a litany of crimes committed against the black
movement in the two Louisiana mill towns: church burnings, police brutal-
ity, and unbridled Klan violence. He expressed frustration with the mount-
ing problem of local police brutality against the movement as it sought
enforcement of the Civil Rights Act. Farmer’s comments reﬂected the grow-
ing consensus among national civil rights organizations that new federal
legislation was needed to enforce the act. Calling for a ‘‘federal presence’’ in
Jonesboro and Bogalusa, Farmer demanded that federal marshals and fbi
agents make ‘‘on-the-spot’’ arrests of local police engaged in brutality or
rights violations.
∞∫
Despite the national attention, Jonesboro’s establishment continued to
harass the Deacons. On Monday, 15 March, the school board abruptly ﬁred
Olin Satcher, the Deacon who had been arrested and brutalized by police
during the 11 March siege. The same day police arrested another Deacon,
Cossetta Jackson, for possessing two concealed weapons. Police also conﬁs-
cated Jackson’s cb radio in an effort to disrupt the Deacons’ communication
system.
∞Ω
The police harassment began to concern federal authorities as they ob-
served from the sidelines. They speculated that the arrests and intimidation
might provoke the Deacons to retaliate violently. On 15 March a federal
government ofﬁcial who had visited Jonesboro warned the fbi that the
Deacons were planning some ‘‘drastic action’’ in the next two or three days.
On 19 March fbi headquarters, acting on the tip, instructed the New Orleans
fbi ﬁeld ofﬁce to interview members of the Deacons. Headquarters charac-
terized the Deacons as ‘‘allegedly formed to provide assistance to Negroes
being arrested’’ and cautioned the New Orleans ofﬁce that the Deacons were
‘‘alleged to be arming.’’ J. Edgar Hoover’s hostility to civil rights organiza-
tions was well known, and in this context the New Orleans ﬁeld ofﬁcers no
doubt understood the ‘‘interview’’ order as instructions to harass the Dea-
cons and discourage participation in the group.
≤≠
The fbi commenced a series of interviews in Jonesboro and Bogalusa
clearly intended to intimidate the Deacons by suggesting that the fbi was
investigating the group for illegal weapons. Typical of these interviews was
the night Harvey Johnson was accosted by two fbi agents in front of his
house as he returned from a protest march. The agents asked little about the
purpose of the Deacons, nor did they raise questions about Klan violence or
police harassment. Instead, Johnson recalled, they grilled him about illegal
weapons. One agent told him, ‘‘They tell me you fellows got all kinds of
machine guns and hand grenades.’’ Puzzled, Johnson asked where the fbi
got its information. The answer was, from a ‘‘Chicago magazine.’’ Johnson


--- PAGE 81 ---
Not Selma 71
waxed indignant, telling the agent, ‘‘Where you got that from is just a whole
lot of junk.’’≤∞
Police and fbi harassment of the Deacons had little effect on the student
boycott. By the second week the resolve of the town fathers was beginning to
weaken as they grew anxious that core would make Jonesboro another
Selma. For all their fervid segregationist talk, the town leaders were busi-
nessmen—and segregation was becoming bad for business. The white estab-
lishment was confronting a new brand of black leadership in the Deacons.
The older Voters League community leaders, for the most part small busi-
ness owners, had been supplanted by more militant and unyielding working-
class leaders such as Earnest Thomas, Percy Bradford, Henry Amos, and
Charlie White.
≤≤
Superintendent Koonce began to search for avenues of compromise. He
offered to arrange a meeting at the school board ofﬁce between the board
and ﬁfteen parent representatives. But because his proposal excluded stu-
dents from the negotiation process, parents and students rejected the re-
quest. They countered with a proposal that the board meet with all the
parents and students at Jackson High on 22 March. The board, desperate but
still prideful, agreed to meet with both parents and students but now de-
manded that the boycott be canceled and the children return to school
before they would negotiate.
A mass meeting was called to consider the proposal to end the boycott,
and hundreds from Jonesboro’s black community spilled into Johnson’s
Skating Rink to debate the issue. Some favored the compromise, but the
Deacons aggressively opposed it. Thomas and Bradford argued that the
boycott was the black community’s only bargaining chip. If the boycott was
canceled, the school board would have no reason to agree to the demands.
In the end, the Deacons prevailed and the community voted to continue the
boycott.
≤≥
The events in Selma continued on a parallel path with the Jonesboro
campaign, though diverging in one important way: the Selma campaign was
dominated by appeals for federal protection, whereas the Jonesboro cam-
paign chose to rely on local community resources. Federal intervention in
Selma was soon to come. By 21 March President Lyndon B. Johnson had
federalized the Alabama National Guard and deployed hundreds of federal
law enforcement ofﬁcials and military personnel to protect the second at-
tempt at a Selma-Montgomery March.
On 22 March James Farmer arrived in Jonesboro amid great excitement
and addressed an audience of six hundred people. Farmer reafﬁrmed core’s
plan to make Jonesboro a major project in the summer, likening the cam-


--- PAGE 82 ---
72 Not Selma
paign to another ‘‘Selma.’’ Farmer was ‘‘shocked by the fact that in Jonesboro
there is practically no compliance with the public accommodations section
of the Civil Rights Act nearly a year after passage.’’ He pointed out that four
restaurants and the library were still segregated, and blacks were still denied
the simple dignity of home mail delivery. Farmer promised to increase staff
for the summer project (voter registration and public accommodation tests)
and ﬁnished his oration to thunderous applause.
≤∂
Farmer departed for New York, and the Deacons returned to expanding
their political role in the community. On 24 March Earnest Thomas au-
daciously led a delegation of Deacons into the mayor’s ofﬁce and presented
the city with a list of demands for community improvements. The demands
centered on an equitable distribution of government services and resources.
The Deacons called for a cleanup drive to rid the black community of trash
and refuse; they wanted the city to erect street signs and provide house
numbers throughout the black section; and, echoing Farmer’s complaint,
they demanded postal service for the black community.
≤∑
The lack of postal service was particularly irksome. For years blacks had
endured the indignity and inconvenience of receiving their mail at the post
ofﬁce, rather than via the home delivery provided to whites. To send or
receive a letter, blacks had to travel to the post ofﬁce, often incurring the
added expense of cab fare. Thomas was fed up with the practice and made
his resolve clear to the mayor. ‘‘I told him that he was going to have mail
delivery in thirty days. If not, we were going to ﬁle in federal court.’’ The
mayor demurred, claiming that there could be no mail service until the
streets and houses were properly named and numbered. ‘‘He said it will take
longer than thirty days because we got to get street signs and we got to order
those.’’ Thomas offered a solution: the Deacons would provide makeshift
street signs and house numbers. The mayor agreed and mail delivery started
promptly.
≤∏
In Alabama the Selma-Montgomery March was proceeding with few inci-
dents, some 25,000 marchers now enjoying the full protection of the federal
government. Despite the show of force, President Johnson still avoided a
showdown with white terrorists, and he declined to bring his full powers to
bear to compel local authorities to uphold law and order. Segregationists
remained ﬁrmly in control of the police, the jails, and the terror apparatus.
If Johnson had forgotten this last point, he soon received a tragic re-
minder. On 25 March, the last day of the Selma-Montgomery March, a car-
load of Klansmen pulled alongside the car of Viola Liuzzo, a white Detroit
housewife and mother of ﬁve, as she ferried marchers from Montgomery to
Selma. She was accompanied by Leroy Moton, a young black activist. As the


--- PAGE 83 ---
Not Selma 73
car came ﬂush with Liuzzo’s, the Klansmen unleashed a volley of gunﬁre.
Liuzzo was killed instantly.≤π
The murder deeply stunned and moved the nation. The Klan had picked
the wrong target. In the past its victims had been strangers to most white
northerners: Michael Schwerner and Andrew Goodman were ‘‘beatnik’’
Jewish kids from New York; James Chaney was a young black man from
Mississippi. But Viola Liuzzo was one of their own. Her photograph featured
on television news programs across the nation showed a beautiful young
woman with a kind, innocent smile. She was a teacher, a housewife, and a
loving mother—in short, the idealized image of white femininity. That the
Civil Rights Act was now the law of the land made the attack appear even
more senseless and barbaric. The next day President Johnson, with J. Edgar
Hoover at his side, appeared on television to angrily declare war on the Ku
Klux Klan. The president called for new legislation to curb the Klan and a
special congressional investigation into the terrorist organization. Liuzzo’s
murder also propelled forward the fbi’s secret Counter Intelligence Program
(cointelpro) to disrupt the Klan.
≤∫
The Klan had always harbored a special hatred for white Yankee civil
rights activists. Black activists were a target as well, but the presence of
white northerners, particularly white women, in the company of black men
enraged the hooded night riders. In Jonesboro, the Klan had also singled out
white activists for threats and brutal treatment. In the summer of 1964
Klansmen had appeared at the Freedom House and demanded the ‘‘two
white guys.’’ On another occasion a black man reported to core that Police
Chief Adrian Peevy had asked him to ‘‘beat those white fellows to the point
of death’’ in an attempt to drive them out of the community.
≤Ω
In the wake of the Selma tragedy, news arrived that Cathy Patterson and
Danny Mitchell had organized a group of white Syracuse University student
volunteers to travel to Jonesboro during spring break. The students planned
to help rebuild the two churches destroyed by arson in January. The Deacons
were justiﬁably anxious for their safety. But undeterred by the Selma vio-
lence, the black community forged ahead toward a militant confrontation
with the school board. The day after Liuzzo’s murder, an impressive phalanx
of 375 students and parents marched to the school board ofﬁce in the brisk
cold of early dawn. In a daring maneuver, the protesters surrounded the
ofﬁce and blocked all entrances. The tactic succeeded in closing the school
board ofﬁce; even Superintendent Koonce did not bother to report to work.
≥≠
Governor John McKeithen sensed a disaster in the making in Jonesboro.
With the violence on the Selma march, the Liuzzo murder, and now the
Deacons and the militant Jonesboro campaign, McKeithen hastened to pre-


--- PAGE 84 ---
74 Not Selma
empt a bloody battle in Louisiana. On Friday, 26 March, as black students
and parents surrounded the Jackson Parish School Board ofﬁce, the gover-
nor announced that he would travel to Jonesboro the following day to at-
tempt to negotiate an end to the two-week-old boycott of Jackson High
School.
McKeithen’s announcement marked a turning point in southern history.
No governor before him had intervened to negotiate a settlement in a civil
rights protest in the Deep South. Most southern governors either neglected
or openly obstructed enforcement of the new civil rights laws. It was politi-
cally advantageous for them to allow a crisis to escalate out of control,
forcing the federal government to intervene. The tactic relieved them from
enforcing the desegregation laws while increasing the governors’ popular-
ity as stalwart defenders of southern honor. McKeithen departed from this
script. ‘‘I’ve been told that I couldn’t win re-election if I came here,’’ said
McKeithen in Jonesboro during the negotiations. ‘‘But I’m here today. The
only person who stands to get hurt here today is your governor.’’
≥∞
We can only speculate as to McKeithen’s motives for assuming the role of
racial moderate. He would later say that his actions reﬂected the growing
moderation of his own white constituents. It was true that throughout the
South white moderates were increasingly voicing their support for détente
with the civil rights movement. The causes for this change in attitude were
complex. Some whites were sincerely troubled by the moral dimension of
segregation; others were simply embarrassed by the unﬂattering media at-
tention focused on the South. Still others feared that southern intransigence
and violence were damaging the South’s economy by hindering its ability to
attract new industry.
Politicians like John McKeithen also understood that the civil rights move-
ment was radically changing the face of southern politics. As black voting
power grew, zealous segregationists found themselves at a disadvantage. It
was politically expedient for some politicians to cultivate a moderate image
by currying favor with black voters. Even before the Voting Rights Act, Loui-
siana had a substantial percentage of registered black voters—more than
16 percent, and the impending voting rights legislation promised to increase
this percentage to well over 25 percent. McKeithen’s moderate stance in
Jonesboro thus stood to gain him more votes than he might lose.
≥≤
In Jonesboro McKeithen had both the Deacons and the Klan to reckon
with. He took steps to undermine both groups, though he would ultimately
target the Deacons for his severest measures. In early March he had consid-
ered instructing Louisiana attorney general Jack Gremillion to investigate


--- PAGE 85 ---
Not Selma 75
existing laws that could be used to break up the Deacons through arrests.
McKeithen had also discussed a plan to discredit the Klan through em-
barrassing congressional hearings on the group—but he took no steps to use
his considerable state power to disarm or destroy the Klan.
≥≥
Regardless of his motives, McKeithen’s actions in Jonesboro won him
the instant enmity of the Ku Klux Klan. In response to the Jonesboro nego-
tiations, the Klan lit up the night sky in the Baton Rouge area with nearly
two dozen blazing crosses, including one brazenly ignited near the state
capitol.
≥∂
The momentous negotiations with the governor occurred over the week-
end of 27–28 March. Local attorney William ‘‘Billy’’ Baker, appointed a spe-
cial liaison for McKeithen, arranged an integrated meeting with about forty
persons at Jackson High, including a ‘‘school committee’’ led by Fred Kirk-
patrick and several other Deacons.
The negotiations on Saturday, 27 March, were a sterling victory for the
black community. Faced with the steely determination of the Deacons and
the students, McKeithen had conceded virtually all of the boycotters’ de-
mands. He agreed to additional textbooks and water fountains, library im-
provements, and new landscaping and playgrounds. Although he could not
promise funds to rebuild the gym, in the aftermath of the boycott voters
approved an $800,000 bond issue for a new gymnasium.
≥∑
In return for the concessions, the students agreed to temporarily suspend
the boycott and return to school. They left open the option to protest unre-
solved grievances in the future and even issued a statement declaring that
they would continue to protest in school through the ‘‘observance of prayer
and studying of Negro history.’’
≥∏ A biracial committee was formed to negoti-
ate future issues. The Deacons had made history: Their willingness to use
public armed force had brought a segregationist governor to his knees, com-
pelling him to negotiate with African Americans as equal citizens.
The marches and pickets would continue for several months, targeting
both school and desegregation issues. But something had changed in the
mill town. The change was apparent to Cathy Patterson, the young core
activist, when she returned to Jonesboro with a group of fellow Syracuse
University students after the boycott. Only seven months had passed since
her departure, but Patterson immediately sensed the difference. When she
had ﬁrst arrived in Jonesboro in the spring of 1964, not a single family
offered their homes for lodging, for fear of Klan retaliation. core activists
had to ﬁnd separate quarters in a house owned by an absentee landlord. But
now, in the spring of 1965, black families without hesitation invited the civil


--- PAGE 86 ---
76 Not Selma
rights activists into their homes. Patterson observed a new determination
and courage in the average citizen. ‘‘I think it had a lot to do with the
Deacons,’’ she reﬂected. ‘‘And I think it had a lot to do with members of the
community sensing their own capacity to protect themselves.’’
≥π
‘‘Example is not the main thing in inﬂuencing others,’’ said Albert Schweit-
zer. ‘‘It is the only thing.’’ ≥∫ The Deacons were exemplars for the ‘‘New Ne-
gro’’ in the South. Their militance and combativeness had been absorbed
into the political consciousness of the New Negro. When, in Cathy Patter-
son’s words, blacks sensed ‘‘their own capacity to defend themselves,’’ when
they accepted that they were entitled to the same rights, respect, and honor
as whites, the Deacons became unnecessary. In a reciprocal process, ordi-
nary people became Deacons, and the Deacons became ordinary people.
Honor was a hallowed value for the Deacons. Honor had, in many cul-
tures, historically functioned as a mechanism to deter physical attacks and
banditry. In the masculine code of the South, an ‘‘honorable man’’ was
someone who was willing to retaliate swiftly and violently to avenge any
insults or affronts to himself or his family. He was willing to risk his life to
defend his family and property. Potential predators would think twice about
attacking an honor-bound man—or assaulting his kinfolk or community in
his absence. The Deacons’ deterrent power depended on the Klan believing
that the Deacons would retaliate against any affront with deadly force. And
Klansmen, as Ronnie Moore observed, ‘‘didn’t want to die. They didn’t mind
killing; they just didn’t want to die.’’
≥Ω
Moore’s insight was borne out in one episode in Jonesboro in the spring of
1965. In early April the movement had shifted its focus back to desegregating
public accommodations, including several restaurants that remained segre-
gated. The campaign expanded to demand an end to occupational discrimi-
nation and to protest police brutality. Student volunteers ﬂooded in from the
University of Kansas, Louisiana State University, and Southern University at
Baton Rouge.
∂≠
The inﬂux of white student volunteers caused considerable anguish for
the Deacons. They did not want another killing like the Liuzzo murder in the
Selma campaign. But the Yankee invasion was bound to inﬂame the Klan,
and on 9 April the racists made their move. During the day a Kansas Univer-
sity student ran out of gas, and Elmo Jacobs, a Deacons leader, offered to
help the student retrieve his car. Jacobs loaded four white students and a
friend into his station wagon. As he drove down the highway, suddenly a
brown Chevrolet station wagon pulled in front of Jacobs and brought his car
to a halt. Startled, Jacobs looked through the windshield and saw a single-


--- PAGE 87 ---
Not Selma 77
barrel shotgun emerge from the car blocking his path. The gun let out a
deafening blast that left fourteen pellets in Jacobs’s door.∂∞
Elmo Jacobs never ﬂinched. ‘‘Well, that made me went to shooting,’’ said
Jacobs. He quickly grabbed his gun and returned a volley of ﬁre as the
students watched in horror. His terriﬁed assailants panicked and ﬂed in a
hail of gunﬁre.
∂≤ It was the ﬁrst and last armed attack on a civil rights worker
in Jonesboro. Jonesboro was not Selma.


--- PAGE 88 ---
chapter
5
On to Bogalusa
washington parish always  had a dark and violent
side. Located in the southeastern corner of Louisiana, the vast forested par-
ish was bordered on two sides by Mississippi; local folklore held that desper-
ados and rascals from Mississippi sought refuge by slipping across the border
and blending into the countryside of Washington Parish. Its frontier charac-
ter and ﬁercely independent farmers and loggers—both black and white—
made for an explosive mixture, as evidenced in the ‘‘Balltown Riot’’ that
erupted in 1901. The violence began when a rumor circulated that local
blacks were preparing to massacre whites. A mob of white men surrounded
a black church and started shooting the worshippers. Blacks returned ﬁre,
resulting in the death of ﬁfteen blacks and three whites, according to ofﬁcial
accounts. Local blacks, in keeping with their tradition of pride and deﬁance,
claimed that many more whites were killed than authorities were willing to
admit. ‘‘Old Man Creole killed about six,’’ recalled John Wilson, a black
farmer, who was interviewed by Horace Mann Bond in the 1930s. Eighteen
years later, in 1919, the Great Southern Lumber Company of Bogalusa, the
largest industrial town in the parish, became a target for a militant campaign
engineered by the anarcho-syndicalist International Workers of the World
(iww). The iww’s interracial organizing drive culminated in the mill police
murdering four white unionists who were defending a black union orga-
nizer. Although Great Southern had defeated the union threat, management
lived in perpetual fear of a worker uprising; at one point the mill manager
built a secret escape tunnel in the basement of his home. It was on this
bloody terrain that the Deacons would take root and lead one of the most
remarkable and successful local campaigns of the civil rights movement.
∞
The Great Southern Lumber Company was at the heart of the social con-
ﬂicts that bedeviled Bogalusa in the twentieth century. In 1905 two Penn-
sylvania businessmen, brothers Charles and Frank Goodyear, scouted the


--- PAGE 89 ---
On to Bogalusa 79
Bogue Lusa Creek area in Washington Parish for the site for a new lumber
mill. The Goodyear brothers had made a fortune in coal and lumber in
Pennsylvania, and they were now determined to harvest the bounty of Loui-
siana’s expansive longleaf yellow pine stands. The Bogue Lusa Creek site was
a barren clearing buried in a vast forest of millions of acres of virgin pine. For
centuries the area had been home to a few bands of seminomadic American
Indians. In the nineteenth century a handful of white homesteaders settled
the region and took up farming and small commercial logging operations.
≤
The Goodyear brothers decided on the Bogue Lusa site for their business
and quickly raised $15 million to erect an enormous sawmill. In 1906 the
Great Southern Lumber Company was born and with it the city that the
Goodyears named Bogalusa—later dubbed the ‘‘Magic City’’ by city boost-
ers.
≥ By 1907 the mill buildings and workers’ housing were completed using
14 million feet of timber. The sawmill began operations on 1 September 1908,
and an adjoining paper mill was established in 1917.
Bogalusa was a classic company town. Great Southern owned virtually
every board and nail in the place: more than 750 homes, the town hospital,
the utility services, and the company stores. The lumber company even
trademarked the town’s name. The only thing not owned by Great Southern
were the people who labored in the mill. Nonetheless, the company ruled
the institutions that ruled the people: city government, the judiciary, and the
police.
Great Southern’s workers were hewn from the independent stock of yeo-
men who peopled the pine country in nearby Mississippi. They were a coarse
lot, hardened by the toil and misery of logging and subsistence farming.
They knew nothing of time clocks, shift work, supervisors, and the discipline
of modern industry. They had been masters of their few simple tools: the
saw, the logging chain, and the mule. The Goodyears were confronted with
the daunting task of transforming this headstrong and proud peasantry into
a modern, regimented, compliant workforce.
Like most northern concerns conducting business in the South, Great
Southern honored local segregation customs and reproduced them through-
out the town and mill. Workers’ housing was strictly segregated by race. In
later years this extended to separate housing for Italians and Jews. Schools,
parks, public facilities, rest rooms, parish fairs, parades, and water fountains
were all segregated. Even hospital services were segregated. A black mother
could have a baby at the local hospital, but, as a matter of policy, white
nurses refused to bathe the child.
Great Southern also segregated jobs and cafeterias, break rooms and bath-
room facilities in the mill. Approximately 15 percent of the workforce was


--- PAGE 90 ---
80 On to Bogalusa
comprised of black men. White women worked in the mill, but no black
women did. Black men were largely excluded from operating machinery and
relegated to the arduous ‘‘yard’’ occupations involved in moving and stack-
ing timber.
The black community, which numbered eight thousand by 1965, emerged
over the years in several distinct neighborhoods. The community neighbor-
ing the business district was dubbed ‘‘Jewtown’’ because of its proximity to
Jewish stores in the downtown district. Other districts included ‘‘Poplas
Quarters’’ (named in the tradition of ‘‘slave quarters’’), Moden Quarters,
Mitch Quarters, and East Side and South Side.
∂
Swept up in the tidal wave of unionization during the late 1930s, the mill
was ﬁnally organized into segregated union locals in 1938. But by 1938 the
leviathan sawmill, the largest in the world, had consumed all the timber
within its grasp. Poor planning forced the mill to switch to processing pulp-
wood used primarily in paper production. Pulpwood could be processed
from young pine trees that took only ﬁfteen years to grow.
∑
Between 1938 and 1965 the mill and city underwent a radical transforma-
tion. Mill operations were increasingly automated and Great Southern was
sold and resold, eventually coming under control of the Crown-Zellerbach
Corporation based in San Francisco in 1960. As the mill changed hands, its
new owners decided to withdraw from managing workers’ housing and city
services. Beginning in 1947, the mill owners systematically divested, radi-
cally transforming the city’s political and social structure. In 1947 the mill
closed the last of its company stores. In 1950 the company sold more than
ﬁve hundred company homes to their occupants and donated the company-
owned hospital to a nonproﬁt corporation. In the years that followed the
company continued to divest all of its city services and withdrew behind
the mill’s gates. The denizens of Bogalusa, comprised almost exclusively of
workers and hardly any middle class, were left to their own devices to run
the city.
∏
The company’s gift to the citizens of Bogalusa was a ticking bomb. Be-
tween 1961 and 1965 Crown-Zellerbach poured $35 million into modernizing
the sawmill and box factory. The mechanization drive resulted in the layoff
of ﬁve hundred workers and intensiﬁed competition between blacks and
whites for the dwindling number of jobs. Crown-Zellerbach did little to assist
the city in mitigating the social problems posed by the drastic layoffs. It
offered no programs to retrain displaced workers or to attract new industry.
While the city’s civic and government institutions foundered in the face of
these problems, the unions did attempt to ﬁght back. A futile nine-month


--- PAGE 91 ---
On to Bogalusa 81
strike lasted from August 1961 to April 1962. In the end it cost Crown-
Zellerbach $15 million and added to the class and racial tensions in the city.π
Though Crown-Zellerbach was the source of virtually all of the economic
suffering visited upon Bogalusa, race became the scapegoat. At the same
time that the corporation was throwing hundreds of workers into the street,
the federal government was pressuring Crown-Zellerbach to end discrimina-
tory practices in hiring and promotions. In March 1961 President John F.
Kennedy signed Executive Order 10925, which mandated a ‘‘fair employment
policy’’ to end racial discrimination by companies that conducted business
with the federal government. Crown-Zellerbach’s government contracts
brought it under the provisions of the order, but rather than quickly imple-
ment and support these changes, the paper company evaded the new regula-
tions. It fed the ﬁres of racial hatred in Bogalusa by dragging out the divisive
negotiations for several years. To add to the growing tensions, the white
union local vigorously opposed the antidiscrimination reforms in an effort to
protect the privileged position of whites in the mill.
∫
In May 1964 Crown-Zellerbach ﬁnally agreed to implement one fair em-
ployment reform: integrating the process by which temporary workers were
selected—the ‘‘extra board.’’ For the ﬁrst time in Bogalusa’s history, unem-
ployed and desperate whites found themselves competing with blacks as
equals. The predicament enraged white workers but left them with few
remedies. They had lost their last battle with the company in the strike of
1962. The only protection they enjoyed was their white skin, and now the
federal government, along with the company and blacks, was threatening to
deprive them of this remaining privilege. White frustration and anger with
the company and government were soon diverted into hatred for a more
vulnerable enemy: black labor.
Given the simmering racial and class conﬂicts, it should come as no sur-
prise that Bogalusa became the site of the most virulent and disciplined Klan
offensives in modern history. Unlike most of Louisiana’s nonunion cities,
white workers in Bogalusa were well organized as a result of decades of
trade union experience. In the 1960s new technology, the drive for proﬁts,
and the emerging black freedom movement conspired to deprive them of
their perceived birthright. The civil rights movement became the stage for
the last battle of organized white labor in Bogalusa. Unable to defeat the
company, whites attempted to secure their caste privilege at the expense of
black rights. Every concession to integration became a symbolic attack on
the status and security of white labor.
This was the boiling cauldron Crown-Zellerbach handed city leaders in


--- PAGE 92 ---
82 On to Bogalusa
1964. Bogalusa’s political and business elites were confronted with two in-
tractable forces: on one side, a well-organized white population, wracked by
economic problems and consumed with racial hatred; on the other side, an
increasingly militant black working class, equally well organized and reso-
lute. For ﬁfty years the mill’s owners had successfully managed the conﬂict
between these groups through authoritarian social control mechanisms.
Now the owners left a power vacuum—one that the Klan would soon ﬁll.
Ω
The militance and independence of Bogalusa blacks were rooted, in part,
in their unique origins as independent farmers and loggers in a racially
mixed society. Horace Mann Bond’s study of Washington Parish, conducted
in 1934, reveals a remarkable degree of social interconnection and mis-
cegenation between blacks and whites in the nineteenth century. According
to Bond, following the Civil War a large number of white men entered into
informal unions with black women and in many cases these family loyalties
survived for generations. White men frequently provided for their mixed-
race daughters by giving dowries of land and arranging for marriages to
respectable and ambitious young Creole men. They also helped their mixed-
race sons establish themselves economically through loans, land, employ-
ment, and interceding with local authorities on their behalf. ‘‘Cheap land
and miscegenation in Washington Parish,’’ wrote Bond, ‘‘made possible the
development of segregated Negro farm-owning communities under the pa-
tronage of white relatives, who, in the nature of things, were usually mem-
bers of the old white families in the community.’’ By the 1930s four thousand
blacks farmed more than ﬁfteen thousand acres. Blacks in Washington Par-
ish had been treated as social equals in ways that would have astounded
blacks in the plantation delta. This special treatment, as limited as it was,
had disappeared by the 1930s, but its legacy was an abiding feeling of equal-
ity and elevated expectations among the parish’s blacks that kindled the
militancy in the movement in the 1960s.
∞≠
The path to Bogalusa for the Jonesboro-based Deacons for Defense and
Justice began in the spring of 1964. A weak and largely ineffective National
Association for the Advancement of Colored People ( naacp) had existed in
Bogalusa since 1950, headed by William Baily Jr., a retired railroad worker.
The chapter had managed to open up registration rolls to blacks in 1950 and
ﬁle a successful voting rights suit in 1959, when local segregationists at-
tempted to purge 1,377 blacks from the voter rolls.
The leading civil rights organization in the early 1960s was the Bogalusa
Civic and Voters League, headed by Andrew Moses. Bogalusa, like Jones-
boro, had a signiﬁcant number of registered black voters who could tip the
balance in city elections. The Voters League concentrated on voter registra-


--- PAGE 93 ---
On to Bogalusa 83
tion and often used its inﬂuence to bargain for political favors. League lead-
ers told one visiting activist that the league was ‘‘signiﬁcant in swinging
elections, and for this reason, also, the power structure is willing to listen
to them.’’
∞∞
By 1964 young members of the Voters League were pressuring Moses to
increase the pace of change. Moses and several other respected black leaders
began meeting with city ofﬁcials as part of the Bogalusa Community Rela-
tions Commission, a biracial organization created by the white power struc-
ture to address civil rights issues. The black bargaining team sought de-
segregation concessions from the city through quiet negotiations. But the
commission accomplished little in 1964 other than the hiring of two black
deputies and the ﬁrst all-black garbage truck crew.
∞≤
In May 1964 core created a stir when its New Orleans ofﬁce announced
that it intended to conduct a voter registration drive in Bogalusa. core was
active in several communities close to Bogalusa and conducted highly pub-
licized campaigns in Hammond and Clinton. Andrew Moses, though, was
not eager to see core in Bogalusa. He had always moved slowly and cau-
tiously, and his Voters League risked losing credibility with the white power
structure if protests erupted.
∞≥
White leaders in Bogalusa were also concerned about core. One core
report observed that ‘‘the white community, evidently noting the demon-
strations in Hammond and the recently established [ core] Regional Ofﬁce
in nearby New Orleans, is scared to death of core. The Power structure,
anxious to attract industry and people to Bogalusa, will do almost anything
to keep core out.’’ The report added that because the power structure feared
disruptive protests, it appeared ‘‘to be willing to give in to at least certain
demands.’’
∞∂
To avert core’s planned intervention, the mayor and the Bogalusa Com-
mission Council asked the Voters League to persuade core to postpone its
planned campaign. On 10 July 1964 Moses led a delegation of three Voters
League leaders, all members of the Community Relations Commission, to
meet with core’s Ronnie Moore. Some militant members of the Bogalusa
movement questioned Moses’ motives. Gayle Jenkins, a member of the Vo-
ters League, claimed that the black delegation was working at the behest of
the city government, and that the town fathers ‘‘paid them to go and talk to
core and ask them not to come in.’’
∞∑
Indeed, the meeting had an air of ofﬁcial negotiations about it, with
Moses presenting Ronnie Moore with a letter of representation from Boga-
lusa mayor Jesse Cutrer. Moses asked core to delay any organizing plans to
provide time for the Community Relations Commission to resolve problems


--- PAGE 94 ---
84 On to Bogalusa
in an orderly manner. Moore agreed and informed Mayor Cutrer that the
group had decided that it ‘‘must remain patient in order to bring about social
adjustments.’’ core and the league would give the mayor ‘‘six months to
make certain progressive steps toward implementing the provisions of the
1964 Civil Rights Act’’ during which time core pledged to stay neutral to
allow the Voters League to resolve the problem.
∞∏
core had scouted Bogalusa in the summer of 1964 and thought that the
city had great organizing potential and was ‘‘ripe for core’s type of pro-
gram.’’ Discontent with white intransigence ran high. The Civil Rights Act
and other federal civil rights mandates had changed nothing in Bogalusa.
Although segregation signs were down at the Crown-Zellerbach paper mill,
the company left intact separate water fountains and toilets. Blacks were not
allowed in the unemployment ofﬁce during morning hours, and when they
were admitted in the afternoon, whites were allowed to cut in front of them.
The Washington Parish Charity Hospital refused black patients except on
Thursdays. Lunch counters, restaurants, and nearly all public accommoda-
tions remained segregated. Blacks were limited to ‘‘broom and mop’’ occupa-
tions at downtown stores, and black neighborhoods lacked street lights,
paved streets, and a sewerage system.
∞π
Bogalusa’s black community certainly had its share of challenges, but it
also had the leadership sufﬁcient for the task at hand. Along with the Voters
League, there was a well-organized black farmers’ cooperative and the black
local of the Pulp and Sulphite Workers Union had developed several young
charismatic leaders. The union had a political education committee that had
implemented a program for voter education. core considered the black
community a ‘‘well organized and reasonably informed community. . . . In
short, we feel that Bogalusa can easily be one of the most exciting and
challenging places this summer and for a long time to come.’’
∞∫
But core’s optimistic assessment of the paper mill town seriously under-
estimated the organizational strength of the white working class and the
Klan. With the decline of the White Citizens Council, several new and violent
Klan organizations began aggressively organizing in the Bogalusa area. The
Original Knights of the Ku Klux Klan ( okkkk), founded in Jonesboro as
an offshoot of the United Klans of America, started recruiting in Washing-
ton Parish in 1963. It publicly announced its presence by burning crosses
throughout the area on 18 January 1964. In response, Lou Major, editor of
the Bogalusa Daily News , attacked the Klan in an editorial three days later.
The Klan retaliated by burning a cross in front of Major’s house. In May 1964
the Klan conducted its ﬁrst rally in Bogalusa, no doubt in response to rumors
that core was planning an organizing drive there.
∞Ω


--- PAGE 95 ---
On to Bogalusa 85
The ﬁrst public accommodations civil rights protest took place on 3 July
1964, when two 12-year-old black girls spontaneously integrated the Wool-
worth lunch counter, sparking an ugly confrontation with a white mob. The
girls’ courageous act was the ﬁrst and last direct action protest in Bogalusa in
1964. Black and white leaders returned to the strategy of negotiations with
core as the Klan watched from the wings.
≤≠
In October 1964 the federal Community Relations Service ( crs), the
agency responsible for assisting communities in implementing the Civil
Rights Act, convinced Bogalusa businessman Bascom Talley to form a group
of white business and civic leaders to oversee orderly desegregation in the
mill town. Talley, an attorney and publisher of the Bogalusa Daily News, and
crs representatives were concerned that young blacks were growing restless
with the snail’s pace of change. They hoped that the business and civic
leaders could preempt disruptive protests. Talley was something of a liberal
anomaly on the race question. He had recently been appointed to the crs,
although discreetly omitting the news story from his own paper. A respected
member of Bogalusa’s business elite, Talley quickly called together a group
comprising a few liberal businessmen and several religious leaders, most of
them not natives of Bogalusa. The ﬁrst meeting at Talley’s home was at-
tended by Reverend Jerry M. Chance, minister of the Main Street Baptist
Church; Ralph Blumberg, operator of a local radio station; Reverend Paul
Gillespie, minister of the Memorial Baptist Church; Lou Major, editor of the
Daily News ; Reverend Bruce Shepherd, rector of St. Matthews Episcopal
Church; and two crs representatives.
Talley’s group decided on a modest and relatively harmless event to launch
their integration efforts. They would sponsor a testimonial dinner for Ver-
trees Young, the former mayor of Bogalusa and the city’s most venerated
leader. The dinner would feature Brooks Hays, a former Arkansas congress-
man, now a Rutgers professor and crs consultant. Hays had served as presi-
dent of the Southern Baptist Convention and as a special assistant to Presi-
dents Kennedy and Johnson. Despite his decidedly liberal credentials, Hays’s
Arkansas roots provided an acceptable southern pedigree. The plan called
for Hays to discuss how other communities had successfully integrated pub-
lic accommodations under the Civil Rights Act. The Hays Committee, as it
came to be known, hoped to exclude potential disrupters from the event by
making it by invitation only. The committee invited a select group of one
hundred white businessmen and professionals and eight black leaders. In
early December it formally invited Hays to speak at the Episcopal Church
House on 7 January 1965.
≤∞
The Klan responded to the news with a well-coordinated and vicious


--- PAGE 96 ---
86 On to Bogalusa
terror campaign against the Hays Committee. Klansmen burned crosses at
the homes of committee members. They assailed the members and their
families with relentless death threats. They tampered with their telephones,
causing them to make bizarre noises (it was later revealed that some Klans-
men worked for the phone company). Night riders silently cruised by com-
mittee members’ homes at all hours. The Klan distributed more than six
thousand handbills door-to-door, carrying the ominous warning that ‘‘those
who do attend this meeting will be tagged as integrationist and will be dealt
with accordingly by the Knights of the Ku Klux Klan.’’ Pressure also increased
on the vestrymen of the Episcopal church, the planned site of the Hays
speech. After the Klan burned a cross on the church lawn, the vestrymen
quickly withdrew their invitation to the Hays Committee.
≤≤
As the intimidation increased, it became clear that local ofﬁcials were
allowing the Klan to terrorize openly. In the fall of 1964 Bogalusa’s okkkk
chapter had at least 150 paid members and several hundred additional sup-
porters at their beck and call (in late 1964 the okkkk changed its name to the
Anti-Communist Christian Association to protect itself from federal legal
actions, but it remained known publicly as a Klan organization). At the
height of the okkkk’s power, it was estimated that Bogalusa contained 800
Klansmen, more Klan members per capita than any other American city. The
liberal press appropriately dubbed the mill town, ‘‘Klantown usa.’’
≤≥
The Louisiana Klan offensive was much more than a knee-jerk reaction by
a few misﬁts. From the standpoint of most white people in the Deep South,
the Klan campaign was the motive force of history. More than a battle against
the new status of African Americans, the Klan’s mobilization was, in the end,
a defense of three centuries of caste privilege. Between 1964 and 1965 the
Klan conducted a highly sophisticated campaign of terror, mobilizing thou-
sands of men into a paramilitary militia. It combined terror with boycotts,
mass demonstrations, and lobbying. In Louisiana and Mississippi, the Klan
seized control of local governments and carved out a territory where civil
rights activity was virtually impossible. Joseph Sullivan, who led the fbi’s
investigations in Mississippi in 1964, put it succinctly: ‘‘They owned the place.
In spirit, everyone belonged to the Klan.’’
≤∂
In Bogalusa the Klan set up headquarters at the ﬁre station directly across
from City Hall. It organized a special terrorist squad to conduct well-planned
assaults and cross burnings. For months the Klan had been arming its mem-
bers for guerrilla warfare. Howard M. Lee, an auto repair shop owner and an
Exalted Cyclops okkkk unit leader in Bogalusa, obtained a federal ﬁrearms
license and began equipping a small army of Klansmen in Louisiana and Mis-
sissippi in 1964. During the period of May–August 1964 alone, Lee bought


--- PAGE 97 ---
On to Bogalusa 87
651 weapons and 21,192 rounds of ammunition, then illegally passed along
the weapons and bulk ammunition to other Klansmen for resale without
recording the sales or true names of purchasers. In one transaction he pro-
vided James M. Ellis, another okkkk unit leader, with 65 Italian riﬂes. Local
ofﬁcials ignored Lee’s activities; it would take a federal court eighty miles
away in New Orleans to ﬁnally bring Lee to justice.
≤∑
The terror quickly isolated the Hays Committee from the rest of the com-
munity, its few supporters silenced by fear and ofﬁcial complicity. ‘‘We were
just six guys bucking the whole darn town,’’ said the Reverend Bruce Shep-
herd. City ofﬁcials were appeasing the Klan, said another community leader,
who asked for anonymity when interviewed by Nation magazine. ‘‘The Klan
cannot survive here unless it has ofﬁcial sanction,’’ he said. City and law
enforcement ofﬁcials had indeed turned a blind eye to the criminal violence,
emboldening the Klan to even more ﬂagrant transgressions. The police de-
partment was riddled with Klansmen: eighteen Bogalusa auxiliary police
ofﬁcers swore out of the Klan in April 1965 so they could remain on the
force and deny Klan membership. At one Klan meeting members openly
debated a proposal to bomb the church where the Hays Committee had
scheduled its event.
≤∏
Mayor Jesse Cutrer and Police Commissioner Arnold Spiers attempted to
conciliate Klansmen by appearing at a Klan meeting at the Disabled Ameri-
can Veterans Hall on 18 December 1964. But it was too late to reverse the mo-
mentum the Klan had gained as a result of the leadership vacuum. All Cutrer
could do was ascend the podium and nervously survey the 150 hooded
Klansmen glaring at him through slitted sheets. The Klan castigated the
Hays Committee as integrationist, though none of its members had ever ad-
vocated integration. An okkkk leaﬂet attacked Talley’s Daily News as ‘‘amal-
gamationist’’ and reviled him for concealing his membership on the crs. Tal-
ley was also the Klan’s favorite target for class-based attacks on the wealthy.
In one leaﬂet the Klan resorted to doggerel to reproach Talley: ‘‘This man
would love the nigger / In order to grow ﬁnancially bigger.’’
≤π
Moderates like Daily News editor Lou Major were confounded by the bitter
response. ‘‘I’m neither an integrationist nor a segregationist,’’ Major pro-
tested. ‘‘We didn’t want Bogalusa to become another McComb with bomb-
ings and burnings. Now for the ﬁrst time in my life, I have a loaded pistol in
the house.’’ Talley laid the blame for the Klan’s success on the failure of white
businesses and government leaders to support the Hays Committee. ‘‘There
has been a leadership vacuum here and that’s what the Klan thrives on,’’
offered Talley. ‘‘That and stupidity.’’
≤∫
Talley and his besieged colleagues frantically searched for an alternative


--- PAGE 98 ---
88 On to Bogalusa
site for the Hays event after the Episcopal church withdrew its facility. In the
last week of December crosses blazed across town as the Klan intensiﬁed its
intimidation campaign. On Monday, 4 January 1965, with only three days
left before the scheduled speaking event, the Hays Committee requested the
use of City Hall. But the Klan had already gotten to the mayor and the
Bogalusa Commission Council. Cutrer promptly turned down the committee
on the pretense that the event would be a private meeting in a public place.
In addition, he rebuked the Hays Committee for interfering with the ‘‘quiet
progress’’ that he was making on race relations through the Community
Relations Committee.
≤Ω The mayor’s capitulation to the Klan signaled the
end of any semblance of freedom and democracy in Bogalusa. The okkkk
now reigned supreme.
The mayor and the council’s appeasement of the Klan set a pattern for the
coming months. Writing to Vice President Hubert Humphrey, Leroy Collins
of the Community Relations Service lamented that the mayor and council
‘‘have not furnished the sort of enlightened leadership that tends to mobilize
strong business and civic support’’ and ‘‘appear more interested in conciliat-
ing the Ku Klux Klan than in enforcing the Civil Rights Act.’’ With crs rep-
resentatives on the ground in other southern communities, Collins knew
that there were other paths available to Bogalusa’s white leaders. Only a
few miles away in Hammond, the town fathers had weathered a similar
crisis in the heart of Klan country. In 1963 black high school students in
Hammond independently organized a protest march against segregation
and forced city leaders to form a biracial committee to negotiate their de-
mands. Infamous racist leader Judge Leander Perez of Plaquemines Parish
soon caught wind of the integration plans and launched a campaign to
reverse the gains blacks had made. But the mayor of Hammond took a hard
line against Perez and the Citizens Council—in contrast to the Bogalusa
experience. The mayor refused to allow the judge to use Hammond’s parks
for protest rallies and made it clear that Perez and his followers were un-
welcome in the city. Perez retreated, and Hammond managed a relatively
peaceful transition to integration.
≥≠
How little it took to counter mob politics speaks volumes about what
could have been another path toward equality. Southern business and gov-
ernment leaders shared a large responsibility for why the South was con-
sumed for ten years—between the Brown decision and the Voting Rights
Act—by a horribly destructive and futile conﬂict. In the 1950s southern racial
liberals discouraged aggressive enforcement of civil and voting rights by
telling northern whites that federal intervention would drive moderates into
the arms of segregationists and cause a second civil war. In truth, it was the


--- PAGE 99 ---
On to Bogalusa 89
absence—not the presence—of federal intervention that encouraged racist
extremism and violence. Segregationists confused silence with consent, and
appeasement only made them redouble their war to maintain white su-
premacy. The Hammond episode clearly demonstrated that decisive south-
ern leaders could neutralize the Klan. But these exemplary acts of leadership
were precious few, and we can only speculate about the outcome had more
leaders taken this path. Alabama governor Jim Folsom had his opportunity
early in the civil rights movement. The ﬁrst showdown between state and
federal authorities over segregation occurred in March 1956, when white
mobs prevented Autherine Lucy, a black woman, from entering the Univer-
sity of Alabama in Tuscaloosa. Years later one noted Alabama journalist
opined that Folsom could have changed the entire course of the subsequent
civil rights movement had he only stood up to the mob; instead, Folsom
disappeared on a three-day ﬁshing and drinking trip.
≥∞
Bogalusa leaders’ acquiescence to the Klan mystiﬁed many outsiders.
Brooks Hays was astonished by the controversy that his planned appearance
had created. The protests were the product of ‘‘a bunch of dunderheads,’’
Hays told one crs ofﬁcial. In all his experience in the South, he had never
seen anything like Bogalusa: ‘‘That is the goddamnest place I’ve ever been.’’
≥≤
That the Klan had forced out Brooks Hays, President Johnson’s top trou-
bleshooter for racial problems, was bound to attract national attention. Lo-
cal media had kept silent about the Klan attacks, but the story went public
on 5 January 1965, when the Hays Committee courageously published a
signed editorial in the Bogalusa Daily News . The editorial recounted the
Klan’s terror campaign and condemned the Klan and the cowering perfor-
mance of the city government. ‘‘It is a shame,’’ wrote the six Hays Committee
members, ‘‘and we are ashamed, that fear should so engulf our community
that it strangles free speech and the right of peaceful assembly, and makes a
mockery of democracy.’’
≥≥
The sting of national publicity caused the town fathers to reconsider their
ill-fated policy of appeasement. In response to the Klan terrorism, Police
Chief Claxton Knight and Safety Commissioner Speirs announced a $500
reward for information concerning the cross burnings. And on 6 January,
Mayor Cutrer went on television to denounce violence and call for ‘‘full and
complete law enforcement at all times regardless of race, creed, or color.’’
The announcements and ofﬁcial protests against the Klan were empty ges-
tures; Bogalusa city police never made a single arrest for the harassment of
the Hays Committee or the scores of cross burnings.
≥∂
Crown-Zellerbach also contributed to the Hays ﬁasco. There was a grow-
ing consensus among business and civic elites in southern manufacturing


--- PAGE 100 ---
90 On to Bogalusa
centers that integration was inevitable and had to be achieved in an or-
derly fashion to ensure economic health. Company towns like Bogalusa that
sold products nationally could ill afford the negative publicity that Birming-
ham had experienced; Crown-Zellerbach’s paper products were vulnerable
to a national boycott. Yet Crown-Zellerbach relinquished leadership to a
weak, ineffective group of leaders who were no match for a well-organized,
working-class–based Klan insurgency. Had Crown-Zellerbach intervened in
behalf of the Hays Committee, the Klan would have faced a formidable foe.
But by the time the paper company realized the consequences of its silence,
the opportunity for a peaceful desegregation had passed.
In contrast, Bascom Talley represented the new southern businessman
guided by enlightened self-interest. Talley was a segregationist, yet he be-
lieved that the South would suffer if it held to its old ways. Early on, his
Bogalusa Daily News  set a course that reﬂected this perspective. In a tren-
chant editorial on 6 January, the paper argued that Brooks Hays would have
served to reduce racial tensions, smooth the transition toward integration,
and avoid racial demonstrations and violence. The Daily News  feared an-
other Little Rock in Bogalusa, pointing out that racial conﬂict ‘‘wrecks a
town’s economy’’ and ‘‘spreads fear and unrest and smears a community’s
image statewide and nationally.’’
≥∑
Governor John McKeithen was also slow to learn the lessons of Birming-
ham. Following the Bogalusa incident, McKeithen castigated Brook Hays for
meddling in Louisiana’s affairs. ‘‘If I were Brook Hays,’’ he said, ‘‘I would
stay in Arkansas. They have twice as much trouble as we have.’’ The gover-
nor declined to visit Bogalusa, claiming that his presence would only inﬂame
the local problems. The cross burnings were not a matter of concern either,
since they did not intimidate anyone, including blacks, said McKeithen. ‘‘The
more we talk about Bogalusa, the more trouble we have,’’ he complained.
‘‘We have had no church burnings here, no bodies pulled from the river, no
one shot on the highway as in other states.’’
≥∏
Mayor Cutrer joined McKeithen in chastising the Hays Committee and
attempting to avert a crisis by declaring it resolved. ‘‘We have been through a
very trying period which has put each one of us to the test,’’ asserted Cutrer.
‘‘And we have come through with ﬂying colors.’’
≥π
Cutrer was dead wrong. The Hays incident was the beginning, not the
end, of Bogalusa’s problems. Young blacks were already upset that the Vot-
ers League had kept core out of Bogalusa. The league’s quiet negotiations
had accomplished nothing more than delivering the city into the hands of
the Klan. The young militants in the league began to pressure Andrew Moses
to start testing public accommodations. Simultaneously, Crown-Zellerbach


--- PAGE 101 ---
On to Bogalusa 91
ofﬁcials were growing nervous about the negative national publicity that the
Hays incident had generated. In early January company ofﬁcials told Cutrer
to arrange for an orderly staged testing of public accommodations. The plan
was to test facilities, declare Bogalusa in compliance with the Civil Rights
Act, and quickly return to normalcy.
≥∫
With national attention focused on Bogalusa, Cutrer knew that the Com-
munity Relations Committee would have to make rapid progress. He had
already notiﬁed restaurant and motel owners that they must face the facts
regarding the Civil Rights Act. Federal ofﬁcials were pressuring the mayor to
comply with the act or lose federal funds. Cutrer contacted Andrew Moses
and other black members of the Community Relations Commission and
arranged for a symbolic choreographed day of testing public accommoda-
tions. Cutrer promised that the testers would have adequate protection and
that he would ask the Klan not to interfere. Moses agreed to the plan and
reluctantly acceded to the young militants’ demand that core participate in
the tests. Moses and city ofﬁcials were adamantly opposed to core interven-
ing in Bogalusa, but they failed to persuade the young militants. Moses and
three other Voters League members—L. C. Dawson, Robert S. ‘‘Bob’’ Hicks,
and Gayle Jenkins—met with Ronnie Moore at core headquarters in New
Orleans. core agreed to assist in the tests and dispatched two white repre-
sentatives to Bogalusa: staff member William ‘‘Bill’’ Yates, a former English
professor at Cornell, and volunteer Steve Miller, an Antioch student.
≥Ω
Yates and Miller planned on four days of tests; they were not told that the
Voters League had agreed to only one day. Prior to the test, scheduled for
Friday, 28 January, Yates and Miller worked with the league to prepare for
the actions. core trained the volunteer testers, most of them teenagers, in
nonviolent protest techniques. The league arranged for the public schools to
be closed so that the students could participate. The city grew tense as the
day of testing drew near. State and city ofﬁcials took precautions to guaran-
tee an orderly, well-orchestrated desegregation test. Governor McKeithen
arranged to have State Highway Patrol troops present to augment Bogalusa’s
small police force. On the eve of the event, Mayor Cutrer delivered a radio
speech urging citizens to avoid the test area and to remain calm.
∂≠
The day of testing went surprisingly well. The Negro Union Hall served as
headquarters for the operation, and the testers were shuttled between the
hall and the testing sites. Andrew Moses led groups of four in testing sixteen
eating establishments, two movie theaters, and the Austin Street Branch of
the Washington Parish Library. Seven businesses refused to serve the testers,
including Capos Restaurant and the Dairy Queen. The Klan stayed out of
sight for most of the day. There were only a few incidents of harassment, and


--- PAGE 102 ---
92 On to Bogalusa
those were directed at core’s representatives. While Bill Yates was waiting
outside Plaza Restaurant, a group of white men jeered him, calling him a
‘‘Hebrew’’ (Yates was not Jewish) and menacingly drawing their ﬁngers
across their throats. Police stopped a large group of white men when they
threatened to attack Steve Miller and a group of blacks who had just suc-
cessfully tested the food counter at the Acme Drug Store. Miller had been
shuttling the teenagers in his new red Barracuda, a sports car that his par-
ents had recently purchased for him. Other than these few incidents, the
testing went as planned. The Klan had honored its pledge not to intervene.
The crisis appeared to be over.
∂∞
But there was still the matter of the seven establishments that had refused
to comply with the desegregation law. At the end of the day the testers as-
sembled for an informal meeting. The mood was exuberant, and the testers
were feeling exhilarated and conﬁdent after a day of daring escapades. One
of the teenagers suggested that they continue with more tests. Moses was
not pleased with this development, since he had promised the town fathers
that there would be only one day of tests. ‘‘Everybody was feeling good,’’
recalled Steve Miller, ‘‘so the kids especially, as young people will do, they
said ‘O.K., let’s do some more!’ So at the end of the meeting, I just yelled,
‘O.K. we’ll be back Monday!’ ’’ It was an impulsive move that added to the
tension between Moses and core. ‘‘I didn’t have any sense of what I was
doing, but it put Moses on the spot,’’ said Miller. ‘‘And he had to call a
meeting for 4:00 p.m. that day.’’ But when they arrived for the meeting, the
Union Hall was locked. Moses had canceled the meeting.
∂≤
The schism between core and the Voters League found its way into news
reports. Earlier in the day, Moses had told the media that no further tests
were scheduled and that injunctions might be sought against the establish-
ments that refused service, but that decision would await a planned evalua-
tion of the day’s activities. But core was sending a different message. Bill
Yates told a reporter that he planned to remain in Bogalusa for some time
and that there would be more tests at the seven establishments that had
failed to comply. Moses and core were apparently at loggerheads.
∂≥
The showdown between Moses and core occurred the following Monday,
1 February. Yates and Miller returned to attend an evaluation and victory
meeting of the Voters League. Over the weekend the conﬂict festered be-
tween old and young members of the league. Blacks on the Community
Relations Committee had been operating with no accountability to the black
community. They were older moderates, hand-picked by the white power
structure. Militants like A. Z. Young and Bob Hicks had been purposefully
excluded. The militants had reached the limits of their patience with nego-


--- PAGE 103 ---
On to Bogalusa 93
tiation and compromise. Hadn’t Moses and his colleagues capitulated to the
Klan on the Hays Committee event? Hadn’t ‘‘quiet negotiations’’ meant di-
versions and preservation of the status quo? Hadn’t the old leaders ac-
quiesced to the city’s demand that the tests be limited to one day of empty
symbolism that allowed half a dozen businesses to ﬂaunt the law? To the
young militants, nothing had changed.
∂∂
The mass meeting on 1 February exploded into a sharp debate when Yates
and Miller suggested more tests and protests. Andrew Moses held ﬁrm. But
by the end of the meeting it was apparent that Moses had lost control of the
Voters League to the younger members. It had been a tense and exhausting
exchange, but Yates and Miller were hopeful. The black community had
sided with core, and the two representatives were excited at the prospect of
organizing a campaign in Bogalusa. As darkness fell, the Voters League
activists grew concerned about the safety of the two core workers. core had
ignored Mayor Cutrer’s agreement with the Klan that core would visit Boga-
lusa for only one day of testing. Now Yates and Miller were back in Bogalusa
planning additional protests. Moreover, Bob Hicks and his wife Valeria
(Jackie) were preparing to violate a strict racial taboo. They had offered to
let Yates and Miller to stay at their home that night. No white person had
ever spent the night in the ‘‘colored quarters’’ in Bogalusa.
Bob and Jackie Hicks sat down for dinner that night with their ﬁve chil-
dren, Bill Yates, and Steve Miller. When they ﬁnished eating, they retired to
the living room to watch television and talk over the day’s events. Suddenly
there was a knock at the door. Bob Hicks opened it and found Police Chief
Knight and a deputy standing in the doorway looking grim. Claxton Knight
was the archetypal southern lawman: a tall, lanky man who always sported
a Stetson cowboy hat. He had bad news. A surly mob of whites had gathered
on Columbia Street and were threatening to come after Yates and Miller. The
core organizers would have to leave immediately. There was little that
could be done to protect them. It might not be a bad idea if Hicks and his
family left as well.
∂∑
Bill Yates did not respond well to ultimatums. The former college pro-
fessor had an arrogant streak that even tried the patience of his friends. ‘‘Bill
Yates was a hot head,’’ recalled Bob Hicks. ‘‘He had a bad temper, a real bad
temper.’’ Yates’s temper ﬂared with Chief Knight. The two exchanged heated
words, with Yates barking to Knight that he did not ‘‘like the goddamn idea
of you trying to run me out of town.’’ Yates paused, then turned to Hicks and
asked if he and Miller could stay the night. ‘‘Hell yeah,’’ said Hicks deﬁantly,
‘‘you’re a guest in my house.’’
∂∏
The two police ofﬁcers left in a huff. As they walked back to their car,


--- PAGE 104 ---
94 On to Bogalusa
Yates asked if they planned to protect the house in light of the threats. Hicks
remembered Knight’s blunt response: ‘‘He wasn’t going to play no nursemaid
to some niggers and people down here in the house.’’ The police chief re-
turned to his patrol car and for a few minutes sat quietly in the dark with
two deputies.
∂π
The frightening prospect of a lynch mob arriving at the door in the next
few minutes sent the Hicks household into a panic. The family was armed
with a riﬂe, a shotgun, and two white paciﬁsts who refused to touch either
weapon. It was a woefully inadequate arsenal. But Bob and Jackie Hicks
were levelheaded activists and they mobilized quickly; Jackie promptly
called several friends for assistance. Within minutes, word of the Klan mob
swept through the black community. One couple arrived to escort the chil-
dren to safety; the woman was so nervous that she panicked and drove off,
leaving her husband stranded at the house.
∂∫
When it became known that the Hicks family needed protection, the black
men of Bogalusa responded swiftly. ‘‘A lot of black men in the community
started coming down,’’ recalled Hicks, and they were talking about how they
were ‘‘going to kill us some Klan tonight.’’ Chief Knight and his deputies
watched in silent disbelief from their patrol car as a line of black men—
armed with shotguns and riﬂes—rapidly ﬁled into the Hicks house. After a
few minutes Knight left. Moses arrived soon afterward but then left to make
calls and never returned.
∂Ω
Yates was busy on the phone trying to secure police protection so that he
and Miller could return to New Orleans. Using a standard core technique,
Yates placed calls to core contacts around the country, as well as local and
national media. In the next few hours hundreds of telephone calls inundated
local, state, and federal ofﬁcials demanding that Bogalusa police provide
protection for the core workers.
Within an hour of Knight’s visit, the Hicks house was reinforced with more
than twenty-ﬁve fully armed black men. The men sat for hours in tense
silence, watching the streets for any sign of danger. Occasionally a police car
drove by slowly and shined a spotlight on the house. Finally, Chief Knight
returned to the house at about 4:00 a.m. The phone calls to core contacts
around the nation had had their intended effect, and Knight now assured
Hicks that the core workers would be safe.
The truth was that there never was a Klan mob on Columbia Street. Knight
concocted the story to bluff Yates and Miller into leaving Bogalusa. Charles
Christmas and Saxon Farmer, the leaders of the okkkk, had demanded that
city ofﬁcials remove Yates and Miller, and Knight, lacking the nerve to sum-


--- PAGE 105 ---
On to Bogalusa 95
marily arrest and deport the two core workers, had resorted to a clumsy
ruse.∑≠
Knight’s ploy to expel core had backﬁred and converted the civil rights
struggle into a contest of honor for blacks in Bogalusa. The phony Klan
threats against core and the Hicks family had only increased the stakes for
the black community. In the past, the Bogalusa Klan had limited its harass-
ment to white accommodationists; now it was threatening the sanctity of
the home and the right to free expression in the black community. Defend-
ing core became a test of manhood and a point of honor for Bogalusa
blacks. And honor was everything to the tough, proud mill workers—white
or black. ‘‘You had what you would call diehards on both sides,’’ explained
Bob Hicks. ‘‘Whites in Bogalusa have been diehards for conviction. Bogalusa
blacks have been diehards for conviction.’’ Beyond defending their princi-
ples, blacks in Bogalusa simply did not like to lose. ‘‘They were sore losers,’’
mused Hicks. ‘‘In whatever they got involved in, whatever they committed
themselves to, they didn’t want to lose. They wanted to win. They wanted to
come out on top.’’
∑∞
The Klan mob incident had started—rather than stopped—the Bogalusa
civil rights movement. ‘‘Had it not been for that . . . I don’t think there would
have ever been a movement in Bogalusa,’’ Hicks stated. The mob incident
was Bob Hicks’s personal Rubicon as well: ‘‘I took whites into my home. No
one else in the Bogalusa Voters League would do that . . . but when I brought
them into my home, I was locked in.’’ Hicks was not the only one locked in.
The men who gathered that night to defend the Hicks family and core had
irreversibly taken their ﬁrst steps toward becoming the largest and most
famous Deacons chapter in the movement.
∑≤


--- PAGE 106 ---
chapter
6
The Bogalusa Chapter
the following morning  Bill Yates and Steve Miller
safely departed Bogalusa with a police escort. Their visit had left the city in
an uproar. Embarrassed ofﬁcials issued a denial that a white lynch mob had
threatened the two representatives of core. The growing rift between Voters
League moderates and militants resurfaced publicly when Andrew Moses
told the media that there would be no further core activity in Bogalusa
without the league’s approval. core’s second visit had also enraged the Klan,
furious that city ofﬁcials had not expelled the core organizers as it had
demanded.
∞
But core was not through with Bogalusa. The intrepid Miller and Yates
returned the next day, Wednesday, 3 February. They had been invited by
local black union ofﬁcials to discuss the developments. The core workers
also hoped to meet again with city ofﬁcials. Late that afternoon Yates and
Miller left the Negro Union Hall in Miller’s car to drive to New Orleans. They
soon realized that a strange car containing ﬁve white men was following
them. The car carried ﬁve segregationists, including Delos Williams and
James Hollingsworth, members of the Original Knights of the Ku Klux Klan
(okkkk). Miller and Yates nervously drove around the black quarters for
several minutes, the Klan car in close pursuit. The pair balked at leaving
town by the single highway between Bogalusa and New Orleans. It was too
risky—a narrow highway with few turnoffs for escape: ‘‘We just knew that
we weren’t going to go out that way,’’ recalled Miller. Finally, Yates decided
to attempt to telephone for help from Andrey’s Cafe, a small restaurant in the
black quarters. He yelled for Miller to stop the car. Miller hesitated but
deferred to the judgment of the older Yates. Yates quickly jumped out of the
car and headed to the restaurant phone.
≤
Suddenly the Klan car pulled in front of Miller’s car, blocking his path.
Shots rang out and one of the Klansmen tossed a brick at Miller’s car. The


--- PAGE 107 ---
The Bogalusa Chapter 97
Klansmen leaped from their vehicle and caught Yates. They threw him to the
ground and violently beat and kicked him, leaving him with severe internal
injuries and a broken hand.
Yates ﬁnally escaped his attackers and stumbled into Andrey’s Cafe. Miller
parked his car behind the cafe and joined Yates. Inside were four or ﬁve older
men. The eatery was a tiny matchbox of a building, little more than a single
room 15 by 15 feet. The two core activists watched anxiously as at least four
more carloads of Klansmen quickly joined the ﬁrst car and began to slowly
circle their prey.
A tense quiet descended on the room as Miller and Yates nervously consid-
ered their options. Their ﬁrst line of defense was visibility. Miller quickly
began to feed nickels into the pay phone, making a series of frantic calls.
First, he called his mother in San Francisco, an activist in her own right, and
told her to start a chain of phone calls to alert authorities and the media to
their plight. Calls soon ﬂooded into the ofﬁces of the Louisiana attorney
general, the state police—anyone who could bring pressure to bear on local
authorities. Miller also contacted core’s New Orleans and Baton Rouge
ofﬁces as well as the wire services. It was a frightening yet exhilarating
situation for the nineteen-year-old Miller. ‘‘Remember Goodman, Schwerner
and Chaney?’’ Miller asked a upi reporter on the phone. ‘‘Well you’re talking
to the next ones right here. We’re about to get it.’’
≥
Within minutes after the attack on Yates, several black men armed with
riﬂes quietly slipped into Andrey’s through the back door. Among them were
the same men who had guarded the Hicks home a few days before. They
took up their positions with an efﬁciency of motion. ‘‘I’m sure many of these
men were combat veterans,’’ recalled Miller. ‘‘They certainly deployed them-
selves as such.’’ The armed men were a comfort to the two paciﬁsts and a
stabilizing presence as the crisis unfolded. At one point Miller panicked
when the pay phone would not work. ‘‘They cut off the phones. They cut off
the phones!’’ Miller shouted to the men in the room. One of the black men
who had been watching Miller calmly diagnosed the problem. ‘‘Son, you got
to put a nickel in there ﬁrst.’’
∂
Even when Miller managed to put the nickel in the slot he still had prob-
lems, for local white telephone operators, as in the March 1965 siege in
Jonesboro, refused to put through calls to the black community. Phone
company employees outside of Bogalusa were drawn into the unfolding
drama. One indignant Boston operator refused to get off the line until she
succeeded in connecting her long-distance caller to Bogalusa. As they waited
for word from the outside, Miller surveyed the dimly lit garrison and the
stern militia standing guard over him. It was a philosophical epiphany for


--- PAGE 108 ---
98 The Bogalusa Chapter
Miller. ‘‘Up to that point, I embraced the concept of nonviolence,’’ said Miller.
Now necessity made him an apostate. ‘‘At that point I guess I said, ‘Oh, I
guess I’m not nonviolent anymore.’ ’’
∑
Eventually fbi special agent Frank Sass in New Orleans reached Miller on
the pay phone in Andrey’s. The Klan caravan circling the block had melted
away at sunset, but it was still unsafe for Miller and Yates to leave the
cafe. Agent Sass told Miller not to leave until Sass could come to Bogalusa
and talk to local authorities. Miller retorted that the agent should not delay
calling the Bogalusa ofﬁcials; he and Yates needed protection immediately,
and they had already notiﬁed the media. ‘‘The world is watching,’’ Miller
warned.
∏
As the resident agent for Bogalusa, Sass was familiar with the recent civil
rights activities there. He soon arrived at Andrey’s but balked at entering the
building. ‘‘Steven Miller, come on out,’’ yelled the agent in his distinctive
southern drawl. One of the black guards cautioned Miller that the cafe door
was illuminated by a light, making Miller a clear target if he ventured out-
side. ‘‘Don’t you go out there and silhouette yourself, boy,’’ warned the man.
So Miller told Sass to come in if he wanted to talk. The fbi agent opened the
door and took a few steps inside. He was not prepared for the scene con-
fronting him: the tiny restaurant was packed with black men armed with
riﬂes and shotguns. ‘‘His mouth dropped a foot,’’ remembered Miller with
some amusement. ‘‘He literally couldn’t talk for four or ﬁve minutes. He just
stood there stunned.’’
π
When Sass regained his composure, he took afﬁdavits from Miller and
Yates, surrounded by their armed defenders. By this time the core orga-
nizers were growing cocky about their bargaining position—bolstered by the
small army at their command. They told Sass that they were not leaving
Bogalusa. They demanded medical treatment for Yates, and they lectured
the fbi agent about how ‘‘things were getting out of hand’’ in Bogalusa. Sass
did not enjoy the scolding and he left without making any promises, saying
only that he would speak with the state police. The black guards waited a
few hours for him to arrange protection, but when the agent failed to return
they decided to move the core men to the home of Bob and Jackie Hicks.
They concealed them in the back seat of a car and transported them in an
armed convoy to the Hicks house. When they arrived, Yates and Miller were
greeted by a second defense force, scattered in trees, behind bushes, and
inside the house.
∫
It was imperative to get Yates to a hospital so his injuries could be treated,
but the local hospital was out of the question. By 10:30 p.m. core’s regional
ofﬁce had arranged for a state police escort for Yates and Miller. Four patrol


--- PAGE 109 ---
The Bogalusa Chapter 99
cars soon arrived at the Hicks home. The ranking patrolman walked to the
door. ‘‘He came in, took about four steps into the room, and saw all these
guys with guns and his mouth fell open and he was rooted to the spot,’’ said
Miller. ‘‘He was just dumfounded.’’ The armed guards relished the moment.
‘‘I deﬁnitely remember these guys were getting a kick out of this, because at
that point they were basically holding the upper hand.’’
Ω
Miller and Yates said their good-byes and thanked their newfound Samu-
rai. As they were leaving the house, they passed Jackie Hicks sitting quietly
in a chair with a forlorn look. Miller bent down and kissed her on the cheek,
much to the horror of the onlooking white patrolman. It was a small gesture
of gratitude, but one that boldly ﬂouted the color line. ‘‘I was always very
proud of that,’’ said Miller thirty years later.
∞≠
City police escorted Miller and Yates to the edge of town, where state police
formed a convoy for the trip to the Lake Pontchartrain bridge. The pair
eventually arrived safely in New Orleans. True to form, Mayor Cutrer and
other city ofﬁcials later denied that the attack on Yates had occurred, attrib-
uting it to the ‘‘vivid and unrestrained imaginations’’ of Yates and Miller. Gov-
ernor McKeithen rebuked the two at a press conference in Baton Rouge, label-
ing them ‘‘professional troublemakers’’ and speculating that Yates’s shattered
bones and internal injuries were ‘‘self-inﬂicted.’’ Adopting the same appease-
ment policy toward the Klan that had brought Bogalusa to the brink of chaos,
McKeithen repeated his claim to the media that Louisiana had no racist
violence problem. Nevertheless, the governor announced that state police
would provide twenty-four-hour protection for core—no doubt to safeguard
Yates and Miller from their ‘‘vivid and unrestrained imaginations.’’
∞∞
The second attack on Yates and Miller sealed Andrew Moses’s fate. Moses
realized that core was in Bogalusa to stay and that the testing and other
forms of direct action protest would continue, regardless of his promises to
the town fathers. Moreover, most of the league’s younger leaders had dem-
onstrated that they would support and defend core. Moses had lost the con-
ﬁdence of blacks and whites alike. His resignation from the Voters League
within a few days marked the end of the naacp strategy of accommodation
and negotiation in Bogalusa. The man who would ultimately replace Moses
symbolized the new strategy of militant confrontation, coercion, and force.
His name was A. Z. Young.
∞≤
At forty-two years old, A. Z. Young bridged the older and younger genera-
tions, combining mature judgment with a youthful passion for justice. The
6-foot 4-inch goliath was a strong-willed charismatic working-class leader
with a ﬂair for the dramatic. He was blessed with considerable oratorical
skills and a gregarious personality and had provided militant leadership for


--- PAGE 110 ---
100 The Bogalusa Chapter
the black local of the Pulp and Sulphite Workers Union for several years. A
stint in the army during World War II imparted a military demeanor to
Young. He had seen combat, serving as a tank commander in the 761st Tank
Battalion under General George Patton. Young’s military experience and
union activism had schooled him in leadership and the art of negotiating
from a position of power.
∞≥
Two other emerging leaders joined Young in the Voters League: Bob Hicks
and Gayle Jenkins. Hicks brought a quiet determination and luminous intel-
ligence to the league. A man of great personal integrity and determination,
Hicks had already assumed leadership in organizing self-defense in the com-
munity. His cousin, Gayle Jenkins, had the best organizational instincts of
the triumvirate. As secretary-treasurer, Jenkins managed the league’s ﬁ-
nances. Her quiet, thoughtful manner counterbalanced Young’s penchant
for showmanship and hyperbole.
All three were solidly working class in their backgrounds and political
instincts. Contrasting sharply with their middle-class predecessors, the new
leaders were passionately independent and militant, and not wedded to the
political tenets of nonviolence. Whereas the league’s previous leaders had
gained concessions through brokering power, electoral bargaining, and
quiet negotiations—all predicated on accommodating white interests—the
new leaders cared little about courting the favor of whites. They eschewed
negotiations and deal making from a position of weakness. They preferred
direct action that forced a crisis and coerced concessions. They had few
qualms about using force as a political tool, even if it alienated whites.
Nor were the new leaders constrained, as were their forebears, by aspira-
tions to white bourgeois propriety. Whereas the old Voters League had been
mired in an uninspired voter registration campaign, the new Voters League
favored a direct challenge to civil and economic inequality. Their legitimacy
rested on community consent, not the blessing of City Hall or national civil
rights organizations. Locally led and locally funded, the new league was
impervious to the paciﬁst agenda imposed by the national organizations and
liberal funders.
∞∂
As the Voters League regrouped in February 1965, the okkkk, encouraged
by ofﬁcial appeasement and virtual immunity from prosecution, was plan-
ning an offensive. Its strategy was to silence all opposition, black and white.
It would force businesses that had desegregated to resegregate, and it would
coerce elected ofﬁcials to defy the Civil Rights Act. To accomplish these ends,
it would employ a variety of tactics, including boycotts, mass mobilizations,
mob violence, and terrorist attacks.


--- PAGE 111 ---
The Bogalusa Chapter 101
In the months that followed the okkkk mobilized thousands of whites to
disrupt picketing, marches, and other forms of desegregation protest. Al-
though the violent attacks on protesters often appeared to be spontaneous,
they were actually the work of small, highly organized terrorist squads called
‘‘wrecking crews.’’ An elaborate communication network of Klan members
and supporters linked by phone and citizen band ( cb) radios allowed the
Klan to swiftly dispatch wrecking crews to impromptu civil rights protests.
∞∑
The Klan campaign of intimidation escalated on 14 February 1965, when
Bob Hicks received a bomb threat by telephone. The next day Sam Barnes, a
tough ex-convict and Voters League supporter, went to Landry’s Restaurant
with six black women. Within minutes the Klan wrecking crew, led by Virgil
Cockern, descended on Landry’s. The crew consisted of nearly thirty men, in-
cluding Sidney August Warner, Delos Williams, James M. Ellis, Charles Ray
Williams, and Albert Applewhite. Cockern and another accomplice bran-
dished clubs and threatened to kill Barnes and the black women if they did
not leave the restaurant. Barnes decided to retreat and returned to the black
quarters as two Klansmen followed closely behind.
∞∏
Shortly afterward, Cockern took his crew to a gas station in the white part
of town where four unfortunate black teenagers had stopped to purchase
gas. One of the Klansmen placed a gun to the head of one of the boys and
ordered the teenagers to leave the station. Three days later, on 17 February,
Cockern and crew struck again. This time they stopped the Reverend Jerry
Chance, a Hays Committee member, and threatened to harm him for his role
on the committee.
∞π
The Bogalusa City Police made no attempt to stop the attacks and in fact
took pains to arrest blacks who had armed themselves in self-defense. On
19 February police stopped black activist Joshua Mondy for a trafﬁc violation
and arrested him for possession of a weapon. In addition to the Klan wreck-
ing crew’s violence, racist sympathizers at the telephone company continued
to disrupt the phone service of civil rights activists such as Bob Hicks. Their
telephones frequently failed to work or made odd noises, and operators
refused to help them make long-distance calls. A subsequent investigation
revealed that one of the principal Klan leaders in Bogalusa worked as a
supervisor at the telephone company.
∞∫
The Klan campaign of terror culminated in thirty-three incidents in the
month following the January desegregation tests. Throughout January and
February local and state law enforcement ofﬁcials failed to arrest a single
Klansman, although core faithfully reported every incident. By the third
week of February the Klan had silenced most white moderates and had


--- PAGE 112 ---
102 The Bogalusa Chapter
forced nearly all of the businesses that had desegregated to resegregate. No
example better demonstrated the Klan’s power to ruthlessly crush white
dissent than the case of Ralph Blumberg.
∞Ω
Blumberg was one of the seven original Hays Committee members. In
1961 he purchased wbox, the local radio station that broadcast news and
country and western music. A World War II veteran and a member of Boga-
lusa’s small Jewish community, Blumberg quickly became a successful busi-
nessman and respected civic leader. But his participation on the Hays Com-
mittee produced a sudden reversal of fortune.
The Klan singled out Ralph Blumberg for special persecution because he
had broadcast the Hays Committee’s editorial against the Klan in January
1965. The campaign against Blumberg was relentless. Night riders drove
nails into the tires of his car and smashed the windshield. An anonymous
caller threatened to kill his wife and children, forcing him to ﬁrst send them
to St. Louis and later to shuttle them around to Jewish homes in Bogalusa
and New Orleans.
≤≠
The Klan accompanied the personal threats and violence with a campaign
to destroy Blumberg’s radio station by intimidating sponsors into withdraw-
ing their advertisements. It threatened businesses with a boycott if they
continued to advertise on wbox. One advertiser received thirty-seven threat-
ening calls. By March 1965 Blumberg had lost all but six of his original
seventy advertisers. Financial ruin was imminent. At ﬁrst Blumberg endured
the harassment in silence. He even met with Klan leaders, who denied that
they were coordinating the harassment campaign. But on 18 March, Blum-
berg struck back with an editorial calling on Bogalusa citizens to speak out
against ‘‘the few who intimidate and attempt to control and infect the com-
munity like a plague.’’
≤∞
Racist terrorists swiftly responded to the editorial. That night, under cover
of darkness, an assailant ﬁred six shots from a high-powered riﬂe into the
wbox transmitter. The next day Blumberg’s engineer hastily resigned. Blum-
berg’s editorial against the Klan and his appeal for public support predictably
failed. Both Governor McKeithen and Mayor Cutrer offered little sympathy
and instead reproved Blumberg for sensationalism. McKeithen insisted that
the Klan had little inﬂuence in Bogalusa and that Blumberg had ‘‘done the
city of Bogalusa a great disservice’’ by claiming to be a victim of Klan terror.
McKeithen also intimated that Blumberg had an ulterior motive for bringing
negative publicity to the city—that he would soon win a lucrative job from an
eastern newspaper or radio station. The mayor dismissed Blumberg’s edi-
torial as an example of Blumberg’s habit of bringing national shame to the
community. Cutrer blamed the station owner for his own predicament, ob-


--- PAGE 113 ---
The Bogalusa Chapter 103
serving that, as a result of his broadcast of the Hays Committee editorial,
core had targeted the community. The mayor also questioned Blumberg’s
claims of Klan harassment, noting that none of wbox’s sponsors had com-
plained of intimidation to local law enforcement ofﬁcials.≤≤
By August 1965 the Klan had frightened away all of wbox’s local adver-
tisers, save for Bill Lott, the owner of a local Honda dealership. The radio
station limped along with ﬁnancial assistance primarily from Jewish sup-
porters in New Orleans and New York. More than $8,000 in contributions
was raised, mostly in New Orleans. A New York merchants’ group bought
one hundred public service commercials featuring the preamble of the Con-
stitution. The national organization of the Presbyterian Church funded a
series of half-minute commercials narrated by comedian Stan Frieberg. The
advertisements implored Bogalusans to live by the Bible and love one an-
other: most white Bogalusans had demonstrated that they were willing to do
neither. In November 1965 Blumberg was forced to sell his station and leave
Bogalusa. With his departure, the Klan had succeeded in driving out the last
voice of white dissent in Bogalusa.
≤≥
As the events intensiﬁed in Bogalusa, civil rights lawyers ﬁled a series of
federal suits that placed increasing pressure on government bodies state-
wide. On 15 February a suit ﬁled in Federal District Court in Baton Rouge
requested the desegregation of state vocational-technical schools, including
two located in Bogalusa: the Sullivan Memorial Trade School and the Sidney
James Owen School. Judge E. Gordon West took only four days to issue a
permanent injunction barring discrimination. The action coincided with an-
other suit ﬁled by the naacp the same week in Judge West’s court seeking to
end segregation in all Louisiana public schools.
≤∂
The escalating Klan attacks forced Bogalusa’s black leaders to seek protec-
tion. In early February Steve Miller and Bill Yates traveled to Jonesboro on
core business. During the visit they discussed the Klan problem in Boga-
lusa with Earnest Thomas, Frederick Kirkpatrick, and other members of the
Jonesboro Deacons. The Deacons suggested that Yates arrange a meeting
with Bogalusa leaders to consider starting a Deacons chapter. Yates agreed,
and the meeting was scheduled for 21 February.
≤∑
On the morning of the twenty-ﬁrst, Charlie Fenton with his dog Duffy
picked up Thomas and Kirkpatrick for the six-hour journey to Bogalusa. Fen-
ton was driving a core station wagon with an ominous history. The vehicle
was one of two donated in 1964 for the Freedom Summer campaign in Mis-
sissippi. The other station wagon had been driven by Schwerner, Goodman,
and Chaney on the night they were murdered in Philadelphia, Mississippi.
The delegation of Jonesboro Deacons and Duffy headed south to Baton


--- PAGE 114 ---
104 The Bogalusa Chapter
Rouge, where they stopped for Bill Yates and Steve Miller. The integrated
group was apprehensive about driving to Bogalusa through the Klan-infested
Florida parishes. Ronnie Moore, who had secured cooperation from the state
police in the past, arranged for a police escort for part of the trip.
As the journey continued, the conversation turned to unpleasant specu-
lations about an ambush. The group knew that the Klan was connected
through a network of cb radios. Kirkpatrick dismissed the nervous chatter,
tapping his Bible: ‘‘Don’t worry, I got the Good Book.’’ A few miles down the
road Kirkpatrick told Miller, who was now behind the wheel, to pull over so
that he could answer nature’s call. Miller kept driving, reluctant to stop in a
remote rural area. Kirkpatrick repeated his request but Miller continued to
ignore him. Finally, Kirkpatrick demanded that Miller stop. Miller relented,
and Kirkpatrick left the car still clutching his Bible. When he returned,
Kirkpatrick held up the Bible to reassure Miller. ‘‘Don’t worry,’’ he repeated
with a large smile, ‘‘we got the Good Book.’’ Kirkpatrick then opened the
Bible to reveal a small derringer in a hollowed-out compartment carved in
the ‘‘Good Book.’’
≤∏
The group arrived at the Negro Union Hall in Bogalusa at approximately
8:00 p.m. Fourteen men were assembled, including Bob Hicks, who had
taken the lead in organizing the meeting. Most of those attending were men
like Charles R. ‘‘Charlie’’ Sims and Alcie Taylor, who had been instrumental
in the informal defense group that had guarded Hicks and other activists.
Kirkpatrick and Thomas entered the hall with guns in their waistbands. As
the meeting began, they drew their pistols and placed them on the table. All
the other participants followed suit, and the table was soon heaped with
guns. The proceedings were tense. ‘‘We were all very scared,’’ said Fenton.
≤π
Fenton, the devout paciﬁst, had been assigned to guard the door with his
dog Duffy and ordered not to speak or call attention to himself. He was not
to allow anyone in or out. It was, according to Fenton, all very ‘‘cloak and
dagger’’ and ‘‘high drama stuff ’’—and he loved it.
≤∫
While the Deacons portrayed themselves as strictly a self-defense group
whenever they spoke to the media—courting public opinion and favorable
publicity—their clandestine organizing meetings allowed them to sound a
different theme. Here their goal was to shock black men out of the lethargy
of fear and convince them that the Deacons had the requisite courage and
martial expertise to counter the Klan. And so they did.
Kirkpatrick and Thomas plunged into their presentation with ‘‘ﬁery rheto-
ric’’ and ‘‘stern admonitions to secrecy and loyalty and discipline,’’ recalled
Fenton. Kirkpatrick lambasted the accommodationist leadership in the black


--- PAGE 115 ---
The Bogalusa Chapter 105
community. ‘‘You been led by the tap-dancing Negro, and the head-tapping
Negro—in other words, the plain old Uncle Tom,’’ Kirkpatrick crowed to the
Bogalusa group. The nonviolent movement’s preoccupation with ‘‘rights’’
was diverting black men from a more important calling. ‘‘You got to forget
about right, because right ain’t gonna get you justice.’’ If black men wanted
justice, they would have to pick up the gun. ‘‘Wherever you’re at, you be
ready,’’ Kirkpatrick warned. ‘‘Keep plenty of stuff in your car and at home. I
carry with me almost all the time a hundred rounds. . . . Now in my town we
have groups patrolling each street. We guarding intersections and every
time a white man comes in[,] an automatic radio call is dispatched to a car to
stop him and ask him his business. When the policeman come around we
right on him too—we patrol him. You got to let him know that as taxpayers,
you are the ones who send him to the commode, you the ones that buy his air
conditioners, and those big cigars he smokes, and the dirty hat he wears.’’
≤Ω
‘‘Chilly Willy’’ Thomas elaborated on how the Deacons used two-way ra-
dios in Jonesboro and detailed plans to develop a statewide network of
Deacons linked together by radios and the use of a secret code. Kirkpatrick
touted the beneﬁts of such a network statewide: ‘‘If they [white police] get to
raising sand in Bogalusa . . . they’ll see us coming down every road all over
the state. When you come in with 300 or 400 cars, string out those auto-
mobiles up and down. The man gonna think twice before he moves, ’cause
he knows he done moved on the devil.’’
≥≠
The presentation was a mix of exhortation, exaggeration, and martial
posturing—all to good effect. If some black men in the South were paralyzed
by fear, then these Jonesboro men were the antidote. Thomas’s military
training showed through. He chastised blacks for buying cheap small-caliber
weapons, like .22 caliber pistols, and urged them instead to purchase larger
weapons, like shotguns and .306 riﬂes. Kirkpatrick added that if they did
buy pistols, they should standardize their purchases with larger-caliber .38
pistols, which would allow them to buy ammunition at a bulk discount.
≥∞
The Jonesboro Deacons challenged the Bogalusa men to prepare for major
warfare. ‘‘We have contacts in Chicago and Houston for automatic weap-
ons—for .50-caliber and .30-caliber,’’ Thomas boasted. A man in the au-
dience asked if those were machine guns. ‘‘Yeah,’’ Thomas replied, ‘‘and we
got grenades too. We want to be ready if they want to be violent.’’
≥≤
Thomas also discussed how to handle the inevitable problem of local
black opposition to a Deacons chapter in Bogalusa. He encouraged the Boga-
lusa men to meet with local black leaders and inﬂuential groups such as
ministers and teachers to persuade them to support the new organization. If


--- PAGE 116 ---
106 The Bogalusa Chapter
they refused, then they did not deserve to be leaders. Thomas offered the
services of the Jonesboro Deacons to help convince black middle-class lead-
ers if the local chapter failed to do so.
≥≥
Thomas explained how Bogalusa could afﬁliate with Jonesboro. The local
chapter would assess initiation fees of ten dollars and then monthly dues
of two dollars. These funds would be used to purchase radio equipment,
walkie-talkies, ammunition, and literature. Ten percent of the monthly dues
would be forwarded to the Jonesboro ofﬁce—now ofﬁcially the Deacons’
state headquarters.
Although Thomas and Kirkpatrick emphasized the defensive role of the
Deacons, behind closed doors they proposed an additional tactic: using
armed groups to stop police harassment. Thomas suggested that armed
patrols could intervene to stop illegal or violent arrests. The mere presence
of armed black men could deter illegal arrests, he argued.
≥∂
The meeting lasted until nearly midnight. Deciding to form a Deacons
chapter, the Bogalusa men immediately elected ofﬁcers and scheduled their
ﬁrst organizational meeting for one week later, on 28 February. The Jones-
boro and Baton Rouge visitors prepared to depart but ﬁrst drove to Bob
Hicks’s house. Soon after they arrived, they noticed a strange car circling the
block. Suddenly, shots rang out and everyone fell to the ﬂoor. Within a few
minutes reinforcements arrived, and word spread that a large caravan of
cars had been spotted nearby. It looked like it would be trial by ﬁre for the
Bogalusa Deacons.
≥∑
The Deacons developed a plan to have several cars leave the house as
decoys. Despite the clear danger, Fenton felt reassured by the cool, profes-
sional demeanor of the Bogalusa Deacons. They were ‘‘in control . . . acting
more like an organized unit than it would have been under another circum-
stance,’’ he recalled. ‘‘They knew what they were doing.’’
≥∏
Several cars departed, and when no one appeared to follow, the core
station wagon left accompanied by several cars of armed men from the
Bogalusa chapter. After they had driven what they thought was a safe dis-
tance from Bogalusa, the armed escort broke away and returned to the city.
But within a few minutes the Jonesboro group realized that they were being
followed again. Thomas was at the wheel and sped up, sending Duffy sliding
around in the back of the station wagon. The car accelerated to more than
one hundred miles an hour down the two-lane highway. Despite the speed,
their pursuers were gaining on them. At the height of the chase Fenton
turned around and saw Kirkpatrick sitting ramrod straight in the back seat,
his eyes closed tight. He had laid his gun on the seat and was clutching his


--- PAGE 117 ---
The Bogalusa Chapter 107
Bible to his chest. Fenton knew they were in trouble. ‘‘It scared the hell out of
me,’’ he said.’’≥π
A few miles ahead loomed a major obstacle: the trafﬁc light in the town of
Sun. If they stopped for the light, the men would be a sitting target for
their Klan pursuers. They hastily discussed their options as they raced into
the pitch-black night. ‘‘All three of us committed that we would rather go
through it and die in ﬁre than get stopped,’’ said Fenton. Thomas, exhibiting
his gritty nerve, successfully executed a daring turn in Sun and headed back
toward New Orleans. He soon lost the Klansmen. When the trio arrived in
New Orleans, Fenton called core leader Dick Haley to report the incident.
Haley listened sympathetically but reprimanded Fenton for getting involved
with the Deacons. The station wagon proceeded back to Jonesboro in the
late hours of the night, and the three exhausted men ﬁnally arrived home at
daybreak.
≥∫
The Jonesboro Deacons’ ﬁrst effort to expand had met with success in
Bogalusa. Indeed, the Bogalusa chapter would eventually overshadow the
Jonesboro group in organizing strength and publicity. The men in Bogalusa
were eager for an alternative to nonviolence. Their motives for afﬁliating
with the Deacons were not much different from the motives of their counter-
parts in Jonesboro: they wanted security, honor, and dignity. The immediate
impetus for joining was simply that law enforcement ofﬁcials had refused to
uphold the law and defend black rights. ‘‘What these people had in Jones-
boro,’’ said Bob Hicks, ‘‘is that since we can’t get the local ofﬁcials to protect
us in our community, our neighborhood, let’s back up on the constitution of
the United States and say that we can bear arms. We have a right to defend
ourselves since the legally designated authorities won’t do it. So this is all we
done. That’s all.’’
≥Ω


--- PAGE 118 ---
chapter
7
The Spring Campaign
bogalusa’s black community ﬁrst learned of the local
Deacons chapter the day after it formed. On Monday night, 22 February
1965, Bob Hicks gave a report on the Deacons to a Voters League meeting
comprising mostly teenagers as the new chapter patrolled the Negro Union
Hall grounds in full force. Hicks discussed his initial organizing meeting
with the Jonesboro group and explained how the chapter operated. ‘‘They
set up a patrol system for the Negro community. They got radios, walkie-
talkies, grenades, gas bombs, M-1 riﬂes.’’ Hicks promised that marauding
whites would now be kept out of Bogalusa’s black community, and the meet-
ing erupted in thunderous applause. ‘‘No white person will be allowed in a
Negro area at night—salesman or anybody,’’ Hicks assured the cheering
crowd. ‘‘It takes violent blacks to combat these violent whites. We’re gonna
be ready for ’em. We’re gonna have to be ready to survive.’’
∞
The ﬁrst meeting of the Bogalusa Deacons took place on 28 February at
the Negro Union Hall. Approximately fourteen men attended. Law enforce-
ment agencies were prepared, and an informant reported back to the fbi the
names of ten men who were present.
≤
Although Bob Hicks led the effort to bring the Deacons to Bogalusa, he did
not serve as an ofﬁcer of the new chapter. Attorneys for core had advised
the Voters League to maintain some organizational distance from the Dea-
cons. Hicks occasionally served as spokesperson for the Deacons, especially
to the national media, but he continued to work primarily through the
league, of which he was vice president. The organizational distinction be-
tween the Voters League and the Deacons was carefully maintained to pro-
tect the nonviolent image of the league and core. ‘‘core had represented the
paciﬁst thing,’’ said Hicks. ‘‘In order for people to try to support this type of
thing, we couldn’t bring them [ core and the Deacons] in together. So we
just separated the two.’’ In fact, the two organizations were separate in name


--- PAGE 119 ---
The Spring Campaign 109
only. Hicks and A. Z. Young, though identifying themselves as ofﬁcers of the
league, were deeply involved in the Deacons’ activities and consistently sup-
ported the group’s self-defense philosophy. The two organizations were fur-
ther intertwined by having the president of the Deacons, Charles Sims, also
serve as treasurer of the Voters League.
≥
At ﬁrst glance Sims appears to have been a strange choice to head an
organization named after church leaders. Charlie Sims was about as rough
as they came. His arrest record carried twenty-one entries dating back to
1957. He prided himself on his rap sheet and bragged that he had frequently
been arrested for whipping ‘‘white boys on the biggest street they have in the
city . . . I wasn’t afraid of the law or nobody else.’’ He had a reputation as a
barroom brawler who strolled about town with a black jack in one pocket
and a loaded pistol in the other.
∂
The years of hard living had taken their toll on Sims’s scarred frame. His
balding head was sprinkled with gray. A few teeth were missing, and his
penetrating eyes were frequently bloodshot. Like Earnest Thomas, Sims was
a veteran, having served with the army in Europe during World War II. He
attended nco (noncommissioned ofﬁcer) school and attained the rank of
sergeant as a shooting instructor. He boasted that now, at age forty-one, he
could still ‘‘strike a match at 50 feet’’ with his riﬂe.
∑
Sims’s travels in the military had profoundly affected him. ‘‘I moved
around,’’ he said. ‘‘I saw things I never thought about in Bogalusa. I went to
the library and I studied.’’ As in the case of many black gis, the freedom Sims
experienced in Europe made him more determined to overcome segregation
in his homeland. ‘‘One day in the Army I see a corporal who was a policeman
in Bogalusa,’’ recalled Sims. ‘‘He see me in integrated places and all that. He
got out of the service ﬁrst. He sees me back in Bogalusa—me still in uniform.
First thing he says, ‘Remember, you’re not in the Army now.’ I made up my
mind then not to be pushed around.’’
∏
The Deacons leader had been tested under ﬁre in civilian life as well as in
military combat, albeit in circumstances less impressive. On 6 December
1959 his girlfriend, Beatrice Harry, shot and wounded him during a ﬁght.
Beatrice was jailed as Sims fought for his life in the hospital. Sims sum-
moned his mother and told her not to allow authorities to prosecute his
girlfriend in the event that he died. Beatrice was innocent of wrongdoing, he
said; she was only defending herself from a potential beating at his hands.
Sims lay in the hospital for forty days, staring at the ceiling. ‘‘You live your
life over like that,’’ he observed several years later. ‘‘I never took the time out
before to sit down and listen to my own thoughts.’’ When he recovered, Sims
refused to cooperate with the prosecutors of Beatrice Harry. He even told


--- PAGE 120 ---
110 The Spring Campaign
the district attorney that he could not read or write so he could not sign a
statement against her. Sims and his would-be murderer eventually recon-
ciled, and the two were still living together when Sims joined the Deacons
in 1965.
π
As a young man, Sims never had much interest in politics. But one day on
television he saw a policeman dragging a woman ‘‘like she was a piece of
wood’’ during a civil rights protest. The scene stuck in his mind, and soon
afterward he joined the Voters League. His military background and pug-
nacious temperament made him a logical choice for Deacons president.
Crude and lacking formal education, he was nevertheless an articulate and
disarming spokesperson for the organization. Moreover, like other Deacons
leaders, Sims was economically independent of the white power structure.
Indeed, no one was quite sure how he made a living. He was an inveterate
hustler who inhabited the twilight between casual labor and banditry. He
listed his occupations as insurance salesman and cab driver, but mainly he
lived, as one friend politely phrased it, ‘‘by his wits.’’ He gambled. He hus-
tled. He was beholden to no man. ‘‘He was free,’’ said his friend Bob Hicks.
∫
For vice president the chapter selected Sam Barnes, a ﬁfty-ﬁve-year-old
ex-convict with twelve arrests. Barnes possessed all of Sims’s courage and
none of his bravado. He had already been on the front line, having been
assaulted by the Klan during the February tests. In the months that followed
he seemed to be wherever trouble erupted. Alcie Taylor and Royan Burris
completed the list of chapter ofﬁcers. Unlike Sims and Barnes, Taylor and
Burris were reputable ﬁgures in the black community. Taylor worked in the
paper mill and eventually served as an ofﬁcer in the Pulp and Sulphite
Workers Union. Burris was the youngest chapter ofﬁcer. A small, wiry man,
he ran the local barbershop, the center of communication for the black
community. His size was no obstacle to his role as guard. The indomitable
Burris was assigned as picketing coordinator for the Voters League, placing
the Deacons at the center of all of the league’s public protests.
There was an obvious difference between the leadership of the Boga-
lusa and Jonesboro Deacons chapters. Whereas Jonesboro’s leadership was
primarily law-abiding and comprised religious community leaders such as
Percy Lee Bradford, Henry Amos, and Frederick Kirkpatrick, the Bogalusa
group was dominated by less-than-respectable ﬁgures like Sims and Barnes,
men who deﬁed the law and social conventions. Every black community in
the South had at least one man like Sims or Barnes—the legendary ‘‘bad
nigger’’ feared by whites and blacks alike. Their reputation for violence
served them well in their confrontations with the Ku Klux Klan.
Ω
The difference in leadership between the two chapters owed to the fact


--- PAGE 121 ---
The Spring Campaign 111
that in Jonesboro the Deacons played two roles: civil rights organization and
paramilitary defense group. In Bogalusa, the Voters League predated the
Deacons. This allowed a leadership overlap between the two organizations.
It was natural that the Deacons would attract the more combative men,
warriors hardened by the military, the streets, or the prisons. Their chief
prerequisite was reckless courage—a quality found more frequently in the
hustler and street thug than in the preacher.
The Bogalusa Deacons plunged into their work. Approximately ﬁfteen
men comprised the chapter’s core. Typical of this inner sanctum were stead-
fast loyalists like Burtrand Wyre. Wyre was a neighbor of the Hicks family
and had come to its aid the ﬁrst night it was under siege by the Klan. He
maintained his vigil over the family for several years. ‘‘And the only time that
he would go home was to change clothes,’’ remembered Bob Hicks. ‘‘He
stayed in my house, slept in my house, sometimes wake up in the morning
with just me and him and my wife, all three of us laying down across the bed,
asleep in our clothes. And he would take me to work, when he wasn’t work-
ing or even when I got ready to get off he would be there in a car with
somebody to pick me up. He stayed in my house for four years.’’
∞≠
In addition to the core group, the Bogalusa chapter had scores of men
called ‘‘well wishers.’’ These, perhaps numbering nearly two hundred, were
mostly paper mill employees who were willing to help with security as
needed.
The Bogalusa chapter began meeting every week at the Negro Union Hall.
Unlike the Jonesboro Deacons, leadership was concentrated in the hands of
one man: Charlie Sims. Sims ran the chapter like the army sergeant he had
been. He managed the money, made the assignments, and barked out orders
to his subordinates. Even Earnest Thomas, a proud veteran, found Sims’s
style a touch heavy-handed. ‘‘In the meetings, he was like a General; he
shouted commands,’’ remembered Thomas. But Thomas respected Sims’s
effectiveness. ‘‘Well, I was impressed that he was militant and that he wasn’t
going to stand for them running rough shod in the community. So I was
impressed with him. He seemed to have a pretty good group together.’’
∞∞
The Bogalusa Deacons set up patrols and guarded meetings and homes. As
Thomas had predicted, not everyone in the black community welcomed
them. fbi records indicate that at least one black leader provided law en-
forcement organizations with extensive information on the Deacons. The
informant, most likely a moderate black leader hostile to the new group,
attended the ﬁrst chapter meeting on 28 February. An fbi report noted that
the informant intimated that the Deacons would not be successful ‘‘as he was
of the impression that his Negro community were not desirous of becoming


--- PAGE 122 ---
112 The Spring Campaign
afﬁliated in any way with an organization which had as its purpose a de-
ﬁance of law and order.’’∞≤
Governor McKeithen, who had been deeply involved in the unfolding
Bogalusa crisis, learned about the Bogalusa chapter within days after it was
formed. Whereas McKeithen had appeased the Klan in Bogalusa during the
Hays incident, he would not tolerate a black organization that protected the
community from Klan terror. McKeithen immediately took steps to destroy
the Deacons, asking Louisiana’s attorney general, Jack Gremillion, to re-
search legal methods for terminating the new organization.
∞≥
The Deacons were, even from McKeithen’s perspective, only half the prob-
lem in Bogalusa. Despite his efforts to publicly deny the power of the Ku Klux
Klan, law enforcement ofﬁcials had apprised him that the Klan in Bogalusa
was ‘‘without question the better organized unit of all the units in Loui-
siana.’’ With his conciliatory policy toward the Klan failing, McKeithen now
contemplated plans to undermine the Klansmen in Bogalusa. He considered
asking Louisiana’s congressional delegation to request hearings with sub-
poena power to investigate the Klan. According to the fbi, the governor felt
that ‘‘if such an inquiry were held into the structure, purpose, and potential
for violence, that this public exposure would cause it to dissolve.’’ It is un-
clear whether or not McKeithen followed through on his plan. The matter
became moot when, in the wake of the Viola Liuzzo murder, President
Johnson called for congressional hearings on the Klan which commenced in
the fall of 1965.
∞∂
Governor McKeithen was not the only ofﬁcial monitoring the Deacons.
Leroy Collins, the former governor of Florida and a noted racial moderate,
was the director of the Community Relations Service (crs), the government
organization created to assist in the orderly implementation of the Civil
Rights Act. On 15 March 1965 Collins called on u.s. Attorney General Nicho-
las Katzenbach to express his concern about the Deacons, whom he likened
to the right-wing Minute Men. Collins requested background information on
the Deacons and any information regarding the fbi’s investigation.
∞∑
When the New York Times broke the story on the Jonesboro Deacons on
21 February, fbi director J. Edgar Hoover ordered the New Orleans ﬁeld
ofﬁce to commence an immediate investigation. In his memo to New Or-
leans, Hoover focused on Earnest Thomas’s claim that the Deacons could
obtain automatic weapons—and his advice that armed patrols should inter-
vene to stop police arrests. ‘‘Because of the potential for violence indicated,
you are instructed to immediately initiate an investigation of the DDJ [Dea-
cons for Defense and Justice],’’ Hoover wrote. He cautioned the ﬁeld ofﬁce
to ‘‘be alert’’ for the spread of the organization and ‘‘for any indications


--- PAGE 123 ---
The Spring Campaign 113
of subversive and/or outside inﬂuence.’’ Hoover was especially concerned
about illegal weapons and ordered New Orleans to follow up on ‘‘Chicago
and Houston contacts for automatic weapons.’’ He also instructed the New
Orleans ofﬁce to increase the number of informants within the Deacons and
to conduct ‘‘interviews’’ to discourage ‘‘illegal arming and illegal action by
the group.’’
∞∏
Hoover’s instructions to conduct ‘‘interviews’’ to ‘‘discourage illegal arm-
ing and illegal action’’ was bureau code for disrupting the Deacons in gen-
eral. The use of intimidating interviews was the ﬁrst of several steps Hoover
took to undermine the Deacons. Before the year was out, he added the
organization to his ‘‘security index,’’ a list of people the fbi planned to detain
in the event of a national emergency. He also targeted the Deacons for
further disruption through the bureau’s covert Counter Intelligence Program
(cointelpro), a ‘‘dirty tricks’’ project to destroy domestic radical political
organizations, including black militant groups.
The New Orleans ﬁeld ofﬁce zealously followed Hoover’s orders and com-
menced a series of interviews intended to intimidate Deacons so they would
terminate their membership. Indeed, the ofﬁce had already begun a cam-
paign to disrupt the Deacons before the director’s memo arrived. On 25 Feb-
ruary Frank Sass and another fbi agent visited Bob Hicks at his home and
warned him not to get involved with the Deacons. Sass hinted that if any
black shot a white in self-defense, the black person would be charged with
murder. Hicks calmly told Sass that self-defense was a constitutional right.
Sass angrily stormed out of Hicks’s house. Charlie Sims received similar
treatment from the fbi.
∞π
The Deacons had their work cut out for them. The Klan, equipped with
approximately ﬁfty cb radios, constantly monitored police calls, which al-
lowed it to coordinate attacks on protesters. In late February 1965 the Voters
League initiated a new series of tests at public establishments, frequently led
by Deacons. A pattern of Klan response to the tests quickly emerged. As soon
as testers arrived, the business manager would tell the testers that he could
not serve or protect them. The proprietor would then make a phone call and
within minutes a mob of whites would converge on the business.
On 28 February Royan Burris and Bob and Jackie Hicks tested the Red-
wood Hotel. They were refused service and decided to leave—not a minute
too soon. Within three minutes after they departed, approximately thirty
Klansmen came into the hotel looking for them. Law enforcement ofﬁcials
offered no protection for the testers; indeed, they regarded the actions as a
needless intrusion on their time. fbi agent Sass told one Deacon to stop
calling him every time someone was arrested. On another occasion Police


--- PAGE 124 ---
114 The Spring Campaign
Chief Claxton Knight told Burris that the testing was ‘‘raising hell’’ with his
ﬁshing time.∞∫
The Klan attacks intensiﬁed in March. On 4 March Klansmen stopped the
Reverend Bruce Shepherd, a member of the Hays Committee, as he drove
down the highway. The Klansmen ordered Shepherd to leave town or face
being killed. A carload of blacks happened upon the scene and rescued the
minister.
∞Ω On 17 March Deacons leader Royan Burris was stopped by a
Washington Parish K-9 unit and three Bogalusa policemen and arrested on
a theft charge. The policemen handcuffed the Deacon and slapped and
stripped him outside the police station. Inside the station they formed a
circle around him and pushed him around. One ofﬁcer, Vertrees Adams,
brutalized Burris to the extent that he needed medical attention. When
released from custody, Burris went to the Community Medical Center for
treatment but was turned away.
≤≠
The harassment continued unabated throughout March and April. The
Deacons were simply outnumbered and outorganized by a Klan that was
exempt from the law. The Voters League and the Deacons were in a quan-
dary over how to move forward. The intermittent tests were achieving lit-
tle, other than demonstrating the Klan’s strength. The black movement in
Bogalusa needed a bold strategic measure that would bring national atten-
tion and reinforcements. Their prayers were answered on Sunday, 14 March
1965, when core director James Farmer announced on national television
that Bogalusa and Jonesboro had been selected as the sites of the national
organization’s next major project.
≤∞
core’s announcement guaranteed that Bogalusa—and the Deacons—
would become a focus of national attention. The news bolstered the spirits
of the Voters League and the Deacons while it sent local ofﬁcials into a panic.
Mayor Cutrer reacted swiftly to Farmer’s embarrassing charges against the
Bogalusa police. In a brief statement, Cutrer denied the charges of police
brutality and intimidation and added that, contrary to Farmer’s claims, no
churches had been burned in Bogalusa (he was right—the church burnings
had been in Jonesboro).
≤≤
The national publicity about the campaign of terror in Bogalusa was
bound to embarrass city ofﬁcials into taking some symbolic action against
the Klan. Later that week Cutrer issued a tepid public statement calling for
restraint and lawfulness in response to Farmer’s announcement and hinting
that the city would take a ﬁrmer stand against the Klan’s rampant violence
and intimidation. Cutrer read a timorous statement by city and parish law
enforcement ofﬁcials acknowledging that Bogalusa had experienced some
cases of what they euphemistically called ‘‘malicious mischief,’’ including


--- PAGE 125 ---
The Spring Campaign 115
‘‘throwing of tacks in driveways, breaking of glass, and so forth.’’ The Klan
could only sneer at the mayor’s idle threats.≤≥
On 28 March the Voters League organized a successful ‘‘Freedom Rally’’ at
the Negro Union Hall. The rally itself was without incident, but the Klan
conducted a series of assaults that tested the Deacons’ organization and
mettle. A carload of whites chased core activists Ronnie Moore, Bill Yates,
and Kimme Johnson in their car as they tried to leave the rally. They were
subsequently rescued by two carloads of armed Deacons who escorted them
from the city. Four Klansmen attacked and beat Jones Radcliffe from Boga-
lusa as he left the rally. Radcliffe managed to strike one of his attackers, so
the Deacons provided him around-the-clock protection. The same night a
carload of whites forced L. C. Magee off the road and into a ditch as he was
returning home from the Freedom Rally. The following day whites lobbed a
can of tear gas into the Negro Union Hall after the Voters League had ﬁn-
ished a meeting.
≤∂
By the end of March Governor McKeithen was beginning to feel the pres-
sure posed by civil rights conﬂicts in the Bayou State. On 26 March he
announced plans to negotiate an end to the black student boycott of Jackson
High School in Jonesboro. But McKeithen continued to insist that the Klan
did not dominate a single community in Louisiana and that Louisiana’s
racial violence paled by comparison to that in other southern states. The
only shooting incident that McKeithen could recall involved the shots ﬁred
into Ralph Blumberg’s radio station transmitter. ‘‘As long as we can keep the
thing down to a few bullets in an empty building at night, instead of rape,
mayhem, and murder, I feel we have done all right,’’ said the governor
conﬁdently.
≤∑
Events in Bogalusa quickened as the community prepared for the core in-
vasion. City leaders had formed a Community Affairs Committee ( cac) the
previous February, comprising the heads of civic, labor, and religious organi-
zations. The cac was created to address civil rights issues by exchanging
information with the city administration, serving as a sounding board for
proposals, and advising the mayor and the Bogalusa Commission Council. At-
torney John N. Gallaspy chaired the group, banker Gardner S. Adams served
as vice chair, and ultimately six Crown-Zellerbach ofﬁcials joined the com-
mittee. By March the cac had made little progress. It had tried unsuccessfully
to persuade restaurants to comply with the Civil Rights Act and had failed to
secure improvements in the black community such as street lighting.
≤∏
Most of the Deacons’ early work had, as in Jonesboro, centered on guard-
ing homes and civil rights workers, providing security for rallies, and patroll-
ing streets. April brought increased responsibilities as the ﬁrst of several


--- PAGE 126 ---
116 The Spring Campaign
groups of student volunteers descended on Bogalusa during spring break.
Sixteen core volunteers from the University of Kansas arrived in the ﬁrst
week of April and began work on voter registration. The recent Liuzzo mur-
der heightened the Deacons’ concern for the safety of the young volunteers,
particularly the women.
The northern students plunged into what must have seemed a surreal
world of danger and violence. They had no qualms about accepting armed
self-defense in the climate of fear that gripped the mill town. The Deacons
taught the volunteers basic security precautions and escorted them around
town twenty-four hours a day. Many young students were so frightened that
they could not sleep the ﬁrst few nights in Bogalusa—jumping nervously at
every noise. The Deacons’ nonchalant attitude toward guns alarmed more
than one Yankee neophyte. On one occasion the Deacons had to leave a fe-
male volunteer alone in an isolated house. They issued her a gun and left the
stunned young woman on her own.
≤π Twenty-three-year-old Anita Levine, a
student at the University of California in Berkeley, arrived in Bogalusa with
nine other civil rights workers on 14 April. The volunteers stayed at ten
different homes, where the Deacons constantly stood guard at the windows
at night. On Easter Sunday Levine and another white volunteer joined her
host and two other women to attend a sunrise service at the Methodist
church. ‘‘The Deacons had given us instructions to tell them whenever we
were going to drive,’’ recalled Levine. The church was only four blocks from
the house, so the Deacons told Levine to go ahead and they would follow in a
few minutes. The women pulled out of the driveway and soon noticed a car
tailing them along with two police cars behind it. The trailing car sported a
Confederate ﬂag license plate, which identiﬁed it as a Klan car. The Klans-
men began to menace the women, passing them and then pulling alongside.
Levine pulled in front of the Methodist church and left her engine running.
The ﬁve women waited anxiously in the deserted street as the Klan car kept
driving up and down in front of the church, brandishing guns out the win-
dows. The police remained in their patrol cars. Finally, the Deacons arrived
on the scene and the Klan and police cars immediately sped away. It was a
frightening experience but one that allowed Levine to see the changing face
of southern blacks as well. ‘‘It’s so great to see a Negro family in the South
that knows its rights and is not afraid,’’ she told a reporter.
≤∫
Forbidding characters like Charlie Sims, outﬁtted with pistols and black-
jacks, were disarming ﬁgures to the students. But the young volunteers were
no less a novelty to their hosts. Working-class blacks like Sims and Hicks had
never seen privilege and wealth of this magnitude. ‘‘Some of the kids were


--- PAGE 127 ---
The Spring Campaign 117
from nice homes,’’ noted Hicks. ‘‘Lot of their parents were wealthy.’’ Hicks
remembered how money was no object for them:
You go get gas, take them somewhere, they’d say ‘‘I’ll pay for it. Here it is.’’
Drop out a credit card there on them. Yeah. And you’d get ready to make a
telephone call, and ‘‘No, here, here, take my telephone card.’’ They had
telephone card, credit card. And when they got ready to leave, you pick
them up and maybe take them to New Orleans, and they would give you
some money to take your car to New Orleans. And they get down there
and they’d get on the airplane, hit that airplane, and hit the air, and gone.
And go ﬂying all over the country.
≤Ω
Hicks became good friends with Steve Miller’s wealthy family in San Fran-
cisco. The Millers assisted in fund-raising when Hicks traveled to San Fran-
cisco. The rich and famous were a heady experience for the paper mill
worker born in Pachutta, Mississippi. ‘‘They [the Millers] had a home sitting
way back up there in them hills up there,’’ said Hicks. ‘‘Filthy rich. He a big
time lawyer in San Francisco. When we came into dinner . . . I was sitting
there with judges. Big judge. And wife with ﬁve or six rings.’’
≥≠
But middle-class whites brought more than money and sweat to the move-
ment: they often brought a missionary’s arrogant presumptions about their
own superior judgment and little respect for the political wisdom of lo-
cal people. Hicks encountered this problem with Bill Yates. ‘‘When he said
something or done something, he wanted you to do what he wanted. If you
had an idea or different thing, he didn’t want to go by your idea, he wanted
to do exactly what he said.’’ The imperious attitude was not well received by
the determinedly independent black Bogalusans. ‘‘Bogalusa was not a part
of core, wasn’t a part of nothing . . . Bogalusa was a town that ran its own
movement,’’ explained Hicks. ‘‘Bill Yates and I fell out about the same thing.
That they wanted to come in and tell us what to do, how to do, and when
to do.’’
≥∞
With volunteers ﬂooding into Bogalusa, tension grew as the Voters League
announced that it would organize its ﬁrst civil rights march on Friday,
9 April. James Farmer would be ﬂying in as the guest speaker. The announce-
ment that the league was going to march in the middle of the Klan’s strong-
hold sent city leaders into a spin. To head off the protest, the Commission
Council quickly passed an emergency ordinance—of dubious constitution-
ality—prohibiting mass picketing and protests. The ‘‘disturbing the peace’’
ordinance limited pickets to three and required people to leave business
premises on demand of an employee or the owner. The ordinance also con-


--- PAGE 128 ---
118 The Spring Campaign
tained provisions aimed at Klan attacks, including a prohibition against
disrupting a lawful assembly. But by this point city government had little
control over either the black movement or the Klan, and the ordinance was
never enforced.
≥≤
A pall of fear fell over the city as the day of the momentous march ap-
proached. Two days before the demonstration, on 7 April, the Klan launched
a series of preemptive attacks that singled out student volunteers. Klansmen
harassed the University of Kansas students as they canvassed with local
blacks. One Klansman waved a pistol at Linda Cook, a student volunteer,
and shouted, ‘‘Now’s a good time to kill a white nigger.’’ Earlier in the morn-
ing Bill Yates left the Hicks house and noticed a green pickup truck with
three men circling the block. As Yates got into his car, the truck abruptly
blocked his path and one of the men leaped from it with a blackjack. Yates
recognized the man as one of the Klansmen who had attacked him and
broken his hand in February. He rolled up his window and started the car as
the man tried to break his window. Yates put the car in reverse and escaped
down the street with the truck in pursuit. He circled the block and returned
to the Hicks house. Standing on the front porch to greet the Klansmen was
Jackie Hicks—with pistol in hand. The pursuers wisely retreated.
≥≥
That night the Klan struck twice more. In the ﬁrst incident, Klansmen
gathered under cover of darkness on the edge of the black community near
the Negro Union Hall. They erected two cofﬁns: one cofﬁn bore Bill Yates’s
name, the other Bob Hicks’s. A sign on the cofﬁns read, ‘‘Here lies core.’’ The
Klansmen illuminated the ghoulish scene with ﬂares and a spotlight and
burned a ten-foot cross.
Later that night Yates and several University of Kansas students were
staying with the Hicks. There were at least seven Deacons posted at the
home, some outside concealed behind bushes and trees. Among them was
Henry Austin, a young insurance salesman and air force veteran from Baton
Rouge. At approximately 1:00 a.m. a car drove slowly by the Hicks house.
Suddenly it stopped and a white man emerged and threw a piece of brick
through the rear window of a Volkswagen bus owned by one of the Kansas
students. Bob Hicks rushed out of the house, and a shot rang out from the
car as the white man was pulled back in. Hicks grabbed his pistol and ﬁred
two shots at the ﬂeeing vehicle, setting off a volley of ﬁfteen shots from the
Deacons. Austin emptied his gun into the Klan car and watched sparks ﬂy off
it as the Klansmen sporadically returned the ﬁre.
It was the Deacons’ ﬁrst shoot-out with the Klan, and the ﬂedgling group
had proved itself disciplined and able. None of the Deacons was injured;
their attackers may not have fared quite as well. Though never conﬁrmed,


--- PAGE 129 ---
The Spring Campaign 119
rumors circulated that one Klansman was shot and another killed in the
exchange. Black hospital workers reported that the injured Klansmen were
secretly shuttled to an Alabama hospital, ostensibly to protect their identity
and police complicity in covering up the attack. As in the past, Governor
McKeithen and local authorities downplayed the incident; some went so far
as to deny that the gun battle ever took place.
≥∂
But core’s sophisticated public relations operation, centered in New York
City, guaranteed extraordinary publicity for the Deacons. The shoot-out at
the Hicks house made the front page of the New York Post under the head-
line: ‘‘Klansmen and core in Louisiana Gun Battle.’’ Apparently based on an
interview with core staffer Bill Yates, the story featured a photograph of
Bob Hicks brandishing a riﬂe as he examined the shattered window of a
student’s van. The article did not mention the Deacons by name, referring to
core’s armed defenders as ‘‘Negroes guarding the house.’’ The piece dubbed
Bogalusa the ‘‘Klan Capital’’ of America, an unﬂattering though ﬁtting moni-
ker that soon gained popularity with the media.
≥∑
It had been a long night for the Deacons, and now they faced the challenge
of shepherding the upcoming march. Law enforcement ofﬁcials braced for
the protest with additional state police, auxiliary police, and deputized ﬁre-
men. Black teenagers could not contain their excitement in anticipation of
the historic event. On 8 April, the day before the march, the teenagers staged
a spontaneous walkout and march from Bogalusa’s black Central Memorial
High School. At 10:25 a.m. two hundred students assembled outside the
school and began advancing to the downtown area. Within a few minutes
police halted the march on the grounds that the students did not have a
parade permit. The demonstration ended in a standoff between the students
and local police reinforced with snarling dogs in K-9 squad cars.
≥∏
Later that day Voters League president A. Z. Young led a delegation of
blacks into City Hall to protest the decision to halt the students’ march and
to discuss a list of demands issued by the league two days earlier. From the
outset, the Bogalusa movement gravitated toward bread-and-butter issues;
the downtown boycott was intended to win jobs, not lunch counter stools.
The league’s demands for reform bore the distinct imprint of its working-
class leadership, placing less emphasis on civil equality and voting rights and
more emphasis on economic power and parity. The seven demands were for
equal economic opportunity in public and private employment and munici-
pal licensing; equal educational opportunities and desegregated educational
facilities; desegregation of all public accommodations and facilities; sewers,
paved roads, and adequate street lighting in the black community; enforced
housing codes; inclusion of black leaders at a decision-making level on city,


--- PAGE 130 ---
120 The Spring Campaign
parish, and industrial and development planning boards; removal from city
ordinances of all unconstitutional discriminatory laws; and employment of
black city policemen.
≥π
Mayor Cutrer was not about to negotiate these or any other demands with
the militant new leadership of the Voters League. He told the media that he
and the Commission Council had been meeting with a ‘‘very ﬁne Negro
committee’’ since July 1963, but the leadership of the league had changed. In
effect, the city was refusing to negotiate with the black community’s largest
civil rights organization. Moreover, the mayor argued, several demands had
already been met: streets in the black community were all paved, and street
lighting conversion was proceeding. Cutrer added that six blacks had taken
the civil service exam for police ofﬁcer in 1963 but all had failed it.
≥∫
The night before the civil rights march the Voters League staged a large,
enthusiastic rally at Central Memorial High. James Farmer arrived from
New York to serve as the keynote speaker. The Deacons accompanied Farmer
from the New Orleans airport and stationed guards inside the school. Their
presence outside was hardly needed. With the eyes of the nation on the
small mill town, local authorities had decided not to invite further Klan
attacks by their absence. An impressive phalanx of more than one hun-
dred law enforcement ofﬁcials ringed the school, including all of Bogalusa’s
thirty-four-member police force, two dozen deputized ﬁremen and sheriffs’
deputies, and ﬁfty state police and fbi agents.
≥Ω
The police cordon around the rally site kept the Klan at bay, forcing it to
conduct a simultaneous rally of more than two hundred people across town.
At one point Klansmen attempted to take a caravan of thirty-two cars into
the black quarters but were stopped by city and state police. The Klan would
have to wait to exact its revenge.
∂≠
The high school auditorium was packed with spirited young people. Ron-
nie Moore soon took the stage to encourage the students to boycott classes
the next day in order to attend the march. He said that the march would pro-
test police brutality and economic injustice in Bogalusa. Following Moore on
the dais, James Farmer reiterated the Voters League’s demands for fair em-
ployment; Crown-Zellerbach needed to hire black women and eliminate its
segregated promotion system. Farmer also chastised the older generation of
blacks, telling the audience of teenagers that ‘‘if our parents had been willing
to go to jail and die, we wouldn’t have to go through this.’’ The rally went
without incident, and the Deacons and the Voters League sent the children
home for a night’s rest before the big event.
∂∞
The morning of the march tension hung over Bogalusa like an ominous
cloud. The Deacons took their places among the demonstrators. An impres-


--- PAGE 131 ---
The Spring Campaign 121
sive column of four hundred marchers departed the Negro Union Hall at
9:07 a.m. It was only four short blocks to their destination: City Hall. Word
came that huge crowds of Klansmen and their white sympathizers were
already gathering along the parade route in the main business district. The
angry mob of white hecklers far outnumbered the police. The marchers
proceeded nervously into the business district led by the indomitable James
Farmer. The scene they encountered was horriﬁc. The protesters were forced
to march through a gauntlet of hundreds of shrieking whites, with threats
and screams of ‘‘niggers’’ reverberating through the streets. As the marchers
approached the corner of Third Street and Columbia, a rabid group of whites
bolted into the street and violently attacked them with ﬁsts and picket signs.
A young Klansman, Randle C. Pounds, raced toward Farmer and lunged
violently at him with a blackjack. Police caught Pounds just before he struck
Farmer. The violence was contagious. As the melee spread, white gangs beat
bystanders, including a Life magazine photographer. In the chaos a white
man, Jimmy Dane Burke, attacked an fbi agent who was photographing
incidents.
∂≤
Ordered by police ofﬁcials to turn back, the besieged marchers quickly re-
turned to the Negro Union Hall to regroup. Within a few minutes three hun-
dred whites led by the Klan assembled at City Hall and confronted a line of
state policemen guarding the entrance. A delegation of four white men, one
identiﬁed as the Grand Wizard of the Louisiana Knights of the Ku Klux Klan,
conferred with Mayor Cutrer as the restless mob milled around the building.
Within an hour the Klan leader emerged from the meeting. He told the
crowd that the mayor had informed him that the civil rights demonstrators
were going to march again later that day with police protection. The Klan
leader instructed the mob to disperse and not attempt to prevent the march
since it ‘‘could not win against either local police or federal ofﬁcials.’’
∂≥
Soon after the mob retreated, James Farmer and members of the Voters
League met with Cutrer and Commissioner Arnold Spiers. The meeting was
a victory for the league, as Cutrer had previously refused to negotiate with
the group and Farmer. Not only was the mayor now meeting with them, but
he also reassured the black delegation that he would continue to confer with
the Voters League. Further, Cutrer promised that the Klan would not be
allowed to congregate in the business district during the second march later
in the afternoon. The mayor kept his word. Vehicular trafﬁc was blocked and
the demonstration occurred without disruption.
When the marchers arrived at City Hall, Farmer, Moore, and other speak-
ers addressed the crowd with high spirits. Cutrer’s conciliatory attitude at
the earlier meeting was an encouraging sign. Farmer told the crowd that the


--- PAGE 132 ---
122 The Spring Campaign
mayor had agreed to further talks with the Voters League. Then, to the
marchers’ amazement, Cutrer emerged from City Hall to address the group.
He surprised the audience by calling for negotiations rather than demon-
strations. The day’s events had forced the mayor to move the debate from the
streets to the negotiating table.
∂∂
The marchers were not the only ones shaken by the Klan attack. In the
midst of the confusion, Assistant Police Chief L. C. Terrell had wheeled his
police car into Louis Applewhite, a Klansman and nephew of Albert Ap-
plewhite, a Klan ‘‘wrecking crew’’ leader. Applewhite was taken to the hospi-
tal. Terrell panicked when he realized that he had nearly killed the relative
of a major Klansman. The highly distraught ofﬁcer returned to City Hall and,
armed with a shotgun, ensconced himself in the mayor’s ofﬁce. Terrell was
convinced that the Klan was going to retaliate by killing him. The dazed
policeman rocked back and forth in his chair mumbling to himself, ‘‘They’re
not going to kill me. They’re not going to kill me.’’ crs representative Jerry
Heilbron, who was in the room with Terrell, watched nervously as the ofﬁcer
continued to mutter to himself, cradling the shotgun in his arms. In Heil-
bron’s words, the ofﬁcer was ‘‘really off his rocker.’’ A local minister arrived
and suggested that the group pray for guidance. Heilbron, the minister, and
Terrell got on their knees and prayed. But they were unwilling to leave
Terrell’s situation to divine intervention. Someone summoned Terrell’s doc-
tor, who soon arrived and administered a sedative to the troubled ofﬁcer.
∂∑
Cutrer stayed true to his promise to negotiate with the Voters League, and
within days he organized a team that included approximately sixty white
merchants. The business group, with the assistance of three representatives
of the federal Community Relations Service, scheduled its ﬁrst meeting with
black community representatives on 13 April. But the talks collapsed before
they even started when the white businessmen refused to meet exclusively
with the Voters League. Instead, they demanded that the black negotiat-
ing team include representatives of two other moderate black groups. The
league responded to the ultimatum by refusing to meet with the business
group. To increase the pressure for negotiations, the league announced that
it would begin a picketing campaign at downtown stores to compel black
employment at the businesses.
∂∏
With negotiations stalled, the Voters League commenced picketing six
stores on 14 April. The new city ordinance restricted the protesters to only
two picketers per store. The situation was particularly difﬁcult for the Dea-
cons, who stood guard. The league picketers were shadowed by Klan pick-
eters who walked alongside carrying signs saying, ‘‘White Man give this
merchant your business.’’ The following day the Klan threw a ﬁrebomb at a


--- PAGE 133 ---
The Spring Campaign 123
house on the edge of the black community where core volunteers had
stayed. The local ﬁre department refused to respond to the call for help.∂π
If there were ever any doubts that the Bogalusa police and the Klan were
collaborating, the events of 15 April would dispel them. Earlier that day the
police arrested and detained Charles Williams, a local black man. As Wil-
liams was being booked, a door opened to an adjacent room and Williams
saw six men dressed in Klan robes—one of them wearing a law enforcement
uniform under his robe. The hooded ofﬁcer entered the booking room and
cursed Williams. ‘‘You black son of a bitch,’’ barked the ofﬁcer, ‘‘pull off the
damn cap.’’
∂∫
Government ofﬁcials scrambled to head off a major clash. In a presenta-
tion to the Bogalusa Chamber of Commerce, Governor McKeithen sounded a
new theme of reconciliation and patience. He told the business leaders that
their ‘‘generation in Louisiana has the responsibility to keep the peace’’ and
to keep their ‘‘heads while those about us lose theirs.’’
∂Ω
As the Easter holiday was rapidly approaching, Mayor Cutrer appealed to
the Voters League to halt the picketing for the Easter weekend. The league
refused to call a moratorium on picketing until the city agreed to negotiate
its demands. But the situation on the picket line was becoming more tense
and creating insurmountable problems for the Deacons. Klansmen marched
side by side with the black picketers as mobs of whites waved rebel ﬂags and
jeered from the sidelines while law enforcement ofﬁcials stood idly by; some
policemen even joined in the heckling. By Good Friday it was clear that the
Deacons and the Voters League could not guarantee the safety of the demon-
strators, so they decided to temporarily withdraw the pickets and ﬁle a
complaint with city ofﬁcials.
∑≠
Police abuse was becoming a paramount issue of the Voters League. On
Good Friday the league presented Mayor Cutrer with additional require-
ments, calling for an ‘‘end of unequal enforcement of law in Bogalusa’’ and
‘‘the end of abuses and harassment of Negro picketers.’’ It also demanded
that the city ﬁre ofﬁcers involved in harassment. The league underscored its
new conditions by announcing that it had invited James Farmer to lead
another march to City Hall, this time protesting police abuse.
∑∞
Farmer returned to Bogalusa on 22 April to address an evening rally at the
Ebenezer Baptist Church. The sanctuary was ﬁlled with nearly ﬁve hundred
people, almost all of them school children. An army of state police guarded
all intersections leading to the church, part of a massive inﬂux of 375 state
troopers earlier in the day. The growing generational schism between young
and old was apparent at the rally. Youth leader Don Lambert rose to give a
speech chastising adults for not assisting in the civil rights drive. The issue


--- PAGE 134 ---
124 The Spring Campaign
had come to light earlier in the week when core spokesperson Wilfred T.
Ussery told the media that a militant teenage element in the league was
pushing for bigger demonstrations than the leadership wanted. Ironically,
the militant leaders of the Voters League and the Deacons were ﬁnding
themselves cast as moderates in the rapidly radicalizing movement.
∑≤
The rally at Ebenezer Baptist Church was not the only civil rights event
where sharp generational conﬂicts were manifest. A few weeks later come-
dian Dick Gregory spoke at another Voters League rally, offering a humor-
ous respite from the grim business of political protest. Gregory delighted
his young audience of more than ﬁve hundred by excoriating old folks as
‘‘too lazy or scared’’ to participate in the civil rights movement: ‘‘When you
die, Lord knows I hope it’s soon, then the civil rights movement can move
forward.’’
∑≥
As time progressed, the Deacons became more explicit in their view that
the black freedom movement required a revolution against both the old
leadership and the worldview produced by the economic reality of the past.
Accommodation had been an effective strategy of resistance for the power-
less. But times had changed. Deacons member R. T. Young advised young
Voters League members that ‘‘the young Negro must erase the image of the
older Negroes—we must turn their young minds to education, one of the
biggest weapons.’’ Young counseled the youngsters that ‘‘automation is here
to stay and the Negro of the cotton ﬁeld is gone forever . . . abide by the
Constitution of the United States and seek what your government has prom-
ised you and mankind.’’
∑∂
Farmer played down the generational divisions in his rally speech, though
he reserved criticism for faint-hearted black ministers who had refused to
support the movement or allow their churches to be used for organizing
activities. The charges of accommodation peeved many of the black clergy.
The Reverend W. J. Nelson protested to the Bogalusa Daily News that he had
been unfairly labeled an ‘‘uncle tom.’’
∑∑
The black movement’s resolve and the potential for mass civil violence
were forcing the federal and state governments to intervene in the crisis.
On 20 April 1965 the u.s. Department of Justice ﬁled the ﬁrst of several
legal actions to enforce the Civil Rights Act in Bogalusa. Attorney General
Nicholas Katzenbach signed the suit ﬁled in federal district court in New
Orleans asking that six restaurants be enjoined from refusing service to
blacks. Meanwhile, Governor McKeithen was working diligently to restart
the stalled negotiations in the city. McKeithen was particularly worried that
another major march would ignite open warfare between the Deacons and


--- PAGE 135 ---
The Spring Campaign 125
the Klan. Gun sales had increased dramatically in Bogalusa, which was
already an armed camp.∑∏
On 22 April McKeithen arranged for three state leaders to publicly offer
to mediate the crisis: Senator Michael O’Keefe, afl-cio state leader Victor
Bussie, and Democratic Party leader Camille Gravel. The next day he met
with city ofﬁcials and the Community Affairs Committee and persuaded
them to sit down with the ‘‘Bussie Committee’’ mediators on Friday, 24 April.
Simultaneously, the governor was working to persuade the Voters League to
suspend its rallies and picketing in exchange for new negotiations. For this
task he turned to Vice President Hubert Humphrey. Humphrey had been in
Louisiana two weeks earlier and had been following the situation in Boga-
lusa. He contacted core’s James Farmer and convinced him to help ease
tensions by leaving Bogalusa on the twenty-third. Farmer also agreed to
cancel a planned rally that was to feature Dick Gregory. On Good Friday, as
the Klan taunted black protesters on the picket line downtown, the Bussie
Committee began intense meetings with the Voters League and city ofﬁcials
and the cac. By the end of the day the Bussie Committee had scored a major
breakthrough. The city and the Community Affairs Committee agreed to
begin new negotiations with the Voters League the following week. In ex-
change, the league agreed to suspended picketing. The Voters League and
the Deacons had forced the city back to the bargaining table.
∑π
McKeithen, feeling that the crisis had been surmounted, withdrew the
army of 335 state police from Bogalusa over the Easter weekend. But segre-
gationists and the Klan were not to be denied. The Original Knights of the Ku
Klux Klan ( okkkk) distributed several hundred leaﬂets announcing a boy-
cott of merchants who complied with integration, as well as the Bogalusa
Daily News  and the wbox radio station. On 27 April George L. Singleman,
executive secretary of the New Orleans Citizens Council, joined Paul Farmer
of the Washington Parish Citizens Council (and brother of Klan leader Saxon
Farmer) to announce plans for a major march and rally on 7 May to protest
the compromise. Singleman denounced the Bussie Committee and claimed
that Bogalusa had been targeted by communists since 1956.
∑∫
Now McKeithen and Cutrer were forced to take measures to undermine
the Klan march and rally. Rally organizers had invited Sheriff Jim Clark of
Selma, Alabama, a hero to white supremacists. McKeithen personally con-
tacted Clark and convinced him to withdraw from the rally. McKeithen had
always been a staunch segregationist, but his new conciliatory approach to
civil rights groups made him the Citizens Council’s new bête noire. One
Council spokesperson labeled him an ‘‘integrationist’’ sympathizer and cas-


--- PAGE 136 ---
126 The Spring Campaign
tigated the Bussie Committee members as ‘‘all out integrationists.’’ Com-
pounding the Council’s problems were rumors that the rally was actually
being organized by the Klan and that two hundred black Southern Univer-
sity students planned to attend and disrupt the rally.
∑Ω
Despite the machinations of elected ofﬁcials, the segregationists man-
aged to stage an impressive march and rally on 7 May. Approximately three
thousand people participated in the march, which ended at Goodyear Park.
Marchers listened to George Singleman of New Orleans and Judge John
Rarick berate Governor McKeithen and other ofﬁcials for interfering in
Bogalusa’s affairs (that both Singleman and Rarick were ‘‘outsiders’’ escaped
attention). The rumor that the Klan had actually organized the rally seemed
to be conﬁrmed by the speaker list, which included Saxon Farmer, Grand
Wizard of the okkkk, and Jack Helm, Louisiana state leader of the United
Klans of America (uka).
∏≠
The Klan counteroffensive did not stop the negotiations, which got under
way on 16 May at the ofﬁce of Jack Martzell, attorney for the city of Boga-
lusa. Attending were Martzell; Lolis Elie, a black New Orleans attorney with
ties to core, representing the Voters League; Mayor Cutrer; and members of
the Commission Council and the Bussie Committee. The talks were cordial
but tense, with Klansmen circling City Hall in trucks. The initial meeting was
productive. Attorneys announced that a joint statement on racial progress in
Bogalusa would be issued at some point and that further conferences were
planned.
∏∞
With the negotiations in progress and the picketing halted, an eerie calm
began to envelop the city. There had been virtually no incidents of Klan
violence since local ofﬁcials had announced negotiations with the Voters
League three weeks earlier. The league decided to take advantage of the
decreased tensions and quietly integrate Bogalusa’s Cassidy Park. Bob Hicks
secured permission from Mayor Cutrer in advance and notiﬁed city police
and the fbi of the test plans for 19 May. On the afternoon of the nineteenth,
Hicks, his wife Jackie, and their son Gregory, approximately twenty other
blacks (mostly teenagers), and one white volunteer arrived at the park to
integrate it. Sam Barnes, the Deacons’ vice president, went along to guard
the group, equipped with his pearl-handled .38 revolver. The adults stood by
their cars watching the children playing on the swings and merry-go-rounds.
Two policemen observed at a distance.
Soon the adults noticed a group of twenty-ﬁve white men approaching the
park. The white men stopped and spoke brieﬂy to the two policemen. The
men then walked toward the children brandishing guns and clubs. The
leader of the mob took off his belt and wrapped it around his ﬁst. He asked


--- PAGE 137 ---
The Spring Campaign 127
the children on the merry-go-round if they were having fun, then suddenly
struck a seven-year-old girl. Mayhem broke out as the white mob charged
through the playground ruthlessly attacking the children and women. Bob
Hicks and Sam Barnes rushed to their defense as the city policemen waded
into the melee indiscriminately clubbing blacks and unleashing their K-9
dogs. One policeman pulled his gun as he approached the children. Jackie
Hicks drew a pistol to fend off the attackers. Barnes also pulled his .38
revolver. Police restrained Bob Hicks as he watched a police dog viciously
bite his son Gregory.
∏≤ Hicks could barely contain his rage. He wished that
he had brought a weapon. ‘‘I guess that’s about the only time that if I had
something, I probably would have done something,’’ said Hicks years later.
∏≥
During the brutal attack several blacks were injured, including a seventy-
ﬁve-year-old woman who was knocked unconscious. Sam Barnes was ar-
rested and charged with assault for pulling his revolver to protect the chil-
dren. As the dust settled, Bob Hicks took the elderly woman and his son to
the Bogalusa Community Medical Center, where they were both refused
emergency room assistance. Eventually Hicks had to drive ninety miles to
ﬁnd treatment for the two at a New Orleans hospital.
The following day more than ﬁve hundred whites gathered to prevent a
second attempt to integrate the park. When no blacks showed up, a gang of
thirty whites brutally attacked Terry Friedman, a white New Orleans Times-
Picayune photographer, as he walked toward the park. The group kicked and
beat Friedman and threw parts of his camera equipment into a nearby creek
as police stood by.
∏∂
Despite the climate of fear and violence, the work of the Bussie Committee
continued; on 23 May the committee made a major breakthrough. A. Z.
Young and Cutrer signed a six-point agreement in which the city met almost
all of the Voters League’s demands. Cutrer took to the airwaves that night to
announce the agreement in a radio speech. He stated that the Commission
Council, with the full support of the Community Affairs Committee, planned
a series of sweeping desegregation reforms. The city had agreed to repeal all
segregation ordinances, open all public facilities and parks to all races, guar-
antee impartial law enforcement by city police and equal protection of citi-
zens exercising their rights, and hire blacks as policemen and in other city
positions. The mayor also promised to promptly investigate any violation of
these strictures by police and enact necessary ordinances regarding sewer-
age and water distribution to allow indoor plumbing in the black community
and paved streets and improved lighting. In exchange, the Voters League
would cancel its picketing, pending negotiations with the store owners, and
defer further attempts to integrate the parks. Cutrer argued that the reforms


--- PAGE 138 ---
128 The Spring Campaign
were necessary to bring city laws in line with federal laws, and to restore
calm and end the harm to the city’s industrial and business growth. The
mayor’s message was one of achieving social peace and economic progress
through unity.
∏∑
It was a stunning victory for the Voters League. Later that night James
Farmer addressed a jubilant victory rally, declaring that the Klan had be-
come ‘‘a laughing matter.’’ Farmer promised full cooperation with Cutrer
and praised him for having gone further ‘‘than any other Southern Mayor.’’
Optimism had to be tempered with caution, though. ‘‘Now we must see to it
that deeds follow these words,’’ said Farmer.
∏∏
Not all core ofﬁcials were as sanguine as Farmer. ‘‘Mike [Jones] reports
that the Negroes’ morale is quite low and that a number of whites seem
angry at the mayor’s conciliatory statement last night,’’ noted a core report
ﬁled on 24 May. ‘‘He fears that this is just the beginning of [the] expression of
white frustration and anger at the mayor’s betrayal of them.’’ As it turned
out, Mike Jones was right. The Klan had lost the ﬁrst battle by relying on
Cutrer. Within hours of the mayor’s announcement, the Klan would regroup
to mount its own lethal counteroffensive.
∏π


--- PAGE 139 ---
chapter
8
With a Single Bullet
on 11 january 1935 a white mob dragged Jerome Wil-
son from the Washington Parish jail and lynched him. Wilson had won a new
trial for a shooting on his father’s farm in 1934 that had left his brother and a
parish deputy dead. The incident had occurred, according to an older mem-
ber of the black community, ‘‘cause them boys cussed that white man.’’ No
African American attempted to save Wilson or avenge his murder; fear of
attack so overwhelmed the black community that some people even refused
to leave the ‘‘colored quarters.’’ The Wilson family, prosperous and respected
landowners, was economically ruined and ﬂed the parish. Three decades
later something had changed in the spirit of black people in Washington
Parish and Bogalusa; they would respond in a radically different way to
murderous assaults by vigilantes. Before the summer of 1965 ended, a white
segregationist would lie on the streets of Bogalusa with three Deacons bul-
lets in his chest.
∞
The morning after Mayor Jesse Cutrer’s momentous speech announcing
desegregation concessions, Bogalusans awakened to ﬁnd utility poles plas-
tered with scores of a new Klan poster: ‘‘Welcome to the Jungle, J. H. Cutrer,
Chief; Victor Bussie, Ambassador; A. Z. Young, Witch Doctor.’’ Later that day
a group of whites festooned the City Hall entrance with a sign reading,
‘‘Nigger Town, u.s.a.’’ As darkness fell, several hundred whites assembled at
Cassidy Park and tore down the gates and signs announcing the park closed
by order of the Commission Council. Members of the group raucously pa-
raded around the park, honking their horns in celebration of their victory.
An intimidating mob of one hundred whites invaded a Community Affairs
Committee (cac) meeting and denounced the Bussie Committee, calling for
an end to ‘‘meddling in the affairs of Bogalusa.’’ The cac, badly shaken by the
confrontation, quickly began to distance itself from the Bussie Committee


--- PAGE 140 ---
130 With a Single Bullet
and the compromise. It was the ﬁrst of a series of reversals in the face of the
Klan’s renewed terror campaign.≤
The Klan also ﬂexed its muscles in its ﬁrst open confrontation with the
Deacons. On 26 May 1965 a crowd of students had congregated the evening
of Graduation Class Night at Central Memorial High School. During the
ceremony, approximately seventy-ﬁve whites gathered outside the school,
including Saxon Farmer, leader of the Original Knights of the Ku Klux Klan
(okkkk), and a group of Klansmen. Minutes later, A. Z. Young and the
Deacons arrived to confront the Klansmen, supported by an equal number of
blacks. After an edgy standoff, city and state police descended on the scene
and dispersed both groups. A few hours later another Deacon, twenty-seven-
year-old Fletcher Anderson, was sitting in his car in front of a restaurant
when Deputy Sheriff Vertrees Adams approached. Adams ordered Anderson
to start the car and race the engine; when Anderson complied, the deputy
arrested him for driving with a faulty mufﬂer. While making the arrest,
Adams discovered a weapon in Anderson’s car and added a concealed weap-
ons charge. At the police station, Adams and other police ofﬁcers lined
Anderson up against a wall and punched and kicked him.
≥
The Klan increased its pressure on local businesses as well. It had been
over a month since the Voters League had suspended picketing on Columbia
Street, yet none of the merchants had agreed to negotiate the league’s de-
mands for jobs. Its patience exhausted, the league decided to renew picket-
ing. On Saturday, 29 May, young black picketers appeared in front of stores
in the downtown area. The situation soon deteriorated into chaos as Klans-
men ran amuck in the business district, brutally attacking the picketers.
Police ofﬁcers did little to stop them; when law enforcers did act, they were
more likely to arrest the black picketers than the offending Klansmen. Sev-
enteen people were arrested that Saturday, eleven of whom were black—
among them, Jackie Hicks.
∂
Though the day had been a setback for the Bogalusa Voters League, the
violent attacks and arrest of black children did shake many African Ameri-
cans out of their lethargy. That night hundreds of angry adults attended a
huge league meeting at the Negro Union Hall to discuss the day’s events. The
scene outside the hall was a surreal carnival of hate, as hundreds of whites
waited menacingly. Smaller groups of whites stalked the downtown area
late into the night. A convoy of ten cars drove past the house where core
leader Ronnie Moore was staying that night as the Deacons stood guard.
Once again the Klan reigned supreme in Bogalusa.
∑
For the next few days the Klan escalated its well-coordinated attacks on the


--- PAGE 141 ---
With a Single Bullet 131
picketers. The wrecking crews staged diversionary strikes to draw police off
the picket line, then sent ﬂying wedges of Klansmen to assault the picketers
with clubs and lead pipes. The Klan became so bold that on 31 May it drove a
New Orleans television crew from the city. The same day Governor Mc-
Keithen traveled to Bogalusa and met secretly with Klan leader Saxon Farmer
and fourteen other white supremacists. That a standing governor would
enter into negotiations with an extremist organization engaged in systematic
terrorism raised serious questions about the state of moral leadership in
Louisiana. In a prescient memo to Vice President Humphrey, John Stewart, a
Humphrey aide, pointed out that McKeithen’s ‘‘principal weakness’’ was his
constant efforts to accommodate the white supremacists. McKeithen ‘‘has
attempted to please both the moderates and the extremists,’’ Stewart told the
vice president, ‘‘and this approach cannot, in the end, provide the leadership
and direction to avoid violence and bloodshed.’’ McKeithen’s conclave with
the Klan proved fruitless: the attacks on picketers continued, and by the end
of the ﬁrst week of June McKeithen had redeployed 212 troopers in Bogalusa.
At the same time Mayor Cutrer had retreated from his détente with the Voters
League, informing the media that the league was responsible for increased
tensions. In the end, only the Voters League and the Deacons refused to be
intimidated by the Klan counteroffensive.
∏
The Klan campaign reached a bloody crescendo in early June. In 1964
Sheriff Dorman Crowe had hired two black deputies, honoring a campaign
promise he had made in return for black votes during his unsuccessful re-
election bid. The two deputies, O’Neal Moore and Creed Rogers, were lim-
ited to patrolling the black community. On the night of 2 June 1965, Moore
and Rogers were patrolling as usual when they noticed a pickup truck fol-
lowing them. Suddenly the truck pulled alongside the deputies and several
shots from a high-powered riﬂe rang out. Moore was killed instantly. His
partner suffered facial wounds but survived. Within an hour Ray McElveen,
a paper mill worker at Crown-Zellerbach, was arrested in nearby Tylertown,
Mississippi. McElveen was driving a truck that matched the description of
the vehicle involved in the attack. When apprehended, he was carrying
membership cards for the Citizens Council of Greater New Orleans and the
National States Rights Party, an extremist white supremacist group. Mc-
Elveen also carried a ‘‘special agent’’ card for the Louisiana Department of
Public Safety, signed by state police director Thomas Burbank. Saxon Farmer
eventually posted bail for McElveen, who was later identiﬁed as an okkkk
member. In the subsequent inquiry even white police investigators became
targets of the terrorists. On 4 June unknown assailants ﬁred six shots into the


--- PAGE 142 ---
132 With a Single Bullet
home of Deputy Doyle Holliday, who was leading the investigation for the
sheriff ’s department. Within minutes of the shooting an anonymous caller
phoned Holliday’s house and asked, ‘‘Did we get anyone?’’
π
McKeithen condemned the Moore murder and offered a $25,000 reward
for the killers, but he continued to deny that the Klan was active in Boga-
lusa—despite the fact that he was secretly negotiating with Klan leaders. At a
press conference McKeithen said he was conﬁdent that justice would be
served and predicted that Louisiana would be vindicated by guilty verdicts
against the assassins. ‘‘We’re going to catch them. We’re going to catch them
all,’’ he promised. History would prove otherwise. No one was ever convicted
of the murder of O’Neal Moore.
∫
Moore’s death produced a ﬂood of national publicity for the Bogalusa
movement and the Deacons. On 6 June 1965 New York Times readers opened
the Sunday paper to a front-page story on the Deacons, carrying the porten-
tous headline, ‘‘Armed Negro Unit Spreads in South.’’ Only a few months
earlier the Times had characterized the Deacons as merely a local phenome-
non and a movement anomaly. Now it was taking a second look at the
Deacons, acknowledging their growing popularity and the challenge they
posed to entrenched civil rights leadership.
Ω
The Times article contributed greatly to the image of the Deacons as
an expanding political organization that had to be reckoned with. It high-
lighted the defense group’s rapid growth, quoting Earnest Thomas and other
sources as saying that the Deacons had ‘‘50 to 55 chapters’’ in Louisiana,
Mississippi, and Alabama and as many as 15,000 members—though the pa-
per cautioned that the ﬁgures were unreliable and that the Deacons were
primarily concentrated in Louisiana.
∞≠
The story described the Deacons’ activities, including guarding civil rights
workers with weapons and their running gun battles with the Klan. The
Times reporter noted that the Deacons characterized their organization as
law-abiding and, according to Earnest Thomas, ‘‘strictly for defense’’ and
‘‘highly disciplined.’’
∞∞
The article also marked Thomas’s ﬁrst appearance as a national spokes-
person for the Deacons and his ﬁrst opportunity to publicly defend the
group’s self-defense policy within the existing framework of nonviolence.
Yes, civil rights workers willingly took risks on the picket line, Thomas con-
ceded. But hearth and home were another matter. Everyone had the right to
defend the sanctity of the home, even the civil rights worker. An activist
might forego his right of self-defense on the picket line, ‘‘but when he goes to
bed at night he is entitled to rest without worry,’’ said Thomas. ‘‘That’s where
the Deacons come in.’’
∞≤


--- PAGE 143 ---
With a Single Bullet 133
The Times article was skeptical that nonviolence could be so easily recon-
ciled with self-defense. The Deacons, it maintained, raised hard questions
for advocates of nonviolence. ‘‘Should a civil rights organization committed
to nonviolence align itself with the Deacons, and accept their services?’’
core leader Richard Haley answered the question with the same ambiva-
lence toward the Deacons that characterized the other national civil rights
organizations. Though they appreciated the protection, the Deacons vio-
lated the movement’s nonviolent principles and imperiled liberal support.
Haley had chastised Charlie Fenton for working with the Deacons back
in February and when the group formed. A few months later Farmer told
the media that core tolerated the Deacons but hoped to convert them:
‘‘Even in the church you have your sinners: we feel we can demonstrate to
these people with our philosophy of love and nonviolence that there is an-
other way.’’
∞≥
The Times reporter pointed out that core had a close relationship with the
Deacons and seemingly approved of them. Haley admitted the close rela-
tionship but suggested that it was, in part, based on self-interest. ‘‘The dea-
cons made the difference between safety and bad health last summer for
core workers in Jonesboro,’’ he observed. They had ‘‘the effect of lowering
the minimum potential for danger now, which can only encourage people to
participate in protests.’’ For Haley, there was no contradiction between the
Deacons and nonviolence; the Deacons were practicing ‘‘protective non-
violence.’’ And though he worked with the Deacons, Haley remained faithful
to his ﬁrst principles. ‘‘But I still have to believe in my own mind that non-
violence is more effective than even the Deacons.’’
∞∂
Still, glimpses of Haley’s own growing disenchantment with nonviolence
came through in his comments to the Times reporter. The core leader noted
that the nature of the attacks on civil rights workers had changed dramati-
cally in recent months. During the lunch counter sit-ins, white violence was
usually limited to dousing protesters with catsup or shoving them off a stool.
Now the attacks were frequently deadly. ‘‘The nonviolence theory holds that
there is an innate goodness in a man,’’ he explained, ‘‘and that this works on
his conscience while he is battering you on the head.’’ This nonviolent strat-
egy had been effective in focusing national attention on the South and
winning ‘‘sympathetic public opinion’’ in the North, but northern sympathy
was slow to translate into protection—something the Deacons provided.
∞∑
The June 1965 Times story redeﬁned the Deacons as an alternative to the
nonviolent movement and correctly recognized that they were more than a
defense group—they also played a role in changing black political conscious-
ness. ‘‘One aim of the deacons,’’ the article asserted, ‘‘is to dispel an old-


--- PAGE 144 ---
134 With a Single Bullet
Southern white notion that the Negro is docile and will not ﬁght back.’’ ∞∏
It was a stubborn stereotype, and there was solid research supporting
the writer’s claim. A study conducted at the Army War College between the
two world wars showed that the majority of student ofﬁcers believed that
‘‘the negro is docile, tractable, lighthearted, carefree, and good-natured. If
treated unfairly, he is like to become surly and stubborn, though this is
usually a temporary phase.’’
∞π
Shortly after the New York Times article appeared the Deacons landed on
the front page of the Los Angeles Times . In the second week of June, while
Bogalusa reeled from the O’Neal Moore killing, Charlie Sims traveled to Los
Angeles for the Deacons’ ﬁrst serious foray into national fund-raising. There
he found a sympathetic ear in the black community but received a chilly
reception from the local media. Two developments contributed to this turn
of events. First, once the Deacons began to signiﬁcantly expand and recruit
in new areas, they could no longer be dismissed as a marginal phenomenon.
Their rapid growth and increasing media exposure threatened the hege-
mony of traditional civil rights organizations, such as the Southern Christian
Leadership Conference ( sclc), which enjoyed liberal media support. Seg-
ments of the media felt compelled to neutralize the upstart Deacons, who
promised to escalate the violence. Second, there were widespread and well-
justiﬁed fears that the summer of 1965 would be wracked by explosive race
riots. The previous summer had witnessed several small race riots in north-
ern cities, including New York and Chicago. Sitting on the powder keg of
racial turmoil in major urban areas, some media organizations sought to
discredit any group that legitimated violence as a political tool, fearing that
self-defensive violence might ignite a major riot.
Los Angeles was a smoldering ﬁre of racial discontent in June 1965, when
Charlie Sims arrived in the city for the ﬁrst leg of his California fund-raising
trip. The Los Angeles Times  published two articles on the Deacons during
Sims’s visit. The front page of the 13 June Sunday paper carried the sensa-
tional headline, ‘‘Negro ‘Deacons’ Claim They Have Machine Guns, Gre-
nades for ‘War.’ ’’ The lead paragraph reported on a secret meeting in which
the Deacons claimed to have ‘‘machine guns and grenades for use in racial
warfare,’’ and the Deacons made little effort to deny the allegation. ‘‘You
don’t tell your opponents what you are doing in any kind of conﬂict,’’ Bob
Hicks told the Los Angeles Times.
∞∫
The 13 June story relied heavily on a highly negative fbi report on the ﬁrst
two Deacons meetings conducted in Bogalusa in February. Apparently an
informant had surreptitiously tape-recorded the meetings and the resulting
information was widely disseminated to the media in fbi memorandums. In


--- PAGE 145 ---
With a Single Bullet 135
one meeting, Earnest Thomas and Frederick Kirkpatrick claimed to have
access to grenades and automatic ﬁrearms. At a second meeting, Bob Hicks
allegedly urged participants to forcibly obstruct police from making illegal
arrests. ‘‘No white person will be allowed in a Negro area at night—salesman
or anybody,’’ Hicks was quoted as saying in the meeting.
∞Ω
The talk about grenades and automatic weapon arsenals had been noth-
ing more than boasts and exaggerations. The Deacons were not preparing
for an apocalyptic race war, as the Los Angeles Times  piece insinuated. But
the hyperbole was grist for the mill. The damaging fbi allegations found
their way not only into that particular article, but they also became a main-
stay for negative media coverage in the months that followed. Despite their
efforts to portray themselves as part of the nonviolent movement, the Dea-
cons were depicted by the Los Angeles Times as a potentially violent organiza-
tion masquerading as a self-defense group. ‘‘The Deacons insist their pur-
pose is only defensive,’’ huffed the newspaper, ‘‘however at both February
meetings they talked of preventing whites from going into Negro residential
areas at night’’ and encouraged ‘‘armed confrontation with policemen when
negroes are arrested.’’
≤≠
The paper also highlighted Kirkpatrick’s comments quoted in the fbi
memorandum urging blacks to buy high-powered riﬂes and ammunition
and claiming that he carried more than one hundred rounds of ammunition.
‘‘It takes violent blacks to combat these violent whites,’’ Kirkpatrick report-
edly said. ‘‘We’re gonna be ready for ’em. We’re gonna have to be ready
to survive.’’
≤∞
The story was so critical of the Deacons that readers might have rea-
sonably concluded that the Deacons were more of a threat to peace than the
Ku Klux Klan. Indeed, it failed to mention the Klan carnage visited upon
blacks in Bogalusa, ranging from beatings to the recent murder of Deputy
O’Neal Moore. The Klan had all but disappeared from the pages of the Los
Angeles Times. But if readers were lulled into believing that the Deacons, not
the segregationists, were the source of violence in the South, at least one
quotation may have brought them to their senses. ‘‘My men are watching
them closely,’’ growled Bogalusa Police Chief Claxton Knight. ‘‘If one of them
makes the wrong move he’s gonna get his head blown off.’’
≤≤
The Los Angeles Times resisted the Deacons’ efforts to portray themselves
as an auxiliary to the nonviolent movement and instead deﬁned them as
part of an emerging ‘‘militant’’ movement. Like the New York Times , the
Los Angeles paper recognized that the Deacons’ philosophy was inherently
counterposed to nonviolence, and that the paramilitary group was part of a
growing revolt against the established civil rights leadership. ‘‘The rising


--- PAGE 146 ---
136 With a Single Bullet
militancy of the Deacons,’’ noted the Los Angeles Times, ‘‘and the expansion
of the movement is a new element in the civil rights movement which federal
and state ofﬁcials view with concern.’’
≤≥
This harsh treatment of the Deacons may have been, in part, a reaction to
Sims’s hint that they might organize a chapter in Los Angeles. Since the
Deacons’ primary focus had been on the Klan, what conceivable role could
they play in California? asked the  Times. ‘‘Man, there’s police brutality and
people with that white supremacy stuff everywhere,’’ replied Sims.
≤∂
Sims’s comments on police brutality would certainly resonate with north-
ern blacks. But were the Deacons prepared to change their emphasis from
Klan violence to police violence? Sims was probably thinking aloud in the
interview and had not given serious thought to the implications of such a
strategic shift. Clearly the Deacons’ leadership was not of one mind. Inter-
viewed by telephone in Bogalusa, Bob Hicks demurred on the prospect of a
Los Angeles chapter. ‘‘They got problems out there just like everywhere
else,’’ admitted Hicks, ‘‘but nobody’s shooting at anybody in Los Angeles.’’
≤∑
The following day the Los Angeles Times followed up with a second critical
article entitled ‘‘Deacons Chief Defends Aims on Visit to L.A.: Use of Arms
Necessary Because of Lack of Justice for Negro in South, He Says.’’ The
Deacons had ‘‘amassed machine guns and grenades and riﬂes for any even-
tuality,’’ reported Paul Weeks in the unﬂattering proﬁle. Sims argued that
the Deacons resorted to weapons only because law enforcement refused to
protect blacks in the South. The reporter was not convinced. ‘‘But federal
and state authorities are worried,’’ he warned. ‘‘The Deacons, they say, are
playing with matches in a powder magazine. Regardless of his words, how
can Sims or his associate leaders ward off an explosion when mob passions
ﬂare?’’
≤∏
There was some justiﬁcation for the media’s skepticism about the Dea-
cons’ commitment to purely defensive violence. Sims was tailoring his mes-
sage to his audience, and the following day he struck a far more militant
pose when he appeared on black journalist Louis Lomax’s television show in
Los Angeles. Now speaking to a sympathetic black studio audience, Sims
dropped all pretense of Gandhian nonviolence. In the event of future trouble
in Bogalusa, he declared, ‘‘blood would be ﬂowing down the streets like
water.’’ The threat received wild applause.
≤π
The scathing rebuke of the Los Angeles Times  set the pattern for future
media attacks on the Deacons. The Deacons’ detractors would argue that the
self-defense group was taking the law into its own hands—that the Deacons
were the black counterpart of the Klan. Evoking images of irresponsible


--- PAGE 147 ---
With a Single Bullet 137
vigilantes and disruptive provocateurs, the Times coverage was the begin-
ning of media efforts to discredit the Deacons as an extremist ‘‘Negro KKK.’’
Although there was an obvious moral chasm between the actions of the
Klan and the Deacons, many white journalists in 1965 made no ethical dis-
tinction between offensive and defensive violence. They feared that black
retaliation against the Klan or the police would only escalate the violence
and lead to bloody civil disorder. Anxious about any efforts to arm blacks,
large segments of the white media, particularly local news outlets, turned a
deaf ear to arguments in support of self-defense.
Sims’s media coverage in Los Angeles began to snowball. He caught the
attention of Life magazine columnist Shana Alexander, who later arranged
interviews with Sims and a young white civil rights worker who had been
organizing in Bogalusa in the spring. The liberal columnist approached the
Deacons with a mixture of trepidation and grudging admiration. Had non-
violence run its course? asked Alexander. Was it a luxury reserved for lib-
erals observing the movement at a safe distance? ‘‘Both interviews strength-
ened my conviction that nonviolence must be the moral keystone of the civil
rights movement,’’ wrote Alexander. But the terrifying accounts of Klan vio-
lence in Bogalusa made her realize ‘‘that one’s feeling about nonviolence are
inﬂuenced more by geography and circumstance than by moral principle.’’
≤∫
Alexander’s article underscored the martial spirit of the Deacons, charac-
terizing them as ‘‘armed Negro vigilantes’’ led by a ‘‘warlike Deacon chief-
tain. . . . The Deacons say they have grenades and machine guns . . . and
that they will not hesitate to use their entire arsenal if necessary,’’ noted
Alexander—converting the fbi’s allegation into a fact. ‘‘Such militancy on
the part of southern Negroes is so utterly without precedent that many
people don’t know what to make of the Deacons.’’ Were they truly ‘‘freedom
ﬁghters’’ or, as had been rumored, ‘‘protection racketeers’’ or ‘‘Mao-inspired
terrorist conspirators.’’
≤Ω
Sims, with characteristic savvy, cast himself as a reluctant apostate of
nonviolence. ‘‘I don’t approve of the Deacons myself,’’ Sims mockingly con-
fessed, ‘‘but we have no choice.’’ And if Alexander lived in Bogalusa, she
would not have a choice either. ‘‘Visit Bogalusa, and you will look for me,’’
chastened Sims.
≥≠
Sims punctuated his argument with his trademark bluntness. He sug-
gested that the three civil rights workers murdered in Philadelphia, Mis-
sissippi, in 1964 were victims of nonviolence as well as of the Klan. ‘‘If we’d
had the Deacons there, three more men would be alive in Mississippi today,’’
Sims told Alexander. ‘‘Or else a lot more would be dead.’’
≥∞


--- PAGE 148 ---
138 With a Single Bullet
The Sims interview left the columnist convinced of the necessity of armed
self-defense in the South. ‘‘If I ever have to go to Bogalusa,’’ she concluded, ‘‘I
should be very glad to have his [Sims] protection, despite the fact that where
brave men like Sims really belong is not in the Deacons but in the ranks of
the Bogalusa police department.’’
≥≤
Jet magazine covered the Los Angeles visit as well, bringing the story to
millions of African Americans. Black media like Jet played a crucial role in
the movement. In many rural areas blacks did not have television and even
radio signals were weak. Local white media generally ignored the move-
ment; some local blacks did not even know about civil rights protests in their
own region. For many blacks, the well-worn copies of Jet that were passed
around in African American shops and businesses were the only source of
information about the movement. The Jet story on Sims highlighted the
conﬂict between the Deacons and the nonviolent movement. Jet had a difﬁ-
cult time ﬁnding civil rights leaders in Los Angeles—far removed from the
Klan—who would speak favorably of the Deacons. Don Smith, president of
the Los Angeles chapter of core, said that ‘‘this may be a necessary part of
the Negro revolution, but philosophically I am opposed to all forms of vio-
lence, no matter who preaches it.’’ H. Hartford Brookins, president of the
United Civil Rights Committee was equally brusque: ‘‘I’m unconditionally
opposed to their methods and what must be the end of their methods.’’ The
Reverend Thomas Kilgore, chairman of the Western Christian Leadership
Conference, joined in condemning the Deacons: ‘‘I disapprove of keeping
civil rights workers alive with guns. The non-violent approach has brought
pressure to bear on those elements which discriminate. The Bogalusa move-
ment, under the Deacons—a misnomer—represents a danger to 20 million
Negroes.’’ Sims had little patience with his critics comfortably ensconced in
California: ‘‘I wonder if those men think that I risk losing my life for kicks?’’
he asked contemptuously.
≥≥
Sims’s trip to Los Angeles had helped generate tremendous national pub-
licity for the Deacons throughout June, but soon the exigencies of organiz-
ing on the front lines brought him back to Bogalusa. There the Voters League
was opening a new front with a legal strategy designed to force local author-
ities to uphold the law. On 25 June core attorney Nils Douglas ﬁled Hicks v.
Knight in federal court in an attempt to compel law enforcement ofﬁcials
to protect the First Amendment rights of civil rights activists. The suit re-
quested $425,000 in damages from Police Chief Knight and other law en-
forcement ofﬁcials for brutality and harassment of civil rights protesters. In
addition, it called for a restraining order to force local and state ofﬁcials to
end their attacks, harassment, and arrests of black demonstrators—and to


--- PAGE 149 ---
With a Single Bullet 139
protect the demonstrators from Klan and civilian attacks as well. Filed on
behalf of eleven Bogalusa civil rights activists, including Deacons vice presi-
dent Sam Barnes and several other Deacons, the suit also asked the court to
end racial discrimination and segregation in the Washington Parish Jail and
to reopen city parks without discrimination. The legal action listed thirty
allegations of brutality, harassment, interference, and failure of ofﬁcers to
protect civil rights workers.
≥∂
Testimony on the suit began the following Monday, 28 June, in Judge
Herbert W. Christenberry’s court in New Orleans. It was the ﬁrst thorough
public airing of police abuse and misconduct in Bogalusa. Activists and Dea-
con members testiﬁed in vivid detail about the wild mob attacks at Cassidy
Park, the police beatings of Deacons like Barnes and Fletcher Anderson, and
the reports of hooded deputies at City Hall. The defendants countered with
testimony from a series of law enforcement ofﬁcials who claimed to have
seen no abuse. fbi agent Frank Sass took the stand and swore that he had
never seen any armed men on Columbia Street, nor had he seen anyone,
police or otherwise, harass or beat picketers. Major Tom Bradley of the state
police claimed that in his months in Bogalusa he never saw any harassment
of demonstrators; indeed, he had never seen a white person even curse a
demonstrator. The normally staid Judge Christenberry struggled to contain
his skepticism. ‘‘You can hear all right?’’ Christenberry asked the ofﬁcer.
≥∑
The hearings had sent the Deacons into a ﬂurry of activity. Anonymous
telephone calls were made to the home of Bob Hicks threatening to kill him
and anyone else who testiﬁed at the hearing. The Deacons tightened security
measures and escorted witnesses for the plaintiffs to and from court. On
the evening of 28 June, Fletcher Anderson returned home after spending the
day testifying. Around midnight six white men approached his house and
pounded on the door, identifying themselves as policemen. Anderson re-
fused to open the door. Suddenly six shots were ﬁred from outside the house.
When Anderson called the police department to report the shooting, he was
told that ‘‘this is what happens to you when you go up against the police
department.’’
≥∏
During the Christenberry hearings startling news leaked out that, after
a two-month moratorium on mass marches, the Voters League and core
planned to step up their campaign with a bold series of seven marches in
seven days. Beginning on 7 July each march would be led by a major civil
rights leader, including James Farmer, Dick Gregory, Harry Belafonte, Elton
Cox, and James Bevel. Rumors swept Bogalusa that core was calling in
hundreds of volunteers from around the country to participate. It appeared
that Bogalusa would become the Selma of Louisiana. Adding to the anticipa-


--- PAGE 150 ---
140 With a Single Bullet
tion were the events that transpired at core’s national convention in Dur-
ham, North Carolina, held the weekend of 4 July. At that conference core
openly debated its policy on nonviolence—a measure of the changes that the
Deacons were forcing in the movement. While remaining true to its paciﬁst
principles and declining to alter its policy on nonviolence for its own mem-
bers and activities, core passed a resolution to accept Deacon protection
wherever offered. Earnest Thomas, representing the Deacons at the confer-
ence, declared that the era of nonviolence was over. ‘‘We stopped the whip-
pings,’’ he told the cheering delegates. He added a blunt warning to the Ku
Klux Klan: ‘‘All that hell you raising is going to come to a screeching halt.’’
≥π
In the days preceding the planned marches, segregationists staged an-
other rally in Bogalusa, this time attracting a crowd of 4,500. The rally
featured arch-racist General Edwin Walker, who, in another ironic link to
Louisiana, had narrowly escaped being assassinated by Lee Harvey Oswald
the previous year in Dallas. During the rally, a gang of whites attacked and
beat two East Indian students visiting Bogalusa when they were mistaken for
African Americans. Governor McKeithen later brushed off the attack on
the students. ‘‘You’re going to have some there who are going to want to
hurt somebody,’’ said McKeithen. ‘‘I’m just happy that something worse did
not occur.’’
≥∫
Tension grew as the ﬁrst march in the series drew near. It would be the
ﬁrst march since the murder of O’Neal Moore and the ﬁling of Hicks v.
Knight. The Deacons prepared feverishly despite police harassment. A few
days before the demonstration, state police arrested Sims for speeding fol-
lowing a harrowing high-speed chase in which the Deacons leader tried
to elude Deputy Vertrees Adams. On 7 July approximately 350 protesters,
mostly teenagers, began the march to City Hall in a drenching thunder-
shower. core organizers were disappointed that adults failed to attend, and
their frustration began to show. ‘‘ core is just wasting money here,’’ com-
plained Isaac Reynolds, a core ﬁeld secretary. White bystanders honked
their horns to drown out the freedom songs, but otherwise the march made
it without serious incident to City Hall. There Voters League leaders pre-
sented a new list of demands, including that Crown-Zellerbach hire black
women, make promotions based on seniority, and dismiss employees that
committed violence. The league also asked the city to dismiss outstanding
charges against demonstrators, require public establishments to desegre-
gate, and compel merchants to initiate fair hiring policies.
≥Ω
The Deacons then prepared for the second march of the series scheduled
for the next day, 8 July. Henry Austin and Milton Johnson were assigned to
guard the rear of the march in A. Z. Young’s car. The pair—Austin at twenty-


--- PAGE 151 ---
With a Single Bullet 141
one and Johnson at twenty-six—were younger than most Deacons. Austin
was unquestionably one of the brightest and best-educated Deacons. Origi-
nally from New Orleans, he had served in the air force, where he took a few
college classes. Articulate and personable, Austin made a good living selling
small burial insurance policies. He wore a suit and tie when he made his
rounds on Friday night to collect the modest weekly premiums—before the
paychecks disappeared. Austin had been O’Neal Moore’s insurance man and
knew Moore well. The two had frequently watched football games together.
Manhood and self-respect were the center of Austin’s attraction for the Dea-
cons. ‘‘The Negro in the South has been stripped of his manhood,’’ Austin
told an interviewer in 1965. ‘‘No respect for him as a man when he’s picked
up by the police force. The white man down the street doesn’t respect him.’’
But with the Deacons, the black man has ‘‘found a way at last to protect
himself, to make himself feel like a man. And this is only human nature. To
want to be a man if you’re a man.’’
∂≠
Austin’s talents, however, were marred by a volatile temper. Bob Hicks
liked the bright young man but considered him a ‘‘hot head’’ who ‘‘couldn’t
control his emotions.’’ While in the air force, Austin had stabbed a white
soldier during an altercation in which the white man had called him a
‘‘nigger.’’ Austin spent two years in prison for the crime. It may have been
Austin’s temper combined with his youth that led Charlie Sims to initially
reject his application to the Deacons. Eventually Sims succumbed to Austin’s
persistent requests.
∂∞
The 8 July march wound its way to City Hall without any signiﬁcant
problems. But as the marchers began the return route, it became evident to
Austin that the police were losing control of the white hecklers who lined the
streets. The white mob was throwing rocks at Austin and Johnson and jump-
ing on their car. Austin told Johnson to roll up the windows and lock the
doors. Suddenly a piece of brick soared from the crowd and struck Hattie
Mae Hill, a black teenager. Some volunteers from the Medical Rights Com-
mittee rushed to her aid and attempted to move her into a station wagon.
The white mob surrounded the frightened girl and began hitting her and
tearing her clothes. Austin told Johnson to get out and bring her back to
their car. Johnson leaped from the vehicle and managed to rescue the girl
and throw her into the back seat. Now the mob turned on Johnson, pinning
him against the driver’s side door and preventing his escape. Austin grabbed
his .38 caliber pistol, shoved open the driver’s door and stepped in front of
Johnson to face the angry mob. ‘‘I have a gun!’’ he shouted, but his voice
could barely be heard over the din of the crowd. When he ﬁred a warning
shot into the air, the mob continued to advance. Austin took aim and ﬁred


--- PAGE 152 ---
142 With a Single Bullet
three shots into the chest of one of the white attackers, Alton Crowe. The
tormenters recoiled in shock. They stared speechless at the black man hold-
ing the pistol.
∂≤
Austin knew that the police would be there in seconds. He calmly threw
the gun on the car seat and placed his hands above his head to show that he
was unarmed. The police arrived and handcuffed Austin and placed him
across the trunk of the car as the white mob began to howl. As Austin stood
handcuffed, a wiry old white woman sprang from the onlookers and began
shrieking, ‘‘They killed a white man. Kill the niggers!’’
∂≥
Austin was in imminent peril of being lynched. Governor McKeithen ar-
ranged for him to be transferred to a jail in nearby Slidell, but the Bogalusa
police panicked at the thought of moving the prisoner. The detective as-
signed to escort him demanded a machine gun for his car, and the police
deployed several decoy patrol cars from the Bogalusa jail to mislead the
angry mob. An ofﬁcer tossed Austin into a patrol car and shouted, ‘‘Nigger,
lay down in the back seat.’’
∂∂
Austin made it safely to the Slidell jail. In New Orleans Alton Crowe, the
young white man Austin had shot, lay on an operating table ﬁghting for his
life. One bullet had missed his heart by inches. Austin had not intended to
kill Crowe; he had aimed for his midriff, but the pistol jerked upward at the
last moment. But his intentions were irrelevant given the circumstances. ‘‘If
that man dies,’’ Austin told himself while sitting in jail, ‘‘they’re damn sure
going to electrocute your ass.’’
∂∑
Austin knew that he had violated the time-honored racial code of conduct
that prohibited black men from collectively defending others from violence.
Since the days of slavery, only plantation masters—or their modern-day
counterparts, the police—had that prerogative. Henry Austin had shattered
the code with the ﬂash of a muzzle. The Alton Crowe shooting marked an
unheralded but signiﬁcant turning point in the black freedom movement. It
was the ﬁrst time in the modern civil rights struggle that a black organiza-
tion had used lethal force to protect civil rights marchers. The incident
ultimately helped convince the federal government to change its civil rights
legal strategy in the South. The shooting signaled that blacks were prepared
to use deadly force if Washington failed to protect their constitutional right
of free speech: ‘‘It was no longer a situation where they could take advantage
of black people with impunity,’’ said Austin thirty years later.
∂∏
Initially, A. Z. Young and Charlie Sims denied that Austin and John-
son were Deacons, hoping to distance the Voters League and the Deacons
from the shooting. But their denials did not last long. It soon became clear
that most of the black community regarded Austin as a hero. After Sims


--- PAGE 153 ---
With a Single Bullet 143
bailed out the young Deacon (Alton Crowe survived the shooting), Austin re-
turned to a warm welcome in Bogalusa. Men shook his hand and bought him
drinks. Elderly women greeted him affectionately on the street and pressed a
few dollar bills into his hand. The Crowe shooting did no damage to the
Deacons’ standing in the black community. The New York Times  reported
that at a mass rally the day after the shooting, Young introduced Sims and
four hundred young black people ‘‘leaped to their feet in a delirious ovation.’’
The night before, Sims had received wild applause at a rally when—going
well beyond defensive violence—he issued a bold warning to racist vigilantes
who had threatened to kill Young. ‘‘This I say to you: If someone is lucky
enough to get past me to get to Mr. Young, then you will have four or ﬁve
hundred funerals to go to.’’
∂π
The talk of white funerals infuriated the governor. In the wake of the
Crowe shooting, McKeithen pursued a ‘‘plague on both your houses’’ strat-
egy toward the Deacons and the Klan. He condemned both the violent rac-
ists and the civil rights groups as equally responsible for the Bogalusa crisis.
But McKeithen reserved his harshest criticism for the Deacons and failed to
even mention the Klan by name. The governor castigated Young and Sims as
‘‘cowards’’ and ‘‘trash’’ and declared that ‘‘no decent negroes’’ were par-
ticipating in the civil rights marches.
∂∫ McKeithen’s appeasement of the Klan
was the rule rather than the exception for white Louisiana politicians. A
subsequent investigation of the Klan conducted by the Louisiana Joint Legis-
lative Committee on Un-American Activities issued a ﬁnal report that lik-
ened Klan secrecy and intrigue to the ‘‘Halloween spirit that is common to
most Americans.’’
∂Ω
In the days to follow, the Klan reacted to the Crowe shooting by denying
the obvious. For a black man to shoot a white man in broad daylight and live
to tell about it was simply inconceivable to the robed terrorists. So they
pretended that nothing had changed. One Klan leader, speaking to the New
York Times, dismissed the Deacons as cowards, invoking the servile stereo-
type that they were struggling against: ‘‘I don’t care how many guns that
bunch of black Mau Maus has,’’ said the Klansman, ‘‘they don’t have the
prerequisite—guts.’’
∑≠
But it was manifest that the Deacons haunted the Klansmen’s thoughts. At
a huge rally in Crossroads, Louisiana, on 18 July, United Klans of America
leader L. C. McDaniel promised more violence against the Deacons. ‘‘I have
never advocated violence,’’ McDaniel told his audience, ‘‘but where such
trash as the Deacons for Defense are on the scene, I don’t think protecting
our rights could be termed violence.’’
∑∞
Professional racists Connie Lynch and J. B. Stoner whipped up a crowd of


--- PAGE 154 ---
144 With a Single Bullet
thousands at a Bogalusa segregation rally following the Crowe shooting.
Lynch, a California-based extremist, threatened genocidal warfare in Boga-
lusa: ‘‘We’re gonna clean the niggers out of these streets . . . that means
bashing heads or anything else it takes. There’s lots of trees around here and
we don’t mind hangin ’em.’’ J. B. Stoner, erstwhile Imperial Wizard of the
Christian Knights of the Ku Klux Klan, did his best to tap the economic
anxiety of the white paper mill workers. ‘‘Every time a nigger gets a job,’’
Stoner asserted at a rally, ‘‘that’s just one more job that you can’t have.’’
∑≤
Behind the bombast and threats was a profoundly distressed Klan. ‘‘Most
whites do not admit it,’’ wrote the New York Times after the Crowe shooting,
‘‘but the Deacons send a chill down their spines.’’ The truth of this was borne
out in subsequent marches. In the days following the shooting the huge
mobs of whites disappeared. The Crowe shooting—and an increased police
presence—discouraged ordinary whites from attending the Klan’s counter-
demonstrations. The Klan could no longer organize mass attacks on black
demonstrations in Bogalusa. This inability to organize mass direct action
protests reduced the Klan to isolated terror tactics and diminished its inﬂu-
ence over nonafﬁliated segregationists in the mill town.
∑≥
The Crowe shooting also marked a political watershed for the Deacons. It
would be difﬁcult, if not impossible, for the Deacons to continue to reconcile
the group’s armed self-defense with Martin Luther King’s nonviolent strategy.
It was unmistakable that the Deacons were no longer simply exercising the
right to defend hearth and home. Their actions now implied the right to
defend black people exercising their constitutional right to free speech any-
where, even in public spaces. Dr. King moved quickly to dissociate himself
from the Deacons. ‘‘We can’t win our struggle with nonviolence and...  cloak
it under the name of defensive violence,’’ he said in the wake of the shooting.
‘‘The line of demarcation between aggressive and defensive violence is very
slim.’’ For King, a key issue was that armed self-defense jeopardized white
support. ‘‘The Negro must have allies to win his struggle for equality,’’ he
warned. ‘‘And our allies will not surround a violent movement. What protects
us from the Klan is to expose its brutality. We can’t outshoot the Klan. We
would only alienate our allies and lose sympathy for our cause.’’
∑∂
The Crowe shooting posed problems for core as well. core depended on
white liberals for funding, and it was precisely this kind of armed self-
defense that endangered the organization’s political legitimacy and ﬁnancial
support. core was already $250,000 in debt and having difﬁculty raising
money to underwrite its ﬁfteen projects in Louisiana. Writing only days after
the Crowe shooting, nationally syndicated columnist Nicholas Hoffman
pointed out that core’s collaboration with the Deacons could cause them


--- PAGE 155 ---
With a Single Bullet 145
to lose ‘‘the ﬁnancial support of Northern liberal whites who are strongly
moved by the idea of a nonviolent social revolution.’’ But repudiating armed
groups like the Deacons carried a price for national groups as well. ‘‘If they
have nothing to do with local Negroes who arm themselves, the locals will
have nothing to do with them, and the big groups will lose their position of
leadership.’’
∑∑
Richard Haley had wrestled with core’s relationship to the Deacons in a
memorandum to core staff in the South. Haley began by noting that it was
‘‘a generally accepted belief among our La. core workers that some of our
people might have been assaulted or even killed had the Deacons not taken
over the job of protection.’’ But the Deacons raised some thorny questions.
Some members of the media were questioning whether core had remained
faithful to its nonviolent principles. They wanted to know if core supported
the Deacons and worked jointly with them. In addition, the Deacons had
asked to use core automobiles and radios and had inquired about securing
loans. It was clear that core needed to establish a ‘‘deﬁnite policy’’ toward
the Deacons to provide guidelines for staff to standardize its public rela-
tions response. Haley conceded that core workers were no longer united
around nonviolence. He identiﬁed several ‘‘schools of thought’’ on nonvio-
lence within core: absolutists, who rejected all forms of violence; those who
regarded nonviolence as only a tactic; those who admired but did not prac-
tice the ‘‘judicious use of violence’’; and proponents of violence.
∑∏
Haley thought that the Deacons’ use of force was comparable to govern-
ment force. The Deacons were merely acting in place of the police; thus core
should ‘‘regard the protective measures of the Deacons on behalf of core as
we would regard any other proper police action.’’ Haley proposed a coopera-
tive and reciprocal working relationship with the Deacons. ‘‘We look to them
to help us in emergencies and in turn, offer to help them in times of crisis.’’
But he wanted to limit the level of joint work. He cautioned against becom-
ing ‘‘involved in the program of any local organization on a permanent basis’’
and warned against planning and recruiting for the Deacons or providing
ﬁnancial support that was ‘‘likely to tie together these two groups’’ and
become damaging to both. ‘‘Thus I view it a necessary part of core policy
that we cooperate with the Deacons as a civic group and, when necessary as
a protective agency,’’ concluded Haley. But core staff would still adhere to
nonviolent principles. ‘‘We are not prepared to violate the basis [ sic] princi-
ples of nonviolence in conﬂict situations.’’
∑π
While core anguished over the problem posed by the Deacons, a new
source of violence was the harbinger of a much more serious challenge to the
movement. The example of the Deacons had stimulated a new combative-


--- PAGE 156 ---
146 With a Single Bullet
ness throughout the African American community. In the days following the
Crowe shooting, young blacks in Bogalusa began to independently retaliate
against white harassment. When two white men jumped a lone black man
near the edge of the black quarters, a group of six blacks attacked the whites
and sent them to the hospital. On another occasion two young whites slowly
drove by a black drive-in and found themselves dodging bullets. On 18 July
four young black men were arrested for shooting at whites in two separate
incidents near Bogalusa. It was a far cry from the summer before, when
whites could invade the black community without fear of retaliation. So
many young people had taken to arming themselves that at one rally James
Farmer told the marchers to ‘‘leave your hardware at home.’’
∑∫
The Deacons were wary of the new ﬁghting spirit. The media frequently
identiﬁed the young culprits involved in these incidents as Deacons, forcing
Charlie Sims to berate the young militants for endangering the movement.
Sims had to issue explicit orders that only the Deacons could carry guns. At a
rally in late July, he gave a stern warning to the ‘‘trigger happy’’ contingent.
‘‘Everything you do, whether you’re a Deacon or not, they call you a Deacon.
We’ve got enough trouble on our hands now without you going across town
carrying guns and stirring up trouble,’’ Sims told the teenagers. ‘‘We’ve got
enough guns to go it without you people.’’
∑Ω
Bogalusa’s descent into chaos sparked a debate on nonviolence in the
national media. ‘‘Race and Violence: More Dixie Negroes Buy Arms to Retali-
ate against White Attacks,’’ was the headline on the front page of the Wall
Street Journal on 12 July 1965, followed by the portentous subheading that
posed the question: ‘‘Non-Violence Coming to End?’’ Fred Zimmerman, who
wrote the article, warned that ‘‘fear is mounting that angry Negroes are
ready to reject the biblical injunction to ‘turn the other cheek’ and embrace
an older, harsher code—an eye for an eye.’’ He noted that bands of ‘‘militant,
heavily armed’’ blacks were forming in small sleepy southern towns and,
unlike mainstream civil rights organizations, they ‘‘are locally led, and they
share an open contempt for the doctrine of nonviolence.’’
∏≠
Armed groups, primarily the Deacons, had spread to six states, reported
Zimmerman, and had alarmed law enforcement and moderates who feared
a ‘‘major bloodletting.’’ He detailed the Deacons’ organizing efforts, repeat-
ing their claim of ﬁfty active chapters centered in Louisiana and the Mis-
sissippi Delta, and stating that new chapters had recently been formed in
northern Florida, South Carolina, North Carolina, and Alabama. ‘‘These
groups are all over the state now,’’ Mississippi activist Charles Evers, brother
of slain civil rights leader Medgar Evers, told Zimmerman, ‘‘and I’m glad
they’re around.’’
∏∞


--- PAGE 157 ---
With a Single Bullet 147
Zimmerman’s source for most of this information was probably the Dea-
cons themselves, although he apparently corroborated some of the claims
through others. Even if the Deacons’ growth was considerably overstated—
and it was—the resulting media image enhanced their standing as impor-
tant opponents of the mainstream civil rights movement. Within just a few
months, the Deacons had evolved from an anonymous guard group into a
symbol of the revolt against nonviolence.
The Wall Street Journal  article touched on the quandary the Deacons
posed to mainstream civil rights groups, speculating that some national
organizations had refused to disavow the Deacons because they feared the
loss of support from local black communities that favored the armed group.
James Farmer of core was quoted as saying that, although core’s demon-
strations were nonviolent, ‘‘I don’t feel that I have any right to tell a Negro
community they don’t have the right to defend the sanctity of their homes.’’
Other civil rights groups interviewed for the story refused to concede any
ground to the Deacons. Paul Anthony, ﬁeld director of the Southern Re-
gional Council (which had spearheaded efforts to steer the movement away
from direct action), was deeply troubled by the Deacons. Anthony warned
that if ‘‘the Deacons really catch hold, it could mean the end of nonviolence
in some areas of the South . . . which could cause a wave of violence with
national repercussions.’’ The Deacons were growing increasingly conﬁdent
in criticizing mainstream civil rights groups. ‘‘We’re going to have a war, I
honestly believe that,’’ Bob Hicks declared. ‘‘But we’re not going to double up
like core people do when we’re attacked.’’
∏≤
Charlie Sims attempted to assuage fears of rampant violence by empha-
sizing the Deacons’ self-discipline and defensive goals. Members were to
only use their weapons to defend themselves, Sims maintained. ‘‘We’re con-
stantly riding all the members all the time about this.’’ Still, the Journal
story indicated apprehension about the Deacons, fearing that defensive
force would provoke more Klan violence. ‘‘It’s true that much of their activity
is, in effect, guard duty,’’ wrote Zimmerman. ‘‘But to Southern law enforce-
ment agencies and to many groups trying to promote integration without
violence—these armed bands are essentially vigilantes posing an increasing
threat of bloodshed.’’
∏≥
Newsweek reporters also descended on Bogalusa in the wake of the Crowe
shooting and published a piece on the ‘‘highly disciplined group of Negro
vigilantes’’ whose ‘‘swift rise’’ and ‘‘spread’’ presented ‘‘nonviolence civil
rights groups with a quandary.’’ The article reprised the stories of the Dea-
cons’ arsenal of automatic weapons and grenades and aptly characterized
their rhetoric as a ‘‘violent repudiation of nonviolent leaders.’’ Firmly lodged


--- PAGE 158 ---
148 With a Single Bullet
in the ‘‘militant’’ camp by the media and their own rhetoric, the Deacons
now found themselves with some unwanted allies. When Newsweek ques-
tioned Charlie Sims about the similarities between the Black Muslims and
the Deacons, the Deacons leader took pains to dissociate his group from the
separatists. ‘‘I despise the Muslims just as much as I do the Ku Klux Klan,’’
Sims protested. ‘‘I don’t believe in either white or black supremacy. I believe
in equality.’’
∏∂
By far, the greatest boost to the Deacons’ popularity in the African Ameri-
can community came one week after the Crowe shooting with the publica-
tion of a major story on the Deacons in Jet magazine. Jet was the most widely
read black weekly digest in America and the principal source of black news
and opinions for much of the black working class. Standard reading fare in
barbershops and beauty salons—the communication centers of the black
community— Jet reached deep into the rural South.
∏∑ Its youthful staff in-
cluded reporters like Larry Still, who was highly sympathetic to militant
groups that were counterposed to the naacp and other mainstream organi-
zations. In its 15 July issue Jet carried a major story based on interviews with
Charlie Sims during his Los Angeles visit the previous month. Louie Robin-
son and Charles Brown wrote the story, featuring a front-cover headline that
read: ‘‘Negro Most Feared by Whites in Louisiana.’’ The story was a virtual
paean to Sims, including his photograph with the glowing caption: ‘‘reﬂects
determination; inward, unswerving courage.’’
∏∏
Sims was at his best in the interview: disarming, unpredictable, and
charming. He had honed his new image as a tough-talking militant. Sporting
bloodshot eyes and his ragged smile, Sims ﬁrst apologized to the reporters
for wearing a suit with a white shirt at the interview. ‘‘This white shirt makes
a good target at night,’’ he observed whimsically. In Bogalusa he wore over-
alls. ‘‘They have nice, big pockets,’’ he added, ‘‘also you can carry your pipe
[gun] and plenty of shells.’’
∏π
Eschewing the white media’s pejorative term of ‘‘vigilantes,’’ Jet described
the Deacons as a ‘‘determined band of heavily armed Negroes who have
vowed to defend themselves with guns from marauding whites who have
terrorized black communities in the South.’’ Sims said that the Deacons
were committed to protecting all leaders of civil rights organizations—even
those who opposed the Deacon’s tactics. ‘‘As long as his face is black and he is
in Bogalusa, we feel his safety is our responsibility.’’
∏∫
Sims related a series of violent incidents, all enlivened with his charac-
teristic embellishments. The Klan had a $1,000 reward on him, he told the
young reporters—an unconﬁrmed claim. He recounted a questionable tale
about capturing Klansmen during the February Klan attack on Steve Miller


--- PAGE 159 ---
With a Single Bullet 149
and Bill Yates. The Deacons leader also recalled an incident in which Claxton
Knight had warned that ‘‘whites were massing nearby to break up the meet-
ing’’ and there was nothing the police could do about it. Sims told Knight,
‘‘Since you brought a message you go back and carry one: Tell them to come
on we’re going to stack ’em up like cross ties.’’
∏Ω
Sims was carefully constructing a new image for the Deacons, something
far more complex than the simple bodyguards they had been only months
before. His tales of daring and courage were intended to convey a picture of
black men upholding black manhood and racial honor. ‘‘They can put me in
jail but they have to let me out one day,’’ Sims told the reporters. ‘‘They can’t
curse and harass me and frighten me. I’m ﬁghting harder now than ever
before because I’ve got something to ﬁght for that the average white man
doesn’t. I’ve never been free before and I want a whole lot of freedom.’’
π≠
Thousands of African Americans read the article in Jet. Calls ﬂooded into
Bogalusa from people offering support and requesting assistance from the
organization. The article led to the formation of several new Deacons chap-
ters, but more important it stimulated a debate on nonviolence in black
communities across the nation—from barbershops to barrooms.
π∞
The Deacons had become a symbol of a sea change in black consciousness.
They were coming to understand that using force was more than just a tactic
to defend the movement; it was a whole different approach to obtaining
freedom. A month earlier Jet had cogently summed up how the Deacons had
forever changed the movement dynamic: ‘‘With deadly guns and bullets and
the nonviolent philosophy living side by side in tense Bogalusa, whites in
that area—perhaps for the ﬁrst time in any Deep South civil rights drive—
have a clear choice of alternatives.’’
π≤ In the coming days events in Bogalusa
would force that choice.


--- PAGE 160 ---
chapter
9
Victory
the alton crowe shooting on 8 July 1965 put local and
state authorities on full alert. Bogalusa city ofﬁcials vainly sought a restrain-
ing order to prevent the Voters League from continuing to march. Governor
McKeithen asked the league to stop the marches and sent an additional 125
state troopers to Bogalusa, raising the total to 325. Meanwhile, the National
States Rights Party launched its own legal attack on the Deacons, delivering
afﬁdavits to Washington Parish charging that Charlie Sims and two other
civil rights leaders were violating Louisiana’s statute forbidding common-
law marriages (Sims was not married to his companion Bernice Harry at the
time). The federal courts also weighed in on the day following the shoot-
ing when Judge Herbert W. Christenberry made a favorable ruling for the
Bogalusa Civic and Voters League in Hicks v. Knight. Christenberry issued a
temporary restraining order that Bogalusa and state ofﬁcials protect civil
rights workers against assaults, harassment, and intimidation. The jurist or-
dered law enforcement to stop the use of unnecessary force and to cease
unlawful arrests, threats of arrest, and prosecutions. He also demanded
that police ofﬁcers not conceal their identity by covering or removing their
badges. There were doubts that the order would be enforced. Christenberry
refused to put any meaningful power behind his injunction when he declined
the Voters League request to appoint a special u.s. commissioner to monitor
compliance. During the hearings he openly mused from the bench that any
injunction he issued would probably not be enforced—nor would it provide
‘‘the physical and moral courage’’ needed by the police to remedy their
behavior. The largely symbolic decision meant that the black movement in
Bogalusa would have to up the political ante if it wanted the Bill of Rights
made a reality for blacks in Louisiana. This was precisely what the Voters
League was planning.
∞
Despite the governor’s entreaties, the league refused to back off and in-


--- PAGE 161 ---
Victory 151
stead announced another march for Sunday, 11 July—the same day that
segregationists had planned to march in Bogalusa. The league promised
additional protests in the future, including a motorcade to the parish seat
of Franklinton. On Sunday, James Farmer led the demonstrators from the
Negro Union Hall to the downtown area. An eerie silence descended as
Farmer walked quietly with his eyes looking straight ahead. The large mobs
of whites that normally lined the streets had disappeared, the memory of
Alton Crowe fresh in their minds. The marchers entered the downtown
shopping district and passed through a subdued crowd of whites. National
Guard helicopters hovered menacingly above the white mob as an army of
several hundred police stood guard armed with machine guns.
≤
McKeithen decided to make another attempt to mediate the conﬂict. On
Monday, 12 July, he sent his ofﬁcial plane to ﬂy Bob Hicks and A. Z. Young to
Baton Rouge. At the Governor’s Mansion McKeithen implored Hicks and
Young to call a thirty-day moratorium on marches—a ‘‘cooling off ’’ period
to renew negotiations. He promised to bring the city back to the negotiat-
ing table and arrange for segregationists Connie Lynch and J. B. Stoner to
leave Bogalusa. Swayed by the governor’s amiable charm—and no doubt
impressed by the vip treatment—Hicks and Young accepted his moratorium
and agreed to present the proposal to the Voters League Executive Board
that night. Following the meeting with McKeithen the two activists issued a
statement saying that they agreed with the governor that ‘‘the Bogalusa
demonstrations are hurting the state and are increasing bitterness between
the races.’’
≥
Hicks and Young may have succumbed to McKeithen’s charm, but the
league’s membership was not so easily seduced. When the compromise
was introduced at a mass meeting later that night at the Ebenezer Bap-
tist Church, cries of ‘‘No, No’’ rang out and the members overwhelmingly
shouted down the moratorium proposal. A somewhat shaken Hicks and
Young adjourned the meeting and went into executive session, where the
Executive Board formally rejected McKeithen’s proposal. McKeithen later
accused Louis Lomax, a black journalist from Los Angeles who had attended
the rally, of turning the league against Hicks and Young by promising to
raise $15,000 to continue the campaign. The governor claimed that the two
league leaders were ‘‘lucky to get out of that hall alive.’’
∂
But Lomax knew only too well that the Voters League and the Dea-
cons were no quislings. ‘‘The genius of Bogalusa is its spontaneity,’’ he told
reporters. ‘‘The civil rights people are indigenously motivated and indige-
nously led.’’ Lomax later caused a stir when he ridiculed the ‘‘Christian
Mothers of Bogalusa,’’ a white segregationist women’s group that had re-


--- PAGE 162 ---
152 Victory
cently staged a protest at the Federal Building in New Orleans. These were
the same ‘‘scrawny white women’’ who went into the black neighborhood
‘‘selling goat meat and string beans,’’ joked Lomax. The barb provoked an
indignant editorial in defense of southern womanhood by the Bogalusa Daily
News, which referred to the segregationist women as ‘‘ﬁne ladies.’’
∑
The next day a determined but frustrated McKeithen ﬂew to Bogalusa for
a second attempt to negotiate a truce, but not before he sought and re-
ceived the blessing of what he called Bogalusa’s ‘‘white conservatives’’—
no doubt the Citizens Council and the Ku Klux Klan. The meeting was held in
a room at the Bogalusa airport, attended by the Voters League Executive
Board, Louis Lomax, city ofﬁcials, representatives of the Community Affairs
Committee, and Deacons leader Charles Sims. At the table the governor
found himself face-to-face with Sims. It was a distasteful experience for Mc-
Keithen, who now had the distinction of being the only governor forced to
negotiate with a black armed self-defense organization. Charlie Sims, the
man with twenty-seven arrests to his name, must have felt a sense of per-
sonal vindication and accomplishment: in a few short months the grisly
brawler had risen from hustling in the streets to negotiating with the Loui-
siana governor.
∏
Little headway was made during the heated meeting. McKeithen turned
down the league’s demand that he hire black state police. Mayor Cutrer was
similarly intractable on the issue of integrating the city police. The Deacons
and the Voters League remained deﬁant and refused to halt the demonstra-
tions. During one angry exchange McKeithen told Sims that he had planned
to have him arrested ‘‘on general principle’’ at the league march on the prior
Sunday. McKeithen told Sims: ‘‘I sent word if you were seen, to arrest you.
You have been bragging you were going to kill people, you were going to
have funerals,’’ referring to Sims’s threat that if A. Z. Young were killed,
white people would have several hundred funerals to attend. McKeithen
warned Sims that he would have him arrested if he made further threats.
Sims was unfazed. The negotiations broke off after an hour and a half, and
McKeithen sulked back to Baton Rouge. ‘‘I don’t know any more that I can do
at this time,’’ asserted the governor at an airport press conference. ‘‘I came
over here to meet with colored people to demonstrate to them that I was
prepared to humble myself as their governor, to listen to their complaints.’’
To his dismay, the Voters League had repaid his magnanimity by talking to
him ‘‘kind of ugly.’’
π
Later in Baton Rouge McKeithen publicly lashed out at the Deacons, an-
nouncing that he had ordered the state police to conﬁscate all weapons
found in cars or on persons in Bogalusa. The conﬁscation order would apply


--- PAGE 163 ---
Victory 153
to both blacks and whites, explained McKeithen, but he left little doubt
about who his target was. ‘‘We’re going to run the Deacons out of business
and anybody else that’s got pistols and riﬂes and shotguns,’’ he declared.
Charlie Sims had, in the past, made clear how he would respond to such an
order. ‘‘I would rather be caught in Bogalusa with concealed weapons,’’ he
would snort, ‘‘than without them.’’
∫
On 14 July Mayor Cutrer announced that the city had drafted an ordinance
to conﬁscate guns in the event of an emergency. The Voters League re-
sponded to the challenge by promptly organizing a march on Wednesday,
14 July, to protest the threatened conﬁscation. It was a protest that Martin
Luther King or any other civil rights leader would have found unimaginable:
a nonviolent march demanding the right to armed self-defense. The march
ended with a spirited, deﬁant rally defending the Deacons. ‘‘If it weren’t for
the Deacons not many of us would be in this church tonight,’’ A. Z. Young
reminded his audience. ‘‘They would have run us all out of town. . . . We got
the lowdowndest white people in Bogalusa than anywhere.’’
Ω
Louis Lomax assailed McKeithen’s duplicity in threatening to disarm the
Deacons while the Klan used guns with impunity. ‘‘They talk about picking
up guns,’’ Lomax told the crowd. ‘‘They didn’t talk about it 100 years ago.
They only talk about it when Charlie Sims has guns. Why didn’t they pick up
guns when the two Negro deputies were shot?’’ Bob Hicks waxed indignant
at the governor’s charge that Lomax had swayed the Voters League to re-
ject the moratorium. ‘‘We are in command. We run this campaign. This is
our town. When the hard ﬁght is over, we have to live in Bogalusa.’’ Hicks
charged that state leaders had created the conditions that called the Dea-
cons into existence. ‘‘Guns are the only protection you have if laws are no
good,’’ he maintained. ‘‘I don’t know if I’d be here today unless I had a gun.’’
It was McKeithen and Cutrer who had created the crisis by abdicating leader-
ship to the Klan, continued Hicks. ‘‘The Governor has no power, the mayor
has no power and if no one has any power everyone should run around
wild.’’ Young summed up the tense, apocalyptic mood of the rally: ‘‘We are
on the verge of civil war.’’
∞≠
The Voters League and the Deacons had pushed the state to the wall. They
were inviting volunteers from around the country to ﬂood into the Bayou
State and make Bogalusa the Selma of Louisiana. McKeithen panicked at the
thought of the Bogalusa crisis sparking a wildﬁre of protests throughout the
state and frantically sought the assistance of moderate black leaders. He
convened a special committee to assess the situation in Bogalusa and head
off further crises. The committee consisted of Dr. Albert W. Dent, president
of Dillard University, Dr. Felton Clark, president of Southern University, and


--- PAGE 164 ---
154 Victory
A. P. Tureaud, attorney for the naacp—old-guard civil rights leaders who, for
the most part, had been superseded by the new militant direct action groups
like the Voters League and the Deacons. Eventually the committee was ex-
panded into a permanent integrated commission, the Louisiana Commission
on Race Relations. The Voters League looked askance at the committee.
core’s Richard Haley would later belittle the commission as a committee ‘‘of
the well-fed to deal with the problem of the hungry.’’
∞∞
By Thursday, 15 July, the crisis had come to a head. Beginning with the
Crowe shooting on 8 July, the league had conducted seven days of relentless
marches. It had deﬁed the Klan and threatened to plunge Bogalusa into a
bloody civil war. People lined up ﬁfteen deep in department stores to buy
weapons. McKeithen had failed to negotiate a truce due to his unwillingness
to concede any of the league’s demands. Now the governor decided to aban-
don the city and turn the crisis over to the federal government. He an-
nounced that he was withdrawing 280 of the 370 state troopers—a dan-
gerous move that in effect handed Bogalusa over to the Ku Klux Klan.
At the same time, McKeithen contacted Vice President Hubert Humphrey
and asked him to intervene in Bogalusa. Initially Humphrey rebuffed the
governor. In the days to follow, Mayor Cutrer and A. Z. Young also sent
telegrams to Washington urgently requesting help, this time addressed to
President Lyndon B. Johnson. Both sides were attempting to draw in the fed-
eral government by using the imminent threat of a civil war in the streets of
Bogalusa—as promised by the Deacons. But the question was much greater
than the resolution of a community race relations dispute. After months of
dodging the issue of southern lawlessness and rule by terror, the challenge
for the president had come to this: Would he reassert the supremacy of the
federal government and restore the u.s. Constitution as the law of the land
in the Deep South? Moreover, would he force local and state governments to
implement the new civil rights laws, enforce the Bill of Rights, and dismantle
the racist terrorist network—rather than rely on an ad hoc deployment of
federalized troops and the u.s. military for enforcement?
The answer came on 15 July, when Johnson announced that he was dis-
patching John Doar, the head of the Justice Department’s Civil Rights Divi-
sion, to Bogalusa to negotiate a compromise to the crisis.
∞≤ At Justice Doar
had been the lead person on voting and civil rights in the South and had
worked closely with civil rights organizations since the beginning of the
movement. By 1965 he had worn out his welcome among many civil rights
activists by maintaining a policy of federal nonintervention. Echoing his
Justice Department’s superiors and the Kennedy administration’s line, Doar
justiﬁed the failure of the federal government to offer protection in the


--- PAGE 165 ---
Victory 155
South by invoking the doctrine of federalism: preserving law and order was
the responsibility of local authorities. Under the policy, the Justice Depart-
ment could not intervene on behalf of activists because the federal govern-
ment lacked jurisdiction to protect civil rights workers or enforce constitu-
tional rights; unless a federal law was broken, Justice could do nothing.
Doar knew better. The Justice Department had at its disposal several laws
enacted during Reconstruction speciﬁcally to protect the rights of citizens
and to rein in Klan terrorists. In addition, the 1957 Civil Rights Act em-
powered the federal government to protect voting rights. Moreover, the
Justice Department always had jurisdiction to protect the rights and liberties
extended in the Bill of Rights—including the right of free expression and the
Fourteenth Amendment’s provisions for equal protection under the law.
Doar had used these laws successfully as early as 1960 to end reprisals
against blacks who had registered to vote in rural Tennessee. In the face of
pervasive and horriﬁc Klan violence during the Freedom Rides of 1962, Doar
also relied on the statutes to obtain a restraining order against the Mont-
gomery police and the Klan to end attacks on the Freedom Riders, though he
did not ﬁle any complaints to enforce the injunction.
∞≥
As the Kennedy administration backed off most of its campaign promises
on civil rights, Doar and the Justice Department became little more than
passive observers to the terror visited upon the movement. It took little
southern political pressure to frighten off Justice when it did gingerly at-
tempt to assert its rightful authority. In 1963, during the highly publicized
police attacks on Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee ( sncc) civil
rights activists in Greenwood, Mississippi, Doar ﬁled a lawsuit to force
Greenwood to permit blacks to ‘‘exercise their constitutional right to assem-
ble for peaceful protest demonstrations and protect them from whites who
might object.’’ When Mississippi’s delegation condemned the action on the
Senate ﬂoor, the Kennedys ducked for cover and ordered Doar to withdraw
the suit. The Kennedys could afford to ignore the injustices and suffering in
Greenwood since the blood was ﬂowing only one way—unlike in Bogalusa.
∞∂
Thelton Henderson, the only black Justice Department investigator in
Mississippi, conﬁrmed the Deacons’ suspicion that only black retaliation
would produce enforcement of the new laws. The department’s concern
‘‘was not necessarily how will we go about enforcing the civil rights laws,’’
said Henderson years later, ‘‘but how much are the blacks going to take
before they strike back, and then we will have to do something.’’
∞∑ From the
Little Rock crisis forward, three presidential administrations avoided a con-
frontation with the South by relying exclusively on federalized troops and
federal law enforcement agencies to enforce civil rights laws and judicial


--- PAGE 166 ---
156 Victory
rulings, rather than compelling local and state agencies to uphold the law
and the Bill of Rights. Without local law enforcement support for rudi-
mentary civil liberties, local African Americans would always lack effective
means to redress their grievances.
∞∏
Now the Deacons forced the confrontation so long avoided. In a memo-
randum to Governor McKeithen (which Vice President Humphrey also re-
viewed), the Community Relations Service ( crs) underscored the pivotal
role of the Deacons in driving the crisis. It was possible for Louisiana to
peacefully settle its racial conﬂicts, the crs told McKeithen, ‘‘But there is
one other unique factor which must be mentioned: no other state has had to
deal with two armed and organized groups. Armed groups of organized
whites are not new, but the Deacons are a ﬁrst’’ and ‘‘the possibility of a
clash between the two armed and determined groups in Louisiana grows
each day.’’
∞π
John Doar clearly had a presidential mandate to take a symbolic stand in
Bogalusa. Doar decided on a two-prong strategy to restore order and enforce
the Civil Rights Act. First, he would force local authorities to uphold civil
liberties and the national law. Second, he would destroy the Klan. To carry
out his plan, Doar ﬁrst had to document violations of Christenberry’s injunc-
tion issued in Hicks v. Knight . He immediately arranged for the Federal
Bureau of Investigation (fbi) to collect the evidence. He did not have to wait
long. In the four short days Doar was in Bogalusa, Klansmen staged a series
of carefully orchestrated assaults against isolated pickets. The smaller guer-
rilla attacks were their only alternative: The white crowds that had sponta-
neously materialized along the march routes had now evaporated in a cloud
of fear. Perhaps drawing a lesson from the Justice Department’s retreat in
Greenwood, the Deacons escalated their threats of retaliatory violence. ‘‘I do
not advocate violence and we are going to do whatever we can to keep down
the civil war in this area,’’ A. Z. Young was quoted as saying in the Bogalusa
Daily News. ‘‘But, if blood is going to be shed, we are going to let it rain down
Columbia Street—all kinds, both black and white. We are not going to send
Negro blood down Columbia Street by itself, that’s for sure.’’
∞∫
Most whites heeded Young’s warning. Only a small group of hard-core
Klansmen remained bold enough to risk attacking the civil rights activists.
The Deacons always had problems protecting picketers, and those difﬁ-
culties were compounded when the demonstration spread to Pine Tree and
La Plaza Shopping Centers located some distance from the Columbia Street
stores. The pickets were also more vulnerable given the reduced state police
presence, which made it easier for the Klan to stage diversionary attacks and


--- PAGE 167 ---
Victory 157
quick guerrilla assaults. Within days the fbi documented and ﬁlmed nu-
merous Klan attacks on pickets and instances of police brutality. Doar per-
sonally watched in horror as the Klan attacked ten pickets at the La Plaza
Shopping Center, pounding them into the pavement as forty state police
stood idly by. When local Bogalusa police ﬁnally arrived, they arrested the
picketers instead of the Klan attackers.
∞Ω
On 16 July the Justice Department began its lethal attack on white re-
sistance in Bogalusa. Doar ﬁled ﬁve federal suits, signed by Attorney General
Nicholas Katzenbach, designed to cripple the segregationist movement and
establish the federal government’s authority. Using the attacks at La Plaza as
evidence, Doar ﬁrst intervened in Hicks v. Knight, asking that the court hold
in criminal and civil contempt Sheriff Arnold Spiers and Police Chief Claxton
Knight for failing to enforce Christenberry’s order and allowing the Klan
attacks to continue. Doar also ﬁled a criminal bill of information against
Ofﬁcer Vertrees Adams, charging him with violating the Hicks order in four
counts of brutality and harassment. By seeking both criminal and civil con-
tempt judgments against the law enforcement ofﬁcers, the Justice Depart-
ment was giving Bogalusa lawmen an ultimatum: enforce the law or face
ﬁnes and jail sentences. Taking aim at the remaining segregated businesses,
Doar additionally ﬁled a civil suit against four Bogalusa merchants to force
them to desegregate and comply with the Civil Rights Act.
≤≠
But the most effective action was Doar’s suit against the Original Knights
of the Ku Klux Klan (okkkk) asking the federal court to enjoin the Klan from
depriving citizens of their constitutional rights through intimidating and
threatening civil rights activists, Washington Parish ofﬁcials, and businesses.
The suit charged that the Klan’s goal was to deprive individuals of their
rights and preserve segregation and white supremacy in Washington Parish.
The suit named thirty-ﬁve defendants, including twenty members of the
Klan and ﬁfteen individuals. Charles Christmas of Amite was identiﬁed as
the okkkk’s principal leader, and Saxon Farmer and Russell Magee were
named as Washington Parish leaders. The suit charged that the group oper-
ated out of the Disabled Veterans Hall near Bogalusa and had committed
twenty speciﬁc acts of intimidation and harassment. The action marked the
ﬁrst time that the Justice Department had purposefully used a federal suit
to destroy the Klan in the civil rights movement era. It would prove a po-
tent weapon.
≤∞
Suddenly Mayor Cutrer was falling all over himself to begin negotiations
with the Voters League. Cutrer hastily took to the airwaves to announce his


--- PAGE 168 ---
158 Victory
support for the league’s right to march and picket and to urge citizens to
simply ignore the protests. Police Commissioner Spiers and Chief Knight ran
large advertisements in the Bogalusa Daily News  calling for people to obey
the law or face arrest. Civic and religious leaders, at Cutrer’s urging, went on
the radio and echoed the call to ignore the protests and return order to the
city. The Daily News mustered the courage to publish an editorial demanding
that the city enforce the law. And the Crown-Zellerbach Corporation began
negotiations with the Voters League to end segregation and discrimination
in the box factory. Even some Klan leaders jumped on the retreating band-
wagon. At a United Klans of America ( uka) rally outside of Bogalusa on 21
July, uka leader Robert Shelton told some four hundred Klansmen to ignore
the civil rights protests. ‘‘Violence is just ammunition for the opposition,’’ he
declared.
≤≤
Business establishments that had refused to integrate suddenly opened
their doors to blacks. On 20 July Deacons ofﬁcer Sam Barnes led successful
tests at La Plaza Restaurant, Redwood Cafe, and Acme Cafe—this time the
police cordially escorted the testers during the tests. In total, activists tested
ﬁve restaurants, all of which complied with the law. By the end of the month
nearly all public establishments were desegregated. Cutrer also arranged for
two blacks to take the Civil Service exam for the police department. They
passed, with the highest scores ever recorded, and promptly integrated the
police force.
≤≥
After seven months of wanton attacks by the Klan, none of the forty
segregationists arrested for crimes had been prosecuted. Now Bogalusa’s
judicial machinery went into motion. City attorney Robert Rester, himself a
secret Klan member, stepped up prosecutions of the white attackers. Not
everything had changed, though. After pleading guilty to assaulting James
Farmer, Klansman Randle Pounds received a paltry $25 ﬁne and a suspended
sentence.
≤∂
The hearings on the Justice Department’s suits began on 26 July, but the
court proceedings were anticlimactic: The Deacons had already triumphed.
They had forced the Yankee government to invade the South once again.
Virtually all of their demands would be met in the coming days. The hear-
ings did, for the ﬁrst time, publicly expose the depth and pattern of ofﬁcial
malfeasance and police abuse in Bogalusa. Judge Christenberry convicted
Knight, Spiers, and one ofﬁcer of civil contempt, and on 30 July he ordered
Knight and Spiers to develop a speciﬁc plan to ensure the protection of civil
rights workers. If they refused to comply, Christenberry promised to proceed
with criminal charges.
≤∑


--- PAGE 169 ---
Victory 159
The effect of the federal offensive was swift and dramatic. Overnight,
Washington had crushed the white supremacist coup in Bogalusa and forced
local authorities to uphold the law—something that the Justice Department
had never before attempted in the modern civil rights movement. In retro-
spect, what is remarkable was how little was required to destroy the Klan and
force local authorities to protect citizens’ rights and liberties. The federal
government did nothing more than threaten city ofﬁcials with modest ﬁnes
and light jail sentences. In the past, the Justice Department had avoided a
showdown with southern law enforcement, fearing that a confrontation
would antagonize the white South and escalate out of control. In 1964 sncc
had suggested to Justice ofﬁcials Burke Marshall and John Doar that they
could stop police brutality if they simply arrested one abusive sheriff. Mar-
shall responded in a nervous voice that the federal government was ‘‘not
going to ﬁght a guerrilla war in Mississippi, and if they arrested a sheriff, they
would have to ﬁght this type of war.’’ As Bogalusa revealed, when the Justice
Department ﬁnally made its move, the ‘‘guerrilla war’’ turned out to be a
tempest in a teapot.
≤∏
With their terrorist wing effectively destroyed, segregationists were re-
duced to peaceful protests to make their case. During the federal court
hearings, white women picketers showed up in front of Doar’s temporary
headquarters at the Bogalusa Post Ofﬁce to protest the Justice Department’s
cooperation with the Deacons. Pickets carried signs demanding that the
Deacons be prosecuted: ‘‘Mr. Doar, You Have Indicted the Ku Klux Klan, How
about the Deacons for Defense?’’ Dorothy McNeese, a Varnado resident and
organizer of the protest, called for an investigation of the Deacons and
assailed Doar as a minion for the paramilitary group. ‘‘We feel that Mr. Doar
came to Bogalusa for one purpose only,’’ McNeese charged, ‘‘and that was to
draw nationwide attention and criticism away from an organization called
the Deacons for Defensive [ sic] Justice.’’
≤π In an ironic reversal of roles,
McNeese formed a white ‘‘women’s civilian patrol’’ of more than three hun-
dred women bent on protecting whites from the Deacons and annoying
picketers. She also announced plans to train members in the ‘‘art of self-
defense.’’
≤∫
Nothing much came of McNeese’s ‘‘White Deacons.’’ By August, marches
and pickets occurred only sporadically. The movement was spent, and nei-
ther civil rights activists nor segregationists could muster much enthusiasm
in the enervating tropical heat of August. Driven underground, the Klan
launched a series of bomb attacks in early August. Two motels in Baton
Rouge were bombed with a single stick of dynamite, including the Lincoln


--- PAGE 170 ---
160 Victory
Motel where Ronnie Moore was staying and the International Motel where a
Canadian civil rights medical team had registered. But even the bombings
could not revive the white mass movement. The Voters League also showed
signs of fatigue. Their marches were losing support, and in desperation the
leadership began pushing for night marches to attract more adults. But the
courts prohibited what would have been an extremely dangerous and un-
manageable form of protest.
≤Ω
Like most catalysts in a radical social movement, the Deacons and the
Voters League were never content with their achievements—which were
substantial. States-Item columnist Alan Katz wrote that Bogalusa had taught
southern whites that racist violence only generated national sympathy and
resulted in federal repression—at the expense of local control. The Bogalusa
civil rights movement had clearly won, said Katz. The city had recognized
the Voters League as the primary bargaining agent for the black community.
The movement had forced the city to repeal its segregation laws, desegre-
gate public accommodations, and concede neighborhood improvements—
including blacktopping streets and installing mercury lights. In addition, the
city was negotiating with the Federal Housing Administration for loans to
construct one hundred low-cost housing units.
≥≠
But Katz recognized an even more signiﬁcant accomplishment for the
Voters League and the Deacons. He quoted a thirteen-year-old Bogalusa girl
who had been harassed and arrested during the Bogalusa campaign. ‘‘My
folk used to be scared of the Ku Klux Klan,’’ said the girl. ‘‘I’m not scared of
them. I’m not afraid of anybody.’’
≥∞
In the wake of the Deacons’ stunning victory in Bogalusa, the nation’s
opinion makers struggled to understand this new phenomenon in the Deep
South. Although there were discrepancies between the Deacons’ media im-
age and their organizational reality, myth is reality in politics. For liberals,
that myth was shaped in large part by the New York Times. On 15 August 1965
Roy Reed, writing for the New York Times Magazine , produced one of the
most extensive and thoughtful stories published on the Deacons. Entitled
‘‘The Deacons, Too, Ride by Night,’’ the lengthy article featured several
prominent photographs of armed Deacons and a steely eyed Charles Sims.
Reed described the Deacons as an ‘‘armed, semisecret, loosely organized
federation’’ that was widely supported and was ‘‘well on their way to com-
munity leadership.’’
≥≤
Reed saw a major strategic difference that underscored the division be-
tween the Deacons and the mainstream civil rights organizations. The divi-
sion, according to Harvard scholar Dr. Thomas Pettigrew, stemmed from the


--- PAGE 171 ---
Victory 161
fact that oppressed communities may choose several paths to liberation,
including to move toward their oppressor to ‘‘seek equality’’—as symbolized
by the naacp and core—or to ‘‘move against the oppressor and ﬁght him.’’
The Deacons had taken the second path. Reed alluded to the inﬂated mem-
bership claims but gave little credence to the ﬁgures or to the reports of a
cache of illegal weapons. Size was unimportant for a symbolic organization
like the Deacons. ‘‘The importance of the Deacons at the moment is not in
their numbers but in their psychological impact on both whites and Ne-
groes.’’ And what was that impact? The Deacons were an intimidating sym-
bol to whites. Their willingness to shoot back had frightened whites and
reduced harassment in Jonesboro, although it had raised racial tension in
Bogalusa. Reed recounted several armed skirmishes between the Deacons
and the Klan, including the shooting of Alton Crowe by Henry Austin one
month earlier. ‘‘Far from dampening the spirit of Bogalusa Negroes, this
foolhardy shooting seemed to stir their passions higher.’’
≥≥
The psychological impact of the Deacons on blacks was equally signiﬁ-
cant. ‘‘Part of the Negro’s task in his struggle for equality is to convince the
nation, and particularly the white south, that he is competitive, that he has
will and backbone,’’ said Reed. To do this, blacks had to overcome the deeply
embedded white stereotype of blacks as ‘‘docile, unaggressive and martially
inferior.’’ In the past blacks had used nonviolence to prove their mettle, to
show that they were ‘‘tough enough to take it and big enough not to hit
back.’’ Now groups like the Deacons in the South and the Muslims in the
North were choosing a new direction. ‘‘They are determined to prove to the
white racists, and perhaps to themselves, that the Negro not only can take it
but that he can also dish it out.’’ The Deacons had inspired pride in the
community and had ‘‘proved to be a natural instrument for building commu-
nity feeling and nourishing the Negro identity.’’ Their strategy demonstrat-
ing that they could ‘‘dish it out’’ had also contributed positively to the new
Negro identity.
Reed, like many other journalists and intellectuals of his time, was trying
to grasp what the Deacons symbolized in the new black male identity. Im-
plicit in his analysis was a connection between physical courage, manhood,
and the New Negro. Also like his counterparts, Reed did not give attention
to how this call to manhood affected gender roles and African American
women in the movement. Only in recent years have scholars begun to ad-
dress this nexus of masculine identity and gender.
≥∂
The growing class tensions within the movement also emerged in the
story. Reed described Charlie Sims as a ‘‘good example of the new non-


--- PAGE 172 ---
162 Victory
middle class Negro leader in the Southern Civil Rights movement.’’ His po-
lice record and streetwise demeanor were no obstacles to leadership. ‘‘In
other times he would have been simply a tough; now he is a hero.’’ Frederick
Kirkpatrick also underscored the Deacons’ resentment of middle-class black
leaders, telling Reed that he was ﬁghting ‘‘Uncle Tom’’ preachers and their
fatalist religious belief that ‘‘all good things come to those who wait.’’ Kirk-
patrick, a minister himself, scoffed at passive religious doctrine, arguing that
‘‘every generation is put here for a purpose, not to lollygag and do nothing.’’
He planned to enlist young men to dig sewer lines in the black community,
and in turn, black residents would be expected to register to vote. ‘‘And if
they don’t?’’ asked Reed. ‘‘We might have to make ’em go,’’ replied Kirk-
patrick bluntly. ‘‘We might have to drag ’em down. You see, they’re holding
back the whole program.’’
≥∑
Reed touched on how core and sncc had quietly cooperated with the
Deacons but noted how Martin Luther King opposed the Deacons’ version of
self-defense. ‘‘The line between defensive violence and aggressive violence is
very thin,’’ King had said in July. ‘‘You get people to thinking in terms of
violence when you have a movement that is built around defensive vio-
lence.’’ King’s criticism of the Deacons was beginning to force the group
into an adversarial relationship with the movement leader. Sims made little
effort to conceal his contempt for King. The Deacons had recently invited a
host of civil rights leaders to Bogalusa, but not King. ‘‘I want everybody here
except Martin Luther King,’’ said Sims. ‘‘If he came and they gun him, I
couldn’t protect him, because he don’t believe in me.’’
≥∏
By the end of the summer of 1965, the Deacons had pushed their way into
the national debate on nonviolence, with major stories in not only the New
York Times , but also the Wall Street Journal , the Los Angeles Times , Life
magazine, Newsweek, and Time. While publications like the New York Times
shaped the image of the Deacons and the controversy on nonviolence for the
white middle class, most blacks learned about the Deacons through black
media like Jet and Ebony (the New Orleans Times-Picayune carried only one
brief story on the Deacons—a disparaging article reporting on the Deacons
leaders’ arrest records).
≥π Jet was widely read by self-taught working-class
intellectuals of the day who strongly inﬂuenced opinion in the African Amer-
ican community. Its coverage of the Deacons was extensive and favorable,
including a cover story in the 15 July 1965 issue with the enticing heading,
‘‘Negro Feared Most by Whites in Louisiana.’’ In September 1965 Ebony, the
leading black monthly magazine, expanded on Jet’s coverage with a lengthy
piece by Hamilton Bims entitled ‘‘Deacons for Defense: Negroes Are Fighting
Back in Bogalusa, Other Towns.’’ The ﬁve-page story captured the excite-


--- PAGE 173 ---
Victory 163
ment generated by the Deacons, identifying them as ‘‘one of the fastest
growing’’ organizations in the civil rights struggle.≥∫
Bims acknowledged that the Deacons’ success was accompanied by con-
troversy and criticism from King and other civil rights leaders. ‘‘For all their
effectiveness, however,’’ he noted, ‘‘the Deacons have become perhaps the
most criticized and feared Negro organization since the Black Muslims.’’ The
Deacons were not the black counterpart of the Klan, as some critics had
suggested. ‘‘I’m glad the Deacons exist,’’ said James Farmer when questioned
about core’s ‘‘strange relationship’’ with the Deacons. ‘‘I know some are
comparing them to the Ku Klux Klan. But how many lynchings have they
committed? The Deacons are not night riders and anyone who likens them
to the Klan is just evading the issue.’’ Not only did Bogalusa’s blacks believe
that the Deacons deterred Klan violence, but with the Watts riot in Los
Angeles fresh in people’s minds, the Deacons now appeared to be a moder-
ate alternative to random violence. ‘‘By giving the job to mature and re-
strained men,’’ Bims argued, ‘‘they discourage Negro hotheads, who other-
wise might trigger a racial bloodbath in the tense city.’’
≥Ω
By the end of the summer of 1965 the media had turned the Deacons into a
symbol of a new approach to black freedom—a challenge to the nonviolent
orthodoxy. The Deacons also came to represent a profound change in the po-
litical consciousness and identity of African American men in the South, one
marked by a self-respect gained by the willingness to use force to secure one’s
rights. They embodied the realization that African American men would
never gain equal status if they denied themselves the rights and prerogatives
of white men; that they would be forever stigmatized as second-class citi-
zens, regardless of their legal status. Laws change behaviors, not attitudes.
As long as whites believed that African Americans were undeserving in-
feriors, they would regard every black advance as a temporary concession.
Black social and economic progress would depend on the goodwill of the
white majority. Real equality required that whites view blacks as intellectual
and moral equals, and this change in attitude could only occur when blacks
acted as equals. Malcolm X summed up this relationship between black self-
image and white perception when he declared, ‘‘You will never get the Ameri-
can white man to accept the so-called Negro as an integrated part of society
until the image of the Negro the white man has is changed, and until the
image that the Negro has of himself has changed.’’ Similar to Malcolm’s
approach, the Deacons’ strategy was intended to establish black men as the
equals of all men; to claim their rightful place in society as fully human,
invested with the same rights, privileges, and prerogatives as whites, and
deserving of the same honor, respect—and fear. ‘‘They ﬁnally found out that


--- PAGE 174 ---
164 Victory
we really are men,’’ said Deacon leader Royan Burris, ‘‘and that we would do
what we said, and that we meant what we said. They found out that when
they ride at night, we ride at night.’’
∂≠
‘‘The Negro in the South is a brand new breed,’’ Charlie Sims told Ebony.
‘‘He’s not the same man he was ten years ago.’’ Buoyed by their spectacu-
lar success in Bogalusa, the Deacons were now poised to take their gospel
of self-defense to the remotest and most forbidding outposts of the Deep
South.
∂∞


--- PAGE 175 ---
chapter
10
Expanding in the Bayou State
meldon acheson and  three other core workers, in-
cluding Archie Hunter, an African American volunteer from Brooklyn, were
leaning against a car when they saw the white man drive down the street,
stop his vehicle, and get out. The four core workers were in the middle of a
black residential neighborhood in Ferriday, Louisiana, one of the most dan-
gerous towns during the civil rights movement. The white man walked di-
rectly over to Mel Acheson and, without warning, began to viciously beat
him. The attacker ignored Hunter, probably assuming that he was a local
black. Hunter stood by and watched helplessly as the man pummeled his
friend. Hunter and the other core workers had taken nonviolent oaths, and
their only choice was to peacefully submit to attack or run. What troubled
Hunter the most, though, was that the attack was taking place in plain view
of the residents. ‘‘And I got very disgusted because the community—we had
about 300 people standing in the streets—and they were just watching,
without doing a thing.’’ Hunter had enough. ‘‘So I got disgusted, and I leaped
up on the car, and I started yelling at the people and . . . screaming at the
people.’’ One of the white core volunteers remembered Hunter telling the
crowd that ‘‘he was proud to be a black man, and he was disgusted with
them, and how could they do that to themselves . . . think so lowly of
themselves as to let this happen in their own community.’’ Finally a small
group of local blacks freed Acheson from his assailant.
∞
Recalling the incident a few weeks later, Hunter was still furious and
frustrated. ‘‘See, the people here, they need someone to shake them out of
their fear for about 10 minutes—and then they just rescind back into it the
level of fear all over again.’’ But Hunter’s exhortations from the car top that
day did not go unheeded. Within thirty minutes of the attack, more than
ﬁve hundred angry blacks gathered. Hunter sensed danger and tried to calm
the mob by leading them in freedom songs. The police soon arrived and—


--- PAGE 176 ---
166 Expanding in the Bayou State
predictably—arrested Hunter and let the white assailant escape. But the
silence had been broken. ‘‘Suddenly several people offered to let us stay with
them,’’ said Acheson. The issue now became one of honor. ‘‘The negro com-
munity feels guilty about letting 2 beatings occur in their neighborhood,’’
reported Acheson, ‘‘so I walk around with my black eye and people can’t get
involved fast enough.’’ In addition, a self-defense group was born overnight
in Ferriday when ‘‘several local guys got their guns and guarded us that night
and plan to continue as long as we’re here.’’ Later that night electrical and
telephone services were cut in the black community, and the Klan ﬁre-
bombed two homes and shot into the home of core sympathizer Martha
Boyd. Boyd was prepared and ﬁred back at the night riders, smashing their
windshield. But the signiﬁcance of the events earlier that day was not lost on
the core staff. ‘‘This is really an index of how demoralized and afraid the
Negro community is,’’ said volunteer Mike Clurman. ‘‘Just one white guy
came walking into the Negro community and started belting the four core
workers.’’
Ferriday was precisely the kind of place that the Deacons for Defense
and Justice were searching for. Word of the Deacons was spreading like
wildﬁre though informal communication networks in the African American
communities—churches, extended families, fraternal organizations—as well
as through activists in core and the Student Nonviolent Coordinating Com-
mittee (sncc) eager to facilitate self-defense measures in their organizing
communities. Charles Sims and Earnest Thomas were soon besieged with
calls for help. The two Deacons leaders began a concerted, full-time effort to
build Deacons chapters throughout the South, with an initial focus on Loui-
siana and Mississippi.
The Deacons’ popularity stemmed from two key factors that fundamen-
tally distinguished them from various black defense groups that preceded
them. First, the Deacons transformed self-defense from a clandestine and
locally restricted activity into a public and wide-ranging organization capa-
ble of challenging the entrenched movement leadership and its creed of non-
violence. By the end of 1965 the Deacons had moved from merely protecting
the movement—as secret, provincial bodyguards for nonviolent groups—to
competing for political legitimacy and seeking the loyalty of the movement
rank and ﬁle. The Deacons were to armed self-defense what the naacp was to
civil rights at its formation in 1908; they transformed individual acts of
deﬁance into collective action for group rights. By moving into the open, the
Deacons forced a national debate on nonviolence in ways that the ad hoc,
clandestine self-defense groups never could have done. ‘‘With the Deacons


--- PAGE 177 ---
Expanding in the Bayou State 167
and their organization,’’ observed Roy Reed of the New York Times , ‘‘the
advocates of armed defense have a symbol and a rallying point.’’≤
Second, to win the hearts and minds of the mass movement, the Deacons
became organizational expansionists. Unlike precursors who were content
with secret local organizing, the Deacons aggressively sought to proliferate
chapters across the South in order to create a powerful mutual defense
network capable of standing up to the Klan. By building a regional alliance,
they overcame the fear that blacks faced insurmountable odds.
‘‘So, see, we’re not going to be in this ﬁght by ourselves,’’ a Mississippi
Deacon once told a group of new recruits. ‘‘You know, like the Klan has a
chapter here, one in the next county, and the next county. And when things
start getting too hot for the Klans around here, they call in more Klansmen.’’
The Deacons offered the same security in regionalism. ‘‘If we get our backs to
the wall, and we’re battling, we will always have the reserves. And they’ll
come in and they’ll battle with us—the same guys, the same Deacons in
Bogalusa and those other places.’’
≥
From 1964 to 1966 the Deacons developed afﬁliates in twenty-one com-
munities, seventeen in the South and four in the North. These afﬁliates
ranged from formal chapters to loosely associated networks of members.
Some afﬁliates lasted only a few months; others endured for several years.
At the height of his organizing, Sims professed to have formed more than
sixty chapters with several thousand members. This claim was an exaggera-
tion if, by chapters, Sims meant fully operational and dues-paying afﬁliates.
The total national membership was approximately 300—far less than the
10,000 number often bandied about by Sims and Earnest Thomas.
∂
Both Sims and Thomas traveled extensively between 1965 and 1966; they
talked with hundreds of potential recruits and may well have established
more chapters than documented. In addition to the twenty-one formal chap-
ters, a thorough review of fbi records, news reports, and interviews with
Deacons yields an additional forty-six cities in which the Deacons had re-
ported afﬁliates, but none of these could be veriﬁed. Always quick to inﬂate
the organization’s size and power, Sims may have stretched the deﬁnition of
a chapter to include any city with Deacon recruits.
∑
Counting heads tells us little about the signiﬁcance and impact of any
organization in the black freedom movement. core, sncc, and the Southern
Christian Leadership Conference (sclc) had only a handful of organizers in
the Deep South, yet they played a central role in uprooting the region’s racial
caste system. Changes in political consciousness and racial identity occur
through a largely symbolic process—as Rosa Parks taught the world. The


--- PAGE 178 ---
168 Expanding in the Bayou State
Deacons had a large symbolic impact not only because they carried guns,
but also because they were remarkably effective organizers and quickly de-
veloped an impressive network of self-defense groups in Louisiana and Mis-
sissippi—in the heart of Klan country.
The Deacons launched their expansion campaign in the summer of 1965,
ﬁrst targeting Louisiana cities where core had been active. The Pelican State
became the site of nine formal chapters: Jonesboro, Bogalusa, New Orleans,
St. Francisville, Minden, Homer, Tallulah, Ferriday, and Grambling (a ru-
mored Varnado chapter was primarily an auxiliary to the Bogalusa chapter).
The Jonesboro chapter aggressively took the lead recruiting in the north-
ern part of the state. In the fall of 1965 Frederick Kirkpatrick, one of the
founders of the Jonesboro Deacons, accepted a position at Grambling Uni-
versity’s physical education department and immediately established a Dea-
cons chapter in the all-black town. There was no signiﬁcant civil rights
movement in Grambling, since it primarily served as home to the 350 uni-
versity faculty and staff members. The Grambling Deacons centered their
activities in nearby Ruston, where civil rights laws were still ﬂouted and
federal courts were forcibly integrating Louisiana Technical College. The
Grambling chapter shuttled civil rights workers to Ruston and neighboring
cities and provided protection for black students integrating schools and
public facilities. Kirkpatrick also organized Grambling students and faculty
into a community organization entitled the ‘‘Great Society Movement.’’ The
organization ﬁled desegregation suits on public accommodations in Ruston,
protested at the Lincoln Parish School Board, agitated for public improve-
ments, picketed seventeen businesses that refused to hire blacks, and orga-
nized voter registration drives.
∏
In neighboring Webster Parish, the small town of Minden had garnered na-
tional attention in 1947, when a white mob lynched a local black man. An
naacp investigation led to a rare federal prosecution. Although the accused
murderers were eventually acquitted by an all-white jury, the unprecedented
Justice Department intervention, over the vociferous protests of J. Edgar
Hoover, had an impact on vigilante terror. The Minden murder was the last
lynching in Louisiana.
π
core workers arrived in Webster Parish in 1964 full of optimism about
developing a project, but it was not long before the parish’s principal black
organization, the Better Citizens and Voters League, frustrated their efforts.
The league was directed by funeral director M. M. Coleman, a conservative
middle-class leader who opposed core’s emphasis on desegregation, anti-
poverty projects, and job discrimination. Coleman favored concentration on
voter registration activities and came to regard core workers as needless


--- PAGE 179 ---
Expanding in the Bayou State 169
intruders. ‘‘There is an extreme caste system in Webster Parish,’’ complained
one core staffer in a memorandum. ‘‘The middle class Negro wants nothing
to do with the lower classes.’’ core was not alone in its assessment of Cole-
man. ‘‘He wasn’t moving,’’ said James Harper, a local activist and Deacons
leader. ‘‘He didn’t want to test the lunch counters. He didn’t want to try to
integrate nothing. He just wanted somebody to sit and talk about it.’’ De-
spite widespread dissatisfaction with Coleman’s accommodationism, core
staffers committed a tactical blunder when they attempted to oust him from
leadership—and four hundred black people walked out of a core meeting.
Eventually core and local militants split off into the Webster Parish United
Christian Freedom Movement (wpucfm) headed by J. D. Hamilton.
∫
In the summer of 1965 core workers informed Earnest Thomas in Jones-
boro that a group of men in Minden wanted to form a Deacons chapter. With
J. D. Hamilton at the helm of the insurgent wpucfm, things were heating up
in Minden. The planned marches and threatened boycott of downtown busi-
nesses critically increased the need for protection.
Ω Hamilton and James
Harper, a twenty-seven-year-old munitions plant worker, traveled to Jones-
boro to meet with Thomas and establish a Minden chapter. Harper was the
son of a lumber mill worker and had served in the National Guard. As a child,
he endured the humiliation of white children who passed by in school buses
throwing things and shrieking racial epithets. ‘‘I felt like things needed to
change,’’ said Harper. ‘‘For especially if I had kids, I didn’t want then to go
through this kind of ﬂack.’’
∞≠
The Klan had little presence in Minden. Still, the lack of police protec-
tion concerned Harper and other activists. The Minden Police Department
boasted two black ofﬁcers, but they were seldom sent to investigate the
harassment of civil rights activists. ‘‘When we called them when we was
being harassed, they always sent a white anyway,’’ said Harper. Nonviolence
was not an option, either. Harper participated in some core demonstrations,
but his notion of manhood conﬂicted with core’s proscription against ﬁght-
ing back. ‘‘Most of the time, I didn’t put myself in a position where it might
come to that,’’ said Harper of nonviolent demonstrations. ‘‘Because I was
going to strike back, and they would blame core on it.’’
∞∞
Harper was impressed with Earnest Thomas at their ﬁrst meeting. Cool,
menacing, and to the point, Thomas told Harper that the lack of police
protection in Minden was no anomaly; in most cities in the South ‘‘you
wasn’t going to receive much protection from the police,’’ so the men in
Minden ‘‘had to protect ourselves.’’ After the meeting Thomas sent Harper
membership cards and literature on the Deacons, and Harper ofﬁcially es-
tablished a chapter, with Fred Kirkpatrick as the liaison from Jonesboro.


--- PAGE 180 ---
170 Expanding in the Bayou State
Thomas instructed Harper that the Deacons were strictly for self-defense
and that he should ‘‘notify the sheriff ’s department, police department, and
fbi’’ in the event of a problem.
∞≤
The Minden chapter began weekly meetings at core’s Freedom House and
other homes, coordinating closely with J. D. Hamilton’s group. There was no
need for patrols in the black community, but the Deacons did guard homes
and escort marches. In contrast to the chapters in Jonesboro and Bogalusa,
the Minden chapter enjoyed a cooperative relationship with local police,
even furnishing them the names and automobile license numbers of individ-
uals who harassed civil rights workers. In the only shooting incident, the
Deacons subsequently guarded the activist’s home and pressured the police
into arresting the three white assailants. Harper believed that the low level
of vigilante terror and police violence could be attributed to Minden’s rela-
tively enlightened white business leaders who reined in the violent racist
element.
∞≥
Comprising young men in their twenties and thirties, the Minden chapter
attracted approximately ﬁfteen members and a much larger group of willing
supporters. Most were military veterans and, because of employment at the
nearby munitions plant, economically independent of the local white elite.
Among the applicants were a number of young zealots attracted to the
romantic image and prestige that the Deacons offered. ‘‘They just wanted to
have a pistol on,’’ recalled Harper with a smile. ‘‘They just wanted to shoot
somebody. Yeah, we had them old radicals.’’ Harper screened out the young
hotheads in preference to military veterans who could ‘‘take an order’’ and
‘‘wouldn’t just ﬁre at random.’’
∞∂
Although the Minden Deacons did not ﬂaunt their weapons as did other
chapters, they were armed just the same. On one occasion Harper was
arrested for carrying a concealed gun while guarding Hamilton. The fbi also
visited Harper at his job and peppered him with questions about illegal
weapons and rumors of planned violent actions. Rather than feel intimi-
dated, Harper found the fbi’s attention encouraging. ‘‘It made me feel a little
better, because it let me know that the word [about the Deacons] was getting
around, that somebody else might be getting a little afraid—on the other
side of town,’’ remembered Harper. ‘‘They ﬁgured that we might be a little
more powerful than we were.’’
∞∑
Indeed, like other chapters, the Minden Deacons played on white fears
and enjoyed inﬂuence well beyond their numbers. In the eyes of whites, the
Deacons chapter was synonymous with militant protest in Minden. They fre-
quently attributed to the Deacons actions for which they had no responsibil-


--- PAGE 181 ---
Expanding in the Bayou State 171
ity. If there was a sit-in or other protest, Harper recalled with amusement,
‘‘you would hear local whites say: ‘They ain’t nothing but the Deacons.’ ’’∞∏
Sometimes the mere presence of the Deacons discouraged racist harass-
ment. In one incident Harper received a report that whites were harassing
blacks at a recently integrated public swimming pool. Harper summoned the
Deacons, and, to his amazement, the word spread quickly; nearly two hun-
dred men arrived on the scene. The men left their cars and began non-
chalantly talking with the white adults around the pool. The show of force
brought a quick end to the harassment. To be on the safe side, the Deacons
sent for sandwiches and drinks and spent the rest of the day leaning against
their cars, watching the children peacefully frolic in the pool.
∞π
The Deacons also captured the attention of a group of seasoned activists in
the town of Homer, just north of Minden, nestled in the pine hills of North
Louisiana, approximately an hour’s drive from Jonesboro. Named after the
poet, Homer took pride in its imposing Greek revival courthouse in the
center of the town square. A chapter of the naacp had existed in the 1940s
and reorganized as the Claiborne Parish Civic League ( cpcl) during the
repression of the 1950s. The cpcl was a weak and timid organization until
January 1965, when a small group of men led by Frederick Lewis infused it
with a new militancy. Lewis was elected president of the cpcl and would
also become the president of the Homer Deacons chapter.
∞∫
Fred Lewis was a pugnacious, short-tempered man from Holsey Stop, a
small settlement outside of Homer. For most of his adult life, he lived on
disability beneﬁts, which provided him with a measure of independence. He
attributed his commitment to the civil rights struggle to a childhood inci-
dent. As a twelve-year-old he had overheard a white man tell his father that
he would not be permitted to vote. Young Lewis adored his father and
thought that there was nothing he could not do—including vote. The in-
justice was etched in his mind forever. ‘‘And at that age, it never did leave
me,’’ recalled Lewis. ‘‘And I vowed right then, at the age of twelve, that if I
ever got a chance, I was going to hit this thing a blow.’’
∞Ω
The black community in Claiborne Parish resembled the independent
industrial working-class communities of Jonesboro and Bogalusa. The lum-
ber industry and a nearby munitions plant provided employment for many of
the rugged descendants of wood cutters and yeoman farmers. Yet segrega-
tion remained entrenched in the spring of 1965. Fear overwhelmed the com-
munity as racist forces torched four black churches and two other buildings
where voter registration had been conducted. In May Fred Kirkpatrick began
to organize in Homer, bringing in core task force members and a busload of


--- PAGE 182 ---
172 Expanding in the Bayou State
students from Jonesboro as reinforcements. At the same time Pam Smith, a
young white student from Massachusetts, arrived to head up a core summer
project in Homer.≤≠
By the end of May Kirkpatrick had organized a Homer chapter of the
Deacons, with Fred Lewis serving as president. Since Lewis also was presi-
dent of the Civic League, the Deacons and the league were virtually indis-
tinguishable. The Deacons chapter had approximately twenty members and
functioned as the armed auxiliary of the Civic League; the two groups often
held joint meetings. Although Lewis was technically the leader of the Homer
Deacons, George Dodd, a munitions worker, served as the principal coordi-
nator for the chapter.
≤∞
The summer of 1965 brought intensiﬁed activity by core in Homer. Pam
Smith worked with local activists to organize mass meetings, desegregation
tests, and nonviolent workshops. The Claiborne Parish Civic League pre-
sented a list of demands to the mayor, school board, and parish jury calling
for desegregation, administrative jobs, and black police. The cpcl also tar-
geted the black middle class, organizing a student march and community
protest that forced school ofﬁcials to dismiss an unpopular black principal at
Mayﬁeld High School. In addition, Lewis’s cpcl had plans to oust ﬁve other
black principals.
≤≤
Initially, local law enforcement ofﬁcials were hostile toward the Homer
Deacons, as demonstrated in an incident with Harvey Malray. Malray, one of
the ﬁrst recruits to the Homer chapter, was a courageous but slightly eccen-
tric young man who prided himself on being a member of an organization
comprising, in his words, ‘‘classy people.’’ On 26 June 1965 Malray had been
guarding a ﬁsh-fry fund-raiser at the Masonic Hall. Around midnight he left
and headed for the Freedom House to receive his new assignment. As he
strolled down the dark road with his shotgun cradled in his arm, a Homer
policeman driving by saw him and screeched to a halt. ‘‘Don’t you know it’s
against the law to be walking up and down a road with a loaded shotgun?’’
asked the ofﬁcer. Malray pulled out his wallet and proudly presented his
Deacons’ membership card—executing the gesture as if the card conferred
obvious and indisputable rights. The ﬂustered ofﬁcer had to think for a
moment, then, with a note of bewilderment, retorted, ‘‘Still, I don’t see any-
thing on here about walking up and down a road with a loaded shotgun!’’
≤≥
Malray managed to avoid arrest that night, but three days later police
arrested him as he stood guard with his shotgun on the porch of the Freedom
House. While in jail Malray refused to cooperate with the fbi, and friends
bailed him out after a few days. Malray persisted in his Deacons’ activities,
guarding marches in Homer and in Jonesboro, where local police brutalized


--- PAGE 183 ---
Expanding in the Bayou State 173
him. Years later when asked why he joined the Deacons, Malray’s explana-
tion was simple: ‘‘I just wanted something to do for the colored man.’’≤∂
Change came slowly in Homer, but eventually public accommodations
opened their doors, the library was desegregated, and the school system
began implementing curriculum reforms. Despite the shaky beginning, rela-
tions between the Deacons and the Homer police improved. One Deacons
leader attributed the new attitude of law enforcement to the federal in-
junction in Bogalusa. ‘‘I think since they did that, in Bogalusa, they’ll be
more careful,’’ he said of the police. ‘‘In the state of Louisiana, in the whole
South.’’
≤∑
On 20 August 1965 the cpcl organized a march to the school board, and,
amazingly, local ofﬁcials asked the Deacons to provide ﬁve members to help
police the march. Lewis did not mince words with city ofﬁcials when he
described what they could expect from the Deacons. ‘‘You know that it’s
nonviolent,’’ Lewis told them, ‘‘but we can get violent.’’
≤∏
More meaningful was the change in black men in Homer. After only seven
months of organizing, the Homer Deacons felt conﬁdent enough to stage a
remarkable night rally. On New Year’s Eve, 1965, approximately ﬁfty Dea-
cons from surrounding chapters in Jonesboro, Minden, and Grambling as-
sembled with local men for a night of celebration in an empty lot owned by
the Reverend T. L. Green, also a Deacon. As midnight drew near, the Dea-
cons hoisted an efﬁgy of a Klansman, marked with a crudely penned sign
saying simply, ‘‘Whitey.’’ The men lighted the Klan efﬁgy and roared with
hoots and laughter as it burned to ashes. The Klan was vanquished into the
smoky night.
≤π
The Homer chapter operated throughout 1965 but appears to have been
fazed out after black ofﬁcers joined the city police force. A ﬁfth Deacons
chapter was established in Tallulah, a tiny cotton town in the northeastern
corner of the state. In May 1965 Gary Craven, a young core task force mem-
ber, reported the ‘‘beginnings of a Deacons of Defense and Justice Chapter in
Tallulah.’’ But the chapter had little to do. Tallulah was a black-majority
community with several black policemen who provided adequate protection.
Moreover, the black community had a formidable and fearless leader, Zelma
Wyche, who was eventually elected chief of police. One core volunteer
found the town’s level of armed defense startling. ‘‘The day before I arrived to
Tallulah, the Ku Klux Klan marched in the city,’’ wrote John L. Gee. ‘‘The Klan
was told by the sheriff of Tallulah, that the Negroes were armed and they
wouldn’t be unarmed.’’ Tallulah blacks ‘‘also marched with their guns.’’
≤∫
The Tallulah chapter soon headed south to Ferriday—where Mel Acheson
and the other core workers had been attacked—to organize a Deacons


--- PAGE 184 ---
174 Expanding in the Bayou State
group. In addition to being one of the most racially despotic towns in the
Deep South, Ferriday was the birthplace of singer Jerry Lee Lewis and his
cousin, television evangelist Jimmy Swaggart. The town’s fame for pop icons
was surpassed only by its notoriety for human rights violations. Racist re-
pression was so severe that no church or fraternal organization would host
civil rights activities. Young civil rights activists were reduced to driving
through the black community with a bullhorn to announce makeshift rallies
held in empty lots.
≤Ω
Ferriday sits across the Mississippi River from Natchez. Although the town
had a 63 percent black majority, whites ruled it; one activist characterized
the sheriff ’s ofﬁce as ‘‘Klan ridden.’’ Klan and police violence besieged the
black community. In February 1965 racists ﬁrebombed two white nightclubs,
the ‘‘Farm House’’ and the ‘‘Silver Dollar Club,’’ in retaliation for hiring black
bands. On 14 December Frank Morris, a Ferriday civil rights leader, was
burned to death at his home in an unsolved arson. One month later night
riders ﬁrebombed a black grocery.
≥≠
‘‘Nearly everyone seemed to be paralyzed by fear of the Ku Klux Klan,’’
wrote Mel Acheson, the young core worker from Tucson. Unable to ﬁnd
lodging in Ferriday’s black community, core workers had to commute from
Alexandria in order to establish a summer project in July 1965. Economic
intimidation was another major source of fear in Ferriday. ‘‘The older people
were afraid, because they had jobs that placed them in white people’s houses
as domestic workers, they were afraid to lose their jobs,’’ said David What-
ley, a local eighteen-year-old activist. ‘‘If they found out that their children
were involved, they gave them an ultimatum: ‘You get them out or you forget
the job.’ ’’
≥∞
core suffered a bizarre reception when two black men beat the ﬁrst white
core staffer who visited Ferriday. Local civil rights leaders suspected that
the two men were acting at the behest of town authorities. Finally, on 13 July
a Ferriday black man offered core one of his rental properties. Three days
later the Klan ﬁrebombed his home, and the man asked the core workers to
move. The Klan then issued an ultimatum that the core task force had to
leave by Saturday, 17 July.
≥≤
Instead of retreating, core forged ahead and organized its ﬁrst meeting
on the day of the Klan’s deadline. core workers met with 30 high school
students, who also expressed interest in forming a Deacons chapter. But by
20 July work came to a standstill because locals were afraid to attend meet-
ings. Then came the beating of Mel Acheson that had so infuriated Archie
Hunter. The incident galvanized the community and led to a spirited rally of
300 people on 21 July. Building on the momentum, core organized a mass


--- PAGE 185 ---
Expanding in the Bayou State 175
meeting on 24 July, which attracted 250 participants, but, to the civil rights
workers’ dismay, almost all of them were children and teenagers. On the
same day core met with 24 teenagers and formed a new mass-organizing
vehicle, the Freedom Ferriday Movement ( ffm). A group of high school
students immediately began to circulate a petition door to door and ob-
tained nearly 800 signatures calling for federal protection of ‘‘their rights,
property, and persons.’’ The petition was sent to Attorney General Nicholas
Katzenbach, along with the warning that citizens would ‘‘take measures to
protect themselves if the federal government did not intervene.’’
≥≥
At the mass meeting on 24 July, a small group of young people decided to
form a Deacons chapter; they were assisted by several core staffers who had
worked with the Deacons in Tallulah, including Artis Ray Dawson. The chap-
ter initially attracted only a few members, who patrolled during rallies and
protected activists’ homes at night.
≥∂
The conditions were so perilous in Ferriday that core staffers welcomed
the presence of the Deacons. ‘‘You should realize, I think, that most people in
core are committed to nonviolence only as a tactic,’’ wrote Mel Acheson.
‘‘For many, it stops at the end of a demonstration or when the day’s work is
thru. Most take self-defense at night for granted (protecting the home, and
all that).’’ The armed guards made the night riders edgy as well. Acheson re-
ported that Klansmen no longer lingered in the black neighborhoods. Their
tactic was to speed by a house and toss ‘‘a badly-made molotov cocktail
(usually a gallon jug of gasoline, burning rag on top)’’ out of the car, then
hastily retreat into the night.
≥∑
The core workers enjoyed modest success through the rest of the sum-
mer, organizing additional marches (though still dominated by children), a
voter registration drive, a boycott of the local movie theater, and several
desegregation tests. Their achievements were remarkable given the age and
inexperience of their front line. At a test of Walgreens lunch counter, one
nervous young participant gulped down his coke and, looking around at his
fellow testers, nervously exclaimed, ‘‘What’s taking you so long. Let’s go!’’
≥∏
Mel Acheson made a sober and honest assessment of core’s summer
project, which ended on 23 August. core had emphasized voter registration
as a ‘‘safe’’ project that would provide experience for the youths and enable
them to move on to desegregation projects, Acheson explained. But he ad-
mitted that the young workers had little interest in voter registration, and
only action could break the grip of fear. ‘‘The negroes are still very much
afraid of the Klan and similar groups, as well as the police,’’ said Acheson.
‘‘But the fear is beginning to channel itself into action instead of the paralysis
we found when we came to Ferriday . . . the determination of the youth, and


--- PAGE 186 ---
176 Expanding in the Bayou State
their example of overcoming fear, has begun to catch hold of their parents
and neighbors.’’≥π
There was still ample reason for fear, however. The Klan renewed its
attacks as soon as core left Ferriday. In September 1965 Klansmen from
Mississippi attacked twelve blacks who were picketing the Arcadia Theater,
and night riders ﬁrebombed two more homes. The Ferriday Deacons were
not much help. Victor Graham had assumed leadership of the chapter, but it
was on shaky ground. Graham was unable to organize regular meetings and
had difﬁculty recruiting a sufﬁcient number of adult men.
≥∫
In the fall of 1965 Robert ‘‘Buck’’ Lewis became president of the Freedom
Ferriday Movement and immediately began to reinvigorate the organiza-
tion. One of the few adults in the ffm, Lewis was also a student at Grambling
University. On 20 November the Klan ﬁrebombed his house; when Lewis,
with a gun at his side, summoned the police, he was arrested for aggravated
assault in a subsequent argument with police. Unfazed by the bombing and
arrest, the ffm leader led 150 marchers the following Sunday to protest the
black Rufus Baptist Church’s refusal to allow the ffm to hold meetings at the
church. The march, targeting the black middle class, reﬂected similar class
ﬁssures in Bogalusa, Jonesboro, and other towns that attracted Deacons
activity. The unwillingness of the local black clergy to aid the movement was
a constant problem for Ferriday activists. ‘‘So far the Ministers have been
making excuses,’’ David Whatley reported to the core regional ofﬁce, ‘‘and
in general [are] just plain scare[d].’’
≥Ω
The Original Knights of the Ku Klux Klan ( okkkk) responded to the ffm
campaign by calling on whites to refuse to bargain with the civil rights
protesters. The okkkk distributed a leaﬂet that chastised government and
business leaders in nearby Natchez for negotiating with blacks. Surprisingly,
the Klan broadsheet argued that violence was ‘‘not the answer’’ since it
would ‘‘only produce more violence’’ (the Justice Department’s successful
suit against the Klan in Bogalusa, no doubt, forced the night riders to curtail
their public threats of violence). Instead, the okkkk advocated forming an
‘‘economic leadership council’’ and urged Ferriday businesses that were ben-
eﬁting from commerce created by the Natchez boycott to ﬁre their black
employees. Blacks needed the white man to survive, asserted the okkkk, but
‘‘no longer does the White man in Concordia Parish need the Negro.’’ In the
world of mechanization, ‘‘our cotton crops, our bean corps [ sic] and other
stable [sic] production can be produced without the Negro hand once touch-
ing it.’’ ‘‘The gain you are making today is going to be the hand that makes
you slave of the very Negro from which You are gaining,’’ the Klan warned.


--- PAGE 187 ---
Expanding in the Bayou State 177
‘‘The all powerful civic and business groups can stop this if they wish to. They
can begin by starting to eliminate the Negro employees now.’’∂≠
Police joined the assault on the struggling Ferriday campaign. On 30 No-
vember Deacons Vernon Smith and Joe Davis were patrolling in their vehicle
around 10:00 p.m. when city police stopped and arrested them for carrying a
shotgun on the back seat and a pistol in the glove compartment. Artis Ray
Dawson, a Deacons leader and former core worker, and David Whatley
went to the jail to inquire about their colleagues, only to be later arrested
themselves.
∂∞
Three days later, on 2 December, racists ﬁred into three buildings in the
black community, including Calhoum’s Grocery and Whatley’s house. On the
evening of 18 December, a gas station owned by Deacon Anthony McRaney
mysteriously burned down following an explosion just after McRaney’s insur-
ance company canceled his insurance. Similar cancellations had occurred in
the case of two black churches that had been active in voter registration in
Ferriday.
∂≤
But the attacks on the Deacons backﬁred, breathing life into the Ferriday
chapter. By December twenty-three members were meeting weekly. They
conducted all-night patrols equipped with walkie-talkies, personal weapons,
and three semiautomatic carbines. A major responsibility was to guard the
young activist David Whatley, as it was rumored that the Klan had offered a
$1,000 reward for his assassination. The Klan had made Whatley a special
target since the fall of 1965, when he single-handedly integrated the lo-
cal white high school. Whatley endured intense harassment at the school.
Teachers left the classroom when he entered. Students screamed racial epi-
thets at him inside the building, placed snakes in his locker, and stuffed his
clothes into the toilet during physical education class. When he played foot-
ball during physical education, his own teammates would tackle him. Travel-
ing to and from school, Whatley had to walk through a gauntlet of Klansmen
who routinely waited outside the building to harass him. In response, the
Deacons posted guards at his home, which also doubled as the core head-
quarters. Whatley wrote the New Orleans core ofﬁce that he clung to life
‘‘only by the grace of God and the tiresome and lonely Gardshifts [ sic] that
we are undergoing every night from six o’clock until six thirty a.m.’’
∂≥
In the early hours of 29 January 1966, Deacons Joseph Davis and Charley
Whatley were standing guard at David Whatley’s house in the cold black
night. The guard shifts lasted for twelve long hours, and by 3:00 a.m. the
Deacons were chilled to the bone and decided to go inside the house to
warm themselves. Within a few minutes, two cars quietly pulled in front of


--- PAGE 188 ---
178 Expanding in the Bayou State
Whatley’s home. A white man exited one of the cars, lighted the fuse of a
dynamite bomb, and tossed it at the house. Joseph Davis heard the sus-
picious sounds outside and rushed to the door, catching a glimpse of the
ﬂeeing bomber. He ﬁred off a round from a .22 caliber pistol and then
grabbed a shotgun and ﬁred a second round at the ﬂeeing cars. Seconds
later the dynamite bomb exploded underneath the bedroom window where
David Whatley and another core worker were sleeping. The two young men
miraculously survived the bombing unscathed; the ﬁrst stick of dynamite
had ignited prematurely and had blown the fuse off the second stick, reduc-
ing the impact of the explosion.
∂∂
By February 1966 the Ferriday Deacons’ chapter slipped into inactivity.
But the Klan was not through. On 16 March it held an open rally, and in May
it burned several crosses, including one near Deacon Anthony McRaney’s
recently ﬁre-damaged gas station and another at the high school that David
Whatley had integrated.
∂∑
With the Deacons in disarray, the ffm desperately needed a new defense
group. Among the new group of core workers who had arrived in Ferriday
in 1966 was an African student, Ahmed Saud Ibriahim Kahafei Abboud
Najah—known to local activists simply as Najah. Najah helped organize a
paramilitary defense group appropriately called the ‘‘Snipers.’’ He selected
approximately nine young men and provided them training in martial arts.
John Hamilton, one of the core staffers assigned to Ferriday, encouraged
the Snipers and hoped that they might motivate the older Deacons to reacti-
vate. Although never well organized, the Snipers managed to equip them-
selves with two-way radios and began to provide security for local activists.
Seven of the Snipers guarded David Whatley when he and his date inte-
grated the high school prom. In the event of an emergency, Whatley’s date
concealed a walkie-talkie in her purse so that she could signal the Snipers
who were patrolling outside the high school. The prom proceeded without
incident, primarily because of a strong presence of law enforcement ofﬁ-
cials, but the teenage Snipers were poised to act if called upon.
∂∏
Young people remained the backbone of the militant movement in Ferri-
day, and by the spring of 1966, with the Snipers in full bloom, there were
additional signs that fear was on the wane. In response to a Klan leaﬂet, an
anonymous black poet penned a poem that was printed and distributed in
white neighborhoods:
As I began to read it my anger grew and bigger,
Because the ﬁrst line read, ‘‘Dear Nigger.’’
They’ve scared the people and have them upset.


--- PAGE 189 ---
Expanding in the Bayou State 179
But I’ll get one of those peckerwoods yet.
They still think I’m scared of ghosts.
But I’ll send them to hell with the devil as their host.
When things are good and going alright
peckerwood stay from around my house at night.
Because after reading the fiery cross.
I’m still the boss.
To ﬁnd out who’s the best you need a good distinguisher,
So I hope you understand— the fiery cross extinguisher.
∂π
The militant spirit of the poem reﬂected a general shift toward Black
Power politics among young African Americans in the summer of 1966. In
August Lincoln Lynch, core’s leading Black Power militant, toured Loui-
siana for a series of speaking engagements that culminated in core’s forma-
tion of the ‘‘Louisiana Youth for Black Power.’’ The new Black Power group
had representatives from fourteen parishes—mostly core strongholds—with
Ferriday’s David Whatley serving as its ﬁrst president.
∂∫
As the Jonesboro chapter spearheaded the Deacons’ expansion in North
Louisiana, the Bogalusa chapter took the lead in organizing the southern
part of the state. The Bogalusa Deacons visited several towns where core
had a presence and developed two chapters and numerous contacts. In
Pointe Coupee Parish, where core had done some organizing, the Dea-
cons had at least one very interesting member: Abraham Phillips, a leftist
and veteran organizer who had once worked as a labor organizer for the
Communist-run Share Croppers Union. There was also a scattering of places
farther south along the Mississippi River where the Deacons advised and as-
sisted local activists. Among these was Plaquemine, a longtime core strong-
hold, Buras, and Donaldsonville. Although the Deacons did not establish
functioning chapters in any of these communities, the visits did provide an
opportunity to popularize their philosophy of self-defense.
∂Ω
New Orleans was the site of the ﬁrst Deacons chapter in South Louisiana.
The chapter was founded by Aubrey Wood, a Texan who had served in the
army during World War II and settled in San Francisco afterward. Wood
became involved in civil rights protests in San Francisco in 1947; by the time
he arrived in New Orleans in 1956, he was a seasoned activist. While working
as a longshoreman, Wood met the Reverend Avery Alexander, a legendary
ﬁgure in the local civil rights movement. Working with Alexander, Wood
became active in the New Orleans movement and eventually left the docks to
establish a small restaurant at Jackson and Dryades, in the heart of the black


--- PAGE 190 ---
180 Expanding in the Bayou State
shopping district. During the Consumer League’s boycott of white businesses
on Dryades Street, he directed the picket committee; he also advised the
naacp Youth organization when its members began picketing stores on Ca-
nal Street, the city’s premier shopping district. When core descended on
New Orleans in 1962, it set up an ofﬁce in the same building that housed
Wood’s restaurant. Wood extended his hospitality to the young activists;
frequently the only meal they ate was the free repast offered by Wood.
∑≠
Wood ﬁrst learned about the Deacons when he traveled to Jonesboro with
Oretha Castle, a New Orleans core leader, to help install plumbing in the
new buildings that replaced two churches destroyed by arson in January
1965. He admired what the Deacons had accomplished: ‘‘To be where they
were, and have the feeling of courage to do what they did, yeah, they im-
pressed me very much.’’ Wood discussed forming a New Orleans chapter
while staying in Jonesboro for several days. ‘‘I started talking to the Deacons
up there and I got a copy of their charter,’’ he recalled. ‘‘Their charter was in
line with my thinking, so I became involved with them.’’
∑∞
Wood formed the New Orleans Deacons chapter in the spring of 1965 and
became its ﬁrst and only president. But there was little for the chapter to do.
The Klan was never strong in the Cradle of Jazz, and mob violence on the
picket line had disappeared by 1965. So most of the New Orleans chapter’s
activities centered on assisting the Bogalusa chapter and transporting visi-
tors between New Orleans and Bogalusa, with Wood traveling to Bogalusa
almost every week.
∑≤
Wood recruited approximately ﬁfteen members for his chapter, many
of them longshoremen, personal friends, and drinking buddies who fre-
quented the Dew Drop Inn on LaSalle Street. The executive committee met
weekly, general members monthly. Dues were modest, to cover gas and
other expenses. Wood remembered his experience with the Deacons with
unabashed pride. ‘‘When you’re a Deacon,’’ he said, ‘‘you walk tall.’’
∑≥
Law enforcement in New Orleans also took note of the Deacons. After the
passage of the Voting Rights Act, Wood would visit the Registrar of Voters’
ofﬁce to help register new voters. These visits often led to confrontations
with city ofﬁcials. On one occasion Wood started ‘‘raising hell’’ and ‘‘talking
loud,’’ and soon found himself handcuffed and arrested. ‘‘When I got back to
the ﬁrst precinct, they was going through my wallet to see if there was any
identiﬁcation,’’ he recalled. ‘‘And when they seen that membership card for
the Deacons for Defense, they said, ‘Oh. This nigger here is the one. He’s a
Deacon.’ ’’
∑∂
The New Orleans chapter helped spread the Deacons’ creed of self-defense
through speaking events and television appearances. Charlie Sims and Wood


--- PAGE 191 ---
Expanding in the Bayou State 181
made a presentation at the International Longshoreman’s Association Hall
on Claiborne Avenue in 1965. Wood also appeared on a local television show.
When the interviewer asked him what he thought of communism, Wood
replied tersely, ‘‘I don’t know nothing about no communism. I don’t know
nothing about our capitalistic system we have here, because you ain’t al-
lowed me to participate.’’
∑∑
In February 1966 Joseph P. Henry Jr., executive secretary of the New
Orleans chapter, made a strange request of the fbi. Henry contacted the New
Orleans fbi ofﬁce and asked for a representative to participate in a public
debate on ‘‘law and citizenship,’’ which the Deacons were organizing. The
proposed debate was to include the mayor of New Orleans and representa-
tives of several civil rights organizations. The fbi declined the invitation,
instead offering to send the Deacons several copies of an ofﬁcial fbi pam-
phlet entitled, ‘‘The fbi, Guardian of Civil Rights.’’ It was an ironic gesture by
a law enforcement organization that had worked assiduously to deprive the
Deacons of their rights.
∑∏
The New Orleans chapter experienced some difﬁculties as a consequence
of the July 1965 Alton Crowe shooting. After the incident, Henry Austin, the
Deacon assailant, was moved out of Bogalusa for his own protection and
assigned to the New Orleans chapter. Wood was not pleased with his new col-
league. ‘‘They kind of disorganized us here, by him being here,’’ he explained.
‘‘When the publicity got out that he was in New Orleans and that he was a
Deacon, well that kind of frightened off some of our people.’’ Despite the
problems posed by his presence, Austin assisted the New Orleans chapter in
several intrepid organizing forays into adjacent Plaquemines Parish, the do-
minion of legendary racist Judge Leander Perez. The New Orleans Deacons
contemplated organizing chapters in Buras and Boothville in Plaquemines
Parish, but the level of interest was insufﬁcient. In addition, geography
worked against creating any chapters in Plaquemines. The parish is a narrow
strip of land that follows the Mississippi River to the Gulf of Mexico. Only one
highway runs through the parish; and with the river on one side and an
alligator-infested swamp on the other, the highway made a poor escape
route. The Deacons had engaged in enough high-speed chases with the Klan
to understand the importance of multiple escape routes. Austin thought that
it was ‘‘suicide’’ to establish a chapter unless local members would be willing
to shoot their way out of the parish, and, in his opinion, they would not.
∑π
By the end of 1965, the Deacons had adherents and self-proclaimed mem-
bers spread across Louisiana. The new organization was both upholding and
radically changing a tradition of self-defense in the state. ‘‘Black people
always did protect their young, but on the q.t. [quiet],’’ said Virginia Collins,


--- PAGE 192 ---
182 Expanding in the Bayou State
a longtime New Orleans black activist. But the Deacons had transformed this
covert tradition into an open, united movement. ‘‘It had an impact on all of
Louisiana,’’ according to Collins.
∑∫
Louisiana was only the beginning. The Bayou State shared a long border
with Mississippi, and it was not long before the Deacons trained their sights
on the Magnolia State. On 29 August 1965 Charlie Sims and a nine-man
delegation of Deacons traveled to Jackson to attend a meeting of the Missis-
sippi Freedom Democratic Party ( mfdp). The mfdp, an electoral civil rights
organization led by Aaron Henry, had attracted national attention at the
1964 Democratic National Convention. The New York Times  covered the
Deacons’ appearance at the Jackson meeting, which was organized by Ed
King, a white teacher and civil rights activist at Tougaloo College in Jackson.
Although the mfdp’s invitation to the Deacons reﬂected the growing disen-
chantment with nonviolence, the Mississippi group was not ready to fully
embrace armed self-defense. When pressed by the media to explain the
mfdp’s relationship with the Deacons, Ed King said that the mfdp was not
endorsing the Deacons but merely providing them a forum. ‘‘The Mississippi
Negro is very interested in them,’’ King told the press.
∑Ω
More than three hundred people ﬁlled the Negro Masonic Hall and ex-
ploded in thunderous applause when Sims was introduced. Sweating pro-
fusely in his Sunday suit in the sweltering 99-degree heat, Sims entertained
the crowd with his trademark gritty bravado. The Deacons leader taunted
the White Knights of the Ku Klux Klan and scoffed at threats of violence. ‘‘I’ve
been shot ﬁve times, and shot at ten times,’’ he boasted. ‘‘So I’m not scared to
come to Jackson.’’ His message was a clarion call to manhood, bluntly chal-
lenging black men to prove their mettle against the Klan. ‘‘It is time for you
men to wake up and be men,’’ Sims declared. He also spoke of plans to
organize a chapter in Jackson and suggested that interested parties confer
with him after the meeting. The next day teams of Bogalusa Deacons spread
across Mississippi to begin recruitment.
∏≠
Mississippi was a formidable challenge for the Deacons. Conditions were
so desperate that even naacp leader Medgar Evers seriously considered the
idea of guerrilla warfare in the state. Both Medgar and his brother Charles
were deeply impressed with Jomo Kenyatta and the Mau Mau uprising in
Kenya in 1952. ‘‘Talk about nonviolent,’’ Ruby Hurley said of the young Med-
gar, ‘‘he was anything but non-violent: anything but! And he always wanted
to go at it in Mau Mau fashion.’’ In her memoir, For Us, the Living, Medgar’s
wife Myrlie recalls that ‘‘Medgar himself ﬂirted intellectually with the idea of
ﬁghting back in the Mississippi Delta. For a time he envisioned a secret black
army of Delta Negroes who fought by night to meet oppression and brutality


--- PAGE 193 ---
Expanding in the Bayou State 183
with violence.’’ Evers went well beyond mere fantasies of a Mississippi Mau
Mau; he and his brother Charles actually began to stockpile ammunition for
a guerrilla war. Their father eventually discovered their plans and quickly
put an end to the nascent rebellion.
∏∞ Now Charlie Sims and the Deacons
were preparing to resurrect Medgar’s dream of a secret black army in the
heart of Klan country.


--- PAGE 194 ---
chapter
11
Mississippi Chapters
on friday, 27 August 1965, at 12:30 p.m., George Met-
calfe casually strode to his car in the parking lot of the Armstrong Tire and
Rubber Company in Natchez, Mississippi. Weary, he had just ﬁnished an
exhausting twelve-hour shift at the plant where he worked as a shipping
clerk. Outside the factory gates Metcalfe was well known in his role as
president of the Natchez chapter of the naacp. His visibility had increased
dramatically in the past weeks. He had led a delegation to the city school
board demanding that the schools desegregate in conformance with the
Civil Rights Act. He had also been recently named as a defendant in a suit
ﬁled by the Natchez mayor to prevent the naacp from picketing his store.
Repression was so severe in Natchez that when George Greene, ﬁeld secre-
tary of the Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee ( sncc), arrived in
1963, he had abandoned all hope of organizing and restricted himself to
documenting incidents of racist violence. The city’s well-organized Ku Klux
Klan had engaged in systematic guerrilla warfare against Adams County’s
black residents since 1964. Robed hooligans bombed churches and ﬂogged
and tortured blacks without fear of consequence. By 1965 the situation had
grown so critical that the u.s. Commission on Civil Rights conducted hear-
ings in Mississippi to investigate the wave of violence and intimidation.
Compounding the danger for Metcalfe was that tensions had increased at
Armstrong Tire and Rubber following the recent desegregation of the com-
pany cafeteria.
∞
Metcalfe eased into his car, put the key into the ignition, and turned the
switch. A tremendous explosion rocked the windows of the plant as a bomb
ripped apart the vehicle and mangled Metcalfe’s legs and arms. The civil
rights leader clung precariously to life as his blood-soaked body was rushed
to the Jefferson Davis Memorial Hospital. As he lay in critical condition in his


--- PAGE 195 ---
Mississippi Chapters 185
hospital bed, the explosion began to reverberate in the black community.
But instead of immobilizing it with fear, the bomb detonated a new com-
bative consciousness among Natchez African Americans. News of the bomb-
ing swept through the black community like a ﬁrestorm, burning away the
bonds of passivity and fear. ‘‘I think one of the greatest mistakes [whites]
made was when they bombed George Metcalfe’s car,’’ recalled James Young,
who became a leader in the Natchez Deacons. ‘‘Well, that made everybody in
this area feel like, ‘Whether I’m a part of it, they’re just subject to do the same
thing to me, so I’m coming out front.’ ’’
≤
If, as Thomas Aquinas once suggested, anger is the precondition of cour-
age, then his maxim was borne out in Natchez the night of 27 August.
Rage electriﬁed young blacks throughout the community. Indignation meta-
morphosed into courage, courage into action. Decades of humiliation, frus-
tration, and resignation gave way to a new militant consciousness. Sober
and established black community leaders detected danger in the restive
mood and worked frantically to control and redirect the youthful passions.
The situation was so grave that naacp state ﬁeld secretary Charles Evers
rushed to Natchez to assist.
Evers quickly found himself entangled in the awkward role of conciliator
and peacemaker. A group of angry young blacks, armed with pistols and
riﬂes, had gathered early Friday night near Metcalfe’s home, which also
served as the naacp headquarters. Evers attempted to calm them, empathiz-
ing with their vengeful mood. ‘‘If they do it anymore, were going to get those
responsible,’’ warned Evers. ‘‘We’re armed, every last one of us, and we are
not going to take it.’’ But Evers tempered his threats with a plea for restraint
and order. ‘‘We want no violence,’’ he implored the crowd. ‘‘We want no
violence.’’
≥
‘‘America thinks the Negroes in Natchez are afraid . . . we’re here to let
them know we aren’t afraid,’’ Evers told reporters who had gathered in the
street. One newsman approached a black minister holding a riﬂe. ‘‘What’s
going to happen here?’’ he asked. ‘‘I’ll tell you,’’ the old preacher said grimly,
‘‘right now, from the way that practically all the Negroes feel, they feel that
the thing that’s about to happen is what happened in California,’’ he said,
referring to the Watts riot, ‘‘a war, or a race riot, or whatever it is, that’s
about to happen here.’’
∂
Years later Evers admitted that he had arranged for national television
crews to tape the minister bragging about how he was prepared to shoot
white men. ‘‘This is the sort of thing that frightens white people,’’ said Evers.
‘‘They expected me to say it, but a local jackleg [self-taught] preacher would


--- PAGE 196 ---
186 Mississippi Chapters
really have some effect on them.’’ Evers said that Natchez’s black community
was ready for full-scale war. ‘‘We had guns and hand grenades, and every-
thing it took to work—and we meant to use them if we had to.’’
∑
Later that night Evers spoke at a rally at the naacp headquarters. Behind
him stood several men armed with pistols and riﬂes, most of whom would
later become leaders in the Natchez Deacons. ‘‘I know all of us are angry and
no one’s more angry than I am,’’ said Evers in measured tones. ‘‘We all are
tired of being mistreated and we know who’s responsible for this. We know
who’s responsible for this and we must use the weapon—that we are soon
going to have—to get rid of them.’’ The crowd began to shout in exalted
response. ‘‘Now that weapon,’’ he continued—and as he spoke, a man stand-
ing behind Evers thrust his pistol into the air and the crowd erupted in a
roar of approval. ‘‘The weapon,’’ Evers went on, a little puzzled by the com-
motion and still unaware of the gun displayed behind him, ‘‘the most ef-
fective weapon, will be as you know, the vote.’’ The crowd moaned in disap-
pointment. One man shouted, ‘‘No! That won’t do no good!’’ Evers had lost
his audience.
∏
James Stokes, an naacp member, had spent the day helping Evers at the
naacp ofﬁce in the wake of the bombing. Stokes was typical of the working-
class men who were the backbone of the Natchez naacp. He worked at a local
paper mill making egg cartons, had leadership experience as a union stew-
ard, and was an army veteran.
π The Metcalfe bombing had sent the naacp
ofﬁce into a ﬂurry of activity, and Stokes, after putting in a long day at the
naacp ofﬁce, had retired to his house for a few hours’ rest. Late that night he
was abruptly aroused from his sleep by a loud pounding. Two friends were at
the door. ‘‘Come on let’s go,’’ they urged, ‘‘all hell broke loose downtown.’’
∫
It was an apt description. The serene jewel on the Mississippi had shat-
tered into violence. As the night wore on, hundreds of enraged black youths
ﬁlled the black business district. Primed for battle, they had armed them-
selves with rocks, bottles, pistols, and riﬂes. James Stokes remembered arriv-
ing on the scene and seeing snipers ﬁring from rooftops, ‘‘shooting at every-
thing that was moving.’’ Groups of young blacks roamed the streets, shouting
threats at white motorists and hurling bricks, bottles, and tomatoes at police
cars. Stokes and some naacp members quickly joined Evers as he attempted
to restore order. The improvised security group gave as much attention to
protecting whites as it did blacks, preventing the agitated crowd from attack-
ing innocent whites who accidentally drove into the fray. But its principal
objective was to deter white police from assaulting young blacks. Stokes and
his compatriots were on the streets ‘‘to keep our eyes on police ofﬁcers’’ and
‘‘to make sure if they shoot somebody, we going to shoot them.’’
Ω


--- PAGE 197 ---
Mississippi Chapters 187
Stokes could empathize with the mob’s rage toward the police. As a young
boy in rural Adams County, he had witnessed police complicity with barbaric
racism. ‘‘One of my neighbors was running a little social club,’’ he recalled,
‘‘and the Klan ran down on this club and took this man out, and cut his penis
out and drug him up and down the road.’’ Law enforcement ofﬁcials partici-
pated in the grisly torture. ‘‘That night, it was some members of the sheriff ’s
force, police force,’’ said Stokes. ‘‘All of them was Klan.’’
∞≠
The day after the bombing, Natchez teetered on the edge of open re-
bellion. In the morning a mass meeting was held to draw up a list of de-
mands. The bombing had galvanized the black community around a militant
program for equal opportunity. The demands included hiring at least four
additional black policemen to complement the two currently on the force;
desegregating public facilities, schools, parks, hospitals, playgrounds, and
the city auditorium; naming a black representative to the school board;
cooperating in a poverty program with funds divided evenly with whites;
and publicly denouncing the White Knights of the Ku Klux Klan and another
local white supremacist group, Americans for the Preservation of the White
Race.
∞∞
In an unusual move, the black leadership also demanded that city em-
ployees be required to address blacks with ‘‘courtesy titles.’’ For decades
whites had addressed blacks with condescending and degrading titles, such
as ‘‘auntie,’’ ‘‘missie,’’ ‘‘boy,’’ ‘‘hoss,’’ and ‘‘uncle.’’ The leadership insisted that
city employees use the respectful titles of ‘‘Mister’’ and ‘‘Missus.’’ Civil equal-
ity was insufﬁcient; Natchez blacks wanted dignity and respect as well.
∞≤
But the black leaders’ demands did little to dampen the temper of the
young community. As the sun slipped into the Mississippi hills on Saturday,
28 August, the tide of anger rose once again. Young men ﬂocked into the
streets to vent their rage. A rock sailed through the air shattering a police car
window. Four grim city policemen brandishing shotguns faced off in a tense
confrontation with the undaunted crowd. At an open-air rally that night,
some participants openly spurned the pleas for nonviolence. As community
leaders spoke to the crowd, one group began a chant that grew into a deﬁant
chorus: ‘‘We’re going to kill for freedom,’’ rose the chant, ‘‘We’re going to kill
for freedom.’’
∞≥
Two days of rioting changed the terms of the conﬂict in Natchez. Prior to
28 August, whites could expect blacks to respond peacefully and lawfully to
Klan terror and police brutality. Blacks now had a new bargaining chip.
∞∂
Set upon a bluff on the winding Mississippi, Natchez stood like a senti-
nel over the sprawling river bottomlands. In the nineteenth century it had


--- PAGE 198 ---
188 Mississippi Chapters
prospered as a key commercial and ﬁnancial center for Mississippi’s slave
economy. By 1965 Natchez had survived the demise of King Cotton and
transformed itself into a bustling industrial city. Wood products and rubber
manufacturing had given rise to a highly unionized and sophisticated black
working class, largely independent of the white power structure.
∞∑
As in the case of Jonesboro and Bogalusa, Natchez’s mill-town culture pro-
duced strongly independent and courageous black men and women. Their
independence derived in part from the protection offered by unions. Trade
unions, despite their poor record on racial equality, generally safeguarded
the right of black members to participate in the civil rights movement with-
out fear of employer reprisal. Typical of this practice was the United Rubber
Workers Union local at the Armstrong Tire and Rubber Company. ‘‘There
would have been many a one of us that would have been ﬁred from Arm-
strong,’’ noted James Young, ‘‘but the union wasn’t going to stand for it. So
that’s what saved us.’’
∞∏
Ironically, the relative freedom from economic coercion may have con-
tributed to Klan violence. In contrast to black sharecroppers, whites could
not intimidate unionized black industrial workers by threatening to deprive
them of income or shelter. White elites and competing white workers were
forced to turn to terrorist violence to discipline the black working class. To a
signiﬁcant degree, the revitalized Klan and the Deacons were both products
of the decline of the agricultural oligarchy and its traditional social control
mechanisms.
Despite being insulated from some reprisals, voter registration policies
prevented blacks from translating economic independence into political
power. In 1965 Natchez was a black majority city still dominated by a white
minority; 12,300 blacks lived under the rule of 11,500 whites. Attempts to
implement the 1964 Civil Rights Act had failed miserably as Natchez whites
clung tenaciously to the old traditions.
∞π
In the summer of 1965 Natchez became a battleground between the local
moderate naacp chapter and the more militant sncc-dominated Missis-
sippi Freedom Democratic Party ( mfdp). An offshoot of sncc’s Freedom
Summer project in 1964, the mfdp was headed by a young black sncc leader,
Lawrence Guyot, who pressed ahead with voter registration work, freedom
schools, and development of community leaders, often circumventing the
entrenched and cautious local naacp leadership. Both organizations dug in
during the summer of 1965 to win the hearts and minds of Natchez blacks.
But the young sncc paciﬁsts faced a politically savvy foe in the naacp’s
Charles Evers. Evers, though always favoring his middle-class minions in the
local naacp chapter, sought to meld a coalition across ﬁssures of class and


--- PAGE 199 ---
Mississippi Chapters 189
competing interests in the black community. He had the beneﬁt of political
experience and the community’s loyalty to the naacp, which, despite its
shortcomings, was an old and familiar institution; as one historian once
observed, ‘‘People prefer the trouble they have to the trouble they may
have.’’ Moreover, Evers had an important tactical advantage over the paciﬁst
sncc. He had been weaned on Jomo Kenyatta, not Mohandas Gandhi; al-
though Evers preferred nonviolent tactics, when necessary he could accom-
modate—indeed advocate—the use of force.
∞∫
In June 1965, two months before the Metcalfe bombing, civil rights activ-
ists launched the ﬁrst coordinated protest in Natchez—a boycott of white
businesses, especially stores owned by Natchez mayor John Nosser. The
mayor’s relatively moderate politics had incurred the wrath of the Klan, but
the black community also targeted him for refusing to integrate the clerical
staff at his four stores. The boycott failed to generate enthusiasm among
blacks and dragged on through the summer, little more than symbolic pro-
test. Women and children walked the picket line as black men kept their
distance. James Jackson, another Deacons leader, had difﬁculty recruiting
men to the picket line. ‘‘Ever since the two civil rights projects came to
Natchez,’’ he noted, ‘‘Negroes would sit around and discuss how they want to
ﬁght for their freedom and how they were ready to die for it.’’ Yet when
Jackson asked them to join the picket line, suddenly they had places to go
and funerals to attend. ‘‘Nobody never dies until there’s going to be a march
or a picket,’’ said Jackson laconically. ‘‘It started me thinking that the Negro
was just fooling himself[,] that he was still ready to do nothing.’’
∞Ω
The day after the Metcalfe bombing, the Bogalusa Deacons announced in
Jackson that they planned to travel to Natchez to develop a Deacons chap-
ter. The presence of Louisiana Deacons in Mississippi posed a dilemma for
Charles Evers. Though he would beneﬁt by their protection, to welcome the
Deacons into Mississippi could be taken as a sign of weakness on the part
of the naacp and invite organizational competition. Evers was already fend-
ing off a serious challenge to his leadership by young militants in sncc and
the mfdp. Another organization on his left ﬂank would only add to his
troubles.
≤≠
Evers had only a short time to weigh his options. The media was pressur-
ing him to comment on the Deacons’ planned campaign in Mississippi. Evers
ﬁnessed the issue by repudiating the Deacons but not armed self-defense.
The naacp leader told the New York Times that Mississippi did not need the
Deacons because the ‘‘state’s Negroes are arming and organizing in their
own way.’’
≤∞
Natchez was a political tightrope for Evers. Even his hesitant endorsement


--- PAGE 200 ---
190 Mississippi Chapters
of self-defense appeased militants at the cost of rankling the naacp national
leadership. Roy Wilkins, the naacp’s national director, told the New York
Times that the national ofﬁce had not approved Evers’s comments on vio-
lence. Evers ignored Wilkins and continued to raise the specter of retaliatory
violence, a few days later announcing again that Natchez blacks were arm-
ing themselves and were prepared to ‘‘ﬁght back.’’
≤≤
Evers’s comments provoked a volley of criticism from naacp leaders in
addition to Wilkins. But his decision to ignore the admonitions was a shrewd
maneuver. If Wilkins pressured Evers too strongly, the national ofﬁce might
alienate him and lose control of the Natchez campaign. Competing forces
were already descending on Natchez. Within a few days of the bombing,
Martin Luther King sent Andrew Young to the troubled city. Young was
assessing the possibility of making Natchez the centerpiece of a campaign
for federal legislation against killing a person engaged in civil rights ac-
tivities. If the naacp national ofﬁce could accommodate Evers, the Natchez
campaign promised to regain prestige lost to younger and more militant
groups such as sncc and core.
≤≥
The factional maneuvering of the national organizations did not divert
Natchez’s rank-and-ﬁle activists from the task at hand. They saw the need for
organized self-defense, and the Deacons were the only visible organization
prepared to meet the challenge. Stokes, James Young, and the rest of the
informal self-defense group that activated following the Metcalfe bombing
ignored Evers’s rebuke to the Deacons and began to take steps to organize a
Natchez chapter.
≤∂
Earlier that summer, John Fitzgerald, a local black middle-class leader,
had organized a meeting to form a Deacons chapter but failed to activate the
group and call subsequent meetings. James Jackson, a twenty-ﬁve-year-old
barber and civil rights militant, suspected that Evers had discouraged Fitz-
gerald from continuing with the Deacons. Evers could be a ruthless inﬁghter
with other civil rights organizations, and he took pains to prevent competi-
tors from invading his turf.
≤∑
The Metcalfe bombing and the slow pace of the naacp leadership had
pushed James Jackson to the brink. ‘‘Man, I done been to 135 meetings, and
that’s all they ever did was meet,’’ Jackson complained to his friend Otis
Firmin. ‘‘You know what I’m talking about? And never does nothing. Just
planning. Negroes is the planningest people I’ve ever seen, boy. We plan too
damn much, man; and never do nothing.’’
≤∏
Jackson contacted a representative of the Bogalusa Deacons and was
deeply impressed by what he heard about Charlie Sims. ‘‘He got fear into the
whole town, man,’’ Jackson told Firmin. Firmin was eager to learn more


--- PAGE 201 ---
Mississippi Chapters 191
about Sims’s defense group. ‘‘They say they got souped-up cars, man?’’ asked
Firmin. ‘‘Yeah, fast cars, man, fast cars . . . shit, they got to be fast,’’ replied
Jackson. ‘‘Say for instance we’re guarding this place, someplace, and some
guy comes by and shoots. We got to catch him, man, and shoot him to kill
him.’’ Jackson paused, then backed off a bit. He remembered that Sims said
not to shoot to kill at ﬁrst. ‘‘You can wound him, like in the leg or shoot his
tires, stop him, burn him in the leg, take him right on down to the police
station, man,’’ said Jackson. The Deacons would not stop whites for simply
driving through the community. ‘‘This is just for defense. If a car comes into
the Negro community just watch him and that’s it, man. You know you can’t
stop people from driving on the streets.’’
≤π
Historians have been blessed with an extraordinary source for what trans-
pired in the ﬁrst Natchez Deacons meeting held on 10 September 1965, con-
ducted in the back room of James Jackson’s barber shop. Filmmaker Ed
Pincus, shooting a cinema verité documentary on the Natchez movement,
ﬁlmed the meeting in its entirety. The transcript provides remarkable insights
into the consciousness and organizing methods of ordinary black workers in
the Deep South—free of the constraints of middle-class leaders and paciﬁst
doctrine—trying to make sense of the events around them and groping for a
purpose and role for the working-class man in the social revolution.
Jackson and Firmin led the meeting. Both men were charismatic and
brilliant organizers—trained in the streets rather than movement work-
shops—adroit at reading the community’s fears and aspirations and crafting
an appeal that could resonate and inspire conﬁdence.
≤∫
‘‘I believe just like Martin Luther King and everybody else, I believe in non-
violence,’’ Jackson assured the ﬁve men assembled. ‘‘I really do, man. I think
that non-violence is the only way to solve the problem, you know. On the
other hand, I believe that our people should stop getting killed.’’ The police
had failed to protect the black community, Jackson pointed out, so the
responsibility fell to the Deacons.
The Deacons were not motivated by hatred of whites. ‘‘I’m not prejudiced,
man,’’ Jackson asserted. ‘‘I like white people; I like green people; I like any
color people. I’m not doing this because I dislike white people. I love white
people . . . but when people is killing me off, killing my mother and my sister
off . . . the Ku Klux Klan—that’s who I’m against completely. . . . It’s time for
us to do something. If there is anyone in this room that isn’t serious, now is
the time to say it.’’ A commitment to the group was a commitment for good.
‘‘So, you guys, if there is anyone else in here that isn’t serious, speak now,
cause after you get it going, there ain’t no out.’’
Firmin raised the stakes. ‘‘You may have to come into hand-to-hand com-


--- PAGE 202 ---
192 Mississippi Chapters
bat with some of them white cats. You may have to shoot somebody. It’s as
simple as that, man.’’ The Deacons were up against the Klan. ‘‘You know
about the klans. No one have to tell you about them. So you got to know the
risk that you’re taking.’’ Fear was their enemy, the fear of ordinary black
men. ‘‘They leave Mississippi and they was afraid of the white man. They
was afraid to ﬁght the white man. Then they go over there to Vietnam and
they ﬁght. Then they come home and they be afraid to stand up for their
rights. And I can’t see it.’’ So the Deacons were going to ﬁght for their rights.
‘‘Right here, now,’’ declared Firmin.
The Deacons membership was to remain a secret, at any cost. In a society
that afforded little honor for black men, their word would be their honor.
‘‘Your tongue is the worst weapon against you,’’ Firmin warned the group.
‘‘And I want to say this, and I mean it from my heart. That I swear before
God, may He kill me now if I don’t mean it: For something as important as
this, I’d burn [kill] my brother. I’d blow his damn brains out.’’ He would
expect the Deacons to do the same to him if he betrayed its members. ‘‘I’m
not directing anything to any one individual, you understand, because I
would want everybody in here to feel the same way about me.’’
The men were to tell no one, not even their families, that they were in the
Deacons. The same went for the police. ‘‘So if he puts this gun beside my
head and say, ‘I’m going to blow your damn brains out,’ well, shit . . . don’t
tell him a damn thing,’’ said Jackson. ‘‘Just let him blow it out, because you
going to get it blowed out one way or the other.’’ Firmin agreed. ‘‘Yeah, that
goes back to like I said in the beginning. If they don’t blow it out—and you
get out—one of us will. And I want you to do the same thing to me.’’
This was the tough talk of street warriors; cool, stoic, and resolute. The
testimonials of courage and self-abnegation served to forge bonds between
the men and identify membership with the virtues of honor, sacriﬁce, and
love of community. The Deacons were facing a dangerous enemy; secrecy
and loyalty offered the security necessary to win recruits.
‘‘This is one thing where we have an advantage on the Klan,’’ pointed out
Jackson. ‘‘Like, we know all the klans, just about, right? The point is that
they don’t know who is a Deacon. That’s the advantage, man. Like they may
know two or three Deacons, but they don’t know who else over there is a
Deacon. They don’t know who we are.’’
It would be perilous work—but not too perilous. While emphasizing the
risks enhanced the Deacons’ appeal as a crucible for manhood, Jackson and
Firmin did not want to scare the men off. ‘‘You got a time set to die,’’ said
Jackson, invoking the detached fatalism of the street hustler. ‘‘Like Metcalfe.


--- PAGE 203 ---
Mississippi Chapters 193
Metcalfe’s car got blowed all to pieces—and he’s still alive. It wasn’t time for
him to die.’’ It was all in the hands of destiny. ‘‘So by taking chances—like we
ﬁxing to take chances—that don’t mean you going to die . . . by taking a risk,
that don’t mean you going to get hurt.’’
≤Ω
The Deacons would restore a sense of community and pride. ‘‘We’re going
to respect each other,’’ promised Firmin. ‘‘We going to learn to love each
other. To live together; to drink together; and above all, ﬁght hard together.
Push, man push, you know. All of us, pushing in the same direction.’’
Talk soon turned to the logistics and duties of the Deacons. ‘‘We don’t
participate in any demonstrations, any marches, anything like that,’’ said
Firmin. ‘‘We be around, we watch, and we observe, and protect them if they
need protecting.’’ They would ﬁnd security in numbers, and, like Klansmen,
they would be part of a regional organization in which local chapters would
come to the aid of one another. The chapter would get two-way radios. ‘‘Do
you reckon we can get permits to tote a weapon?’’ asked one of the recruits.
‘‘I don’t think we going to be looking for permits to tote a weapon,’’ replied
Firmin wryly. ‘‘We just going to tote a weapon.’’
Though the chapters were ostensibly organized to defend the movement
against the Klan, the majority of the meeting was devoted to discussing how
the Deacons could discipline their own community, especially the middle-
class ‘‘Uncle Toms’’ who were breaking ranks and undermining the boycott.
‘‘Are we going get in on this other thing,’’ asked one of the recruits, ‘‘like the
people that—like downtown there’s a boycott now—are we going to take
care of the peoples that has been warned three or four times or are we going
to let somebody else do that?’’ The Deacons would handle it, said Jackson.
‘‘Like certain people been warned ﬁve or six times not to go back into the
stores.’’ The Deacons would ‘‘put the ﬁnger on him and shake him up, to
teach him, man, teach him a little lesson.’’ This kind of action would be done
as individuals, not formally as the Deacons.
‘‘I am pretty sure that we all physically ﬁt,’’ said Firmin, ‘‘and I know that
everybody in here is ready to go to war and whup the average frail man that
go in any of them stores.’’ Jail was no problem. ‘‘Let them put me in jail. I just
pay my ﬁne for ﬁghting and disturbing the peace.’’ He would not use a
weapon. ‘‘Not going to hit him with anything but my ﬁst. Just put a whup-
ping on him. And when I get him on that ground, I’ll stomp him. And while
he’s down there, I’ll tell him what it’s for.’’
Jackson knew an army veteran who was a karate expert. He was going to
begin to train the men the next week. ‘‘This is why this karate and judo is
needed . . . we may pick you to just go and ﬁght the man, just walk up to him


--- PAGE 204 ---
194 Mississippi Chapters
and beat him,’’ said Jackson. ‘‘Flat out beat him with your bare hands. O.K.?
It’s not but $35 for ﬁghting and disturbing the peace. You give him a good
whupping, then we pay the $35.’’
This talk of violent beatings did not sit well with one recruit. ‘‘I don’t know
if I can whup anybody as bad as you say,’’ he confessed. ‘‘Stomping them and
all that.’’ No problem, said Firmin, if the recruit would not do it, then Firmin
would take on the job personally. ‘‘It’s not but $35 for disturbing the peace,’’
Jackson pointed out again. Another recruit weighed in. ‘‘I’ll tell you all what,
I have to be honest. I’d have to be in on that [beating] too, because if
someone is doing something that shouldn’t be done, that is hindering the
advancement of colored peoples in Mississippi, I’d have to do it, man. If not,
I’d have to give it a good try.’’
The Deacons would be effective against Uncle Toms ‘‘because when this
type thing happen, we going to be harder on him than we are on a Klansman
if we caught him messing around,’’ warned Firmin. ‘‘We’ll take a hose pipe
and beat his life out.’’ People feared the Klan, but the Deacons would make a
boycott breaker ‘‘more afraid of us than he is of them.’’ The next time an
Uncle Tom contemplated breaking the boycott, ‘‘they’ll think, ‘the white man
might come by and he’ll shoot into the air; or he might throw a brick and
run. But that nigger is going to kill me—that nigger is going to whip my tail.’ ’’
‘‘Once you ﬁnd one that’s leading the people astray,’’ continued Firmin,
‘‘that’s keeping the people confused, or that’s getting people hurt by going
back telling things, and hurting innocent people, then maybe he don’t de-
serve to die. But maybe he don’t deserve to see. Or hear. Or even talk any
more. I believe in that kind of stuff. I really do.’’
The focus on how to handle middle-class collaborators was not unique to
the Natchez chapter and, in fact, characterized the Deacons wherever they
emerged. In Natchez, as elsewhere, the concern with ‘‘Toming’’ reﬂected a
measure of class conﬂict within the black community. Jackson admitted that
there was opposition to the Deacons in the community, primarily among
black businessmen, but the Deacons would ‘‘give our service to everybody,
whether they go along with us or not.’’
Jackson and Firmin had skillfully orchestrated the meeting, presenting
the Deacons as an elite organization reserved for men of honor and courage,
and offering the recruits a way of participating in the movement that would
allow them to keep their dignity as well as their lives. It all made sense.
Rather than one black man against a lynch mob, they would be part of a
secret organization that could match the Klan in tactics and breadth. They
would end the three-hundred-year white monopoly on fear. ‘‘This has just
got to happen,’’ Firmin said as the meeting ended. ‘‘I swear, this is our


--- PAGE 205 ---
Mississippi Chapters 195
chance, when we are older, to be able to say, ‘We helped to build Natchez.’
Not only Natchez—but Mississippi.’’ One of the recruits concurred. ‘‘It has to
be a great thing,’’ he said with obvious pride. ‘‘Everybody here is serious
about the thing. It has to be a great thing.’’
Following that initial organizing meeting, the Natchez chapter elected
ofﬁcers: James Jackson, the group’s founder, became president; Isaac Ter-
rell, a sawmill millwright, was elected vice president; Sandy Nealy became
treasurer; and James Stokes, the naacp militant who had assisted in quelling
the riot after the Metcalfe bombing, was appointed spokesman. The secre-
tary was James Young, a coworker of Metcalfe’s at Armstrong Tire and
Rubber. Young had guarded Metcalfe in the hospital and, like most of the
Deacons, was an army veteran, having served as a demolition technician in
the South Paciﬁc during World War II.
≥≠
The rapidly unfolding events provided the Deacons with considerable
work. Mayor Nosser had rejected the demands presented by the black lead-
ers during the ﬁrst week of September. When the leaders threatened a series
of marches, Nosser persuaded Governor Paul Johnson to send 650 national
guard troops to Natchez. The invading force converged on the city on 3
September and promptly sealed off the black community. A strict 10:00 p.m.
to 5:00 a.m. curfew was imposed. Although Prohibition was already in effect
in Natchez, city ofﬁcials banned the previously tolerated bootlegged liquor
trade in the black community. They also ordered several black-owned busi-
nesses to close on the theory that they threatened civil order by allowing
blacks to congregate on their premises.
≥∞
Given that the riots had subsided before the National Guard arrived, many
blacks felt that its presence was intended to discourage legal protest—not
violence. On their arrival, the National Guardsmen mounted .50 caliber
machine guns in the downtown area. Evers and other black leaders debated
whether to defy the guns and march. They were confronted with a grim
choice. James Young recalled that a Guard ofﬁcial told them, ‘‘If you march,
we will open ﬁre.’’ Evers wisely canceled the march and charged that the
National Guard was in Natchez with one purpose: to ‘‘beat and kill’’ black
citizens if they exercised their right to demonstrate.
≥≤
The National Guard never had an opportunity to conﬁrm Evers’s fears. In
response to protests by Aaron Henry, head of the mfdp, Governor Johnson
withdrew the troops three days later, on 6 September. The Guard’s depar-
ture cleared the way for the ﬁrst of a series of marches in a bitter four-month
boycott campaign. Negotiations over black demands soon reached an im-
passe as city ofﬁcials remained intransigent. Instead of negotiating in ear-
nest, city fathers grasped for a legal instrument to suppress protest. On 30


--- PAGE 206 ---
196 Mississippi Chapters
September they succeeded temporarily when they secured an injunction
from the Chancery Court prohibiting demonstrations.
The injunction set off a wave of mass arrests. During 1–7 October 544
blacks, including Charles Evers, were charged with violating the injunc-
tion. The arrests—another shameful chapter in Mississippi history—none-
theless attest to the impressive breadth of the local movement. Prisoners
were herded into buses and shipped two hundred miles to the infamous state
prison at Parchman, where guards subjected the protesters to unspeakable
abuses. The wife and daughter of Deacons leader James Stokes were both
arrested and imprisoned. Stokes’s wife never recovered from the trauma,
and she died shortly afterward.
≥≥
Evers suspended the demonstrations on 7 October after city ofﬁcials
agreed to consider a revised list of naacp demands. The boycott of downtown
stores continued, however, and by 12 October Mayor Nosser admitted that
business was down by as much as 50 percent. Demonstrations resumed
brieﬂy in mid-October, when local ofﬁcials and black leaders failed to reach a
settlement. The business community’s support for segregation was quickly
eroding; by the end of October most of its resistance to black demands was
due to Klan threats and intimidation.
≥∂
The boycott and the marches ﬁrmly secured Evers’s leadership of the
movement. The sncc activists, working through the mfdp, were marginal-
ized—in good measure because of Evers’s ruthless campaign against them—
but also because their efforts to impose nonviolence alienated rank-and-ﬁle
community members. The problem became manifest in a meeting in early
September at the Bright Star Baptist Church, when the mfdp activists at-
tempted a ﬁnal revival of their faltering movement. Approximately one hun-
dred local people attended and listened politely to the speeches. After sncc
activist Bill Ware ﬁnished, a black woman rose from the audience and ad-
dressed the speakers. ‘‘I don’t want to march on this accord,’’ she said with
great solemnity. ‘‘If a man or woman hits me, I’m going to hit back. And so I
don’t want to get in there since it’s non-violent. I don’t want to get in there
and upset your plans that you have before you . . . I’m not afraid to march,
but if he hold my hand, if he stand in front of me, I’ll spit on him. I’m not
afraid of them.’’
≥∑
The response of the sncc activists was a case study in misguided idealism.
First, sncc leader Lawrence Guyot replied to the woman by castigating her
cohorts for ‘‘being quiet and doing nothing.’’ As he continued to reproach
the audience, a large group rose and began to walk out. Guyot continued,
‘‘You’re being understood by simply being quiet and sitting back and staying
in your places.’’ More people ﬁled out. ‘‘The most cowardly thing I have ever


--- PAGE 207 ---
Mississippi Chapters 197
heard,’’ Guyot declared, his voice growing tense, ‘‘is for someone to say, ‘I
would go with you all but I ain’t non-violent.’ ’’ ≥∏ The audience had heard
enough. By the end of Guyot’s speech, the church was nearly empty.
sncc never recovered from the church meeting, and Evers now had solid
control of the movement. In truth, the people who sncc had rebuked as
cowards ultimately did demonstrate—under Evers’s leadership and in num-
bers and with courage unparalleled in Mississippi organizing. The source of
sncc’s difﬁculties was its emphasis on federal intervention. Although the
organization endeavored to develop local leadership and encouraged par-
ticipatory democracy, it also, like other national civil rights groups, pursued
a strategy designed to create confrontations that would force federal inter-
vention. It was a strategy deeply embedded in sncc’s origins. ‘‘The youth
must take the freedom struggle into every community in the South without
exception,’’ Martin Luther King had announced at the group’s founding con-
ference in 1961. ‘‘Inevitably this broadening of the struggle and the deter-
mination which it represents will arouse vocal and vigorous support and
place pressures on the federal government that will compel its intervention.’’
When Dorie Ladner, a seasoned sncc staffer, attempted to get Natchez resi-
dents to march to the courthouse in a spontaneous protest, people were
reluctant to participate in what they viewed as a small, symbolic protest that
would have little effect on city leaders and likely end in arrests and police vio-
lence. One local woman told Ladner, ‘‘Yeah, I want to march, and when
everybody else march, I’m going to march too. But I’ll be damned if I’m going
down there by myself . . . when it be done, we’re going to do it together.’’ Lad-
ner’s rejoinder spoke volumes about the federal interventionist approach: ‘‘If
they start jumping on you,’’ she retorted, ‘‘the president of the United States
can federalize them like he did in Alabama.’’ But the Natchez community was
not going to depend on some fabled avenging angel from the banks of the
Potomac. It would rely on its own power to compel concessions from the city.
A similar desire to force the federal government to secure rights underpinned
the Freedom Summer strategy that ﬂooded Mississippi with young white
volunteers. Reﬂecting back on the movement years later, cofo leader Dave
Dennis said the belief was that America would only respond to ‘‘the death of a
white college student.’’ The Natchez movement had rejected the federal
interventionist strategy of appealing to northern conscience through suffer-
ing; instead, it emphasized gaining power locally through direct force and
coercion—the organizing model developed by the Deacons in Louisiana.
≥π
Beginning with the boycott, initiated in September 1965, the Natchez
Deacons served as the black community’s informal police force (the city
police were more accommodating to the dead than the living; funerals were


--- PAGE 208 ---
198 Mississippi Chapters
the only occasion when blacks were guaranteed a police escort). The Dea-
cons regularly patrolled the black community by car and on foot to prevent
Klan attacks, maintaining contact through a cb radio network. The patrols
effectively discouraged Klan harassment without resorting to gunﬁre, as was
necessary in Bogalusa and Jonesboro. They stopped white interlopers and
politely yet ﬁrmly told them to leave the area. ‘‘A guy driving through ﬁrst,
you wouldn’t say nothing to him,’’ recalled James Young. ‘‘You didn’t bother
him. But now if he just constantly driving through, back and forth, then you
stopped him . . . we’d tell him unless he has some business through that way,
don’t come through no more.’’ The Deacons also guarded the homes of civil
rights activists and provided escorts for visiting activists and supporters.
≥∫
Most of the Deacons’ activity centered on guarding demonstrators dur-
ing the scores of pickets and marches. The Natchez Deacons were always
armed—often openly. James Young walked along the marches sporting a
pistol in a side holster. White hecklers lined the streets, but generally the
display of resolve and ﬁrepower was a sufﬁcient deterrent. ‘‘Just the pres-
ence of the Deacons kept a lot of things from happening that would have
happened,’’ said Young. Occasionally a white antagonist disregarded the
danger. In one incident a white man attempted to disrupt a march by steer-
ing his car into the line. Within seconds the Deacons converged on the
car with weapons drawn, detained the startled driver, and delivered him to
the police.
≥Ω
As the boycott proceeded, the organizational life of the Natchez Deacons
fell into a regular pattern. Monthly meetings were scheduled, but during the
height of the campaign, they met daily if necessary. The chapter operated in
a modiﬁed democratic style. As a quasi-paramilitary organization, the Dea-
cons found it necessary to delegate authority to a leader for swift command.
But they reserved the right to overrule the leader’s decisions. As Young
described the process, ‘‘The leader would make the decision, or he would say
that this is the way that he thinks it should be. Well, if we felt like it was
meant to be a little different than that or what not, we would discuss it, and
whatever we come up with was what we would do.’’
∂≠
Approximately ﬁfteen men comprised the core of the chapter, regularly
attending meetings and performing duties. Complementing this core was a
network of roughly one hundred men who considered themselves members,
either formally or informally, and who assisted the chapter when they were
needed.
∂∞
The Natchez Police Department’s stance toward the Deacons differed
markedly from the belligerent policy of Bogalusa authorities. In general,


--- PAGE 209 ---
Mississippi Chapters 199
Police Chief J. T. Robinson followed a neutral approach, declining to harass
the Deacons with arrests or intimidation. Indeed, James Stokes had a sur-
prisingly cordial relationship with Chief Robinson. At one point a Deacon
was arrested and assessed a ﬁne following a scufﬂe with police. Stokes asked
Robinson to intervene, and he complied, paying the Deacon’s ﬁne and prom-
ising to prevent future incidents.
∂≤
Robinson’s policy was not all that mystifying. In truth, the police beneﬁted
from having a disciplined defense group in the black community. ‘‘Well
really, the Chief always looked to us to help him to keep law and order,’’ said
Young. The Deacons’ purpose was not to provoke confrontations with the
Klan, but rather to minimize conﬂict. ‘‘We were out to see that there were
law and order carried out.’’ Nevertheless, Chief Robinson was not averse to
manipulating the group. On one occasion a black deputy brought Stokes a
message offering him a police department job if he would quit the Dea-
cons. Stokes was polite but ﬁrm. ‘‘I’ll tell you like this: I really don’t need
that job.’’
∂≥
From the outset, the Natchez chapter maintained their independence
from the Louisiana Deacons, probably to please Charles Evers, who jealously
guarded his territory from outsiders, and also because the national Deacons
required a $100 chapter membership fee and 10 percent of collected dues
to defray national organizing costs. The Natchez chapter’s independence
was not anomalous; typically, most chapters regarded themselves as an au-
tonomous local organization within a loose federation. This relationship
mirrored the independent and democratic nature of most organizations in
southern black communities. Baptist ministers served at the pleasure of the
church laity, unlike Roman Catholic, Methodist, and other hierarchical de-
nominations. Segregation gave rise to a wide range of locally organized
mutual self-help organizations, including benevolent associations and insur-
ance and burial societies. Additionally, the community was honeycombed
with self-organized recreational clubs, including social and pleasure clubs
and travel clubs. These highly independent, localized organizations pro-
vided a model for the relationships between the national Deacons organiza-
tion and its local chapters. In fact, members of the Natchez and Jonesboro
Deacons frequently referred to the organization as a ‘‘club.’’
∂∂
To ensure that state ofﬁcials would accept their application for a corporate
charter, the Natchez group decided to organize under a name other than
the Deacons. It chose the innocently deceptive name ‘‘Natchez Sportsmen
Club.’’ The name was not without irony, as the Klan frequently named their
klaverns ‘‘sportsmens’’ clubs to conceal their identity. In public fund-raising


--- PAGE 210 ---
200 Mississippi Chapters
appeals the Natchez chapter acknowledged the subterfuge, explaining that
‘‘the name ‘sportsmen club’ is used in order to obtain a Mississippi state
charter.’’
∂∑
As in Jonesboro, the Deacons charter in Natchez carried a special signiﬁ-
cance for the members. They believed that the charter gave them the right to
carry ﬁrearms and defend their community. ‘‘In the charter, we had to pro-
tect people’s property and churches and so forth,’’ Stokes pointed out, ‘‘and
therefore couldn’t no one take our weapons from us. So we could carry our
weapons just like the local law enforcement ofﬁcers carry theirs.’’ When
the police challenged Stokes’s right to carry a weapon, the Deacons leader
would stand fast, produce the charter like a talisman, and demand that the
police honor his rights.
∂∏
The Natchez Deacons maintained strict membership standards and sought
mature recruits, fearless men capable of sound judgment and restraint. The
front line against the Klan was no place for hotheads and impulsive youths.
The chapter generally attracted men of character and good standing in the
community. The mission of the organization appealed to men independent in
spirit and mind. ‘‘If we thought that they were the type of person who was
easily persuaded or swayed, we didn’t want that type of person,’’ noted
Stokes. Most recruits were stable family men, often in their thirties; nearly all
were members of the naacp. As mill workers, log haulers, barbers, and
contractors, most Natchez Deacons enjoyed the security of professions that
shielded them from economic retaliation.
∂π
A typical member was the chapter’s secretary, James Young. Young was
forty-one years old when he joined the Deacons in 1965. He had lived his
entire life in Adams County. His memories of Mississippi in the 1930s were of
an arduous yet peaceful childhood with few incidents of racial harassment.
His sharecropper parents lived among poor whites, and the children played
together unencumbered by the prejudices of their parents. Young dropped
out of high school in the ninth grade to work in the ﬁelds; he perhaps would
have lived out his life on the farm had not the dogs of war invaded the
slumbering world of rural Mississippi.
In September 1943 Young joined the army and soon found himself loading
bombs onto warplanes in the South Paciﬁc. The demolition training he
received paid few dividends later in life; more proﬁtable were the lessons
learned about the power of discipline and collective action. Returning to
segregation in Mississippi was a painful and degrading experience for the
young soldier. Young sought refuge on his parents’ farm to avoid Natchez
and the inevitable humiliations attendant to contact with whites. Young
described the solace of the farm: ‘‘It was kind of hard at ﬁrst,’’ he said. ‘‘The


--- PAGE 211 ---
Mississippi Chapters 201
main thing about it is you just have to adjust. . . . I spent most of my time out
there. I didn’t even come around to town.’’ The military had taught him to
accept the bitterness in life. All he could do—all any man could do—was
‘‘adjust and fall in line.’’
∂∫
After risking life and limb for a nation that denied them full citizenship,
black veterans like Young returned with rising expectations for democracy
and declining tolerance for Jim Crow. ‘‘This is what started changing,’’ ex-
plained Stokes. ‘‘Men vowed, ‘If I go to Korea, or Vietnam, I’m damn sure not
going to go back home to nothing like the other soldiers did in World War
One and Two.’ ’’
∂Ω
Not all black men were prepared to ﬁght for their freedom. There were
Deacons who faltered under the pressure of their duties and quit. ‘‘The wives
was scared,’’ explained Stokes. ‘‘Or the fellows was scared that they were
going to get killed or go to jail—when they were the sole provider.’’ Fear was
even more pervasive in the small towns dotting the hills and the delta in Mis-
sissippi. Accompanying Charles Evers as bodyguards on organizing drives,
the Deacons frequently arrived at a courthouse rally to ﬁnd only one or two
people there. These visits to remote communities offered an opportunity for
the Deacons to spread the gospel of self-defense and recruit new members,
but ﬁrst they had to overcome the ever-present nemesis of fear. ‘‘We had to
sort of get the fright out of any county that we went into,’’ admitted Stokes.
‘‘We had to get the fright out of those guys.’’
∑≠
The gun was the Deacons’ principal organizing tool in these isolated com-
munities. Rural blacks could not help being impressed by the Deacons’ au-
dacity. ‘‘We would go to their town, and they would watch us in action, doing
our job with our guns,’’ explained Stokes. ‘‘Police ofﬁcers didn’t bother us. If
he did, he was in trouble. So therefore, that made him [the black man] not
be afraid.’’ The Natchez Deacons were always armed. ‘‘There wasn’t no cer-
tain time; we were armed day and night,’’ said Young, ‘‘and everybody knew
that, and I think that’s what made it so much the better.’’ The willingness to
defend themselves bred conﬁdence. ‘‘I didn’t want to come to the point to
have to pull a gun to use it on nobody,’’ Young remarked, ‘‘but knowing that
you had the gun was a bit of relief because it was more forceful that way.’’
∑∞
To some observers, the Natchez Deacons did more than bear arms; they
recklessly ﬂaunted them. Members of the Natchez chapter developed a rep-
utation for brandishing their weapons, a practice that disturbed their coun-
terparts in Bogalusa. Royan Burris was the Bogalusa chapter ofﬁcer who
initially helped organize the Natchez Deacons. On several occasions he re-
turned to Natchez as a liaison to the Mississippi chapters. He was troubled by
the brazen display of weaponry. ‘‘The Deacons in Natchez really got violent,’’


--- PAGE 212 ---
202 Mississippi Chapters
recalled Burris. ‘‘We had to, kind of call their hand because they felt like
‘because we had a charter,’ they could just walk around with guns . . .
guns everywhere they went. Just like it wasn’t nothing. And that wasn’t our
purpose. They said they just needed to do it because that was the only way
they could walk the streets at the time.’’ Burris’s plea for discretion had lit-
tle effect. The Natchez chapter, according to Burris, continued to swagger
through the streets ‘‘with guns hanging outside like cowboys.’’
∑≤
Like James Jackson and other Deacons leaders, most of the men recruited
by the Natchez chapter regarded nonviolence as a futile strategy. James
Stokes equated nonviolence with the passivity exhibited by preceding gener-
ations. ‘‘They [old people] believed in nonviolence,’’ he pointed out. And the
Klan ‘‘had gone out and caught old people who believed in nonviolence,
killed them, set them aﬁre, cut their penis out and stuffed it in their mouth,
drug them up and down the roads, whipped them with barbed wire.’’ His-
tory had turned Stokes against nonviolence. ‘‘I believe if you shoot at me, I’m
going to shoot at you.’’ Nor was Stokes impressed with the partisans of
nonviolence. ‘‘Those crazy rascals would lay down in the street and so forth,’’
he mused. ‘‘The naacp got rid of core and sncc. After a few people got
killed, we just asked them to pack up and leave and let us take care of
everything ourselves. Thank you but no thank you.’’ Under Evers’s leader-
ship, the naacp gave the Deacons ample berth. ‘‘The naacp was a fully
nonviolent organization,’’ said Young, ‘‘and they still stood for that. But they
didn’t stand in the way of no one else that decided that it took some violence
to protect yourself. They didn’t stand in the way of this, no way.’’
∑≥
Although the Natchez Deacons came to an understanding with the naacp
and Evers, not all segments of the black community accepted them. When
they encountered opposition within the black community, fear changed
from adversary to ally for the Deacons. As they had planned in their ﬁrst
organizing meeting, the Natchez Deacons frequently used violence to disci-
pline critics and collaborators within their own ranks. It was a pattern of
anti–middle-class violence that was a signature of the Deacons throughout
the region. Local authorities implicated the Deacons in shootings and as-
saults against their black detractors in Bogalusa and Port Gibson, but they
were never convicted of the crimes.
In Natchez, this internal intimidation was carried out by the Deacons—as
they had planned in their ﬁrst meeting—but also by independent community
members under the direction of the Deacons. A vigilante group of women
and men frequently attacked blacks who violated the boycott by making pur-
chases at targeted stores. ‘‘There was a little group that would go around,’’
said Young, ‘‘and if they had violated the boycott, whatever they had, they


--- PAGE 213 ---
Mississippi Chapters 203
took it from them and possibly would whup them up.’’ In addition to boycott
violators, informants within the black community caused problems by pro-
viding whites with critical information about organizational plans and inter-
nal conﬂicts. Because of their regular contact with whites, black domestic
workers sometimes came under suspicion. In these cases, the Deacons en-
couraged women members of the naacp to take measures against infor-
mants. ‘‘So we’d have these women, that wasn’t members of our organiza-
tion—they were people in the naacp—they would go catch them and beat
them up,’’ said Stokes. The vigilante groups also attacked black ministers
whom they thought had betrayed the community by providing information
to the white community. Stokes, who eventually became a minister, charged
that some black clergy sold information and campaign endorsements to
white politicians. ‘‘It almost makes you feel somewhat embarrassed to say
you are a minister, because of the things you see ministers do. Every four
years they put black people on sale.’’
∑∂
While the Natchez Deacons countenanced women enforcing the boycott,
they had no place for them within their own ranks. Unlike the prominent for-
mal leadership role played by women in Bogalusa and Jonesboro, the naacp
prevented women from representing the black community in Natchez. Jessie
Bernard, a young African American naacp staffer, crossed swords with
Charles Evers and local naacp members over this policy during one encoun-
ter at the naacp ofﬁce. Bernard pointed out to Evers that women led the
movement on the picket line. ‘‘It’s these ladies, people like Mrs. Duncan, Mrs.
MacNeilly, Mrs. Muzeek, Mrs. Jackson . . . they are the people who are really
getting the job done around here,’’ declared Bernard. ‘‘Look, I think if you’re
going to be a man, I think you should be a man all the way.’’ Women were the
ones who had endured arrests and ‘‘fought off those dogs’’ on the picket line,
yet men had assumed control of negotiations with city ofﬁcials. ‘‘Not one of
them walked out there on the picket line,’’ complained Bernard, ‘‘and yet
when it’s time to go around to the City Hall, they can sit down there and make
decisions. How can they make decisions when they really don’t know what’s
going on?’’
∑∑ As with the naacp, whenever the Deacons assumed political
leadership, their exclusion of women had the effect of limiting women’s
participation at the leadership level.
The Natchez Deacons had ample funds to carry on their work thanks to
Clifford Boxley, a Natchez native who made his home in Redwood, Califor-
nia. Boxley, a postal worker, returned to Natchez for a visit during the height
of the boycott and was impressed by the Deacons’ work. He arranged for a
fund-raising tour in California for James Stokes in November 1965. Stokes
was a natural choice as a spokesperson for the Deacons. A well-spoken,


--- PAGE 214 ---
204 Mississippi Chapters
articulate man with a ﬂair for the dramatic, he had honed his leadership
abilities as a church deacon and choir director and union steward, and he
had traveled extensively around the world in the army’s entertainment unit
from 1953 to 1955.
∑∏
Born in 1928, Stokes grew up on a dusty sharecropper farm on the Lin-
wood Plantation, a few miles outside of Natchez. For generations, his ances-
tors had toiled as slaves and sharecroppers on the plantation. All they had to
show for their labor was a small family cemetery atop a hill on the planta-
tion. In the 1960s a highway was charted to carve through the cemetery. The
Stokes family had long since left the plantation, and despite the desecration,
the plantation owners warned Stokes to stay away from the cemetery and
keep off the property. One morning Stokes strapped on his gun, drove out to
the plantation, and deﬁantly marched up the hill to the cemetery. He came
down the hill with his mother’s small tombstone on his shoulder. He took the
stone to the cemetery and placed it beside his father’s stone, ﬁnally laying
them to rest together. His deﬁance toward the white plantation owner was a
trait acquired early in life. ‘‘My mother used to be afraid for me to leave
home, and afraid when I came back,’’ recalled Stokes. ‘‘Because, even in my
teen-age days, I would say something. I don’t know. Maybe I was too crazy to
be scared.’’
∑π
Stokes exhibited the same outspokenness as a fund-raiser for the Deacons
during his tour of California. On 9 November 1965 Stokes delivered a speech
at San Mateo College. A handbill distributed at the event noted that the
Deacons’ purpose was to ‘‘protect the lives and property of negro citizens
from hooded night riders.’’ The leaﬂet requested contributions ‘‘to purchase
such items as Walkie Talkies, Radio Equipment, Uniform Equipment, and
cars that are radio equipped to patrol the negro neighborhood.’’ Though the
circular omitted mention of weapons, the fbi reported that in his speech
Stokes said that funds would also be used to buy weapons. Years later Stokes
conﬁrmed the report and frankly admitted that the objective of the fund-
raising tour was to ‘‘buy guns.’’
∑∫
Stokes traveled throughout California for approximately a week, speaking
at several churches in Redwood and appearing at fund-raising events in Los
Angeles, Oakland, and San Francisco. He returned to Natchez with contribu-
tions totaling $7,000, several guns, and a donated automobile. All of the
money went for additional guns and radios.
∑Ω
Stokes’s successful fund-raising enabled the Deacons to give their full at-
tention to the boycott, which was entering its third month in November.
Since the Metcalfe bombing, militants such as Charles Evers, Rudy Shields,
naacp director Archie Jones, and the Reverend Shead Baldwin had displaced


--- PAGE 215 ---
Mississippi Chapters 205
the older moderate leaders, and the aggressive new spirit was undermining
unity in the white community. The wintry winds of December ﬁnally brought
a sober reappraisal of the situation by the white power structure. The boycott
had effectively eroded business class solidarity to the extent that twenty-
three merchants had already hired blacks as clerks or cashiers. Finally, on
3 December city government and local businessmen formally conceded de-
feat. The white elite agreed to comprehensive racial reforms, acceding to
virtually all of the original naacp demands. Evers hailed the agreement as
the ‘‘greatest concession’’ ever made in the civil rights movement—and he
was certainly right as far as Mississippi was concerned. Whereas virtually
every other local campaign had ended in failure during the civil rights move-
ment in Mississippi, the Natchez project had mobilized an entire community
and exacted sweeping concessions from the white establishment—without
beneﬁt of federal intervention. When Evers and Mayor Nosser announced
the accord at a joint press conference, Evers took the occasion to dance on
the grave of Jim Crow. The black movement had set out to make Natchez
a ‘‘whipping boy,’’ he bragged, and now the rest of Mississippi needed to
‘‘take heed.’’
∏≠
The concessions made by city government and business leaders were con-
siderable and went well beyond civil equality reforms. The white establish-
ment agreed to integrate all city-operated facilities, including schools and
hospitals; hire more blacks and upgrade current jobs; enforce building codes
to eliminate slums; create a biracial committee to advise the City Council;
and even implement a beautiﬁcation program in black neighborhoods. The
merchants that the boycott had targeted also agreed to open sales clerk
positions to blacks. Although not consenting to mandatory courtesy titles,
government and businesses promised to discharge clerks if they addressed
blacks with demeaning terms.
∏∞
The Natchez campaign was the single greatest community victory for the
civil rights movement in Mississippi, though historians have never given it
the credit it deserves. By any standard of community organizing, the cam-
paign was a sterling success: the organizers united and inspired a commu-
nity to courageous action (more than ﬁve hundred demonstrators were ar-
rested in one week) and secured dramatic legal and economic reforms. In
comparison, the projects in McComb, Clarksdale, and Jackson failed to win
any signiﬁcant demands and frequently left the black community demor-
alized and in disarray (the McComb project, e.g., registered only six voters in
six months).
∏≤
What blinds many observers to the Natchez success is Charles Evers. Com-
peting national civil rights organizations universally reviled Evers, and few


--- PAGE 216 ---
206 Mississippi Chapters
of his critics would begrudge him a victory—even decades later. Nonethe-
less, he deserves credit for his accomplishment. Evers did not pioneer the
strategy he used in Natchez: he simply employed the strategic model for
community organizing that the Louisiana Deacons had perfected before the
Natchez campaign. It was a strategy that eschewed appeals to northern
conscience and instead forced local concessions through a combination of
legal protest, economic coercion, and, most importantly, militant force—in
the form of armed self-defense and community discipline.
∏≥ Moreover, it was
a strategy that succeeded where others had failed.
The end of the boycott completed the Deacons’ work in Natchez, and the
chapter now turned its attention to civil rights campaigns in the surrounding
area. On one occasion the chapter provided security for Martin Luther King
in Jackson, Mississippi, and later offered to assist him in McComb. Some of
the Natchez Deacons were deputized by Charles Evers and provided security
for Evers as he organized in Southwest Mississippi, including during trips
to McComb, Hazelhurst, and Brookhaven. Although Evers had initially re-
buked the Deacons, he quickly integrated the Natchez chapter into every
aspect of his organizing. By the spring of 1966 Evers had boycotts planned in
the uncharted territories of Fayette and Port Gibson. ‘‘Deep down in himself,
he knew he needed this protection,’’ said James Stokes. ‘‘Because he wasn’t
going to get it from nowhere else. Nobody else was going to protect him.’’
Evers’s assistant, Rudolph ‘‘Rudy’’ Shields, an ex-boxer from Yazoo, Mis-
sissippi, served as liaison to the Deacons. Though he was reluctant to discuss
his use of force at the time, years later Evers admitted that he relied on
armed guards and offensive violence in his Mississippi organizing. ‘‘We had
our protective squad,’’ Evers wrote in his autobiography, Evers. ‘‘We had our
guns. We didn’t go around bragging about it, but we were ready to enforce
those boycotts, to die if necessary. And they knew we were ready.’’
∏∂
Between 1965 and 1968 Charles Evers’s extensive local campaigns pro-
vided the main framework for Deacons organizing in Mississippi. The
Natchez Deacons went on to organize several Deacons chapters and infor-
mal groups in Port Gibson, Fayette (where Evers was eventually elected to
ofﬁce), Vicksburg, Kosciusko, Woodville, Centreville, and St. Francisville,
Louisiana. Three of the informal Deacons groups that Natchez organized—
in Fayette, Kosciusko, and Vicksburg—had little activity. Fayette, a tiny, pre-
dominantly black town a short drive from Natchez, was the site of a naacp
boycott of white stores. Little is known about the Fayette chapter, other
than that J. D. Washington headed it. The Vicksburg chapter consisted


--- PAGE 217 ---
Mississippi Chapters 207
of only a few members and had little success. The same was true for the
Kosciusko chapter. In response to the Klan murder of Vernon Dahmer, a
black leader in Hattiesburg, Mississippi, the Bogalusa Deacons organized a
chapter known as ‘‘the police unit’’ in Hattiesburg in 1966. Contacts there
helped the Bogalusa group to form another chapter in Laurel, Mississippi—
one that extended its activities into the labor movement. In addition, the
Bogalusa Deacons organized chapters in Tylertown and Columbia—bringing
the total number of Mississippi chapters to eight.
∏∑
Port Gibson became one of the strongest Deacons chapters in Mississippi.
In January 1966 the town was still completely segregated, untouched by the
Civil Rights Act. When white leaders learned that Charles Evers was plan-
ning a campaign there, they quickly sought out a group of compliant black
leaders to negotiate a compromise. In response, local activists organized a
naacp chapter to represent the community, but the increasingly militant
community considered even the new naacp chapter, led by a local minister,
too accommodating. ‘‘He was a minister there, but the black community felt
like he could be no spokesman for them,’’ said George Walker, a Port Gibson
Deacons leader, ‘‘because whatever they [whites] told him, he was going to
do that.’’
∏∏
In the spring of 1966, activists presented a list of demands to local authori-
ties but failed to receive an acceptable response. On 1 April Evers announced
a boycott of all white-owned businesses in Port Gibson, hoping that white
merchants would, in turn, pressure municipal and county government of-
ﬁcials to accept the demands.
∏π To assist with the boycott, Rudy Shields
helped form the Port Gibson Deacons chapter in July 1966. Shields became a
chapter member and served as the liaison between Evers and the chapter. A
retired professional ﬁghter and streetwise operator, Shields was a popular
and accomplished grassroots organizer. Like Evers, he had lived in Chicago
for several years and returned to his native Mississippi to organize in the
movement.
∏∫ Although ofﬁcially a Deacons chapter, the Port Gibson group
quickly acquired the name ‘‘Black Hats of Claiborne County,’’ owing to their
habit of wearing black hats to identify themselves to police and community
members. George Walker, a lifelong resident of the county, became the
chapter’s ﬁrst president.
∏Ω
Walker had learned responsibility at a young age on a sharecropper farm.
When he was nine, Walker took over farming the cotton crop while his father
staved off starvation by doing ‘‘public work,’’ that is, logging and other forms
of hired labor. ‘‘We didn’t never do nothing but work,’’ remembered Walker.
‘‘Didn’t think about nothing else. And just trying to do what we was sup-


--- PAGE 218 ---
208 Mississippi Chapters
posed to do: take care of each other.’’ Walker served three years as an army
corpsman in Korea, then returned to a job at the Thompson Funeral Home.
He supplemented his income with masonry and electrical work.
π≠
In his youth, segregation had seemed natural and immutable to Walker.
He never entertained the thought of challenging Jim Crow. ‘‘It never dawned
on me,’’ said Walker. ‘‘I just thought this was a way of life.’’ But in the 1960s,
when he saw the movement unfolding around him, his outlook on segrega-
tion changed radically. ‘‘And then after I got involved with everything else,
everything started coming out. Looked like the sun was coming out where
I could see. And it come to me—well maybe things not supposed to be
like this.’’
π∞
As the head of the Port Gibson Deacons, Walker was preoccupied with
ensuring that the black community complied with the boycott. Most blacks
did, but a few were intractable. The naacp resorted to forceful tactics to rein
in boycott violators. At the regular Tuesday night naacp meetings, Evers
would read aloud a list of violators and warn them that the ‘‘spirit’s going
to get you.’’ In most cases the ‘‘spirit’’ assumed the form of a brick ﬂying
through a window.
π≤
Early in the campaign Evers recruited a group of ‘‘store watchers’’ to en-
force the boycott, many of whom eventually made up the Port Gibson Dea-
cons chapter. The watchers frequently used strong-arm tactics. They rou-
tinely stopped shoppers and intimidated them into not patronizing the store.
If the shoppers had already made their purchases, the watchers would seize
and destroy the items. Boycott breakers received threatening calls, and on
two occasions assailants ﬁred guns into their homes.
π≥
The Deacons aided the store watchers in enforcing the boycott, clearly
crossing the line between defensive and offensive force. Their actions won
them the enmity of many, particularly middle-class blacks and ministers.
‘‘The ministers, in general, they were opposed,’’ related Walker. ‘‘Some peo-
ple hated us.’’ Within a few months the Deacons found themselves blamed
for any act of intimidation that occurred. Walker maintained that the Dea-
cons ‘‘got labeled for harassing people’’ because of their association with
Evers, but he denied that the Deacons were intimidating people. ‘‘We were
just there to see that the people were protected.’’
π∂
The Claiborne County sheriff ’s ofﬁce thought otherwise. It suspected that
the Port Gibson Deacons were involved in at least one shooting attack on a
black boycott breaker. One night a car cruised by the home of Ed Gilmore
and ﬁred several shots into his house. Gilmore, a mechanic, had been one of
the high-proﬁle boycott breakers. Within minutes, sheriff ’s deputies stopped


--- PAGE 219 ---
Mississippi Chapters 209
Elmo Scott as he and two other Deacons were driving on Highway 61 but
later released them for lack of evidence.π∑
The Port Gibson chapter held regular meetings at several sites, including
the First Baptist Church. Before meeting they would check the church for
bombs and then post guards on the roof of an adjacent building. The chapter
charged dues to pay for ammunition, and individual members paid for their
own weapons and cb radios used to coordinate actions and monitor Klan
activities. The chapter conducted both motor and foot patrols and organized
regular target practice at a target range south of Port Gibson. ‘‘We had our
weapons everywhere we went,’’ said Walker. But like the Jonesboro chapter,
the Port Gibson Deacons did not publicly display them.
π∏
In addition to patrolling, their duties included guarding marchers and
keeping a watchful eye on picketers at stores. They occasionally exported
their guard services to other towns such as nearby Tillman. By staying in
contact by cb radios in their cars and homes, the chapters in Port Gibson,
Natchez, and Fayette comprised a regional defense network that could in-
stantly summon assistance and communicate alerts.
The cb transmissions could be a source of fear as well as solace. Walker
recalled a white man who spewed an unending torrent of threats on the cb
radio. ‘‘He stayed on his walkie-talkie and he was always talking about how
he was going to ‘send them monkeys back to Africa . . . going to send them to
the moon before June.’ The whole situation was scary for me.’’ The murder
of civil rights workers in Neshoba County also haunted Walker and the
Deacons. ‘‘Didn’t nobody really know what was going to happen. The three
fellas had just got killed up there. It constantly stayed on all our minds and
all our thoughts.’’
ππ
In Port Gibson, the Klan went beyond mere insults and threats. A gang of
armed whites assaulted Deacon Alfred Lee Davis while he was picketing the
Jones Furniture Store. Davis refused to back down in the face of a gun, and
within minutes George Walker and several other Deacons went to his aid.
With reinforcements at his side, Davis told one of the white men that he did
not have ‘‘nerve enough to shoot him.’’ Fortunately, the sheriff intervened
and defused the situation.
π∫
As in other places, the mere presence of the Deacons transformed the role
of the naacp in Port Gibson. ‘‘naacp ofﬁcials realized that the presence of the
Deacons made the naacp a more appealing negotiating body and enhanced
their effectiveness,’’ observes Emilye Crosby in her study of Port Gibson.
With the Deacons ﬁghting back against the Klan, the town negotiated an
agreement that the Deacons would disarm if the Klan would, too. The mu-


--- PAGE 220 ---
210 Mississippi Chapters
tual stand-down was a remarkable achievement for the Deacons and testi-
ﬁed to the effectiveness of their approach to secure reform on the local level.
The boycott became a landmark legal case when white merchants sued the
naacp for conducting an illegal secondary boycott. The merchants claimed
that the naacp had no valid complaint against their establishments, that the
civil rights groups had targeted their businesses only to pressure town and
county ofﬁcials to accept their demands. On 9 August 1976, after a pro-
longed court battle, Hinds County chancellor George W. Haynes awarded a
$1,250,699 settlement to the white merchants and issued a permanent in-
junction against several forms of boycotts. The decision was later overturned
by the u.s. Supreme Court.
πΩ
Charles Evers’s role in Port Gibson ended ignominiously when he sum-
marily called off the boycott, raising suspicions that he had accepted a deal
with the white establishment. The black community asked him to leave, and
the community, unlike many other civil rights–era projects, survived the loss
of outside leadership and sustained a vibrant, effective organization. Ac-
cording to Walker, the Deacons chapter ﬁnally dissolved in 1968 in response
to complaints that it was intimidating blacks in the community. The Port
Gibson naacp had summoned the Deacons to answer a charge that they had
thrown a brick at Alexander Collins’s barbershop. The Deacons were in-
censed at having to defend themselves. ‘‘We done put our lives on the line
out here. If they think that low of us, then we’ll just let what happens
happen.’’ The need for self-defense did not end with the demise of the
Deacons. Only one year later a shooting incident at a church led to a riot and
shoot-out between blacks and the Mississippi State Highway Patrol.
∫≠
The Deacons also found fertile organizing soil in Wilkinson County in
Southwest Mississippi. In 1965 James Stokes from the Natchez chapter
formed the Woodville chapter, which eventually recruited approximately
forty members from Woodville, Centreville, and rural areas in Wilkinson
County. William ‘‘Bilbo’’ Ferguson served as president of the Woodville chap-
ter; other ofﬁcers included Edward Caine, the chapter’s spokesperson, and
Herman Burkes, vice president. Ferguson was a thirty-two-year-old scrap
metal worker who had been reared by his grandparents. Family members es-
caped sharecropping by buying their own land in the 1940s. They lived a
humble but relatively independent life raising cotton, sweet potatoes, corn,
and a few livestock. A Mason and a churchgoer, Ferguson joined the naacp
in 1964.
∫∞
Ed Caine was a self-employed carpenter. Caine paid a price for his associa-
tion with the Deacons: he lost all of his white customers after word circu-
lated of his Deacons membership. Other chapter members included Henry


--- PAGE 221 ---
Mississippi Chapters 211
Jones, another carpenter; Benjamin Groom, a logger; Elmo McKenzie, a
sawmill worker; William Davis; and Earnest Tollivar. Nearly all of the men
were also Masons.
∫≤
The Woodville Deacons worked closely with the naacp and conducted
monthly meetings at the Negro Masonic Temple. Attendance varied from a
dozen to just two or three members. Although organized in 1965, the Wood-
ville Deacons primarily assisted with marches in Natchez for the ﬁrst two
years of its existence. Then in August 1967, blacks became upset when they
failed to win any county posts in the Democratic primary. In September the
Wilkinson County branch of the naacp led a series of protests and launched
a boycott in Woodville to secure a new election and the appointment of
blacks to the Wilkinson County Election Commission. The naacp was par-
ticularly disturbed with a Board of Education election in which a white
candidate defeated a popular black leader, Anselm Joseph Finch, in part,
because several black teachers had supported the white candidate. The con-
troversy sparked a protest led by James Joliff, president of the Wilkinson
County naacp, a tough uncompromising militant, who called for a boycott of
white merchants until a new election could be held.
∫≥
On 4 September 1967 Joliff led a group of two hundred blacks and a
contingent of armed Deacons in a march to the Wilkinson County Training
School on the outskirts of Woodville. The naacp was demanding that school
ofﬁcials ﬁre ‘‘Negro teachers there who did not favor Negroes running in the
Democratic primaries.’’ ‘‘We are going to have to bury those Negroes who
have sold themselves out to the white people,’’ Joliff told the marchers at a
rally. Forty-ﬁve grim members of the State Highway Patrol confronted the
marchers on the way to the school. In a subsequent skirmish, patrolmen
arrested three Deacons for possession of illegal weapons. Later in the day
Joliff and the Deacons traveled the twenty miles to neighboring Centreville
and staged a second march of approximately two hundred blacks. This time
a white man emerged from a gas station along the march route and menaced
the demonstrators with a riﬂe. In an instant, twenty-ﬁve Deacons pulled
weapons—carbines, 30-30s, and pistols—and surrounded the bewildered
white gunman, who retreated back into the gas station. Ferguson was philo-
sophical about the confrontation. ‘‘It would have been my time or theirs.’’
∫∂
The Deacons’ armed action at the march brought Charles Evers into the
controversy. Evers arrived in Woodville the following day and addressed a
gathering of one thousand blacks at a Methodist church. In typical high-
handed fashion, he ordered an end to the marches and other demonstra-
tions but promised that the boycott would continue. Deacons president Bilbo
Ferguson later met with law enforcement ofﬁcials to discuss the march in-


--- PAGE 222 ---
212 Mississippi Chapters
cident. To mollify the police, the Deacons promised to dismiss members
involved in the incident, but Ferguson never followed through with the
dismissal. Five Deacons, including Earnest Tollivar, were later arrested on
charges arising from the 4 September incident.
∫∑
Lenox Forman, district attorney for the Southwestern District of Missis-
sippi, who witnessed the 4 September march, was perturbed by the spectacle
of the openly armed Deacons walking the streets. Forman authorized the
State Highway Patrol to conﬁscate the Deacons’ ﬁrearms—a move reminis-
cent of Louisiana governor John McKeithen’s attempt to disarm the Bogalusa
Deacons. The naacp protested the ﬂagrant violation of the Second Amend-
ment, pointing out that the highway patrol was disarming the Deacons but
not whites. Conﬁscating the Deacons’ weapons at the 4 September march
was not difﬁcult, but Forman had a problem carrying out his policy in the fol-
lowing months. The Woodville Deacons maintained strict secrecy, and law
enforcement ofﬁcials failed to learn the identity of all of the members. As a
result, the State Highway Patrol began to indiscriminately conﬁscate the ﬁre-
arms of any blacks they encountered. Trampling on the Bill of Rights with im-
punity, Mississippi law enforcement agents arbitrarily stopped blacks in Wil-
kinson County—sportsmen and Deacons alike—and seized their weapons.
∫∏
Over the next several months the Deacons guarded naacp meetings
equipped with walkie-talkies and cb radios. ‘‘They wouldn’t have no meeting
without the Deacons,’’ recalled Ferguson. Although the Woodville chapter
performed admirably, its record was marred by two shooting incidents. At
one Deacons meeting a young member of the chapter argued with Ed Caine,
then drew a revolver and shot and wounded Caine. In a second incident
Leon Chambers, a Woodville Deacon, was convicted of shooting a black
deputy sheriff, Aaron Liberty. Although Gable McDonald, another Wilkinson
County man, confessed to the crime, Chambers remained in prison for sev-
eral years.
∫π
In addition to strong chapters in Port Gibson, Natchez, and Woodville,
Deacon groups and individual members were spread throughout Missis-
sippi. The Bogalusa and Jonesboro chapters recruited most of these contacts
during organizing sorties in Mississippi from 1965 to 1966. Recruiters visited
Greenville, Poplarville, Canton, Jackson, Meridian, Tougaloo, Columbia,
Hattiesburg, Lexington, Edwards, and Holmes County. Sometimes the Dea-
cons merely advised local groups on how to set up their own security force.
On other occasions they actually recruited members and established nomi-
nal chapters.
∫∫
Typical of Bogalusa’s organizing efforts were its activities in Columbia,


--- PAGE 223 ---
Mississippi Chapters 213
Mississippi, located in Walthall County. After receiving several requests for
assistance from Columbia, Royan Burris and Henry Austin, the Deacon who
had shot the white man who attacked the march in Bogalusa, traveled to the
Mississippi town—only an hour’s drive from Bogalusa. The Columbia civil
rights activists told Burris and Austin that the Freedom House had been
damaged by arson; that whites drove by and ﬁred shots into the house. ‘‘So
we asked them, what was they doing, just sitting there letting people shoot
at them,’’ recalled Burris. ‘‘And they said, ‘Well we don’t have no other
choice. If we shoot, the police arrest us.’ ’’ Burris had little patience for this
rationale. He told the Columbia men, ‘‘If I can walk out there and slap you,
and you not going to slap me back, then I’ll slap you anytime I get ready. But
if I ﬁgure I’m going to slap you, and I’m going to be slapped back, I’ll be
skeptical about it.’’
∫Ω
Burris and Austin began guarding homes in Columbia and organizing a
local chapter. To discourage the drive-by shootings without ﬁring at the
Klan, Austin worked with local men to booby-trap the road. They drove nails
into wooden planks, attached ropes to the planks, and then placed them in
the road. They waited three nights until a carload of Klansmen fell into the
trap, which ﬂattened all of their tires. The Klan never returned. The Dea-
cons’ guns had a chilling effect on the night riders too, said Burris. The Klan
‘‘found out that the same type of guns that they had could kill them—just like
they would kill us.’’
Ω≠
In addition to Mississippi, there were reports that the Bogalusa Deacons
were recruiting individuals and forming chapters in Alabama. Clayborne
Carson documents a chapter in Lowndes County, Alabama, a sncc strong-
hold and the birthplace of the Lowndes County Black Panther Party, which
became the namesake of Huey Newton’s California-based organization.
Charles Sims traveled to Eutaw, Alabama, a small city in Greene County,
another sncc base, and claimed to have established a chapter there. Henry
Austin also visited the area. fbi reports give a different version of events,
indicating that local blacks had deliberately spread a false rumor that the
Deacons had organized a chapter as a form of ‘‘psychological retaliation to
combat the parading and demonstrating of Klansmen in and around Greene
County.’’
Ω∞
The Deacons also organized in Tuskegee, Alabama, the site of the Tuske-
gee Institute. A local man sent a letter to Tuskegee residents soliciting mem-
bership in the Deacons organization. At least one meeting was held, but the
extent of further organizing is unknown. core had several projects in the
Carolinas, and the connection between core and the Deacons soon brought


--- PAGE 224 ---
214 Mississippi Chapters
the Deacons to the Southeast. Deacons from Atlanta were sent to provide
protection at a voter registration demonstration on 14 August 1965 at Ply-
mouth, North Carolina. The Deacons offered their assistance again in Sep-
tember, but apparently their August visit had achieved the desired results.
Ω≤
A militant movement in St. George, South Carolina, led to questions about
the links between the Deacons and another shadowy self-defense group, the
Saints of St. George. The fbi suspected that the Saints were ‘‘afﬁliated’’ with
the Deacons but failed to uncover a link. There was also Deacons activity
south of St. George in Jacksonboro. The leader of the Jacksonboro Deacons
was Bobbie Cox, a longtime civil rights activist and military veteran. It ap-
pears that the activists in Walterboro, Jacksonboro, and neighboring towns
coordinated defense activities in the region. In April 1966 fourteen black
men claiming to be Deacons attacked and beat two Klansmen who were
putting up posters for a Klan rally. One of the Klansmen was Kelly Morris, the
owner of a local cafe. All of Morris’s black employees had quit when Morris
advertised that the proﬁts from his cafe would go to the Klan. In addition,
blacks and some local whites boycotted the restaurant. Morris’s luck got
even worse when he and the Klan subsequently parted ways and Morris
himself became the target of a Klan cross burning.
Ω≥
There were reports of Deacons’ organizing efforts in several other states,
including Georgia and Florida. At least one report indicates that there were
Deacons in Atlanta, although these may have been members from other
chapters visiting the city. The Deacons also claimed to have chapters in
North Florida. An fbi investigation revealed that the Deacons had indeed
stirred interest in the region. In July 1965 local blacks gave serious thought
to forming a chapter in Jefferson and Madison Counties, but there is no
evidence that the chapter ever existed.
Ω∂
The Deacons’ record in the Deep South was impressive. They developed
several effective chapters and recruited hundreds of members. But more
important than size was their inﬂuence on the grassroots movement. Like a
single cottonwood tree whose thousands of seeds are carried aloft to distant
lands, the Deacons’ message traveled far and wide across the fertile crescent
of the Black Belt. In 1965 Earnest Thomas and Charlie Sims seemed to be
everywhere. They crisscrossed Louisiana, Mississippi, and Alabama, visiting
scores of cities and spreading the gospel of self-defense. core organizer
Ronnie Moore recalled that the Deacons were widely known in the region—
by whites as well as blacks. ‘‘I think that the greater white community
became afraid,’’ said Moore. ‘‘You have to understand that the Klan in the


--- PAGE 225 ---
Mississippi Chapters 215
South had a free hand with no threat of retaliation in any organized fashion
until the Deacons were announced. And just the thought that there might be
a legitimate, or reactionary response to Klan activities made the white com-
munity afraid.’’
Ω∑
The Deacons had neutralized the Klan in the South. Their next stop was
the North.


--- PAGE 226 ---
chapter
12
Heading North
earnest thomas thought  Elijah Muhammad was
rude. In the spring of 1966 Muhammad, leader of the Black Muslim Nation
of Islam, invited Thomas to his palatial home for several Sunday dinners.
Thomas had become something of a celebrity in nationalist and leftist cir-
cles, and the Muslims were determined to recruit the Deacons leader. It was
an impressive experience for Thomas: a bountiful meal in a luxurious set-
ting, complete with famous dinner guests like Muhammad Ali. But one of
Elijah Muhammad’s habits annoyed Thomas. At their ﬁrst dinner, the Mus-
lim leader was fasting and did not join Thomas in eating. Thomas, the small-
town southerner, was offended that Muhammad would not share the meal.
When the guests ﬁnished their repast, Thomas told Muhammad that it made
him ‘‘feel bad’’ to be eating while his host ate nothing. The next time Thomas
was invited, Muhammad joined in the meal.
∞
But the food and ﬂattery did little to win Thomas to Islam. When Muham-
mad ﬁnally asked him to join the Nation of Islam, Thomas said that the
Muslims would only be gaining a hypocrite, not a convert. ‘‘I smoke, I drink,
and I don’t have any intention of quitting either of them,’’ he told Muham-
mad. But Thomas had some trepidation about the Muslims, as well. He
had heard the dark rumor that Fard Muhammad, Elijah Muhammad’s men-
tor, had mysteriously disappeared and that some suspected foul play. The
Deacons leader also objected to the Muslims’ separatist political program.
Thomas sought justice within America, not without. ‘‘I don’t want no sepa-
rate state,’’ he told the Muslims. The Muslims also told Thomas that if he
joined them, he would have to learn Arabic so that he could read the Koran.
That was too much. ‘‘I can hardly speak English,’’ said Thomas years later,
‘‘and they wanted me speaking Arabic.’’
≤
The incident was emblematic of a problem the Deacons would encounter
in their forays into the North. They were an indigenous southern orga-


--- PAGE 227 ---
Heading North 217
nization, steeped in rural southern folkways: pragmatic, independent, and
stubborn. By 1966 they were resolute opponents of nonviolence and, com-
pared to the national civil rights organizations, had a radically different ap-
proach to winning equality. But they were not ideologues or revolutionaries.
They were simple hardworking men—barbers, mill hands, factory workers,
church deacons—who wanted nothing more than equality and justice within
the framework of the traditional American dream. Their pragmatism would
confound their nationalist and leftist suitors, but it also shaped the Deacons’
brief but extraordinary sortie into national politics and would take the orga-
nization from the mansions of Chicago to the streets of Peking.
≥
The Deacons initially went north for one reason—money. In their early
stages, the organization derived most of its ﬁnancial support from local
sources: chapter fees, membership dues, and community contributions. It is
impossible to determine the precise amount of the Deacons’ income. Few
chapters kept ﬁnancial records, and most of the income was collected and
controlled by Earnest Thomas and Charlie Sims, neither of whom kept rec-
ords. Chapters did not closely monitor the treasury nor did they require
receipts for reimbursements. Sims and Thomas casually disbursed cash for
travel and other expenses.
∂
By the summer of 1965 both Sims and Thomas had become full-time
organizers for the Deacons, and both felt justiﬁed in compensating them-
selves for their work with funds they had raised for the Deacons. Sims
normally collected chapter fees himself, so he had wide discretion on how to
use the money. Neither Sims nor Thomas grew rich off the Deacons, but
their haphazard bookkeeping and indiscriminate spending raised questions
about their motives and fueled rumors of self-aggrandizement.
∑
As the Deacons expanded and traveled extensively to assist local projects
and recruit members, funding needs soon outstripped local support. Na-
tional fund-raising not only represented a new source of revenue, but it
also presented an important opportunity for the Deacons to publicize their
unique approach and win political support. The ﬁrst major contribution to
the Deacons from outside of Louisiana came from a Los Angeles fund-raising
effort headed up by black journalist Louis Lomax. Lomax raised $15,000 for
the Bogalusa movement after Sims appeared on Lomax’s Los Angeles tele-
vision show in June 1965. Fifteen thousand dollars was a staggering wind-
fall for a small organization like the Bogalusa Civic and Voters League
and comparable to nearly two years’ income for a mill worker. Although
Lomax’s contribution went directly to the Voters League, some of the funds
underwrote the Deacons’ activities as well (Charlie Sims was the league’s
treasurer).
∏


--- PAGE 228 ---
218 Heading North
core organized most of the Deacons’ fund-raising forays to the West
Coast. In July 1965 it was Earnest Thomas’s turn to tap California for support.
By this time Thomas was billing himself as ‘‘Regional Vice-President and
Director of Organization’’ for the Deacons for Defense and Justice, a self-
appointed title that gave him autonomy from the Jonesboro chapter. Thomas
arrived in San Francisco during the last week of July to raise funds and set
up a ‘‘Friends of the Deacons’’ organization that would serve as a perma-
nent fund-raising support group. He spoke at a core-sponsored reception in
Berkeley on 24 July 1965 and at a rally at the Macedonia Baptist Church in
San Francisco the following day. On 5 August he attended a reception at the
Sun Reporter Newspaper Building to raise funds for bail for eighteen persons
jailed in Jonesboro. The two-week trip also produced a sympathetic article in
the San Francisco Chronicle: ‘‘Rights Army—The Angry ‘Deacons.’ ’’ While in
California, Thomas also met with Bobby Seale, a member of the Revolution-
ary Action Movement ( ram), who later helped found the Black Panther
Party. Seale was impressed with Thomas and the Deacons and raised the
possibility of forming a Deacons chapter in Los Angeles. Thomas let the
subject drop, judging Seale to be too ‘‘radical’’ for the Deacons.
π
The Deacons next turned their eyes north to Detroit. The Motor City had
long been a center of black nationalist activity, dating back to the Marcus
Garvey movement in the 1920s. Malcolm X had spent a great deal of time in
Detroit, where his brother directed an important mosque for Elijah Muham-
mad’s Nation of Islam. One of the most prominent black nationalist organi-
zations in Detroit was the Group on Advanced Leadership ( goal), led by
Richard Henry, which had close ties to Malcolm X and other nationalists.
Like most black nationalist groups, goal admired the Deacons for their
willingness to challenge the nonviolent orthodoxy. ‘‘Birmingham shows . . .
you just can’t change the white man by letting him beat you over the head
every day,’’ said goal leader Reverend Albert B. Cleage in 1963. ‘‘I’m sick and
tired of singing ‘We Shall Overcome.’ ’’ Socialist as well as nationalist, goal
charged that white liberal institutions controlled the mainstream black civil
rights movement and were steering it to voter registration and desegrega-
tion and away from radical economic and political change.
∫
Like numerous southern communities, Bogalusa had lost many of its black
citizens to the industrial behemoth of Detroit. In August 1965 former Boga-
lusa residents Clement Johnson, Melvina Dexter, and Dexter’s wife arranged
for goal to sponsor a ‘‘freedom dinner’’ in Detroit to honor Bob Hicks and
raise funds for the Voters League. The league’s attorneys had advised the
league to maintain a clear distinction between its organization and the
Deacons—although overlapping membership made the distinction a legal


--- PAGE 229 ---
Heading North 219
ﬁction. To comply with their attorneys’ advice, Hicks attended the Detroit
event as a representative of the Voters League and Charlie Sims attended as
the Deacons’ ofﬁcial spokesperson.
Hicks and Sims may have been regarded as ‘‘militants’’ in Bogalusa, but
their self-defense rhetoric paled by comparison to the revolutionary fervor
of their hosts in Detroit. goal leader Richard Henry, who would later head
the separatist Republic of New Africa, told the audience of three hundred
that violence was the only way ‘‘of ‘letting Mr. Charlie’ know that the black
people were tired of being pushed around.’’ As a sign of the changing atti-
tudes toward nonviolence, Congressmen John Conyers and Charles Diggs
both ascended the podium to praise the Deacons and defend the principle
of self-defense, with Diggs observing that new situations called for ‘‘new
techniques.’’
Ω
Hicks and Sims sounded moderate themes of reconciliation and racial
harmony. Sims told the audience that the ‘‘white man’’ respects three things:
money, the vote, and force. The Deacons were going to ﬁght until they had
the ‘‘whole hog,’’ since they were ‘‘backed up to the river and will drown or
ﬁght.’’ The dinner raised $509 for the Voters League.
∞≠
Sims went on the road again in September 1965, this time with A. Z.
Young, to attend a San Bernardino, California, fund-raiser for the Voters
League. Their old supporter Louis Lomax had organized a ‘‘Freedom Fes-
tival’’ at the Swing Auditorium to beneﬁt the Bogalusa movement and the
‘‘victims of Watts rioting.’’ Lomax had recruited an impressive lineup of
entertainers for the festival, including actor Dick Van Dyke and comedians
Bill Cosby and Godfrey Cambridge.
∞∞
But plans began to unravel as the event drew near. Some of the festival’s
sponsors and stars withdrew at the last minute because, according to Lomax,
the John Birch Society was applying ‘‘incredible pressure.’’ The extremist
right wing in San Bernardino was familiar with the Deacons: the city was
home to the Reverend Connie Lynch, the racist leader who had spoken in
Bogalusa at the height of civil rights activities in July 1965. Lomax and
the festival promoters desperately fought to salvage the event in the face
of mounting pressure. A. Z. Young appeared on local television and later
spoke at a Unitarian church, where he was introduced as a member of the
Deacons. Young tried to deﬂect the criticism that the funds raised by the
event would help purchase guns and ammunition. He announced that con-
tributions would go only for children’s clothes and ﬁnes and bail for protest-
ers. He told his television audience that the Klan was ‘‘on the way out’’ in
Bogalusa. ‘‘They still ride, but now they are careful when they ride and
where they ride.’’ Despite Lomax’s countermeasures, the right wing’s cam-


--- PAGE 230 ---
220 Heading North
paign to discredit the Deacons in San Bernardino had considerable effect. A
disappointingly small crowd of six hundred attended the festival, enter-
tained by Dick Gregory, singer Sally Jones, and a handful of local groups.
∞≤
The Deacons also attracted ﬁnancial and political support from an assort-
ment of Marxist organizations, including the Communist Party usa, the
Socialist Workers Party ( swp), the Workers World Party, and the Sparticist
League. The more revolutionary of these groups, such as the Workers World
Party and the Sparticists, admired the Deacons’ use of armed violence and
viewed the defense group as a harbinger of the coming revolution. It was not
long before these leftist groups arrived in Bogalusa offering assistance and
support.
∞≥
The Sparticist League, a small and highly disciplined Trotskyite faction,
was the most radical of the predominantly white leftist groups courting
the Deacons. The New Orleans Sparticist chapter arranged a meeting with
Charlie Sims and Henry Austin in 1965. The young Marxists began the meet-
ing by melodramatically pulling their guns from under their shirts and laying
them on the table. Austin was not impressed. He thought the Sparticists
went overboard with ‘‘a lot of ﬂattery and praise that the Deacons were the
vanguard of the coming revolution and this general kind of crap.’’ Austin
regarded the leftists as irresponsible dilettantes. ‘‘Their attitude was, regard-
less if it was necessary to have a bloodbath in Bogalusa, they wanted to start
a revolution right then and there.’’ The Sparticists offered to assist the Dea-
cons with defense duties and provide them guns if necessary. Though Sims
politely declined their offer to help with patrols, he was not one to turn down
money. The Sparticists publicized the Deacons in their national paper and
organized a ‘‘buy a bullet for the Deacons’’ fund-raising campaign that gener-
ated some contributions.
∞∂
The fbi suspected that the Sparticists had found an even more lucrative
funding source for the Deacons: Fidel Castro. In the fall of 1965 an unidenti-
ﬁed source contacted the fbi and charged that the Sparticists were ﬁnancing
the Deacons and speculated that Robert F. Williams was using the Sparticists
to channel funds from the Cuban government to the Deacons. Williams had
ﬂed to Cuba following the Monroe, North Carolina, riot, and in 1962 he
began to broadcast a radio program in Cuba entitled ‘‘Radio Free Dixie.’’ The
program was beamed to the United States and could be heard in many areas
of the Deep South. Williams took to the airwaves preaching a doctrine of
armed revolution to blacks in the South, so it was logical that the fbi sus-
pected a relationship between the Cuban government and the Deacons.
Although there was no evidence that the Cubans ever funded the organiza-


--- PAGE 231 ---
Heading North 221
tion, the Deacons’ close ties to revolutionary black nationalists and white
leftists continued to raise suspicions in the intelligence community.∞∑
Another leftist ally and funder of the Deacons was the New York–based
Workers World Party. The group viewed the Deacons as the political heirs of
Robert F. Williams and the vanguard of a growing self-defense movement.
The Workers World newspaper opined that the Deacons were a sign that
despite ‘‘continuous propaganda of ‘turn the other cheek’ encouraged by the
white ruling class, armed defense will be adopted by the black masses all
over the u.s.’’ When Henry Austin shot Alton Crowe in July 1965, Workers
World praised Austin’s actions as ‘‘commendable.’’ ‘‘Henry Austin, his fellow
Deacons for Defense and all who take up arms along with them deserve the
respect and support of every honest friend of Black Freedom.’’
∞∏
The Deacons’ connection to the Workers World Party introduced the Boga-
lusa chapter to the rariﬁed world of left-wing politics in New York. In the fall
of 1965 Workers World organized several New York fund-raising tours for the
Deacons, featuring Charlie Sims and Bob Hicks. Workers World kicked off
the project in September, operating under the auspices of the John Brown
Commemoration Committee, with two fund-raising dances.
∞π
In the same month the Deacons established a base in New York by creating
a support organization, the Friends of the Deacons for Defense and Justice
(fddj), housed at 271 West 125th Street. The fddj chapter was coordinated
by Ricque LeSeur, a core member who had the title of ‘‘Special New York
Assistant to Charles Sims.’’ It was during these New York trips that Hicks and
Sims made links to many black nationalists in Harlem, including Jesse Gray,
Leroi Jones (Amiri Baraka), and Mae Mallory. Mallory, an African American
woman, had become a notable on the left after she was arrested in the
Monroe, North Carolina, riot that forced Robert F. Williams into exile. In
New York, Mallory spoke at several rallies to help raise funds to purchase
weapons for the Deacons.
∞∫
Foremost among the Deacons’ new black nationalist suitors was the Revo-
lutionary Action Movement. ram had its roots in a loose confederation of
revolutionary black nationalists that began forming in 1961 during a Na-
tional Student Association ( nsa) conference in Madison, Wisconsin—at the
same meeting that gave birth to the premier white antiwar organization, the
Students for a Democratic Society ( sds). At the conference, Donald Free-
man, an African American student at Case Western Reserve College in Cleve-
land, met several other black students who shared his emerging militant and
nationalist viewpoint, including Max Stanford, a student at Wilberforce Col-
lege. The ﬂedgling black nationalist network that emerged from the Madi-


--- PAGE 232 ---
222 Heading North
son meeting comprised young blacks radicalized by the civil rights move-
ment in the South, as well as former members of the Nation of Islam and
African nationalist organizations.
∞Ω
In 1964 Freeman and Stanford joined forces with a Philadelphia black
study group led by Stan Daniels and Playthell Benjamin and formed ram.
The secretive cadre posed itself as a radical alternative to the mainstream
black civil rights movement. It published two periodicals, Black America and
ram Speaks, and worked with a wide range of black organizations, including
Richard Henry’s goal in Detroit and the Student Nonviolent Coordinating
Committee ( sncc) in the South. Fusing nationalism and socialism, ram
became an openly Maoist communist organization devoted to overthrowing
capitalism. The group adopted a twelve-point program, which included a
call for riﬂe clubs and the creation of an underground vanguard.
≤≠
Robert F. Williams was an icon for the young nationalists, and, accord-
ingly, ram named him its ﬁrst international chairman. Don Freeman became
the executive chairman and Max Stanford the executive ﬁeld director. De-
troit radicals played a prominent role in the organization, with James Boggs
serving as the ideological chairman and his wife, Grace Boggs, as executive
secretary. In addition, Detroit goal leader Richard Henry, whom the Boga-
lusa Deacons had worked with, and his brother Milton Henry were both
active in ram.
≤∞
ram’s birth in 1964 coincided with several other watershed events in the
development of the black nationalist movement. In March 1964 Malcolm X
left the Nation of Islam and began forming a secular nationalist alternative,
which gave impetus to nationalist organizing in general. In the same year
Robert F. Williams published an inﬂuential article in ram’s Crusader entitled
‘‘Revolution without Violence.’’ Williams departed from his previous posi-
tion advocating self-defense and now argued for urban mass rebellions and
guerrilla warfare. Among inﬂuential black activists and intellectuals, black
nationalism had become a signiﬁcant political challenge to the nonviolent
and integrationist orthodoxy by 1964. Indeed, though historians often date
the birth of the Black Power slogan as the 1966 Meredith March, in 1965 an
umbrella group of militant organizations had already assumed the name
‘‘Organization for Black Power’’ and had convened a major national con-
ference in Detroit.
≤≤
Black nationalists began a concerted effort to inﬂuence students in the
civil rights movement as early as 1964. In the spring of 1964 ram and the
Black Liberation Front ( blf) sponsored the Afro-American Student Con-
ference on Black Nationalism at Fisk University, Nashville. At the confer-
ence, ram sharply criticized sncc, core, and other mainstream nonviolent


--- PAGE 233 ---
Heading North 223
groups. But while the black nationalists were publicly attacking the non-
violent movement, ram was simultaneously inﬁltrating core and sncc to set
up armed self-defense projects and win recruits to the nationalist move-
ment. As a result of their factionalizing inside core and sncc, ram seriously
antagonized black-white relations within the groups.
≤≥
ram’s attempt to import self-defense groups to the South was not unique.
In March 1964 Malcolm X had issued a call for blacks to form ‘‘Negro riﬂe
clubs’’ to resist racist attacks, proclaiming that the black man should ‘‘ﬁght
back whenever and wherever he is being unjustly and unlawfully attacked.’’
Malcolm’s clarion call went unheeded with one notable exception. When a
white clergyman was crushed by a bulldozer in a civil rights protest in
Cleveland, the tragedy sparked the development of the Medgar Evers Riﬂe
Club in Cleveland, led by a local black housing inspector, Louis Robinson. In
July 1964 Malcolm X, growing impatient with the lack of response to his call
for riﬂe clubs, publicly offered to provide defense for Martin Luther King and
James Farmer in Mississippi during the Freedom Summer. Following Mal-
colm X’s lead, ram publicly called for northern blacks to form an army of
riﬂe clubs to defend blacks in the South in the coming ‘‘civil war.’’ Richard
Henry took to the airwaves in the summer of 1964, calling for the ‘‘formation
of riﬂe clubs by Negroes all across the North.’’ The riﬂe clubs were criti-
cal, according to Henry, because blacks in the South ‘‘will very shortly be-
gin guerrilla warfare against white terrorists’’ and ‘‘white bigots will react
by slaughtering wholesale, helpless Negroes—men, women and children.’’
Ironically, with all their political sophistication and experience, ram, Rob-
ert F. Williams, and Malcolm X all foundered in their efforts to develop
a broad self-defense organization in the Deep South, while a handful of
working-class black men in Jonesboro found the Holy Grail.
≤∂
ram saw great promise in the Deacons. The Marxist organization believed
that black riﬂe clubs would provide the infrastructure for a revolutionary
army, and it was determined to recruit the Deacons to its brand of revolu-
tionary nationalism. But the black nationalists would have no more success
converting the Deacons than had the New York white leftists. ‘‘They were
very unpolitical,’’ complained Virginia Collins, a ram member and a lifelong
Garveyite nationalist from New Orleans. Collins, the only female ram mem-
ber in the South, met with the Deacons in Jonesboro and Bogalusa but had
little luck in moving them toward black nationalism. She found them inde-
pendent, stubborn, and unwilling to advance beyond their political views.
And, according to Collins, the Deacons were beset with the attitude that
‘‘women can’t tell you nothing.’’ When Collins abandoned her plan to recruit
the Deacons, national ram ofﬁcials implored her to renew her effort; they


--- PAGE 234 ---
224 Heading North
were conﬁdent that the Deacons could be ‘‘politicized’’ to a revolutionary
viewpoint. ‘‘If you think so,’’ Collins responded curtly, ‘‘then you politicize
them.’’ ram eventually gave up on the Deacons; in truth, they never had a
chance of winning the pragmatic group to revolution. ‘‘I’m not a left winger,’’
Thomas once said. ‘‘I’m just a capitalist that don’t have a damn thing.’’
≤∑
In addition to fund-raising, Thomas and Sims attempted to build Deacons
chapters in the North, working through contacts they had made with revolu-
tionary groups and black nationalists. For the most part, the northern orga-
nizing was not coordinated between the Jonesboro and Bogalusa chapters.
Thomas organized when and where he pleased, regardless of Sims’s wishes,
and even independent of the Jonesboro chapter—much to its consternation.
The North proved inhospitable terrain for the Deacons. A short-lived Bos-
ton chapter was formed in August 1965, controlled by the Boston Action
Group (bag), a local organization with links to the Maoist-Communist Pro-
gressive Labor Party. A chapter was also established in Cleveland, in 1965,
with local activist Harlell Jones serving as spokesperson, once again linked
to ram. It appears that ram attempted to organize a Deacons chapter in
Philadelphia in 1966—with Charlie Sims’s blessing, but it came to nothing.
Similarly, in the spring of 1966 Thomas was also pursuing a chapter in
Washington, D.C., this time through local militant activist Julius Hobson.
≤∏
Chicago became the Deacons’ strongest foothold in the North. On 15 Octo-
ber 1965 the Chicago Daily News  carried a story that gave the ﬁrst warn-
ing that the Deacons were heading north. ‘‘Militant Negroes Here Forming
Armed Unit to Fight the Klan’’ announced the headline of a story based on an
interview with Earnest Thomas. News reports in preceding days had de-
tailed the resurgence of the Klan in nearby Indiana and Wisconsin, and
Thomas was pointing to the renewed Klan activity as justiﬁcation for the
Deacons’ expansion northward.
≤π
‘‘We believe there are Klansmen active in this city and we’re conﬁdent they
have thousands of sympathizers,’’ Thomas told the Daily News. His claim of a
mounting Klan resurgence was met with considerable skepticism by blacks
and whites alike. Chicago had its share of racists, as the response to Martin
Luther King’s campaign would soon demonstrate, but the Windy City’s most
violent racists were more likely to wear a badge than a sheet. Racism in the
North manifested itself in police brutality and discrimination, but seldom as
vigilante violence. Thomas was still struggling to transform the Deacons
from an essentially southern black self-defense organization into a militant
nationwide organization. He clearly had no ideological blueprint, but, like
scores of other militant leaders following the Watts riot, he knew that he


--- PAGE 235 ---
Heading North 225
could not successfully organize in the North with a strategy based on non-
violence, civil rights, and a legislative coalition with white liberals. Bobby
Seale and Huey Newton were moving in the same direction on the West
Coast, as were the Henry Brothers in Detroit and the Associated Community
Teams (act) group, an umbrella organization of militants from around the
nation. But the challenge facing the Deacons was substantial: the urban
ghettos of the North were a different world from Jonesboro and Bogalusa.
‘‘Watts wasn’t suffering from segregation, or the lack of ofﬁcial rights,’’ said
one participant in the Watts riot. ‘‘You didn’t have two drinking water foun-
tains.’’ When Lyndon Johnson signed the 1964 Civil Rights Act, the partici-
pant added, ‘‘nobody even thought about it in Watts. . . . It had nothing to
do with us.’’
≤∫
In Chicago the Deacons focused on issues of self-defense against police
brutality and opposition to political corruption. Thomas told the Daily News
that the Deacons would also ‘‘operate freedom patrols’’ that would ‘‘be alert
for police brutality against Negroes’’—a tactic that the Black Panthers even-
tually adopted. In addition, they would ‘‘campaign against shady deals that
are often pulled off on us Negroes.’’ Thomas emphasized that the Deacons
were law-abiding and peaceful. ‘‘We don’t teach hatred.’’
≤Ω
Following months of futile attempts by the Deacons to ﬁt their philosophy
into the Procrustean bed of nonviolence, Thomas’s opening salvo in Chicago
marked a turning point in the Deacons’ political thinking. Evoking the spirit
of Malcolm X, Thomas bluntly criticized Martin Luther King and the non-
violent orthodoxy. ‘‘Talk doesn’t solve anything,’’ scoffed Thomas. ‘‘We Ne-
groes are not going to gain our freedom by talking. We Negroes can’t con-
tinue to let the Klan and similar hate groups trample on us.’’ He speculated
that the difference between him and King was the difference between local
and national organizing. ‘‘King and I really live in two different worlds,’’
said Thomas.
≥≠
Chicago’s black press had supported the Deacons’ actions in the South but
now balked at the idea of importing an armed black movement to Chicago.
The respected Chicago Defender  sharply rebuked the Deacons, ridiculing
the idea that the Klan posed a threat in the city. ‘‘I don’t know these fellows
or anything about their activities,’’ Timuel Black of the Negro American
Labor Council told the Defender. ‘‘We don’t run with this kind of people.’’ The
Reverend Lynward Stevenson, militant president of the Woodlawn Organi-
zation, dismissed the Deacons as vigilantes who were ignorant about demo-
cratic politics. The Deacons only ‘‘know how to get rid of the Klan,’’ Ste-
venson asserted. ‘‘They don’t know anything about law and order and the
ordinary ways of achieving justice.’’
≥∞


--- PAGE 236 ---
226 Heading North
The hostile reception by the black political establishment did not alter
Thomas’s plans. During his October visit he appeared on two black radio
programs: the Lou House Show and—along with Nahaz Rogers, who even-
tually became a leader in the Chicago Deacons chapter—the Wesley South
Show on wvon radio. On the wvon program, Thomas boasted that he could
bring ten thousand Deacons to Chicago to confront the Klan. Listeners were
dubious. Some callers challenged his assertion that the Klan was a menace
in Chicago; others chided him for professing that he had ten thousand Dea-
cons at his disposal. Grasping for a role in the North, Thomas suggested that
the Deacons could protect demonstrators from attacks by police, as the
Deacons had done in the South. Chicagoans were not convinced.
≥≤
Though the radio interview went poorly for Thomas, he did give a co-
herent explication of the Deacons’ critique of nonviolence, which had been
evolving over the last year. He told listeners that many civil rights organiza-
tions were training blacks into submission. In contrast, the Deacons instilled
manhood in black men—a quality missing in most blacks ‘‘over the age of
twenty-one.’’ Manhood depended on the willingness to protect oneself. For
Thomas, the Deacons’ philosophy was clear: Freedom for black men de-
pended on manhood, and manhood meant the willingness to use force to
defend one’s family and community. Black men could not attain manhood
through the strategy of nonviolence, since nonviolence prohibited the use of
force. And without manhood status, rights were meaningless. For black men
to be free, whites had to fear as well as respect them.
≥≥
On Sunday, 24 October, the Deacons for the ﬁrst time engaged the par-
tisans of nonviolence in public debate. The West Side Organization ( wso),
a Chicago black activist organization, invited Thomas and Nahaz Rogers
to participate in a discussion of ‘‘Non-violence vs. Self-Defense.’’ Their op-
ponents were two of the ablest representatives of the Southern Christian
Leadership Conference ( sclc), the Reverend C. T. Vivian and James Bevel.
In many respects, Thomas and Rogers were badly mismatched in the wso
debate. Vivian and Bevel were brilliant, eloquent, and formally educated.
Thomas had a sharp mind, but he was hardly a polished orator of Vivian’s
caliber. Rogers, like Thomas, was intellectually nimble but lacked the erudi-
tion of his opponents.
≥∂
Thomas suspected that the debate was part of an effort by Martin Luther
King to discredit the Deacons before they could get a foothold in Chicago. In
the fall of 1965 King was taking his ﬁrst steps toward organizing in Chicago,
and Thomas believed that ‘‘the man’’—the white political establishment—
had anointed King leader of the movement in the North. ‘‘Well they was
trying to ostracize me,’’ charged Thomas years later. ‘‘You know, King and


--- PAGE 237 ---
Heading North 227
them was moving into Chicago. I don’t know why he was moving into Chi-
cago, but he was moving in and they had the blessing of the man.’’≥∑
Thomas and Rogers had a sympathetic urban audience at the debate. In
the wake of the Watts riot, sclc would have had a difﬁcult time selling
nonviolence to any northern black audience. Thomas thought that he fared
well. ‘‘They brought their best speaker, and that’s Vivian,’’ he recalled. ‘‘And
this little country boy, they was going to eat me alive. But they made a
mistake. The audience was more with me.’’ The Deacons could be reason-
ably criticized on many issues, but sclc had challenged them on their
strongest point: the right of blacks to defend themselves against violent
attacks. ‘‘They couldn’t shoot a hole in that, because everyone had a right to
protect home and family,’’ said Thomas. ‘‘They never tried that again.’’
≥∏
During his speaking tour of Chicago, Thomas met Edward ‘‘Fats’’ Crawford
and Claudell Kirk, two local activists who began assisting Thomas in quietly
recruiting members for a Chicago Deacons chapter. Crawford, a seasoned
community activist who was heavily involved in Chicago electoral politics,
would eventually become the primary driving force for the new chapter. But
it was several months before Thomas galvanized the Chicago chapter. In the
interim, he continued to publicize the Deacons in the North through speak-
ing events in the Chicago and Detroit areas. In the same way that the Work-
ers World Party had adopted Charlie Sims and the Bogalusa Deacons in New
York, white leftists in the Midwest became patrons of Thomas. The So-
cialist Workers Party, another Trotskyite Marxist organization, assiduously
courted Thomas, inviting him to speak at several forums. On 18 February
1966 Thomas was the featured speaker at the ‘‘Friday Night Socialist Forum’’
in Chicago. The Deacons had over ﬁve hundred armed members and sixty-
two chapters, Thomas told the audience, and the new Chicago chapter
would become the regional headquarters of the North. Reﬂecting his left-
ward shift, Thomas laced his speech with a class analysis of black problems,
arguing that the social welfare legislation of the Great Society was a ploy by
the rich to perpetuate their own power. For him, the problem was no longer
a few Klansmen, but rather the entire American ruling class.
≥π
The nonviolent movement’s reliance on direct action was a diversion from
effective change, Thomas told his audience. Civil rights demonstrations
were a ‘‘game’’ and antipoverty legislation had been enacted to placate black
people. The only people beneﬁting from reform legislation were ‘‘fat politi-
cians.’’ ‘‘They get the cream while the masses get the non-fat milk.’’
≥∫
Thomas ridiculed the idea that education would bring economic equal-
ity—another deception of the nonviolent strategy, he charged. Racial dis-
crimination was the culprit, not the lack of skills. But inequality had its price.


--- PAGE 238 ---
228 Heading North
Thomas predicted a ‘‘black revolution’’ in Chicago during the coming sum-
mer that would make it unsafe for whites to travel in black neighborhoods.
He was no longer talking self-defense; at one point in his address Thomas
warned that for every Deacon killed, the Deacons would respond by killing
three whites. Turning to foreign policy, he criticized the u.s. role in Vietnam,
pointing out that a high percentage of soldiers in Vietnam were black and
hinting at a genocidal plot. ‘‘I guess the power structure feels if they can kill
off seven or eight million of us that will solve the problem.’’
≥Ω
Two months later, as part of his tour to raise funds for a Chicago Deacons
chapter, Thomas spoke at another swp forum in Detroit. Here he laid out
plans to make Chicago the training center for a Deacons organization that
would have chapters in every major northern city by the summer of 1966.
Similar to his performance at the Chicago forum, Thomas departed from the
‘‘self-defense’’ rhetoric and ominously hinted that the Deacons would retali-
ate against fbi or cia informants in the organization.
∂≠
The Detroit speech marked the end of Thomas’s short relationship with
the swp. The socialists had asked to see his comments before he spoke in
Detroit—a thinly veiled effort to censor his remarks. Thomas balked at the
attempt to muzzle him. ‘‘I told them my speech is in my head,’’ recalled
Thomas. And even if he could produce written remarks, his new socialist
friends should not expect him to share their views. He had made his point. ‘‘I
never had an invitation from them again,’’ said Thomas.
∂∞
By April 1966 Thomas had yet to establish a Chicago chapter, and he soon
found himself competing with the Bogalusa chapter in efforts to organize in
Chicago. Thomas had isolated himself from the Louisiana chapters when he
severed relations with Jonesboro and anointed himself ‘‘Vice-President and
Regional Organizer’’ for the Deacons. The leaders of the Jonesboro Deacons
were too conservative for his growing radical tastes, and he wanted the
latitude to organize his own chapters in the North without interference from
Jonesboro or Bogalusa. But his decision to strike out on his own antagonized
relations with both chapters. Soon the Bogalusa Deacons were on their way
to Chicago to test the waters themselves. In April 1966 Charlie Sims, Sam
Barnes, and A. Z. Young held a press conference at the Chicago home of
Lavernon Cornelius, a Bogalusa native. Cornelius announced that the Dea-
cons had been clandestinely recruiting for six months and had established a
Chicago chapter at the request of the Olive Branch Masonic Lodge of the
Prince Hall Masons (Cornelius served as Grand Master of the branch). Cor-
nelius was joined by Ray McCoy, a wealthy Chicago funeral home owner and
also a native of the Bogalusa area. Cornelius said that Chicago needed ‘‘a
Negro Group that believed in defense and justice at any price.’’ The Deacons


--- PAGE 239 ---
Heading North 229
were ‘‘primed to ﬁght a war to protect Negro rights.’’ He noted that ‘‘only last
week a cross was burned on a lawn in Waukegan. There’s no doubt that we
need a chapter here.’’ Cornelius also suggested that the Deacons might pro-
vide defense at polling places.
∂≤
But things began to quickly unravel for the Bogalusa group. Whereas
Cornelius clearly stated that the Deacons would conduct armed activities in
Chicago, Hicks and Young later characterized the Chicago chapter as merely
a support group for the southern movement. On 6 April the Chicago Daily
News published a second article on the Deacons, bearing the headline, ‘‘Not
Trying to Start Movement in North’’ and ‘‘Negro Vigilantes Here Will Aid
Dixie Fight.’’ Sims reportedly told the Daily News that the Deacons were only
establishing a branch ‘‘to help in the struggle in the South. . . . We’re not
trying to come up here and start a movement.’’ Young said that they hoped to
raise money for the defense of ninety children and six adults arrested the
previous fall; he also mentioned that the Bogalusa group was seeking sup-
port for a 105-mile march to Baton Rouge. ‘‘We’re going to clean up the
whole state of Louisiana. The whole state is out of line.’’
∂≥
The Chicago press conference underscored the growing schism between
Thomas and the Bogalusa Deacons. As Thomas inclined to black national-
ism, his Bogalusa cohorts remained pragmatists. Whereas Thomas openly
viliﬁed Martin Luther King, Young crafted a more moderate image for the
Deacons, one in which the defense group complemented the civil rights
movement. In Chicago, Young went to great lengths to afﬁrm the Deacons’
loyalty to the nonviolent movement and to extend an olive branch to King.
His group wanted to confer with the sclc leader and ‘‘ask his support in our
struggle in Bogalusa.’’ According to Young, ‘‘King has been misled about
Deacons and the Voters League in Bogalusa. The Bogalusa Voters League is
non-violent, just like Dr. King’s organization. And the Deacons are nonvio-
lent—up to a point.’’ Emphasizing the Deacons’ peaceful objectives, Charlie
Sims suggested that the Chicago chapter might get involved in voter registra-
tion and could endorse Dick Gregory, who was planning a run for mayor.
‘‘We’re a defensive organization, organized to defend people,’’ Sims empha-
sized. ‘‘We have a constitutional right to defend our home, our children’s
lives. In the South the [white] man is making us pick up arms in order to
live. . . . While the Northern Negro can use ballots instead of bullets, there’s a
need for Deacons anywhere in the country where black men exist.’’
∂∂
The Chicago press conference and subsequent rally backﬁred on the Dea-
cons and created more controversy than beneﬁts. Election ofﬁcials publicly
protested against the Deacons’ announcement that they planned to provide
armed guards at polling places. Oscar Stanton DePriest, Grand Master of the


--- PAGE 240 ---
230 Heading North
Prince Hall Masons, disputed Lavernon Cornelius’s claim that the Masons
had requested the Deacons to form a Chicago chapter. DePriest ordered a
‘‘sweeping investigation’’ of the Olive Branch Masonic Lodge and ordered
Cornelius to ‘‘cease and desist’’ any activity connected with the Deacons.
Masonic leaders also canceled a planned ﬁnancial contribution to the Dea-
cons. The Bogalusa group had failed to form their Chicago chapter. A. Z.
Young found the experience discouraging. ‘‘I raised more money in San
Francisco when I was there by myself than we have been able to scrape up
here,’’ he complained afterward.
∂∑
One month after the Bogalusa chapter’s abortive organizing effort,
Thomas appeared on the pages of Newsweek touting plans for a Chicago
chapter. He did not hesitate to berate Martin Luther King’s efforts to import
his nonviolent strategy to Chicago. ‘‘I don’t see where in hell nonviolence is
going to solve anything,’’ Thomas declared. ‘‘When you deal with the beast,
you better deal with him appropriately.’’ Thomas punctuated his attack on
nonviolence with a call for blacks to arm themselves. ‘‘The black man is a
fool if he doesn’t have a gun or two—and ammunition in abundance.’’ The
Watts riot in Los Angeles was an argument for more violence rather than
less. ‘‘Throwing bricks is going out of style,’’ said Thomas. ‘‘Thirty black
people and only four whites died in Los Angeles [in the riots]. We’ve learned
from that—it won’t happen again.’’
∂∏
Newsweek questioned how successful the Deacons’ anti-Klan strategy
would be in Chicago, given that ‘‘racial discrimination there goes in many
guises, but bed sheets are not among them.’’ Exhibiting the same ambiguity
that undermined the Bogalusa chapter’s foray into the North, Thomas in-
sisted that the Chicago chapter would primarily support the movement in the
South, through fund-raising and—a new twist—bringing blacks, instead of
whites, into the South. He picked Chicago because the Deacons could raise
money for southern operations through initiation fees of ten dollars, mem-
bership dues of two dollars a month, and selling ‘‘Friends of the Deacons’’
bumper stickers for ﬁfty cents. But he intimated that the Deacons might get
involved in armed actions as well. ‘‘Chicago is no different from anywhere
else,’’ said Thomas. ‘‘The Southern red-neck lets you know where he’s at. The
Northern red-neck is a little smarter; but they are still exploiting my people.’’
Echoing Malcolm X’s famous dictum, he added, ‘‘I believe in freedom by any
means necessary.’’
∂π
The Chicago chapter began to take form, and in May 1966 Thomas of-
ﬁcially opened a Deacons for Defense and Justice ofﬁce at 1230 Pulaski on
the West Side. Thomas, who was now living in Chicago, served as president,
Fats Crawford as vice president, and Claudell Kirk as secretary. The ﬁrst


--- PAGE 241 ---
Heading North 231
public appearance of the Chicago chapter was on 23 May, when Thomas
appeared for a second time on Wesley South’s radio program. During the
interview Thomas made a series of claims that tested the credulity of his
black listeners. He claimed that 455 members had already joined the Chi-
cago chapter since he began recruitment in October 1965, and that the
Deacons now had sixty-seven chapters nationwide. Thomas also bragged
that he was taking 2,000 Deacons to Washington, D.C., for the June demon-
stration protesting the White House Conference on Civil Rights (in fact, no
Deacons attended the demonstration). He followed up with the dubious
claim that he was summoning 15,000 Deacons to Chicago in the next three
months. The hyperbole only prompted black listeners to call in and openly
deride his obvious exaggerations.
∂∫
During the summer of 1966 the Pulaski Street headquarters began to
come to life, taking on the trappings of northern militants such as the emerg-
ing Black Panther Party. The storefront window featured a riﬂe balancing
the scales of justice. Some of the Deacons donned berets like the Panthers,
and the local chapter offered free training in martial arts. Comprising ten to
ﬁfteen active members, the Chicago chapter attempted to establish ofﬁces in
surrounding communities, including Harvey and Evanston. The fbi kept a
close watch on the Chicago chapter, and when a small riot erupted on 4
August in nearby Harvey, the bureau suspected that the Deacons had sup-
plied weapons to youths involved in the shooting, though there was no
evidence that they had done so.
∂Ω
The Chicago chapter did not restrict its activities to support of the south-
ern movement, as Thomas had promised, but also got involved in local black
issues. In August 1966 a Chicago court issued an injunction preventing Mar-
tin Luther King and sclc from marching through the volatile white neigh-
borhoods of Gage Park and Cicero. In response, the Deacons and several
other militant groups threatened to defy the order and march. A planned
march on 28 August through Cicero, a racist stronghold, particularly trou-
bled law enforcement ofﬁcials because of the potential for violent attacks by
whites and retaliation by blacks. Rumors spread that young blacks were
practicing with weapons in preparation for the protest. But when King ac-
ceded to the injunction and pledged a moratorium on the marches, sclc
condemned the militants’ plan for the Cicero march. In the end, the protest
failed to materialize.
∑≠
The Chicago chapter’s relationship with King was cloaked in mystery.
Beginning in July 1966, the Chicago Deacons, led by John Harris and Fats
Crawford, provided security for King at speaking events in Chicago and
when King traveled in the South. Harris later said that King’s lieutenants


--- PAGE 242 ---
232 Heading North
were divided over the role of the Deacons, with Jesse Jackson adamantly
opposed to any contact between King and the Deacons. In the end, King
acquiesced on the condition that his new bodyguards would not be publicly
identiﬁed as Deacons. Fats Crawford and the Deacons, working through
intermediaries like activist Bennett Johnson, contrived to provide inconspic-
uous security for King through 1968.
∑∞
By the fall of 1966 Thomas had returned to his family in Jonesboro, leav-
ing the Chicago chapter to the leadership of Crawford. The chapter allied
itself with a host of emerging Black Power groups that formed the Commu-
nity Coalition for Black Power (ccbp). The ccbp linked the Deacons with a
broad range of groups: radicalized Chicago chapters of core and sncc;
Lawrence Landry and Nahaz Rogers of act; the W. E. B. Du Bois Club;
activists like Monroe Sharp; and members of the two major youth gangs, the
Blackstone Rangers and the Vicelords. Through the ccbp, the Deacons be-
came involved in several community protests with mixed success.
∑≤
The chapter encountered some police harassment. In one incident the
Deacons accused the Chicago police of shooting out the front window of
their Pulaski Street ofﬁce. Some of the chapter’s activities skirted the bound-
aries of the law, especially in the area of fund-raising. White businesses on
the West Side, desiring good relations with the militants, supplied a signiﬁ-
cant portion of the Deacons’ funds. In the process of soliciting funds from
businesses, the Deacons walked a thin line between fund-raising and extor-
tion. At least one local business accused them of extorting money, though no
charges were ﬁled. The Deacons became involved in another controversial
incident in nearby Gary, Indiana. Richard Hatcher, a black political leader,
was running for mayor when another black candidate with the same name
placed his name on the ballot. It was an obvious attempt to confuse voters
and take votes from Hatcher. The Chicago Deacons were called in to assist.
What they did in Gary remains a mystery. All that is certain is that the
second candidate withdrew his name from the ballot, complaining that he
had been ‘‘coerced’’ by unnamed parties.
∑≥
The Chicago chapter’s dilemma was the same one that vexed all of the
Deacons chapters in the North. The Deacons’ call for manhood through
physical courage in the face of Klan terror had little appeal in the North,
where African Americans were relatively free from vigilante violence. Given
their origins in the civil rights movement, the Deacons had framed their
politics in the language of rights and liberties—not issues that resonated in
the North. Moreover, unlike the Black Panthers, the Deacons did not project
a revolutionary image that could attract militant young blacks. Even with
the adjustments made to adapt to the concerns of northern blacks, the


--- PAGE 243 ---
Heading North 233
Deacons’ mix of self-defense rhetoric, community organizing, and racial
pride could not compete with the Panthers’ romantic revolutionary image
and distinctive reputation as opponents of police abuse.
The Deacons’ venture into the North had failed. They had experimented
with a variety of issues—police brutality, economic discrimination, electoral
politics, and humanitarian and political aid for southern blacks. But none of
the approaches struck a chord with northern blacks. Meanwhile, black mili-
tants were ﬂocking to the Black Panthers and other Black Power organiza-
tions that projected far more confrontational images.
The Deacons’ emphasis on the right of self-defense was both their strength
and their weakness. While it provided credibility in the South, where the foe
was vigilante violence, it failed in the North, where racial domination and
violence were cloaked in the legitimacy of state authority. The Deacons’
program rested on a belief in constitutional rights (obedience to federal law
and authority) rather than revolutionary rights (the right to disobey law and
authority). The latter path, taken by the Panthers, had its own perils.


--- PAGE 244 ---
chapter
13
Black Power—Last Days
by 1967 the Bogalusa movement looked nothing like it
did in January 1965, when it conducted peaceful and polite desegregation
tests. Something had changed. On 24 July 1967 A. Z. Young led a group from
Bogalusa to the Washington Parish Courthouse in Franklinton, Louisiana, in
a protest against continuing inequality and racism. Instead of the pious and
reserved James Farmer, who had led several of the marches in the past, this
time core was represented by militant Black Power advocate Lincoln Lynch.
‘‘There’s a new movement afoot,’’ Lynch told the rally audience, ‘‘it’s not civil
rights any longer—it’s the movement of revolution. . . . Some call it black
power, others may call it the black revolution, but it’s all the same. If those
rednecks in Bogalusa won’t hire you, don’t picket at their stores anymore,
run them out of your neighborhood. The days of black people clapping their
hands and singing are over and many of you are going to be asked to kill for
freedom—and you’d better be ready to kill.’’
∞
Young echoed Lynch’s revolutionary theme. Referring to the recent re-
lease of two white men who had killed a Bogalusa black man, Young told the
rally, ‘‘There’s a penalty for killing birds out of season, but there is never any
penalty for killing a Negro—there has never been a white man convicted for
killing a Negro in the history of Washington Parish.’’ Young was going to see
Governor John McKeithen about the situation. If he did not get any results,
‘‘Get Ready, LBJ, to open those pearly gates. They talk about Watts and the
burning—everything will burn in the state of Louisiana,’’ shouted Young to
an ecstatic crowd. ‘‘Burn, Burn, Burn.’’ It was shocking rhetoric from a man
who only a year before had assured the media that the ‘‘Bogalusa Voters
League is non-violent, just like Dr. King’s organization.’’ And it was rheto-
ric that would permeate the work of the Voters League and the Deacons in
their ﬁnal days. Something had changed, indeed, and that change was the
Watts riot.
≤


--- PAGE 245 ---
Black Power—Last Days 235
The Los Angeles Watts riot erupted on 11 August 1965, just days after the
Voting Rights Acts went into effect. The rebellion permanently changed
racial politics in America—and profoundly impacted the work of the Dea-
cons. Watts transformed black political consciousness unlike any event in
modern history. For the ﬁrst time in the twentieth century, racial politics
were explicitly shaped by the threat of black civil violence. More than thirty
thousand people participated in the riot. They picked their targets selec-
tively, sparing schools, churches, and public buildings, prompting Bayard
Rustin to observe that Watts ‘‘marked the ﬁrst major rebellion of Negroes
against their own masochism.’’ Watts would dramatically affect the move-
ment in Bogalusa, as Bogalusa had affected Watts. Journalists reported that
as the rioters pelted motorists and ﬁremen with rocks, they were shouting,
‘‘This is for Bogalusa!’’
≥
Of the Watts residents who did not directly participate in the rebellion, the
majority sympathized with the rioters and viewed their actions as a political
protest. The plight of the urban working class and poor had ﬁnally come to
the forefront. ‘‘We won because we made the whole world pay attention to
us,’’ a rioter jubilantly proclaimed. ‘‘We made them come.’’ As one writer
observed: ‘‘The boost that the events of Watts gave to the sense of commu-
nity, to black stature in the era of black assertion, to black self-esteem was
surely enormous. The world had noticed Watts and, in ghettoes throughout
the land, other blacks stood up and demanded to be noticed too.’’ The quest
for honor and respect was at the heart of the rebellion. ‘‘They couldn’t call
me boy anymore,’’ said another rioter proudly. ‘‘I was respected as a man.’’
∂
Watts shifted the black freedom movement agenda from a campaign for
civil and political equality to a focus on economic parity and community
empowerment. By 1965 the civil rights movement’s singular obsession with
civil equality had become an albatross around the neck of the broader free-
dom movement. The strategy suggested that civil discrimination was the
primary cause for racial economic inequality, an argument that conserva-
tives would later exploit in their battle against afﬁrmative action and other
compensatory programs. Nothing in the civil rights strategy explained the
legacy of racism, nor did it even hint that enormous educational and eco-
nomic resources would have to be marshaled to reverse the effects of three
centuries of oppression. To many African Americans captivated by the events
in Watts, organizations identiﬁed with the old civil rights agenda seemed
hopelessly outmoded. Martin Luther King encountered a hostile reception
when he traveled west to help mediate the crisis. As he drove into Watts, one
onlooker jeered King: ‘‘I had a dream, I had a dream—hell, we don’t need no
damn dreams. We want jobs.’’
∑


--- PAGE 246 ---
236 Black Power—Last Days
With these shortcomings, how then did nonviolence become the ofﬁcial
movement doctrine? African Americans in the South had never been dis-
posed to paciﬁsm: even James Lawson, one of the foremost advocates of non-
violence, admitted that there ‘‘never was an acceptance of the nonviolent
approach’’ in the South. The answer is that, in good part, northern liberals,
paciﬁsts, and leftists managed to impose nonviolence on the movement
because they possessed superior organizational and funding resources. Non-
violence was also the natural outcome of an organizing strategy that cen-
tered on the rural South, where traditional movement leaders were more
economically vulnerable and cautious than their northern counterparts. Un-
til 1955, the black freedom movement had pursued campaigns both rural and
urban, North and South. Its greatest organizational accomplishment was
A. Phillip Randolph’s threatened march on Washington during World War II,
which aimed to draw on black organized labor in the North and which
produced signiﬁcant concessions on the part of the federal government. Yet
the movement strategy came to focus on the South in the 1950s and 1960s. Its
rebirth in Montgomery in 1955, with the city’s large college-educated sector—
uncharacteristic of the rest of the South—meant that the movement was
midwifed by the black middle class, with its genteel aspirations, meritocratic
beliefs, and indifference to the political and psychological tasks of transform-
ing black men in the working class and rural agricultural regions.
∏
Some spontaneous organizing in the South was beyond the control of
movement organizations and prompted by the exigencies imposed by Jim
Crow, as, for example, the Montgomery Bus Boycott and the lunch counter
sit-ins. But the key organizing initiatives after 1960—Freedom Rides, deseg-
regation campaigns, and voter registration—were part of a calculated strat-
egy to make the South the battleground of the black freedom movement—
and, in the case of the Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee ( sncc)
and core, especially the rural South. There was a powerful logic to the
choice. Civil inequality was statutory in the South, and the white majority
was determined to violently defend its privileged position. What better way
to move public opinion and Congress than to confront racism in its most
naked form?
But there were substantial obstacles to building a black freedom move-
ment. Rural African Americans lacked the education and economic in-
dependence of their northern counterparts. Indeed, no successful reform
movement in the United States began by organizing its most impoverished,
economically dependent, and educationally deprived constituency. The
1930s organized labor movement—the other great social movement of the
twentieth century—established its beachhead where its constituency was


--- PAGE 247 ---
Black Power—Last Days 237
strongest. The militant Congress of Industrial Organizations ( cio) chose
Flint and Detroit, Michigan, to stage their successful sit-down strikes.
Although the South presented formidable obstacles to creating self-
sustaining movement, it did offer something that movement strategists
came to value: a stage where protest would provoke the latent violence that
propped up the caste system. This racist violence, in the age of television,
had the potential to embarrass the United States in the Cold War, win sym-
pathy from northern liberals, and eventually galvanize a national legislative
coalition that could secure federal intervention or legislation on behalf of
black equality.
For these media images of violence to be effective, it was critical that the
black victims remain passive and not exhibit behaviors that would evoke
white stereotypes of black impulsiveness and violence—or cause observers
to confuse perpetrators for victims. Michael Clurman, a veteran of three
summer projects—in both sncc and core—described the strategy succinctly:
Nonviolence was ideal for the civil rights movement because, more than any
other struggle for freedom, the movement depended ‘‘a great deal on the
action of the federal government, which in turn depends on white northern
public opinion,’’ Clurman told an interviewer in 1965. And northern opinion
‘‘has to be won by showing that in every instance not only that the Negroes
are right, but that they’re absolutely right, and that all the right-doers are on
one side and all the wrong-doers are on another side.’’
π
This kind of political theater could not have succeeded in the urban North,
where African Americans were economically independent and had a stron-
ger tradition of self-defense and combativeness. The agrarian South was
more hospitable terrain, with its small, isolated black populations and a host
of police and vigilantes who historically acted with impunity. And so the
stage was set. The drama went as planned, and the guilt and pity followed as
predicted, but not without detrimental consequences. However necessary it
may have been to shape the national legislative agenda, the political theater
of nonviolence did not bring about the profound changes in psychology and
political consciousness that were the precondition of meaningful black free-
dom: changes in identity and perceptions for both blacks and whites.
Moreover, nonviolence’s singular focus on Jim Crow in the South de-
ﬂected national attention from economic and social forces that reproduced
inequality and racism—for example, discrimination in employment, hous-
ing, and education—as well as less visible but more insidious forms of in-
stitutional and cultural racism. Nonviolence equated racism with civil and
political discrimination, the two more obvious forms of racism in the South.
For the southern black middle class, lifting these civil and political barriers


--- PAGE 248 ---
238 Black Power—Last Days
did, in fact, remove most of their obstacles to equality. Even Martin Luther
King recognized the class bias of his own strategy. Evaluating the successes
in public accommodations and the vote, King later lamented that ‘‘we must
face the fact that progress has been limited mainly to the Negro middle
class.’’ Blacks had ‘‘gotten great new job opportunities in this country’’ but
‘‘they have applied mainly to the Negro middle class.’’ What is more, King
added, ‘‘the great problem we face today is that the economic plight of the
Negro poor is worse today than before.’’ For poor and working-class blacks,
the legacy of slavery would require solutions far more substantial than a
stool at the lunch counter.
∫
The Watts riot had been a black working-class referendum on nonviolence
and the civil rights strategy—and King had lost decisively. Hundreds of thou-
sands of African American men and women who had refused to participate
in the nonviolent movement ﬁnally found a strategy that they believed could
compel reforms. The Watts rebellion infused a new militancy in young Afri-
can Americans, and that militancy soon found its way to Bogalusa.
The Deacons’ vigorous organizing and fund-raising efforts across the na-
tion had paid dividends for the group, but the movements in Bogalusa and
Jonesboro were still their paramount concern. The Bogalusa campaign in
the summer of 1965 had been a key test of the federal government’s commit-
ment to free speech, equal treatment, and an end to vigilante racist terror on
a mass scale in the South. The Deacons could say, with deserving pride, that
they had played a key role in compelling Washington to restore the Constitu-
tion in the Deep South. But by the fall of 1965 the Deacons were becoming
victims of their own success in Bogalusa. They had popularized attitudes
that gave birth to a new assertive and uncompromising black identity—one
that elicited both fear and grudging respect from whites. As community
people internalized the Deacons’ values of courage, pride, and self-reliance,
the community became more willing to defend itself—and the Deacons be-
came less necessary.
In the fall of 1965 young blacks began to assert their authority over the
movement in Bogalusa, impatient to ‘‘take it to the streets’’ and do battle
directly with town ofﬁcials. In October several hundred students boycotted
classes and marched to the annual Washington Parish Fair. The students
were protesting a school policy that released white students from classes for
three days to attend the fair, while black students were given only one day.
The students marched through the fair grounds, drawing little more than a
few critical stares from the hundreds of whites in attendance. The protest
also targeted black teachers who had crossed the picket line at the fair to


--- PAGE 249 ---
Black Power—Last Days 239
work on an exhibit. It was the second time students had singled out middle-
class leaders; earlier in the year Bogalusa students had marched in protest
against black ministers who refused to participate in the movement or honor
the downtown boycott.
Ω
One week later the Deacons became embroiled in a controversial school
boycott. School integration had never been a paramount issue for the Boga-
lusa movement; instead, the October school boycott focused on demands for
equal distribution of resources. The Voters League’s Youth Organization de-
manded improved facilities, equal expenditures, new books (rather than
castoff books from white schools), and foreign language course offerings.
The youth group also called for more and better teachers and disciplinary
action against teachers who were perceived as hostile toward the movement.
In addition, the students demanded an end to the degrading practice of
forcing black students to cut the lawn at the school superintendent’s home.
Leading the student boycott was Don Expose, son of Voters League ofﬁcer
Gayle Jenkins. After the school board rejected the demands, students boy-
cotted classes, picketed the school gates, and staged militant marches to the
school board ofﬁces.
∞≠
The school board countered with a new tactic. With the Ku Klux Klan in
retreat, local courts and police now became the principal instruments of
repression. At the request of the school board, on 19 October District Judge
Jim Warren Richardson signed an injunction prohibiting the Voters League
from encouraging or assisting school children to absent themselves from
school. Simultaneously, Washington Parish district attorney W. W. Erwin
ﬁled a criminal bill of information against leaders of the Voters League
charging them with contributing to the delinquency of school children.
∞∞
Undeterred by the legal actions, the next day Voters League and Deacons
leaders joined a group of more than two hundred for a protest march to the
school board building. A few minutes before the march was to begin, city
police swooped down on the site and arrested virtually all of the leaders.
Among those jailed were nearly all the Deacons’ elected ofﬁcers: Charlie
Sims, Royan Burris, and Sam Barnes. Police also arrested Voters League
leaders Robert Hicks and Gayle Jenkins. A. Z. Young, who was hospitalized
at the time, was the only leader to escape arrest. All were charged with
contributing to the delinquency of a minor.
∞≤
If the city fathers had hoped to thwart the movement by beheading its
adult leadership, they had seriously underestimated the determination and
organization of the youth. When informed that they could not march, two
hundred students began shouting, ‘‘Let’s go to jail.’’ They forged ahead
with the demonstration, forcing police to arrest forty-six students, including


--- PAGE 250 ---
240 Black Power—Last Days
march leader Don Expose. A second march staged later that day led to
another twenty-one arrests.∞≥
By nightfall all of the adult leaders, with the exception of Sims, remained
in jail. The arrests sent tempers ﬂaring in the black community. At 10:00 p.m.
an angry crowd of approximately 250 blacks gathered at the Negro Union
Hall and began a spontaneous march to protest arrests earlier that day.
Charlie Sims was the lone remaining adult leader on the scene; he was
joined by Henry Austin, who had heard of the arrests and had traveled from
New Orleans to lend a hand. When the police learned that the marchers
were moving toward the downtown area, they quickly sent all available units
to the scene. There the police were confronted by a mob that was a far
cry from the polite, nonviolent marchers that had walked the picket line
the summer before. ‘‘You could have heard them for three or four blocks,
whooping and hollering, calling us cowards,’’ bristled Chief Claxton Knight.
The crowd began chanting ‘‘Freedom, Freedom, Freedom’’ and then more
ominously ‘‘War, War, War.’’
∞∂
Police claimed that the demonstrators tossed beer bottles at them. What-
ever the provocation, there is little doubt that law enforcement grossly over-
reacted. Instead of asking the marchers to disperse, Chief Knight sent the
police into the crowd to scatter it. The result was nothing short of a police
riot. Police ofﬁcers stormed through the black community, arresting anyone
in their way: innocent bystanders, people returning from work, people eat-
ing in restaurants, even business owners in their own establishments. When
police found Henry Austin in the Bamboo Club, they dragged him out and
brutally beat him with clubs. ‘‘You niggers aren’t going to rule this town,’’
one policeman screamed at Austin. Police indiscriminately clubbed and
manhandled children and pulled hapless passersby from their cars and beat
them. After going to the police station to bail out his son-in-law, the Rever-
end Nathan Lewis was stopped, roughed up, and arrested for possession of a
pocketknife. One policeman told the minister that he might be found with ‘‘a
weight around your head in the Pearl River.’’
∞∑
‘‘Bloody Wednesday,’’ as the police riot came to be known, posed a chal-
lenge for the federal government. Using the injunction that it had won in
federal court, Hicks v. Knight , the Justice Department ﬁled charges against
several ofﬁcers, including Vertrees Adams, Sidney J. Lyons, and John Hill. At
the hearing, Judge Herbert W. Christenberry aptly described the events of
the night as ‘‘more like East Germany than the United States’’; he lectured po-
lice ofﬁcials for engaging in a ‘‘deliberate scheme to harass these people and
throw them in jail.’’ Although Hicks v. Knight was primarily intended to com-
pel local ofﬁcials to protect civil rights activists from vigilante attacks, it had


--- PAGE 251 ---
Black Power—Last Days 241
now become an effective tool against police violence. Bloody Wednesday was
the ﬁrst and last police assault on the black community in Bogalusa.∞∏
Bloody Wednesday left the Voters League and the Deacons in bad shape.
Bail for the arrested marchers drained the league’s resources. The boycott
had little success, and students soon returned to school. By the end of the
year the Voters League shifted its focus from school issues back to equal
employment. In November the league launched a new boycott of twenty-four
stores that had still not hired blacks. The picketing was effective, and by De-
cember Bogalusa shop owners admitted that business was down—although
they accused the league of frightening away blacks through threats and
intimidation. There was some merit to their claim. For most black Boga-
lusans, the civil rights movement had ended in the summer of 1965. It is
difﬁcult to sustain interest and support for any social movement for long
periods, especially when the movement’s goals appear to be accomplished.
The Christmas holidays were approaching, and, for some, the temptation to
slip downtown for a little holiday shopping was irresistible. It became difﬁ-
cult for the league to recruit pickets, and the group increasingly used threats
to enforce the boycott.
∞π
One leaﬂet distributed by the league read: ‘‘Warning, Warning, Warning.
Any persons found shopping at any of these stores will have to pay the
penalty. Cooperate and together we shall overcome. Don’t cooperate and we
shall overcome you along with the white man .’’ During a rally in January
1966, A. Z. Young berated the black community for lack of participation
in the movement. ‘‘I am not getting the cooperation you promised me,’’ he
said. ‘‘You promised 24-hour-a-day cooperation. I have been embarrassed at
marches and rallies by your not turning out.’’ Young accused the Voters
League Youth Organization of ‘‘dragging its feet,’’ and he laid the blame on
parents who prevented their children from participating. ‘‘You had better
join me,’’ Young warned his audience. ‘‘If you don’t join me, we are out to get
you, baby.’’
∞∫
Occasionally the Deacons made Young’s threats a reality. On 16 April 1966
unknown assailants ﬁred several shots at the home of the Reverend Herrod
Morris, a longtime black critic of the Voters League, and black resident
Raleigh Lucas. Several weeks later Sam Barnes, the Deacons’ vice president,
and George Skiffer were arrested and charged with attempted murder for
the shooting incident at the Morris home. Although there was enough evi-
dence to indict them, the case never went to trial. Barnes, the ﬁfty-ﬁve-year-
old Deacons ofﬁcer, died of a heart attack a few weeks after his arrest.
∞Ω
In the fall of 1965 the Klan was also having trouble sustaining interest, hav-
ing lost the ability to organize mass marches and counterprotests. The night


--- PAGE 252 ---
242 Black Power—Last Days
riders were reduced to an occasional skirmish with local blacks. In Septem-
ber, only a few days before the federal hearing of the Original Knights of the
Ku Klux Klan ( okkkk) was scheduled to open, police arrested Klansman
Saxon Farmer for brandishing a .38 caliber pistol during a brawl between
blacks and whites at the Bogalusa Dairy Queen.
≤≠
In September federal court proceedings commenced against the Klan in
New Orleans. Faced with deﬁant Klan leaders Saxon Farmer and Charles
Christmas who refused to reveal the names of Klan members, the special
three-judge panel composed of Christenberry, Robert A. Ainsworth Jr., and
John Minor Wisdom gave the Grand Dragon and his Grand Titan a choice:
names or jail. Farmer and Christmas quickly caved in and delivered a list of
87 names, later supplemented by the Justice Department with a second list
of 151 names—including the name of Bogalusa city attorney Robert Rester.
But the full extent of the Klan’s terror campaign in Bogalusa never came
to light at the hearing. To spare themselves the embarrassment of a pub-
lic airing of their crimes, Farmer and Christmas admitted to most of the
counts against the okkkk, including the numerous assaults and intimida-
tions against civil rights workers, business people, judges, congressmen, and
even Governor McKeithen. The evidence that did emerge indicated that the
Klan had been behind most of the seemingly spontaneous violence in Boga-
lusa. fbi special agent Frank Sass, whose memory had failed him in previous
hearings, now recalled that he had seen Klansman Adrian Goings Jr. dis-
pense baseball bats and two-by-four clubs to a group of young white teen-
agers in a parking lot near a civil rights protest. Armed with the bats and
clubs, the teenagers were then apparently deployed for attacks by Randle C.
Pounds, the Klansman who had assaulted James Farmer.
≤∞
The hearings did not go well for the Klan, and on 22 December the three-
judge panel issued a permanent injunction against the okkkk. Naming a
total of 234 okkkk members in Washington Parish, the injunction prohibited
Klansmen from harassing and intimidating blacks who were exercising their
civil rights or voting rights, or pursuing equal employment. Klansmen would
face ﬁnes or jail if they threatened or intimidated blacks, business owners, or
city ofﬁcials and employees. The court also ordered Farmer and Christmas to
maintain a record of members of the okkkk and post copies of the injunction
in a conspicuous place where they met. Federal marshals fanned out around
Washington Parish in the following weeks and served the injunction papers
on all 234 Klan members. Saxon Farmer remained deﬁant in the face of
defeat. ‘‘So what?’’ Farmer said of the injunction, ‘‘I think the decision was
actually rendered before we entered into the hearing.’’
≤≤
Deprived of their secrecy, the okkkk withered away within days. That it


--- PAGE 253 ---
Black Power—Last Days 243
took so little to destroy the Klan in Louisiana begs the question, why didn’t
the Justice Department take decisive measures against racist terrorist orga-
nizations earlier? The statutes and constitutional provisions used to destroy
the Klan in Bogalusa had been available to the department from the begin-
ning of the civil rights movement. The truth was that the Kennedy adminis-
tration failed to vigorously prosecute the Klan for a simple reason: the presi-
dent feared that aggressive federal intervention would alienate southern
voters and lose him the White House in 1964. Moreover, Kennedy needed the
cooperation of the South’s powerful congressional delegation in order to
pass his legislative initiatives. His assassination led to a national mandate for
civil rights legislation, but Lyndon Johnson, despite his leadership on civil
rights, also fell short of using his power to ensure the safety of people seek-
ing to enjoy these rights. Civil rights leaders implored Johnson to enact
special federal legislation to protect rights workers in the South, but their
entreaties went unheeded. In the wake of Viola Liuzzo’s murder in the Selma
protests, President Johnson had publicly declared ‘‘war’’ on the Klan, but he
took his time making his way to the battleﬁeld. Even after the Neshoba
County murders, the Justice Department limited its anti-Klan campaign to
identifying Klan members and their activities and placing informants in
several Klan groups. The Civil Rights Division assigned nine lawyers to inves-
tigate the Klan terror campaign in southwestern Mississippi; it failed to
produce a single criminal or civil case. The fbi carried out a secret Coun-
ter Intelligence Program ( cointelpro–white hate ) to disrupt the Klan
groups but did not aggressively build cases against the vigilantes. These low-
proﬁle, unobtrusive actions were simply a continuation of the Justice De-
partment’s policy of remaining invisible in the South. As might be expected,
the strategy proved to be totally ineffective: the Klan continued to spread
like wildﬁre throughout 1964–65.
≤≥
In announcing his ‘‘war’’ on the Klan, Johnson called for a thorough investi-
gation of the organization. He quickly disappointed civil rights activists when
he inexplicably handed over the investigation to the House Un-American
Activities Committee (huac)—a body dominated by unreconstructed segre-
gationists (the hearings took more than a year to get off the ground). John-
son continued to ignore the Klan problem until the Deacons left him no
options in Bogalusa.
≤∂
The successful Bogalusa injunction against the Louisiana Klan deprived
the night riders of their secrecy and their ability to mobilize large-scale
demonstrations and public violence with impunity. The remaining Klan loy-
alists retreated into a world of fragmented, clandestine cells that carried on
intermittent acts of terror. But the most immediate and telling development


--- PAGE 254 ---
244 Black Power—Last Days
was the way that the Deacons had turned the tables on the Klan and inspired
a paranoid panic among hooded vigilantes in the Deep South.≤∑
In November 1965 J. H. Wood, a member of the United Klans of America
(uka), contacted Washington County deputy sheriff Earl Fisher of Green-
ville, Mississippi, to relate a bizarre tale of a black conspiracy and an immi-
nent race war. Wood told Deputy Fisher that he and his associates had
discovered that the Deacons and the Black Muslims were smuggling guns,
automatic weapons, and thousands of rounds of ammunition into Missis-
sippi through the Gulf of Mexico. The Klan was convinced that the Deacons
and the Muslims had joined forces to foment a violent revolt against whites
in the South. Though dubious, Fisher began investigating the allegations
and talked to other uka members who had staked out the Delta Memo-
rial Gardens Cemetery outside the city limits of Greenville. The Klansmen
claimed that they had observed several suspicious black burials in recent
months. One burial was mysteriously attended by only one person; in the
case of another burial, there allegedly was no record of a recent death. The
Klansmen were convinced that the Deacons were concealing weapons and
ammunition in empty graves. The Alcohol, Tobacco, and Firearms Depart-
ment also became interested in the allegations and interviewed Earnest
Thomas about them.
≤∏
The Klansmen made Fisher an offer. They would lead him to the graves
where the weapons were hidden if the Klan would receive a portion of the
guns and ammunition to protect whites against the planned uprising. They
also insisted that if weapons were found, the State Highway Patrol should
post guards at every black cemetery in the state. The Klan was in a panic over
the prospects of a race war and even offered to help the highway patrol
contain the Deacon-Muslim conspiracy. ‘‘One of our members is in tears out
there thinking about those guns,’’ said uka Kleagle Ernest Gilbert.
≤π
Deputy Fisher grew concerned that the rumor of a black revolt might
spread in the white community. His fears were well founded. Paranoid fan-
tasies of bloody and vengeful black revolts were deeply embedded in the
southern white psyche, dating back to the time of slavery when revolt was a
real threat. The Deacons had jogged the phantom memory to the surface.
Compounding the problem was the Klansmen’s insistence on massive public-
ity to unmask the black insurrection. ‘‘They wanted abc, nbc, cbs, and the
Jackson newspapers on hand when the graves were opened,’’ said Fisher.
Fearing a riot if the rumors reached the white community, the anxious
deputy contacted the state attorney general, who authorized the investiga-
tion to continue. Fisher then secured permission to exhume the grave of an
elderly black man where the Klan believed that weapons were hidden. To


--- PAGE 255 ---
Black Power—Last Days 245
minimize publicity, the police dug up the grave at night under armed guard.
At last they reached the cofﬁn and anxiously pried off the lid. Inside they
found the remains of James Turner, a sixty-four-year-old black man who had
been buried on 4 November. There were no guns. The next day Fisher invited
the local media to examine the ridiculous scene. ‘‘This was done to disprove
once and for all that Negroes are not stashing guns,’’ Fisher solemnly an-
nounced. ‘‘The Black Muslims and the Deacons for Defense and Justice are
not in here creating an uprising.’’ The photograph accompanying the news
story showed three slightly befuddled deputy sheriffs peering into a gaping
and harmless grave. To add insult to injury, Fisher stated that his ofﬁce was
now opening an investigation of the Klan.
≤∫
Amusing as the Mississippi Klan panic was, it demonstrated the power of
the ‘‘New Negro’’ image that the Deacons had helped create. Moreover, it tes-
tiﬁed to the effectiveness of this image in discouraging open Klan violence.
By the end of 1965 the Klan in Louisiana was virtually dead. That year its
campaign of terror had included hundreds of cross burnings and assaults,
twenty-two shootings, twenty-eight bombings, and arson. The Klan’s last
attack in Bogalusa occurred on 27 January 1966, when James Farmer re-
turned to the city for the ﬁrst large march in several months. In response, the
Klan held a rally and—under cover of darkness—lit four small crosses in a
circle around Ebenezer Baptist Church. Initially, the Voters League decided
to retaliate by donning Klan robes and parading through Bogalusa to ridi-
cule the night riders as cowards. The shocking idea electriﬁed the black
community as much as it terriﬁed whites. It also attested to the sweeping
psychological transformation that the Deacons had produced in ten short
months. The provocative plan was dropped, but a rally on 29 January pro-
vided a forum for the league to issue a stern threat to the Klan. ‘‘Thursday
there were four crosses burned in the Negro section of town,’’ A. Z. Young
told the rally audience. ‘‘They don’t scare us,’’ he continued. ‘‘But if any more
are burned, we’ll strike a match on you baby.’’ The crowd roared its approval.
Charlie Sims warned local authorities that if the city attempted a repeat of
‘‘Bloody Wednesday,’’ the Deacons would ‘‘come off of defense and go on
offense.’’ As the rally ended, Fletcher Anderson joined Sims on the stage and
donned a wrinkled sheet with a pointed Klan hood painted with the letters
‘‘KKK.’’ Anderson pronounced the Klan ofﬁcially dead and pranced around
the stage in his costume—to gales of laughter from the audience.
≤Ω
On 5 June 1966 James Meredith began a quiet 220-mile protest pilgrimage
from Memphis, Tennessee, to Jackson, Mississippi. Now a Columbia Univer-
sity Law School student, Meredith had ﬁrst attracted international attention


--- PAGE 256 ---
246 Black Power—Last Days
during his efforts to integrate the University of Mississippi in 1962. The
iconoclastic and inveterate loner set off on his pilgrimage joined by only a
few supporters. Meredith’s goal was to encourage black voter registration
and increase national awareness of ‘‘the all-pervasive and overriding fear
that dominates the day-to-day life’’ of blacks in the South. On the second
day of his journey, a white man emerged from the brush along the high-
way near Hernando, Mississippi, and ﬁred three shotgun blasts at the civil
rights leader. Meredith miraculously survived the attack with only super-
ﬁcial wounds. But the shooting triggered a major reaction by national civil
rights organizations, who were determined to use the incident to call for
additional voting rights and poverty legislation and to highlight the failure
of state and local governments to provide the promised rights. On 7 June
Martin Luther King, representing the Southern Christian Leadership Con-
ference ( sclc), Floyd McKissick, the new national director of core, and
Stokely Carmichael, chairman of sncc, announced that the three organiza-
tions would continue Meredith’s march to Jackson. The subsequent ‘‘Mere-
dith March against Fear’’ was the last great march of the modern civil rights
movement, stretching out for nearly three weeks and covering 260 miles.
Deacons from both South and North became immediately involved in the
march. When the news of the Meredith shooting reached Chicago, Earnest
Thomas departed the city with a contingent of Deacons bound for Memphis.
They planned to join forces with Deacons from Mississippi and Louisiana.
Thomas pulled his van into the Lorraine Motel and quickly caught the atten-
tion of Memphis police as the Deacons piled out with M-1 riﬂes and ban-
doliers. A police superintendent questioned the Deacons and ran arrest war-
rant checks. The group checked out clean, but the superintendent was still
wary of the surly looking armed gang. He asked Thomas why they were so
heavily armed. ‘‘That’s the only way I’m going to Mississippi, sir,’’ replied
Thomas coolly.
≥≠
That night Thomas talked brieﬂy with Martin Luther King. Although the
two had crossed swords in the media in the past, Mississippi had a way of
making friends of old enemies. They appeared to put aside their differences,
and King even took to calling Thomas ‘‘Deac.’’ Tuesday night Dick Gregory
told Thomas that there was a meeting in King’s room at the Lorraine. As
soon as they crossed the threshold, Hosea Williams, an sclc aide, protested
Thomas’s presence. ‘‘Well I’m going to tell you right now, there ain’t going to
be no Deacons on the march,’’ Williams announced. Tempers ﬂared for a
moment as King calmly sat on the edge of his bed quietly eating a steak.
Stokely Carmichael and Floyd McKissick, who supported the Deacons, were
also there, along with Roy Wilkins of the naacp and Whitney Young of the


--- PAGE 257 ---
Black Power—Last Days 247
National Urban League. The naacp and the Urban League were appalled at
the idea of armed guards in the march and adamantly opposed the Deacons.
Thomas fumed at Williams and warned him that sclc risked losing the
support of rank-and-ﬁle blacks, ‘‘because you getting people hurt, and you
get back on them god-damn planes and you ﬂy off and forget about them.’’
The Deacons were not going to allow that to happen again. This was going
to be a ‘‘different march,’’ promised Thomas. King looked surprised and
stopped carving his steak for a moment. ‘‘Deac, you mean you’re going to
march?’’ asked King. ‘‘I don’t have no intention of marching one block in
Mississippi,’’ Thomas told King. ‘‘But we’re going to be up and down the
highways and the byways. And if somebody gets shot again, they going to
have somebody to give account to for that.’’
≥∞
The Mississippi Delta was sncc country, and King could ill-afford to alien-
ate the young radicals. He would need their support and organizational
network in the region if the march were to succeed. To many who listened to
the debate at the Lorraine that night, King’s silence appeared to be tacit
support for sncc and the militants. sncc not only demanded that the Dea-
cons be invited to guard the march, but also argued that the focus of the
demonstration should be ‘‘an indictment of President Johnson over the fact
that existing laws were not being enforced.’’ Reﬂecting the growing Black
Power politics in sncc, Carmichael demanded that whites be excluded from
the march. Wilkins and Young opposed sncc’s strategy as divisive—and they
wanted nothing to do with the gun-toting Deacons. The two moderates left
the meeting, and the remaining organizers drafted a march ‘‘manifesto’’ that
contained much of sncc’s militant rhetoric. By the end of the night King
reluctantly agreed that the Deacons could remain in the march.
≥≤
Why King consented to having the Deacons on the march remains a mys-
tery. He may have assumed that they would not become a media issue, given
Thomas’s assurances that the Deacons would not carry weapons. Still, it was
a risky concession for King. The media was alert to symbols of a growing
political schism in the movement over nonviolence. naacp leader Charles
Evers received deafening applause when he told a Mississippi rally that he
and his followers were going to Meredith’s aid like the popular matinee
gunslingers Buck Jones and Tim McCoy. Meredith himself bluntly repudi-
ated nonviolence while recuperating from his wounds. He told reporters that
before the march he had debated whether to bring a gun or a Bible. To his
regret, he chose the Bible. ‘‘I was embarrassed because I could have knocked
the intended killer off with one shot if I had been prepared,’’ said Meredith.
‘‘I will return to the march . . . and I will be armed unless I have assurances I
will not need arms. I believe in law and order, but if the whites continue to


--- PAGE 258 ---
248 Black Power—Last Days
kill the Negro in the South, I will have no choice but to urge them [Negroes]
to go out and defend themselves.’’ Meredith had little to say about the
Deacons other than he did not ‘‘favor’’ the Deacons—or any group for that
matter. The Deacons would be there to protect Meredith just the same. ‘‘If
a white man starts shooting again,’’ Thomas told reporters, ‘‘you’ll know
where to ﬁnd him.’’
≥≥
As the march continued, the Deacons positioned themselves in cars in
front of and behind the marchers. Some Deacons walked in the march guard-
ing King, but without weapons. They scouted the march route, guarded
campsites, and escorted travelers to the Memphis airport at night. Charlie
Sims brought a contingent of Deacons from Louisiana, and the New Orleans
and Jonesboro chapters also sent members. ‘‘I was carryin’ two snub-nosed
.38s and two boxes of shells,’’ recalled Sims, ‘‘and had three men ridin’ down
the highway with semi-automatic carbines with thirty rounds apiece. . . . See,
I didn’t believe in that naked shit, no way.’’ Although there were rumors that
350 Deacons were at the march, the ﬁgure was probably closer to 30. As
promised, the Deacons kept a low proﬁle.
≥∂
Despite their efforts to remain out of the public eye, the Deacons’ role in
the march soon surfaced in the media. On 13 June Thomas got involved in a
heated debate with a white pastor who had objected to the Deacons carrying
weapons at the march campsite. Thomas told the pastor that he was wrong
to tell blacks not to ﬁght back when their lives were at stake. The argument
spread among marchers throughout the camp until core ﬁeld secretary
Bruce Baines admonished the group not to air their dispute in front of the
press. It was too late. The New York Times carried a story on the argument
and quoted Thomas as saying that the Deacons were guarding the campsite
at night ‘‘with pistols, riﬂes and shotguns’’ and providing armed escorts of
marchers who traveled at night to the Memphis airport. ‘‘But we don’t take
guns with us when the people are marching,’’ said Thomas. ‘‘The march is
nonviolent.’’ Floyd McKissick attempted damage control by telling the Times
that he had no knowledge of weapons around the campsite and that he had
talked ‘‘way into the night’’ telling the Deacons and the marchers that the
march ‘‘must remain nonviolent.’’
≥∑
Tension began to grow between sclc and the Deacons. On 21 June King
asked Thomas if the Deacons could set up a series of radio base stations
along the march route. King said that he feared that there were ‘‘dark days
ahead’’ for the march, and the communication system would aid security
(pay phone lines were frequently cut along the route). Thomas agreed and
left for Jonesboro to retrieve the radios. In his absence, King left the Mere-
dith March and took approximately twenty persons to Philadelphia, Mis-


--- PAGE 259 ---
Black Power—Last Days 249
sissippi, to attend a memorial service for the three civil rights workers slain
there two years before. In Philadelphia, King led an impromptu march that
was quickly surrounded by a mob of several hundred armed whites. A group
of twenty-ﬁve whites broke away from the mob and viciously assaulted the
marchers. Half a dozen black marchers vainly fought back as police and fbi
agents looked on for several minutes. Later that night marauding whites
made four gunﬁre attacks on the black community, including an attack on
the headquarters of the Mississippi Freedom Democratic Party. Blacks at the
headquarters returned ﬁre during two of the attacks and wounded one of
the white assailants.
≥∏
Thomas was furious with King when he learned of the detour to Phila-
delphia and the subsequent debacle. Right or not, Thomas suspected that
the radio errand was a ruse to prevent him from accompanying King to
Philadelphia. ‘‘This is the end of this,’’ Thomas told King’s aides in disgust.
Relations between King and the Deacons were clearly strained by the inci-
dent. The same day as the Philadelphia attack, the Meredith March arrived
in Indianola, where sncc ﬁeld secretary Charles McLaurin led marchers in a
chant for ‘‘black power’’—a chant that Carmichael had ﬁrst introduced in the
march at Greenwood. King ﬂew from Philadelphia to Indianola, where he
addressed a rally that night. He took the opportunity to bitterly condemn the
Deacons and the Black Power advocates. ‘‘Some people are telling us to be
like our oppressor, who has a history of using Molotov cocktails, who has a
history of dropping the atom bomb, who has a history of lynching Negroes,’’
said King. ‘‘Now people are telling me to stoop down to that level. I’m sick
and tired of violence.’’
≥π
King repeated his attack on self-defense throughout 1966, arguing in the
pages of Ebony that ‘‘it is extremely dangerous to organize a movement
around self-defense’’ because the ‘‘line between defensive violence and ag-
gressive retaliatory violence is a ﬁne line indeed. When violence is tolerated
even as a means of self-defense there is a grave danger that in the fervor of
emotion the main ﬁght will be lost over the question of self-defense.’’ King
emphasized that the movement should not rely on self-defense in marches,
but rather suffer bloodshed for the greater good. Ultimately, ‘‘violence, even
in self-defense, creates more problems than it solves.’’
≥∫
The Meredith March ended without incident, though it lay bare for the
public the divisions between the old civil rights leaders and the new Black
Power militants. The march had involved scores of Deacons from several
chapters and served to strengthen ties between the defense group and lead-
ers of the emerging Black Power movement. The inﬂuence of nationalists
was evident in the new rhetoric and tactics of the Deacons in Bogalusa. Black


--- PAGE 260 ---
250 Black Power—Last Days
Power as a political movement has often been dismissed as a doctrine of
hatred and racial separatism. ‘‘It was born from the womb of despair and
disappointment,’’ said Martin Luther King. ‘‘Black Power is a cry of pain. It is
in fact a reaction to the failure of White Power to deliver the promises and to
do it in a hurry.’’ Its advocates engaged in ‘‘disruption for disruption’s sake,’’
argued King, and failed to offer a program for change because they believed
‘‘that evil has so engrossed itself in the society that there is no answer within
the society.’’
≥Ω
Black Power was admittedly an ambiguous term, but it was much more
than a cry of pain. Most Black Power activists advanced a program of com-
munity control of police and economic resources and a strategy of force and
coercion rather than moral appeals to secure these reforms. They believed
that blacks had to control their own organizations of liberation, in contrast
to interracial groups like core, or organizations ﬁnancially dependent on
white liberals and trade unions, such as the naacp and sclc. But racial
separatism was a means, not an end. ‘‘The concept of Black Power rests on a
fundamental premise,’’ said Stokely Carmichael in 1967: ‘‘Before a group can
enter an open society, it must ﬁrst close ranks .’’ Regardless of the intended
meaning of the term, historical hindsight makes clear its political impact.
Black Power conveyed to white people that African Americans were no lon-
ger willing to behave politically in ways prescribed by white liberals. In
contrast to the popular nonviolent image of peaceful and polite supplicants,
swaying to song and prayer, Black Power presented a gritty coercive image
of black men and women, deﬁant, proud, exalting in their blackness, and
impervious to white expectations and entreaties. Black Power leaders like
Stokely Carmichael viewed nonviolence as a form of cultural imperialism in
which white people had imposed their own culturally preferred method of
social change. ‘‘For black people to adopt their methods of relieving our
oppression is ludicrous,’’ said Carmichael. Black Power was fundamentally a
movement for self-deﬁnition. ‘‘We blacks must respond in our own way, on
our own terms, in a manner which ﬁts our temperaments. The deﬁnitions of
ourselves, the roles we pursue, the goals we seek are our responsibility.’’ Far
from a puerile tantrum or nihilistic hate, Black Power was a lucid alternative
to nonviolence that had a calculated effect on white and black consciousness
and an implicit message about how change occurs in America.
∂≠
The Deacons who participated in the Meredith March were profoundly
inﬂuenced by Black Power, and when they returned home they soon began
to employ the militant rhetoric of confrontation. During an interview on
wdsu television in New Orleans on 16 September, Bob Hicks bemoaned the


--- PAGE 261 ---
Black Power—Last Days 251
slow pace of change and intimated that violence was necessary. ‘‘The federal
government won’t do anything, the state government won’t do anything, so
somebody has to die,’’ said Hicks. ‘‘It won’t do any good for a Negro to die, so
somebody else has got to die.’’ A. Z. Young took the same tack at a subse-
quent rally. ‘‘If you own a gun buy plenty of ammunition for it and get ready
to use it,’’ Young said, ‘‘because we might have to burn this baby down.’’
These threats provoked a near-hysterical response by Bogalusa whites. Gayle
Jenkins did her best to defuse the situation. ‘‘You know A. Z. as well as I do,’’
Jenkins told reporters. ‘‘He makes all those kinds of statements.’’
∂∞
But Robert Rester, Bogalusa city attorney and Klan member, was unwill-
ing to forgive Young’s statements. Rester announced that he would ask the
Twenty-second District Court to convene a Washington Parish Grand Jury
to investigate the Deacons and ‘‘inﬂammatory’’ statements by the Voters
League. The investigation would determine if the league ‘‘advocates vio-
lence’’ and if the Deacons ‘‘have violated state statutes on purchase, sale, or
possession of ﬁrearms.’’ Rester’s threats never bore fruit, but they repre-
sented the white political establishment’s new strategy of using the courts to
neutralize the Voters League and the Deacons. In the fall of 1966 city ofﬁcials
sued several league and Deacon members.
∂≤
The last armed confrontation between the Deacons and the Klan occurred
on 12 September 1966, the same day as Hicks’s television appearance. A
rumor had spread that James Meredith had been invited to speak at the
newly integrated Bogalusa Junior High. Black and white students had been
involved in a series of ﬁghts in recent days, adding to the tension. Fifty white
men and twelve women, many of them Klan members, assembled outside
the school a few hours before classes began. They were led by Paul Farmer,
leader of the Citizens Council and brother of Klan leader Saxon Farmer.
Hicks, Young, and about twenty members of the Voters League and the
Deacons arrived at the school. Guns were drawn, but police eventually per-
suaded the two groups to leave. It was the last time that the Klan attempted
to use force to intimidate the black community in Bogalusa.
∂≥
Voters League protests revived brieﬂy in August 1967 with a dramatic
105-mile march from Bogalusa to Baton Rouge—through the heart of Klan
country—led by A. Z. Young. It was a surreal scene: a handful of marchers,
stoked by ﬁery Black Power rhetoric, walking in a slow, deliberate gait into
the lion’s den. Though it attracted hardly any followers, the march became
the focus of enormous media coverage and sparked fears of black rioting. On
10 August Young commenced the march from Bogalusa, with plans to end


--- PAGE 262 ---
252 Black Power—Last Days
with a rally at the state capitol featuring Black Power advocates H. Rap
Brown and Lincoln Lynch. The protest began with a meager forty-four par-
ticipants and a handful of Deacons.
∂∂
The last leg of the march tested the mettle of even the bravest demonstra-
tors. Livingston Parish stood between the marchers and Baton Rouge, with
only a small contingent of state troopers standing guard. A Klan stronghold
with virtually no black population, Livingston Parish had a deserved reputa-
tion as dangerous to blacks. The militant tone of the march had attracted
statewide attention, and Governor McKeithen blustered with threats to ar-
rest anyone at the Baton Rouge rally who made ‘‘inﬂammatory statements.’’
In the small town of Satsuma a group of whites broke through state troopers
and attacked the marchers. The next day McKeithen dispatched 150 state
police to guard the march, which had dwindled to only six participants.
∂∑
After more attacks occurred, McKeithen was forced to call out the Na-
tional Guard and order in state troopers to ensure the marchers’ safety. By
the time the marchers reached the outskirts of Baton Rouge, they were
accompanied by a formidable army of nearly 1,000 troops: 825 Louisiana
National Guardsmen and 170 state police. National guard helicopters roared
overhead as a magnetic sweeper cleared the highway of rooﬁng nails scat-
tered by the Klan. Wilting in the 97-degree August heat, Guardsmen lined
the highway with riﬂes with ﬁxed bayonets. State police stood by nervously
ﬁngering submachine guns with live ammunition. Law enforcement ofﬁcials
discovered sections of wire under the twin spans crossing the Amite River on
Highway 190, apparently intended to blow up marchers. ‘‘If they hadn’t had
the Louisiana National Guard, it would have been a slaughter camp,’’ Young
said later.
∂∏
With black nationalist H. Rap Brown as the major speaker for the rally
ending the march, Louisiana’s white power structure feared a major re-
bellion in Baton Rouge’s simmering slums. To cool passions Governor Mc-
Keithen took to the airwaves with a statewide address. When the marchers
arrived in Baton Rouge on Saturday, they were greeted by ﬁfteen hundred
National Guardsmen standing by for the rally with express orders from the
governor to ‘‘shoot-to-kill’’ if a riot erupted. McKeithen told state police
ofﬁcials that if any speaker made ‘‘treasonous or seditious statements’’ they
were to ‘‘arrest them on the spot.’’
∂π
Ignoring McKeithen’s threats, several hundred blacks attended the rally,
which turned out to be law-abiding and peaceful (Rap Brown had been
arrested on a ﬁrearms charge and could not attend). At one point about
150 blacks splintered off from the main rally and threatened to conduct a
sit-in on the state capitol steps. In a strange role reversal, it was Charlie


--- PAGE 263 ---
Black Power—Last Days 253
Sims, now billing himself as national chairman of the Deacons, who inter-
vened and persuaded them to abandon their plan and rejoin the rally. Later
that night spontaneous violence did break out in the city’s black neighbor-
hoods, as gangs of youths roamed the streets breaking windows and hurling
ﬁrebombs.
∂∫
The march to Baton Rouge ushered in the twilight of the Deacons organi-
zation. As the march had demonstrated, local law enforcement agencies
were living up to their obligation to protect activists. The Klan had been
defanged, and black communities now turned to the task of working within
the political system to acquire resources and power. The Voting Rights Act
offered new opportunities to inﬂuence local government, and many Deacons
made bids for elective ofﬁce. In Jonesboro, Earnest Thomas ran for sheriff;
in Bogalusa, several former Deacons launched campaigns for school board
and municipal ofﬁces in the late 1960s and early 1970s. None were success-
ful; warriors seldom make good statesmen.
Of all the Deacons, only A. Z. Young remained in the public eye. The Baton
Rouge march had made Young a legend across the state, and in 1972 he
campaigned vigorously for Edwin Edwards in the gubernatorial race. When
Edwards won with a unique coalition of blacks and blue-collar whites,
he awarded Young a plumb appointment in his administration. Young re-
mained in state government for the rest of his life; he was serving as assistant
to the commissioner of elections at his untimely death in 1993. The Loui-
siana Department of Social Services’ building in Baton Rouge now bears his
name and, in a ﬁnal twist, a ‘‘no guns allowed’’ sign is prominently afﬁxed to
the front door.
∂Ω
Bob Hicks stayed active in local politics and made history by becoming the
ﬁrst black supervisor at the Crown-Zellerbach plant. As a commentary on
the limits of the civil rights laws, when Hicks retired he was, because of
workforce reductions, still the only black supervisor at the plant. Charles
Sims, the old lion, retired to a quiet life of odd jobs and bartending. He
grew bitter with the years, disappointed that young people had failed the
struggle—that they had ‘‘let it fall back in the same shape.’’ He was also
convinced that unscrupulous journalists had exploited his story without
ﬁnancially compensating him. Plagued by health problems in his ﬁnal years,
Sims died quietly in Bogalusa in 1989.
∑≠
Henry Austin, the young Deacon who shot Alton Crowe in the Bogalusa
march, left Bogalusa in exchange for Washington Parish ofﬁcials dropping
charges against him. Austin continued his efforts to organize Deacons chap-
ters in the North and brieﬂy attended college, but his subsequent life became
a struggle against his own demons.


--- PAGE 264 ---
254 Black Power—Last Days
Frederick Douglas Kirkpatrick, one of the original founders of the Jones-
boro Deacons, went on to a life with several fascinating turns. He left his
position at Grambling to become a coordinator for sncc in Houston while
attending Texas Southern University. Kirkpatrick founded a Deacons chap-
ter and was involved in efforts to stop a riot at the school in 1967. He later
worked with King’s sclc. During the antiwar movement he became a well-
known folk singer and later started the ‘‘Hey Brother Coffee House’’ at
Hunter College in New York—a place to combine politics and friendship. He
remained active in various social justice movements as a singer and ‘‘cultural
worker’’ until his premature death in 1987. There was one sweet irony in
Kirkpatrick’s later life. In the 1970s he made several singing appearances on
PBS’s Sesame Street as ‘‘Brother Kirk’’ and later released an album of music
from the program. Little did the millions of children viewing the show sus-
pect that the gentle and warm folk singer was also the founder of a militant
black armed organization that once fought pitched battles with the Ku Klux
Klan in the dusty hot streets of little towns in the Deep South.
∑∞
Earnest ‘‘Chilly Willy’’ Thomas also had a remarkable life. In 1966 he
traveled to Cuba to visit exiled black nationalist leader Robert F. Williams.
On arriving in Havana, Thomas learned that Williams had left the previous
day for the People’s Republic of China by way of North Vietnam. Williams
had become deeply disillusioned with Castro’s Cuba and was looking for a
more hospitable home for exile.
∑≤
Cuban ofﬁcials assigned an interpreter to Thomas and arranged a series of
tours, including of the Cuban countryside. He soon tired of the ofﬁcial tours
and political propagandizing and spent much of his time walking the streets
of Havana, chatting with ordinary people. He met bricklayers (his old trade)
and learned that they earned a paltry eighty-ﬁve cents an hour—yet were
forced to pay twenty-four dollars for a ﬁfth of rum—a profound injustice to a
drinking man like Thomas.
∑≥
The Cuban government treated Thomas considerably better than they
treated their bricklayers, providing him with a free hotel, sumptuous meals,
and all the perks of a visiting dignitary. He met with military ofﬁcials, in-
cluding a Cuban general, ‘‘Commandant Bayou,’’ who had received training
in New Orleans. The general, who had been treated as a white during his
stay in segregated New Orleans, recounted how his American superiors had
once reprimanded him for politely stepping off the sidewalk to allow a black
couple to pass. Later Thomas attended the annual ceremony commemorat-
ing the 26 July Revolution and was assigned a prestigious seat only a few
rows from Fidel Castro. The barroom hustler from Jonesboro was coming up
in the world.
∑∂


--- PAGE 265 ---
Black Power—Last Days 255
But Thomas never received an introduction to Castro, and after a few days
in Cuba he began to run afoul of the government. Part of his difﬁculties arose
from his characteristic frankness. Thomas had noticed early on that a dis-
tinct color line divided blacks and whites in Cuba. When Cuban ofﬁcials in-
quired about his impression of Cuba compared to the United States, Thomas
replied indelicately: ‘‘I see the same thing. I see a lot of black people working
on the farm and I see all the white folks got the best jobs. I don’t see no
difference.’’ His criticisms did not endear him to his hosts.
∑∑
Thomas asked Cuban ofﬁcials to allow him to travel to China to meet with
Williams, but the government dragged its feet in providing an exit visa, no
doubt a consequence of increasing tensions between the Chinese and Soviet
blocs. Growing impatient with the bureaucratic delays, Thomas attempted
to secure an exit through several of the embassies in Havana. He had little
luck with the African embassies, but the North Vietnamese offered to help
on the condition that he would urge black u.s. troops to refuse to ﬁght in
Vietnam. ‘‘I said shit with that. I can’t do that,’’ recalled Thomas. Finally he
went to the Chinese embassy, which, after contacting Williams in China,
arranged to expedite his departure. After four weeks in Cuba, Thomas left
for China by way of Europe.
∑∏
Thomas rendezvoused with Williams in China and began another long
tour of ofﬁcial sites: military bases, war museums—or, in Thomas’s words,
‘‘nothing of interest.’’ He admired the Chinese for not attempting to prosely-
tize him as the Cubans had. After two weeks in China, Thomas departed for
the United States. Originally he planned to arrive through New Orleans, but
the Chinese government warned that he might encounter difﬁculties with
u.s. ofﬁcials, so he returned through Canada and drove across the border.
∑π
The news that Thomas had traveled to Cuba and China sent the fbi into a
paroxysm of frantic memos and international cables. The bureau knew that
the Deacons had close contact with revolutionary nationalists and suspected
that they had purchased hundreds of automatic weapons. After Thomas
returned to the United States via Canada, the fbi received information that
he had served as a courier for Chinese funds for the Revolutionary Action
Movement ( ram) and other radical groups. fbi headquarters sent their
forces scurrying from London to Hong Kong to determine where Thomas
had been and whether he had been a conduit for Chinese money to ram or
other u.s. revolutionaries. J. Edgar Hoover ordered the New Orleans ﬁeld
ofﬁce to look into the rumors. The New York ﬁeld ofﬁce was instructed to see
if Thomas had had contact with ram since his return, and Hong Kong was
queried about Thomas, ram, and connections to China. Thomas denied that
he served as a courier, and Williams declined to comment on the matter.
∑∫


--- PAGE 266 ---
256 Black Power—Last Days
As it turned out, the fbi was right. Three years after Thomas’s China
trip, Williams returned to the United States to face charges arising from the
Monroe riot. The charges were soon dropped, and Williams withdrew from
the movement and moved to rural Michigan. He spent time brieﬁng the u.s.
State Department on China, and in the fall of 1970 he was called before
the House Un-American Activities Committee to give testimony on his ac-
tivities in China. Though Williams initially balked at the subpoena, he even-
tually turned over personal ﬁnancial records and testiﬁed before the com-
mittee. He was a reluctant witness and did his best not to provide huac
with names of other u.s. citizens residing in China. But the cia and other
government investigators had amassed detailed evidence that Williams was
funneling money from China into the United States for revolutionary
groups. Among Williams’s records was a $1,200 payment to Earnest Thomas
intended for ram.
∑Ω
The Cuba-China trip had been an amazing adventure for Chilly Willy—
hailed as a revolutionary leader and immersed in cloak-and-dagger opera-
tions in the Far East. Rubbing shoulders with Third World revolutionaries
had some effect on Thomas, but it had not changed his political views. He
did not return home a Marxist-Leninist; he was too ﬁrm in his convictions to
succumb to revolutionary politics. He would have been a prize catch for any
of the leftist groups, but they all found his political stubbornness impene-
trable. ‘‘Everyone was trying to get a hold of him,’’ remembered ram leader
Virginia Collins, but ‘‘Chilly Willy just couldn’t catch on.’’
∏≠
In 1967 Thomas cut back his organizing activities for the Deacons and
began traveling and speaking with Stokely Carmichael, as well as serving as
Carmichael’s bodyguard. In May 1967 Thomas returned to Louisiana, guard-
ing Carmichael during a speaking engagement at Southern University in
Baton Rouge. In an incident outside the university, police arrested him on a
concealed weapons charge. When Thomas failed to appear for a 14 June
hearing, he was found in contempt of court and received a sentence of
ﬁfteen days in jail and a $500 ﬁne.
∏∞
By 1968 Thomas had left the Deacons for a new career. On his way back
from China, he had met football and movie star Jim Brown at the Lon-
don airport. The two developed an instant rapport, and Brown soon asked
Thomas to be his bodyguard. Thomas jumped at the opportunity and shortly
left for California, leaving the Deacons and the civil rights movement in his
past. He later started a successful trucking company in Los Angeles and
retired to a comfortable life of playing the money markets.
∏≤
Many of the Bogalusa Deacons insist that the organization never dis-
banded. It is still alive, they assert, only awaiting the call to arms. The sen-


--- PAGE 267 ---
Black Power—Last Days 257
timent is more metaphor than fact, but a metaphor rich in meaning. The
Deacons understood—better than any civil rights organization of their time—
that rights are no more secure than our willingness to defend them. Charlie
Sims was once asked how long the Deacons would be needed in the civil
rights movement. ‘‘In 1965 there will be a great change made,’’ Sims said,
alluding to the Voting Rights Act. ‘‘But after this change is made, the biggest
ﬁght is to keep it,’’ he continued. ‘‘My son, his son might have to ﬁght this
ﬁght and that’s one reason why we won’t disband the Deacons for a long
time. How long, Heaven only knows. But it will be a long time.’’
∏≥


--- PAGE 268 ---
conclusion The Myth of Nonviolence
several years ago  I was discussing the history of the
civil rights movement with Dr. J. L. Garret, a respected African American
leader in Hammond, Louisiana. Garret is a middle-class professional who
takes great pride in how he ushered in change in the 1960s through patient
and quiet negotiations with the town’s leading white citizens. He is, by no
stretch of the imagination, a militant or a nationalist. As we talked, I asked if
he had heard of the Deacons. His eyes lit up and a smile spread across his
face. ‘‘Do you know who H. Rap Brown was?’’ he asked. Yes, I replied, he
was the Black Power ﬁrebrand whom the Deacons and the Bogalusa Voters
League had invited to speak at a night rally in Baton Rouge in 1967. At the
time, Brown struck terror in the hearts of white people and his threatened
appearance panicked the Louisiana political powers and prompted paranoid
fears of riots and mayhem. Brown had a way of making nettlesome activists
like Garret look appealingly conservative to the white establishment. Garret
took a sip of his coffee and looked at me across the table. ‘‘Rap Brown did a
great favor for black people in Louisiana,’’ he said with deliberation. ‘‘You
understand what I am saying?’’ ‘‘Yes,’’ I said; I thought I understood his
point. ‘‘The Good Book says that sometimes the Devil can do God’s work,’’ he
added with a wink. ‘‘That’s who Rap Brown was. He was God’s Devil.’’
∞
According to conventional wisdom, nonviolence provided the impetus for
change during the civil rights movement. In some quarters it has become
heresy to suggest otherwise. Historians, for the most part, continue to labor
under this truism. But the experience of the Deacons—and the other ‘‘God’s
Devils’’ of the period—stubbornly contradict the myth of nonviolence.
Nonviolence as the motive force for change became a reassuring myth of
American moral redemption—a myth that assuaged white guilt by suggest-
ing that racism was not intractable and deeply embedded in American life,
that racial segregation and discrimination were handily overcome by or-


--- PAGE 269 ---
Conclusion 259
derly, polite protest and a generous American conscience, and that the plu-
ralistic system for resolving conﬂicts between competing interests had pre-
vailed. The system had worked and the nation was redeemed.
It was a comforting but vacant ﬁction. In the end, segregation yielded to
force as much as it did to moral suasion. Violence in the form of street riots
and armed self-defense played a fundamental role in uprooting segregation
and economic and political discrimination from 1963 to 1965. Only after the
threat of black violence emerged did civil rights legislation move to the
forefront of the national agenda. Only after the Deacons appeared were the
civil rights laws effectively enforced and the obstructions of terrorists and
complicit local law enforcement agencies neutralized.
≤
Nonviolence did have its day. Nonviolence unquestionably deﬁned the
black freedom movement from 1954 to 1963—through the Montgomery Bus
Boycott, the lunch counter sit-ins, and the Freedom Rides. But by the end of
1962 Martin Luther King and the more militant nonviolent organizations
had fallen victim to state repression and terrorism. The Student Nonviolent
Coordinating Committee (sncc), core, and Southern Christian Leadership
Conference ( sclc) had all failed to secure local reform, voting rights, or
protective federal legislation. Appeals to the conscience of whites had foun-
dered in the South and were having limited success in the North. By the
beginning of 1963 the Kennedy administration was backtracking on prom-
ised civil rights legislation. Terrorism and legal repression so demoralized
the movement that activists concluded that federal intervention was their
only salvation. Activists were learning that the myth of nonviolence rested
on a perilous underestimation of racism and a misplaced conﬁdence in the
American conscience and democratic institutions.
Then came the Birmingham campaign in 1963 and, more important, the
Birmingham riots. The ﬁrst riot occurred on 3 May after police opened up
with water cannons on protesters. Young black men, nonpaciﬁsts who had
previously lingered on the sidelines, now retaliated with bricks and bottles.
On 4 May three thousand blacks, most of whom were uninvolved in non-
violent marches, assembled in downtown Birmingham and clashed with
police again.
≥ Three days later a peaceful protest sparked more displays of
force by nonmovement blacks, including several hundred who encircled two
police ofﬁcers.
∂ Finally, in the early hours of 12 May a massive riot broke out
in response to two Ku Klux Klan bombings the night before. For the ﬁrst time
in the history of the civil rights movement, working-class blacks took to the
streets in a violent protest against police brutality and Klan terror. The young
blacks who deﬁed King’s strictures irreversibly altered the strategy of the
civil rights movement, raising the specter of massive black civil violence and


--- PAGE 270 ---
260 Conclusion
ultimately forcing the ﬁrst real concession in the form of the Civil Rights Act.
From Birmingham forward, every peaceful nonviolent protest carried the
threat of black violence. The Birmingham riots marked the end of non-
violence and the advent of a movement characterized by both lawful mass
protest and defensive violence.
∑
The May riots were followed by another riot in Birmingham on 15 Septem-
ber 1963 in response to the bombing of the 16th Street Baptist Church. All of
these riots were essentially acts of defensive violence, that is to say, collective
acts intended to protect the black community from police or white terrorist
violence. In this sense, these forcible collective protests were part of the
same countermovement against nonviolence represented by the Deacons
and their armed self-defense philosophy. The tactic of collective force spread
rapidly after the May riots in Birmingham. In the summer of 1963—in the
middle of what is traditionally viewed as the nonviolent phase of the move-
ment—black civil violence against police and white vigilantes exploded in
Lexington, North Carolina; Savannah, Georgia; Charleston, South Carolina;
and Cambridge, Maryland. During 1964–65 more black riots erupted in
southern cities, including a second uprising in Cambridge and disorders in
St. Augustine, Florida; Natchez, McComb, and Jackson, Mississippi; Jack-
sonville, Florida; Henderson, North Carolina; Princess Anne, Maryland; and
Bogalusa, Louisiana. Numerous ‘‘near-riots’’ occurred in Nashville, Atlanta,
and other cities.
∏
Urban rebellions in the South placed enormous pressure on national pol-
icymakers, but they also dramatically affected local power relations. Sig-
niﬁcantly, the southern riots contributed to civil rights victories in many
cities—in some cases, months before the Civil Rights Act went into effect.
Desegregation settlements were quickly negotiated in Charleston, Savan-
nah, Cambridge, Lexington, and St. Augustine. McComb, Mississippi, lived
under a siege by white terrorists from 1962 to 1964, despite two separate
sncc campaigns. After a series of bombings in September 1964, McComb
blacks abandoned nonviolence and staged a riot. Within days, President
Johnson brought pressure to bear on state ofﬁcials, and the Klan was soon
out of business. ‘‘Whatever the speculation,’’ writes John Dittmer, ‘‘the fact
remains that until the end of September the Klan had its way in McComb,
and the bombers were arrested only after blacks engaged in retaliatory
violence and after both the president and the governor had threatened to
send troops to occupy McComb.’’
π
The phenomenon of the defensive street riot also casts light on the role of
black men in the freedom movement. Throughout the South, most black


--- PAGE 271 ---
Conclusion 261
men boycotted the civil rights movement; the campaigns in Birmingham,
New Orleans, Bogalusa, and Jonesboro became movements of women and
children.
∫ Many civil rights leaders explained the absence of men as some
character failing—apathy, alienation, or fear.Ω Yet black men did participate
in the black freedom movement in the Deep South—but not under the disci-
pline of nonviolent organizations.
The numerous instances of black violence in response to police brutality
and Klan terror constituted a form of collective political behavior—one that
attracted thousands of black men. These collective acts of force were, in
every sense, an integral part of the African American freedom movement.
But for many leaders of the national civil rights organizations, the non-
violent movement was the only movement. When sclc’s James Bevel tried to
disperse rioters who were taunting Bull Connor’s troops in downtown Bir-
mingham, Bevel shouted, ‘‘If you are not going to respect the policemen,
you’re not going to be in the movement.’’ Contrary to Bevel, the crowd was
very much a part of the movement—but a movement beyond the control of
the paciﬁsts.
∞≠
This conﬂation of nonviolence with ‘‘the movement’’ blinded many to a
new social movement unfolding before their eyes. ‘‘No longer can white
liberals merely be proud of those well-dressed students, who are specialists
in non-violent direct action,’’ wrote Bayard Rustin in the days after Bir-
mingham. ‘‘Now they are confronted with a Negro working class that is
demanding equal opportunity and full employment.’’
∞∞
Even the role of black students in the movement was changing. During the
1964 Freedom Summer, sncc lamented the lack of participation by southern
black men and college students. But earlier that year, nearly one thousand
black Mississippi students—men and women—risked life and limb in a mili-
tant demonstration and riot against police at Jackson State College. Al-
though police wounded three protesters, the students were determined to
march the following day and confront the police again; they were deterred
only when Charles Evers and James Meredith intervened.
∞≤ The hundreds of
young people who participated in these protests were no less courageous or
motivated than the passive resisters and no less part of a movement. But
their actions made it clear that they believed that repression would only
yield to force. One study concluded that black working-class parents of core
volunteers were less concerned with the possibility that their children would
end up in jail and more concerned with the perils of paciﬁsm. ‘‘Most of the
working parents—like with the core members—just object to the nonvio-
lence,’’ said one core leader. ‘‘That’s what they disapproved of most. They


--- PAGE 272 ---
262 Conclusion
wished we were taking guns.’’ ∞≥ It was the genius of the Deacons that they
recognized this sentiment and offered black men a way to participate in the
movement while maintaining their concept of male honor and dignity.
‘‘The lesson of Birmingham,’’ Malcolm X once observed, ‘‘is the Negroes
have lost their fear of the white man’s reprisals and will react with violence,
if provoked.’’
∞∂ One of the great ironies of the civil rights movement was
that black collective force did not simply enhance the bargaining power of
moderates; it was the very source of their power. This was evident even at the
March on Washington, long heralded as the apogee of the nonviolent move-
ment. Although the day at the reﬂecting pool was tranquil, the weeks pre-
ceding the march provoked considerable anxiety over fears of violence. The
city banned liquor sales, President Kennedy mobilized 4,000 troops and
placed another 15,000 paratroopers on alert in North Carolina. Authori-
ties in Washington, according to one King biographer, feared that ‘‘Negroes
might sack the Capitol like Moors and Visigoths reincarnate.’’
∞∑
Later in the day of the march, King met with Kennedy, accompanied by
several other civil rights leaders and labor leader Walter Reuther. Reuther’s
remarks to the president offer a glimpse at how the fear of violence was
shaping white opinion. Reuther took it upon himself to advise Kennedy on
how to get the business community to support the pending civil rights legis-
lation. In Detroit, Reuther said, he had pigeonholed automobile executives
and told them bluntly, ‘‘Look, you can’t escape the problem. And there are
two ways of resolving it; either by reason or riots.’’ As King looked on,
Reuther pushed home his point. ‘‘Now the civil war that this is gonna trigger
is not gonna be fought at Gettysburg,’’ Reuther warned. ‘‘It’s gonna be fought
in your backyard, in your plant, where your kids are growing up.’’
∞∏
Black violence, in the form of riots and militant armed self-defense, funda-
mentally changed the meaning of nonviolence and the role of King and
moderate leaders; it provided moderates with a negotiating power that they
had never enjoyed before.
∞π It was the threat of black violence, not redemp-
tive suffering and moral suasion, that was now making the political estab-
lishment take notice of nonviolent protest. King understood the changing
dynamics and readily deployed apocalyptic images of black violence in his
speeches and writings. In his famous ‘‘Letter from Birmingham City Jail’’
written in April 1963, King posed nonviolence as the only alternative to an
impending violent revolt that was being fomented by the forces of ‘‘bitterness
and hatred’’ in the black movement. If nonviolence ‘‘had not emerged I am
convinced that by now the streets of the South would be ﬂowing with ﬂoods
of blood,’’ wrote King. ‘‘And I am further convinced that if our white broth-
ers dismiss as ‘rabble rousers’ and ‘outside agitators’—those of us working


--- PAGE 273 ---
Conclusion 263
through the channels of nonviolent direct action . . . millions of Negroes, out
of frustration and despair, will seek solace and security in black ideologies, a
development that will lead inevitably to a frightening racial nightmare.’’
∞∫
King added that the black man had ‘‘many pent-up resentments and latent
frustrations’’ that needed to be released through nonviolent marches, sit-ins,
and Freedom Rides. ‘‘If his repressed emotions do not come out in these
nonviolent ways,’’ he warned, ‘‘they will come out in ominous expressions of
violence. This is not a threat; it is a fact of history.’’
∞Ω
Following the March on Washington, King returned to his Birmingham
theme. ‘‘Unless some immediate steps are taken by the u.s. government, to
restore a sense of conﬁdence and the protection of life, limb, and property,’’
he told an audience, ‘‘my pleas [for nonviolence] will fall on deaf ears and
we shall see in Birmingham and Alabama the worst racial holocaust the
nation has ever seen.’’ At times, King’s message was multilayered and seem-
ingly contradictory, conveying different meanings to different audiences.
His preachments against violence were intended for blacks, while his allu-
sions to retributive violence were intended for whites.
≤≠
King’s words were not wasted on the nation’s leaders. What the Kennedy
administration feared was not peaceful protest, but the black violence that
might accompany it.
≤∞ After the Birmingham riots, Attorney General Robert
Kennedy expressed concern that police violence ‘‘could trigger off a good
deal of violence around the country, with Negroes saying that they’ve been
abused for all these years and they are gonna have to start following the
ideas of the Black Muslims and not go along with the white people.’’ Presi-
dent Kennedy, in his famous 11 June 1963 speech calling for civil rights legis-
lation, spoke of ‘‘a rising tide of discontent that threatens the public safety.’’
Social chaos would be the price of complacency. ‘‘The ﬁres of frustration and
discord are burning in every city, North and South, where legal remedies are
not at hand,’’ Kennedy warned. ‘‘Redress is sought in the streets, in demon-
strations, parades, and protests which create tensions and threaten violence
and threaten lives.’’ Unless Congress acted, the only remedy blacks had was
‘‘in the street.’’ In his message to Congress one week later the president
revisited his apocalyptic images, speaking of the ‘‘ﬁres of frustration and
discord’’ now burning ‘‘hotter than ever’’ and conjuring up images of a nation
wracked by ‘‘rancor, violence, disunity, and national shame.’’ Kennedy’s ar-
gument was explicit: nonviolent protest had become violent, and civil rights
legislation was the only way to end the protests and avert black violence.
≤≤
Force and coercion also contributed to the 1965 Voting Rights Act. Al-
though African Americans protested peacefully in Selma, Alabama, by 1965
most whites believed that the nonviolent civil rights movement had disap-


--- PAGE 274 ---
264 Conclusion
peared. The summer before, riots had erupted in Harlem; Rochester, New
York; Jersey City, Paterson, and Elizabeth, New Jersey; Chicago; and Phila-
delphia—in which 2,483 rioters were arrested and more than 1,000 stores
destroyed. By the time of the Selma march, many white Americans feared
that behind every gospel-singing nonviolent protester stood a menacing
street thug ready to hurl a ﬁrebomb.
≤≥
The experience of the Deacons lays bare the myth of nonviolence, testify-
ing to the crucial role of defensive violence in securing enforcement of the
law of the land. The Deacons’ greatest accomplishment was in Bogalusa,
where their willingness to retaliate against Klan violence ultimately forced
the federal government to enforce the Civil Rights Act and the Bill of Rights,
assert federal supremacy, and destroy two major pillars of white suprem-
acy—local police repression and Klan terror. Since the beginning of the
movement in 1960, rights activists had pleaded with the federal government
for protection, to no avail. Not even the assassination of black deputy O’Neal
Moore in June 1965 aroused the government to action. But when Deacon
Henry Austin shot Alton Crowe in defense of a lawful civil rights march, the
White House ﬁnally decided that violence had become a problem in the
South. After years of appeasing white supremacists—a policy that led to a
decade of unmitigated terrorism, marked by a score of assassinations and
thousands of vicious beatings and imprisonments—it ﬁnally took the blood
of one white man to change the course of history.
The Deacons’ tactical ﬂexibility gave them an immense advantage over
doctrinaire nonviolent organizations. The national civil rights organizations
like sclc, sncc, and core succeeded in drawing national attention to the
plight of black southerners, exposing the latent violence concealed within
segregation and winning federal civil rights legislation. They were coura-
geous and visionary, and their members served as exemplary models of
moral commitment. But the hard truth is that these organizations produced
few victories in their local projects in the Deep South—if success is measured
by the ability to force changes in local government policy and create self-
governing and sustainable local organizations that could survive when the
national organizations departed. Indeed, time and again sncc’s local voter
registration projects ended in demoralization and defeat. The celebrated
McComb voter registration campaign of 1962, which established the tem-
plate for future sncc organizing in Mississippi, resulted in registering only
six new voters in six months.
≤∂
In contrast, the Deacons’ campaigns frequently resulted in substantial and


--- PAGE 275 ---
Conclusion 265
unprecedented victories at the local level, producing real power and self-
sustaining organizations. Their willingness to use force, unlike the national
civil rights organizations, was a vital part of their strategy. In Jonesboro,
the Deacons made history when they compelled Louisiana governor John
McKeithen to intervene in the city’s civil rights crisis and require a compro-
mise with city leaders—the ﬁrst capitulation to the civil rights movement by
a Deep South governor. In Bogalusa, the Deacons scored a dramatic victory
in May 1965 when they forced city ofﬁcials and business leaders to agree to
abolish all segregation laws, provide equal protection under the law for
protesters, integrate city government and police, and carry out physical im-
provements in the black neighborhoods. When the Klan blocked the agree-
ment, the Deacons were, again, the ﬁrst organization to successfully compel
the federal government to intervene against the Klan and ofﬁcial intran-
sigence. Across the state line, the Natchez campaign, employing the Dea-
cons’ organizing model, was undoubtedly the greatest success of the civil
rights movement in Mississippi: its mobilization of the entire black commu-
nity led to massive marches, hundreds of arrests, and a devastating boycott
that brought the city fathers to their knees. Similarly, the Port Gibson Dea-
cons ensured the success of the boycott of town businesses and helped build
local organizing capacity to the point that when local activists decided to
part ways with Charles Evers, the community emerged from the crisis even
stronger than before. No other civil rights–era organization could claim
these kinds of achievements. Force made the difference between success and
failure.
In addition to appreciating the role of force, the Deacons understood the
importance of respect and honor in the social revolution in the South. For
black men to become equal in the eyes of whites, they had to acquire the
respect that comes with fear. The Deacons believed that by encouraging
armed self-defense, they were not only unshackling black men from the
chains of fear and passivity, they were also vanquishing a submissive stereo-
type that fostered white supremacist attitudes and violence.
≤∑ Implicit in
their actions was a belief that black self-respect and dignity depended on the
ability to defend themselves against white violence.
≤∏ Self-defense became
the sine qua non of black dignity. Nonviolence was the path to self-respect
and personal dignity for many African American men—but not all. Segrega-
tion and the caste system in the South rested on violence—state and vigi-
lante violence. White violence could not be overcome through an increased
sense of worth; self-respect never stopped a lynch mob. To overcome white
terror, blacks had to gain respect through fear. The black image in the white


--- PAGE 276 ---
266 Conclusion
mind had to change. ‘‘You have to put some injury on your enemy to get
respect,’’ said core leader Dave Dennis in the wake of the murder of three
civil rights workers in Philadelphia, Mississippi.≤π
Moreover, for many black men, especially the nonpaciﬁst working-class
men who found the Deacons appealing, nonviolence posed a serious di-
lemma. Profound psychological changes were required for black men to
transform their social identity and emancipate themselves—including over-
coming passive and submissive stereotypes. In the minds of southern whites,
the ritual of nonviolent protest, centering on the interplay of domination
and submission, only reinforced the stereotype of black men as passive,
timorous, and childlike. Robert F. Williams, the president of the militant
Monroe, North Carolina, naacp, who once castigated nonviolence as ‘‘ritual
sado-masochism,’’ summarized the misgivings that many black men had
about nonviolence. ‘‘There are many liberals and many organizations in the
North that are dumping hundreds of thousands of dollars into our struggle
in the South,’’ said Williams:
This money is sent into the South to convert us to nonviolence, to make us
paciﬁsts. But you see, the thing is that we’ve always been submissive.
We’ve served in slavery; we were submissive then. We’ve gone through a
period of lynching, of all types of brutal exploitation. And our children
have been denied the right to grow up, to develop as total human beings.
Our women have been raped and our men deprived of the right to stand
up as men. . . . Nobody spends money to go into the South and ask the
racists to be martyrs or paciﬁsts. But they always come to the downtrod-
den Negro who is already oppressed, who’s already too submissive, and
then ask him not to ﬁght back.
≤∫
If black men wanted to effectively counter vigilante violence, they had to
maintain a ‘‘credible threat of violence’’ in the eyes of whites. According to
the southern white code of honor, passivity was cowardice and cowards
were inherently inferior. Honor required a man to defend his family and
home—something that nonviolence prohibited. Southern whites could not
respect, let alone fear, a man without honor. Without fear of reprisals, white
terror and the caste system would continue, and southern whites would
never regard blacks as their equals. The experience of black abolitionist and
former slave Frederick Douglass illustrates how both slaves and slave mas-
ters linked self-defense to self-respect. One day as a young man Douglass
refused to be beaten by his overseer, Edward Covey the ‘‘Negro Breaker.’’ ‘‘It
was a glorious resurrection, from the tomb of slavery to the heaven of free-
dom,’’ wrote Douglass in a memoir. ‘‘My long-crushed spirit rose, cowardice


--- PAGE 277 ---
Conclusion 267
departed, bold deﬁance took its place; and I now resolved that, however
long I might remain a slave in form, the day had passed forever when I would
be a slave in fact. I did not hesitate to let it be known of me, that the white
man who expected to succeed in whipping me, must also succeed in killing
me.’’ Douglass believed that he had restored his manhood; as one historian
observed, when Covey walked away from Douglass, ‘‘he had implicitly ac-
cepted Douglass’s assertion of his liberty and equality.’’ The same could be
said for what happened when the Klan walked away from the Deacons.
≤Ω
Northern whites had stereotypes about southern blacks as well, though
they were anchored in the hoary images of noble suffering savages or docile
helpless children. Nonviolence was never intended to help African Ameri-
cans counter passive or impulsive stereotypes, nor overcome the psycho-
logical barriers that prevented an effective assault on economic and social
inequality. It was a strategy devoid of racial pride, masculine honor, and self-
reliance—all crucial qualities for the birth of the New Negro in the South.
From the outset, nonviolence implicitly conceded the white stereotype of
African Americans as violent, impulsive, and lacking self-restraint: they were
either beast or child (one could argue that the popular myth that the black
freedom movement lunged blindly from peaceful protest to violent riots was
the political representation of this dualistic cultural stereotype). Many north-
ern whites were convinced that blacks were fundamentally different: that
they lacked the internal psychological restraints and self-discipline that were
the hallmarks of civilization; that blacks had failed Cicero’s dictum, ‘‘let the
passions be amenable to reason.’’ They believed that blacks, unlike them-
selves, could not move between conﬂicting emotional states and behaviors:
hate and forgiveness, violence and peace.
Martin Luther King had hoped that nonviolence would allay white liberal
fears of black vengeance and retaliation in the aftermath of freedom by
demonstrating that blacks were unwilling to respond with force to the grav-
est assaults and provocations. But the failure to challenge and eradicate this
stereotype continues to haunt American race relations in two important
ways. First, by winning sympathy through conformance with white expecta-
tions of passive behavior, passive behavior became the condition for continu-
ing support—which helps explain why white liberal support evaporated so
rapidly during the Black Power period. Second, since the 1960s opponents of
the black policy agenda have adroitly mobilized support by deploying im-
ages of blacks as an intemperate people lacking the virtues of self-denial:
sobriety, thrift, and delayed gratiﬁcation. These ‘‘intemperate’’ stereotypes
have found their way into virtually every social policy debate on the causes
and remedies for poverty, crime, drugs, education, and employment. Black


--- PAGE 278 ---
268 Conclusion
paciﬁsm may have pricked the conscience of northerners and assuaged their
fears of black violence, but it did little to subvert the negative images that
hobbled black social and economic progress. White guilt came at the ex-
pense of black dignity.
≥≠
The Deacons’ strength was that they were the only southernwide organi-
zation created and controlled by the black working class during the civil
rights movement. It is no coincidence that it was crystallized around a chal-
lenge to the doctrine of nonviolence, which, as a matter of principle, de-
prived African Americans of an indispensable means of countering white
terror. The Deacons reﬂected the reality that there were competing forces in
the black movement based on class and geography, with conﬂicting views of
how black liberation should be achieved. The Deacons’ strategy gave the
movement a new ability to determine the terms of the conﬂict in the South.
Previously, the nonviolent organizations had conceded to the federal gov-
ernment the exclusive right to use force and, by doing so, surrendered strate-
gic control of the black movement to the government. The federal govern-
ment alone—not the movement—had the right to decide when to use force
against racist terror. The Deacons ended this practice by using the threat of
force to appropriate the right to choose their own battles. This gave the black
movement the ﬂexibility and power to redeﬁne its strategy toward the Klan,
manifest in Bogalusa where the Deacons’ decision to confront Klansmen
compelled the federal government to intervene—according to the Deacons’
terms and timing.
The Deacons did not see their self-defense activities as mutually exclusive
of nonviolent tactics and voter registration. Viewing themselves as part of
the broader civil rights movement, they did not oppose nonviolent direct
action—indeed, they supported it, employed it as a tactic, and expended
most of their energy defending its practitioners. What the Deacons opposed
was the dogmatic idea that nonviolent direct action precluded self-defense.
The Deacons evolved a more ﬂexible strategy—similar to the 1930s labor
movement—that employed tactics of nonviolence, direct action, symbolic
protest, and the judicious use of defensive force. The choice confronting the
black movement was not, as Martin Luther King and his disciples main-
tained, strictly a choice between nonviolence and violence. By cloaking their
pragmatic legislative strategy in religious paciﬁst trappings, the partisans of
nonviolence could take the high moral ground and dismiss their critics as
being pro-violence. It was a clever use of language. But the Deacons never
advocated violence. It was quite possible to follow a peaceful path, while
rejecting nonviolence’s inﬂexible passive strictures and legislative reform


--- PAGE 279 ---
Conclusion 269
strategies. What paciﬁsts disparaged as violence was in fact force—the will-
ingness to coerce change rather than win consent from one’s enemies.
That many of the national civil rights organizations rejected the Deacons
is not surprising. The national organizations had a narrow conception of
what comprised ‘‘the movement,’’ so conﬁning that it excluded hundreds of
thousands of African Americans who were also ﬁghting racism. The civil
rights movement was only part of a much broader black freedom movement
that contained a variety of strategies that were simultaneously competing
for the loyalty of African Americans. This parallel movement was comprised
of public ﬁgures like Malcolm X and organizations like the black nationalists
and the Deacons. It also encompassed what Malcolm called ‘‘the brothers in
the streets,’’ those thousands of southern working-class blacks who had
taken to the streets for defensive violence in cities like Birmingham, Mc-
Comb, and Natchez; and they were the hundreds of students who had re-
buked the nonviolent movement and fought back against police violence at
Jackson State University in Mississippi. These defensive street rebellions
from Birmingham forward, though not plotted out in seminaries and foun-
dation ofﬁces, were conscious strategies, as well, with clear ideas about how
to counter police and vigilante terror and how to force the white majority
to correct injustices. There was a common thread that united the armed
self-defense movement, the Black Power movement, and the thousands of
working-class blacks who shunned nonviolence and participated in collec-
tive civil violence. All these disparate groupings shared what might be called
a ‘‘black autonomist’’ strategy. Black autonomists were deﬁned by their re-
fusal to allow their political behavior to be dependent on maintaining a
coalition with white liberals or the federal government. Largely anchored in
the black working class, the black autonomists acted without concern for
alienating white liberals or accommodating white fears of black violence.
≥∞
This stance was reﬂected in the Deacons who, like Malcolm X, used rhetoric
and exemplary courage to counter fear and resignation. For the Deacons, the
imperative was psychological liberation, even if it jeopardized the black-
liberal coalition.
The autonomist movement had its own problems. Riots and street re-
bellions lacked leadership and discipline and were prone to reckless vio-
lence, needlessly endangering lives and property. Ironically, because of its
inﬂexibility, nonviolence ultimately delivered young people into the hands
of street violence, since there was no organized alternative to the middle-
class dominated civil rights organizations until 1965. The Deacons were the
ﬁrst indigenous southern organization to offer a middle path, tertium quid,
that attracted people who doubted the effectiveness of nonviolence but had


--- PAGE 280 ---
270 Conclusion
no taste for riotous behavior (on more than one occasion the Deacons played
a role in quelling riots).
In the end, Martin Luther King crafted a successful strategy for winning
legislative civil reforms, but it came at the expense of challenging economic
inequality and changing the attitudes, practices, customs, and institutional
systems that also sustained inequality. Nothing in the rhetoric of nonvio-
lence helped white Americans understand the social and economic legacy of
three centuries of racism—and the government resources and compensatory
policies that would be necessary to reverse its effects. The limitations of
nonviolence rhetoric came back to haunt the black movement in the decades
following the Civil Rights Act. By equating rights with freedom, opponents
of the black agenda could claim that racism had been vanquished since the
civil barriers to progress had been lifted; the playing ﬁeld had been leveled
and merit alone determined success or failure. Any remaining economic
inequality was the result of defects in blacks’ values and character—the lack
of industry, thrift, and self-discipline (here again, the stubborn stereotypes
that nonviolence left unchallenged).
In a ﬁnal twist of irony, King’s ‘‘content of our character’’ phrase became a
rallying cry against any race-conscious policy intended to remedy inequality.
The single-minded focus of nonviolence on legislative coalition building to
win civil reforms came at a high price. Nonviolence ultimately subsumed
economic equality under a civil reform agenda that served the interests of
white liberals and middle-class blacks. For the next three decades the nation
would pay the price in the form of persistent urban poverty, profound in-
equalities in education, and a host of social and economic equity issues.
Remarkably, even the lion of the nonviolent movement displayed an un-
canny appreciation for the shortcomings of the strategy he had pioneered for
ten years. In November 1966 King told an sclc staff retreat that the civil
rights movement ‘‘did not defeat the monster of racism.’’ Blacks needed ‘‘to
see that racism is still alive in our country’’ and that ‘‘the roots of racism are
very deep in America.’’ Legislative and judicial victories against the caste
system ‘‘did very little to improve the lot of millions of Negroes in the teem-
ing ghettos of the North.’’ The civil rights victories—integration of public
accommodations and enforcement of equal voting rights—‘‘were at best sur-
face change, they were not really substantive changes.’’ Voting rights and
desegregation had primarily beneﬁted the black middle class by opening
new job opportunities, but the millions of poor blacks in the nation’s ghettos
had seen their condition actually worsen. ‘‘Now what I want to say is that we
are now making demands that will cost the nation something,’’ King con-


--- PAGE 281 ---
Conclusion 271
tinued. In effect, King was admitting that the legislative reform strategy had
erred in equating civil inequality with racism.≥≤
There is one ﬁnal contribution that the Deacons made to the black free-
dom movement, and that is in the realm of black consciousness. Only when
blacks felt entitled to their rights would their rights be secure. These changes
in consciousness were far more signiﬁcant than laws and judicial decisions,
for without these changes, whites and blacks would have inevitably slipped
back into the old roles, habits, and customs. Blacks had to construct a new
political personality. It is in this realm of consciousness changing that Mal-
colm X and Black Power groups excelled over nonviolent organizations. In
the ﬁnal analysis, the most important elements of contemporary black politi-
cal identity and consciousness—group identity, racial pride, militance with-
out regard for white approbation, and the will to defend rights at all costs—
owe more to Malcolm X than to Martin Luther King.
≥≥
No small measure of the Deacons’ success came from their emphasis on
changing consciousness over changing laws, and in this regard they shared
much in common with black nationalism. Changing black consciousness
was a paramount concern for Malcolm X and the nationalist current of the
freedom movement that predated the rise of Black Power. Nationalists were
deﬁned by a core of shared and interrelated beliefs: the power of group
identity; the notion that rights are natural and inalienable rather than a
reward conditioned on good behavior; a willingness to use coercion and
force to secure these rights with little concern for winning sympathy or
approval from the ethnic majority; the conviction that these rights can only
be won and secured by transforming the consciousness of the oppressed—
engendering self-respect, courage, conﬁdence, and a sense of entitlement—
rather than depending on the goodwill of the oppressor; a belief that power
for the dispossessed depends more on fear than guilt; and the idea that real
freedom is found in the struggle for freedom—that psychological liberation
is the precondition of political freedom. For nationalists, the fundamental
choice confronting the black movement was between guilt or coercion.
≥∂
Nationalists rebelled against whites dictating the terms of the movement
and deﬁning the emerging black political identity. Violence and separatist
rhetoric served to drive whites out of the movement, providing blacks with
the organizational independence necessary to change black consciousness.
As a consequence, the source of power for blacks in America today is not only
civil rights laws, but also a new black political identity derived from Black
Power consciousness that emphasized racial pride, self-respect, militancy,


--- PAGE 282 ---
272 Conclusion
coercion, and a resolute belief in rights entitlement. These changes in con-
sciousness among ordinary blacks were critical to making economic ad-
vances and protecting rights following the civil rights movement. The Dea-
cons served as a unique bridge between the civil rights movement and the
burgeoning nationalist groups. While continuing to identify with the older
goals of the civil rights agenda, the Deacons saw their principal project as
creating new black men and women who confronted whites on their own
terms. ‘‘When you’re dealing with the wolf,’’ said Deacons militant Henry
Austin, ‘‘you have to speak the language of the wolf.’’
≥∑
The Deacons—and the Black Power movement that followed them—repre-
sented a decisive shift from the politics of the past. The new militants swept
away old ideologies, deposed old leaders, and forged a new black identity.
They operated on the premise that to bring about real social and economic
equality, the social costs of disruption had to exceed the social costs of
inequality.
≥∏ The signiﬁcance of the Deacons’ strategy is even more evident
when contrasted with the accommodationist politics that preceded them.
Fear and resignation posed real obstacles to the movement. It is noteworthy
that even the most militant campaigns in Louisiana—Jonesboro and Boga-
lusa—occurred in communities that, prior to the Civil Rights Act and the
arrival of core, never engaged in a single organized public protest against
segregation laws. To ignore this reality is to miss how radically the Deacons
departed from the politics of the past, and to diminish the magnitude of their
contribution to the African American freedom movement.
Somewhere along the way the Deacons were forgotten—and for a reason.
They simply did not ﬁt into the myth of nonviolence. They stood as an
embarrassing testimonial to the level of force that was necessary to bring
African Americans into full citizenship.
Violence is a controversial and emotional subject. Americans would like to
believe that change has always been peaceful and orderly. We like to believe
that each generation learns from the past, and we fear that young people
will learn the wrong lessons from history; that in an age of numbing vio-
lence, a story about people who took the law into their own hands is a
misguided fable.
But the story of the Deacons is at heart a cautionary tale and a compass for
ﬁnding more peaceful ways to remedy injustice in the future. Moral appeals
to the conscience of America were indispensable to the success of the move-
ment. They won millions to the cause of racial justice, and, for those who
were not so moved, moral arguments gave an enduring ethical legitimacy to
the new laws and their underlying principles. But moral suasion reached its


--- PAGE 283 ---
Conclusion 273
limits as the movement began to demand change that undermined white
privilege. When change came, it was because some Americans hoped to buy
salvation, while others only hoped to buy social insurance against disorder.
In the end, both love and fear animated the social revolution of the 1960s.
In an ideal world, rational argument and moral suasion should settle all
conﬂicts. But that was not the history of the civil rights movement. We can
predict with the precision of science that problems of inequality and ethnic
competition for power and resources will persist well into the future. What
the Deacons tell us is that when appeals to reason and morality fail, op-
pressed people will turn to coercive methods of disruption, force, and vio-
lence. We delude ourselves as a nation if we think we can remain indifferent
to these inequities and injustices without paying a price. We have the histori-
cal hindsight and the means to stop this cycle of violence.
Finally, there is something inspiring in a story of people who stood up to
injustice when everyone around them was afraid. That is a fable that will
always serve us well.


--- PAGE 284 ---
Notes
Abbreviations
airtel air telegram
ARC Amistad Research Center, Tulane University, New Or-
leans
BDN Bogalusa Daily News
CORE Congress of Racial Equality
CORE (FFM) Ferriday Freedom Movement Files, CORE Papers,
SHSW
CORE (Jackson Parish) Jackson Parish Files, CORE Papers, SHSW
CORE (Microﬁlm) CORE Papers, Microﬁlm, ARC
CORE (SHSW) CORE Papers, SHSW
CORE (SRO) Southern Regional Ofﬁce, CORE Papers, SHSW
GMHP Gwendolyn Midlo Hall Papers, ARC
LHM Letterhead Memorandum
LW Louisiana Weekly
MFP Miriam Feingold Papers, SHSW
MHS Minnesota Historical Society, St. Paul
MLK Martin Luther King Jr.
NOT-P New Orleans Times-Picayune
NYT New York Times
PSCSUA Project South Collection, Stanford University Ar-
chives, Stanford, Calif. (Glen Rock, N.J.: Microﬁlm-
ing Corp. of America, 1975)
SAC Special Agent in Command
SHSW State Historical Society of Wisconsin, Madison
SNCCP Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee Papers,
MLK Center for Nonviolent Social Change, Atlanta
TDC Tom Dent Collection, ARC
WFO Washington Field Ofﬁce, FBI


--- PAGE 285 ---
276 Notes to Pages 1–3
Introduction
1. Burris interview by author (quotations); LW, 24 September 1966; NOT-P, 14
September 1966. Tension was exacerbated at the school by a rumor that civil
rights activist James Meredith had been invited to speak there. See Sobel, Civil
Rights, 407.
2. Burris interview by author.
3. Ibid.
4. There are abundant cases of individual African Americans defending them-
selves and communities against racist attacks before and during the civil rights
movement. Some scholars offer these incidents as evidence of political resis-
tance to oppression, a break from subjugation, or a conscious effort to subvert
white supremacy. But individual acts of self-defense did not in themselves con-
stitute a sign of militancy or a leap of consciousness. Physically defending oneself
can be motivated by nothing more than common sense and the instinct to sur-
vive. Armed self-defense had no political signiﬁcance until it became collective
and public and openly challenged authority and white terror. Unlike individu-
alized resistance, collective and public self-defense was an assertion of group
rights and equality, and, as we shall see with the Deacons, had the potential to
effectively counter police violence and white terrorism. The Jim Crow system
frequently tolerated individual acts of self-defense against random white inva-
sions of homes. But collective armed defense was the kiss of death for African
Americans in the South, because it implicitly claimed social and civil equality.
The real sea change in consciousness occurred when African Americans trans-
formed this isolated, covert practice into a well-organized public movement—
and asserted the same right to collective armed defense that whites possessed.
The proscriptions against black collective armed self-defense date back to Re-
construction. Kantrowitz (‘‘One Man’s Mob,’’ 67) concludes that in South Caro-
lina ‘‘black men’s right to vote and bear arms in collective struggle represented a
revolutionary challenge to white patriarchal authority.’’
Because I draw an important distinction between the Deacons and the covert,
pragmatic self-defense groups that preceded them, I do not devote space to
documenting the history of these earlier self-defense activities. But the accounts
of these incidents of armed self-defense are substantial. An overview of informal
armed self-defense groups can be found in Tyson, Radio Free Dixie . See also
Tyson, ‘‘Robert F. Williams,’’ 543 (n. 4). There was nothing clandestine about
Tyson’s subject: a militant North Carolina activist, Williams was the ﬁrst ﬁgure in
the modern civil rights movement to publicly practice and endorse what he
called ‘‘armed self-reliance.’’ The deﬁnitive account of Mississippi self-defense
activities is contained in Umoja, ‘‘Eye for an Eye.’’ Umoja uncovers a large num-
ber of clandestine and informal self-defense groups throughout Mississippi, op-
erating in virtually every community where the Student Nonviolent Coordinat-
ing Committee (SNCC) was active. Accounts can also be found in Dittmer, Local


--- PAGE 286 ---
Notes to Pages 3–4 277
People; Payne, Light of Freedom ; and Youth of the Rural Organizing and Cul-
tural Center, Mind Stayed on Freedom . Dent’s interviews in the TDC contain a
wealth of references to armed self-defense in Mississippi; see esp. interviews
with Charlie Cobb, Jerome Smith (on Choctaw Indians in Lee County, Miss.,
aiding the black community), June Johnson, and Mary Hightower. In Meridian,
Miss., in 1964, Rev. R. S. Porter organized a self-defense organization that in-
cluded one white member, Bill Ready; see Nelson, Terror in the Night, 108–9. A
study of the remarkable Columbia riot of 1946, in which African Americans
engaged in extensive self-defense, is found in O’Brien, Color of Law. Accounts of
self-defense groups in Louisiana can also be found in Meier and Rudwick, CORE,
263–64. At their national meeting in June 1964, SNCC staffers reported wide-
spread armed self-defense activities in Mississippi. See Staff Meeting Minutes, 10
June 1964, box 7, folder 8, SNCCP. On armed guards in King’s house, see Fair-
clough, To Redeem the Soul, 24–25 (Glenn Smiley said that the ‘‘whole movement
is armed in a sense, and this is what I must convince him [King] to see as the
greatest evil’’ [25]), and Belfrage, Freedom Summer, xvii.
5. To this day, the Deacons remain an important part of African American lore
in the Deep South. Akinyele Umoja credits the Deacons with pioneering the or-
ganized self-defense movement in the region. In his study of armed self-defense
in Mississippi, Umoja (‘‘Eye for an Eye,’’ 186, 194) concludes that the ‘‘Deacons of
Defense and Justice provided the paradigm for protection of the Movement and
the Black community in general’’ and ‘‘served as a model for Blacks interested in
armed self-defense in Mississippi and throughout the South.’’ Also according to
Umoja (‘‘Repression Breeds Resistance,’’ 5), the Deacons were ‘‘considered by
many to be the armed wing of the civil rights movement from 1965 through
1969.’’ Among the deﬁnitive works on the mainstream nonviolence groups are
Garrow, Bearing the Cross ; Fairclough, To Redeem the Soul ; Branch, Parting the
Waters and Pillar of Fire ; Meier and Rudwick, CORE; Carson, In Struggle ; and
Kluger, Simple Justice. See also Tushnet, The NAACP’s Legal Strategy against Seg-
regated Education. Fairclough’s book on Louisiana, Race and Democracy, touches
brieﬂy on the Deacons in Bogalusa.
6. Brink and Harris, Negro Revolution , 72–74, 206–7. Lerone Bennett Jr. ad-
dresses the additional dynamic of emotional repression and self-hatred. ‘‘But the
harsh fact is that the choice for most Negroes is not between hating or loving, but
between hating and hating,’’ wrote the black intellectual in 1964, ‘‘between hat-
ing themselves or hating their oppressors. You cannot deny people the basic
emotions of rage, resentment and, yes, hate. Only slaves or saints or masochists
love their oppressors. If you humiliate a man, if you degrade him, if you do this
over and over for hundreds of years, he will either hate you or hate himself.’’
Bennett, Negro Mood, 146.
7. Scholarly interest in the role of local organizing began with community
studies like Garrow, Protest at Selma; Thornton, ‘‘Challenge and Response’’; Nor-
rell, Reaping the Whirlwind; Chafe, Civilities and Civil Rights; and Colburn, Racial


--- PAGE 287 ---
278 Notes to Pages 4–6
Change. Early community studies of the civil rights movement revealed the dis-
tinctions between local and national movements; see Eagles, Civil Rights Move-
ment, esp. Carson’s essay, 19–32. Regional studies have expanded signiﬁcantly in
recent years with works like Dittmer’s Local People and Payne’s Light of Freedom.
8. Tyson, Radio Free Dixie . NAACP leaders spared no efforts in ostracizing
Williams, including bribing Little Rock activist Daisy Bates to condemn Wil-
liams—despite her own use of armed guards. See ibid., 159. On Williams’s view
of the 27 August 1961 Monroe riot, see his Negroes with Guns . An illuminating
ﬁrst-person account of the riot can be found in Mayﬁeld, ‘‘The Monroe Kidnap-
ping.’’ Williams did not attempt to build separate self-defense organizations
outside of Monroe, though he did much to publicize his criticism of nonviolence
in his publication Crusader and his book Negroes with Guns . He later broadcast
his philosophy across the South on his Cuban radio program, ‘‘Radio Free Dixie.’’
None of the Deacons interviewed recalled hearing of Williams before they joined
the organization, but Williams was widely known among CORE and SNCC activ-
ists. When Sam Block, Willie Peacock, and other SNCC workers were arrested in
June 1964, authorities found a large number of copies of the Crusader; see Tyson,
Radio Free Dixie, 290.
9. McMillen, Citizens’ Council.
10. On the distinction between the Council and the Klan, see ibid., 359–63.
11. I deﬁne the region of the Klan Nation as encompassing the Third Con-
gressional District in southwestern Mississippi and the adjoining Sixth Congres-
sional District in southeastern Louisiana—sometimes referred to as the ‘‘Florida
parishes.’’ Normally the historiography of the civil rights movement makes Afri-
can Americans the subject of history, as, indeed, they were. There is some bene-
ﬁt, though, to viewing the period as a defense of caste privilege, rather than
simply motivated by ‘‘hatred’’ as most paradigms suggest. Viewing poor whites in
this sense underscores how important white terrorism was in support of the
caste system and how any efforts to dismantle that system without neutralizing
white terrorism—the Kennedy-Johnson strategy—were doomed to fail. On the
Klan’s meteoric growth during 1964–65, see U.S. House, Present-Day Ku Klux
Klan and Activities of Ku Klux Klan.
12. On Jim Crow remaining the ‘‘rule rather than the exception’’ after the Civil
Rights Act, see Dittmer, Local People, 390.
13. Cashmore’s Dictionary of Race and Ethnic Relations , 63–64, offers a typical
example of the nonviolence myth in publications for the general public. The Civil
Rights Act was due ‘‘in large part to the sustained, nonviolent campaigns of the
civil rights movement and the ability of King to negotiate at the highest political
levels’’ reads the entry on the civil rights movement. ‘‘Whereas King and his
movement brought, through peaceful means, tangible gains and a heightening
of self-respect for blacks, the new movement [Black Power] was based on the
view that no signiﬁcant long-term improvements could be produced through
working peacefully with the political system—as King had done.’’


--- PAGE 288 ---
Notes to Pages 6–8 279
14. The portrayal of King as naive idealist–turned-pragmatist—or a shrewd
pragmatist all along—underpins most of the recent works on King and the move-
ment; see Garrow, Protest at Selma, esp. the chapter, ‘‘The Strategy of Protest and
the SCLC at Selma,’’ 212–36. Garrow characterizes King as moving from a ‘‘moral
commitment to nonviolence’’ to a more pragmatic strategy designed to win the
broader populace. He takes the ‘‘idealist to pragmatist’’ a step further, suggesting
that King deliberately sought to provoke white violent reactions to protest in
order to garner sympathy in the North. The failed Albany campaign convinced
him that nonviolence was ‘‘unrealistic and ineffective’’ and moved him toward a
strategy of ‘‘coercive nonviolence’’ as opposed to ‘‘persuasive nonviolence.’’ The
new coercive strategy was intended to win ‘‘external allies’’ and force through
federal legislation—and the path to federal legislation lay in national news me-
dia (pp. 221–22, 224–25). Fairclough ( To Redeem the Soul , 52–53) argues that
King was never an idealist; that he ‘‘never made an unqualiﬁed assertion that
nonviolent protest succeeded through moral suasion,’’ and that the notion of
redemptive suffering was ‘‘marginal’’ to his strategy.
What King believed and what he said may have been two different things; but
in social movements, one’s public expressions are all that matters; it is what
deﬁnes the movement’s image, message, and appeal. King’s constant public ex-
hortations to nonviolence leave little question about his public image. On his ﬁrst
and most deﬁnitive publication on nonviolence, see MLK, Stride toward Freedom.
15. Clayborne Carson offers that local organizations ‘‘were more concerned
with local issues, including employment opportunities and political power, than
with achieving national legislation’’; they were not ‘‘designed to persuade and
coerce the federal government to act on behalf of black civil rights.’’ Carson,
‘‘Civil Rights Reform,’’ 24, 27.
16. The idea that whites could be won by moral argument by exploiting the
tension between American principles and practice is expressed in Myrdal, Ameri-
can Dilemma.
17. MLK, Stride toward Freedom, 215–17.
18. Garrow, Protest at Selma , 224–25 (King); LW, 17 July 1965. King never
wavered in his public preachments for paciﬁsm as a response to white violence.
In the aftermath of the worst police violence in the Birmingham campaign, he
took the pulpit at New Pilgrim Baptist Church to sermonize that the guiding
ideal of the movement should be based on the Greek notion of agape—‘‘an over-
ﬂowing, redemptive love toward all men.’’ Quoted in Fairclough, To Redeem the
Soul, 138–39.
19. Fredrickson, Black Liberation, 232. There is clearly a need for a full study of
the pragmatic reformist roots of nonviolence in the civil rights movement. King
himself knew full well the pitfalls of Christian paciﬁsm and was profoundly
affected by his reading of Nietzsche’s Genealogy of Morals, which criticized Chris-
tian otherworldliness and the precepts of suffering, piety, and humility. See
McCartney, Black Power Ideologies.


--- PAGE 289 ---
280 Notes to Pages 8–9
20. Bennett, Negro Mood, 30–31.
21. Lynch quoted in NYT, 22 June 1966.
22. Popularized historical treatments of Martin Luther King’s theological and
political education—based largely on his autobiographical work—have perpetu-
ated this identiﬁcation of nonviolence with philosophy and religion. It is note-
worthy that some scholars have concluded that King’s core beliefs on social
change and the role of the church—the ‘‘social gospel’’ doctrine—originated
not from white theologians and philosophers, but rather from the pragmatic
‘‘African-American folk religion’’ that King learned from his father’s sermons and
activities at Ebenezer Baptist Church. King’s later study of the works of Niebuhr,
Rauschenbusch, Fosdick, and Gandhi clariﬁed and gave intellectual force to his
ideas, but they were not the original inspiration for his political strategy. His ﬁrst
principles were rooted in folk religion, black middle-class reformism, and prag-
matism. On the inﬂuence of black folk religion on King, see Baldwin, Balm in
Gilead and Keith D. Miller, Voice of Deliverance, 58–66, 88. Branch ( Parting the
Waters, 138–40) suggests that King initially seized upon the theme of nonvio-
lence in the Montgomery Bus Boycott primarily to distinguish the black boycott
from the coercive and violent white Citizens Council boycotts. The criticism that
nonviolence was a conciliatory political strategy masquerading as religion dates
back to the anticolonial movement in India. Gandhi’s Muslim adversaries often
dismissed nonviolence as Hindu accommodation to British imperialism.
23. Nonviolence is a difﬁcult term to deﬁne in part because there is no schol-
arly consensus on the meaning of its antithesis—violence. Gandhi himself argued
that nonviolence meant the primacy of means over ends; that nonviolence was
not a means to a goal, but the goal itself; that success should not be measured by
the achievement of political reforms, but by a permanent change in the human
spirit. For Gandhi, nonviolence was the path of puriﬁcation—means and ends
were identical. ‘‘Take an instance of untruth or violence,’’ he wrote, ‘‘and it will
be found that at its back is the desire to attain the cherished end.’’ This other-
worldly ‘‘primacy of means’’ concept would later pose problems for civil rights
activists who attempted to employ nonviolence as a pragmatic political reform
strategy. See Bell, CORE, 117; Hanigan, King . . . and the Foundations of Non-
violence; and Bondurant, Conquest of Violence  (Gandhi). Bondurant discusses
Gandhi’s ends-means concept on pp. 229–32. In his seminal Reﬂections on Vio-
lence, Georges Sorel argued that the distinction between legitimate state author-
ity and violence was artiﬁcial; that ruling elites used violence cloaked in the au-
thority of the state. For ruling elites, force equals authority and violence equals
revolt. By naming his strategy as ‘‘nonviolence,’’ Gandhi was conceding the rul-
ing elite’s notion that any force on behalf of the oppressed was illegitimate
‘‘violence.’’ The distinctions between coercion, force, and violence are subtle yet
critical to understanding the role of nonviolence in the civil rights movement.
See Ronald B. Miller, ‘‘Violence, Force, and Coercion,’’ 9–44. Anthony Oberschall
(Social Conﬂict , 332–33) argues that violence is ‘‘but one of several means of


--- PAGE 290 ---
Notes to Pages 10–14 281
conducting conﬂict’’ and that conﬂict can be pursued through a mixture of col-
lective (civil) violence, nonviolence, coercive and noncoercive means. He deﬁnes
violence as ‘‘the use of force with the intent of inﬂicting damage or injury upon
one’s opponent in order to coerce him against his will.’’
Chapter One
1. Thomas interview by author.
2. Shugg, Origins of Class Struggle . The impact of automation in discussed in
Zieger, Rebuilding the Pulp . . . Union. On the role of blacks in the paper industry,
see Northrup, The Negro in the Paper Industry.
3. Daniel Mitchell to Ronnie M. Moore, ‘‘Jackson Parish and Jonesboro, Loui-
siana: A White Paper,’’ [September 1964], Jonesboro, Monroe Project Files,
CORE (SHSW) (hereafter cited as Daniel Mitchell, ‘‘White Paper’’).
4. Census data cited in ibid.
5. Ibid.
6. Ibid.
7. For a summary of the literature on black fraternal orders, see Fahey, Black
Lodge, 5–12.
8. Daniel Mitchell, ‘‘White Paper.’’
9. Ibid.; Kirkpatrick interview by Hall.
10. Daniel Mitchell, ‘‘White Paper.’’ On the campaign to destroy the NAACP in
Louisiana in the 1950s, see Fairclough, Race and Democracy, which also contains
a comprehensive history of the Louisiana NAACP. Local NAACP chapters often
enjoyed a great deal of independence from the national NAACP, and Voters
Leagues also served to keep the national organization at a distance. Similar state
studies of the movements in Mississippi and Georgia draw the same conclusion
on the local NAACP chapters. On Mississippi, see Payne, Light of Freedom , and
Dittmer, Local People ; on Georgia, see Tuck, Beyond Atlanta . Louisiana had a
signiﬁcantly higher percentage of black voters who were registered in com-
parison to surrounding states. Black voter registration in 1960 was 30 percent for
Louisiana, 14 percent for Alabama, and only 6 percent for Mississippi. Twenty-
seven counties with substantial black populations had no registered voters, in-
cluding four in Louisiana. See Doar and Landsberg, ‘‘Performance of the FBI,’’
6:955.
11. Kirkpatrick interview by Hall; Daniel Mitchell, ‘‘White Paper.’’ The clientel-
ist relationship between black political machines and the white power structure
was noted early on by Myrdal, American Dilemma, 498–99.
12. ‘‘Weekly Report—August 1–August 4,’’ [August 1964], Clinton, La., box 4,
folder 13, CORE (SRO). The role of the black middle class in local movements in
the South was a complex one that changed throughout the 1950s and 1960s. Part
of the difﬁculty in assessing its contributions and failings is that the category of
middle class cannot be easily assigned by income or profession. While indepen-


--- PAGE 291 ---
282 Notes to Pages 15–18
dent black business people had the same or better incomes than teachers, they
were not as vulnerable to economic retaliation by the white establishment. Gail
Williams O’Brien (Color of Law, 246–47) found particular militance among black
proprietors who played a role in the 1946 Columbia, Tenn., riot. Educational and
professional training also shaped the attitudes of middle-class blacks toward
the movement, as did community size and proximity to larger urban areas and
black institutions of higher education. Different sectors of the middle class had
strengths and weaknesses depending on the task at hand: negotiating with the
white power structure, winning incremental changes, confrontational politics.
The leadership in the local movement included a panoply of social categories
with subtle but important differences in political disposition: ministers, church
deacons, women church leaders, fraternal order leaders, proprietors, etc. A con-
cise, perceptive description of the diversity of the black middle class by a move-
ment veteran is found in Carmichael and Hamilton, Black Power, 101.
13. On mass meetings as a method of leadership control, see the account of
Bogalusa mass meetings in Chapters 5–9 of this book, where the old leadership
was displaced, and even the new militant leadership was occasionally reigned in;
see also Morris, Origin of the Civil Rights Movement , 23, 166. In Montgomery,
according to Jo Ann Gibson Robinson ( Montgomery Bus Boycott , 56), the initial
mass meetings were used to control community protest.
14. Dittmer, Local People, 76 (Evers); Eskew, But for Birmingham , 229 (King).
John Dittmer ( Local People , 75–76) notes that in Mississippi ‘‘the institutional
church did not stand in the forefront of civil rights activity, and black ministers
were conspicuously absent from the front ranks of movement leadership.’’
15. Nixon quoted in Branch, Parting the Waters, 136.
16. On black fraternal orders in the South, see the introduction in Fahey, Black
Lodge.
17. An overall history is covered in Meier and Rudwick, CORE. Regrettably,
there are still no state studies of the organization, particularly in Louisiana. In
contrast, several state studies of NAACP local chapters and state organizations in
Louisiana, Mississippi, and Georgia are contained in Fairclough, Race and De-
mocracy; Dittmer, Local People; Payne, Light of Freedom ; and Tuck, Beyond At-
lanta. For a comprehensive history of the SCLC, see Fairclough, To Redeem the
Soul; Garrow, Bearing the Cross; and Branch, Parting the Waters and Pillar of Fire.
SNCC studies include Carson, In Struggle, and the state studies of Dittmer and
Payne cited above.
18. Meier and Rudwick, CORE. CORE’s roots in the World War II paciﬁst move-
ment gave it a much stronger commitment to nonviolence than SNCC, even as
the strategy began to falter in the South. As early as 1961, some SNCC activists
began to privately question Gandhian principles; see Carson, In Struggle, 54, 62,
82, 95.
19. Meier and Rudwick, CORE.
20. Laue, Direct Action, 85–86 (King), 87 (Lawson).


--- PAGE 292 ---
Notes to Pages 18–20 283
21. ‘‘An Interview with John Lewis: The Chairman of SNCC Discusses the
Negro Revolt, Its Problems and Prospects,’’ Dialogue Magazine 4, no. 2 (Spring
1964): 7–9, reprinted in Meier, Rudwick, and Broderick, Black Protest Thought,
355–56. Bob Moses discussed his opposition to armed defense in Greenwood and
Amite County in an interview with Akinyele K. Umoja; see Umoja, ‘‘Eye for an
Eye,’’ 124 (n. 22). References to SNCC activists carrying weapons are found in
Umoja, 169, and throughout the Dent interviews.
22. Quotations from the Atlanta debate on armed self-defense are found in
Staff Meeting Minutes, 10 June 1964, box 7, folder 7, 12–15, SNCCP. For RAM’s
self-defense project in Greenwood, see Ahmad, History of RAM , 15, 20, 28, and
Forman, Making of Black Revolutionaries , 374–75. The Freedom Summer volun-
teer orientation sessions, conducted during 12–27 June 1964, were organized by
the National Council of Churches (NCC), Commission on Religion and Race, with
the stated purpose of teaching ‘‘the art of nonviolence and interpersonal rela-
tions.’’ (Unbeknownst to the participants, Edwin Espy, general secretary of the
NCC, secretly turned over a list of all orientation participants to the FBI, including
ﬁeld workers and grassroots attendees.) By midsummer, Mississippi was ﬂooded
with nonviolent partisans; in addition to the 800–1,000 Freedom Summer volun-
teers, the NCC sent 275 of its own volunteer ministers to Mississippi to serve as
‘‘counselors.’’ Findlay, Church People in the Struggle, 85–87, 89. Clayborne Carson
locates the shift away from Gandhism and appeals to liberal conscience among
SNCC staff beginning as early as the fall of 1961; he argues that by 1963 most
SNCC staff had soured on nonviolence. Dave Dennis, a leader of the Congress of
Federated Organizations (COFO) in Mississippi, and other movement leaders set
the date of the disillusionment much later—the fall of 1964 following the disap-
pointing Democratic National Convention; Carson, In Struggle, 55, 62, 82, 95, and
Dennis interview by Dent. David Garrow ( Bearing the Cross, 171) maintains that
King also realized that nonviolence ‘‘could not be simply a tool of persuasion for
convincing southern whites of the evils of segregation.’’
23. Dennis interview by Dent; Muse, American Negro Revolution , 160 (CORE
oath); Moore interview by author; James ‘‘Mice’’ Williams interview by anony-
mous (Tallulah volunteer). The microﬁlm edition does not carry names of inter-
viewees; these can be gleaned from the collection container list for the Project
South Collection available from http://www.oac.cdlib.org/dvnaweb/ead/stan
ford/uarc/sc0066/@Generic; Internet; accessed 11 November 2002. On armed
self-defense in West Feliciana Parish, see Meier and Rudwick, CORE, 263–64.
Garrow (Protest at Selma , 215–18, 220–21) discusses Seifert’s and Lipsky’s theo-
ries on the impact of nonviolence on reform protest. According to Seifert, vio-
lence on the part of protesters delegitimates their claims, whereas unprovoked
violence inﬂicted on undeserving victims wins sympathy. Garrow believes that
King reached the same conclusion and shrewdly applied these insights to the
movement. The counterpoint to this ‘‘undeserving victim’’ theory of reform are
those social science theories that argue that radical movements employing coer-


--- PAGE 293 ---
284 Notes to Pages 21–25
cion can also win reforms by enhancing the appeal of moderates. Two of the
greatest victories for the black freedom movement, the Fair Housing Act and
President Richard Nixon’s afﬁrmative action policy, came on the heels of the
massive riots in 1968 at the height of the Black Power movement—which had
thoroughly alienated the white majority. This ‘‘radical ﬂank’’ theory is cogently
argued in Haines, Black Radicals.
24. Moore interview by author; Umoja, ‘‘Eye for an Eye,’’ 92–93 (Flug).
25. Mike Lesser, ‘‘Report on Jonesboro-Bogalusa Project,’’ March 1965, box 5,
folder 5, CORE (SRO); Meier and Rudwick, CORE, 266–67.
26. Lesser, ‘‘Report.’’
27. Catherine Patterson Mitchell interview by author.
28. Ibid.
29. Anonymous CORE volunteer interview by anonymous; Daniel Mitchell,
‘‘White Paper.’’ The conditions in Louisiana constantly tested the convictions of
many CORE volunteers. ‘‘I came down here thinking, as I still do, that non-
violence is the way for all men and is the only way that any peace will be
achieved,’’ said CORE volunteer Lorraine Roy in 1965. But she was having her
doubts. ‘‘And until nonviolence as a tactic . . . begins to prick the conscience of
the [southern] white, if that doesn’t happen soon, people are going to chuck it
completely, because it’s not defending their families and it’s not securing justice.
It hasn’t been working. It’s all been pricking the Northern white conscience, but
we’re all coming down here.’’ Roy, anonymous interviewer.
30. In a remarkably insightful study of nonviolence and the attitudes of activ-
ists, Inge Powell Bell ( CORE, 43–44) makes a persuasive argument that non-
violence was adopted to legitimize black protest in the eyes of whites and was a
concession to whites’ unwillingness to accept blacks as fully equal and deserving
of the right to use coercive measures to gain their rights. For a comparative study
of nonviolence in the United States and South Africa, see Fredrickson, Black
Liberation, esp. 225–76.
31. Daniel Mitchell, ‘‘White Paper.’’
32. Catherine Paterson Mitchell interview by author.
33. Thomas and Annie Purnell Johnson interviews by author. Any history of a
semiclandestine organization like the Deacons must rely heavily on oral inter-
views. With the exception of a few reprinted news interviews, there are few
accounts of the Deacons in published memoirs. First-person accounts of the
movement are a growing part of the literature, including CORE and SNCC lead-
ers’ contributions such as Farmer, Lay Bare the Heart , and Forman, Making of
Black Revolutionaries. See also Lyon, Memories of the Southern Civil Rights Move-
ment; Sutherland, Letters from Mississippi; Moody, Coming of Age in Mississippi ;
Reavis, If White Kids Die ; and various activists’ recollections in Cheryl Lynn
Greenberg, Circle of Trust. The interviews with CORE staff and volunteers found
in the Project South Collection at the Stanford University Archives are some of


--- PAGE 294 ---
Notes to Pages 26–27 285
the most illuminating. Almost all of the interviews touch on the Deacons and
nonviolence. There is a marked difference between the Stanford interviews,
which were conducted contemporaneously with the movement, and interviews
like those in the Tom Dent Collection, which were conducted many years later.
The contemporaneous interviews give more emphasis to problems of fear, pas-
sivity, and apathy in the rural African American community. See esp. Fred
Lacey and James Bell interviews by anonymous. In his interview Bell, a young
black community recruit, talks about the ‘‘mental block’’ of deferential attitudes
in older African Americans and credits CORE with being a catalyst for change:
‘‘The organizations such as CORE have come in, and I think this has changed
it . . . has removed the mental block.’’ See also Annie Purnell Johnson interview
by author.
34. Sutherland, Letters from Mississippi, 44–45.
35. CORE’s organizers in Jonesboro were true believers in nonviolence, but the
debate in CORE over how to use nonviolence—as mere tactic or overarching
strategy—had been going on privately for several years. CORE staffers’ doubts
about nonviolence were frequently prompted by the militance they encountered
among young local black activists whom they had recruited. ‘‘Most everyone,
especially the kids who have been the most active, are disillusioned with non-
violence, and see the situation very much running toward violence,’’ wrote CORE
staffer Miriam Feingold in 1963. ‘‘They think that we must do as the masses feel—
and if that means violence, then that’s what we do.’’ Feingold hastened to add,
‘‘But never fear—we’ve decided that non-violence is still the most viable tactic at
the moment.’’ Feingold to Parents, 17 July 1963, Plaquemine, La., MFP. See also
armed self-defense groups and the debate on nonviolence in West Feliciana
Parish in Rudwick and Meier, CORE, 263–64.
36. Lawson interview in 1969 quoted in Estes, ‘‘ ‘i am a man!,’ ’’ 164 (n. 42).
37. Catherine Patterson Mitchell interview by author.
38. Moore interview by author.
39. Catherine Patterson Mitchell and Thomas interviews by author. The role of
masculine honor and violence has primarily been the purview of anthropologists
and ethnographers. Here the literature is vast, though generally focused on
Europe and the Mediterranean. See, e.g., Péristiany, Honour and Shame . Histo-
rians have suggested that African American honor and manhood values most
likely derived from both African social traditions and the inﬂuence of the honor-
bound white society in the South. Bertram Wyatt-Brown’s study of honor in the
Old South, Southern Honor , leaves little doubt of the centrality of the code of
honor for the white patrician classes. In his most recent work (Shaping of South-
ern Culture ), Wyatt-Brown argues that honor played an important role among
slaves as well, especially in the chapter, ‘‘Dignity, Deception, and Identity in
the Male Slave Experience.’’ Honor and violence are inextricably linked in the
southern experience; writers and scholars have long speculated on the causes


--- PAGE 295 ---
286 Notes to Pages 28–29
of excessive violence in the region. See Cash, Mind of the South ; McWhiney,
Cracker Culture ; Moore, Frontier Mind ; and Ayers, Vengeance and Justice . See
also Fischer, Albion’s Seed, on Celtic culture in the South.
For many African American men, the Civil War became the ﬁrst opportunity to
test their manhood using the same martial values of courage and valor that
informed white masculine identity. Violence and militarism have been at the
heart of honor studies of the Old South, beginning ﬁrst with works such as
Franklin, Militant South; McWhiney and Jamieson, Attack and Die ; and Bruce,
Violence and Culture. On honor and southern politics, see Kenneth S. Greenberg,
Masters and Statesmen. Whereas Wyatt-Brown’s early works on honor centered
on the southern upper classes, other scholars have posited the idea that honor
also animated plebian violence. See Ayers, Vengeance and Justice , 21; Ownby,
Subduing Satan; Gorn, ‘‘ ‘Gouge and Bite’ ’’; and McWhiney, Cracker Culture, esp.
the chapter, ‘‘Violence,’’ 146–70. A broader cultural study is made in Kenneth S.
Greenberg, Honor and Slavery . For an opposing view that attributes southern
violence to politics more than honor, see Vandal, Rethinking Southern Violence. A
series of essays that address the intersection of honor and masculine values in
early African American life can be found in Hine and Jenkins, A Question of
Manhood. The literature on honor and the twentieth-century African American
freedom movement is virtually nonexistent. See the discussion of honor and
masculine values in Tyson, Radio Free Dixie, 140–43.
40. Defending one’s family was a requisite of white masculine honor in the
South. A traditional southern saying was, ‘‘Every man should be sheriff on his
own hearth.’’ Nisbett and Cohen, Culture of Honor , 5. Nonviolence also posed
recruitment problems for SNCC in its earliest project in Mississippi. Attacks on
SNCC in Greenwood ‘‘brought no signiﬁcant outcry’’ from blacks, according to
Akinyele Umoja. As in Jonesboro, those participating in marches ‘‘had to commit
themselves to nonviolence and not to be armed on the march’’; this inevitably
excluded some local residents. SNCC activist Hollis Watkins recalled that ‘‘some
of the local brothers and sisters said ‘I can’t give up my stuff so I wont be on the
march, I’ll be on the side.’ ’’ Umoja, ‘‘Eye for an Eye,’’ 107–9.
41. Ed Pincus, ‘‘ Black Natchez ,’’ ﬁlm transcript, Pincus Collection, ARC. On
local women exhorting black men to protect the community, see also Tyson,
Radio Free Dixie, 148–49.
42. Ibid. The relationship between black masculine values and patriarchy has
recently attracted some scholarly attention, drawing heavily on gender studies of
white male identity in the nineteenth century, especially Gail Bederman’s Man-
liness and Civilization . Bederman combines race and gender to draw a link be-
tween male dominance and white supremacy. The obsession with a new ‘‘primal’’
manliness in the late nineteenth century—in contrast to earlier notions of man-
hood that were anchored in Victorian restraint—was intimately connected to the
idea that white males deserved to rule the world (a notion that she believes
African Americans resisted). But imposing Bederman’s paradigm onto twentieth-


--- PAGE 296 ---
Notes to Pages 29–34 287
century black masculinity has its own perils. Bederman herself cautions against
viewing manhood as a ﬁxed set of traits and attitudes; she posits that manhood is
a dynamic ‘‘historical, ideological process’’ in which ‘‘concrete individuals are
constituted as members of a preexisting social category—as men’’ (p. 7). See esp.
chap. 1, ‘‘Remaking Manhood through Race and ‘Civilization,’ ’’ 1–44. See also
Rotundo, American Manhood, and Kimmel, Manhood in America. A related work
on manhood ideals and patriarchy is Hoganson, Fighting for American Manhood.
See anthropologist David Gilmore (Manhood in the Making) on how courage and
loyalty in the role of protector are linked to honor. See also Carnes’s Secret Ritual,
which looks at the fraternal lodge movement in the same late-nineteenth-century
period and concludes that the lodges were a response to the growing inﬂuence of
women in the domestic sphere and religion. Jacquelyn Dowd Hall (Revolt against
Chivalry) offers insights on the chivalric tradition and racism and patriarchy in
the early twentieth century. Given this connection between manhood and pa-
triarchy in white middle-class society, a key challenge for students of the modern
civil rights era is to determine how the black masculine ideal differed from the
white ideal. For perspectives on this question for nineteenth-century African
Americans, see Hine and Jenkins, A Question of Manhood , which contains a
variety of viewpoints on how black men constructed manhood and expressed
masculinity while resisting the dominance of white middle-class male identity. I
will return to this question in later chapters.
43. Catherine Patterson Mitchell interview by author.
44. For the Voter Education Project, voter registration, and direct action, see
Chapter 2.
Chapter Two
1. This account is drawn from Thomas, White, and Mitchell interviews by
author and Kirkpatrick interview by Hall.
2. Kirkpatrick interview by Hall.
3. Ibid.
4. White and Thomas interviews by author.
5. Thomas interview by author.
6. Danny Mitchell, ‘‘VEP Field Report,’’ 24 June 1964, 124–770, CORE (Micro-
ﬁlm); Hunter interview by anonymous.
7. On SNCC and community demands for desegregation, see Belfrage, Free-
dom Summer, 179–241.
8. Danny Mitchell, ‘‘A Special Report on Jonesboro, Louisiana,’’ July 1964, box
1, folder 10, CORE (Jackson Parish).
9. Ibid.
10. Ibid.
11. This account is drawn from ibid. and Moore interview by author.
12. Moore interview by author.


--- PAGE 297 ---
288 Notes to Pages 35–41
13. ‘‘Chronology on Jonesboro, July 1964–January 1965,’’ reel 20, CORE (Mi-
croﬁlm); Daniel Mitchell to Ronnie M. Moore, ‘‘Jackson Parish and Jonesboro,
Louisiana: A White Paper,’’ [September 1964], Jonesboro, Monroe Project Files,
CORE (SHSW) (hereafter cited as Daniel Mitchell, ‘‘White Paper’’).
14. ‘‘Chronology on Jonesboro’’; NYT, 21 February 1965.
15. Daniel Mitchell, ‘‘White Paper.’’
16. Ibid.
17. Ibid.; Annie Purnell Johnson interview by author.
18. ‘‘The M and D Restaurant and Cafeteria, July 29, 1964,’’ GMHP; Kirkpatrick
interview by Hall.
19. ‘‘The M and D Restaurant and Cafeteria, July 29, 1964,’’ GMHP.
20. Daniel Mitchell, ‘‘White Paper’’; Ed Hollander, ‘‘Jonesboro Swimming Pool
Arrests,’’ 29 July 1964, Jonesboro, GMHP; Willie Swafford Jr., ‘‘A Statement by
Willie Swafford, Jr. of Jonesboro, July 1964, Jonesboro, Louisiana,’’ GMHP; LW,
31 July 1964.
21. Thomas and White interviews by author; Kirkpatrick interview by Hall.
22. The jail incident account draws on Rudwick and Meier, CORE, 267–68, and
LW, 8 August 1964.
23. Thomas, White, and Harvey Johnson interviews by author; Kirkpatrick
interview by Hall. The precise date of this ﬁrst meeting is unclear, though it
probably was 31 July 1964.
24. Annie Purnell Johnson interview by author.
25. Several published sources mistakenly cite this initial meeting as the ofﬁcial
beginning of the Deacons for Defense and Justice. The meeting was certainly the
impetus for the Deacons, but the organization did not develop a name, an orga-
nizational identity, and a formal structure until November 1964. Throughout its
life, it interchangeably used the name Deacons of Defense and Justice and Dea-
cons for Defense and Justice. In this book I use the latter.
26. Will Palmer Jr., ‘‘A Statement by Will Palmer Jr. of Jonesboro,’’ 3 August
1964, GMHP.
27. Rev. Y. D. Jackson, ‘‘Statement by Y. D. Jackson,’’ 4 August 1964, GMHP.
28. Catherine Patterson Mitchell interview by author.
29. Danny Mitchell, ‘‘VEP Field Report.’’
30. Daniel Mitchell, ‘‘White Paper.’’
31. The shift from direct action protest, such as the lunch counter sit-ins and
Freedom Rides, began in 1961 through the VEP, a program funded by several
liberal foundations. The Kennedy administration engineered the strategic ma-
neuver, hoping to steer CORE and SNCC away from the highly public and disrup-
tive direct action confrontations that were pressuring the White House to inter-
vene in the South. The shift nearly split SNCC, where a signiﬁcant number of
staffers viewed voter registration as a retreat from the kind of militant direct
action of the lunch counter sit-ins and Freedom Rides that had inspired a genera-
tion of new activists. Scholars differ over the importance of this programmatic


--- PAGE 298 ---
Note to Page 41 289
shift; most recent histories of SNCC and CORE treat the move to voter registra-
tion as insigniﬁcant, and some, like Adam Fairclough, view voter registration—
and even litigation—as simply another form of direct action. Fairclough writes
that ‘‘white authorities drew no distinction between direct action and ‘conven-
tional’ activities like litigation and voter registration. They treated both equally
harshly. Voter registration was direct action in that it directly challenged white
supremacy and evoked severe repression. So was litigation, as many a black
plaintiff found out to his or her cost.’’ Fairclough, ‘‘Civil Rights Movement in
Louisiana,’’ 15–28 (quotation, p. 25). For Fairclough, virtually any political ac-
tivity passes for meaningful and subversive resistance to oppression. In his effort
to exonerate the black community of criticism of accommodation, Fairclough
blurs the very real distinctions between militant and direct confrontation with
authority—which was the motive force of the movement—and far less inspiring
and transformative activities like voter registration and litigation. In Louisiana,
the shift to voter registration was a strategic sea change and did indeed reduce
disruptive protests as the Kennedys had hoped for. It also placed CORE at odds
with local militants eager to directly challenge segregation, as the Jonesboro and
Bogalusa cases bear out. In both communities, white authorities and racist vigi-
lantes responded much more violently to desegregation. Ronnie Moore opted for
voter registration precisely because he understood that desegregation protests
provoked a more violent response from local whites. In Plaquemine, La., Moore
said that ‘‘I thought voter registration was dangerous enough down here, that’s
all I wanted to do.’’ But when voter registration failed to capture the enthusiasm
of local people, he altered his course. ‘‘Since voter registration was such a frus-
trating thing,’’ Moore explained, ‘‘we weren’t getting anybody to register anyway,
no matter how many people we took down, we decided to get involved in other
things [direct action protests]’’; Moore interview by author.
Dittmer’s and Payne’s studies of Mississippi both assign less importance to the
move away from direct action. On the Kennedy administration and the VEP, see
Dittmer, Local People, 119–20. For a Kennedy administration insider’s view, see
Wofford, Of Kennedys and Kings , 159–60. Payne ( Light of Freedom, 108–11) also
argues that voter registration was ‘‘at least as problematic’’ as direct action pro-
test for the Kennedys in Mississippi. James Laue ( Direct Action, 114–17) gives a
very different account of the VEP controversy and SNCC’s strategic move, one in
which SNCC leader Tim Jenkins, assisted by SNCC chairman Charles McDew
and ﬁeld secretary Charles Jones, carefully engineered a ‘‘takeover’’ of SNCC to
move it away from direct action protest. Jenkins was convinced that the success
of the black movement hinged on suffrage and that SNCC need to ally with the
Justice Department to destroy the southern white electoral bloc. During the
summer of 1961 Jenkins arranged for a series of special meetings between SNCC
Executive Committee members and the Justice Department; he capped off his
campaign with a month-long training seminar attended by most of SNCC’s staff
in Nashville, 30 July–26 August. Far from ‘‘grassroots training,’’ the ‘‘Special


--- PAGE 299 ---
290 Notes to Pages 41–47
Southern Student Leadership Seminar’’ was led by a team of academics and was
designed to give SNCC ‘‘a solid academic approach to understanding the move-
ment.’’ According to Jenkins, the seminar served as a catalyst for the SNCC
takeover; following the seminar, SNCC placed voter registration on an equal
footing with direct action. Laue, Direct Action, 114–17.
32. For a characteristic African American perspective on the civil rights move-
ment in the fall of 1964, see ‘‘Worst of Racial Strife over in South, Some Say,’’ Jet,
15 October 1964, 4.
33. Kirkpatrick interview by Hall.
34. LHM, 25 March 1965, Deacons ﬁle 157-2466-13, FBI Files.
35. Fenton interview by author; Donovan Bess, ‘‘Torture in a Louisiana Jail,’’
Louisiana–Summer 1964, n.p., Moore Collection, ARC. Fenton was not a religious
person and found his inspiration in more secular sources. Nonviolence has its
roots in Christianity and Hindu-derived Gandhism, but also in the nineteenth-
century philosophy of Leo Tolstoy and Henry David Thoreau: see Tolstoy’s Writ-
ings on Civil Disobedience and Gandhi, Non-Violent Resistance. On Gandhian non-
violence, see Sharp, Gandhi as a Political Strategist . See also Kapur, Raising Up
a Prophet . On the inﬂuence of Gandhi, Walter Rauschenbusch, and Reinhold
Niebuhr on Martin Luther King, see Ansbro, Martin Luther King Jr.
36. Fenton interview by author.
37. Ibid.
38. Ibid.
39. Ibid.
40. Ibid.
41. Ibid.
42. Ibid.
43. There are no studies of the role of women in the self-defense movement,
though it would be a fascinating and useful subject.
44. Annie Purnell Johnson interview by author. Jackie Hicks in Bogalusa was
said to have organized target practice for a women’s group.
45. Fred Brooks to Ronnie Moore, ‘‘Field Report 11-1-64 to 11-15-64, Jonesboro,
Louisiana,’’ box 5, folder 4, CORE (SRO); Charles Fenton and Willie Green, ‘‘Field
Report of Jackson Parish,’’ November 1965, Jonesboro, La., box 1, folder 7, CORE
(Jackson Parish).
46. Kirkpatrick, Black Music.
47. Kirkpatrick, Harvey Johnson, and Catherine Patterson Mitchell interviews
by author. The ﬁrst recorded use of the Deacons’ name was in a 6 January 1965
FBI memorandum based on an interview with Percy Lee Bradford. See SAC New
Orleans to Director, 6 January 1965, Deacons ﬁle 157-2466-1, FBI Files. Kirk-
patrick’s tendency to revise the history of the Deacons deserves some explana-
tion. He, along with other Deacons, failed to mention in interviews that the
Deacons evolved, in part, from a volunteer police squad. In the late 1960s anti-


--- PAGE 300 ---
Notes to Pages 47–51 291
police sentiment was at a fever pitch in the movement, especially among the
Black Power and antiwar groups that Kirkpatrick associated with. Kirkpatrick
was understandably reluctant to admit his service as a policeman. Moreover, it
would have been difﬁcult to elevate the Deacons to icon status if it were known
that they had originated, in part, as a police squad.
48. Fred Brooks to Oretha Castle, Monroe, La., n.d., box 3, folder 2, CORE
(SRO); Brooks to Moore, ‘‘Field Report.’’
49. Fenton and Green, ‘‘Field Report.’’
50. Belfrage, Freedom Summer, 170, 175. Many CORE workers interviewed for
Project South in 1965 strongly complained that Freedom Summer had repro-
duced the condescending dynamic of white people telling poor African Ameri-
cans what was best for them, especially by emphasizing registration in the Mis-
sissippi Freedom Democratic Party (MFDP). Ickes, interview by anonymous.
Ickes believed that the MFDP project had diverted attention away from the felt
needs of local people. See also Lacey, interview by anonymous; but the criticism
runs throughout the interviews.
51. The community organizing model became ofﬁcial CORE policy by January
1965. One document widely circulated in CORE clearly delineated this line of
debate: Jimmy Garrett, ‘‘Who Decides,’’ The Movement, April 1965, reprint in box
1, ﬁle 9, CORE, ‘‘Bogalusa, Louisiana, Records, 1965–1966,’’ CORE (SHSW). See
also Ronnie Moore, ‘‘Discussion Draft on Louisiana Project,’’ January 1965, box 4,
folder 2, CORE (SRO). Moore argues, ‘‘Rather than institutors of pre-selected
programs, the staff should present the full array of alternatives and allow the
community to shape its individual project.’’ Indeed, by 1965 several former SNCC
volunteers had joined CORE in Louisiana because of its focus on local control
and leadership. Harold Ickes, who ended up in CORE in 1965, had worked with
SNCC the previous summer; he felt that ‘‘when you start comparing actual
method of operation to the line that’s preached, I think there’s a wide division.’’
Ickes, interview by anonymous. Payne gives a comprehensive account of SNCC’s
community organizing model in Light of Freedom.
52. Dennis, interview by anonymous; Lesser, interview by anonymous.
53. Belfrage, Freedom Summer, 174–75, 178.
54. Oretha Castle, ‘‘Field Report, December 6, 1964 to December 12, 1964,’’
Monroe, La., box 4, folder 2, CORE (SRO); Wall Street Journal, 21 February 1965.
55. Investigative report, 17 August 1965, Deacons ﬁle 157-2466-41, FBI Files.
56. White interview by author. The fear and reluctance to act that Charles
Fenton witnessed was not unique to Jonesboro. Whereas most recent studies of
African American life in the twentieth century emphasize cultural resistance and
downplay the role of fear, resignation, and fatalism, scholars studying poor
whites in the South offer illuminating analyses of these attitudes and behaviors
in the white community, viewing them as ‘‘functionally positive’’ adjustments to
poverty. ‘‘Such folk did not expect much from life,’’ writes I. A. Newby, ‘‘at least in


--- PAGE 301 ---
292 Notes to Pages 51–56
a material sense, because experience discouraged expectation, and they wanted
to avoid the disappointment of unrealized hope.’’ Their numerous encounters
with ‘‘prejudice and discrimination necessitated behavioral strategies to avoid
humiliation and a consequent sense of inadequacy.’’ These survival behaviors
took the form of noncompetitiveness, low aspirations, and attraction to paternal-
ism. By limiting their sense of pride, they limited their deﬁnition of success and
protected themselves from feelings of inferiority. The failing of this adaptive
behavior, though, was that ‘‘in keeping their hopes low and expectations realis-
tic, plain folk helped perpetuate the system that exploited them.’’ Plain folk were
ultimately concerned with their self-image, and although they were not ‘‘de-
based’’ or ‘‘demoralized,’’ there was widespread guilt and shame because they
could not live up to the values they shared with other southerners: ‘‘They were
supposed to be . . . independent, unrestrained, and beholden to no one.’’ Newby,
Plain Folk in the New South, 456–57, 454–55, 458–60.
57. Ibid.
Chapter Three
1. LW, 2 January 1965.
2. ‘‘Chronology on Jonesboro,’’ [1965], box 5, folder 4, CORE (SRO); LW, 9
January 1965.
3. SAC New Orleans to Director, 6 January 1965, Deacons ﬁle 157-2466-1, FBI
Files; LHM, ‘‘Deacons for Defense and Justice, Jonesboro, Louisiana, Percy Lee
Bradford, President,’’ 6 January 1964, Deacons ﬁle 157-2466-2, FBI Files.
4. LHM, ‘‘Deacons for Defense and Justice.’’
5. This broader, more ﬂuid notion of ‘‘membership’’ is addressed by Deacons
leader Henry Austin (interview by author).
6. A similar phenomenon occurred with the Black Panther Party. By 1970 there
were thousands of self-proclaimed Black Panthers scattered around the nation,
most of whom had never formally joined the party or, for that matter, even met a
party member.
7. White, Thomas, and Burris interviews by author. The autonomous Deacons
chapter that spontaneously formed in Port Gibson is representative of this latter
trend. For membership estimates, see Thomas and White interviews by author.
In some reports the FBI estimated total membership at 15,000—an obviously
inﬂated number.
8. SAC New Orleans to Director, 6 January 1965, Deacons ﬁle 157-2466-1, FBI
Files.
9. ‘‘Chronology on Jonesboro’’; Annie Purnell Johnson, Jacobs, and Lewis
interviews by Feingold; LW, 4 December 1965.
10. LHM, ‘‘Deacons for Defense and Justice, Inc., Jonesboro, Louisiana, March
26, 1965,’’ Deacons ﬁle 157-2466-13, FBI Files.
11. Annie Purnell Johnson interview by author.


--- PAGE 302 ---
Notes to Pages 56–60 293
12. Ibid.; Kirkpatrick interview by Hall.
13. NYT, 21 February 1965.
14. Ibid.
15. Ibid.
16. Ibid.
17. Moore interview by author.
18. On informal, clandestine self-defense groups, see Introduction (n. 4),
above.
19. On SNCC’s McComb campaign, see Dittmer, Local People , 102–14 (voter
registration total, p. 114). The theme that civil rights workers were not building
organizations that could be sustained by local members runs throughout the
Stanford University’s Project South Oral History interviews with CORE workers
in Louisiana. See esp. Miriam Feingold transcript, Clinton, La., 5 July 1965, reel
0124–0125, PSCSUA. One CORE volunteer commented on how activists fre-
quently reinforced old patterns of racial deference. There were ‘‘many projects
that were sort of messed up by well-intentioned but nevertheless white people
who set up organizations . . . and then left, and left a community that was maybe
a little bit worse off than before, for having yes-ma’amed and no-ma’amed an-
other summer.’’ Roy, interview by anonymous.
20. Viewing violence as primarily an ethical question obscures its political
function. Georges Sorel argued that violence guaranteed the political indepen-
dence of the working class by driving away middle-class leaders who favored
orderly and lawful reform. Though the Deacons were far from a revolutionary
vanguard, their advocacy of violence accomplished the same end—it kept white
liberals and middle-class blacks at a distance. See Sorel, Reﬂections on Violence,
99, 105, 132.
21. Thomas’s activities in New York are drawn from Thomas interview by au-
thor. Special thanks to Virginia Collins (Dara Abubakari), Lawrence Landry, and
Gwendolyn Midlo Hall for their insights on New York’s black political groups.
See also Landry interview by author.
22. On Thomas’s contact with RAM, see Thomas interview by author. On
Thomas, the Deacons, and RAM, see FBI Files: SAC Detroit to Director, 10 June
1965, airtel, Deacons ﬁle 157-2466-LHM; Enclosure, ‘‘Revolutionary Action Move-
ment[,] June 10-1965,’’ app. ‘‘Revolutionary Action Movement [RAM])’’; SAC
WFO to Director, 9 September 1965, airtel, Deacons ﬁle (unnumbered), and en-
closure, LHM, ‘‘Organization for Black Power (OBP),’’ Washington, D.C., 9 Sep-
tember 1965, Deacons ﬁle 157-3022-156; Director to SAC New Orleans, 12 October
1966, Deacons ﬁle (unnumbered); John Edgar Hoover, Director of FBI, to Direc-
tor of CIA, 13 October 1966, originally serialized as Deacons ﬁle 157-3022-156;
Cleveland SAC to Director, 28 February 1967, airtel, Deacons ﬁle 157-2466-200;
and Mr. W. C. Sullivan to R. W. Smith, memorandum, 29 September 1967, Dea-
cons ﬁle 157-2466-243. Sullivan recommends ‘‘that monographs be prepared on
several black extremist organizations, including the Deacons, that would be


--- PAGE 303 ---
294 Notes to Pages 61–65
circulated to law enforcement agencies.’’ He describes RAM as a ‘‘fanatical all-
Negro hate group that follows the Red Chinese Marxist-Leninist line.’’
23. The Articles of Incorporation are contained in SAC New Orleans to Direc-
tor, 26 March 1965, Deacons ﬁle 157-2466-13, FBI Files.
24. Ibid.
25. The charter listed Bradford as president, Thomas as vice president, Charlie
White as secretary, Cossetta Jackson as treasurer, and Elmo Jacobs as a member
of the Board of Directors. Thomas’s listing as vice president introduced the ﬁrst
public note of discord in the organization. Henry Amos had served as vice presi-
dent since the group’s formation in November 1964, but Thomas managed to
substitute his name for the position in the incorporation papers—a maneuver
that angered Bradford and other ofﬁcers and led to a permanent rift between
Thomas and the rest of the Jonesboro chapter. Thereafter, Thomas identiﬁed
himself as the Deacons’ national vice president. See Harvey Johnson interview
by author.
26. Quotation from Anonymous CORE members and Deacons interview by
anonymous. Teachers in Homer, La., who wanted to join the Deacons also la-
bored under this misapprehension. See ibid.; Cottrol and Diamond, ‘‘Second
Amendment,’’ 336–37, 355; and Stokes interview by author.
27. Harvey Johnson interview by author.
Chapter Four
1. King quoted in Weisbrot, Freedom Bound, 132.
2. The accommodationism of teachers and ministers is a recurring theme in
interviews with the Deacons. See Harvey Johnson and Whatley interviews by
author and Kirkpatrick interview by Hall. See also Owen Brooks, June John-
son, and Hightower interviews by Tom Dent. On the conservative role of black
educators in Mississippi, see Dittmer, Local People, 37, 44, 110, and Payne, Light
of Freedom , 129, 138, 177. Principals of black schools provoked student pro-
tests in other Deacon strongholds such as Bogalusa and Woodville (see later
chapters).
3. This elitism and complacency were evident in small and medium commu-
nities in the Deep South but seemed to be mitigated in larger urban areas, as
evidenced by the leading role of black women educators in the Montgomery Bus
Boycott. See Robinson, Montgomery Bus Boycott . In her interview with Tom
Dent, Mary Hightower, a grassroots activist from Lexington, Miss., conﬁrmed
the meritocratic ideas of middle-class blacks. Hightower said that middle-class
blacks felt that they were ‘‘above’’ the movement because protesters were de-
manding what the middle class had already achieved through education and
being a ‘‘good citizen.’’
4. Whatley interview by author.
5. Annie Purnell Johnson interview by author.


--- PAGE 304 ---
Notes to Pages 65–73 295
6. Ibid.; Oretha Castle, ‘‘Activities in Jonesboro, Louisiana,’’ n.d., box 5, folder
4, CORE (SRO).
7. Alvin Adams, ‘‘3-Week School Boycott Gets Results in Jonesboro, La.,’’ Jet, 15
April 1965, 46–48.
8. Ibid.
9. Ibid.
10. Castle, ‘‘Activities in Jonesboro’’; Mike Lesser, ‘‘Report on Jonesboro-
Bogalusa Project,’’ March 1965, box 5, folder 5, CORE (SRO).
11. On this incident, see Lesser, ‘‘Report on Jonesboro’’; Thomas interview by
author; ‘‘Statement by Ernest [sic] Thomas regarding Events of March 11, 1965,’’
box 5, folder 4, CORE (SRO); and Jet, 15 April 1965, 46–48.
12. ‘‘Statement by Ernest [sic] Thomas regarding Events of March 11, 1965.’’
13. Ibid.
14. Ibid.
15. Thomas interview by author.
16. This account is drawn from Frederick Brooks and Annie Purnell Johnson
interviews by author.
17. Ibid.
18. NOT-P, 15 March 1965.
19. ‘‘Statement by Cossetta Jackson on Arrest of March 15, 1965,’’ box 5, folder
4, CORE (SRO); Castle, ‘‘Activities in Jonesboro.’’
20. Gale to Belmont, 15 March 1965, memorandum, Deacons ﬁle 157-2466-10,
and Director to SAC New Orleans, 19 March 1965, Deacons ﬁle (unnumbered),
FBI Files. I am indebted to David Garrow and retired FBI agent Clifford Anderson
for their assistance in interpreting the Deacons’ FBI Files.
21. Harvey Johnson interview by author.
22. Thomas, Bradford, and White had all been paper mill workers. A similar
change in leadership occurred in the Bogalusa movement.
23. Castle, ‘‘Activities in Jonesboro’’; SAC New Orleans to Director, 26 March
1965, Deacons ﬁle 157-2466-13, FBI Files.
24. BDN, 23, 25 March 1965.
25. This account is drawn from SAC New Orleans to Director, 26 March 1965;
Castle, ‘‘Activities in Jonesboro’’; and Thomas interview by author.
26. SAC New Orleans to Director, 26 March 1965; Castle, ‘‘Activities in Jones-
boro’’; Thomas interview by author.
27. Sobel, Civil Rights, 304.
28. NOT-P, 27 March 1965. On the FBI, COINTELPRO, and black activists, see
O’Reilly and Gallen, Black Americans, 48–52. The FBI documents on COINTEL-
PRO operations against the Klan are in Counterintelligence Program, Internal
Security, Disruption of Hate Groups, 157-9-33, FBI Files.
29. Daniel Mitchell, ‘‘A Special Report on Jonesboro, Louisiana,’’ July 1964,
box 1, folder 10, CORE (Jackson Parish).
30. Castle, ‘‘Activities in Jonesboro.’’


--- PAGE 305 ---
296 Notes to Pages 74–78
31. NOT-P, 28 March 1965.
32. BDN, 29 March 1965; NYT, 26 April 1965.
33. SAC New Orleans to Director, 3 March 1965, Deacons ﬁle 157-2466-9, FBI
Files.
34. Ibid.
35. Jet, 15 April 1965; BDN, 29, 30 March 1965; Castle, ‘‘Activities in Jonesboro.’’
36. Castle, ‘‘Activities in Jonesboro.’’
37. Catherine Patterson Mitchell interview by author.
38. Simpson, Simpson’s Contemporary Quotations, 195.
39. Moore interview by author. Scholarship on southern values among the
nineteenth-century upper class deﬁnes honor as a set of values and attitudes
including honesty, courage, trustworthiness, and moral probity. Anthropologists
deﬁne plebian honor differently, linking it directly to the readiness to ﬁght: the
ability to protect one’s family and property in one’s absence—a trait found in
societies marked by stiff competition, scarce resources, and limited government.
This was particularly true for the Scotch-Irish herdsmen who peopled the Celtic
South. Unable to constantly monitor their widespread herds, the Celts relied on
maintaining a credible threat of violence that guaranteed that any theft would
be mercilessly avenged. This was also ‘‘true wherever gaining resources, or keep-
ing them, depends on the community’s believing that the individual is capable of
defending himself against predation,’’ according to Richard Nisbett and Dov
Cohen. Potential predators will avoid the risk of someone ‘‘who knows how to
defend himself and his possessions and who appears not to be afraid to die.’’
Honor served the same purpose in the black community, where the absence of
legal protection made masculine honor an important deterrent to vigilante vio-
lence. On honor and Celtic culture, see Nisbett and Cohen, Culture of Honor, xv;
on Celtic culture, see McWhiney, Cracker Culture; on ﬁghting and the South, see
Gorn, ‘‘ ‘Gouge and Bite.’ ’’ Ultimately, a person’s honor depended on what other
people thought of him or her. As Edward Ayers ( Vengeance and Justice, 13) has
written, honor is ‘‘a system of values within which you have exactly as much
merit as others confer upon you.’’
40. Castle, ‘‘Activities in Jonesboro.’’
41. This account is drawn from ibid. and Jacobs interview by Feingold.
42. Jacobs interview by Feingold.
Chapter Five
1. Quick, ‘‘History of Bogalusa.’’ On the Balltown Riot, see Bond and Bond, Star
Creek Papers, 10, 141 (n. 5). An excellent overview of the early history of Bogalusa
and its labor relations can be found in Norwood, ‘‘Bogalusa Burning,’’ which also
contains an account of the IWW’s 1919 campaign. Norwood concludes that the
campaign ‘‘marked the only time during the ﬁrst half of the twentieth century
when white workers picked up guns to protect black rights’’ (p. 627).


--- PAGE 306 ---
Notes to Pages 79–84 297
2. Quick, ‘‘History of Bogalusa.’’
3. John Fahey, ‘‘Will Bogalusa Survive?,’’ NOT-P, 28 August 1977.
4. ‘‘The Bogalusa Negro Community,’’ 16 May 1965, box 7, folder 6, CORE
(SRO).
5. The unionization of the Bogalusa mill was not unusual for two reasons.
First, papermaking was a continuous process and mill owners wanted a mini-
mum of labor stoppages. Second, the mills were capital-intensive operations and
had a low ratio of mill worker costs to total costs. This capital-intensive nature of
paper production exacerbated racial tension in the 1950s, when black employ-
ment declined as a result of automation. The recessions of 1958 and 1961 com-
pounded labor cutbacks and caused whites to ‘‘harden the opposition’’ to black
job opportunities. Northrup, The Negro in the Paper Industry , 14, 48, 54; on the
Bogalusa mill, see 95–104.
6. Fahey, ‘‘Will Bogalusa Survive?’’
7. Rony, ‘‘Bogalusa.’’
8. Ibid., 235–36.
9. Paul Good, ‘‘Klantown, USA,’’ Nation, 1 February 1965, 110–13.
10. Bond and Bond, Star Creek Papers, 11, 5, 12.
11. Lori Davis, Mimi Feingold, and Howard R. Messing, ‘‘Summer Parish Scout-
ing Report, Washington Parish,’’ [Summer 1964], box 7, folder 6, CORE (SRO).
Much of the scholarly literature on the civil rights movement has been domi-
nated by the ‘‘resource mobilization’’ theory, which stresses the movement’s
reliance on local traditions and resources and continuity between the old and
new organizations. The experience of the Deacons, with their dramatic break
from old organizations and established ideologies, clearly argues against this
continuity thesis; see McAdam, Political Process, and Morris, Origin of the Civil
Rights Movement . Adam Fairclough’s study of Louisiana emphasizes the con-
tinuity theme, arguing that in Louisiana ‘‘the NAACP provided the backbone of
the civil rights struggle.’’ Fairclough, Race and Democracy, xiv–xv. On the role of
the black church, see Morris, Origin, xiii, 77. For an alternative perspective on
the spontaneity of the social movements, see Piven and Cloward, Poor People’s
Movements.
12. Hicks interview by Feingold.
13. On the May CORE announcement, see Hill, ‘‘Character of Black Politics,’’
65.
14. Davis, Feingold, and Messing, ‘‘Scouting Report.’’
15. Hill, ‘‘Character of Black Politics,’’ 65.
16. Moore to Cutrer, 18 July 1965, box 7, folder 5, CORE (SRO).
17. Davis, Feingold, and Messing, ‘‘Scouting Report.’’
18. Ibid.
19. Good, ‘‘Klantown,’’ 110–13. The May rally is referred to in U.S. House,
Activities of Ku Klux Klan , 3:2413. The social composition and political appeal of
the Klan has been the subject of recent debate. Most scholarly works on the Klan


--- PAGE 307 ---
298 Notes to Pages 85–87
in the twentieth century have focused on the ‘‘second klan’’ of the 1910s and
1920s. Early inﬂuential writers like John Moffat Mecklin ( Ku Klux Klan ) char-
acterized the Klan as an organization of antimodern misﬁts: violent, white su-
premacist, and rural. Richard Hofstadter and other scholars in the 1950s con-
tinued to employ the Mecklin thesis, but beginning in the 1960s, authors such
as David Chalmers (Hooded Americanism) and Kenneth T. Jackson (Ku Klux Klan
in the City ) challenged the paradigm. In recent years a populist-civic school
argued that the ‘‘second klan’’ was not a group of aberrant, low-status reac-
tionaries, but rather ordinary people who saw themselves as upholders of the
moral order. Their nativist and racist attitudes were typical of the times; they
were not particularly violent, nor were they driven by white supremacist ideas.
See Lay, War, Revolution and Invisible Empire; Jenkins, Steel Valley Klan; Gerlach,
Blazing Crosses in Zion ; and Lutholtz, Grand Dragon. See also MacLean, Behind
the Mask . A scholarly study of the 1960s Klan ideology is found in Rich, ‘‘Klan
Ideology.’’ One of the few studies of the ‘‘third klan’’ of the 1960s is Newton,
Invisible Empire , though Newton fails to use oral history interviews with Klan
members that would have produced a useful social history. The proceedings of
the 1965 HUAC hearings on the Klan remain a rich source of material on the 1960s
Klan; see U.S. House, Present-Day Ku Klux Klan and Activities of Ku Klux Klan .
The OKKKK in Bogalusa was quite unlike the ‘‘second klan’’ described by the
populist-civic school. It was overtly white supremacist, unrelentingly violent, and
largely working class—though the leadership was comprised of small business
proprietors.
20. Rony, ‘‘Bogalusa,’’ 238.
21. NOT-P, 6 January 1965; BDN, 6 January 1965.
22. ‘‘Fact Sheet on Bogalusa, Louisiana,’’ 17 February 1965, reel 25, CORE
(Microﬁlm); Good, ‘‘Klantown,’’ 110–11. For earlier Klan leaﬂets attacking Talley
and Lou Major, see ‘‘Published by the Original Ku Klux Klan of Louisiana,’’ [Sep-
tember 1964], box 7, folder 6, CORE (SRO), and Klan leaﬂet text in U.S. House,
Activities of Ku Klux Klan, 3:2421–22.
23. Good, ‘‘Klantown.’’ On the OKKKK name change, see NOT-P, 7 September
1965.
24. Linder, Bending toward Justice, 7.
25. U.S. House, Present-Day Ku Klux Klan , 106–7, and Activities of Ku Klux
Klan, 3:2525–29; BDN, 17 June 1965; LW, 31 July 1965. Lee was found guilty by a
federal court in New Orleans and sentenced to three years in prison in June 1965.
26. Good, ‘‘Klantown,’’ 111–12.
27. U.S. House, Activities of Ku Klux Klan , 3:2487–88 (18 December meeting);
Good, ‘‘Klantown,’’ 111 (doggerel). A copy of a Klan leaﬂet, dated 27 December
1964, can be found in U.S. House, Activities of Ku Klux Klan, 3:2454; several other
Bogalusa Klan leaﬂets appear on pp. 2454–58; on the Klan in the Bogalusa auxili-
ary police, see p. 2549.
28. Good, ‘‘Klantown,’’ 111.


--- PAGE 308 ---
Notes to Pages 88–95 299
29. Ibid.
30. Leroy Collins to Hubert Humphrey, 13 August 1965, 150-E-7-10-F, Hum-
phrey Papers, MHS; ‘‘Field Report, Tangipahoa Parish, Hammond, Spring 1964,’’
ca. 1964, Hammond, La., box 7, folder 2, CORE (SRO).
31. Badger, ‘‘Fatalism, Not Gradualism,’’ 87–88.
32. Heilbron interview by author.
33. BDN, 5 January 1965.
34. BDN, 3 January 1965; Good, ‘‘Klantown,’’ 110–11.
35. BDN, 6 January 1965.
36. BDN, 8 January 1965.
37. NOT-P, 12 January 1965.
38. Crown-Zellerbach’s role in staging the tests is documented in ‘‘Crown-
Zellerbach in Bogalusa,’’ 16 May 1965, box 7, folder 6, CORE (SRO), and Rony,
‘‘Bogalusa,’’ 238. See also ‘‘Field Report, January–June 1965,’’ GMHP.
39. Good, ‘‘Klantown,’’ 112; ‘‘Fact Sheet on Bogalusa, Louisiana’’; BDN, 29 Janu-
ary 1965.
40. Hill, ‘‘Character of Black Politics,’’ 67–70; ‘‘Summary of Incidents: Boga-
lusa, Louisiana, January 28–July 1, 1965,’’ box 7, folder 6, CORE (SRO).
41. BDN, 29 January 1965; NOT-P, 29 January 1965; ‘‘Summary of Incidents:
Bogalusa, Louisiana, January 28–July 1, 1965.’’
42. Miller interview by author.
43. BDN, 29 January 1965.
44. Hill, ‘‘Character of Black Politics,’’ 67–70; Miller and Hicks interviews by
author.
45. The account of the events at the Hicks’s home is drawn from Hicks and
Miller interviews by author and ‘‘Fact Sheet on Bogalusa, Louisiana.’’
46. Hicks interview by author.
47. Ibid.
48. Ibid.
49. Ibid.; ‘‘Fact Sheet on Bogalusa, Louisiana.’’
50. The Klan’s pressure on Mayor Cutrer is documented in ‘‘Federal Com-
plaint,’’ United States of America, . . . v. Original Knights , and Miller interview by
author.
51. Hicks interview by author. The new militancy evident in Jonesboro and
Bogalusa can be attributed to the failure of old strategies and to many structural
developments following World War II, including mechanization of agriculture
that led to northern and urban migration, increased unionization, the abolition
of the white primary, de-legitimization of racist theories, the Cold War, rising
expectations of veterans, and military discipline. Morris, Origin of the Civil Rights
Movement, 73–77, 79–81; Payne, Light of Freedom , 431. On the impact of the
1940s and the Cold War on the black movement, see Korstad and Lichtenstein,
‘‘Opportunities Found and Lost.’’
52. Hill, ‘‘Character of Black Politics,’’ 70.


--- PAGE 309 ---
300 Notes to Pages 96–102
Chapter Six
1. BDN, 3 February 1965.
2. This account is drawn from Miller and Hicks interviews by author and
‘‘Federal Complaint,’’ United States of America, . . . v. Original Knights.
3. Miller interview by author.
4. Ibid.
5. Ibid. Miller’s sudden disillusionment with nonviolence is representative of
the popular narrative of the civil rights movement as a journey from nonviolent
idealism to disillusioned Black Power. It is a quintessentially middle-class narra-
tive of the period: whereas middle-class activists were indeed disabused of their
faith in moral suasion, the black working class did not labor under this illusion.
6. Ibid.
7. Ibid.
8. Ibid.
9. Ibid.
10. Ibid.
11. BDN, 5 February 1965; NOT-P, 5 February 1965.
12. Hill, ‘‘Character of Black Politics,’’ 67–68.
13. Program for ‘‘A. Z. Young Civil Rights March 25th Anniversary Commem-
oration,’’ 12 November 1992, Louisiana Legislative Black Caucus, in author’s
possession. Military service deeply affected a generation of African American
men, raising their expectations for full citizenship and teaching them the power
of collective and disciplined action. See MacGregor, Integration of the Armed
Forces; Wynn, The Afro-American and the Second World War; Donaldson, History
of African-Americans in the Military ; and McGuire, Taps for a Jim Crow Army.
14. On the nonviolent mandates of the national organizations, see Carson, In
Struggle; Meier and Rudwick, CORE; Fairclough, To Redeem the Soul ; Garrow,
Bearing the Cross; and Branch, Parting the Waters and Pillar of Fire.
15. On Klan strategy and wrecking crews, see NOT-P, 8 September 1965, and
‘‘Federal Complaint.’’
16. NOT-P, 8 September 1965; ‘‘Federal Complaint’’; ‘‘Summary of Incidents:
Bogalusa, Louisiana, January 28–July 1, 1965,’’ box 7, folder 6, CORE (SRO).
Charles Ray Williams was the only assailant who was not a Klan member.
17. ‘‘Summary of Incidents: Bogalusa’’; ‘‘Federal Complaint.’’
18. ‘‘Summary of Incidents: Bogalusa.’’ Ovied Dunaway, a supervisor at the
telephone company in Bogalusa, was the exalted Cyclops of the Bogalusa klavern
of the OKKKK. Dunaway spoke at a United Klans of America rally near Poplar-
ville, Miss., on 17 July 1965; U.S. House, Activities of Ku Klux Klan, 3:2463.
19. ‘‘Bogalusa, Louisiana, Incident Summary: January 25–February 25,’’ [Feb-
ruary 1965], box 7, folder 5, CORE (SRO); ‘‘Summary of Incidents: Bogalusa’’;
‘‘Federal Complaint.’’
20. On the Blumberg incident, see ‘‘One Man’s Stand,’’ ADL Bulletin, May 1965,


--- PAGE 310 ---
Notes to Pages 102–8 301
1; NOT-P, 20, 23 March 1965; ‘‘WBOX and the KKK,’’ Newsweek, 16 August 1965, 75;
and Blumberg’s testimony in U.S. House, Activities of Ku Klux Klan, 3:2415–38.
21. ‘‘One Man’s Stand.’’
22. NOT-P, 20, 23 March 1965; BDN, 23 March 1965.
23. ‘‘WBOX and the KKK,’’ Newsweek, 75.
24. BDN, 16, 21, 17 February 1965.
25. The account of the ﬁrst visit to Bogalusa by the Jonesboro Deacons is
drawn from Miller, Thomas, and Taylor interviews by author; Kirkpatrick inter-
view by Hall; SAC New Orleans to Director, 23 February 1965 (Deacons ﬁle
157-2466-3), 24 February 1965 (Deacons ﬁle 157-2466-4), and 26 February 1965
(Deacons ﬁle 157-2466-6), FBI Files; and ‘‘The Deacons,’’ Newsweek, 2 August
1965, 28–29.
26. Miller interview by author.
27. Fenton interview by author.
28. Ibid.
29. ‘‘The Deacons,’’ Newsweek, 28.
30. Ibid.
31. Ibid.
32. Ibid. Thomas’s reference to machine guns later provided the FBI a pretext
to launch an investigation of the Deacons and illegal ﬁrearms. There were also
rumors that the Deacons had imported 420 Czech machine guns to Baton Rouge
in July 1965. In both cases, the FBI never uncovered any evidence of illegal ﬁre-
arms. See SAC Los Angeles to Director, 25 April 1966, Deacons ﬁle 157-2466-129,
FBI Files.
33. SAC New Orleans to Director, ‘‘Deacons for Defense and Justice,’’ 24 Febru-
ary 1965, Deacons ﬁle 157-2466-4, FBI Files.
34. The FBI later seized on these remarks to argue that the Deacons went
beyond defensive force and encouraged attacks on police. See ibid. and SAC New
Orleans to Director, ‘‘Deacons for Defense and Justice,’’ and March 1965, Dea-
cons ﬁle 157-2466-8, FBI Files.
35. Fenton interview by author.
36. Ibid.
37. Ibid.
38. Ibid.; Kirkpatrick interview by Hall.
39. Hicks interview by author.
Chapter Seven
1. SAC New Orleans to Director, ‘‘Deacons for Defense and Justice,’’ 23 Febru-
ary 1965 (Deacons ﬁle teletype 157-2466-3), and 24 February 1965 (Deacons ﬁle
157-2466-4), FBI Files; Los Angeles Times, 2 August 1965.
2. LHM, ‘‘Deacons for Defense and Justice, Jonesboro, Louisiana Percy Lee
Bradford,’’ 4 March 1965, Deacons ﬁle 157-2466-8, FBI Files.


--- PAGE 311 ---
302 Notes to Pages 109–15
3. Hicks interview by author. In August 1965 Sims identiﬁed Hicks as a ‘‘public
relations man for the Deacons.’’ Sims interview by Price.
4. BDN, 12 July 1965; Louie Robinson and Charles Brown, ‘‘The Negro Feared
Most by Whites in Louisiana,’’ Jet, 15 July 1965, 14–17; Sims interview by Price
(quotation).
5. ‘‘Deacons Chief Defends Aims on Visit to L.A.,’’ Los Angeles Times , 14 June
1965; Robinson and Brown, ‘‘Negro Most Feared by Whites’’ (quotation).
6. ‘‘Deacons Chief Defends Aims on Visit to L.A.’’
7. Ibid.
8. Ibid.; Hicks interview by author.
9. Deacon Henry Austin once described Sims as a consummate ‘‘bullshit art-
ist.’’ Though the term is normally pejorative, in this instance it had a positive
implication. The black man most capable of defying whites in the era of Jim
Crow had to be skilled at confrontation, bluff, and trickery. Sims the street
hustler was a master of that style. Austin interview by author.
10. Hicks interview by author.
11. Thomas interview by author.
12. SAC New Orleans to Director, ‘‘Deacons for Defense and Justice,’’ 3 March
1965, Deacons ﬁle 157-2466-8, FBI Files.
13. Ibid.
14. SAC New Orleans to Director, 3 March 1965, Deacons ﬁle 157-2466-9, FBI
Files.
15. A. H. Belmont to J. H. Gale, 15 March 1965, Deacons ﬁle 157-2466-9, FBI
Files.
16. Director to SAC New Orleans, ‘‘Deacons for Defense and Justice,’’ 26 Febru-
ary 1965, Deacons ﬁle 157-2466-6, FBI Files.
17. A March memo indicated that the New Orleans Ofﬁce had been instructed
to conduct these interviews ‘‘for deterrent value such interviews have.’’ See
Baumgardener to Sullivan, memorandum, 20 March 1965, Deacons ﬁle 157-
2466-12, FBI Files; ‘‘Additions to Bogalusa Intimidation List,’’ [March 1965], box 7,
folder 5, CORE (SRO).
18. Burris interview by author; ‘‘Summary of Incidents: Bogalusa, Louisiana,
January 28–July 1, 1965,’’ box 7, folder 6, CORE (SRO); ‘‘Statement by Mr. Royan
Burris,’’ n.d., box 7, folder 5, CORE (SRO); BDN, 25 February 1965; ‘‘Additions to
Bogalusa Intimidation List.’’
19. ‘‘Summary of Incidents: Bogalusa’’; ‘‘Additions to Bogalusa Intimidation
List.’’
20. Hamilton Bims, ‘‘Deacons for Defense,’’ Ebony, September 1965, 25–30;
NOT-P, 20 July 1965; ‘‘Statement by Mr. Royan Burris’’; Burris interview by
author.
21. NOT-P, 15 March 1965; BDN, 15 March 1965.
22. BDN, 15 March 1965.
23. BDN, 26 March 1965.


--- PAGE 312 ---
Notes to Pages 115–24 303
24. ‘‘Additions to Intimidation List’’; ‘‘Summary of Incidents: Bogalusa.’’
25. NOT-P, 27 March 1965; BDN, 28, 29 March 1965.
26. BDN, 26, 28, March 1965; ‘‘Caught in the Civil Rights Crossﬁre,’’ Business
Week, 7 August 1965, 102–6.
27. Robinson and Brown, ‘‘Negro Most Feared by Whites.
28. Ibid.
29. Hicks interview by author.
30. Ibid.
31. Ibid.
32. BDN, 7, 8 April 1965, 4 April 1965.
33. The account in this and the next two paragraphs is drawn from ‘‘Summary
of Incidents: Bogalusa’’; New York Post, 8 April 1965; ‘‘Bogalusa Riﬂemen Fight
Off KKK Attack,’’ Jet, 22 April 1965, 5; Austin interview by Hall; Austin interview
by author; BDN, 8 April 1965; NOT-P, 9 April 1965; and New York Post , 8 April
1965.
34. BDN, 8 April 1965; NOT-P, 9 April 1965.
35. New York Post, 8 April 1965.
36. BDN, 8 April 1965.
37. NOT-P, 9 April 1965; BDN, 9 April 1965; ‘‘Letter to Police Jury et al.,’’ reel
20–43, CORE (Microﬁlm).
38. NOT-P, 9 April 1965; BDN, 9 April 1965.
39. NOT-P, 9 April 1965.
40. ‘‘Summary of Incidents: Bogalusa.’’
41. NOT-P, 9 April 1965.
42. Accounts of the attack are in BDN, 9, 13 April 1965, and NOT-P, 10 April
1965. Police made no arrests at the time, but four days later Klansman Randle C.
Pounds was arrested for attempted assault on Farmer. Charles McClendon, Lati-
more McNeese, and Klansman Bill Alford Jr. were arrested on charges of disturb-
ing the peace for their involvement in the incidents. See BDN, 14 April 1965, and
‘‘Federal Complaint,’’ United States of America, . . . v. Original Knights.
43. NOT-P, 10 April 1965.
44. NOT-P, 10, 11 April 1965; BDN, 9, 11 April 1965.
45. Heilbron interview by author.
46. BDN, 14 April 1965.
47. NOT-P, 14 April 1965; ‘‘Summary of Incidents: Bogalusa.’’
48. NOT-P, 29 June 1965; BDN, 29 June 1965; Will Ussery to Ed Hollander, 16
April 1965, box 7, ﬁle 6, CORE (SRO).
49. NOT-P, 16 April 1965.
50. BDN, 16 April 1965; NOT-P, 17 April 1965.
51. LW, 1 May 1965.
52. Accounts of the rally can be found in NOT-P, 23 April 1965, and BDN, 23
April 1965. See also NOT-P, 17 April 1965.
53. BDN, 2, 3 May 1965; NOT-P, 4 May 1965; LW, 15 May 1965.


--- PAGE 313 ---
304 Notes to Pages 124–34
54. NOT-P, 2 April 1965.
55. NOT-P, 23 April 1965; BDN, 23, 25 April 1965.
56. NOT-P, 21 April 1965.
57. NOT-P, 23 April 1965; NYT, 26 April 1965.
58. NOT-P, 25, 24, 28 April 1965; BDN, 28, 30 April 1965.
59. NOT-P, 6, 7 May 1965.
60. BDN, 9 May 1965.
61. NOT-P, 17 May 1965; BDN, 17 May 1965.
62. This account of the Cassidy Park assault is drawn from Hicks interview by
author; BDN, 20 May 1965; NYT, 20 May 1965; NOT-P, 20 May 1965; and ‘‘Federal
Complaint.’’ Klan leader Virgil Corkern and his two teenaged sons were part of
the white mob. See ‘‘Federal Complaint.’’
63. Hicks interview with author.
64. NOT-P, 21 May 1965.
65. NOT-P, 24 May 1965.
66. LW, 30 May 1965; BDN, 24 May 1965.
67. ‘‘Telephone Report from Mike Jones, May 24, 1965,’’ box 7, folder 6, CORE
(SRO).
Chapter Eight
1. On the Wilson lynching, see Bond and Bond, Star Creek Papers, 123–29.
2. BDN, 24, 25 May 1965; NOT-P, 25 May 1965.
3. BDN, 27 May 1965; Mike Jones to Ed Hollander, 26 May 1965, box 7, ﬁle 6,
CORE (SRO); States-Item, 1 July 1965.
4. BDN, 30 May 1965.
5. NOT-P, 31, 30 May 1965; LW, 5 June 1965.
6. John Stewart to Hubert Humphrey, 15 June 1965, Humphrey Papers, MHS;
‘‘Summary of Incidents: Bogalusa, Louisiana, January 28–July 1, 1965’’; NOT-P,
1 June 1965; BDN, 1, 4 June 1965. McKeithen’s secret meeting with the Klan
is documented in J. Edgar Hoover to David B. Filvaroff, 2 June 1965, attached
memorandum, ‘‘Racial Situation: Bogalusa, Louisiana,’’ Humphrey Papers, MHS.
7. NOT-P, 8, 10, 6 June 1965.
8. Newsweek, 14 June 1965, 38; NOT-P, 4, 7, 29 June, 4 July 1965.
9. NYT, 6 June 1965.
10. Ibid.
11. Ibid.
12. Ibid.
13. ‘‘Guns, Pickets Down: Talks Begin in Bogalusa Racial Crisis,’’ Jet, 24 June
1965, 8–11.
14. NYT, 6 June 1965.
15. Ibid.
16. Ibid.


--- PAGE 314 ---
Notes to Pages 134–40 305
17. Joyce, ‘‘The ‘Double V’ Was for Victory,’’ 107.
18. Los Angeles Times, 13 June 1965.
19. Two representative FBI reports on this meeting are SAC New Orleans to
Director, 23 February 1965 (Deacons ﬁle 157-2466-3) and 24 February 1965 (Dea-
cons ﬁle 157-2466-4), FBI Files.
20. Los Angeles Times, 13 June 1965.
21. Ibid.
22. Ibid.
23. Ibid.
24. Ibid.
25. Ibid.
26. Los Angeles Times, 14 June 1965.
27. SAC Los Angeles to Director, 15 June 1965, and LHM, ‘‘Deacon for Defense
and Justice,’’ 15 June 1965, Deacons ﬁle 157-2466-16, FBI Files.
28. Shana Alexander, ‘‘Visit Bogalusa, and You Will Look for Me,’’ Life, 2 July
1965, 28.
29. Ibid.
30. Ibid.
31. Ibid.
32. Ibid. Many CORE volunteers had the same ambivalence about the Dea-
cons. Joan Grieco was hoping not to be assigned to Bogalusa, but ‘‘when I heard
about the Deacons, I heaved a huge sigh of relief, and I thought, gee. I’m going to
have some protection. And it relieved me so that’s why I’m kind of mixed up on
my theories on non-violence now.’’ Grieco interview by anonymous.
33. ‘‘Guns, Pickets Down.’’
34. NOT-P, 26 June 1965; BDN, 27 June 1965; Hicks et al. v. Cutrer et al.
35. NOT-P, 2, 3 July 1965; BDN, 2 July 1965.
36. ‘‘WATS Report,’’ 6–28 to 7–65, box 4, folder 2, CORE (SRO); ‘‘Summary of
Incidents: Bogalusa, Louisiana, January 28–July 1, 1965’’; BDN, 1 July 1965; NOT-
P, 30 June 1965; ‘‘WATS Line Report,’’ [July 1964], box 7, folder 6, CORE (SRO);
States-Item, 1 July 1965.
37. On the planned marches, see Hill, ‘‘Character of Black Politics,’’ 83, and
BDN, 30 June 1965. The CORE convention and Thomas’s comments are reported
in ‘‘Core Shifts to Politics: Tackles Needy Money Problem,’’ Jet, 22 July 1965, 8–9.
Many CORE members disagreed with the new policy that allowed the paciﬁsts to
accept armed protection: ‘‘I can’t see letting someone else do it for you,’’ said one
CORE volunteer working in Louisiana. ‘‘If you’re going to be non-violent, you
have to refuse their protection it seems to me.’’ Peters interview by anonymous.
38. NOT-P, 10 July 1965.
39. On the Sims arrest, see ‘‘WATS Line Report, July 5, 1965,’’ box 7, folder 6,
CORE (SRO); BDN, 8 July 1965; NYT, 8 July 1965; and NOT-P, 7 July 1965. The 7
July meeting is found in ‘‘CORE and Bogalusa Civic and Voters League Meeting,’’
7 July 1965, reel 0104, Bogalusa, La., transcript, PSCSUA. At the meeting A. Z.


--- PAGE 315 ---
306 Notes to Pages 141–44
Young expressed surprise that members of Bogalusa’s Italian community had
joined in on the attacks and reminded the audience that the Sicilians had been
on the same side of the color line with blacks: until recently, Italians were buried
in the ‘‘colored cemetery.’’
40. Austin and Hicks interviews by author; Austin interview by anonymous.
Austin joined the Deacons before July 1965 but publicly denied membership on
occasion.
41. Austin interview by author.
42. The account of this incident is drawn from Austin interview by Hall; Austin
interview by author; NOT-P, 9 July 1965; BDN, 9 July 1965; and Newsweek, 19 July
1965, 25–26.
43. Austin interview by author.
44. Ibid.
45. Ibid.
46. Ibid.
47. Ibid.; NYT, 15 August 1965. Austin admitted to police that he was a Deacon.
See Newsweek, 19 July 1965. Accounts of the CORE/League meetings are also
drawn from ‘‘CORE and Bogalusa Civic and Voters League Meeting,’’ Bogalusa,
La., transcript, PSCSUA, reel 0104, 8 July 1965 (Sims), reel 0108, 9 July 1965, and
reel 0047, 10 July 1965.
48. BDN, 9 July 1965; NOT-P, 10 July 1965.
49. NOT-P, 25 January 1966.
50. Fred Zimmerman, ‘‘Race and Violence: More Dixie Negroes Buy Arms to
Retaliate against White Attacks: Non-Violence Coming to End?,’’ Wall Street
Journal, 12 July 1965.
51. BDN, 19 July 1965.
52. Hamilton Bims, ‘‘Deacons for Defense,’’ Ebony, September 1965, 25–30;
NYT, 11 July 1965.
53. NYT, 11 July 1965.
54. LW, 17 July 1965. King made allowances for armed self-defense in a 1959
article published in Liberation. In a response to Robert F. Williams, King said,
‘‘The principle of self-defense, even involving weapons and bloodshed, has never
been condemned, even by Gandhi, who sanctioned it for those unable to master
pure nonviolence.’’ MLK, ‘‘The Social Organization of Non-Violence,’’ Liberation,
October 1959; reprinted in Robert F. Williams, Negroes with Guns , 11–15. But in
the same year King joined the campaign to expel Williams from the NAACP for
his support of armed self-defense, saying that armed action ‘‘would be the great-
est tragedy that could befall us’’ because it would give ‘‘our oppressors . . . an
opportunity to wipe out many innocent Negroes.’’ Tyson, Radio Free Dixie , 163.
By 1965, when the Deacons posed a real threat to the alliance with liberals, King
held ﬁrm to his position against armed self-defense. Bayard Rustin, a key ﬁgure
in King’s leadership circle, echoed the theme of the liberal alliance in his analysis
of the March on Washington. The march ‘‘took place because the Negro needs


--- PAGE 316 ---
Notes to Pages 145–51 307
allies,’’ wrote Rustin in October 1963. Until ‘‘the successful completion of the
March, the method was on trial,’’ but now the march had succeeded and reas-
sured ‘‘our white allies.’’ Rustin, ‘‘The Meaning of the March on Washington,’’
reprinted in Meier, Rudwick, and Broderick, Black Protest Thought, 1965 ed., 381,
383.
55. LW, 17 July 1965; NOT-P, 13 July 1965.
56. Richard Haley, ‘‘Memorandum: CORE, Deacon, Relationship,’’ [1965], reel
no. 19, Southern Civil Rights Litigation Records, Yale University, New Haven.
57. Ibid.
58. NOT-P, 11, 12 July 1965. News reports identiﬁed the four young black men
as Deacons, though Sims appeared to deny that they were. The four were Joe
Gatlin, Gerald Simmons, Harrison Andrews, and Lucious Manning. BDN, 19 July
1965; NOT-P, 19 July 1965; NYT, 11 July 1965.
59. BDN, 20 July 1965.
60. Zimmerman, ‘‘Race and Violence.’’
61. Ibid.
62. Ibid.
63. Ibid.
64. ‘‘The Deacons,’’ Newsweek, 2 August 1965, 28–29.
65. Jet served as a barometer of concerns and hopes of the black working class
during the civil rights period—reﬂecting its changing identity, ideas, and politi-
cal debates on movement strategy. That the publication is virtually invisible in
most early works on civil rights is an indication of the tendency to view the
movement through the perspective of middle-class leaders. Most coverage of the
Deacons in the black media was positive. See LW, 13 March 1965, 8 May, 19, 26
June, and 17 July 1965. The coverage in Jet was extensive; a sampling of articles
include ‘‘Bogalusa Riﬂemen Fight Off OKKKK Attack,’’ 22 April 1965, 5; ‘‘Guns,
Pickets Down: Talks Begin in Bogalusa Racial Crisis,’’ 24 June 1965, 8; Louie
Robinson and Charles Brown, ‘‘Negro Most Feared by Whites,’’ Jet, 15 July 1965,
14–17; ‘‘CORE Shifts to Politics: Tackles Needy Money Problem,’’ 22 July 1965, 8–
9; and ‘‘Deny Deacons Shot Bogalusa White Youth,’’ 22 July 1965, 5.
66. Robinson and Brown, ‘‘Negro Most Feared by Whites.’’
67. Ibid.
68. Ibid.
69. Ibid.
70. Ibid.
71. ‘‘Guns, Pickets Down.’’
72. Ibid.
Chapter Nine
1. BDN, 3, 11 July 1965; NOT-P, 13, 11 July 1965; Hicks et al. v. Cutrer et al.
2. NOT-P, 12 July 1965; BDN, 12, 15 July 1965.


--- PAGE 317 ---
308 Notes to Pages 151–56
3. NOT-P, 13 July 1965.
4. NOT-P, 14 July 1965; BDN, 15 July 1965. Lomax had raised at least $5,641 for
the league by 9 July 1965. See ‘‘Ledger: Bogalusa Voters League,’’ 9 July 1965,
Jenkins Papers, CORE (SHSW).
5. NOT-P, 13, 15 July 1965; BDN, 15 July 1965.
6. NOT-P, 14 July 1965.
7. Ibid. Another account of the airport meeting is given in Time, 23 July 1965,
19–20.
8. NOT-P, 14 July 1965 (McKeithen); Los Angeles Times , 14 June 1965 (Sims).
McKeithen’s attempt to disarm the Deacons was consistent with the tradition of
whites controlling black access to weapons. See Cottrol and Diamond, ‘‘Second
Amendment.’’
9. BDN, 15 July 1965.
10. Ibid.; NOT-P, 15 July 1965.
11. NOT-P, 15 July 1965; LW, 28 August 1965.
12. Commonwealth, 29 July 1965, 517; NOT-P, 16 July 1965.
13. Doar and Landsberg, ‘‘Performance of the FBI,’’ 6:912–21; United States v.
U.S. Klans. In 1962 the Justice Department had asked Federal Judge Frank John-
son Jr. in Montgomery for injunctions to prevent the Klan from violence against
the Freedom Riders and requiring Alabama police to protect the protesters.
Johnson issued the injunction but negated its impact by also enjoining CORE and
Martin Luther King from conducting Freedom Rides. Unlike the Bogalusa case
where the Justice Department used the restraining order to destroy the Klan and
compel local police to consistently protect the constitutional rights of activists,
the department never sought to enforce the Montgomery injunction. Bass, Tam-
ing the Storm , 179–82. By 1962 most movement activists believed that there
would be no progress in the South unless the federal government protected
activists against racist terrorism. John Kennedy had campaigned on the promise
that he would enact ‘‘effective anti-bombing and anti-lynching legislation’’ but
failed to deliver on his pledge. Protective legislation did not pass until 1968.
Mann, Walls of Jericho, 300.
14. Scholars differ on how credible the ‘‘federalism’’ defense was. Some believe
that the Kennedys genuinely respected the doctrine. Others think that they in-
voked federalism only to avoid a confrontation with southern segregationists—a
confrontation that was both a constitutional and a moral imperative. Taylor
Branch (Parting the Waters, 721–25) writes that the Kennedys backed out of the
Greenwood suit because they feared that southern ofﬁcials would balk at en-
forcement, provoking a showdown with Washington across the South. On the
Greenwood suit, see Dittmer, Local People, 153–55.
15. Quoted in Dittmer, Local People, 468 (n. 62).
16. The federal government prosecuted ﬁve Klansmen in 1964 for a Florida
bombing but failed to obtain a guilty verdict. Newton, Invisible Empire, 173–74.


--- PAGE 318 ---
Notes to Pages 156–61 309
17. ‘‘A Report to Governor McKeithen: Louisiana at the Crossroads,’’ 20 July
1965, Community Relations Service, Humphrey Papers, MHS.
18. BDN, 18 July 1965.
19. NOT-P, 17 July 1965.
20. BDN, 19 July 1965; NOT-P, 19 July 1965.
21. BDN, 19 July 1965; NOT-P, 20 July 1965. Klansmen named in the suit were
Dewey Smith, Virgil Corkern, Albert Applewhite, Arthur Ray Applewhite, Louis
Applewhite, E. J. Dixon, O’Neal Austin Jones, Delos Williams, James M. Ellis,
Hardie Adrian Goings Jr., Esley Freeman, James A. Hollingsworth Jr., Randle C.
Pounds, Sidney August Warner, Billy Alford, and Rawlin Williams. The Justice
Department had ﬁled a similar suit against the Klan in Montgomery in 1962 but
never enforced the order. See n. 13, above.
22. BDN, 18, 20, 29, 22 July 1965; NOT-P, 22 July 1965.
23. BDN, 21, 30 July, 6 August 1965; NOT-P, 21, 25, 30 July 1965.
24. NYT, 19 August 1965; BDN, 20 July 1965. On Rester’s Klan membership, see
NOT-P, 12 September 1965.
25. NOT-P, 29, 30 July 1965.
26. Forman, Making of Black Revolutionaries, 381.
27. NOT-P, 28, 29 July 1965.
28. BDN, 3 August 1965; NOT-P, 8 August 1965.
29. BDN, 13 August 1965.
30. States-Item, 9 August 1965.
31. Ibid.
32. Roy Reed, ‘‘The Deacons, Too, Ride by Night,’’ New York Times Magazine, 15
August 1965, 10–24.
33. Ibid.
34. Ibid. The ways in which masculine rhetoric shaped gender roles in the
modern civil rights movement have received little scholarly attention. Tim Tyson
(Radio Free Dixie , 140–43) offers a perspective on masculine rhetoric and pa-
triarchy. ‘‘For black men as well as white men,’’ writes Tyson, ‘‘the rhetoric of
protecting women was an integral part of the politics of controlling women.’’ He
cautions that black patriarchy must be placed in ‘‘social context’’ (p. 141). Steve
Estes has undertaken the most ambitious effort to apply gender theory to the
modern civil rights movement in ‘‘Race, Masculinity, and the 1968 Memphis
Sanitation Strike’’ and ‘‘ ‘ i am a man !,’ ’’ Drawing on the work of Gail Bederman
and Jacquelyn Dowd Hall, Estes maintains that the masculine rhetoric of the
movement was a response to the verbal and physical emasculation of black men.
Although appeals to manhood were a powerful mobilizing tool, the concept of
manhood also carried with it the idea of female subordination—that ‘‘black and
white masculinity rested on deﬁnitions of womanhood as well as race, age, and
class.’’ Estes quotes Martin Luther King telling the Memphis sanitation workers,
‘‘We are tired of our men being emasculated so that our wives and daughters


--- PAGE 319 ---
310 Note to Page 161
have to go out and work in the white lady’s kitchen, leaving us unable to be with
our children and give them the time and attention that they need.’’ From this
statement Estes concludes that King was relegating women to the mother role
and accepting the ‘‘patriarchal ordering of the black family.’’ ‘‘Race, Masculinity,’’
154 (King quoted on pp. 160–61). Estes posits that ‘‘masculinist liberation strat-
egies’’ exploited ‘‘male insecurities,’’ and though this strategy yielded political
victories, it also ‘‘circumscribed the roles women could play in the struggle and
accepted many of the patriarchal and heterosexist assumptions that underlie
American society. ‘‘ ‘i am a man!,’ ’’ iii.
Gender role analysis of black manhood ideals deserves more attention, but
there are important considerations. First, care should be taken in assuming that
the act of protecting women necessarily subordinates them. This may be true in
honor and shame societies in the Mediterranean, where the defense of women is
inextricably linked to a strict set of prescribed behaviors and punishments im-
posed on women clearly intended to degrade and control them—that is, where
protection is explicitly linked to dominance. But there is no compelling evidence
that a comparable social code existed in the African American community. The
Deacons were a male-exclusive organization, but they did not, for the most part,
attempt to relegate their wives to the domestic sphere. Indeed, many Deacons’
wives and children were politically active, and there were women auxiliaries for
the Deacons in both Jonesboro and Bogalusa, though their role is unclear. Jackie
Hicks, wife of Deacons leader Bob Hicks, had armed confrontations with racist
vigilantes on more than one occasion and organized target practice for the Boga-
lusa Deaconesses. See Hicks interview by author and ‘‘The Deacons,’’ Newsweek,
2 August 1965, 28–29. Moreover, for African American men, slavery imparted a
meaning to manhood that was quite different from the white male ideal. Slavery
systematically denied African American men the right to protect their loved ones
from violence and sexual assault. The frustration, anger, and shame that accom-
panied this dehumanizing treatment led the freedmen to defend their families to
prove their humanity and equality. That the struggle for human dignity was
expressed in masculine symbols does not mean that the black masculine ideal
possessed the same patriarchal meaning as that found in white society. The
freedmen were using the only vernacular at hand to express their hopes and
aspirations for dignity. For black men, the desire to protect their families owed
more to a sense of ﬁlial and community responsibility than to a desire to exert
power over others and construct black patriarchy. This is not to say that there
were not patriarchal meanings to the newly found manhood, but rather that—in
historical perspective—becoming a man had much more to do with fulﬁlling
obligations to family and community than with subordinating women. Ul-
timately, ‘‘manhood’’ meant a set of virtues and duties that had very real mean-
ing for African American men in the South: it determined how they measured
their success or failure as humans and created the basis for self-esteem. For male
self-abnegation, honor, and the ideology of masculinity, see Gilmore, Manhood


--- PAGE 320 ---
Notes to Pages 162–67 311
in the Making , esp. 121, 229–30. On male honor, violence, and patriarchy in the
slave quarters, see Wyatt-Brown, Shaping of Southern Culture , and Wilma King,
Stolen Childhood.
35. Reed, ‘‘Deacons, Too, Ride by Night.’’
36. Ibid.
37. NOT-P, 12 April 1965; BDN, 31 May 1965; ‘‘Caught in the Civil Rights Cross-
ﬁre,’’ Business Week, 7 August 1965, 102–6.
38. Ebony, September 1965, 25–30.
39. Ibid.
40. Malcolm X quote in ‘‘James Farmer and Malcolm X: A Debate at Cornell
University, March 7, 1963’’; Burris quote from Reed, ‘‘Deacons, Too, Ride by
Night.’’
41. Ebony, September 1965, 25–30.
Chapter Ten
1. The quotations in this and the next paragraph are from Hunter interview by
anonymous; Clurman interview by anonymous; Acheson interview by anony-
mous; Peters interview by anonymous; ‘‘Louisiana CORE Newsletter,’’ [ca. Sum-
mer 1965], MFP; and Meldon Acheson to Mr. and Mrs. Robert Acheson, 22 July
1965, reprinted in ‘‘Richland Boy Beaten in Louisiana CORE Mission—Letter
to Parents Outlines,’’ a leaﬂet distributed by the Richland and Ollie Methodist
Churches, Richland, Iowa, n.d., Acheson Papers, CORE (SHSW). On the shoot-
ing incident at the end of the next paragraph, see ‘‘Report 7-21-65 by Jim Peters
on Ferriday,’’ 22 July 1965, box 4, folder 7, CORE (SRO). Contrary to scholarship
that argues that resistance and armed self-defense were unceasing traditions in
the African American community, the Ferriday episode demonstrates the very
real problems of fear and passivity that created the need for organizations like
the Deacons that could spawn a new consciousness. Similarly, witness the ab-
sence of local protest in response to the lynching of Mack Parker in 1959 in
Poplarville, Miss.
2. Roy Reed, ‘‘The Deacons, Too, Ride by Night,’’ New York Times Magazine, 15
August 1965, 10–24. The pattern of development for expansionist organizations
emerging from social movement tends to follow three parallel and interrelated
courses of action: (1) uniting atomized and episodic protests into a cohesive
organization, (2) crystallizing a strategy and philosophy (intellectual labor—
which organization frees up people to do), and (3) competing for political legiti-
macy, followers, and resources.
3. Otis Firmin, quoted in Natchez Deacons Meeting, 10 September 1965, audio
tape reels 178, 179, Pincus Collection, ARC.
4. Several factors make it difﬁcult to accurately assess the Deacons’ size, the
most signiﬁcant being that the national leadership did not keep records. In
addition, while the Deacons leadership was public, most of the membership was


--- PAGE 321 ---
312 Notes to Pages 167–72
secret and some entire chapters were clandestine. Even the FBI, with its exten-
sive network of informants, frequently failed to uncover chapters until they had
been operating for some time.
5. The FBI Deacons ﬁles alone indicate suspected organizing activity in ﬁfty-
one cities and counties. Afﬁliated Deacons members who worked alone were
more likely to escape FBI attention and be omitted from oral histories with
Deacons leaders. For example, although there was no FBI record of Deacons
activity in the River Parishes of Louisiana, in a 1999 interview Black Panther
leader Geronimo ji Jaja Pratt said that his uncle, Percy Pratt, of Morgan City, La.,
was a Deacon. Pratt interview by author. The FBI found no evidence of a Dea-
cons chapter in Houston, although an active chapter in the city, operated by
Frederick Kirkpatrick, was well known to local police. See Investigative Report,
Deacons for Defense and Justice, New Orleans, 27 November 1967, Deacons ﬁle
157-2466-250, and SAC Houston to Director, memorandum 157-2466-2455, FBI
Files. On Kirkpatrick in Houston, see Justice, Violence in the City, 24, 35–37, 119,
128–29.
6. Investigative Report, Deacons for Defense and Justice, New Orleans, 22
November 1966, Deacons ﬁle 157-2466-176, FBI Files; Jet, 19 May 1966, 7.
7. Fairclough, Race and Democracy, 113–19.
8. ‘‘WATS Line Report,’’ 30 June 1965, box 7, folder 7, CORE (SRO); Harper
interview by author; Meier and Rudwick, CORE, 352.
9. ‘‘WATS Line Report,’’ 30 June 1965; Meier and Rudwick, CORE, 352.
10. Harper interview by author.
11. Ibid.
12. Ibid.
13. Investigative Report, Deacons for Defense and Justice, New Orleans, 28
March 1966, Deacons ﬁle 157-2466-120, FBI Files; Harper interview by author.
14. Harper interview by author.
15. Ibid.
16. Ibid.
17. Ibid.
18. Background on the Homer Deacons is drawn from Anonymous Core Mem-
bers and Deacons interview by anonymous.
19. Lewis interview by Feingold. Background information on the Homer chap-
ter is drawn from Malray and Dodd interviews by author.
20. Pam Smith and Dan Paik, ‘‘Follow-up Scouting Report, May 25, 1965,’’ box
4, folder 12, CORE (SRO); ‘‘Field Report, April 25 to April 30, 1965,’’ box 4, folder
6, CORE (SRO).
21. SAC New Orleans to Director, 24 June 1965, Deacons ﬁle 157-2466-18, and
Investigative Report, Deacons for Defense and Justice, New Orleans, 17 August
1965, Deacons ﬁle 157-2466-41, FBI Files. Other Homer ofﬁcers included Otis
Chatman, Joe Lester Green, and George Lewis, Fred Lewis’s brother.


--- PAGE 322 ---
Notes to Pages 172–76 313
22. Pam Smith, ‘‘Claiborne Parish (Homer), July 12, 1965,’’ and ‘‘Homer Re-
port,’’ 15 July 1965, box 4, folder 6, CORE (SRO); Lewis interview by Feingold.
23. ‘‘Statement of Harvey Malray,’’ n.d., box 4, folder 6, CORE (SRO); Malray
interview by author.
24. ‘‘WATS Line Report, June 29, 1965,’’ box 1, folder 9, Monroe Project Files,
CORE (SHSW); Malray interview by author.
25. Anonymous CORE members and Deacons interview by anonymous.
26. Lewis interview by Feingold.
27. Harper interview by author.
28. Oretha Castle and Gary Craven to unidentiﬁed correspondent, 26 May
1965, box 5, folder 6, CORE (SRO); John L. Gee to David Dennis, [ca. December
1965], Ferriday, La., box 1, folder 1, CORE (FFM). FBI sources conﬁrmed that a
chapter had been formed in Tallulah. See Investigative Report, Deacons for De-
fense and Justice, New Orleans, 28 March 1966, Deacons ﬁle 157-2466-120, FBI
Files. On the ﬁrst unsuccessful attempt to establish a Deacons chapter, see Daw-
son interview by anonymous.
29. Whatley interview by author.
30. LW, 2 January 1965; Meldon Acheson to unidentiﬁed correspondent, 10
August 1965, Ferriday, La., Acheson Papers, CORE (SHSW); ‘‘Chronology of
Events in Concordia Parish,’’ 30 January 1966, box 4, folder 7, CORE (SRO).
31. Meldon Acheson to Gary Greenberg, 17 July 1965, Acheson Papers, CORE
(SHSW); Whatley interview by author.
32. ‘‘WATS line report,’’ 3 July 1965, box 1, folder 3, CORE (SRO).
33. Acheson to Greenberg, Ferriday, La., 27 July, 17 August 1965, Acheson
Papers, CORE (SHSW). The youthful FFM found itself competing with an older
moderate organization: the Civic League, headed up by Father August Thomp-
son, a black priest, which was attempting to organize biracial talks. See Fair-
clough, Race and Democracy , 401, and Pat Scharber, ‘‘Negro Pastor Says People
Have Love, but Frustrated,’’ [St. Paul, Minnesota] Catholic Bulletin , September
1965, found in box 1, folder 6, CORE (FFM).
34. Archie Hunter, ‘‘Report,’’ 24 July 1965, Ferriday, La., box 4, folder 7, CORE
(SRO); Whatley interview by author.
35. Acheson to unidentiﬁed correspondent, Ferriday, La., 30 July 1965, Ache-
son Papers, CORE (SHSW).
36. Acheson to Greenberg, Ferriday, La., 17 August 1965, Acheson Papers,
CORE (SHSW).
37. Ibid.
38. LW, 13 November 1965; ‘‘Chronology of Events in Concordia Parish,’’ 30
January 1966. The ﬁrst efforts to organize a chapter in Ferriday are noted in
‘‘Non-Prosecutive Summary Report,’’ New Orleans, 14 October 1965, Deacons ﬁle
157-2466-73, FBI Files.
39. ‘‘Freedom Ferriday Movement Release,’’ 23 November 1965, GMHP; LW,


--- PAGE 323 ---
314 Notes to Pages 177–80
4 December 1965; Whatley to Rev. Willie Johnson, 29 December 1965, Ferriday,
La., box 1, folder 1, CORE (FFM).
40. OKKKK, Realm of Louisiana, Concordia Parish, ‘‘The Fiery Cross,’’ Novem-
ber 1965, box 1, folder 15, CORE (FFM).
41. ‘‘Statement by Vernon Smith,’’ box 1, folder 14, 30 November 1965, CORE
(FFM).
42. ‘‘Statement by David Whatley,’’ 3 December 1965, GMHP; LW, 4, 25 De-
cember 1965; ‘‘Negro Gas Station Burned after Insurance Canceled: Violence
Continues in Ferriday, LA.,’’ News Release, Ferriday, 19 December 1965, CORE
(FFM).
43. Investigative Report, Deacons for Defense and Justice, New Orleans, 30
December 1965, Deacons ﬁle 157-2466-102, FBI Files; Whatley interview by au-
thor; Whatley, ‘‘Autobiography of David Lee Whatley,’’ n.d., n.p., in author’s
possession, and ‘‘Field Report of Concordia Parish, La.,’’ Ferriday, La., 29 January
1966, GMHP. A ‘‘guard shift’’ book is one of the few remaining written records of
the self-defense group in Ferriday. See ‘‘Guard Note Booklet,’’ ca. December
1965, Ferriday, La., box 1, folder 16, CORE (FFM).
44. Whatley, ‘‘Autobiography’’ and ‘‘Field Report of Concordia Parish, La.’’
45. Investigative Report, Deacons for Defense and Justice, New Orleans, 28
March 1966, Deacons ﬁle 157-2466-120, FBI Files.
46. Little is know about Najah or his place of origin. There is a small collection
of his papers donated by Miriam Feingold at the State Historical Society of
Wisconsin. See Najah Papers, SHSW. On the Snipers, see John Hamilton to
Richard Haily [sic], 22 March 1966; Hamilton to Mr. Haley, May 1966; Unidenti-
ﬁed correspondent to Haily [sic], ca. April 1966; Hamilton to Haily [sic], 16 April
and ca. May 1966—all Ferriday, La., box 1, folder 5, CORE (FFM).
47. ‘‘The Fiery Cross Extinguisher,’’ Ferriday, La., Spring 1966, Acheson Papers,
CORE (SHSW).
48. LW, 27 August 1966. Other ofﬁcers included Steven Ward (Bogalusa), vice
president; Lillie Mae Thompson (Bogalusa), assistant secretary; and Willie Jack-
son (Lake Providence), treasurer.
49. Kelley, Hammer and Hoe , 169 (thanks to Arthur Carpenter for this cita-
tion); Burris and Austin interviews by author. Bill Yates reported that in May
1965 Charlie Sims traveled to Donaldsonville on several occasions and met with
CORE staff and local blacks. See Yates, ‘‘Memo,’’ 6 May 1965, box 4, folder 3,
CORE (SRO).
50. Wood interview by author.
51. Ibid.
52. On the New Orleans chapter, see Investigative Reports, Deacons for De-
fense and Justice, New Orleans, 10 January 1966, Deacons ﬁle 157-2466-104; 21
July 1966, Deacons ﬁle 157-2466-152; and 27 November 1967, Deacons ﬁle
157-2466-250—all in FBI Files.
53. Wood interview by author.


--- PAGE 324 ---
Notes to Pages 180–86 315
54. Ibid.
55. ‘‘Deacons for Defense and Justice Rally,’’ October 1965, broadsheet, Politi-
cal Ephemera Collection, Special Collections, Tulane University Library, New
Orleans; Wood interview by author.
56. New Orleans SAC to Director, 8 February 1966, Deacons ﬁle 157-2466-111,
FBI Files.
57. Wood interview by author; Investigative Report, Deacons for Defense and
Justice, New Orleans, 28 March 1966, Deacons ﬁle 157-2466-120, FBI Files; Aus-
tin interview by author.
58. Collins [Dara Abubakari] interview by author. The Deacons also formed a
chapter in St. Francisville, north of Baton Rouge, which was primarily active
in a 1967 boycott protest. On the St. Francisville chapter, see Noﬂin interview
by author, and SAC New Orleans to Director, 27 February 1968, Deacons ﬁle
157-2466-264, FBI Files.
59. NYT, 30 August 1965; LW, 11 September 1965. The FBI’s account of the
Jackson meeting is contained in SAC Jackson to Director, 3 September 1965,
Deacons ﬁle 157-2466-59, and 25 October 1965, Deacons ﬁle 157-2466-78, FBI
Files.
60. NYT, 30 August 1965. Recruiters departed for Natchez, Columbia, and
Greenville.
61. Dittmer, Local People (Hurley), 49–50; Mrs. Medgar Evers and Peters, For
Us, the Living, 82–84; Charles Evers, Evers, 74–75.
Chapter Eleven
1. U.S. Commission on Civil Rights, Justice in Jackson ; NYT, 28 August 1965.
On SNCC in Natchez in 1964, see Robert Coles, ‘‘Natchez, Lovely Natchez,’’ New
Republic, 18 February 1967, 31–34. Accounts of the bombing and community
response are drawn from NYT, 28 August 1965; NOT-P, 28 August 1965; LW, 4
September 1965; and Young interview by author.
2. Young interview by author.
3. NYT, 29, 28 August 1965.
4. ‘‘Black Natchez,’’ transcript.
5. Charles Evers, Evers, 132.
6. ‘‘Black Natchez,’’ transcript.
7. Stokes interview by author.
8. Ibid.
9. NYT, 29, 30 August 1965; Stokes interview by author. The Natchez riot was
not the ﬁrst incident of black civil violence in the Mississippi movement. One of
the rare integration efforts during the lunch counter sit-in period was on Sunday,
24 April 1960, when blacks tried to integrate the Gulf Coast beach in Biloxi.
When a white mob attacked protesters during the day, the black community
quickly abandoned the nonviolence that protest organizers prescribed and


--- PAGE 325 ---
316 Notes to Pages 187–89
launched its own form of collective protest. Before sundown, 200–300 blacks
roamed the streets of Biloxi, throwing bottles and bricks at passing cars. After
midnight, shooting broke out between blacks and whites, wounding 2 whites
and 8 blacks. Police arrested several whites and blacks for ﬁghting. Police Chief
Herbert McDonnell closed all white and black bars (though liquor was illegal
anyway). The incident portended the coming conﬂict between nonviolence and
the political instincts of the Mississippi black working class. Johnston, Missis-
sippi’s Deﬁant Years, 105–11.
10. Stokes interview by author.
11. NYT, 29 August 1965.
12. Ibid.
13. Ibid.
14. The Metcalfe bombing was not an isolated event. A wave of racist violence
and intimidation swept across the Deep South beginning on 20 August, when
Thomas L. Coleman, a member of a prominent Lowndes County family, blasted
his shotgun at two civil rights workers in Hayneville, Ala., killing Jonathan Dan-
iels, a 26-year-old white seminarian. Two days later, three white men wounded a
Unitarian minister in a similar shotgun attack as he stood outside his apart-
ment house in Jackson, Miss. The bloody assaults were accompanied by a wild-
ﬁre of cross burnings, including three crosses torched in Philadelphia, Miss.—
apparently in protest of plans to desegregate city schools. Klan passions had
been inﬂamed the previous week when ofﬁcials desegregated Neshoba Central
School just outside Philadelphia. Sobel, Civil Rights , 360–61; NYT, 30 August
1965.
15. Economic, social, and political facts on Natchez are drawn from SNCC
Research, ‘‘Adams County, Mississippi,’’ 25 October 1965, Atlanta, Ga., Pincus
Collection, ARC.
16. Young interview by author.
17. SNCC Research, ‘‘Adams County.’’
18. Untitled report on Natchez Political Groups, ca. 1965, Pincus Collection,
ARC. Many young blacks in Natchez were predisposed to Evers’s tactical use of
force. The Klan threatened ﬁlmmakers Ed Pincus and David Neuman when they
ﬁrst arrived in July 1965. Without hesitation, four young black boys appointed
themselves guardians, and unbeknownst to the ﬁlmmakers, perched on their
roof all night with riﬂes and Molotov cocktails. The boys were unsure how to
ignite the fuses on their coke bottle bombs and ended up littering the yard with
unsuccessful experiments. When the ﬁlmmakers awoke the next morning, they
were shocked to ﬁnd a yard full of Molotov cocktails. They thanked the boys for
their concern but convinced them to station their guard farther down the street.
Percy Shain, ‘‘Story of Change in ‘Black Natchez,’ ’’ Boston Globe, 21 March 1976.
19. ‘‘Black Natchez,’’ transcript.
20. NYT, 4 September 1965.
21. Ibid.


--- PAGE 326 ---
Notes to Pages 190–97 317
22. NYT, 4, 9 September 1965.
23. NYT, 4, 9 September 1965.
24. Stokes interview by author.
25. ‘‘Natchez Deacons Meeting,’’ ca. July 1965, audiotape reels 43–44, Pincus
Collection, ARC; ‘‘Black Natchez,’’ transcript.
26. ‘‘Black Natchez,’’ transcript.
27. Ibid.
28. The following quotations from the meeting are from ‘‘Natchez Deacons
Meeting,’’ 10 September 1965, audiotape reels 178–79, Pincus Collection, ARC,
and ‘‘Black Natchez,’’ transcript.
29. There are obvious similarities between African American and white beliefs
about masculine honor. By linking death with honor and freedom, Jackson was
propounding a notion of masculine honor identical to that held a century before
by slave masters. According to Kenneth S. Greenberg ( Honor and Slavery ), the
willingness to risk death for freedom was central to the code of masculine honor
for slave owners. Slave owners believed that slaves could never be men because
they were unwilling to risk their lives for freedom. The idea of ‘‘slavery as an
alternative to death reached deeply into the abstract thought of men of honor,’’
and one of ‘‘the distinguishing features of slaves was their inability to confront
death without fear or submission. Men of honor believed that every slave had
chosen a life of humiliation over an honorable death’’ (pp. 100, 107, 98).
30. Young interview by author.
31. ‘‘Natchez Hurries Bi-Racial Talks as Fear Grips City,’’ Jet, 16 September
1965, 14–15; LW, 11 September 1965; NYT, 4 September 1965.
32. NYT, 3, 4 September 1965; Young interview by author.
33. NYT, 8 October 1965; Stokes interview by author.
34. NYT, 13, 14 October 1965; ‘‘Natchez Crisis Eases a Bit; City Fathers Still
Evasive,’’ Jet, 28 October 1965, 6–7; Francis Ward, ‘‘Economic Squeeze High-
lights,’’ Jet, 4 November 1965, 16–20.
35. ‘‘Black Natchez,’’ transcript.
36. Ibid.
37. Ibid.; Laue, Direct Action and Desegregation , 85–86 (King); ‘‘Black
Natchez,’’ transcript (local woman, Ladner); Dittmer, Local People, 210 (Dennis).
SNCC consistently employed the federal interventionist strategy throughout the
civil rights movement. According to Clayborne Carson ( In Struggle, 37, 128), its
reliance on the liberal–federal government coalition did not change until after
the 1964 Democratic convention. As the Ladner and Guyot exchanges demon-
strate, in some communities SNCC activists continued to adhere to the interven-
tionist strategy well into 1965. In 1965 SNCC joined the Selma campaign, whose
explicit purpose was to achieve federal legislation. In Selma, King exhorted his
followers to, as Robert Weisbrot ( Freedom Bound, 132) writes, ‘‘ﬁll the jails and
‘arouse the federal government’ to assure the ballot.’’ On the interventionist
strategy in the Greenwood campaign, see Umoja, ‘‘Eye for an Eye,’’ 107. John


--- PAGE 327 ---
318 Notes to Pages 198–201
Dittmer (Local People, 199, 209) writes that by 1963 COFO activists had decided
that the movement could not make substantive gains as long as ‘‘white hoodlums
and police could attack black organizers with impunity’’ and that this could be
accomplished only by federal intervention. Opposition to Bob Moses’ Freedom
Summer proposal came primarily from those activists who favored local organiz-
ing and community empowerment over the interventionist strategy. On opposi-
tion to Freedom Summer, see Cobb and Peacock interviews by Dent. Cobb, a
SNCC leader, feared that the white volunteers would ‘‘take over’’ by virtue of
their skills and contacts, and the movement would come to be deﬁned as ‘‘white
people doing good works.’’ Peacock also saw the Freedom Summer strategy as
primarily an attempt to secure federal intervention and viewed the project as a
major turning point for SNCC—a move away from ‘‘mass education’’ for eco-
nomic power. Voting rights were illusory: ‘‘After you got the vote, you didn’t have
nothing . . . you had to have some economic power.’’
38. ‘‘Natchez Crisis Eases a Bit; City Fathers Still Evasive,’’ Jet, 28 October 1965;
Young interview by author; NYT, 31 October 1966.
39. Young interview by author.
40. Ibid.
41. Group size is drawn from Young and Stokes interviews by author.
42. Ibid. Early FBI intelligence on the Deacons substantially underestimated
the organization’s reach—e.g., the FBI knew virtually nothing about the Natchez
Deacons until 1966. See SAC Jackson to Director, 25 October 1965, Deacons
ﬁle 157-2466-78, and Director to SAC Jackson, 11 January 1966, Deacons ﬁle
157-2466-105, FBI Files.
43. Young and Stokes interviews by author.
44. On fees and dues, see Investigative Report, Deacons for Defense and Jus-
tice, 17 August 1965, New Orleans, Deacons ﬁle 157-2466-41, FBI Files.
45. Director to SAC Jackson, 11 January 1966, Deacons ﬁle 157-2466-105, FBI
Files.
46. Stokes interview by author.
47. Ibid.
48. Young interview by author.
49. Stokes interview by author.
50. Ibid. The relationship of violence and self-respect—and the emphasis on
psychological transformation in social revolution—was ﬁrst explored by Fanon
in Wretched of the Earth  (see esp. the chapter, ‘‘Concerning Violence’’). Fanon’s
argument, often criticized as nihilistic and reckless, goes well beyond self-
defense to include therapeutic revolutionary violence. But his central idea of the
need for social movements to extirpate internal psychological demons—to liber-
ate consciousness as a precondition of political liberation—is useful in analyzing
the civil rights movement. The Deacons employed militant rhetoric and exem-
plary courage to overcome fear and resignation. This psychological liberation
was imperative, even if it had to be done at the expense of destroying alli-


--- PAGE 328 ---
Notes to Pages 201–6 319
ances with liberals and the government. The teachings of Black Muslim leader
Elijah Muhammad framed this theory of social death and rebirth in the bibli-
cal imagery of Lazarus. According to Muhammad, slavery and segregation had
killed the black man ‘‘mentally, culturally, spiritually, economically, politically,
and morally—transforming him into a ‘Negro.’ ’’ The ‘‘Negro’’ remained in the
graveyard ‘‘of segregation and second-class citizenship’’ until Elijah Muhammad
was summoned to lift Lazarus from the grave. On ‘‘social death,’’ see Patter-
son, Slavery and Social Death ; on Black Muslim teachings and social death, see
Cleaver, Soul on Ice, 91–94.
51. Stokes and Young interviews by author.
52. Burris interview by author.
53. Stokes and Young interviews by author.
54. Ibid. That Stokes, Kirkpatrick, and many Deacons were religious men
raises the question about the conﬂict between black Christian paciﬁsm and black
masculine honor. The black church played a progressive role in sustaining black
resistance and culture, but it also taught the Christian doctrine of ‘‘turn the other
cheek,’’ an idea clearly at odds with the Deacons’ belief in self-defense. In con-
trast, the fraternal orders that the Deacons belonged to did not promote Chris-
tian paciﬁsm and were, in some respects, a retreat from the asceticism, humility,
and self-restraint associated with the black church. Masculine honor and Chris-
tianity also clashed in the white southern experience. Ted Ownby ( Subduing
Satan, 12) writes that Christian evangelicalism in the nineteenth century ‘‘de-
manded self-control, humility in manner, and harmony in personal relations’’
whereas southern ‘‘honor demanded self-assertiveness, aggressiveness, and
competitiveness,’’ all of which violated the norms of evangelical morality. There
would be some value in a study of how working-class African American men
reconciled their own notions of honor with the teachings of the black church.
55. ‘‘Black Natchez,’’ transcript.
56. Stokes interview by author.
57. Ibid.
58. Director to SAC Jackson, 11 January 1966, Deacons ﬁle 157-2466-105, FBI
Files; Stokes interview by author.
59. Director to SAC Jackson, 11 January 1966, Deacons ﬁle 157-2466-105, FBI
Files; Stokes interview by author.
60. Ward, ‘‘Economic Squeeze Highlights’’; NYT, 4 December 1965; LW, 11
December 1965.
61. Ward, ‘‘Economic Squeeze Highlights’’; NYT, 4 December 1965; LW, 11
December 1965.
62. On the ill-fated Jackson protest campaign in the wake of the Medgar Evers
shooting, see Dittmer, Local People, 166–68; on the Clarksdale defeat, see p. 177;
and on the McComb campaign, see p. 114.
63. Evers’s reputation took a serious blow with the release of the Sovereignty
Commission Papers, which revealed his extensive cooperation with the commis-


--- PAGE 329 ---
320 Notes to Pages 206–9
sion. Dittmer (pp. 360–61) casts the Natchez campaign in a less positive light,
arguing that it secured reforms that were ‘‘of little direct beneﬁt’’ to the black
community. He also concludes that ‘‘the emergence of Charles Evers was a set-
back for the Mississippi movement’’ (p. 178). The 3 December agreement did not
end the movement in Natchez. Picketing at stores continued, and on 22 Decem-
ber a ﬁght between a black picketer and a white man resulted in charges of police
brutality. The following day Evers announced that the boycott was in effect
again. It formally ended on 3 March 1966, when the city agreed to ﬁre two
policemen and reinstate several black store employees who had been dismissed
in retaliation for the renewed boycott. The Natchez Deacons continued to meet
and maintain activities through 1968. The chapter survives at the time of this
writing as the ‘‘Natchez Sportsmen Club,’’ having made a peaceful transition to a
hunting club.
64. On Port Gibson, see Investigative Report, Deacons for Defense and Justice,
New Orleans, 27 November 1967, Deacons ﬁle 157-2466-250, FBI Files; Stokes
interview by author; and Charles Evers, Evers, 134.
65. Stokes and Young interviews by author. The Hattiesburg and Laurel chap-
ters are documented in Umoja, ‘‘Eye for an Eye,’’ 221–22.
66. Walker interview by author.
67. George Haynes, ‘‘Opinion of the Court,’’ ‘‘Final Decree,’’ Claiborne Hard-
ware v. NAACP (hereafter cited as Claiborne Hardware v. NAACP); Walker inter-
view by author. A thorough study of the Port Gibson campaign can be found in
Crosby, ‘‘Common Courtesy.’’
68. Crosby, ‘‘Common Courtesy,’’ 230.
69. Walker interview by author. Walker was joined by Calvin Williams and
Julius Warner, who was later elected chapter president.
70. Ibid.
71. Ibid.
72. Claiborne Hardware v. NAACP ; Walker interview by author (Evers quota-
tion).
73. Claiborne Hardware v. NAACP.
74. Walker interview by author. The Deacons also encouraged rumors about
their boycott enforcement actions to bolster their reputation. See Crosby, ‘‘Com-
mon Courtesy,’’ 234.
75. Claiborne Hardware v. NAACP. On the arrests, see Crosby, ‘‘Common Cour-
tesy,’’ 319. Although the sheriff ’s ofﬁce could never prove that the three Deacons
were involved in the shooting, they did make a major ﬁnd in Scott’s car that
night. Scott was carrying minutes of chapter meetings and a complete member-
ship list of forty-two Deacons. The incident was a convincing argument for the
secrecy practiced by most other Deacons chapters. By keeping written records,
the Port Gibson chapter had exposed itself to potential retaliation by police and
racist forces. Indeed, the Citizens Councils of America subsequently published
the names of all of the Deacons. See Claiborne Hardware v. NAACP, and ‘‘Blacks


--- PAGE 330 ---
Notes to Pages 209–13 321
Terrorized into Boycotting White Stores,’’ Citizen, November 1976, 4–14. The FBI
reported that ‘‘members of the DDJ [Deacons for Defense and Justice] organiza-
tion are again active in Port Gibson, Mississippi’’ and that ‘‘Negroes wearing
black hats were on the streets on 14 January 1967, harassing other Negroes.’’
Investigative Report, Deacons for Defense and Justice, New Orleans, 27 Novem-
ber 1967, Deacons ﬁle 157-2466-250, FBI Files.
76. Walker interview by author.
77. Ibid.
78. Ibid.
79. Crosby, ‘‘Common Courtesy,’’ 232, 250; NAACP v. Claiborne Hardware Co. ,
United States Reports 458 (October 1981): 886–940.
80. For many years Evers was dogged with accusations that he had cooperated
with Mississippi authorities. The release of the state’s ﬁles on the Sovereignty
Commission—Mississippi’s segregation spy agency—conﬁrmed that Evers had
cooperated with the agency, though he defended his actions as an effort to pro-
tect the movement. On Evers’s interactions with the Sovereignty Commission,
see Crosby, ‘‘Common Courtesy,’’ 316–44; on the 1969 shoot-out, see Crosby,
400–413.
81. SAC Jackson to Director, 29 June 1967, Deacons ﬁle 157-2466-234, FBI Files;
Ferguson interview by author. For a personal autobiographical viewpoint on
Wilkinson County’s black community, see Moody, Coming of Age in Mississippi.
82. Ferguson and Burkes interviews by author; SAC Jackson to Director, 29
June 1967, Deacons ﬁle 157-2466-234, FBI Files.
83. SAC Jackson to Director, 29 June 1967, FBI, Deacons ﬁle 157-2466-234, and
6 September 1967, Deacons ﬁle (unnumbered), FBI Files; Ferguson interview by
author; Investigative Report, Deacons for Defense and Justice, New Orleans, 27
November 1967, Deacons ﬁle 157-2466-250, FBI Files.
84. NYT, 5 September 1967; Ferguson interview by author.
85. Investigative Report, Deacons for Defense and Justice, New Orleans, 27
November 1967, Deacons ﬁle 157-2466-250, FBI Files.
86. SAC Jackson to Director, 6 September 1967, Deacons ﬁle (unnumbered),
FBI Files; NYT, 5 September 1967.
87. Stokes interview by author; NYT, 25 February 1973.
88. Recruiting forays are referred to in Thomas, Burris, and Austin interviews
by author.
89. Burris and Austin interviews by author.
90. Investigative Report, Deacons for Defense and Justice, New Orleans, 10
January 1966, Deacons ﬁle 157-2466-104, FBI Files; Austin and Burris interviews
by author; Austin interview by Hall.
91. Carson, In Struggle, 164; Burris and Austin interviews by author; Investiga-
tive Report, Deacons for Defense and Justice, New Orleans, 28 March 1966,
Deacons ﬁle 157-2466-120; SAC Birmingham to Director, 2 September 1965, Dea-
cons ﬁle 157-2466-56, and 3 September 1965, ﬁle 157-2466-576—all in FBI Files.


--- PAGE 331 ---
322 Notes to Pages 214–20
92. On Tuskegee, see SAC Mobile to Director, 13 September 1965, Deacons ﬁle
(unnumbered), FBI Files. On North Carolina, see SAC Charlotte to Director, 1
October 1965, Deacons ﬁle 157-2466-68, FBI Files.
93. On South Carolina, see SAC Savannah to Director, 25 September 1965,
Deacons ﬁle (unnumbered), 26 November 1965, Deacons ﬁle 157-246-93, and 22
September 1965, Deacons ﬁle 157-731, FBI Files. The Klan incident is cited in SAC
Columbia to Director, [13 April 1966], Deacons ﬁle (unnumbered), and Frazier
and Riley interviews by author. Blacks in the lowlands of South Carolina en-
gaged extensively in armed self-defense in Reidsville and Dorchester, accord-
ing to Victoria Delee (interview by author), a black veteran of the civil rights
movement.
94. SAC Mobile to Director, 13 September 1965, Deacons ﬁle (unnumbered);
SAC Savannah to Director, 15 September 1965, Deacons ﬁle 157-2466-58, and 22
September 1965, ﬁle 157-2466-65—all in FBI Files.
95. Moore interview by author.
Chapter Twelve
1. Thomas interview by author. It was not Thomas’s and the Deacons’ ﬁrst
contact with the Muslims. The Muslims had a strong presence in Monroe, La.,
and frequently traveled to Jonesboro to sell Muhammad Speaks . When the Na-
tion of Islam group was harassed by police in Monroe, Thomas led a delegation
of Jonesboro Deacons to confront the mayor and police chief. The Muslims were
also actively recruiting in Bogalusa as early as 1965.
2. Thomas interview by author.
3. Ibid.
4. Austin interview by author.
5. Ibid.
6. The Lomax windfall gave rise to internal bickering and recriminations about
how the funds were used. See Austin interview by author.
7. SAC San Francisco to Director, 21 September 1965, Deacons ﬁle 157-2466-67
(article), FBI Files; Thomas interview by author.
8. Larry Still, ‘‘Talk Is of a Revolution—Complete with Mixed Blood,’’ Jet, 28
November 1963, 14–19.
9. SAC Detroit to Director, 12 August 1965, Detroit ‘‘Appearance of Robert
Hicks,’’ Deacons ﬁle 157-2466-40, FBI Files.
10. Ibid.
11. SAC Los Angeles to Director, 29 September 1965, Deacons ﬁle 157-2466-69,
FBI Files.
12. Ibid.
13. One of the leftist support groups was the Committee to Aid the Deacons;
see SAC San Antonio to Director, 9 August 1965, Deacons ﬁle 157-2466-35, and 10
August 1965, ﬁle 157-2466-42, FBI Files.


--- PAGE 332 ---
Notes to Pages 220–24 323
14. Austin interview by author.
15. On the Deacons’ Castro money connection, see Director to SAC New Or-
leans, 14 March 1966, Deacons ﬁle 157-2466-115, and SAC New Orleans to Direc-
tor, 23 March 1966, ﬁle 157-2466-117, FBI Files.
16. Phyllis Fishberg, ‘‘Klan Stopped Cold When Masses Fight Back,’’ Workers
World, 29 April 1965; ‘‘Black Armed Groups Spread across South,’’ Workers
World, 10 June 1965.
17. SAC New York to Director, 28 October 1965, Deacons ﬁle 157-2466-80, FBI
Files; Workers World, 14, 28 October 1965.
18. On LeSeur, see SAC New York to Director, 30 June 1966, Deacons ﬁle
157-2466-140, FBI Files. The Labadie Collection at the University of Michigan has
one item of correspondence from LeSeur written on stationary from the ‘‘Dea-
cons for Defense and Justice—New York Chapter.’’ See LeSeur to unidentiﬁed
correspondent, 7 January 1966, Staten Island, New York, Labadie Collection,
University of Michigan Library, Ann Arbor. Thanks to Caroline Melish for this
document. On New York fund-raising, see SAC New York to Director, 26 October
1965, Deacons ﬁle 157-2466-81, and 24 November 1965, ﬁle 157-2466-90; Inves-
tigative Report, Deacons for Defense and Justice, New Orleans, 28 March 1966,
Deacons ﬁle 157-2466-120—all in FBI Files; and Workers World, 28 October, 11
November 1965.
19. Ahmad, History of RAM, 6–8.
20. Ibid., 10–11, 14–15, 20–21.
21. Ibid., 20.
22. Ahmad, History of RAM , 18 (Crusader article); Airtel to Director from SAC
WFO, 9 September 1965, Deacons ﬁle and enclosure LHM, ‘‘Organization for
Black Power (OBP)’’ Washington, D.C., 9 September 1965, FBI, Deacons ﬁle
originally numbered 157-3022-156, FBI Files.
23. Ahmad, History of RAM , 15, 20, 28; Forman, Making of Black Revolution-
aries, 374–75.
24. NYT, 13 March 1964; Sobel, Civil Rights , 283–84; ‘‘North’s First Rights
Martyr Made in Bloody Cleveland,’’ Jet, 23 April 1964, 16–20; Ahmad, History of
RAM, 28; ‘‘Form Riﬂe Clubs, Militant Detroiter Urges,’’ Jet, 16 July 1964, 7.
25. Collins and Thomas interviews by author.
26. On Boston, see SAC Boston to Director, 6 October 1965, Deacons ﬁle
157-2466-70, and 3 November 1965, ﬁle 157-2466-85; Investigative Report, Dea-
cons for Defense and Justice, New Orleans, 22 November 1966, Deacons ﬁle
157-2466-176, and 27 November 1967, ﬁle 157-2466-250—all in FBI Files. On
Cleveland, see Investigative Report, Deacons for Defense and Justice, New Or-
leans, 28 March 1966, Deacons ﬁle 157-2466-120, and 10 January 1966, ﬁle
157-2466-104, FBI Files. The Cleveland chapter became a target for the only
COINTELPRO action against the Deacons. See SAC Cleveland to Director,
21 April 1966, Deacons ﬁle unnumbered, and Investigative Report, New Orleans,
21 July 1966, Deacons ﬁle 157-2466-152, FBI Files. On Philadelphia, see Director


--- PAGE 333 ---
324 Notes to Pages 224–30
to SACs Newark, New Orleans, Philadelphia, and WFO, 20 April 1966, Deacons
ﬁle (unnumbered); SAC Philadelphia to Director, 17 April 1966, Deacons ﬁle
157-2466-127; SAC WFO to Director, 29 April 1966, Deacons ﬁle 157-2466-134;
Director to SACs, Chicago, New Orleans, and Philadelphia, 14 September 1967,
Deacons ﬁle 157-2466-241—all in FBI Files; and Philadelphia Enquirer , 17 April
1965. On Washington, D.C., see Jet, 21 April 1966, 5; SAC WFO to Director, 31
March 1966, LHM, Deacons ﬁle 157-2466-121; and Investigative Report, Deacons
for Defense and Justice, New Orleans, 28 March 1966, Deacons ﬁle 157-2466-120,
and 21 July 1966, ﬁle 157-2466-152—all in FBI Files.
Hobson never formed a chapter and only spread the rumor to gain political
leverage. A Deacons chapter was successfully organized in Newark—apparently
without the knowledge of the national Deacons. See SAC Philadelphia to Direc-
tor, 18 April 1966, Deacons ﬁle 157-2466-128, and SAC Newark to Director, 25 May
1966, Deacons ﬁle 157-2466-136, FBI Files.
27. Chicago Daily News, 15 October 1965.
28. Viorst, Fire in the Streets, 321.
29. ‘‘Militant Negroes Here Forming Armed Unit to Fight the Klan,’’ Chicago
Daily News, 15 October 1965.
30. Ibid.
31. ‘‘Rights Leaders Reject Plan to Start Deacons,’’ Chicago Defender, 18 Octo-
ber 1965.
32. SAC Chicago to Director, 2 November 1965, Deacons ﬁle 157-2466-84, FBI
Files. This document contains a complete transcript of the WVON program.
33. Ibid.
34. Rogers interview by author.
35. Thomas interview by author.
36. Thomas and Rogers interviews by author.
37. LHM, 28 February 1966, Deacons ﬁle no. 157-2466-113, FBI Files. Thomas
(interview by author) conﬁrmed these and the following statements taken from
the FBI.
38. Ibid.
39. Ibid.
40. Investigative Report, Deacons for Defense and Justice, New Orleans, 21
July 1966, Deacons ﬁle 157-2466-152, FBI Files.
41. Ibid.; Thomas interview by author.
42. Slightly different versions of the news stories of 5 and 6 April were pub-
lished in different editions of the Chicago Daily News : Quoted material here is
gleaned from 6 April 1966 and articles quoted in SAC Chicago to Director, 5 April
1966, Deacons ﬁle 157-2466-123, and 13 April 1966, ﬁle 157-2466-125, FBI Files.
43. Chicago Daily News, 6 April 1966.
44. Ibid.
45. Chicago Daily News , 8 April 1966; Hicks interview by author; ‘‘Deacons
Come to Chicago for Money and Muscle,’’ Jet, 21 April 1966, 5–6.


--- PAGE 334 ---
Notes to Pages 230–36 325
46. ‘‘The Deacons Go North,’’ Newsweek, 2 May 1966, 20–21.
47. Ibid. On the Deacons’ Chicago tour, see ‘‘Deacons Come to Chicago for
Money and Muscle,’’ 5.
48. SAC Chicago to Director, 8 June 1966, Deacons ﬁle 157-2466-137; Investiga-
tive Report, Deacons for Defense and Justice, New Orleans, 21 July 1966, Dea-
cons ﬁle 157-2466-152—all in FBI Files.
49. On the Deacons and the Harvey incident, see SAC Chicago to Director, 10
August 1966, Deacons ﬁle 157-2466-158, FBI Files.
50. SAC Chicago to Director, 22, 29 August 1966, Deacon ﬁles (unnumbered),
FBI Files.
51. Fred Kirkpatrick, one of the Deacons’ founders from Jonesboro, worked
closely with King beginning in 1966 and eventually worked for SCLC while he
was still active in the Chicago Deacons; see Kirkpatrick interview by Hall. The
FBI reported that approximately forty Deacons guarded King during a speech in
Chicago on 29 July 1966. See Investigative Report, Deacons for Defense and
Justice, 22 November 1966, Deacons ﬁle 157-2466-176, FBI Files. On Deacons
secretly guarding King, see interview with John Harris, a Chicago chapter mem-
ber, by author. Harris’s account is conﬁrmed by Bennett Johnson, a major ﬁgure
in Chicago black politics, in Bennett Johnson interview by author.
52. SAC Chicago to Director, 7 November 1966, Deacons ﬁle (unnumbered),
FBI Files.
53. Investigative Report, Deacons for Defense and Justice, New Orleans, 27 No-
vember 1967, Deacons ﬁle 157-2466-250, FBI Files; Thomas interview by author.
Chapter Thirteen
1. NOT-P, 25 July 1967.
2. Ibid.; Chicago Daily News, 6 April 1966 (Young).
3. Viorst, Fire in the Streets, 334 (Rustin). On the Watts riot and Bogalusa, see
Oberschall, Social Conﬂict, 332.
4. Viorst, Fire in the Streets (ﬁrst rioter, writer, 341; second rioter, 338). A study
of opinions of Watts residents in the riot curfew area is found in Tomlinson, ‘‘Riot
Ideology.’’ The study indicated that 15 percent of the community participated in
the riot, 50 percent ‘‘express[ed] a sympathetic understanding of the views of the
supporters,’’ 62 percent viewed the riot as a ‘‘protest,’’ 56 percent thought that it
had purpose, and 58 percent expected it to have ‘‘favorable effects’’ (p. 418).
5. Lentz, Symbols, 17, 186.
6. Lawson quoted in Estes, ‘‘ ‘ i am a man !,’ ’’ Ella Baker leaves little doubt that
nonviolence was imported by northern paciﬁsts and leftists. In 1955 Baker, Bay-
ard Rustin, Stanley Levison, and others formed ‘‘In Friendship,’’ a liberal–labor
coalition to aid school integration in the South. In Friendship became the princi-
pal organization fostering nonviolence as the strategy for the modern civil rights
movement in the South. Baker said that discussions between members of the


--- PAGE 335 ---
326 Notes to Pages 237–42
Fellowship for Reconciliation and Martin Luther King ‘‘strengthened whatever
germ of an idea about a nonviolent movement Martin had.’’ Rustin’s ‘‘inﬂuence
became paramount’’ in what Baker said was the ‘‘articulation of the nonviolent
concept coming out of Montgomery.’’ The outcome of a series of meetings in
Levison’s kitchen with Baker and Rustin was the ‘‘creation of the Southern Chris-
tian Leadership Conference, SCLC.’’ When asked if the ‘‘genesis of the idea for
SCLC’’ came out of the North, Baker said, ‘‘That’s correct.’’ Grant, Ella Baker ,
102–3. Levison, who eventually became Martin Luther King’s closest adviser, was
a major ﬁgure in the Communist Party in the early 1950s. On Levison, see Barron,
Operation SOLO, 263–66, and Garrow, ‘‘The FBI and Martin Luther King,’’ Atlan-
tic Monthly, 80–86, 88. On the Montgomery Bus Boycott’s middle-class origins,
see Robinson, Montgomery Bus Boycott , esp. 7–8. The boycott was initiated and
controlled by the black middle class, but the rank and ﬁle was the working class.
There had been incidents of deﬁance on Montgomery buses before Rosa Parks,
but E. D. Nixon and the Women’s Political Committee selected Parks as the test
case because her genteel demeanor and respectable profession made her accept-
able to the black middle class.
7. Clurman interview by anonymous. Clurman’s support for nonviolence was
strictly tactical: ‘‘I think when homes get shot into, and people go around telling
them they should be nonviolent—I think they should shoot back.’’
8. MLK, Speech at Frogmore, 11 November 1966, box 11966, MLK Papers, MLK
Center for Nonviolent Social Change, Atlanta (hereafter cited as ‘‘Frogmore
speech’’).
9. BDN, 12, 16 October 1965.
10. BDN, 18 October 1965; Hill, ‘‘Character of Black Politics,’’ 86.
11. NOT-P, 20 October 1965.
12. LW, 6 November 1965; NOT-P, 21 October 1965.
13. LW, 6 November 1965; NOT-P, 21 October 1965.
14. NOT-P, 7, 30 December 1965.
15. NOT-P, 7, 30 December 1965; BDN, 2 November 1965; Austin interview by
author; NOT-P, 29 December 1965.
16. NOT-P, 28, 29, 30 December 1965.
17. NOT-P, 21 November, 8 December 1965; BDN, 5 December 1965.
18. ‘‘Bogalusa Voters League Boycott List,’’ n.d., box 1, folder 6, CORE, ‘‘Boga-
lusa, Louisiana, Records, 1965–1966,’’ CORE (SHSW); BDN, 5 December, 30 Jan-
uary 1966; LW, 6 February 1966.
19. BDN, 7 June 1966.
20. BDN, 3 September 1965.
21. NOT-P, 8, 9, 10, 12, 13 September, 4 December 1965. Christmas admitted
that the OKKKK had maintained a ‘‘bureau of investigations’’ and a secret
‘‘wrecking crew’’—which he characterized as peacekeepers. ‘‘I guess you might
call it the police force.’’ NOT-P, 8 September 1965.


--- PAGE 336 ---
Notes to Pages 242–49 327
22. NOT-P, 4 (Farmer), 23 December 1965; BDN, 2 February 1966.
23. John Doar’s report (Doar and Landsberg, ‘‘Performance of the FBI’’),
though an apologia for the FBI and the Justice Department, gives a good over-
view of the department’s dismal record. In response to the reign of Klan terror in
southwestern Mississippi, Doar assigned nine lawyers to investigate the beatings
and bombings; they failed to bring a single legal action. As early as 17 July 1964, J.
Edgar Hoover had sent the attorney general a list of Klan members in Mississippi
and a list of law enforcement ofﬁcials who were known or suspected Klan mem-
bers; the Justice Department failed to follow up with any criminal or civil actions.
On the Klan’s explosive growth in 1964–65, see Doar and Landsberg, ‘‘Perfor-
mance of the FBI,’’ 929–31; Dittmer, Local People , 215–17, 305–6; Newton, In-
visible Empire, 159, 177; and U.S. House, Present-Day Ku Klux Klan.
24. NOT-P, 25 January 1965. The HUAC hearing resulted in three volumes of
testimony and reports, contained in U.S. House, Activities of Ku Klux Klan  and
Present-Day Ku Klux Klan.
25. The Mississippi panic ﬁnds its echoes in the slave revolt panics that periodi-
cally swept across the South in the nineteenth century. In Mississippi the para-
noia was heightened by emancipation, as in the case of the 1865 insurrection
panic. See Wharton, The Negro in Mississippi, 218. In the 1940s similar rumors of
murderous black conspiracies were rampant, including the Eleanor Clubs panic.
See Odum, Race and Rumors of Race.
26. ‘‘Miss. KKK Scared Stiff: Say Black Muslims Hide Guns in Graves, Cofﬁns,’’
Jet, 2 December 1965, 6–8; Thomas interview by author.
27. ‘‘Miss. KKK Scared Stiff.’’
28. Ibid.
29. LW, 29 January, 6 February 1966; BDN, 28, 30 (Young) January 1966; NOT-
P, 29 January 1966 (Sims). The Klan did launch a rash of cross burnings in
January 1966 in response to the HUAC hearings.
30. Thomas interview by author.
31. There are several differing accounts of this meeting. I have combined
Thomas’s recollections with Garrow, Bearing the Cross, 477; Oates, Let the Trum-
pet Sound, 397–98; and Sellers, River of No Return, 162.
32. Dittmer, Local People, 393.
33. ‘‘Meredith Threat ‘To Arm’ Not the Answer, Says Dr. King,’’ Jet, 23 June
1966, 16–19.
34. Interview in Raines, My Soul Is Rested , 416–23 (Sims, 422); Thomas inter-
view by author.
35. NYT, 14 June 1966.
36. Thomas interview by author; NYT, 22 June 1966.
37. Thomas interview by author; ‘‘Dr. King Scores Deacons,’’ NYT, 22 June
1966; LW, 17 July 1965 (King).
38. MLK, ‘‘Nonviolence: The Only Road To Freedom,’’ Ebony, October 1966,


--- PAGE 337 ---
328 Notes to Pages 250–57
27–30. King also had harsh words for Charles Evers’s support of self-defense on
the Meredith March. See MLK, Frogmore speech.
39. MLK, Frogmore speech.
40. Carmichael and Hamilton, Black Power, ix, 44.
41. BDN, 16 September 1966; NOT-P, 16 September 1966.
42. BDN, 16 September 1966. In July 1967 City Attorney Rester and nine other
men were charged with littering for throwing Klan leaﬂets on lawns. See BDN, 28
July 1967, and NOT-P, 22 December 1966.
43. Burris interview by author; BDN, 16 September 1966; NOT-P, 21 September
1966; Sobel, Civil Rights, 407.
44. NOT-P, 11, 15 August 1967.
45. NOT-P, 16, 17 August 1967.
46. NOT-P, 18, 19 August 1967.
47. NOT-P, 21 August 1967.
48. Ibid.
49. ‘‘A. Z. Young: A Leader’s Legacy,’’ NOT-P, 7 December 1993.
50. Lisa Frazier, ‘‘Thank you, Mr. Young,’’ NOT-P, 6 December 1993.
51. On Kirkpatrick in Houston, see Justice, Violence in the City , 24, 35–37, 119,
128–29. Thanks to Annie Pearl Kirkpatrick and Charlie Fenton for background on
Kirkpatrick’s life after the movement.
52. Thomas interview by author; Tyson, Radio Free Dixie, 292–94.
53. Thomas interview by author.
54. Ibid.
55. Ibid.
56. Ibid.
57. Ibid.
58. SAC Chicago to Director, 19 July 1966, Deacons ﬁle 157-2466-153; Director
to SAC New Orleans, 12 October 1966, unrecorded; SAC Hong Kong to Director,
20, 28 July 1967, Deacons ﬁle (unnumbered)—all in FBI Files; Robert F. Williams
and Thomas interviews by author.
59. Williams’s ﬁnancial records and testimony are found in U.S. Senate, Hear-
ings before the Subcommittee to Investigate the Administration of the Internal
Security Act; payments to Thomas for RAM are documented in pt. 3, 247, 252.
60. Collins interview by author.
61. Investigative Report, Deacons for Defense and Justice, New Orleans, 27
November 1967, FBI, Deacons ﬁle 157-2466-250; Thomas interview by author.
62. Thomas’s chance meeting with Jim Brown placed the celebrity under
added FBI scrutiny. A memorandum from the Cleveland SAC detailed Brown’s
current movie production and included a transcript of a speech Brown gave
in January during a ‘‘Jim Brown Farewell Night’’ at the Cleveland Arena. See
SAC Cleveland to Director, 28 February 1967, Deacons ﬁle 157-2466-200, FBI
Files.
63. Sims interview by Price.


--- PAGE 338 ---
Notes to Pages 258–60 329
Conclusion
1. Dr. J. L. Garret, conversation with the author.
2. Sidney Hook maintained that nonviolence is never effective by itself: that
the threat of violence is what inﬂuences those in power, and reform is futile
without violence. The popular myth that Gandhi led a nonviolent anticolonial
revolution in India is belied by the violence that surrounded his movement.
Gandhi constantly launched campaigns he could not control. For example, dur-
ing the boycott of the visit of the prince of Wales in 1921, Gandhi’s followers
rioted in Bombay while chanting their leader’s name. In 1922 Gandhi called off a
noncooperation campaign when volunteers attacked a police station and killed
twenty-one police and Chaukidars. Hook cited in Aiyar, ‘‘Anatomy of Mass Vio-
lence in India,’’ 28. See also Phadke, ‘‘Historical Background of Mass Violence in
India,’’ 50–51.
3. Eskew, But for Birmingham, 268, 270–71.
4. Ibid., 278 (riot of 7 May); Sobel, Civil Rights, 181.
5. Eric Arnesen’s book on black dockworkers, Waterfront Workers of New Or-
leans, is a case study on how the judicious use of force helped secure black
working-class economic gains. In the last decade there has been more interest in
the role of organized labor in the civil rights movement. See Honey, Southern
Labor and Black Civil Rights.
6. For the Lexington, N.C., riot of 5 June 1963, see Sorensen, Kennedy, 493, and
Sobel, Civil Rights, 204; for the Cambridge, Md., riot of 11 June 1963, see Sobel,
Civil Rights , 196–97; for the Jackson State College, Jackson, Miss., riot of 4
February 1964, see NYT, 4, 5 February 1964, and Dittmer, Local People, 238; for
the Jacksonville, Fla., riot of 23–24 March 1964, see ‘‘Shocking Police Action
Spurs Negro Students to Strike Back,’’ Jet, 9 April 1964, 14–19, Newton, Invisible
Empire, 173, and Sobel, Civil Rights, 252–53; for the Henderson, N.C., riot of 12
July 1964, see Sobel, Civil Rights, 253, and Parker, Violence in the U.S., 75; for the
Princess Anne, Md., riot of 26 February 1964, see Sobel, Civil Rights, 253; for the
1964 McComb, Miss., riot, see Dittmer, Local People, 305–10. Violence erupted in
the wake of NAACP leader Medgar Evers’s assassination in Jackson on 12 June
1963 as a crowd of rock-throwing blacks, chanting ‘‘We want the murderer,’’
marched on the downtown business district, resulting in twenty-seven arrests.
See Sobel, Civil Rights , 191; Linder, Bending toward Justice , 2–3. Jackson State
erupted a second time on 10 May 1967, when more than one thousand students
engaged in a pitched battle against police and the National Guard. See Dittmer,
Local People, 413. The Cambridge riots began on 11 June 1963, and the National
Guard was not withdrawn until 1964. Cleveland Sellers ( River of No Return , 68,
74) reported that blacks were extensively armed in the spring of 1964 in Cam-
bridge, Md., and that during the April riot a group of armed black men held off
advancing National Guard troops with gunﬁre. For the St. Augustine, Fla., riot,
see Newton, Invisible Empire, 173.


--- PAGE 339 ---
330 Notes to Pages 260–62
7. Dittmer, Local People, 310.
8. On the dearth of adult African American men in the movement, see Bel-
frage, Freedom Summer, 76. In the Mississippi Delta, SNCC’s constituency was
primarily the very young and the very old. See Dittmer, Local People, 125. As early
as the Nashville sit-ins in 1961, young black men were ﬁghting back, says SNCC
leader James Forman. There was regrettably ‘‘limited participation of young
blacks in the student movement precisely because of its nonviolent character.’’
Forman, Making of Black Revolutionaries, 376, 95.
9. One researcher found that black CORE activists, frustrated by their organiz-
ing failures, often blamed working-class blacks, whom they thought were ‘‘too
cowardly to stand ﬁrm, too brainwashed by the white culture, and too apathetic
to support the militant movement.’’ Bell, CORE, 99–100.
10. Eskew, But for Birmingham, 271.
11. Viorst, Fire in the Streets, 222.
12. On the lack of involvement by black students, see Dittmer, Local People ,
245, and NYT, 4, 5 February 1964.
13. Bell, CORE, 99. Bell concluded that there was an inverse relationship be-
tween socioeconomic status and participation in the movement by black stu-
dents. Black middle-class students were less likely to participate in protests,
often succumbing to pressure from status-conscious parents who regarded jail as
a ‘‘badge of disgrace.’’ CORE tended to attract more children of the working
class, whose parents were less concerned with the stigma of jail.
14. ‘‘Freedom Now,’’ Time, 17 May 1963, 23–25.
15. Branch, Parting the Waters, 872.
16. Ibid., 885.
17. Herbert Haines ( Black Radicals) makes a strong argument for the ‘‘radical
ﬂank effect’’ on mainstream movements, though I would argue that the radical
ﬂank effect theory misreads the role of radicals in the black freedom movement.
William Van Deburg ( New Day in Babylon ) offers an excellent analysis of the
positive impact of Black Power consciousness; he also argues, like Haines, that
Black Power rhetoric enhanced the bargaining position of moderates (p. 306). I
am arguing that black civil violence did not merely enhance the power of moder-
ates: it was the primary source of their negotiating power. The events of the
movement demonstrated time and again that the white power structure was
unwilling to make any meaningful concessions unless there was a threat of black
civil violence. The threat of violence transformed the very role of moderates;
they ceased to be moderates when they began to beneﬁt from white fears of
black violence. After Birmingham, it was impossible to employ nonviolence in
the moral and noncoercive way that Gandhi intended; the threat of violence was
ever-present in the minds of whites. The fear of black civil violence was the
driving force for the passage of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 and the Voting Rights
Act of 1965. Moreover, nonviolent reformers who derived their bargaining power


--- PAGE 340 ---
Notes to Page 263 331
from the threat of violence were not, in the strict sense, practicing the teachings
of Gandhi.
18. MLK, ‘‘Letter from Birmingham City Jail,’’ 48–49.
19. Ibid., 49.
20. Loevy, To End All Segregation, 63–64. A few weeks later King told a gather-
ing at Howard University, ‘‘If the civil rights legislation does not pass, I say to you
that this ugly sore on the body politic of segregation suddenly will become
malignant, and this nation may live in a long night of darkness and violence.’’
‘‘Dr. King, Others Forecast Violence in Rights Struggle,’’ Jet, 21 November 1963, 5.
21. Malcolm X saw a direct link between the Birmingham riots and Kennedy’s
new civil rights initiative. Malcolm argued that King had met failure in the
Albany desegregation campaign in 1962 and was failing again in Birmingham
until ‘‘Negroes took to the streets’’—forcing Kennedy to expedite the Civil Rights
Act. Malcolm X, ‘‘Message to the Grass Roots,’’ 10 November 1963, in Malcolm X
Speaks, 13–14.
22. Public Papers . . .: John F. Kennedy , 397–98, 483–94. ‘‘Everybody looks
back on it and thinks that everybody was around this [civil rights] for the last
three years,’’ Robert Kennedy once said, ‘‘but what aroused people generally in
the country and aroused the press was the Birmingham riots in May of 1963.’’
Quoted in Haines, Black Radicals, 159, and Eskew, But for Birmingham , 392 (n.
24). The 12 May riot is detailed in Eskew, 300–303, and Sobel, Civil Rights, 184.
President Kennedy’s national television address on the heels of the Birmingham
riots said nothing about rights or racial justice but instead sounded a ‘‘pox on
both houses’’ theme. ‘‘The Federal Government will not permit it to be sabotaged
by a few extremists on either side who think they can defy both the law and the
wishes of responsible citizens by inciting or inviting violence,’’ said Kennedy,
equating Klan and police terror with the black response in Birmingham. ‘‘I call
upon the citizens of Birmingham, both Negro and white, to live up to the stan-
dards their responsible leaders set last week in reaching the agreement, to real-
ize that violence only breeds more violence. . . . There must be no repetition of
last night’s incidents by any group.’’ John F. Kennedy, ‘‘Radio and Television
Remarks Following Renewal of Racial Strife in Birmingham,’’ 12 May 1964, 9:00
p.m., Public Papers , 397–98 (quotation, p. 397). One month later Kennedy ap-
peared before the U.S. Conference of Mayors and once again invoked the threat
of black civil violence. He reminded the mayors that during the summer ‘‘large
numbers of Negroes will be out of work’’ and the ‘‘events in Birmingham have
stepped up the tempo of the nationwide drive for full equality—and rising sum-
mer temperatures are often accompanied by rising human emotions.’’ If the
nation did nothing it would be ‘‘inviting pressure and increasing tension, and
inviting possible violence.’’ Kennedy, ‘‘Address in Honolulu before the United
States Conference of Mayors,’’ 6 June 1963, Public Papers, 454–59. In his 19 June
message to Congress introducing the civil rights bill, Kennedy made eight sepa-


--- PAGE 341 ---
332 Notes to Pages 264–68
rate references to the threat of violence, six that speciﬁcally appealed to white
fears of black civil violence. He ended his address by warning blacks that ‘‘vio-
lence is never justiﬁed; and, while peaceful communication, deliberation and
petition of protest continue, I want to caution against demonstrations which can
lead to violence.’’ Kennedy, ‘‘Special Message to the Congress on Civil Rights and
Job Opportunities,’’ 19 June 1963, Public Papers, 483–94 (quotation, p. 493).
23. Violence in the City: An End or a Beginning . White fears of black violence
were pervasive by 1964. In the New York Times Magazine  in November 1964,
philosopher and author Eric Hoffer opined: ‘‘The Negro seems to say: ‘Lift up my
arms. I am an abandoned and abused child. Adopt me as your favorite son. Feed
me, clothe me, educate me, love me and baby me. You must do this right away or
I shall set your house on ﬁre, or rot at your doorstep and poison the air you
breathe.’ ’’ Conservative cartoonist Al Capp responded to Hoffer’s article, saying,
‘‘It says aloud what most of America is saying through clenched teeth.’’ Hoffer
and Capp quoted in Muse, American Negro Revolution, 107.
24. On the McComb campaign, see Dittmer, Local People, 114. On SNCC’s shift
from redemptive suffering to mobilizing the poor, see Carson, In Struggle, 62, 82,
155. Voter registration during Freedom Summer is found in Carson’s chapter,
‘‘Mississippi Challenge.’’
25. Bell (CORE, 111–12, 115) found that even loyal CORE members were ambiv-
alent toward nonviolence, precisely because they feared that it would perpetuate
negative passive stereotypes.
26. Nietzsche stated this viewpoint in the extreme when he said, ‘‘Self respect
depends on being able to make reprisals.’’ Quoted in Mencken, Nietzsche, 238.
Sorel (Reﬂections) makes a similar argument on the relationship of self-defense
and self-respect.
27. Dennis interview by Dent. Richard King ( Civil Rights , 175) says that the
central question for the civil rights movement was, ‘‘How are the possibilities of
self-respect and dignity created?’’ See esp. King’s chapters, ‘‘Self-Interest and
Self-Respect’’ and ‘‘Violence and Self-Respect: Fanon and Black Radicalism,’’ and
his discussion of the Hegelian master/slave dynamic (pp. 78–81).
28. Schultz, ‘‘Interview with Robert F. Williams,’’ 54–55. Thanks to Annie
Chamberlain for this citation.
29. Kenneth S. Greenberg, Honor and Slavery, 36–37.
30. White conceptions of African American character historically alternated
between two contradictory images: on the one hand, the romantic racialist ste-
reotype of blacks as submissive and grateful children; on the other hand, the
paranoid image of blacks as violent and treacherous savages. The two stereo-
types found expression in the nineteenth century in the popular and conﬂicting
images of ‘‘Sambo’’ and Nat Turner. See Fredrickson, Black Image. In the after-
math of the Watts riot, CORE leaders like Dave Dennis recognized what the quid
pro quo for liberal support had been. Future violence was ‘‘going to do more to
antagonize the white liberals than it is to appease them.’’ Liberals looked at


--- PAGE 342 ---
Notes to Pages 269–72 333
Watts and only saw ‘‘ungrateful people.’’ Liberals did not ‘‘realize that none of the
[civil rights] bills have really spoken to the problems of those people.’’ Dennis
interview by anonymous.
31. Rethinking the deﬁnition and periodization of the black freedom move-
ment opens up new directions in scholarship. Of the many published interviews
reviewed in preparing this book, not one has been with a participant of the
Birmingham riots—despite the pivotal role of the event. In the past scholars have
attempted to classify the movement using categories of integrationists, assimila-
tionists, gradualists, separatists, nationalists, etc., or by using concepts such as
transformative politics and consciousness-changing. My concept of ‘‘black au-
tonomism’’ is not intended to reduce the movement to simple categories, but to
link together many currents within the movement that had different goals but a
common strategy with respect to coercion and force. Charles Silberman saw
coercion at the center of change during the movement: ‘‘The tragedy of race
relations is that there is no American Dilemma. White Americans are not torn
and tortured by the conﬂict between their devotion to the American creed and
their actual behavior. They are upset by the state of race relations, to be sure. But
what troubles them is not that justice is being denied but that their peace is being
shattered and their business interrupted.’’ Quoted in Carmichael and Hamilton,
Black Power , 5. Carmichael and Hamilton argue that the coalition with white
liberals was at the heart of the difference between Black Power and the national
civil rights organizations (pp. 54–84). The notion of a black autonomist move-
ment is reﬂected in Julius Lester’s Look Out, Whitey!  ‘‘Nonetheless, they have
been in ‘the movement,’ often silent and unseen, but affecting the course of
events,’’ according to Lester. ‘‘In Birmingham in 1963, they were the ones who
burned the cars and buildings after the frustration of watching mass arrest of
nonviolent demonstrators. In Selma in 1965 they were the ones who lined the
curbs, armed, saying ‘Go ahead and march. If Jim Clark tries anything this time,
we’ll take care of him’’ (p. 25).
32. MLK, Frogmore speech.
33. Historians have never held Black Power in high regard; the movement is
usually dismissed as politically divisive and counterproductive; it is even held re-
sponsible for the Republican Party’s ascendancy beginning with Richard Nixon’s
election in 1968. See Carson, ‘‘Rethinking African-American Political Thought,’’
122. Carson says that Black Power militancy ‘‘survives not as insurgencies but as
unthreatening expression of Afrocentrism’’ and contributed to ‘‘a decline in the
ability of African-Americans to affect the course of American politics.’’
34. Here an echo of Fanon’s notion that freedom bequeathed without revolt is
no freedom at all; that the oppressed must transform themselves in the process
of liberation to ensure that they can be self-governing.
35. Austin interview by Hall.
36. Within this trend in history are writings that employ a ‘‘culture of re-
sistance’’ framework. This framework argues that there was a continuous tradi-


--- PAGE 343 ---
334 Note to Page 272
tion of cultural resistance to oppression in the African American community,
from slavery to the modern civil rights movement. But oppression not only bred
cultural resistance; it also bred passivity, fatalism, and internalization of op-
pressor values. Martin Luther King described this phenomenon as the ‘‘force of
complacency made up of Negroes who, as a result of long years of oppression,
have been so completely drained of self-respect and a sense of ‘somebodiness’
that they have adjusted to segregation.’’ MLK, ‘‘Letter from Birmingham City
Jail,’’ 48. That resistance was relegated to symbolic expressions in religion, mu-
sic, and other cultural forms is evidence of political defeat, not victory. By giving
too much weight to symbolic cultural resistance, we lose sight of the only form of
resistance capable of liberating people from systems of domination—direct and
open confrontation with authority through political resistance. Emphasis on cul-
tural resistance and continuity inevitably diminishes the crucial importance of
radical leadership and political ideas and expressly political movements that
seek to redeﬁne power relationships—e.g., armed self-defense, Black Power, and
black nationalism. The overemphasis on culture can lead us to impart politi-
cally subversive meaning to quietism, fatalism, apathy, and individualistic self-
preservation. (For a representative work arguing the culture of resistance, see
Kelley, Hammer and Hoe .) Similarly, most recent scholarship minimizes the po-
litical differences between nonviolence and Black Power, positing that these
movements shared core values, organizational resources, or consciousness-
transforming goals. Studies that emphasize the commonalities of black national-
ists and the nonviolent movement include Tyson, Radio Free Dixie ; Richard H.
King, Civil Rights; and Cone, Martin and Malcolm . This search for continuity in
militancy and political resistance arises, in part, from a well-intentioned desire
to correct the passive images of African Americans portrayed in scholarly litera-
ture and popular ﬁction. Among historians, most ‘‘culture of resistance’’ writers
are responding to Stanley Elkins’s Slavery, published in 1959. For decades histo-
rians have been endeavoring to prove Elkins wrong, especially his notion that the
‘‘infantalized’’ slave experience crushed the slave’s personality. By framing the
debate in an ‘‘either-or’’ dichotomy, scholars have overlooked the way in which
passive and rebellious attitudes coexist and compete within the human person-
ality. See Elkins, Slavery.


--- PAGE 344 ---
Bibliography
Archival Collections
Ann Arbor, Mich.
University of Michigan Library
Labadie Collection
Atlanta, Ga.
Martin Luther King Jr. Center for Nonviolent Social Change
Martin Luther King Papers
Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee Papers
Madison, Wis.
State Historical Society of Wisconsin
Congress of Racial Equality Papers
Meldon Acheson Papers
Bogalusa Voters League Files
CORE, ‘‘Bogalusa, Louisiana, Records, 1965–1966’’
Ferriday Freedom Movement Files
Homer Files
Jackson Parish Files
Gayle Jenkins Papers
Monroe Project Files
Southern Regional Ofﬁce Files
Miriam Feingold Papers
El Ahmed Saud Ibriahim Kahafei Abboud Najah Papers
New Orleans, La.
Amistad Research Center, Tulane University
Congress of Racial Equality Papers, microﬁlm
Gwendolyn Midlo Hall Papers
Lawyers Constitutional Defense Committee Files, Southern Civil Rights
Litigation Records (SCRLR), microﬁlm. Published by Wesleyan
University, Middletown, Conn. 1980.
Ronnie Moore Collection
National Association for the Advancement of Colored People Field Director
for Louisiana Papers


--- PAGE 345 ---
336 Bibliography
Ed Pincus Collection
Kim Lacy Rogers–Glenda Stephens Oral History Collection
Tulane University Library, Special Collections
Political Ephemera Collection
St. Paul, Minn.
Minnesota Historical Society, Manuscript Collections
Hubert H. Humphrey Papers, Vice Presidential Files, 1965–68, Civil and
Human Rights, Correspondence
Stanford, Calif.
Stanford University Archives
Project South Collection (Glen Rock, N.J.: Microﬁlming Corp. of America,
1975)
Government and Judicial Documents
Doar, John, and Dorothy Landsberg. ‘‘The Performance of the FBI in
Investigating Violations of Federal Laws Protecting the Right to Vote, 1960–
1967.’’ In U.S. Senate, Hearings before the Select Committee to Study
Governmental Operations with Respect to Intelligence Activities, 94th Cong., 1st
sess., vol. 6. Washington, D.C.: Government Printing Ofﬁce, 1976.
George Haynes, ‘‘Opinion of the Court,’’ ‘‘Final Decree,’’ Claiborne Hardware v.
NAACP, 9 August 1976, Case no. 78353, Hinds County Chancery Court,
Mississippi.
National Association for the Advancement of Colored People et al. v. Claiborne
Hardware Co. et al., 10 December 1980, Case no. 51,488, Supreme Court of
Mississippi.
National Association for the Advancement of Colored People et al. v. Claiborne
Hardware Co. et al., 2 July 1982, 458 U.S. 886–940.
Public Papers of the President of the United States: John F. Kennedy, 1963.
Washington, D.C.: Government Printing Ofﬁce, 1964.
Robert Hicks et al. v. Jesse H. Cutrer et al., Case no. 66-225, Civil Case Files,
U.S. District Court for the Eastern District of Louisiana, New Orleans
Division.
United States of America, by Nicholas deB. Katzenbach, Attorney General of the
United States, v. Original Knights of the Ku Klux Klan, an Incorporated
Association et al., 1965. U.S. District Court, Eastern District of Louisiana. Civil
Action 15793, Case Records, Federal Records Center, Fort Worth, Texas.
United States v. U.S. Klans, Knights of Ku Klux Klan, Inc., 194 F. Supp. 897 (M.D.
Ala. 1961).
U.S. House of Representatives. Activities of Ku Klux Klan Organizations in the
United States: Hearing before the Committee on Un-American Activities. 3 vols.
90th Cong., 1st sess., 19–22, 25 October 1965. Washington, D.C.: Government
Printing Ofﬁce, 1966.


--- PAGE 346 ---
Bibliography 337
— — —. The Present-Day Ku Klux Klan Movement: Report by the Committee on Un-
American Activities. 90th Cong., 1st sess., 11 December 1967. Washington,
D.C.: Government Printing Ofﬁce, 1967.
U.S. Senate. Hearings before the Subcommittee to Investigate the Administration
of the Internal Security Act and Other Internal Security Laws of the Committee
on the Judiciary, Testimony of Robert F. Williams. 91st Cong., 2d sess., pt. 1, 16
February 1970; pt. 2, 24 March 1970; pt. 3, 25 March 1970. Washington, D.C.:
Government Printing Ofﬁce, 1970.
Violence in the City: An End or a Beginning: A Report by the Governor’s
Commission on the Los Angeles Riots, http://www.usc.edu/isd/archives/
cityinstress/mccone/part3.html, (2 December 1965).
Federal Bureau of Investigation Files
Bogalusa Civic and Voters League Files
17-117
166-32
44-0-5411
Congress of Racial Equality Files
100-225-892
Counterintelligence Program, Internal Security, Disruption of Hate Groups Files
157-9-33
Deacons for Defense and Justice Files
157-2466
Revolutionary Action Movement Files
100-442684
Interviews
Acheson, Meldon. Interview by anonymous, Ferriday, La., ca. July 1965, reel
0290. Project South Collection, Stanford University Archives, Stanford, Calif.
Glen Rock, N.J.: Microﬁlming Corp. of America. Transcript.
Anonymous CORE members and Deacons. Interview by anonymous, Homer,
La., ca. August 1965, reel 0207. Project South Collection, Stanford University
Archives, Stanford, Calif. Glen Rock, N.J.: Microﬁlming Corp. of America.
Transcript.
Anonymous CORE volunteer (white male). Interview by anonymous, Bogalusa,
La., ca. July 1965, reel 0044-1. Project South Collection, Stanford University
Archives, Stanford, Calif. Glen Rock, N.J.: Microﬁlming Corp. of America.
Transcript.
Austin, Henry. Interview by anonymous, n.p., ca. July 1965, reel 0333. Project
South Collection, Stanford University Archives, Stanford, Calif. Glen Rock,
N.J.: Microﬁlming Corp. of America. Transcript.
— — —. Interview by Gwendolyn Midlo Hall, tape recording, New Orleans,


--- PAGE 347 ---
338 Bibliography
8 October 1978. Gwendolyn Midlo Hall Papers, Amistad Research Center,
Tulane University, New Orleans.
— — —. Interview by author, tape recording, New Orleans, 26 September 1994.
Bell, James. Interview by anonymous, Clinton, La., ca. July 1965, reel 0121.
Project South Collection, Stanford University Archives, Stanford, Calif. Glen
Rock, N.J.: Microﬁlming Corp. of America. Transcript.
Bradford, Johnnie (Mrs. Percy Lee Bradford). Interview by author, by
telephone, 30 August 1994.
Brooks, Frederick. Interview by author, by telephone, 10 August 1993.
Brooks, Owen. Interview by Tom Dent, tape recording, 18 August 1978. Tom
Dent Collection, Amistad Research Center, Tulane University, New Orleans.
Bryant, Patrick. Interview by author, New Orleans, 30 June 1993.
Burkes, Herman. Interview by author, by telephone, tape recording,
11 September 1994.
Burris, Royan. Interview by author, tape recording, Bogalusa, La., 7 March
1989.
Clurman, Michael. Interview by anonymous, Ferriday, La., ca. July 1965, reel
0287. Project South Collection, Stanford University Archives, Stanford, Calif.
Glen Rock, N.J.: Microﬁlming Corp. of America. Transcript.
Cobb, Charlie. Interview by Tom Dent, tape recording, 11 February 1983. Tom
Dent Collection, Amistad Research Center, Tulane University, New Orleans.
Collins, Virginia [Dara Abubakari]. Interview by author, New Orleans, 15 March
1993.
Cox, Louisa. Interview by author, by telephone, 6 August 1994.
Dawson, Artis Ray. Interview by anonymous, Tallulah, La., ca. August 1965, reel
0335. Project South Collection, Stanford University Archives, Stanford, Calif.
Glen Rock, N.J.: Microﬁlming Corp. of America. Transcript.
Delee, Victoria. Interview by author, by telephone, 6 August 1994.
Dennis, Dave. Interview by anonymous, New Orleans, ca. August 1965, reels
0442-1 and 0443. Project South Collection, Stanford University Archives,
Stanford, Calif. Glen Rock, N.J.: Microﬁlming Corp. of America. Transcript.
— — —. Interview by Tom Dent, tape recording, 8 October 1983. Tom Dent
Collection, Amistad Research Center, Tulane University, New Orleans.
Dodd, George. Interview by author, tape recording, Homer, La., 14 November
1993.
Feingold, Miriam. Interview by anonymous, Clinton, La., 5 July 1965, reels
0124-0125. Project South Collection, Stanford University Archives, Stanford,
Calif. Glen Rock, N.J.: Microﬁlming Corp. of America. Transcript.
Fenton, Charles. Interview by author, by telephone, tape recording, 19 February
1993.
Ferguson, William. Interview by author, tape recording, Percy Creek
Community, Miss., 12 November 1993.
Frazier, Lee. Interview by author, Jacksonboro, S.C., 5 August 1994.


--- PAGE 348 ---
Bibliography 339
Grieco, Joan. Interview by anonymous, Bogalusa, La., ca. July 1965, reel 0045-1.
Project South Collection, Stanford University Archives, Stanford, Calif. Glen
Rock, N.J.: Microﬁlming Corp. of America. Transcript.
Harper, James. Interview by author, tape recording, Minden, La., 11 November
1993.
Harris, John. Interview by author, by telephone, tape recording, 23 January
1994.
Heilbron, Jerry. Interview by author, by telephone, tape recording,
12 September 1993.
Hicks, Robert. Interview by Miriam Feingold, tape recording, Bogalusa, La., ca.
July 1966. Miriam Feingold Papers, State Historical Society of Wisconsin,
Madison.
— — —. Interview by author, tape recording, Bogalusa, La., 25 February 1989.
Hightower, Mary. Interview by Tom Dent, tape recording, 20 August 1978. Tom
Dent Collection, Amistad Research Center, Tulane University, New Orleans.
Hunter, Archie Hunter. Interview by anonymous, Ferriday, La., ca. July 1965,
reel 0286. Project South Collection, Stanford University Archives, Stanford,
Calif. Glen Rock, N.J.: Microﬁlming Corp. of America. Transcript.
Ickes, Harold. Interview by anonymous, Tallulah, La., ca. August 1965, reel
0353. Project South Collection, Stanford University Archives, Stanford, Calif.
Glen Rock, N.J.: Microﬁlming Corp. of America. Transcript.
Jacobs, Elmo. Interview by Miriam Feingold, tape recording, Jonesboro, La., ca.
July 1966. Miriam Feingold Papers, State Historical Society of Wisconsin,
Madison.
Johnson, Annie Purnell. Interview by Miriam Feingold, tape recording,
Jonesboro, La., ca. July 1966. Miriam Feingold Papers, State Historical
Society of Wisconsin, Madison.
— — —. Interview by author, tape recording, Jonesboro, La., 15 November 1993.
Johnson, Bennett. Interview by author, by telephone, tape recording, 11 May
2002.
Johnson, Harvey. Interview by author, tape recording, Jonesboro, La., 14
November 1993.
Johnson, June. Interview by Tom Dent, tape recording, 22 July 1979. Tom Dent
Collection, Amistad Research Center, Tulane University, New Orleans.
Kirkpatrick, Frederick Douglas. Interview by Gwendolyn Midlo Hall, New York
City, notes, 31 October 1977. Gwendolyn Midlo Hall Papers, Amistad Research
Center, Tulane University, New Orleans.
Lacey, Fred. Interview by anonymous, Greensburg, La., ca. July 1965, reel 0126.
Project South Collection, Stanford University Archives, Stanford, Calif. Glen
Rock, N.J.: Microﬁlming Corp. of America. Transcript.
Landry, Lawrence. Interview by author, Washington, D.C., by telephone, notes,
14 June 1993.
Lesser, Michael. Interview by anonymous, Baton Rouge, La., ca. July 1965, reel


--- PAGE 349 ---
340 Bibliography
0284. Project South Collection, Stanford University Archives, Stanford, Calif.
Glen Rock, N.J.: Microﬁlming Corp. of America. Transcript.
Lewis, Frederick Douglas. Interview by Miriam Feingold, tape recording,
Homer, La., ca. July 1966. Miriam Feingold Papers, State Historical Society of
Wisconsin, Madison.
Malray, Harvey. Interview by author, tape recording, Homer, La., 14 November
1993.
Miller, Steven. Interview by author, by telephone, tape recording, 28 August
1994.
Mitchell, Catherine Patterson. Interview by author, by telephone, tape
recording, 6 June 1993.
Montgomery, Lucille. Interview by author, by telephone, tape recording,
29 May 1993.
Moore, Ronnie M. Interview by author, tape recording, New Orleans, 26
February 1993.
Noﬂin, Reverend George. Interview by author, by telephone, 4 September 1993.
Peacock, Willie. Interview by Tom Dent, tape recording, 20 July 1979. Tom Dent
Collection, Amistad Research Center, Tulane University, New Orleans.
Peters, James. Interview by anonymous, Baton Rouge, La., ca. August 1965, reel
0210. Project South Collection, Stanford University Archives, Stanford, Calif.
Glen Rock, N.J.: Microﬁlming Corp. of America. Transcript.
Pittman, William J. Interview by author, by telephone, 15 September 1993.
Riley, Reverend James D. Interview by author, by telephone, 5 August 1994.
Rogers, Nahaz. Interview by author, by telephone, tape recording, 13 June
1993.
Roy, Lorraine. Interview by anonymous, Baton Rouge, La., ca. July 1965, reel
0211-1. Project South Collection, Stanford University Archives, Stanford,
Calif. Glen Rock, N.J.: Microﬁlming Corp. of America. Transcript.
Sims, Charles R. Interview by William A. Price, Bogalusa, La., 20 August 1965.
Transcript in author’s possession.
Smith, Jerome. Interview by Tom Dent, tape recording, 23 September 1983.
Tom Dent Collection, Amistad Research Center, Tulane University, New
Orleans.
Stokes, James. Interview by author, tape recording, Natchez, Miss., 12
November 1993.
Taylor, Alcie. Interview by author, tape recording, Bogalusa, La., 8 March 1989.
Thomas, Earnest. Interview by author, San Mateo, Calif., by telephone, tape
recording and notes, 6, 20 February 1993.
Walker, George. Interview by author, tape recording, Warren County, Miss.,
19 April 1994.
Whatley, David Lee. Interview by author, tape recording, Baton Rouge, La., 5
May 1993.


--- PAGE 350 ---
Bibliography 341
White, Charles. Interview by author, tape recording, Jonesboro, La.,
11 November 1993.
Williams, James ‘‘Mice.’’ Interview by anonymous, Tallulah, La., ca. August
1965, reel 0313. Project South Collection, Stanford University Archives,
Stanford, Calif. Glen Rock, N.J.: Microﬁlming Corp. of America. Transcript.
Williams, Robert F. Interview by author, by telephone, tape recording,
11 November 1995.
Wood, Aubry. Interview by author, tape recording, New Orleans, 21 February
1989.
Woods, Moses, Sr. Interview by author, Natchez, Miss., 8 June 1992.
Young, James. Interview by author, tape recording, Natchez, Miss., 19 April
1994.
Books and Chapters in Books
Ahmad, Akbar Muhammad. History of RAM—Revolutionary Action Movement .
N.p., n.d. In author’s possession.
Aiyar, S. P. ‘‘The Anatomy of Mass Violence in India.’’ In The Politics of Mass
Violence in India, edited by S. P. Aiyar, 21–33. Bombay: P. C. Manaktalas and
Sons, 1967.
Ansbro, John J. Martin Luther King, Jr.: The Making of a Mind. Maryknoll, N.Y.:
Orbis Books, 1982.
Arnesen, Eric. Waterfront Workers of New Orleans: Race, Class, and Politics,
1863–1923 . New York: Oxford University Press, 1991.
Ayers, Edward L. Vengeance and Justice: Crime and Punishment in the
Nineteenth-Century American South. New York: Oxford University Press,
1984.
Badger, Tony. ‘‘Fatalism, Not Gradualism: Race and the Crisis of Southern
Liberalism, 1944–1965.’’ In The Making of Martin Luther King and the Civil
Rights Movement, edited by Tony Badger and Brian Ward, 67–95. New York:
New York University Press, 1996.
Baldwin, Lewis V. There Is a Balm in Gilead: The Cultural Roots of Martin Luther
King, Jr. Minneapolis: Augsburg Fortress Press, 1991.
Barron, John. Operation SOLO: The FBI’s Man in the Kremlin. Washington, D.C.:
Regnery Publishing, Inc., 1996.
Bass, Jack, Taming the Storm: The Life and Times of Judge Frank M. Johnson, Jr.,
and the South’s Fight over Civil Rights. New York: Doubleday, 1993.
Bederman, Gail. Manliness and Civilization: A Cultural History of Gender and
Race in the United States, 1880–1917 . Chicago: University of Chicago Press,
1995.
Belfrage, Sally. Freedom Summer. 1965. Charlottesville: University Press of
Virginia, 1990.
Belknap, Michal. Federal Law and Southern Order: Racial Violence and


--- PAGE 351 ---
342 Bibliography
Constitutional Conﬂict in the Post-Brown South. Athens: University of Georgia
Press, 1987.
Bell, Inge Powell. CORE and the Strategy of Nonviolence. New York: Random
House, 1968.
Bennett, Lerone, Jr. The Negro Mood and Other Essays. New York: Ballantine
Books, 1964.
Bond, Horace Mann, and Julia W. Bond. The Star Creek Papers. Edited by Adam
Fairclough. Athens: University of Georgia Press, 1997.
Bondurant, Joan V. Conquest of Violence: The Gandhian Philosophy of Conﬂict.
Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press, 1958.
Branch, Taylor. Parting the Waters: America in the King Years, 1954–1963 . New
York: Simon and Schuster, 1989.
— — —. Pillar of Fire: America in the King Years, 1963–1965 . New York: Simon and
Schuster, 1998.
Brink, William, and Louis Harris. The Negro Revolution in America: What
Negroes Want, Why and How They Are Fighting, Whom They Support, What
Whites Think of Them and Their Demands. New York: Simon and Schuster,
1964.
Brown, Cynthia, ed., Ready from Within: Septima Clark and the Civil Rights
Movement. Navarro, Calif.: Wild Trees Press, 1986.
Bruce, Dickson D., Jr. Violence and Culture in the Antebellum South. Austin:
University of Texas Press, 1979.
Carmichael, Stokely, and Charles V. Hamilton. Black Power: The Politics of
Liberation in America. New York: Vintage Books, 1967.
Carnes, Mark C. Secret Ritual and Manhood in Victorian America. New Haven:
Yale University Press, 1991.
Carson, Clayborne. In Struggle: SNCC and the Black Awakening of the 1960s.
Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1981.
— — —. ‘‘Civil Rights Reform and the Black Freedom Struggle.’’ In The Civil Rights
Movement in America: Essays by David Levering Lewis, Clayborne Carson,
Nancy Weiss, John Dittmer, Charles V. Hamilton, William Chafe, edited by
Charles W. Eagles and David L. Lewis, 19–32. Jackson: University Press of
Mississippi, 1986.
— — —. ‘‘Rethinking African-American Political Thought in the Post-Revolutionary
Era.’’ In The Making of Martin Luther King and the Civil Rights Movement ,
edited by Brian Ward and Tony Badger. New York: New York University Press,
1996.
Cash, W. J. Mind of the South. New York: Vintage Books, 1941.
Cashmore, Ellis. Dictionary of Race and Ethnic Relations , 3d ed. London:
Routledge, 1994.
Chafe, William. Civilities and Civil Rights: Greensboro, North Carolina, and the
Black Struggle for Freedom. New York: Oxford University Press, 1980.


--- PAGE 352 ---
Bibliography 343
Chalmers, David Mark. Hooded Americanism: The First Century of the Ku Klux
Klan, 1865–1965 . Garden City: Doubleday, 1965.
Cleaver, Eldridge. Soul on Ice. 1967. Reprint, New York: Dell Publishing,
1992.
Colburn, David, Racial Change and Community Crisis. New York: Columbia
University Press, 1985.
Crawford, Vicki, Jacqueline Rose, and Barbara Woods. Black Women in the Civil
Rights Movement: Trailblazers and Torchbearers. Brooklyn, N.Y.: Carlson
Publishing, 1990.
Dittmer, John. Local People: The Struggle of Civil Rights in Mississippi. Urbana:
University of Illinois Press, 1994.
Donaldson, Gary Donaldson. The History of African-Americans in the Military:
Double V. Malabar, Fla.: Krieger Publishing Co., 1991.
Eagles, Charles W., and David L. Lewis, eds. The Civil Rights Movement in
America: Essays by David Levering Lewis, Clayborne Carson, Nancy Weiss, John
Dittmer, Charles V. Hamilton, and William Chafe. Jackson: University Press of
Mississippi, 1986.
Elkins, Stanley M. Slavery: A Problem in American Institutional and Intellectual
Life. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1959.
Eskew, Glen T. But for Birmingham: The Local and National Movements in the
Civil Rights Struggle. Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 1997.
Evans, Sara. Personal Politics: The Roots of Women’s Liberation in the Civil Rights
Movement and the New Left. New York: Random House, 1979.
Evers, Charles. Evers. New York: World Publishing Co., 1971.
Evers, Mrs. Medgar, and William Peters. For Us, the Living. New York: Ace
Books, 1970.
Fahey, David M. The Black Lodge in White America: ‘‘True Reformer’’ Browne and
His Economic Strategy. Dayton, Ohio: Wright State University Press, 1994.
Fairclough, Adam. To Redeem the Soul of America: The Southern Christian
Leadership Conference and Martin Luther King, Jr. Athens: University of
Georgia Press, 1987.
— — —. Race and Democracy: The Civil Rights Struggle in Louisiana, 1915–1972 .
Athens: University of Georgia Press, 1995.
— — —. ‘‘The Civil Rights Movement in Louisiana, 1939–54,’’ in The Making of
Martin Luther King and the Civil Rights Movement, eds. Tony Badger and
Brian Ward. New York: New York University Press, 1996.
Fanon, Frantz. The Wretched of the Earth. Translated by Constance Farrington.
New York: Grove Press, 1968 (originally published by François Maspero, ed.,
Les Damne’s del la Terre, Paris, 1961).
Farmer, James. Lay Bare the Heart: An Autobiography of the Civil Rights
Movement. New York: Arbor House, 1985.
Findlay, James F., Jr. Church People in the Struggle: The National Council of


--- PAGE 353 ---
344 Bibliography
Churches and the Black Freedom Movement, 1950–1970 . New York: Oxford
University Press, 1993.
Fischer, David Hackett. Albion’s Seed: Four British Folkways in America. New
York: Oxford University Press, 1989.
Fleming, Cynthia Griggs. Soon We Will Not Cry: The Liberation of Ruby Doris
Robinson. Lanham, Md.: Rowman and Littleﬁeld, 1998.
Forman, James. The Making of Black Revolutionaries. Washington, D.C.: Open
Hand Publishing, Inc., 1985.
Franklin, John Hope. The Militant South, 1800–1861 . Cambridge, Mass.:
Belknap Press, 1956.
Fredrickson, George M. The Black Image in the White Mind: The Debate on Afro-
American Character and Destiny, 1817–1914 . New York: Harper and Row, 1971.
— — —. Black Liberation: A Comparative History of Black Ideologies in the United
States and South Africa. New York: Oxford University Press, 1995.
Gandhi, Mohandas. Non-Violent Resistance (Satyagraha). New York: Schocken
Books, 1951.
Garrow, David J. Protest at Selma: Martin Luther King, Jr. and the Voting Rights
Act of 1965. New Haven: Yale University Press, 1978.
— — —. Bearing the Cross: Martin Luther King, Jr. and the Southern Christian
Leadership Conference. New York: William Morrow and Co., 1986.
Gerlach, Larry R. Blazing Crosses in Zion: The Ku Klux Klan in Utah. Logan: Utah
State University Press, 1982.
Gilmore, David D. Manhood in the Making: Cultural Concepts of Masculinity.
New Haven: Yale University Press, 1990.
Grant, Joanne. Ella Baker: Freedom Bound. New York: John Wiley and Sons,
1998.
Greenberg, Cheryl Lynn. A Circle of Trust: Remembering SNCC. New Brunswick,
N.J.: Rutgers University Press, 1998.
Greenberg, Kenneth S. Masters and Statesmen: The Political Culture of American
Slavery. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1985.
— — —. Honor and Slavery: Lies, Duels, Noses, Masks, Dressing as a Woman, Gifts,
Strangers, Humanitarianism, Death, Slave Rebellions, the Proslavery
Argument, Baseball, Hunting, and Gambling in the Old South . Princeton, N.J.:
Princeton University Press, 1996.
Haines, Herbert H. Black Radicals and the Civil Rights Mainstream, 1954–1970 .
Austin: University of Texas, 1988.
Hall, Jacquelyn Dowd. Revolt against Chivalry: Jesse Daniel Ames and the
Women’s Campaign against Lynching. New York: Columbia University Press,
1979.
Hanigan, James P. Martin Luther King, Jr. and the Foundations of Nonviolence.
Lanham, Md.: University Press of America, 1984.
Hine, Darlene Clark, and Earnestine Jenkins, eds. A Question of Manhood: A
Reader in U.S. Black Men’s History and Masculinity . Vol. 1, ‘‘Manhood Rights’’:


--- PAGE 354 ---
Bibliography 345
The Construction of Black Male History and Manhood, 1750–1870 .
Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1999.
Hoganson, Kristin L. Fighting for American Manhood: How Gender Politics
Provoked the Spanish-American and Philippine-American Wars. New Haven:
Yale University Press, 1998.
Honey, Michael K. Southern Labor and Black Civil Rights: Organizing Memphis
Workers. Urbana: University of Illinois Press, 1993.
Jackson, Kenneth T. The Ku Klux Klan in the City, 1915–1930 . New York: Oxford
University Press, 1967.
‘‘James Farmer and Malcolm X: A Debate at Cornell University, March 7, 1963.’’
In The Rhetoric of the Civil-Rights Movement, edited by Haig A. Bosmajian and
Hamida Bosmajian, 59–87. New York: Random House, 1969.
Jenkins, William D. Steel Valley Klan: The Ku Klux Klan in Ohio’s Mahoning
Valley. Kent, Ohio: Kent State University Press, 1990.
Johnston, Erle. Mississippi’s Deﬁant Years, 1953–1973. Forest, Miss.: Lake Harbor
Publishers, 1990.
Justice, Blair. Violence in the City. Texas Christian University Press, 1969.
Kantrowitz, Stephen. ‘‘One Man’s Mob Is Another Man’s Militia: Violence,
Manhood, and Authority in Reconstruction South Carolina.’’ In Jumpin’ Jim
Crow: Southern Politics from Civil War to Civil Rights, edited by Jane Dailey,
Glenda Elizabeth Gilmore, and Bryant Simon, 67–87. Princeton, N.J.:
Princeton University Press, 2000.
Kapur, Sudarshan. Raising Up a Prophet: The African American Encounter with
Gandhi. Boston: Beacon Press, 1992.
Kelly, Robin G. Hammer and Hoe: Alabama Communists during the Great
Depression. Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 1990.
Kimmel, Michael S. Manhood in America: A Cultural History. New York: Free
Press, 1996.
King, Martin Luther, Jr. Stride toward Freedom: The Montgomery Story. New
York: Harper and Brothers, 1958.
— — —. ‘‘Letter from Birmingham City Jail, April 16, 1963,’’ in The Rhetoric of the
Civil-Rights Movement, edited by Haig A. Bosmajian and Hamida Bosmajian,
37–57. New York: Random House, 1969.
King, Richard H. Civil Rights and the Idea of Freedom. New York: Oxford
University Press, 1992.
King, Wilma. Stolen Childhood: Slave Youth in Nineteenth-Century America.
Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1995.
Kirkpatrick, Frederick Douglas. Black Music. N.p., 1980. In author’s possession.
Kluger, Richard. Simple Justice: The History of Brown v. Board of Education and
Black America’s Struggle for Equality. New York: Vintage, 1977.
Laue, James H. Direct Action and Desegregation, 1960–1962: Toward a Theory
of the Rationalization of Protest. Brooklyn, N.Y.: Carlson Publishing, Inc.,
1989.


--- PAGE 355 ---
346 Bibliography
Lay, Shawn. War, Revolution, and the Ku Klux Klan: A Study in Intolerance in a
Border City. El Paso: Texas Western Press, 1985.
— — —, ed. The Invisible Empire in the West: Toward a New Historical Appraisal of
the Ku Klux Klan of the 1920s. Urbana: University of Illinois Press, 1992.
Lentz, Richard. Symbols, the News Magazines, and Martin Luther King. Baton
Rouge: Louisiana State University Press, 1990.
Lester, Julius. Look Out, Whitey! Black Power’s Gon’ Get Your Mama. New York:
Grove Press, 1968.
Linder, Douglas O. Bending toward Justice: Heroes in Great Trials Involving the
Rights of Black Americans, http://www.law.umkc.edu/faculty/projects/
ftrials/trialheroes/doaressay.html, 2001.
Loevy, Robert D. To End All Segregation: The Politics of the Passage of the Civil
Rights Act of 1964. Lanham, Md.: University Press of America, 1990.
Lutholtz, William M. Grand Dragon: D. C. Stephenson and the Ku Klux Klan in
Indiana. West Lafayette, Ind.: Purdue University Press, 1991.
Lyon, Danny. Memories of the Southern Civil Rights Movement . Chapel Hill:
University of North Carolina Press, 1992.
MacGregor, Morris J., Jr. The Integration of the Armed Forces, 1940–1965 .
Washington, D.C.: Center for Military History, 1989.
MacLean, Nancy. Behind the Mask of Chivalry: The Making of the Second Ku Klux
Klan. New York: Oxford University Press, 1994.
Malcolm X. Malcolm X Speaks. New York: Grove Press, n.d.
Mann, Robert. The Walls of Jericho: Lyndon Johnson, Hubert Humphrey, Richard
Russell, and the Struggle for Civil Rights. New York: Harcourt and Brace, 1996.
May, Henry Farnham. Protestant Churches and Industrial America. New York:
Harper and Brothers, 1949.
McAdam, Doug. Political Process and the Development of Black Insurgency, 1930–
1970. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1982.
McCartney, John T. Black Power Ideologies: An Essay in African-American
Political Thought. Philadelphia: Temple University Press, 1992.
McGuire, Phillip, ed. Taps for a Jim Crow Army: Letters from Black Soldiers in
World War II. Santa Barbara, Calif.: ABC-Clio, 1983.
McMillen, Neil R. The Citizens’ Council: Organized Resistance to the Second
Reconstruction, 1954–1964 . Urbana: University of Illinois Press, 1971.
McWhiney, Grady. Cracker Culture: Celtic Ways in the Old South. Tuscaloosa:
University of Alabama Press, 1988.
McWhiney, Grady, and Perry D. Jamieson. Attack and Die: Civil War Military
Tactics and the Southern Heritage. University: University of Alabama Press,
1982.
Mecklin, John Moffatt. The Ku Klux Klan: A Study of the American Mind . 1924.
Reprint, New York: Russell and Russell, 1963.
Meier, August, and Elliott Rudwick. CORE: A Study in the Civil Rights Movement,
1942–1968 . New York: Oxford University Press, 1973.


--- PAGE 356 ---
Bibliography 347
Meier, August, Elliott Rudwick, and Francis L. Broderick, eds. Black Protest
Thought in the Twentieth Century. 1965. Reprint, Indianapolis: Bobbs-Merrill,
1971.
Mencken, H. L. The Philosophy of Friedrich Nietzsche. Boston: Luce, 1913.
Miller, Keith D. Voice of Deliverance: The Language of Martin Luther King, Jr. and
Its Sources. New York: Free Press, 1992.
Miller, Ronald B. ‘‘Violence, Force, and Coercion.’’ In Violence, edited by Jerome
A. Shaffer, 9–44. New York: Daniel McKay Co., 1971.
Mills, Kay. This Little Light of Mine: The Life of Fannie Lou Hamer. New York:
Dutton, 1993.
Moody, Anne. Coming of Age in Mississippi. New York: Dell, 1971.
Moore, Arthur K. The Frontier Mind: A Cultural Analysis of the Kentucky
Frontiersman. Lexington: University Press of Kentucky, 1957.
Morris, Aldon D. The Origins of the Civil Rights Movement: Black Communities
Organizing for Change. New York: Free Press, 1984.
Muse, Benjamin. The American Negro Revolution: From Nonviolence to Black
Power, 1963–1967. Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1968.
Myrdal, Gunnar. An American Dilemma: The Negro Problem and Modern
Democracy. New York: Harper and Brothers, 1944.
Nelson, Jack. Terror in the Night: The Klan’s Campaign against the Jews. New
York: Simon and Schuster, 1993.
Newby, I. A. Plain Folk in the New South: Social Change and Cultural Persistence,
1880–1915 . Baton Rouge: Louisiana State University Press, 1989.
Newton, Michael. The Invisible Empire: The Ku Klux Klan in Florida. Gainesville:
University of Florida Press, 2001.
Nisbett, Richard E., and Dov Cohen. Culture of Honor: The Psychology of Violence
in the South. Boulder, Colo.: Westview Press, 1996.
Norrell, Robert J. Reaping the Whirlwind: The Civil Rights Movement in Tuskegee.
New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 1985.
Northrup, Herbert R. The Negro in the Paper Industry: The Racial Politics of
American Industry. Report no. 8, Industrial Research Unit, Department of
Industry, Wharton School of Finance and Commerce, University of
Pennsylvania. Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press, 1969.
Oates, Stephen. Let the Trumpet Sound: The Life of Martin Luther King, Jr. New
York: Harper and Row, 1982.
Oberschall, Anthony. Social Conﬂict and Social Movements. Englewood Cliffs,
N.J.: Prentice-Hall, 1973.
O’Brien, Gail Williams. The Color of Law: Race, Violence, and Justice in the Post–
World War II South. Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 1999.
Odum, Howard W. Race and Rumors of Race: Challenge to American Crisis .
Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 1943.
O’Reilly, Kenneth, and David Gallen, eds. Black Americans: The FBI Files. New
York: Carroll and Graf Publishers, Inc., 1994.


--- PAGE 357 ---
348 Bibliography
Ownby, Ted. Subduing Satan: Religion, Recreation, and Manhood in the Rural
South, 1865–1920 . Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 1990.
Parker, Thomas F., ed. Violence in the U.S. Vol. 1, 1956–1967 . New York: Facts on
File, 1974.
Patterson, Orlando. Slavery and Social Death: A Comparative Study. Cambridge:
Harvard University Press, 1982.
Payne, Charles M. I’ve Got the Light of Freedom: The Organizing Tradition and
the Mississippi Freedom Struggle. Berkeley: University of California Press,
1995.
Pearson, Hugh. The Shadow of the Panther: Huey Newton and the Price of Black
Power in America. Reading, Mass.: Addison-Wesley Publishing Co., 1994.
Péristiany, Jean Georges, ed. Honour and Shame: The Values of Mediterranean
Society. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1966.
Phadke, Y. D. ‘‘The Historical Background of Mass Violence in India.’’ In The
Politics of Mass Violence in India, edited by S. P. Aiyar, 44–52. Bombay: P. C.
Manaktalas and Sons, 1967.
Piven, Frances Fox, and Richard Cloward. Poor People’s Movements. New York:
Vintage Books, 1979.
Raines, Howell. My Soul Is Rested: Movement Days in the Deep South
Remembered. New York: G. P. Putnam’s Sons, 1977.
Reavis, Dick J. If White Kids Die: Memories of a Civil Rights Movement Volunteer.
Denton: University of North Texas Press, 2001.
Robinson, Jo Ann Gibson. The Montgomery Bus Boycott and the Women Who
Started It: The Memoir of Jo Ann Robinson Gibson. Edited by David J. Garrow.
Knoxville: University of Tennessee Press, 1987.
Rothschild, Mary A. A Case of Black and White: The Northern Volunteers and the
Southern Freedom Summers, 1964–1965 . Westport, Conn.: Greenwood Press,
1982.
Rotundo, E. Anthony. American Manhood: Transformations in Masculinity from
the Revolution to the Modern Era. New York: Basic Books, 1993.
Rustin, Bayard. ‘‘The Meaning of the March on Washington,’’ in Black Protest
Thought in the Twentieth Century, edited by August Meier, Elliott Rudwick,
and Francis L. Broderick. 1965. Reprint, Indianapolis: Bobbs-Merrill, 1971.
Sellers, Cleveland, with Robert Terrell. The River of No Return: The
Autobiography of a Black Militant and the Life and Death of SNCC . New York:
William Morrow and Co., 1973.
Sharp, Gene. Gandhi as a Political Strategist. Boston: Porter Sargent, 1979.
— — —. ‘‘The Lesson of Eichmann: A Review-Essay on Hannah Arendt’s Eichmann
in Jerusalem.’’ Social Power and Political Freedom. Boston: Porter Sargent
Publishers, 1980.
Shugg, Roger W. Origins of Class Struggle in Louisiana: A Social History of White
Farmers and Laborers during Slavery and After, 1840–1875 . Baton Rouge:
Louisiana State University Press, 1939.


--- PAGE 358 ---
Bibliography 349
Simpson, James B., comp. Simpson’s Contemporary Quotations. Boston:
Houghton Mifﬂin, 1988.
Sobel, Lester, ed. Civil Rights, 1960–1966 . New York: Facts on File, 1967.
Sorel, Georges. Reﬂections on Violence. Translated by T. E. Hulme and Jay Roth,
with an introduction by Edward A. Shils. Glencoe, Ill.: Free Press, 1950.
Sorensen, Theodore C. Kennedy. New York: Harper and Row, 1965.
Sutherland, Elizabeth. Letters from Mississippi. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1965.
Tolstoy, Leo. Tolstoy’s Writings on Civil Disobedience and Nonviolence. New York:
Bergman, 1967.
Tomlinson, T. M. ‘‘Riot Ideology among Urban Negroes.’’ In Riots and Rebellion:
Civil Violence in the Urban Community, edited by Louis H. Masotti and Don R.
Bowen, 417–28. Beverly Hills: Sage Publications, 1968.
Tuck, Stephen G. N. Beyond Atlanta: The Struggle for Racial Equality in Georgia,
1940–1980 . Athens: University of Georgia Press, 2000.
Tushnet, Mark V. The NAACP’s Legal Strategy against Segregated Education,
1925–1950 . Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 1987.
Tyson, Timothy B. Radio Free Dixie: Robert F. Williams and the Roots of Black
Power. Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 1999.
Umoja, Akinyele Omowale, ‘‘Repression Breeds Resistance: The Black
Liberation Army and the Radical Legacy of the Black Panther Party.’’ In
Liberation, Imagination, and the Black Panther Party: A New Look at the
Panthers and Their Legacy, edited by Kathleen Cleaver and George
Katsiaﬁcas. New York: Routledge, 2001.
U.S. Commission on Civil Rights. Justice in Jackson, Mississippi: Hearing Held in
Jackson, Miss., February 16–20, 1965 . Vols. 1 and 2. New York: Arno Press and
the New York Times, 1971.
Vandal, Gilles. Rethinking Southern Violence: Homicides in Post–Civil War
Louisiana, 1866–1884 . Columbus: Ohio State University Press, 2000.
Van Deburg, William L. New Day in Babylon: The Black Power Movement and
American Culture, 1965–1975 . Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1992.
Viorst, Milton. Fire in the Streets: America in the 1960s. New York: Simon and
Schuster, 1979.
Weisbrot, Robert. Freedom Bound: A History of America’s Civil Rights Movement .
New York: Norton, 1990.
Wharton, Vernon Lane. The Negro in Mississippi, 1865–1890 . James Sprunt
Studies in History and Political Science, vol. 28. Chapel Hill: University of
North Carolina Press, 1947.
Williams, Robert F. Negroes with Guns. Edited by Marc Schleifer. New York:
Marzani and Munsell, Inc., 1962.
Wofford, Harris. Of Kennedys and Kings: Making Sense of the Sixties. New York:
Farrar, Straus and Giroux, 1980.
Wyatt-Brown, Bertram. Southern Honor: Ethics and Behavior in the Old South .
New York: Oxford University Press, 1982.


--- PAGE 359 ---
350 Bibliography
— — —. The Shaping of Southern Culture, 1765–1865: Honor, Grace, and War,
1760s–1890s . Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 2001.
Wynn, Neil A. The Afro-American and the Second World War. New York: Holmes
and Meier Publishers, 1976.
Youth of the Rural Organizing and Cultural Center. Mind Stayed on Freedom:
The Civil Rights Struggle in the Rural South, an Oral History . Boulder, Colo.:
Westview Press, 1991.
Zieger, Robert H. Rebuilding the Pulp and Paper Makers Union, 1933–1941 .
Knoxville: University of Tennessee Press, 1984.
Articles
Cottrol, Robert J., and Raymond T. Diamond. ‘‘The Second Amendment:
Toward an Afro-Americanist Reconsideration.’’ Georgetown Law Journal, no.
80 (1991): 309–61.
Estes, Steve. ‘‘Race, Masculinity, and the 1968 Memphis Sanitation Strike.’’
Labor History 41, no. 2 (May 2000): 153–70.
Garrow, David J. ‘‘The FBI and Martin Luther King.’’ Atlantic Monthly, July–
August 2002, 80–88.
Gorn, Elliott. ‘‘ ‘Gouge and Bite, Pull Hair and Scratch’: The Social Signiﬁcance
of Fighting in the Southern Backcountry.’’ American Historical Review 90
(February 1985): 18–43.
Korstad, Robert, and Nelson Lichtenstein. ‘‘Opportunities Found and Lost:
Labor, Radicals, and the Early Civil Rights Movement.’’ Journal of American
History 75, no. 3 (December 1988): 786–811.
Mayﬁeld, Julian. ‘‘The Monroe Kidnapping.’’ West Indian Gazette and Afro-Asian
Caribbean News. Reprinted in House Un-American Activities Committee,
‘‘Testimony of Robert F. Williams,’’ 144–48.
Norwood, Stephen H. ‘‘Bogalusa Burning: The War against Biracial Unionism in
the Deep South, 1919.’’ Journal of Southern History 63, no. 3 (August 1997):
591–628.
Quick, Amy. ‘‘The History of Bogalusa, the ‘Magic City’ of Louisiana.’’ Louisiana
Historical Quarterly 29, no. 1 (January 1946): 74–178.
Rony, Vera. ‘‘Bogalusa: The Economics of Tragedy.’’ Dissent 13, no. 4 (May–
June): 234–42.
Schultz, John. ‘‘An Interview with Robert F. Williams.’’ Studies on the Left: A
Journal of Research, Social Theory, and Review  2, no. 3 (1962): 51–62.
Thornton, J. Mills. ‘‘Challenge and Response in the Montgomery Bus Boycott of
1955–1956.’’ Alabama Review 33 (July 1980): 163–235.
Tyson, Timothy B. ‘‘Robert F. Williams, ‘Black Power,’ and the Roots of the
African Freedom Struggle.’’ Journal of American History (September 1998):
540–70.


--- PAGE 360 ---
Bibliography 351
Dissertations and Theses
Crosby, Emilye. ‘‘Common Courtesy: The Civil Rights Movement in Claiborne
County, Mississippi.’’ Ph.D. diss., Indiana University, 1995.
Estes, Stephen Sanford, Jr. ‘‘ ‘i am a man!’: Race, Manhood, and the Struggle for
Civil Rights.’’ Ph.D. diss., University of North Carolina, 2001.
Hill, Rickey. ‘‘The Character of Black Politics in a Small Southern Town
Dominated by a Multinational Corporation: Bogalusa, Louisiana, 1965–1975.’’
Master’s thesis, Atlanta University, 1977.
Joyce, Thomas. ‘‘The ‘Double V’ Was for Victory: Black Soldiers, the Black
Protest, and World War II.’’ Ph.D. diss., Ohio State University, 1993.
Rich, Evelyn. ‘‘Ku Klux Klan Ideology, 1954–1988.’’ Ph.D. diss., Boston
University, 1988.
Umoja, Akinyele K. ‘‘Eye for an Eye: The Role of Armed Resistance in the
Mississippi Freedom Movement.’’ Ph.D. diss., Emory University, 1996.


--- PAGE 361 ---
Index
Acheson, Meldon, 165–66, 174
Adams, Gardner S., 115
Adams, Vertrees, 114, 140, 240
Ainsworth, Robert A., Jr., 242
Alexander, Avery, 179
Alexander, Shana, 137–38
Amos, Henry, 15, 32, 35, 50, 55, 67–68
Amos, Ruth, 15, 46
Anderson, Fletcher, 131, 139, 245
Anthony, Paul, 147
Applewhite, Albert, 101, 122
Applewhite, Louis, 122
Armed self-defense: emerges to coun-
ter Klan terror and enforce Civil
Rights Act, 4–5; opposition to
serves as litmus test for national
civil rights organizations, 6–9; hid-
den from public to perpetuate non-
violent image, 21, 181–82, 276–77
(n. 4); collective forms of pro-
hibited, 24; and defense groups
prior to Deacons, 276–77 (n. 4);
drives wedge between middle and
working classes, 293 (n. 20). See
also Honor; Manhood ideal
Austin, Henry, 118, 213, 220, 240, 253;
background, 140–41; and shooting
of Alton Crowe, 140–43; Deacons
membership, 141, 142–43
Baily, William, Jr., 82
Baines, Bruce, 248
Baker, William, 75
Baldwin, Shead, 204
Balltown Riot, 78
Barnes, Sam, 101, 110, 126–27, 158, 241
Belafonte, Harry, 139
Belfrage, Sally, 2–3, 49
Bennett, Lerone, 8
Bernard, Jesse, 28, 203
Better Citizens and Voters League,
168–69
Bevel, James, 22, 139, 226, 261
Bims, Hamilton, 162–63
Birmingham, Alabama: riot in, 259–
60
Black autonomism, 269–70
Black nationalism, 269–72
Black Panther Party, 218
Black Power movement, 179, 249–50
Blumberg, Ralph, 85, 102–3, 115
Bogalusa, Louisiana: early history, 78–
80; and Crown-Zellerbach Corpora-
tion, 80–81; and Hays Committee
debacle, 85–91; and ﬁrst desegrega-
tion tests, 91–99; and Community
Affairs Committee, 115; and ﬁrst
major protest march, 118–22; and
‘‘Bussie Committee,’’ 125–29; and
Klan counteroffensive, 129–32; and
Hicks v. Knight hearings, 138–39;
and Alton Crowe shooting and
aftermath, 140–44, 214–15; and
intervention of Johnson administra-


--- PAGE 362 ---
354 Index
tion, 154–57; city ofﬁcials and Klan
comply with federal court orders,
157–59; and fall school boycott,
238–40; and ‘‘Bloody Wednesday’’
riot, 240–41; Bogalusa to Baton
Rouge march, 251–53
Bogalusa, Louisiana, Deacons chap-
ter: confrontations with Klan, 1–2,
13, 130, 251; founding by Jonesboro
chapter, 103–6, 108; leadership,
109, 110; membership, 111; and
Alton Crowe shooting, 140–44; and
Deacons organizing in Chicago,
228–30; leadership jailed, 239;
Bogalusa to Baton Rouge march,
251–53
Bogalusa Civic and Voters League: his-
tory prior to arrival of CORE, 83–
84; leadership changes, 92–93, 99–
100; wins concessions in spring
campaign, 125–28; organizes march
to defend right of armed self-
defense, 153; fund-raising in North,
218–20; and Martin Luther King,
229. See also Bogalusa, Louisiana;
Hicks v. Knight
Bogalusa Community Relations Com-
mission, 83
Bogalusa Daily News, 84–85, 87, 89–
90
Bond, Horace Mann, 78, 82
Boston, Massachusetts, Deacons chap-
ter, 224
Boxley, Clifford, 203
Bradford, Percy Lee, 15, 32, 50, 53–55,
57, 71, 110
Bradley, Tom, 139
Brookins, H. Hartford, 138
Brooks, Fred, 32, 33, 35, 39–41, 43, 69
Brown, H. ‘‘Rap,’’ 252, 258
Burke, Jimmy Dane, 121
Burkes, Herman, 210
Burris, Royan, 1–2, 110, 113–14, 213
Bussie, Victor, 125, 129
Bussie Committee, 125–29
Caine, Ed, 210, 212
Cambridge, Maryland: riot in, 260
Canton, Mississippi: Deacons activity
in, 212
Carmichael, Stokely, 19, 246, 250,
256
Centreville, Mississippi, Deacons
chapter, 210–12
Chambers, Leon, 212
Chance, Jerry M., 85, 101
Charleston, South Carolina: riot in,
260
Chicago, Illinois, Deacons chapter,
225–32; protects Martin Luther
King, 231–32
Christenberry, Herbert W.: role in
Bogalusa, 138–39, 150, 154–58, 240,
242
Christian Mothers of Bogalusa, 151
Christmas, Charles, 94, 157, 242
Citizens Council (Bogalusa), 125–26
Claiborne Parish Civic League, 171–72
Clark, Felton, 153
Clark, Jim, 125
Cleveland, Ohio, Deacons chapter, 224
Clurman, Michael, 237
Cockern, Virgil, 10
Coleman, M. M., 168–69
Collins, Leroy, 88, 112
Collins, Virginia, 181–82, 223–24, 256
Columbia, Mississippi, Deacons chap-
ter, 212–13
Community Affairs Committee (CAC),
115, 129–30
Community Coalition for Black Power,
232
Community Relations Service, 85, 122;
memorandum on Deacons to John
McKeithen and Hubert Humphrey,
156


--- PAGE 363 ---
Index 355
Congress on Racial Equality (CORE):
history, 17; paciﬁst principles of,
17–21; and community organizing
versus federal intervention strat-
egies, 48–49; targets Jonesboro and
Bogalusa, 69–70; and Bogalusa
desegregation tests, 91–99; policy
toward Deacons, 133, 139–40, 144–
45, 163
Consumer League, 180
Conyers, John: supports Deacons, 219
Cook, Linda, 119
Cornelius, Lavernon, 228
Cox, Bobbie, 214
Cox, Elton, 139
Craven, Gary, 173
Crawford, Edward ‘‘Fats,’’ 227, 230–31
Crosby, Emilye, 209
Crowe, Alton, 141–43
Crown-Zellerbach Corporation: in
Bogalusa, 80–82, 84, 89–90
Cutrer, Jesse, 83–84, 87–91, 93, 99,
102, 114, 120–23, 126–29
Dade, J. W., 13
Dahmer, Vernon, 207
Davis, Alfred Lee, 209
Davis, Joseph ‘‘Joe,’’ 177
Davis, William, 211
Dawson, Artis Ray, 175, 177
Dawson, L. C., 91
Deacons for Defense and Justice: and
confrontational protest versus cul-
tural resistance, 2–4, 276 (n. 4),
288–90 (n. 31), 333–34 (n. 36); rep-
resent new strategy, 2–9, 62, 149,
160–62, 163–64, 206, 261–62, 264–
71, 276–77 (n. 4); founded in
Jonesboro, 42–47; role of women
in, 45–46, 203; selection of name,
46–47; membership, 53–54, 167;
differences from preceding armed
self-defense groups, 58, 166–67,
311 (n. 2); charter and right to bear
arms, 60–62; efforts to disarm and
destroy by government, 112, 143,
152–53, 212, 251; and generational
conﬂicts in their communities, 120,
124, 172; claim to have machine
guns and grenades, 134–35; and
Alton Crowe shooting, 140–46;
impact on Klan and segregationists,
143–44, 181–82, 243–45; and white
liberals, 145; chapters and afﬁliates,
167; burn Klansman in efﬁgy, 173;
and Charles Evers, 189–90; crit-
icism of nonviolence, 190–95, 202,
225, 230; and retaliatory violence,
190–95, 202–3; coercive tactics
against black middle class and
‘‘Uncle Toms,’’ 193–94, 202–3, 208,
241; autonomous nature of chap-
ters, 199; role in overcoming fear
and passivity, 201, 291–92 (n. 56);
spark 1965 ‘‘Mississippi Klan Panic,’’
243–45; taunt Klan by wearing Klan
robes, 244; and Meredith March,
245–49; and Black Power, 250–51;
accomplishments, 264–65; organiz-
ing model used by other groups, 277
(n. 5); conﬂict with Christian paci-
ﬁsm, 319 (n. 54). See also Federal
Bureau of Investigation; Honor;
Manhood ideal; McKeithen, John;
and individual Deacons chapters
Dennis, Dave, 20, 49, 266
Dent, Albert, 153
Dexter, Clement and Malvina, 218
Diggs, Charles: supports Deacons,
219
Dittmer, John, 260
Doar, John, 38; legal actions in Boga-
lusa, 154–59
Dodd, George, 172
Douglas, Nils, 138
Douglass, Frederick, 266–67


--- PAGE 364 ---
356 Index
Ebony: coverage of Deacons, 162–63;
Martin Luther King article con-
demning armed self-defense, 249
Edwards, Mississippi: Deacons activity
in, 212
Elie, Lolis, 126
Ellis, James M., 87, 101
Erwin, W. W., 239
Eutaw, Alabama: Deacons activity in,
213
Evers, Charles, 195–96, 210–11, 247;
initially supports Deacons, 146,
182–83, 185–90, 205; endorses
armed self-defense, 185–89; battle
with MFDP, 188; displaces old lead-
ership in Natchez, 204; denied
credit for successes, 205–6; uses
Deacons’ strategy in Natchez, 206
Evers, Medgar, 15; considers using
guerilla warfare in Mississippi, 182–
83
Expose, Don, 239, 240
Farmer, James, 17, 69–71, 114, 117,
120–21, 123–25, 128, 146, 151; on
Deacons, 147, 151, 163
Farmer, Paul, 1, 125
Farmer, Saxon, 94, 125–26, 131, 157,
242
Fayette, Mississippi, Deacons chapter,
206
Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI):
harassment of Deacons, 53–55, 70–
71, 112–13
Fenton, Charlie, 42–50, 52, 57, 65–66,
103–4, 106–7, 133; opposition to
armed guards at Freedom House,
43–44; role in founding Deacons,
52–50
Ferguson, William ‘‘Bilbo,’’ 210–12
Ferriday, Louisiana, Deacons chapter,
165–66, 173–79
Finch, Anselm Joseph, 211
Firmin, Otis, 191–95
Fitzgerald, John, 190
Flannagan, W. C., 13
Flug, Michael, 21
Folsom, Jim, 89
Forman, Lenox, 212
Francis, E. N., 13
Freedom Ferriday Movement (FFM),
175–76
Freeman, Donald, 221
Frieberg, Stan, 103
Friedman, Terry, 127
Friends of the Deacons for Defense
and Justice, 221
Gallaspy, John N., 115
Garret, J. L., 258
Gee, John, 173
Gillespie, Paul, 85
GOAL (Group on Advanced Leader-
ship), 218–19
Goings, Adrian, Jr., 242
Goodyear, Charles, 78–79
Goodyear, Frank, 78–79
Graham, Victor, 176
Grambling, Louisiana, Deacons chap-
ter, 168, 173
Gravel, Camille, 125
Gray, Jesse, 221
Great Society Movement, 168
Great Southern Lumber Company,
78–80
Green, T. L., 173
Greene, George, 184
Greenville, Mississippi: Deacons
activity in, 212
Gregory, Dick, 124–25, 139, 220, 246
Gremillion, Jack, 74, 112
Groom, Benjamin, 211
Guyot, Lawrence, 196–97
Haley, Richard, 107, 154; on CORE’s
policy toward Deacons, 133, 145


--- PAGE 365 ---
Index 357
Hall, Prathia, 19
Hamilton, J. D., 169–70
Hamilton, John, 178
Hammond, Louisiana, 88
Harper, James, 169–71
Harris, Eland, 32, 35, 40
Harris, John, 231
Harry, Beatrice, 109
Hatcher, Richard, 232
Hattiesburg, Mississippi, Deacons
chapter, 207, 212
Hays, Brooks, 85, 89–90
Hays Committee, 85–90
Hearn, Fred, 13
Heilbron, Jerry, 122
Helm, Jack, 126
Henderson, North Carolina: riot in,
260
Henderson, Thelton, 155
Henry, Aaron, 195
Henry, Joseph P., Jr., 181
Henry, Richard: raises funds for
Bogalusa movement, 218–19; calls
for black ‘‘riﬂe clubs,’’ 223
Hicks, Gregory, 126–27
Hicks, Robert ‘‘Bob,’’ 136, 239, 253;
tests public accommodations in
Bogalusa, 91–95; provides refuge
from Klan, 98–101; helps found
Bogalusa Deacons, 103–9; commits
to armed self-defense, 106–10;
attacked by Klan and police in Cas-
sidy Park, 126–27; on need for Dea-
cons, 153; and Deacons organizing
in Chicago, 229
Hicks, Valeria ‘‘Jackie,’’ 93–95, 98–99,
113, 118, 126–27
Hicks v. Knight, 138–39, 150, 156–59,
240–43; effect on law enforcement
outside Bogalusa, 173
Hill, Hattie Mae, 141
Hill, John, 240
Hobson, Julius, 224
Holliday, Doyle, 132
Hollingsworth, James, 96
Holmes County, Mississippi: Deacons
activity in, 212
Homer, Louisiana, Deacons chapter,
171–73
Honor: importance in Deacons strat-
egy, 27–29, 76, 140–41, 149, 163–64,
192, 226, 265–68, 318–19 (n. 50);
as deterrent to attacks, 76, 296
(n. 39); and violence and self-
respect, 265–68, 318–19 (n. 50); in
southern culture, 285–86 (n. 39);
and patriarchy, 286–87 (n. 42);
linked to role of protector, 287
(n. 42); tied to risking death, 317
(n. 29); conﬂict with Christian paci-
ﬁsm, 319 (n. 54). See also Manhood
ideal
Hoover, John Edgar, 53, 55, 70, 73; tar-
gets Deacons, 112–13
House, Lou, 226
House Un-American Activities Com-
mittee (HUAC): hearings on Loui-
siana Klan, 243
Houston, Texas, Deacons chapter, 254
Humphrey, Hubert, 88, 125, 156; inter-
venes in Bogalusa, 154–55
Hunter, Archie, 33, 165–66
International Workers of the World
(IWW): Bogalusa campaign, 78
Jackson, Cossetta, 70
Jackson, James, 29, 189–95
Jackson, Jesse, 232
Jackson, Mississippi: Deacons activity
in, 212; riot in, 260
Jackson, Y. D., 40
Jacksonboro, South Carolina: Dea-
cons activity in, 214
Jackson State College: riot in, 261
Jacksonville, Florida: riot in, 260


--- PAGE 366 ---
358 Index
Jacobs, Elmo, 57, 76–77
Jefferson County, Florida: Deacons
activity in, 214
Jenkins, Gayle, 83, 91, 100, 239
Jet: coverage of Deacons, 138, 148–49;
importance in civil rights move-
ment, 138, 162, 307 (n. 65)
John Birch Society: opposition to Dea-
cons, 219–20
Johnson, Annie Purnell, 25, 36, 56, 65
Johnson, Bennett, 232
Johnson, Glenn, 66
Johnson, Harvey, 46, 62, 66, 70–71
Johnson, Kimme, 115
Johnson, Lyndon, 5, 41, 71–73, 112;
intervenes in Bogalusa, 154–55;
reluctant to counter Klan, 242–43
Johnson, Paul B.: orders National
Guard into Natchez, 195
Joliff, James, 211
Jones, Archie, 204
Jones, Harlell, 224
Jones, Henry, 210–11
Jones, James, 19
Jones, Leroi (Amiri Baraka), 60, 221
Jones, Mike, 128
Jones, Sally: sings at Bogalusa fund-
raiser, 220
Jonesboro, Louisiana: early history of
black community in, 10–14; Voters
League in, 13; voting rights suit in,
14; mass meeting as control mecha-
nism in, 14–15; conservative role of
black church in, 15–16; positive role
of fraternal orders in, 16; desegrega-
tion campaign in, 35–37; formation
of Deacons for Defense and Justice
in, 38–51 passim; school boycott in,
65–75; school boycott in settled by
McKeithen, 73–75. See also Jones-
boro, Louisiana, Deacons chapter
Jonesboro, Louisiana, Deacons chap-
ter: and informally armed defense
groups, 24–25; debates nonviolence
with CORE, 26–29; formation of
black police unit, 31–32; and deseg-
regation campaign, 35–37; and Klan
parade, 36–37; formation of Dea-
cons for Defense and Justice, 38–51;
ofﬁcers, 50, 294 (n. 25); member-
ship, 53–54; and Jackson High
School boycott, 64–75
Justice Department, U.S.: claims fed-
eralism doctrine prevented it from
protecting civil rights activists, 38,
154–56; ﬁles suits in Bogalusa, 124,
154–59; fails to act effectively
against Klan, 243. See also Hicks v.
Knight
Katz, Alan, 160
Katzenbach, Nicholas, 112, 124
Kennedy, John F., 81; fails to protect
civil rights activists and counter
Klan, 155–56, 242–43, 259; fear of
black violence motivates civil rights
agenda, 262–64, 331–32 (n. 22)
Kennedy, Robert, 263
Kilgore, Rev. Thomas, 138
King, Ed, 182
King, Martin Luther, Jr., 2–4, 6–8, 15,
19, 63, 238; strategy contrasted with
that of Deacons, 63; condemns Dea-
cons and armed self-defense, 144,
162, 249, 306 (n. 54); repudiated by
Deacons, 162, 225, 230; federal
intervention strategy, 197; accepts
protection by Deacons, 206, 325
(n. 51); rejected in Watts, 235; and
Meredith March conﬂict with Dea-
cons, 245–50; and Black Power,
249–50; raises specter of black vio-
lence, 262–63; views on failures of
civil rights strategy, 270–71; public
versus private views on non-
violence, 279 (n. 14)


--- PAGE 367 ---
Index 359
Kirk, Claudell, 227, 230
Kirkpatrick, Frederick Douglas, 35,
63–65, 75, 103, 110, 162, 168, 254;
early history, 31; role in black police
unit, 31–33, 36–42; commitment to
armed self-defense, 45–48; and
Bogalusa Deacons, 103–7; and
Homer Deacons, 171–72
Knight, Claxton, 89, 93–95, 114, 135,
156–58, 240
Koonce, J. D., 65, 71, 73
Kosciusko, Mississippi: Deacons
activity in, 206–7
Ku Klux Klan: confrontations with
Deacons, 1–2, 130, 251; 18 July
Bogalusa rally, 143; intimidation in
Ferriday, 174. See also Original
Knights of the Ku Klux Klan; United
Klans of America
Ladner, Dorie, 197
Lambert, Don, 123
Landry, Lawrence, 232
Laurel, Mississippi: Deacons activity
in, 207
Lawson, James, 18, 19, 26, 236
Lee, Howard M., 86–87
LeSeur, Ricque, 221
Lesser, Mike, 21, 29, 34, 43, 49
Levine, Anita, 116
Lewis, Frederick, 171–73
Lewis, John: commitment to non-
violence, 18
Lewis, Robert ‘‘Buck,’’ 176
Lexington, Mississippi: Deacons
activity in, 212
Lexington, North Carolina: riot in,
260
Liberty, Aaron, 212
Life: coverage of Deacons, 137–38
Liuzzo, Viola, 72–73, 76, 112, 116
Loe, Newt T., 22, 33–34, 36–37, 57
Lomax, Louis, 136, 152–53; raises
funds for Bogalusa movement, 217,
219
Los Angeles Times: coverage of Dea-
cons, 134–37
Lott, Bill, 103
Louisiana Commission on Race Rela-
tions, 154
Louisiana Youth for Black Power, 179
Lowndes County, Alabama, Deacons
chapter, 213
Lucas, Raleigh, 241
Lynch, Connie, 143–44
Lynch, Lincoln, 9, 179, 234
Lyons, Sidney J., 240
Madison County, Florida, 214
Magee, L. C., 115
Magee, Russell, 157
Major, Lou, 84–85, 87
Malcolm X, 59–60, 163; calls for black
‘‘riﬂe clubs,’’ 223
Mallory, Mae, 221
Malray, Harvey, 172–73
Manhood ideal: and respect in armed
self-defense movement, 8–9, 27–
29, 265–68, 318–19 (n. 50); plays
central role in Deacons strategy, 27–
29, 76, 140–41, 149, 161, 192, 226;
and patriarchy, 309–11 (n. 34)
Marshall, Burke: on fear of guerilla
warfare in South, 159
Martzell, Jack, 126
McBride, W. D., 33
McComb, Mississippi: riot in, 260
McCoy, Ray, 228
McDaniels, L. C., 143
McDonald, Gable, 212
McElveen, Ray: arrested for murder of
black deputy, 131–32
McKeithen, John, 90, 91, 99, 102, 112,
115, 119, 123–26, 156, 252; negotia-
tions in Jonesboro, 73–75; criticism
of and efforts to destroy Deacons,


--- PAGE 368 ---
360 Index
112, 143, 152–53; on O’Neal Moore
killing, 131; secretly meets with Klan
in Bogalusa, 131; negotiations in
Bogalusa, 151–53
McKenzie, Elmo, 211
McKissick, Floyd, 246, 248
McLaurin, Charles, 19
McNeese, Dorothy, 159
Mellion, Willie, 32
Meredith March, 245–49
Meridian, Mississippi: Deacons
activity in, 212
Metcalfe, George, 184–85
Middle class, African American, 62–
63; and conservative nature of
black church, 15–16; and conserva-
tive nature of black teachers, 64–
65; black working class protests
against in Deacons’ communities,
66, 172, 175, 238–39; role in civil
rights movement, 281–82 (n. 12)
Miller, Steve, 91–93, 96–99, 103–4,
117
Minden, Louisiana, Deacons chapter,
168–71
Mississippi Freedom Democratic Party
(MFDP): sponsors public meeting
for Deacons, 182; conﬂict with
Charles Evers, 188; in Natchez, 196–
97
Mitchell, Catherine Patterson, 21–22,
27–29, 32, 35, 40, 46, 73, 75–76
Mitchell, Danny, 12, 22, 24, 32, 40, 73
Mondy, Joshua, 101
Moore, O’Neal: murdered by Klan,
131–32
Moore, Ronnie, 20, 21, 27, 34, 48, 57,
76, 91, 104, 115, 160, 214; meets with
Bogalusa ofﬁcials, 83–84; and
school boycott meeting, 120–21
Morris, Frank, 174
Morris, Herrod, 241
Morton, Leroy, 72
Moses, Andrew, 82, 83, 90–95, 99
Moses, Robert ‘‘Bob,’’ 18–19
Muhammad, Elijah, 216
Najah (Ahmed Saud Ibriahim Kahafei
Abboud Najah), 178
Natchez, Mississippi: Metcalfe bomb-
ing and riots in, 184–87; history,
187–88; October 1965 demonstra-
tions and arrests in, 195–96; suc-
cess of boycott campaign in, 204–6
Natchez, Mississippi, Deacons chap-
ter: founding, 190–95; ofﬁcers, 195;
fund-raising, 203–4
National Association for the Advance-
ment of Colored People (NAACP),
17; in Bogalusa, 82; opposes armed
self-defense in Natchez, 190
National States Rights Party, 150
Nation of Islam (Black Muslims), 216
Nealy, Sandy, 195
Nelson, W. J., 124
Newark, New Jersey: Deacons activity
in, 323 (n. 26)
New Orleans, Louisiana, Deacons
chapter, 179–81
Newsweek: coverage of Deacons, 147–
48, 230
New York Post: coverage of Deacons,
119
New York Times: coverage of Deacons,
56–58, 63, 112, 132–33, 160–62
Nonviolence: myth as driving force in
civil rights movement, 2–9, 258–64;
as pragmatic reform strategy rather
than philosophy, 2–9, 280 (n. 22);
as way of avoiding white attacks,
20; varying degree of commitment
to among activists, 20; and federal
intervention strategy, 20, 197;
appeals to conscience of enemy, 22;
use by CORE in Jonesboro, 22–23;
problems with application in United


--- PAGE 369 ---
Index 361
States, 23–24; debate over between
paciﬁsts and local people, 25–29;
discourages black male participa-
tion in civil rights movement, 27–
29; limitations of, 236–38, 265–68,
270–71; imposed on southern civil
rights movement by paciﬁsts, 236–
38, 325 (n. 6); ineffective without
threat of violence, 258–64, 329
(n. 2), 330–31 (n. 17); deﬁned, 280
(n. 23); and theory of ‘‘legitimating’’
power, 283–84 (n. 23)
Nosser, John, 189, 195
O’Keefe, Michael, 125
Organization for Black Power, 222
Original Knights of the Ku Klux Klan,
86; founding, 84; change name to
Anti-Communist Christian Associa-
tion, 86; members in police depart-
ment, 87, 123; terror campaign in
Bogalusa, 100–101; attack Ralph
Blumberg, 102–3; violent response
to Bogalusa concessions to Voters
League, 129–32; leadership, 157;
Justice Department suit against,
157, 242–43; in Ferriday, 176–77; in
Natchez, 176–77. See also Hays
Committee; Hicks v. Knight
Patterson, Catherine. See Mitchell,
Catherine Patterson
Peevy, Adrian, 22, 31–32, 36–37, 41,
47, 73
Perez, Leander, 88, 181
Phillips, Abraham, 179
Pincus, Ed, 28, 191
Plaquemines Parish, 181
Pleasant Grove Baptist Church, 16
Plymouth, North Carolina: Deacons
activity in, 214
Pointe Coupee Parish: and Deacons,
179
Poplarville, Mississippi: Deacons
activity in, 212
Port Gibson, Mississippi: riot in, 210
Port Gibson, Mississippi, Deacons
chapter, 207–10; forces disarma-
ment with Klan, 209–10
Pounds, Randle C., 121, 158, 242
Powledge, Fred, 56–57
Princess Anne, Maryland: riot in, 
260
Qualls, Ceola, 32
Radcliffe, Jones, 115
Rarick, John, 125
Reeb, James, 69
Reed, Roy, 160–62
Rester, Robert, 158, 251
Reuther, Walter, 262
Revolutionary Action Movement
(RAM): arms blacks in Mississippi
Delta, 19; relationship with Dea-
cons, 60, 221–23, 255–56; calls for
black ‘‘riﬂe clubs,’’ 223
Reynolds, Isaac, 140
Rich, Marvin, 37
Richardson, Jim Warren, 239
Riots: importance of Watts riot, 235–
38 passim; impact in South, 259–
62, 315–16 (n. 9); impact in North,
264
Robinson, J. T., 199
Rogers, Nahaz, 226, 232
Rustin, Bayard, 17, 235, 261
St. Augustine, Florida: riot in, 260
St. Francisville, Louisiana, Deacons
chapter, 168, 206, 315 (n. 58)
St. George, South Carolina: Deacons
activity in, 214
Saints of St. George, 214
Sass, Frank, 98, 113, 242
Satcher, Olin, 67, 70


--- PAGE 370 ---
362 Index
Savannah, Georgia: riot in, 260
Scott, Elmo, 209
Seale, Bobby, 218
Segregation: as basis of social order in
South, 24
Sharp, James, 60
Shelton, Robert, 158
Shepherd, Bruce, 85, 87, 114
Shields, Rudy, 206–7
Shuttlesworth, Fred, Jr., 22
Sims, Charles ‘‘Charlie,’’ 104, 113, 116,
180, 228, 240, 253, 257; background,
109–11; on nonviolence, 137; at
CORE convention, 140; meets with
John McKeithen, 152
Singleman, George L., 125–26
Skiffer, George, 241
Smith, Don, 138
Smith, Pam, 172
Smith, Vernon, 177
‘‘Snipers’’ group, 178
Socialist Workers Party (SWP), 227–
28
South, Wesley, 226, 231
Southern Christian Leadership Con-
ference (SCLC), 17, 190, 226–27
Southern Regional Council (SRC):
opposes Deacons, 147
Sparticist League, 220
Spiers, Arnold, 87, 89, 121, 156–58
Stanford, Max, 60, 221
Stewart, John, 131
Stokes, James, 62, 186–87, 195, 199–
204
Stoner, J. B., 143–44
Student Nonviolent Coordinating
Committee (SNCC), 17, 25, 155;
debate over paciﬁst principles, 17–
21; leader Bob Moses initially
opposes local armed self-defense,
18, 283 (n. 21); advocates non-
violence in Natchez, 196–97; and
federal intervention strategy, 197,
317–18 (n. 37); shifts to voter regis-
tration, 288–89 (n. 31)
Sullivan, Joseph, 86
Talley, Bascom, 85, 87–88, 90
Tallulah, Louisiana, Deacons chapter,
173–74
Taylor, Alcie, 104, 110
Temple, Margaret, 36
Terrell, Isaac, 195
Thomas, Earnest ‘‘Chilly Willy,’’ 10,
218, 227–28, 246–49, 253; early life,
25; opposes nonviolence in Jones-
boro, 25, 26–27, 39, 45; helps found
predecessors to Deacons group, 25–
27, 38–39; as Deacons leader, 48;
arrested in school boycott, 67–69;
helps found Bogalusa Deacons,
103–7; in New York Times, 132; in
Minden, 169; trip to Cuba and
China, 254–56. See also Chicago,
Illinois, Deacons chapter; Deacons
for Defense and Justice; Jonesboro,
Louisiana, Deacons chapter
Tillman, Mississippi: Deacons activity
in, 209
Tollivar, Earnest, 211
Tureaud, A. P., 154
Tuskegee, Alabama: Deacons activity
in, 213
Tylertown, Mississippi: Deacons
activity in, 207
United Klans of America, 143, 158; and
1965 ‘‘Mississippi Klan Panic,’’ 243–45
United Rubber Workers Union, 188
U.S. Commission on Civil Rights: in
Natchez, 184
Ussery, Wilfred T., 124
Van Beasley, James, 39–40, 68
Vicksburg, Mississippi: Deacons
activity in, 206–7


--- PAGE 371 ---
Index 363
Vivian, C. T., 226–27
Von Hoffman, Nicholas: on Deacons,
144–45
Voter registration: provokes less vio-
lence than desegregation protest,
29; CORE promotes over desegrega-
tion, 41; local people show little
interest in, 175; intended to divert
activity from desegregation protest,
288–89 (n. 31)
Voters Education Project (VEP): pro-
moted by Kennedy administration
to discourage desegregation pro-
test, 288–89 (n. 31)
Walker, Edwin, 140
Walker, George, 207–9
Wall Street Journal: coverage of Dea-
cons, 146–47
Walterboro, South Carolina: Deacons
activity in, 214
Ware, Bill, 196
Warner, Sidney August, 101
Washington, Booker T., 64
Washington, D.C.: Deacons activity in,
224
Washington, J. D., 206
Washington, J. R., 65
Watkins, Hollis, 19
Weaver, Mike, 22, 35
Weaver, Robert, 34, 35
Webster Parish. See Minden, Loui-
siana, Deacons chapter
Webster Parish United Christian Free-
dom Movement (WPUCFM), 169–
70
Wells, Ruthie, 22, 40
West, Gordon E., 103
Whatley, Charlie, 177–78
Whatley, David, 64, 174, 177–79
White, Charlie, 51, 67, 71
White, Lee, 37
Wilkins, Roy: condemns armed self-
defense in Natchez, 190; opposes
Deacons, 246–47
Wilkinson County. See Centreville,
Mississippi, Deacons chapter;
Woodville, Mississippi, Deacons
chapter
Williams, Charles, 123
Williams, Charles Ray, 101
Williams, Delos, 96, 101
Williams, Hosea, 246
Williams, Robert F., 60, 222, 254, 266;
relationship to Deacons, 220–21, 256
Wilson, Jerome, 129
Wilson, John, 78
Wisdom, John Minor, 242
Women’s Civilian Patrol, 159
Wood, Aubrey, 179–81
Woodville, Mississippi, Deacons chap-
ter, 210–12
Workers World Party, 221
Wyche, Zelma, 173
Wyre, Burtrand, 111
Yates, William ‘‘Bill,’’ 22, 35, 40, 91–95,
103–4, 115, 117–19; tests public
accommodations in Bogalusa, 91–
95; attacked by Klan, 96–99, 118
Young, A. Z., 92, 99–100, 109, 119,
127, 129, 229, 253; confrontations
with Klan, 13
Young, Andrew: sent to Natchez by
SCLC, 190
Young, James, 185, 188, 195, 198, 200–
201
Young, R. T., 124
Young, Whitney: opposes Deacons,
246–47

