=== EXTRACTED TEXT FROM: The-Miseducation-of-the-Negro-by-Dr-Carter-Godwin-Woodson.pdf ===
Extraction Method: PyPDFLoader
Total Pages: 91
Timestamp: 2026-01-04T17:36:18.001626
================================================================================


--- PAGE 1 ---
THE MIS-EDUCATION OF THE NEGRO
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
The Mis-Education of the Negro
by Carter Godwin Woodson 
Edited with an Introduction by Charles H. Wesley
and Thelma D. Perry
First Published in 1933
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Contents
      INTRODUCTION v 
      FOREWORD xxv 
      Preface xxix 
      CHAPTER PAGE 
      I. THE SEAT OF THE TROUBLE 1 
      II. HOW WE MISSED THE MARK 9 
      III. HOW WE DRIFTED AWAY FROM THE TRUTH 17 
      IV. EDUCATION UNDER OUTSIDE CONTROL 26 
      V. THE FAILURE TO LEARN TO MAKE A LIVING 38 
      VI. THE EDUCATED NEGRO LEAVES THE MASSES 52 
      VII. DISSENSION AND WEAKNESS 62 
      VIII. PROFESSIONAL EDUCATION DISCOURAGED 74 
      IX. POLITICAL EDUCATION NEGLECTED 83 
      X. THE LOSS OF VISION 96 
      XI. THE NEED FOR SERVICE RATHER THAN LEADERSHIP 111 
      XII. HIRELINGS IN THE PLACES OF PUBLIC SERVANTS 120 
      XIII. UNDERSTAND THE NEGRO 132 
      XIV. THE NEW PROGRAM 144 
      XV. VOCATIONAL GUIDANCE 157 
      XVI. THE NEW TYPE OF PROFESSIONAL MAN REQUIRED 173 
      XVII. HIGHER STRIVINGS IN THE SERVICE OF THE COUNTRY 181 
      XVIII. THE STUDY OF THE NEGRO 190 
      APPENDIX 199 
      INDEX 207 
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Introduction 
Considerable time has passed since the first printing of this volume, but it is 
significant that it has meaning and direct implications for today's 
consideration. While it does not relate exclusively to Black History it does 
emphasize its instruction, research and writing. In substance Carter Woodson has
 
produced a definitive and constructive critique of the educational system, with 
special reference to its blighting effects on the Negro; and the term he used, 
Mis-education, was the most apt and descriptive word available. It is still, in 
1969, equally as relevant and expressive. Now, however, it is loudly articulated
 
by many voices of Whites as well as Blacks, who likewise challenge the system. 
The most imperative and crucial element in Woodson's concept of mis-education


--- PAGE 2 ---
hinged on the education system's failure to present authentic Negro History in 
schools and the bitter knowledge that there was a scarcity of literature 
available for such a purpose, because most history books gave little or no space
 
to the black man's presence in America. Some of them contained casual references
 
to Negroes but these generally depicted them in menial, subordinate roles, more 
or less sub-human. Such books stressed their good fortune at having been 
exposed, through slavery, to the higher (white man's) civilization. There were 
included derogatory statements relating to the primitive, heathenish quality of 
the African background, but nothing denoting skills, abilities, contributions or
 
potential in the image of the Blacks, in Africa or America. Woodson considered 
this state of affairs deplorable, an American tragedy, dooming the Negro to a 
brain-washed acceptance of the inferior role assigned to him by the dominant 
race, and absorbed by him through his schooling. 
Moreover, the neglect of Afro-American History and distortion of the facts 
concerning Negroes in most history books, deprived the black child and his whole
 
race of a heritage, and relegated him to nothingness and nobodyness. This was 
Woodson's conviction as he stated it in this book and as he lived by it. In his 
Annual Report of the Association for the Study of Negro Life and History for the
 
year ending June 30, 1933, the publication period of Mis-Education, he stated: 
  Regarding the Negro race as a factor in world culture rather than as an 
  element in a sequestered sphere, the Director (Woodson) has recently made two 
  trips to Europe to extend the study of the notice taken of Negroes by European
 
  authors and artists, and to engage a larger number of Europeans and Africans 
  in the study of the past of the Negro. 1 
Thus it is evident that the stress which Dr. Woodson places on historical 
research, writing, and teaching in this volume was not theoretical jargon. It 
represented rather, a firm belief; also a judgement of the available type of 
education that was so strongly oriented as to warrant his complete and selfless 
dedication to its betterment. This devotion became a crusade which, in the above
 
instance, carried him to Europe in an effort to open new avenues for recreating 
and writing of the black man's past. This was in line with his basic charges 
against the omission by most historians of such an important part of history. 
Mis-Education criticizes the system, and explains the vicious circle that 
results from mis-educated individuals graduating, then proceeding to teach and 
mis-educate others. But the book is by no means a study in negation. The author 
goes to great lengths in tracing the historical foundations of the problem, its 
development, and its influence on interpersonal relations and historical 
scholarship. Numerous other scholars now follow its example. 
The youths of the race were Woodson's particular concern because he recognized 
that it was with, the boys and girls that Mis-education began, later 
crystallizing into deep-seated insecurities, intra-racial cleavages, and 
interracial antagonisms. All of these factors have been discussed over and over 
in the immediate past, by historians, sociologists, psychiatrists, and laymen, 
but Dr. Woodson, and a pitifully small number of others, had pointed the way a 
full generation earlier.


--- PAGE 3 ---
More so than most of his contemporaries did Woodson contribute because he gave 
up a prestigious educational career, including a school principalship in 
Washington, D.C., the position of Dean at both Howard University and West 
Virginia State College. He decided instead to devote his finances and energies 
to an association which would help to overcome the inadequacies of the system 
which promoted mis-education. This was not by any means his first book but the 
views expressed herein form a sort of core or center, to and from which his 
texts and other writings protrude and revert. 
All of this scholar's researches and writings were designed to provide 
educational sustenance, to fill the void which existed by reason of neglect of 
Black Studies. As has been already observed, however, he was no mere theorist, 
he was an activist and a pragmatist. He knew that writing alone would be 
inadequate for the enormity of the need. Consequently he, with four others, 
founded The Association for the Study of Negro Life and History, established the
 
Journal of Negro History, and concentrated mightily on the educational aspect of
 
his program, trying to counteract the poison of mis-education. In regard to 
these efforts he reported: 
  The calls on the Research Department for assistance to teachers and students 
  have multiplied so as to make this phase of the work a heavy burden on a small
 
  staff. Instructors now taking up the study of the Negro require help in 
  working out courses in this new field; and their students are urged to make 
  frequent use of the Department by correspondence or a visit to the home of the
 
  Association. 2 
That statement is just as relevant in today's situation as it was when Woodson 
made it! As a matter of fact it might be copied and used by the present Director
 
of the Association and it would be true except that the demand for services has 
increased a thousand-fold. The study of the Black man is still new in this 
generation, but such advances as have been made are in large part due to the 
vision, insight, writings, and publishing of pioneers like Carter Woodson. 
Indeed his analyses and conclusions regarding the entire educational system and 
its unrelatedness to future needs of the students stand firm, on solid ground. 
They were extendable to the 1960's, and student attitudes and actions make it 
quite clear that the reasoning and recommendations of Mis-Education constitute a
 
convenient point of departure for the current reformation of educational 
institutions. 
If Woodson had been content with merely writing his own articles and books his 
contribution would have been monumental, because his production was tremendous 
and his methodology was scientific. He, however, conceived of this historical 
vacuum in terms of such magnitude that no one historian could possibly do enough
 
research and writing to seek the facts, organize and present them, and correct 
the false and distorted information which had been passed off for true history 
for many generations. Consequently he sought, encouraged, and published the 
works of other scholars who shared his convictions and his sense of urgency in 
the premises. 
As one noteworthy example, Lawrence D. Reddick has an analytical article of 
forty pages in the Journal of Negro History entitled "Racial Attitudes in


--- PAGE 4 ---
American History Textbooks of the South." 3 In line with Woodson's complaints 
this author pointed out that the average pupil received a picture of slavery 
which generally managed to justify it, to explain the climate and economic 
conditions which fastened it to the South, and to minimize the hardships for 
blacks by emphasizing their good nature and song-singing. The textbook authors 
stressed the fact that there had been no practical way to free southern slaves, 
and blamed the northern abolitionists for the hardening of southern attitudes. 
There was virtually nothing in the textbooks he explored that referred to the 
role and development of the Negro in national life after Reconstruction. His 
activities in the wars and national defense were completely ignored, and 
illustrations for all periods were almost non-existent. Thus this article, 
accepted, edited, and published by Woodson, in all respects bore out his 
grievance against Mis-education, and it went to the very heart of his thesis. 
In the same issue of the Journal of Negro History another article reinforced his
 
views from a different investigative angle. Thomas L. Dabney made a survey of 
Negro and white colleges to determine the ones which offered courses in Negro 
History and/or Literature, or Race Relations; the Negro public schools which 
offered Negro History and/or Negro Literature; and the enrollment figures for 
both colleges and pre-college students. He also explained the purposes and 
progress of Negro History Week, as well as the home study courses offered by the
 
Association for the Study of Negro Life and History, and its clubs in their 
states. 4 
Another respected educator, Dr. Horace Mann Bond, was strongly aware of the 
substantive character of Dr. Woodson's charges of Mis-Education, particularly 
with regard to the curriculum under which the southern Negro child studied. In 
that connection he wrote, "The activities of the Association for the Study of 
Negro Life and History may ... be said to represent a Negro nationalism which is
 
a reaction against the 'white' nationalism of the American people." 5 
Then, referring to the curriculum builders who took "for granted that white 
supremacy had to be maintained," Bond declared: 
  The load of what appears to the present writer, and Dr. Woodson, as 
  propaganda, was not so considered by the former writers of southern textbooks,
 
  nor is it today. 6 
Thus it is apparent that Dr. Bond was either influenced by or was in agreement 
with the mis-education ideas which constituted so vital a part of Dr. Woodson's 
entire theory of the unfavorable effect of the American educational system on 
black children. 
Many of the investigations were concentrated on the Southland and that is 
understandable. The hulk of the Negro population then lived below the 
Mason-Dixon line where no blacks were admitted to the white schools or colleges,
 
and the dual system of education was obviously and definitely designed to 
perpetuate the Negro-inferiority image of the slavery period. Dr. Woodson also 
condemned the North for discrimination. As one who had studied at northern 
universities, The University of Chicago, and Harvard University, where he 
received the Ph.D degree, his experiences and observations enabled him to make 
valid judgments about that section.


--- PAGE 5 ---
One of his intellectual contemporaries, another Harvard-trained scholar, W. E. 
B. DuBois, was especially outspoken on northern education for Negroes, believing
 
with Woodson, that it propagandized and indoctrinated youth, draining them of 
self-confidence, self-respect, and self-knowledge. 
In 1935 DuBois wrote: 
  ... race prejudice in the United States today is such that most Negroes cannot
 
  receive proper education in white institutions ... many public school systems 
  in the North where Negroes are admitted and tolerated but they are not 
  educated; they are crucified ... certain Northern universities where Negro 
  students ... cannot get fair recognition, either in classroom or on the 
  campus, in dining hall or student activities, or in human common courtesy ... 
  at Harvard, Yale, and Columbia, Negroes are admitted but not welcomed; while 
  in other institutions like Princeton they cannot even enroll. 7 
In further development of his thesis that Blacks needed special education, Dr. 
DuBois made a point-blank statement with respect to a constructive means of 
overcoming the mis-education to which they were subjected: 
  Negroes must know the history of the Negro race in America, and this they will
 
  seldom get in white institutions. Their children ought to study textbooks like
 
  Brawley's "Short History," the first edition of Woodson's "Negro in Our 
  History," and Cromwell, Turner, and Dykes' "Readings from Negro Authors." 
  Negroes who celebrate the birthdays of Washington and Lincoln, and relatively 
  unimportant "founders" of various Negro colleges, ought not to forget the 5th 
  of March,
 that first national holiday of this country, which commemorates the 
  martyrdom of Crispus Attucks. They ought to celebrate Negro Health Week and 
  Negro History Week. They ought to study intelligently and from their own point
 
  of view, the slave trade, slavery, emancipation, Reconstruction and present 
  economic development. 8 
Dr. DuBois proceeded then to explain in careful detail that he was making no 
special plea for segregated schools, or mixed schools, but for education. To use
 
his language: 
  ... a separate Negro school where children are treated like human beings, 
  trained by teachers of their own race, who know what it means to be black in 
  the year of salvation 1935, is infinitely better than making our boys and 
  girls doormats to be spit and trampled upon and lied to by ignorant social 
  climbers, whose sole claim to superiority is ability to kick "niggers" when 
  they are down. 9 
The foregoing observations relate directly to the problems of mis-education, 
well understood and posed by Woodson; and the same problems are at long last 
being faced and attacked by the very universities identified by DuBois and many 
others. These institutions, formerly known only as "white" colleges, are now


--- PAGE 6 ---
heeding the black demands, and are soliciting black students, even at the 
expense of the "quota systems," once so firmly entrenched. The "cry in the 
wilderness" of Woodson in Mis-Education, and his few like-minded cohorts, has 
become a resounding chorus, and the reverberations will in time shake the mis 
from Mis-education. 
The scholars under discussion all shared a common goal, namely, to provide for 
Negro youth access to historical information and education which would be true 
and thus nullify or diminish the false and belittling propaganda type of history
 
which had been handed to them by whites. This, it was felt, would build up the 
black child's self and race knowledge as well as his self-respect. In a larger 
sense they expected that their publications would at least partly fill the 
unjustifiable void in American History and its antecedents, reveal the existing 
distortions of actual facts, and constitute a service to the entire field of 
historical and social science writing and understanding. 
Ultimately, thought Woodson and those who had similar beliefs, the program would
 
be a responsible factor in regenerating race relations in all areas and not only
 
in education. Without detracting from any other efforts (and there were others) 
it is reasonably certain that those writers who tried so zealously to right the 
wrongs of mis-education exerted a positive influence in that direction. As a 
result the democratic practices of this society are beginning to reach for its 
ideology, thus narrowing the long-existing cultural lag. 
It is, in fact, quite clear that Woodson regarded this book as historical only 
in its most inclusive sense
 history as interrelated with social customs, 
literature, economic and political matters and all else that affects society. 
This is a sensible and legitimate approach, as such historians as Spengler and 
Toynbee have demonstrated by popularizing broad areas and issues. Woodson was 
familiar with the tendency to include the intangible factors that influence the 
course of history
 psychological elements and traditional sensitivities, based of 
course on valid historical methodology. He fitted Mis-Education into that 
framework. 
Necessarily he thought in terms of other aspects of society which influenced 
education and which were, in turn influenced by it, because all of his writings 
show that he was convinced of the interrelations of all types of social 
phenomena. Furthermore, when he published Mis-Education, the nation was in the 
throes of a paralyzing economic depression, and President Franklin D. Roosevelt 
was on the verge of his vigorous and innovative administration. The "separate 
but equal" myth then afforded respectable legal sanction for an unequal, 
caste-like society, in education and all areas of national life. Permissive 
resignation had settled over much of the Negro population, and a majority 
rationalized that the caricature of education that they received was at least 
"better than it used to be." 
The debilitating depression had thrust the problems of the Negro, as the lowest 
socioeconomic class, into the forefront of those in dire need. As an educator of
 
stature who was already engaged in his intensive writing and publishing program,
 
the role of the disadvantageous educational system in keeping the black people 
on the lowest level, became abundantly clear to Woodson. Hence his attempts to 
analyze the problem and to define and castigate the type of education that 
confined Negroes in a vice-like grip of inferiority was designed not only to 
inform other historians and educators of their own derelictions, but to arouse 
the black people from their apathy. Mis-Education did not immediately have the


--- PAGE 7 ---
impact that he hoped, but in the long run it merges now with the researches of 
the awakened historians and other educators; the demands of several minority 
groups, which have discovered each other; the insistence of students on racial 
equality and relevant curricula; and the clamor of the downtrodden masses for 
appropriate treatment as fellow human beings. 
Dr. Woodson, in adopting a comprehensive, overall view of the problem of 
education in this book, was strongly prophetic, and showed a rare intellectual 
kinship with those who would move to the forefront in the next generation. His 
statement (p. 114), "The warring area, then, is in the cities," is highly 
pertinent to current circumstances, as are also the points in context which he 
connected with it. Another idea that he expressed with clarity (p. 117) in the 
sentences which follow, will be recognized at once for its present relevance: 
  The race will free itself from exploiters just as soon as it decides to do so.
 
  No one else can accomplish this task for the race. It must plan and do for 
  itself. 
Another matter connected with Mis-education should be noted. The inferior 
character of black education was made inevitable by virtue of the poor financing
 
of the segregated school systems. Although most Northern states had some 
racially-mixed schools, education in the sixteen southern, former slave states, 
plus Oklahoma and the District of Columbia, forming a bloc, provided the 
pattern, the atmosphere, and the reflection of Negro problems and general 
attitudes of whites about black education in the United States. 
This southern bloc maintained a completely segregated system, and though there 
were differences in one category or another in spending money for education 
among its jurisdictions they had one common denominator
 there were great 
differentials between moneys allocated for white education and black education. 
In 1930 the average expenditure per school-age child was $45.00 per white pupil 
and $14.95 per Negro pupil. Average southern investment in public school 
property per school-child amounted to $120.09 for whites and $29.62 for Negroes.
 
Figures for 1928-1929 disclose that the average southern white teacher's pupil 
load was 31 for a school term of 164 days, while the average black teacher 
instructed about 44 pupils for 144 days. The average white teacher's salary was 
$1020, while the average black teacher earned $524. 10 
These figures were frustratingly well known to Dr. Woodson. As a participator in
 
the field of education, an observer, a scholar and a reformer, he had long 
studied the disparities in the dual system. Before 1930 he had become thoroughly
 
alarmed because the differentials between white and black education were 
increasing rather than diminishing, and that knowledge undoubtedly motivated 
some of the pessimism which creeps through in this volume. 
Early in his Preface to Mis-Education the author takes a positive stand for tax 
money to be allocated in such manner that "every individual in the social order"
 
should be given the opportunity to do his best. He rejected the objective notion
 
of "progress" taken from statistical data, and injected a qualitative criteria 
which would judge the effectiveness of education by whether it was instrumental 
in making an individual "do and think for himself." With respect to Negro


--- PAGE 8 ---
education in particular, it would require much study of the race and the role of
 
its members in society. The dual system did not afford the opportunity for such 
study. As Woodson evaluated then, the inequity of the two societies within the 
nation, black and white, with its financial and propagandistic suppression of 
blacks through education and otherwise, was efficiently responsible for the 
social ills that he so deplored. He was really aiming a direct blow at the 
rationale which the South used to justify the dual school system; and his 
position was vindicated by the United States Supreme Court in the 1950's, and 
subsequently by public opinion. When he suggested equal educational 
opportunities regardless of financial status or race he was more or less 
anticipating the "social citizen" concept of the incoming administration, 
although President Roosevelt did not implement his concept to its logical 
conclusion. 
When Woodson likewise made observations to the effect that information alone was
 
not education, he was not stating a unique or isolated theory. Other educators 
agreed, but many who professed to adhere to the notion did so in a merely 
abstract fashion. The author of this book very carefully elaborated and 
illustrated the thesis. He sought for meaningful, qualitative training, yet most
 
educational institutions held fast to their rigid, inflexible programs, under 
which much of the required subject-matter might prove useful as intellectual 
discipline, but not to the life interests of the hapless, captive students. It 
was Woodson's idea that this system was most devastating to the black children 
whose schools were inferior, and whose future life interests were farthest 
removed from the traditional curricula. In recent years, and frequently by 
reason of student pressures, colleges have been reappraising and restructuring 
their programs, not necessarily because of Woodson's long-ago reasoning but 
surely in line with it. 
The Preface to Mis-Education also contains a statement that the educational 
systems of both Europe and the United States were antiquated and failed to hit 
the mark for either race. A bold and daring assertion in 1933, to be sure, but 
Woodson had successfully pursued education in both Europe and America. It is 
evident now that his judgement was projected far beyond its utterance, as 
witness the student movements which are presently accelerating, and assuming 
differing and ever more demanding forms. In further attestation note also the 
trend toward "vocational" education; and the frenzied effort to incorporate 
Black Studies at all educational levels. 
Indeed long before this present climactic phase, there had been a rising racial 
consciousness and a new stridency to the demands by American Negroes. By the 
start of World War II the sacred cow of segregation was being reexamined more 
vigorously than ever before. Such scholars as Frazier, Myrdal, Silberman and 
others were writing sociologically with candor and verve on racial problems, 
while Woodson continued his even and uninterrupted interpretation of these 
problems, plus writing historical books, papers, and engaging in other 
journalistic endeavors. Cynicism and disillusionment among blacks had spread and
 
become crystallized into a determination to make equality real. The indictments 
against discrimination were even more virile than Woodson's had been in 
Mis-Education some years earlier, and they covered more thoroughly the entire 
spectrum of race relations, but there was a direct line of descent from the 
educational castigation of 1933 to the more vigorous racial agitation and 
writings of the next decade. 
Carter G. Woodson did not propose, in Mis-Education, such drastic action as the 
mass protest movement of A. Phillip Randolph in 1941, but then he did not have


--- PAGE 9 ---
the type of support which later materialized; nor had there been in 1933 the 
mass militancy to which World War II gave birth. His was a modest demand, as 
really were the goals of Randolph's movement when judged by the scope of later 
demands and achievements. But if one seeks to comprehend the present culmination
 
period in race relations, he must turn back to those earlier efforts and 
acknowledge the ideas and the work which "seeded the ground" as it were, and 
made possible a climate of opinion within which concerted action for equality 
could germinate and grow to fruition. This intellectual climate was possible 
because the research, writings, and publications of a dedicated scholar like 
Woodson had provided the historical information, the impetus, and the 
inspiration for black people to acquire a worthwhile self and race image, to 
make a start toward overcoming the inferiority complex which had for so long 
been an emotional prison. Looking back in such manner is a major purpose of 
history, and in that context the reissuing of this book is both appropriate and 
necessary. 
It will be of great interest for readers to note the similarity in Woodson, the 
critic, as he looks at education in his day and the day in which we live. Black 
youth seems to be asking for what Woodson wanted as he expressed it in these 
pages. His philosophy was not only sound for him but it is sound for them, as 
they make the same demands of administrators for Black Studies, Black Curricula 
and Black personnel. It is for this reason that we publish this volume. It had a
 
message for Yesterday and it has a message which Black and white should know for
 
Today. 
Charles H. Wesley and Thelma D. Perry 
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Foreword 
THE thoughts brought together in this volume have been expressed in recent 
addresses and articles written by the author. From time to time persons deeply 
interested in the point of view therein presented have requested that these 
comments on education be made available in book form. To supply this demand this
 
volume is given to the public. 
In the preparation of the volume the author has not followed in detail the 
productions upon which most of the book is based. The aim is to set forth only 
the thought developed in passing from the one to the other. The language in some
 
cases, then, is entirely new; and the work is not a collection of essays. In 
this way repetition has been avoided except to emphasize the thesis which the 
author sustains. 
Carter Godwin Woodson Washington, D. C.
January, 1933. 
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------


--- PAGE 10 ---
Preface 
HEREIN are recorded not opinions but the reflections of one who for forty years 
has participated in the education of the black, brown, yellow and white races in
 
both hemispheres and in tropical and temperate regions. Such experience, too, 
has been with students in all grades from the kindergarten to the university. 
The author, moreover, has traveled around the world to observe not only modern 
school systems in various countries but to study the special systems set up by 
private agencies and governments to educate the natives in their colonies and 
dependencies. Some of these observations, too, have been checked against more 
recent studies on a later tour. 
Discussing herein the mistakes made in the education of the Negro, the writer 
frankly admits that he has committed some of these errors himself. In several 
chapters, moreover, he specifically points out wherein he himself has strayed 
from the path of wisdom. This book, then, is not intended as a broadside against
 
any particular person or class, but it is given as a corrective for methods 
which have not produced satisfactory results. 
The author does not support the once popular view that in matters of education 
Negroes are rightfully subjected to the will of others on the presumption that 
these poor people are not large taxpayers and must be content with charitable 
contributions to their uplift. The author takes the position that the consumer 
pays the tax, and as such every individual of the social order should be given 
unlimited opportunity make the most of himself. Such opportunity, too, should 
not be determined from without by forces set to direct the proscribed element in
 
a way to redound solely to the good of others but should be determined by the 
make-up of the Negro himself and by what his environment requires of him. 
This new program of uplift, the author contends, should not be decided upon by 
the trial and error method in the application of devices used in dealing with 
others in a different situation and at another epoch. Only by careful study of 
the Negro himself and the life which he is forced to lead can we arrive at the 
proper procedure in this crisis. The mere imparting of information is not 
education. Above all things, the effort must result in making a man think and do
 
for himself just as the Jews have done in spite of universal persecution. 
In thus estimating the results obtained from the so-called education of the 
Negro the author does not go to the census figures to show the progress of the 
race. It may be of no importance to the race to be able to boast today of many 
times as many "educated" members as it had in 1865. If they are of the wrong 
kind the increase in numbers will be a disadvantage rather than an advantage. 
The only question which concerns us here is whether these "educated" persons are
 
actually equipped to face the ordeal before them or unconsciously contribute to 
their own undoing by perpetuating the regime of the oppressor. 
Herein, however, lies no argument for the oft-heard contention that education 
for the white man should mean one thing and for the Negro a different thing. The
 
element of race does not enter here. It is merely a matter of exercising common 
sense in approaching people through their environment in order to deal with 
conditions as they are rather than as you would like to see them or imagine that


--- PAGE 11 ---
they are. There may be a difference in method of attack, but the principle 
remains the same. 
"Highly educated" Negroes denounce persons who advocate for the Negro a sort of 
education different in some respects from that now given the white man. Negroes 
who have been so long inconvenienced and denied opportunities for development 
are naturally afraid of anything that sounds like discrimination. They are 
anxious to have everything the white man has even if it is harmful. The 
possibility of originality in the Negro, therefore, is discounted one hundred 
per cent to maintain a nominal equality. If the whites decide to take up 
Mormonism the Negroes must follow their lead. If the whites neglect such a 
study, then the Negroes must do likewise. 
The author, however, does not have such an attitude. He considers the 
educational system as it has developed both in Europe and America an antiquated 
process which does not hit the mark even in the case of the needs of the white 
man himself. If the white man wants to hold on to it, let him do so; but the 
Negro, so far as he is able, should develop and carry out a program of his own. 
The so-called modern education, with all its defects, however, does others so 
much more good than it does the Negro, because it has been worked out in 
conformity to the needs of those who have enslaved and oppressed weaker peoples.
 
For example, the philosophy and ethics resulting from our educational system 
have justified slavery, peonage, segregation, and lynching. The oppressor has 
the right to exploit, to handicap, and to kill the oppressed. Negroes daily 
educated in the tenets of such a religion of the strong have accepted the status
 
of the weak as divinely ordained, and during the last three generations of their
 
nominal freedom they have done practically nothing to change it. Their pouting 
and resolutions indulged in by a few of the race have been of little avail. 
No systematic effort toward change has been possible, for, taught the same 
economics, history, philosophy, literature and religion which have established 
the present code of morals, the Negro's mind has been brought under the control 
of his oppressor. The problem of holding the Negro down, therefore, is easily 
solved. When you control a man's thinking you do not have to worry about his 
actions. You do not have to tell him not to stand here or go yonder. He will 
find his "proper place" and will stay in it. You do not need to send him to the 
back door. He will go without being told. In fact, if there is no back door, he 
will cut one for his special benefit. His education makes it necessary. 
The same educational process which inspires and stimulates the oppressor with 
the thought that he is everything and has accomplished everything worth while, 
depresses and crushes at the same time the spark of genius in the Negro by 
making him feel that his race does not amount to much and never will measure up 
to the standards of other peoples. The Negro thus educated is a hopeless 
liability of the race. 
The difficulty is that the "educated Negro" is compelled to live and move among 
his own people whom he has been taught to despise. As a rule, therefore, the 
"educated Negro" prefers to buy his food from a white grocer because he has been
 
taught that the Negro is not clean. It does not matter how often a Negro washes 
his hands, then, he cannot clean them, and it does not matter how often a white 
man uses his hands he cannot soil them. The educated Negro, moreover, is 
disinclined to take part in Negro business, because he has been taught in 
economics that Negroes cannot operate in this particular sphere. The "educated 
Negro" gets less and less pleasure out of the Negro church, not on account of


--- PAGE 12 ---
its primitiveness and increasing corruption, but because of his preference for 
the seats of "righteousness" controlled by his oppressor. This has been his 
education, and nothing else can be expected of him. 
If the "educated Negro" could go off and be white he might be happy, but only a 
mulatto now and then can do this. The large majority of this class, then, must 
go through life denouncing white people because they are trying to run away from
 
the blacks and decrying the blacks because they are not white. 
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Chapter I: The Seat of the Trouble 
THE "educated Negroes" have the attitude of contempt toward their own people 
because in their own as well as in their mixed schools Negroes are taught to 
admire the Hebrew, the Greek, the Latin and the Teuton and to despise the 
African. Of the hundreds of Negro high schools recently examined by an expert in
 
the United States Bureau of Education only eighteen offer a course taking up the
 
history of the Negro, and in most of the Negro colleges and universities where 
the Negro is thought of, the race is studied only as a problem or dismissed as 
of little consequence. For example, an officer of a Negro university, thinking 
that an additional course on the Negro should be given there, called upon a 
Negro Doctor of Philosophy of the faculty to offer such work. He promptly 
informed the officer that he knew nothing about the Negro. He did not go to 
school to waste his time that way. He went to be educated in a system which 
dismisses the Negro as a nonentity. 
At a Negro summer school two years ago, a white instructor gave a course on the 
Negro, using for his text a work which teaches that whites are superior to the 
blacks. When asked by one of the students why he used such a textbook the 
instructor replied that he wanted them to get that point of view. Even schools 
for Negroes, then, are places where they must be convinced of their inferiority.
 
The thought of the inferiority of the Negro is drilled into him in almost every 
class he enters and in almost every book he studies. If he happens to leave 
school after he masters the fundamentals, before he finishes high school or 
reaches college, he will naturally escape some of this bias and may recover in 
time to be of service to his people. 
Practically all of the successful Negroes in this country are of the uneducated 
type or of that of Negroes who have had no formal education at all. The large 
majority of the Negroes who have put on the finishing touches of our best 
colleges are all but worthless in the development of their people. If after 
leaving school they have the opportunity to give out to Negroes what traducers 
of the race would like to have it learn such persons may thereby earn a living 
at teaching or preaching what they have been taught but they never become a 
constructive force in the development of the race. The so-called school, then, 
becomes a questionable factor in the life of this despised people. 
As another has well said, to handicap a student by teaching him that his black 
face is a curse and that his struggle to change his condition is hopeless is the


--- PAGE 13 ---
worst sort of lynching. It kills one's aspirations and dooms him to vagabondage 
and crime. It is strange, then, that the friends of truth and the promoters of 
freedom have not risen up against the present propaganda in the schools and 
crushed it. This crusade is much more important than the anti-lynching movement,
 
because there would be no lynching if it did not start in the schoolroom. Why 
not exploit, enslave, or exterminate a class that everybody is taught to regard 
as inferior? 
To be more explicit we may go to the seat of the trouble. Our most widely known 
scholars have been trained in universities outside of the South. Northern and 
Western institutions, however, have had no time to deal with matters which 
concern the Negro especially. They must direct their attention to the problems 
of the majority of their constituents, and too often they have stimulated their 
prejudices by referring to the Negro as unworthy of consideration. Most of what 
these universities have offered as language, mathematics, and science may have 
served a good purpose, but much of what they have taught as economics, history, 
literature, religion and philosophy is propaganda and cant that involved a waste
 
of time and misdirected the Negroes thus trained. 
And even in the certitude of science or mathematics it has been unfortunate that
 
the approach to the Negro has been borrowed from a "foreign" method. For 
example, the teaching of arithmetic in the fifth grade in a backward county in 
Mississippi should mean one thing in the Negro school and a decidedly different 
thing in the white school. The Negro children, as a rule, come from the homes of
 
tenants and peons who have to migrate annually from plantation to plantation, 
looking for light which they have never seen. The children from the homes of 
white planters and merchants live permanently in the midst of calculations, 
family budgets, and the like, which enable them sometimes to learn more by 
contact than the Negro can acquire in school. Instead of teaching such Negro 
children less arithmetic, they should be taught much more of it than the white 
children, for the latter attend a graded school consolidated by free 
transportation when the Negroes go to one-room rented hovels to be taught 
without equipment and by incompetent teachers educated scarcely beyond the 
eighth grade. 
In schools of theology Negroes are taught the interpretation of the Bible worked
 
out by those who have justified segregation and winked at the economic 
debasement of the Negro sometimes almost to the point of starvation. Deriving 
their sense of right from this teaching, graduates of such schools can have no 
message to grip the people whom they have been ill trained to serve. Most of 
such mis-educated ministers, therefore, preach to benches while illiterate Negro
 
preachers do the best they can in supplying the spiritual needs of the masses. 
In the schools of business administration Negroes are trained exclusively in the
 
psychology and economics of Wall Street and are, therefore, made to despise the 
opportunities to run ice wagons, push banana carts, and sell peanuts among their
 
own people. Foreigners, who have not studied economics but have studied Negroes,
 
take up this business and grow rich. 
In schools of journalism Negroes are being taught how to edit such metropolitan


--- PAGE 14 ---
dailies as the Chicago Tribune and the New York Times, which would hardly hire a
 
Negro as a janitor; and when these graduates come to the Negro weeklies for 
employment they are not prepared to function in such establishments, which, to 
be successful, must be built upon accurate knowledge of the psychology and 
philosophy of the Negro. 
When a Negro has finished his education in our schools, then, he has been 
equipped to begin the life of an Americanized or Europeanized white man, but 
before he steps from the threshold of his alma mater he is told by his teachers 
that he must go back to his own people from whom he has been estranged by a 
vision of ideals which in his disillusionment he will realize that he cannot 
attain. He goes forth to play his part in life, but he must be both social and 
bisocial at the same time. While he is a part of the body politic, he is in 
addition to this a member of a particular race to which he must restrict himself
 
in all matters social. While serving his country he must serve within a special 
group. While being a good American, he must above all things be a "good Negro"; 
and to perform this definite function he must learn to stay in a "Negro's 
place." 
For the arduous task of serving a race thus handicapped, however, the Negro 
graduate has had little or no training at all. The people whom he has been 
ordered to serve have been belittled by his teachers to the extent that he can 
hardly find delight in undertaking what his education has led him to think is 
impossible. Considering his race as blank in achievement, then, he sets out to 
stimulate their imitation of others The performance is kept up a while; but, 
like any other effort at meaningless imitation, it results in failure. 
Facing this undesirable result, the highly educated Negro often grows sour. He 
becomes too pessimistic to be a constructive force and usually develops into a 
chronic fault-finder or a complainant at the bar of public opinion. Often when 
he sees that the fault lies at the door of the white oppressor whom he is afraid
 
to attack, he turns upon the pioneering Negro who is at work doing the best he 
can to extricate himself from an uncomfortable predicament. 
In this effort to imitate, however, these "educated people" are sincere. They 
hope to make the Negro conform quickly to the standard of the whites and thus 
remove the pretext for the barriers between the races. They do not realize, 
however, that even if the Negroes do successfully imitate the whites, nothing 
new has thereby been accomplished. You simply have a larger number of persons 
doing what others have been doing. The unusual gifts of the race have not 
thereby been developed, and an unwilling world, therefore, continues to wonder 
what the Negro is good for. 
These "educated" people, however, decry any such thing as race consciousness; 
and in some respects they are right. They do not like to hear such expressions 
as "Negro literature," "Negro poetry," "African art," or "thinking black"; and, 
roughly speaking, we must concede that such things do not exist. These things 
did not figure in the courses which they pursued in school, and why should they?
 
"Aren't we all Americans? Then, whatever is American is as much the heritage of 
the Negro as of any other group in this country." 
The "highly educated" contend, moreover, that when the Negro emphasizes these 
things he invites racial discrimination by recognizing such differentness of the
 
races. The thought that the Negro is one thing and the white man another is the 
stock-in-trade argument of the Caucasian to justify segregation. Why, then,


--- PAGE 15 ---
should the Negro blame the white man for doing what he himself does? 
These "highly educated" Negroes, however, fail to see that it is not the Negro 
who takes this position. The white man forces him to it, and to extricate 
himself therefrom the Negro leader must so deal with the situation as to develop
 
in the segregated group the power with which they can elevate themselves. The 
differentness of races, moreover, is no evidence of superiority or of 
inferiority. This merely indicates that each race has certain gifts which the 
others do not possess. It is by the development of these gifts that every race 
must justify its right to exist. 
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Chapter II: How We Missed the Mark 
How we have arrived at the present state of affairs can be understood only by 
studying the forces effective in the development of Negro education since it was
 
systematically undertaken immediately after Emancipation. To point out merely 
the defects as they appear today will be of little benefit to the present and 
future generations. These things must be viewed in their historic setting. The 
conditions of today have been determined by what has taken place in the past, 
and in a careful study of this history we may see more clearly the great theatre
 
of events in which the Negro has played a part. We may understand better what 
his rôle has been and how well he has functioned in it. 
The idea of educating the Negroes after the Civil War was largely a prompting of
 
philanthropy. Their white neighbors failed to assume this responsibility. These 
black people had been liberated as a result of a sectional conflict out of which
 
their former owners had emerged as victims. From this class, then, the freedmen 
could not expect much sympathy or cooperation in the effort to prepare 
themselves to figure as citizens of a modern republic. 
From functionaries of the United States Government itself and from those who 
participated in the conquest of the secessionists early came the plan of 
teaching these freedmen the simple duties of life as worked out by the 
Freedmen's Bureau and philanthropic agencies. When systematized this effort 
became a program for the organization of churches and schools and the direction 
of them along lines which had been considered most conducive to the progress of 
people otherwise circumstanced. Here and there some variation was made in this 
program in view of the fact that the status of the freedmen in no way paralleled
 
that of their friends and teachers, but such thought was not general. When the 
Negroes in some way would learn to perform the duties which other elements of 
the population had prepared themselves to discharge they would be duly 
qualified, it was believed, to function as citizens of the country. 
Inasmuch as most Negroes lived in the agricultural South, moreover, and only a 
few of them at first acquired small farms there was little in their life which 
any one of thought could not have easily understood. The poverty which afflicted
 
them for a generation after Emancipation held them down to the lowest order of


--- PAGE 16 ---
society, nominally free but economically enslaved. The participation of the 
freedmen in government for a few years during the period known as the 
Reconstruction had little bearing on their situation except that they did join 
with the uneducated poor whites in bringing about certain much-desired social 
reforms, especially in giving the South its first plan of democratic education 
in providing for a school system at public expense. 
Neither this inadequately supported school system nor the struggling higher 
institutions of a classical order established about the same time, however, 
connected the Negroes very closely with life as it was. These institutions were 
concerned rather with life as they hoped to make it. When the Negro found 
himself deprived of influence in politics, therefore, and at the same time 
unprepared to participate in the higher functions in the industrial development 
which this country began to undergo, it soon became evident to him that he was 
losing ground in the basic things of life. He was spending his time studying 
about the things which had been or might be, but he was learning little to help 
him to do better the tasks at hand. Since the Negroes believed that the causes 
of this untoward condition lay without the race, migration was attempted, and 
emigration to Africa was again urged. At this psychological moment came the wave
 
of industrial education which swept the country by storm. The educational 
authorities in the cities and States throughout the Black Belt began to change 
the course of study to make the training of the Negro conform to this policy. 
The missionary teachers from the North in defense of their idea of more liberal 
training, however, fearlessly attacked this new educational policy; and the 
Negroes participating in the same dispute arrayed themselves respectively on one
 
side or the other. For a generation thereafter the quarrel as to whether the 
Negro should be given a classical or a practical education was the dominant 
topic in Negro schools and churches throughout the United States. Labor was the 
most important thing of life, it was argued; practical education counted in 
reaching that end; and the Negro worker must be taught to solve this problem of 
efficiency before directing attention to other things. 
Others more narrow-minded than the advocates of industrial education, seized 
upon the idea, feeling that, although the Negro must have some semblance of 
education, it would be a fine stroke to be able to make a distinction between 
the training given the Negro and that provided for the whites. Inasmuch as the 
industrial educational idea rapidly gained ground, too, many Negroes for 
political purposes began to espouse it; and schools and colleges hoping thereby 
to obtain money worked out accordingly makeshift provisions for such 
instruction, although they could not satisfactorily offer it. A few real 
industrial schools actually equipped themselves for this work and turned out a 
number of graduates with such preparation. 
Unfortunately, however, the affair developed into a sort of battle of words, for
 
in spite of all they said and did the majority of the Negroes, those who did 
make some effort to obtain an education, did not actually receive either the 
industrial or the classical education. Negroes attended industrial schools, took
 
such training as was prescribed, and received their diplomas; but few of them 
developed adequate efficiency to be able to do what they were supposedly trained
 
to do. The schools in which they were educated could not provide for all the 
experience with machinery which white apprentices trained in factories had. Such
 
industrial education as these Negroes received, then, was merely to master a 
technique already discarded in progressive centres; and even in less complicated


--- PAGE 17 ---
operations of industry these schools had no such facilities as to parallel the 
numerous processes of factories conducted on the plan of the division of labor. 
Except what value such training might have in the development of the mind by 
making practical applications of mathematics and science, then, it was a 
failure. 
The majority of Negro graduates of industrial schools, therefore, have gone into
 
other avenues, and too often into those for which they have had no preparation 
whatever. Some few who actually prepared for the industrial sphere by 
self-improvement likewise sought other occupations for the reason that Negroes 
were generally barred from higher pursuits by trades unions; and, being unable 
to develop captains of industry to increase the demand for persons in these 
lines, the Negroes have not opened up many such opportunities for themselves. 
During these years, too, the schools for the classical education for Negroes 
have not done any better. They have proceeded on the basis that every ambitious 
person needs a liberal education when as a matter of fact this does not 
necessarily follow. The Negro trained in the advanced phases of literature, 
philosophy, and politics has been unable to develop far in using his knowledge 
because of having to function in the lower spheres of the social order. Advanced
 
knowledge of science, mathematics and languages, moreover, has not been much 
more useful except for mental discipline because of the dearth of opportunity to
 
apply such knowledge among people who were largely common laborers in towns or 
peons on the plantations. The extent to which such higher education has been 
successful in leading the Negro to think, which above all is the chief purpose 
of education, has merely made him more of a malcontent when he can sense the 
drift of things and appreciate the impossibility of success in visioning 
conditions as they really are. 
It is very clear, therefore, that we do not have in the life of the Negro today 
a large number of persons who have been benefited by either of the systems about
 
which we have quarreled so long. The number of Negro mechanics and artisans have
 
comparatively declined during the last two generations. The Negroes do not 
proportionately represent as many skilled laborers as they did before the Civil 
War. If the practical education which the Negroes received helped to improve the
 
situation so that it is today no worse than what it is, certainly it did not 
solve the problem as was expected of it. 
On the other hand, in spite of much classical education of the Negroes we do not
 
find in the race a large supply of thinkers and philosophers. One excuse is that
 
scholarship among Negroes has been vitiated by the necessity for all of them to 
combat segregation and fight to retain standing ground in the struggle of the 
races. Comparatively few American Negroes have produced creditable literature, 
and still fewer have made any large contribution to philosophy or science. They 
have not risen to the heights of black men farther removed from the influences 
of slavery and segregation. For this reason we do not find among American 
Negroes a Pushkin, a Gomez, a Geoffrey, a Captein or a Dumas. Even men like 
Roland Hayes and Henry O. Tanner have risen to the higher levels by getting out 
of this country to relieve themselves of our stifling traditions and to recover 
from their education.


--- PAGE 18 ---
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Chapter III: How We Drifted Away from the Truth 
How, then, did the education of the Negro take such a trend? The people who 
maintained schools for the education of certain Negroes before the Civil War 
were certainly sincere; and so were the missionary workers who went South to 
enlighten the freedmen after the results of that conflict had given the Negroes 
a new status. These earnest workers, however, had more enthusiasm than 
knowledge. They did not understand the task before them. This undertaking, too, 
was more of an effort toward social uplift than actual education. Their aim was 
to transform the Negroes, not to develop them. The freedmen who were to be 
enlightened were given little thought, for the best friends of the race, 
ill-taught themselves, followed the traditional curricula of the times which did
 
not take the Negro into consideration except to condemn or pity him. 
In geography the races were described in conformity with the program of the 
usual propaganda to engender in whites a race hate of the Negro, and in the 
Negroes contempt for themselves. A poet of distinction was selected to 
illustrate the physical features of the white race, a bedecked chief of a tribe 
those of the red a proud warrior the brown, a prince the yellow, and a savage 
with a ring in his nose the black The Negro, of course, stood at the foot of the
 
social ladder. 
The description of the various parts of the world was worked out according to 
the same Plan. The parts inhabited by the Caucasian were treated in detail. Less
 
attention was given to the yellow people, still less to the red, very little to 
the brown, and practically none to the black race. Those people who are far 
removed from the physical characteristics of the Caucasians or who do not 
materially assist them in the domination or exploitation of others were not 
mentioned except to be belittled or decried. 
From the teaching of science the Negro was likewise eliminated. The beginnings 
of science in various parts of the Orient were mentioned, but the Africans' 
early advancement in this field was omitted. Students were not told that ancient
 
Africans of the interior knew sufficient science to concoct poisons for 
arrowheads, to mix durable colors for paintings, to extract metals from nature 
and refine them for development in the industrial arts. Very little was said 
about the chemistry in the method of Egyptian embalming which was the product of
 
the mixed breeds of Northern Africa, now known in the modern world as "colored 
people." 
In the study of language in school pupils were made to scoff at the Negro 
dialect as some peculiar possession of the Negro which they should despise 
rather than directed to study the background of this language as a broken-down 
African tongue
 in short to understand their own linguistic history, which is 
certainly more important for them than the study of French Phonetics or 
Historical Spanish Grammar. To the African language as such no attention was 
given except in case of the preparation of traders, missionaries and public 
functionaries to exploit the natives. This number of persons thus trained, of


--- PAGE 19 ---
course, constituted a small fraction hardly deserving attention. 
From literature the African was excluded altogether. He was not supposed to have
 
expressed any thought worth knowing. The philosophy in the African proverbs and 
in the rich folklore of that continent was ignored to give preference to that 
developed on the distant shores of the Mediterranean. Most missionary teachers 
of the freedmen, like most men of our time, had never read the interesting books
 
of travel in Africa, and had never heard of the Tarikh Es-Soudan. 
In the teaching of fine arts these instructors usually started with Greece by 
showing how that art was influenced from without, but they omitted the African 
influence which scientists now regard as significant and dominant in early 
Hellas. They failed to teach the student the Mediterranean Melting Pot with the 
Negroes from Africa bringing their wares, their ideas and their blood therein to
 
influence the history of Greece, Carthage, and Rome. Making desire father to the
 
thought, our teachers either ignored these influences or endeavored to belittle 
them by working out theories to the contrary. 
The bias did not stop at this point, for it invaded the teaching of the 
professions. Negro law students were told that they belonged to the most 
criminal element in the country; and an effort was made to justify the procedure
 
in the seats of injustice where law was interpreted as being one thing for the 
white man and a different thing for the Negro. In constitutional law the 
spinelessness of the United States Supreme Court in permitting the judicial 
nullification of the Fourteenth and Fifteenth Amendments was and still is boldly
 
upheld in our few law schools. 
In medical schools Negroes were likewise convinced of their inferiority in being
 
reminded of their rôle as germ carriers. The prevalence of syphilis and 
tuberculosis among Negroes was especially emphasized without showing that these 
maladies are more deadly among the Negroes for the reason that they are 
Caucasian diseases; and since these plagues are new to Negroes, these sufferers 
have not had time to develop against them the immunity which time has permitted 
in the Caucasian. Other diseases to which Negroes easily fall prey were 
mentioned to point out the race as an undesirable element when this condition 
was due to the Negroes' economic and social status. Little emphasis was placed 
upon the immunity of the Negro from diseases like yellow fever and influenza 
which are so disastrous to whites. Yet, the whites were not considered inferior 
because of this differential resistance to these plagues. 
In history, of course, the Negro had no place in this curriculum. He was 
pictured as a human being of the lower order, unable to subject passion to 
reason, and therefore useful only when made the hewer of wood and the drawer of 
water for others. No thought was given to the history of Africa except so far as
 
it had been a field of exploitation for the Caucasian. You might study the 
history as it was offered in our system from the elementary school throughout 
the university, and you would never hear Africa mentioned except in the 
negative. You would never thereby learn that Africans first domesticated the 
sheep, goat, and cow, developed the idea of trial by jury, produced the first 
stringed instruments, and gave the world its greatest boon in the discovery of 
iron. You would never know that prior to the Mohammedan invasion about 1000 A.D.


--- PAGE 20 ---
these natives in the heart of Africa had developed powerful kingdoms which were 
later organized as the Songhay Empire on the order of that of the Romans and 
boasting of similar grandeur. 
Unlike other people, then, the Negro, according to this point of view, was an 
exception to the natural plan of things, and he had no such mission as that of 
an outstanding contribution to culture. The status of the Negro, then, was 
justly fixed as that of an inferior. Teachers of Negroes in their first schools 
after Emancipation did not proclaim any such doctrine, but the content of their 
curricula justified these inferences. 
An observer from outside of the situation naturally inquires why the Negroes, 
many of whom serve their race as teachers, have not changed this program. These 
teachers, however, are powerless. Negroes have no control over their education 
and have little voice in their other affairs pertaining thereto. In a few cases 
Negroes have been chosen as members of public boards of education, and some have
 
been appointed members of private boards, but these Negroes are always such a 
small minority that they do not figure in the final working out of the 
educational program. The education of the Negroes, then, the most important 
thing in the uplift of the Negroes, is almost entirely in the hands of those who
 
have enslaved them and now segregate them. 
With "mis-educated Negroes" in control themselves, however, it is doubtful that 
the system would be very much different from what it is or that it would rapidly
 
undergo change. The Negroes thus placed in charge would be the products of the 
same system and would show no more conception of the task at hand than do the 
whites who have educated them and shaped their minds as they would have them 
function. Negro educators of today may have more sympathy and interest in the 
race than the whites now exploiting Negro institutions as educators, but the 
former have no more vision than their competitors. Taught from books of the same
 
bias, trained by Caucasians of the same prejudices or by Negroes of enslaved 
minds, one generation of Negro teachers after another have served for no higher 
purpose than to do what they are told to do. In other words, a Negro teacher 
instructing Negro children is in many respects a white teacher thus engaged, for
 
the program in each case is about the same. 
There can be no reasonable objection to the Negro's doing what the white man 
tells him to do, if the white man tells him to do what is right; but right is 
purely relative. The present system under the control of the whites trains the 
Negro to be white and at the same time convinces him of the impropriety or the 
impossibility of his becoming white. It compels the Negro to become a good Negro
 
for the performance of which his education is ill-suited. For the white man's 
exploitation of the Negro through economic restriction and segregation the 
present system is sound and will doubtless continue until this gives place to 
the saner policy of actual interracial cooperation
 not the present farce of 
racial manipulation in which the Negro is a figurehead. History does not furnish
 
a case of the elevation of a people by ignoring the thought and aspiration of 
the people thus served. 
This is slightly dangerous ground here, however, for the Negro's mind has been 
all but perfectly enslaved in that he has been trained to think what is desired 
of him. The "highly educated" Negroes do not like to hear anything uttered 
against this procedure because they make their living in this way, and they feel


--- PAGE 21 ---
that they must defend the system. Few mis-educated Negroes ever act otherwise; 
and, if they so express themselves, they are easily crushed by the large 
majority to the contrary so that the procession may move on without 
interruption. 
The result, then, is that the Negroes thus mis-educated are of no service to 
themselves and none to the white man. The white man does not need the Negroes' 
professional, commercial or industrial assistance; and as a result of the 
multiplication of mechanical appliances he no longer needs them in drudgery or 
menial service. The "highly educated" Negroes, moreover, do not need the Negro 
professional or commercial classes because Negroes have been taught that whites 
can serve them more efficiently in these spheres. Reduced, then, to teaching and
 
preaching, the Negroes will have no outlet but to go down a blind alley, if the 
sort of education which they are now receiving is to enable them to find the way
 
out of their present difficulties. 
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Chapter IV: Education Under Outside Control 
"IN the new program of educating the Negro what would become of the white 
teachers of the race?" some one recently inquired. This is a simple question 
requiring only a brief answer. The remaining few Christian workers who went 
South not so long after the Civil War and established schools and churches to 
lay the foundation on which we should now be building more wisely than we do, we
 
would honor as a martyred throng. Anathema be upon him who would utter a word 
derogatory to the record of these heroes and heroines! We would pay high tribute
 
also to unselfish Southerners like Hay-good, Curry, Ruffner, Northern, and 
Vance, and to white men of our time, who believe that the only way to elevate 
people is to help them to help themselves. 
The unfortunate successors of the Northern missionary teachers of Negroes, 
however, have thoroughly demonstrated that they have no useful function in the 
life of the Negro. They have not the spirit of their predecessors and do not 
measure up to the requirements of educators desired in accredited colleges. If 
Negro institutions are to be as efficient as those for the whites in the South 
the same high standard for the educators to direct them should be maintained. 
Negro schools cannot go forward with such a load of inefficiency and especially 
when the white presidents of these institutions are often less scholarly than 
Negroes who have to serve under them. 
By law and custom the white presidents and teachers of Negro schools are 
prevented from participating freely in the life of the Negro. They occupy, 
therefore, a most uncomfortable dual position. When the author once taught in a 
school with a mixed faculty the white women connected with the institution would
 
bow to him in patronizing fashion when on the campus, but elsewhere they did not
 
see him. A white president of one Negro school never entertains a Negro in his 
home, preferring to shift such guests to the students' dining-room. Another


--- PAGE 22 ---
white president of a Negro college maintains on the campus a guest cottage which
 
Negroes can enter only as servants. Still another such functionary does not 
allow students to enter his home through the front door. Negroes trained under 
such conditions without protest become downright cowards, and in life will 
continue as slaves in spite of their nominal emancipation. 
"What different method of approach or what sort of appeal would one make to the 
Negro child that cannot be made just as well by a white teacher?" some one asked
 
not long ago. To be frank we must concede that there is no particular body of 
facts that Negro teachers can impart to children of their own race that may not 
be just as easily presented by persons of another race if they have the same 
attitude as Negro teachers; but in most cases tradition, race hate, segregation,
 
and terrorism make such a thing impossible. The only thing to do in this case, 
then, is to deal with the situation as it is. 
Yet we should not take the position that a qualified white person should not 
teach in a Negro school. For certain work which temporarily some whites may be 
able to do better than the Negroes there can be no objection to such service, 
but if the Negro is to be forced to live in the ghetto he can more easily 
develop out of it under his own leadership than under that which is 
super-imposed. The Negro will never be able to show all of his originality as 
long as his efforts are directed from without by those who socially proscribe 
him. Such "friends" will unconsciously keep him in the ghetto. 
Herein, however, the emphasis is not upon the necessity for separate systems but
 
upon the need for common sense schools and teachers who understand and continue 
in sympathy with those whom they instruct. Those who take the position to the 
contrary have the idea that education is merely a process of imparting 
information. One who can give out these things or devise an easy plan for so 
doing, then, is an educator. In a sense this is true, but it accounts for most 
of the troubles of the Negro. Real education means to inspire people to live 
more abundantly, to learn to begin with life as they find it and make it better,
 
but the instruction so far given Negroes in colleges and universities has worked
 
to the contrary. In most cases such graduates have merely increased the number 
of malcontents who offer no program for changing the undesirable conditions 
about which they complain. One should rely upon protest only when it is 
supported by a constructive program. 
Unfortunately Negroes who think as the author does and dare express themselves 
are branded as opponents of interracial cooperation. As a matter of fact, 
however, such Negroes are the real workers in carrying out a program of 
interracial effort. Cooperation implies equality of the participants in the 
particular task at hand. On the contrary, however, the usual way now is for the 
whites to work out their plans behind closed doors, have them approved by a few 
Negroes serving nominally on a board, and then employ a white or mixed staff to 
carry out their program. This is not interracial cooperation. It is merely the 
ancient idea of calling upon the "inferior" to carry out the orders of the 
"superior." To express it in post-classic language, as did Jessie O. Thomas, 
"The Negroes do the `coing' and the whites the `operating.'" 
This unsound attitude of the "friends" of the Negro is due to the persistence of
 
the mediaeval idea of controlling underprivileged classes. Behind closed doors 
these "friends" say you need to be careful in advancing Negroes to commanding


--- PAGE 23 ---
positions unless it can be determined beforehand that they will do what they are
 
told to do. You can never tell when some Negroes will break out and embarrass 
their "friends." After being advanced to positions of influence some of them 
have been known to run amuck and advocate social equality or demand for their 
race the privileges of democracy when they should restrict themselves to 
education and religious development. 
It is often said, too, that the time is not ripe for Negroes to take over the 
administration of their institutions, for they do not have the contacts for 
raising money; but what becomes of this argument when we remember what Booker T.
 
Washington did for Tuskegee and observe what R. R. Moton and John Hope are doing
 
today? As the first Negro president of Howard University Mordecai W. Johnson has
 
raised more money for that institution among philanthropists than all of its 
former presidents combined. Furthermore, if, after three generations the Negro 
colleges have not produced men qualified to administer their affairs, such an 
admission is an eloquent argument that they have failed ingloriously and should 
be immediately closed. 
Recently some one asked me how I connect my criticism of the higher education of
 
the Negroes with new developments in this sphere and especially with the four 
universities in the South which are to be made possible by the millions obtained
 
from governments, boards, and philanthropists. I believe that the establishment 
of these four centres of learning at Washington, Atlanta, Nashville, and New 
Orleans can be so carried out as to mark an epoch in the development of the 
Negro race. On the other hand, there is just as much possibility for a colossal 
failure of the whole scheme. If these institutions are to be the replica of 
universities like Harvard, Yale, Columbia and Chicago, if the men who are to 
administer them and teach in them are to be the products of roll-top desk 
theorists who have never touched the life of the Negro, the money thus invested 
will be just as profitably spent if it is used to buy peanuts to throw at the 
animals in a circus. 
Some of the thought behind the new educational movement is to provide in the 
South for educating the Negroes who are now crowding Northern universities, 
especially the medical schools, many of which will not admit Negroes because of 
the racial friction in hospital practice. In the rush merely to make special 
provisions for these "undesirable students," however, the institutions which are
 
to train them may be established on false ideas and make the same blunders of 
the smaller institutions which have preceded them. It will hardly help a 
poisoned patient to give him a large dose of poison. 
In higher institutions for Negroes, organized along lines required for people 
differently circumstanced, some few may profit by being further grounded in the 
fundamentals, others may become more adept in the exploitation of their people, 
and a smaller number may cross the divide and join the whites in useful service;
 
but the large majority of the products of such institutions will increase rather
 
than diminish the load which the masses have had to carry ever since their 
emancipation. Such ill-prepared workers will have no foundation upon which to 
build. The education of any people should begin with the people themselves, but 
Negroes thus trained have been dreaming about the ancients of Europe and about 
those who have tried to imitate them.


--- PAGE 24 ---
In a course at Harvard, for example, students were required to find out whether 
Pericles was justly charged with trying to supplant the worship of Jupiter with 
that of Juno. Since that time Negroes thus engaged have learned that they would 
have been much better prepared for work among the Negroes in the Black Belt if 
they had spent that time learning why John Jasper of "sun-do-move" fame joined 
with Joshua in contending that the planet stood still "in the middle of the line
 
while he fought the battle the second time." 
Talking the other day with one of the men now giving the millions to build the 
four Negro universities in the South, however, I find that he is of the opinion 
that accredited institutions can be established in mushroom fashion with 
theorists out of touch with the people. In other words, you can go almost 
anywhere and build a three million dollar plant, place in charge a white man to 
do what you want accomplished, and in a short while he can secure or have 
trained to order the men necessary to make a university. "We want here," he will
 
say, "a man who has his Master's degree in English. Send me another who has his 
Doctor's degree in sociology, and I can use one more in physics." 
Now, experience has shown that men of this type may "fill in," but a university 
cannot be established with such raw recruits. The author once had some 
experience in trying to man a college in this fashion, and the result was a 
story that would make an interesting headline for the newspapers. When Dr. 
William Bainey Harper was establishing the University of Chicago he called to 
the headship of the various departments only men who had distinguished 
themselves in the creative world. Some had advanced degrees, and some had not. 
Several of them had never done any formal graduate work at all. All of them, 
however, were men whose thought was moving the world. It may be argued that the 
Negroes have no such men and must have them trained, but such a thing cannot be 
forced as we are now doing it. It would be much better to stimulate the 
development of the more progressive teachers of old than experiment with novices
 
produced by the degradation of higher education. 
The degradation of the doctorate especially dawned upon the author the other day
 
more clearly than ever when a friend of his rushed into his office saying, "I 
have been trying to see you for several days. I have just failed to get a job 
for which I had been working, and I am told that I cannot expect a promotion 
until I get my `darkter's 'gree.'" That is what he called it. He could not even 
pronounce the words, but he is determined to have his "darkter's 'gree" to get 
the job in sight. 
This shameful status of higher education is due in a large measure to low 
standards of institutions with a tendency toward the diplomamill procedure. To 
get a job or to hold one you go in and stay until they "grind" you out a 
"darkter's 'gree." And you do not have to worry any further. The assumption is 
that almost any school will be glad to have you thereafter, and you will receive
 
a large salary. 
Investigation has shown, however, that men who have the doctorate not only lose 
touch with the common people, but they do not do as much creative work as those 
of less formal education. After having this honor conferred upon them, these 
so-called scholars often rest on their oars. Few persons have thought of the 
seriousness of such inertia among men who are put in the lead of things because 
of meeting statutory requirements of frontier universities which are not on the 
frontier.


--- PAGE 25 ---
The General Education Board and the Julius Rosenwald Fund have a policy which 
may be a partial solution of the undeveloped Negro college instructor's problem.
 
These foundations are giving Negro teachers scholarships to improve themselves 
for work in the sphere in which they are now laboring in the South. These 
boards, as a rule, do not send one to school to work for the Doctor's degree. If
 
they find a man of experience and good judgment, showing possibilities for 
growth, they will provide for him to study a year or more to refresh his mind 
with whatever there is new in his field. Experience has shown that teachers thus
 
helped have later done much better work than Doctors of Philosophy made to 
order. 
The Northern universities, moreover, cannot do graduate work for Negroes along 
certain lines when they are concentrating on the educational needs of people 
otherwise circumstanced. The graduate school for Negroes studying chemistry is 
with George W. Carver at Tuskegee. At least a hundred youths should wait daily 
upon the words of this scientist to be able to pass on to the generations unborn
 
his great knowledge of agricultural chemistry. Negroes desiring to specialize in
 
agriculture should do it with workers like T. M. Campbell and B. F. Hubert among
 
the Negro farmers of the South. 
In education itself the situation is the same. Neither Columbia nor Chicago can 
give an advanced course in Negro rural education, for their work in education is
 
based primarily upon what they know of the educational needs of the whites. Such
 
work for Negroes must be done under the direction of the trail blazers who are 
building school houses and reconstructing the educational program of those in 
the backwoods. Leaders of this type can supply the foundation upon which a 
university of realistic education may be established. 
We offer no argument here against earning advanced degrees, but these should 
come as honors conferred for training crowned with scholastic distinction, not 
to enable a man to increase his salary or find a better paying position. The 
schools which are now directing attention exclusively to these external marks of
 
learning will not contribute much to the uplift of the Negro. 
In Cleveland not long ago the author found at the Western Reserve University 
something unusually encouraging. A native of Mississippi, a white man trained in
 
a Northern university and now serving as a professor in one, has under him in 
sociology a Negro student from Georgia. For his dissertation this Negro is 
collecting the sayings of his people in everyday life
 their morning greetings, 
their remarks about the weather, their comments on things which happen around 
them, their reactions to things which strike them as unusual, and their efforts 
to interpret life as the panorama passes before them. This white Mississippian 
and black Georgian are on the right way to understand the Negro and, if they do 
not fall out about social equality, they will serve the Negro much better than 
those who are trying to find out whether Henry VIII lusted more after Anne 
Boleyn than after Catherine of Aragon or whether Elizabeth was justly styled as 
more untruthful than Philip II of Spain.


--- PAGE 26 ---
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Chapter V: The Failure to Learn to Make a Living 
THE greatest indictment of such education as Negroes have received, however, is 
that they have thereby learned little as to making a living, the first essential
 
in civilization. Rural Negroes have always known something about agriculture, 
and in a country where land is abundant they have been able to make some sort of
 
living on the soil even though they have not always employed scientific methods 
of farming. In industry where the competition is keener, however, what the Negro
 
has learned in school has had little bearing on the situation, as pointed out 
above. In business the rôle of education as a factor in the uplift of the Negro 
has been still less significant. The Negroes of today are unable to employ one 
another, and the whites are inclined to call on Negroes only when workers of 
their own race have been taken care of. For the solution of this problem the 
"mis-educated" Negro has offered no remedy whatever. 
What Negroes are now being taught does not bring their minds into harmony with 
life as they must face it. When a Negro student works his way through college by
 
polishing shoes he does not think of making a special study of the science 
underlying the production and distribution of leather and its products that he 
may some day figure in this sphere. The Negro boy sent to college by a mechanic 
seldom dreams of learning mechanical engineering to build upon the foundation 
his father has laid, that in years to come he may figure as a contractor or a 
consulting engineer. The Negro girl who goes to college hardly wants to return 
to her mother if she is a washerwoman, but this girl should come back with 
sufficient knowledge of physics and chemistry and business administration to use
 
her mother's work as a nucleus for a modern steam laundry. A white professor of 
a university recently resigned his position to become rich by running a laundry 
for Negroes in a Southern city. A Negro college instructor would have considered
 
such a suggestion an insult. The so-called education of Negro college graduates 
leads them to throw away opportunities which they have and to go in quest of 
those which they do not find. 
In the case of the white youth in this country, they can choose their courses 
more at random and still succeed because of numerous opportunities offered by 
their people, but even they show so much more wisdom than do Negroes. For 
example, a year or two after the author left Harvard he found out West a 
schoolmate who was studying wool. "How did you happen to go into this sort of 
thing?" the author inquired. His people, the former replied, had had some 
experience in wool, and in college he prepared for this work. On the contrary, 
the author studied Aristotle, Plato, Marsiglio of Padua, and Pascasius 
Rathbertus when he was in college. His friend who studied wool, however, is now 
independently rich and has sufficient leisure to enjoy the cultural side of life
 
which his knowledge of the science underlying his business developed, but the 
author has to make his living by begging for a struggling cause. 
An observer recently saw at the market near his office a striking example of 
this inefficiency of our system. He often goes over there at noon to buy a bit


--- PAGE 27 ---
of fruit and to talk with a young woman who successfully conducts a fruit stand 
there in cooperation with her mother. Some years ago he tried to teach her in 
high school; but her memory was poor, and she could not understand what he was 
trying to do. She stayed a few weeks, smiling at the others who toiled, and 
finally left to assist her mother in business. She learned from her mother, 
however, how to make a living and be happy. 
This observer was reminded of this young woman soon thereafter when there came 
to visit him a friend who succeeded in mastering everything taught in high 
school at that time and later distinguished himself in college. This highly 
educated man brought with him a complaint against life. Having had extreme 
difficulty in finding an opportunity to do what he is trained to do, he has 
thought several times of committing suicide. A friend encouraged this despondent
 
man to go ahead and do it. The sooner the better. The food and air which he is 
now consuming may then go to keep alive some one who is in touch with life and 
able to grapple with its problems. This man has been educated away from the 
fruit stand. 
This friend had been trying to convince this misfit of the unusual opportunities
 
for the Negroes in business, but he reprimanded his adviser for urging him to 
take up such a task when most Negroes thus engaged have been failures. 
"If we invest our money in some enterprise of our own," said he, "those in 
charge will misuse or misappropriate it. I have learned from my study of 
economics that we had just as well keep on throwing it away." 
Upon investigation, however, it was discovered that this complainant and most 
others like him have never invested anything in any of the Negro enterprises, 
although they have tried to make a living by exploiting them. But they feel a 
bit guilty on this account, and when they have some apparent ground for 
fault-finding they try to satisfy their conscience which all but condemns them 
for their suicidal course of getting all they can out of the race while giving 
nothing back to it. 
Gossiping and scandal-mongering Negroes, of course, come to their assistance. 
Mis-educated by the oppressors of the race, such Negroes expect the Negro 
business man to fail anyway. They seize, then, upon unfavorable reports, 
exaggerate the situation, and circulate falsehoods throughout the world to their
 
own undoing. You read such headlines as GREATEST NEGRO BUSINESS FAILS, NEGRO 
BANK ROBBED BY ITS OFFICERS, and THE TWILIGHT OF NEGRO BUSINESS. The 
mis-educated Negroes, then, stand by saying: 
"I told you so. Negroes cannot run business. My professors pointed that out to 
me years ago when I studied economics in college; and I never intend to put any 
of my money in any Negro enterprise." 
Yet, investigation shows that in proportion to the amount of capital invested 
Negro enterprises manifest about as much strength as businesses of others 
similarly situated. Negro business men have made mistakes, and they are still 
making them; but the weak link in the chain is that they are not properly 
supported and do not always grow strong enough to pass through a crisis. The 
Negro business man, then, has not failed so much as he has failed to get support
 
of Negroes who should be mentally developed sufficiently to see the wisdom of 
supporting such enterprises. 
Now the "highly educated" Negroes who have studied economics at Harvard, Yale,


--- PAGE 28 ---
Columbia, and Chicago, will say that the Negro cannot succeed in business 
because their professors who have never had a moment's experience in this sphere
 
have written accordingly. The whites, they say, have the control of the natural 
resources and so monopolize the production of raw materials as to eliminate the 
competition of the Negro. Apparently this is true. All things being equal from 
the point of view of the oppressor, he sees that the Negro cannot meet the test.
 
The impatient, "highly educated" Negroes, therefore, say that since under the 
present system of capitalism the Negro has no chance to toil upward in the 
economic sphere, the only hope for bettering his condition in this respect is 
through socialism, the overthrow of the present economic régime, and the 
inauguration of popular control of resources and agencies which are now being 
operated for personal gain. This thought is gaining ground among Negroes in this
 
country, and it is rapidly sweeping them into the ranks of what are commonly 
known as "Communists." 
There can be no objection to this radical change, if it brings with it some 
unselfish genius to do the task better than it is now being done under the 
present régime of competition. Russia so far has failed to do well this 
particular thing under a proletarian dictatorship in an agricultural country. 
But whether this millennium comes or not, the capitalistic system is so strongly
 
intrenched at present that the radicals must struggle many years to overthrow 
it; and if the Negro has to wait until that time to try to improve his condition
 
he will be starved out so soon that he will not he here to tell the story. The 
Negro, therefore, like all other oppressed people, must learn to do the 
so-called "impossible." 
The "uneducated" Negro business man, however, is actually at work doing the very
 
thing which the "mis-educated" Negro has been taught to believe cannot be done. 
This much-handicapped Negro business man could do better if he had some 
assistance, but our schools are turning out men who do as much to impede the 
progress of the Negro in business as they do to help him. The trouble is that 
they do not think for themselves. 
If the "highly educated" Negro would forget most of the untried theories taught 
him in school, if he could see through the propaganda which has been instilled 
into his mind under the pretext of education, if he would fall in love with his 
own people and begin to sacrifice for their uplift
 if the "highly educated" 
Negro would do these things, he could solve some of the problems now confronting
 
the race. 
During recent years we have heard much of education in business administration 
departments in Negro colleges; but if they be judged by the products turned out 
by these departments they are not worth a "continental." The teachers in this 
field are not prepared to do the work, and the trustees of our institutions are 
spending their time with trifles instead of addressing themselves to the study 
of a situation which threatens the Negro with economic extermination. 
Recently the author saw the need for a change of attitude when a young woman 
came almost directly to his office after her graduation from a business school 
to seek employment. After hearing her story he finally told her that he would 
give her a trial at fifteen dollars a week.


--- PAGE 29 ---
"Fifteen dollars a week!" she cried, "I cannot live on that, sir." 
"I do not see why you cannot," he replied. "You have lived for some time 
already, and you say that you have never had permanent employment, and you have 
none at all now." 
"But a woman has to dress and to pay board," said she; "and how can she do it on
 
such a pittance?" 
The amount offered was small, but it was a great deal more than she is worth at 
present. In fact, during the first six or nine months of her connection with 
some enterprise it will be of more service to her than she will be to the firm. 
Coming out of school without experience, she will be a drag on a business until 
she learns to discharge some definite function in it. Instead of requiring the 
firm to pay her she should pay it for training her. Negro business today, then, 
finds the "mis-educated employees" its heaviest burden. Thousands of graduates 
of white business schools spend years in establishments in undergoing 
apprenticeship without pay and rejoice to have the opportunity thus to learn how
 
to do things. 
The schools in which Negroes are now being trained, however, do not give our 
young people this point of view. They may occasionally learn the elements of 
stenography and accounting, but they do not learn how to apply what they have 
studied. The training which they undergo gives a false conception of life when 
they believe that the business world owes them a position of leadership. They 
have the idea of business training that we used to have of teaching when it was 
thought that we could teach anything we had studied. 
Graduates of our business schools lack the courage to throw themselves upon 
their resources and work for a commission. The large majority of them want to be
 
sure of receiving a certain amount at the end of the week or month. They do not 
seem to realize that the great strides in business have been made by paying men 
according to what they do. Persons with such false impressions of life are not 
good representatives of schools of business administration. 
Not long ago a firm of Washington, D. C., appealed to the graduates of several 
of our colleges and offered them an inviting proposition on the commission 
basis, but only five of the hundreds appealed to responded and only two of the 
five gave satisfaction. Another would have succeeded, but he was not honest in 
handling money because he had learned to purloin the treasury of the athletic 
organization while in college. All of the others, however, were anxious to serve
 
somewhere in an office for a small wage a week. 
Recently one of the large insurance companies selected for special training in 
this line fifteen college graduates of our accredited institutions and financed 
their special training in insurance. Only one of the number, however, rendered 
efficient service in this field. They all abandoned the effort after a few days'
 
trial and accepted work in hotels and with the Pullman Company, or they went 
into teaching or something else with a fixed stipend until they could enter upon
 
the practice of professions. The thought of the immediate reward, 
shortsightedness, and the lack of vision and courage to struggle and win the 
fight made them failures to begin with. They are unwilling to throw aside their 
coats and collars and do the groundwork of Negro business and thus make


--- PAGE 30 ---
opportunities for themselves instead of begging others for a chance. 
The educated Negro from the point of view of commerce and industry, then, shows 
no mental power to understand the situation which he finds. He has apparently 
read his race out of that sphere, and with the exception of what the illiterate 
Negroes can do blindly the field is left wide open for foreign exploitation. 
Foreigners see this opportunity as soon as they reach our shores and begin to 
manufacture and sell to Negroes especially such things as caps, neckties, and 
housedresses which may be produced at a small cost and under ordinary 
circumstances. The main problem with the Negro in this field, however, is 
salesmanship; that is where he is weak. 
It is unfortunate, too, that the educated Negro does not understand or is 
unwilling to start small enterprises which make the larger ones possible. If he 
cannot proceed according to the methods of the gigantic corporations about which
 
he reads in books, he does not know how to take hold of things and organize the 
communities of the poor along lines of small businesses. Such training is 
necessary, for the large majority of Negroes conducting enterprises have not 
learned business methods and do not understand the possibilities of the field in
 
which they operate. Most of them in the beginning had had no experience, and 
started out with such knowledge as they could acquire by observing some one's 
business from the outside. One of them, for example, had waited on a white 
business club in passing the members a box of cigars or bringing a pitcher of 
water. When they began to discuss business, however, he had to leave the room. 
About the only time he could see them in action was when they were at play, 
indulging in extravagances which the Negro learned to take up before he could 
afford them. 
Negro businesses thus handicapped, therefore, have not developed stability and 
the capacity for growth. Practically all worth while Negro businesses which were
 
flourishing in 1900 are not existing today. How did this happen? Well, Negro 
business men have too much to do. They have not time to read the business 
literature and study the market upon which they depend, and they may not be 
sufficiently trained to do these things. They are usually operating in the dark 
or by the hit-or-miss method. They cannot secure intelligent guidance because 
the schools are not turning out men properly trained to take up Negro business 
as it is to develop and make it what it ought to be rather than find fault with 
it. Too often when the founder dies, then, the business dies with him; or it 
goes to pieces soon after he passes away, for nobody has come into sufficiently 
close contact with him to learn the secret of his success in spite of his 
handicaps. 
The business among Negroes, too, continues individualistic in spite of advice to
 
the contrary. The founder does not take kindly to the cooperative plan, and such
 
business education as we now give the youth does not make their suggestions to 
this effect convincing. If the founder happens to be unusually successful, too, 
the business may outgrow his knowledge, and becoming too unwieldy in his hands, 
may go to pieces by errors of judgment; or because of mismanagement it may go 
into the hands of whites who are usually called in at the last hour to do what 
they call refinancing but what really means the actual taking over of the 
business from the Negroes. The Negroes, then, finally withdraw their patronage 
because they realize that it is no longer an enterprise of the race, and the 
chapter is closed. 
All of the failures of the Negro business, however, are not due to troubles from


--- PAGE 31 ---
without. Often the Negro business man lacks common sense. The Negro in business,
 
for example, too easily becomes a social "lion." He sometimes plunges into the 
leadership in local matters. He becomes popular in restricted circles, and men 
of less magnetism grow jealous of his inroads. He learns how richer men of other
 
races waste money. He builds a finer home than anybody else in the community, 
and in his social program he does not provide for much contact with the very 
people upon whom he must depend for patronage. He has the finest car, the most 
expensive dress, the best summer home, and so far outdistances his competitors 
in society that they often set to work in child-like fashion to bring him down 
to their level. 
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Chapter VI: The Educated Negro Leaves the Masses 
ONE of the most striking evidences of the failure of higher education among 
Negroes is their estrangement from the masses, the very people upon whom they 
must eventually count for carrying out a program of progress. Of this the Negro 
churches supply the most striking illustration. The large majority of Negro 
communicants still belong to these churches, but the more education the Negroes 
undergo the less comfort they seem to find in these evangelical groups. These 
churches do not measure up to the standard set by the university preachers of 
the Northern centres of learning. Most Negroes returning as finished products 
from such institutions, then, are forever lost to the popular Negro churches. 
The unchurched of this class do not become members of such congregations, and 
those who have thus connected themselves remain chiefly for political or 
personal reasons and tend to become communicants in name only. 
The Negro church, however, although not a shadow of what it ought to be, is the 
great asset of the race. It is a part of the capital that the race must invest 
to make its future. The Negro church, has taken the lead in education in the 
schools of the race, it has supplied a forum for the thought of the "highly 
educated" Negro, it has originated a large portion of the business controlled by
 
Negroes, and in many cases it has made it possible for Negro professional men to
 
exist. It is unfortunate, then, that these classes do not do more to develop the
 
institution. In thus neglecting it they are throwing away what they have, to 
obtain something which they think they need. In many respects, then, the Negro 
church during recent generations has become corrupt. It could be improved, but 
those Negroes who can help the institution have deserted it to exploiters, 
grafters, and libertines. The "highly educated" Negroes have turned away from 
the people in the churches, and the gap between the masses and the "talented 
tenth" is rapidly widening. 
Of this many examples may be cited. When the author recently attended in 
Washington, D. C., one of the popular Negro churches with a membership of 
several thousands he saw a striking case in evidence. While sitting there he 
thought of what a power this group could become under the honest leadership of 
intelligent men and women. Social uplift, business, public welfare
 all have 
their possibilities there if a score or more of our "highly educated" Negroes


--- PAGE 32 ---
would work with these people at that center. Looking carefully throughout the 
audience for such persons, however, he recognized only two college graduates, 
Kelly Miller and himself; but the former had come to receive from the church a 
donation to the Community Chest, and the author had come according to 
appointment to make an appeal in behalf of Miss Nannie H. Burroughs' school. 
Neither one had manifested any interest in that particular church. This is the 
way most of them receive attention from our "talented tenth." 
Some "highly educated" Negroes say that they have not lost their interest in 
religion, that they have gone into churches with a more intellectual atmosphere 
in keeping with their new thoughts and aspirations. And then there is a sort of 
contagious fever which takes away from the churches of their youth others of 
less formal education. Talking with a friend from Alabama, the other day, the 
author found out that after her father had died and she had moved to Washington 
she forsook the Baptist church in which he had been a prominent worker and 
joined a ritualistic church which is more fashionable. 
Such a change of faith is all right in a sense, for no sensible person today 
would dare to make an argument in favor of any particular religion. Religion is 
but religion, if the people live up to the faith they profess. What is said here
 
with respect to the popular churches of Negroes, which happen to be chiefly 
Methodist and Baptist, would hold also if they were mainly Catholic and 
Episcopal, provided the large majority of Negroes belonged to those churches. 
The point here is that the ritualistic churches into which these Negroes have 
gone do not touch the masses, and they show no promising future for racial 
development. Such institutions are controlled by those who offer the Negroes 
only limited opportunity and then sometimes on the condition that they be 
segregated in the court of the gentiles outside of the temple of Jehovah. 
How an "educated Negro" can thus leave the church of his people and accept such 
jimcrowism has always been a puzzle. He cannot be a thinking man. It may be a 
sort of slave psychology which causes this preference for the leadership of the 
oppressor. The excuse sometimes given for seeking such religious leadership is 
that the Negro evangelical churches are "fogy," but a thinking man would rather 
be behind the times and have his self-respect than compromise his manhood by 
accepting segregation. They say that in some of the Negro churches bishoprics 
are actually bought, but it is better for the Negro to belong to a church where 
one can secure a bishopric by purchase than be a member of one which would deny 
the promotion on account of color. 
With respect to developing the masses, then, the Negro race has lost ground in 
recent years. In 1880 when the Negroes had begun to make themselves felt in 
teaching, the attitude of the leaders was different from what it is today. At 
that time men went off to school to prepare themselves for the uplift of a 
downtrodden people. In our time too many Negroes go to school to memorize 
certain facts to pass examinations for jobs. After they obtain these positions 
they pay little attention to humanity. This attitude of the "educated Negro" 
toward the masses results partly from the general trend of all persons toward 
selfishness, but it works more disastrously among the Negroes than among the 
whites because the lower classes of the latter have had so much more 
opportunity. 
For some time the author has been making a special study of the Negroes in the 
City of Washington to compare their condition of today with that of the past. 
Now although the "highly educated" Negroes of the District of Columbia have 
multiplied and apparently are in better circumstances than ever, the masses show
 
almost as much backwardness as they did in 1880. Sometimes you find as many as 
two or three store-front churches in a single block where Negroes indulge in


--- PAGE 33 ---
heathen-like practices which could hardly be equaled in the jungle. The Negroes 
in Africa have not descended to such depths. Although born and brought up in the
 
Black Belt of the South the author never saw there such idolatrous tendencies as
 
he has seen under the dome of the Capitol. 
Such conditions show that the undeveloped Negro has been abandoned by those who 
should help him. The educated white man, said an observer recently, differs from
 
the "educated Negro" who so readily forsakes the belated element of his race. 
When a white man sees persons of his own race tending downward to a level of 
disgrace he does not rest until he works out some plan to lift such unfortunates
 
to higher ground; but the Negro forgets the delinquents of his race and goes his
 
way to feather his own nest, as he has done in leaving the masses in the popular
 
churches. 
This is sad indeed, for the Negro church is the only institution the race 
controls. With the exception of the feeble efforts of a few all but starved-out 
institutions, the education of the Negroes is controlled by the other element; 
and save the dramatization of practical education by Booker T. Washington, 
Negroes have not influenced the system at all in America. In business, the lack 
of capital, credit, and experience has prevented large undertakings to 
accumulate the wealth necessary for the ease and comfort essential to higher 
culture. 
In the church, however, the Negro has had sufficient freedom to develop this 
institution in his own way; but he has failed to do so. His religion is merely a
 
loan from the whites who have enslaved and segregated the Negroes; and the 
organization, though largely an independent Negro institution, is dominated by 
the thought of the oppressors of the race. The "educated" Negro minister is so 
trained as to drift away from the masses and the illiterate preachers into whose
 
hands the people inevitably fall are unable to develop a doctrine and procedure 
of their own. The dominant thought is to make use of the dogma of the whites as 
means to an end. Whether the system is what it should be or not it serves the 
purpose. 
In chameleon-like fashion the Negro has taken up almost everything religious 
which has come along instead of thinking for himself. The English split off from
 
the Catholics because Henry VIII had difficulty in getting sanction from the 
Church to satisfy his lust for amorous women, and Negroes went with this ilk, 
singing "God save the King." Others later said the thing necessary is baptism by
 
immersion; and the Negroes joined them as Baptists. Another circle of promoters 
next said we must have a new method of doing things and we shall call ourselves 
Methodists; and the Negroes, then, embraced that faith. The Methodists and 
Baptists split up further on account of the custom of holding slaves; and the 
Negroes arrayed themselves on the respective sides. The religious agitators 
divided still more on questions beyond human power to understand; and the 
Negroes started out in similar fashion to imitate them. 
For example, thirty of the two hundred and thirteen religious bodies reported in
 
1926 were exclusively Negro, while thirty which were primarily white


--- PAGE 34 ---
denominations had one or more Negro churches among their number. In other words,
 
Negroes have gone into practically all sects established by the whites; and, in 
addition to these, they have established thirty of their own to give the system 
further complication and subdivision. The situation in these churches is 
aggravated, too, by having too many ministers and about five times as many 
supervisory officials as a church embracing all Negro communicants would 
actually need. All of the Negro Methodists in the world, if united, would not 
need more than twelve bishops, and these would have time to direct the affairs 
of both Methodists and Baptists in a united church. There is no need for three 
or four bishops, each teaching the same faith and practice while duplicating the
 
work of the other in the same area merely because a long time ago somebody 
following the ignorant oppressors of the race in these churches committed the 
sin of dissension and strife. For all of this unnecessary expense impoverished 
Negroes have to pay. 
The "theology" of "foreigners," too, is the important factor in this disunion of
 
churches and the burden which they impose on an unenlightened people. 
Theologians have been the "bane of bliss and source of woe." While bringing the 
joy of conquest to their own camp they have confused the world with disputes 
which have divided the church and stimulated division and subdivision to the 
extent that it no longer functions as a Christian agency for the uplift of all 
men. 
To begin with, theology is of pagan origin. Albert Magnus and Thomas Aquinas 
worked out the first system of it by applying to religious discussion the logic 
of Aristotle, a pagan philosopher, who believed neither in the creation of the 
world nor the immortality of the soul. At best it was degenerate learning, based
 
upon the theory that knowledge is gained by the mind working upon itself rather 
than upon matter or through sense perception. The world was, therefore, confused
 
with the discussion of absurdities as it is today by those of prominent 
churchmen. By their peculiar "reasoning," too, theologians have sanctioned most 
of the ills of the ages. They justified the Inquisition, serfdom, and slavery. 
Theologians of our time defend segregation and the annihilation of one race by 
the other. They have drifted away from righteousness into an effort to make 
wrong seem to be right. 
While we must hold the Negroes responsible for following these ignorant 
theorists, we should not charge to their account the origination of this 
nonsense with which they have confused thoughtless people. As said above, the 
Negro has been so busy doing what he is told to do that he has not stopped long 
enough to think about the meaning of these things. He has borrowed the ideas of 
his traducers instead of delving into things and working out some thought of his
 
own. Some Negro leaders of these religious factions know better, but they hold 
their following by keeping the people divided, in emphasizing nonessentials the 
insignificance of which the average man may not appreciate. The "highly 
educated" Negroes who know better than to follow these unprincipled men have 
abandoned these popular churches. 
While serving as the avenue of the oppressor's propaganda, the Negro church, 
although doing some good, has prevented the union of diverse elements and has 
kept the race too weak to overcome foes who have purposely taught Negroes how to
 
quarrel and fight about trifles until their enemies can overcome them. This is 
the keynote to the control of the so-called inferior races by the self-styled


--- PAGE 35 ---
superior. The one thinks and plans while the other in excited fashion seizes 
upon and destroys his brother with whom he should cooperate. 
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Chapter VII: Dissension and Weakness 
IN recent years the churches in enlightened centres have devoted less attention 
to dissension than formerly, but in the rural districts and small cities they 
have not changed much; and neither in urban communities nor in the country has 
any one succeeded in bringing these churches together to work for their general 
welfare. The militant sects are still fighting one another, and in addition to 
this the members of these sects are contending among themselves. The spirit of 
Christ cannot dwell in such an atmosphere. 
Recent experiences show that these dissensions are about as rank as ever. For 
example, a rural community, in which an observer spent three weeks a year ago, 
has no church at all, although eight or ten families live there. No church can 
thrive among them because, with one or two exceptions, each family represents a 
different denomination, and the sectarian bias is so pronounced that one will 
not accept the procedure of the other. Each one loves his fellow man if he 
thinks as he does; but if his fellow man does not, he hates and shuns him. 
In another rural community where the same observer recently spent two weeks he 
found a small and poorly attended Methodist church. Worshiping there one Sunday 
morning, he counted only four persons who lived in the community. Others might 
have come, for there was no other church for them in that place; but this 
particular church was not of their faith, and their number was too small to 
justify the establishment of one to their liking. The support given the 
unfortunate pastor there is so meager that he can hardly afford to come to them 
once a month, and consequently these peasants are practically without spiritual 
leadership. People who are so directed as to develop such an attitude are 
handicapped for life. 
Some one recently inquired as to why the religious schools do not teach the 
people how to tolerate differences of opinion and to cooperate for the common 
good. This, however, is the thing which these institutions have refused to do. 
Religious schools have been established, but they are considered necessary to 
supply workers for denominational outposts and to keep alive the sectarian bias 
by which the Baptists hope to outstrip the Methodists or the latter the former. 
No teacher in one of these schools has advanced a single thought which has 
become a working principle in Christendom, and not one of these centres is 
worthy of the name of a school of theology. If one would bring together all of 
the teachers in such schools and carefully sift them he would not find in the 
whole group a sufficient number qualified to conduct one accredited school of 
religion. The large majority of them are engaged in imparting to the youth 
worn-out theories of the ignorant oppressor. 
This lack of qualified teachers in Negro schools of theology, however, is not 
altogether the fault of the teachers themselves. It is due largely to the system
 
to which they belong. Their schools of "theology" are impoverished by their 
unnecessary multiplication, and consequently the instructors are either poorly 
paid or not compensated at all. Many of them have to farm, conduct enterprises, 
or pastor churches to make a living while trying to teach. Often, then, only the


--- PAGE 36 ---
inefficient can be retained under such circumstances. Yet those who see how they
 
have failed because of these things nevertheless object to the unification of 
the churches as taught by Jesus of Nazareth, whom they have all but ceased to 
follow because of their sectarian bias obtained from thumb-worn books of 
misguided Americans and Europeans. 
Recently an observer saw a result of this in the sermon of a Negro college 
graduate, trying to preach to a church of the masses. He referred to all the 
great men in the history of a certain country to show how religious they were, 
whether they were or not. When he undertook to establish the Christian character
 
of Napoleon, however, several felt like leaving the place in disgust. The climax
 
of the service was a prayer by another "mis-educated" Negro who devoted most of 
the time to thanking God for Cicero and Demosthenes. Here, then, was a case of 
the religion of the pagan handed down by the enslaver and segregationist to the 
Negro. 
Returning from the table where he had placed his offering in a church on a 
Sunday morning not long thereafter, this observer saw another striking example 
of this failure to hit the mark. He stopped to inquire of his friend, Jim Minor,
 
as to why he had not responded to the appeal for a collection. 
"What!" said Jim, "I ain't givin' that man nothing. That man ain't fed me this 
morning, and I ain't feedin' him." 
This was Jim's reaction to a "scholarly" sermon entitled "The Humiliation of the
 
Incarnation." During the discourse, too, the minister had had much to say about 
John Knox Orthodox, and another of the communicants bowing at that shrine 
inquired of the observer later as to who this John Knox Orthodox was and where 
he lived. The observer could not answer all of the inquiries thus evoked, but he
 
tried to explain the best he could that the speaker had "studied" history and 
theology. 
This was the effect this sermon had on an earnest congregation. The minister had
 
attended a school of theology but had merely memorized words and phrases, which 
meant little to him and nothing to those who heard his discourse. The school in 
which he had been trained followed the traditional course for ministers, 
devoting most of the time to dead languages and dead issues. He had given 
attention to polytheism, monotheism, and the doctrine of the Trinity. He had 
studied also the philosophical basis of the Caucasian dogma, the elements of 
that theology, and the schism by which fanatics made religion a football and 
multiplied wars only to moisten the soil of Europe with the blood of unoffending
 
men. 
This minister had given no attention to the religious background of the Negroes 
to whom he was trying to preach. He knew nothing of their spiritual endowment 
and their religious experience as influenced by their traditions and environment
 
in which the religion of the Negro has developed and expressed itself. He did 
not seem to know anything about their present situation. These honest people, 
therefore, knew nothing additional when he had finished his discourse. As one 
communicant pointed out, their wants had not been supplied, and they wondered


--- PAGE 37 ---
where they might go to hear a word which had some bearing upon the life which 
they had to live. 
Not long ago when the author was in Virginia he inquired about a man who was 
once a popular preacher in that state. He is here, they said, but he is not 
preaching now. He went off to school, and when he came back the people could not
 
understand what he was talking about. Then he began to find fault with the 
people because they would not come to church. He called them fogy, because they 
did not appreciate his new style of preaching and the things he talked about. 
The church went down to nothing, and he finally left it and took up farming. 
In a rural community, then, a preacher of this type must fail unless he can 
organize separately members of the popular Methodist and Baptist churches who go
 
into the ritualistic churches or establish certain "refined" Methodist or 
Baptist churches catering to the "talented tenth." For lack of adequate numbers,
 
however, such churches often fail to develop sufficient force to do very much 
for themselves or for anybody else. On Sunday morning, then, their pastors have 
to talk to the benches. While these truncated churches go higher in their own 
atmosphere of self-satisfaction the mentally undeveloped are left to sink lower 
because of the lack of contact with the better trained. If the latter exercised 
a little more judgment, they would be able to influence these people for good by
 
gradually introducing advanced ideas. 
Because our "highly educated" people do not do this, large numbers of Negroes 
drift into churches led by the "uneducated" ministers who can scarcely read and 
write. These preachers do not know much of what is found in school books and can
 
hardly make use of a library in working out a sermon; but they understand the 
people with whom they deal, and they make such use of the human laboratory that 
sometimes they become experts in solving vexing problems and meeting social 
needs. They would be much better preachers if they could have attended a school 
devoted to the development of the mind rather than to cramming it with 
extraneous matters which have no bearing on the task which lies before them. 
Unfortunately, however, very few of such schools of religion now exist. 
For lack of intelligent guidance, then, the Negro church often fulfills a 
mission to the contrary of that for which it was established. Because the Negro 
church is such a free field and it is controlled largely by the Negroes 
themselves, it seems that practically all the incompetents and undesirables who 
have been barred from other walks of life by race prejudice and economic 
difficulties have rushed into the ministry for the exploitation of the people. 
Honest ministers who are trying to do their duty, then, find their task made 
difficult by these men who stoop to practically everything conceivable. Almost 
anybody of the lowest type may get into the Negro ministry. The Methodists claim
 
that they have strict regulations to prevent this, but their net draws in 
proportionately as many undesirables as one finds among the Baptists. 
As an evidence of the depths to which the institution has gone a resident of 
Cincinnati recently reported a case of its exploitation by a railroad man who 
lost his job and later all his earnings in a game in a den of vice in that city.
 
To refinance himself he took an old black frock coat and a Bible and went into 
the heart of Tennessee, where he conducted at various points a series of 
distracted, protracted meetings which netted him two hundred and ninety-nine 
converts to the faith and four hundred dollars in cash. He was enabled thereby


--- PAGE 38 ---
to return to the game in Cincinnati and he is still in the lead. Other such 
cases are frequently reported. 
The large majority of Negro preachers of today, then, are doing nothing more 
than to keep up the mediaeval hell-fire scare which the whites have long since 
abandoned to emphasize the humanitarian trend in religion through systematized 
education. The young people of the Negro race could be held in the church by 
some such program, but the Negro's Christianity does not conceive of social 
uplift as a duty of the church; and consequently Negro children have not been 
adequately trained in religious matters to be equal to the social demands upon 
them. Turning their back on medievalism, then, these untrained youth think 
nothing of taking up moonshining, gambling, and racketeering as occupations; and
 
they find great joy in smoking, drinking, and fornication as diversions. They 
cannot accept the old ideas, and they do not understand the new. 
What the Negro church is, however, has been determined largely by what the white
 
man has taught the race by precept and example. We must remember that the 
Negroes learned their religion from the early white Methodists and Baptists who 
evangelized the slaves and the poor whites when they were barred from 
proselytizing the aristocracy. The American white people themselves taught 
Negroes to specialize unduly in the "Praise the Lord," "Hallelujah" worship. In 
the West Indies among the Anglicans and among the Latin people Negroes do not 
show such emotionalism. They are cold and conservative. 
Some of the American whites, moreover, are just as far behind in this respect as
 
are the Negroes who have had less opportunity to learn better. While in Miami, 
Florida, not long ago the author found in two interracial "Holiness Churches" 
that the following was a third or fourth white. The whites joined 
whole-heartedly with the Negroes in their "holy rolling" and some of them seemed
 
to be "rollers not holy." 
A few months ago in Huntington, West Virginia, where the author was being 
entertained by friends, the party was disturbed throughout the evening by the 
most insane outbursts of white worshippers in a "Church of God" across the 
street. There they daily indulged in such whooping and screaming in "unknown 
tongues" that the Negroes have had to report them to the police as a nuisance. 
The author has made a careful study of the Negro church, but he has never known 
Negroes to do anything to surpass the performance of those heathen. 
The American Negroes' ideas of morality, too, were borrowed from their owners. 
The Negroes could not be expected to raise a higher standard than their 
aristocratic governing class that teemed with sin and vice. This corrupt state 
of things did not easily pass away. The Negroes have never seen any striking 
examples among the whites to help them in matters of religion. Even during the 
colonial period the whites claimed that their ministers sent to the colonies by 
the Anglican Church, the progenitor of the Protestant Episcopal Church in 
America, were a degenerate class that exploited the people for money to waste it
 
in racing horses and drinking liquor. Some of these ministers were known to have
 
illicit relations with women and, therefore, winked at the sins of the officers 
of their churches, who sold their own offspring by slave women. 
Although the author was born ten years after the Civil War the morals and 
religion of that régime continued even into his time. Many of the rich or 
well-to-do white men belonging to the churches in Buckingham County, Virginia,


--- PAGE 39 ---
indulged in polygamy. They raised one family by a white woman and another by a 
colored or poor white woman. Both the owner of the largest slate quarry and the 
proprietor of the largest factory in that county lived in this fashion. One was 
an outstanding Episcopalian and the other a distinguished Catholic. 
One day the foreman of the factory, a polygamous deacon of the local white 
Baptist Church, called the workmen together at noon for a short memorial service
 
in honor of Parson Taylor, for almost half a century the pastor of the large 
white Baptist church in that section. The foreman made some remarks on the life 
of the distinguished minister, and then all sang "Shall We Meet Beyond the 
River?" But "to save his life" the author could not restrain himself from 
wondering all that time whether the foreman's white wife or colored paramour 
would greet him on the other side, and what a conflict there would be if they 
happened to get into an old-fashioned hair-pulling. In spite of his libertine 
connections, however, this foreman believed that he was a Christian, and when he
 
died his eulogist commended his soul to God. 
Some years later when the author was serving his six years' apprenticeship in 
the West Virginia coal mines he found at Nutallburg a very faithful vestryman of
 
the white Episcopal Church at that point. He was one of the most devout from the
 
point of view of his co-workers. Yet, privately, this man boasted of having 
participated in that most brutal lynching of the four Negroes who thus met their
 
doom at the hands of an angry mob in Clifton Forge, Virginia, in 1892. 
It is very clear, then, that if Negroes got their conception of religion from 
slaveholders, libertines, and murderers, there may be something wrong about it, 
and it would not hurt to investigate it. It has been said that the Negroes do 
not connect morals with religion. The historian would like to know what race or 
nation does such a thing. Certainly the whites with whom the Negroes have come 
into contact have not done so. 
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Chapter VIII: Professional Education Discouraged 
IN the training for professions other than the ministry and teaching the Negro 
has not had full sway. Any extensive comment on professional education by the 
Negro, then, must be mainly negative. We have not had sufficient professional 
schools upon which we can base an estimate of what the Negro educator can do in 
this sphere. If mistakes have been made in mis-educating the Negro 
professionally it must be charged not so much to the account of the Negroes 
themselves as to that of their friends who have performed this task. We are 
dealing here, then, mainly with information obtained from the study of Negroes 
who have been professionally trained by whites in their own schools and in mixed
 
institutions. 
The largest numbers of Negroes in professions other than the ministry or 
education are physicians, dentists, pharmacists, lawyers and actors. The numbers


--- PAGE 40 ---
in these and other lines have not adequately increased because of the economic 
status of the Negroes and probably because of a false conception of the rôle of 
the professional man in the community and its relation to him. The people whom 
the Negro professional men have volunteered to serve have not always given them 
sufficient support to develop that standing and solidarity which will make their
 
position professional and influential. Most whites in contact with Negroes, 
always the teachers of their brethren in black, both by precept and practice, 
have treated the professions as aristocratic spheres to which Negroes should not
 
aspire. We have had, then, a much smaller number than those who under different 
circumstances would have dared to cross the line; and those that did so were 
starved out by the whites who would not treat them as a professional class. This
 
made it impracticable for Negroes to employ them in spheres in which they could 
not function efficiently. For example, because of a law that a man could not be 
admitted to the bar in Delaware without practicing a year under some lawyer in 
the state (and no white lawyer would grant a Negro such an opportunity until a 
few years ago) it was only recently that a Negro was admitted there. 
Negroes, then, learned from their oppressors to say to their children that there
 
were certain spheres into which they should not go because they would have no 
chance therein for development. In a number of places young men were discouraged
 
and frightened away from certain professions by the poor showing made by those 
trying to function in them. Few had the courage to face this ordeal; and some 
professional schools in institutions for Negroes were closed about thirty or 
forty years ago, partly on this account. 
This was especially true of the law schools, closed during the wave of 
legislation against the Negro, at the very time the largest possible number of 
Negroes needed to know the law for the protection of their civil and political 
rights. In other words, the thing which the patient needed most to pass the 
crisis was taken from him that he might more easily die. This one act among many
 
others is an outstanding monument to the stupidity or malevolence of those in 
charge of Negro schools, and it serves as a striking demonstration of the 
mis-education of the race. 
Almost any observer remembers distinctly the hard trials of the Negro lawyers. A
 
striking example of their difficulties was supplied by the case of the first to 
be permanently established in Huntington, West Virginia. The author had 
entrusted to him the matter of correcting an error in the transfer of some 
property purchased from one of the most popular white attorneys in the state. 
For six months this simple transaction was delayed, and the Negro lawyer could 
not induce the white attorney to act. The author finally went to the office 
himself to complain of the delay. The white attorney frankly declared that he 
had not taken up the matter because he did not care to treat with a Negro 
attorney; but he would deal with the author, who happened to be at that time the
 
teacher of a Negro school, and was, therefore, in his place. 
At one time the Negroes in medicine and correlated fields were regarded in the 
same light They had difficulty in making their own people believe that they 
could cure a complaint, fill a tooth, or compound a prescription. The whites 
said that they could not do it; and, of course, if the whites said so, it was 
true, so far as most Negroes were concerned. In those fields, however, actual 
demonstrations to the contrary have convinced a sufficient number of both


--- PAGE 41 ---
Negroes and whites that such an attitude toward these classes is false, but 
there are many Negroes who still follow those early teachings, especially the 
"highly educated" who in school have been given the "scientific" reasons for it.
 
It is a most remarkable process that while in one department of a university a 
Negro may be studying for a profession, in another department of the same 
university he is being shown how the Negro professional man cannot succeed. Some
 
of the "highly educated," then, give their practice to those who are often 
inferior to the Negroes whom they thus pass by. Although there has been an 
increase in these particular spheres, however, the professions among Negroes, 
with the exception of teaching and preaching, are still undermanned. 
In the same way the Negro was once discouraged and dissuaded from taking up 
designing, drafting, architecture, engineering and chemistry. The whites, they 
were told, will not employ you and your people cannot provide such 
opportunities. The thought of pioneering or of developing the Negro to the 
extent that he might figure in this sphere did not dawn on those monitors of the
 
Negroes preparing for their life's work. This tradition is still a heavy load in
 
Negro education, and it forces many Negroes out of spheres in which they might 
function into those for which they may not have any aptitude. 
In music, dramatics and correlated arts, too, the Negro has been unfortunately 
misled. Because the Negro is gifted as a singer and can render more successfully
 
than others the music of his own people, he has been told that he does not need 
training. Scores of those who have undertaken to function in this sphere without
 
adequate education, then, have developed only to a certain point beyond which 
they have not had ability to go. We cannot easily estimate how popular Negro 
musicians and their music might have become had they been taught to the 
contrary. 
Of these, several instances may be cited. A distinguished man, talking recently 
as a member of a large Episcopal church, which maintains a Negro mission, 
mentioned his objection to the budget of fifteen hundred dollars a year for 
music for these segregated communicants. Inasmuch as the Negroes were naturally 
gifted in music he did not believe that any expensive training or direction was 
required. The small number of Negro colleges and universities which undertake 
the training of the Negro in music is further evidence of the belief that the 
Negro is all but perfect in this field and should direct his attention to the 
traditional curricula. 
The same misunderstanding with respect to the Negro in dramatics is also 
evident. We have long had the belief that the Negro is a natural actor who does 
not require any stimulus for further development. In this assertion is the idea 
that because the Negro is good at dancing, joking, minstrelsy and the like he is
 
"in his place" when "cutting a shine" and does not need to be trained to 
function in the higher sphere of dramatics. Thus misled, large numbers of 
Negroes ambitious for the stage have not bloomed forth into great possibilities.
 
Too many of them have finally ended with rôles in questionable cafés, cabarets, 
and night clubs of America and Europe; and instead of increasing the prestige of
 
the Negro they have brought the race into disgrace. 
We scarcely realize what a poor showing we make in dramatics in spite of our


--- PAGE 42 ---
natural aptitude in this sphere. Only about a half dozen Negro actors have 
achieved greatness, but we have more actors and showmen than any other 
professionals except teachers and ministers. Where are these thousands of men 
and women in the histrionic sphere? What do we hear of them? What have they 
achieved? Their record shows that only a few measure up to the standard of the 
modern stage. Most of these would-be artists have no preparation for the tasks 
undertaken. 
A careful study of the Negro in dramatics shows that only those who have 
actually taken the time to train themselves as they should be have finally 
endured. Their salvation has been to realize that adequate training is the 
surest way to attain artistic maturity. And those few who have thus understood 
the situation clearly demonstrate our ineptitude in the failure to educate the 
Negroes along the lines in which they could have admirably succeeded. Some of 
our schools have for some time undertaken this work as imitators of institutions
 
dealing with persons otherwise circumstanced. Desirable results, therefore, have
 
not followed, and the Negro on the stage is still mainly the product of the 
trial and error method. 
Several other reasons may be given for the failure of a larger number of Negro 
actors to reach a higher level. In the first place, they have been recognized by
 
the white man only in parely plantation comedy and minstrelsy, and because of 
the large number entering the field it has failed to offer a bright future for 
many of such aspirants. Repeatedly told by the white man that he could not 
function as an actor in a different sphere, the American Negro has all but 
ceased to attempt anything else. The successful career of Ira Aldridge in 
Shakespeare was forgotten until recently recalled by the dramatic success of 
Paul Robeson in Othello. The large majority of Negroes have settled down, then, 
to contentment as ordinary clowns and comedians. They have not had the courage 
or they have not learned how to break over the unnatural barriers and occupy 
higher ground. 
The Negro author is no exception to the traditional rule. He writes, but the 
white man is supposed to know more about everything than the Negro. So who wants
 
a book written by a Negro about one? As a rule, not even a Negro himself, for if
 
he is really "educated," he must show that he has the appreciation for the best 
in literature. The Negro author, then, can neither find a publisher nor a 
reader; and his story remains untold. The Negro editors and reporters were once 
treated the same way, but thanks to the uneducated printers who founded most of 
our newspapers which have succeeded, these men of vision have made it possible 
for the "educated" Negroes to make a living in this sphere in proportion as they
 
recover from their education and learn to deal with the Negro as he is and where
 
he is. 
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Chapter IX: Political Education Neglected


--- PAGE 43 ---
SOME time ago when Congressman Oscar De Priest was distributing by thousands 
copies of the Constitution of the United States certain wiseacres were disposed 
to make fun of it. What purpose would such an act serve? These critics, however,
 
probably did not know that thousands and thousands of Negro children in this 
country are not permitted to use school books in which are printed the 
Declaration of Independence or the Constitution of the United States. Thomas 
Jefferson and James Madison are mentioned in their history as figures in 
politics rather than as expounders of liberty and freedom. These youths are not 
permitted to learn that Jefferson believed that government should derive its 
power from the consent of the governed. 
Not long ago a measure was introduced in a certain State Legislature to have the
 
Constitution of the United States thus printed in school histories, but when the
 
bill was about to pass it was killed by some one who made the point that it 
would never do to have Negroes study the Constitution of the United States. If 
the Negroes were granted the opportunity to peruse this document, they might 
learn to contend for the rights therein guaranteed; and no Negro teacher who 
gives attention to such matters of the government is tolerated in those backward
 
districts. The teaching of government or the lack of such instruction, then, 
must be made to conform to the policy of "keeping the Negro in his place." 
In like manner, the teaching of history in the Negro area has had its political 
significance. Starting out after the Civil War, the opponents of freedom and 
social justice decided to work out a program which would enslave the Negroes' 
mind inasmuch as the freedom of body had to be conceded. It was well understood 
that if by the teaching of history the white man could be further assured of his
 
superiority and the Negro could be made to feel that he had always been a 
failure and that the subjection of his will to some other race is necessary the 
freedman, then, would still be a slave. If you can control a man's thinking you 
do not have to worry about his action. "When you determine what a man shall 
think you do not have to concern yourself about what he will do. If you make a 
man feel that he is inferior, you do not have to compel him to accept an 
inferior status, for he will seek it himself. If you make a man think that he is
 
justly an outcast, you do not have to order him to the back door. He will go 
without being told; and if there is no back door, his very nature will demand 
one. 
This program, so popular immediately after the Civil War, was not new, but after
 
this upheaval, its execution received a new stimulus. Histories written 
elsewhere for the former slave area were discarded, and new treatments of local 
and national history in conformity with the recrudescent propaganda were 
produced to give whites and blacks the biased point of view of the development 
of the nation and the relations of the races. Special treatments of the 
Reconstruction period were produced in apparently scientific form by 
propagandists who went into the first graduate schools of the East to learn 
modern historiography about half a century ago. Having the stamp of science, the
 
thought of these polemics was accepted in all seats of learning. These rewriters
 
of history fearlessly contended that slavery was a benevolent institution; the 
masters loved their slaves and treated them humanely; the abolitionists meddled 
with the institution which the masters eventually would have modified; the Civil


--- PAGE 44 ---
War brought about by "fanatics" like William Lloyd Garrison and John Brown was 
unnecessary; it was a mistake to make the Negro a citizen, for he merely became 
worse off by incurring the displeasure of the master class that will never 
tolerate him as an equal; and the Negro must live in this country in a state of 
recognized inferiority. 
Some of these theories may seem foolish, but historians even in the North have 
been won to this point of view. They ignore the recent works of Miss Elizabeth 
Donnan, Mrs. H. T. Catterall, and Dr. Frederic Bancroft, who have spent years 
investigating slavery and slavetrading. These are scientific productions with 
the stamp of the best scholarship in America, treatises produced from such 
genuine documents as the court records of the slaveholding section itself, and 
these authors have rendered the public a valuable service in removing the 
whitewash which pseudo-historians have been giving to slavery and slaveholders 
for more than a century. 
In the preparation of Negroes, many of whom teach in the South, these biased 
Northern historians even convert them to such a faith. A few years ago the 
author happened to listen to a conversation of Negro lawyers in one of our 
Southern cities, in which they unanimously conceded practically every contention
 
set forth in this program of propaganda. They denounced, therefore, all 
reconstructionists who advocated equality and justice for all. These Negroes had
 
the biased point of view of the rewriters like Claude Bowers and had never been 
directed to the real history of that drama as set forth by A. A. Taylor, Francis
 
B. Simkins and Robert H. Woodly of the new Southern school of thought. These 
Negro critics were especially hard on Negroes of our day who engage in agitation
 
for actual democracy. Negroes themselves in certain parts join with the whites, 
then, in keeping out of the schools teachers who may be hold enough to teach the
 
truth as it is. They usually say the races here are getting along amicably now, 
and we do not want these peaceful relations disturbed by the teaching of new 
political thought. 
What they mean to say with respect to the peaceful relation of the races, then, 
is that the Negroes have been terrorized to the extent that they are afraid even
 
to discuss political matters publicly. There must be no exposition of the 
principles of government in the schools, and this must not be done in public 
among Negroes with a view to stimulating political activity. Negroes engaged in 
other spheres in such communities finally come to the point of accepting silence
 
on these matters as a fixed policy. Knowing that action to the contrary means 
mob rule which may destroy the peace and property of the community, they 
constitute themselves a sort of a vigilant committee to direct their fellows 
accordingly. 
A few years ago a rather youthful looking high school principal in one of the 
large cities was unceremoniously dismissed because he said jocosely to the 
president of the board of education, in reply to his remark about his youthful 
bearing, "I am old enough to vote." "Horrors!" said the infuriated official. 
"Put him out. We brought him here to teach these Negroes how to work, and here 
he is thinking about voting," A few prominent Negroes of the place muttered a 
little, but they did nothing effective to correct this injustice. 
In certain parts, therefore, the Negroes under such terrorism have ceased to 
think of political matters as their sphere. Where such things come into the


--- PAGE 45 ---
teaching in more advanced work they are presented as matters of concern to a 
particular element rather than as functions in which all citizens may 
participate. The result is that Negroes grow up without knowledge of political 
matters which should concern all elements. To prevent the Negroes from learning 
too much about these things the whites in the schools are sometimes neglected 
also, but the latter have the opportunity to learn by contact, close 
observation, and actual participation in the affairs of government. 
Negroes in certain parts, then, have all but abandoned voting even at points 
where it might be allowed. In some cases not as many as two thousand Negroes 
vote in a whole state. By special legislation providing for literacy tests and 
the payment of taxes their number of voters has been reduced to a negligible 
quantity, and the few who can thus function do not do so because they are often 
counted out when they have the deciding vote. 
The tests established for the restriction of suffrage were not intended to 
stimulate political education but to eliminate the Negro vote by subterfuge. 
Negroes presenting themselves for registration are asked to do the all but 
impossible thing of expounding parts of the Constitution which have baffled high
 
courts; but whites are asked simple questions which almost any illiterate man 
can answer. In this way the Negroes, however intelligent, are turned down; and 
all ignorant whites are permitted to vote. These laws, then, have retarded 
rather than stimulated the political education of both races. Such knowledge is 
apparently useless for Negroes and unnecessary for the whites, for the Negroes 
do not immediately profit by having it and the whites may function as citizens 
without it. 
The effect of such a one-sided system is decidedly bad. One does not realize it 
until he talks with men and women of these districts, who because of the denial 
of these privileges have lost interest in political matters. A book agent 
working in the plantation area of Mississippi tested the knowledge of Negroes of
 
these matters by asking them questions about the local and State government. He 
discovered that they knew practically nothing in this sphere. It was difficult 
to find any who knew who was president of the United States. One meets teachers,
 
physicians, and ministers who do not know the ordinary operations of courts, the
 
functions of the counsel, jury or judge, unless such knowledge has come by the 
bitter experience of having been imposed upon by some tribunal of injustice. 
Some of the "educated" Negroes do not pay attention to such important matters as
 
"the assessment of property and the collection of taxes, and they do not inform 
themselves as to how these things are worked out. An influential Negro in the 
South, then, is one who has nothing to do or say about politics and advises 
others to follow the same course. 
The elimination of the Negro from politics, then, has been most unfortunate. The
 
whites may have profited thereby temporarily, but they showed very little 
foresight. How the whites can expect to make of the Negroes better citizens by 
leading them to think that they should have no part in the government of this 
country is a mystery. To keep a man above vagabondage and crime he needs among 
other things the stimulus of patriotism, but how can a man be patriotic when the
 
effect of his education is to the contrary? 
What little chance the Negro has to learn by participation in politics in most 
parts of the South is unfortunately restricted now to corruption. The usual stir


--- PAGE 46 ---
about electing delegates to the National Republican Convention from the Southern
 
States and the customary combat the Negroes have with Lily-white corruptionists 
are about all the political matters which claim their attention in the Lower 
South. Neither the white nor the black faction, as a rule, makes any effort to 
restore suffrage to Negroes. The objective is merely the control of delegates 
and Federal patronage for the financial considerations involved. To do this they
 
resort to numerous contests culminating in closing hotels and bolting doors for 
secret meetings. Since this is the only activity in which Negroes can 
participate they have learned to look upon it as honorable. Large numbers of 
Negroes become excited over the contest and give much publicity to it on the 
rostrum and in the press as a matter of great importance. The methods of these 
corruptionists of both races, however, should be condemned as a disgrace to the 
state and nation. 
Instead of doing something to get rid of this ilk, however, we find the "highly 
educated" Negroes trying to plunge also into the mire. One of the most 
discouraging aspects in Negro life recently observed was that of a presidential 
campaign. Prominent Negroes connected with three of our leading institutions of 
learning temporarily abandoned their work to round up Negro votes for one of the
 
candidates. The objective, of course, was to control the few ordinary jobs which
 
are allotted to Negro politicians for their campaign services. When the 
successful candidate had been inaugurated, however, he carefully ignored them in
 
the make-up of the personnel of his administration and treated Negroes in 
general with contempt. When you think of the fact that the Negroes who are being
 
thus used are supposedly the most reputable Negro leaders and our most highly 
educated men you have to wonder whether the Negro has made any progress since 
Emancipation. The only consolation one can get out of it is that they may not 
represent the whole race. 
In the North the Negroes have a better chance to acquire knowledge of political 
matters of the simple kind, but the bosses do not think it is advisable to 
enlighten them thoroughly. Negroes in parts are employed in campaigns, but they 
are not supposed to discuss such issues of the day as free trade, tariff for 
protection, the World Court, and the League of Nations. These Negro workers are 
supposed to tell their people how one politician seeking office has appointed 
more Negro messengers or charwomen in the service than the other or how the 
grandfather of the candidate stood with Lincoln and Grant through their ordeal 
and thus brought the race into its own. Another important task of these Negroes 
thus employed is also to abuse the opposing party, showing how hostile it has 
been to the Negro while the highly favorable party was doing so much for the 
race. 
The course of these bosses has been interesting. At first the white man used the
 
Negro leader by giving him a drink occasionally. The next step was to give him 
sufficient money to set up drinks in the name of the white candidate. When 
drinking at the expense of the candidate became too common the politicians fell 
back on the distribution of funds in small amounts. When this finally proved to 
be insufficient, however, the politicians had to go a bit further and provide 
Jim Crow jobs in certain backrooms with the understanding that the functions of 
the so-called office would be merely nominal and the incumbents would have no 
close contact with white people. In this stage the Negroes find themselves 
today.


--- PAGE 47 ---
The undesirable aspect of the affair is that the Negro in spite of the changes 
from one method of approach to that of another is never brought into the inner 
circle of the party with which he is affiliated. He is always kept on the 
outside and is used as a means to an end. To obtain the meager consideration 
which he receives the Negro must work clandestinely through the back door. It 
has been unnecessary for the white man to change this procedure, for until 
recent years he has generally found it possible to satisfy the majority of 
Negroes with the few political positions earmarked as "Negro jobs" and to crush 
those who clamor for more recognition. 
It is unfortunate, too, that such a large number of Negroes do not know any 
better than to stake their whole fortune on politics. History does not show that
 
any race, especially a minority group, has ever solved an important problem by 
relying altogether on one thing, certainly not by parking its political strength
 
on one side of the fence because of empty promises. There are Negroes who know 
better, but such thinkers are kept in the background by the traducers of the 
race to prevent the enlightenment of the masses. The misleading politicians are 
the only persons through whom the traducers act with respect to the Negro, and 
there are always a sufficient number of mentally undeveloped voters who will 
supply them a large following. 
Even the few Negroes who are elected to office are often similarly uninformed 
and show a lack of vision. They have given little attention to the weighty 
problems of the nation; and in the legislative bodies to which they are elected,
 
they restrict themselves as a rule to matters of special concern to the Negroes 
themselves, such as lynching, segregation and disfranchisement, which they have 
well learned by experience. This indicates a step backwards, for the Negroes who
 
sat in Congress and in the State Legislatures during the Reconstruction worked 
for the enactment of measures of concern to all elements of the population 
regardless of color. Historians have not yet forgot what those Negro statesmen 
did in advocating public education, internal improvements, labor arbitration, 
the tariff, and the merchant marine. 
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Chapter X: The Loss of Vision 
HISTORY shows, then, that as a result of these unusual forces in the education 
of the Negro he easily learns to follow the line of least resistance rather than
 
battle against odds for what real history has shown to be the right course. A 
mind that remains in the present atmosphere never undergoes sufficient 
development to experience what is commonly known as thinking. No Negro thus 
submerged in the ghetto, then, will have a clear conception of the present 
status of the race or sufficient foresight to plan for the future; and he drifts
 
so far toward compromise that he loses moral courage. The education of the 
Negro, then, becomes a perfect device for control from without. Those who 
purposely promote it have every reason to rejoice, and Negroes themselves 
exultingly champion the cause of the oppressor.


--- PAGE 48 ---
A comparison of the record of the spokesmen of the race today with that of those
 
of the eighteenth century shows a moral surrender. During the prolonged struggle
 
between the French and English in America the Negroes held the balance of power 
at several strategic points and used it accordingly; today the Negro finds 
himself inconsequential because he can be parked on one side of the fence. The 
same balance of power was evident also during the American Revolution when Negro
 
soldiers insisted on serving side by side with others; today many Negroes are 
content as menials in the army. At that time Negroes preached to mixed 
congregations; today we find Negroes busy separating them. The 
eighteenth-century Negro resented any such thing as social distinctions; today 
Negroes are saying that they do not want social equality. Negroes of that epoch 
said with the ancient poet, "I am a man and deem nothing that relates to man a 
matter of indifference to me"; today, however, the average Negro says, "Now, I 
am a colored man, and you white folks must settle that matter among yourselves."
 
At a still later date the American Negro showed more courage than he does today 
with all of his so-called enlightenment. When the free Negroes were advised a 
hundred years ago to go to Africa they replied that they would never separate 
themselves from the slave population of this country as they were brethren by 
the "ties of consanguinity, of suffering, and of wrong." Today, however, the 
Negro in the North turns up his nose at the crude migrant from the South who 
brings to the North the race problem but along with it more thrift and actual 
progress than the Northern Negro ever dreamed of. 
When, again in 1816, free Negroes like Richard Allen, James Forten, and Robert 
Purvis, were referred to as a foreign element whose social status might not be 
secure in this country, instead of permitting the colonizationists to shove them
 
aside as criminals to be deported to a distant shore, they replied in no 
uncertain terms that this soil in America which gave them birth is their only 
true home. "Here their fathers fought, bled, and died for this country and here 
they intended to stay." Today when such things come up you find Negroes 
appearing upon the scene to see how much pay they can obtain to assist in the 
proposed undoing of the race. 
Further emphasizing this thought of resistance a few years later, Nathaniel 
Paul, a Baptist preacher of Albany, informed the colonizationists that the free 
Negroes would not permit their traducers to formulate a program for the race. 
You may go ahead with your plan to deport this element in order to make slavery 
secure, he warned; but the free Negroes will never emigrate to Africa. "We shall
 
stay here and fight until the foul monster is crushed. Slavery must go." 
"Did I believe it would always continue," said he, "and that man to the end of 
time would be permitted with impunity to usurp the same undue authority over his
 
fellow, I would disavow any allegiance or obligation I was under to my fellow 
creatures, or any submission that I owed to the laws of my country! I would deny
 
the superintending power of divine Providence in the affairs of this life; I 
would ridicule the religion of the Savior of the world, and treat as the worst 
of men the ministers of the everlasting gospel; I would consider my Bible as a 
book of false and delusive fables, and commit it to the flames; nay, I would 
still go farther; I would at once confess myself an atheist, and deny the


--- PAGE 49 ---
existence of a holy God." 
And these Negroes of a century ago stood their ground and fought the pro-slavery
 
deportationists to a standstill, for with the exception of a few pioneers the 
emigrants to Liberia were largely slaves manumitted on the condition that they 
would settle in Africa. These freedmen, then, could have no ideals but those of 
the slave-holding section from which they were sent. They established, 
therefore, a slavocracy in Liberia. If Liberia has failed, then, it is no 
evidence of the failure of the Negro in government. It is merely evidence of the
 
failure of slavery. 
The Negroes attacking Jim-Crowism almost a century ago fearlessly questioned the
 
constitutionality of such a provision. Speaking through Charles Lenox Remond of 
that day, they said, "There is a distinction between social and civil rights. We
 
all claim the privilege of selecting our society and associations, but, in civil
 
rights, one man has not the prerogative to define rights for another. These 
[race] distinctions react in all their wickedness
 to say nothing of their 
concocted and systematized odiousness and absurdity upon those who are illiberal 
and mean enough to practice them." 
In our day, however, we find some "highly educated" Negroes approving such 
Jim-Crowism. For example, not many years ago an outstanding Baptist preacher, 
dabbling in politics in West Virginia, suggested to the whites that they enact a
 
Jim Crow car law in that State, and we had difficulty in crushing that 
sentiment. A few years thereafter the author heard one of our bishops say that 
we should not object to such separation, for we want to be by ourselves. When 
this distinguished churchman died the traducers of the Negro lauded him to the 
skies; and thoughtless members of the race, thinking that he deserved it, joined
 
in the loud acclaim. 
In this way the large majority of "educated" Negroes in the United States have 
accepted segregation and have become its fearless champions. Their filled but 
undeveloped minds do not enable them to understand that, although an opiate 
furnishes temporary relief, it does not remove the cause of the pain. In this 
case we have yielded on principle to satisfy the mob, but have not yet found an 
ultimate solution of the problem at hand. In our so-called democracy we are 
accustomed to give the majority what they want rather than educate them to 
understand what is best for them. We do not show the Negro how to overcome 
segregation, but we teach him how to accept it as final and just. 
Numerous results from this policy may be cited. The white laboring man refuses 
to work with Negroes because of the false tradition that the Negro is an 
inferior, and at the same time the Negro for the same reason becomes content 
with menial service and drudgery. The politician excludes the Negro from the 
councils of his party and from the government because he has been taught that 
such is necessary to maintain the supremacy of his race; the Negro, trained in 
the same school of thought, accepts this as final and contends for such meager 
consideration as the bosses may begrudgingly grant him. An irate resident in an 
exclusive district protests against an invasion by Negroes because he has 
learned that these poverty-stricken people are carriers of disease and agents of
 
crime; the Negroes, believing that such is the truth, remain content in the 
ghetto. The irrational parent forces the separation of the races in some schools


--- PAGE 50 ---
because his child must occupy a seat next to a pupil of "tainted" African blood;
 
the educated Negro accepts this as inevitable and welcomes the makeshift for his
 
people. Children of Negroes are excluded from the playgrounds because of the 
assertion that they will contaminate those of the whites; the Negroes yielding, 
settle down to a policy of having their children grow up in neglected fashion in
 
the most undesirable part of the city. The Negro is forced to ride in a Jim Crow
 
car to stamp upon him more easily the badge of his "inferiority"; the "educated 
Negro" accepts it as settled and abandons the fight against this social 
proscription. 
And thus goes segregation which is the most far-reaching development in the 
history of the Negro since the enslavement of the race. In fact, it is a sequel 
of slavery. It has been made possible by our system of mis-educating innocent 
people who did not know what was happening. It is so subtle that men have 
participated in promoting it without knowing what they were doing. 
There are a few defenders of segregation who are doubtless sincere. Although 
nominally free they have never been sufficiently enlightened to see the matter 
other than as slaves. One can cite cases of Negroes who opposed emancipation and
 
denounced the abolitionists. A few who became free reenslaved themselves. A 
still larger number made no effort to become free because they did not want to 
disconnect themselves from their masters, and their kind still object to full 
freedom. 
Ever since the Civil War when Negroes were first given a chance to participate 
in the management of their affairs they have been inconsistent and compromising.
 
They have tried to gain one thing on one day by insisting on equality for all, 
while at the same time endeavoring to gain another point the next day by 
segregation. At one moment Negroes fight for the principle of democracy, and at 
the very next moment they barter it away for some temporary advantage. You 
cannot have a thing and dispose of it at the same time. 
For example, the Negro political leaders of the Reconstruction period clamored 
for suffrage and the right of holding office, serving in the militia, and 
sitting on the jury; but few of them wanted white and colored children to attend
 
the same school. When expressing themselves on education most of them took the 
position of segregationists; and Charles Sumner in his fight for the civil 
rights of the Negro had to eliminate mixed schools from his program not only 
because many whites objected but also because the Negroes themselves did not 
seem to want them. All of these leaders might not have been looking for jobs in 
those days; but as nominal freemen, who were still slaves, they did not feel 
comfortable in the presence of their former masters. 
These timorous men were very much like some Negroes who were employed near the 
author's home in Virginia by a Northern farmer, who had moved into the State 
after the Civil War. When breakfast time came the first morning he called them 
in to eat at the table with his family. These actual slaves, however, 
immediately lost their appetite. One finally called the employer aside and 
settled the matter in another way. He said: 
"Now boss, you ain't used to de rules ob dis country. We just can't sit at de 
table wid wite folks. We been use ter eating a cake er bread out yonder 'tween


--- PAGE 51 ---
de plow handles. Les us go out dar." 
The system, therefore, has extended from one thing to another until the Negroes 
today find themselves hedged in by the color bar almost every way they turn; 
and, set off by themselves, the Negroes cannot learn from the example of others 
with whom they might come into contact. In the ghetto, too, they are not 
permitted to construct and carry out a program of their own. These segregating 
institutions interfere with the development of self-help among Negroes, for 
often Negroes fail to raise money to establish institutions which they might 
control, but they readily contribute large sums for institutions which segregate
 
persons of African blood. 
Denied participation in the higher things of life, the "educated" Negro himself 
joins, too, with ill-designing persons to handicap his people by systematized 
exploitation. Feeling that the case of the Negro is hopeless, the "educated" 
Negro decides upon the course of personally profiting by whatever he can do in 
using these people as a means to an end. He grins in their faces while 
"extracting money" from them, hut his heart shows no fond attachment to their 
despised cause. With a little larger income than they receive he can make 
himself somewhat comfortable in the ghetto; and he forgets those who have no way
 
of escape. 
Some of this "educated" class join with unprincipled real estate men in keeping 
Negroes out of desirable parts of the city and confining them to unsanitary 
sections. Such persons help the profiteer to collect from Negroes thus cornered 
a larger rental than that exacted from whites for the same property. In similar 
fashion a Negro minister sometimes goes into a community where the races are 
moving along amicably together in their churches and rents a shack or an old 
empty store to start a separate church for "our people," not to supply any 
practical need but to exploit those who have never learned to think. 
Professional men, too, walking in their footsteps, impose also upon the poor 
innocent Negroes who do not know when they are being treated properly and when 
they are not, but high fees may be obtained from them inasmuch as they cannot 
always go to others for service. 
Settling in a community with mixed schools, the educated Negro often advocates 
their separation that his daughter may secure a position in the system. The 
Negro politician is accustomed to corner the Negro vote, by opening a separate 
office from which he may bargain with the chieftains of the machine for the 
highest price available. When paid off by some position, which is not very 
lofty, this office-holder accepts such employment with the understanding that he
 
will be set off by himself as if he were destructive of the rest of mankind. 
In the present crisis, however, the "highly educated" Negroes find very little 
to exploit, and in their untoward condition they have no program of finding a 
way out. They see numerous instances of Negroes losing their jobs in white 
establishments. In fact, these things occur daily. Janitors who have been giving
 
satisfaction are abruptly told that they will no longer be needed. Negro waiters
 
in hotels are being informed that their places will go to white workers. Negro 
truck drivers are ordered to step down and let the needy of the other race go 
up. We hear so much of this that we wonder what the outcome will be. 
In this readjustment, of course, when there are fewer opportunities left for 
those who cannot or do not have the opportunity to operate machines the Negroes 
will naturally be turned out of their positions by their employers who think


--- PAGE 52 ---
first of their own race. In the ultimate passing of the depression, however, 
Negroes will not be much better off when some of the whites now displacing them 
will rise to higher levels. In the economic order of tomorrow there will be 
little use for the factotum or scullion. Man will not need such personal 
attention when he can buy a machine to serve him more efficiently. The menial 
Negroes, the aggregate of parasites whom the "highly educated" Negro has 
exploited, will not be needed on tomorrow. What, then, will become of "our 
highly educated" Negroes who have no initiative? 
We have appealed to the talented tenth for a remedy, but they have nothing to 
offer. Their minds have never functioned in this all-important sphere. The 
"educated" Negro shows no evidence of vision. He should see a new picture. The 
Negroes are facing the alternative of rising in the sphere of production to 
supply their proportion of the manufacturers and merchants or of going down to 
the graves of paupers. The Negro must now do for himself or die out as the world
 
undergoes readjustment. If the whites are to continue for some time in doing 
drudgery to the exclusion of Negroes, the latter must find another way out. 
Nothing forces this upon one more dramatically than when he learns that white 
women in Montgomery, Alabama, are coming to the back door of Negro homes asking 
for their washing. If the whites have reached this extremity, and they must be 
taken care of first, what will be left for the Negroes? 
At this moment, then, the Negroes must begin to do the very thing which they 
have been taught that they cannot do. They still have some money, and they have 
needs to supply. They must begin immediately to pool their earnings and organize
 
industries to participate in supplying social and economic demands. If the 
Negroes are to remain forever removed from the producing atmosphere, and the 
present discrimination continues, there will be nothing left for them to do. 
There is no reason for lack of confidence because of the recent failure of Negro
 
enterprises, although the "highly educated" Negroes assert the contrary. This 
lack of confidence is the cause of the failure of these enterprises. If the 
Negroes had manifested enough confidence in them and had properly supported 
them, they would have been strong enough to stand the test in the crisis. Negro 
banks, as a rule, have failed because the people, taught that their own pioneers
 
in business cannot function in this sphere, withdrew their deposits. An 
individual cannot live after you extract the blood from his veins. The strongest
 
bank in the United States will last only so long as the people will have 
sufficient confidence in it to keep their money there. In fact, the confidence 
of the people is worth more than money. 
The lack of confidence of the Negro in himself and in his possibilities is what 
has kept him down. His mis-education has been a perfect success in this respect.
 
Yet it is not necessary for the Negro to have more confidence in his own workers
 
than in others. If the Negro would be as fair to his own as he has been to 
others, this would be all that is necessary to give him a new lease on life and 
start the trend upward. 
Here we find that the Negro has failed to recover from his slavish habit of 
berating his own and worshipping others as perfect beings. No progress has been 
made in this respect because the more "education" the Negro gets the worse off 
he is. He has just had so much longer to learn to decry and despise himself. The


--- PAGE 53 ---
race looking to this educated class for a solution of its problems does not find
 
any remedy; and, on the contrary, sees itself further and further away from 
those things to which it has aspired. By forgetting the schoolroom for the time 
being and relying upon an awakening of the masses through adult education we can
 
do much to give the Negro a new point of view with respect to economic 
enterprise and group cooperation. The average Negro has not been sufficiently 
mis-educated to become hopeless. 
Our minds must become sufficiently developed to use segregation to kill 
segregation, and thus bring to pass that ancient and yet modern prophecy, "The 
wrath of man shall praise thee." If the Negro in the ghetto must eternally be 
fed by the hand that pushes him into the ghetto, he will never become strong 
enough to get out of the ghetto. This assumption of Negro leadership in the 
ghetto, then, must not be confined to matters of religion, education, and social
 
uplift; it must deal with such fundamental forces in life as make these things 
possible. If the Negro area, however, is to continue as a district supported 
wholly from without, the inept dwellers therein will merit and will receive only
 
the contempt of those who may occasionally catch glimpses of them in their 
plight. 
As Frederick Douglass said in 1852, "It is vain that we talk of being men, if we
 
do not the work of men. We must become valuable to society in other departments 
of industry than those servile ones from which we are rapidly being excluded. We
 
must show that we can do as well as they. When we can build as well as live in 
houses; when we can make as well as wear shoes; when we can produce as well as 
consume wheat, corn and rye
 then we shall become valuable to society. 
"Society," continued Douglass, "is a hard-hearted affair. With it the helpless 
may expect no higher dignity than that of paupers. The individual must lay 
society under obligation to him or society will honor him only as a stranger and
 
sojourner." 
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Chapter XI: The Need for Service Rather than Leadership 
IN this untoward situation the Negro finds himself at the close of the third 
generation from Emancipation. He has been educated in the sense that persons 
directed a certain way are more easily controlled, or as Ovid remarked, "In time
 
the bull is brought to bear the yoke." The Negro in this state continues as a 
child. He is restricted in his sphere to small things, and with these he becomes
 
satisfied. His ambition, does not rise any higher than to plunge into the 
competition with his fellows for these trifles. At the same time those who have 
given the race such false ideals are busy in the higher spheres from which 
Negroes by their mis-education and racial guidance have been disbarred.


--- PAGE 54 ---
Examples of this failure of the mis-educated Negro to have high ideals may be 
cited. The author has known numerous cases of Negro lawyers, physicians and 
business men who, while attending local Sunday schools, churches, and lodges, 
have fallen out about trifles like a resolution or the chairmanship of a 
committee, which so embittered them as to make themselves enemies for life and 
stumbling blocks preventing any such thing as organization or community 
cooperation. 
It is a common on occurrence to see a Negro well situated as a minister or 
teacher aspiring to a political appointment which temporarily pays little more 
than what he is receiving and offers no distinction except that of being 
earmarked as a Jim Crow job set aside for some Negro who has served well the 
purposes of the bosses as a wardheeler in a campaign. Negroes who have begun 
promising business enterprises sometimes abandon them temporarily for the same 
sort of empty honor. In this way they have been known to hamper their business 
by incurring the displeasure of ambitious politicians who might otherwise 
patronize them. 
Negroes of this point of view have developed in that part of the country where 
it is thought that the most distinguished persons in the community are those who
 
hold and exploit the local offices or those who are further honored with 
positions in the state and nation. While this may apply in the case of their 
oppressors the few positions allotted the Negroes are magnified beyond all 
reasonable bounds. This comes as a natural result, however, for the "education" 
of the Negro requires it. The ambitious mis-educated Negro in the struggle for 
the little things allotted by others prevents any achievement of the people in 
matters more constructive. Potentially the colored people are strong although 
they are actually weak. 
This much-ado-about-nothing renders impossible cooperation, the most essential 
thing in the development of a people. The ambitious of this class do more to 
keep the race in a state of turmoil and to prevent it from serious community 
effort than all the other elements combined. The one has a job that the other 
wants; or the one is a leader of a successful faction, and the other is 
struggling to supplant him. Everything in the community, then, must yield ground
 
to this puerile contest. 
In one city of a few thousand Negroes there is no chance for community 
cooperation because of the antagonism of the Methodist and Baptist preachers in 
charge of the two largest churches. The one is determined to dictate the 
appointment of the teaching corps and the social welfare workers; the other is 
persistently struggling to undo everything accomplished by his opponent. The one
 
is up today, and the other in ascendency tomorrow. Several efforts have been 
made to start business enterprises there, but none has succeeded because one 
faction tears down what the other builds up. 
In another city the cleavage is along political lines. Preachers are there, but 
a lawyer and a dentist plunging into politics have dispossessed the clergy of 
the stage. The leader of one faction is so bitterly opposed to the other that he
 
even warns strangers against going to the home of his adversary. To present a 
sane proposition to the community through one of these leaders means local 
warfare rather than an effort to work together for the common good. 
Consequently, although there are thousands of Negroes living together in one 
quarter they have no business enterprises of worth. The selfish struggle for 
personal aggrandizement, which has not yet brought either faction more than an 
appointment on the police force or a clerkship in one of the city offices, thus


--- PAGE 55 ---
blocks the social and economic progress of thousands of unoffending people. 
In another state the ambition of the highly educated Negro is restricted to 
becoming principals of the high schools. The neglected state school has not 
developed sufficiently to become attractive. The warring area, then, is in the 
cities. In one of them, where several Negroes own considerable wealth which, if 
pooled and properly used, would produce all but wonderful results, the petty 
strife has been most disastrous. Little thought is given to social uplift, and 
economic effort is crushed by factional wrangling. Before the author had been in
 
one of the towns an hour a stalwart of one faction sounded him on becoming a 
candidate for the position held by the principal of the high school. A few 
minutes thereafter another approached him for advice as to how "to get him out."
 
The high cost of this childishness to the community can be estimated only by 
taking into consideration the fact that this strife is all but endless. If it 
were a matter that developed now and then only to be forgotten by people 
directing their attention thereafter to more important things, it would not do 
much harm; but this confusion continues for years. Sometimes it grips a 
community for a whole generation, vitiating the entire life of the people. 
In spite of the meager rewards, however, the idea of leadership looms high in 
the Negro mind. It always develops thus among oppressed people. The oppressor 
must have some dealing with the despised group, and rather than have contact 
with individuals he approaches the masses through his own spokesman. The term 
itself connotes a backward condition. In its strides upward a race shuffles off 
its leaders because they originate outside of the group. They constitute a load 
that sinks the oppressed in the mire of trials and tribulations. 
Leadership is usually superimposed for the purpose of "directing the course of 
the ostracized group along sane lines." This was accomplished during the days of
 
slavery by restricting the assembly of Negroes to certain times and places and 
compelling them to meet in the presence of a stipulated number of the "wisest 
and discreetest men of the community." These supervisors of the conduct of 
Negroes would prevent them from learning the truth which might make them 
"unruly" or ambitious to become free. 
After the Negroes became free the same end was reached by employing a Negro or 
some white man to spy upon and report behind closed doors on a plan to enslave 
the Negroes' minds. In case that actual employment as a spy seemed too bold, the
 
person to be used as such an instrument took up some sort of enterprise which 
the oppressors of the race warmly supported to give him the desired influence in
 
the community. This "racial racketeer" might be a politician, minister, teacher,
 
director of a community center, or head of a "social uplift agency." As long as 
he did certain things and expressed the popular opinion on questions he lacked 
nothing, and those who followed him found their way apparently better paid as 
the years went by. His leadership, then, was recognized and the ultimate undoing
 
of the Negroes in the community was assured. 
Such leadership, too, has continued into our day and it goes from bad to worse. 
The very service which this racial toady renders hardens him to the extent that 
he loses his soul. He becomes equal to any task the oppressor may impose upon 
him, and at the same time he becomes artful enough to press his case


--- PAGE 56 ---
convincingly before the thoughtless multitude. What is right is sacrificed 
because everything that is right is not expedient; and what is expedient soon 
becomes unnecessary. 
Recently a citizen, observing how we have been thus betrayed, suggested that 
there be called a national meeting to take steps for a program of development of
 
the race from within under "a new leadership." Such a movement can be made to 
mean something, and then it can degenerate into an assembly of abuse and 
vituperation followed by the usual whereas-therefore-be-it-resolved effort which
 
has never meant anything in the awakening and the development of an oppressed 
people. 
The Negroes, however, will not advance far if they continue to waste their 
energy abusing those who misdirect and exploit them. The exploiters of the race 
are not so much at fault as the race itself. If Negroes persist in permitting 
themselves to be handled in this fashion they will always find some one at hand 
to impose upon them. The matter is one which rests largely with the Negroes 
themselves. The race will free itself from exploiters just as soon as it decides
 
to do so. No one else can accomplish this task for the race. It must plan and do
 
for itself. 
Checking up on what they do, Negroes often find themselves giving money and 
moral support to various persons and institutions which influence the course of 
the race in the wrong way. They do not often ask themselves whether the support 
thus given will redound in the long run to the good of the people with whom they
 
are identified. They do not inquire whether the assistance thus given offers 
temporary relief but eventually results in irreparable loss. So many Negroes 
often do themselves harm when they actually believe that they are doing good. 
Under their present teachers they cannot easily learn to do any better, for such
 
training as we undergo does not open our eyes sufficiently for us to see far 
ahead of us. 
If the Negro could abandon the idea of leadership and instead stimulate a larger
 
number of the race to take up definite tasks and sacrifice their time and energy
 
in doing these things efficiently the race might accomplish something. The race 
needs workers, not leaders. Such workers will solve the problems which race 
leaders talk about and raise money to enable them to talk more and more about. 
When you hear a man talking, then, always inquire as to what he is doing or what
 
he has done for humanity. Oratory and resolutions do not avail much. If they 
did, the Negro race would be in a paradise on earth. It may be well to repeat 
here the saying that old men talk of what they have done, young men of what they
 
are doing, and fools of what they expect to do. The Negro race has a rather 
large share of the last mentioned class. 
If we can finally succeed in translating the idea of leadership into that of 
service, we may soon find it possible to lift the Negro to a higher level. Under
 
leadership we have come into the ghetto; by service within the ranks we may work
 
our way out of it. Under leadership we have been constrained to do the biddings


--- PAGE 57 ---
of others; by service we may work out a program in the light of our own 
circumstances. Under leadership we have become poverty-stricken; by service we 
may teach the masses how to earn a living honestly. Under leadership we have 
been made to despise our own possibilities and to develop into parasites; by 
service we may prove sufficient unto the task of self-development and contribute
 
our part to modern culture. 
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Chapter XII: Hirelings in the Places of Public Servants 
IF the highly educated Negroes have not learned better the simple lessons of 
life one cannot expect the laboring classes to conduct themselves differently. 
In the large number of cases the employers of Negroes in common labor, in which 
most of them are now engaged, assert that there is no hope for advancement of 
Negroes in their employ because Negroes will not work under foremen of their own
 
color. In other words, the average Negro has not yet developed to the point that
 
one is willing to take orders from another of his own race. 
While it is true that such an answer is often given as a mere excuse for not 
placing Negroes in responsible positions when it can be done without any 
particular trouble, the investigation among Negroes themselves reveals numerous 
facts to prove that there is more truth than falsehood in this statement. 
Hundreds of employes of African blood frankly say that they will not work under 
a Negro. One is afraid that the other may prosper more than he does and be 
recognized accordingly. 
Some of these instances are interesting. A head of one of the Government 
departments, in which Negro women are employed to do unskilled labor, reports 
that he placed in charge of the group of these workers an intelligent colored 
woman who seemed to have all of the necessary qualifications which he had found 
in other women thus employed. Those working under her, however, refused to obey 
instructions, kept the place in turmoil and soon destroyed the morale of the 
whole force. As soon as he placed a white woman in charge, however, order was 
reestablished on the premises, and everything moved along smoothly. 
Another employer conducting a wholesale business placed a Negro foreman in 
charge of others of his race to function as one of the important departments of 
the establishment. The Negroes working under him, who had formerly taken orders 
without question from the white foreman, soon undertook to take liberties with 
the promoted Negro and to ignore his orders. Knowing that the Negro foreman was 
well qualified, however, and being personally interested in him, the employer 
instead of doing what so many others under such circumstances had done, 
dismissed those who refused to cooperate and supplied the vacancies with others 
until an efficient working force could thus be obtained. Only a few employers, 
however, have had such patience and have manifested such interest in the 
advancement of the Negro. As a rule they merely dispose of Negro foremen with 
the excuse that one Negro will not take orders from another. 
This refusal of Negroes to take orders from one another is due largely to the 
fact that slaveholders taught their bondmen that they were as good as or better 
than any others and, therefore, should not be subjected to any member of their


--- PAGE 58 ---
race. If they were to be subordinated to some one it should be to the white man 
of superior culture and social position. This keeps the whole race on a lower 
level, restricted to the atmosphere of trifles which do not concern their 
traducers. The greater things of life which can be attained only by wise 
leadership, then, they have no way to accomplish. 
The strong have always used this as a means of dealing with the so-called weaker
 
races of the world. The Caucasian arrays the one against the other so that they 
may never combine their forces and thus deprive their so-called superiors of 
control over them, which they could easily do if organized. One white man was 
thus able to maintain himself on a plantation where there were thirty or forty 
slaves because the Negroes were mis-educated in such a way as to keep them 
divided into distinct factions. In petty strife their power would be lost in the
 
process of attrition. Today we find the same thing in Africa where this end is 
reached by embittering one tribe against another; and it worked the same way in 
India until recently when it began to break down under the masterful leadership 
of Mahatma Gandhi. 
The Negroes of the United States have followed leadership slavishly but 
sometimes unfortunately that of those leaders who are selected for them by the 
traducers of the race. The enemies of the race, for example, will find a Negro 
willing to do certain things they desire to have accomplished and will finance 
him and give him sufficient publicity to get before the world, for the few 
favors which he may dispense among his followers as a result of his influence 
and economic position will bring to him the adequate number of Negroes for the 
constituency which he desires. 
Negroes, however, sometimes choose their own leaders but unfortunately they are 
too often of the wrong kind. Negroes do not readily follow persons with 
constructive programs. Almost any sort of exciting appeal or trivial matter 
presented to them may receive immediate attention and temporarily at least 
liberal support. When the bubble collapses, of course, these same followers will
 
begin to decry Negro leadership and call these misrepresentatives of the group 
rascals and scoundrels. Inasmuch as they have failed to exercise foresight, 
however, those who have deceived them should not be blamed so much as those who 
have liberally supported these impostors. Yet the fault here is not inherently 
in the Negro but in what he has been taught. 
The Negroes' point of view, therefore, must be changed before they can construct
 
a program which will bring them out of the wilderness. For example, no good can 
be expected from one of our teachers who said that she had to give up her class 
in Sunday school to accept an extra job of waiting on table at that hour because
 
she had bought a twenty-four-hundred-dollar coat and her husband had purchased 
an expensive car. Such a teacher has no message for the Negro child. Her example
 
would tend to drag the youth downward, and the very thought of having such a 
person in the schoolroom is most depressing. 
We must feel equally discouraged when we see a minister driving up to his church
 
on Sunday morning in a Cadillac. He does not come to feed the multitude 
spiritually. He comes to fleece the flock. The appeal he makes is usually 
emotional. While the people are feeling happy the expensive machine is granted, 
and the prolonged vacation to use it is easily financed. Thus the thoughtless 
drift backward toward slavery.


--- PAGE 59 ---
When you see a physician drive to one's door in his Pierce Arrow, you cannot get
 
the impression he has come to treat the patient for a complaint. He has come to 
treat him for a dollar. Such physicians, as a rule, know less and less medicine 
as the years go by, although they make much money by learning human psychology 
and using it for personal gain. With leeches of this type feeding upon an all 
but impoverished people and giving them nothing back there can be no hope for 
advancement. 
No people can go forward when the majority of those who should know better have 
chosen to go backward, but this is exactly what most of our misleaders do. Not 
being learned in the history and background of the race, they figure out that 
there is no hope for the masses; and they decide, then, that the best thing they
 
can do is to exploit these people for all they can and use the accumulations 
selfishly. Such persons have no vision and therefore perish at their own hands. 
It is an injustice to the Negro, however, to mis-educate him and suffer his 
manners to be corrupted from infancy unto old age and then blame him for making 
the mistakes which such guidance necessitates. "People who have been restricted 
and held down naturally condescend to the lower levels of delinquency. When 
education has been entirely neglected or improperly managed we see the worst 
passions ruling with uncontrolled and incessant sway. Good sense degenerates 
into craft, anger wrangles into malignity, restraint which is thought most 
solitary comes too late, and the most judicial admonitions are urged in vain." 
Philosophers have long conceded, however, that every man has two educations: 
"that which is given to him, and the other that which he gives himself. Of the 
two kinds the latter is by far the more desirable. Indeed all that is most 
worthy in man he must work out and conquer for himself. It is that which 
constitutes our real and best nourishment. What we are merely taught seldom 
nourishes the mind like that which we teach ourselves." 
The same eternal principle applies to a race forced to live apart from others as
 
a separate and distinct group. Inasmuch as the education of the Negro has come 
from without we can clearly see that he has received only a part of the 
development which he should have undergone or he has developed negatively. The 
Negro lacks mental power, which cannot be expected from ill-fed brains. 
This naturally brings up a serious question. The people on the outside, who are 
directing the race from afar, will take this condition of affairs as evidence 
that the Negro is not prepared for leadership. What they ought to say is that 
they have not prepared the Negro to assume the responsibility of his own uplift.
 
Instead of doing this, however, they play up this result of their own failure as
 
an argument for imposing upon the Negro race the guidance of others from 
without. 
As to whether or not a white man should be a leader of the Negroes may be 
dismissed as a silly question. What has the color to do with it? Such a worker 
may be white, brown, yellow, or red, if he is heart and soul with the people 
whom he would serve. It just happens, however, that most white men now in 
control of Negro institutions are not of this required type. Practically all of 
those with whom I have talked and communicated believe in imposing some sort of 
disability upon Negroes. Some object to the freedom of intermarriage as a 
substitute for concubinage, scoff at the idea of the enfranchisement of the 
Negroes, approve their segregation, and justify the economic exploitation of the


--- PAGE 60 ---
race. Now if these are the persons to elevate the Negroes, to what point do they
 
expect to lift them, and what will the Negroes be when they get there? 
With this same thought in mind a white director of Negroes recently said to the 
author: 
"I realize that I have no useful function in my present position as a president 
of a Negro institution. I do not approve of their aspirations to many things. I 
cannot accept the students in my house as I would white students because it 
might lead to an interracial romance. Marrying is such a difficult problem at 
the best that I should not like to see one of my children make a failure in life
 
by marrying a Negro." 
"In other words," continued he, "we live in two different worlds. While I am 
among them I cannot become a part of them. How then can I help them under these 
circumstances?" 
I am acquainted with another white educator at the head of a Negro institution, 
who will not address a colored girl as Miss, and to avoid the use of a title in 
speaking to women of the race he addresses them as his kin. One of them was 
sharp enough to reply to him thus when he accosted her as auntie: 
"Oh, I am so glad that I have found my lost relatives at last. My mother often 
told me that I had some distinguished kin, and just to think that you are my 
nephew makes me feel glad." 
Another such exploiter in charge of a Negro college never wears his hat on the 
campus. His confidential explanation is that he might have to lift it when he 
meets a Negro woman. Of course, that would never do. "White supremacy" would be 
lost in the Negro school. 
As we realize more and more that education is not merely imparting information 
which is expected to produce certain results, we see very clearly the 
inconsistency of the position of white persons as executives of Negro 
institutions. These misfits belong to the very group working out the segregation
 
of the Negro, and they come into these institutions mainly to earn a living. 
They make no particular contribution to the development of education, for they 
are not scholarly enough to influence educational theory; and they are so far 
out of sympathy with the Negro that they cannot make any contribution to 
educational practice. These "foreigners" are not bringing to such institutions 
large sums of money which the Negroes cannot obtain, for the institutions now 
directed by Negroes are receiving larger appropriations than those under the 
management of whites. 
Our so-called thinkers, however, seldom see the inevitable results of this 
unsound policy. Not long ago when the author wrote the textbook entitled NEGRO 
MAKERS OF HISTORY it was adversely criticised by a Negro who said that the book 
should have had as an illustration the cut of the white man who established a 
certain Negro college. The author had to explain that the book was to give an 
account of what the Negro has done, not of what has been done for him. 
The school referred to, moreover, was in no sense a Negro school. It had very 
few Negro teachers and only one Negro trustee. The policy of the school was 
determined altogether by others without giving the Negro credit for having a 
thought on education. In other words, it was merely a school which Negroes were 
permitted to attend. If they picked up here and there something to help them,


--- PAGE 61 ---
well and good; if not, may God help them! 
It is all right to have a white man as the head of a Negro college or to have a 
red man at the head of a yellow one, if in each case the incumbent has taken out
 
his naturalization papers and has identified himself as one of the group which 
he is trying to serve. It seems that the white educators of this day are 
unwilling to do this, and for that reason they can never contribute to the 
actual development of the Negro from within. You cannot serve people by giving 
them orders as to what to do. The real servant of the people must live among 
them, think with them, feel for them, and die for them. 
The white worker in Negro institutions, too, can never be successful without 
manifesting some faith in the people with whom he has cast his lot. His efforts 
must not be merely an attempt to stimulate their imitation of things in a 
foreign sphere. He must study his community sufficiently to discover the things 
which have a trend in the proper direction that he may stimulate such forces and
 
thus help the community to do better the good things which it may be capable of 
doing and at the same time may be interested in doing. If these people are to be
 
brought the ideas of "foreigners," and must be miraculously transformed into 
something else before anything can be made of them, such effort will be a 
fruitless task like most of the so-called education and uplift of the Negroes in
 
America. 
The Negro, in spite of his confinement to the ghetto, has some opportunities to 
develop his special capacities if they are properly studied and understood. The 
real servant of the people, then, will give more attention to those to be served
 
than to the use that somebody may want to make of them. He will be more 
concerned with what he can do to increase the ease, comfort, and happiness of 
the Negro than with how the Negro may be used to contribute to the ease, 
comfort, and happiness of others. 
The servant of the people, unlike the leader, is not on a high horse elevated 
above the people and trying to carry them to some designated point to which he 
would like to go for his own advantage. The servant of the people is down among 
them, living as they live, doing what they do and enjoying what they enjoy. He 
may be a little better informed than some other members of the group; it may be 
that he has had some experience that they have not had, but in spite of this 
advantage he should have more humility than those whom he serves, for we are 
told that "Whosoever is greatest among you, let him be your servant." 
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Chapter XIII: Understand the Negro 
"WE do not offer here any course in Negro history, Negro literature, or race 
relations," recently said a professor of a Negro college. "We study the Negro 
along with other people." 
"An excellent idea," the interviewer replied. "No one should expect you to do 
any more than this, but how do you-do it when the Negro is not mentioned in your


--- PAGE 62 ---
textbooks except to be condemned? Do you, a teacher in a Negro school, also 
condemn the race in the same fashion as the writers of your textbooks of history
 
and literature?" 
"No," said he, "we bring the Negro in here and there." 
"How often does 'here and there' connote?" 
"Well, you know," said he, "Negroes have not done much; and what they have 
accomplished may be briefly covered by referring to the achievements of a few 
men and women. 
"Why do you emphasize the special study of the Negro?" said he further. "Why is 
it necessary to give the race special attention in the press, on the rostrum, or
 
in the schoolroom? This idea of projecting the Negro into the foreground does 
the race much harm by singing continually of his woes and problems and thus 
alienating the public which desires to give its attention to other things." 
It is true that many Negroes do not desire to hear anything about their race, 
and few whites of today will listen to the story of woe. With most of them the 
race question has been settled. The Negro has been assigned to the lowest 
drudgery as the sphere in which the masses must toil to make a living; and 
socially and politically the race has been generally proscribed. Inasmuch as the
 
traducers of the race have "settled" the matter in this fashion, they naturally 
oppose any effort to change this status. 
Many Negro professional men who are making a living attending to the affairs of 
these laborers and servants in their mentally undeveloped state and many 
teachers who in conservative fashion are instructing their children to maintain 
the status quo ante bellum, also oppose any movement to upset this arrangement. 
They are getting paid for their efforts Why should they try innovations? The 
gods have so decreed it. Human beings cannot change it. Why be foolish? 
A Negro with sufficient thought to construct a program of his own is 
undesirable, and the educational systems of this country generally refuse to 
work through such Negroes in promoting their cause. The program for the uplift 
of the Negroes in this country must be handed over to an executive force like 
orders from the throne, and they must carry it out without question or get out 
of line and let the procession go on. Although the Negro is being daily forced 
more and more by segregation into a world peculiarly his own, his unusually 
perplexing status is given little or no thought, and he is not considered 
capable of thinking for himself. 
The chief difficulty with the education of the Negro is that it has been largely
 
imitation resulting in the enslavement of his mind. Somebody outside of the race
 
has desired to try out on Negroes some experiment which interested him and his 
coworkers; and Negroes, being objects of charity, have received them cordially 
and have done what they required. In fact, the keynote in the education of the 
Negro has been to do what he is told to do. Any Negro who has learned to do this
 
is well prepared to function in the American social order as others would have 
him. 
Looking over the courses of study of the public schools, one finds little to 
show that the Negro figures in these curricula. In supplementary matter a good


--- PAGE 63 ---
deed of some Negro is occasionally referred to, but oftener the race is 
mentioned only to be held up to ridicule. With the exception of a few places 
like Atlantic City, Atlanta, Tulsa, St. Louis, Birmingham, Knoxville, and the 
states of Louisiana and North Carolina no effort is made to study the Negro in 
the public schools as they do the Latin, the Teuton, or the Mongolian. Several 
mis-educated Negroes themselves contend that the study of the Negro by children 
would bring before them the race problem prematurely and, therefore, urge that 
the study of the race be deferred until they reach advanced work in the college 
or university. These misguided teachers ignore the fact that the race question 
is being brought before black and white children daily in their homes, in the 
streets, through the press and on the rostrum. How, then, can the school ignore 
the duty of teaching the truth while these other agencies are playing up 
falsehood? 
The experience of college instructors shows that racial attitudes of the youth 
are not easily changed after they reach adolescence. Although students of this 
advanced stage are shown the fallacy of race superiority and the folly of social
 
distinctions, they nevertheless continue to do the illogical thing of still 
looking upon these despised groups as less worthy than themselves and persist in
 
treating them accordingly. Teachers of elementary and secondary schools giving 
attention to this interracial problem have succeeded in softening and changing 
the attitude of children whose judgment has not been so hopelessly warped by the
 
general attitude of the communities in which they have been brought up. 
In approaching this problem in this fashion to counteract the one-sided 
education of youth the thinking people of this country have no desire to upset 
the curricula of the schools or to force the Negro as such into public 
discussion; but, if the Negro is to be elevated he must be educated in the sense
 
of being developed from what he is, and the public must be so enlightened as to 
think of the Negro as a man. Furthermore, no one can be thoroughly educated 
until he learns as much about the Negro as he knows about other people. 
Upon examining the recent catalogues of the leading Negro colleges, one finds 
that invariably they give courses in ancient, mediaeval, and modern Europe, but 
they do not give such courses in ancient, mediaeval, and modern Africa. Yet 
Africa, according to recent discoveries, has contributed about as much to the 
progress of mankind as Europe has, and the early civilization of the 
Mediterranean world was decidedly influenced by Africa. 
Negro colleges offer courses bearing on the European colonists prior to their 
coming to America, their settlement on these shores, and their development here 
toward independence. Why are they not equally generous with the Negroes in 
treating their status in Africa prior to enslavement, their first 
transplantation to the West Indies, the Latinization of certain Negroes in 
contradistinction to the development of others under the influence of the 
Teuton, and the effort of the race toward self-expression? 
A further examination of their curricula shows, too, that invariably these Negro
 
colleges offer courses in Greek philosophy and in that of modern European 
thought, but they direct no attention to the philosophy of the African. Negroes 
of Africa have and always have had their own ideas about the nature of the 
universe, time, and space, about appearance and reality, and about freedom and 
necessity. The effort of the Negro to interpret man's relation to the universe 
shows just as much intelligence as we find in the philosophy of the Greeks. 
There were many Africans who were just as wise as Socrates.


--- PAGE 64 ---
Again, one observes in some of these catalogues numerous courses in art but no 
well defined course in Negro or African art which early influenced that of the 
Greeks. Thinkers are now saying that the early culture of the Mediterranean was 
chiefly African. Most of these colleges do not even direct special attention to 
Negro music in which the Negro has made his outstanding contribution in America.
 
The unreasonable attitude is that because the whites do not have these things in
 
their schools the Negroes must not have them in theirs. The Catholics and Jews, 
therefore, are wrong in establishing special schools to teach their principles 
of religion, and the Germans in America are unwise in having their children 
taught their mother tongue. 
Such has been the education of Negroes. They have been taught facts of history, 
but have never learned to think. Their conception is that you go to school to 
find out what other people have done, and then you go out in life to imitate 
them. What they have done can be done by others, they contend; and they are 
right. They are wrong, however, in failing to realize that what others have 
done, we may not need to do. If we are to do identically the same thing from 
generation to generation, we would not make any progress. If we are to duplicate
 
from century to century the same feats, the world will grow tired of such a 
monotonous performance. 
In this particular respect "Negro education" is a failure, and disastrously so, 
because in its present predicament the race is especially in need of vision and 
invention to give humanity something new. The world does not want and will never
 
have the heroes and heroines of the past. What this age needs is an enlightened 
youth not to undertake the tasks like theirs but to imbibe the spirit of these 
great men and answer the present call of duty with equal nobleness of soul. 
Not only do the needs of generations vary, but the individuals themselves are 
not duplicates the one of the other; and being different in this respect, their 
only hope to function efficiently in society is to know themselves and the 
generation which they are to serve. The chief value in studying the records of 
others is to become better acquainted with oneself and with one's possibilities 
to live and to do in the present age. As long as Negroes continue to restrict 
themselves to doing what was necessary a hundred or a thousand years ago, they 
must naturally expect to be left out of the great scheme of things as they 
concern men of today. 
The most inviting field for discovery and invention, then, is the Negro himself,
 
but he does not realize it. Frederika Bremer, when reflecting upon her visit to 
America about 1850, gave this country a new thought in saying to Americans, "The
 
romance of your history is the fate of the Negro." In this very thought lies 
unusual possibilities for the historian, the economist, the artist, and the 
philosopher. Why should the Negro writer seek a theme abroad when he has the 
greatest of all at home? 
The bondage of the Negro brought captive from Africa is one of the greatest 
dramas in history, and the writer who merely sees in that ordeal something to 
approve or condemn fails to understand the evolution of the human race. Negroes 
now studying dramatics go into our schools to reproduce Shakespeare, but 
mentally developed members of this race would see the possibilities of a greater
 
drama in the tragedy of the man of color. Negroes graduating from conservatories


--- PAGE 65 ---
of music dislike the singing of our folk songs. For some reason such misguided 
persons think that they can improve on the productions of the foreign drama or 
render the music of other people better than they can themselves. 
A knowledge of real history would lead one to think that slavery was one of the 
significant developments which, although evil in themselves, may redound 
sometimes to the advantage of the oppressed rather than to that of the 
oppressor. Some one has said that the music of Poland was inspired by incidents 
of a struggle against the despots invading and partitioning their prostrate 
land. The Greeks never had an art until the country was overrun by hostile 
Orientals. Some one then began to immortalize in song the sons who went forth to
 
fight for the native land. Another carved in marble the thought evoked by the 
example of the Greek youth who blocked the mountain pass with his body or who 
bared his breast to the javelin to defend the liberty of his country. These 
things we call art. 
In our own country the other elements of the population, being secure in their 
position, have never faced such a crisis; and the Europeans, after whose pattern
 
American life is fashioned, have not recently had such experience. White 
Americans, then, have produced no art at all, and that of Europe has reached the
 
point of stagnation. Negroes who are imitating whites, then, are engaged in a 
most unprofitable performance. Why not interpret themselves anew to the world? 
If we had a few thinkers we could expect great achievements on tomorrow. Some 
Negro with unusual insight would write an epic of bondage and freedom which 
would take its place with those of Homer and Virgil. Some Negro with esthetic 
appreciation would construct from collected fragments of Negro music a grand 
opera that would move humanity to repentance. Some Negro of philosophic 
penetration would find a solace for the modern world in the soul of the Negro, 
and then men would be men because they are men. 
The Negro in his present plight, however, does not see possibilities until it is
 
too late He exercises much "hindsight," and for that reason he loses ground in 
the hotly contested battles of life. The Negro as a rule waits until a thing 
happens before he tries to avert it. He is too much like a man whom the author 
once saw knocked down in a physical combat. Instead of dodging the blow when it 
was being dealt he arose from his prostration dodging it. 
For example, the author has just received a letter from a lady in Pittsburgh 
complaining that the librarian in one of its schools insists upon reading to the
 
children "a great deal of literature containing such words as `nigger,' 
`Blackie,' `Little Black Sambo,' etc." This lady, therefore, would like to place
 
in that school some books by Negro authors. This is a commendable effort, but it
 
comes a little late; we hope not too late. 
For centuries such literature has been circulated among the children of the 
modern world; and they have, therefore, come to regard the Negro as inferior. 
Now that some of our similarly mis-educated Negroes are seeing how they have 
been deceived they are awakening to address themselves to a long neglected work.
 
They should have been thinking about this generations ago, for they have a 
tremendous task before them today in dispelling this error and counteracting the


--- PAGE 66 ---
results of such bias in our literature. 
There has just come, too, from a friend of humanity in Edinburgh, Scotland, a 
direful account of the increase in race prejudice in those parts. Sailors who 
had frequented the stronghold of race prejudice in South Africa undertook 
recently to prevent Negro men from socializing with Scotch women at a dance; and
 
certain professors of the University of Edinburgh with the same attitude show so
 
much of it in their teaching that this friend entreats us to send them informing
 
books on the Negro. We are doing it. 
Here again, however, the effort to uproot error and popularize the truth comes 
rather late. The Negro since freedom has gone along grinning, whooping, and 
"cutting capers" while the white man has applied himself to the task of defining
 
the status of the Negro and compelling him to accept it as thus settled forever.
 
While the Negro has been idle, propaganda has gone far ahead of history. 
Unfortunately, too, Negro "scholars" have assisted in the production of 
literature which gives this point of view. 
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Chapter XIV: The New Program 
IT seems only a reasonable proposition, then, that, if under the present system 
which produced our leadership in religion, politics, and business we have gone 
backward toward serfdom or have at least been kept from advancing to real 
freedom, it is high time to develop another sort of leadership with a different 
educational system. In the first place, we must bear in mind that the Negro has 
never been educated. He has merely been informed about other things which he has
 
not been permitted to do. The Negroes have been shoved out of the regular 
schools through the rear door into the obscurity of the backyard and told to 
imitate others whom they see from afar, or they have been permitted in some 
places to come into the public schools to see how others educate themselves. The
 
program for the uplift of the Negro in this country must be based upon a 
scientific study of the Negro from within to develop in him the power to do for 
himself what his oppressors will never do to elevate him to the level of others.
 
Being without actual education, we have very few persons prepared to help the 
Negroes whom they have set out to lead. These persons are not all dishonest men 
and women. Many of them are sincere, and believe that they are doing the race 
some great good in thus holding it backward. They must be awakened and shown the
 
error of their ways. 
We have very few teachers because most of those with whom we are afflicted know 
nothing about the children whom they teach or about their parents who influence


--- PAGE 67 ---
the pupils more than the teachers themselves. When a boy comes to school without
 
knowing his lesson he should be studied instead of being punished. The boy who 
does well in the beginning of the year and lags behind near the end of the term 
should not always be censured or ridiculed. As a rule, such children are not 
responsible for their failures. Their parents and their social status account 
mainly for these shortcomings. The Negro teacher, then, must treat the disease 
rather than its symptoms. 
But can you expect teachers to revolutionize the social order for the good of 
the community? Indeed we must expect this very thing. The educational system of 
a country is worthless unless it accomplishes this task. Men of scholarship and 
consequently of prophetic insight must show us the right way and lead us into 
the light which shines brighter and brighter. 
In the church where we have much freedom and independence we must get rid of 
preachers who are not prepared to help the people whom they exploit. The public 
must refuse to support men of this type. Ministers who are the creations of the 
old educational system must be awakened, and if this is impossible they must be 
dethroned. Those who keep the people in ignorance and play upon their emotions 
must be exiled. The people have never been taught what religion is, for most of 
the preachers find it easier to stimulate the superstition which develops in the
 
unenlightened mind. Religion in such hands, then, becomes something with which 
you take advantage of weak people. Why try to enlighten the people in such, 
matters when superstition serves just as well for exploitation? 
The ministers with the confidence of the people must above all things understand
 
the people themselves. They must find out the past of their parishioners, 
whether they were brought up in Georgia, Alabama or Texas, whether they are 
housed under desirable circumstances, what they do to make a living, what they 
do with their earnings, how they react to the world about them, how they spend 
their leisure, or how they function along with other elements of the social 
order. 
In our schools, and especially in schools of religion, attention should be given
 
to the study of the Negro as he developed during the antebellum period by 
showing to what extent that remote culture was determined by ideas which the 
Negro brought with him from Africa. To take it for granted that the ante-bellum 
Negro was an ignoramus or that the native brought from Africa had not a valuable
 
culture merely because some prejudiced writers have said so does not show the 
attitude of scholarship, and Negro students who direct their courses accordingly
 
will never be able to grapple with the social problems presented today by the 
Negro church. 
The preachers of today must learn to do as well as those of old. Richard Allen 
so interpreted Christianity anew to his master that he was converted, and so did
 
Henry Evans and George Bentley for other whites in North Carolina and Tennessee.
 
Instead of accepting and trying to carry out the theories which the exploiters 
of humanity have brought them for a religious program the Negroes should forget 
their differences and in the strength of a united church bring out a new 
interpretation of Christ to this unwilling world. Following the religious 
teachings of their traducers, the Negroes do not show any more common sense than


--- PAGE 68 ---
a people would in permitting criminals to enact the laws and establish the 
procedure of the courts by which they are to be tried. 
Negro preachers, too, must be educated to their people rather than away from 
them. This, of course, requires a new type of religious school. To provide for 
such training the Negro church must get rid of its burdensome supervisory force.
 
If the number of bishops of the various Negro Methodist churches were reduced to
 
about twelve or fifteen, as they should be, the amount of a hundred thousand 
dollars or more now being paid to support the unnecessary number could be used 
to maintain properly at least one accredited college; and what is now being 
raised here and there to support various struggling but starving institutions 
kept alive by ambitious bishops and preachers could be saved to the people. With
 
this money diverted to a more practical use the race would be able to establish 
some other things which would serve as assets rather than as liabilities. 
We say liabilities, for practically all of our denominational schools which are 
bleeding the people for the inadequate support which they receive are still 
unable to do accredited work. There are so many of them that the one 
impoverishes the other. Outstanding men of the church, therefore, have to 
acquire their advanced education by attending other schools in the beginning or 
by taking additional training elsewhere after learning all our denominational 
schools can offer. This is a loss of ground which should be regained if the 
church is to go forward. 
By proper unification and organization the Negro churches might support one or 
two much needed universities of their own. With the present arrangement of two 
or three in the same area and sometimes as many in one city there is no chance 
for emerging from the trying poverty-stricken state. And even if these 
institutions could do well what they undertake they do not supply all 
educational needs. To qualify for certification in the professions Negroes must 
go to other schools, where, although they acquire the fundamentals, they learn 
much about their "inferiority" to discourage them in their struggle upward. 
We should not close any accredited Negro colleges or universities, but we should
 
reconstruct the whole system. We should not eliminate many of the courses now 
being offered, but we should secure men of vision to give them from the point of
 
view of the people to be served. We should not spend less money for the higher 
education of the Negro, but should redefine higher education as preparation to 
think and work out a program to serve the lowly rather than to live as an 
aristocrat. 
Such subjects of certitude as mathematics, of course, would continue and so 
would most of the work in practical languages and science. In theology, 
literature, social science, and education, however, radical reconstruction is 
necessary. The old worn-out theories as to man's relation to God and his 
fellowman, the system of thought which has permitted one man to exploit, 
oppress, and exterminate another and still be regarded as righteous must be 
discarded for the new thought of men as brethren and the idea of God as the 
lover of all mankind. 
After Negro students have mastered the fundamentals of English, the principles 
of composition, and the leading facts in the development of its literature, they
 
should not spend all of their time in advanced work on Shakespeare, Chaucer and 
Anglo-Saxon. They should direct their attention also to the folklore of the


--- PAGE 69 ---
African, to the philosophy in his proverbs, to the development of the Negro in 
the use of modern language, and to the works of Negro writers. 
The leading facts of the history of the world should be studied by all, but of 
what advantage is it to the Negro student of history to devote all of his time 
to courses bearing on such despots as Alexander the Great, Caesar, and Napoleon,
 
or to the record of those nations whose outstanding achievement has been rapine,
 
plunder, and murder for world power? Why not study the African background from 
the point of view of anthropology and history, and then take up sociology as it 
concerns the Negro peasant or proletarian who is suffering from sufficient ills 
to supply laboratory work for the most advanced students of the social order? 
Why not take up economics as reflected by the Negroes of today and work out some
 
remedy for their lack of capital, the absence of cooperative enterprise, and the
 
short life of their establishments. Institutions like Harvard, Yale and Columbia
 
are not going to do these things, and educators influenced by them to the extent
 
that they become blind to the Negro will never serve the race efficiently. 
To educate the Negro we must find out exactly what his background is, what he is
 
today, what his possibilities are, and how to begin with him as he is and make 
him a better individual of the kind that he is. Instead of cramming the Negro's 
mind with what others have shown that they can do, we should develop his latent 
powers that he may perform in society a part of which others are not capable. 
During his life the author has seen striking examples of how people should and 
should not be taught. Some of these are worth relating. Probably the most 
interesting was that of missionary work in China. In 1903 the author crossed the
 
Pacific Ocean with twenty-six missionaries who were going to take the Orient by 
storm. One Todd, from North Carolina, was orating and preaching almost every day
 
to stimulate his coworkers to go boldly to the task before them. Dr. De Forest, 
long a missionary to Japan, informed them that the work required more than 
enthusiasm; that they could not rush into the homes of the natives saying, 
"Peace be to this house." for it might turn out the other way and give somebody 
the opportunity to say, "Peace be to his ashes." 
Dr. De Forest explained to them how he chose a decidedly different course, 
preferring first to study the history, the language, the manners and the customs
 
of the people to approach them intelligently; and not until he had been in the 
country four years did he undertake to exhort, but after that time he had had 
great success and had been invited to preach before the Mikado himself. Now Todd
 
did not take this advice, and he had not been in China five months before he and
 
his wife had been poisoned by their native cook who had become incensed at the 
way they interfered with the institutions of his people. 
Another striking illustration was the education of the Filipinos. Not long after
 
the close of the Spanish-American War the United States Government started out 
to educate the Filipinos over night. Numbers of "highly trained" Americans were 
carried there to do the work They entered upon their task by teaching the


--- PAGE 70 ---
Filipinos just as they had taught American children who were otherwise 
circumstanced. The result was failure. Men trained at institutions like Harvard,
 
Yale, Columbia, and Chicago could not reach these people and had to be dismissed
 
from the service. Some of these "scholarly" Americans had to be maintained by 
the subscription of friends until they could be returned to this country on 
Government transportation. 
In the meantime, however, there came along an insurance man, who went to the 
Philippines to engage in business. He had never taught at all, and he had never 
studied authorities like Bagley, Judd, and Thorndike; but he understood people 
Seeing that others had failed, he went into the work himself. He filled the 
schoolroom with thousands of objects from the pupil's environment. In the 
beginning he did not use books very much, because those supplied were not 
adapted to the needs of the children. He talked about the objects around them. 
Everything was presented objectively. When he took up the habits of the snake he
 
brought the reptile to the school for demonstration. When he taught the 
crocodile he had one there. In teaching the Filipinos music he did not sing 
"Come shake the Apple-Tree." They had never seen such an object. He taught them 
to sing "Come shake the Lomboy Tree," something which they had actually done. In
 
reading he did not concentrate on the story of how George Washington always told
 
the truth. They had never heard of him and could not have appreciated that myth 
if some one had told them about it. This real educator taught them about their 
own hero, José Rizal, who gave his life as a martyr for the freedom of his 
country. By and by they got rid of most books based on the life of American 
people and worked out an entirely new series dealing with the life of Filipinos.
 
The result, then, was that this man and others who saw the situation as he did 
succeeded, and the work of the public schools in the Philippines is today the 
outstanding achievement of the Americans in that country. 
We do not mean to suggest here, however, that any people should ignore the 
record of the progress of other races. We would not advocate any such unwise 
course. We say, hold on to the real facts of history as they are, but complete 
such knowledge by studying also the history of races and nations which have been
 
purposely ignored. We should not underrate the achievements of Mesopotamia, 
Greece, and Rome; but we should give equally as much attention to the internal 
African kingdoms, the Songhay empire, and Ethiopia, which through Egypt 
decidedly influenced the civilization of the Mediterranean world. We would not 
ignore the rise of Christianity and the development of the Church; but we would 
at the same time give honorable mention to the persons of African blood who 
figured in these achievements, and who today are endeavoring to carry out the 
principles of Jesus long since repudiated by most so-called Christians. We would
 
not underestimate the achievements of the captains of industry who in the 
commercial expansion of the modern world have produced the wealth necessary to 
ease and comfort; but we would give credit to the Negro who so largely supplied 
the demand for labor by which these things have been accomplished. 
In our own particular history we would not dim one bit the luster of any star in
 
our firmament. We would not learn less of George Washington, "First in War, 
First in Peace and First in the Hearts of his Countrymen"; but we would learn 
something also of the three thousand Negro soldiers of the American Revolution 
who helped to make this "Father of our Country" possible. We would not neglect


--- PAGE 71 ---
to appreciate the unusual contribution of Thomas Jefferson to freedom and 
democracy; but we would invite attention also to two of his outstanding 
contemporaries, Phillis Wheatley, the writer of interesting verse, and Benjamin 
Banneker, the mathematician, astronomer, and advocate of a world peace plan set 
forth in 1793 with the vital principles of Woodrow Wilson's League of Nations. 
We would in no way detract from the fame of Perry on Lake Erie or Jackson at New
 
Orleans in the second struggle with England; but we would remember the gallant 
black men who assisted in winning these memorable victories on land and sea. We 
would not cease to pay tribute to Abraham Lincoln as the "Savior of the 
Country"; but we would ascribe praise also to the one hundred and seventy-eight 
thousand Negroes who had to be mustered into the service of the Union before it 
could be preserved, and who by their heroism demonstrated that they were 
entitled to freedom and citizenship. 
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Chapter XV: Vocational Guidance 
BUT how can the Negro in this new system learn to make a living, the most 
important task to which all people must give attention? In view of the Negro's 
economic plight most of the schools are now worked up over what is called 
"vocational guidance" in an effort to answer this very question. To what, 
however, are they to guide their Negro students? Most Negroes now employed are 
going down blind alleys, and unfortunately some schools seem to do no more than 
to stimulate their going in that direction. 
This may seem to be a rash statement, but a study of our educational system 
shows that our schools are daily teaching Negroes what they can never apply in 
life or what is no longer profitable because of the revolution of industry by 
the multiplication of mechanical appliances. For example, some of our schools 
are still teaching individual garment making which offers no future today except
 
in catering to the privileged and rich classes. Some of these institutions still
 
offer instruction in shoemaking when the technique developed under their 
handicaps makes impossible competition with that of the modern factory based 
upon the invention of a Negro, Jan Matzeliger. 
These facts have been known for generations, but some of these institutions 
apparently change not. Education, like religion, is conservative. It makes haste
 
slowly only, and sometimes not at all. Do not change the present order of 
thinking and doing, many say, for you disturb too many things long since 
regarded as ideal. The dead past, according to this view, must be the main 
factor in determining the future. We should learn from the living past, but let 
the dead past remain dead. 
A survey of employment of the Negroes in this country shows a most undesirable 
situation The education of the masses has not enabled them to advance very far 
in making a living and has not developed in the Negro the power to change this 
condition. It is revealed that in many establishments the Negro when a young man
 
starts as a janitor or porter and dies in old age in the same position. 
Tradition fixes his status as such, and both races feel satisfied.


--- PAGE 72 ---
When this janitor or porter dies the dailies headline the passing of this Negro 
who knew his place and rendered satisfactory service in it. "Distinguished" 
white men, for whom he ran errands and cleaned cuspidors, volunteer as honorary 
pall-bearers and follow his remains to the final resting place. Thoughtless 
Negro editors, instead of expressing their regret that such a life of usefulness
 
was not rewarded by promotion, take up the refrain as some great honor bestowed 
upon the race. 
Among people thus satisfied in the lower pursuits of life and sending their 
children to school to memorize theories which they never see applied, there can 
be no such thing as vocational guidance. Such an effort implies an objective; 
and in the present plight of economic dependence there is no occupation for 
which the Negro may prepare himself with the assurance that he will find 
employment. Opportunities which he has today may be taken from him tomorrow; and
 
schools changing their curricula in hit-and-miss fashion may soon find 
themselves on the wrong track just as they have been for generations. 
Negroes do not need some one to guide them to what persons of another race have 
developed. They must be taught to think and develop something for themselves. It
 
is most pathetic to see Negroes begging others for a chance as we have been 
doing recently. "Do not force us into starvation." we said. "Let us come into 
your stores and factories and do a part of what you are doing to profit by our 
trade." The Negro as a slave developed this fatal sort of dependency; and, 
restricted mainly to menial service and drudgery during nominal freedom, he has 
not grown out of it. Now the Negro is facing the ordeal of either learning to do
 
for himself or to die out gradually in the bread line in the ghetto. 
If the schools really mean to take a part in necessary uplift they must first 
supply themselves with teachers. Unfortunately we have very few such workers. 
The large majority of persons supposedly teaching Negroes never carry to the 
schoolroom any thought as to improving their condition. From the point of view 
of these so-called teachers they have done their duty when in automaton fashion 
they impart in the schoolroom the particular facts which they wrote out in the 
examination when they "qualified" for their respective positions. Most of them 
are satisfied with receiving their pay and spending it for the toys and gewgaws 
of life. 
For example, the author is well acquainted with a Negro of this type, who is now
 
serving as the head of one of the largest schools in the United States. From the
 
point of view of our present system he is well educated. He holds advanced 
degrees from one of the leading institutions of the world; and he is known to be
 
well informed on all the educational theories developed from the time of 
Socrates down to the day of Dewey. Yet this "educator" says repeatedly that in 
his daily operations he never has anything to do with Negroes because they are 
impossible. He says that he never buys anything from a Negro store, and he would
 
not dare to put a penny in a Negro bank. 
From such teachers large numbers of Negroes learn this fateful lesson. For 
example, not long ago a committee of Negroes in a large city went to the owner 
of a chain store in their neighborhood and requested that he put a Negro manager
 
in charge. This man replied that he doubted that the Negroes themselves wanted


--- PAGE 73 ---
such a thing. The Negroes urging him to make the change assured him that they 
were unanimously in favor of it. The manager, however, asked them to be fair 
enough with his firm and themselves to investigate before pressing the matter 
any further. They did so and discovered that one hundred thirty-seven Negro 
families in that neighborhood seriously objected to buying from Negroes and 
using articles handled by them. These Negroes, then, had to do the groundwork of
 
uprooting the inferiority idea which had resulted from their mis-education. 
To what, then, can a Negro while despising the enterprise of his fellows guide 
the youth of his race; and where do you figure out that the youth thus guided 
will be by 1950? The whites are daily informing Negroes that they need not come 
to them for opportunities. Can the Negro youth, mis-educated by persons who 
depreciate their efforts, learn to make, opportunities for themselves? This is 
the real problem which the Negroes must solve; and he who is not interested in 
it and makes no effort to solve it is worthless in the present struggle. 
Our advanced teachers, like "most highly educated" Negroes, pay little attention
 
to the things about them except when the shoe begins to pinch on one or the 
other side. Unless they happen to become naked they never think of the 
production of cotton or wool; unless they get hungry they never give any thought
 
to the output of wheat or corn; unless their friends lose their jobs they never 
inquire about the outlook for coal or steel, or how these things affect the 
children whom they are trying to teach. In other words, they live in a world, 
but they are not of it. How can such persons guide the youth without knowing how
 
these things affect the Negro community? 
The Negro community, in a sense, is composed of those around you, but it 
functions in a different way. You cannot see it by merely looking out of the 
windows of the schoolroom. This community requires scientific investigation. 
While persons of African blood are compelled to sustain closer relation to their
 
own people than to other elements in society, they are otherwise influenced 
socially and economically. The Negro community suffers for lack of delimitation 
because of the various ramifications of life in the United States. For example, 
there may be a Negro grocer in the neighborhood, but the Negro chauffeur for a 
rich man down town and the washerwoman for an aristocratic family in "quality 
row" will be more than apt to buy their food and clothing at the larger 
establishment with which their employers have connections, although they may be 
insulted there. Negroes of the District of Columbia have millions of dollars 
deposited in banks down town, where Negro women are not allowed in the ladies' 
rest rooms. 
Right in the heart of the highly educated Negro section of Washington, too, is a
 
restaurant catering through the front door exclusively to the white business 
men, who must live in the Negroes' section to supply them with the necessities 
of life, and catering at the same time through the back door to numbers of 
Negroes who pile into that dingy room to purchase whatever may be thrown at 
them. Yet less than two blocks away are several Negroes running cafés where they
 
can be served for the same amount and under desirable circumstances. Negroes who
 
do this, we say, do not have the proper attitude toward life and its problems, 
and for that reason we do not take up time with them. They do not belong to our 
community. The traducers of the race, however, are guiding these people the 
wrong way. Why do not the "educated" Negroes change their course by identifying


--- PAGE 74 ---
themselves with the masses? 
For similar reasons the Negro professional man may not always have a beautiful 
home and a fine car. His plight to the contrary may result from action like that
 
of a poor man who recently knocked on the author's door about midnight to use 
his telephone to call the ambulance of the Casualty Hospital to take immediate 
charge of his sick wife. Although living nearer to the Freedmen's Hospital, 
where more sympathetic consideration would have been given this patient, he 
preferred to take her to the other hospital where she would have to be carried 
through the back yard and placed in a room over a stable. He worked there, 
however; and because of long association with his traducers and the sort of 
treatment that they have meted out to him he was willing to entrust to their 
hands the very delicate matter of the health of his wife. This was a part of his
 
community. 
Large numbers of Negroes live in such a community. You say that such an 
atmosphere is not congenial and you will not lose time with these people who are
 
thus satisfied, but the exploiting preacher, the unprincipled politician, the 
notorious gambler, and the agent of vice are all there purposely misleading 
these people who have not as yet shaken from their minds the shackles of 
slavery. What is going to become of them? What is going to become of you? 
We avoid them because we find enjoyment among others; but they are developing 
their own community. Their teacher lives in another community which may or may 
not be growing. Will his community so expand as to include theirs? If not, their
 
community may encroach upon his. It is a sort of social dualism. What will the 
end be? The teacher will help to answer this question. 
Such guidance, however, must not be restricted to the so-called common people. 
So many Negroes now engaged in business have no knowledge of its possibilities 
and limitations. Most of them are as unwise as a Negro business man who came to 
Washington recently in a ten-thousand-dollar car representing a firm with only 
one hundred thousand dollars invested. It is only a matter of time before his 
firm will be no more. He started out destroying his business at the very source.
 
While Negroes are thus spending their means and themselves in riotous living the
 
foreigners come to dwell among them in modest circumstances long enough to get 
rich and to join those who close in on these unfortunates economically until all
 
the hopes for their redemption are lost. 
If the Negroes of this country are to escape starvation and rise out of poverty 
unto comfort and ease, they must change their way of thinking and living. Never 
did the author see a more striking demonstration of such a necessity than 
recently when a young man came to him looking for a job. He was well bedecked 
with jewelry and fine clothes, and while he was in the office he smoked almost 
enough cigars to pay one's board for that day. A man of this type in a 
poverty-stricken group must suffer and die. 
A young woman recently displaced in a position from which she received 
considerable income for a number of years approached the author not long ago to 
help her solve the problem of making a living. He could not feel very 
sympathetic toward her, however, for she had on a coat which cost enough to 
maintain one comfortably for at least two years. While talking with him, 
moreover, she was so busy telling him about what she wanted that she had little


--- PAGE 75 ---
time to inform him as to what she can do to supply her needs. 
A man whom the author knows is decidedly handicapped by having lost a lucrative 
position. He must now work for a little more than half of what he has been 
accustomed to earn. With his former stipend he was able to maintain two or three
 
girls in addition to his wife, and he drank the best of bootleg stuff available.
 
In now trying to do all of these things on a small wage he finds himself 
following a most tortuous course to make his ends meet, and he suffers within as
 
well as without. 
This undesirable attitude toward life results from the fact that the Negro has 
learned from others how to spend money much more rapidly than he has learned how
 
to earn it. During these days, therefore, it will be very wise for Negroes to 
concentrate on the wise use of money and the evil results from the misuse of it.
 
In large cities like Washington, Baltimore, Philadelphia, New York, and Chicago 
they earn millions and millions every year and throw these vast sums immediately
 
away for trifles which undermine their health, vitiate their morals, and 
contribute to the undoing of generations of Negroes unborn. 
This enlightenment as to economic possibilities in the Negro community must not 
only include instruction as to how enterprises can be made possible but how they
 
should be apportioned among the various parts of the Negro community. Such 
knowledge is especially necessary in the case of Negroes because of the fatal 
tendency toward imitation not only of the white man but the imitation of others 
in his own group. For example, a Negro starts a restaurant on a corner and does 
well. Another Negro, observing this prosperity, thinks that he can do just as 
well by opening a similar establishment next door. The inevitable result is that
 
by dividing the trade between himself and his forerunner he makes it impossible 
for either one to secure sufficient patronage to continue in business. 
In undertakings of great importance this same undesirable tendency toward 
duplication of effort is also apparent. It has been a common thing to find two 
or three banks in a Negro community, each one struggling for an existence in 
competing for the patronage of the small group of people, all of whom would 
hardly be able to support one such financial institution. These banks continue 
their unprofitable competition and never think of merging until some crisis 
forces them to the point that they have to do so or go into bankruptcy. The 
Negro community, then, never has a strong financial institution with sufficient 
resources to stimulate the efforts of the business men who otherwise might 
succeed. 
The same shortsightedness has been evident in, the case of the insurance 
companies organized by Negroes. One was established here and then another 
followed there in imitation of the first. We have been accustomed to boast that 
the Negroes have about fifty insurance companies in this country, marking the 
corners of the streets of the cities with large signs displaying what they are 
doing for the race. Instead of boasting of such unwise expansion we should have 
received such information with sorrow, for what the race actually needs is to 
merge all of the insurance companies now supported by Negroes and make one good 
one. Such a step away from duplication would be a long stride toward our much 
needed awakening, and it would certainly give us prestige in the business world.


--- PAGE 76 ---
This imitation and duplication are decidedly disastrous to economic enterprise 
as we can daily observe. A few days ago a young man in the East lamented the 
fact that after investing his life's earnings in the drug business and making 
every effort to stimulate the enterprise, he has failed. Some one took occasion,
 
thereupon, to remind him that men have grown rich, as a rule, not by doing what 
thousands of others are doing but by undertaking something new. If instead of 
going into the retail dispensing of drugs, he had conceived and carried out the 
idea of the chain-drug store, he would have become an independently rich man. 
There is always a chance to do this because the large majority of people do not 
think and, therefore, leave the field wide open for those who have something new
 
with which to please the public. Negroes even found this possible during the 
days of slavery when the race supposedly had no chance at all. 
About a hundred years ago Thomas Day, a North Carolina Negro, realized that the 
rough furniture of the people in his community did not meet the requirements of 
those of modern taste. He, therefore, worked out a style of ornate and beautiful
 
furniture which attracted the attention of the most aristocratic people of the 
state and built up for himself a most successful business. Persons in that state
 
are still talking about the Day furniture, and not long ago it became the 
subject of a magazine article. If North Carolina would turn out more Negroes of 
this type today, instead of the rather large number who are going to teach and 
preach, some of its present economic problems might thereby be solved. 
During these same years another Negro was showing himself to be equally 
ingenious. This was Henry Boyd. After buying himself in Kentucky, he went to 
Cincinnati to start life as a free man. There he encountered so much prejudice 
against Negro labor that he could not find employment at his trade of 
cabinetmaking. A new thought came to him, however; and in this way he solved his
 
own problem. 
Boyd became convinced that people had been sleeping long enough on straw ticks 
and wooden slats, and he invented the corded bed, the most comfortable bed prior
 
to the use of springs which brought still more ease. Boyd's corded bed became 
popular throughout the Ohio and Mississippi Valleys, and he built up a 
profitable trade which required the employment of twenty-five white and black 
artisans. Other enterprising Negro business men like Boyd gave the Negro element
 
of Cincinnati more of an aspect of progress before the Civil War than it has 
today. Has the Negro less chance today than he had a century ago? 
For about thirty years the author knew an old Negro lady at Gordonsville, 
Virginia, who gave the world something new in frying chicken. She discovered the
 
art of doing this thing in the way that others could not, and she made a good 
living selling her exceptionally prepared chicken and fried puffs at the windows
 
of the cars when the trains stopped at the station. Well-to-do men and women of 
both races would leave the Pullman train with its modern diner attached and go 
out and supply themselves and their friends with this old lady's tastefully made
 
up lunches.


--- PAGE 77 ---
Another woman of color living in Columbia, Missouri, recently gave the world 
another new idea. She had learned cooking, especially baking, but saw no 
exceptional opportunity in the usual application of the trade. After studying 
her situation and the environment in which she had to live, she hit upon the 
scheme of popularizing her savorous sweet potato biscuits, beaten whiter than 
all others by an invention of her own; and the people of both races made a 
well-beaten path to her home to enjoy these delicious biscuits. In this way she 
has made herself and her relatives independent. 
This is the way fortunes are made, but Negroes, who are conscientiously doing 
their best to rise in the economic sphere, do not follow the noble examples of 
those who had less opportunity than we have today. We spend much time in slavish
 
imitation, but our white friends strike out along new lines. Almost all of the 
large fortunes in America have been made in this way. 
John D. Rockefeller did not set out in life to imitate Vanderbilt. Rockefeller 
saw his opportunity in developing the oil industry. Carnegie had better sense 
than to imitate Rockefeller, for that task was already well done, and he 
consolidated the steel interests. Henry Ford knew better than to take up what 
Carnegie had exploited, for there appeared a still larger possibility for 
industrial achievement in giving the world the facility of cheap transportation 
in the low-priced car. 
While such guidance as the Negro needs will concern itself first with material 
things, however, it must not stop with these as ends in themselves. In the 
acquisition of these we lay the foundation for the greater things of the spirit.
 
A poor man properly directed can write a more beautiful poem than one who is 
surfeited. The man in the hovel composes a more charming song than the one in 
the palace. The painter in the ghetto gets an inspiration for a more striking 
portrait than his landlord can appreciate. The ill-fed sculptor lives more 
abundantly than the millionaire who purchases the expression of his thought in 
marble and bronze. For the Negro, then, the door of opportunity is wide open. 
Let him prepare himself to enter this field where competition is no handicap. In
 
such a sphere he may learn to lead the world, while keeping pace with it in the 
development of the material things of life. 
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Chapter XVI: The New Type of Professional Man Required 
NEGROES should study for the professions for all sane reasons that members of 
another race should go into these lines of endeavor and also on account of the 
particular call to serve the lowly of their race. In the case of the law we 
should cease to make exceptions because of the possibilities for failure 
resulting from prejudice against the Negro lawyer and thE lack of Negro business
 
enterprises to require his services Negroes must become like English gentlemen 
who study the law of the land, not because they intend to practice the 
profession, but because every gentleman should know the law. In the 
interpretation of the law by the courts, too, all the rights of the Negroes in 
this country are involved, and a larger number of us must qualify for this 
important service. We may have too many lawyers of the wrong kind, but we have


--- PAGE 78 ---
not our share of the right kind. 
The Negro lawyer has tended to follow in the footsteps of the average white 
practitioner and has not developed the power which he could acquire if he knew 
more about the people whom he should serve and the problems they have to 
confront. These things are not law in themselves, but they determine largely 
whether or not the Negro will practice law and the success he will hare in the 
profession. The failure to give attention to these things has often meant the 
downfall of many a Negro lawyer. 
There are, moreover, certain aspects of law to which the white man would hardly 
address himself but to which the Negro should direct special attention. Of 
unusual importance to the Negro is the necessity for understanding the 
misrepresentations in criminal records of Negroes, and race distinctions in the 
laws of modern nations. These matters require a systematic study of the 
principles of law and legal procedure and, in addition thereto, further study of
 
legal problems as they meet the Negro lawyer in the life which he must live. 
This offers the Negro law school an unusual opportunity. 
Because our lawyers do not give attention to these problems they often fail in a
 
crisis. They are interested in the race and want to defend its cause. The case, 
however, requires not only the unselfish spirit they sometimes manifest but much
 
more understanding of the legal principles, involved. Nothing illustrates this 
better than the failure of one of our attorneys to measure up in the case 
brought up to the United States Supreme Court from Oklahoma to test the validity
 
of the exclusion of Negroes from Pullman cars. The same criticism may be made of
 
the segregation case of the District of Columbia brought before this highest 
tribunal by another Negro attorney. In both of these cases the lawyers started 
wrong and therefore ended wrong. They lacked the knowledge to present their 
cases properly to the court. 
Our lawyers must learn that the judges are not attorneys themselves, for they 
have to decide on the merits of what is presented to them. It is not the 
business of the judges to amend their pleadings or decide their cases according 
to their good intentions. Certainly such generosity cannot be expected from 
prejudiced courts which are looking for every loophole possible to escape from a
 
frank decision on the rights of Negroes guaranteed by the constitution. These 
matters require advanced study and painstaking research; but our lawyers, as a 
rule, are not interested in this sort of mental exercise. 
The Negro medical schools have had a much better opportunity than the few Negro 
law schools which have functioned in the professional preparation of Negroes. On
 
account of the racial contact required of white physicians who are sometimes 
unwilling to sustain this relation to Negroes the Negro physicians and dentists 
have a better chance among their people than the Negro lawyers; and the demand 
for the services of the former assures a larger income than Negro lawyers are 
accustomed to earn. But in spite of this better opportunity Negro medical 
institutions and their graduates have done little more than others to solve the 
peculiar problems confronting the Negro race 
Too many Negroes go into medicine and dentistry merely for selfish purposes, 
hoping thereby to increase their income and spend it in joyous living. They have


--- PAGE 79 ---
the ambition to own fine automobiles, to dress handsomely, and to figure 
conspicuously in society. The practice of these professions among poor Negroes 
yields these results. Why not be a physician or dentist then? 
Too many of our physicians are like the one whom the author recently visited in 
New York City. "When I heard you coming up the stairs," said he, "I began to 
feel glad, for I was sure that you were another patient from whom I might 
extract at least two dollars for a prescription." 
Yet one would wonder how that physician could prosper in his profession, for he 
had no special equipment for the practice of any kind of advanced phases of 
medicine. About all he could do was to look at the patient's tongue, feel his 
pulse, ask him a few questions, write a prescription and collect the fee. The 
apparatus required for the modern treatment of serious maladies he did not have 
and seemed to have no ambition to possess. 
The Negroes of today are very much in need of physicians who in their 
professional work will live up to what they are taught in school, and will build
 
upon their foundation by both experience and further training. In his segregated
 
position in the ghetto the Negro health problem presents more difficulties than 
that of the whites who are otherwise circumstanced. The longevity of the Negro 
depends in part upon the supply of Negro physicians and nurses who will address 
themselves unselfishly to the solution of this particular problem. Since the 
Negroes are forced into undesirable situations and compelled to inhabit 
germ-infested districts, they cannot escape ultimate extermination if our 
physicians do not help them to work out a community health program which will 
provide for the Negroes some way to survive. 
Negro medical schools and their graduates must do more preaching of the 
necessity for improving conditions which determine health and eradicate disease.
 
A large number of physicians and nurses must be trained, and new opportunities 
for them to practice must be found This can be done by turning out better 
products from these schools and the extension of hospitals among Negroes who 
have been so long neglected In this campaign, however, the Negro physicians must
 
supply the leadership, and others must join with them in these efforts. 
From medical schools, too, we must have Negroes with a program of medical 
research. Today the world is inclined to give attention to the health of the 
Negro since unsanitary conditions of the race will mean the lose of health among
 
the whites. Philanthropists, however, hardly know how to proceed or which way to
 
go because they have so long neglected the Negroes that they do not know how to 
provide wisely for them; and the Negro physicians themselves have failed to give
 
adequate attention to these conditions. Negro medical students have not directed
 
sufficient attention to the ante-bellum background of the Negro who, still under
 
that influence, indulges in superstitious and religious practices which impede 
the progress of medicine among them. One would be surprised to know the extent 
to which primitive medicine is practiced Among American Negroes today. Often in 
the rural districts they seldom see a physician. The midwife and the herb doctor
 
there control the situation.


--- PAGE 80 ---
The greatest problem now awaiting solution is the investigation of the 
differential resistance of races to disease. What are the diseases of which 
Negroes are more susceptible than whites? What are the diseases of which the 
whites are more susceptible than Negroes? The Negro escapes yellow fever and 
influenza, but the white man dies. The white man withstands syphilis and 
tuberculosis fairly well, but the Negro afflicted with these maladies easily 
succumbs. These questions offer an inviting field of research for Negro medical 
students. 
While we hear much about medicine, law and the like their importance must not be
 
unduly emphasized. Certainly men should not crowd into these spheres to make 
money, but all professions among Negroes except those of teaching and preaching 
are undermanned. All Negroes in professions constitute less than two and a half 
per cent of those over ten years of age who are gainfully employed. At the same 
time the whites find certain of their professions overcrowded, and some of their
 
practitioners could not exist without the patronage of Negroes. 
Negroes, too, should undergo systematic training for those professions in which 
they have shown special aptitude as in the arts. They must not wait for the 
Americans to approve their plunging into unknown spheres. The world is not 
circumscribed by the United States, and the Negro must become a pioneer in 
making use of a larger portion of the universe. If the people here do recognize 
the Negro in these spheres let him seek a hearing in the liberal circles of 
Europe. If he has any art Europeans will appreciate it and assure him success in
 
forbidden fields 
In Europe, it should be noted, the Negro artist is not wanted as a mere imitator
 
Europeans will recognize him in the role of an enlightened artist portraying the
 
life of his people. As an English abolitionist said more than a century ago, 
"The portrait of the Negro has seldom been drawn but by the pencil of his 
oppressor and the Negro has sat for it in the distorted attitude of slavery." A 
new method of approach, however, is now possible. There has been an awakening in
 
Europe to the realization of the significance of African culture, and circles 
there want to see that life depicted by the Negro who can view it from within. 
There is a philosophy in it that the world must understand. From its 
contemplation may come a new social program Herein lies the opportunity of the 
Negro artist as a world reformer. Will he see it and live or continue the mere 
imitation of others and die? 
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Chapter XVII: Higher Strivings in the Service of the Country 
ANOTHER factor the Negro needs is a new figure in politics, one who will not 
concern himself so much with what others can do for him as with what he can do 
for himself. He will know sufficient about the system of government not to carry
 
his trouble to the federal functionaries and thus confess himself a failure in 
the community in which he lives. He will know that his freedom from peonage and 
lynching will be determined by the extent that he can develop into a worthy


--- PAGE 81 ---
citizen and impress himself upon his community. 
The New Negro in politics will not be so unwise as to join the ignorant 
delegations from conferences and convention which stage annual pilgrimages to 
the White House to complain to the President because they have socially and 
economically failed to measure up to demands of self-preservation. The New Negro
 
in politics will understand clearly that in the final analysis federal 
functionaries cannot do anything about these matters within the police powers of
 
the states, and he will not put himself in the position of being received with 
coldness and treated with contempt as these ignorant misleaders of the Negro 
race have been from time immemorial. The New Negro in politics, then, will 
appeal to his own and to such friends of other races in his locality as believe 
in social justice. If he does something for himself others will do more for him.
 
The increasing vigor of the race, then, will not be frittered away in partisan 
strife in the interest of the oppressors of the race. It ought not to be 
possible for the political bosses to induce almost any Negro in the community to
 
abandon his permanent employment to assist them and their ilk in carrying out 
some program for the selfish purposes of the ones engineering the scheme. It 
ought not to be possible for the politicians to distribute funds at the rate of 
fifty or a hundred dollars a head among the outstanding ministers and use them 
and their congregations in vicious partisan strife. It is most shameful that 
some ministers resort to religion as a camouflage to gain influence in the 
churches only to use such power for selfish political purpose. 
The Negro should endeavor to be a figure in politics, not a tool for the 
politicians. This higher rôle can be played not by parking all of the votes of a
 
race on one side of the fence as both blacks and whites have done in the South, 
but by independent action. The Negro should not censure the Republican party for
 
forgetting him and he should not blame the Democratic party for opposing him. 
Neither can the South blame any one but itself for its isolation in national 
politics. Any people who will vote the same way for three generations without 
thereby obtaining results ought to be ignored and disfranchised. 
As a minority element the Negro should not knock at the door of any particular 
political party. He should appeal to the Negroes themselves and from them should
 
come harmony and concerted action for a new advance to that larger freedom of 
men. The Negro should use his vote rather than give it away to reward the dead 
for some favors done in the distant past. He should clamor not for the few 
offices earmarked as Negro jobs but for the recognition of these despised 
persons as men according to the provision of the Constitution of the United 
States. 
The few state and national offices formerly set aside for Negroes have paled 
into insignificance when compared with the many highly lucrative positions now 
occupied by Negroes as a result of their development in other spheres. Sometimes
 
a Negro prominent in education, business or professional life can earn more in a
 
few months than the most successful politicians can earn in years. These 
political jobs, moreover, have diminished in recent years because the increase 
of race prejudice, which this policy has doubtless aided, supplies the political


--- PAGE 82 ---
leaders with an excuse for not granting their Negro coworkers anything 
additional. 
The New Negro in politics must learn something that the old "ward-heelers" have 
never been able to realize, namely, not only that the few offices allotted 
Negroes are insignificant but that even if the Negro received a proportionate 
share of the spoils, the race cannot hope to solve any serious problem by the 
changing fortunes of politics. Real politics, the science of government, is 
deeply rooted in the economic foundation of the social order. To figure greatly 
in politics the Negro must be a great figure in politics. A class of people 
slightly lifted above poverty, therefore, can never have much influence in 
political circles. The Negro must develop character and worth to make him a 
desirable everywhere so that he will not have to knock at the doors of political
 
parties but will have them thrown open to him. 
The New Negro in politics must not ask the party for money, he must not hire 
himself for a pittance to swing voters in line. He must contribute to the 
campaign of the party pleasing him, rather than draw upon it for an allowance to
 
drive the wolf from the door during the three months of the political canvass. 
It will be considered a stroke of good fortune that a Negro of such influence 
and character has aligned himself with a party, and this fact will speak 
eloquently for the element to which he belongs. 
The New Negro in politics, moreover, must not be a politician. He must be a man.
 
He must try to give the world something rather than extract something from it. 
The world, as he should see it, does not owe him anything, certainly not a 
political office; and he should not try solely to secure one, and thus waste 
valuable years which might be devoted to the development of something of an 
enduring value. If he goes into office, it should be as a sacrifice, because his
 
valuable time is required elsewhere. If he is needed by his country in a civil 
position, he may respond to the call as a matter of duty, for his usefulness is 
otherwise assured. From such a Negro, then, we may expect sound advice, 
intelligent guidance, and constructive effort fort the good of all elements of 
our population 
When such Negroes go into office you will not find them specializing in things 
which peculiarly concern the Negroes, offering merely antilynching bills and 
measures for pensioning the freedmen. The New Negro in politics will see his 
opportunity not in thus restricting himself but in visioning the whole social 
and economic order with his race as a part of it. In thus working for the 
benefit of all as prompted by his liberal mindedness the New Negro will do much 
more to bring the elements together for common good than he will be able to do 
in prating only of the ills of his particular corner and extending his hand for 
a douceur. 
In suggesting herein the rise of the New Negro in politics the author does not 
have in mind the so-called radical Negroes who have read and misunderstood Karl 
Marx and his disciples and would solve the political as well as the economic 
problems of the race by an immediate application of these principles. History 
shows that although large numbers of people have actually tried to realize such 
pleasant dreams, they have in the final analysis come back to a social program 
based on competition. If no one is to enjoy the fruits of his exceptional labor 
any more than the individual who is not prepared to render such extraordinary 
service, not one of a thousand will be sufficiently humanitarian to bestir 
himself to achieve much of importance, and force applied in this case to


--- PAGE 83 ---
stimulate such action has always broken down. If the excited whites who are 
bringing to the Negroes such strange doctrines are insane enough to believe 
them, the Negroes themselves should learn to think before it is too late 
History shows that it does not matter who is in power or what revolutionary 
forces take over the government, those who have not learned to do for themselves
 
and have to depend solely on others never obtain any more rights or privileges 
in the end than they had in the beginning. Even if the expected social upheaval 
comes, the Negro will be better prepared to take care of himself in the 
subsequent reconstruction if he develops the power to ascend to a position 
higher up after the radically democratic people will have recovered from their 
revelry in an impossible Utopia. 
To say that the Negro cannot develop sufficiently in the business world to 
measure arms with present-day capitalists is to deny actual facts, refute 
history, and discredit the Negro as a capable competitor in the economic battle 
of life. No man knows what he can do until he tries. The Negro race has never 
tried to do very much for itself. The race has great possibilities. Properly 
awakened, the Negro can do the so-called impossible in the business world and 
thus help to govern rather than merely be governed. 
In the failure to see this and the advocacy of the destruction of the whole 
economic order to right social wrong we see again the tendency of the Negro to 
look to some force from without to do for him what he must learn to do for 
himself. The Negro needs to become radical, and the race will never amount to 
anything until it does become so, but this radicalism should come from within. 
The Negro will be very foolish to resort to extreme measures in behalf of 
foreign movements before he learns to suffer and die to right his own wrongs. 
There is no movement in the world-working especially for the Negro. He must 
learn to do this for himself or be exterminated just as the American Indian has 
faced his doom in the setting sun. 
Why should the Negro wait for some one from without to urge him to 
self-assertion when he sees himself robbed by his employer, defrauded by his 
merchant, and hushed up by government agents of injustice? Why wait for a spur 
to action when he finds his manhood insulted, his women outraged, and his 
fellowmen lynched for amusement? The Negroes have always had sufficient reason 
for being radical, and it looks silly to see them taking up the cause of others 
who pretend that they are interested in the Negro when they merely mean to use 
the race as a means to an end. When the desired purpose of these so-called 
friendly groups will have been served, they will have no further use for the 
Negro and will drop him just as the Republican machine has done 
The radicals bring forward, too, the argument that the Negro, being of a 
minority group, will always be overpowered by others From the point of view of 
the selfish elements this may be true, and certainly it has worked thus for some
 
time; but things do not always turn out according to mathematical calculations. 
In fact, the significant developments in history have never been thus 
determined. Only the temporary and the trivial can be thus forecast. The human 
factor is always difficult for the materialist to evaluate and the prophecies of
 
the alarmist are often upset Why should we expect less in the case of the Negro?


--- PAGE 84 ---
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Chapter XVIII: The Study of the Negro 
The facts drawn from an experience of more than twenty years enable us to make 
certain deductions with respect to the study of the Negro. Only one Negro out of
 
every ten thousand is interested in the effort to set forth what his race has 
thought and felt and attempted and accomplished that it may not become a 
negligible factor in the thought of the world By traditions and education, 
however, the large majority of Negroes have become interested in the history and
 
status of other races, and they spend millions annually to promote such 
knowledge. Along with this sum, of course, should be considered the large amount
 
paid for devices in trying not to be Negroes. 
The chief reason why so many give such a little attention to the background of 
the Negro is the belief that this study is unimportant. They consider as history
 
only such deeds as those of Mussolini who after building up an efficient war 
machine with the aid of other Europeans would now use it to murder unarmed and 
defenseless Africans who have restricted themselves exclusively to attending to 
their own business. If Mussolini succeeds in crushing Abyssinia he will be 
recorded in "history" among the Caesars, and volumes written in praise of the 
conqueror will find their way to the homes and libraries of thousands of 
miseducated Negroes. The oppressor has always indoctrinated the weak with this 
interpretation of the crimes of the strong. 
The war lords have done good only accidentally or incidentally while seeking to 
do evil. The movements which have ameliorated the condition of humanity and 
stimulated progress have been inaugurated by men of thought in lifting their 
fellows out of drudgery unto ease and comfort, out of selfishness unto altruism.
 
The Negro may well rejoice that his hands, unlike those of his oppressors, are 
not stained with so much blood extracted by brute force. Real history is not the
 
record of the successes and disappointments, the vices, the follies, and the 
quarrels of those who engage in contention for power. 
The Association for the Study of Negro Life and History is projected on the fact
 
that there is nothing in the past of the Negro more shameful than what is found 
in the past of other races The Negro is as human as the other members of the 
family of mankind. The Negro, like others, has been up at times; and at times he
 
has been down. With the domestication of animals, the discovery of iron, the 
development of stringed instruments, an advancement in fine art, and the 
inauguration of trial by jury to his credit, the Negro stands just as high as 
others in contributing to the progress of the world. 
The oppressor, however, raises his voice to the contrary. He teaches the Negro 
that he has no worth-while past, that his race has done nothing significant 
since the beginning of time, and that there is no evidence that he will ever 
achieve anything great. The education of the Negro then must be carefully 
directed lest the race may waste time trying to do the impossible. Lead the 
Negro to believe this and thus control his thinking. If you can thereby 
determine what he will think, you will not need to worry about what he will do.


--- PAGE 85 ---
You will not have to tell him to go to the back door. He will go without being 
told; and if there is no back door he will have one cut for his special benefit.
 
If you teach the Negro that he has accomplished as much good as any other race 
he will aspire to equality and justice without regard to race Such an effort 
would upset the program of the oppressor in Africa and America. Play up before 
the Negro, then, his crimes and shortcomings. Let him learn to admire the 
Hebrew, the Greek, the Latin and the Teuton. Lead the Negro to detest the man of
 
African blood
 to hate himself. The oppressor then may conquer exploit, oppress 
and even annihilate the Negro by segregation without fear or trembling. With the
 
truth hidden there will be little expression of thought to the contrary. 
The American Negro has taken over an abundance of information which others have 
made accessible to the oppressed, but he has not yet learned to think and plan 
for himself as others do for themselves. Well might this race be referred to as 
the most docile and tractable people on earth. This merely means that when the 
oppressors once start the large majority of the race in the direction of serving
 
the purposes of their traducers, the task becomes so easy in the years following
 
that they have little trouble with the masses thus controlled. It is a most 
satisfactory system, and it has become so popular that European nations of 
foresight are sending some of their brightest minds to the United States to 
observe the Negro in "inaction" in order to learn how to deal likewise with 
Negroes in their colonies. What the Negro in America has become satisfied with 
will be accepted as the measure of what should be allotted him elsewhere. 
Certain Europeans consider the "solution of the race problem in the United 
States" one of our great achievements. 
The mis-educated Negro joins the opposition with the objection that the study of
 
the Negro keeps alive questions which should be forgotten. The Negro should 
cease to remember that he was once held a slave, that he has been oppressed, and
 
even that he is a Negro. The traducer, however, keeps before the public such 
aspects of this history as will justify the present oppression of the race. It 
would seem, then, that the Negro should emphasize at the same time the favorable
 
aspects to justify action in his behalf. One cannot blame the Negro for not 
desiring to be reminded of being the sort of creature that the oppressor has 
represented the Negro to be; but this very attitude shows ignorance of the past 
and a slavish dependence upon the enemy to serve those whom he would destroy. 
The Negro can be made proud of his past only by approaching it scientifically 
himself and giving his own story to the world. What others have written about 
the Negro during the last three centuries has been mainly for the purpose of 
bringing him where he is today and holding him there. 
The method employed by the Association for the Study of Negro Life and History, 
however, is not spectacular propaganda or fire-eating agitation. Nothing can be 
accomplished in such fashion. "Whom the gods would destroy they first make mad."
 
The Negro, whether in Africa or America, must be directed toward a serious 
examination of the fundamentals of education, religion, literature, and 
philosophy as they have been expounded to him. He must be sufficiently 
enlightened to determine for himself whether these forces have come into his 
life to bless him or to bless his oppressor. After learning the facts in the


--- PAGE 86 ---
case the Negro must develop the power of execution to deal with these matters as
 
do people of vision. Problems of great importance cannot be worked out in a day.
 
Questions of great moment must be met with far-reaching plans. 
The Association for the Study of Negro Life and History is teaching the Negro to
 
exercise foresight rather than "hindsight." Liberia must not wait until she is 
offered to Germany before realizing that she has few friends in Europe. 
Abyssinia must not wait until she is invaded by Italy before she prepares for 
selfdefense. A scientific study of the past of modern nations would show these 
selfish tendencies as inevitable results from their policies in dealing with 
those whom they have professed to elevate. For example, much of Africa has been 
conquered and subjugated to save souls How expensive has been the Negro's 
salvation! One of the strong arguments for slavery was that it brought the Negro
 
into the light of salvation. And yet the Negro today is all but lost. 
The Association for the Study of Negro Life and History, however, has no special
 
brand for the solution of the race problem except to learn to think. No general 
program of uplift for the Negroes in all parts of the world will be any more 
successful than such a procedure would be in the case of members of other races 
under different circumstances. What will help a Negro in Alabama may prove 
harmful to one in Maine. The African Negro may find his progress retarded by 
applying "methods used for the elevation of the Negro in America." A thinking 
man, however, learns to deal wisely with conditions as he finds them rather than
 
to take orders from some one who knows nothing about his status and cares less. 
At present the Negro, both in Africa and America, is being turned first here and
 
there experimentally by so-called friends who in the final analysis assist the 
Negro merely in remaining in the dark. 
In the furtherance of the program of taking up these matters dispassionately the
 
Association had made available an outline for the systematic study of the Negro 
as he has touched the life of others and as others have functioned in their 
relation to him, The African Background Outlined: A Handbook. This book is 
written from the point of view of history, literature, art, education, religion 
and economic imperialism. In seventeen chapters as Part I of the work a brief 
summary of the past in Africa is presented; and courses on "The Negro in 
Africa," "The Negro in the European Mind," "The Negro in America," "The Negro in
 
Literature," "The Negro in Art," "The Education of the Negro," "The Religious 
Development of the Negro," and "Economic Imperialism," follow as Part II with 
ample bibliographical comment for every heading and subhead of these outlines. 
This facilitates the task of clubs, young peoples' societies, and special 
classes organized where the oppressors of the race and the Negroes cooperating 
with them are determined that the history and status of the Negro shall not be 
made a part of the curricula. 
In this outline there is no animus, nothing to engender race hate. The 
Association does not bring out such publications. The aim of this organization 
is to set forth facts in scientific form, for facts properly set forth will tell
 
their own story. No advantage can be gained by merely inflaming the Negro's mind
 
against his traducers. In a manner they deserve to be congratulated for taking


--- PAGE 87 ---
care of their own interests so well. The Negro needs to become angry with 
himself because he has not handled his own affairs wisely. In other words, the 
Negro must learn from others how to take care of himself in this trying ordeal. 
He must not remain content with taking over what others set aside for him and 
then come in the guise of friends to subject even that limited information to 
further misinterpretation. 
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Appendix: 
Much Ado about a Name 
A PARTICIPANT who recently attended an historical meeting desired to take up the
 
question as to what the race should be called. Africans, Negroes, colored 
people, or what? This is a matter of much concern to him because he hopes 
thereby to solve the race problem. If others will agree to call Negroes Nordics,
 
he thinks, he will reach the desired end by taking a short cut. 
This may sound all but insane, but there are a good many "highly educated" 
Negroes who believe that such can be accomplished by this shift in terminology; 
and they have spent time and energy in trying to effect a change. Many of this 
class suffer mentally because of the frequent use of "offensive expressions" in 
addressing Negroes. When dealing with them, then, one has to be very careful. 
For this reason our friends in other races have to seek guidance in approaching 
us. For example, Lady Simon, the wife of Sir John Simon of the British Cabinet, 
has recently asked an American Negro what his people prefer to be called, and 
later in England she took up the same matter with another member of this race. 
Being an advocate of freedom, she has written considerably to advance its cause.
 
She would not like to use in her works, then, an expression which may hurt some 
one's feelings. 
Although a student of social problems, this learned woman cannot fathom this 
peculiar psychology. Americans, too, must confess the difficulty of 
understanding it, unless it is that the "highly educated Negro mind" tends to 
concern itself with trifles rather than with the great problems of life. We have
 
known Negroes to ask for a separate Y. M. C. A. or Y. W. C. A., a separate 
church or a separate school, and then object to calling the institution colored 
or Negro. These segregationists have compromised on principle, but they are 
unwilling to acknowledge their crime against justice. The name, they believe, 
will save them from the disgrace. 
It does not matter so much what the thing is called as what the thing is. The 
Negro would not cease to be what he is by calling him something else; but, if he
 
will struggle and make something of himself and contribute to modern culture,


--- PAGE 88 ---
the world will learn to look upon him as an American rather than as one of an 
undeveloped element of the population. 
The word Negro or black is used in referring to this particular element because 
most persons of native African descent approach this color. The term does not 
imply that every Negro is black; and the word white does not mean that every 
white man is actually white. Negroes may be colored, but many Caucasians are 
scientifically classified as colored. We are not all Africans, moreover, because
 
many of us were not born in Africa; and we are not all Afro-Americans, because 
few of us are natives of Africa transplanted to America. 
There is nothing to be gained by running away from the name. The names of 
practically all races and nations at times have connoted insignificance and low 
social status. Angles and Saxons, once the slaves of Romans, experienced this; 
and even the name of the Greek for a while meant no more than this to these 
conquerors of the world. The people who bore these names, however, have made 
them grand and illustrious. The Negro must learn to do the same. 
It is strange, too, that while the Negro feels ashamed of his name, persons 
abroad do not usually think of it in this sense. One does find in Europe a 
number of West Indian and American Negroes of some Caucasian blood, who do not 
want to be known as Negroes. As a rule, however, a European of African Negro 
blood feels proud of this racial heritage and delights to be referred to as 
such. The writer saw a striking case of this in London in the granddaughter of a
 
Zulu chief. She is so far removed from the African type that one could easily 
mistake her for a Spaniard; and yet she thinks only for her African connection 
and gets her inspiration mainly from the story of her people beyond the Pillars 
of Hercules. 
The writer was agreeably surprised a few days later, too, when he met a 
prominent Parisian with the same attitude. He has produced several volumes in 
which he champions the cause of the Negro because he has in his veins the same 
blood. A well-to-do European woman, the daughter of a Dutchman and an African 
mother, is similarly enthusiastic over her Negro blood. The first thing she 
mentioned in conversing with the writer was that black mother. This young woman 
expressed the regret that she did not have more of that color that she, too, 
might say, as do members of certain tribes of Africa: "I am black and comely. I 
am black and beautiful. I am beautifully black." 
These people surprise you when you think of the attitude of many American 
Negroes on this question. These race-conscious people can think, but it is 
seldom that the American Negro indulges in such an exercise. He has permitted 
other people to determine for him the attitude that he has toward his own 
people. This means the enslavement of his mind and eventually the enslavement of
 
his body. 
Some Europeans rather regard the word Negro as romantic. Going now along the 
streets of Paris, one will see advertised such places as "l'Elan Noir," and the 
"Café au Nègre de Toulouse." In one of these cases the writer was especially 
attracted by the "Choppe du Nègre" end took dinner there one day. The cuisine 
was excellent, the music rendered by the orchestra was charming, and a jolly 
crowd came to enjoy themselves. However, he was the only "Nègre" there. 
Walking along a street in Geneva not long ago, the writer's attention was 
attracted to something of the sort, which is still more significant. It was a 
wholesale coffee house called "A La Case de l'Oncle Tom." He entered and asked: 
"Why did you give this store such a name?" The proprietress laughed and


--- PAGE 89 ---
explained that her grandfather, François Prudhom, who had read "Uncle Tom's 
Cabin" and had been deeply impressed thereby, selected this name for the store 
when he established it in 1866. 
THE VALUE OF COLOR 
NOT long ago the writer saw on a street ear one of the prettiest women in the 
world. She was a perfectly black woman becomingly dressed in suitable gray and 
modest adornments which harmonized with her color. She was naturally a 
commanding figure without any effort to please others, for her bearing was such 
that she would not fail to attract attention. He could not restrain myself from 
gazing at her; and, looking around to see whether others were similarly 
concerned, he found the whites in the car admiring her also, even to the point 
of commenting among themselves. 
This woman's common sense, manifested in knowing how to dress, had made her 
color an asset rather than a liability. The writer easily recalled, then, that 
tribe in Africa that feels unusually proud of being black. We are told that they
 
are so anxious to be black that if they find one of the group with a tendency to
 
depart the least from this color they go to the heart of nature and extract from
 
it its darkest dye and paint therewith that native's face that he may continue 
perfectly black. 
Here in America, however, we are ashamed of being black. So many of us who are 
actually black powder our faces and make ourselves blue. In so doing we become 
all but hideous by the slavish aping of those around us in keeping with our 
custom of imitation. We fail to take ourselves for what we are actually worth, 
and do not make the most of ourselves. 
We show lack of taste in the selection of our dress. We long for what others 
wear whether it harmonizes with our color or not They have given particular 
attention to design with respect to their race and have written books to this 
effect. Thinking, however, that the Negro is not supposed to wear anything but 
what the poor may pick up, the artists have not thought seriously of him. Both 
teachers and students of nearby schools thus concerned, then, repeatedly appeal 
to us for help in the study of design with respect to the Negro, but we have 
nothing scientific to offer them. We have no staff of artists who can function 
in this sphere. 
To be able to supply this need requires the most painstaking effort to 
understand colors and color schemes. It is a very difficult task because of the 
variation of color within the race. Sometimes in one family of ten you will 
hardly find two of the same shade. To dress them all alike may be economical, 
but the world thereby misses that much of beauty. The Negro mother, then, needs 
to be the real artist, and the schools now training the youth to be the parents 
of tomorrow should give as much attention to these things esthetic as they do to
 
language, literature or mathematics. 
In neglecting to know himself better from this point of view, then, the Negro is
 
making a costly mistake. He should be deeply concerned with the esthetic


--- PAGE 90 ---
possibilities of his situation. In this so-called Negro race we have the 
prettiest people in the world, when they dress in harmony with the many shades 
and colors with which we are so richly endowed. Why do we so away from home to 
find what we already have on hand? 
Recently one saw in Washington a demonstration of the value of color when the 
Masonic conclave staged a tremendous parade in this national city. The whites 
were attracted to the upstanding, outstanding Negroes so becomingly bedecked in 
costumes of the Orient. This, however, was accidental. The color of the Negroes 
happened to be Oriental, and the colors of this order were originally worked out
 
to suit the people of those parts. The dead white of the Caucasian does not 
harmonize with such garb. Why, then should the Negro worry about what others 
wear? 
Carrying the imitation of others to an extreme today, we do not find ourselves 
far in advance of the oppressed antebellum Negroes, who, unable to dress 
themselves, had to take whatever others threw at them. We make a most hideous 
spectacle, then, when we are on dress parade in our social atmosphere. So many 
of us clad in unbecoming colors often look like decorated pet horses turned 
loose for an hour or so of freedom. 
Appreciating the value of color, the artists in European cities are trying to 
change their hue to that of the colored people. They can understand how 
inexpressive the dead white is, and they are trying to make use of what we are 
seeking to conceal. The models in their shops are purposely colored to display 
to good effect the beautiful costumes which require color. Some of these 
Europeans frankly tell Negroes how they envy them for their color. 
One is not surprised, then, to find European cafés and hotels employing American
 
or African Negroes to supply this color which the Europeans lack. Pictures of 
such black men are sometimes displayed to great effect. That of Josephine Baker 
adorns the windows of large stores in Paris. Here in America, too, we observe 
that art centres are likewise getting away from the dead white to enjoy the 
richness of color. 
The writer felt somewhat encouraged recently when he talked with a Washington 
lady who runs "The Pandora," a unique establishment devoted to design. Upon 
inquiring about her progress in the effort to teach colored people how to wear 
what becomes them, she reported considerable success. Sometimes customers insist
 
on purchasing unbecoming attire, but usually she has shown them the unwisdom of 
so doing, and most of them now take her advice. 
In this way this enterprising woman is not only conducting a pioneer business, 
but she is rendering a social service. She has not had any special training in 
this work, but on her initiative she is building upon what she has learned by 
studying the Negroes in her community. Others of us may do likewise, if we try 
to help the Negro rather than exploit him. 
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Notes


--- PAGE 91 ---
1 Annual Report of the Director of the Association for the [return] Study of 
Negro Life and History, Incorporated, July 1, 1932 to June 30, 1933. Washington,
 
D. C. p. 4 
2 Annual Report, ibid., July 1, 1929 to June 30, 1930. p. 4 [return] 
3 Lawrence D. Reddick, "Racial Attitudes in American History [return] Books in 
the South." The Journal of Negro History Volume XIX No. 3, July, 1934 pp. 
225-265 
4 Thomas L. Dabney, "The Study of the Negro." The Journal [return] of Negro 
History ibid., pp. 265-307 
5 Horace Mann Bond, "The Curriculum and the Negro Child" [return] Journal of 
Negro Education Volume IV No. 2, April, 1935. p. 163 ff. 
6 ibid. [return] 
7 W. E. Burghardt DuBois "Does the Negro Need Separate [return] Schools?" 
Journal of Negro Education Volume IV No. 3, July, 1935. pp. 328-329 
8 ibid. p. 333 [return] 
9 ibid. p. 335 [return] 
10 Monroe Work, Negro Yearbook: An Annual Encyclopedia [return] of the Negro 
1931-1932. Negro Yearbook Publishing Company. Tuskegee Institute Alabama, 1931. 
pp. 204, 205, 206. 
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
      'If those in charge of our society 
  politicians, corporate executives, 
      and owners of press and television   can dominate our ideas, they will be 
      secure in their power. They will not need soldiers patrolling the streets.
 
      We will control ourselves.' 
      
 Howard Zinn
END OF TEXT.
E-TEXT SOURCE (with minor corrections) History Is A Weapon =   http://www.histor
yisaweapon.com/defcon1/misedne.html

