=== EXTRACTED TEXT FROM: The-RBG-Street-Scholar-Melanin-Papers-20-12-Updates-RBG-Street-Scholar.pdf ===
Extraction Method: PyPDFLoader
Total Pages: 38
Timestamp: 2026-01-04T17:36:49.401401
================================================================================


--- PAGE 1 ---
ICEBREAKER VIDEOS 
 
 
 
 
RBG STREET SCHOLARS THINK TANK 
The RBG Melanins Paper 
The Role of Melanin In Afrikan Re-Education / ReAfrikanization Process 
 
RBG Street Scholar 
 
“Melanin gives Black people advanced 
mental , physical and spiritual  ability” 
 
...your mental processes (brain power) are 
controlled by the same chemical that gives 
Black humans their superior physical 
(athletics, rhythmic dancing) abilities. This 
chemical...is Melanin!" The abundance of 
melanin in Black humans produces a 
superior organism both mentally , physically 
and spirituality. 
Videos: 
Melanin 
 
 RBG Sports Highlights: f. DPZ The 
Game of Life / Score, This Ain't No Game 
This Is War 
 
Video: RBG on the Role of 
Melanin in Our Afrikan 
Re-Education / Re-
Afrikanization Process


--- PAGE 2 ---
RBG Street Scholars Think Tank  2 
 
The RBG Melanins Paper 
 2012 Updates 
 
As Dr. Wilson explains very eloquently in  Black Child Development 
Under White Supremacy , the cognitive, psychomotor , psychological and 
affective development of the Black (Afrikan) child is grounded in an 
overstanding of Afrikan peoples history and culture and the neurobiology 
of neuromelanin. For the past fifteen years  "The Melanin Systems of 
Afrikan People"  has been my primary area of research focus and the 
nexus of my current pedagogical approach. What follows are 
some  opening volleys into my work. My thesis is that "Afrikan peoples 
cultural dev elopment, education and socialization (social sciences) are 
grounded in biological science/ biochemistry (i.e., a fostering of 
functional melaninization)." My academic approach is simultaneously 
historocultural, sociopolitical, psychoeducational and moro -
spiritual. 
 
Part I: AFRIKAN HEAL THYSELF:The Role of 
Melanin In Our Afrikan Re-Education / 
ReAfrikanization Process 
 
The Problem: “Melinan Wars” 
 A DEEP CUT ANALYSIS OF EUROPEAN (ARYAN AND 
SEMITIC) SCHOLARSHIP AND CULTURE (INCLUDING PHILOSOPHY, 
MYTHOLOGY AND RELIGION, POLITICS/GOVERNANCE, SOCIAL 
THEORY AND HISTORY, CURRENT EVENTS, EDUCATION AND 
ECONOMICS, LAW AND MEDICINE, MEDIA COMMUNICATIONS, 
CREATIVE PRODUCTIONS, ARTS AND HUMANITIES) 
DEMONSTRATES THAT THEY ALL SPEAK IN ONE VOICE, AND 
ALWAYS IN CONCERT WHEN IT COMES TO THOSE WITH THE 
ABILITY TO PRODUCE COLOR (MELANIN).   BUT, PRECISELY 
BECAUSE MELANIN IS MORE THAN A MATTER OF COLOR (SKIN 
PIGMENTATION); RATHER, IT IS THE BASTIAN OF “HUE -MAN” 
ORGANIZING, UNIFYING AND PROTECTING PROBABILITY, POSSIBILITY AND 
POTENTIALITY; THE EUROPEAN GROUP HAS HISTORICALLY AND PRESENTLY 
CONTINUES TO WAGE AN UNDECLARED “MELANIN WAR”.   THIS WAR IS 
CHARACTERIZED BY REMARKA BLE UNITY OF THOUGHT AND ACTION IN ALL THE 
AFOREMENTIONED DISCIPLINE IN AN EFFORT TO MAINTAIN A VEIL OF FALSIFICATION 
OVER THE FUNDAMENTAL TRUTH, I.E., THERE DISPLINES OF STUDY ONLY AMOUNT TO 
WAYS AND MEANS OF   EXPLOITING AND OPPRESSING PEOPLE OF COLOR TO THEIR 
FININCIAL BENEFIT.   HENCEFORTH, AFRIKAN PEOPLES STUDY OF THEIR HISTORY AND 
CULTURE MUST SET OUT TO RUIN ALL OF THESE TENDENTIOUS THEORETICAL 
FRAMEWORKS AND PRACTICES OF GLOBAL WHITE SUPREMACY/RACISM.  
 
 
 
An Intro to Black Child 
Development Under White 
Supremacy, Dr. Amos Wilson-
Audio 
An Intro to Black Child 
Development Under White 
Supremacy, Dr. Amos Wilson-
Audio Lec. PPT 
 
 
Black Child Development Under 
White Supremacy Dr. Amos 
Wilson-Audio Lecture... 
Audio Lecture by The Honorable 
Dr. Amos Wilson- “Black Child 
Development Under White 
Supremacy” ... Why and How the 
AFRIKAN Child is Miseducated 
in the Western Educational 
System  
From: Marc Imhotep Cray, M.D.


--- PAGE 3 ---
RBG Street Scholars Think Tank  3 
 
The RBG Melanins Paper 
 2012 Updates 
 
LET’S START WITH A QUICK REVIEW OF OUR MELANIN SCHOLARS 
FINDINGS: 
Melanin, a widely distributed pigment in the natural world, found in all humans, has a number of 
extraordinary properties that are best manifested in Afrikan people. Melanin is a superconductor 
that absorbs all frequencies of the electromagnetic spectrum and converts sound energy and light 
energy to kinetic energy reversibly. In addition, melanin can function as a minicomputer to 
process information. It is involved in the regulation of all psychological and physiological 
processes of the human body. Afrikan people, having the highest and most functional form of 
melanin (eumelanin) have better muscular coordination (which makes us better athletes) and 
mentally superior. Today, it is well documented that humans  evolved as blacks in Africa, and 
whites are mutants (albinos, or melanin recessives) (Welsing 1989; King 1991). Dr. Welsing 
(1989; 1991) uses the notion of whites as melanin recessives to explain white racism on a 
"scientific" basis. She professes that wh ite men have to destroy black men in self defense 
because black men have the potential to destroy white men genetically. Dr. Welsing teaches us 
that a white child can only be produced by having a white mother and father. She goes on to 
explain that all oth er combinations can only produce black children, and that black men are 
considered dangerous because they are the greatest threat to white genetic annihilation. Thus, 
“the conspiracy to destroy black males”.  
The high rates of murder, of imprisonment, and of drug use, as well as the high rates of 
unemployment among black males, are evidence for the conspiracy; 
 
Dr. Wade Nobles (1989) states that whites stopped evolving with the development of the central 
nervous system (CNS), but that blacks continued to ev olve an essential melanic system (EMS). 
From this he develops an "equation": CNS + EMS = HB (human being) - that is, whites are not 
fully human. Dr. Richard King (1991), express the same idea in his term hue -man instead of 
"human," connoting that only people with color are truly human. 
 
 
N.B. Illustrations that follow: Both nerve cells and Melanocytes, which produce melanin, have 
the same embryologic origin  (neural crest cells) . Below I illustrate  (A and B) the similar 
histological structures. Then I go on to show the synthetic cascades that enable the amino acid 
tyrosine to produce neurotransmitters (dopamine)  or melanin, depending on whether it is 
catalyzed by the enzyme tyrosine hydroxylase (to dopamine) or tyrosinase (to melanin); thus the 
two systems are inter-related. The important thing to remember is, if dopamine is depleted, such 
as in cocaine addiction, the body will attempt to replenish the dopamine by increasing its 
synthesis. That mean tyrosine will now be shunted away from melanin synthesis. So, in short, for 
those of us that have brain functions that are more dependent on neuromelanin (people of 
Afrikan descent), those areas will become compromised.


--- PAGE 4 ---
RBG Street Scholars Think Tank  4 
 
The RBG Melanins Paper 
 2012 Updates 
 
 Illustrations 
A) Melanocytes Structure


--- PAGE 5 ---
RBG Street Scholars Think Tank  5 
 
The RBG Melanins Paper 
 2012 Updates 
B) Nerve Cell Structure 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
C) MELANINS STRUCTURE


--- PAGE 6 ---
RBG Street Scholars Think Tank  6 
 
The RBG Melanins Paper 
 2012 Updates 
 
D) MELANIN BIOSYNTHESIS 
 
 
 
The first step of the biosynthetic pathway for both eumelanins and 
pheomelanins is catalysed by tyrosinase: 
 
Tyrosine → DOPA → dopaquinone 
 
Dopaquinone can combine with cysteine by two pathways to benzothiazines 
and pheomelanins 
 
Dopaquinone + cysteine → 5-S-cysteinyldopa → benzothiazine intermediate 
→ pheomelanin 
 
Dopaquinone + cysteine → 2-S-cysteinyldopa → benzothiazine intermediate 
→ pheomelanin 
 
Alternatively, dopaquinone can be converted to leucodopachrome and follow 
two more pathways to the eumelanins 
 
Dopaquinone → leucodopachrome → dopachrome → 5,6-dihydroxyindole-2-
carboxylic acid → quinone → eumelanin 
 
Dopaquinone → leucodopachrome → dopachrome → 5,6-dihydroxyindole → 
quinone → eumelanin


--- PAGE 7 ---
RBG Street Scholars Think Tank  7 
 
The RBG Melanins Paper 
 2012 Updates 
 
Source of biosynthesis cascade: 
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Melanin 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Click for enlarged view 
 
E) NEUROTRANSMITTER 
(catecholamine) 
BIOSYNTHESIS and DEGRADATION


--- PAGE 8 ---
RBG Street Scholars Think Tank  8 
 
The RBG Melanins Paper 
 2012 Updates 
N.B: Again, the important thing to remember is, if dopamine is depleted, such as in cocaine 
addiction, the body will attempt to replenish the dopamine by increasing its synthesis. That mean 
tyrosine will now be shunted away from melanin synthesis. So, in short, for those of us that have 
brain functions that are more dependent on neuromelanin (people of Afrikan descent), those 
areas will become neurochemically deficient as the precursors amino acids are shunted towards 
replenishing the dopamine.. 
F) DISTRIBUTION OF MELANIN WORLDWIDE 
 
 
 
"Melanin is a conductor and a stable free radical, holding positive charges, balanced by counter 
anions and exhibiting a small gap, 1.4 eV. Experimental data, molecular modeling studies and  
molecular quantum mechanics calculations agree describing DHI -melanin, the best known 
synthetic melanin , as a structure fundamentally  constituted by repetitive units of 5 -gem-diol-
indol-6-one linked at 4,7 positions (VII). Electric and conformational properties explain different 
roles of melanins. As a UV filter and a radical scavenger black it has a protective function in 
epithelial tissue; in dopaminergic neurons of  substantia nigra, an area of the brain involved in 
fine motor control, it can act as a conductor allowing rapid electron passage which, generating a 
magnetic field, can sense the Earth's field and control movements. Melan in destroys, in 
Parkinson’s disease it can participate to the symptoms and development of the neuro -
degenerative process. Finally there may be considered a cell assembling factor."


--- PAGE 9 ---
RBG Street Scholars Think Tank  9 
 
The RBG Melanins Paper 
 2012 Updates 
 
From: The Pigment Cell and its Biogenesis  
 
                                                                                                                   See: 
We have been lea d to believe that melanin is simply a biochemical 
substance that gives our skin its hue (the skin pigment that gives us our 
darkness).  Although this anatomical (structural) characteristic does in fact 
have life (cell) supporting physiologic (functional) s ignificance, it is only 
one of the many life (cell) protecting, unifying and organizing features of 
the *Afrikan Melanin System.   Melanins (misnomered melanin) comprise 
a system in people of Afrikan descent that yields structural -functional 
perfectness.  Truly a blessing and God given gift, melanins render Afrikan 
people physically, mentally and spiritually flawless; having no defects, 
deficits or faults.   
Dermatomelanin (in the dermis of the skin),  
Iridomelanin (in the iris of the eye),  
Organomelanin (in the internal organs of the body),  
Retinomelanin (in the retina/nerve cell of vision),  
Neuromelanin (in the central nervous system/brain and spinal cord),  
Nucleomelanin (surrounding/protecting the biogenetic subcellular apparatus of human life [DNA 
and RNA], to name a few, gives the Afrikan descendent (hueman/woman) refined mind body 
and soul unification.


--- PAGE 10 ---
RBG Street Scholars Think Tank  10 
 
The RBG Melanins Paper 
 2012 Updates 
Melanin in humans 
In humans, melanin is the primary determinant of human skin color and also found in hair, the 
pigmented tissue underlying the iri s, the medulla and zona reticularis of the adrenal gland, the 
stria vascularis of the inner ear, and in pigment -bearing neurons within areas of the brain stem, 
such as the locus ceruleus and the substantia nigra. 
 
Dermal melanin  is produced by melanocytes, which are found in the stratum basale of the 
epidermis. Although human beings generally possess a similar concentration of melanocytes in 
their skin, the melanocytes in some individuals and ethnic groups more frequently or less  
frequently express the melanin -producing genes, thereby conferring a greater or lesser 
concentration of skin melanin. Some individual animals and humans have very little or no 
melanin in their bodies, a condition known as albinism. 
 
Because melanin is an aggregate of smaller component molecules, there are a number of 
different types of melanin with differing proportions and bonding patterns of these component 
molecules. Both pheomelanin and eumelanin are found in human skin and hair, but eumelanin is 
the most abundant melanin in humans, as well as the form most likely to be deficient in albinism. 
 
Eumelanin polymers have long been thought to comprise numerous cross -linked 5,6 -
dihydroxyindole (DHI) and 5,6 -dihydroxyindole-2-carboxylic acid (DHICA) polymers; recent 
research into the electrical properties of eumelanin, however, has indicated that it may consist of 
more basic oligomers adhering to one another by some other mechanism. Thus, the precise 
nature of eumelanin's molecular structure is once again the o bject of study. Eumelanin is found 
in hair and skin, and colors hair grey, black, yellow, and brown. In humans, it is more abundant 
in peoples with dark skin. There are two different types of eumelanin, which are distinguished 
from each other by their pattern of polymer bonds. The two types are black eumelanin and brown 
eumelanin, with black melanin being darker than brown. Black eumelanin is in mostly non -
Europeans and aged Europeans, while brown eumelanin is in mostly young Europeans. A small


--- PAGE 11 ---
RBG Street Scholars Think Tank  11 
 
The RBG Melanins Paper 
 2012 Updates 
amount of black eumelanin in the absence of other pigments causes grey hair. A small amount of 
brown eumelanin in the absence of other pigments causes yellow (blond) color hair. 
 
Pheomelanin is also found in hair and skin and is both in lighter skinned humans and dark er 
skinned humans. In general women have more pheomelanin than men, and thus women's skin is 
generally redder than men's. Pheomelanin imparts a pink to red hue and, thus, is found in 
particularly large quantities in red hair. Pheomelanin is particularly co ncentrated in the lips, 
nipples, glans of the penis, and vagina. Pheomelanin also may become carcinogenic when 
exposed to the ultraviolet rays of the sun. Chemically, pheomelanin differs from eumelanin in 
that its oligomer structure incorporates benzothiaz ine units which are produced instead of DHI 
and DHICA when the amino acid L-cysteine is present. 
 
Neuromelanin is the dark pigment present in pigment bearing neurons of four deep brain nuclei: 
the substantia nigra (in Latin, literally "black substance") - Pars Compacta part, the locus 
ceruleus ("blue spot"), the dorsal motor nucleus of the vagus nerve (cranial nerve X), and the 
median raphe nucleus of the pons. Both the substantia nigra and locus ceruleus can be easily 
identified grossly at the time of auto psy due to their dark pigmentation. In humans, these nuclei 
are not pigmented at the time of birth, but develop pigmentation during maturation to adulthood. 
Although the functional nature of neuromelanin is unknown in the brain, it may be a byproduct 
of the synthesis of monoamine neurotransmitters for which the pigmented neurons are the only 
source. The loss of pigmented neurons from specific nuclei is seen in a variety of 
neurodegenerative diseases. In Parkinson's disease there is massive loss of dopamine producing 
pigmented neurons in the substantia nigra. A common finding in advanced Alzheimer's disease is 
almost complete loss of the norepinephrine producing pigmented neurons of the locus coeruleus. 
Neuromelanin has been detected in primates and in carnivores such as cats and dogs.  
Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Melanin


--- PAGE 12 ---
RBG Street Scholars Think Tank  12 
 
The RBG Melanins Paper 
 2012 Updates 
The “Melanin System” mediates the advanced exactness of brain -mind (neuropsychological) 
interactions, which are most fine -tuned in Afrikan people.   None other than melanin is the 
biochemical that coordinates and conjuncts thought feelings, memory, creativi ty and 
imagination.  It is the system that controls Afrikan people’s sophisticated perception; precisely 
guiding us into the true and otherwise hidden nature of things.   It is our six -sense system 
enabling our ability to be intuitively award of all things around us.  In addition to sensitizing our 
taste, touch, sight, hearing and smell; the “Melanin System” makes accurate our “have a feeling 
about” quality.   What is most, the “Melanin System” is responsible for facilitating Afrikan 
people’s direct knowledge and awareness of the “God Force”; even without conscious reasoning 
and/or attention.  This, as well as all of the aforementioned phenomena, is by no means purely 
metaphysical.  Rather, it is a biophysiologically and scientifically grounded truth.   Let us 
explain.  When we reflect on the psychocultural and educational foundation of Western society, 
we appreciate that it exclusively develops and maintains the left hemisphere of the brain (the 
intellectual, logical, articulate, concrete brain).   This is the b rain that differentiates between 
things, separating wholes into parts, analyzing and enabling us to deal only with sequential 
phenomena.  The left brain (the primary and predominate brain of the European group) is 
segmented, serial, linear, deductive, segr egative and material/tangible grounded.   On the other 
hand, the right hemisphere of the brain (the primary and predominate brain of our Afrikan 
ancestors) mediates spiritual, abstract, creative, artistic, artistic, athletic and rhythmic 
phenomena.  This is  the brain that motes similarities between things and relates them to each 
other and the whole —thus unifying.   Our right brain provides a mode of thinking that is 
synthetical, holistic, dynamic, congregative and metaphysically/spiritually grounded.   Keeping 
this dictomy in mind, let us review three salient points:  
(1) The brain as a whole (both hemispheres included and structurally -functionally 
communicating) is a large mass of nerve tissue (nerve cells or neurons) enclosed in the cranium 
(skull) responsible for interpretation of sensory impulses, control of body coordination and the 
center of thought and emotion  
(2) the mind is the abstract element of the human being which controls perception, thought, 
feeling, memory, creativity and imagination —the most advanced level of the functional mind 
yielding the creative power of GOD (THE UNIVERSAL SPIRIT)


--- PAGE 13 ---
RBG Street Scholars Think Tank  13 
 
The RBG Melanins Paper 
 2012 Updates 
(3)  and finally, the spirit, is the vital essence of man, considered divine in origin; the part of the 
body characterized by personality, character, morals, e thics and self -consciousness.  Now, let’s 
further understand Fact #2.  The mind is an extracorporeal (of a non -material nature) entity most 
refinely expressed through the pineal body (a posterior located cerebral/  brain structure which is 
by in large calcified / afunctional in greater than seventy -five percent of persons of European 
descent by the time they reach adulthood).   On the other hand, because Afrikan people have 
twelve specific structural locations in their brains, which are significantly melanini zed (high in 
neuromenlanin concentration) a functional pineal gland is biophysiologically necessary.   But 
Why?  Well, when the pineal gland is stimulated it releases melatonin, which in turn results in 
increased neuromelanin production.   This neuromelanin is the necessary neurochemical 
substance (mediator) required to maintain optimal functioning of Afrikan people’s twelve brain 
Melanin Centers.   Clearly, in persons who don’t have as much of a dependence upon 
neuromelanin for normal neuropsycological (brain -mind) functioning, this mechanism is not as 
sophisticated (remember the vast majority of Europeans have a calcified/afunctional pineal 
gland).  Henceforth, it is melanin, (neuromelanin specially) that biochemically mediates the 
phenomena of the most refin ed mind (expressed through the pineal body).   Because “the most 
advanced level of functional mind yields the creative power of GOD”, neuromelanin gives 
Afrikan people a neurobiologically based scientific connection with the “God -Force” (THE 
UNIVERSAL SPIRI T) not possible in left brain dominate, amelaninized (without Eumelanin) 
cultures and people. Analysis, research and synthesis of concepts such as these have elevated the 
melanin system concept (notion) to the level of an operational scientifically base precept (fact). 
Reference: 
 
_____, 1990b. Lecture at the 1st Annual Melanin Conference, San Francisco, 1987; broadcast 
titled "AFRIKAN World View," WDTR 90.9 FM, September 25. 
Barnes, C. 1990. Melanin: The Chemical Key to Black Greatness. Houston, Tex.: C.B. 
Publishers. 
King, Richard. 1991. Lecture at the 5th Annual Melanin Conference, Los Angeles, April 19-21, 
1991; broadcast titled "AFRIKAN World View," WDTR 90.9 FM, June 4. 
Montgomery, Bonachi. 1989. Broadcast titled "AFRIKAN World View," WDTR 90. 9 FM, 
April 18; quoting from Carol Barnes, Melanin: The Chemical Key to Black Greatness.


--- PAGE 14 ---
RBG Street Scholars Think Tank  14 
 
The RBG Melanins Paper 
 2012 Updates 
Nobles, Wade. 1989. Lecture at the 1st Annual Melanin Conference, San Francisco, 1987; 
broadcast titled "AFRIKAN World View," WDTR 90.9 FM, June 27. 
Welsing, F. C. 1975. Blacks, hypertension, and the active skin melanocyte. Urban Health, 
4(3):64-72. 
______, 1989. Lecture at the ist Annual Melanin Conference, San Francisco, 1987; broadcast 
titled "AFRIKAN World View," WDTR 90.9 FM, September 5,12. 
 
PART I SUMMARY/CAPSULE AND PART II FOLLOWING 
In review, we have been lead to believe that melanin is simply a biochemical substance that 
gives our skin its hue (the skin pigment that gives us our darkness). Although this anatomical 
(structural) characteristic does in fact have life (cell) supporting physiologic (functional) 
significance, it is only one of the many life (cell) protecting, unifying and organizing features of 
the *Afrikan Melanin System. Melanins (misnomered melanin) comprise a system in people of 
Afrikan descent that yields structural-functional perfectness. Truly a blessing and God given gift, 
melanins render Afrikan people physically, mentally and spiritually flawless; having no defects, 
deficits or faults. 
Dermatomelanin (in the dermis of the skin), 
Iridomelanin (in the iris of the eye), 
Organomelanin (in the internal organs of the body), 
Retinomelanin (in the retina/nerve cell of vision), Neuromelanin (in the central nervous 
system/brain and spinal cord), 
Nucleomelanin (surrounding/protecting the bioge netic subcellular apparatus of human life 
[DNA and RNA], to name a few, gives the Afrikan descendent (hueman/woman) refined mind 
body and soul unification. The “Melanin System” mediates the advanced exactness of brain -
mind (neuropsychological) interactions, which are most fine-tuned in Afrikan people. None other 
than melanin is the biochemical that coordinates and conjuncts thought feelings, memory,


--- PAGE 15 ---
RBG Street Scholars Think Tank  15 
 
The RBG Melanins Paper 
 2012 Updates 
creativity and imagination. It is the system that controls Afrikan people’s sophisticated 
perception; precisely guiding us into the true and otherwise hidden nature of things. It is our six -
sense system enabling our ability to be intuitively award of all things around us. In addition to 
sensitizing our taste, touch, sight, hearing and smell; the “Melanin System” makes accurate our 
“have a feeling about” quality. What is most, the “Melanin System” is responsible for facilitating 
Afrikan people’s direct knowledge and awareness of the “God Force”; even without conscious 
reasoning and/or attention. This, as well as all of the aforementioned phenomena, is by no means 
purely metaphysical. Rather, it is a biophysiologically and scientifically grounded truth. Let us 
explain. When we reflect on the psychocultural and educational foundation of Western society, 
we appreciate that it exclusively develops and maintains the left hemisphere of the brain (the 
intellectual, logical, articulate, concrete brain). This is the brain that differentiates between 
things, separating wholes into parts, analyzing and enabling us to deal only with sequential 
phenomena. The left brain (the primary and predominate brain of the European group) is 
segmented, serial, linear, deductive, segregative and material/tangible grounded. On the other 
hand, the right hemisphere of the brain (the primary and p redominate brain of our Afrikan 
ancestors) mediates spiritual, abstract, creative, artistic, artistic, athletic and rhythmic 
phenomena. This is the brain that motes similarities between things and relates them to each 
other and the whole —thus unifying. Our  right brain provides a mode of thinking that is 
synthetical, holistic, dynamic, congregative and metaphysically/spiritually grounded. Keeping 
this dichotomy in mind, let us review three salient points: 
(1) the brain as a whole (both hemispheres included a nd structurally -functionally 
communicating) is a large mass of nerve tissue (nerve cells or neurons) enclosed in the cranium 
(skull) responsible for interpretation of sensory impulses, control of body coordination and the 
center of thought and emotion 
(2) the mind is the abstract element of the human being which controls perception, thought, 
feeling, memory, creativity and imagination —the most advanced level of the functional mind 
yielding the creative power of GOD (THE UNIVERSAL SPIRIT) 
(3) and finally, the spirit, is the vital essence of man, considered divine in origin; the part of the 
body characterized by personality, character, morals, ethics and self -consciousness. Now, let’s


--- PAGE 16 ---
RBG Street Scholars Think Tank  16 
 
The RBG Melanins Paper 
 2012 Updates 
further understand Fact #2. The mind is an extracorporeal (of a non -material nature) entity most 
refinely expressed through the pineal body (a posterior located cerebral/brain structure which is 
by the large calcified or functional in greater than seventy -five percent of persons of European 
descent by the time they reach adultho od). On the other hand, because Afrikan people have 
twelve specific structural locations in their brains, which are significantly melaninized (high in 
neuromenlanin concentration) a functional pineal gland is biophysiologically necessary. But 
Why? Well, wh en the pineal gland is stimulated it releases melatonin, which in turn results in 
increased neuromelanin production. This neuromelanin is the necessary neurochemical substance 
(mediator) required to maintain optimal functioning of Afrikan people’s twelve b rain Melanin 
Centers. Clearly, in persons who don’t have as much of a dependence upon neuromelanin for 
normal neuropsychological (brain -mind) functioning, this mechanism is not as sophisticated 
(remember the vast majority of Europeans have a calcified/afunctional pineal gland). Henceforth, 
it is melanin, (neuromelanin specially) that biochemically mediates the phenomena of the most 
refined mind (expressed through the pineal body). Because “the most advanced level of 
functional mind yields the creative power  of GOD”, neuromelanin gives Afrikan people a 
neurobiologically based scientific connection with the “God -Force” (THE UNIVERSAL 
SPIRIT) not possible in left brain dominate, amelaninized (without Eumelanin) cultures and 
people. Analysis, research and synthe sis of concepts such as these have elevated the melanin 
system concept (notion) to the level of an operational scientifically base precept (fact)...to be 
cont. 
Part II-TOWARD UNDERSTANDING THE MELANIN, *AFRI-ESSENCE, GOD-
FORCEi 
“All humans possess this B lack internal brain evidence of their common Black -AFRIKAN 
Origin. The all Black neuromelanin nerve tract of the brain is profound proof that the human race 
is a Black race, with many variations of Black, form Black -Black to White-Black, all internally 
rooted in a vast sea of Brain Blackness.” 
AFRIKAN ORIGIN OF BIOLOGICAL PSYCIATRY 
Richard King, M.D. (1990)


--- PAGE 17 ---
RBG Street Scholars Think Tank  17 
 
The RBG Melanins Paper 
 2012 Updates 
INTRODUCTION: THE HU-MAN WAS FIRST 
Today it is well known that the birthplace of humanity was around the East Afrikan Great Lake 
region, around the Omo Valley. Being located almost on the equator, in accordance with Gloger 
Law (warm-blooded animals in a hot humid climate are necessarily pig mented) the mothers and 
fathers of humanity; the maker, shapers, fashioners and molders of civilization, were our black 
(melanized) Afrikan ancestors. All of today’s human forms: Afrikan, Asian, European, Latino 
and Oceanic are very recent offspring of the ir Afrikan (melanized) black parents. If it were not 
for melanin, just as if it were not for the hear or the lungs, human life as we know it would not 
exist. Let us explore how these “black seeds of humanity” come into form. 
BIOLOGICAL ORGIN OF MELANINS 
The wonder of human reproduction begins with the male sperm fertilizing the female egg, thus 
giving rise to an embryo (a developing human being). Following fertilization this newly formed 
Zygote rapidly divides and grows into three distinct cell layers known  as primary germ layers 
(the endoderm, mesoderm and ectoderm). The primary germ layers give rise to the various body 
parts that comprise the completely developed fetus. The ectoderm or outer germ layer is where 
melanin is produced. Specifically, this ectod ermal tissue invaginates to form the spinal column, 
the end of which balloons out, becoming the brain. Melanocytes (cells that secrete melanin) and 
the skin among other structures are also produced by the ectodermal germ layer. In the core of 
the brain are fond twelve black nerve tissue masses (known as brain nuclei) or melanated centers. 
The twelfth of these “centers: and therefore the “highest”, is the locus coeruleus (1). The (LC) is 
pivotal in our understanding of the “Melanin, Afri -Essence, God -Force C onnection”, 
consequently, we will revisit this structure in more detail further on in our development. 
THE FUNCTION OF MELANIN 
We have been lead to believe that melanin is simply the biochemical substance that gives our 
skin, hair and eyes there color. Alt hough these structural characteristics do in fact have life 
support functional significance, they are only a few of many organizing, unifying and protecting 
features of the Melanin System. For instance, **melanin’s (misnomered in the singular, melanin)


--- PAGE 18 ---
RBG Street Scholars Think Tank  18 
 
The RBG Melanins Paper 
 2012 Updates 
comprise a system in people of Afrikan descent that yields structural -functional perfectness. 
Truly a blessing and GOD given gift, melanin renders Afrikan people physically, mentally and 
spiritually flawless; having no defects, deficits or faults, Dermatomela nin (in the derms of the 
skin), Retinomelanin (in the retina/nerve cell of vision), Iridomelanin (in the iris of the eye), 
Organomelanin (in the internal organs of the body), Nucleomelain (surrounding protecting the 
biogenetic subcellular apparatus of huma n life [DNA and RNA] and Neuromelanin (in the 
central nervous system/brain and spinal cord) give Afrikan people refined mind, body and soul 
unification. Neuromelanin mediates the advanced exactness of brain -mind interactions. It 
coordinates and conjuncts thought, feelings, memory, creativity and imagination. 
It is the “system” that controls Afrikan people’s sophisticated perception, precisely guiding us 
into the true and otherwise hidden nature of things. Neuromelanin facilitates the transfer of 
chemicals through the nervous system thus speeding nerve impulses throughout the brain. Our 
awareness of the environment is made possible by the integrated function go nervous system 
tissue. Neuromelanin enhances both the excitability and conductivity to give us an o ptimal level 
of performance. This facilitation process has the effect of fin e tuning Afrikan people’s sense of 
smell, taste, touch, sight and hearing. Moreover, neuromelanin makes accurate our “having a 
feeling about” quality. What is most, the “Melanin System” is responsible for facilitating Afrikan 
people’s direct knowledge and awareness of the God-Force. Let us explain. 
 
AFRIKAN CONCEPT OF GOD 
We must remember that Afrikan religion and philosophy considers the human being the center 
for the universe. This notion makes us ascribe human attributes to the God -Force as human; in 
fact both ancient and traditional Afrikan conceptions maintain that the God -Force is beyond 
human experience. Although the former and the latter views may at first glance appear 
contradictory, the foundation of ***Afrikan thought” has as one of its central themes the idea 
that the world is ordered in accordance with the principle of how opposites co -exist and interact. 
That is to say, th e science of Afrikan religion and philosophy informs us that there are two 
realms in our universe —“existence and no-existence.” The world is seen as being two in one. A


--- PAGE 19 ---
RBG Street Scholars Think Tank  19 
 
The RBG Melanins Paper 
 2012 Updates 
duality of void and matter, spiritual and physical, invisible and visible and/or the un conscious 
and the conscious. The Universal Being (GOD) also referred to as the Universal force, Universal 
Energy and/or God -Force (for in Afrikan religion these concepts are one and the same) is not 
manifest in itself but through its opposite/complement, t he physical. Dr. John S. Mbiti describes 
this duality in his classic work AFRIKAN Religion and Philosophy as the visible and invisible: 
“The invisible world is symbolized or manifested by those visible and concrete phenomena and 
objects of nature. The invi sible world presses hard upon the visible world. This is one of the 
most fundamental religious heritages of AFRIKAN peoples…the physical and the spiritual are 
but two dimensions of one and the same universe.”(1) 
RIGHT BRAIN AS AGAINST THE LEFT BRAIN 
The ps ycho-culture and educational foundation of Western society exclusively develops and 
maintains the left hemisphere of the brain (the intellectual, logical, articulate, concrete brain). 
This is the brain that differentiates between things, separating wholes into parts, analyzing and 
enabling us to deal with sequential phenomena. The left brain (the primary and predominate 
brain used by the European group) is segmented serial, linear, deductive and segregative and 
material/tangible grounded. On the side, the r ight hemisphere of the brain (the primary and 
predominate brain used by our Afrikan ancestors) mediates spiritual, abstract, creative, astatic, 
artistic, athletic and rhythmic phenomena. This is the brain that notes similarities between things 
and relates them to each other and the whole —thus unifying. Our right brain provides a mode of 
thinking that is synthetical, holistic, dynamic, congregative and metaphysical/intangible 
grounded. Given this dictomy, we can appreciate that most present day Afrikans in A merica are 
literally out of their Afrikan (right brain) mind. 
(1) The brain as a whole (both hemispheres included and structurally -functionally 
communicating) is a large mass of nerve tissue (nerve cells) enclosed in the cranium (skull) 
responsible for interpretation of sensory impulses, control of body coordination and the center of 
thought and emotion. 
(2) the mind is the abstract element of the human being, which controls perception; thought, 
feeling, memory, creativity and imagination. The most advan ced level of the functional mind


--- PAGE 20 ---
RBG Street Scholars Think Tank  20 
 
The RBG Melanins Paper 
 2012 Updates 
(he/she who has obtained Divine Universal Consciousness) allows there to be a connection of the 
invisible order with the visible order —the spiritual (transcendent) with the physical (immanent), 
the “HU-MAN” with the GOD-FORCE.” 
(3) And finally, the spirit is the vital essence of man, considered divine in origin; the part of the 
human characterized by personality, character, morals, ethics and self -consciousness. The 
intertwining and interconnectedness of mental thought (the mind) and Divine Universal 
Consciousness (the spirit) emerges due to the phenomenology of the “Afrikan Melanin System.” 
 
NEUROMELANIN, THE LOCUS COERULEUS AND THE PINEAL GLAND 
As mentioned earlier in this essay, neuromelnin (brain melanin) serves to facilitate the transfer of 
chemicals (neurotransmitters) through the nervous system, thus speeding nerve impulses in the 
brain. Dr. T. Owens Moore, a specialist in brain and behavior relationships, in his “excellent” 
book The Science of Melanin sums this point u p as follows: “Neuromelanin may affect neurons 
in their vicinity by storing energy and using it for future neural transmission. Depending on the 
brain region, the spread of stored energy in certain locations of the brain can enhance mental 
abilities that are associated with the particular brain region.” What we are saying is that there are 
parallel relationships between the twelve -melinated nerve tissue masses in the brain and 
catecholamine neurotransmitters (chemical mediators of nerve impulse transmission  like 
dopamine, serotonin and norepinephrine). Neuromelanin enhances the function of these brain 
chemicals. One of the nerve masses (brain nuclei) is the locus coeruleus (LC). The (LC) secretes 
the neurotransmitter norepinephrine and is black block in colo r because of its large melanin 
content. Dr. Richard King, in his classic book AFRIKAN Origin of Biological Psychiatry asserts 
that “the locus coeruleus is the structural brain site responsible for linking the Afrikan mind to 
the spiritual world…the (LC) is  literally a brain doorway to the collective unconscious”. Dr. 
King further teaches us that the twelve black pigmented brain sites make up the “Ameta” “The 
black neuromelnin (Amenta) brain nerve tract, headed by the (LC) with multiple upper brain 
connections is a critical path followed by unconscious memory images as they move upward to 
become conscious.”(3)


--- PAGE 21 ---
RBG Street Scholars Think Tank  21 
 
The RBG Melanins Paper 
 2012 Updates 
The pineal gland, also known as the eye of Horus, is momentous to how the (LC) and 
neuromelanin link. Functionally the operation of the pineal gland is  directed by sunlight (you 
will recall that ancient Afrikan mythology refers to the sun as GOD -RA and darkness. During 
darkness the pineal gland releases melatonin. Melatonin acts upon our unconscious (dream) 
system—facilitated by neuromelanin —to increase the movement of sensory images from the 
unconscious level to the level of consciousness. It has been well documented that the capacity for 
brain melanin functioning is greater in people of Afrikan descent. This is because there appears 
to be a strong relat ionship with pineal gland calcification and reduced release of melatonin. 
Adult Afrikans have a recorded pineal calcification incidence rate of 5-15%. 
Whereas, Europeans experience a pineal gland calcification incidence rate of 60% to 80% by 
adulthood. Dr. King explains this difference as follows: “Perhaps with only ½ of the melatonin 
key to unl0ck the locus coeruleus doorway to neuromelanin all Black Amenta (inner vision), 
many European -Afrikans with pineal calcification had access to only surface levels o f the 
unconscious… 
CONCLUSION: KEYS TO THE SPIRITUAL DOOR OF BLACKNESS 
At the outset we defined Afri-Essence as having an Afrikan basis or Afrikan cultural perspective. 
This author believes that the challenges that Afrikans in America will be confronted wi th in the 
21st century (given the current repressive climate of America) make it mandatory that our 
personal and collective character be based on the rescue and restoration of a revolutionary 
Africentric spirituo-cultural paradigm and praxis. We must recap ture a wisdom that is informed 
by cosmic inter -relationships; appraising the meaning of our existence and being motivated and 
guided by that meaning. Thus, our cultural development must above all else transform us 
spiritually—reconnect us with spiritual, h olistic, syntheical metaphysical Afrikan (right brain) 
mind. Such a mindset will enable us to relate thoughts to feelings, thereby bringing fourth 
clairvoyant (insightful) understanding. This cognitive/affective sense is best transmitted through 
our having an ancestral (transcendent) adjainment. We can best tap into our ancestral collective 
unconscious memory (the spiritual door of blackness) by proper mediation and serious study. Dr. 
George G. M. James is his monumental work, Stolen Legacy, teaches us that  “the purpose of 
education in the Ancient Kemetic System was deification through salvation. Salvation being the


--- PAGE 22 ---
RBG Street Scholars Think Tank  22 
 
The RBG Melanins Paper 
 2012 Updates 
elevation of ones self to a spiritual level.”(5) It was at that paint that the individual connected and 
communicated with the God -Force. It was through the use of the Ten Virtues, Negative 
Confessions and Seven Liberal Arts that our ancestors were able to obtain Divine Universal 
Consciousness. Consequently, in order for us to come back to black (realizing that melanin’s are 
the enhancers and facilitators of Afrikan people’s connection to the spiritual world) we need only 
consider and begin daily use of Maatian Principles, The Nguzo Saba, Metu Neter, The Way and 
Prayer and Mediation. These are the keys to opening the spiritual door of Blackness, mak ing 
complete the Melanin, Afri-Essence, God-Force Connection. 
Hotep 
                                    
*Afri (meaning Afrikan) and Essence (meaning basis), thus Afrikan basis or culture. Dr. Wade 
Nobles defines culture as “a process which gives people general design for living and patterns 
for interpreting their reality” Its “aspects” he says are ideology, ethos and worldview; its factors 
are ontology, cosmology and axiology; and its “manifestations” consists of behavior, values and 
attitudes. [From Wade Nobles, AFRIKANity and the Black Family 1985, pg. 103} 
**All people (white, yellow, red, brown and black) produce and maintain some form of melanin. 
The European group (white/albinoids) has numerous effects, deficits and flows due to their lack 
of the genetic ability to produce Eumelanin. Their melanocytes, melanosomes and mast cells, 
etc., are biogenetically  deficient in tyrosinae (catalyst concentrations) and tyrosinase reactivity 
(electrical charge). Consequently, Europeans produce a less sophisticated/less effective, lower 
molecular weight form of melanin called Phaeomelanin or Pseudomelanin (false melanin ). {See 
Melanin: The Chemical Key to Black Greatness, Volume I, Carol Barnes, 1988} 
***We cannot hope to do justice to this concept because it is beyond the scope of this essay. It 
would involve the introduction of a set of non -European assumptions about t he nature of the 
universe, which even we Afrikan -minded black folk are not accustomed to viewing in a 
reflective manner. But for a more complete understanding {See Afrikan Religion and 
Philosophy, John S. Mbiti, 1970}.


--- PAGE 23 ---
RBG Street Scholars Think Tank  23 
 
The RBG Melanins Paper 
 2012 Updates 
                                                                                                                 
PART III: MELANIN, NEGATIVE MUSIC AND THE DOPE GAME 
Icebreaker Video: http://youtu.be/z_IjLVKhemE 
 
In the artic where the indigenous people sometimes might hunt a wolf they'll take a double edge 
blade and they'll put blood on the blade and melt the ice and stick the handle in the ice so only 
the blade is protruding. And that a wolf who smells the blood and wants to eat will come and lick 
the blade trying to eat and what happens is when the wolf licks the blade he cuts his tongue and 
he bleeds and he thinks he's really having a good meal and he drinks, and he licks and licks and 
of course he's drinking hi s own blood and he kills himself. - Wolves (1st track on "Let's Get 
Free"). 
Linkto the HTML Video Enhanced Version for context video 
Stic: “That's the Chairm an Omali from INPDUM (International Peoples Democratic Uhuru 
Movement) speaking. It's about brothers having to hustle because they don't have any money or 
opportunities that we're aware of. The government pumps crack into the community to keep 
brothers down, such as the Black Panthers, etc. Brothers feel its a bright idea when they see they 
could get $50 from this little piece of glass rock product. When you're able to eat when yesterday 
you wasn't, thats a real self -esteem booster. That's a really hard thi ng to come down on people, 
but they feel like their actually doing something for themselves but the effect is like a wolf licking 
a blade, he's tasting the blood but he don't realize that its his own blood. He's so blood thirsty, so


--- PAGE 24 ---
RBG Street Scholars Think Tank  24 
 
The RBG Melanins Paper 
 2012 Updates 
                                                                                                                 
hungry to eat. It's not the wolfs fault, he got to eat just like everybody else, he's been tricked into 
thinking the blade is opportunity. Brothers are tricked into thinking that Crack -Cocaine is our 
opportunity and we're licking the blade and the blood we're tasting is us in prison, getting shot at 
parties and living in a military state.”  
 
 
See the video: RBG Street Scholar On the Dope Game 
Chairman says we need to blame the hunter, the CIA, government; the people who set us up 
in these conditions and robbed us from Africa and have been living off of us since we got here; 
the people who really benefit from the drug trade. The same crack-cocaine after a few years don't 
start to look better, it looks fucked up. So the money is going s omewhere, could it be for more 
police officers? Weapons? And all the new sophisticated technology? That's what the intro to the 
album is represents. To look at things for what they really are and stop licking the blade and start 
using it.


--- PAGE 25 ---
RBG Street Scholars Think Tank  25 
 
The RBG Melanins Paper 
 2012 Updates 
                                                                                                                 
 
In their ongoing effort to physically, mentally and spiritually destroy people of color, oppressors 
(scientists, chemists) create “designer drugs” that are specially structured to chemically bind with 
the melanin molecule and cause melanin to become toxic to Blacks! The molecules of these 
drugs resemble the Melanin molecule. The body is thus fooled and its balance is thrown off as it 
relies on contaminated melanin in order to function. Major culprits include heroin, cocaine/crack, 
ecstasy and yes, marijuana. 
 
 
 
Blacks get addicted faster, stay addicted longer, and suffer the worse...from these drugs which 
are deliberately placed in Black communities. In his vital book, MELANIN: The Chemical Key 
to Black Greatness, essential reading for all Melanated People, Carol Barn es clearly documents 
this subject along with the wonders of Melanin. He shows how illegal drugs alter or change 
Melanin’s chemical structure and thus alter many life supporting functions. Toxic drugs and


--- PAGE 26 ---
RBG Street Scholars Think Tank  26 
 
The RBG Melanins Paper 
 2012 Updates 
                                                                                                                 
chemicals are destroying the heart of the Black comm unity and causing many deaths. Barnes 
writes: “MELANIN can become toxic to the BLACK HUMAN because it combines with 
harmful drugs such as cocaine, amphetamines, hallucinogens, neuroleptic (tranquilizers), 
marijuana, ‘agent orange’...parquets, tetracyclines...” 
 
Toxic drugs such as cocaine, LSD, and even marijuana are very similar to Melanin and the sub -
units that make up the Melanin substance. Many health -conscious Blacks consider marijuana to 
be a safe healthy herb, not realizing that once this (or any herb) is “cooked,” it becomes a drug as 
far as your body is concerned! 
 
Even legal drugs (tetracyclines, neuroleptics, etc.) have a remarkable affinity for reacting with or 
binding to Melanin and may be toxic to all Melanin centers in the Black human. 
 
Other culprits which bind with Melanin and cause death for Blacks are aromatic and lipid 
compounds. Melanin shows extreme affinity for binding with “aromatic and lipid compounds.” 
Lipid means fat. Lipid or fat compounds (fatty acids) are animal and vegetable oil  /fats used for 
frying and cooking. Examples are shortening and corn oil. Aromatic compounds contain 
benzene, a major component of gasoline. 
 
Herbicides (parquets, agent orange, etc.) bind irreversibly with Melanin and remain in the Black 
human throughout life causing many disorders. Hence Blacks especially, should buy organically 
grown food. 
 
Most Blacks test positive in the urine test for marijuana! People having high levels of Melanin or 
a high number of pigmented centers, such as the Black human, tend t o show a positive test for 
the use of marijuana because the chemical species found in the urine which indicates someone’s 
use of marijuana is also found in the urine of Black humans.


--- PAGE 27 ---
RBG Street Scholars Think Tank  27 
 
The RBG Melanins Paper 
 2012 Updates 
                                                                                                                 
Melanin directly converts light for vertebrate metabolic use: Heuristic thoughts on birds, Icarus 
and dark human skin 
Notes: 
Medical Hypotheses, Volume 71, Issue 2, Pages 190-202  
 
G. Goodman, D. Bercovich 
PHOTOELECTROCHEMICAL PROPERTIES OF MELANIN 
http://precedings.nature.com/documents/1312/version/1/files/npre20071312-1.pdf 
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Melanin  
A) Melanocytes Structure


--- PAGE 28 ---
RBG Street Scholars Think Tank  28 
 
The RBG Melanins Paper 
 2012 Updates


--- PAGE 29 ---
RBG Street Scholars Think Tank  29 
 
The RBG Melanins Paper 
 2012 Updates 
                                                                                                                 
B) Nerve Cell Structure


--- PAGE 30 ---
RBG Street Scholars Think Tank  30 
 
The RBG Melanins Paper 
 2012 Updates 
                                                                                                                 
 
C) MELANINS STRUCTURE 
 
 
D) MELANIN BIOSYNTHESIS


--- PAGE 31 ---
RBG Street Scholars Think Tank  31 
 
The RBG Melanins Paper 
 2012 Updates 
                                                                                                                 
 
E) NEUROTRANSMITTER 
 
(Catacholamine) 
 
BIOSYNTHESIS and DEGRADATION 
 
 
If dopamine is depleted, such as in cocaine addiction, the body will attempt to replenish the 
dopamine by increasing its synthesis. That mean tyrosine will now be shunted away from 
melanin synthesis. So, in short, for those of us that have brain functions that are more dependent 
on neuromelanin (people of Afrikan descent), those areas will become compromised. 
 
 
N.B. The melanin polymer is a precurrsor resource to the body’s neurotransmitters.


--- PAGE 32 ---
RBG Street Scholars Think Tank  32 
 
The RBG Melanins Paper 
 2012 Updates 
                                                                                                                 
D) DISTRIBUTION OF MELANIN WORLDWIDE 
 
 
 
 
MELANIN: GOD’S GIFT TO THE BLACKMAN 
 
We have been lead to believe that melanin is simply a biochemical substance that gives our skin 
its hue (the skin pigment that gives us our darkness). Although this anatomical (structural) 
characteristic does in fact have life (cell) supporting physiologic (functional) significance, it is 
only one of the many life (cell) protecting, unifying and organizing features of the *Afrikan 
Melanin System . Melanins (misnomered melanin) comprise a system in p eople of Afrikan 
descent that yields structural -functional perfectness. Truly a blessing and God given gift, 
melanins render Afrikan people physically, mentally and spiritually flawless; having no defects, 
deficits or faults.  
 
Dermatomelanin (in the dermis of the skin), 
Iridomelanin (in the iris of the eye),  
Organomelanin (in the internal organs of the body),  
Retinomelanin (in the retina/nerve cell of vision),  
Neuromelanin (in the central nervous system/brain and spinal cord),  
Nucleomelanin (surrounding/protecting the biogenetic subcellular apparatus of human life 
retina/nerve cell of vision),  
Nucleomelanin (surrounding/protecting the biogenetic subcellular apparatus of human life [DNA


--- PAGE 33 ---
RBG Street Scholars Think Tank  33 
 
The RBG Melanins Paper 
 2012 Updates 
                                                                                                                 
and RNA], to name a few, gives the Afrikan descendent (hueman/woman) refined mind body 
and soul unification. 
 
The “Melanin System” mediates the advanced exactness of brain -mind (neuropsychological) 
interactions, which are most fine -tuned in Afrikan people. None other than melanin is the 
biochemical that coordinates a nd conjuncts thought feelings, memory, creativity and 
imagination. It is the system that controls Afrikan people’s sophisticated perception; precisely 
guiding us into the true and otherwise hidden nature of things. It is our six-sense system enabling 
our a bility to be intuitively award of all things around us. In addition to sensitizing our taste, 
touch, sight, hearing and smell; the “Melanin System” makes accurate our “have a feeling about” 
quality. What is most, the “Melanin System” is responsible for fac ilitating Afrikan people’s 
direct knowledge and awareness of the “God Force”; even without conscious reasoning and/or 
attention. This, as well as all of the aforementioned phenomena, is by no means purely 
metaphysical. Rather, it is a biophsiologically and  scientifically grounded truth. Let us explain. 
When we reflect on the psychocultural and educational foundation of Western society, we 
appreciate that it exclusively develops and maintains the left hemisphere of the brain (the 
intellectual, logical, artic ulate, concrete brain). This is the brain that differentiates between 
things, separating wholes into parts, analyzing and enabling us to deal only with sequential 
phenomena. The left brain (the primary and predominate brain of the European group) is 
segmented, serial, linear, deductive, segregative and material/tangible grounded. On the other 
hand, the right hemisphere of the brain (the primary and predominate brain of our Afrikan 
ancestors) mediates spiritual, abstract, creative, artistic, artistic, athlet ic and rhythmic 
phenomena. This is the brain that motes similarities between things and relates them to each 
other and the whole —thus unifying. Our right brain provides a mode of thinking that is 
synthetical, holistic, dynamic, congregative and metaphysica lly/spiritually grounded. European 
medicine and biological science dominates contemporary studies of biochemistry, physiology, 
neurobiology, endocrinology, psychology and psychiatry. These disciplines reveal themselves as 
yet another form of alien intrusio n and cultural imposition on the Afrikan (melaninized) mothers 
and fathers of humanity and civilization. It is not strange, but true, that the essence of human 
blackness (melanin, melatonin, tyrosinase, stimulating hormone, melanocytes and the pineal


--- PAGE 34 ---
RBG Street Scholars Think Tank  34 
 
The RBG Melanins Paper 
 2012 Updates 
                                                                                                                 
gland) is today defined, studied and mystified according to the techniques, theories and methods 
of the Europeans group.  
 
Therefore, it appears indispensable for us to demonstrate how their points of view are 
short sighted, untenable and outright scientificall y racist. The scientific evidence of 
Melanin threatens the life of white supremacy. 
 
See: 
The Science And The Myth Of Melanin by T. Owens Moore 
 
 
Also see this Book 
 
After considering Melanin to be a “waste” product of body -metabolism which “served no useful 
function,” Western science has now discovered that Black Melanin (neuromelanin) is the 
chemical key to life and the brain itself. All the  studies, facts, and statistics about Melanin 
suggest that after four hundred years of attempting to interiorize the Black race, “Western 
science is facing the sobering reality that, by its own self -defined standards, Black people are 
probably superior to whites in both intellectual potential and muscle coordination.” 2 The central 
role that melanin plays in the body has been “suppressed to maintain the mythological inferiority 
of blacks...and the defensive clinging to whiteness as some token of superiority.” 
 
It also possesses the unique ability to absorb various energy sources and convert these absorbed 
energies in to re -usable energy, this includes mediums such as; Music vibration and sound


--- PAGE 35 ---
RBG Street Scholars Think Tank  35 
 
The RBG Melanins Paper 
 2012 Updates 
                                                                                                                 
waves, the sun rays, sun heat, light rays etc. Most whites have c alcified pineal glands apparently 
thwarting their production of Melatonin. 
 
Why did Afrikans view the European as a child of God, but the Europeans viewed the Afrikan as 
a soulless savage? Because of “melatonin,” described as a mentally and morally stimula ting 
hormone produced by the pineal gland. 
 
 
 
According to scientific research, most whites are unable produce much of this hormone 
because their pineal glands are often calcified and non -functioning. The pineal calcification 
rates with Afrikans is 5 -15%; Asians 15 -25%; Europeans 60 -80%!  
Dr. Richard Kings states “When we talk about cultural differences, some black scholars 
have raised the question that the European approach, that of the logical, erect, rigid, anti -
feeling posture, reflects a left brain orientation and reflects that they lack the chemi cal key 
[melatonin] to turn on their unconscious and therefore cannot get into feelings...”  
Carol Barnes writes “Melanin is responsible for the existence of civilization, philosophy, 
religion, truth, justice, and righteousness. Individuals (whites) conta ining low levels of Melanin 
will behave in a barbaric manner.” Melanin gives humans the ability to FEEL because it is the 
absorber of all frequencies of energy. Since whites have the least amount of Melanin, this is why 
they are perceived by People of Colo r as generally being rigid, unfeeling (heartless), cold,


--- PAGE 36 ---
RBG Street Scholars Think Tank  36 
 
The RBG Melanins Paper 
 2012 Updates 
                                                                                                                 
calculating, mental, and “unspiritual.” Their historical behavior towards nonwhites often 
confirms this. 
 
The “superiority complex” of white people is a mask for their deep-set inferiority complex which 
they project onto people of color. They have an inferiority complex about their lack of color in a 
world where everyone else (the majority) is colored. If Albinos really believed white skin was 
“superior,” then why is “tanning” so important in white cu lture despite its known health risks? 
(Thousands of whites die annually from skin cancer). In fact, Albinos are now making Melanin 
tanning ointments. The Wall Street Journal (8/26/88) reported that companies are developing 
Melanin-based products to help whites tan safely: a California company is developing a Melanin 
ointment that blocks the entire spectrum of burning ultraviolet rays; researchers in Arizona are 
testing an ointment that stimulates the skin to produce a natural melanin tan before you go out t o 
the sunlight. “The white man or white species is a genetically defective species.  
 
*All people (white, yellow, red, brown and black) produce and maintain some form of 
melanin. The European group (whites/albinoids) has numerous body defects, deficits an d 
flaws due to their lack of the genetic ability to produce Eumelanin. Their melanocytes, 
melanosomes, and mast cells, etc., are biogenetically deficient in tyrosinase (catalyst 
concentrations) and tyrosinase reactivity (electrical charges) required toproduce Eumelanin in 
the various Melanin Centers throughout the body. Consequently, Europeans produce a less 
sophisticated/less effective, lower molecular weight form a melanin called Phaeomelanin or 
Pseudomelanin (false melanin). Thus, the cells, tissues, org ans and systems which depend 
upon melanin to work most effectively are sub -optional in Europeans and they therefore 
suffer numerous disorders such as:  
 
1) rapid aging  
2) cancer 
3) poor physical, mental and spiritual capabilities/capcities  
4) low morals  
5) white supremacist psychopathy, a (biogenetic) inferiority complex, etc. 
 [See Melanin: The Chemical Key to Black Greatness, Volume I, by Carol Barnes, 1988].


--- PAGE 37 ---
RBG Street Scholars Think Tank  37 
 
The RBG Melanins Paper 
 2012 Updates 
                                                                                                                 
 
Melanin absorb and hold on to toxic chemicals, such as drugs of abuse 
 
The above mentioned wi thstanding, to appreciate the “hue -man” organizing, unifying and 
protecting nature of melanin completely is to be clear on some salient historical and current facts 
about European cultural banditry and domination, political oppression, social degradation, socio-
material exploitation, etc.; as they relate to the current “functional amelanization” of the vast 
majority of Afrikans throughout the world. Due to the nomadic,  zenophobic and war mongrel 
nature and nurture of the European group against their least b e known to them, color producing 
(melanized) foreparents; since first contact (some 3,000 –5,000 years ago) they (Europeans) have 
used everything from scriptures to science (from social theory to biology) to dehumanize, de -
Afrikanize and inferioritize, rape , murder, maim and ahistority Afrikan people. When all is said 
and done, all of their death walks and rains of terror on Afrikan descended people were/are due 
to one major factor, namely, Afrikan descended people (as against Europeans) produce color 
(Eumenlanin). *The whole race stratificatin/classification was/is a European creation meant to 
establish, maintain, expand and refine white world supremacy (racism); RBG STREET 
SCHOLARS THINK TANK  will use this terminology only as a means to an end —defining 
race as a group of people united or classified together on the basis of common history, 
nationality and geographical distribution. The ultimate end is for us to view all “races” of people 
as one , differing only because of migration and geographical/ecological circumstances/ 
conditions.  
 
[See Prehistory/Race and History: Origin of Humanity and Racial Differentiation, Pg. 11-68, in 
Civilization or Barbarism, Chiekh Anta Diop, 1991].


--- PAGE 38 ---
RBG Street Scholars Think Tank  38 
 
The RBG Melanins Paper 
 2012 Updates 
                                                                                                                 
 
RBG Melanins Learning Series: Video Enhanced HTML Versions  
1) RBG On The Role of Melanin In Our Afrikan Re-Education / ReAfrikanization Process 
2) Black Child Development Under White Supremacy / Audio, Text and Video, The Honorable Dr. Amos 
Wilson 
3) TOWARD UNDERSTANDING THE MELANIN, AFRI-ESSENCE, GOD-FORCE CONNECTION 
4) MELANIN, NEGATIVE MUSIC AND THE DOPE GAME 
5) AFRIKAN HEAL THYSELF:The Role of Melanin In Our Afrikan Re-Education / ReAfrikanization 
Process

