=== EXTRACTED TEXT FROM: The_Gospel_of_Thomas.pdf ===
Extraction Method: PyPDFLoader
Total Pages: 13
Timestamp: 2026-01-04T17:35:26.920395
================================================================================


--- PAGE 1 ---
THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO THOMAS
    These are the secret sayings which the living Yeshúa has spoken and Didymos
Judas Thomas inscribed.
1. And he says: Whoever finds the interpretation of these sayings shall not
taste death.
2. Yeshúa says: Let him who seeks not cease seeking until he finds, and when
he finds he shall be troubled, and when he has been troubled he shall
marvel and he shall reign over the totality and find repose.
3. Yeshúa  says:  If  those  who  would  lead  you,  say  to  you:  Behold,  the
Sovereignty is in the sky!, then the birds of the sky would precede you. If
they say to you: It is in the sea!, then the fish of the sea would precede you.
But the Sovereignty of God is within you and it is without you. Those who
come  to  recognize  themselves  shall  find  it,  and  when  you  come  to
recognize yourselves then you shall know that you are the Sons of the
Living  Father.  Yet  if  you  do  not  recognize  yourselves  then  you  are
impoverished and you are poverty.
4. Yeshúa says: The person old in days will not hesitate to ask a little child of
seven days concerning the place of life--and he shall live. For many who
are first shall become last, and the last first. And they shall become a single
unity. 
5. Yeshúa says: Recognize Him in front of thy face, and what is hidden from
thee shall be revealed to thee. For there is nothing concealed which shall
not be manifest, and nothing buried that shall not be raised. 
6. His Disciples ask him, they say to him: How do thou want us to fast, and
how shall we pray? And how shall we give alms, and what diet shall we
maintain? Yeshúa says: Do not lie, and do not practice what you hate--for
everything  is  revealed  before  the face of the  sky.  For  there  is nothing
concealed that shall not be manifest, and there is nothing covered that shall
remain without being exposed. 
7. Yeshúa says: Blest be the lion which the human eats--and the lion shall
become human. And accursed be the human which the lion eats--and the
human shall become lion.
8. And he says: The Sovereignty is like a wise fisherman who cast his net into
the sea. He drew it up from the sea full of small fish. Among them he


--- PAGE 2 ---
found a large good fish. That wise fisherman, he threw all the small fish
back into the sea, he chose the large fish without hesitation. Whoever has
ears to hear, let him hear! 
9. Yeshúa says: Behold, the sower came forth--he filled his hand, he threw.
Some  indeed  fell  upon  the  road--the  birds  came,  they  gathered  them.
Others fell on the bedrock--and they did not take root down into the soil,
and did not sprout grain skyward. And others fell among the thorns--they
choked the seed, and the worm ate them. And others fell upon the good
earth--and it produced good fruit up toward the sky, it bore 60-fold and
120-fold. 
10. Yeshúa says: I have cast fire upon the world--and behold, I guard it until it
is ablaze. 
11. Yeshúa says: This sky shall pass away, and the one above it shall pass
away. And the dead are not alive, and the living shall not die. In the days
when you consumed the dead, you transformed it to life--when you come
into the Light, what will you do? On the day when you were united, you
became separated--yet when you have become separated, what will you
do? 
12. The Disciples say to Yeshúa: We know that thou shall go away from us.
Who is it that shall be Rabbi over us? Yeshúa says to them: In the place that
you have come, you shall go to Jacob the Righteous, for whose sake the sky
and earth come to be. 
13. Yeshúa says to his Disciples: Make a comparison to me, and tell me whom
I resemble.  Shimon Kefa says to him: Thou art like a righteous angel.
Matthew says to him: Thou art like a philosopher of the heart. Thomas
says to him: Teacher, my mouth will not at all be capable of saying whom
thou art like! Yeshúa says: I'm not thy teacher, now that thou have drunk,
thou  have  become  drunken  from  the  bubbling  spring  which  I  have
measured out. And he takes him, he withdraws, he speaks three words to
him. Now when Thomas comes to his comrades, they inquire of him: What
did Yeshúa say to thee? Thomas says to them: If I tell you even one of the
words which he spoke to me, you will take up stones to cast at me--and
fire will come from the stones to consume you. 
14. Yeshúa  says  to  them:  If  you  fast,  you  shall  beget  transgression  for
yourselves. And if you pray, you shall be condemned. And if you give
alms, you shall cause evil to your spirits. And when you go into any land
to travel in the regions, if they receive you then eat what they set before


--- PAGE 3 ---
you and heal the sick among them. For what goes into your mouth will not
defile you--but rather what comes out of your mouth, that is what will
defile you. 
15. Yeshúa says: When you see him who was not born of woman, prostrate
yourselves upon your faces and worship him--he is your Father. 
16. Yeshúa says: People perhaps think that I have come to cast peace upon the
world, and they do not know that I have come to cast conflicts upon the
earth--fire, sword, war. For there shall be five in a house--three shall be
against two and two against three, the father against the son and the son
against the father. And they shall stand as solitaries. 
17. Yeshúa says: I shall give to you what eye has not seen and what ear has
not heard and what hand has not touched and what has not arisen in the
mind of mankind. 
18. The Disciples say to Yeshúa: Tell us how our end shall be. Yeshúa says:
Have you then discovered the origin, so that you inquire about the end?
For at the place where the origin is, there shall be the end. Blest be he who
shall stand at the origin--and he shall know the end, and he shall not taste
death. 
19. Yeshúa says: Blest be he who was before he came into being. If you become
Disciples to me and heed my sayings, these stones shall serve you. For you
have five trees in paradise, which in summer are unmoved and in winter
their leaves do not fall--whoever is acquainted with them shall not taste
death. 
20. The Disciples say to Yeshúa: Tell us what the Sovereignty of the Heavens
is like. He says to them: It resembles a mustard seed, smaller than all other
seeds--yet when it falls on the tilled earth, it produces a great plant and
becomes shelter for the birds of the sky. 
21. Mariam says to Yeshúa: Whom are thy Disciples like? He says: They are
like little children who are sojourning in a field which is not theirs. When
the owners of the field come, they will say: Leave our field to us! They take
off their clothing in front of them in order to yield it to them and to give
back their field to them. Therefore I say, if the householder ascertains that
the thief is coming, he will be alert before he arrives and will not allow him
to dig thru into the house of his domain to carry away his belongings. Yet
you, beware of the system--gird up your loins with great strength lest the
bandits find a way to reach you, for they will find the advantage which


--- PAGE 4 ---
you anticipate. Let there be among you a person of awareness--when the
fruit ripened, he came quickly with his sickle in his hand, he reaped it.
Whoever has ears to hear, let him hear! 
22. Yeshúa sees little children who are being suckled. He says to his Disciples:
These little children who are being suckled are like those who enter the
Sovereignty. They say to him: Shall we thus by becoming little children
enter the Sovereignty? Yeshúa says to them: When you make the two one,
and you make the inside as the outside and the outside as the inside and
the above as the below, and if you establish the male with the female as a
single unity so that the man will not be masculine and the woman not be
feminine, when you establish an eye in the place of an eye and a hand in
the place of a hand and a foot in the place of a foot and an image in the
place of an image--then shall you enter the Sovereignty. 
23. Yeshúa says: I shall choose you, one from a thousand and two from ten
thousand--and they shall stand as a single unity. 
24. His Disciples say: Show us thy place, for it is compulsory for us to seek it.
He says to them: Whoever has ears, let him hear! Within a person of light
there is light, and he illumines the entire world. When he does not shine,
there is darkness. 
25. Yeshúa says: Love thy Brother as thy soul, protect him as the pupil of thine
eye. 
26. Yeshúa says: The mote which is in thy Brother's eye thou see--but the
plank that is in thine own eye thou see not. When thou cast the plank out
of thine own eye, then shall thou see clearly to cast the mote out of thy
Brother's eye. 
27. Yeshúa  says:  Unless  you  fast  from  the  system,  you  shall  not  find  the
Sovereignty of God. Unless you keep the entire week as Sabbath, you shall
not behold the Father. 
28. Yeshúa says: I stood in the midst of the world, and incarnate I appeared to
them. I found them all drunk, I found none among them athirst. And my
soul was grieved for the sons of men, for they are blind in their hearts and
do not see that empty they have come into the world and that empty they
are destined to come forth again from the world. However, now they are
drunk--when they have shaken off their wine, then shall they rethink.


--- PAGE 5 ---
29. Yeshúa says: If the flesh has come to be because of spirit, it is a marvel--yet
if spirit because of the body, it would be a marvel among marvels. But I
marvel at this, how this great wealth has inhabited this poverty. 
30. Yeshúa says: Where there are three gods, they are godless. Where there is
only one, I say that I myself am with him. Raise the stone and there you
shall find me, cleave the wood and there am I. 
31. Yeshúa says: No oracle is accepted in his own village, no physician heals
those who know him. 
32. Yeshúa says: A city being built upon a high mountain and fortified cannot
fall nor can it be hidden. 
33. Yeshúa says: What thou shall hear in thy ear proclaim to other ears from
your rooftops. For no one kindles a lamp and sets it under a basket nor
puts it in a hidden place, but rather it is placed upon the lampstand so that
everyone who comes in and goes out will see its light. 
34. Yeshúa says: If a blind person leads a blind person, both together fall into a
pit. 
35. Yeshúa says: It is impossible for anyone to enter the house of the strong to
take it by force, unless he binds his hands--then he will ransack his house. 
36. Yeshúa says: Be not anxious in the morning about the evening nor in the
evening about the morning, neither for your food that you shall eat nor for
your  garments  that  you  shall  wear.  You  are  much  superior  to  the
windflowers which neither comb wool nor spin thread. When you have no
clothing, what do you wear? Or who can increase your stature? He himself
shall give to you your garment. 
37. His Disciples say: When will thou appear to us, and when shall we behold
thee?  Yeshúa  says:  When  you  take  off  your  garments  without  being
ashamed, and take your garments and place them under your feet to tread
on them as the little children do--then shall you behold the Son of the
Living-One, and you shall not fear. 
38. Yeshúa says: Many times have you yearned to hear these sayings which I
speak to you, and you have no one else from whom to hear them. There
will be days when you will seek me but you shall not find me.


--- PAGE 6 ---
39. Yeshúa says: The clergy and the theologians have received  the keys of
recognition, but they have hidden them. They did not enter, nor did they
permit those to enter who wished to. Yet you--become astute as serpents
and pure as doves. 
40. Yeshúa says: A vine has been planted without the Father, and as it is not
viable it shall be pulled up by its roots and destroyed. 
41. Yeshúa says: Whoever has in his hand, to him shall more be given. And
whoever does not have, from him shall be taken even the trifle which he
has. 
42. Yeshúa says: Become passers-by. 
43. His Disciples say to him: Who art thou, that thou say these things to us?
Yeshúa says to them: From what I say to you, you do not recognize who I
be, but rather you have become as the Jews--for they love the tree but hate
its fruit, and they love the fruit but hate the tree. 
44. Yeshúa says: Whoever vilifies the Father, it shall be forgiven him. And
whoever vilifies the Son, it shall be forgiven him. Yet whoever vilifies the
Holy Spirit, it shall not be forgiven him--neither on earth nor in heaven. 
45. Yeshúa says: They do not harvest grapes from thorns, nor do they gather
figs  from  thistles--for  they  give  no  fruit.  A  good  person  brings  forth
goodness out of his treasure. A bad person brings forth wickedness out of
his evil treasure which is in his heart, and he speaks oppressively--for out
of the abundance of the heart he brings forth wickedness. 
46. Yeshúa says: From Adam until John the Baptist there is among those born
of women none more exalted than John the Baptist--so that his eyes shall
not be broken. Yet I have said that whoever among you becomes childlike
shall recognize the Sovereignty, and he shall become more exalted than
John. 
47. Yeshúa says: It is impossible for a person to mount two horses or to stretch
two bows, and a slave cannot serve two masters--otherwise he will honor
the  one  and  offend  the  other.  No  person  drinks  vintage  wine  and
immediately desires to drink new wine, and they do not put new into old
wineskins lest  they  burst,  and they  do  not put vintage  wine into new
wineskins lest it sour. They do not sew an old patch on a new garment
because there would come a split.


--- PAGE 7 ---
48. Yeshúa says: If two make peace with each other in this one house, they
shall say to the mountain: Be moved!--and it shall be moved. 
49. Yeshúa  says:  Blest  be  the  solitary  and  chosen--for  you  shall  find  the
Sovereignty. You have come from it, and unto it you shall return. 
50. Yeshúa says: If they say to you: 'From whence do you come?', say to them:
'We have come from the Light, the place where the Light has originated
thru himself--he stood and he himself appeared in their imagery.' If they
say to you: 'Who are you?', say: 'We are his Sons and we are the chosen of
the Living Father.' If they ask you: 'What is the sign of your Father in
you?', say to them: 'It is movement with repose.' 
51. His Disciples say to him: When will the repose of the dead occur, and
when will the New World come? He says to them: That which you look for
has already come, but you do not recognize it.
52. His Disciples say to him: Twenty-four prophets proclaimed in Israel, and
they all spoke within thee. He says to them: You have ignored the Living-
One who is facing you, and you have spoken about the dead. 
53. His Disciples say to him: Is circumcision beneficial or not? He says to them:
If it were beneficial, their father would beget them circumcised from their
mother. But the true spiritual circumcision has become entirely beneficial.
54. Yeshúa says: Blest be the poor, for the Sovereignty of the Skies is yours. 
55. Yeshúa says: Whoever does not hate his father and his mother will not be
able to become a Disciple to me. And whoever does not hate his brothers
and his sisters and does not take up his own cross in my way, will not
become worthy of me. 
56. Yeshúa says: Whoever has recognized the system has found a corpse--and
whoever has found a corpse, of him the system is not worthy.
57. Yeshúa says: The Sovereignty of the Father is like a person who has good
seed. His enemy came by night, he sowed a weed among the good seed.
The man did not permit them to pull up the weed, he says to them: Lest
perhaps you go forth saying: 'We shall pull up the weed', and you pull up
the wheat along with it. For on the day of harvest the weeds will appear--
they pull them and burn them. 
58. Yeshúa says: Blest be the person who has suffered--he has found the life.


--- PAGE 8 ---
59. Yeshúa says: Behold the Living-One while you are alive, lest you die and
seek to perceive him and be unable to see. 
60. They  see a  Samaritan  carrying  a  lamb, entering  Judea. Yeshúa says  to
them: Why does he take the lamb with him? They say to him: So that he
may kill it and eat it. He says to them: While it is alive he will not eat it, but
only after he kills it and it becomes a corpse. They say: Otherwise he will
not be able to do it. He says to them: You yourselves--seek a place for
yourselves in repose, lest you become corpses and be eaten. 
61. Yeshúa says: Two will rest on a bed--the one shall die, the other shall live.
Salome says: Who art thou, man? As if sent by someone, thou laid upon
my bed and thou ate from my table. Yeshúa says to her: I-Am he who is
from  equality.  To  me  have  been  given  from  the  things  of  my  Father.
Salome  says:  I'm  thy  Disciple.  Yeshúa  says  to  her:  Thus  I  say  that
whenever someone equalizes he shall be filled with light, yet whenever he
is divisive he shall be filled with darkness. 
62. Yeshúa says: I tell my mysteries to those who are worthy of my mysteries.
What thy right hand shall do, let not thy left hand ascertain what it does. 
63. Yeshúa says: There was a wealthy person who possessed much money,
and he said: I shall utilize my money so that I may sow and reap and
replant, to fill my storehouses with fruit so that I lack nothing. This is what
he thought in his heart--and that night he died. Whoever has ears, let him
hear!
64. Yeshúa says: A person had houseguests, and when he had prepared the
banquet he sent his slave to invite the guests. He went to the first, he says
to him: My master invites thee. He replied: I have some business with
some merchants, they are coming to me in the evening, I shall go to place
my orders with them--I beg to be excused from the banquet. He went to
another, he says to him: My master has invited thee. He replied to him: I
have bought a house and they require me for a day, I shall have no leisure
time. He came to another, he says to him: My  master invites thee. He
replied to him: My comrade is to be married and I must arrange a feast, I
shall not be able to come--I beg to be excused from the banquet. He went to
another, he says to him: My master invites thee. He replied to him: I have
bought a villa, I go to receive the rent, I shall not be able to come--I beg to
be excused. The slave came, he said to his master: Those whom thou have
invited to the banquet have excused themselves. The master said to his


--- PAGE 9 ---
slave: Go out to the roads, bring those whom thou shall find so that they
may  feast. And he says: Tradesmen and merchants shall  not enter  the
places of my Father.
65. He says: A kind person had a vineyard. He gave it out to tenants so that
they would work it and he would receive its fruit from them. He sent his
slave so that the tenants would give to him the fruit of the vineyard. They
seized his slave, they beat him--a little longer and they would have killed
him. The slave went, he told it to his master. His master said: Perhaps they
did not recognize him. He sent another slave--the tenants beat him also.
Then the owner sent his son. He said: Perhaps they will respect my son.
Since those tenants knew that he was the heir of the vineyard, they seized
him, they killed him. Whoever has ears, let him hear!
66. Yeshúa says: Show me the stone which the builders have rejected--it is the
cornerstone. 
67. Yeshúa says: Whoever knows everything but himself, lacks everything. 
68. Yeshúa says: Blest be you when you are hated and persecuted and find no
place there where you have been persecuted. 
69. Yeshúa says: Blest be those who have been persecuted in their heart--these
are they who have recognized the Father in truth. Yeshúa says: Blest be the
hungry, for the stomach of him who desires shall be filled. 
70. Yeshúa says: When you bring forth that which is within you, this that you
have shall save you. If you do not have that within you, this which you do
not have within you will kill you.
71. Yeshúa says: I shall destroy this house, and no one will be able to rebuild
it. 
72. Someone says to him: Tell my brothers to divide the possessions of my
father with me. He says to him: Oh man, who made me a divider? He
turned to his Disciples, he says to them: I'm not a divider, am I? 
73. Yeshúa says: The harvest is indeed plentiful, but the workers are few. Yet
beseech the Lord that he send workers into the harvest. 
74. He says: Lord, there are many around the reservoir, yet no one in the
reservoir.


--- PAGE 10 ---
75. Yeshúa says: There are many standing at the door, but the solitary are
those who shall enter the Bridal-Chamber. 
76. Yeshúa says: The Sovereignty of the Father is like a merchant possessing a
fortune,  who  found  a  pearl.  That  merchant  was  shrewd--he  sold  the
fortune, he bought the one pearl for himself. You yourselves, seek for the
treasure of his face, which perishes not, which endures--the place where no
moth comes near to devour nor worm ravages. 
77. Yeshúa says: I-Am the Light who is above them all, I-Am the All. All came
forth from me and all return to me. Cleave wood, there am I. Lift up the
stone and there you shall find me. 
78. Yeshúa  says:  Why  did  you  come  out  to  the  wilderness--to  see  a  reed
shaken by the wind? And to see a person dressed in plush garments?
Behold, your rulers and your dignitaries are those who are clad in plush
garments, and they shall not be able to recognize the truth. 
79. A woman from the multitude says to him: Blest be the womb which bore
thee, and the breasts which nursed thee! He says to her: Blest be those who
have heard the meaning of the Father and have kept it in truth. For there
shall  be  days  when  you  will  say:  Blest  be  the  womb  which  has  not
conceived and the breasts which have not nursed.
80. Yeshúa says: Whoever has recognized the system has found the body--and
whoever has found the body, of him the system is not worthy. 
81. Yeshúa says: Let whoever is enriched become sovereign, and let whoever
has power renounce it.
82. Yeshúa says: Whoever is close to me is close to the fire, and whoever is far
from me is far from the Sovereignty. 
83. Yeshúa says: The images are manifest to mankind, and the Light which is
within them is hidden. He shall reveal himself in the imagery of the Light
of the Father--and yet his image is concealed by his Light. 
84. Yeshúa says: When you see your reflection, you rejoice. Yet when you
perceive  your images  which  have come into being  in your   presence--
which neither  die nor  manifest--to  what extent will they  depend upon
you?


--- PAGE 11 ---
85. Yeshúa says: Adam came into existence from a great power and a great
wealth, and yet he did not become worthy of you. For if he had been
worthy, he would not have tasted death. 
86. Yeshúa says: The foxes have their dens and the birds have their nests, yet
the Son of Mankind has no place to lay his head for rest. 
87. Yeshúa says: Wretched be the body which depends upon another body,
and wretched be the soul which depends upon their being together.
88. Yeshúa says: The angels and the oracles shall come to you, and they shall
bestow upon you what is yours. And you yourselves, give to them what is
in your hands, and say among yourselves: On what day will they come to
receive what is theirs?
89. Yeshúa says: Why do you wash the outside of the chalice? Do you not
mind that He who creates the inside is also He who creates the outside? 
90. Yeshúa says: Come unto me, for my yoga is natural and my lordship is
gentle--and you shall find repose for yourselves. 
91. They say to him: Tell us who thou art, so that we may believe in thee. He
says to them: You scrutinize the face of the sky and of the earth--yet you
do not recognize Him who is facing you, and you do not know to inquire
of Him at this moment. 
92. Yeshúa says: Seek and you shall find. But those things which you asked
me in those days, I did not tell you then. Now I wish to tell them, and you
do not inquire about them. 
93. Yeshúa says: Give not what is sacred to the dogs, lest they throw it on the
dungheap. Cast not the pearls to the swine, lest they cause it to become
[...].
94. Yeshúa says: Whoever seeks shall find. And whoever knocks, it shall be
opened to him. 
95. Yeshúa says: If you have copper-coins, do not lend at interest--but rather
give them to those from whom you will not be repaid. 
96. Yeshúa says: The Sovereignty of the Father is like a woman, she has taken
a little yeast, she has hidden it in dough, she produced large loaves of it.
Whoever has ears, let him hear!


--- PAGE 12 ---
97. Yeshúa says: The Sovereignty  of the Father  is like a woman who was
carrying a jar full of grain. While she was walking on a distant road, the
handle of the jar broke, the grain streamed out behind her onto the road.
She did not know it, she had noticed no accident. When she arrived in her
house, she set the jar down--she found it empty. 
98. Yeshúa says: The Sovereignty of the Father is like someone who wishes to
slay a prominent person. He drew forth his sword in his house, he thrust it
into the wall in order to ascertain whether his hand would prevail. Then he
slew the prominent person. 
99. His  Disciples  say  to  him:  Thy  brethren  and  thy  mother  are  standing
outside.  He  says  to  them:  Those  here  who  practice  the  desires  of  my
Father--these are my Brethren and my Mother. It is they who shall enter
the Sovereignty of my Father. 
100.They show Yeshúa a gold-coin, and they say to him: The agents of Caesar
extort  tribute  from  us.  He says  to  them:  Give  the  things  of  Caesar  to
Caesar, give the things of God to God, and give to me what is mine. 
101.Yeshúa says: Whoever does not hate his father and his mother in my way,
shall not be able to become a Disciple to me. And whoever does not love
his  Father  and  his  Mother  in  my  way,  shall  not  be  able  to  become  a
Disciple to me. For my mother bore me, yet my true Mother gave me the
life. 
102.Yeshúa says: Woe unto them, the clergy--for they are like a dog sleeping
in the manger of oxen. For neither does he eat, nor does he allow the oxen
to eat. 
103.Yeshúa says: Blest be the person who knows in which part the bandits
may invade, so that he shall arise and collect his things and gird up his
loins before they enter. 
104.They say to him: Come, let us pray today and let us fast. Yeshúa says:
Which then is the transgression that I have committed, or in what have I
been vanquished? But when the Bridegroom comes forth from the Bridal-
Chamber, then let them fast and let them pray. 
105.Yeshúa says: Whoever acknowledges father and mother, shall be called
the son of a harlot.


--- PAGE 13 ---
106.Yeshúa says: When you make the two one, you shall become Sons of
Mankind--and  when  you  say  to  the  mountain:  Be  moved!,  it  shall  be
moved.
107.Yeshúa says: The Sovereignty is like a shepherd who has 100 sheep. One
of them went astray, which was the largest. He left the 99, he sought for
the one until he found it. Having wearied himself, he said to that sheep: I
desire thee more than 99. 
108.Yeshúa says: Whoever  drinks from my mouth shall become like me. I
myself shall become him, and the secrets shall be manifest to him. 
109.Yeshúa says: The Sovereignty is like a person who has a treasure hidden
in his field without knowing it. And after he died, he bequeathed it to his
son. The son did not know about it, he accepted that field, he sold it. And
he came who purchased it--he plowed it, he found the treasure. He began
to lend money at interest to whomever he wishes. 
110.Yeshúa says: Whoever has found the system and been enriched, let him
renounce the system. 
111.Yeshúa says: The sky and the earth shall be rolled up in your presence.
And he who lives from within the Living-One shall see neither death nor
fear--for  Yeshúa  says:  Whoever  finds  himself,  of  him  the  world  is  not
worthy. 
112.Yeshúa says: Woe to the flesh which depends upon the soul, woe to the
soul which depends upon the flesh. 
113.His Disciples say to him: When will the Sovereignty come? Yeshúa says: It
shall not come by expectation. They will not say: Behold here! or: Behold
there!  But the Sovereignty of the Father is spread upon the earth, and
humans do not perceive it. 
114.Shimon Kefa says to them: Let Mariam depart from among us, for women
are not worthy of the life. Yeshúa says: Behold, I shall lure her so that I
make her male, in order that she herself shall become a living spirit like
you males. For every female who becomes male shall enter the Sovereignty
of the Heavens. 
The Gospel according to Thomas

