=== EXTRACTED TEXT FROM: The-Enslavement-of-the-American-People-Debt-and-Slavery-in-Modern-America.pdf ===
Extraction Method: PyPDFLoader
Total Pages: 5
Timestamp: 2026-01-04T17:22:17.255642
================================================================================


--- PAGE 1 ---
Page 1 of 5 
 
The Enslavement of the American People                       Debt & Slavery in Modern America 
The Enslavement of the American People  
The Politics eZine - Economics  
 
Debt & Slavery in Modern America  
March 30th 2011.  
http://politics.lilithezine.com/The-Enslavement-of-the-American-People.html  
In ancient times if people had too much debt, they were dragged before 
the barbaric courts of the time and if they could not pay their debts they 
were sold into slavery.  
In modern America, much the sam e thing is happening but Americans have had the wool pulled 
over their eyes so they cannot see how they've been enslaved by a corrupt system.  
The Recession of 2007 - 2009 was brought on by greedy bankers seeking bigger and bigger 
bonuses for the buying an d selling of debt. The more debt you sold to investors, the bigger your 
bonuses were. This system was doomed to fail.  
In a nutshell here is what happened:  
#1. During the Reagan administration the government 
began deregulating the financial markets, allow ing 
banks to make riskier investments.  
#2. These bankers then went out and gave mortgages to 
people who couldn't afford them, but at a higher 
interest rate because this was "in theory" more 
profitable for the bank.  
#3. The bankers then sold the mortgage debts to 
investors through "derivatives" and classified them as 
"AAA", meaning they were just as safe as government 
bonds, even though they were risky mortgages.  
#4. Because bankers were now giving mortgages to anyon e who asked for one it meant many 
Americans started bidding on homes with money they didn't actually have. Over the short term 
this caused a spike in housing prices.  
#5. Then during the Bush administration more deregulation led to a massive explosion in F utures 
trading. Futures is where you basically bet on whether a stock will go up or down, essentially 
turning the financial markets into a gambling casino where investors and banks could even bet 
against companies and whole industries, including the real estate market.  
Editor’s Note: I am posting th is 
perspective/ capsule of the curre nt 
American economic debacle because 
I find it to be a very cogent summary 
of a subject that many of us haven ’t 
a clue about. As you read it please 
keep in mind that “when America 
sneezes, Black people convulse.”


--- PAGE 2 ---
Page 2 of 5 
 
The Enslavement of the American People                       Debt & Slavery in Modern America 
#6. The bankers knew their mortgages were risky but in order to maintain the status quo they 
borrowed more money against themselves in what is known as "leverage". Prior to the Bush 
administration there was a cap on how much they could borro w, but the bankers convinced the 
Bush administration to allow them to leverage many times their previous value with guarantees 
from the American government so that if anything went wrong the American government would 
pay for it.  
#7. Poor economic policies by the Bush Administration led to the American real estate market to 
collapse when people stopped paying their mortgages. Banks started foreclosing on homebuyers 
who couldn't pay, the housing market bubble burst.  
#8. Because all the American banks had so ld their mortgages through derivatives, these "junk 
mortgages" suddenly became a hefty debt. The big investment banks began declaring bankruptcy 
and their debts, guaranteed by the American government, was passed on to the American people.  
And thus it was that the US government had little choice but to bailout the big investment banks 
in order to restabilize the system.  
In theory the US government should have then brought about more regulation to prevent this 
from happening again, but the Obama administration's regulatory bills have little or no teeth.  
Thus the financial collapse of the 2007-2009 period can and will happen again.  
During that period it wasn't just the housing market which was collapsing.  
People were also defaulting on car loans, credit ca rds, personal loans and other methods of 
credit.  
To try and fix the problem the American government borrowed trillions of dollars from China, 
money which will eventually have to be paid back through taxes.  
Stimulus packages by the American and Canadian g overnments have proved ineffective at 
getting the American people back to work. Unemployment in North America is still very high 
because of a lack of manufacturing (manufacturing is the backbone of a stable economy). The 
stimulus packages were aimed at sho rt term building projects, which help the lumber, steel and 
concrete industries, but do nothing to help factory workers.  
In Canada the stimulus packages were even more corrupt because the Harper government spent 
the stimulus money in their own political r idings, giving money to their friends, instead of 
spending it in the hardest hit regions of the country.  
We can assume that in the USA how the stimulus money was allocated was probably equally 
plagued by corruption.  
In the wake of the financial crisis what boggles the mind is how we are back to the old system of 
mortgages, bankers, astronomical bonuses...


--- PAGE 3 ---
Page 3 of 5 
 
The Enslavement of the American People                       Debt & Slavery in Modern America 
But while this means great financial success to anyone with a MBA working in Wall Street, what 
it means for Americans is slavery.  
 
DELAYING THE CREDIT APOCALYPSE 
Americans now live in a society that NEEDS credit.  
In order to buy almost anything an American must 
either whip out their credit card, secure a car loan, 
or ask for a mortgage from the bank. Very few 
Americans actually use cash any more.  
When they are sent off to college or university the 
first thing Americans do is get a student loan, the 
2nd thing they do is apply for a credit card or some 
kind of line of credit from their bank.  
These debts are then bought and sold as derivatives on the stock market by investment banks, 
who sell them to investors. The problem however is that when they cannot get enough investors 
they instead leverage their bank by borrowing money from the American government, who in 
turn acts as a guarantor should the investments go sour.  
The investment bankers then pay their employees huge bonuses (and continue to do so today) 
based on "projected profits", even if the debts they are selling are junk because they know the 
government has already guaranteed them anyway. This is commonly known as 'counting your 
chickens before they've hatched'.  
Thus if the average American, lets call them Sam, defaults on their student debt the banks don't 
actually suffer the burden of that debt. Indeed the investors don't get stuck with the debt either. 
The investment banks take all of their junk debts and stick them in one set of "assets" which they 
then sell to a rival bank who is setup to take the fall, which the government will ultimately end 
up paying for.  
But what happens when too many Sams default on all their loans?  
Well thanks to the system of leverage the banks can leverage anywhere from 30 to 50 times what 
they actually have in assets. That means if only 2 to 3% of people default on their loans, the bank 
will go bankrupt.  
Thus lets take for example VISA, Mastercard and American Express, the three biggest credit 
card companies in America.


--- PAGE 4 ---
Page 4 of 5 
 
The Enslavement of the American People                       Debt & Slavery in Modern America 
Where do they get the money from which they are giving to Americans? Its not coming from the 
banks, because the banks don't want to be holding the bag. They've sold that debt through 
derivatives, leveraged their assets and borrowed money from the American government.  
The question is how much have they leveraged and 
when will it finally collapse?  
THE DEBT TSUNAMI 
In a Ponzi scheme you need to keep finding more and 
more investors (suckers) to loan you money in order to 
keep your other investors happy. However there is a 
zenith point where eventually you run out of investors 
and the money all starts to disappear. The  Ponzi 
schemer has spent too much of their money living high 
on the hog and often (for whatever reason) thinks they 
can try and fix it. Eventually people start pulling out 
their investments and the Ponzi schemer runs out of 
money.  
This is the case with Am erica's debt, a debt which has crippled America's economy to the point 
that in the near foreseeable future we will encounter a debt tsunami. Its the zenith point where 
everything will collapse.  
Here's what will happen... the biggest debts will go first. W e've already seen this with the 
collapse of the mortgage industry in 2007.  
Next people will start defaulting on their other debts, the ones they don't need as much or can't 
afford to pay.  
ie. If they need their car, they might choose to pay their car loa n instead of paying their credit 
card.  
Or they might decide to renege on their car loan. Or both.  
Heck, many people might just decide to declare bankruptcy and start over again, going back to 
the old system of paying for everything with cash...  
The problem however is that the American people is not going to support bailing out car loans 
and credit card companies, even if the government is the guarantor on these debts thanks to the 
derivatives and securities markets.  
What will happen is a cascade effect.  One section of the markets will drop suddenly, causing 
other markets to collapse. Then banks will declare bankruptcy, banks will be shut out so people 
cannot get their money, millions of Americans will lose all their savings which the banks have 
gambled away on the stock market and wasted on executive bonuses.


--- PAGE 5 ---
Page 5 of 5 
 
The Enslavement of the American People                       Debt & Slavery in Modern America 
THE CURRENCY IMPLOSION 
Which brings us to the problem with America's 
currency. The American dollar isn't based on 
anything. Its not tied to the value of any 
commodity, like gold or silver. Its just  a piece of 
paper.  
If the US government takes on too much debt, and 
that debt cannot be borrowed from China or other 
countries, America's currency will become 
worthless.  
Indeed we would argue that it already is worthless 
and that Americans should act "wh ile the getting is 
good" and try to buy everything they will need for when the Debt Tsunami finally hits.  
Judging from the reaction of many Americans during the 2007 -2009 period they went and 
bought tents and camping gear.  
The irony is that in cities lik e Detroit there are thousands of homes sitting there empty and 
derelict because the local economy has collapsed. Detroit is now a Ghost City, its population is 
one third of what it was in 2006.  
THE SOLUTION? 
The solution is probably going to be tough, bru tal and Americans aren't going to enjoy it one bit. 
The American people have already become slaves to their debts and credit cards, debts they 
cannot afford.  
When people become desperate they will resort to crime to find food and a place to live. The US 
government will react by turning America into a police state (some would argue it already is).  
Anarchy, civil war, an uprise in communism... the worst is yet to come. Expect crime to rise 
dramatically, violence during elections, and tight security around p oliticians and influential 
bankers... and bankers continuing to be getting away with theft even as the economy plummets.

