=== EXTRACTED TEXT FROM: THE-STATE-AGAINST-BLACKS.pdf ===
Extraction Method: PyPDFLoader
Total Pages: 204
Timestamp: 2026-01-04T17:36:44.424919
================================================================================


--- PAGE 1 ---



--- PAGE 2 ---
THE STATE 
AGAINST BLACKS


--- PAGE 3 ---



--- PAGE 4 ---
THE STATE 
AGAINST BLACKS 
Walter E. Williams 
PROFESSOR OF ECONOMICS 
GEORGE MASON UNIVERSITY 
McGRAW-HILL BOOK COMPANY 
New York St. Louis San Francisco Hamburg 
Mexico Toronto


--- PAGE 5 ---
A Manhattan Institute for 
Policy Research Book 
Copyright© 1982 by Walter E. Williams 
All rights reserved. 
Printed in the United States of America. 
Except as permitted under the Copyright Act 
of 1976, no part of this publication may be 
reproduced or distributed in any form or by any 
means, or stored in a data base or retrieval system, 
without prior written permission of the publisher. 
34567890DOCDOC876543 
ISBN 0-07-070378-7 
UBRARY OF CONGRESS CATALOGING IN PUBUCATlON DATA 
Williams, Walter E. (Walter Edward), 1936-
The state against Blacks. 
1. Afro-Americans-Employment-Law and legisla­
tion. 2. Afro-Americans-Legal status, laws, etc. 
I. Title. 
KF3464.W54 
ISBN 0-07-070378-7 
344.73'016396073 
347.30416396073 
Book design by Christine Aulicino. 
82-7232 
AACR2


--- PAGE 6 ---
To Mom, who kept the faith 
and did it her way.


--- PAGE 7 ---



--- PAGE 8 ---
My race needs no special defense, for the past 
history of them in this country proves them 
to be the equal of any people anywhere. All 
they need is an equal chance in the battle of 
life. 
-Robert Smalls 
Congressman, Beaufort, S.C. 
1874-1886


--- PAGE 9 ---



--- PAGE 10 ---
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
The research for this book began in 1975 when I was a National 
Fellow at the Hoover Institution on War, Peace and Revolution 
at Stanford University. Unencumbered by teaching responsibilities 
and surrounded by good minds that year in residence assisted me 
in developing my ideas. 
Some years later, with the appropriate digressions, I basically 
completed the book with the assistance of a Rockefeller research 
grant and the cheerful assistance of the Heritage Foundation in 
Washington, D.C. The Heritage Foundation provided research as­
sistance, materials and a place to hang my hat while I searched 
the Library of Congress, sometimes successfully and sometimes 
in vain, for information. Appreciation also goes to the Scaife Foun­
dation in its assistance grant, which allowed me the time to put 
the manuscript into its final form. 
To fully list scholars, mentors and colleagues who gave me 
useful criticism would be hopeless. Such a list would range from 
my tenacious mentors at UCLA to my Temple University colleague 
Professor Lynn Holmes, who allowed me to exploit his mind. 
A final and special thanks goes to Pat Conboy, my research 
assistant at Temple University, and my secretary/assistant, Pamela 
Crawford, who cheerfully managed various stages of the manu­
script.


--- PAGE 11 ---



--- PAGE 12 ---
CONTENTS 
Acknowledgments 
List of Tables 
Introduction 
Chapter 1 DISCRIMINATION AXIOMS AND 
DISCRIMINATION FACTS 
Racial Conftict-Chinese in Southeast Asia-Racial Malevo­
lence and Economic Progress-Intergroup Relations-Resi­
dential Grouping-Race or Class?--Summary 
Chapter 2 RACIAL TERMINOLOGY AND 
CONFUSION 
Racial Preferences-Racial Prejudice-Racial Discrimina­
tion-Prejudice in Action-Racial Preference, Optimizing 
Prejudice or Real Differences?-Hiring and Employment 
Discrimination-Home Mortgage Discrimination-Discrimi­
nation Against Poor Shoppers-Conclusion 
ix 
xiii 
XV 
1 
19 
Chapter 3 MINIMUM WAGE, MAXIMUM FOLLY 33 
Minimum Wage and Racial Discrimination-U.S. Union Sup­
port for Minimum Wage Laws-U.S. Business Support for 
Minimum Wage Laws-Labor Market Myths-Invisible Vic­
tims 
Chapter 4 WHAT DO DIFFERENCES IN MEDIAN 
INCOME MEAN? 53


--- PAGE 13 ---
xii CONTENTS 
Chapter 5 OCCUPATIONAL AND BUSINESS 
LICENSING 
Racial Effects of Occupational and Business Licensing 
Chapter 6 THE TAXICAB INDUSTRY 
New York Entry Restrictions-New York's Ghetto Response 
to the Taxi Monopoly-Philadelphia Taxi Industry-The 
Taxicab Industry in Washington, D.C.-Conclusion-Appen­
dix 
Chapter 7 OCCUPATIONAL LICENSING OF 
PLUMBERS AND ELECTRICIANS 
Brief History-Licensing Out Negroes-Union Growth and 
Exclusion of Negroes from the Crafts-Negro Opportunity 
in Electrical and Plumbing Work Today-Some Other Ad­
verse Effects of Licensing-What Can Be Done? 
Chapter 8 NEGROES AND THE RAILROAD 
INDUSTRY 
Racist Union Policy Toward Others: A Digression 
Chapter 9 INTERSTATE COMMERCE COMMISSION 
67 
75 
89 
99 
TRUCK REGULATION 109 
Opportunities in Trucking for Minorities-Barriers to Entry­
Minority Participation in Motor Carrier Transportation­
How Many Black Truckers?-Govemment Programs to Assist 
Minority Truckers-Union Discrimination in the Trucking 
Industry-Conclusion 
Chapter 10 ECONOMIC REGULATION BY THE 
STATES 125 
A Brief Review of Constitutional Law-Possible Challenges 
to State Economic Regulation 
Chapter 11 CONCLUSION 
Notes 
Bibliography 
Index 
141 
147 
167 
175


--- PAGE 14 ---
LIST OF TABLES 
TABLE PAGE 
1 Percentage with Family Income of $7,000 or More in 1959, 
by Distance from Central Business District, Nonwhite Fami-
lies, 24 Selected Cities, 1960 14 
2 Male Civilian Labor Force Participation Ratio by Race, Age 37 
3 Comparison of Youth and General Unemployment by Race 
(Males) 38 
4 Ratio of Black/White Income by Skill Levels in 1960 56 
5 Female Black/White Income Ratios by Region for Ages 
14 and Over, 1950, 1960, 1970 57 
6 Male Black/White Income Ratios by Region for Ages 14 
and Over, 1950, 1960, 1970 57 
7 Racial/Sexual Distribution of Occupations, Male 60 
8 Racial/Sexual Distribution of Occupations, Female 62 
9 Racial/Sexual Composition of Taxi Industry in Washington, 
D.C., 1979 84 
10 Taxis in Major U.S. Cities 85 
11 Locomotive Firemen in the U.S. by Region, 1910-60 (Males 
Only) 104 
xiii


--- PAGE 15 ---



--- PAGE 16 ---
INTRODUCTION 
A person would have to be dead or completely insensitive 
not to realize that for the last twenty years race has been 
a major focus of public debate and public policy. What is 
reducible to racism, bigotry and callousness on the behalf 
of whites is most often featured as the cause of the current 
condition of many blacks. The assumption is made that since 
blacks do not differ biologically from whites in ways that 
should affect socioeconomic status, the different status of 
blacks in the society reflects racism and mistreatment by 
whites. Therefore, the fight to promote equality and opportu­
nity is portrayed as a struggle between the forces of good 
and the forces of evil. To the extent that the problems of 
blacks are cast this way, more-effective policies are ignored 
and people seeking to help blacks set out to find evil people 
and punish them. 
The problems with explaining the plight of black people 
in terms of good and evil are: (1) that approach does not 
yield testable hypotheses, a basic requirement of science and 
(2) finding and punishing evil people cannot explain the 
economic progress of minorities in the United States or any 
place else. For example, Jews in the U.S. and elsewhere did 
not have to wait for the end of anti-Semitism in order to 
prosper as a group. Japanese-Americans did not have to wait 
to become liked in order to be the second highest group in 
the U.S. in most measures of well-being. West Indian blacks 
did not have to wait for racism to end to earn a median 
income, in the U.S., that is just slightly below that for the 
nation as a whole. People discriminated against elsewhere 
frequently exhibit similar patterns; these are briefly dis­
cussed in chapter 1. 
XV


--- PAGE 17 ---
xvi THE STATE AGAINST BLACKS 
Clearly, the experience of Orientals, Jews and West Indi­
ans calls into question the hypothesis that racial bigotry can 
be a complete explanation of the difficulties that blacks face 
in America. The point is that if racial discrimination is not 
the most important cause, then economic and political re­
sources need to be reallocated to address the more important 
causes of the disadvantages faced by many blacks. 
There was in the past gross denial of basic rights of 
and gross discrimination against blacks in the U.S. Residual 
discrimination remains. But the basic premise of this book 
is that racial bigotry and discrimination is neither a com­
plete nor a satisfactory explanation for the current condition 
of many blacks in America. 
We will see that instead of racial discrimination and 
bigotry, it is the "rules of the game" that account for many 
of the economic handicaps faced by blacks. The rules of 
the game are the many federal, state and local laws that 
regulate economic activity. Game rules can, and do, influ­
ence the outcome of the game. As such, there are many laws 
in the United States that systematically discriminate against 
the employment and advancement of people who are outsid­
ers, latecomers and poor in resources. It is important to point 
out that these laws or rules discriminate against certain peo­
ple irrespective of race. However, because of their history 
in the U.S., blacks are disproportionately represented in the 
class of people described as outsiders, latecomers and re­
sourceless. 
What all of this means is that there are significant differ­
ences in opportunities for upward mobility which blacks 
face relative to ethnic groups despised and disadvantaged 
in the past. The major difference is that when other ethnics 
became urbanized, markets were freer and less regulated. 
When blacks became urbanized and received the franchise, 
they very often found those avenues of traditional upward 
mobility closed through various forms of business and occu­
pational regulation. For example (explored more fully in 
chapter 6), an illiterate, uneducated poor person in New 
York in the 1920s could get a used car and become an owner­
operator of a taxi. Today a person seeking a similar route


--- PAGE 18 ---
Introduction xvii 
to upward mobility must pay $60,000 just for a license to 
do so. 
If the evidence bears out the argument that there are 
laws that eliminate economic opportunities, then political 
resources should be expended in the direction of modifying 
those laws. The government, at various levels, can exert its 
authority to ensure that all people have unrestricted access 
to legitimate markets. 
The plan of this book will be that of examining several 
specific market restrictions. However, in order to demystify 
various aspects of race, the early chapters will investigate 
propositions, axioms and definitions that have clouded our 
understanding of one of America's most complex problems.


--- PAGE 19 ---



--- PAGE 20 ---
THE STATE 
AGAINST BLACKS


--- PAGE 21 ---



--- PAGE 22 ---
CHAPTER I 
Discrimination 
Axioms and 
Discrimination Facts 
As for doing good, that is one of the professions 
which are full. 
-Henry David Thoreau 
Walden, I, Economy 
BLACKS, BY EVERY MEASURE of group well-being, experi­
ence a lower standard of living than Americans in general. 
Blacks compared with whites suffer lower income, educa­
tional achievement, occupational status and life expectancy 
and experience less employment stability. 1 The most fre­
quently cited causes of group differences between blacks 
and whites are racial discrimination in employment, school­
ing, housing and law enforcement, plus that catch-all "insti­
tutional racism." 
Racial discrimination having been identified as the 
prime cause of black disadvantage, several propositions are 
seen to characterize the racial literature. They are: 
1 
a. Without economic advances, political gains will be lim­
ited, and vice versa. 2 
b. Homogeneous association based on race impedes the eco­
nomic progress of minorities because: (1) it leads to a "dis­
torted" distribution of public goods; (2) it denies minori­
ties many job opportunities, and (3) it denies individuals 
the "beneficial" results from interacting with individuals 
of different backgrounds and cultural values. 3


--- PAGE 23 ---
2 THE STATE AGAINST BLACKS 
c. No attempts to provide equal opportunities in our soci­
ety, or to improve conditions among deprived groups, 
are likely to succeed unless we eliminate or counteract 
racism." 
d. . .. one effective way to build up capabilities quickly 
among the most deprived members of the black popula­
tion, and to enhance the self-respect of the already capa­
ble members, is for Negroes to dominate most public and 
private activities in predominately Negro neighborhoods. 5 
e. . . . greater progress can be made by eliminating discrim­
ination in employment. For it is there that the most impor­
tant barriers to equality of opportunity are found. Far 
more than is now being done can be accomplished by 
extension of equal opportunity, affirmative action, andre­
lated employment programs. . . . The basic concept is 
that blacks and other minorities be hired at all skill levels 
in approximately the same proportion that they bear to 
the total labor force in the locality. This approach could 
well be extended by law to all private employers, not just 
government contractors .... In this way, the opportunity 
system could move well beyond equal opportunity toward 
positive action that actively seeks out blacks and other 
minorities. 6 
Throughout these propositions, and many others in the 
discussion of race, runs the common theme: There are col­
lective forces that seek to deny blacks socioeconomic oppor­
tunity which must be offset by some other force in order 
to give blacks equal chances. It is this general intellectual 
thrust that will be challenged throughout this book. Does 
group socioeconomic progress depend upon whether the 
general society likes or dislikes the group in question? 
Racial Conflict 
Racial antagonism in the United States, from subtle innuen­
does to open conflict, is a widely known phenomenon. Racial, 
as well as religious, conflict has existed in the United States 
since the founding of our country. The Irish, Italian, Negro, 
Jew, Puerto Rican, Polish, Chinese, Japanese, Swedish and 
most other ethnic groups have commonly shared the experi-


--- PAGE 24 ---
Discrimination Axioms and Discrimination Facts 3 
ence of being discriminated against in one form or another. 7 
The extent of discrimination faced by these groups has dif­
fered in degree and kind. Similarly, the response to discrimi­
nation by these ethnic groups has varied between groups 
and within groups. In all ethnic groups, members divide 
on the issue of cultural pluralism versus assimilation. 
As highly publicized as racial conflict is in the United 
States, what seems not to be appreciated, to any significant 
degree, is that racial conflict is a phenomenon that is unique 
neither to the United States nor to the twentieth century. 
Racial preferences, grouping and conflict are a permanent 
global feature of man's history. 
In England there is wide discrimination against West 
Indians, Pakistanis and Indians. 8 In South Africa there is 
the widely known societal bifurcation and hostility between 
white, Asian, colored and black Africans. Contrary to what 
modern day rhetoric would have us believe, racial oppres­
sion and discrimination find no color group innocent of their 
practice. Colored peoples racially discriminate against 
whites as well as other colored peoples. For example, in Af­
rica, black Africans often discriminate against Arabs, Syr­
ians, Lebanese, Indians and Chinese. 9 In recent history there 
has been expulsion en masse of some 50,000 Asians from 
Uganda. 10 There have also been massive expulsions of 
Asians from Kenya. 11 Although the situation is nowhere 
nearly as extreme as in Uganda and Kenya, Asians encoun­
ter racial discrimination and hostility in the other countries 
of East Africa and Central Africa, Tanganyika, Zambia and 
Malawi. 12 
In addition to racial discrimination and conflict between 
peoples of different racial stock, there is discrimination and 
conflict between people of identical racial stock but of differ­
ent "tribes" and/or religious groups. Widely known exam­
ples of these types of conflicts are Irish Catholics versus 
Irish protestants; Ebos of Biafra versus the Rausa of Nigeria; 
Watusi versus Bantu; strife between the Kikuyu and the Luo 
in Kenya; and the periodic massacres of the Batutsi and 
the Bahutu in Rwanda and Burundi. 1s 
Lesser-known examples of ethnic conflict are those


--- PAGE 25 ---
4 THE STATE AGAINST BLACKS 
found in Lebanon, with the Muslims versus Christians; Bel­
gium, with the Flemings versus the Walloons; Ceylon, with 
the Singhalese versus the Tamil; and in Canada, with En­
glish-speaking versus French-speaking populations. 
Chinese in Southeast Asia 
In most of the countries of southeast Asia, the minority Chi­
nese population suffers the status of the most despised 
minority. 14 The Chinese have always constituted a small mi­
nority-no more than 10 percent of the entire southeast 
Asian population-and numbering less than 3 percent in 
such countries as Indonesia and the Philippines. The hostil­
ity of the indigenous population toward the Chinese has been 
manifested by frequent massacres and occasional deporta­
tion of segments of the Chinese population. 15 
No less prevalent than the hostile racial climate the Chi­
nese face in southeast Asia is their considerable economic 
strength; in Indonesia, as we have noted, the Chinese consti­
tute less than 3 percent of the entire population. Through 
their roles as middlemen, merchants and money handlers, 
Chinese produce 30 to 40 percent of the national product. 16 
The disproportionate Chinese economic power can be seen 
in most other countries of southeast Asia-in the Philip­
pines, Malaysia 17 and Thailand, 18 for example. In Malaysia 
the Chinese constitute a larger percentage of the population 
(37 percent), but they produce 60 percent of the national 
income. 
From time to time, numerous measures have been un­
dertaken to restrict the economic power held by the Chinese 
segment of the southeastern Asia population. These mea­
sures have ranged from outright expropriation of property 
and job reservation laws to harsh business licensing 
requirements. 19 Despite measures to restrict Chinese enter­
prise; the Chinese population clearly enjoys a higher stan­
dard of living. Moreover, there is wholesale evasion and cor­
ruption of these anti-Chinese discriminatory laws. In many 
enterprises reserved for the indigenous population, what ap­
pears to be indigenous ownership and control is really a


--- PAGE 26 ---
Discrimination Axioms and Discrimination Facts 5 
front or a dummy for a Chinese owner. Such illegalities are 
often effected with the connivance and the participation of 
officials who are charged with the enforcement of the dis­
criminatory laws. 
Racial Malevolence and Economic Progress 
No attempt is being made here to fully examine racial hostil­
ity. We only want to establish its widespread existence. Chi­
nese, Indians and Jews, as despised aliens, have enjoyed eco­
nomic progress in a racially hostile environment. A fuller 
examination would suggest that the same is true about Ar­
menians, Greeks and Jews in the successor states of the Otto­
man Empire. The fact that despised minorities sometimes 
make significant economic gains throws into question at 
least two axiomatic statements made in the literature on 
race. First, benevolence on the behalf of the larger society 
is neither a necessary nor a sufficient condition for an ethnic 
minority to achieve economic power. 20 Second, economic 
power can exist in the absence of what is traditionally con­
sidered political power. 21 
Obviously, if the dominant racial group expropriates all 
the wealth of the non preferred group, such as in the extreme 
case of slavery, little or no economic progress can take place. 
But under less extreme cases, the effect of racial hostility 
on group progress is less clear. The point is not one of justify­
ing racial malevolence; nor is it one of saying that racial 
malevolence is of no consequence. 
Racial benevolence is one part of racial rhetoric; politi­
cal power is another. The cases of the Chinese in southeast 
Asia, Indians in Africa, and Armenians in the post-Ottoman 
Empire suggest that political power is not a necessary condi­
tion for group economic progress. In our own country, we 
have seen how Jews have prospered in the face of hostility 
and discrimination. Although Jews have significant political 
power now, their strongest socioeconomic progress occurred 
at a time when they were politically unimportant even in 
areas where they were most highly concentrated. 22 
Japanese-Americans have always been and are now po-


--- PAGE 27 ---
6 THE STATE AGAINST BLACKS 
litically insignificant. On the West Coast they were subjected 
to some of the harshest forms of persecution. The Oriental 
Exclusion Act of 1882 proscribed citizenship. This set the 
Japanese up for being denied land ownership. California, 
in 1913, enacted an anti-Japanese land law. Under its terms, 
a person ineligible for citizenship could not own agricultural 
land or lease it for more than three years. Over the ensuing 
years, ten other western states adopted the California policy. 
The U.S. Supreme Court upheld the constitutionality of these 
state laws. 23 Eventually Japanese were interned during 
World War II and their property was virtually confiscated. 
Without a doubt Japanese (and Chinese) have had expe­
riences which, at least according to prevailing thought, 
make them prime candidates for group disadvantage. Yet 
by almost any measure selected, they are one of the most 
"successful" ethnic groups in America. To cite some 1975 
figures on socioeconomic characteristics of the Japanese­
American: 19.5 percent of employed Japanese were profes­
sional workers compared to 15.6 percent of white workers 
(that of the Chinese was 25 percent); unemployment rate 
for the Japanese was 2.4 percent while that of whites was 
4.1 percent; similarly in labor force participation and educa­
tion the Japanese and the Chinese exceed that of the white 
population. 24 By contrast, the Irish can be said to be among 
the most politically successful of United States ethnic 
groups; yet by every measure of socioeconomic status they 
do not compare favorably to the Japanese or Jews or Chinese. 
The history of ethnic minorities in the United States, 
and elsewhere, seriously calls into question those premises 
that argue that disadvantaged minorities in the United 
States must acquire political power and undertake programs 
to "end racism" in order for socioeconomic growth to occur. 
The importance of recognizing that political power and/or 
social benevolence may not be a necessary condition for the 
socioeconomic progress of an ethnic group is not only a sig­
nificant intellectual exercise but is of practical importance 
as well because all activities require resource expenditure. 
If resources are spent for political organization, for example, 
that means that those same resources cannot be spent, per­
haps more usefully, elsewhere.


--- PAGE 28 ---
Discrimination Axioms and Discrimination Facts 7 
Intergroup Relations 
When one discusses racial relationships, at some point the 
conversation usually turns to concepts involving patterns 
among different racial groups, i.e., integration and segrega­
tion. This issue has become the focal point of legislative 
bodies, courts and civil rights activists (school integration, 
residential integration and employment integration). In ar­
eas of civil rights activity where integration and an equal 
opportunity policy are translated into racial goals, targets 
and quotas, the notion that blacks, Mexican-Americans, In­
dians and Puerto Ricans may have preferences that are at 
variance with statistical laws of nature or have preferences 
that produce racial patterns inconsistent with preconceived 
notions of social scientists and judges escapes many people. 
Many people assume that the existence of homogeneous as­
sociation is evidence of racial injustice or racial exclusion. 
This point of view implicitly assumes that, in the absence 
of racial injustice or exclusion, voluntary individual action 
would not produce today's pattern of homogeneous group­
ings by race. 
Whether homogeneous grouping by race reflects racial 
injustice or social conditions that we should change raises 
important questions for social scientists and policy-makers 
alike. How much does racial grouping reflect voluntary indi­
vidual or group behavior? How much does racial grouping 
reflect institutional restraints on individual or group choice? 
Homogeneous grouping or sorting, in general, can take 
place along many lines. Groups develop where the shared 
common characteristic appears to be language, age, sex, 
color, religion, income, comparative advantage, education, 
etc. Some grouping obviously results from various laws; for 
example, racially restrictive housing covenants may pro­
duce certain well-defined racial land-use patterns where one 
race of people may reside solely in one area. However, some 
voluntary grouping results from individual characteristics 
such as age. For example, one does not expect to find senior 
citizens enrolled in kindergarten classes. Other kinds of ho­
mogeneous grouping are of a more complex nature but very 
simple in their primary component parts. The poor become


--- PAGE 29 ---
8 THE STATE AGAINST BLACKS 
separated from the rich, the low-skilled from the high­
skilled, the less educated from the more educated, and so 
forth. 
For various reasons, race is correlated with income and 
education. Therefore, even if there were no collectively or­
ganized racial separation of blacks, Puerto Ricans, and Mex­
ican-Americans in housing or employment, these minorities 
might not be randomly distributed in terms of residences 
and employment. Nor would they be distributed by some 
preconceived notion of what is required for justice. The rea­
son is that education is correlated to skill level; skill level 
is correlated with income; and income is correlated with 
residence. 
Nothing here is being said to minimize the effects of 
economic, as opposed to racial, grouping. Instead, the recog­
nition is being made that unorganized individual behavior 
often gets transformed into "apparently" organized results. 
But there are a large number of collective results that oper­
ate independently of individual motivation or intent which 
are widely known. For example, the phenomena of pile-ups 
of a large number of automobiles, or even two-car accidents, 
are commonplace events that operate independently of indi­
vidual desires. Dating and marriage are essentially private 
activities; yet the income and genetic implications of the 
persons involved produce certain collective results. No cou­
ple marries with the intent of maintaining or increasing 
the skewness of the income distribution. But the fact that 
the rich tend to marry the rich, the intelligent marry the 
intelligent and the educated marry the educated seems to 
reinforce income differentials between groups of people. 
Neither do couples purposely intend to increase the genetic 
randomization in the population when girls seek men who 
are taller than themselves. 
In the realm of economic activity, there are collective 
results produced by individual action that cannot be traced 
to individual intent. The most familiar are depressions and 
inflations. The actions of millions of consumers that produce 
a depression or an inflation cannot be traced to individu.al 
desires to earn lower income or to pay higher prices. 
The fact that collective behavior may not result from


--- PAGE 30 ---
Discrimination Axioms and Discrimination Facts 9 
individual intentions (or racial motivation) should compel 
the student of race relations to examine more carefully the 
meaning of racial patterns. And even where human intent 
is found to be the cause of a collective phenomenon that 
has a racial character, we should ask whether the phenome­
non is a result of racial tastes or some other set of motives. 
Or more generally, we should ask: If man does not exhibit 
random association, what attributes serve as a basis for vari­
ous types of grouping? What are the kinds of incentives that 
produce homogeneous grouping? When the questions are 
asked in this way, it is by no means clear that race is the 
most important criterion upon which associative relation­
ships are formed. 
Residential Grouping 
Residential racial grouping is a common form of racial asso­
ciation in the United States. This is a fact even though there 
has been general compliance with laws that prohibit people 
from refusing to sell real estate on racial grounds despite 
the fact that relatively few resources have been allocated 
to the enforcement of these laws. 25 The fact that racially 
homogeneous neighborhoods persist in the face of general 
compliance with nondiscriminatory housing laws suggests 
that these patterns are just the visual component of a far 
more complex grouping pattern. 
Buying a house is not just the purchasing of a physical 
property; it is the "purchasing" of neighbors, shopping cen­
ters, schools, playgrounds and a host of other publicly fi­
nanced services such as fire and crime protection and refuse 
collection. Economists often refer to a house as a composite 
good, which differs from, say, a car. When one purchases 
a house, he simultaneously makes a decision about his con­
sumption and expenditure level for a number of publicly 
financed good~ The cost of public goods such as schools, 
playgrounds and refuse collection are reflected in the pur­
chase price of the house and the local property taxes. Peo­
ple's preferences for public goods as well as private goods 
differ and may differ systematically with income. However, 
/


--- PAGE 31 ---
10 THE STATE AGAINST BLACKS 
the implications of taste differences for public goods are 
not the same as those for private goods. For private goods, 
it pays the individual to enter the market to exchange with 
people whose tastes are different from his own. 26 For exam­
ple, a boy possessing Yankee cards, but desiring Dodger 
cards, will achieve a higher level of satisfaction if he finds 
another boy possessing Dodger cards but desiring Yankee 
cards. Or when we shop, we seek people (merchants) who 
wish to get rid of food in exchange for money while we 
wish to get rid of money in exchange for food. 
However, in the case of publicly financed goods, it pays 
him to associate with persons whose tastes and means are 
similar to his own. This is because of the characteristics 
of some publicly financed goods. Most publicly produced 
goods, because of their nature, must be provided in approxi­
mately equal levels within the particular locality. A group 
of individuals with similar tastes for public goods (and simi­
lar means for paying) are likely to experience lower deci­
sion-making costs and fewer political hassles as a result of 
their basic agreement on objectives. For example, a hetero­
geneous community, say, that of retired senior citizens and 
young married couples, may encounter conflict and hence 
high decision-making costs on an issue such as the number 
of schools to finance with a property tax levied on all resi­
dents. Obviously, the people with school-age children would 
prefer a larger expenditure on school support than those 
without school-age children. 
Therefore, it is efficient for people with similar tastes 
and the means to pay for public goods to reside together. 
If communities exhibit a high degree of homogeneity, it is 
less likely that local budget and expenditure decisions will 
be highly offensive to any one individual's set of tastes. 27 
This theoretical proposition regarding homogeneous associ­
ation is reinforced by studies of sociologists and demogra­
phers. Reynolds Farley reports, "Once a suburb is estab­
lished, the population that moves into that suburb tends to 
resemble the population already living there." 28 
In effect, the choice of residence becomes a method for 
the registering of tastes for public goods such as schools.


--- PAGE 32 ---
Discrimination Axioms and Discrimination Facts 11 
The presence of many local political jurisdictions that pro­
vide different kinds, quantities and qualities of public goods 
enables households to achieve the desired mix of public 
goods, given their means, in a way that minimizes conflict. 
Therefore, we expect to find income and residence, indepen­
dent of any other factor (including race), highly correlated. 
Also, to the extent that residents want to minimize individ­
ual expenditures for a given quantity of local services, they 
have an incentive to exclude from use those who add to 
costs but do not bear the full share of the tax burden. Locali­
ties use a number of devices for ensuring that everyone pays 
his share of the cost; zoning ordinances are a prime tool 
for this purpose. 
Exclusion techniques utilized by local jurisdictions ulti­
mately take the shape of those based on income. The fact 
that race is correlated with income should make it not sur­
prising nor difficult to reconcile the fact of a relatively small 
number of blacks in the suburbs and the absence of orga­
nized behavior to keep blacks out. The absence of blacks 
is consistent with either community indifference, malevo­
lence or benevolence toward blacks as a group. 
Race or Class? 
Negroes are entering the economic mainstream of American 
life in unprecedented numbers. In some respects this pro­
vides something of a laboratory by which we can evaluate 
arguments that use racial tastes (or racial injustice) as the 
explanation for certain racial patterns in society. We can 
for the first time ask: Do Negroes and whites differ signifi­
cantly in their associative patterns when they are similar 
in socioeconomic characteristics other than race? 
First, consider residential patterns and neighborhood 
preferences of blacks and whites. Middle-class suburbanites 
have categorically rejected federally subsidized "scatter­
site" low-income housing in the suburbs. The resistance to 
low-income housing sites in the suburbs is attributed in 
many minds to anti-Negro sentiments of the white middle 
class. 29 The purely racial aspect of the motivation for the


--- PAGE 33 ---
12 THE STATE AGAINST BLACKS 
exclusion of low-income housing loses some of its credibility 
when we consider the evidence. 
A Gallup poll in 1972 asked middle-class whites what 
they thought of letting lower-class whites and blacks move 
into their neighborhoods. The results were significant: 44 
percent resented lower-class blacks moving in while 37 per­
cent resented lower-class whites moving in. But blacks of 
the same middle-class status were resented by only 24 per­
cent. White middle-class people clearly preferred a black 
neighbor of their own status to a white who was of a lower 
class. 30 These survey results take on greater significance if 
they are compared with those in the early 1940s. To the 
question: "If a Negro with just as much income and educa­
tion as you have moved into your block, would it make a 
difference to you?" the National Opinion Research Center 
found that 65 percent of the respondents would object. 31 
These surveys definitely indicate important changes in 
white attitudes toward blacks. 32 This trend interestingly 
enough continued through the 1960s in spite of the much 
publicized riot-oriented "white backlash," which did not ma­
terialize in the survey data. 
Only a few suburbs contain a large number of blacks. 
However, as a result of increasing economic progress and 
a complete collapse of restrictive covenants, blacks are find­
ing their ways into the suburbs in increasing numbers. 
There is evidence that Negro suburban families entertain 
the same fears of the incursion of low-income families for 
the same stated reasons as white suburbanites. In the town 
of North Hempstead on Long Island, black family organized 
opposition led to the killing of a federally-subsidized low­
income housing project. The reasons that the black families 
gave for their opposition was that they felt that neighbor­
hood deterioration would take place and the quality of life 
would change. 33 
It appears that middle-class black families will resist 
federally-subsidized low-income housing just as middle­
class white families will, in spite of the fact that the occu­
pants of the low-income housing may be fellow blacks. In 
fact, a key court decision limiting low-income housing subsi-


--- PAGE 34 ---
Discrimination Axioms and Discrimination Facts 13 
dies in a predominantly black middle-class area was brought 
by blacks (Shannon v. Hud, 436 F. 2d. 809, 3d. Cir. 1970). 
Other cases where blacks brought suit against federally-sub­
sidized housing in black middle-class neighborhoods are: 
Banks v. Perk, 341 F. Supp. 1175 (N.D. Ohio, 1972); Hicks 
v. Weaver, 302 F. Suppl. 619 (E.D. La. 1969). 
Open-housing advocates and their new allies, builders 
and developers, are making through the courts an assault 
on zoning and other restrictive land use practices. Not sur­
prisingly, they found middle-class blacks allied with middle­
class whites as their opponents to subsidized low-income 
housing in the suburbs. 34 
These findings suggest that what may appear to be a 
racial phenomenon (such as suburban rejection of low-in­
come housing) may instead be an economic or social class 
phenomenon. But even more importantly, from a policy per­
spective, the findings point up the danger of equating white 
with high incomes and black with low incomes. Today, in 
light of unprecedented economic gains being made by 
blacks, such an equation increasingly does not apply. 
Another phenomenon that has been suggested to be ra­
cially motivated is "white flight" to the suburbs. What has 
recently become a concern of many cities with large black 
populations such as Chicago, Boston, New York, Washing­
ton, D.C., Newark, and elsewhere is black flight to the 
suburbs. 35 The reasons given by blacks for their unprece­
dented movement to the suburbs are quite similar to those 
given by whites who have moved to the suburbs, such as 
better schooling, fear of crime, and the declining quality 
of city life. 36 Again, this behavior on the part of blacks weak­
ens the aspect of suburban flight purportedly motivated by 
racial tastes. 37 
That residential patterns per se cannot be fully ac­
counted for by racial discrimination is revealed by examin­
ing residential patterns of Negroes within areas of their 
highest concentration. One question that can be asked is: 
Does residential segregation, according to social class, exist 
within a color group? More particularly, are social classes 
segregated within Negro ghettos? Or are the forces of racial


--- PAGE 35 ---
Table 1 
Percentage with Family Income of $7,000 or More in 1959, by Distance from Central Business District, Nonwhite 
Families, 24 Selected Cities, 1960a.b 
NORTH SOUTHWEST WEST 
I:::S (') 8 
~ 
.... (') 
i 
c .... 
~ 
~ 
"'1:3 ~ 
(,) 
"" ~ ~ ~ "'1:3 
~ & .... I:::S ~ I:::S .... "'1:3 ~ ~ 
"" 
<::> (') <::> 
tt 
~ 
s ~ I:::S 
~ 
.... ~ ~ ~ I:::S ~ (') ~ 
~ 
.... .... 
~ 
~ ~ 
~ 
~ 
;::! ~ ~ (') 
c5 
~ 
C3 ~ 
;::! 
~ J3 
I:::S <::> MILES Cl I:Q Cl 0 ~ 
0-1 } 9.3 } 12.2 3.3 8.2 11.8 11.4 13.5 7.9 } 5.5 4.2 29.6 14.3 } 14.8 1-2 6.7 12.4 10.8 15.2 17.5 12.5 8.2 23.6 15.2 
2-3 12.8 11.8 10.7 15.4 19.1 16.1 33.8 22.1 7.9 19.6 32.8 26.3 19.3 
3-4 13.6 16.2 15.7 26.1 29.3 25.9 37.4 32.3 5.5 7.2 26.7 27.3 21.8 
4-5 18.8 20.4 24.2 26.2 36.0 46.0 5.0 8.6 40.8 31.0 29.8 
5-6 18.8 27.9 23.7 29.8 46.1 10.8 50.5 37.8 34.3 
6-7 22.5 26.8 27.3 37.5 27.2 35.6 
7-8 15.0 27.7 30.8 24.1 
8-9 11.3 41.2 16.3 
9-10 - 50.4 29.5 
10-11 25.6 45.6 
11-12 40.0 54.6 
12-13 46.9


--- PAGE 36 ---
BORDER SOUTH 
Cj 
Q 
~£ ;::t, 
fl.) 
~ ;::! 
c ...... .... "'l::! ~ 
~ ...... <:) ~ ...... ~ .J::! 
~ 
fl.) ~ 
-
;::! fl.) 
T~ c ;::! - ~ c 1: ~ ~ fl.) 
~ ·s 0 .... c ~ ;::! ;::! ~ ·~ R. .J::! fl.) .... ·c ·~ fl.) ~ ;::! ...... .g .J::! 
~ 
~ 
~ 
~ ~ ;::! ;::! ~ ... ~ .... <:) c ...... 
~ .... 
MILES Cl) ~ I:Q ~ ~ I:Q 
0-1 12.6 1.8 4.2 7.0 4.7 4.0 5.1 4.0 5.5 2.3 1.9 
1-2 19.1 4.1 7.9 11.2 9.6 8.3 8.0 10.9 6.5 8.2 4.2 
2-3 24.4 9.4 17.4 21.2 18.1 12.7 10.6 10.4 10.3 10.5 5.4 
3-4 35.1 15.7 17.3 27.5 29.1 16.1 14.9 10.4 8.7 8.0 8.0 
4-5 41.0 21.4 28.7 7.0 6.7 
5-6 28.0 8.2 4.0 
a Source: Schnore, Demography, p. 130. 
b Underscoring represents highest percent in column.


--- PAGE 37 ---
16 THE STATE AGAINST BLACKS 
discrimination strong enough to force Negroes of different 
socioeconomic classes to live side by side? 
Leo F. Schnore conducted a study of 24 major metropoli­
tan areas with large contiguous areas of Negro residents. 38 
He combined census tracts into zones that had a radial dis­
tance of one-mile intervals from the center of the city. The 
research question was to find the percentage of Negro fami­
lies with incomes over $7,000 per year as a function of miles 
from the center of the city. The study found that "as distance 
increases from the center of the city, the socioeconomic sta­
tus of nonwhite neighborhoods rises. Nonwhite family in­
come is higher, nonwhite educational levels mount, and the 
relative number of nonwhite males in "white-collar" em­
ployment increases." 39 In Table 1, these findings are pre­
sented for Schnore's 24 cities. It shows a consistent pattern 
for most of the cities studied; in some cities (e.g., Los Ange­
les) there are some problems of interpretation because of 
peculiarities in the legal city boundaries. These findings also 
point to the inescapable conclusion that collective behavior 
that produces homogeneous association is not necessarily 
indicative of racial discrimination. 
The point of this discussion is not to minimize the ef­
fects of residential grouping attributable to economic or 
class differences; nor is the assertion made that racial dis­
crimination is nonexistent in housing. But we know that 
housing patterns depend upon at least three different fac­
tors: the first is racial discrimination; the second is economic 
restraints that limit the quantity and quality of housing that 
can be purchased; and the third is individual taste. All three 
influence the choice of neighborhood. The recognition that 
residential housing patterns are a result of the interaction 
of these, and perhaps other factors, may help us to overcome 
the error of assuming that the absence of a proportional 
residential distribution of blacks is necessarily indicative 
of racial discrimination. Determining which factors play 
what roles and which factors are more important than oth­
ers is no small statistical task. To design a test that will 
give us such knowledge may even be impossible. However, 
the recognition that racial residential patterns are influ­
enced by several variables should compel us to realize that


--- PAGE 38 ---
Discrimination Axioms and Discrimination Facts 17 
government programs to integrate housing forcefully may 
undo far more than what racial discrimination, alone, has 
created. 
The courts, possibly recognizing this phenomenon, have 
not usually ordered metropolitan remedies for strictly city 
problems. Perhaps the clearest statement of this position 
was Milliken v. Bradley, 40 which upheld the long-standing 
federal equity principle that the nature of the violation de­
termines the scope of the remedy. The Court said that with­
out an interdistrict violation, there is no basis for an interdis­
trict remedy-in short, that the school districts of Detroit 
and its environs could not be ordered consolidated for the 
purposes of achieving racial balance. 
However, the courts have been equivocal in the applica­
tion of the federal equity principle. In Metropolitan Housing 
Development v. Village Heights, 41 the court said, "Whenever 
a de facto condition of segregation exists, a municipality­
regardless of its involvement in the condition of segrega­
tion-is constitutionally obligated to ease the problem by 
affirmative action." The court went on to say, "Merely be­
cause Arlington Heights did not create the problem does 
not necessarily mean that it can ignore it." 42 In the more 
recent H. U.D. v. Gatreaux Supreme Court decision, uphold­
ing a lower court decision, the Court said, "Nothing in the 
Milliken decision suggests a per se rule that Federal courts 
lack authority to order parties found to have violated the 
constitution to undertake remedial efforts beyond the munic­
ipal boundaries of the city where the violation occurred." 43 
Summary 
In this chapter, we have discussed a number of popularly 
believed statements about racial discrimination which have 
taken on the status of axiomatic truths. We have presented 
brief accounts of ethnic minorities, both in the United States 
and elsewhere, which suggest (1) that social benevolence 
is not a necessary condition for minority socioeconomic 
progress and (2) that political power is not a necessary condi­
tion for economic advance.


--- PAGE 39 ---
18 THE STATE AGAINST BLACKS 
We have also argued that homogeneous association by 
race does not require, as its antecedent, malevolent majority 
preferences for minorities. In the housing market model that 
we discussed, it was shown how unorganized individual be­
havior gets transformed into "apparently" organized results, 
i.e., ethnically homogeneous communities. However, an ex­
ample of some of the nonracial considerations surrounding 
housing choice and community behavior, we presented evi­
dence that Negroes who were suburban residents exhibited 
behavior quite similar to that of whites. This observation 
tends to weaken the purely racial hypothesis of homoge­
neous grouping. 
The importance of all of this, and a guiding point to 
all of our discussion, is that effective policy to remedy the 
legacy of racial oppression requires correct identification 
of cause and effect. In the next chapter we will discuss what 
we believe accounts for much of the confusion surrounding 
racial issues, which is the imprecise and value-ladened ter­
minology that is used to analyze racial relationships. The 
object of the discussion is not to justify different behavioral 
forms but to set up an effective way, free of emotions, by 
which we may better analyze racial relationships.


--- PAGE 40 ---
CHAPTER 2 
Racial Terminology 
and Confusion 
Error is never so difficult to be destroyed as when it has 
roots in language. 
-Jeremy Bentham 
WoRDS CAN, and usually do, have more than one meaning 
and therefore can be used ambiguously. Without a doubt, 
part of the confusion in understanding racial problems 
stems from the imprecise and ambiguous language used by 
scholars and laymen alike in discussing race. In analytical 
usage not only is it necessary to separate the connotative 
from the literal content of words, but precise and operation­
ally useful distinctions and definitions must be made. 
A good example of shifting definitions is found in the 
usage of the phrase "racial segregation." If the average 
American were asked: Are public water fountains, libraries 
and theaters of the U.S. desegregated? a broad, if not unani­
mous, consensus would be reached that they were indeed 
desegregated. Then ask the average American whether the 
country's public schools are desegregated. For this question, 
a consensus on any one answer would be virtually impossi­
ble. In fact, there are many legal actions charging that 
schools are segregated and there are just as many claiming 
that the schools are not segregated. 
A little thought on the matter shows that the term racial 
segregation means one thing when applied to water foun-
19


--- PAGE 41 ---
20 THE STATE AGAINST BLACKS 
tains, libraries and theaters. Racial segregation means quite 
another thing when applied to schools, jobs and housing. 
In the case of water fountains, desegregation means that 
if a black is at a water fountain and desires to drink, he is 
free to do so. In the case of public schools, desegregation 
"means" that the number of blacks in attendance is some 
preconceived percentage, say 12 percent, of those in atten­
dance. If the preconceived numerical figure is not realized, 
then remedial measures are proposed or legislated. No one 
ever bothers to apply a similar numerical test to establish 
whether water fountains, libraries and theaters are desegre­
gated. And surely no one proposes busing blacks to all white 
water fountains, libraries and theaters for the purpose of 
promoting "social justice." 
There are other terms and concepts used in the racial 
literature and debate which are just as misleading and con­
fusing. The aim of this chapter is to point out the ambiguities 
and suggest operational definitions to see whether more light 
can be shed on public policy analysis. 
Racial Preferences 
People may have likes or dislikes or be indifferent toward 
many objects of desire. In everyday language as well as in 
economic analysis, an individual is said to prefer object A 
to object B if he places a higher value on A than on B. In 
economic theory, we postulate that each individual has a 
consistent set of preferences-that is, tastes-and chooses 
the combination he most prefers from the available alterna­
tives. When we are speaking as economists, there are no 
objective criteria by which we can judge whether one set 
of preferences is "better" than another. We cannot prove, 
for example, that it is better or more righteous for a person 
to prefer the wines of Bordeaux to those of Burgundy or to 
prefer blue cars to red cars. The most we can ever say objec­
tively is that, given his preference pattern and income and 
price constraints, the chooser is-or is not-doing the best 
he can. 
This holds true as well when we come to individual pref-


--- PAGE 42 ---
Racial Terminology and Confusion 21 
erences for physical attributes such as height, weight, 
"richly" endowed body, hair color, and so forth: these are 
solely matters of individual taste. And given that there are 
individual preferences for or against physical attributes in 
general, we expect people to exhibit preferences for or 
against racial attributes as well. Indeed, so far as our analy­
sis is concerned, there are no conceptual distinctions be­
tween racial and other preferences. 
It may be rejoined that racial preferences are not compa­
rable to other kinds of preferences in the consequences they 
have for society and for individuals. However, although the 
indulgence of racial preferences has specific effects that the 
indulgence of preferences for certain wines does not have, 
are the preferences basically different? If so, how do they 
differ? The preference for Bordeaux wines "harms" Bur­
gundy producers by reducing the value of resources that 
are held for Burgundy production. If the consequences of 
preferences are generally thought to reduce the value of 
some resources and increase the value of others, then it can 
be said that preferences for physical attributes have effects 
similar to those of other preferences. The essential differ­
ence-by no means small-between preferences for racial 
features and those for wines is that the latter are not as 
specialized as the former. In other words, if Burgundy pro­
ducers see that consumers prefer Bordeaux, they will try 
to shift their resources to Bordeaux production. On the other 
hand, for example, people who are black cannot become 
white. 1 
But the fact that racial characteristics are unchangeable 
does not put them in a class by themselves. Persons with 
average IQs are preferred to those with below-average IQs, 
and persons who are not physically disabled are preferred 
to those who are. In each of these cases the less-preferred 
characteristic is unchangeable and in each the less- pre­
ferred person suffers a competitive disadvantage. This dis­
advantage is to be expected. Disadvantage and advantage 
are inevitable consequences of differences in individual 
tastes, abilities, and traits, on the one hand, and freedom 
of choice in a democratic society, on the other.


--- PAGE 43 ---
22 THE STATE AGAINST BLACKS 
Racial Prejudice 
In the literature on race, prejudice is usually interpreted 
as meaning suspicion, intolerance or an irrational hatred 
of other races. Such an interpretation exposes the analysts 
to the pitfall of making ambiguous statements and advanc­
ing faulty logic. A more useful interpretation of "prejudice" 
can be found by looking to its Latin root meaning "to judge 
before." Therefore, a prejudiced act may be thus defined 
as a decision made on the basis of incomplete information. 
Making decisions without complete information is neces­
sary in a world of scarcity and uncertainty. Another common 
experience in a complex world is erroneous interpretation 
of the evidence. Moreover, different individuals may arrive 
at different conclusions even if confronted with the same 
evidence. Furthermore, any given individual may some­
times be quite unresponsive to changes in the evidence. 
Consider a simple, yet intuitively appealing, example 
of how decisions are made on the basis of incomplete infor­
mation (and perhaps erroneous interpretation of evidence). 
Suppose a fully grown tiger suddenly appeared in the room. 
A reliable prediction is that most individuals would en­
deavor to leave the area with great dispatch. In most in­
stances, the individual response to the tiger's presence is 
not based on detailed information about the behavioral char­
acteristics of that particular tiger. Instead, the response is 
based on the individual's stock of information and perhaps 
misinformation about tigers as a class. The response is based 
on a stereotype; the individual makes a prejudiced decision. 
He makes no attempt to seek additional information but 
rather ascribes known or surmised group characteristics to 
the individual tiger. There abound examples of prejudiced 
behavior: not talking to strangers, running in response to 
rustling in the bushes, not buying dented cans of food, not 
recruiting employees from certain schools. 
Decisions to prejudge are inextricably tied to individual 
judgments on what constitutes the right amount of informa­
tion search. Information is not a free good; it is acquired 
by the expenditure of time, effort and usually money. As a


--- PAGE 44 ---
Racial Terminology and Confusion 23 
result, individuals can be expected to economize on informa­
tion costs. For any of us, there will be a point at which the 
cost of acquiring one more unit of information is equal to 
the expected total gain from that unit. This I!leans that addi­
tional information will not be sought because the total cost 
would be greater than the added gain. 
A vast number of decisions must be made during our 
lives. Some of them, such as deciding to greet a passerby 
in the morning, require relatively small amounts of informa­
tion. Others, such as selecting a marriage partner, require 
relatively larger amounts. A person is not prejudiced or un­
prejudiced. Rather, a person always exhibits prejudiced be­
havior to the extent that he substitutes general information 
(prejudgment or stereotypes)-which is less costly-for more 
costly specific information. What distinguishes different 
people are their comparative degrees of prejudiced behavior 
when facing similar situations; some people will get more 
information than others prior to a decision. 
In the literature on racial behavior, the word "preju­
diced" is most often used pejoratively to refer to those whose 
optimum quantity of information is deemed by the observer 
to be too small. Behavior based on racial or sexual stereo­
types is commonly viewed as making use of too little infor­
mation and thus viewed as opprobrious-and in many cases, 
of course, it is illegal. However, the quantity of information 
effectively collected before decisions are made is up to the 
individual's calculation: for there is no social standard or 
optimum amount of search that is applicable to all individu­
als in all cases. For example, for the prospective house buyer 
there is no socially determined optimum number of houses 
to be canvassed before making a decision. Instead, the 
amount of information collected by free individuals before 
acting is determined by and reflects, among other things, 
the skill of the individual in converting resources into infor­
mation. The value of those resources is measured against 
the expected value of a "correct" decision. 
Since all of us will seek to economize on information 
expense, we will tend to substitute less costly forms of infor­
mation for more costly forms. Physical attributes are easily


--- PAGE 45 ---
24 THE STATE AGAINST BLACKS 
observed and hence constitute a cheap form of information. 
If a particular physical attribute is highly correlated with 
some less easily observed attribute, then the physical attri­
bute may be used as an estimator or proxy for the other. The 
cheaply observed fact that an individual is short, or an am­
putee, or a Negro, or a woman provides what some people 
deem "sufficient" information for predicting the presence 
of some other unobserved attribute under certain circum­
stances. Most of us, for example, if asked to identify individu­
als with advanced academic degrees only by observing race 
and sex, would assign a higher probability that white males 
would have such degrees than black males or women. Such 
behavior is what decision theory expects where unob­
servable variables must be estimated from observable vari­
ables. 
Racial Discrimination 
Discrimination may be defined as an act of choice based 
upon utility maximization. Racial discrimination is an act 
of choice whereby racial attributes provide the criteria for 
choice. In this view, racial discrimination does not differ 
in any fundamental sense from other kinds of discrimina­
tion. All selection necessarily and simultaneously requires 
nonselection; choice requires discrimination. When we 
preface the word "discrimination" with the word "racial," 
all we do is to state the attributes selected as the criteria 
for choice. 
Our lives are largely spent discriminating for and 
against selected activities, objects and people. For example, 
many of us discriminate against those who have criminal 
records, who bathe infrequently, who use vulgar speech. 
Some employers discriminate against applicants who speak 
with a foreign accent, who have a low intelligence or cannot 
read or went to the "wrong" college. There is also evidence 
of discrimination in politics. Not many short men have been 
elected to the United States Presidency. Furthermore, per­
sonal discrimination is not consistent. Sometimes people dis­
criminate against theater in favor of parties, against women


--- PAGE 46 ---
Racial Terminology and Confusion 25 
in favor of men; and at other times the same people do the 
reverse. 
When a choice is made on the basis of race, that choice 
may reflect the preferences of the chooser for a particular 
race, but it also may not. It is impossible for an observer 
to say for sure whether choices based on a particular physi­
cal feature reflect the indulgence of preference (tastes) or 
the attempt to minimize information costs (prejudice) or 
the recognition of real differences. 
Prejudice in Action 
Some may think my discussion of discrimination and preju­
dice renders the words meaningless, since it can be said 
that all human acts involve choice and all choices are based 
on incomplete information (as well as on tastes). But the 
discussion is useful because it permits us to avoid confusing 
one form of behavior with another. It enables us to see that 
certain kinds of choices-those made on the basis of racial, 
sexual and other physical attributes-may be intelligent op­
timizing or may be the result of tastes. An example will 
clarify these points. 
Suppose we are on a university campus where the racial 
and sexual composition of the student body is the same as 
that of the U.S. population, and suppose we play a game 
of trying to identify students who can find the integral for 
the mathematical expression f x2dx. Players are given zero 
information about the students' mathematical proficiency 
and may not communicate with students except to ask, 
"What is the integral?" In other words, players can distin­
guish between students only by observable attributes such 
as race, sex, mannerisms, dress and speech accent. The pay­
off from the game is $2,000 for each student chosen by the 
player who answers correctly and the player loses $200 for 
each student that he chooses who does not know the answer. 
Finally, it is assumed that the payoff is sufficient to induce 
participation and the player's sole objective is to maximize 
his winnings. 
The player is in a situation where choices must be made


--- PAGE 47 ---
26 THE STATE AGAINST BLACKS 
on the basis of incomplete information. He is faced with 
identifying those observable attributes that will be the best 
indicators of student proficiency in calculus (the unknown 
and unobservable attribute). If he thinks that mathematical 
proficiency is equally distributed by physical attributes, his 
choice process will be essentially random. But if he thinks 
that mathematical proficiency is not randomly distributed, 
he must adopt a different (nonrandom) decision rule. In his 
first cut at such a rule, he may decide not to choose females 
because he knows that women are not well represented in 
the quantitative sciences. (Note that such a rule might not 
be as valuable in the Soviet Union, where a greater portion 
of women enter the quantitative sciences.) In successive cuts 
at a decision rule, the player may discriminate against­
not choose-Negroes, Puerto Ricans, and American Indians, 
perhaps reflecting his awareness that math skills are related 
to the quality of pre-college schooling and that these particu­
lar minorities have historically received grossly inferior ele­
mentary and secondary education. In the end the player may 
settle on a rule that confines his choices to males of Jewish 
or Oriental ancestry. 
The fact that the choice may be made on the basis of 
race and sex is not the same as saying that there is a genetic 
or causal relationship between race or sex and mathemati­
cal proficiency. What is said is that these variables are corre­
lated in the real world. 2 
Suppose we relax the implicit assumption of neutral ra­
cial preferences and assume that instead the player has a 
dislike for Jews and Orientals but still believes these groups 
to be disproportionately represented in the quantitative sci­
ences. So long as we retain the assumption that the player 
seeks to maximize winnings, his decision rule, his preju­
dice, will not be distinguishable from that of a player with 
no particular racial preferences. 
This illustrates an important point that is lost in most 
discussions of racial issues: choices made on the basis of 
race (or sex) do not always permit us to put the preferences 
of the chooser in unambiguous categories. Moreover, the 
example raises a question whether anyone should care if


--- PAGE 48 ---
Racial Terminology and Confusion 27 
the player in the game chose to indulge his preference and 
not select Jews or Orientals? In our scenario (assuming that 
Jews and Orientals are disproportionately represented in the 
class of individuals knowing calculus), the player who be­
cause of tastes discriminated against Jews and Orientals 
would win less than other players. Even the most fervent 
advocate of civil rights would have little reason to seek a 
social policy that required anti-Jewish or anti-Oriental play­
ers to give Jews and Orientals an equal opportunity to be 
selected. The racist (or, for that matter, any individual who 
permitted his choices to be determined by economically ir­
relevant "preferences" of whatever kind) would bear the 
full cost of such an action. He would lose money. 
Racial Preference, Optimizing Prejudice 
or Real Differences? 
For some reason these points get lost in discussions of racial 
discrimination. We overlook the fact that not every discrimi­
natory action reflects dislike of Negroes. For example: cer­
tain discrimination may come from the rational behavior 
of individuals minimizing information costs or confronting 
real differences in the market, whether that market is free 
or institutionally constrained. And we often overlook the fact 
that in a free market economically irrational preferences 
will impose costs on whoever indulges them. Institutional 
restraints may render that indulgence costless to the in­
dulger. If they do, the answer is to lift the restraints and 
reimpose the costs. In other words, to free the market. 
When we are formulating policy, we must be careful 
to distinguish among the three sources of "discrimination"­
preference, prejudice and real differences. If we assume that 
racial tastes cause the problem we are addressing, when 
in fact the problem is caused by something else, our policy 
will be at least ineffectual and quite possibly harmful to 
its intended beneficiaries. Let us briefly look here at three 
areas where whites are generally charged with discrimina­
tion against blacks, and where the assumption is generally 
made that the discrimination is based on racial preferences.


--- PAGE 49 ---
28 THE STATE AGAINST BLACKS 
These areas are hiring, home mortgages and the prices 
ghetto shoppers pay. 
Hiring and Employment Discrimination 
Many recruitment and hiring practices are said to reflect 
racial preference, but an alternative explanation can be 
drawn from our knowledge of hiring procedures. When a 
firm seeks labor, it must find out how productive those seek­
ing jobs are likely to be and must train the persons it hires. 
Since this process costs money, the firm has incentive to 
search for recruits that appear to have a high probability 
of success. If the firm believes there is an important relation­
ship between a recruit's high school performance (and the 
quality of his high school), on the one hand, and employee 
productivity, on the other, it can reduce some of its recruit­
ment costs just by knowing the job candidate's record (and 
high school). If a firm knows that blacks at grade twelve 
(regardless of transcript grades) are frequently three to five 
years behind whites in scholastic achievement, it can assign 
a higher probability to a white recruit's having the desired 
productivity. 
In the mind of the employer, skin color may be a first 
indicator of expected worker productivity. To observe a pro­
cess that selects in part by skin color and to attribute the 
selection to taste (in this case, to employer "racism") would 
be misleading. It would be like concluding that auto insur­
ance companies charge drivers under twenty-five years of 
age higher premiums because companies dislike them. Or 
that life insurance companies charge women lower premi­
ums because the companies like women better than men. 
In both cases, a physical attribute may act as a general proxy 
for some other attribute (in the case of drivers, the higher 
probability of an accident) that is individually more costly 
to ascertain. 
Suppose an employer who has racially neutral prefer­
ences incorrectly perceives that, on the average, a Negro 
worker is less productive than a white worker. What kinds 
of laws would cause him to seek more information and per­
haps revise his perception? And what kinds of laws would


--- PAGE 50 ---
Racial Terminology and Confusion 29 
discourage him from doing so? Clearly, laws that require 
him to pay all workers identical wages or laws that make 
it very costly to fire an employee. The reason is that laws 
or union rules that mandate a certain specified pay for a 
particular job reduce the incentive for experimentation. The 
employer quite rationally hires that employee whom he per­
ceives as more productive. The basis for the perception can 
be sex, race, accent, demeanor, school and other factors. The 
existence of laws or union rules that make it difficult to 
fire a worker reinforces the reluctance of employers to ex­
periment in hiring. The reason is that the employer feels 
that if his experimentation turns out to be a mistake, he 
has to incur additional costs to reverse the error. 
This kind of behavior by employers is just a special case 
of a general principle that all people employ in their con­
duct. A brief example will demonstrate it. Suppose a new, 
unheard of supermarket located in an area in the presence 
of established supermarkets. How would it entice customers 
(employers of food) to try it out? The standard way is to 
offer "sales," i.e., sell some of its merchandise at a lower 
price than charged elsewhere. Customers have additional 
inducement to experiment with the new supermarket be­
cause if they are dissatisfied they need not come back; i.e., 
they "fire" the supermarket. Now suppose there is some law 
or rule (1) requiring that all supermarkets charge the same 
price and (2) stipulating that once a customer chose a super­
market he had to stick with it; he could not "fire" it. The 
response of customers to the new supermarket would be ob­
vious: Why try it? 
Home Mortgage Discrimination 
Some of the principles discussed in this chapter apply to 
redlining, a practice whereby banks and other lending insti­
tutions refuse to grant mortgages for homes in certain neigh­
borhoods. Because the practice most often applies to minor­
ity inner-city poor neighborhoods, the national debate about 
it has focused on its racial aspects, with banks being labeled 
as racist. 
Forgotten in much of the .debate is the existence of regu-


--- PAGE 51 ---
30 THE STATE AGAINST BLACKS 
lations that place ceilings on the interest rates banks can 
charge for home mortgages. Given these ceilings, banks have 
an incentive to ration credit, namely to lend money to those 
whose perceived credit worthiness is appropriate to the per­
mitted legal interest rate. It turns out that, for a number 
of reasons, the probability of default per dollar lent is greater 
in some neighborhoods than in others. Moreover, several 
laws designed to protect borrowers make the collection and 
eviction of debtors who are in default more costly to bankers. 
These circumstances reduce the probability of earning nor­
mal profits in some neighborhoods. 
Thus, redlining need not be a result of bankers' racism. 
In many cases (perhaps almost all) it occurs not because 
bankers are unwilling to make home loans to inner-city 
blacks but because the inner city is not perceived as a profit­
able market at the state-imposed interest rate ceiling. The 
real villain in the redlining issue is the legislature that im­
poses, say, a 10 percent interest rate ceiling. Such a ceiling 
in effect says that if an applicant is not a good enough risk 
for a mortgage at 10 percent, he will not get a mortgage at 
all-although without a ceiling he may get a mortgage at 
a 15 percent rate. Interestingly, black-owned banks that do 
not find the ghetto an attractive place to make loans are 
not called racist, and we should note that more black-owned 
banks invest more of their loan portfolio outside the commu­
nity in which they are located than do white-owned banks. 3 
Public policy directed at supposed banker racism will 
miss its mark and may, like affirmative action in lending, 
exacerbate the credit problems of blacks. Banks will simply 
move away. An effective policy would examine cost condi­
tions in inner-city ghettos and remove or change state usury 
laws. Once again, what is prejudice or perhaps a recognition 
of real differences is misdiagnosed as "preference"-with 
predictably poor policy results. 
Discrimination Against Poor Shoppers 
During the mid-1960s it was widely alleged that white mer­
chants in ghetto areas exploited their customers by charging


--- PAGE 52 ---
Racial Terminology and Confusion 31 
higher prices and selling lower-quality merchandise there 
than they did elsewhere. The merchants, it was said, were 
trying to earn supranormal profits as a way of acting out 
their racial hostility toward Negroes. 4 But it turns out that 
racial hostility by merchants could not adequately explain 
ghetto prices. 
Prices were indeed higher in ghetto areas, and several 
studies showed that retail food chains followed different 
pricing policies in ghetto and nonghetto areas. With these 
findings in hand, the Federal Trade Commission, along with 
consumer advocate groups and public interest lawyers, at­
tempted, through public pressure, to require that ghetto mer­
chants offer their customers the same terms of exchange 
they were offered in nonghetto areas. 
But to view the merchants' behavior as exploitative or 
racist ignores the fact that ghettos tend to present a high­
cost business environment. Losses from business-related 
crime are higher there than elsewhere as a percentage of 
total sales; business, fire and theft insurance premiums are 
also higher; and extension of credit is riskier. In addition, 
because of the low income of ghetto residents and its effect 
on sales mix and volume, merchandising techniques used 
to lower sales costs in nonghetto areas are not readily adapta­
ble to ghetto areas. Much of the behavior that critics have 
condemned is merely an economic response to an environ­
ment that raises the cost of doing business. If products and 
services are to be provided in the ghetto, prices must reflect 
their higher costs. 
Evidence substantiates this explanation of merchant be­
havior. The Federal Trade Commission has shown that 
while gross margins were higher in ghetto areas, the differ­
ence was more than accounted for by higher operating costs, 
and the return on equity was considerably lower in the 
ghetto than elsewhere. 5 The assertion that supranormal 
profits were earned becomes even less credible when we 
recognize that retailing is characterized by relative ease of 
entry, so that if supranormal profits existed, merchants 
would open new businesses until profits in ghetto and non­
ghetto areas were equalized. The opposite of this has oc-


--- PAGE 53 ---
32 THE STATE AGAINST BLACKS 
curred in urban areas: businesses have left without being 
replaced. Furthermore, none of those who attributed the 
prices charged by white merchants to racism noted that the 
prices charged by Negro merchants were about the same. 
The crusade that blamed the problem of the ghetto con­
sumer on the greed and racism of whites may well have 
reduced the welfare of the ghetto consumer. The adverse 
publicity and boycotts (and other actions) against merchants 
in ghetto communities gave these merchants increased rea­
son to move out. The result is fewer neighborhood stores, 
with shoppers being forced to travel longer distances or pay 
even higher local prices than in the past. 
Conclusion 
The chapter has sought to give operational meaning to the 
terminology used in the analysis of race. There was also 
the attempt to extricate from race some of the emotive lan­
guage. Dispassionate analysis and a clear meaning of lan­
guage are two minimal requirements for effective policy. 
In the next chapters, there will be more detailed discus­
sion of what is the basic problem of blacks in America. This 
problem is: severe government-imposed restraints on volun­
tary exchange. Or put another way: the diminution of free 
markets in the United States.


--- PAGE 54 ---
CHAPTER 3 
Minimum Wage, 
Maximum Folly 
Of sentences that stir my bile, 
Of phrases I detest, 
There's one beyond all others vile: 
"He did it for the best." 
-James Kenneth Stephen 
The Malefactor's Plea 
MOST LABOR MARKET ACTIVITY is regulated by some level 
of government. Well-meaning people put political pressures 
on government to enact laws they think will help disadvan­
taged people. One of the ways government regulates, "in 
the interest" of the disadvantaged, is through the setting 
of maximum and minimum prices at which transactions 
can legally occur. The imposition of maximum prices, as 
in the case of rent controls, and minimum prices, as in the 
case of wages, yields predictable economic results. Often 
the results are at considerable variance with the intentions 
of well-meaning people. In this chapter the results of the 
minimum wage will be analyzed. 
The Fair Labor Standards Act was adopted by Congress 
in 1938. The act has been amended many times to increase 
the number of employees under its coverage and to increase 
the legal minimum wage. The most recent amendment, in 
1977, provided for a minimum hourly wage in 1981 of $3.35. 
The federal minimum wage is complemented by state mini­
mum wage laws that may exceed the federal minima. Fed­
eral and state minimum wage laws are acts of governmental 
intervention in the labor market which are intended to pro-
33


--- PAGE 55 ---
34 THE STATE AGAINST BLACKS 
duce a pattern of events other than that produced in a free 
market. The legislated minima raise the wage to a level 
higher than that which would have occurred with free mar­
ket forces. 
Legislative bodies have the power to legislate a wage 
increase, but unfortunately, they have not found a way to 
legislate worker productivity increases. Further, while Con­
gress can legislate the price of a labor transaction, it cannot 
require that the transaction actually be made. That is, they 
can dictate what minimum wage must be paid a person if 
you hire him, but they cannot dictate that you hire him in 
the first place. To the extent that the minimum wage law 
raises the pay level to that which may exceed the productiv­
ity of some workers, employers will predictably make adjust­
ments in their use oflabor. 1 Such an adjustment will produce 
gains for some workers at the expense of other workers. 
Those workers who retain their jobs and receive a higher 
wage clearly gain. The adverse effects are borne by those 
workers who are most disadvantaged in terms of marketable 
skills-those who lose their jobs and their income or who 
are not hired in the first place. 
The effect of the minimum wage law is more clearly 
seen if we put ourselves in the place of an employer and 
ask: If a wage of $3.35 per hour must be paid no matter 
who is hired, what kind of worker does it pay to hire? 2 Clearly 
the answer, in terms of economic efficiency, is to hire work­
ers whose productivity is the closest to $3.35 per hour. If 
such workers are available, it does not pay the firm to hire 
workers whose output is, say, $2 per hour. Even if the em­
ployer were willing to train such a worker, the fact that 
the worker must be paid a wage higher than the market 
value of his output plus the training cost makes on-the-job 
training an unattractive proposition. 
The impact of legislated minima can be brought into 
sharper focus if we ask the distributional question: Who 
bears the burden of the minimum wage? As suggested ear­
lier, the workers who bear the heaviest burden are those 
that are the most marginal. These are workers whom em­
ployers perceive as being less productive or more costly to


--- PAGE 56 ---
Minimum Wage, Maximum Folly 35 
employ than other workers. In the U.S. there are at least 
two segments of the labor force that share the marginal 
worker characteristics to a greater extent than do other seg­
ments of the labor force. The first group consists of youths 
in general. They are low-skille_d or marginal because of their 
age, immaturity and lack of work experience. The second 
group, which contains members of the first group, are racial 
minorities such as Negroes and Hispanics, who, as a result 
of racial discrimination and a number of other socioeco­
nomic factors, are disproportionately represented among 
low-skilled workers. These workers are not only made unem­
ployable by the minimum wage, but their opportunities to 
upgrade their skills through on-the-job training are also se­
vere! y limited. 3 
It is no accident that it is precisely these labor market 
participants who are also disproportionately represented 
among the unemployment statistics. Youth unemployment, 
even during relatively prosperous times, ranges from two 
to three times that of the general labor force. Black youth 
unemployment ranges from three to five times that of the 
general labor force. Black youth unemployment, nationally 
for more than a decade, had ranged from two to three times 
the unemployment rate for white youths. In some metropoli­
tan areas it is reported that black youth unemployment ex­
ceeds 60 percent! The economic effects of minimum wage 
legislation have been analyzed in numerous statistical stud­
ies that could be read by the interested. 4 While there is some 
debate over the magnitude of the effects, the weight of aca­
demic research by economists points to the conclusion that 
unemployment for some population groups is directly re­
lated to legal minimum wages and that the unemployment 
effects of the minimum wage law are felt disproportionately 
by nonwhites. Professor Jacob Mincer, in an important sta­
tistical study of minimum wage laws, reports: 5 
The net minimum wage effects on labor force participation 
appear to be negative for most of the groups. The largest nega­
tive effects are observed for nonwhite teenagers, followed by 
nonwhite males (20-24), white teenagers, and nonwhite males 
(25-64).


--- PAGE 57 ---
36 THE STATE AGAINST BLACKS 
The net employment effects are negative within the exception 
of nonwhite females (20 plus), for whom the positive coeffi­
cient is statistically insignificant. The largest disemployment 
effects are observed for nonwhite teenagers, followed by 
nonwhite males (20-24), white teenagers, and white males 
(20-24). 
Although most people are familiar with the recent statis­
tics on black youth unemployment, not many are aware of 
the black/white youth employment statistics for earlier peri­
ods, which are included in Tables 2 and 3. In 1948 black 
youth unemployment was roughly the same as white youth 
unemployment. For that year, blacks aged sixteen to seven­
teen had an unemployment rate which was less than whites 
for the same age-9.4 percent unemployed compared with 
10.2 percent whites unemployed. In the same period (until 
the mid-60s), black youths generally were either just as ac­
tive in the labor force or more so than white youths. Since 
the sixties, both the labor force participation rate and the 
employment rate of black youths have fallen to what it is 
today. For black youths sixteen to seventeen years old, the 
labor force participation rate is now only 60 percent of that 
of white youths while earlier their labor force participation 
rate was higher than that of white youths. 
Faced with these facts, one naturally asks why have la­
bor market opportunities deteriorated so precipitously for 
black youth? Can racial discrimination explain this kind 
of reversal? Probably not. It would be a very difficult task 
for anyone to support the argument that employers have 
now become more racially discriminatory than they were 
in the past. Can we say that the lower unemployment for 
blacks in the past was because blacks had educational at­
tainment levels equal to or higher than whites? No we can­
not. The answer lies elsewhere. One of the answers is that 
reduced employment opportunities is one effect of minimum 
wage legislation. 
But some supporters of the minimum wage law attempt 
to rebut this line of reasoning through another argument. 
For example, economist Professor Bernard Anderson says, 
"The minimum wage argument does not explain why black


--- PAGE 58 ---
Table 2 
Male Civilian Labor Force Participation 
Ratio by Race, Age 
B/W 
B/W B/W B/W MALES 
MALES MALES MALES 16 AND 
16-17 18-19 20-24 OVER 
1954 .99 1.11 1.05 1.00 
1955 1.00 1.01 1.05 1.00 
1.00/hr 1956 .96 1.06 1.01 .99 
1957 .95 1.01 1.03 .99 
1958 .96 1.03 1.02 1.00 
1959 .92 1.02 1.04 1.00 
1960 .99 1.03 1.03 1.00 
1.15/hr 1961 .96 1.06 1.02 .99 
1962 .93 1.04 1.03 .98 
1.25/hr 1963 .87 1.02 1.04 .99 
1965 .88 1.01 1.05 .99 
1966 .87 .97 1.06 .98 
1.40/hr 1967 .86 .95 1.04 .97 
1.60/hr 1968 .79 .96 1.03 .97 
1969 .77 .95 1.02 .96 
1970 .71 .92 1.00 .96 
1971 .65 .87 .98 .94 
1972 .68 .85 .97 .93 
1973 .63 .85 .95 .93 
2.00/hr 1974 .65 .85 .95 .92 
2.10/hr 1975 .57 .79 .92 .91 
2.30/hr 1976 .57 .77 .91 .90 
1977 .57 .77 .90 .90 
2.65/hr 1978 .60 .79 .89 .92 
2.90/hr 1979 .57 .78 .91 .91 
3.10/hr 1980 .60 .76 .91 .90 
SouRCE: Computed from U.S. Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statis-
tics, Handbook of Labor Statistics 1975-Reference ed. (Washington 
D.C.: Government Printing Office, 1975), pp. 36-37; U.S. Department 
of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics, Employment and Unemployment 
in 1976; Special Labor Force Report 199 (Washington, D.C.: Government 
Printing Office, 1977). 1978, '79, '80 figures obtained directly from Em-
ployment Analysis Division of U.S. Department of Labor.


--- PAGE 59 ---
Table 3 
Comparison of Youth and General Unemployment 
by Race (Males) 
WHITE BLACK B/W WHITE BLACK B/W WHITE BLACK B/W 
YEAR GENERAL 16-17 16-17 RATIO 18-19 18-19 RATIO 20-24 20-24 RATIO 
1948 3.8 10.2 9.4 .92 9.4 10.5 1.11 6.4 11.7 1.83 
1949 5.9 13.4 15.8 1.18 14.2 17.1 1.20 9.8 15.8 1.61 
*1950 5.3 13.4 12.1 .90 11.7 17.7 1.51 7.7 12.6 1.64 
1951 3.3 9.5 8.7 .92 6.7 9.6 1.43 3.6 6.7 1.86 
1952 3.0 10.9 8.0 .73 7.0 10.0 1.43 4.3 7.9 1.84 
1953 2.9 8.9 8.3 .93 7.1 8.1 1.14 4.5 8.1 1.80 
1954 5.5 14.0 13.4 .96 13.0 14.7 1.13 9.8 16.9 1.72 
1955 4.4 12.2 14.8 1.21 10.4 12.9 1.24 7.0 12.4 1.77 
*1956 4.1 11.2 15.7 1.40 9.7 14.9 1.54 6.1 12.0 1.97 
1957 4.3 11.9 16.3 1.37 11.2 20.0 1.70 7.1 12.7 1.79 
1958 6.8 14.9 27.1 1.81 16.5 26.7 1.62 11.7 19.5 1.66 
1959 5.5 15.0 22.3 1.48 13.0 27.2 2.09 7.5 16.3 2.17 
1960 5.5 14.6 22.7 1.55 13.5 25.1 1.86 8.3 13.1 1.58 
*1961 6.7 16.5 31.0 1.89 15.1 23.9 1.58 10.0 15.3 1.53 
1962 5.5 15.1 21.9 1.45 12.7 21.8 1.72 8.0 14.6 1.83 
*1963 5.7 17.8 27.0 1.52 14.2 27.4 1.83 7.8 15.5 1.99 
1964 5.2 16.1 25.9 1.61 13.4 23.1 1.72 7.4 12.6 1.70 
1965 4.5 14.7 27.1 1.84 11.4 20.2 1.77 5.9 9.3 1.58 
1966 3.8 12.5 22.5 1.80 8.9 20.5 2.30 4.1 7.9 1.93 
*1967 3.8 12.7 28.9 2.26 9.0 20.1 2.23 4.2 8.0 1.90 
*1968 3.6 12.3 26.6 2.16 8.2 19.0 2.31 4.6 8.3 1.80 
1969 3.5 12.5 24.7 1.98 7.9 19.0 2.40 4.6 8.4 1.83 
1970 4.9 15.7 27.8 1.77 12.0 23.1 1.93 7.8 12.6 1.62 
1971 5.9 17.1 33.4 1.95 13.5 26.0 1.93 9.4 16.2 1.72 
1972 5.6 16.4 35.1 2.14 12.4 26.2 2.11 8.5 14.7 1.73 
1973 4.9 15.1 34.4 2.28 10.0 22.1 2.21 6.5 12.6 1.94 
*1974 5.6 16.2 39.0 2.41 11.5 26.6 2.31 7.8 15.4 1.97 
*1975 8.1 19.7 45.2 2.29 14.0 30.1 2.15 11.3 23.5 2.08 
*1976 7.0 19.7 40.6 2.06 15.5 35.5 2.29 10.9 22.4 2.05 
1977 6.8 17.6 38.7 2.20 13.0 36.1 2.78 9.3 21.7 2.33 
*1978 6.6 19.4 40.4 2.08 13.0 32.2 2.47 10.0 22.5 2.25 
*1979 5.8 16.1 34.4 2.14 12.3 29.6 2.41 7.4 17.0 2.30 
*1980 7.1 18.5 37.7 2.04 14.6 33.0 2.26 11.1 22.3 2.01 
SouRCE: Adapted from Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics, Handbook of Labor Statistics 1975-Reference ed. (Washing-
ton, D.C.: Government Printing Office, 1975), pp. 153-55; U.S. Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics, Employment 
and Unemployment in 1976. Special Labor Force Report 199 (Washington, D.C.: Government Printing Office, 1977). 
*Shows change in the federal minimum wage law.


--- PAGE 60 ---
Minimum Wage, Maximum Folly 39 
youths are so disproportionately affected; then why doesn't 
it reduce it as much for white youths as it does for black 
youths?" 6 This is not a refutation of economic theory about 
effects of the minimum wage. When wages are legislated 
that exceed the productivity of some workers, firms will 
make adjustment in their use of labor. One adjustment is 
to hire not only fewer youths, but to seek among those youths 
hired the more highly qualified youths. It turns out for a 
number of socioeconomic reasons that white youths, more 
often than black youths, have higher levels of educational 
attainment and training. 7 Therefore any law that discrimi­
nated against low-skilled people can be expected to confer 
a disproportionate burden on black youths compared with 
white youths. 
Employer substitution of higher-skilled workers for 
lower-skilled workers, as discussed, is not the only effect 
of the minimum wage law. Minimum wages cause employ­
ers to make other kinds of substitution: machines for labor, 
changes in productive techniques and elimination of certain 
jobs altogether. 
The substitution of automatic dishwashers for hand­
washing and automatic tomato-picking machines for man­
ual labor are examples of the substitution of machines for 
labor in response to higher wages. The switch from checkout 
ladies behind each counter in five-and-dime stores to cash­
iers and the switch from waiter-served restaurants to fast 
food restaurants are examples of changes-in-productive­
technique response to higher wages. The absence of movie 
theater ushers and the wide usage of plastic and paperware 
utensils in restaurants are examples of the elimination-of­
certain-jobs response to higher wages. 
These are all possible and predictable responses to in­
creases in the minimum wage law. Employers ask to econ­
omize on the usage of labor. 
Minimum Wage and Racial Discrimination 
"There is no job reservation left in the building industry, 
and in the circumstances I support the rate for the job as 
the second best way of protecting our white artisans." 8 "A


--- PAGE 61 ---
40 THE STATE AGAINST BLACKS 
year later, he stated that he would be prepared to allow black 
artisans into the industry provided that minimum wages 
were raised from Rand 1,40 to at least Rand 2,00 per hour 
and if the rate-for-the-job was strictly enforced." 9 These 
statements were made by the secretary of the avowedly rac­
ist Building Worker's Union, Gert Beetge. The question is 
why South Africa's racist unions support minimum wages 
and equal-pay-for-equal-work laws (rate-for-the-job) for 
blacks! 
The racial effect of the minimum wage laws exists in 
the absence of racial preferences on behalf of employers. 
The minimum wage law gives firms effective economic in­
centive to seek to hire only the most productive employees, 
which means that firms are less willing to hire and/or train 
the least productive employee, which includes teenagers, 
particularly minority teenagers. But assuming away any 
productivity differences between black and white workers, 
minimum wage laws give firms incentive to racially dis­
criminate in hiring. The reason is that the minimum wage 
law lowers the private cost of discriminating against the 
racially less preferred person. 
The fact that a well-intentioned policy such as the mini­
mum wage law can foster and promote racial discrimination 
is incomprehensible to some people. Therefore, it is useful 
to develop a nonracial example to illustrate the generality 
of the principle. 
Take filet mignon and chuck steak. Assume that con­
sumers, holding all else constant, prefer filet mignon to 
chuck steak, a not too unrealistic assumption. Then the ques­
tion is: Why is it, in spite of consumer preferences, chuck 
steak sells at all? The actual fact of business is that chuck 
steak outsells (is more employed than) filet mignon! How 
does something less-liked compete with something more­
liked? 
It offers "compensating differences." In other words, as 
you wheel your shopping cart down the aisle, chuck steak, 
in effect, "says" to you, "I don't look as nice as filet mignon; 
I'm not as tender and tasty; but I'm not as expensive either." 
That is, chuck steak, by selling for $1.50 per pound, against


--- PAGE 62 ---
Minimum Wage, Maximum Folly 41 
filet mignon's $4 per pound, offers to "pay" you $2.50 for 
its "inferiority." Chuck steak pays you a compensating dif­
ference, which only means that it sells for a lower price. 
Now suppose filet mignon, or a seller of filet mignon, 
wanted to collude against its less-preferred competitor, 
chuck steak, what would be its most effective strategy? Short 
of getting a law passed prohibiting sales of chuck steak, 
the best strategy would be that of a minimum steak law. 
What would be the effect of a minimum steak law of, say, 
$4 per pound of steak should the law be effectively enforced? 
Again, put yourself in the position of the shopper wheel­
ing the shopping cart down the aisle. Chuck steak "says" 
to you, "I don't look as nice as filet mignon, I'm not as tender 
and tasty, and I sell for the same price as filet mignon. Buy 
me." Such a message would fall on deaf ears. You would 
say to yourself, "Why should I buy chuck steak when it sells 
for the same price as filet mignon, which I like better any­
way?" Such a sentiment reflects the basic law of demand. 
The lower the price of discriminating, the more of it will 
be done. The cost of discriminating against chuck steak, in 
the presence of the minimum steak law, is effectively zero. 
Whereas in the absence of the law, the cost of discriminating 
against chuck steak was $2.50 per pound, i.e., the difference 
in price. 
We can now discuss how the minimum wage law en­
courages racial discrimination in the labor market through 
a similar mechanism. But first, a possible complaint about 
the analogy should be aired: people are not the same thing 
as cuts of meat. That is true just as a steel ball is not the 
same as a stone. But while steel balls and stones are different, 
both are influenced in the identical fashion by gravity. The 
independent influence of gravity on a steel ball's accelera­
tion is 32 feet per second per second and its influence on a 
stone is 32 feet per second per second. Similarly, quantities 
demanded for cuts of meat are influenced by the law of de­
mand and quantities demanded for labor services are influ­
enced by that same law. 
To understand how the minimum wage can raise the 
probability of employer preference indulgence and racial


--- PAGE 63 ---
42 THE STATE AGAINST BLACKS 
discrimination, we have to recognize that money income 
is not the only form of compensation businessmen earn. 10 
The return from business consists of nonmoney income as 
well. An employer prefers what he considers as desirable 
working conditions to less-desirable working conditions. In 
his estimation more-desirable working conditions may in­
clude finer furniture, plusher carpets, prettier secretaries 
and more likable employees. The amount of these "more­
desirable working conditions" that he will choose depends 
on their costs. 
Suppose that an employer has a preference for white 
employees over black employees. And for expository simplic­
ity, assume the employees from which he chooses are identi­
cal in terms of their productivity. If there is a law, such 
as the minimum wage law, that requires that employers 
pay the same wage no matter who is hired, what are his 
incentives? 11 His incentives are that of preference indul­
gence. He must pay the black $3.35 per hour and he must 
pay the white $3.35 per hour. He must find some basis for 
choice. The minimum wage law says that his choice will 
not be based on economic criteria. Therefore, it must be 
based on noneconomic criteria. Race is a noneconomic crite­
rion. If he wishes, the employer can discriminate against 
the black worker at zero cost. However, if there were no 
minimum wage and the black was willing to work for a 
lower wage, say $2 per hour, there would be positive costs 
to employer racial discrimination. In this example, it would 
be $1.35 per hour, the difference in wages per employee. 
That's only one part of the story. The market would pe­
nalize the employer who chooses employees on market-irrel­
evant criteria. 12 There would be some employers who would 
hire blacks at the lower wage. Doing so and hence experienc­
ing lower production costs, these firms would reap supernor­
mal profits. Such a firm would be able to underprice the 
racially discriminating firms, thereby capturing a greater 
share of the market and attracting more investors. In addi­
tion, new firms may enter the scene, enticed by the profits. 
In their attempt to secure the cheaper black labor, they 
would offer higher wages. The effect would be that of wage


--- PAGE 64 ---
Minimum Wage, Maximum Folly 43 
equality between blacks and whites. 13 This line of reasoning 
is given additional weight when we consider black employ­
ment during relatively hostile times. During the "relatively 
unenlightened" times, black unemployment was lower and 
black labor force participation rates were higher than they 
are today. In 1910, for example, 71 percent of blacks over 
nine years of age were employed compared with 51 percent 
for whites. 14 Chinese were discriminated against, but they 
were employed building the railroads of the West. Neither 
phenomenon can be explained by racial likes or dislikes. 
The willingness to work for lower wages explains both. 
The notion that it is sometimes necessary for some indi­
viduals to lower their price in order that some transactions 
can occur is offensive to the sensibilities of many people. 
These people support the minimum wage law as a matter 
of moral conviction motivated by concern for equity in the 
distribution of wealth. However, white racists' unions in 
South Africa have also been supporters of minimum wage 
laws and equal-pay-for-equal-work'laws for blacks. The New 
York Times reported that in South Africa, where the racial 
climate is perhaps the most hostile in the world: 
Right wing white unions in the building trades have com­
plained to the South African government that laws reserving 
skilled jobs for whites have [been] broken and should be aban­
doned in favor of equal-pay-for-equal-work laws .... The 
conservative building trades made it clear that they were not 
motivated by concern for black workers but had come to feel 
that legal job reservation had been so eroded by government 
exemptions that it no longer protected the white worker. 15 
To understand how job reservation laws became eroded 
requires only two bits of information: (1) During the post­
World War II period, there was a significant building boom 
in South Africa, and (2) black construction workers were 
willing to accept wages of less than 25 percent of wages 
paid to white construction workers. Such a differential made 
racial discrimination in hiring a costly proposition. Firms 
that chose to hire whites instead of blacks paid dearly-$1.91


--- PAGE 65 ---
44 THE STATE AGAINST BLACKS 
per hour versus $.39 per hour. White racist unions well rec­
ognized that equal-pay-for-equal-work laws (a variant of 
minimum wage laws) would lower the cost of racial discrim­
ination and thus improve their competitive position in the 
labor market. 
Moral philosophers can get into unending debate over 
whether it is fair for some people to have to pay higher 
prices for what they buy than others and accept lower prices 
for what they sell (as in the case of labor services) than 
others do. But solid economic evidence shows that whatever 
the handicap, preventing people from lowering (raising) the 
price of what they sell (buy) tends to reinforce that handi­
cap. 
U.S. Union Support for Minimum Wage Laws 
As is the case in South Africa and elsewhere, unions in the 
United States are also the major supporters of the minimum 
wage law. While our unions have different stated intentions 
behind their support of minimum wage laws, one must al­
ways remember that the effect of policy is by no means nec­
essarily determined by the intents of policy. But a good case 
can be made that the effects of the minimum wage law (high 
unemployment among low-skilled workers) are its inten­
tions. This can be readily understood if we consider as econo­
mists do that for many productive activities low-skilled 
workers are substitutes for higher-skilled workers. And if 
high-skilled workers, through organizing, can reduce or 
eliminate the use of low-skilled workers, they achieve mo­
nopoly power and command higher wages. A numerical ex­
ample can demonstrate the strategy. 
Suppose a fence can be produced by using either one 
high-skilled worker or by using three low-skilled workers. 
If the wage of high-skilled workers is $38 per day, and that 
of a low-skilled worker is $13 per day, the firm would employ 
the high-skilled worker because costs would be less and prof­
its higher ($38 versus $39). The high-skilled worker would 
soon recognize that one of the ways to increase his wealth


--- PAGE 66 ---
Minimum Wage, Maximum Folly 45 
would be to advocate a minimum wage of, say, $20 per day 
in the fencing industry. The arguments that the high-skilled 
worker would use to gain political support would be those 
given by any of our union leaders: "to raise the standard 
of living," "prevention of worker exploitation," "worker 
equality," and so forth. After the enactment of the minimum 
wage laws, the high-skilled worker can now demand any 
wage up to $60 per day (what it would now cost to hire three 
low-skilled workers) and retain employment. 16 Prior to the 
enactment of the minimum wage of $20 per day, a demand 
for $60 per day would have cost the high-skilled worker his 
job. Thus the effect of the minimum wage is to price the 
high-skilled worker's competition out of the market. 
Whether the example given here accurately describes 
the motives of labor unions' support of and expenditures 
made lobbying for minimum wages is not really at issue. 
The effects of union action do not depend on its motivation. 
That is, whether the union means to help or to harm the 
low-skilled worker, the effect is to price him out of the mar­
ket. However, it is worthwhile to note that the restrictive 
activities promoted by unions do reduce employment oppor­
tunities and the income of those forced out of the market. 
This fact suggests that union strategies to raise wages of 
their members must be complemented by their lobbying for 
government welfare programs. The reason is that if not hav­
ing a job meant not eating, there would be considerable polit­
ical disruption. Therefore, unions have incentives to support 
subsidy programs for those denied job access. 17 Thus, it is 
very probable that unions will lead the support for income 
subsidy programs such as Job Corps, summer work pro­
grams, CET A, food stamps, public service employment and 
welfare. The redistribution of income really constitutes a 
subsidy from society at large, who pay the taxes, to those 
who have used the various powers of government to restrict 
or eliminate job opportunity. Income subsidy programs have 
disguised the true effects of restriction created by unions 
and other economic agents by casting a few crumbs to those 
denied jobs in order to keep them quiet, thereby creating 
a permanent welfare class.


--- PAGE 67 ---
46 THE STATE AGAINST BLACKS 
U.S. Business Support for Minimum Wage Laws 
Businesses have sought protection from competition by way 
of the minimum wage law. President John Kennedy, when 
he was senator, supported increases in the minimum wage 
law as a way of protecting New England industry from com­
petition with southern industry. 18 Farmers have supported 
agricultural minimum wage laws in order to reduce compe­
tition. A particularly insightful comment was made by Con­
gressman Joseph Y. Resnick: 
Mr. Chairman, I would like to point out to all the members 
of the Northeast and from the city what this legislation means 
to them. For one thing, Mr. Chairman, it means that the farm­
ers of the Northeast can compete fairly with farmers from 
the rest of the country. 
Now, Mr. Chairman, we have poultry farmers in our part 
of the country. Our farmers pay anywhere from $1.25 to $1.75 
an hour for help. I ask you how can they compete with poultry 
farmers in Mississippi who pay $3 a day for a ten-hour day. 19 
There are numerous examples of business interests that 
are served by minimum wages. Surely included among them 
are businessmen's past interest in having U.S. minimum 
wage laws applied to U.S. territories and Puerto Rico. The 
underlying drive of businessmen, in their support for the 
minimum wage law, was to reduce competition that they 
would face from lower-wage areas. The minimum wage law 
gets very little political support from the low-wage states, 
mostly in the South. 
Labor Market Myths 
Before ending this chapter we should comment on several 
widely accepted labor market myths. 
1. If teenagers are allowed to work at subminimum 
wages, they will be employed while their parents go unem­
ployed. This statement is an example of what economists 
call the "lump of labor fallacy." The statement assumes that 
there is a finite number of jobs available whereby the acqui-


--- PAGE 68 ---
Minimum Wage, Maximum Folly 47 
sition of one job by one person of necessity means that an­
other person will lose his job. There is no evidence to support 
such a contention. The number of people holding jobs grew 
from less than a million during colonial times to nearly 100 
million holding jobs now. All evidence suggests that this 
trend will continue. While there may be some substitutions, 
the overwhelming effect of subminimum wages would be 
to increase employment. 
2. The employment problem faced by youths and others 
is that there are simply no jobs available. If this myth is 
accepted at face value, it is the same thing as saying that 
all human wants have been satisfied. In other words, it as­
serts that no one anywhere wishes to have more of some 
good or service. Again, there is no evidence to support such 
a claim. The quantity of labor employed, just as any other 
thing of value, conforms to the law of demand: the higher 
its price the less it is used, and vice versa. What people mean 
by this particular statement is that at some particular wage 
there are no jobs available. Nothing is strange about this 
observation, because at some particular wage anyone will 
find that his labor is not demanded. For example, if a writer 
informed his employer that the minimum wage that he was 
willing to work for was $200,000 per year, there would simply 
be no job available. This notion applies to any worker. The 
only difference is that the wage that would cause some peo­
ple to be unemployed is higher than that which would cause 
other people to be unemployed. 
3. Many people are unemployed because they are low­
skilled and have few qualifications. Low skills explain low 
wages, but low skills cannot explain unemployment. A per­
son is qualified or u!nqualified only in a relative sense-rela­
tive to some wage. To speak of qualifications or skills in 
an absolute sense has little meaning. For example, a carpen­
ter who is qualified, and hence employable at a wage of 
$4 per hour, may be unqualified, and hence unemployable, 
at a wage of $10 per hour. This idea applies to anything. 
A Sears suit is "unqualified" to sell for the same price as a 
tailored Pierre Cardin suit. 
One of the interesting aspects of skills and qualifications


--- PAGE 69 ---
48 THE STATE AGAINST BLACKS 
is that if an organization of, say, carpenters can through 
legal institutions require that employers pay all carpenters 
hired a wage of $10 per hour, then they have artificially 
disqualified and made unemployable the carpenter who was 
formerly qualified and employable at the wage of $4 per 
hour. 
This kind of artificial disqualification has direct applica­
tion to the problems that minorities face in the labor market. 
Frequently, it is said that minorities have a high unemploy­
ment rate because of their low skills. How does one reconcile 
this statement with the fact that in earlier times minorities 
had lower unemployment rates? No one, we think, would 
be prepared to argue that blacks during earlier times had 
more education and training than blacks in present times 
and that is why they had higher employment rates. No, the 
real reason is that through the political mechanism (perhaps 
without intent) many blacks have been artificially disquali­
fied. 
4. High youth unemployment reflects the ababy boom,, 
of the post-World War II era. This myth reflects a misunder­
standing of the basic laws of supply and demand. Given a 
demand, an increased supply of labor (or for that matter 
anything else) results in lower prices in a free market. It 
just happens that the labor market in the United States is 
not free. 
5. Widespread automation is the cause of high unem­
ployment rates among a large sector of the labor force. This 
myth reflects both a kind of amnesia and the lump of labor 
fallacy. First, higher wages are the proximate cause of auto­
mation. When wages rise relative to capital costs, firms have 
incentives to substitute capital for labor. For example, when 
elevator operators negotiated a higher wage, a few years 
later we saw widespread installation of automatic elevators. 
After tomato pickers were brought under the minimum 
wage, we saw the implementation of tomato-picking ma­
chines. As grape pickers negotiate higher wages, we are now 
seeing the transition to grape-picking machines. Second, this 
myth is the lump of labor fallacy because it asserts that 
society has no use for the labor displaced by automation.


--- PAGE 70 ---
Minimum Wage, Maximum Folly 49 
6. The minimum wage law will give workers increased 
purchasing power that will sustain high employment. This 
myth assumes that workers keep their jobs and work the 
same number of hours as before. Some workers will and 
some will not. The workers who lose their jobs as a result 
of a hypothetical right to earn $3.35 will find that the hypo­
thetical right will not buy them groceries and housing. Fur­
thermore, more wages are not necessarily the same thing 
as more purchasing power when the artificial wage in­
creases give rise to political forces for inflation. 
7. The minimum wage law is an antipoverty weapon. 
If this were true, we would have an instant solution to the 
world's poverty and underdevelopment problems. We would 
just advise countries to raise their minimum wage. The sad 
fact of business is that low-skilled workers are not so much 
underpaid as they are underskilled. The way to help them, 
as well as poor countries, is to make them more productive. 
This cannot be done with a stroke of the legislative pen. 
These labor market myths have maintained their popu­
larity down through the ages primarily because they have 
served particular interest groups and because many other 
people are decent and have legitimate concern for their fel­
lowman. However, truly compassionate policy requires dis­
passionate analysis. Therefore, the debunking of these and 
other labor market myths is an important ingredient toward 
that end. 
The minimum wage law, as well as many other laws 
that have placed minimum prices on labor transactions, has 
imposed incalculable harm on the most disadvantaged 
members of our society. The absence of work opportunities 
for many youngsters does not mean only an absence of 
pocket money. Early work opportunities provide much more 
than that. Early work opportunities teach youngsters how 
to find a job. They learn work attitudes. They learn the im­
portance of punctuality and respect for supervision. These 
things learned in any job make a person a more valuable 
worker in the future. Furthermore, early work experiences 
give youngsters the pride and self-respect that comes from 
being financially independent. All the benefits of early work


--- PAGE 71 ---
50 THE STATE AGAINST BLACKS 
experiences are even more important for black youngsters 
who go to the nation's worst schools. If they are to learn 
something that will make them more valuable in the future, 
they have to learn it in the job market. 
Since the minimum wage law does incalculable harm 
to the nation's youth, the only moral thing to do is repeal 
it. Failing that, a national subminimum wage would be a 
partial solution. 
Invisible Victims 
Some of the political support for the minimum wage reflects 
self-interest. It is a way to eliminate, as we have discussed, 
low wage competition. Others lend political support to mini­
mum wage legislation because of a real concern for the dis­
advantaged worker. They think that the poor are helped to 
live a better life. In one sense these people are correct. The 
less poor are made better off and the poorest poor are made 
worse off. But the truly concerned supporter of the minimum 
wage law cannot see this. 
The reason that this effect of the minimum wage law 
goes unnoticed is that there are policy blind spots. Very often 
the victims of many forms of social policy are invisible. They 
are not seen or accounted for by the do-gooders. 
Do-gooders may see people working under "sweatshop" 
conditions. Old ladies working ten hours a day and earning 
$1.50 an hour. Or teenagers working well into the night for 
$1 an hour. Having made such an observation, the do­
gooders may force the U.S. Department of Labor to do some­
thing about these conditions. The Labor Department may 
very well do something that may include heavy penalties 
on the factory owner for violations of wage laws and other 
labor laws. 
Having brought this action, the do-gooders walk away 
triumphantly, knowing that good has won over evil. Six 
months later they may return to the factory. The people that 
they see are better off. They are earning the minimum wage 
and have better working conditions. Once again the do­
gooders feel a sense of triumph.


--- PAGE 72 ---
Minimum Wage, Maximum Folly 51 
What they do not see are the people, the old lady and 
kids, who no longer have a job. The old lady is without in­
come and the kid may be standing on street corners commit­
ting crime. These are the invisible victims of the do-gooders' 
actions. Often the causes are invisible to the victims them­
selves: they do not know why they cannot find a job. 
What the do-gooders forgot to ask before they enacted 
their policy to "help" is why would anyone work ten hours 
per day for the paltry sum of a dollar or two an hour? Would 
he have selected such a job if he had a better opportunity? 
Therefore, the "sweatshop" job was his best-known opportu­
nity. Such a person is indeed unfortunate, but is he helped 
by the destruction of his best opportunity with the do-gooder 
offering him no replacement other than the dole? 
The real problem, both in the U.S. and other countries, 
is that people are not so much underpaid as they are under­
skilled. The real task is to make skilled those people who 
are underskilled. This is not done by merely declaring, "As 
of January 1, 1981, everybody's productive output is now 
worth $3.35 per hour." This makes about as much sense, 
and accomplishes about as much, as doctors curing patients 
by merely declaring that they are cured.


--- PAGE 73 ---



--- PAGE 74 ---
CHAPTER 4 
What Do Differences 
in Median Income 
Mean? 
The great tragedy of Science-the slaying of a 
beautiful hypothesis by an ugly fact. 
-T. H. Huxley 
Biogenesis and Abiogenesis 
THERE ARE SIGNIFICANT INCOME DIFFERENCES by race. Social 
scientists have searched for well over a decade for the an­
swer. The statistic shrouded in mystery is the fact that black 
median income is roughly 60 percent of white median in­
come. In the 1960s, everyone was quite sure of the cause 
of white/black income differences. It was racial discrimina­
tion. In the wake of legal litigation, antidiscriminatory laws 
and affirmative action, now the question is why do these 
differentials remain. 
To examine the labor market for current racial discrim­
ination is a very difficult statistical task. The statistician 
must be able to compare likes with likes. This means that 
he must discover all those human characteristics that have 
some bearing on earning capacity. Some of these are quanti­
fiable, such as age, years of schooling and experience. Other 
influences are less quantifiable, such as quality of schooling, 
mannerisms and demeanor and just plain luck. Somehow 
the statisticians must standardize these variables to see how 
much bearing the race of the individual has on his income. 
Typically, the statistician/researcher concludes that after 
controlling for all other differences, the remaining differ-
53


--- PAGE 75 ---
54 THE STATE AGAINST BLACKS 
ence in income can be accounted for by racial discrimina­
tion. Such an approach, though none better is known, is 
fraught with many technical difficulties. These difficulties 
include inadequate measures of employee productivity and 
inclusiveness of all the income-relevant variables and varia­
ble quantification. But for whatever it's worth, where econo­
mists have been able to do a good job in handling these 
problems, very little current labor market discrimination 
exists. 1 
This chapter will focus on one area of the labor market 
for analysis. Definitive answers will not be provided. But 
questions to "sure" answers will be asked. The discussion 
focuses on comparisons between black and white profession­
als. Though professional occupations constitute only a small 
fraction of the total labor market, there are some interesting 
facts uncovered that might offer insight into the labor mar­
ket in general. 
A widely noted characteristic of median income differ­
ences between black and white workers is the fact that they 
spread as black education increases. The following state­
ment is typical of what has acquired axiomatic status in 
the racial discrimination literature: 
Another reason for arguing that racial discrimination exists 
in the demand for labor is that the measured income differen­
tials are greater at higher educational levels. For example, 
among males aged 35 to 44 in the northern United States in 
1959, the ratio of mean non-white to mean white income was 
79 percent for those with elementary school education, 70 
percent for those with high school education and only 59 per­
cent for those with college education ... it is hard to give 
any explanation for these figures based on supply consider­
ations. It is most reasonable to explain them on the hypothesis 
of a racial discrimination in demand that is more intensive 
for higher economic positions, the jobs into which the more 
educated go.2 
And, as Finis Welch reports: 
The most important result is that the market evidently dis­
criminates much more heavily against a Negro's education


--- PAGE 76 ---
What Do Differences in Median Income Mean? 55 
than against his skilled labor. Thus, relative to whites with 
similar schooling, Negro income declines as school comple­
tion increases. 3 
Numerous statistical studies have been motivated by 
these and similar findings. By and large, the studies conclude 
that after controlling for education and other socioeconomic 
variables thought to influence earnings, there remains an 
"unexplained residual" in the comparison of black/white 
earnings. The "unexplained residual" is said to be racial 
discrimination in the labor force. The typical explanation 
given for the unexplained residual is that employers or em­
ployees exhibit a distaste for working with blacks. There­
fore, if the black worker is to be employed, he must offer 
a compensating difference in the form of lower earnings 
to offset white employer I employee distastes. The explana­
tion goes on to assert that the distaste for blacks is greater 
at higher-level jobs since high-level jobs entail more super­
visory responsibilities and whites have an aversion to having 
a black supervisor. This is said to make the highly educated 
black less valuable to the firm. 
The racial taste hypothesis of earning differentials be­
tween black and white workers can be satisfactory only if 
there is confidence that all variables that influence income 
are known and adequately controlled. However, there are 
many factors that can influence income and productivity 
which are statistically elusive. Some of the more difficult 
variables to account for in statistical analysis but known 
to influence productivity are chance, genetic endowment 
and household or cultural values that shape individual fu­
ture versus present choices (and hence educational invest­
ment decisions), just to name a few. But ignoring these diffi­
culties for the moment, let us look at some facts. 
One of the best-kept secrets of all times and virtually 
totally ignored in the literature on racial differences in earn­
ings is that black/white female professional income ratios 
do not exhibit patterns even remotely similar to their male 
counterparts. Table 4 presents these facts. In 1960, black 
male college graduates earned a median income which was


--- PAGE 77 ---
56 THE STATE AGAINST BLACKS 
only 60 percent of white male college graduates. This is com­
pared to black female college graduates whose median in­
come was 102 percent of that of white female college gradu­
ates. Black female college graduates earned a median 
income that was 2 percent higher than their white female 
counterparts. Table 4 also shows that for black female high 
school and grade school graduates, median earnings were 
significantly closer to those of white females than black 
males' earnings were to those of their counterparts. 
Table 4 
Ratio of Black/White Income by Skill Levels in 1960 
EDUCATION 
College 
High School 
Grade School 
MALE 
.60 
.69 
.75 
FEMALE 
1.02 
.79 
.87 
SOURCE: Richard B. Freeman, "Labor Market Discrimination," in Michael 
D. lntriligator and David A. Kendrick (eds.), Frontiers of Quantitative 
Economics, vol. II (New York: American Elsevier Publishing Co., 1974), 
p. 503. 
The story does not end there; more remarkable results 
were found in the 1970 census. By 1970, the median earnings 
of black male college graduates rose from 60 to 73 percent 
of similar whites, while in the same year, blacks classified 
as professionals earned 72 percent of the income of white 
male professionals. More evidence of racial discrimination? 
What about black and white females? It turns out that in 
1970, black female college graduates earned an income 
which was 125 percent of their white counterparts! Those 
classified as professionals earned incomes of 118 percent 
of their white counterparts! That is, black female college 
graduates and professionals, compared to their white coun­
terparts, were respectively earning 25 and 18 percent more! 4 
It is easy to suggest that the favorable status of black 
female professionals is due to affirmative action and civil 
rights legislation. But the economic position of black female


--- PAGE 78 ---
What Do Differences in Median Income Mean? 57 
Female Black/White Income Ratios by Region for Ages 14 and 
Over, 1950, 1960, 1970 
1950 1960 1970 
Northeast .84 .99 1.17 
North Central .86 .97 1.17 
South .58 .56 .67 
West .86 .96 1.08 
SouRCE: U.S. Census of Population 1950, 1960, 1970 
college graduates relative to whites is not a new phenome­
non. As early as 1950, black female college graduates earned 
a median income that was 91 percent that of white female 
college graduates. 5 The fact of business is that on the whole 
the difference between median incomes for black and white 
females in the general work force have been considerably 
less than that of males. Table 5 gives black/white female 
income ratios by region for females 14 years of age and over 
in the years 1950, 1960 and 1970. Table 6 gives the same 
information for males 14 years of age and over. 
Table 5 shows that, except for the South, black females 
achieved economic parity with white females by 1970. More­
over, the data show that black females as a group, except 
for the South, have had median incomes quite close to that 
of white females for nearly three decades. Black males are 
Table 6 
Male Black/White Income Ratios by Region for Ages 14 and Over, 
1950, 1960, 1970 
1950 1960 1970 
Northeast .75 .71 .75 
North Central .81 .76 .79 
South .58 .56 .56 
West .68 .71 .71 
SouRCE: U.S. Census of Population 1950, 1960, 1970


--- PAGE 79 ---
58 THE STATE AGAINST BLACKS 
just now achieving the economic position relative to white 
males that black females, relative to white females, had 
achieved by 1950! 
The presence of these facts seriously calls into question 
most theories of racial earnings differentials, particularly 
the relative discrimination hypothesis where it is argued 
by Welch, for example, that discrimination is against black 
education. 6 The reason to question this is that the relative 
discrimination hypothesis fails to explain why black fe­
males relative to white females appear not to be discrimi­
nated against. Are they immune? Using the identical reason­
ing utilized by Welch and others, the argument could be 
produced, as far as female college graduates are concerned, 
that there is racial discrimination against white female col­
lege graduates. This, according to the prevailing thought, 
would be the only way that we could explain the fact that 
black female college graduates earn higher wages than their 
white counterparts. 7 
Therefore, as suggested by the discussion so far, there 
are at least three important questions that are inadequately 
answered in the racial discrimination literature: (1) Why 
do black/white female income ratios rise with increased 
education while the opposite is the case with black/white 
male median income ratio; (2) Why is it that black/white 
female income differences are virtually nonexistent, as a 
group, while there are significant differences between black 
and white males; and (3) What can possibly explain why 
the median income of the black female professional is 25 
percent higher than that of white female professionals? 
Definitive answers to these questions are all but impossi­
ble because of the highly aggregated form of data that are 
available. That is, it appears to be meaningless to use aggre­
gated data such as the median income of persons to explain 
a behavior phenomenon that is essentially at the unit level 
of analysis. To say more-meaningful things about racial dis­
crimination, one needs to have wage/race and other data 
by occupation by firm. Such a source of data is unknown 
to the writer. 
However, there are some things that can be done with


--- PAGE 80 ---
What Do Differences in Median Income Mean? 59 
census data which, while not providing complete answers, 
tend to weaken some of the usual explanations given for 
black/white income differences. The standard explanations 
range from poor quality education and lower group socioeco­
nomic status to labor market racial discrimination. If these 
factors cause black male income to be significantly lower 
than that of white males, then why is it that black females, 
who presumably share the same environmental background 
as do black males, have incomes that are for the most part 
equal to or greater than white females? 
Some insight into these questions may be found if we 
analyze the racial differences (or the lack thereof) in the 
professional occupational distribution broken down by sex. 
The specific question that is asked is how do blacks and 
whites compare, by sex, within the professional category 
of jobs? The reasoning behind this question is that: (1) If 
occupational distributions are similar, by race, within a sex 
group, then preliminarily we may attach more significance 
to the wage discrimination hypothesis of racial median in­
come differences; (2) If the occupational distribution differs 
by race within a sex group, then one possible explanation 
of racial income differences may reflect that one group may 
be more highly represented in the lower-paying jobs within 
the professional ranks. 
To examine differences and similarities between black 
and white professionals by race, the 1970 Census of Popula­
tion was used. Tables 7 and 8 are representations of the 
census of professionals broken down into 27 professional 
classes. To test for the degree of similarity in the occupa­
tional distributions, the Kendall rank order coefficient of cor­
relation was used. 8 This is a statistical test for comparison. 
The closer the coefficient is to 1.0, the more similar the 
groups under comparison. The coefficient for black and 
white professional males was (.68) and that for black and 
white females was (.85). A coefficient of (1.0) would suggest 
that the distributions were identical. The fact that the coeffi­
cient is significantly higher in the case of black/white fe­
males is interpreted as meaning that the similarity in distri­
bution among professional occupations is stronger in the


--- PAGE 81 ---
Table 7 
Racial/Sexual Distribution of Occupations, Male 
%OF TOTAL RANKING %OF TOTAL RANKING 
WHITE WHITE MALE ORDER FOR BLACK BLACK MALE ORDER FOR 
MALES PROFESSIONALS WHITE MALES MALES PROFESSIONALS BLACK MALES 
Professional Technicians 6,394,050 237,293 
Accounting 500,302 .078 5 9,026 .04 10 
Architects 51,545 .008 20 1,151 .005 22 
Computer Specialists 194,261 .03 11 5,803 .02 14 
Engineers 1,140,035 .18 1 12,995 .05 6 
Farm Management Advisors 5,982 .0009 26 337 .001 26 
Foresters & Conservationists 36,977 .005 23 638 .003 25 
Home Management Advisors 186 .00005 27 16 .00007 27 
Lawyers & Judges 252,219 .04 9 3,231 .01 17 
Life & Physical Scientists 167,063 .027 13 4,845 .02 15 
Operations & Systems Research 69,428 .01 18 1,112 .005 23 
Personnel & Labor Relations 188,314 .03 12 8,337 .04 11 
Doctors, Dentists, etc. 470,476 .07 6 9,581 .04 8 
Nurses, Dieticians 44,126 .007 22 6,808 .02 13 
Health Technologists 66,872 .01 19 8,007 .03 12 
Religious Workers 211,521 .03 10 12,840 .05 7 
Social Scientists 83,760 .01 16 2,013 .008 20 
Social Workers 89,602 .01 15 15,013 .06 5 
Teachers (University) 331,224 .05 7 9,211 .04 9


--- PAGE 82 ---
Librarians 24,676 .004 24 1,412 .006 21 
Mathematical Specialists 21,984 .003 25 643 .003 24 
Teachers (Non-University) 745,673 .12 2 50,891 .21 1 
Engineering Technicians 670,054 .10 3 21,836 .09 3 
Technicians (Nonhealth, Eng.) 131,023 .02 14 2,993 .01 18 
Vocational & Education 
Counselors 54,133 .008 21 4,414 .02 16 
Writers, Artists, Entertainers 491,756 .08 4 18,236 .08 4 
Research Workers 82,023 .01 17 1,999 .008 19 
Professional Workers (Allocated) 258,830 .04 8 23,908 .10 2 
SouRCE: U.S. Bureau of the Census, Census of Population: 1970 Characteristics of the Population, vol. I, pt. I, United States Summary, 
sec. 2 (Washington D.C.: Government Printing Office, 1973).


--- PAGE 83 ---
Table 8 
Racial/Sexual Distribution of Occupations, Female 
%OF TOTAL RANKING %OF TOTAL RANKING 
WHITE WHITE FEMALE ORDER FOR BLACK BLACK FEMALE ORDER FOR 
FEMALES PROFESSIONALS WHITE FEMALES FEMALES PROFESSIONALS BLACK FEMALES 
Professional Technicians 4,181,932 374,041 
Accounting 171,565 .04 5 7,495 .02 7 
Architects 1,789 .0004 25 107 .0003 26 
Computer Specialists 46,360 .01 13 2,655 .007 13 
Engineers 18,465 .004 19 684 .002 22 
Farm Management Advisors 1,096 .0003 27 131 .0004 25 
Foresters & Conservationists 1,491 .0004 26 89 .0002 27 
Home Management Advisors 4,498 .001 24 618 .002 21 
Lawyers & judges 12,478 .003 21 497 .001 23 
Life & Physical Scientists 24,444 .006 16 1,486 .004 15 
Operations & Systems Research 7,073 .002 23 443 .001 24 
Personnel & Labor Relations 80,844 .02 10 6,276 .02 10 
Doctors, Dentists, etc. 42,378 .02 11 1,855 .005 14 
Nurses, Dieticians 803,976 .19 2 69,620 .18 2 
Health Technologists 159,175 .04 6 16,151 .04 5 
Religious Workers 24,210 .006 17 1,031 .003 19 
Social Scientists 19,391 .005 18 1,075 .003 18 
Social Workers 124,604 .03 8 25,778 .06 4 
Teachers (University) 127,305 .03 7 7,599 .02 6 
Librarians 93,660 .02 9 6,808 .02 8 
Math Specialists 11,147 .003 22 737 .002 20 
Teachers (Non-University) 1,719,739 .41 1 172,372 .46 1 
Engineering Technicians 80,375 .02 12 4,820 .01 12 
Technicians (Nonhealth, Eng.) 15,977 .004 20 1,075 .003 17


--- PAGE 84 ---
Vocational & Education 
Counselors 40,263 .01 14 5,469 .01 11 
Writers, Artists, & 
Entertainers 214,809 .05 3 6,643 .02 9 
Research Workers 28,186 .007 15 1,284 .003 16 
Professional Workers (Allocated) 206,534 .05 4 31,243 .08 3 
SoURCE: U.S. Bureau of the Census, Census of Population: 1970 Characteristics of the Population. vol. I, pt. I, United States Summary, 
sec. 2 (Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office, 1973).


--- PAGE 85 ---
64 THE STATE AGAINST BLACKS 
case of black and white females than in the case of their 
male counterparts. 
These findings suggest that a good part of the income 
differential between white and black male professionals 
may lie in occupational distribution differences between the 
two populations. This would imply that even if white and 
black males were paid identical incomes within an occupa­
tion, significant differences would occur when measuring 
median professional income. For example, the largest cate­
gory (rank 1) of white male professionals are classed as engi­
neers. This class constitutes 18 percent of white male profes­
sionals. On the other hand, only 5 percent of black male 
professionals are classed as engineers-rank 6 among black 
male professionals. Non-university teachers is the largest 
group for black professionals (21 percent) while only 12 per­
cent of white male professionals are so classified. 
The significance of these occupational differences is 
seen when we compare median earnings in these occupa­
tions. According to the 1970 Census, the median earnings 
of engineers was $13,149! The median earnings for non-uni­
versity teachers was $8,711! Making the most heroic assump­
tion that blacks and whites earn the same pay within the 
respective occupations, there would be significant differ­
ences in black and white male professional incomes at the 
median. However, the fact of business is that there are dif­
ferences. The median earnings of black male engineers was 
$10,494 compared to $13,149 for white males, while the earn­
ings of black male non-university teachers was $7,777 and 
that of white male non-university teachers was $8,711. On 
the other hand, median earnings for black female non-uni­
versity teachers, $6,620, exceeded that of white female non­
university teachers, $6,369. 
For female professionals, there is an entirely different 
story. Non-university teaching is the largest category (rank 
1) for both black and white female professionals. Forty-six 
percent of black female and 41 percent of white female pro­
fessionals are in that category. Nurses and dieticians are 
the second most important category among female profes­
sionals. Eighteen percent of black and 19 percent of white


--- PAGE 86 ---
What Do Differences in Median Income Mean? 65 
professionals are nurses and dieticians. Table 8 shows the 
rank order for black and white female professionals which 
shows that black/white female professions are far more sim­
ilar in their distribution across the professional occupational 
structure than are black/white male professionals. 
Why black male professionals differ so significantly 
from their white counterparts, and black female profession­
als do not, is a matter for interesting speculation. 
A more interesting question is, Given the similarities 
between black and white female professionals, why is it that 
the median income for black female professionals is 125 
percent that of white female professionals? One thing that 
is implied by the showing of black females is that sex dis­
crimination is not compounded by race discrimination. The 
higher earnings of black female professionals could show 
the effect of rural versus nonrural employment and compen­
sation. Blacks, as a group, are more urban than are whites 
as a group. 9 To the extent that urban salaries are higher 
than rural salaries, the fact that a larger percentage of black 
female professionals are urban, this coupled with the fact 
that their professional occupation distribution is very simi­
lar to white, could very well account for the income differen­
tial. Particularly so, when we take note of the fact that teach­
ers and nurses, the most important category of employment 
for women, earn higher salaries in metropolitan areas than 
in nonmetropolitan areas. 
Income differences can be the result of factors other 
than racial discrimination by employers. They could be the 
result of factors having little or nothing to do with discrimi­
nation. Factors racially benign such as age, geography, edu­
cational attainment, family size and personal occupational 
choice can account for the results we see. 10 But income dif­
ferences can be explained by racial discrimination either 
by employers or other agents in the society. The policy-rele­
vant question is how much of a role does racial discrimina­
tion play and how much of a role do the other factors play 
in explaining white/black differences in income? To develop 
effective policy requires correct identification of causal rela­
tionships.


--- PAGE 87 ---



--- PAGE 88 ---
CHAPTER 5 
Occupational and 
Business Licensing 
People of the same trade seldom meet together, even for 
merriment and diversion, but the conversation ends in a 
conspiracy against the public, or in some other 
contrivance to raise prices. 
-Adam Smith 
Wealth of Nations 
FEDERAL, STATE AND LOCAL GOVERNMENTS regulate the con­
ditions by which individuals may enter and conduct them­
selves in many businesses and occupations. 1 The often stated 
justification for government regulation is the desire to pro­
tect public safety and morals, provide for orderly markets, 
eliminate unscrupulous practitioners and provide for a fair 
rate of return. Apart from the "public spirited" intentions 
that may underlie the regulation of businesses and occupa­
tions, there are the effects of regulation that can be analyzed 
through economic analysis. It is not required in any way 
that in order to analyze effects of regulation we analyze, 
deny or even acknowledge its intents. 2 The emphasis here 
is that intentions are one part of social legislation and effects 
of social legislation are another part since such intentions 
of policy may bear no relation to policy results. 
Entry into a number of businesses and occupations is 
controlled at the various levels of government. For example, 
entry into interstate trucking is controlled by the U.S. Inter­
state Commerce Commission while intrastate trucking is 
controlled at the state level, usually by some public utility 
authority. In some states, entry into the taxi business is con-
67


--- PAGE 89 ---
68 THE STATE AGAINST BLACKS 
trolled by a state authority and in other states the responsi­
bility is delegated to the municipalities. Adding to the com­
plexity of business and occupational regulation is that they 
are strictly controlled in some states and municipalities 
while in others there may be little or no control. 
The control by government over the entry into an occu­
pation is typically done through licensure laws. People who 
practice the trade without being licensed are subject to crim­
inal prosecution which includes arrest, fines or imprison­
ment. Licensure laws have various legal minimum require­
ments that must be satisfactorily met as a condition of entry. 
These may include: prior minimum schooling, citizenship, 
written, oral or practical competency testing, attendance at 
"approved" schools or "approved" apprenticeship programs, 
prior occupational experience, minimum age requirements, 
and so forth. 
Licensing laws are administered by experts who are se­
lected from those who are already practicing the occupation 
or business. 3 These experts, sometimes called commission­
ers, change and modify licensure laws. They have full state 
police powers at their disposal to enforce concurrence and 
compliance among practitioners. 
The economic effects of occupational and business licen­
sure are quite predictable. The most immediate effect of 
licensing is that the number of practitioners is smaller than 
it would otherwise be. The reasons are mostly the result 
of higher entry costs for the licensed activity. Some licenses 
require many months of schooling as in the cases of cosmeti­
cians and barbers. Others require installation of costly 
health and safety equipment. Yet others require the pur­
chase of the license or "certificate of authorization" which 
can cost into the millions of dollars. Then some licensing 
jurisdictions issue only a fixed number of licenses or authori­
zations. All of these licensure requirements raise the cost 
of entry, which leads necessarily to a smaller number of 
practitioners in the licensed activity. 
Fewer practitioners is the primary effect of licensing. 
The secondary effect is that the price of the good or service 
is higher than it would otherwise be. Therefore, the effect 
of restricting entry to a business or occupation, and fre-


--- PAGE 90 ---
Occupational and Business Licensing 69 
quently the unstated intent of licensing, is to raise the in­
comes of incumbent practitioners. Informal evidence seems 
to support this: (1) most licensure laws are the result of in­
tense lobbying by incumbent practitioners, not consumers 
demanding better protection; (2) when incumbents in an 
unlicensed trade lobby for licensing (or when incumbents 
in an already licensed trade lobby for higher entry require­
ments) they virtually always seek a grandfather's clause that 
exempts them from meeting all the requirements; (3) viola­
tions of the licensing codes by practitioners, such as price 
cutting and extra hours, are nearly always reported to the 
licensing board by the incumbent practitioners and not by 
customers.• 
The severest form of occupational licensing is that 
which imposes a fixed number of licensed practitioners in 
addition to education, age, citizenship and apprenticeship 
requirements. Numerical limits tend to produce the highest 
economic rewards for those already in the trade. 5 For the 
most part, legal restrictions on the number of practitioners 
in occupations are not often set by statute. The right to set 
and modify the number of practitioners is effectively done 
by unions or trade associations. Unions accomplish this 
through their power to set the number of apprenticeship 
"openings" or restrict union membership "openings" or use 
a probationary status to adjust to transitory changes in de­
mand for the services of their members. Licensing arrange­
ments, in general, restrict entry by raising entry cost and 
not so much by imposing numerical limits on the number 
of practitioners. The reason appears to be mostly political. 
It is a far more successful political strategy to argue for 
practitioners of a trade to justify higher entry costs on the 
ground that it raises standards and hence consumers are 
protected against quacks. Such pleas can be made under 
the pretense of public interest. It is considerably more diffi­
cult to argue public interest by simply restricting the num­
ber of practitioners. Numerical restrictions must be argued 
on the ground of adverse "third party" effects, such as too 
many taverns will lead to drunkenness or too many taxis 
will lead to congestion. The liquor industry and the taxicab 
industry, incidentally, are two of many areas of business


--- PAGE 91 ---
70 THE STATE AGAINST BLACKS 
licensing where many municipalities impose numerical re­
strictions on practitioners. 
In some occupations the state permission to practice the 
trade is transferable. The original owner of the license can 
transfer it to another person. Hence the license commands 
a market price. The taxicab industry, the retail liquor busi­
ness and the trucking business are examples of businesses 
where the license is transferable. Where licenses are sold 
on the market, this affords the opportunity to calculate the 
value to practitioners to do business in a state-monopolized 
market. The selling price of the license represents the dis­
counted value of having the right to earn monopoly income 
over the life of the business. For example, the market price 
of a license to own and operate a single taxicab on the streets 
of New York has been approximately $60,000. If entry were 
open to all would-be taxicab owners, the amount of money 
that people would be willing to pay for the taxi license would 
be zero. Taxi owners' earnings would be equal to the costs 
of providing taxi services. Taxi prices would be equal to 
the cost of providing that service (prices lower than those 
that now exist). However, a numerical limit on the number 
of taxis produces abnormal profits and hence the willingness 
of people to pay the license price. In other words, people 
are willing to pay $60,000 for a taxi license because they 
expect to earn higher-than-normal profits. In the case of 
New York, there have been no new licenses issued since 
the early pre-World War II period. On the other hand, per­
sonal incomes have risen creating a higher demand for taxi 
service. Most of the adjustment to the higher demand has 
taken the form of higher prices for taxi services. If there 
had been open opportunities, the long-run adjustment would 
have been in the form of more taxis and perhaps a price 
increase but not as high as that that now exists. The next 
chapter will more fully explore the taxi industry. 
Racial Effects of Occupational and Business Licensing 
In addition to the effects of licensure already outlined, there 
are others. The major effect of licensing is that it leads to


--- PAGE 92 ---
Occupational and Business Licensing 71 
fewer practitioners than would be the case in the absence 
of licensing. This, of course, means that there are fewer 
employment opportunities, and hence income-earning op­
portunities. Occupational or business licensing has also sig­
nificant effects on the distribution of income. The distribu­
tional effects of licensing are not equally shared among the 
potential and actual market participants. 
Occupational licensing raises entry costs through vari­
ous requirements, thereby causing some potential entrants 
to decide against pursuing the occupation. This category of 
requirements are age, minimum secondary school educa­
tion, citizenship and license fees. No person is explicitly 
rejected. People decide not to try in the first place. Obviously, 
these requirements are more burdensome to some demo­
graphic groups than others. For example, the possession of 
a high school diploma, as a preliminary requirement, will 
impose a greater burden on those demographic groups who 
experience a higher high school dropout rate. 
A common form that many licensing examinations take 
is of two parts: a written part and a performance part. This 
introduces considerable bias and this is particularly so when 
the written portion is of little significance in predicting the 
presence of practical performance talents. This is because 
those with better education have greater facility with writ­
ten expression. Potential entrants with limited reading abil­
ity and those whose native language is not English will be 
disadvantaged. 
Often licensing requirements spell minimum hours of 
specialized education at "approved" schools. Schooling re­
quirements involve tuition costs and, as such, exclusion on 
the basis of availability of financial resources will not be 
evenly spread across all demographic groups. 
Stuart Dorsey studied the distributional effects of occu­
pational licensing of cosmetologists (beauticians) in Mis­
souri and Illinois. 6 He found that in both samples the black 
failure rate was two to three times that that would have 
been the case if race and failure rate were unrelated. In 
the Missouri sample only 3 percent of successful applicants 
are black while blacks constituted 21 percent of failures.


--- PAGE 93 ---
72 THE STATE AGAINST BLACKS 
Similar results were obtained in the Illinois sample: 38 per­
cent of failures were black applicants while only 11 percent 
of successful applicants were black. The Dorsey study fur­
ther reported that black examination scores averaged more 
than ten points lower than whites when years of education 
and training are held constant. 
Both Illinois and Missouri require that cosmetology ap­
plicants pass a performance test in addition to the written 
examination. On the performance examination the score 
is based upon the applicant's performance on a person that 
the applicant chooses as a model. All applicants, at the time 
they take the performance examination, are una ware of 
their score on the written portion. Dorsey reports that the 
total failure rate on the practical examination is low. In 
Missouri the failure rate was 13 percent and in Illinois it 
was 5 percent. But more remarkable than this finding is 
that the characteristics (race, education and apprenticeship) 
that are important in written examination performance 
have no explanatory value for the score on the practical 
examination. In other words, on the practical examination, 
race has no statistical significance with success as an ex­
planatory variable. 
Put straightforwardly, the written examination acts to 
exclude applicants, mainly by race, who are just as pro­
ductive as others as evaluated by practical examination. The 
Dorsey study concludes that the occupational licensing of 
cosmetologists: (1) screens out people on the basis of charac­
teristics unrelated to job performance; and (2) causes an 
overinvestment in education and formal training because 
much of the required training does not improve productivity 
and therefore is individually and socially wasteful. In addi­
tion, licensing serves to reinforce handicaps suffered by dis­
advantaged minorities. 
Therefore, the theoretical predictions made by econo­
mists about the adverse racial effects of occupational licen­
sure are borne out here by empirical evidence. Furthermore, 
the exclusion of disadvantaged people does not serve the 
public-interest arguments that are so often made for occupa­
tional licensing. When qualified people, as indicated by the


--- PAGE 94 ---
Occupational and Business Licensing 73 
practical performance tests, are denied entry because they 
failed the written test, the "public interest" is not enhanced. 
The consuming public is made worse off through higher 
prices and longer queues. The only clear beneficiaries of 
occupational licensing are incumbent practitioners who can 
charge higher prices and hence have higher incomes as a 
result of their monopolized market.


--- PAGE 95 ---



--- PAGE 96 ---
CHAPTER 6 
The Taxicab Industry 
"Give me your tired, your poor, 
Your huddled masses yearning to breathe free, 
The wretched refuse of your teeming shore, 
Send these, the homeless, tempest-tossed, to me: 
I lift my lamp beside the golden door." 
-Emma Lazarus 
"The New Colossus" 
TAXICAB AND JITNEY OPERATIONS are two closely related 
business opportunities that lie within the capital and skills 
limitations of many urban poor. 1 Initial capital costs are 
modest when compared to other businesses. It is estimated 
that initial outlay, which includes a car, meter, radio and 
liability insurance would rarely exceed $5,000 for the opera­
tion of a single vehicle as a taxi. Furthermore, most of this 
outlay is recoverable if an owner defaults, thereby increas­
ing the likelihood of bank finance. The personal business 
skills necessary to become a taxi owner-operator are simi­
lar! y minimal. No more is required than the ability to oper­
ate a car and to learn locations in the city and its environs. 
Despite the fact that the real entry conditions are mini­
mal for the taxicab industry, there are significant, and for 
many insurmountable, politically erected barriers to entry. 
These barriers appear mostly in the form of local regulations 
that specify entry conditions. In all major American cities 
except three, the taxicab industry is a highly restricted gov­
ernment-regulated monopoly. 2 Some cities have restrictions 
on the number of taxicab licenses (permits or medallions) 
they issue. Other cities grant exclusive operating rights to 
75


--- PAGE 97 ---
76 THE STATE AGAINST BLACKS 
one or more fleet operators. The city may allow only one 
fleet company to operate within its city limits. New York 
City is an example of the former which will be discussed 
in some detail because it is such an outstanding case. 
New York Entry Restrictions 
The municipal government of New York City requires a me­
dallion for each taxicab operating in the city. 3 The code also 
provides for regulation of taxi fares and other conditions 
of operation. The medallion system began as a requirement 
of the Haas Act of 1937. Under the Haas Act, the city sold 
medallions for $10 to all persons then operating taxis in 
New York City. There were 13,566 original medallions is­
sued, but 1,794 of the original medallions were returned to 
the city during World War II by their owners who went into 
the armed forces. Since 1937 no new medallions have been 
issued and the 1,794 turned into the city during World War 
II have not been reissued, leaving the city with 11,772 medal­
lions, which in turn sets the upper limit on the number of 
taxis that may operate within the city. The owner of a medal­
lion pays a small annual fee, but the medallion itself and 
the rights that it confers to the owner is private property. 
And as such it is transferable and commands a market price. 
The selling price for a medallion for an independent 
taxi is now approximately $60,000.4 The selling price of a 
medallion for a fleet taxi is $45,000. With 8,424 fleet taxi 
medallions and 3,348 independent taxi medallions, the esti­
mated total market value of medallions in New York City 
is nearly $600 million. The artificially high entry cost means 
that if an individual wished to become an independent taxi 
owner-operator, the full cash cost of entry approaches 
$70,000. In practice, the initial outlay is less because some 
New York banks will lend up to $25,000 for a taxi medallion. 5 
These very high prices for taxi medallions can be readily 
explained economically. If the taxi industry were a free en­
terprise industry, namely, open to all potential entrants, the 
market value of a medallion would be zero. But to the extent 
that there is government-controlled entry, which confers


--- PAGE 98 ---
The Taxicab Industry 77 
monopoly power on incumbent taxi owners, and medallions 
are transferable, medallions will command a price. The 
present value (selling price) of the medallion represents and 
measures the value of the increased earnings that the taxi 
owner earns as a result of being able to sell taxi services 
in a government-protected monopoly market. In other words, 
the value of the medallion shows what the buyer is willing 
to pay for government protection from free market competi­
tion.6 
Therefore, the medallion system of New York keeps the 
supply of taxis constant. The inevitable result of this is that 
when there is an increase in public demand for taxi services, 
as there has been in New York since 1937, there is no re­
sponse in the form of more legal taxis. The response to the 
higher demand is mostly in the form of higher taxi fares 
and poorer-quality taxi service. This is the natural result 
of monopolized markets: the tendency of higher prices and 
lower-quality service when a seller is insulated from open 
market competition. 
New York's Ghetto Response to the Taxi Monopoly 
Several ghetto communities have responded to the medal­
Honed taxicab monopoly and the grossly inferior services 
it provides to ghetto communities. In New York this response 
has taken the form of "gypsy" taxicabs. The emergence of 
gypsy (illegal) taxicabs is in part a direct response to the 
failure of the medallioned industry to provide an adequate 
level of taxi services. Ghettos such as Harlem, Bedford Stuy­
vesant, Brownsville and the South Bronx, to name a few 
neighborhoods in New York City, have consistently received 
poor taxi service from the medallioned industry. Many resi­
dents in these communities simply installed meters, painted 
signs and put lights on their private cars and declared them 
taxis and cruised the neighborhoods, providing taxi services. 
High risks of robberies and other violence is the reason 
given by the medallioned taxi industry for not providing 
services in these communities. In addition, medallioned op­
erators perceive these areas as being economically unprof-


--- PAGE 99 ---
78 THE STATE AGAINST BLACKS 
itable compared to the central business district and some 
other areas of the city. To a significant degree, these claims 
are correct. One report estimates that 70 percent of all taxi 
robberies occur in black or Puerto Rican neighborhoods of 
the city. 7 As such, there is considerable inducement for many 
medallioned taxi drivers not to operate in these neighbor­
hoods. 
High crime and lower profitability have left an unmet 
demand for taxi services which has been taken up by illegal 
gypsy taxis. Estimates vary considerably on the size of the 
gypsy cab service in New York. The New York Times esti­
mates that 4,000 to 5,000 such taxis operate in New York's 
ghettos. 8 Michael J. Lazar, the first chairman of the newly 
created Taxi and Limousine Commission, estimates that 
there are as many as 15,000 gypsy taxis operating in the 
city. 9 If the latter estimate is correct, the illegal taxi industry 
is numerically larger than the legal taxi industry, which 
consists of a maximum of 11,772 taxis. 
Such a large illegal operation is possible for two reasons. 
One, because of poor services by the medallioned industry 
and two, because the authorities do not arrest gypsy taxi 
operators as long as their operations are limited to New 
York's ghettos. The Taxi and Limousine Commission, the 
courts and recent mayors have shown a similar reluctance 
to suppress illegal taxi operations. In no small part, this 
reluctance reflects official recognition of the poor services 
provided to the ghetto by the medallioned industry. However, 
when gypsy taxi drivers, emboldened by their ghetto success 
at ignoring the law, started to operate in the central business 
district and other nonghetto, higher income areas, they en­
countered resistance. Some of the resistance was in the form 
of violent attacks and the burning of gypsy taxis by the me­
dallioned industry. Gypsy drivers, on the other hand, re­
turned these actions in kind on many occasions. Another 
response to the bold action of the gypsies was that the Taxi 
and Limousine Commission started pressing for the enforce­
ment of city taxi law. Also they took out full-page advertise­
ments in local newspapers warning potential taxi patrons 
of the hazards of using unlicensed taxis. 10 The gypsy's pene­
tration into the medallioned taxi market was made easier


--- PAGE 100 ---
The Taxicab Industry 79 
because their initial thrust came at a time when the Taxi 
and Limousine Commission granted a substantial increase 
in taxi fares which led to an increase in the willingness 
of New Yorkers to use gypsy taxis. 
New York's gypsy taxi industry is a combination of ille­
gal and semilegal operators. The semilegal component con­
sists of private livery drivers. Private liveries are not li­
censed by the City of New York. They may operate as a 
vehicle for hire if they are licensed by the State of New 
York as an omnibus. But livery drivers are required by law 
to obtain all of their business either by telephone or by off­
the-street requests for service. This distinction between pri­
vate liveries and taxicabs has broken down in recent years. 
It is estimated that at least 75 percent of private livery busi­
ness is obtained by passenger hails while cruising along the 
street. That is, private liveries conduct their business in a 
fashion reserved by law for medallioned taxis. 11 
There are no reliable figures on the racial composition 
of taxi owners and private livery drivers (and much less 
about gypsy taxis) because of prohibitions by the New York 
State Human Rights Commission. But according to one esti­
mate, nearly 95 percent of all livery drivers are either black 
or Puerto Rican. 12 In telephone conversation with Joseph 
Basora of the Taxi and Limousine Commission, the writer 
was told that the racial composition of the illegal gypsy in­
dustry (private livery drivers who behave as taxis are consid­
ered gypsy by the Commission) is virtually black- and Puerto 
Rican-dominated. 
The flourishing gypsy operation in New York is indica­
tive of at least three important factors: (1) abnormal profits 
are currently being earned in New York's legal taxi industry. 
Simple economic theory makes the prediction that when 
above-average profits exist, the potential for entry also exists; 
(2) the fact that most of the entrants are black or Puerto 
Rican shows that these minorities can, with relative ease, 
provide a service that is socially valuable. Evidence that a 
socially valuable service is being provided is that patrons 
are willing to pay and the service has existed more than 
ten years; (3) the fact that the gypsy taxi service survives 
proves that these producers are capable of adapting to the


--- PAGE 101 ---
80 THE STA TF AGAINST BLACKS 
environment and provide services that cannot be provided 
by the medallioned industry. The medallioned taxis allege 
that they cannot provide services to the ghetto because of 
high crime and unprofitability; somehow the gypsy operator 
can. Finally, and most importantly, the flourishing gypsy 
cab operation has significant implication for other areas of 
economic life. New York's blacks and Puerto Ricans ob­
tained a chance to earn a livelihood providing taxi services 
by openly disregarding monopolistic laws. It so happens that 
the authorities in New York tacitly condone this illegal be­
havior. But there are many other areas of economic life 
where poor blacks and Puerto Ricans have the fitness re­
quirements to compete on equal footing. But in these areas 
the monopoly barriers to entry are institutionally and legally 
enforced. 
Philadelphia Taxi Industry 
In Philadelphia, the taxicab industry is regulated by the 
Pennsylvania Public Utility Commission (PUC). 13 Taxicabs 
are specifically designated as common carriers and are is­
sued a certificate of "public convenience and necessity." A 
certificate to own and operate a taxi in Philadelphia can 
be obtained from the PUC for the payment of $20 provided 
the applicant is deemed fit and he can prove the need for 
additional services. To prove "public convenience and neces­
sity" is the most formidable aspect of the entry barrier. When 
an application for a certificate is made, the PUC permits 
all existing taxicab owners to protest the application of the 
prospective entrant. The city's incumbent taxi owners retain 
attorneys at the state capitol in Harrisburg for the expressed 
purpose of keeping new taxi owners out of the taxi business. 
By tying up certificate applicants in costly and lengthy 
court procedures, existing companies have discouraged en­
try and have gained monopoly control of the city's taxi 
industry. 14 The reason for limiting entry is that it protects 
the market value of certificates held by existing companies 
which now sell for approximately $20,000 (down from 
$35,000). 
Taxicab regulation has brought about severe transporta-


--- PAGE 102 ---
The Taxicab Industry 81 
tion consequences for Philadelphia. Philadelphia, a city of 
nearly 2 million people, has about 500 taxicabs in opera­
tion-down from approximately 1,300 taxis in 1961. Much 
of the decline is a result of the several bankruptcies of the 
city's largest fleet operator-the Yellow Cab Company. The 
number of taxis operated by the city's independent operators 
has remained constant at 175 vehicles over the period. 
Despite this drastic decline in the number of taxis, the 
Public Utilities Commission, in the last forty years, has is­
sued only a handful of new taxi certificates. Only recently, 
in March of 1979, did the Commission vote to award citywide 
operating rights to a taxi association that had formerly been 
excluded from citywide operation. This action was unsuc­
cessfully contested by United and Yellow Cab Companies 
who had citywide operating rights as well as rights to oper­
ate in the area served by the company that had formerly 
been denied citywide rights. 
There are no reliable estimates on the level of illegal 
taxicab operation in Philadelphia. According to one newspa­
per account, there are some 40 gypsy taxis that operate at 
Philadelphia's train stations, airport and bus stations. 15 In 
the poor neighborhoods of North Philadelphia, it is esti­
mated that at least 25 gypsies operate ferrying shoppers to 
and from shopping centers. While the gypsy cab operation 
has grown in recent years, it does not compare in any way 
to that in New York. 
The Pennsylvania Public Utility Commission is very lax 
about the enforcement of taxicab laws. They concede that 
there is not much that they can do about it because of legal 
rules of evidence. For the most part, they have only issued 
Letters of Warning to illegal taxi operators. According to 
Commission files, in 1977 there were sixteen Letters of Warn­
ing issued in Philadelphia and in 1978 there were only two 
such letters issued. 16 
The Taxicab Industry in Washington, D.C. 
The taxicab industry in the nation's capitol differs markedly 
from that found in other major metropolitan areas. For all 
intents and purposes, there is open entry to Washington's


--- PAGE 103 ---
82 THE STATE AGAINST BLACKS 
taxicab industry. The regulatory agency, the Public Service 
Commission, controls tariffs and some other conditions of 
operation such as vehicle safety and insurance require­
ments. Taxis and limousines are required to be licensed un­
der paragraph 31(d) of the License Act [section 47 2331(d)] 
of the D.C. code at a cost of $25 per year. 17 
As of 1979, there are about 8,400 taxi vehicles that oper­
ate in the District of Columbia. Approximately 90 percent 
of the taxis are owner-operated. The largest fleet operator 
in the city is the Yellow Cab Company. The Yellow Cab Com­
pany owns a fleet of 40 vehicles. In addition, the Company 
franchises its name to about 900 independent owner-opera­
tors. The Yellow Cab Company regulates only those taxis 
that it owns as a fleet operator. 
Consumer groups and individual taxi owner-operators 
have always taken a stand against placing numerical limits 
on the number of taxis in the District of Columbia. A typical 
statement expressing the attitude of owner-operators in D.C. 
is the following: 
Considering the monopolistic trend that all similar [referring 
to numerical limitations] practices have taken in other cities 
where they have been put into operation, it seems as though 
we could, here in Washington, profit by the mistakes of those 
who have preceded us in this taxi-control problem. This is 
the Capitol of the United States and the seat of the Federal 
Government and as such it is advisable that we shun any 
legislation that is monopolistic in nature for it is the duty 
of the Federal Government to oppose monopolies, not to foster 
them. 18 
Similar sentiments were expressed by the Taxicab In­
dustry Group, which is a loosely knit owner-operator associa­
tion which represents 43 of the 62 taxi companies and associ­
ations and 85 percent of the drivers operating in Washington, 
D.C.: 
The taxi business is unique here in that approximately 90 
percent of the cabs are owner-operated. Therefore, passengers 
get a better and safer ride because of the driver's personal


--- PAGE 104 ---
The Taxicab Industry 83 
interest in his own taxicab. This is not true in other large 
cities where meters are required and the operation of the 
taxi system is controlled by fleets. Because he is an indepen­
dent businessman, as we have previously stated many times, 
the owner-operator has better equipment and exercises 
greater care than a driver who is not an owner. It is the inde­
pendent cab drivers in Washington, D.C., who have given the 
city the best taxi service of any city in the United States. This 
is a recognized fact, testified to by the many visitors who ride 
our cabs as well as many Senators and Congressmen who 
travel worldwide and know first hand about good service. 19 
A considerable portion of taxi owners have always taken 
a strong stand against the monopolization of the taxi indus­
try in Washington. Such an attitude is not so much an expres­
sion of an ideological persuasion as the fear that monopo­
lization would benefit and foster large fleet operators at the 
expense of the independent owner-operator. 20 
With open entry the Washington taxi industry consists 
of mostly self-employed people who work and conduct their 
business as they see fit. It is estimated that at least 50 percent 
of the taxi owners are part-time operators who work after 
and before hours of their regular nontaxi employment. In 
addition, a number of taxi owners lease their taxis to other 
individuals on either a full- or part-time basis. 
The free market that exists in Washington produces ben­
efits for a large group of people. First it produces business 
ownership or work opportunities for many semiskilled work­
ers, college students and others wishing to supplement their 
regular earnings. It provides higher-quality services to con­
sumers at lower prices. It also refutes the disorderly market, 
"dog-eat-dog" and congestion type of arguments used as jus­
tification for strict regulation in other cities. 
Table 9 gives information on the taxi industry in the 
District of Columbia. The Public Service Commission main­
tains a file on persons licensed to operate a taxi. On each 
file, there is a picture of the licensee. Therefore, the race 
of the licensee can be reliably identified. In another file, 
there is a listing of the membership of the various taxi asso­
ciations in the District. From this file it can be established


--- PAGE 105 ---
84 THE STATE AGAINST BLACKS 
Table 9 
Racial/Sexual Composition of Taxi Industry in Washington, D.C., 
1979 
OWNED RENTAL NEW• NO NEb TOTALS 
Black Males 1563 479 513 1209 3764 
White Males 695 520 235 350 1800 
Black Females 66 42 39 108 255 
White Females 8 2 13 6 29 
Total 2332 1043 800 1673 5848 
a New licensee, status not yet available 
b The licensee neither owns nor rents a cab. He has a license on file but 
according to records is not currently operating a taxicab 
whether the licensee owns or rents his taxi. With these two 
files, race and ownership could be established. The associa­
tions selected for use in identifying ownership were Yellow 
Cab (1365), Capitol Cab (1111), Liberty Cab (410), and Dia­
mond Cab ( 434). Together these associations accounted for 
46 percent of the licensed taxis in Washington. 
From one set of files containing nearly 12,000 license 
holders, we were able to identify the ownership/rental status 
of 5,848 people by using the membership listing from the 
above taxi associations. We found that 2,332 such persons 
owned their taxis. Of this number, there were 1,563 black 
male owners and 66 black female owners. There were 695 
white male owners and 8 white female owners. Therefore, 
of all owners that we were able to identify, 70 percent of 
taxis were owned by blacks individually and 30 percent of 
taxi ownership was held by whites. It is a good possibility 
that this number is a fair representation of racial ownership 
for the industry as a whole because officials assisting us 
with the data estimate that 75 percent of taxi ownership 
in the District is black ownership. 21 
While a more rigorous investigation would seek a com­
plete record of the licensee file (which consists of more than 
20,000 cards, many of which are duplicates for individual 
license holders), preliminary findings of the Washington


--- PAGE 106 ---
Table 10 
Taxis in Major U.S. Cities 
POPULA- NUMBER 
YEAR TIONIN OF NUMBER NUMBER 
OF YEAR OF NUMBER 1960 TAXIS TAXIS/ 1970 OF TAXIS/ 1976 OF TAXIS/ 
RESTRIC- RESTRIC- OF TAXIS/ POPULA- IN 1,000 POPULA- TAXIS 1,000 POPULA- TAXIS 1,000 
TION TION TAXIS 1,000 TION 1960 1960 TION 1970 1970 TION 1976 1976 
Washington, D.C. 1930 486,869 4,000 8.2 763,956 10,180 13.3 757,000 9,144 13.0 700,000 9,144 12.1 
New Orleans 1972 546,116 1,604 2.9 627,525 1,537 2.5 593,000 1,600 2.7 581,000 1,162 2.0 
Boston 1931 781,188 1,525 2.0 697,197 1,525 2.2 641,000 1,525 2.4 618,000 1,525 2.5 
New York 1937 7,297,630 13,556 1.9 7,781,984 11,722 1.5 7,895,000 11,722 1.5 7,423,000 11,722 1.5 
Chicago 1963 3,482,140 4,600 1.3 3,550,404 4,600 1.3 3,367,000 4,600 1.4 3,074,000 4,600 1.5 
Baltimore 1936 804,874 1,151 1.4 939,024 1,151 1.2 906,000 1,525 1.7 827,000 1,078 1.3 
San Francisco NA 740,316 713 0.96 716,000 798 1.0 663,000 711 1.1 
Detroit 1946 1,759,001 1,310 0.7 1,670,144 1,310 0.8 1,511,000 1,310 0.9 1,314,000 1,310 1.0 
Houston 1934 292,352 NA 938,219 496 0.5 1,233,000 689 0.6 1,455,000 993 0.7 
Atlanta 1967 487,869 1,300 2.6 487,455 1,300 2.7 
Memphis NA NA NA 497,524 NA 624,000 347 0.6 668,000 425 0.6 
Dallas 1937 260,475 NA 679,684 520 0.8 844,000 435 0.5 849,000 439 0.5 
Milwaukee 1924 457,147 170 0.4 741,324 450 0.6 717,000 412 0.6 661,000 389 0.6 
San Diego 1928 NA 573,224 304 0.5 697,000 789,000 421 0.5 
Los Angeles 1925 NA 2,479,015 885 0.4 2,816,000 885 0.3 2,744,000 690 0.3 
Phoenix 1928 NA 439,170 99 0.2 582,000 99 0.2 680,000 240 0.4 
Honolulu 1967 308,668 947 3.0 294,194 947 3.2 326,000 1,400 4.3 347,000 1,600 4.6 
Cleveland 876,050 586 0.66 751,000 626,000 220 0.4 
Philadelphia 1920 823,779 NA 2,002,512 1,480 0.7 1,949,000 1,480 0.8 1,797,000 604 0.3 
Based on U.S. Bureau of the Census, Population of the United States: 1960, 1970, 1976; and Sandi Rosenbloom, "Taxis, Jitneys and Poverty," Transaction 
(February, 1970), p. 50; and Sandi Rosenbloom, "Taxis and Jitneys: The Case for Deregulation," Reason (February, 1972), pp. 9 and 10. 
NA = Not available


--- PAGE 107 ---
86 THE STATE AGAINST BLACKS 
taxi industry are remarkable in comparison to some other 
U.S. cities that have large black populations-Philadelphia, 
for example, which has about 14 black taxi owners accord­
ing to an estimate of the State Commissioner of the Public 
Utility Commission, Wilson Goode. 
Table 10 gives a partial description of the taxicab indus­
try in twenty U.S. cities. As indicated, Washington, D.C., has 
the largest number of taxis per one thousand of the popula­
tion. This means that Washington taxi-riders not only re­
ceive higher-quality service but they receive that service 
at prices that are among the lowest in the nation. 
In examining the available data, there appears to be 
little doubt that it is an open taxicab market that benefits 
would-be taxicab drivers, as it has in Washington, D.C.22 
The only basic difference between the operation of the D.C. 
taxicab industry and that in nearly every other major city 
in the U.S. is the nominal license fee and the absence of 
numerical restrictions on the number of taxis. The Washing­
ton case supports the contention made earlier that racial 
discrimination alone is overused to explain the restricted 
earning opportunities for blacks. 
Restrictive licensing in the taxicab business not only 
denies opportunity, but it imposes a considerable burden 
on poor minority communities in another way. This is in 
the form of reduced transportation for poor communities. 
Several studies have shown that a considerable part of the 
taxicab ridership consists of poor people: 
. . . in Boston, households with annual incomes under $4,000 
used cabs about as often as those with incomes greater than 
$10,000; and ... in New York's Central Brooklyn Model Cities 
area, one in which 40 percent of the households had annual 
incomes of $4,000 or less, these latter households accounted 
for 43 percent of the cab trips generated by that area; 72 per­
cent of the area's cab riders came from households without 
autos. 23 
Conclusion 
A free market in the taxicab industry will not produce a 
panacea for the disadvantaged. However, it is one small way


--- PAGE 108 ---
The Taxicab Industry 87 
to upward mobility for some, which has been cut off by gov­
ernment. As such, it demonstrates again one of the key dif­
ferences between disadvantaged blacks and disadvantaged 
ethnic groups of the past. A poor illiterate Italian, for exam­
ple, arriving in our cities in 1925 or 1930 could, if he had 
ambition and industry, go out and buy a car and write TAXI 
on it. Thus he could provide upward mobility for his family. 
Today a poor person of any race would find that industry 
and ambition are not enough, if he sought the same path 
to upward mobility. He would find the path barricaded by 
a license costing $20, $30, or $60 thousand-a considerable 
barrier. 
APPENDIX 
D. C. Rules and Regulations, 
Title 14, Public Service Commission 
Procedure For Obtaining A License For 
A Passenger Vehicle For Hire Having A Seating 
Capacity Of Less Than Eight Passengers 
(Sept. 24, 1964) 
Taxicabs and limousines (except those used exclusively for funerals) 
are required to be licensed under Par. 31(d) of the License Act (Sec. 47-
2331(d), D.C. Code) at a cost of $25.00 a year. The license year begins on 
April 1st. 
Forms for applying for the license (copy attached hereto) can be ob­
tained from taxicab company or association offices or from the Taxicab 
Bureau of the Public Service (formerly Public Utilities) Commission of 
the District of Columbia. 
When all information required is furnished on the form, it should be 
presented with the taxicab to one of the Department of Motor Vehicle in­
spection stations (see Appendix E for standards) for inspection. 
After the vehicle has passed inspection and the Inspection Station 
stamp has been placed on the license application form, present the form, 
together with properly executed Certificate of Insurance (Appendix C,


--- PAGE 109 ---
88 THE STATE AGAINST BLACKS 
Chapter IV, Title 14, DCRR) from the insurance carrier, to the Taxicab 
Bureau of the Public Service Commission. 
If all information required on the form is correct, the vehicle has been 
approved by the Inspection Station and the Certificate of Insurance in order, 
the Taxicab Bureau will put the Public Service Commission's stamp of 
approval on the license application form. It can then be taken to the Depart­
ment of Motor Vehicles, Office of Public Vehicle Services, 469 C Street, 
N.W., (C.O. 69--670, 12-24-69) where, upon the payment of $25.00 for a full 
year (pro rated for less than a full year), the license will be issued. 
LosT LICENSE 
In the event a license is lost or destroyed, a duplicate can be obtained 
by submitting an affidavit on the form attached hereto, to the Taxicab 
Bureau of the Public Service Commission. There is usually a notary public 
available in the Taxicab Bureau before whom the affidavit can be executed. 
Thereafter, the affidavit can be taken to the Office of Public Vehicle 
Services at the address shown above, where, upon the payment of a $2.00 
fee, a duplicate can be issued.


--- PAGE 110 ---
CHAPTER 7 
Occupational 
Licensing 
of Plumbers 
and Electricians 
There is no worse torture than the torture of laws. 
-Francis Bacon 
Of judicature 
The law is but words and paper without the hands and 
swords of men. 
-James Harrington 
The Commonwealth of Oceana 
Brief History 
Plumbers were among the first trades to become licensed 
in the United States. They were first licensed in California 
in 1885. Most licensing statutes classify plumbers into three 
groups: master plumbers, journeyman plumbers and ap­
prentice plumbers. Master plumbers can be thought of as 
employers who are independent businessmen or who act 
as plumbing contractors. 1 Journeyman plumbers are work­
ers who have been certified as competent and can do the 
ordinary work of plumbing. Apprentices are untrained men 
learning the trade either through on-the-job training or for­
mal schooling. State or local plumber-licensing boards are 
granted the authority to determine all conditions of entry 
and have police powers to enforce concurrence. 
89


--- PAGE 111 ---
90 THE STATE AGAINST BLACKS 
When plumbers were first licensed, the broad issue of 
constitutionality of such licensing arose in several court 
cases. Indeed, some early courts struck down state licensing 
of plumbers as a violation of the Fourteenth Amendment 
of the United States Constitution. For example, in a Wash­
ington case, State ex rel. Richey v. Smith, 2 the court said, 
in granting a habeas corpus to free a plumber who was 
arrested for working without a license, that the legislature 
was limited in making laws in the name of public health 
and safety. The Washington court cited Justice Peckham's 
opinion in an earlier case: 
Taking the act as a whole ... its purpose is to enable the 
employing plumbers to create a sort of guild or body among 
themselves, into which none is to be permitted to enter except­
ing as he may pass an examination, the requisites of which 
are not stated, and where his success or failure is to be deter­
mined by a board of which some of their own number are 
members .... It is difficult for me to see the least resemblance 
to a health regulation in all this. 
I think the act is vicious in its purpose and that tends directly 
to the creation and fostering of a monopoly. 3 
In later years, the courts upheld licensing, including that 
of plumbers and electricians, as a legitimate expression of 
the police powers of the state. 4 While courts now hold that 
licensing is consistent with constitutionally valid use of state 
police powers, such a decree does not change the effects of 
licensing, including its effects on minority economic oppor­
tunity. 
Licensing Out Negroes 
Occupational licensing can reduce employment opportuni­
ties for Negroes by creating artificial or unrealistic stan­
dards. It can occur without apparent racial motivation as 
in the case of cosmetologists discussed earlier. Or occupa­
tional licensing can be used as a tool to achieve certain goals 
such as the elimination of Negroes from a craft. Occupa-


--- PAGE 112 ---
Occupational Licensing of Plumbers and Electricians 91 
tionallicensing coupled with white-dominated craft unions 
has been a particularly effective tool for reducing employ­
ment for Negroes. Craft unions such as the plumbers and 
electricians explicitly advocated licensure laws to eliminate 
Negro competition. Greene and Woodson wrote, "a favorite 
method of barring (Negroes) from plumbing and electrical 
work was to install a system of unfair examinations which 
were conducted by whites." 5 
An example of one union's desire to eliminate Negro 
plumbers is contained in the following letter advocating li­
censing: 
Editor journal: Norfolk, Va., 
Dear Sir and Brother: February 12, 1905 
Enclosed you will find a clipping from a Norfolk paper, 
which I would suggest that you give space in the next issue 
of the journal, believing that it will be of interest to the mem­
bers of U.A., especially of the southern district, as the Negro 
is a factor in this section, and I believe the enclosed Virginia 
state plumbing law which will eliminate him and the im­
poster from following our craft. . . . 
(Signed) C. H. Perry, Sec. L.U. 1106 
Enclosed with the letter was a legislative bill containing 
the following commonly stated justification for the licensing 
of plumbers: "To promote the public health and to regulate 
the sanitary construction, house draining, and plumbing, 
and to secure the registration of plumbers in all cities. . 7 
In a northern trade publication was the following: 
.. All the other work, jobbing, etc, is done by Negroes ... 
Bro. Becker and a few of the boys are going to run over to 
Greenville and make a thorough investigation and try to have 
these bosses hire white men. It is a wonder to me that there 
are not more Negroes working at our business from the way 
our members in a great many places use them as helpers . 
. . . Plumbers, Gas and Steam Fitters Official journal (Chi­
cago, january 1905), vol. X.8 
In the same issue the Plumbers, Gas and Steam Fitters 
Official journal contained another entry:


--- PAGE 113 ---
92 THE STATE AGAINST BLACKS 
There are about ten Negro skate plumbers working around 
here [Danville, Va.], doing quite a lot of jobbing and repairing, 
but owing to the fact of not having an examination board 
[licensing agency] it is impossible to stop them, hence the 
anxiety of the men here to organize. Plumbers, Gas and Steam 
Fitters Official journal, January 19059 
Proposals for licensing as a means of eliminating black 
tradesmen were not restricted to the South. In Kansas City, 
Negroes were denied entry into a number of trades including 
plumbing and electricity. 10 In New Jersey it was reported 
that it was impossible for a Negro to become a licensed 
plumber or steam fitter. 11 Spero and Harris, in their study, 
found that "in a city like Philadelphia, the licensing board 
will not grant a Negro a license-in Chicago the Negro 
plumbers have failed to gain advances after years of 
effort." 12 
Union Growth and Exclusion of Negroes from the Crafts 
Negroes have not always been conspicuously absent or un­
derrepresented in the skilled crafts and trades. Considerable 
evidence from the past, albeit anecdotal, suggests that years 
ago Negroes were the dominant practitioners in some crafts. 
Isaac Weld, in his eighteenth-century travels around the 
United States, observed, "Amongst their slaves are found tay­
lors, shoemakers, carpenters, smiths, turners, wheelwrights, 
weavers, tanners, etc." 13 
Novelist James Weldon Johnson wrote, "The Negroes 
drove the horse and mule teams, they laid the bricks, they 
painted the buildings and fences, they loaded and unloaded 
ships. When I was a child, I did not know that there existed 
such a thing as a white carpenter or bricklayer or plasterer 
or tinner." 14 
According to Charles B. Rousseve: "Throughout the 
South 'where the majority of white men were too lazy to 
work,' by far the largest proportion of labor, skilled and un­
skilled, was performed by Negroes, both freeman and the 
slave." 15


--- PAGE 114 ---
Occupational Licensing of Plumbers and Electricians 93 
John Stephen Durham wrote about union exclusion of 
Negroes from skilled crafts: 
In the city of Washington, for example, at one period, some 
of the finest buildings were constructed by colored workmen. 
Their employment in large numbers continued some time 
after the war. The British Legation, the Centre Market, the 
Freeman's Bank, and at least four well-built schoolhouses are 
monuments to the acceptability of their work under foremen 
of their own color. Today, apart from hod-carriers, not a col­
ored workman is to be seen on new buildings, and a handful 
of jobbers and patchers, with possibly two carpenters who 
can undertake a large job, are all who remain of the body 
of colored carpenters and builders and stone-cutters who were 
generally employed a quarter of a century ago. 16 
Commenting about stevedores, Durham says, "The ef­
fective organization of white laborers was closely followed 
by the driving of Negroes from the levees at the muzzles 
of loaded rifles. The iron industry is passing through the 
same experience .... "17 Durham goes on to point out in con­
clusion," ... the real struggle of the unions is in opposition 
to the general desire of the employing class of the South 
to give the Negro whatever work he is capable of doing." 18 
Herbert Hill in a summary of Durham's findings writes: 
Extending his inquiry into the North, Durham found the ef­
fects of the Negro exclusion policy to be even "more mani­
fest." In Philadelphia in 1838, the Society of Friends had com­
piled a directory of occupations in which Negroes were 
employed. Significantly included were such skilled jobs as 
cabinet maker, plumber, printer, sailmaker, ship's carpenter, 
stone cutter and many others. By the end of the 1890's, Negroes 
had been forced out of most of these and other craft occupa­
tions.19 
Herbert Hill continues his documentation of the impact of 
unions on Negro craft employment opportunities: 
In the older seaboard cities of the South, Negroes had once 
been employed in a great variety of occupations, skilled and


--- PAGE 115 ---
94 THE STATE AGAINST BLACKS 
unskilled. However, in the last decades of the nineteenth cen­
tury the process of Negro displacement had begun, and trade 
unions were a most important part of this development. . . . 
in both South and North the trade union opposes black labor 
wherever it can and admits it to fellowship only as a last 
resort. 20 
It does not take too much search to conclude that the 
absence of Negroes from the crafts, including electricians 
and plumbers, is a result of a tradition of racial exclusion 
policies by labor unions. The International Brotherhood of 
Electrical Workers and the United Association of Plumbers 
and Steamfitters unions have traditionally excluded Negroes 
from membership by tacit agreement among their mem­
bers.21 
There is no question about union exclusionary policy 
and practices of the past. But what can be said about today? 
More than likely there is little evidence of flagrant racial 
exclusion. But somehow in many craft unions black mem­
bership is virtually absent. Such an outcome can be ex­
plained in several ways that are perhaps interrelated. One 
is that people may not seek entry to the union because they 
view their chances as being slim because there are relatively 
few black journeymen electricians or plumbers. Second, en­
try conditions are artificially raised so as to discourage entry. 
This is related to a third possible reason: the whole package 
of entry conditions that include long apprenticeship periods 
and restrictions on the number of apprentices, seniority 
rules, and artificially high wages and licensure-all these 
tend to discriminate against lower skilled tradesmen. 
Negro Opportunity in Electrical and Plumbing Work Today 
Racial discrimination by occupational licensing boards is 
not just a historical curiosity made irrelevant by racial en­
lightenment of today. Benjamin Shimberg reports: 
The only licensed Negro plumber in Montgomery County, Ala­
bama at the time of this study reported that he had spent 
four years learning the plumbing trade at Talladega College,


--- PAGE 116 ---
Occupational Licensing of Plumbers and Electricians 95 
but that when he attempted to obtain a license, he faced seem­
ingly insurmountable barriers. He took the local examination 
and was told each time that he failed. He was not told what 
his score was nor was he allowed to see his examination pa­
per. Finally he took and passed the state master plumber's 
examination and then managed to use his state license as a 
means of obtaining a local license in Montgomery County. 22 
Shimberg reports that black electricians face similar diffi­
culty in Alabama. Union-sponsored electrical apprentice­
ship programs appear closed to them. The union require­
ment is that all applicants must be high school graduates. 
High school equivalency test certificates are not accepted. 
Final selection to the apprenticeship training programs is 
determined on the basis of a personal interview, which gives 
considerable latitude for racial discrimination. 23 
Professor Shimberg insightfully concludes his analysis 
of the problems that blacks have in entering licensed crafts 
such as plumbing and electrical work by pointing out that 
the vested economic interests that are protected from compe­
tition by state licensing boards cannot be persuaded to 
change their practices voluntarily and: " ... nor is there 
much room for optimism that many state legislatures or 
city councils would be willing to incur the wrath of powerful 
labor unions or affluent trade associations whose members 
derive economic benefits from the perpetuation of the status 
quo."24 
Even though we now live in what is called an age of 
racial enlightenment, there is evidence that licensing and 
unionization consistently work to the disadvantage of blacks. 
Some evidence comes in the form of black membership in 
the major electrical and plumbing unions in the building 
trades. According to Equal Employment Opportunity Com­
mission (EEOC) data, in 1969, Negroes constituted 1.9 per­
cent of the membership of the International Brotherhood 
of Electrical Workers (IBEW) and they constituted 0.6 per­
cent of the International Plumbers and Pipe:fitters. 2s By 1972 
their membership had risen to 6.5 and 4.4 percent 
respectively. 26 In a study of the "mechanical" trades (boiler-


--- PAGE 117 ---
96 THE STATE AGAINST BLACKS 
makers, electrical workers, elevator constructors, iron work­
ers, plumbers and pipefitters, and sheetmetal workers), Her­
bert Hammerman found that in 1972, 58 percent of the local 
unions had no Negro or Spanish-origin members. 27 
While the number of Negro union members is not a 
perfect measure of racial discrimination, it does suggest that 
licensing and unionization may have an ongoing adverse 
impact on minority chances to become plumbers and electri­
cians. The issue of occupational entry barriers, whether they 
are those imposed by state licensing authorities or by labor 
organizations, is not whether open racial discrimination is 
practiced. The issue is, so far as policy is concerned, what 
is the racial effect of artificial barriers to entry? 
There is evidence that occupational licensing is used 
in other ways that handicap minorities. This happens when 
incumbent practitioners attempt to protect their jobs in the 
face of a slack market for their services. Professor Alex Mau­
rizi investigated the relationships between a slack market 
for labor in licensed occupations and the examination pass 
rate. 28 He found that a substantial, and statistically signifi­
cant, portion of the pass rate was explained by the excess 
demand. In other words, when there was unemployment in 
the licensed trade, the difficulty level of the examination 
rose in order to reduce the number of new entrants. Obvi­
ously, such a technique to protect the incomes of incumbent 
practitioners is going to have its greatest discriminatory im­
pact on the groups in the population who have less and 
poorer education. Minorities are disproportionately repre­
sented in such a population. 
The discussion would be incomplete if it were not men­
tioned that blacks are not the only group targeted for dis­
criminatory licensing. During the 1930s virtually every occu­
pational licensure law was amended. They were amended 
to add U.S. citizenship as a new requirement. One might 
ask what public health safety interest is served by stipulat­
ing that a tradesman, otherwise qualified, be a U.S. citizen? 
There is none. However, during the 1930s there was a large 
migration of Jews to the United States as a result of the 
hostilities in Europe. Many of these immigrants, which in-


--- PAGE 118 ---
Occupational Licensing of Plumbers and Electricians 97 
eluded non-Jews as well, were skilled artisans. The U.S. citi­
zenship requirement was an effective way to forestall their 
entry into licensed occupations which served the interests 
of incumbent licensees. 29 
Some Other Adverse Effects of Licensing 
Restricted entry, through licensing, places disadvantaged 
people at a severe handicap without necessarily improving 
the quality of services received by the consumer, the often 
stated (pretended) beneficiary of the regulation. In fact, one 
study showed that there is a significant relationship between 
occupational licensing and the number of accidental deaths 
by electrocution. The more stringent the state licensing ex­
amination, the fewer the electricians, hence the higher are 
the prices of an electrician's services; therefore, the greater 
the willingness of amateurs to undertake electrical wiring 
tasks and risk electrocution in the process. 30 Aside from this 
adverse impact of licensing, it produces what the authors, 
Carroll and Gaston, call the "Cadillac effect." By having high 
requirements for entry, licensing provides high-quality ser­
vices for high-income people. But those people who have 
low incomes, who cannot afford to pay the higher prices, 
are forced either to do without the service, to do the work 
themselves, or to rely upon low-priced unlicensed quacks 
or charlatans. As far as electrical services are concerned, 
strict licensing requirements may account for a significant 
portion of fires of electrical origin. That is because of high 
electrician fees caused by restrictive licensing. Owing to 
high prices some people make their own electrical repairs 
ineptly or fail to make them at all. 
What Can Be Done? 
Presently there are few legal remedies that promise to be 
effective in eliminating the anticompetitive features of occu­
pational licensure. Federal antitrust laws offer little hope 
because of the Parker doctrine. The Parker doctrine 
emerged from a 1943 U.S. Supreme Court decision that held


--- PAGE 119 ---
98 THE STATE AGAINST BLACKS 
that antitrust statutes apply to private acts of collusion 
which restrain competition. 31 The Court held that collusion 
in the restraint of competition was sanctioned if it was done 
by the state. The reason that the Court took its position was 
that it thought that wide application of antitrust laws to 
state regulatory practices would create a crisis in federalism. 
One possible remedy for restrictive licensing can be 
found in another U.S. Supreme Court case, Griggs v. Duke. 32 
This decision held that racial discrimination has been rein­
forced by tests which are actually unrelated to successful 
job performance, and employers have been ordered to elimi­
nate this kind of testing. Much of the testing for licensure 
is unrelated to successful job performance. As such, Griggs 
v. Duke may be a partial remedy sought by public interest 
lawyers. 
Ultimately, occupational licensing is a political prob­
lem. Power interest groups representing various occupa­
tions, through lobbying, have used the coercive powers of 
the state to protect their incomes from competition. Whether 
the general public can politically defeat narrow interests 
is a debatable issue. All evidence suggests that the narrow 
interests are the superior political force.


--- PAGE 120 ---
CHAPTER 8 
Negroes and 
the Railroad Industry* 
One of the most significant things that I saw in the South­
and I saw it everywhere-was the way in which white 
people were torn between their feelings of race prejudice 
and their downright economic needs. 
-Ray Stannard Baker, 1908 
THE RAILROAD INDUSTRY has historically been the site of 
the most virulent forms of racially discriminatory employ­
ment policy by unions. There are several factors that made 
this possible. First, union organization in the railroad indus­
try has traditionally been along craft lines. Second, unions 
in the railroad industry, having launched collective bargain­
ing as early as the 1880s, are among the oldest and the strong­
est of American unions. Third, the railroad unions were sig­
nificantly strengthened by government protection during 
World War I and later by the Railway Labor Act, as amended 
in 1934, which outlawed yellow-dog contracts and the forma­
tion of company-dominated or company-financed unions. 1 
The effects of these factors are of such importance that some 
detail will be useful on how union racial discrimination and 
government support combined to reduce and virtually elimi­
nate jobs for Negroes in the railroad industry. 
The National Mediation Board (NMB), created by the 
1934 amendments to the Railway Act of 1926, was to mediate 
*Adapted from my article, "Freedom to Contract Blacks and Labor 
Organizations" in Black America and Organized Labor: A Fair Deal 
(Washington, D.C., The Lincoln Institute, 1980), pp. 10-32. 
99


--- PAGE 121 ---
100 THE STATE AGAINST BLACKS 
labor disputes arising on railroads. One of the practices of 
the NMB was that of defining the bargaining unit that was 
to represent railroad employees. The NMB nearly always 
defined the unit to suit the jurisdictional claims of the partic­
ular railway union under consideration. 2 
Negroes who were not accepted for membership in most 
locals or were relegated to a low status in the railroad unions 
during this time naturally attempted to form their own 
unions. These attempts were nullified by the action of the 
National Mediation Board, which simply ruled that these 
alternative unions created by discriminated-against Negroes 
could not represent black employees who were unfairly be­
ing represented by the bargaining unit given exclusive 
rights by the board. In effect, the board bestowed monopoly 
representation powers to white labor unions that were 
discriminatory in refusing equal membership rights to 
Negroes. 
The adverse effects of this policy stand out in stark relief 
in the case of Brotherhood of Railway and Steamship Clerks 
v. United Transport Service Employees of America 
(UTSEA). 3 The court in this case was asked to settle the 
conflicting claims of two unions competing for the rights 
to represent forty-five Negro porters at a train station in 
St. Paul, Minnesota. The porters were ineligible for member­
ship in the Brotherhood of Railway and Steamship Clerks 
Union because they were Negro; they unanimously voted for 
UTSEA as their bargaining agent. The NMB dismissed the 
application of UTSEA on the ground that the porters were 
not a separate class of employees and that there was no dis­
pute over representation. The court held that the Brother­
hood of Railway and Steamship Clerks represented porters. 
The federal district court, upon appeal, declared the dis­
missal order void. The Court of Appeals pointed out that 
the dismissal forced the Negro employees to accept repre­
sentation by an organization in which they had no right 
to membership or right to speak or be heard on their own 
behalf. However, the Negro workers' victory was not to be 
had. The United States Supreme Court reversed the Appeals 
Court decision on the ground that the Mediation Board's cer­
tifications are not subject to judicial review.


--- PAGE 122 ---
Negroes and the Railroad Industry 101 
During this era and later there were numerous certifica­
tion proceedings that granted discriminatory labor unions 
exclusive bargaining representation. 4 
The racially discriminatory practices of railway labor 
unions, reinforced by national labor laws, gave rise to sev­
eral important court cases. Chief among these cases was 
Steele v. Louisville & Nashville Railroad. 5 This case in­
volved a Negro fireman, B. W. Steele, who had been laid 
off as a result of the Southeastern Carrier's Agreement, an 
agreement between several railroad companies and railway 
labor organizations. Steele had been working as a fireman 
along with three other Negro firemen in the high-paying 
passenger division of the Louisville and Nashville line. The 
union declared that the jobs of the four Negroes were vacant. 
The jobs were later filled by white firemen having less se­
niority. 
When Steele first started working in 1910, 98 percent 
of the firemen in his Louisville and Nashville district were 
Negro. By 1943 the proportion of Negroes had dropped to 
20 percent hired as firemen. Steele's case was originally held 
before the Alabama Supreme Court. The court found that, 
as a certified representative of the firemen, the brotherhood 
had the right to destroy or create rights of members of the 
bargaining unit. However, when the United States Supreme 
Court heard the case it reversed the decision of the state 
court and found that the union had violated the Railway 
Labor Act. In reaching its decision, the Court recognized 
that the Railway Labor Act would be on very weak constitu­
tional grounds if it denied individuals both the right to bar­
gain for themselves and the right to be fairly. represented 
by the exclusive bargaining unit. The U.S. Supreme Court 
ruled that "the Railway Labor Act imposes on the bargaining 
representative of a craft or class of employees the duty to 
exercise fairly the power conferred upon it in behalf of all 
those for whom it acts, without hostile discrimination 
against them." 6 Despite the Supreme Court ruling, effective 
discrimination against Negro railroad workers did not end: 
the mechanism for the maintenance of effective discrimina­
tion had not been weakened-namely, the monopoly powers 
conferred upon unions by the federal government. The


--- PAGE 123 ---
102 THE STATE AGAINST BLACKS 
Brotherhood of Locomotive Firemen ignored the Court deci­
sion and maintained the illegal Southeastern Carrier's 
Agreement. It was not until the 1950s, following separate 
law suits awarding damages, that the effect of the Steele 
decision was even modestly felt. 7 
In the late 1940s, unions began to employ subtler tech­
niques that had the effect of reducing or eliminating Negro 
firemen. For example, the Brotherhood of Locomotive Fire­
men began a campaign in 1947 that, superficially at least, 
appeared to be aimed at rejecting its racially discriminatory 
practices of the past by negotiation of an agreement that 
struck out the anti-Negro quota clause. However, this was 
nothing but a strategy to win gains that had been lost 
through litigation throughout the forties. The new contract 
contained a clause stipulating that only those firemen who 
were "promotable" were to be employed on freight and pas­
senger train runs. All others could be employed only in yards. 
In January 1948 the Brotherhood of Locomotive Firemen 
proposed to the members of the Southeastern Carrier's Con­
ference a test to determine whether a fireman was promota­
ble. Failing the test after three tries would mean that the 
man was unpromotable and would be dismissed from the 
service. Obviously, the test was directed at eliminating 
Negro firemen. Most Negro firemen had been hired many 
years ago and there had been no education requirements. 
The test based on the hiring requirement for engineers 
would have caused the Negroes to be dismissed. Fortunately, 
for the Negro firemen around the country, the courts held 
that the test was illegal. 
One of the most remarkable stories to be told about the 
early history of Negroes in the railroad industry is their 
success despite white worker hostility. As such this story 
demonstrates that racial discrimination, in and of itself, can­
not generally explain Negro unemployment. But it may ex­
plain lower wages. 
The turn of the century in the United States saw consid­
erable hostility against Negroes, particularly in the railroad 
industry. Some of the hostility involved the murder of 
Negroes. Trainmen and firemen, while able effectively to


--- PAGE 124 ---
Negroes and the Railroad Industry 103 
bar Negroes from union membership, could not bar them 
from their craft. In the South, where hostility toward Negro 
workmen was the greatest, some railroad companies had 
firemen crews that were 85 to 90 percent Negro. For southern 
states as a whole, Negroes constituted 27 percent of the 
brakemen, and 12 percent of the switchmen. These statistics 
changed dramatically in later years. By 1940, 18 percent of 
the firemen in the South were Negroes, falling to 7 percent 
by 1960.8 W. E. B. Dubois, writing of this period, concluded, 
"The great railway systems too discriminate against the 
Negro, and here his opportunity is limited, no matter how 
high a degree of efficiency he may attain, to the menial and 
poorly paid tasks." 9 Frequently, according to Dubois, unioni­
zation meant the redesignation of "Negro jobs" as "white 
man's work," forcing Negroes out of jobs they traditionally 
held. 
This changing employment picture in the railroad in­
dustry is of considerable interest and supportive of the gen­
eral hypothesis suggested in this essay. Table 11 gives the 
number of black and white firemen by years and regions. 
It shows the fall in the number of firemen in general since 
1920. But most remarkable is the decline of black firemen 
compared to white firemen after 1920. The decline of black 
firemen was the greatest in the South, where, at one time, 
they were the most numerous by percentage. 
The high rate of employment for Negroes in the railroad 
industry was not at all a result of benevolence on behalf 
of white owners and managers of railroads. It existed be­
cause Negroes would work for wages that were often just 
two-thirds of the wages paid to white firemen for doing the 
same job. The wage differential had the clear effect of reduc­
ing the power of white firemen to demand higher wages. 
As one white fireman put it, "Everytime the firemen ask 
for an increase in wages or for overtime due them, they 
are told by the superintendent, 'Why, I can get a Negro in 
your place for one dollar, while I'm paying you $1.50 per 
day.' "Io 
Railroad companies were very much interested in keep­
ing the Negro in their employ because hiring Negroes meant


--- PAGE 125 ---
Table 11 
Locomotive Firemen in the U.S. by Region, 1910-60 (Males Only) 
1910 1920 1930 1940 1950 1960 
REGION WHITE BLACK* WHITE BLACK** WHITE BLACK WHITE BLACK WHITE BLACK WHITE BLACK 
SOUTH Abs. # 14,755 5,012 17' 722 5,878 14,309 4,254 9,545 2,114 12,690 1,823 9,563 750 
Percent (7 4.6) (25.4) (75.1) (24.9) (77.1) (22.9) (81.9) (18.1) (87.4) (12.6) (92.7) (7.3) 
-------------------------------------------------------------
Abs. 
Change - - 2,967 866 -3,413 -1,624 -4,764 -2,140 3,145 -291 -3,127 -1,073 
% 
Change - - 20.1 17.3 -19.3 -27.6 -33.3 -50.3 32.9 -13.8 -24.6 -58.9 
NORTH Abs. # 28,353 105 32,762 359 23,814 234 15,430 88 20,063 250 13,925 62 
CENTRAL Percent (99.6) (.4) (98.9) (1.1) (99.0) (1.0) (99.4) (.6) (98.8) (1.2) (99.6) (.4) 
-------------------------------------------------------------
Abs. 
Change - - 4,409 254 -8,948 -125 -8,384 -146 4,633 162 -6,138 -188 
% 
Change - - 15.5 241.9 -27.3 -34.8 -35.2 -62.4 30.0 184.1 -30.6 -75.2


--- PAGE 126 ---
NORTH Abs. # 19,202 53 24,765 217 17,128 138 11,341 54 12,080 123 7,545 33 
EAST Percent (99. 7) (.3) (99.1) (.9) (99.2) (.8) (99.5) (.5) (99.0) (1.0) (99.6) (.4) 
-------------------------------------------------------------
Abs. 
Change - - 5,563 164 -7,637 -79 -5,787 -84 739 69 -4,535 -90 
% 
Change - - 29.0 309.4 -30.8 -36.4 -33.8 -60.9 6.5 127.8 -37.5 -73.2 
WEST Abs. # 8,883 18 9,611 31 6,122 14 5,258 7 6,872 26 5,071 5 
Percent (99.8) (.2) (99.7) (.3) (99.8) (.2) (99.9) (.1) (99.6) (.4) (99.9) (.1) 
-------------------------------------------------------------
Abs. 
Change - - 728 13 -3,489 -17 -864 -7 1,614 19 -1,801 -21 
% 
Change - - 8.2 72.2 -36.3 -54.8 -14.1 -50.0 30.7 271.4 -26.2 -80.8 
SouRCES: U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of the Census, Census of the Population: 1910, vol. 2, Occupations, Table 2 (Washing-
ton, D.C.: Government Printing Office, 1910). 
___ , Census of the Population: 1920, vol. 4, Occupations, Table 15, p. 66. 
___ , Census of the Population: 1930, vol. 4, Occupations by State, Table 11. 
__ , Census of the Population: 1940, vol. 3, The Labor Force, Table 63, p. 91. 
__ , Census of the Population: 1950, vol. 2, pt. 1, Detailed Characteristics, Table 139, pp. 1-397. 
__ , Census of the Population: 1960, vol. 1, pt. 1D, Detailed Characteristics, Table 257, p. 717. 
___ , *U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of the Census, Negro Population: 17~1915, Occupation, Table 17, pp. 517-520. 
___ , ** U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of the Census, Census of the Population: 1920, vol. 4, Occupations, Ch. 7, Table 
1, pp. 874-1048.


--- PAGE 127 ---
106 THE STATE AGAINST BLACKS 
a lower cost of operation. White firemen naturally protested, 
using allegations of Negro incompetency, large-scale crip­
pling strikes, intimidation and murder. 
In 1909 a bitter strike action was taken against the Geor­
gia Railroad. The Brotherhood of Locomotive Firemen de­
manded that Negroes be completely eliminated from the 
road. Instead of recommending the elimination of Negroes 
as was demanded by the union, the arbitration board decided 
that Negro firemen, hostlers and hostlers' helpers must be 
paid wages that were equal to the wages of white men doing 
the same job. 11 The Brotherhood of Locomotive Firemen ex­
pressed delight with this decision. They said, "If this course 
is followed by the company and the incentive for employing 
Negroes thus removed, the strike will not have been in 
, vain." 12 
Why would the Brotherhood of Locomotive Firemen be 
happy with the decision for equal-pay-for-equal-work? The 
reason is that if railroads were required to pay blacks the 
same as they paid whites, the cost to the railroad of discrimi­
nating against blacks in employment would in effect be zero. 
The work pay rule would effectively prevent blacks from 
competing with whites: the white firemen knew this and 
knew it well. They knew that they could trust economic in­
centives to further their racist objectives better than custom, 
gentlemen's agreements or feelings of white brotherhood. 
The understanding of the power of economic induce­
ment to further the cause of racial discrimination in employ­
ment is further seen in an agreement between the Brother­
hood of Railway Trainmen and the Southern Railroad 
Association signed in Washington, D.C., in January 1910: 
No larger percentage of Negro firemen or yardmen will be 
employed in any division or in any yard than was employed 
on January 1, 1910. If on any roads this percentage is now 
larger than on January 1, 1910, this agreement does not con­
template the discharge of any Negroes to be replaced by 
whites; but as vacancies are filled or new men employed, 
whites are to be taken until the percentage of January first 
is again reached.


--- PAGE 128 ---
Negroes and the Railroad Industry 107 
Negroes are not to be employed as baggagemen, flagmen or 
yard foremen, but in any case in which they are so now em­
ployed, they are not to be discharged to make places for 
whites, but when the positions they occupy become vacant, 
whites shall be employed in their places. 
Where no difference in the rates of pay between white and 
colored exists, the restrictions as to percentage of Negroes 
to be employed does not apply. 13 
This famous Washington Agreement shows the under­
standing of and confidence in the power of economic induce­
ment for racial discrimination. As seen by the above citation, 
while the white firemen insisted on hard and fast quotas 
for the hiring of Negroes, they recognized that these discrim­
inatory measures were not necessary where the wages be­
tween the races were equal. In fact, they perhaps realized 
that if they insisted on racial quotas where wages were 
equal, that might result in reduced employment opportuni­
ties for white firemen. 
Firemen brotherhoods, fresh from their victory with 
southeast railroads, followed up by negotiating a similar 
agreement on the railroads in the Mississippi Valley. These 
agreements, with the full backing of government and mo­
nopolistic labor laws, led to the virtual elimination of Ne­
groes from all but the most menial jobs on railroads. Rail­
road companies were coerced and blackmailed not to 
hire Negroes as a condition for labor peace. 
Charles Houston, who was the lawyer for many black 
railwaymen, points out how the government failed in its 
job. Government officials permitted white unions to assist 
in writing the 1934 Railway Act. Furthermore, each brother­
hood had its representative sitting on the First Division of 
the National Railway Adjustment Board, which had juris­
diction over all grievances affecting train and engine service 
employment. 14 
Racist Union Policy Toward Others: A Digression 
Samuel Gompers, the first president of the American Federa­
tion of Labor (AF of L), is mistakenly revered by many as


--- PAGE 129 ---
JOB THE STATE AGAINST BLACKS 
the benevolent father of the labor movement. He is looked 
at as not having a single racist bone in his body. The evi­
dence shows that Gompers not only led the racist labor move­
ment against blacks but he led it against Orientals as well. 
In 1906 the AF of L called for immigration restrictions. 
The AF of L according to Gompers believed that "the mainte­
nance of the nation depended upon the maintenance of ra­
cial purity and strength." 15 The most comprehensive state­
ment of Gompers's feelings about Orientals is found in a 
pamphlet that he coauthored with Herman Gutstat, an AF 
of L official. The pamphlet is entitled Some Reasons for Chi­
nese Exclusion: Meat vs Rice, American Manhood Against 
Coolieism- Which Shall Survive. 16 According to Gompers 
the Chinese were congenitally immoral: "The Yellow man 
found it natural to lie, cheat and murder and ninety-nine 
out of one hundred Chinese are gamblers." Gompers did 
say that Chinese were good workers in American house­
holds, but "he goes [the Chinese] joyfully back to his slum 
and his burrow to the grateful luxury of his normal sur­
roundings-vice, filth, and an atmosphere of horror." 17 
In other speeches, letters and writings, Gompers and 
other high officials made it clear that similar feelings, and 
subsequent union practice, extended to Japanese, Koreans 
and Mexican-Americans. 18


--- PAGE 130 ---
CHAPTER 9 
Interstate 
Commerce 
Commission 
Truck Regulation 
Experience should teach us to be most on our guard to 
protect liberty when the Government's purposes are 
beneficent. Men born to freedom are naturally alert to 
repel invasion of their liberty by evil minded rulers. The 
greatest dangers to liberty lurk in the insidious 
encroachment by men of zeal, well meaning but without 
understanding. 
-Louis Brandeis 
EVERYONE WHO can own a truck and can drive a truck 
is not allowed by law to do so. Trucking is regulated. Na­
tional regulation of the transportation industry originated 
in 1887 with the Act to Regulate Commerce. This act estab­
lished the Interstate Commerce Commission. The act origi­
nally applied only to the railroad industry. The purpose of 
the act was to "stabilize" the railroad industry, which was 
fraught with practices such as rebates, price discrimination 
and secret rate-cutting. 
For a long time, railroad companies tried to form collu­
sive agreements among themselves. But the collusive agree­
ments would always break down because unfaithful part­
ners would cheat on price. The price cheating (cutting price) 
109


--- PAGE 131 ---
110 THE STATE AGAINST BLACKS 
would take customers away from the faithful collusion 
members. Therefore, the faithful would have no other 
choice but to start cutting prices themselves. Thus price wars 
would develop which would be painful to all the railroad 
companies. 
The railroad companies had considerable interest in 
seeking government control and regulation. This meant that 
when the railroad companies got together and colluded on 
price, they would be successful in doing so. The reason is 
that the cheating partner to the collusion would be punished 
by government. The punishment for charging a lower price 
would be heavy fines, imprisonment or the loss of the right 
to do business. 
Control over the railroads was also sought by some ship­
pers who used the railroad services. Shippers were con­
cerned about the competitive disadvantage they would face 
if some shippers were granted rebates or low prices by rail­
roads and others were not. The shipper who received the 
rebate, or lower price, would have cost advantage over his 
competitor who did not. The favored shipper would be able 
to entice customers away from the unfavored sQ.ipper 
through charging lower prices or he would be able to attract 
more investors through higher profits. 
The early history of the Interstate Commerce Commis­
sion was essentially that of controlling entry and setting 
minimum and maximum rates and conditions for new con­
struction within the railroad industry. 1 The Motor Carrier 
Act of 1935 extended the authority of the Interstate Com­
merce Commission to the regulation of the trucking and 
bus industries. The chief source of political pressure for the 
regulation of the trucking industry came from the Interstate 
Commerce Commission and the railroad industry. At the 
time of the Motor Carrier Act, most legislative debate on 
trucking associations stood in opposition. The National In­
dustrial Traffic League, National Highway Users Confer­
ence, American Trucking Association, the Automobile Man­
ufacturers Association and the National Association of 
Motor Bus Operators were all against regulation. 2 Railroads 
supported the Motor Carrier Act of 1935 because trucks be-


--- PAGE 132 ---
Interstate Commerce Commission Truck Regulation 111 
gan to make significant inroads into a freight business that 
had become dominated by the railroad industry. 
The railroad industry had become a cartel with the sup­
port of the Interstate Commerce Act of 1887. The police 
power of the Interstate Commerce Commission was used 
to enforce price agreements and other practices among rail­
road companies. But with the advent of the truck and its 
widespread application, the railroad industry lost much of 
its monopoly power. Truck companies not only matched the 
rail rates (sometimes they offered lower rates) but they were 
able to provide what many shippers considered superior ser­
vices, namely, door-to-door service. Former chief of the Civil 
Aeronautics Board, Alfred Kahn, said, " ... the Motor Car­
rier Act was passed and has been enforced with the explicit 
purpose and effect of protecting railroads against the inten­
sified competition of motor carriers and protecting motor 
carriers from one another." 3 
Opportunities in Trucking for Minorities 
Interstate motor carrier business is an activity that would 
offer a person with little money and little education a busi­
ness ownership opportunity were it not for various forms 
of government regulations. The initial outlay required to 
own a tractor for the purposes of hauling, say, household 
goods, is quite modest. To purchase a late model used tractor 
costs $15,000. With a standard down-payment of 20 to 25 
percent, the buyer needs an initial outlay of $3,000 to $4,000 
for a suitable tractor (the selling price of a new tractor is 
$40,000 and $8,000 to $10,000 down is standard in the trade).• 
Other expenses such as insurance, vehicle registration, in­
spection and a radio make the initial outlay costs to enter 
the trucking business (assuming a used tractor) approxi­
mately $8,000. 
With the relatively low entry costs in terms of skills and 
initial money outlay, there is still no guarantee that a person 
can become a truck owner-operator. For many a prospective 
entrant there are insurmountable entry barriers created by 
the Interstate Commerce Commission.


--- PAGE 133 ---
112 THE STATE AGAINST BLACKS 
Barriers to Entry 
Not everyone who wishes to own and operate a truck for 
the purposes of transporting goods across state lines is per­
mitted to do so. People who are permitted receive a certifi­
cate of authority (or authorization) from the ICC. These cer­
tificates are transferable to persons other than those 
originally granted the authority. 
Today there are approximately 16,000 certificates, which 
have been obtained in one of two ways. One way is to pur­
chase it from someone to whom it has already been issued. 
The purchase price has been estimated to be 15 to 20 percent 
of the certificate holder's gross sales. 5- 6 The second way to 
get a certificate of authority is to make an application to 
the Interstate Commerce Commission. The applicant must 
meet the conditions of the Interstate Commerce Act. Its basic 
requirement is: 
Whether the new operation or service will serve a useful pub­
lic purpose, responsive to public demand or need; whether 
this purpose can and will be served as well by existing lines 
or carriers; and whether it can be served by the applicant 
with the new operation or service proposed without endanger­
ing or impairing the operations of existing carriers contrary 
to the public interest. 7 
A major part of this requirement, in addition to proving 
public need and necessity, is that the applicant must show 
that by his entry he will not take business away from truck­
ing companies already supplying services along the route 
the applicant proposes to serve. When there is an Interstate 
Commerce Commission applicant hearing, existing truckers 
have the right to attend the hearings. They nearly always 
exercise this right, and nearly always protest the granting 
of new authorization. Numerous studies have shown that 
the primary effect of the Motor Carrier Act has been to pro­
tect the incumbent trucking companies against new 
competition. 8 
The application process itself serves as an effective bar­
rier to entry. The applicant must retain legal services spe-


--- PAGE 134 ---
Interstate Commerce Commission Truck Regulation 113 
cialized in the administrative law of the Interstate Com­
merce Act. He must have shippers to support his application, 
and the application process can go on for years and have 
no guarantee of being successful. In one recent case, a black 
trucking company spent over $300,000 in legal fees and other 
costs seeking authority to haul household goods across all 
the states. 9 
This case is particularly interesting because it high­
lights the difficulties faced by anyone seeking national ship­
ping authority from the Interstate Commerce Commission. 
Allstates Moving Company has been in operation since 1929. 
It has twenty-five employees and annual sales of $200,000. 
The owner has sought to acquire broad national authority, 
which would allow it to operate in every state. The company 
started its appeal to the Interstate Commerce Commission 
in the late 1950s. At the ICC hearings on his petition, the 
owner has borne the formidable burden of attempting to 
prove that his services are "needed." In opposition to All­
states' bid for national moving authority are the major mov­
ing companies whose annual revenues are well in excess 
of $100 million. 
Allstates is somewhat unique in its efforts because na­
tional operating permits are seldom sought, because the ICC 
seldom grants them. They are expensive if one wants to buy 
them from an existing holder. Thomas G. Moore, of Stanford 
University, estimates that a permit, such as that requested 
by the Allstates Moving Company, if purchased from an ex­
isting major moving company would sell for over $15 mil­
lion. 
Minority Participation in Motor Carrier Transportation 
The overall impact of ICC restrictive regulations can be 
more readily seen by looking at minority participation in 
the trucking industry. According to the American Trucking 
Association (AT A), "The vast majority of operating rights 
existing today arose under what is referred to as the 'grand­
father' clause in the Act." 10 In other words, when the motor


--- PAGE 135 ---
114 THE STATE AGAINST BLACKS 
truck industry was brought under the control of the ICC 
in 1935, approximately 18,000 existing carriers were given 
operating authority by the ICC. While the operating rights 
today are reduced in number, mainly because of mergers, 
these grandfathered operating rights make up the bulk of 
the operating rights existing today. Minorities, in any signif­
icant numbers, were not present in the trucking business 
in 1935 when these rights were given away. Because they 
are newcomers, they are heavily penalized by the system, 
even though entry costs in terms of physical requirements 
are quite modest compared to other business activities. 
How Many Black Truckers? 
Since the race of motor carriers is not a statistic known to 
the ICC it is difficult to state accurately the number of minor­
ity carriers with ICC authorization certificates. However, 
there have been recent efforts to estimate this number by 
the ICC with the assistance of the Minority Trucking- Trans­
portation Development Corporation (MTTDC). 
According to the ICC 1979 report, there are about 133 
minority motor freight carriers with ICC authority. 11 There 
are a total of 16,874 ICC-authorized motor freight carriers 
in the U.S. Therefore, approximately 0.8 percent of ICC au­
thorization certificates are held by black truckers. No black 
truckers (except Frank Pierson of Allstates Moving Com­
pany) have nationwide authority, which is particularly use­
ful in the household goods industry. The report further 
estimates that of the 133 minority carriers with ICC authori­
zation, 5 are Class I carriers, 13 are Class II carriers, and 
115 are Class III carriers. 12 Furthermore, more than 80 per­
cent of ICC certificates of authority held by minorities have 
been held for less than twenty years. 
According to a survey of minority truckers in 1975 to 
determine their assistance needs, minority truckers were 
virtually unanimous in their agreement that obtaining inter­
state authority was their major obstacle to growth and in­
creased business. 13 Other obstacles cited were difficulties in


--- PAGE 136 ---
Interstate Commerce Commission Truck Regulation 115 
securing contracts for carrying shipments and in obtaining 
loans for working capital and equipment acquisition. The 
latter two obstacles are inherently related to the problem 
of getting ICC (or state) operating authority. Shippers are 
reluctant to make contracts with carriers having no author­
ity and banks are reluctant to grant loans for working capital 
and equipment acquisition when a trucker does not have 
shipping contracts and authority. Compounding this diffi­
culty is the ICC's reluctance to grant authority when a pro­
spective carrier does not demonstrate and meet the "fitness" 
requirement of the Interstate Commerce Act. 
Government Programs to Assist Minority Truckers 
Several government programs under the force of Executive 
Order 11625, under the general rubric of affirmative action, 
have been instituted to give minorities a greater share of 
government shipping business. Some of these programs are 
outlined in a Government Accounting Office report, "Minor­
ity Motor Carriers Can Be Given More Opportunity to Partici­
pate in Defense Transportation." 14 The Department of De­
fense (DOD) issued guidelines aimed at increasing minority 
participation in DOD business and has been asked to imple­
ment these guidelines more effectively by the Government 
Accounting Office (GAO). Part of the GAO recommendations 
say: "Set up specific objectives, goals, and methodologies for 
increasing the use of minority carriers." 15 
A significant part of federal agency affirmative action 
plans are set up in conjunction with the Small Business Ad­
ministration (SBA) section 8(a) program. Section 8(a) of the 
Small Business Administration Act of 1953 permits the SBA 
to enter into contracts with federal agencies and then sub­
contract the work out to small businesses that meet the SBA 
program criteria. Under the section 8(a) program, a govern­
ment agency can select a high-cost carrier and pay him the 
competitive price with the SBA making up the difference 
between that price and the contracted price, which is 
higher.


--- PAGE 137 ---
116 THE STATE AGAINST BLACKS 
There are other aspects of affirmative action programs 
for minorities in trucking which are not of significant inter­
est here. What is of interest, however, are the various inequi­
ties involved and various government laws and programs 
that work at cross-purposes. Interstate Commerce Act regu­
lations are just one of many federal laws that handicap mi­
norities in their efforts to enter the mainstream of American 
society. The law does not have this as its explicit intent, 
but the effect of the law is precisely that. Interstate Com­
merce trucking regulation tends to discriminate against 
latecomers to the trucking industry, those most unable to 
bear the costly and time-consuming application process and 
those with little political clout and are outside the "insider" 
network. In this sense, the Interstate Commerce Act discrim­
inates against whole classes of American citizens. A dispro­
portionate burden of this discrimination is borne by blacks 
because they are most likely to be in the group of people 
bearing the aforementioned characteristics. 
When original monopoly privileges, in the form of ICC 
authorization certificates, were issued, blacks in many 
places did not possess basic Bill of Rights guarantees, much 
less trucks. Surely they did not have the business rights that 
those had who received the 18,000 grandfathered privileges. 
When the Motor Carrier Act was enacted in 1935, there were 
a few black-owned companies in the business of interstate 
trucking. The authorization certificates of most, if not all, 
of them were revoked. The reason was that in those days 
insurance companies, by and large, did not write insurance 
policies for blacks. There is at least one black who was able 
to keep this authority by having a shipper fraudulently list 
his race as white on his insurance application. 16 
Many minorities are already in the general transporta­
tion business. Nationally, according to the 1972 Survey of 
Minority-Owned Business Enterprises, there are 12,917 mi­
nority-owned transportation companies. 17 The survey cate­
gory is broad, so this number does not represent only people 
who own trucks; some offer transportation-related services. 18 
Most minority-owned trucking companies are individual 
owner-operators.


--- PAGE 138 ---
Interstate Commerce Commission Truck Regulation 117 
Most minority truckers are in the local sector of the 
trucking business. Very few are in the more lucrative inter­
state trucking market. It is estimated that only 133 blacks 
hold certificates of authority which entitle them to operate 
independently in the interstate sector of the trucking indus­
try. Contrary to the situation in many other areas of business, 
the minority problem is not capitalization and business acu­
men. Their problem was summarized by Timothy Person, 
citing testimony by Samuel Cornelius, deputy director of the 
Office of Minority Business Enterprise, to the Subcommittee 
on Housing, Minority Enterprise and Economic Develop­
ment of the Congressional Black Caucus: 
... the share which minority truckers have of the interstate 
trucking market is infinitesimally small, apparently less than 
one-tenth of 1 percent. Why is this the case? Is it a matter 
of difficulty in capitalization, lack of an experience base in 
the industry, or disinterest of shippers? After examining this 
situation we must answer this question with a resounding 
no. 
The extent of capitalization required by firms entering the 
trucking industry or expanding from local hauling to inter­
state service is modest compared to the revenue potential of 
such growth. . . . In addition, there is no lack of minority 
firms with trucking experience .... The incredibly small 
participation of minority firms in the interstate trucking is 
without question due in large part to the severely restrictive 
entry criteria mandated by the Interstate Commerce Act. 
The Interstate Commerce Commission must labor under the 
burdens of this archaic act when determining the award of 
operating rights. The effect of this act is to place enormous 
barriers in the way of minority truckers. These barriers are 
fully as restrictive as the discredited practices of the Jim Crow 
system that barred entry into public facilities and many 
professions. 19 
Uniquely neither to minorities nor to the trucking indus­
try, when government actions or policies hurt one group 
of citizens in order to benefit another group of citizens, there 
is usually clamor for enactment of a policy that will help


--- PAGE 139 ---
118 THE STATE AGAINST BLACKS 
the group of citizens originally hurt by the government ac­
tion. The governmental assistance given this group will typi­
cally hurt some other group. Marc Connelly, in the Negro 
play Green Pastures, expressed what may be the dilemma 
of privilege-granting activities of government in a passage 
where God says to the angel Gabriel: "Every time Ah passes 
a miracle, Ah have to pass fo' or five mo' to ketch up wid 
it." 
Ex Parte Number 278, Equal Opportunity in Surface 
Transportation, is one such policy instituted by the Interstate 
Commerce Commission in an attempt to offset the govern­
ment-created disadvantage that confronts minorities in the 
trucking industry. 20 The purpose of Ex Parte Number 278 
is to increase and assist minority participation in the ship­
ment of government goods. The commission's function un­
der Ex Parte 278 is to expedite the application procedure 
for disadvantaged businesses. The expedited authority that 
is to be granted by the ICC to small businesses and minority 
businesses i& limited to the shipment of government goods. 
Aside from the issue of the effectiveness of Ex Parte 
278 in increasing the share of trucking business done by 
minorities, is the interesting point of why the law was 
needed in the first instance. Particularly insightful is the 
case of a black-owned trucking firm in Omaha, Nebraska. 
Ward Smith, the owner of the firm, submitted the low bid 
on a contract to ship the household goods of Offutt Air Force 
Base personnel. The contract was instead awarded to a 
white-owned trucking company that had bid $80,000 more 
than that bid by Ward Smith. Smith was denied the contract 
for reasons other than ability to perform the contract. He 
was denied the contract because he did not have state or 
federal authorization and was certified to move goods only 
within the city of Omaha. 21 Many people will suggest racial 
quotas and racial set-asides in government contracts to help 
blacks. But did Ward Smith need such help? No, he needed 
government off his back; he needed freedom of enterprise. 
Quotas as a remedy not only fail to confront the problem 
of government-sponsored monopolies but cause other prob­
lems. There are many white truckers too who, like Smith, 
cannot obtain certificates of authority (the Teamsters Union


--- PAGE 140 ---
Interstate Commerce Commission Truck Regulation 119 
and the American Trucking Association seek to keep anyone 
out regardless of race). It does not do much for racial rela­
tionships if the government grants a special privilege to a 
black trucker and denies that special privilege to a white 
trucker. What the government action will do is cause conflict 
between black and white, who will not realize that the real 
culprit is government. 
Union Discrimination in the Trucking Industry 
The discriminatory practices of the International Brother­
hood of Teamsters, the dominant union in the trucking in­
dustry, have been an important impediment to minority op­
portunities in trucking. Unions played a major role in getting 
blacks out of trucking, particularly in the South. In the post­
Civil War days, trucking was regarded as a "Negro" job. 
As wages in the trucking industry began to rise, these jobs 
became attractive to whites. Today, while flagrant discrimi­
nation is not widely practiced, union work-rules penalize 
blacks in their advancement to the more lucrative jobs of 
over-the-road drivers who, in some cases, earn more than 
$30,000 in wage income annually. 
The International Brotherhood of Teamsters negotiates 
seniority rules that are a part of its National Master Freight 
Agreement. Although there are blacks in the part of the 
Teamsters Union which deals in over-the-road trucking, 
most are dockmen and local drivers. These blacks may be 
high up on the seniority list, but generally over-the-road 
drivers are on a separate seniority list. The significance of 
this is that if a dockman or a local driver seeks to move to 
the over-the-road list, he must give up all the seniority rights 
he presently holds and go to the bottom of the over-the-road 
seniority list. Such a rule, because of the risks of unemploy­
ment and layoffs, acts as a powerful inducement not to trans­
fer. As pointed out by attorney William B. Gould, 22 this form 
of seniority rules is unlawful to the extent that they ad­
versely affect minorities. 23 According to Gould," ... no mat­
ter how many courts declared the provisions unlawful, the 
parties not directly ordered to make changes continued to


--- PAGE 141 ---
120 THE STATE AGAINST BLACKS 
adhere to the same practices and procedures." 24 Professor 
Gould argued that discriminatory seniority rules continue 
because (1) the Teamsters are a highly decentralized organi­
zation and (2) the government has been unwilling to carry 
its confrontation with the trucking industry to a showdown. 
Union officials threatened a nationwide strike if any com­
pany hired a Negro because of government pressure. 
The economic impact of seniority rules struck through 
collective bargaining agreements is that they reduce minor­
ity opportunities to gain over-the-road trucking skills. They 
also perpetuate the effects of past discrimination. It perpetu­
ates past discrimination because many trucking companies 
did not hire Negro road drivers until very recently. 25 Many 
times the Teamsters locals demanded that trucking compa­
nies practice racial employment discrimination against 
blacks as a condition for labor peace. 26 
Another significant factor in the problem that blacks 
face in their attempt to get over-the-road trucking driving 
positions is the refusal of white truck drivers to ride with 
them. The Wall Street journal reported that one teamster 
official asked, "Would you like to climb in a bunk bed that 
a nigger just got out of?" Another said, "To my knowledge 
no law has been written yet that says a white man has to 
bed down with Negroes." 27 While these sentiments were ex­
pressed a few years ago, more recent evidence shows that 
this attitude prevails to a significant degree. This is evi­
denced by the fact that Teamsters Union officials protect 
union men who have been discharged by a company for 
refusing to ride with a Negro driver. 28 
Seniority rules, the refusal of white drivers to ride with 
Negro drivers, and highly discriminatory job referral prac­
tices by the Teamsters have contributed, and continue to 
contribute to reduced Negro opportunities for jobs in the 
trucking indus try. 29 
Conclusion 
For the most part piecemeal attempts to alter the institu­
tional structure of the trucking industry have not given


--- PAGE 142 ---
Interstate Commerce Commission Truck Regulation 121 
equality of opportunity to all potential entrants. There have 
been, and probably will continue to be, minor concessions 
here and there to assist the small businessman, particularly 
the minority businessman. These special exceptions to high 
legal entry barriers, however, come at no small personal 
cost to the recipient because of the legal fees and lengthy 
application procedures. 
Complete deregulation is what is needed in the trucking 
industry. Deregulation will provide real equality of opportu­
nity for all Americans in trucking. The only socially compel­
ling regulation is in the area of truck safety. There should 
be three questions that should be answered satisfactorily 
by an applicant in order for him to operate a truck on the 
national roads. These are: (1) Can you drive a truck safely? 
(2) Is your truck safe? (3) Do you have the appropriate liabil­
ity insurance? All other questions as to whether the services 
of the applicant are "needed" or whether he provides the 
"right" services will be settled by the market. If the trucker 
provides unneeded or wrong services, he will have few cus­
tomers. He will not be able to cover all his costs. He will 
go bankrupt and then out of business. 
Current law in the trucking industry, administered by 
the ICC, appears to be in violation of the spirit, if not the 
letter, of the Constitution of the United States. 30 Indeed, as 
a layman sees it, the statements of the Supreme Court of 
the United States would suggest that ICC restrictive prac­
tices violate the spirit of the Constitution. Justice Joseph 
P. Bradley (1813-92) characterized occupational freedom as 
an "inalienable right." 31 Justice Stephen J. Field (1816-99) 
said that it (occupational freedom) was a "distinguishing 
feature of our republican institutions." 32 Justice William 0. 
Douglas (1898-1980) proclaimed that occupational freedom 
is "the most precious liberty that man possesses." 33 
It is clear that the regulation of the trucking industry 
does violate the democratic sentiments expressed by the sev­
eral Supreme Court justices. Potential entrants are denied 
occupational freedom. To compound the inequity involved, 
the denial of occupational freedom is for the expressed pur­
pose of protecting the incumbent trucking companies from


--- PAGE 143 ---
122 THE STATE AGAINST BLACKS 
increased competition, making their incomes higher than 
would otherwise be the case. The failure to recognize sub­
stantial barriers to economic opportunity has led to consider­
able confusion in the analysis of, and public discussion of, 
our nation's racial problems. 
Recently there have been several suits against public 
policy that propose to remedy injustices against minorities. 
Frequently these programs seek to give minority business­
men and workers a fixed percentage of government contracts 
or to set hiring quotas. As such these programs have been 
accused of fostering what is called "reverse discrimination." 
A case in point is the Associated General Contractors 
of California v. Secretary of Commerce (U.S.D.C., Cal. Oct. 
20, 1978).34 This case sought to enjoin the 10 percent minority 
set-aside provision of the Public Works Employment Act.35 
The lower court held that the set-aside for minority business­
men was unconstitutional and violated Title VI of the Civil 
Rights Act. On appeal the Supreme Court vacated the judg­
ment and remanded the case, asking the lower court to con­
sider the question of mootness. 
The particular details of this case do not interest us here; 
however, the principles involved do. To a significant degree 
the difficulties that minorities face in competing for govern­
ment projects are caused by government-erected barriers 
that impose a disproportionate burden on minorities. The 
difficulty that minority truckers face in getting authorization 
certificates is only one among many barriers erected by gov­
ernment. More germane to the case in point is the Davis­
Bacon Act, which tends to discriminate against non-union 
contractors. 36 1t produces a racial effect because most minor­
ity contractors are in the non-union sector. 
Therefore, the set-aside program may be viewed as a 
remedy for the original government-mandated restriction. 
But it is the set-aside program that is being challenged in 
the courts on constitutional grounds, and the original barrier 
(which gives rise to minority demands for set-asides) goes 
completely unnoticed by the courts. In terms of equity, con­
stitutionality and economic efficiency, the government-man­
dated entry restrictions would be a more suitable target. If


--- PAGE 144 ---
Interstate Commerce Commission Truck Regulation 123 
these restrictions were to be successfully challenged and 
removed, there would be no necessity for the many compen­
satory measures that cause so much controversy in our soci­
ety. 
Many people clamor against quotas as a violation of 
democratic principles. Recently, there has been a political 
demand for their elimination. Those clamoring against quo­
tas assume that the economic game is being played fairly. 
It is not being played fairly. It is rigged and rigged in a 
way particularly devastating to blacks because of their his­
tory in the United States. So the moral question has to be 
asked: If we are going to retain various laws and regulations 
that systematically discriminate against black opportuni­
ties, what do we do? If we keep the laws, then hard and 
fast racial quotas, in some areas, may constitute a "second­
best" solution. The first-best solution, in turns of equity and 
efficiency, is to eliminate the regulations and eliminate the 
quotas.


--- PAGE 145 ---



--- PAGE 146 ---
CHAPTER 10 
Economic Regulation 
by the States 
Those who expect to reap the blessings of freedom must, 
like men, undergo the fatigue of supporting it. 
-Thomas Paine 
The American Crisis IV 
September 12, 1777 
THE THESIS OF THIS BOOK is that black handicaps resulting 
from centuries of slavery, followed by years of gross denial 
of constitutional rights, have been reinforced by government 
laws. The government laws that have proven most devastat­
ing, for many blacks, are those that govern economic activ­
ity. The laws are not discriminatory in the sense that they 
are aimed specifically at blacks. But they are discriminatory 
in the sense that they deny full opportunity for the most 
disadvantaged Americans, among whom blacks are dispro­
portionately represented. 
Restrictions on the right to work are not a part of Ameri­
ca's past value system. After all, much of the impetus for 
our ancestors to risk all of what they had to come to America 
was the search for freedom. They sought not only religious 
and political freedom. They sought economic freedom as 
well. They thought that a man should not have to get permis­
sion from the king, a mercantile association or a guild in 
order to pursue a particular trade. They thought that the 
right to work was part and parcel of the natural rights of 
man. What modern Americans have done is resurrect the 
mercantile system of monopolies and other state privileges 
that the Founding Fathers sought to escape. 
125


--- PAGE 147 ---
126 THE STATE AGAINST BLACKS 
Naturally, one asks how did we evolve from a condition 
of significant economic freedom to the highly restricted eco­
nomic freedom of today? When we speak of economic free­
dom in reference to the past, we use the term with some 
reservation. The reason is that certain population segments, 
like the blacks, had little or none while others were restricted 
in one degree or another. But, on the other hand, there were 
few license requirements to practice a trade. Up until re­
cently, there were only three licensed occupations: doctors, 
lawyers and ministers. Today there are more than 500 li­
censed occupations. Businesses were not regulated and li­
censed as they are today. It might be tempting to say that 
what's wrong with the past was all that economic freedom. 
But it is helpful to note that it was this period when America 
made its rapid growth to become a world power, all the while 
absorbing wave after wave of poor, illiterate immigrants 
from every oppressive corner of the earth. 
To understand what happened to the economic freedom 
that did exist in America, we have to look at constitutional 
law. The brief review that follows will help us understand 
what happened. It may even suggest what can be done to 
bring about a larger measure of economic freedom. 
A Brief Review of Constitutional Law 
A leading case of the 1870s, Munn v. Illinois, 1 is typically 
viewed as the initial symbol of judicial deference to legisla­
tive regulation of economic activity. In this landmark deci­
sion the Supreme Court of the United States held that certain 
industries, "affected with a public interest," could be sub­
jected to state regulation without violating the due process 
clause of the Fifth and Fourteenth amendments. 2 
Munn v. Illinois was one of the most far-reaching deci­
sions of the nineteenth-century Supreme Court. It instituted 
state economic regulation of private businesses. In Munn 
v. Illinois the Court upheld an Illinois law (1873) that fixed 
maximum rates for grain storage. Chief Justice Waite, 
speaking for the majority, declared the Illinois law a legiti­
mate expression of the police powers of the state. However,


--- PAGE 148 ---
Economic Regulation by the States 127 
Justice Field, in dissent, and perhaps correctly anticipating 
the future course of events, said, "If this be a sound law, 
if there be no protection either in the principles upon which 
our republican government is founded, or in the prohibition 
of the Constitution against such invasion of private rights, 
all property and all businesses in the State are held at the 
mercy of a majority of its legislature." 
While the Munn decision made the police powers of 
the state to regulate private businesses explicit, it suggested 
potential limits on legislative powers. The Court felt that 
since the grain elevator operators had a virtual monopoly 
on grain storage, regulation of their activities was similar 
to the traditional rate regulation of utilities and monopolies. 
In the years following the Munn decision, the Supreme 
Court moved toward substantive due process review and in­
terpretation of state regulation. 3 
Mugler v. Kansas 4 signaled the Court's later interpreta­
tion of the Constitution. Justice Harlan, speaking for the 
Court, stated in Mugler, "Not every statute enacted ostensibly 
for the promotion of the public morals, the public health, 
or the public safety would be accepted as a legitimate exer­
tion of the police powers of the State." Harlan pointed out 
that the courts would not be misled by mere pretenses; they 
were obligated to look at the substance of things. 
Allgeyer v. Louisiana 5 marked the completion of the 
Court's movement to substantive due process review of state 
economic regulation. Allgeyer was the first case where a 
state law was invalidated on the ground of substantive due 
process. The case involved an insurance company that ad­
vertised in Louisiana but was not licensed to operate in the 
state. The Court's articulation of liberty of contract is what 
gave this case significance in the development of substantive 
due process, which was to influence the next thirty years 
of the Court's decision. Justice Peckham said: 
The liberty mentioned in that amendment [Fourteenth] means 
not only the right of the citizen to be free from the mere 
physical restraint of his person, as by incarceration, but the 
term is deemed to embrace the right of the citizen to be free


--- PAGE 149 ---
128 THE STATE AGAINST BLACKS 
in the enjoyment of all of his faculties; to be free to use them 
in all lawful ways; to live and work where he will; to earn 
his livelihood by any lawful calling; to pursue any livelihood 
or avocation, and for that purpose to enter into all contracts 
which may be proper, necessary and essential to his carrying 
out to a successful conclusion the purposes above mentioned. 6 
The liberty of contract theme, which characterized the 
Court's opinion in Allgeyer, was to be more firmly stated 
in Lochner v. New York. 7 This case involved a New York 
State law prohibiting the employment of bakery employees 
for a period of more than 10 hours per day or 60 hours per 
week. Again Justice Peckham delivered the opinion of the 
Court: 
The statute necessarily interferes with the right of contract 
between the employer and employees .... The general right 
to make a contract in relation to his business is part of the 
liberty of the individual protected by the Fourteenth Amend­
ment of the Federal Constitution. The right to purchase or 
sell labor is part of the liberty protected by this amendment, 
unless there are circumstances which exclude the right .... 
This court has recognized the existence and upheld the exer­
cise of the police powers of the States in many cases which 
might fairly be considered border ones .... It must, of course, 
be conceded that there is a limit to the valid exercise of the 
police power by the State. . . . Otherwise the Fourteenth 
Amendment would have no efficacy and the legislatures of 
the States would have unbounded power, and it would be 
enough to say that any piece of legislation was enacted to 
conserve the morals, the health or safety of the people; such 
legislation would be valid, no matter how absolutely without 
foundation the claim might be. The claim of the police power 
would be a mere pretext-become another and delusive name 
for the Supreme Sovereignty of the State to be exercised free 
from constitutional restraint. 8 
From the Lochner decision until the mid-1930s, the Su­
preme Court held unconstitutional many state laws that reg­
ulated economic activity on substantive due process grounds. 
Many of the state laws that were struck down were those


--- PAGE 150 ---
Economic Regulation by the States 129 
regulating product prices and labor wages, including those 
fixing minimum wages, and especially vulnerable during 
this period were laws regulating conditions for entering into 
business. In studying this period, an economist would see 
that the Court struck down, as unconstitutional, many state 
laws providing the mechanism for producer collusions. 9 
Thus, in numerous decisions prior to 1937, the U.S. Su­
preme Court ruled that the liberty guaranteed by the due 
process clause included the liberty to contract. The basic 
restriction, narrowly interpreted, was in businesses "affected 
with the public interest." Government infringement on basic 
economic relationships such as wages and prices was held 
to be a violation of the Fifth and Fourteenth amendments. 10 
The due process clause was interpreted as barring both state 
and federal governments from regulating businesses not af­
fected with the public interest. 
Numerous attempts by states were made to circumvent 
court rulings. Of particular interest is the New State Ice Co. 
v. Liebman 11 because of its similarities to current practices 
in truck and taxi regulation. In this case the Supreme Court 
invalidated an Oklahoma law that treated ice manufactur­
ing as a public utility, i.e., an activity affected with the public 
interest. The Oklahoma law required, as a condition of entry, 
that public "need and convenience" be demonstrated before 
one could manufacture ice. The burden of proving public 
need and necessity, i.e., that there were not enough existing 
facilities to meet public demand, was on the prospective 
entrant. The Court held that such licensure was an invalid 
regulation of a business not affected with a public interest 
and a denial of liberty to pursue a lawful calling contrary 
to the due process clause of the Fourteenth Amendment. 
In dissenting, Justice Brandeis expressed an opinion that 
was to be adopted by the Court in later years: "The notion 
of a distinct category of business 'affected with the public 
interest' employing property 'devoted to a public use' rests 
upon historical error. In my opinion the true principle is 
that the State's power extends for the public protection. I 
find in the due process clause no other limitation upon the 
character and scope or regulation permissible." 12


--- PAGE 151 ---
130 THE STATE AGAINST BLACKS 
A 1934 case, Nebbia v. New York, marks the break in 
the U.S. Supreme Court's distinction between "businesses 
affected with the public interests" and any other kind of 
business. 13 Nebbia protested against the New York State law 
that fixed the minimum price of milk at the retail level. 
Nebbia claimed that price regulation by the state, except 
in business affecting the public interest such as utilities­
for example, railroads, water and electricity-was a viola­
tion of the due process clause of the Constitution. The Court 
did not agree. The Court declared that there is "no closed 
category of business affected with the public interest." Jus­
tice Roberts, speaking for the majority, said: 
The Fifth Amendment, in the field of Federal activity, and 
the Fourteenth, as respects state action, do not prohibit gov­
ernmental regulation for the public welfare. They merely 
condition the execution of the admitted power, by securing 
that the end shall be accomplished by methods consistent 
with due process ... demands only that the law shall not 
be unreasonable, arbitrary, or capricious, and that the means 
selected shall have a real and substantial relation to the object 
sought to be attained. 14 
But Justice Reynolds, dissenting with the majority in 
Nebbia, held that: 
This is not regulation, but management, control, dictation­
it amounts to the deprivation of the fundamental right which 
one has to conduct his own affairs honestly and along custom­
ary lines . . . if it be now ruled that one dedicates his property 
to public use whenever he embarks on an enterprise which 
the Legislature may think is desirable to bring under control, 
this is but to declare that rights guaranteed by the Constitu­
tion exist only so long as supposed public interest does not 
require their extinction. To adopt such a view, of course, 
would put an end to liberty under the Constitution. 15 
Essentially then, during the decades preceding Nebbia, 
the constitutional issue of a state's economic regulation


--- PAGE 152 ---
Economic Regulation by the States 131 
within its borders was resolved. The states were held to pass 
only those laws that have a "reasonable and proper" legisla­
tive purpose and are neither discriminatory nor arbitrary. 
Nebbia was to usher in a different Court attitude. In 1937 
the shift in the Court's interpretation of the Constitution 
was sealed. In West Coast Hotel v. Parrish 16 the Court upheld 
the validity of the Washington State minimum wage law 
and thereby rejected its own principles enunciated in the 
Adkins 11 case. It upheld the National Labor Relations Act 
and the Railway Labor Act, 18 both requiring that employers 
bargain with union representatives who were chosen by a 
majority of employees. Both of these decisions stand in stark 
contrast with the Court's earlier decisions, most notably in 
Adair v. United States 19 and Coppage v. Kansas. 20 
During this period the Court effectively ruled out liberty 
of contract as a guarantee of the Fifth and Fourteenth 
amendments and substituted procedural due process as the 
criterion for judging the constitutionality of state exercise 
of its police powers. West Coast Hotel v. Parrish 21 is thought 
of as the watershed case in the Court's interpretation of the 
Constitution. In West Coast Hotel, a case challenging the 
constitutionality of the Washington State minimum wage 
law, Chief Justice Hughes overruled the earlier Adkins v. 
Children's Hospital decision. In the Adkins case, Justice 
Sutherland said that freedom of contract was the general 
rule and restraint the exception. He also pointed out that 
since the Nineteenth Amendment, women were not civilly 
inferior and hence liberty of contract could not be subject 
to greater restriction for women than for men (the Adkins 
case concerned a minimum wage law for women only in 
the District of Columbia). Contrast Chief Justice Hughes's 
opinion for the majority in West Coast (also a minimum 
wage law for women): 
What can be closer to the public interest than the health of 
women and their protection from unscrupulous and over­
reaching employers? And if the protection of women is a legit­
imate end of the exercise of state power, how can it be said 
that the requirement of the payment of a minimum wage


--- PAGE 153 ---
132 THE STATE AGAINST BLACKS 
fairly fixed in order to meet the very necessities of existence 
is not an admissible means to that end? ... Our conclusion 
is that the case of Adkins v. Children's Hospital, supra, should 
be, and it is, overruled. 
The dissenting justices, in a 5 to 4 decision, said: 
Neither the statute involved in the Adkins case nor the Wash­
ington statute ... has the slightest relation to the capacity 
or earning power of the employee. . . . The sole basis upon 
which the question of validity rests is the assumption that 
the employee is entitled to receive a sum of money sufficient 
to provide a living for her, keep her in health and preserve 
her morals .... The law takes account of the necessities of 
only one party to the contract. It ignores the necessities of 
the employer by compelling him to pay not less than a certain 
sum, not only whether the employee is capable of earning 
it, but irrespective of the ability of his business to sustain 
the burden. . . . To the extent that the sum fixed exceeds the 
fair value of the services rendered, it amounts to a compulsory 
exaction from the employer for the support of a partially indi­
gent person ... it arbitrarily shifts to his shoulders a burden 
which, if it belongs to anybody, belongs to society as a 
whole .... 
Hughes said that an employer should pay an hourly 
wage that will meet "the very necessities of existence" of 
the worker. The dissent points out that such a sum may 
exceed the value of some employee's services. If the em­
ployer hires such a worker, the law requires the payment 
of a gift to the worker. Of course employers will attempt 
to avoid paying a gift. One way is not to hire the worker 
whose services do not equal or exceed the mandated wage. 
The justices in dissent are really saying that the burden of 
an indigent worker is not that of the employer but that of 
society. In this sense they might have insightfully provided 
the moral argument for the "negative income tax." This idea 
was proposed by Professor Milton Friedman some years ago. 
Essentially it says that a person should be allowed to earn 
whatever wage he can. If society deems that the income


--- PAGE 154 ---
Economic Regulation by the States 133 
thereby generated is insufficient, an automatic payment 
from the Treasury to make up the difference would be forth­
coming. 
A year after West Coast, Justice Stone, for the Court, 
went further down the road toward striking down a substan­
tive due process interpretation of the Constitution in United 
States v. Carotene Products. 22 Justice Stone, in this case, held 
that state economic regulation, even in businesses not af­
fected with the public interest, is constitutional as long as 
the regulatory legislation rests upon some rational basis. 
At least at this point of constitutional history, a regula­
tory law could be declared unconstitutional by proving that 
the law had no rational basis. But by 1941, even this require­
ment was abandoned. In Olsen v. Nebraska, the state courts 
had held as unconstitutional a law fixing maximum employ­
ment-agency fees. 23 The Supreme Court unanimously re­
versed. Justice Douglas, speaking for the Court, said that 
the state did not have to prove that a regulatory law was 
appropriate: "Differences of opinion on that score suggest 
a choice which should be left where ... it was left by the 
Constitution-to the State and to Congress." 24 
In Supreme Court decisions that followed, the Court's 
attitude was made clear. In the Day-Brite v. Missouri 25 - 26 
decision, Justice Douglas, speaking for the Court, held that 
it was not for the Supreme Court to decide whether regula­
tory legislation "offends the public welfare." 27 In the Wil­
liamson v. Lee Optical Company decision, the Court reiter­
ated its stance. In this case the Court upheld a state law 
requiring a prescription before an optician could fit old 
lenses to new frames; the Court said that even though the 
law may cause "needless, wasteful requirement in most 
cases," the legislature "might have concluded" that such 
waste was justified in order to protect public health. 28 
There is considerable speculation attempting to explain 
the extraordinary shift in the Court's judicial values. The 
strongest contender is that the "extremism" of the Court 
in the pre-1937 years, which saw a strong resistance to eco­
nomic experimentation, typified by its anti-New Deal deci­
sions, gave rise to extremism in another direction through


--- PAGE 155 ---
134 THE STATE AGAINST BLACKS 
those who thought that government should play a larger 
role in the conduct of economic affairs. 29 Another explana­
tion for the Court's departure from substantive due process 
interpretation of the Constitution is that the Court mirrors 
public opinion. This is seen in Justice Holmes's opinion in 
the Tyson case: "The truth seems to me to be that, subject 
to compensation when compensation is due, the legislature 
may forbid or restrict any business when it has a sufficient 
force of public opinion behind it. "30 At the time of the Tyson 
case, those justices opposed to constitutional laissez-faire 
were in the minority; in later years those justices constituted 
the majority on the Court. 
Essentially in the late 1930s and the 1940s and thereaf­
ter, the Courts made the interpretation that state economic 
regulation was not a violation of the guarantees of the Fifth 
and Fourteenth amendments/Further, they made it clear 
that it was not their job to question the rationality or wisdom 
of state economic regulation. They held that it was within 
the police powers of the state to pursue economic regulation 
and economic experimentation. 
To the legal layman the position of the Courts borders 
on the unbelievable. Imagine a would-be barber, a would­
be taxicab owner or a would-be real estate broker who has 
been denied entry because of state regulation, which protects 
existing practitioners from competition, successfully wag­
ing a political campaign against the entrenched, monied 
barber, taxi and real estate broker interests in the state capi­
tol. Justice Douglas, perhaps recognizing that state occupa­
tional licensing gives the state an opportunity for arbitrary 
action, said: 
The right to work, I had assumed, was the most precious lib­
erty that man possesses. Man has indeed as much right to 
work as he has to live, to be free, to own property .... To 
work means to eat. It means also to live. For many it would 
be better to work in a jail, than to sit idle on the curb. The 
great values of freedom are in the opportunities afforded man 
to press to new horizons, to pit his strength against the forces 
of nature, to match skills with his fellow man. 31


--- PAGE 156 ---
Economic Regulation by the States 135 
Such sentiments have always characterized Court rheto­
ric. Justice Bradley viewed occupational freedom as an "in­
alienable right." 32 Occupational freedom was viewed by Jus­
tice Field as a "distinguishing feature of our republican 
institutions." 33 Justice Rufus W. Peckman (1838-1909) said, 
"The liberty mentioned in that Amendment (Fourteenth) 
means ... to earn his livelihood by any lawful calling; to 
pursue any livelihood or avocation .... "34 
Despite these traditional pronouncements, occupational 
freedom has little meaning as demonstrated by contempo­
rary Court opinion. Contrast Mr. Justice Douglas's statement 
(above) with his statement just one year later in a case in­
volving a plaintiff whose occupational choice was restricted 
by the state: 
The day is gone when this court uses the Due Process Clause 
of the Fourteenth Amendment to strike down state laws, regu­
latory of business and industrial conditions, because they may 
be unwise, improvident, or out of harmony with a particular 
school of thought. ... We emphasize again what Chief Justice 
Waite said in Munn v. Illinois, 94 U.S. 113, 134, "For protec­
tions against abuses by the legislatures people must resort 
to the polls, not to the courts. "35 
Justice Douglas reiterated the fact that individual occu­
pational freedom was secondary to state convenience: 
Our recent decisions make plain that we do not sit as a super­
legislature to weigh the wisdom of legislation nor to decide 
whether the policy which it expresses offends the public wel­
fare. The legislative power has limits .... But the state legis­
latures have constitutional authority to experiment with new 
techniques; they are entitled to their own standard of the pub­
lic welfare; they may within extremely broad limits control 
practices in the business-labor field, so long as specific consti­
tutional prohibitions are not violated and so long as conflicts 
with valid and controlling federal laws are avoided. 36 
By the time of Ferguson v. Skrupa, in 1963, substantive 
due process as a restriction of state regulation of economic


--- PAGE 157 ---
136 THE STATE AGAINST BLACKS 
activity was, without question, dead. In holding valid a Kan­
sas law that made it a misdemeanor for a person to engage 
in debt adjustment without being a Kansas-licensed lawyer, 
Justice Black said: 
We have returned to the original constitutional proposition 
that courts do not substitute their social and economic beliefs 
for the judgment of legislative bodies, who are elected to pass 
laws .... The Kansas debt adjusting statute may be wise or 
unwise. But relief, if any be needed, lies not with us but with 
the body constituted to pass laws for the State of Kansas. 37 
Therefore, the Court, through most of its post-1940 deci­
sions, has entrusted basic individual rights having to do with 
economic freedom of contract to the legislatures of the states. 
On the other hand, the Court has been ambivalent in reach­
ing decisions where economic freedom of contract and free­
dom of speech issues simultaneously present themselves. 
For example, in Barsky v. Board of Regents, 38 the petitioner 
had "left wing" connections that led to the licensing authori­
ty's revocation of his physician's license. The Court sus­
tained the revocation against the charge of unreasonable­
ness, whim and caprice even though the evidence that such 
was the case was fairly strong. 39 In Barsky, Justices Black, 
Frankfurter and Douglas dissented, emphasizing that the 
conduct constituting the crime had no bearing on the appel­
lant's competency to practice medicine. 
However, just a few years later the Court held invalid 
a similar restraint on occupational freedom. In this case, 
Schware v. Board of Examiners, 40 the petitioner had been 
denied permission to take the state bar examination on the 
ground that he did not meet the "good moral character" 
requirement of the state. The New Mexico board had refused 
to let Schware take the state bar because of his former associ­
ation with subversive groups and his record of arrest. Justice 
Black, for the Court, in invalidating the state's claim, said: 
We need not enter into a discussion whether the practice of 
law is a "right" or "privilege." Regardless of how the State's


--- PAGE 158 ---
Economic Regulation by the States 137 
grant of permission to engage in this occupation is character­
ized, it is sufficient to say that a person cannot be prevented 
from practicing except for valid reasons. Certainly the prac­
tice of law is not a matter of the State's grace. 41 
Justice Black, delivering the opinion for the Court, said 
that state occupational qualifications must have a rational 
basis connected with the fitness or capacity of the candidate 
to perform the occupation. 42 
The history of Supreme Court interpretation of constitu­
tional law demonstrates the difficulty, at least for the lay­
man, of interpreting the Court's translation of guarantees 
found in the U.S. Bill of Rights. In addition, one places him­
self in considerable jeopardy if he attempts to derive general 
principles from one Court opinion to use as predictors of 
future Court opinions, even when the Court membership 
does not change. 
Take the declaration by Mr. Justice Black speaking for 
the Court in Schware. Black said that state-imposed qualifi­
cations "must have a rational connection with the appli­
cant's fitness or capacity" to practice the occupation. 43 
Clearly, if a literal interpretation is given to Justice Black's 
declaration, it would appear that there would be many forms 
of economic regulation at the state or local levels which 
the Court would hold as invalid exercise of the police powers 
of the state. For example, the City of New York requires 
the possession of a medallion for each taxi that operates 
within the city. Because the city has not issued a new medal­
lion since 1937, the only way that one can be obtained is 
through the purchase of an existing medallion, which has 
a current price of about $60,000. Therefore, the city, through 
its numerical restriction on medallions, causes a new en­
trant to pay $60,000 as a condition of entry. Such a require­
ment or qualification has no "rational connection with the 
applicant's fitness or capacity" to practice the occupation, 
i.e., to own a taxi and provide taxi services. As we have 
pointed out earlier, the entry conditions in Washington, D.C., 
have a more nearly rational basis for state regulation of 
economic activity. The District of Columbia Public Services


--- PAGE 159 ---
138 THE STATE AGAINST BLACKS 
Commission requires that the applicant certify his vehicle 
as being safe (inspected) and that he have a minimum 
amount of liability insurance in force and a chauffeur's li­
cense. The right to own and operate a taxi, itself, costs an 
annual fee of $25! 
Possible Challenges to State Economic Regulation 
As this brief history of economic regulation has shown, there 
is little basis for optimism about a successful challenge on 
constitutional principles. The only limitation that the Court 
has placed on state economic regulation is that it may not 
act in an arbitrary, capricious or unreasonable manner in 
the exercise of its police powers. However, these limitations 
do not get us very far in the specification of the precise 
bounds of state intervention into the economic arena be­
cause "arbitrary," "capricious" and "unreasonable" mean 
different things to different people at different times. 
Title VII of the Civil Rights Act, and the cases that have 
arisen under it, may constitute a basis for the challenge of 
some forms of economic regulation. Section 703(h) of Title 
VII says that it shall not be an unlawful employment prac­
tice: 
... for an employer to give and to act upon the results of 
any professionally developed ability test provided such a test, 
its administration or action upon the results is not designed, 
intended, or used to discriminate because of race, color, reli­
gion, sex, or national origin. . . . 
Therefore, testing procedures are lawful within the meaning 
of the Civil Rights Act only if they can be shown to be job­
related. 
Griggs v. Duke Power Company was a major case aris­
ing under Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964.44 The 
lower court found that the high school and test requirements 
for employee promotion and assignment had been adopted 
without any discriminatory intent against Negro employees. 
But Chief Justice Burger, speaking for a unanimous Court,


--- PAGE 160 ---
Economic Regulation by the States 139 
declared that "good intent or absence of discriminatory in­
tent does not redeem employment procedures or testing 
mechanisms that operate as 'built-in headwinds' for minor­
ity groups and are unrelated to measuring job capability . 
. . . Congress directed the thrust of the act to the conse­
quences of employment practices, not simply the motivation. 
More than that, Congress has placed on the employer the 
burden of showing that any given requirement must have 
a manifest relationship to the employment in question." Jus­
tice Burger stated further: ". . . The Act proscribes not only 
overt discrimination but also practices that are fair in form, 
but discriminatory in operation. The touchstone is business 
necessity. If an employment practice which operates to ex­
clude Negroes cannot be shown to be related to job perfor­
mance, the practice is prohibite~." 
Again, if one literally applied the Court's opinion to the 
ownership of taxis or trucks as a form of employment, albeit 
self-employment, he would find the entry requirements to 
be invalid. That is, the ability to purchase expensive licenses 
to own and operate a truck or taxi does not appear to be a 
requirement that is necessary for the performance of the 
service in question. Further, even though discriminatory ra­
cial intent cannot be shown as 2 basis for taxi licenses or 
Interstate Commerce Commission certificates of authoriza­
tion, preliminary evidence shows that the consequence is 
that of barring entry, particularly for disadvantaged minori­
ties. In the case of Interstate Commerce Commission certifi­
cates of authority, the case is quite clear. Virtually all the 
more than 16,000 certificates of authority were issued in 1935 
after the enactment of the Motor Carrier Act. At that time, 
blacks did not have trucks in any number, much less the 
constitutional guarantees that they possess today. In effect, 
the certification process tends to make permanent the histor­
ical disadvantages of blacks in the trucking business. It is 
in this sense-equity considerations-that it can be shown 
that a good bit of economic regulatio:q. at the state, federal 
and local levels is violative of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 
and the Equal Protection Clause of the Constitution. 
Some recent challenges to economic regulation have


--- PAGE 161 ---
140 THE STATE AGAINST BLACKS 
come in the form of antitrust suits by the Department of 
Justice and the Federal Trade Commission. The Antitrust 
Division of the Justice Department has taken the American 
Bar Association and the Texas State Board of Public Accoun­
tants to court charging violations of federal antitrust laws. 
The Federal Trade Commission is now conducting investiga­
tions into licensing "to identify instances of disguised mo­
nopoly." Furthermore, the Equal Employment Opportunity 
Commission is now contending that job discrimination by 
state licensing boards violates Title VII of the 1964 Civil 
Rights Act. In addition, Congress, as a result of trucking 
deregulation legislation, is conducting studies into the mo­
nopoly aspects of Interstate Commerce Commission admin­
istrative law.


--- PAGE 162 ---
CHAPTER 11 
Conclusion 
Premum Non Nocere 
-Hippocratic Oath 
THE THEME THROUGHOUT THIS book is that racial antipathy 
and discrimination do not explain all that they are purported 
to explain. The fact that a person likes one race over another 
does not tell us what that person will find to be in his inter­
ests. This is just as true as in the case of anything else. 
Knowledge that some people like Rolls-Royces better than 
Pintos or twenty-five-point diamonds better than two-point 
diamonds, alone, cannot unambiguously tell us which the 
person will possess. To understand fully what people will 
in fact do, one not only needs to know what people desire, 
one also needs to know the costs that people must pay for 
the desired object in question. 
All economic evidence shows that the lower the cost of 
doing something, the more people will do it. Very often the 
government lowers the costs involved. When the government 
fixes prices, wages, profits or rents, the tendency for choices 
to be made on noneconomic criteria increases. Race, sex, 
national origin are all noneconomic criteria. The chapters 
on the railroad industry and on minimum wages demon­
strated how wage-fixing has heightened the disadvantages 
faced by blacks. 
141


--- PAGE 163 ---
142 THE STAT£ AGAINST BLACKS 
The reason why blacks are disadvantaged because of 
government intervention is no mystery. There is a kind of 
parity in the marketplace that does not exist in the political 
arena. Discriminated-against people generally do better un­
der a system where there is market allocation of goods and 
services than when there is political allocation of goods and 
services. The market resembles one-man-one-vote. This 
means that one person's one dollar is the same as another 
person's one dollar. The difference between people lies in 
the number of dollars they have. No such parity exists in 
the political arena. 
When choices are made in the market arena, people, 
including poor people, have a higher probability of getting 
some of what they want, even if they are a minority. When 
choices are made through the political arena, they very well 
may get none of what they want. That is, if the majority 
votes to use social resources to produce X and the minority 
voted for Y, if majority rule carries the day, there will be 
no Y. 
Partial evidence of this, as Dr. Milton Friedman points 
out, is seen in the poorest ghettos of the nation. 1 If you go 
through the ghetto, you will see some nice cars, some nice 
clothing and some nice foods. In that respect the residents 
have some of the things that middle-class and rich people 
possess. But you will see no nice public schools. Why not 
at least some public schools like rich people have? Cars, 
clothing and food are distributed by the market mechanism. 
Schools are distributed by the political mechanism. More 
often than not, if a nice school is found in the ghetto, it is 
a nonpublic school. 
The power of the market is seen when one looks at the 
historical housing opportunities for blacks. Appreciation of 
the market ability to thwart the forces of racial discrimina­
tion is gained by asking the following question: How did 
blacks seize the use-control of housing in the central areas 
of most major cities? During the racially hostile times of 
the 1920s, 30s, 40s, one could not prevent whole blocks and 
neighborhoods from going from white to black virtually 
overnight. That fact ought to give rise to the question: How


--- PAGE 164 ---
Conclusion 143 
did poor, discriminated-against blacks do this? Keep in mind 
that some of these neighborhoods were occupied by rela­
tively affluent whites. 
The poor blacks simply outbid the whites for the prop­
erty. At first thought, the ability of poor people to outbid 
nonpoor people may seem an impossibility. But an example 
can show how it is possible. Imagine a three-story brown­
stone being rented by a nonpoor white family for $200 per 
month. Suppose further that the landlord does not like 
blacks. But if six poor black families suggested that the 
building be partitioned into six parts to rent for $75 per part, 
the landlord might have to reassess his position. Namely, 
he would have to evaluate the prospect of an income yield 
of $450, by renting to the six blacks, as opposed to an income 
yield of $200 by retaining his white tenant. The fact that 
blacks have come to occupy neighborhoods formerly occu­
pied by whites demonstrates that the landlord's dilemma 
was resolved in favor of blacks. 
Now the question: Why is it that poor blacks did not 
inundate suburban areas to the extent they did the cities? 
The answer is easy: The power of the state subverted the 
operation of the market. Suburban areas, to a greater extent 
than cities, have highly restrictive zoning ordinances. There 
are laws that fix the minimum lot size, minimum floor space 
in the house, minimum distance to adjacent houses plus 
laws that restrict property use to a single family. The com­
bined effect of these laws, independent of de jure or de facto 
racial discrimination, is to deny poor people the chance to 
outbid nonpoor people. It is far more difficult for a person 
to get together the whole house price than one month's rent 
for a cubbyhole. 
Herein lies the power of the market. People can offset 
some of their handicaps by offering a higher price for what 
they buy or a lower price for what they sell. Many well­
meaning people are morally outraged by such a necessity. 
But the fact of business is that if handicapped people are 
not permitted to use price as a bargaining tool, they may 
very well end up with none of what they want as opposed 
to some. 2


--- PAGE 165 ---
144 THE STATE AGAINST BLACKS 
There are numerous laws, regulations and ordinances 
that have reduced or eliminated avenues of upward mobility 
for blacks. The common feature of these barriers is that 
they prevent people from making transactions that are 
deemed mutually beneficial by the transactors. However, 
it would be extremely misleading to leave the reader with 
the impression that these laws are exclusively antiblack. 
An ordinance that generates a $60,000 license price to own 
a taxi, such as the one in New York City, discriminates and 
handicaps anyone, brown, black, white or yellow, who can­
not meet the price. Therefore, these laws are antipeople! 
They are only antiblack to the extent that blacks may be 
least likely to meet the entry conditions. Blacks were the 
last major ethnic group to become urbanized and to gain 
basic civil rights. When they finally achieved that status, 
blacks found that new barriers had been erected. 
Laws that restrict economic activity are antipeople in 
another way. Another effect of these laws is they always 
raise prices and often reduce the received quality of the 
regulated good or service. This makes for a lower standard 
of living than would be the case with less restrictive licens­
ing and regulation. On top of this, American citizens are 
made to suffer in two additional ways. Because of restricted 
economic opportunities more people than otherwise would 
be the case are living at taxpayer expense through welfare, 
unemployment compensation and other income supplemen­
tal programs. Moreover, when we are called to support the 
indigent the support level is higher because of the higher 
product prices caused by the monopolistic restrictions. 
Our recognition that laws which create economic barri­
ers are antipeople is important, not for analytical clarity 
alone, but for another reason as well. Such a recognition 
may suggest political strategy for change. The people who 
financially benefit from New York's taxicab monopoly, for 
example, are relatively few in number. The beneficiaries 
are taxi owners and those in allied trades. The people who 
bear the burden of the monopoly are large in number. They 
are the taxicab riders of New York City, who receive a lower 
quality service and pay higher prices, and all those who 
would enter the taxi business.


--- PAGE 166 ---
Conclusion 145 
Such a tabulation of beneficiaries and losers of New 
York's taxi monopoly suggests that a political coalition could 
be formed to eliminate the monopoly. A coalition of voters 
could be formed to counter the political pressure by the 
Teamsters Union and taxi owner associations to maintain 
and enhance the monopoly. Moreover, the recognition that 
government-sponsored monopolies are antipeople tells us 
that blacks, who are already taxi owners, are part of the 
opposition. People like a monopoly in what they sell. Black 
people are not immune to this propensity. Blacks who are 
a part of a monopolized market structure, such as a licensed 
trade or occupation or a union-protected job, will share the 
same interest in monopoly maintenance as whites. 
Economically the solution to problems of upward mobil­
ity that blacks face are relatively simple. Their most difficult 
problem lies in the political arena. How can they eliminate 
or reduce the power of interest groups to use government 
to exclude? The broad solution to exclusion for all Ameri­
cans is for the United States Supreme Court to interpret the 
right to work as it now interprets the right to speech. The 
Court has all but said that there is no compelling state reason 
for limiting freedom of speech. Similarly, there are very 
few compelling state reasons for limiting the freedom to 
work. 
It is hoped that this book will help sift through much 
of the nonsense that is being said about black economic prog­
ress so that national resources can be more effectively fo­
cused on the true causal factors.


--- PAGE 167 ---



--- PAGE 168 ---
NOTES 
CHAPTER 1 
1. See U.S. Bureau of Census, Current Population Reports, 
P-60, No. 85, December 1972. 
2. Lester C. Thurow, Poverty and Discrimination (Washing­
ton, D.C.: The Brookings Institution, 1969), p. 2. 
3. This is essentially the position taken by those who advocate 
"ghetto dispersal." See John F. Kain and Joseph J. Persky, "Alterna­
tive to the Gilded Ghetto," The Public Interest (winter 1969), pp. 
74-87. 
4. Anthony Downs, Urban Problems and Prospects (Chicago: 
Markham Publishing Co., 1970), p. 76. 
5. Ibid., p. 96. 
6. Daniel R. Fusfeld, The Basic Economics of the Urban Racial 
Crisis (New York: Holt, Rinehart & Winston, Inc., 1973), pp. 115-
16. 
7. For an excellent discussion of immigrant groups see: Oscar 
Handlin, The Uprooted (New York: Grosset & Dunlap, 1951); J.C. 
Furnas, The Americans (New York: G.P. Putnam's Sons, 1969); Na­
than Glazer and Daniel Patrick Moynihan, Beyond the Melting 
Pot (Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 1963). 
8. Bob Hepple, Race, jobs and the Law in Britain, 2nd ed. (Lon­
don: Penguin Books, Ltd., 1970), p. 20 ff. 
9. R.A. Schermerhorn, Comparative Ethnic Relations (New 
York: Random House, 1970), p. 75. 
10. Yosh Tandon, Problems of a Displaced Minority: The New 
Position of East Africa's Asians (London: Minority Rights Group, 
1972), p. 5. 
11. The ironic aspect of this whole matter was that anti-Asian 
feelings developed even in light of Indian support and collaboration 
with the Africans in their struggles for independence. The Indians 
147


--- PAGE 169 ---
148 THE STATE AGAINST BLACKS 
considered Mau Mau as an orthodox struggle and were sympathetic 
to its aims; Indian newspapers voiced Black African opinion and 
directly sponsored publication of their newspapers, assisted in Afri• 
can education and were in general cooperative with the East Afri­
cans. But none of this overshadowed the rising intensity of African 
nationalism and the resentment by the Africans of the Indian socio­
economic position in the territories. See J.S. Mangat, A History 
of the Asians in East Africa (London: Oxford University Press, 
1969), esp. pp. 172-78. 
12. Ibid., p. 15 ff. 
13. In Uganda, in addition to the expulsion of Asians, there 
has been a mass execution of the Langi and the Acholi by the 
Nubians. See John Humphreys, "Amin Promises Liberation, Deliv­
ers Exile and Murder," Matchbox (spring/summer 1975), pp. 7-
12. 
14. Except in Burma, where the Indians are even more de­
spised. 
15. Hugh Mabbett, The Chinese in Indonesia, the Philippines 
and Malaysia (London: Minority Rights Group, 1972), p. 19, 24. 
16. Ibid., p. 5. 
17. See T.H. Silcock, "The Effects of Industrialization on Race 
Relations in Malaya," in Industrialization and Race Relations, 
ed., Guy Hunter (New York: Oxford University Press, 1965), pp. 
177-200. 
18. See Virginia Thompson and Richard Adloff, Minority Prob­
lems in Southeast Asia (Stanford: Stanford University Press, 1955); 
G.W. Skinner, Leadership and Power in the Chinese Community 
of Thailand (Ithaca, N.Y.: Cornell University Press, 1958). 
19. Hugh Mabbett, The Chinese, p. 25. 
20. We might add that in the East African states of Kenya, 
Tanzania and Uganda, before Asian expulsion, the Indians repre­
senting an alien and politically powerless yet economically power­
ful middle class owned large industrial enterprises and controlled 
most of the retail activity. They are discriminated against by both 
the Africans and the Europeans. See: Y ash Tandon, Problems of 
a Displaced Minority: The New Position of East Africa's Asians 
(London: Minority Rights Group, 1972). 
21. Some observers of the Chinese problem in southeast Asia 
assert that the resentment and hostility against the alien Chinese 
population is caused by their success in the economic sphere. Con-


--- PAGE 170 ---
Notes 149 
trast this assertion with that frequently made with regard to ethnic 
minorities in the United States, that they are unsuccessful in the 
economic sphere because of white hostility and resentment. 
22. Thomas Sowell, Race and Economics (New York: David 
McKay Co., Inc., 1975), p. 127. 
23. William Petersen, "Chinese and Japanese Americans," in 
Essays and Data on American Ethnic Groups, ed., Thomas Sowell 
(Washington, D.C.: The Urban Institute, 1978), pp. 65-106. 
24. U.S. Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics, 
"Asian Americans in the Labor Market," Monthly Labor Review 
(July 1975), pp. 33-38. 
25. One argument that may be given for the relative ease of 
compliance with the law is that the duration of contact between 
buyer and seller is short and the seller is likely to move out of 
the neighborhood. 
26. Whenever there is a disparity between the personal values 
of goods for any two persons, exchange possibilities exist that will 
permit each person to achieve a higher level of satisfaction. 
27. For a theoretical discussion of this phenomenon see 
Charles M. Tiebout, "A Pure Theory of Local Expenditures," jour­
nal of Political Economy, LXIV (October 1956), pp. 416-24; Yoram 
Barzel, "Two Propositions on the Optimum Level of Producing Col­
lective Goods," Public Choice, 6 (spring 1969), pp. 31-37; Robert 
L. Bish and Hugh 0. Nourse, Urban Economics and Policy Analysis 
(New York: McGraw-Hill Book Co., 1975), pp. 129-31. 
28. Reynolds Farley, "Suburban Persistence," American Socio­
logical Review (February 1964), p. 47. See also: Charles S. Benson 
and Peter B. Lund, Neighborhood Distribution of Local Public Ser­
vices (Berkeley: Institute of Governmental Studies, 1969). 
29. In a report, Building the American City (Washington, D.C.: 
Government Printing Office, 1969), p. 149, the U.S. National Com­
mission on Urban Problems (The Douglas Commission) states the 
following: " ... These latter purposes were not explicitly avowed 
but were soon detected. Those who were generally hostile to racial 
integration were therefore successful in persuading the House to 
require that the consent of a locality was necessary before rent 
supplements could be put into effect there. Unfortunately, this vir­
tually barred the program from the suburbs." Earlier in the report, 
it was conceded, however, that economic class antagonisms played 
some role in suburban rejection of low-income housing.


--- PAGE 171 ---
150 THE STATE AGAINST BLACKS 
30. See Ben J. Wattenberg, The Real America (New York: Dou­
bleday & Co., Inc., 1974), pp. 244-45. 
31. Thomas F. Peltigrew, "Attitude on Race and Housing: A 
Social-Psychological View" in Segregation in Residential Areas, 
(eds.) Amos H. Hawley and Vincent P. Rock (Washington, D.C.: 
National Academy of Sciences, 1973), pp. 21-84. 
32. Contrast these findings with, for example, such misleading 
statements as: "Most whites simply do not want Negroes living 
next door or in white neighborhoods." See L.W. Eley and T.S. 
Casstevens, The Politics of Fair Housing Legislation: State and Lo­
cal Case Studies (San Francisco: Chandler Publishers, 1968), pp. 
6-7. 
33. See New York Times (July 24, 1970), p. 27. 
34. See Nathan Glazer, Affirmative Discrimination (New 
York: Basic Books, Inc., 1975), pp. 160-64. 
35. See "Black Middleclass Joining the Exodus to White Subur­
bia," New York Times (Jan. 4, 1976), p. 1 and p. 40. 
36. The number of blacks living in suburbs between 1970 and 
1974 has increased by 550,000, more than 11 percent of the net 
(4,600,000) migration to the suburbs. See U.S. Department of Com­
merce, Bureau of Census, Current Population Reports, Series P-
23, No. 55, "Social and Economic Characteristics of the Metropoli­
tan and Non-Metropolitan Population: 1974-1970." (Washington, 
D.C.: Government Printing Office, 1975), p. 1. 
37. Obviously, the movement by middle-class blacks has the 
same center city fiscal implications as that of movement by white 
middle-class families: each erodes the city tax base. 
38. Leo F. Schnore, "Social Class Segregation Among Non­
whites in Metropolitan Centers," Demography (1965), 2, pp. 126-
33. 
39. Leo F. Schnore, "Social Classes in Cities and Suburbs," in 
Segregation in Residential Areas, (eds.) Amos H. Hawley and Vin­
cent P. Rock (Washington, D.C.: National Academy of Sciences, 
1973), pp. 199. 
40. 418 u.s. 717 (1974). 
41. 373 F. Supp. 208 (N.D. Ill., 1973). 
42. See Gregory A. Adamski and Stephen B. Engleman, "Civil 
Rights and Civil Liberties," Chicago Kent Law Review, Vol. 32, 
No.2 (1975), pp. 246-93.


--- PAGE 172 ---
Notes 151 
43. Hills, Secretary of Housing and Urban Development v. Dor­
othy Gatreaux et al., 425 U.S. 284 (1976). 
CHAPTER 2 
1. This is not completely true: one report estimates that approx­
imately 2,600 Negroes become white, "pass," each year. See E.W. 
Eckard, "How Many Negroes Pass?," American journal of Sociol­
ogy (May 1947), pp. 498-500. 
2. It is important to recognize the difference between causality 
and correlation. The rooster crowing is correlated with the sunrise, 
but is not the cause of the sunrise. However, if one has to predict 
the sunrise, the crowing of the rooster is a good predictor. 
3. Walter E. Williams, "Some Hard Questions on Minority Busi­
nesses," Negro Educational Review (April/July 1974), pp. 123-42; 
Andrew F. Brimmer, "The Black Banks: An Assessment of Perfor­
mance and Prospect." The journal of Finance (May 1971), pp. 379-
405. 
4. See David Caplovitz, The Poor Pay More (New York: Free 
Press of Glencoe, 1967); Warren G. Magnuson and Jean Carter, The 
Dark Side of the Market Place (Englewood Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice­
Hall, Inc., 1968); Frederick Sturdivant, "Better Deal for Ghetto 
Shoppers," Harvard Business Review (March-April 1968), pp. 130-
39; Frederick Sturdivant and Walter Wilhelm, "Poverty, Minorities 
and Consumer Exploitation," Social Science Quarterly (December 
1968), pp. 643-50. 
5. Federal Trade Commission, Economic Report on Install­
ment Credit and Retail Sales Practices of District of Columbia 
Retailers (Washington, D.C.: Government Printing Office, 1968). 
CHAPTER3 
1. The role and actions of businessmen are largely miscon­
ceived by Americans victimized by antibusiness ideology. The busi­
nessman, in the literal sense of the word, is really an employee. 
Customers, acting collectively, are the employers. The fact that 
customers exhibit preferences for lower prices forces the business­
man to make adjustments that minimize production costs, given 
a rise in labor prices. If he does not make adjustments, he will 
lose his customers and/or investors to those firms who do make


--- PAGE 173 ---
152 THE STATE AGAINST BLACKS 
the corresponding adjustments. These cost-minimizing adjust­
ments would be unnecessary were his customers indifferent to 
prices. 
2. Actually the cost to the employer is higher because, in addi­
tion to wages, he pays fringe benefits such as Social Security, medi­
cal insurance and the like. 
3. It is important to note that most people acquire work skills 
by working at a "subnormal wage," which amounts to the same 
thing as paying to learn. For example, inexperienced doctors (in­
terns), during their training, work at wages which are a tiny frac­
tion of that of trained doctors. College students forego considerable 
amounts of money in the form of tuition and foregone income so 
that they may develop marketable skills. It is ironic, if not tragic, 
that low-skilled youths from poor families are denied an opportu­
nity to get a start in life. This is exactly what happens when a 
high minimum wage forbids low-skilled workers to pay for job 
training in the form of a lower beginning wage. It must be remem­
bered that teenagers are not supporting families and in most cases 
are living at home and hence could afford to "pay" for their train­
ing. 
4. See David E. Haun, "Minimum Wages, Factor Substitution, 
and the Marginal Producer," Quarterly journal of Economics (Au­
gust 1965), pp. 478-86; Yale Brozen, "The Effect of Statutory Mini­
mum Wages on Teenage Unemployment," journal of Law and Eco­
nomics (April 1969), pp. 109-22; Marvin Kosters and Finis Welch, 
"The Effects of Minimum Wages on the Distribution of Changes 
in Aggregate Employment," American Economic Review (June 
1972), pp. 323-32; William G. Bowen and T. Aldrich Finegan, The 
Economics of Labor Force Participation (Princeton University 
Press, 1969); EdmundS. Phelps, Inflationary Policy and Unemploy­
ment Theory (New York: W.W. Norton and Co., 1972); Arthur F. 
Burns, The Management of Prosperity (New York.: Columbia Uni­
versity Press, 1966); Thomas G. Moore, "The Effect of Minimum 
Wages on Teenage Unemployment Rates," journal of Political 
Economy (July/August 1971), pp. 897-902; James F. Ragan, Jr., 
"Minimum Wages and the Youth Labor Market," The Review of 
Economics and Statistics (May 1977), pp. 129-36; Martin Feldstein, 
"The Economics of the New Unemployment," The Public Interest 
(fall 1973); Andrew Brimmer, Minimum Wage Proposals, Labor 
Costs, and Employment Opportunities in the Nation's Capitol 
(Brimmer & Co., Inc., 1978), demonstrates the adverse employment


--- PAGE 174 ---
Notes 153 
and business migration effects of the minimum wage law in Wash­
ington, D.C. 
5. Jacob Mincer, "Unemployment Effects of Minimum Wages," 
journal of Political Economy (August 1976), pp. 87-105. 
6. The Fairmont Papers, ed. Monroe H. Brown (San Francisco: 
Institute for Contemporary Studies, 1981), p. 50. 
7. Census data reveal a remarkable closing of the educational 
gap, measured in median years of education, between blacks and 
whites. In fact the difference is negligible with median years for 
blacks 12.2 and whites 12.5. However, possession of a high school 
diploma is not synonymous with the ability to read, write and per­
form simple numerical calculations. The Coleman Report said that 
blacks at grade 12lagged three to five years behind whites on aca­
demic achievement. 
8. G.M.E. Leistner and W.J. Breytenbach, The Black Worker 
of South Africa (Pretoria, South Africa: The African Institute, 
1975), p. 28. 
9. Ibid., p. 28. Rate-for-the-job is the same as our equal-pay­
for-equal-work laws. 
10. See Armen A. Alchian and Reuben A. Kessel, "Competition, 
Monopoly, and the Pursuit of Pecuniary Gains," in H. Gregg Lewis, 
ed., Aspects of Labor Economics, fall, (Princeton: University Press, 
1962). 
11. The federal minimum wage is only one among many mini­
mum wages. Union collective bargaining agreements, the Davis­
Bacon Act and others have the economic effect of minimum wages. 
12. The assumption here is that the purchasers of the firm's 
final product do not care whether the product was produced by 
white or black workers. 
13. The assumption here is that people are legally free to enter 
the market and there are many firms, such as the case of domestic 
workers, car washers and manufacturing operatives. 
14. See U.S. Bureau of the Census, Negro Population, 1790-
1950 (Washington, D.C., 1918), pp. 166, 503-504. 
15. The New York Times, Nov. 28, 1972. In the United States, 
"liberals" are virtually unanimous in their condemnation of South 
African policy; yet they and black political leaders support some 
of the same labor policies and union practices that are supported 
in South Africa in order to handicap blacks. Interestingly enough,


--- PAGE 175 ---
154 THE STATE AGAINST BLACKS 
it is U.S. "conservatives" who reject, for the U.S., South African 
labor and union policy. 
16. The effectiveness of the wage demand also depends upon 
the elasticity of the substitution of capital for labor, i.e., the extent 
to which machines can be substituted for labor. 
17. Union support for these programs may explain why minori­
ties and their political leaders give unions strong political support. 
Union support for these programs gives the impression that unions 
are pro-minority. Thus, in an important sense, minorities are cap­
tured union constituents. If they do not politically support union 
goals that put them out of work in the first place, unions will not 
support the government handouts minorities receive as a result 
of being out of work. 
18. John F. Kennedy, "New England and the South: the Strug­
gle for Industry," Atlantic Monthly, January 1954, p. 33. 
19. Congressional Record, May 25, 1966, p. 11383. 
CHAPTER 4 
1. Richard B. Freeman, Black Elite (New York: McGraw-Hill, 
1976), ch. 4, especially pp. 98-99, 107. See also Thomas Sowell, 
"Three Black Histories," Essays and Data on American Ethnic 
Groups (Washington, D.C.: The Urban Institute, 1978), pp. 7-48, 
and Thomas Sowell, "Affirmative Action Reconsidered," The Public 
Interest (winter 1976), pp. 47-65. 
2. Kenneth J. Arrow, "Models of Job Discrimination," in An­
thony Pascal (ed.), Racial Discrimination in Economic Life (Bos­
ton: D.C. Heath & Co., 1972), pp. 85-86. 
3. Finis Welch, "Labor-Market Discrimination: An Interpreta­
tion of Income Differences in the Rural South," journal of Political 
Economy (June 1967), p. 226. 
4. See Richard B. Freeman, "Decline of Labor Market Discrim­
ination and Economic Analysis," American Economic Review 
(May 1973), p. 281, table 1. 
5. Ibid. 
6. Welch, op. cit., p. 235. Welch's study finds that the coefficient 
of discrimination against black labor is .19 and that against black 
education is .72. 
7. These findings are even more interesting in light of the fact


--- PAGE 176 ---
Notes 155 
that black and white female professionals work nearly identical 
number of weeks per year (47.2 and 46.6 weeks respectively). Fur­
ther, 42.5 percent of black female professionals and 42 percent 
of white female professionals work 50 to 52 weeks per year. See 
U.S. Census of Population, 1970: Occupational Characteristics. 
8. The Kendall Coefficient (tau) is a widely used measure of 
the degree of association or correlation between two sets of data. 
9. According to the 1970 Census of Population, vol. 1, 73.5 per­
cent of the U.S. population lives in urban areas and 26.5 percent 
are rural. The white population that is urban is 72.4 percent. But 
the black urban population is 81.3 percent. The differences are 
very striking when comparisons are made on the basis of "central 
city" versus other areas. For all Americans, 31.5 percent live in 
central cities. Nearly 28 percent of the white population lives in 
central cities while 56.9 percent of the black population resides 
in central cities. 
10. See Thomas Sowell, Ethnic America (New York: Basic 
Books, Inc., 1981), pp. 4-13. See also Thomas Sowell, American Eth­
nic Groups (Washington, D.C.: The Urban Institute, 1978), esp., 
pp. 253-411. 
CHAPTER 5 
1. There is little distinction to be made between the licensing 
of occupations and that of businesses. Licensing a taxi regulates 
the behavior of the driver and licensing a cafe regulates the cafe 
keeper. 
2. This is very important and bears an example. A truck driver 
can run over a man. The truck driver may have done it accidentally 
or intentionally. But its being done either way has nothing to do 
with the effects of the wheels going over the human body. 
3. About three-fourths of all licensing boards are composed 
solely of practitioners in the occupations that the boards control. 
See Occupational Licensing and the Supply of Non-Professional 
Labor, Manpower Monograph No. 11 (Washington, D.C.: U.S. De­
partment of Labor, 1969). 
4. See Lee Benham, "Demand for Occupational Licensure," in 
Occupational Licensure and Regulations, Simon Rottenburg, ed. 
(Washington, D.C.: American Enterprise Institute, 1980), pp. 13-
25.


--- PAGE 177 ---
156 THE STATE AGAINST BLACKS 
5. For a more complete discussion of these and other effects 
of licensing see Simon Rottenberg, "Economics of Occupational 
Licensing," in Aspects of Labor Economics, A Report of the Na­
tional Bureau of Economic Research (Princeton, N.J.: Princeton 
University Press, 1962), pp. 3-20. 
6. Stuart Dorsey, "The Occupational Licensing Queue," un­
published manuscript, Center for the Study of American Business, 
Washington University, St. Louis, Mo. 
CHAPTER 6 
1. Jitney service differs from taxis in that it picks up passengers 
who originate at one or more places along a fixed or semi-fixed 
route. Jitney service, before outlawed, was a very common mode 
of travel in the U.S. It remains a common form of travel in many 
countries, particularly those of the Far East and Latin America. 
The only surviving jitney service in the U.S. is in Atlantic City, 
N.J., along one major street. 
2. These cities are Washington, D.C., Atlanta, Georgia, and Ho­
nolulu, Hawaii. Atlanta has recently (1981) enacted an ordinance 
to restrict the number of taxis. 
3. New York City Administrative Code, para. 436-2.0 (Supp. 
1969). 
4. For all of 1978 and the first six months of 1979, the price 
for an independent medallion has fluctuated between $50,000 and 
$60,000. The lower price for a fleet medallion suggests that fleet 
operation is less profitable than independent operation. Driver 
theft is a significant problem. 
5. Conversation with Sam Pesce, loan officer of the Chase Man­
hattan Bank in New York City. Mr. Pesce points out that this is 
the maximum loan for either independent or fleet medallions. 
6. Technically, the license price can be approximated by 
n Rr _ Ro 
i~1 
(; + r)\ where the superscripts r and o are the receipts in a 
restricted and open market respectively. Thus, Rr- R 0 is the differ­
ence in receipts accruing from a protected market. The denomina­
tor is the interest rate that yields the present value. 
7. Charles Vidich, The New York Cab Driver and His Fare 
(Cambridge, Mass.: Schenkman Publishing Co., 1976), p. 135.


--- PAGE 178 ---
Notes 157 
8. See New York Times, "The Taxicab Mess," July 27, 1969, 
p. 46, col. 1. 
9. Michael J. Lazar, "The Non-Medallioned Industry: A Trans­
portation Phenomena," Nov. 19, 1971, City Record Supplement. 
10. See New York Times (Jan. 13, 1969), Section C, p. 21. "Ignore 
them and you may be putting yourself in the care of a murderer, 
a thief, or even a rapist. The gypsy driver, by the very fact that 
he solicits on the street, is at least a crook, but he may have big 
ideas which include you." 
11. Charles Vidich, op. cit., p. 148. 
12. Ibid., p. 146. 
13. Pennsylvania Public Utilities Commission, Bus and Taxi­
cab Regulations, as adopted April 15, 1946, with amendments 
thereto, Harrisburg, Pa., Apr. 1, 1967. 
14. Philadelphia Inquirer, May 28, 1979, p. SA. 
15. See Philadelphia Inquirer, May 27, 1979, p. 18A. 
16. This information was obtained from Public Utility Com­
mission, Office of Enforcement, files in Harrisburg, Pa., Apr. 19, 
1979. 
17. See, District of Columbia Register, Special Edition, D.C. 
Rules and Regulations, Title 14 (Washington, D.C.: Public Service 
Commission, Jan. 10, 1975), p. 71. The relevant passages are in 
the appendix to this chapter, pp. 87-88. 
18. See Hearings before the Subcommittee on Public Utilities, 
Insurance, and Banking of the Committee on the District of Colum­
bia, House, 85th Cong.: Taxicab Industry in the District of Columbia 
(Washington, D.C.: Government Printing Office, June 24-26, July 
3,8,9, 10, 12, 18,23,24, 1957),p. 425. 
19. U.S. Congress, House, Committee on the District of Colum­
bia, Taxicab Regulation Staff Report (Washington, D.C.: Govern­
ment Printing Office, 1976), p. 281. 
20. Ibid., pp. 278-296. 
21. Telephone conversations with Malcolm Wood and Mrs. Hill 
of the District Public Service Commission. 
22. Clearly, incumbent black taxi owners in Washington, D.C., 
would benefit from market closures. In this sense they do not differ 
from whites as beneficiaries of closed entry. 
23. Martin Wohl, "The Taxi's Role in Urban America: Today 
and Tomorrow," Transportation, 1975, pp. 155-56.


--- PAGE 179 ---
158 THE STATE AGAINST BLACKS 
CHAPTER 7 
1. Until the Court stopped it in 1951, to become a master 
plumber in Illinois took longer than it took to become a Fellow 
of the American College of Surgeons. See Walter Gellhorn, "The 
Abuse of Occupational Licensing," Chicago Law Review (fall1976). 
2. 42 Washington, 237, 84 Pacific 851 (1906). 
3. People v. Warden, 144 New York, 529, 39 N.W. 686 (1895). 
4. See Homer Clark, "Occupational Licensing in the Building 
Industry," Washington University Law Quarterly (December 
1952), pp. 484-541. 
5. Lorenzo Greene and Carter G. Woodson, The Negro Wage 
Earner (Washington, D.C.: The Association for the Study of Negro 
Life and History, Inc., 1930), p. 192. 
6. Sterling D. Spero and Abram L. Harris, The Black Worker: 
The Negro and the Labor Movement (New York: Kennikat Press, 
Inc., 1931), pp. 477-78. 
7. Ibid., pp. 478-79. 
8. Ibid., p. 480. 
9. Ibid., p. 481. 
10. Greene and Woodson, op. cit., p. 320 ff. 
11. Ibid., p. 320. 
12. Spero and Harris, op. cit., p. 68. 
13. Isaac Weld, Travels Through the States of North America 
and the Providences of Upper and Lower Canada (London: J. Stock­
dale, 1799), vol. I, pp. 145-52. 
14. James Weldon Johnson, Along This Way (New York: Vi­
king, 1937), p. 32. 
15. Cited in Herbert Hill, "The Racial Practices of Organized 
Labor," in Arthur M. Ross & Herbert Hill (ed.), Employment, Race 
and Poverty (New York: Harcourt Brace & World, Inc., 1967), p. 
375. 
16. John Stephen Durham, "The Labor Unions and the Negro," 
Atlantic Monthly, vol. 81 (February 1898), pp. 226. 
17. Ibid., p. 226. 
18. Ibid., p. 227. 
19. Hill, op. cit., p. 378. 
20. Ibid., p. 379.


--- PAGE 180 ---
Notes 159 
21. Herbert R. Northrup, Organized Labor and the Negro (New 
York: Harper & Bros., 1944), pp. 1-5. 
22. Benjamin Shimberg, et al., Occupational Licensing (Wash-
ington, D.C.: Public Affairs Press, 1973), pp. 112-13. 
23. Ibid., p. 113. 
24. Ibid., p. 123. 
25. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission, news re­
lease, May 19, 1970. 
26. United States Commission on Civil Rights, The Challenge 
Ahead: Equal Opportunity in Referral Unions (Washington, D.C.: 
Government Printing Office, May 1976), p. 25. 
27. Herbert Hammerman, "Minority Workers in Construction 
Referral Unions," Monthly Labor Review, May 1972. 
28. Alex Maurizi, "Occupational Licensing and the Public In­
terest," journal of Political Economy (March 1974), pp. 399-413. 
29. See Thomas G. Moore, "The Purpose of Licensing," journal 
of Law and Economics (October 1961), pp. 93-117. 
30. Sidney L. Carroll and Robert J. Gaston, "Occupational Li­
censing," an unpublished National Science Foundation Report, Au­
gust 1977. 
31. Parker v. Brown, 317 U.S. 341, 350-52 (1943). 
32. Griggs v. Duke Power Co., 401 US 424 (1971). 
CHAPTER 8 
1. A yellow-dog contract is one in which the employee agrees 
not to join a union. 
2. Herbert R. Northrup, "The Appropriate Bargaining Unit 
Question Under the Railway Labor Act," Quarterly journal of Eco­
nomics, vol. 60 (February 1946), p. 254. 
3. 137 F2d 817 (D.C. Cir. 1943), rev., 320 U.S. 715 (1943). 
4. For additional problems and examples see Howard W. 
Risher, Jr., The Negro in the Railroad Industry (Philadelphia, Pa.: 
University of Pennsylvania Press, 1971), especially chapters 4-7. 
5. 323 u.s. 192, 202-203 (1944). 
6. Ibid. 
7. Risher, op. cit.


--- PAGE 181 ---
160 THE STATE AGAINST BLACKS 
8. U.S. Census of the Population: 1940, vol. 3, The Labor Force, 
pt. I, Table 62. 
9. Cited by Herbert Hill, "The Racial Practices of Organized 
Labor," in Employment, Race and Poverty, Arthur M. Ross & Her­
bert Hill, ed. (New York: Harcourt Brace & World, 1967). 
10. Locomotive Firemen's Magazine (August 1899), p. 203. 
11. Despite a general consensus among today's public that peo­
ple should be paid identically if they do identical work, this law 
is the first step toward handicapping the most disadvantaged group 
of workers. 
12. Sterling D. Spero and Abram L. Harris, The Black Worker 
(New York: Kennikat Press, 1931), p. 291. 
13. Ibid., p. 293. 
14. Charles H. Houston, "Foul Employment Practice on the 
Rails," Crisis (October 1949), pp. 269-84. 
15. Hill, op cit., p. 389. 
16. Ibid., p. 390. 
17. Ibid., p. 390. 
18. Ibid., pp. 390-91. 
CHAPTER 9 
1. See Thomas G. Moore, Freight Transportation Regulation 
(Washington, D.C.: American Enterprise Institute, 1972), for an ex­
cellent summary of the history of the Interstate Commerce Act 
and its amendments. 
2. Ibid., p. 26. 
3. Alfred E. Kahn, The Economics of Regulation: Principles 
and Institutions (New York: John Wiley & Sons, 1971), vol. II, p. 
14. See discussion on page 28 on the tendency of regulation to 
spread. 
4. This information was obtained through conversations with 
various truck sales and banking establishments in the Philadelphia 
area. There is considerable variation in the prices of trailers since 
they are specialized in use, but they range from $7,000 to $20,000 
depending on intended load. 
5-6. See John W. Snow and Stephen Sobotka, "Certificate Val­
ues," in Regulation of Entry and Pricing in Truck Transportation,


--- PAGE 182 ---
Notes 161 
Paul W. MacAvoy and John W. Snow, eds. (Washington, D.C.: Amer­
ican Enterprise Institute, 1977), pp. 153-58. As an example, when 
the large Associated Transport Company went bankrupt, it sold 
its certificate of authorization for $20 million. 
7. Motor Carrier Code 190, 203. 
8. Harold Demsetz, "Why Regulate Utilities?" journal of Labor 
Economics (April 1968). 
9. "Mover's Fight for a National License," New York Times, 
May 4, 1979, p. Dl. 
10. American Trucking Association, Accounting for Motor Car­
rier Operating Rights, Brief and Petition of American Trucking 
Association, Inc., before the Financial Standards Board of the Fi­
nancial Accounting Foundation, Washington, D.C., 1974. 
11. Interstate Commerce Commission, Office of Policy and 
Analysis, Economic Impact of New Motor Carrier Entry for the 
Transportation of Government Traffic (Washington, D.C.: Inter­
state Commerce Commission, March 1979). 
12. Class I carriers are those having annual gross revenues 
of $3 million or more; Class II carriers are those having gross reve­
nues of $500,000 to $2,999,999; Class III carriers are those having 
gross revenues less than $500,000. See Motor Carrier Statistical 
Summary(Washington, D.C.: American Trucking Association, Inc., 
1977). 
13. Asil Gezen and Marion Forrester, TERA, Inc., A Report on 
OMBRE's Minority Trucking Program, (DOC Contract No. 6-
11685), p. 16. 
14. Government Accounting Office, "Minority Motor Carriers 
Can Be Given More Opportunity to Participate in Defense Trans­
portation" (Washington, D.C.: General Accounting Office, June 6, 
1978). 
15. Ibid., p. 11. 
16. See statement of Timothy D. Person before the Subcommit­
tee on Special Small Business Problems of the House Committee 
on Small Business: Regulatory Problems of the Independent 
Owner-Operator in the Nation's Trucking Industry, Sept. 29, 1977. 
17. U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of the Census, 1972 
Survey of Minority-Owned Business Enterprises, MB 72-1 (Wash­
ington, D.C.: Government Printing Office, November 1974).


--- PAGE 183 ---
162 THE STATE AGAINST BLACKS 
18. The category includes freight forwarders, limousine com­
panies, etc. 
' 19. Testimony of Timothy D. Person before Hearings Subcom­
mittee on Activities of Regulatory Agencies of the Committee on 
Small Business, House, 94th Congress: Regulatory Problems of the 
Independent Owner-Operator in the Nation's Trucking Industry 
(Part one), p. 267, May 19, 1976. 
20. 353 I.C.C. 425 (1977). 
21. Jack Anderson, Washington Post, Wednesday, July 26, 1978, 
p. C27. 
22. William B. Gould, Black Workers in White Unions (Ithaca: 
Cornell University Press, 1977). 
23. See Franks v. Bowman Transportation Co., 495 F 2d 398 
(5th Cir.), cert. denied, 419 U.S. 1050 (1974); U.S. v. Navaho Freight 
Lines, Inc., 525 F 2d 1318 (9th Cir. 1975); Hairston v. McLean Truck­
ing Co., 520 F 2d 226 (4th Cir. 1975); U.S. v. T.l.M.E.-D.C., Inc., 
517 F 2d 299 (5th Cir. 1975); Saba v. Western Gillette, Inc., 516 F 
2d 1251 (5th Cir. 1975); Rodriguez v. East Texas Motor Freight, 
Inc., 505 F 2d 66 (Sth Cir. 1974); Herrara v. Yellow Freight Systems, 
Inc., 505 F 2d 66 (5th Cir. 1974; U.S. v. Lee Way Motor Freight, 
Inc., 505 F 2d 69 (5th Cir. 1975); Bing v. Roadway Express, Inc., 
444 F 2d 687 (5th Cir. 1971); U.S. v. Lee Way Motor Freight, Inc., 
6 FEP Cases 274 (C.D. Cal. 1973). 
24. Gould, op cit., p. 369. 
25. See United States v. Pilot Freight Carriers, Inc., 6 FEP 
Cases 280 (M.D., N.C. July 30, 1973) and United States v. Navajo 
Freight Lines, Inc., 6 FEP Cases 274. (C.D. Cal. June 6, 1973). 
26. United States v. Lee Way Motor Freight, Inc., 6 FEP Cases 
274 (C.D. Cal. 1973). 
27. "Bias in the Cab," Wall Street journal, Mar. 31, 1966, pp. 
1, 6. 
28. FEP Cases at 745 and 7 FEP Cases at 729. 
29. Many teamsters unions have formal or informal exclusive 
hiring arrangements with employers of truck drivers which re­
quire that the employer hire drivers on a referral basis from the 
union hall. This permits wide scope for racial discrimination. 
30. Article I., Section 8 of the U.S. Constitution gives Congress 
the power: "To regulate Commerce with foreign Nations, and 
among the several States, and with the Indian Tribes."


--- PAGE 184 ---
Notes 163 
31. Butcher's Union Co. v. Crescent City Co., 111 U.S. 746, 762 
(1884). 
32. Dent v. West Virginia, 129 U.S. 114, 121 (1888). 
33. Barsky v. Board of Regents of New York, 347 U.S. 442, 472 
(1954). 
34. Report in United States Law Week (Nov. 7, 1978), p. 47. 
35. 42 U.S.C. paragraph 6705 (f) (2). 
36. The Davis-Bacon Act of 1931, along with its subsequent 
amendments, requires that "prevailing wages" be paid on all feder­
ally financed or assisted construction projects. Considerable con­
sensus among economists shows that the Davis-Bacon Act discrimi­
nates against non-union contractors and workers. Most minority 
contractors and employees in the construction industry are in the 
non-union sector. For insightful analysis of the Davis-Bacon Act, 
see General Accounting Office Report to Congress. "The Need for 
More Realistic Minimum Rate Determinations for Certain Feder­
ally Financed Housing in Washington Metropolitan Area" (Wash­
ington, D.C.: Government Printing Office, 1968); Richard L. Rowan 
and Lester Rubin, Opening the Skilled Construction Trades to 
Blacks (Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press, 1972); Yale 
Brozen, "The Davis-Bacon Act: How to Load the Dice Against Your­
self" (unpublished manuscript, University of Chicago, 1971); John 
P. Gould, Davis Bacon Act: The Economics of Prevailing Wage Laws 
(Washington, D.C.: American Enterprise Institute, 1972); The Legis­
lative History of the Davis-Bacon Act (Washington, D.C.: Govern­
ment Printing Office, 1962); Government Accounting Office Report 
to the Congress of the United States. The Davis-Bacon Act Should 
be Repealed (Washington, D.C.: Government Printing Office, Apr. 
27, 1979). 
CHAPTER 10 
1. Munn v. Illinois, 94 U.S. 113 (1877). 
2. The relevant portions of the Fifth and Fourteenth amend­
ments respectively are: No person shall ... be deprived of life, 
liberty, or property, without due process of law; nor shall private 
property be taken for public use, without just compensation. 
Amendment Fourteen, Section 1. All persons born or naturalized 
in the United States and subject to the jurisdiction thereof, are 
citizens of the United States and of the State wherein they reside.


--- PAGE 185 ---
164 THE STATE AGAINST BLACKS 
No State shall make or enforce any law which shall abridge the 
privileges or immunities of citizens of the United States; nor shall 
any State deprive any person of life, liberty, or property, without 
due process of law; nor deny any person within its jurisdiction 
the equal protection of the laws. 
3. The constitutional safeguard of substantive due process re­
quires that all legislation, state or federal, must be reasonably re­
lated to the furtherance of a legitimate governmental objective. 
Not only must the legislation be rationally related, but it must uti­
lize that method of promoting the government interest which is 
the least burdensome to other rights. Procedural due process, on 
the other hand, guarantees procedural fairness where the govern­
ment would deprive one of his property or liberty. This requires 
that notice and the right to a fair hearing be accorded prior to a 
deprivation. See Steven H. Gifis, Law Dictionary (New York: Bar­
ron's Educational Series, Inc., 1975), pp. 66-67. 
4. Mugler v. Kansas, 123 U.S. 623 (1887). 
5. Allgeyer v. Louisiana, 165 U.S. 578 (1897). 
6. Ibid., 578, 579 (1897). 
7. Lochner v. New York, 198 U.S. 45 (1905). 
8. Ibid. 
9. Especially interesting cases during this period were: Nielson 
v. Oregon, 212 U.S. 315 (1909); Dozier v. Alabama, 218 U.S. 124 
(1910); Crenshaw v. Arkansas, 227 U.S. 389 (1913); Adams v. Tan­
ner, 244 U.S. 590 (1917); Buck v. Kuykendall, 567 U.S. 307 (1925); 
Louis K. Liggett Co. v. Baldridge, 278 U.S. 105 (1928). 
10. See Moorehead v. New York ex rel. Tipaldo, 298 U.S. 587 
(1936); New State Ice Co. v. Liebman, 235 U.S. 262 (1932); Williams 
v. Standard Oil Co., 278 U.S. 235 (1929); Ribnick v. McBride, 277 
U.S. 350 (1928); Tyson & Brother v. Banton, 273 U.S. 418 (1927); 
Adkins v. Children's Hospital, 261 U.S. 525 (1923); Adams v. 
Turner, 244 U.S. 590 (1917); Coppage v. Kansas, 236 U.S. 1 (1915); 
Adair v. United States, 208 U.S. 161 (1908); Lochner v. New York, 
198 u.s. 45 (1905). 
11. New State Ice Co. v. Liebman, op. cit. 
12. Ibid. 
13. Nebbia v. New York, 291 U.S. 502 (1934). 
14. Ibid., 502, 525 (1934). 
15. Ibid., 502, 554-55 (1934).


--- PAGE 186 ---
Notes 165 
16. West Coast Hotel Co. v. Parrish, 300 U.S. 379 (1937). 
17. Adkins v. Children's Hospital, op. cit. 
18. National Labor Relations Board v. ]ones & Laughlin Steel, 
301 U.S. 1. 
19. Adair v. United States, 208 U.S. 161 (1908). 
20. Coppage v. Kansas, op. cit. 236 U.S. (1915). 
21. 300 u.s. 379 (1937). 
22. 304 u.s. 144 (1938). 
23. 313 u.s. 236 (1941). 
24. 313 u.s. 246 (1941). 
25-26. 342 u.s. 421 (1952). 
27. 342 u.s. 423 (1952). 
28. 348 u.s. 487 (1955). 
29. See Robert G. McCloskey, "Economic Due Process and the 
Supreme Court: An Exhumation and Reburial," Philip B. Kurland, 
ed., The Supreme Court Review (1962), pp. 42-43. 
30. Tyson & Brother v. Banton, 273 U.S. 446 (1927), dissenting 
opinion. 
31. Barsky v. Board of Regents of New York, 347 U.S. 472 (1954), 
dissenting opinion. 
32. Allgeyer v. Louisiana, op. cit., 578, 589 (1897). 
33. Butcher's Union Co. v. Crescent City Co., 111 U.S. 746, 762 
(1884), concurring opinion. 
34. Dent v. West Virginia, 129 U.S. 114, 121 (1888). 
35. Williamson v. Lee Optical Company of Oklahoma, 348 U.S. 
483, 487, 488 (1955). 
36. Day-Brite Lighting v. Missouri, 342 U.S. 421, 423 (1952). 
37. Ferguson v. Skrupa, 372 U.S. 730, 732 (1963). Contrast this 
attitude of the Court, particularly that of Douglas, with that held 
in most civil rights cases. That is, the Court did substitute its judg­
ment for that of the state legislatures on civil rights issues. 
38. 347 u.s. 442 (1954). 
39. See Robert G. McCloskey, "Economic Due Process and the 
Supreme Court: An Exhumation and Reburial," The Supreme 
Court Review (1962), pp. 26, 27.


--- PAGE 187 ---
166 THE STATE AGAINST BLACKS 
40. 353 u.s. 232 (1957). 
41. Ibid. 
42. 353 U.S. 239 (1957). 
43. Ibid. 
44. Griggs v. Duke Power Company, 401 U.S. 424 (1971). 
CHAPTER 11 
1. Milton Friedman, Capitalism and Freedom (Chicago: Uni­
versity of Chicago Press, 1962), p. 92. 
2. For a more thorough examination of these principles see 
Harold Demsetz, "Minorities in the Market Place," North Carolina 
Law Review (February 1965), pp. 271-99; Alchian and Kessel, 
"Competition, Monopoly, and the Pursuit of Pecuniary Gain," in 
Aspects of Labor Economics (National Bureau of Economic Re­
search, 1962).


--- PAGE 188 ---
BIBLIOGRAPHY 
Barber, Thomas H., Where We Are At. New York: Charles Scribner's 
Sons, 1950. 
Barger, Melvin D., "Occupational Licensing Under Attack," in Free­
man, April 1975. 
Bauer, P.T., West African Trade: A Study of Competition, Oligopoly 
and Monopoly in a Changing Economy. New York: Augustus 
M. Kelley Publishers, 1954. 
Blaisdell, Ruth F., et al. compilers, Sources of Information in 
Transportation. Evanston, Ill.: Northwestern University Press, 
1964. 
Blalock, Hubert M. Jr., Toward a Theory of Minority Group Rela­
tions. New York: Wiley, 1967. 
Bland, Randall W., Constitutional Law in the United States. Flor­
ida: Omni Press, Inc., 1976. 
Bradley, Philip D. (ed.), The Public Stake in Union Power. Char­
lottesville: University of Virginia Press, 1959. 
Chamberlain, Edward H., Philip D. Bradley, Gerald D. Reilly, Ros­
coe Pound, Labor Unions and Public Policy. Washington, D.C.: 
American Enterprise Institute, 1958. 
Clark, HomerS., "Occupational Licensing in the Building Industry," 
in Washington University Law Quarterly, December 1952. 
Conant, Michael, The Constitution and Capitalism. St. Paul, Minn.: 
West Publishing Co., 1974. 
Davidson, Roger H., and Sar A. Levitan, Anti-Poverty Housekeep­
ing: The Administration of the Economic Opportunity Act. 
Michigan: The Institute of Labor and Industrial Relations, 
1968. 
Dorsey, Stuart, "Characteristics of the Occupational Licensing 
Queue," unpublished paper, Western Illinois University. 
167


--- PAGE 189 ---
168 THE STATE AGAINST BLACKS 
Du Bois, W.E.B., The Philadelphia Negro (1899). 
__ , (ed.), The Negro Artisan (Atlanta, 1902). 
__ ,"The Economic Future of the Negro," American Economic 
Association Publications (1906). 
__ ,"The Passing of Jim Crow," The Independent, July 14, 1917, 
pp. 53-54. 
__ , "The Host of Black Labor," The Nation, May 9, 1923, pp. 
539-41. 
Eckert, Ross D., Regulatory Commission Behavior: Taxi Franchis­
ing in Los Angeles and Other Cities. University of California, 
Los Angeles, Ph.D. dissertation, 1968. 
__ , "The Los Angeles Taxicab Monopoly: An Economic In­
quiry," in Southern California Law Review, vol. 45, summer 
1970. 
Eckert, Ross D., and George W. Hilton, "The Jitneys," journal of 
Law and Economics, vol. 15 (October 1972), pp. 293-327. 
Fitzhugh, George, "What's to Be Done with the Negroes?" DeBow's 
Review. New Series I (June 1866): 577-81. 
Foner, PhilipS., and Ronald L. Lewis (eds.), The Black Worker to 
1869. Philadelphia: Temple University Press, 1978, vol. I. 
__ , The Black Worker During the Era of the National Labor 
Union. Philadelphia: Temple University Press, 1978. 
Friedman, Lawrence, "Freedom of Contract and Occupational Li­
censing 1890-1910: A Legal and Social Study," in California 
Law Review, vol. 53, 1965. 
Friedman, Milton, Capitalism and Freedom. Chicago: University 
of Chicago Press, 1962. 
Garfield, Paul J., and Wallace F. Lovejoy, Public Utility Economics. 
Englewood Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice-Hall, Inc., 1964. 
Gellhorn, Walter, Individual Freedom and Government Restraints. 
Baton Rouge: Louisiana University Press, 1956. 
__ , "Abuse of Occupational Licensing," in University of Chi­
cago Law Review, vol. 44, fall 1976. 
Gould, William B., Black Workers in White Unions: job Discrimina­
tion in the United States. Ithaca, N.Y.: Cornell University 
Press, 1977. 
Greene, Lorenzo J., and Carter G. Woodson, The Negro Wage Earner. 
New York: Van Rees Press, 1930.


--- PAGE 190 ---
Bibliography 169 
Greene, Lorenzo J., The Negro in Colonial New England. New York: 
Atheneum, 1969. 
Gross, James A., "Historians and the Literature of the Negro 
Worker," Labor History (1969). 
Harris, Abram L., The Negro as Capitalist. Philadelphia: American 
Academy of Political and Social Science, 1936. 
Higgs, Robert, Competition and Coercion: Blacks in the American 
Economy, 1865-1914. New York: Cambridge University Press, 
1977. 
Huggins, Nathan 1., Martin Kilson, and Daniel M. Fox; under the 
general editorship of John Morton Blum, Key Issues in the Afro­
American Experience. New York: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, 
1971. 
Hutt, William H., The Economics of the Color Bar. London: The 
Institute of Economic Affairs, Ltd., 1964. 
__ , The Strike-Threat System. New York: Arlington House, 
1973. 
Johnson, Charles, "Negro Workers in the Unions," Survey (Apr. 
15, 1928), pp. 113-15. 
Johnson, Thomas H., The Oxford Companion to American History. 
New York: Oxford University Press, 1966. 
Kain, John F., and John R. Meyer (eds.), Essays in Regional Eco­
nomics, 1971. 
Kennedy, Louise Venable, The Negro Peasant Turns Cityward. 
New York: AMS Press, Inc., 1968. 
Kitch, Edmund W., Mark Isaacson and Daniel Kasper, "The Regu­
lation of Taxicabs in Chicago," The journal of Law and Eco­
nomics (October 1971), vol. XIV, pp. 285-350. 
Kitch, Edmund W., "The Yellow Cab Anti-trust Case," The journal 
of Law and Economics, vol. 15 (October 1972), pp. 327-36. 
Litwack, Leon F., North of Slavery: The Negro in the Free States, 
1790-1860. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1961. 
Logan, Rayford W., The Negro in American Life and Thought. New 
York: Dial Press, Inc., 1954. 
__ , The Betrayal of the Negro, from Rutherford B. Hayes to 
Woodrow Wilson. New York: Collier Books, 1965. 
Manpower Research Monograph, U.S. Department of Labor, Man­
power Adntinistration.


--- PAGE 191 ---
170 THE STATE AGAINST BLACKS 
Marshall, F. Ray, "Union Racial Practices," statement before the 
U.S. Senate Subcommittee on Labor and Public Welfare, Hear­
ing, 88th Congress, Aug. 6-7 and Sept. 10, 11, 13, 1963. 
Maurizi, Alex, "Occupational Licensing and the Public Interest," 
in journal of Political Economy, March-April 1974. 
McCloskey, Robert G., "Economic Due Process and the Supreme 
Court: An Exhumation and Reburial," in Philip B. Kurland 
(ed.), 1962 Supreme Court Review 34. 
McPherson, James M. et al., Blacks in America. Garden City, N.Y.: 
Doubleday, 1971. 
Meier, August, and Elliott Rudwic, From Plantation to Ghetto. New 
York: Hill and Wang, 1970. 
Miller, W. Elizabeth, and Mary L. Fisher, The Negro in America. 
Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1970. 
Moore, Thomas G., "The Purpose of Licensing," in journal of Law 
and Economics, October 1961. 
__ , Freight Transportation Regulation, Surface Freight and In­
terstate Commerce Commission. Washington, D.C.: American 
Enterprise Institute for Public Policy Research, 1972. 
__ , "The Beneficiaries of Trucking Regulation," The journal 
of Law and Economics (October 1978), vol. 21 (2), pp. 327-42. 
Muller, Helen M., Federal Regulation of Motor Transport. New 
York: The Wilson Co., 1933. Part of "The Reference Shelf" se­
ries, vol. VIII, no. 9. 
Myrdal, Gunnar, An American Dilemma. New York: Harper, 1944. 
National Bureau of Economic Research, Aspects of Labor Econom­
ics. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press, 1962. 
Oak, Vishnu V., The Negro's Adventure in General Business. West­
port, Conn.: Negro University Press, 1949. 
Occupational Licensing and the Supply of Non-Professional Labor. 
Washington, D.C.: Department of Labor, 1969. Manpower 
monograph No. 11. 
Oi, Walter Y., Economics of Private Truck Transportation. Du­
buque, Iowa: William C. Brown Company, Publisher, 1965. 
Okon Edet Uya, From Slavery to Public Service: Robert Smalls 1839-
1915. New York: Oxford University Press, 1971. 
Perlman, Selig, A Theory of the Labor Movement. New York: Au­
gustus M. Kelley, Publisher, 1966.


--- PAGE 192 ---
Bibliography 171 
Pejovich, Svetozar, and David Klingaman, Individual Freedom: Se­
lective Works of William H Hutt. London: Greenwood Press, 
1975. 
Pejovich, Svetozar (ed.), Governmental Controls and the Free Mar­
ket: The U.S. Economy in the 1970's. College Station: Texas 
A&M University Press, 1976. 
Pfeffer, J., "Some Evidence on Occupational Licensing and Occupa­
tional Income," in Social Forces, vol. 53, September 1974. 
Price, Daniel 0., Changing Characteristics of the Negro Population. 
Washington, D.C.: Government Printing Office, 1969. A 1960 
Census monograph. 
Reid, Ira De A., Negro Membership in American Labor Unions. 
New York: The Alexander Press, 1930. 
___ , The Negro Immigrant: His Background, Characteristics and 
Social Adjustment, 1899-1937. New York: AMS Press, 1970. 
Renshaw, Patrick, "The Black Ghetto, 1890-1940," journal of Amer­
ican Studies, 1974. 
Risher, Howard W., The Negro in the Railroad Industry. Philadel­
phia: University of Pennsylvania Press, 1971. The Racial Poli­
cies of American Industry, Report No. 16, with assistance of 
Marjorie C. Denison. 
Roche, John P., Sentenced to Life. New York: Macmillan Publish­
ing Co., Inc., 197 4. 
Rosenbloom, Sandi, "Taxis and Jitneys: The Case for Deregula­
tion," Reason (February 1972), pp. 4-16. 
Rottenberg, Simon, "The Economics of Occupational Licensing," 
in Aspects of Labor Economics, Princeton, N.J.: National Bu­
reau of Economic Research, Princeton University Press, 1962. 
Schubert, Gledon A., Constitutional Politics. New York: Holt, Rine­
hart & Winston, Inc., 1960. 
Scott, Emmett J., Negro Migration During the War. New York: 
Oxford University Press, 1920. 
Shimberg, Benjamin, Barbara F. Esser, and Daniel H. Kruger, Oc­
cupational Licensing: Practices & Policies. Washington, D.C.: 
Public Affairs Press, 1972. 
___ , Improving Occupational Regulation. Princeton, N.J.: Edu­
cational Testing Service, 1976. 
Siverman, Irwin W., L. T. Bennett, and Irvin Lechliter, "Control


--- PAGE 193 ---
172 THE STATE AGAINST BLACKS 
by Licensing over Entry into the Market," Law and Contempo­
rary Problems, spring 1941. 
Spero, Sterling D. and Abram L. Harris, The Black Worker: The 
Negro and the Labor Movement. New York: Kennikat Press, 
Inc., 1931. 
Starobin, Roberts, Industrial Slavery in the Old South. New York: 
Oxford University Press, 1970. 
Stiglitz, Joseph, "Approaches to the Economics of Discrimination," 
American Economic Review 63 (May 1973), 287-95. 
Stern, Robert L., "The Problems of Yesteryear-Commerce and Due 
Process," Vanderbilt Law Review (4/51), pp. 44fH38. 
Stone, Alfred Holt, Studies in the American Race Problems, New 
York: Doubleday Page and Co., 1908. 
"The Negro in Unskilled Labor," Annals of the American Academy 
of Political and Social Science 49, September 1913, pp. 19-27. 
Thirsk, Joan, and J.P. Cooper (eds.), Seventeenth-Century Eco­
nomic Documents. London: Oxford University Press, 1972. 
U.S. Bureau of the Census, Sixteenth (1940) Population: Compara­
tive Occupational Statistics for U.S. 1870-1940, Washington, 
D.C., 1943. 
U.S. Bureau of the Census, Historical Statistics of the U.S. U.S. 
Government Printing Office, 2nd edition, 1960. 
U.S. Department of Labor, "Conditions of the Negro in Various 
Cities," Bulletin # 10, pp. 257-69 (1897). 
Virkuil, Paul R., "The Economic Regulation of Taxicabs," Rutgers 
Law Review, vol. 24 (1970), pp. 673-711. 
Wagner, Warren H., A Legislative History of the Motor Carrier 
Act. Denton, Md.: RUE Publishing Co., 1935. 
Washington, Booker T., Up from Slavery: An Autobiography. Lon­
don: Oxford University Press, 1945 (1901). 
__ , "The Negro and the Labor Unions," Atlantic Monthly 111, 
June 1913: 75fH>7. 
Welch, Finis, "Labor-Market Discrimination: An Interpretation of 
Income Differences in the Rural South: journal of Political 
Economy 75 (June 1967): 225-40. 
Wesley, Charles H., Negro Labor in the United States-1850-1925. 
New York: Russell & Russell, 1967. 
Wharton, Vernon Lane, The Negro in Mississippi, 1865-90. Univer­
sity of North Carolina Press, 1947.


--- PAGE 194 ---
Bibliography 173 
White, D.M., and R.L. Francis, "Title VII and the Masters of Reality: 
Eliminating Credentialism in the American Labor Market," 
in Georgetown Law journal, July 1976. 
Wiprud, Arne C., justice in Transportation: An Expose of Monopoly 
Control. New York: Ziff-Davis Publishing Co., 1945. 
Wisconsin Legislative Council Staff, "Regulation and Licensing: 
An Overview," Research Bulletin No. 76-7, Madison, Wis., July 
1976. 
Wollett, Donald H., and Benjamin Arron, Labor Relations and the 
Law. Boston: Little, Brown & Co., 1960. 
Worthman, Paul B., "Black Workers and Labor Unions in Birming­
ham, Alabama-1897-1904," Labor History, 1969. 
Wyckoff, Daryl D., and David H. Maister, The Owner-Operator: 
Independent Trucker. Lexington, Mass.: D.C. Heath & Co., 
1975. 
__ , The Motor Carrier Industry. Lexington, Mass.: D.C. Heath 
& Co., 1977.


--- PAGE 195 ---



--- PAGE 196 ---
INDEX


--- PAGE 197 ---



--- PAGE 198 ---
Adair v. United States, 131 
Adkins v. Children's Hospital, 
131, 132 
Affirmative action programs: 
in government shipping, 115-
116, 118-119 
suits against, 122 
Allgeyer v. Louisiana, 127 
American Federation of Labor 
(AF of L), 107-108 
Anderson, Bernard, 36, 39 
Anti-trust laws, government 
regulation and, 97-98, 140 
Associated General Contractors 
of California v. Secretary of 
Commerce, 122 
Automation, minimum wage 
impetus to, 39, 48 
Barsky v. Board of Regents, 136 
Basora, Joseph, 79 
Beetge, Gert, 40 
Black, Justice Hugo, 136-137 
Blacks: 
income differences for, 54-55 
by sex, 55-58 
labor union exclusion of, 91 
labor union membership of, 
95-96 
middle class, 11-16 
occupational distribution of, 
59-65 
177 
in railroad industry, 103, 104t-
105t, 106 
in trucking industry, 113-119 
youth unemployment for, 35-
36, 37 t, 38t, 39 
(See also Discrimination) 
Bradley, Joseph P., 121, 135 
Brandeis, Justice Louis, 129 
Brotherhood of Locomotive 
Firemen, 102, 106 
Brotherhood of Railway and 
Steamship Clerks v. United 
Transport Service Employ­
ees of America ( UTSEA), 100 
Burger, Chief Justice Warren, 
138-139 
Business: 
role of, 151rr152n 
state regulation of, 126-133 
(See also Railroad industry; 
Taxicab industry; Truck­
ing industry) 
Chinese minority: 
discrimination against, 4-5 
economic progress of, 6 
Cities (see Ghetto areas; Urban 
areas) 
Citizenship requirements in li­
censing laws, 96-97 
Civil Rights Act in regulation 
challenge, 138-140


--- PAGE 199 ---
178 Index 
Constitution, U.S.: 
licensing laws and, 90 
state regulation and, 127-128, 
130-131, 135 
Coppage v. Kansas, 131 
Cornelius, Samuel, 117 
Cosmetologist occupation, li-
censing effects on, 71-72 
Craft employment: 
black exclusion from, 91-92, 
93-94 
plumbing-electrical trades, 
94-97 
in eighteenth century, 92-93 
Davis-Bacon Act of 1931, 122, 
163n 
Day-Brite v. Missouri, 133 
Desegregation defined, 19-20 
Discrimination: 
axioms of, 1-2 
by blacks, 3 
defined, 24-25 
and ethnic conflict, 3-4 
of ethnic populations, 2-3 
Chinese, 4-5 
economic progress and, ~ 
in market vs. political arena, 
142-143 
race vs. class in, 11-17 
sources of, 27 
(See also Employment dis­
crimination; Housing dis­
crimination) 
Dorsey, Stuart, 71-72 
Douglas, Justice William 0., 
121, 133, 134, 135 
Dubois, W. E. B., 103 
Durham, John Stephen, 93 
Earnings (see Income) 
Education levels: 
income differences at, 54-55 
women and, 55-58 
in licensing requirements, 71 
Electrical Trade, black employ­
ment in, 95-97 
Employment discrimination, 2 
income differences in, 53-55 
occupational distribution 
and, 59, 60t-63t, 64-65 
through licensing laws, 70-73, 
90-92, 94-95, 96-97 
for taxicab industry, 75-76, 
80-81, 85t 
minimum wage law and, 34-
35,36,39-44,49-50 
productivity expectations 
and, 28-29 
through restrictive regula­
tion, 122-123, 125-126 
challenges to, 138-140 
Supreme Court decisions 
on, 126-138 
in trucking industry, 111-
114, 116 
(See also Labor union discrim­
ination) 
Engineering profession, racial 
distribution in, 60 t, 62 t, 64 
Equal-pay-for-equal-work, dis­
criminatory effects of, 106-
107 
Ethnic minority(s): 
conflict within, 3-4 
discrimination against, 2-3 
licensing laws in, 96-97 
Orientals, 4-5, 108 
economic progress of, ~ 
political power and, 6 
Fair Labor Standards Act (1938), 
33 
Farley, Reynolds, 10


--- PAGE 200 ---
Ferguson v. Skrupa, 135-136 
Field, Stephen J., 121, 127, 135 
Friedman, Milton, 132, 142 
Ghetto areas: 
cab service in, 77-80, 81 
creation of, 142-143 
price levels in, 30-32 
Gompers, Samuel, 107-108 
Goode, Wilson, 86 
Gould, William B., 119-120 
Government regulation (see 
Regulation) 
Green Pastures, 118 
Griggs v. Duke Power Company, 
98, 138-139 
Grouping (see Homogeneous 
grouping) 
Gutstat, Herman, 108 
Gypsy taxicabs, 77-80, 81 
Haas Act of 1937, 76 
Hammerman, Herbert, 96 
Harlan, Justice John Marshall, 
127 
Hicks v. Weaver, 13 
Hill, Herbert, 93-94 
Hiring practices (see Employ­
ment discrimination) 
Holmes, Justice Oliver Wendell, 
134 
Homogeneous grouping: 
class vs. race in, 11-12 
economic effects of, 1, 8 
residential, 9-11 
types of, 7-8 
redlining in, 29-30 
restrictive regulation and, 
143 
Housing patterns: 
factors in, 16-17 
Index 179 
white flight and, 142-143 
(See also Residential prefer-
ence) 
Houston, Charles, 107 
HU.D. v. Gatreaux, 17 
Hughes, Justice Charles Evans, 
131-132 
Income: 
of black women, 55-58 
differences in, 53-55 
homogeneous grouping and, 
8 
occupational distribution 
and, 59, 60 t-63 t, 64-65 
residential preference and, 
14t-15t, 16 
subminimum, 46-47, 152n 
(See also Minimum wage law) 
Information costs in prejudiced 
behavior, 22-24 
International Brotherhood of 
Electrical Workers (IBEW), 
94, 95 
International Brotherhood of 
Teamsters, discriminatory 
practices of, 119 
International Plumbers and 
Pipefitters, 95 
Interstate Commerce Commis­
sion: 
affirmative action by, 117-
119 
establishment of, 109 
and railroad industry, 110-111 
restrictive regulations of, 112-
114, 116, 139 
Japanese-Americans: 
discrimination against, 5-6 
economic progress of, 6


--- PAGE 201 ---
180 Index 
Jews: 
discriminatory licensing of, 
96-97 
economic progress of, 5 
Jitney service, 156n 
Johnson, James Weldon, 92 
Kahn, Alfred, Ill 
Kennedy, John, 46 
Labor force participation: 
by black youth, 35-36, 37 t, 38 t, 
39, 49-50 
by marginal workers, 34-35 
minimum wage law and, 35-
36,46-49 
under subminimum wages, 
46-47, 152n 
(See also Employment dis­
crimination) 
Labor unions: 
black membership in, 95-96 
discrimination: 
entry restrictions in, 69, 91, 
93-94 
Gompers and, 107-108 
through license advocacy, 
91-92 
minimum wage law and, 
43-45 
against Orientals, 108 
in railroad industry, 99-102, 
106-107 
in South Africa, 40, 43 
in trucking industry, 119-
120 
Lazar, Michael J., 78 
Licensing laws: 
constitutionality of, 90 
discriminatory effects of, 70-
73, 90-92, 94-95, 96-97, 
144 
economic effects of, 68--69, 77-
80, 86, 97 
entry conditions in, 67-68, 71 
citizenship requirements, 
96-97 
for labor market protection, 
96 
testing under, 96, 98 
entry costs under, 69, 70, 71 
for taxicab industry, 76-77, 
80 
numerical restrictions under, 
69-70 
for taxicab industry, 75-76, 
80-81, 85t 
occupations with, 126 
Lochner v. New York, 128 
Low-income housing, suburban 
opposition to, 11-12 
by blacks, 12-13 
Maurizi, Alex, 96 
Metropolitan Housing Develop-
ment v. Village Heights, 17 
Milliken v. Bradley, 17 
Mincer, Jacob, 35-36 
Minimum wage law: 
automation response to, 39, 48 
discriminatory effects of, 34-
35,36,39-44,49-50 
enactment of, 33-34 
labor force participation and, 
35-36, 46-49 
productivity response to, 34, 
39 
supporters of, 50-51 
business, 46 
labor unions, 44-45 
Supreme Court decision on, 
131-132 
Mortgage loans, discriminatory 
policies on, 29-30


--- PAGE 202 ---
Motor Carrier Act of 1935, 110--
111, 112, 116, 139 
Mugler v. Kansas, 127 
Munn v. Illinois, 126-127 
National Mediation Board 
(NMB) and railroad unions, 
99-100 
Nebbia v. New York, 130, 131 
New State Ice Co. v. Liebman, 
129 
New York City taxicab regula­
tion in, 76-80, 144 
Occupations: 
licensed, 126 
(See also Licensing laws) 
racial distribution of, 59--65 
(See also specific types) 
Olsen v. Nebraska, 133 
Oriental minority, labor union 
discrimination against, 108 
Parker doctrine, 97-98 
Peckham, Rufus W., 90, 127-128, 
135 
Person, Timothy D., 117, 161n, 
162n 
Philadelphia, taxicab regula­
tion in, 80--81 
Pierson, Frank, 114 
Plumbing trade: 
black employment in, 94-97 
black exclusion from, 91-92 
licensing laws in, 89-90 
Cadillac effect of, 97 
Preference patterns, racial, 20--
21, 27 
Prejudice: 
defined, 22-23 
operation of, 25-27 
Index 181 
Price discrimination by ghetto­
area merchants, 30--32 
Procedural due process, 164n 
Productivity: 
racial indicators of, 28-29 
wage levels and, 34 
Public goods: 
vs. private goods, 9-10 
in residential choice, 10--11 
Racial discrimination (see Dis­
crimination) 
Racial grouping (see Homoge­
neous grouping) 
Railroad industry: 
black employment in, 103, 
104t-105t, 106 
labor union discrimination in, 
99-102, 106-107 
motor carrier competition to, 
111 
racial hostility in, 102-103 
regulation of, 109-111 
Railway Labor Act, 101 
Redlining, 29-30 
Regulation: 
anti-trust laws and, 97-98 
discriminatory effects of, 122-
123, 125-126 
in trucking industry, 111-
115, 116, 121 
of housing patterns, 142-143 
justification for, 67 
of railroad industry, 109-111 
state-level: 
legal challenges to, 138-140 
Supreme Court decisions 
on, 126-131 
wage laws in, 33-34 
(See also Licensing laws) 
Residential preference, and so­
cial class, 9-11


--- PAGE 203 ---
182 Index 
Residential preference (cont.) 
low income housing and, 11-
12 
within minority group, 13-16 
Resnick, Joseph Y., 46 
Reynolds, Justice, 130 
Richey v. Smith, 90 
Roberts, Justice Owen J., 130 
Rousseve, Charles B., 92 
Schnore, Leo F., 16 
Schware v. Board of Examiners, 
136 
Segregation: 
defined, 19-20 
(See also Homogeneous group-
ings) 
Set aside programs, 122 
Shannon v. Hud, 13 
Shimberg, Benjamin, 94-95 
Small Business Administration 
(SBA), affirmative action 
programs of, 115 
Smith, Ward, 118 
Social class, residential prefer­
ence and, 9-16 
South Africa: 
labor unions in, 40 
minimum wage in, 40, 43-44 
Southeast Asia, anti-Chinese 
sentiment in, 4-5 
State regulation, Supreme Court 
decision on, 126-138 
Steele v. Louisville & Nashville 
Railroad, 101 
Stone, Justice Harlan F., 133 
Substantive due process, 127-
129, 135-136, 164n 
Suburbs: 
blacks in, 13 
low-income housing in, 11-13 
restrictive regulations in, 143 
Supreme Court decisions: 
on occupational licensing, 90 
on railroad discrimination, 
101 
and segregated housing, 17 
on state regulation, 126-138 
Sutherland, Justice George, 131 
Taxicab industry, 144 
entry costs in, 70, 76-77, 80, 
137 
gypsy cabs and, 77-80, 81 
numerical restrictions in, 75-
76, 80-81,85t 
under open entry, 81-83, 87-
88, 137-138 
racial composition of, 84, 
86 
Teaching profession, racial dis­
tribution in, 6lt, 62t, 64 
Trucking industry: 
affirmative action programs 
for, 115-116, 118-119 
classification of, 161 n 
deregulation of, 121 
entry costs to, Ill 
labor union discrimination in, 
119-120 
minority carriers in, 113-115, 
116-119 
restrictive regulations in, 111-
114, 116, 139 
Unemployment: 
of black youth, 35-36, 37 t, 38 t, 
39, 49-50 
skills and qualifications in, 
47-48 
wage levels and, 47 
United Association of Plumbers 
and Steamfitters, 94


--- PAGE 204 ---
United States v. Carolene Prod­
ucts, 133 
Urban areas: 
black/white population in, 
155n 
income levels in, 14t-15t, 
16 
white flight from, 142-143 
Wages (see Income; Minimum 
wage law) 
Waite, Justice Morrison R., 126 
Washington, D.C., taxicab in-
Index 183 
dustry in, 81-84, 86, 87-88, 
137-138 
Welch, Finis, 54-55, 58 
Weld, Isaac, 92 
West Coast Hotel v. Parrish, 131-
132 
Williamson v. Lee Optical Com­
pany, 133 
Women, black/white income ra­
tio for, 55-58 
Youth employment, 35-36, 37 t, 
38t, 39, 48, 49-50

