=== EXTRACTED TEXT FROM: The-Fugitive-Slave-Act-and-the-Underground-Railroad-w-Supplemental-Timeline.pdf ===
Extraction Method: PyPDFLoader
Total Pages: 9
Timestamp: 2026-01-04T17:23:31.495358
================================================================================


--- PAGE 1 ---
The Fugitive Slave Act and the Underground Railroad                                                                                1 
 
The Fugitive Slave Act and the 
Underground Railroad 
“This is an embellished repost from a webpage that discusses the Underground Railroad (UGRR). It was the Fugitive Slave Act which 
increased the necessity of the UGRR.” 
Source of text: http://www.nsm.buffalo.edu/~sww/0history/UndergroundRailRoad.html 
 
…“In 1899, Harriet Tubman purchased a 
home in Auburn, New York. Tubman, after 
escaping slavery, lead, on 15 trips to the 
South, hundreds of Blacks to freedom, via 
The Underground Railroad, in the North 
and Canada”… From below


--- PAGE 2 ---
The Fugitive Slave Act and the Underground Railroad                                                                                2 
 
The Fugitive Slave Acts of 1793 and 1850 
The federal acts of 1793 and 1850 providing for the return between states of escaped black slaves. 
Similar laws existing in both North and South in colonial days applied also to white indentured servants 
and to Native American slaves. Many Northern states also passed personal-liberty laws that allowed 
fugitives a jury trial, and others passed laws forbidding state officials to help capture alleged fugitive 
slaves or to lodge them in state jails. As a concession to the South a second and more rigorous fugitive 
slave law was passed as part of the Compromise of 1850 
 
The Fugitive Slave Act of 1793 
Article 4. For the better security of the peace and friendship now entered into by the contracting parties, 
against all infractions of the same, by the citizens of either party, to the prejudice of the other, neither 
party shall proceed to the infliction of punishments on the citizens of the other, otherwise than by 
securing the offender, or offenders, by imprisonment, or any other competent means, till a fair and 
impartial trial can be had by judges or juries of both parties, as near as can be, to the laws, customs, and 
usage's of the contracting parties, and natural justice: the mode of such trials to be hereafter fixed by the 
wise men of the United States, in congress assembled, with the assistance of such deputies of the 
Delaware nation, as may be appointed to act in concert with them in adjusting this matter to their mutual 
liking. And it is further agreed between the parties aforesaid, that neither shall entertain, or give 
countenance to, the enemies of the other, or protect, in their respective states, criminal fugitives, 
servants, or slaves, but the same to apprehend and secure, and deliver to the state or states, to which 
such enemies, criminals, servants, or slaves, respectively below. 
The 1793 law was loosely enforced, to the great irritation of the South, and as abolitionist sentiment 
developed, organized efforts to circumvent the law took form in the Underground Railroad. 
In Prigg v. Pennsylvania (1842), the United States Supreme Court determined that 'personal liberty laws' 
were unconstitutional: They interfered with the Fugitive Slave Act. The Court held that while states were 
not compelled to enforce the 1793 federal law, they could not override it with other enactments.


--- PAGE 3 ---
The Fugitive Slave Act and the Underground Railroad                                                                                3 
 
The Fugitive Slave Act of 1850 
In 1850 Congress passed the Fugitive Slave Act. It was favored strongly by, and signed by US President 
Millard Filmore a native of Buffalo. Only John P. Hale, Charles Sumner, Salmon Chase and Benjamin Wade 
voted against the measure. Slave hunters were allowed to capture an escapee in any territory or state 
and were required only to confirm orally before a state or federal judge that the person was a runaway. 
At the behest of Senator Henry Clay, it was legislated that any United States Marshall who did not arrest 
an alleged and who refused to return a runaway slave would pay a hefty penalty of $1,000. The law stated 
that in future any federal marshalrunaway slave could be fined $1,000. People suspected of being a 
runaway slave could be arrested without warrant and turned over to a claimant on nothing more than his 
sworn testimony of ownership. A suspected black slave could not ask for a jury trial nor testify on his or 
her behalf. 
Any person aiding a runaway slave by providing shelter, food or any other form of assistance was liable to 
six months' imprisonment and a $500 fine  an expensive penalty in those days. Those officers capturing a 
fugitive slave were entitled to a fee and this encouraged some officers to kidnap free Negroes and sell 
them to slave-owners. Frederick Douglass, Wendell Phillips, William Lloyd Garrison and John Greenleaf 
Whittier led the fight against the law. If an escaped slave was sighted, he or she should be apprehended 
and turned in to the authorities for deportation back to the "rightful" owner down south. It was thought 
that the Fugitive Slave Act would diminish the incentive for slaves to attempt escape. The rationale behind 
this was the slaves' realization that even if they managed to escape from their plantation, they could still 
be caught and returned by any citizen in the United States. Even moderate anti-slavery leaders such as 
Arthur Tappan declared he was now willing to disobey the law and as result helped fund the Underground 
Railroad. 
The law was opposed in many Northern states; several reacted by enacting legislation to protect free 
black Americans and fugitive slaves. The 'personal liberty laws' compelled a slave catcher to furnish 
corroborative proof that his captive was a fugitive and frequently accorded the accused the rights to trial 
by jury and appeal. Laws in some states made it easier to extradite a runaway if his or her slave status 
were confirmed. 
 
Author’s references: 
1. http://www.yale.edu/lawweb/avalon/fugitive.htm 
2. http://www.nationalcenter.org/FugitiveSlaveAct.html 
3. http://www.law.ou.edu/hist/fugslave.html


--- PAGE 4 ---
The Fugitive Slave Act and the Underground Railroad                                                                                4 
 
 
In 1793, the first parliament of the province of Ontario passed "An Act to Prevent the Further Introduction 
of Slaves and to Limit the Term of Forced Servitude within This Province." This statute confirmed the 
ownership of slaves then held, but provided that the children of slaves, upon reaching the age of twenty-
five years, automatically would be set free. This legislation remained in force until 1834 when, by power of 
the Imperial Parliament's Emancipation Act, slavery was abolished in all parts of the British Empire. Thus 
Canada was the closest place for slaves to escape. 
In 1899, Harriet Tubman purchased a home in Auburn, New York. Tubman, after escaping slavery, lead, on 
15 trips to the South, hundreds of Blacks to freedom, via The Underground Railroad, in the North and 
Canada. MAPS 
“This webpage discusses the Underground Railroad (UGRR). It was the Fugitive Slave Act which 
increased the necessity of the UGRR.” 
Amy Post (1802-1889) and Isaac Post (1798-1872) moved to Rochester from Long Island in 1836. They 
were active advocates of temperance, spiritualism, and abolition. They were close friends of Frederick 
Douglass and their home on Sophia Street was a station on the Underground Railroad.  
A list of: UNDERGROUND RAILROAD AGENTS IN WESTERN NEW YORK. More recently the New York History 
Net has published a very interesting list of "all" persons and places connected with the Underground 
Railroad in New York. 
The Underground Railroad 
For the 240 years from the first African slave until 1860, slaves ran and some escaped to freedom. In 
1850, the value of a trained slave was around $2500 - an enormous sum at a time more than ten times 
the average person's annual earnings. Thus, slaves were chased by their masters or bounty hunters. 
Because intelligence agencies placed single men and women in domestic jobs in cities like Syracuse and 
towns as Geneva, the transportation of slaves to freedom obviously had to be done under the utmost 
secret of conditions. The transport worked much like a railroad and so it was called The Underground 
Railroad. Once a slave escaped and managed to make contact with sympathizers, he or she became a 
part of the underground railroad and would hopefully be transported to freedom.Similar to an actual 
railroad, the act of transporting the escaped slaves incorporated all the terms used during a railroad 
journey. The routes from safe-house to safe-house (houses where fugitive slaves were kept) were called 
lines and were roughly 15 miles long, but the distance shortened considerably the further north one got. 
Stopping places were called stations (Catherine Harris' home). Those who aided fugitive slaves were 
known as conductors. In order to keep terms as clandestine as possible, the fugitive slaves were known


--- PAGE 5 ---
The Fugitive Slave Act and the Underground Railroad                                                                                5 
 
as packages or freight. Though the road to freedom, called The Underground Railroad, was organized 
prior to 1850, the organization became widespread after The Fugitive Slave Act. 
 
Harriet Tubman with escaped slaves at an Underground Rail Road station 
In 1842, William Wells Brown carried sixty-nine fugitive slaves on a steam boat to Canada. It is estimated 
that between 1850 and 1863, the Underground Railroad movement was responsible for helping 
approximately 70,000 slaves escape and journey safely northwards into Canada and subsequent freedom. 
The cities of Buffalo, Rochester and their surrounding areas helped to play a leading role in the 
Underground Railroad movement. As they are conveniently located close to the Canadian border, they 
served as one of the stations of the Underground Railroad . Certainly one of the last stops before fugitive 
slaves could be considered free men. 
The entire area of western New York was filled with stops or stations of This Underground Railroad. With 
the help of Harriet Tubman, Rochester became a main station. In 1868, Frederick Douglass said he knew of 
major stations in Albany, Syracuse, Rochester, Buffalo, and in Canada, St. Catherines, Ontario. In Buffalo, 
Broderick Park (at the foot of Ferry Street and the Black Rock Canal) was a site for a crossing the 
Niagara river into Canada. 
At the "stations", the weary slaves were given food, rest, and a change of clothing. Instances often 
occurred in which common citizens did not have direct contact with the fugitive slaves, but were 
nonetheless equally vital in attaining  their eventual freedom. There were various fundraising events. 
Further, there were informants who had knowledge about police activity and who would pass this 
information on to the "conductors" who saw that the "freight" received safe passage.


--- PAGE 6 ---
The Fugitive Slave Act and the Underground Railroad                                                                                6 
 
James and Eber Petit established stations along the Lake Erie shoreline in Western New York. Dr. James 
Petit, born 1777, practiced in both Madison and Onandaga Counties. His son Eber, born 1802, ran his 
station in Versailles New York for nearly 25 years. In 1839 James  lived near Fredonia. With Eber and 
James had a local organization called the Society for the Abolition of Slavery. 
EberPetit's book Sketches in the history of the Underground Railroad  tells numerous stories of slaves 
who passed through their station. Here is one: 
“Margaret was born on a slave ship from Africa. She was described at 18 as jet black, tall, and well -
formed, very bright and learned things quickly. She served as a maid to a young woman. When Margaret 
refused sex with her mistress’s husband, Margaret's husband was sold and she was put into the fields 
under a strick overseer. 
 
 
Margaret was worked hard up until the day her baby (by her 
husband) was born. A week later she was put back to work. It 
was customary that babies be cared for by broken down 
slaves; but Margaret was forced to leave the baby Samuel in 
the shade of a bush by the field, returning to it only twice the 
entire day she worked. 
On returning to Samuel one day she found him senseless, 
exhausted with crying, and a large snake covering him. She 
then decided to run away with her baby or see it dead. She ran 
and the tail was magnificent. At one time she, with her baby on her shoulders and in a river, kills the 
favorite salve hunting dog of her master, an old mastiff. 
She escapes to her freedom and her finds a home in New York where her son was given education. Her 
son receives more education and becomes a great man, Frederick Douglas once called "the ablest man 
the country has ever produced" 
Samuel Ward (above), author of Autobiography of a Fugitive Negro: His Anti-Slavery Labours in the United 
States, Canada, & England .


--- PAGE 7 ---
The Fugitive Slave Act and the Underground Railroad                                                                                7 
 
Supplemental: 
Underground Railroad Timeline:  
Source of information: http://purehistory.org/libraries/18887/underground-railroad-timeline.html 
 
Date Event 
1585 First Africans brought to North America and enslaved at St. Augustine, Florida. 
Shortly after this Underground Railroad begins when some unknown aids first freedom seeker. 
February 18, 1688 Mennonites in North America oppose slavery, aid freedom seekers (Disputed). 
1754 Quakers in North America condemn slavery, require manumission among Quakers. 
1775 First abolition society formed in Philadelphia. 
1780 Methodist Church in America states that slavery contradicts laws of God and man 
1780′s People assisting freedom seekers begin to find one another and cooperate in the beginning of 
Underground Railroad networks. 
1780-1786 Nine northern states abolish slavery and/or legislate emancipation. 
March 1, 1781 Articles of Confederation, the first United States constitution, sidesteps the issue of slavery. 
1784 A motion put forth by a congressional committee headed by Thomas Jefferson to abolish 
slavery fails by a single vote in the United States in Congress Assembled, the nation’s first 
government. 
Harriet Tubman with a group of runaway slaves during slavery, seeking freedom  
(c. Lawrence E. Walker Foundation Collection). Click for full size view


--- PAGE 8 ---
The Fugitive Slave Act and the Underground Railroad                                                                                8 
 
November 20, 1786 George Washington writes of his acting as a slave catcher. 
1787 Rev. Absalom Jones, Rev. Richard Allen form Independent Free African Society. 
July 13, 1787 Northwest Ordinance bans slavery in Ohio, Indiana, Illinois, Michigan, Wisconsin. 
1787 Presbyterian Church of America condemns slavery, begins promoting abolition. 
June 21, 1788 United States Constitution ratified, fails to deal with slavery. 
November, 1788 George Washington, an enslaver from Virginia, elected president. 
1789 Baptist Church of Virginia condemns slavery, urges abolition. 
November, 1796 John Adams, only abolitionist among main Founders, elected president. 
1808 United States outlaws further importation of slaves 
June 14, 1811 Harriet Beecher Stowe, future author of Uncle Toms Cabin, born in Connecticut. 
1816 African Methodist Episcopal Church founded, opposes slavery, aids fugitives. 
February, 1818 Frederick Douglass, national hero, born enslaved on the Maryland eastern shore. 
Probably 1822 Harriet Tubman, national heroine, born enslaved on the Maryland eastern shore. 
1827 John Russworm and Samuel Cornish, black journalists, publish Freedom’s Journal. 
1828 Russworm and Cornish publish The Rights of All, first black abolitionist periodical. 
1830 James and Lucretia Mott form Pennsylvania Anti-Slavery Society. 
January 1, 1831 William Lloyd Garrison, 26, publishes first issue of his anti-slavery newspaper, The Liberator. 
Continues publication until Thirteenth Amendment is passed in 1865. 
1831 First known reference to the Underground Railroad when the enslaver of Tice Davids remarks 
that Davids “must have gone on some underground road” when the enslaver could not find 
Davids after pursuing him across the Ohio River at Maysville, Kentucky. 
August 21, 1831 Nat Turner Rebellion in North Carolina alarms South, emboldens abolitionists. 
1831 William Lloyd Garrison, others, form New England Anti-Slavery Society. 
1831 Arthur and Lewis Tappan form the National Anti-Slavery Society in New York. 
1830′s Vigilance committees formed in northern cities to prevent return of fugitive slaves. 
1830′s Network aiding freedom seekers first takes on the name Underground Railroad. 
June 17, 1833 Detroit Riots rescue Lucie and Thornton Blackburn from jail and slave catchers. 
August 1, 1833 Great Britain abolishes slavery throughout its worldwide Commonwealth. Canada becomes 
magnet for United States freedom seekers. 
1830′s-1840′s Some other European powers abolish slavery at home and in their colonies. 
November 19, 1842 First known appearance in print of the term Underground Railroad when Thomas Smallwood 
uses the phrase “our new underground railroad” in his November 19, 1842, letter to the editor 
of The Tocsin of Liberty. 
1849 Harriet Tubman escapes enslavement. 
Beginning in 1850′s Philadelphia businessman and safe-house operator William Still begins recording accounts of 
freedom seekers whom he assists. 
1850-1859 Harriet Tubman makes at least nine successful rescues of Maryland freedom seekers. “Never 
lost a passenger” 
September 18, 1850 Fugitive Slave Act passed requiring US citizens to aid in capturing freedom seekers. 
April 1, 1852 Uncle Tom’s Cabin by Harriet Beecher Stowe published, sells a record 500,000 copies in 
months, same number abroad in two years. First international best-seller. 
September 11, 1851 Blacks in Christiana, Pennsylvania, run off slave catchers, kill leader, alarm South. 
1831-1865 Baltimore and Ohio Railroad Company sued for aiding freedom seekers.


--- PAGE 9 ---
The Fugitive Slave Act and the Underground Railroad                                                                                9 
 
March 6, 1857 Dred Scott decision, authored by Supreme Court Chief Justice Roger Taney, strips blacks free 
and enslaved of citizenship. 
October 16, 1859 Abolitionist John Brown seizes federal armory at Harpers Ferry, West Virginia. 
December 2, 1859 John Brown hanged in Charlestown, West Virginia (then Virginia). 
By 1860 Of the 33 states, 18 no longer permit slavery. 
March, 1861 Abraham Lincoln inaugurated as 16th president. Southern states begin seceding. 
April 12, 1861 Fort Sumter fired on, Civil War begins. 
January 1, 1863 Emancipation Proclamation promulgated abolishing slavery in Confederate states. 
July, 1863 Working as a Union scout, Harriet Tubman in a single week frees more than 750 enslaved 
people along Combahee River in South Carolina. 
May 26, 1865 Civil War ends. 
December 6, 1865 Thirteenth Amendment outlaws slavery, with Mississippi the only dissenting state. 
1872 William Still authors The Underground Railroad recounting 190 accounts of over 900 freedom 
seekers he had aided. 
1876 Reconstruction ends when northern members of Congress swing deals with southern members 
to gain vote for northern interests. Eighty-eight years of Jim Crow pseudo-slavery, racial 
discrimination, lynchings and persecution ensue. 
February 20, 1895 Frederick Douglass dies. 
July 1, 1896 Harriet Beecher Stowe dies. 
1898 Wilbur Siebert authors The Underground Railroad from Slavery to Freedom, the first extensive 
cataloguing of Underground Railroad safe-houses, routes and people. 
March 10, 1913 Harriet Tubman, national heroine, last living major figure of the Underground Railroad, dies at 
her home in Auburn, New York. 
1961 Larry Gara authors The Liberty Line: The Legend of the Underground Railroad, which recasts 
the Underground Railroad more into the experience of the freedom seeker.

