=== EXTRACTED TEXT FROM: The-Honorable-Dr-Amos-N-Wilson-Publications-and-Audio-Lecture-Downloads.pdf ===
Extraction Method: PyPDFLoader
Total Pages: 9
Timestamp: 2026-01-04T17:23:32.044435
================================================================================


--- PAGE 1 ---
Page 1 of 9 
  
The Honorable Dr. Amos N. Wilson Publications and Audio Lecture Downloads 
RBG Communiversity  
 
The Honorable Dr. Amos N. Wilson 
HTML source (Website) of this Download: 
http://awis.scripterz.org/ 
(1941 - 1995) 
Former Social Caseworker, Psychological 
Counselor, Supervising Probation Officer, 
Training Administrator in the New York City 
Department of Juvenile Justice, Assistant 
Professor of Psychology at the City University 
of New York, Master Teacher, Organizer, and 
Author 
The late, Honora ble Dr. Wilson was born in 
Hattiesburg, Mississippi in 1941. Familiarly 
referred to as Brother Amos, he provided the 
average person with an acute analysis of where 
we are and the things that affect us. He served as a council to energize our race and those in 
positions of influence as to how to carry out their leadership responsibilities.   Dr. Wilson's 
activities transcended academia into the fields of business, owning and operating various 
enterprises in the greater New York area.


--- PAGE 2 ---
Page 2 of 9 
  
The Honorable Dr. Amos N. Wilson Publications and Audio Lecture Downloads 
RBG Communiversity  
 
Dr. Wilson's Works: 
 
The Developmental Psychology of the Black Child 
Are Black and White Children the same? Is the Black Child merely 
a White Child who 'happens' to be 'painted' Black? Are there any 
significant differences in the mental and physical growth and 
development of Black and White Children? What effects does race 
awareness have on the mental and personality development of 
Black Children? Are such leisure time activities as the playing of 
certain games, watching TV., going to the movies, listening to the 
radio, hazardous to the mental health of Black Children? Is the use 
of Black English a sign of mental inferiority? Why do Black Children generally score 
lower than White Children on I.Q. tests? Do Black parents socialize their children to be 
inferior to White Children?  Why have integrated schools and busing failed so many 
Black Children? If you have been looking for a single source which deals with these and 
related controversial questions from a black perspective, then this book may be the book 
for you. For between its  covers, The Developmental Psychology of the Black Child, the 
first of a UBCS series of books dealing with the growth, development, and education of 
the black child, in a scholarly but readily understandable way, forthrightly confronts these 
and other issues.


--- PAGE 3 ---
Page 3 of 9 
  
The Honorable Dr. Amos N. Wilson Publications and Audio Lecture Downloads 
RBG Communiversity  
 
 
Awakening the Natural Genius of Black Children 
Afrikan children are naturally precocious and gifted. They begin life 
with a 'natural head start.' However, their natural genius it too 
frequently underdeveloped and misdirected by (1) the fact that  the 
racist and imperialist status quo politically mandates their 
intellectual under-achievement and social maladaptiveness; (2) belief 
in the myth that intelligence is fixed at birth and that Afrikans are 
innately less intelligent than Europeans; (3) a la ck of knowledge of 
their positively unique developmental psychology; (4) a lack of 
confidence in their ability to equal or surpass the intellectual performance of any other 
ethnic group; and (5) the general lack of infant and early childhood educational 
experiences which stimulate, sustain and actualize their abundant human potential. 
Awakening the Natural Genius of Black Children provides effective means by which 
these political and social maladies may be fully remedies. Intelligence is not fixed at 
birth. The quality of children’s educational experiences during infancy and early 
childhood are substantially related to their measured intelligence, academic achievement 
and prosocial behavior. In this volume, Amos N. Wilson, author of the bestseller, The 
Developmental Psychology of the Black Child, surveys the daily routines, child -rearing 
practices, parent -child interactions, games and play materials, parent -training and pre -
school programs which have made demonstrably outstanding and lasting differences in 
the intellectual, academic and social performance of Black children.


--- PAGE 4 ---
Page 4 of 9 
  
The Honorable Dr. Amos N. Wilson Publications and Audio Lecture Downloads 
RBG Communiversity  
 
 
Black-On-Black Violence: The Psychodynamics of Black 
Self-Annihilation in Service of White Domination 
The Psychodynamics of Black Self -Annihilation in Service of White 
Domination repr esents a distinct milestone in criminology and 
Afrikan Studies. Its explanatory perspectives on the 
sociopsychological and politicoeconomic causes of Black -on-Black 
Violence are exceptionally insightful, incisive and iconoclastic. The 
Psychodynamics of the  Black-on-Black criminal are presented here 
with a depth and clarity rarely seen before.  
The main thesis of this book is that the operational existence of Black -on-Black in the 
United States is psychologically and economically mandated by the White Americ an-
dominated status quo. The criminalization of the Black American male is a 
psychopolitically engineered process designed to maintain the dependency and relative 
powerlessness of the Afrikan American and Pan-African communities.  
Black-on-Black Violence, however, moves far beyond blaming the victimizer. Its 
meticulous and painstaking exposure of the psycho-social and intrapsychical dynamics of 
Black-on-Black criminality is startlingly revealing. Its analyses of the collective psych es 
of both the White American and Black American communities are unsparingly and 
powerfully instructive. The reader will not be left unmoved.  
Although Professor Wilson argues that Black-on-Black Violence is orchestrated by White 
America’s need to maintain its oppressive domination of Black America, and of Western 
Europe’s need to continue -without end -its economic exploitation of Africa, he also 
contends that the ending of Black -on-Black violence is the primary, if not sole, 
responsibility of African people  in America and abroad. This book, in revealing the 
anatomy of Black -on-Black violence, simultaneously lays the practical, intellectual and 
political foundations for its social eradication.


--- PAGE 5 ---
Page 5 of 9 
  
The Honorable Dr. Amos N. Wilson Publications and Audio Lecture Downloads 
RBG Communiversity  
 
 
Understanding Black Male Adolescent Violence: Its 
Remediation and Prevention 
In this ground -breaking volume, Amos Wilson shows in brilliant 
detail how American society creates and sustains Black -on-Black 
adolescent criminality in its inner -cities across the United States. 
He boldly asserts that Black -on-Black adolescen t violence is 
rooted in historical and contemporary White -on-Black violence. 
He further argues that White -on-Black violence induces in the 
Afrikan American community a pervasive false consciousness, 
one which interacts with the adolescent crises of Black m ales and the socioeconomic 
conditions which typify inner -city communities to spawn criminality and violence. More 
than an explanatory analysis of Black male adolescent criminality, Understanding Black 
Adolescent Male Violence provides very practical and wo rkable remedial and 
preventative approaches to this problem which threatens the vitality of the Afrikan 
American community.


--- PAGE 6 ---
Page 6 of 9 
  
The Honorable Dr. Amos N. Wilson Publications and Audio Lecture Downloads 
RBG Communiversity  
 
 
The Falsification of Afrikan Consciousness: Eurocentric 
History, Psychiatry, and the Politics of White Supremacy 
This book  presents two ground -breaking lectures by Amos Wilson. 
The first, European Historiography and Oppression Exposed: An 
Afrikan Perspective and Analysis, was among the first contemporary 
analyses which delineated the role Eurocentric history -writing plays 
in rationalizing European oppression of Afrikan consciousness. It 
explicates why we should study history, how history -writing shapes 
the psychology of peoples and individuals, how Eurocentric history as mythology creates 
historical amnesia in Afrikans in orde r to rob them of the material, mental, social and 
spiritual wherewithal for overcoming poverty and oppression. Moreover, this engrossing 
lectures the relationship between the rediscovery and rewriting of Afrikan history and 
achievement of liberation and pr osperity by Afrikan peoples. The second lecture, 
Eurocentric Political Dogmatism: Its Relationship to the Mental Health Diagnosis of 
Afrikan People, advances the contention that the alleged mental and behavioral 
maladaptiveness of oppressed Afrikan peoples  is a political -economic necessity for the 
maintenance of White domination and imperialism. Furthermore, it indicts the 
Eurocentric mental health establishment for entering into collusion with the Eurocentric 
political establishment to oppress and exploit Afrikan peoples by officially sanctioning 
these egregious practices through its misdiagnosing, mislabeling, and mistreating of 
Afrikan peoples’ behavioral reactions to their oppression and their efforts to win their 
freedom and independence.


--- PAGE 7 ---
Page 7 of 9 
  
The Honorable Dr. Amos N. Wilson Publications and Audio Lecture Downloads 
RBG Communiversity  
 
 
Blueprint for Black Power: A Moral, Political, and 
Economic Imperative for the Twenty-First Century 
Blueprint for Black Power details a master plan for the power 
revolution necessary for Black survival in the 21st century. 
Blueprints posits that an African  American/Caribbean/Pan-
African bloc would be most potent for the generation and 
delivery of Black power in the United States and the World to 
counter White and Asian power networks. Wilson frames this 
imperative by deconstructing the U.S. elite power stru cture of government, political 
parties, think tanks, corporations, foundations, media, interest groups, banking and 
foreign investment particulars. Potentially strong Black institutions as the church, media 
and think tanks; industry; collectives such as in vestment clubs and credit unions; rotating 
credit associations such as Afrikan -originated esusu, tontine and partner are analyzed. 
Pan-Afrikanism, Black Nationalism, ethnocentrism and reparation are assessed, often 
misused and underused financial instituti ons as securities, mutual funds, stocks, bonds, 
underwriting, and incubators advocated, thus elucidating oft -negated opportunities for 
economic empowerment.


--- PAGE 8 ---
Page 8 of 9 
  
The Honorable Dr. Amos N. Wilson Publications and Audio Lecture Downloads 
RBG Communiversity  
 
Afrikan-Centered Consciousness versus The New World 
Order: Garveyism in the Age of Globalism 
In two masterful lectures contained within the pages of this modest 
text, Dr. Wilson challenges the all too pervasive assumption and 
false perception that the "New World Order" is somehow ordained -
- that if Afrikan people are to progress, they have no oth er 
alternative but to remain colonized by White-Western interests. This 
of course is patently false. Dr. Wilson debunks this myth with an 
insightful analysis of the Legacy of Marcus Garvey and the proven validity of Afrikan -
Centered Consciousness as necessary psychological and material tools in the struggle for 
true liberation.


--- PAGE 9 ---
Page 9 of 9 
  
The Honorable Dr. Amos N. Wilson Publications and Audio Lecture Downloads 
RBG Communiversity  
 
 
Dr. Wilson Speaks On: (ram audio files) 
The Psychological Alienation of Black America 
The Impact of the Media on the Afrikan Psyche 
Black-On-Black Violence 
The Falsification of Afrikan Consciousness 
The Transformation of Afrikan Consciousness 
The Euro-American Roots of Violence, Criminality, & Terrorism 
Special Education and Black Children 
Riot or Revolt: An Urban Analysis 
Global White Supremacy

