=== EXTRACTED TEXT FROM: The-Last-Message-From-Dr-John-Henrik-Clarke-July-16TH-1998.pdf ===
Extraction Method: PyPDFLoader
Total Pages: 7
Timestamp: 2026-01-04T17:36:21.398214
================================================================================


--- PAGE 1 ---
A GREAT AND MIGHTY WALK
BY: DR. JOHN HENRIK CLARKE
JULY 16TH, 1998
This is the last message from Dr. Clarke before he made the 
transition to dwell with our revolutionary ancestors. It 
demonstrates what we already knew, we were the first and last 
thought on his mind. He always celebrated us as he criticized us 
with the up most affection. As our master teacher he opened us 
up to new possibilities and eternal truths. But yet again, we 
allowed another elder to be abused by profiteers, thieves and 
undermining reactionaries that got in his way as he struggled for 
us. At his funeral some that spoke the loudest, cried the hardiest 
and fought for photo opportunities were the same ones who didn't 
pay him his royalty checks, his honorariums and left him without 
the resources he needed to fight for us. You know who you are 
and so does he. We continue to allow our elders to be exploited. 
Thank you Dr. Clarke for all you have given us and through the 
body of work you left, we will find a way to make you proud of us.
Del Jones, Editor of the "Eye of the Storm" on-line newspaper
THE LAST MESSAGE
from: Dr. John Henrik Clark
 
THE LAST MESSAGE
1
DR. JOHN HENRIK CLARKE


--- PAGE 2 ---
On January 1, 1915 when I was born in Union Springs, Alabama, little black 
Alabama boys were not fully licensed to imagine themselves as conduits of 
social and political change. I remember when I was about three years old, I 
fell off something. I do not know what it was but I remember Uncle Henry 
putting some water on my head and I really do think that instead of the "fall" 
knocking something out of me, it knocked something into me. In fact, they 
called me "Bubba" and because I had the mind to do so, I decided to add "e" 
to the family name "Clark" and change the spelling of "Henry" to "Henrik", 
after the Scandinavian rebel playwright, Henrik Ibsen. I liked his spunk and 
the social issues he addressed in "A Doll’s House". I understood that my 
family was rich in love but would probably never own the land my father, John 
dreamed of owning. 
My mother Willie Ella Mays Clarke, was a washer woman for poor white 
folks in the area of Columbus, Georgia where the writer Carson McCullers 
once lived. My mother would go to the houses of these "folks" and pick up 
her laundry bundles and, pull them back home in a little red wagon, with me 
sitting on top. At the end of the week, she would collect her pay of about 
$3.00. My siblings are based in the varied ordering and descriptives that 
characterize traditional African diasporic families. They are Eddie Mary 
Clarke Hobbs, Walter Clarke, Hugo Oscar Clarke, Earline Clarke, Flossie 
Clarke (deceased), Alvin Clarke (deceased), and Nathaniel Clarke 
(deceased). Together, in varied times and forms, we have known love. My 
loving sister Mary has always shared the pain and pleasure of my heartbeat in 
a unique and special way. 
We have sung our sad and warm songs together. But, we have all felt the 
warm rains of Spring, and felt the crispness of the fallen leaves in Fall 
together. As the eldest son of an Alabama sharecropper family, I was 
constantly troubled by a collage of North American southern behaviors and 
notions in reference to the inhumanity of my people. There were questions that 
I did not know how to ask but could, in my unsophisticated way, articulate a 
series of answers. My daddy wanted me to be a farmer; feel the smoothness 
of Alabama clay and become one of the first blacks in my town to own land. 
But, I was worried about my history being 
caked with that southern clay and I 
 
THE LAST MESSAGE
2
DR. JOHN HENRIK CLARKE


--- PAGE 3 ---
subscribed to a different kind of teaching and learning in my bones and in my 
spirit.
I am a Nationalist, and a Pan-Africanist, first and foremost. I was well 
grounded in history before ever taking a history course. I did not spend much 
formal time in school---I had to work. I caddied for Dwight Eisenhower and 
Omar Bradley long before they became Generals or President, for that 
matter. Just between you and me, Bradley tipped better than Eisenhower did. 
When I was able to go to school in my early years, my third grade teacher, 
Ms Harris convinced me that one day I would be a writer. I heard her, but I 
knew that I had to leave Georgia, and unlike my friend Ray Charles, I did not 
go around with "Georgia on My Mind." Instead, my best friend, Roscoe 
Chester use to sit with me spellbound, as I detailed the history of Timbuktu. 
I soon took a slow moving train out of Georgia because I did not want to end 
up like Richard (Dick) Wright's "Black Boy." I came to New York, via 
Chicago and then I enlisted in the army and earned the rank of Master 
Sergeant. Later, I selected Harlem as the laboratory where I would search for 
the true history of our people. I could not stomach the lies of world history, so 
I took some strategic steps in order to build a life of scholarship and activism 
in New York. I began to pave strong roads toward what I envisioned as a 
mighty walk where I would initiate, inspire and help found organizations to 
elevate my people. I am thinking specifically of The Harlem's Writers Guild, 
Freedomways, Presence Africane, African Heritage Studies Association, 
Association for the Study of Negro Life and History, National Council of 
Black Studies, Association for the Study of Classical African Civilization. 
I became an energetic participant in circles like Harlem Writer's Workshop, 
studied history and world literature at New York and Columbia Universities 
and at the League for Professional Writers. And, much like the Egyptians 
taught Plato and Socrates what they eventually knew, I was privileged to sit at 
the feet of great warriors like Arthur Schomburg, Willis Huggins, Charles 
Seiffert, William Leo Hansberry, John G. Jackson and Paul Robeson. Before, 
I go any further, let me assure you that I always made attempts at structuring a 
holistic life. My three children are products of that reality. My oldest daughter 
who kind of grew up with me, became a warm and wonderful 
woman. 
 
THE LAST MESSAGE
3
DR. JOHN HENRIK CLARKE


--- PAGE 4 ---
Unfortunately, she preceded me in her passage. Part of my life's mission has 
been to deliver a message of renewal, redemption and rededication for young 
people all over the world and I hope the walk has afforded me that claim. So, 
now and in my traditionally fatherly way, I appeal to my two younger children, 
Sonni Kojo and Nzingha Marie to appreciate my commitment to them and the 
rest of the world. Sonni, in forming your identity, I called upon the spirit of 
Sonni Ali, the great Emperor of the Sudanic Empires to anoint you; and 
Nzingha, my second daughter, I reached back for the spirit of the warrior 
Queen Nzingha to lay her hands upon you. I have always felt blessed by the 
many nieces and nephews who have surrounded me: John H. Clarke, Charlie 
Mae Rowell, Walter L. Hobbs, Lillie Kate Hobbs, Wanda D. McCaulley, 
Madalynn McCaulley and a host of other extended family and friends. Lillie, I 
have always loved and needed the special touches of our relationship; without 
you this walk could not have been completed-I have not left you. 
When the Europeans emerged in the world in the 15th and 16th centuries, for 
the second time, they not only colonized most of the world, they colonized 
information about the world, and they also colonized images, including the 
image of God, thereby putting us into a trap, for we are the only people who 
worship a God whose image we did not choose! I had to respond to this 
behavior. I could not live this nonsense and contradictions and I challenged 
these insidious concepts and theories. While I have not finished my work and 
I remain worried about who will replace Dr. Ben and me, I am not displeased 
of my progress of 83 years. As we all would agree, the struggle is continuous. 
I have utilized several avenues: I wrote songs and while most of you are 
familiar with the "Boy Who Painted Christ Black", I wrote some two hundred 
short stories. 
I question the political judgement of those who would have the nerve to paint 
Christ white with his obvious African nose, lips and wooly hair. My 
publications in the form of edited books, major essays, and book 
introductions are indeed important documents and number more than thirty. 
"Africa, Lost and Found" with Richard Moore and Keith Baird, and "African 
People at the Crossroads" are among the major publications used in History 
and African American Studies disciplines on college and university campuses. 
I am also honored to have edited books on Malcolm X and Marcus 
Garvey. 
 
THE LAST MESSAGE
4
DR. JOHN HENRIK CLARKE


--- PAGE 5 ---
Through the United Nations, I published monographs on Paul Robeson and 
W.E.B. DuBois; and, to clarify the historical record, I was compelled to 
publish a monograph on "Christopher Columbus and the African Holocaust". 
One of my latest works, "Who Betrayed the African Revolution"?, was a very 
painful project indeed. And, when I think of William Styron’s error with Nat 
Turner and our response to it, I feel convinced that Nat was able to return to 
his rest in peace. Among the paths of my journey, I have had a chance to 
engage in dialogue at the major centers of higher education throughout North 
and South America, Africa and Europe. I am humbled by these opportunities 
and, I have been blessed as the recipient of a number of honorary degrees. 
My professorships at the Africana Studies and Research Center at Cornell 
University (where my portrait hangs at the artistic genius of Don Miller) was 
very important for the young men and women I taught there, and the work 
that I did with African and Puerto Rican Studies at Hunter College between 
1965 and 1985 was highly significant. 
I have walked Majestically with kings and queens and presidents and other 
heads of states. My special destiny with Africa, early on in this walk, afforded 
me the opportunity to mentor Kwame Nkrumah when he arrived in the United 
States as a student. The reciprocity of our relationship was manifested in my 
sojourn to post independence Ghana as a young journalist. Without question, 
my walk has been sweeter because I have shared the path with Kwame 
Nkrumah, Betty Shabazz and Malcolm X, Zora Neale Hurston, Jimmy 
Baldwin, Martin Luther King Jr., Richard Wright, Julian Mayfield, John G. 
Jackson, Cheikh Anta Diop, John O. Killens, Hoyt Fuller, Chancellor 
Williams, Drucella Houston. Well, what do you know, I am transitioning with 
all of these giants now and the process is much easier because all of you are 
here with me. 
This walk has been anointed by God and the list of walkers is endless, and all 
of you have touched me deeply. I humbly acknowledge Dorothy Calder, 
Diane James, Doris Lee, Adalaide Sanford, Ruby Dee and Ozzie Davis, 
Barbara Adams, Judy Miller, Gil Noble, James Turner, Howard Dodson, 
Mari Evans, Haki Madhabuti, Selma White, William and Camille Cosby, 
Irving Burgess, Pat Williams and others too numerous to mention. As all 
of 
 
THE LAST MESSAGE
5
DR. JOHN HENRIK CLARKE


--- PAGE 6 ---
you must know, I made an early commitment to transfer my library to Black 
institutions in an effort to demonstrate my unlimited trust and respect to the 
black community. So, it is to the Atlanta University Center and to the 
Schomberg center for Research in Black Culture where I have donated the 
majority of my books and documents. I entrusted this task to members of the 
Institute for African Research, the Foundation which will perpetuate those 
objectives for which I dedicated my life. 
This has really been a long marathon and there have been caregivers at my 
dehydration stations that kept vigil and in the spirit of love and devotion, I 
thank you for your deeds. Ann Swanson and Barbara True, your work with 
me has been unconditional and I ask you now to accept my gratitude and 
know that my spirit will always be your protective shield. Chris Fitzpatrick 
and Derrick Grubb, you are familiar with the parameters of this run and with 
me; you are of long-distance caliber. Jim Dyer, Andy Thompson, Les 
Edmond, and Debbie Swire, I thank you for walking in step with me and 
bracing me with your strength. In you I observed the ingredients of African 
kings and queens. Iva Elaine Carruthers and Bettye Parker Smith, I know that 
I have raised you the right way and you must now move with the winds of my 
spirit wings. You know my literary agenda and you are obligated to manage 
that knowledge. 
The ancestors have stretched out their arms and I see them beckoning now at 
a distance. And, like Langston Hughes has known rivers, I have known love 
and bliss. Sybil Williams Clarke, whom I have known for over fifty tears and 
now my wife of ten months and my companion and friend for eleven years, 
has made this journey with me and made my life complete. But, Sybil, your 
loving touch, notwithstanding, your arms were not long enough to box with the 
eminent moment. But, while I must make this physical departure, spiritually, I 
will not leave you and God will take care of you. When you feel a cool breeze 
blow across your face every now and then, just know that it comes from the 
deep reservoir of love that I hold for you. Oh, By the way, Christ is Black; I 
see him walking at distance with Nkrumah. I think they are coming over to 
greet me.
 
THE LAST MESSAGE
6
DR. JOHN HENRIK CLARKE


--- PAGE 7 ---
My feet have felt the sands
Of many nations
I have drunk the water
Of many springs.
I am old,
Older than the pyramids,
I am older than the race
That oppresses me.
I will live on
I will out-live oppression.
I will out-live oppressors
"DETERMINATION"
John Henrik Clarke
 
THE LAST MESSAGE
7
DR. JOHN HENRIK CLARKE

