=== EXTRACTED TEXT FROM: The-Republic-of-New-Africa-vs-the-US-Government-Dissent-and-Repression-in-the-RNA-1968-1973.pdf ===
Extraction Method: PyPDFLoader
Total Pages: 5
Timestamp: 2026-01-04T17:36:17.761603
================================================================================


--- PAGE 1 ---
RBG Blakademics                                                                                   March, 2011 
 
 
Dissent and Repression in the Republic of New Africa, 1968-1973 
Page 1 
  
 
 
 
 
 
Dissent and Repression in the Republic of New Africa,  
1968-1973 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The Republic of New Africa vs. the US Government 
HTML Source Page of Text 
Background Information 
  
     Wikipedia entry for Republic of 
New Afrika 
     Map of Detroit 
     Political Context - Jerome 
Cavanaugh and the 1967 Riot by Prof. 
Boyle  
     Information about the Detroit Riot 
of 1967 
     “Informants, Surveillance and 
Other Sources of Information” 
    The Republic of New Afrika’s 
Webpage 
     The Black Declaration of 
Independence 
     The Mississippi Freedom 
Movement - Archival material 
     Black Nationalism Course Material


--- PAGE 2 ---
RBG Blakademics                                                                                   March, 2011 
 
 
Dissent and Repression in the Republic of New Africa, 1968-1973 
Page 2 
 
Secession and Suppression 
 HTML Source Page 
 
Nearly 8 years ago, I attempted to systematically examine the political behavior of the Republic 
of New Afrika (RNA) and the political repression that was directed against the organization from 
1967 to 1974.  This effort was facilitated by the provision of  the RNA’s “Red Squad” file, a 
composite of different documents emerging from local police, federal bureau of investigation, 
and various courts within the United States.  The work was funded by the National Science 
Foundation.   
  
As designed, the “Red Squad” file was used to compile two databases.  Each is discussed briefly 
below.    
  
Raw Government Records. The first database is composed of all the raw fi les.  Here, several 
thousand pages of documents have been scanned (e.g., police documents, informant reports, 
arrest records, and information regarding activities observed during physical or electronic 
surveillance).  This information is categorized by yea r and then sorted by government agency: 
for example, Detroit Police Department (DPD) Special Investigation Division, DPD Intelligence 
Unit, DPD Homicide Division, and so forth.   
  
To date, I have only scanned some of these documents.  Over the next year, I will be scanning 
more.  Check back every month or so to see additions.   
  
Coded Events.  The second database is composed of information that I coded from the raw files. 
 My particular interest was with identifying all meetings (when they took place, where they took 
place, how long they lasted, who showed up, and what was talked about), prote st events (e.g., 
petitions, marches, rallies, fundraising, demonstrations, and speeches), miscellaneous group 
behavior (e.g., conferences, trips, elections, publications of materials, recruitments, and training 
sessions) and instances of political repressi on (physical as well as electronic surveillance, 
infiltration by informant, arrests, warrants, questioning of members, raids, searches, distribution 
of false letters, and suspicion of infiltration/informants within the group) – all of this information 
is available within the raw data; I merely decided to represent the data in spreadsheet form so 
that one van better identify and examine patterns across variables (e.g., is meeting attendance 
influenced by repressive activity, is surveillance activity responsive to inter-group activity or is it 
merely following the pattern of who was previously under surveillance, how far back in the past 
do group members talk about overtime, and are particular geographic locations more likely to be 
selected for protest or repression).   
  
Additionally, I have connected with a geographer and he is assisting me with the development of 
mapping software.  As the police paid attention to geographically where things took place, we 
are able to map all activity over time.  This allows one to gauge spatial patterns in membership, 
repressive activity, and protest – identifying where things took place, what happened and how 
responsive different factors were to each other.  In a sense, we will have RNA movies of 
meetings, membership, protest and repression.


--- PAGE 3 ---
RBG Blakademics                                                                                   March, 2011 
 
 
Dissent and Repression in the Republic of New Africa, 1968-1973 
Page 3 
  
  
Sample Raw Documents from RNA Red Squad (all are PDF Documents) 
  
    Special Investigation Bureau, Criminal Investigation Division 1966, March-June 
    Special Investigation Bureau, Detective Division 1968, January-March 
    Special Investigation Bureau, Detective Division 1968, April-June 
    Special Investigation Bureau, Detective Division 1968, July-September 
    Special Investigation Bureau, Detective Division 1968, October-December 
    Special Investigation Bureau, Detective Division 1969, January-March  
    Special Investigation Bureau, Detective Division 1969, April-June 
    Special Investigation Bureau, Detective Division 1969, July-September 
    Special Investigation Bureau, Detective Division 1969, October-December 
    Special Investigation Bureau, Detective Division 1970, January-July 
    Special Investigation Unit 1970, March-October 
    Special Investigation Unit 1971, January-August     
  
    RNA Memos - 1 
    RNA Memos - 2 
    RNA Flyer - The Black Mississippian 
    RNA Flyer - We ask for your steady support 
  
    Obituary for Milton Henry (co-founder of RNA) 
   
Data 
  
    Codebook 
     
  
Background Information 
  
    Wikipedia entry for Republic of New Afrika 
    Map of Detroit 
    Political Context - Jerome Cavanaugh and the 1967 Riot by Prof. Boyle  
    Information about the Detroit Riot of 1967 
    “Informants, Surveillance and Other Sources of Information” 
   The Republic of New Afrika’s Webpage 
    The Black Declaration of Independence 
    The Mississippi Freedom Movement - Archival material 
    Black Nationalism Course Material 
  
Related Publications


--- PAGE 4 ---
RBG Blakademics                                                                                   March, 2011 
 
 
Dissent and Repression in the Republic of New Africa, 1968-1973 
Page 4 
  
    “Killing the Afro: Dissent and the Puzzle of Repressive Persistence” 
    “Understanding Covert Repressive Action: The Case of the U.S. Government Against  
        the Republic of New Afrika” - The Journal of Conflict Resolution 2005 
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
             Proposed territory of the Republic of New Africa within the United States 
 
 
This editor’s add-on: 
 
Dr. Mutulu Shakur describes the "New Bethel Incident" of March 29, 1969 during a Republic of 
New Africa conference. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
‘ 
 
 
 
 
 
View the video


--- PAGE 5 ---
RBG Blakademics                                                                                   March, 2011 
 
 
Dissent and Repression in the Republic of New Africa, 1968-1973 
Page 5 
 
“…At the first anniversary gathering of the RNA held at New Bethel Baptist Church on March 29, 
1969, two white Detroit police officers were shot, one fatally, outside the building on Linwood 
Avenue on Detroit’s west side. This area had been the epicenter of the 1967 rebellion. 
 
 
Reports on the incid ent would indicate that several armed guards from the RNA, known as the 
Black Legionaires, were escorting Obadele out of the church after the meeting was over when 
the police driving in a squad car attempted to approach and question the group. The officers  
were fired on which shortly prompted a massive police raid on the church where hundreds of 
rounds were discharged and nearly 150 people were arrested. 
 
 
Soon afterwards, Rev. C.L. Franklin, State Representative James Del Rio and Recorder’s Court 
Judge George Crockett, Jr. went to the police station where the RNA members and supporters 
were being held. Judge Crockett set up court at the detention facility and released all of the 
RNA members and supporters jailed stating that the arrests were a violation of t he fourth 
amendment of the U.S. Constitution prohibiting illegal search and seizure. 
 
The release of the participants at the RNA meeting held in the New Bethel Baptist Church 
sparked outrage by the police and the white establishment in Detroit. The police demanded the 
recall of Judge Crockett and he was forced to travel for several months with a bodyguard. 
 
 
…Nonetheless, the so -called “New Bethel Incident” would galvanize the African -American 
community politically. The first  Black United Front was formed and Judge Crockett was 
defended by a broad section of the African-American community in the city.  
 
 
Three people who were charged in the shooting of the police officers were acquitted and the 
coalition which developed in the aftermath of the shooting would lay the groundwork for the 
eventual election of the city’s first African -American mayor, State Senator Coleman A. Young in 
1973. Young had been a veteran labor organizer and leftist with close ties with the Communist 
Party USA…”  
From: Pan-African News Wire 
Wednesday, June 09, 2010 
Detroit Tribute to Dr. Imari Obadele, Co-Founder of the RNA and Leader in the Modern 
Reparations Movement

