=== EXTRACTED TEXT FROM: The-Origins-of-the-Egyptians-by-Cheikh-Anta-Diop.pdf ===
Extraction Method: PyPDFLoader
Total Pages: 58
Timestamp: 2026-01-04T17:36:47.835184
================================================================================


--- PAGE 1 ---
"The basis of the Egyptian 
population was negro in the Pre-Dynastic epoch." 
 
 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
 
ORIGIN OF THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS 
 
 
by Cheikh Anta Diop 
 
 
 
 
 
                              
 
The general acceptance, as a sequel to the work of Professor 
[Louis B.] 
Leakey, of the hypothesis of mankind's monogenetic and African 
origin, makes 
it possible to pose the question of the peopling of Egypt and 
even of the 
world in completely new terms. More than 150,000 years ago, 
beings 
morphologically identical with the man of today were living in 
the region of 
the great lakes at the sources of the Nile and nowhere else. 
This notion, 
and others which it would take too long to recapitulate here, 
form the 
substance of the last report presented by the late Dr. Leakey 
at the Seventh


--- PAGE 2 ---
Pan-African Congress of Pre-History in Addis Ababa in 1971.1 It 
means that 
the whole human race had its origin, just as the ancients had 
guessed, at 
the foot of the mountains of the Moon. Against all expectations 
and in 
defiance of recent hypotheses it was from this place that men 
moved out to 
people the rest of the world. From this two facts of capital 
importance 
result: 
 
     (a) of necessity the earliest men were ethnically 
     homogeneous and negroid. Gloger's law, which 
     would also appear to be applicable to human 
     beings, lays it down that warm-blooded 
     animals evolving in a warm humid climate will 
     secrete a black pigment (eumelanin).2 Hence 
     if mankind originated in the tropics around 
     the latitude of the great lakes, he was bound 
     to have brown pigmentation from the start and 
     and it was by differentiation in other climates 
     that the original stock later split into 
     different races; 
 
     (b) there were only two routes available by which 
     these early men could move out to people 
     the other continents, namely, the Sahara and 
     the Nile valley. It is the latter region which 
     will be discussed here.


--- PAGE 3 ---
>From the Upper Palaeolithic to the dynastic epoch, the whole 
of the river's 
basin was taken over progressively by these negroid peoples. 
 
Evidence of Physical Anthropology on the Race of the Ancient 
Egyptians 
 
It might have been thought that, working on physiological 
evidence, the 
findings of the anthropologists would dissipate all doubts by 
providing 
reliable and definitive truths. This is by no means so: the 
arbitrary nature 
of the criteria used, to go no farther, as well as abolishing 
any notion of 
a conclusion acceptable without qualification, introduces so 
much scientific 
hair-splitting that there are times when one wonders whether 
the solution of 
the problem would not have been nearer if we had not had the 
ill luck to 
approach it from this angle. 
 
Nevertheless, although the conclusions of these anthropological 
studies stop 
short of the full truth, they still speak unanimously of the 
existence of a 
negro race from the most distant ages of prehistory down to the 
dynastic 
period. It is not possible in this paper to cite all these 
conclusions: they 
will be found summarized in Chapter X of Dr. Emile Massoulard's 
Histoire et 
protohistoire d' Egypt (Institut d'Ethnologix, Paris, 1949). We 
shall quote


--- PAGE 4 ---
selected items only. 
 
     Miss Fawcett considers that the Negadah 
     skulls form a sufficiently homogeneous 
     collection to warrant the assumption of 
     a Negadah race. In the total height of 
     the skull, the auricular height, the 
     length and breadth of the face, nasal 
     length, cephalic index and facial index 
     this race would seem to approximate to 
     the negro; in nasal breadth, height of 
     orbit, length of palate and nasal index 
     it would seem closed to the Germanic 
     peoples; accordingly the Pre-Dynastic 
     Negadians are likely to have resembled 
     the negroes in certain of their 
     characteristics and the white race in 
     others. 
 
It is worth noting that the nasal indices of Ethiopians and 
Dravidians would 
seem to approximate them to the Germanic peoples, though both 
are black 
races. 
 
These measurements, which would leave an open choice between 
the two 
extremes represented by the negro and the Germanic races, give 
an idea of 
the elasticity of the criteria employed. A sample follows:


--- PAGE 5 ---
An attempt was made by Thompson and 
     Randall MacIver to determine more 
     precisely the importance of the negroid 
     element in the series of skulls from 
     El'Amrah, Abydos and Hou. They divided 
     them into three groups: (1) negroid 
     skulls (those with a facial index below 
     54 and a nasal index above 50, i.e. 
     Short broad face and broad nose); 
     (2) non-negroid skulls (facial index 
     above 54 and nasal index below 50, long 
     narrow face and narrow nose), (3) inter- 
     mediate skulls (assignable to one of 
     the two previous groups on the basis of 
     either the facial index or on the 
     evidence of the nasal index, plus 
     individuals marginal to either group). 
     The proportion of negroids would seem to 
     have 24% of men and 19% of women in the 
     early Pre-Dynastic and 25% and 28% 
     respectively in the late Pre-Dynastic. 
 
     Kieth has disputed the value of the 
     criterion selected by Thompson and 
     Randall MacIver to distinguish the 
     negroid from the non-negroid skulls. 
     His opinion is that if the same


--- PAGE 6 ---
criteria were applied to the study of 
     any series of contemporary English 
     skulls, the sample would be found to 
     contain approximately 30% of negroid 
     types. (pp. 420-1) 
 
The converse of Kieth's proposition could also be asserted, 
namely, that if 
the criterion were applied to the 140 million negroes now alive 
in black 
Africa a minimum of 100 million negroes would emerge 
whitewashed. 
 
It may also be remarked that the distinction between negroid, 
non-negroid 
and intermediary is unclear; the fact is that 'non-negroid' 
does not mean of 
white race and 'intermediary' still less so. 
 
'Falkenburger reopened the anthropological study of the 
Egyptian population 
in a recent work in which he discusses 1,787 male skulls 
varying in date 
from the old, Pre-Dynastic to our own day. He distinguishes 
four main 
groups' (p. 421). The sorting of the predynastic skulls into 
these four 
groups gives the following results for the whole predynastic 
period: "36% 
negroid, 33% Mediterranean, 11% Cro-Magnoid and 20% of 
individuals not 
falling in any of these groups but approximating either to the 
Cro-Magnoid 
or to the negroid'. The proportion of negroids is definitely 
higher than


--- PAGE 7 ---
that suggested by Thomson and Randall MacIver, though Kieth 
considers the 
latter too high. 
 
'Do Falkenburger's figures reflect the reality? It is not our 
task to decide 
this. If they are accurate, the Pre-Dynastic population far 
from 
representing a pure bred race, as Elliott-Smith has said, 
comprised at least 
three distinct racial elements - over a third of negroids, a 
third of 
Mediterraneans, a tenth of Cro-Magnoids and a fifth of 
individuals crossbred 
- to varying degrees' (p. 422). 
 
The point about all these conclusions is that despite their 
discrepancies 
the degree to which they converge proves that the basis of the 
Egyptian 
population was negro in the Pre-Dynastic epoch. Thus they are 
all 
incompatible with the theories that the negro element only 
infiltrated into 
Egypt at a late stage. Far otherwise, the facts prove that it 
was 
preponderant from the beginning to the end of Egyptian history, 
particularly 
when we note once more that 'Mediterranean' is not a synonym 
for 'white', 
Elliott-Smith's 'brown' or Mediterranean race being nearer to 
the mark'. 
'Elliott Smith classes these Proto-Egyptians as a branch of 
what he calls 
the brown race".' The term 'brown' in this context refers to 
skin colour and


--- PAGE 8 ---
is simply a euphemism for negro.3 it is thus clear that it was 
the whole of 
the Egyptian population which was negro, barring an 
infiltration of white 
nomads in the proto-dynastic epoch 
 
In Petrie's study of the Egyptian race we are introduced to a 
possible 
classification element in great abundance which cannot fail to 
surprise the 
reader. 
 
     Petrie . . . published a study of the races 
     of Egypt in the Pre-Dynastic and Proto- 
     Dynastic periods working only on portrayals 
     of them. Apart from the steatopygian race, 
     he distinguishes six separate types: an 
     aquiline type representative of a white- 
     skinned Libyan race; a 'plaited beard' type 
     belonging to an invading race coming perhaps 
     from the shores of the Red Sea, a 'sharp-nosed' 
     type almost certainly from the Arabian Desert: 
     a 'tilted-nose' type from Middle Egypt; a 
     'jutting beard' type from Lower Egypt; and a 
     'narrow-nose' type from Upper Egypt. Going 
     on the images, there would thus have been 
     seven different racial types in Egypt during 
     the epochs we are considering. In the pages 
     which follow we shall see that study of the 
     skeletons seems to provide little authority


--- PAGE 9 ---
for these conclusions. (p.391) 
 
The above mode of classification gives an idea of the arbitrary 
nature of 
the criteria used to define the Egyptian races. Be that as it 
may, it is 
clear that anthropology is far from having established the 
existence of a 
white Egyptian race and would indeed tend rather to suggest the 
opposite. 
 
Nevertheless, in current textbooks the question is suppressed: 
in most cases 
it is simply and flatly asserted that the Egyptians were white 
and the 
honest layman is left with the impression that any such 
assertion must 
necessarily have a prior basis of solid research. But there is 
no such 
basis, as this chapter has shown. And so generation after 
generation has 
been misled. Many authorities skate around the difficulty today 
by speaking 
of red-skinned and black-skinned whites without their sense of 
common logic 
being in the least upset. 'The Greeks call Africa "Libya", a 
misnomer au 
initio since Africa contains many other peoples besides the so-
called 
Libyans, who belong among the whites of the northern or 
Mediterranean 
periphery and hence are many steps removed from the brown (or 
red) skinned 
whites (Egyptians).'4 
 
In a textbook intended for the middle secondary school we find 
the following


--- PAGE 10 ---
sentence: 'A Black is distinguished less by the colour of his 
skin (for 
there are black-skinned "whites") than by his features: thick 
lips, 
flattened nose . . .'5 It is only through these twistings of 
the basic 
definitions that it has been possible to bleach the Egyptian 
race. 
 
It is worthwhile calling to mind the exaggerations of the 
theorists of 
anthropo-sociology in the last century and the beginnings of 
the present one 
whose minute physiognomical analyses discovered racial 
stratifications even 
in Europe, and particularly in France, when in fact there was 
really a 
single and by now practically homogeneous people.6 Today 
Occidentals who 
value their national cohesion are careful to avoid examining 
their own 
societies on so divisive a hypothesis, but continue 
unthinkingly to apply 
the old methods to the non-European societies. 
 
Human Images of the Protohistoric Period: Their Anthropological 
Value 
 
The study of human images made by Flinders Petrie on another 
plane shows 
that the ethnic type was black: according to Petrie these 
people were the 
Anu whose name, known to us since the protohistoric epoch, is 
always 
'written' with three pillars on the few inscriptions extant 
from the end of


--- PAGE 11 ---
the fourth millennium before our era. The natives of the 
country are always 
represented with unmistakable chiefly emblems for which one 
looks in vain 
among the infrequent portrayals of other races, who are all 
shown as servile 
foreign elements having reached the valley by infiltration (cf. 
Tera Neter7 
and the Scorpion king whom Petrie groups together; 'The 
Scorpion King . . . 
belonged to the preceding race of Anu, moreover he worshipped 
Min and 
Set.').8 
 
As we shall see later Min, like the chief gods of Egypt, was 
called by the 
tradition of Egypt itself 'the great negro'. 
 
After a glance at the various foreign types of humanity who 
disputed the 
valley with the indigenous blacks, Petrie describes the latter, 
the Anu, in 
the following terms: Besides these types, belonging to the 
North and East, 
there is the aboriginal race of the Anu, or Annu, people 
(written with three 
pillars) who became a part of the historic inhabitants. The 
subject ramifies 
too doubtfully if we include all single pillar names, but 
looking for the 
Annu written, with the three pillars, we find that they 
occupied southern 
Egypt and Nubia, and the name is also applied in Sinai and 
Libya. As to the 
southern Egyptians, we have the most essential document, one 
portrait of a


--- PAGE 12 ---
chief, Tera Neter, roughly modelled in relief in green glazed 
faience, found 
in the early temple at Abydos. Preceding his name his address 
is given on 
this earliest of visiting cards, 'Palace of the Anu in Hemen 
city, Tera 
Neter'. Hemen was the name of the god of Tuphium, Erment, 
opposite to it, 
was the palace of Annu of the south, Annu Menti. The next place 
in the south 
is Aunti (Gefeleyn), and beyond that Aunyt-Seni (Esneh)." 
 
Amelineau lists in geographical order the fortified towns built 
along the 
length of the Nile valley by the Annu blacks. 
 
[Hieroglyphics] =Ant=(Esneh) 
 
[Hieroglyphics] =An =the southern 'On' 
(now Hermonthis) 
 
[Hieroglyphics] =Denderah, the traditional 
birthplace of Isis 
 
[Hieroglyphics] = A town also called 'On' in the 
name of Tinis 
 
[Hieroglyphics] =The town called the northern 
'On', the renowned city of 
Heliopolis


--- PAGE 13 ---
The common ancestor of the Annu settled along the Nile was Ani 
or An, a name 
determined by the word [hieroglyphics] (khet) and which, dating 
from the 
earliest versions of the "Book of the Dead" onwards, is given 
to the god 
Orisis. 
 
The wife of [hieroglyphics] the god Ani is the goddess Anet 
[hieroglyphics] 
who is also his sister, just as Isis is the sister of Osiris. 
 
The identity of the god An with Osiris has been demonstrated by 
Pleyte;10 we 
should, indeed recall that is also surnamed by (?) the Anou; 
'Osiris Ani'. 
The god Anu is represented alternately by the symbol 
[hieroglyphics] and the 
symbol [hieroglyphics]. Are the Aunak tribes now inhabiting the 
upper Nile 
related to the ancient Annu? Future research will provide the 
answer to this 
question. 
 
Petrie thinks it possible to make a distinction between the 
predynastic 
people represented by Tera Neter and the Scorpion King (who is 
himself a 
Pharaoh even at that date as his head-dress shows) and a 
dynastic people 
worshipping the falcion and probably represented by the 
Pharaoh's Narmer,14 
Khasekhem, Sanekhei and Zoser.12 By reference to the faces 
reproduced in the 
figure it is easily perceived that there is no ethnic 
difference between the


--- PAGE 14 ---
two lots, and both belong to the black race. 
 
The mural in tomb SD 63 (Sequence Date 63) of Hierakonopolis 
shows the 
native-born blacks subjugating the foreign intruders into the 
valley if we 
accept Petrie's interpretation: 'Below is the black ship at 
Hierakonpolis 
belonging to the black men who are shown as conquering the red 
men.'13 
 
The Gebel-el-Arak knife haft shows similar scenes: 'There are 
also combats 
of black men overcoming red men.'13 However, the archaeological 
value of 
this object, which was not found in situ but in the possession 
of a 
merchant, is less than that of the preceding items. 
 
What the above shows is that the images of men of the 
protohistoric and even 
of the dynastic period in no way square with the idea of the 
Egyptian race 
popular with Western anthropologists. Wherever the 
autochthonous racial type 
is represented with any degree of clearness, it is evidently 
negroid. 
Nowhere are the Indo-European and Semitic elements shown even 
as ordinary 
freeman serving a local chief, but invariably as conquered 
foreigners. The 
rare portrayals found are always shown with the distinctive 
marks of 
captivity, hands tied behind the back or strained over the 
shoulders.14 A 
protodynastic figurine represents an Indo-European prisoner 
with a long


--- PAGE 15 ---
plait on his knees, with his hands bound tight to his body. The 
characteristics of the object itself show that it was intended 
as the foot 
of a piece of furniture and represented a conquered race.15 
Often the 
portrayal is deliberately grotesque as with other proto-
dynastic figures 
showing individuals with their hair plaited in what Petrie 
calls pigtails.16 
 
In the tomb of King Ka (first dynasty) at Abydos, Petrie found 
a plaque 
showing an Indo-European captive in chains with his hands 
behind his back.17 
Elliott-Smith considers that the individual represented is a 
Semite. The 
dynastic epoch has also yielded the documents illustrated in 
Pls 1.9. and 
1.14 showing Indo-European and Semitic prisoners. In contrast, 
the typically 
negroid features of the pharaohs (Narmer, first dynasty, the 
actual founder 
of the Pharaonic line; Zoser, third dynasty, by whose time all 
the 
technological elements of the Egyptian civilization were 
already in 
evidence; Cheops, the builder of the Great Pyramid, a Cameroon 
type,18 
Menthuhotep, founder of the eleventh dynasty, very black,19 
Sesostris 1; 
Queen Ahmosis Nefertari; and Amenhophis I) show that all 
classes of Egyptian 
society belong to the same black race. 
 
Pls 1.15 and 1.16, showing the Indo-European and Semitic types, 
have been


--- PAGE 16 ---
included deliberately to contrast them with the quite 
dissimilar 
physiognomies of the black pharaohs and to demonstrate clearly 
that there is 
no trace of either of the first two types in the whole line of 
Pharaohs if 
we exclude the foreign Libyan and Ptolemaic dynasties. 
 
It is usual to contrast the negresses on the tomb of Horemheb 
with the 
Egyptian type also shown. This contrast is surely a false one; 
it is social 
and not ethnic and there is as much difference between an 
aristocratic 
Senegalese lady from Dakar and those antique African peasant 
women with 
their horny hands and splay feet as between the latter and an 
Egyptian lady 
of the cities of antiquity. 
 
There are two variants of the black race: (a) straight-haired, 
represented 
in Asia by the Dravidians and in Africa by the Nubians and the 
Tubbou or 
Tedda, all three with jet-black skins; (b) the kinky-haired 
blacks of the 
Equatorial regions. Both types entered into the composition of 
the Egyptian 
population. 
 
Melanin Dosage Test 
 
In practice it is possible to determine directly the skin 
colour and hence


--- PAGE 17 ---
the ethnic affiliations of the ancient Egyptians by microscopic 
analysis in 
the laboratory; I doubt if the sagacity of the researchers who 
have studied 
the question has overlooked the possibility. 
 
Melanin (eumelanin), the chemical body responsible for skin 
pigmentation, 
is, broadly speaking, insoluble and is preserved for millions 
of years in 
the skins of fossil animals.20 There is thus all the more 
reason for it to 
be readily recoverable in the skins of Egyptian mummies, 
despite a tenacious 
legend that the skin of mummies, tainted by the embalming 
material, is no 
longer susceptible of any analysis.21 Although the epidermis is 
the main 
site of the melanin, the melanocytes penetrating the derm at 
the boundary 
between it and the epidermis, even where the latter has mostly 
been 
destroyed by the embalming materials, show a melanin level 
which is 
non-existent in the white-skinned races. The samples I myself 
analyzed were 
taken in the physical anthropology laboratory of the Mus'ee de 
l'Homme in 
Paris off the mummies from the Marietta excavations in Egypt.22 
The same 
method is perfectly suitable for use on the royal mummies of 
Thutmoses III, 
Seti I and Ramses II in the Cairo Museum, which are in an excel 
state of 
preservation. For two years past I have been vainly begging the 
curator of 
the Cairo Museum for similar samples to analyze. No more than a 
few square


--- PAGE 18 ---
millimetres of skin would be required to mount a specimen, the 
preparations 
being a few um in thickness and lightened with ethyl benzoate. 
They can be 
studied by natural light or with ultra-violet lighting which 
renders the 
melanin grains fluorescent. 
 
Either way let us simply say that the evaluation of melanin 
level by 
microscopic examination is a laboratory method which enables us 
to classify 
the ancient Egyptians unquestionably among the black races. 
 
Osteological Measurements 
 
Among the criteria accepted in physical anthropology for 
classifying races, 
the osteological measurements are perhaps the least misleading 
(in contrast 
to craniometry) for distinguishing a black man from a white 
man. By this 
criterion, also, the Egyptians belong among the black races. 
This study was 
made by the distinguished German savant Lepsius at the end of 
the nineteenth 
century and his conclusions remain valid; subsequent 
methodological progress 
in the domain of physical anthropology in no way undermines 
what is called 
the 'Lepsius canon' which, in round figures, gives the bodily 
proportions of 
the ideal Egyptian, short-armed and of negroid or negrito 
physical type.23


--- PAGE 19 ---
Blood Groups 
 
It is a notable fact that even today Egyptians, particularly in 
Upper Egypt, 
belong to the same Group B as the populations of western Africa 
on the 
Atlantic seaboard and not the A2 group characteristic of the 
white race 
prior to any crossbreeding.24 It would be interesting to study 
the extent of 
Group A2 distribution in Egyptian mummies, which present-day 
techniques make 
possible. 
 
The Egyptian Race According to the Classical Authors of 
Antiquity 
 
To the Greek and Latin writers contemporary with the ancient 
Egyptians the 
latter's physical classification posed no problems: the 
Egyptians were 
negroes, thick-lipped, kinky-haired and thin-legged; the 
unanimity of the 
author's evidence on a physical fact as salient as a people's 
race will be 
difficult to minimize or pass over. Some of the following 
evidence drives 
home the point. 
 
(a) Herodotus, 'the father of history', -480(?) to -425. With 
regard to the 
origins of the Colchians25 he writes: 
 
     it is in fact manifest that the Colchidians are


--- PAGE 20 ---
Egyptian by race ... several Egyptians told me 
     that in their opinion the Colchidians were 
     descended from soldiers of Sesostris. I had 
     conjectured as much myself from two pointers, 
     firstly because they have black skins and 
     kinky hair (to tell the truth this proves 
     nothing for other peoples have them too) and 
     secondly, and more reliably for the reason that 
     alone among mankind the Egyptians and the 
     Ethiopians have practiced circumcision since 
     time immemorial. The Phoenicians and Syrians 
     of Palestine themselves admit that they learnt 
     the practice from the Egyptians while the 
     Syrians in the river Thermodon and Pathenios 
     region and their neighbors the Macrons say 
     they learnt it recently from the Colchidians. 
     These are the only races which practice 
     circumcision and it is observable that they do 
     it in the same way as the Egyptians. As 
     between the Egyptians themselves and the 
     Ethiopians I could not say which taught the 
     other the practice for among them it is 
     quite clearly a custom of great antiquity. 
     As to the custom having been learnt through 
     their Egyptian connections, a further strong 
     proof to my mind is that all those Phoenicians 
     trading to Greece cease to treat the pudenda 
     after the Egyptian manner and do not subject


--- PAGE 21 ---
their offspring to circumcision.26 
 
Herodotus reverts several times to the negroid character of the 
Egyptians 
and each time uses it as a fact of observation to argue more or 
less complex 
theses. Thus to prove that the Greek oracle at Dondona in 
Epirus was of 
Egyptian origin, one of his arguments is the following: '. . . 
and when they 
add that the dove was black they give us to understand that the 
woman was 
Egyptian.'27 The doves in question - actually there were two 
according to 
the text - symbolize two Egyptian women who are said to have 
BEEN carried 
off from the Egyptian Thebes to found the oracles in Greece at 
Dodona and in 
Libya (Oasis of Jupiter Amon) respectively. Herodotus did not 
share the 
opinion of Anaxagoras that the melting of the snows on the 
mountains of 
Ethiopia was the source of the Nile floods.28 He relied on the 
fact that it 
neither rains or snows in Ethiopia 'and the heat there turns 
men black'.29 
 
(b) Aristotle, -389 to -332, scientist, philosopher and tutor 
of Alexander 
the Great. 
 
In one of his minor works, Aristotle attempts, with unexpected 
naivete', to 
establish a correlation between the physical and moral natures 
of living 
beings and leaves us evidence on the Egyptian-Ethiopian race 
which confirms


--- PAGE 22 ---
what Herodotus says. According to him, 'Those who are too black 
are cowards, 
like for instance, the Egyptians and Ethiopians. But those who 
are 
excessively white are also cowards as we can see from the 
example of women, 
the complexion of courage is between the two.'30 
 
(c) Lucian, Greek writer, +125(?) to +190. 
 
The evidence of Lucian is as explicit as that of the two 
previous writers. 
He introduces two Greeks, Lycinus and Timolaus, who start a 
conversation. 
 
     Lycinus (describing a young Egyptian): 
     'This boy is not merely black; he has 
     thick lips and his legs are too thin. . . 
     his hair worn in a plait behind shows 
     that he is not a freeman.' 
 
     Timolaus: 'But that is a sign of really 
     distinguished birth in Egypt, Lycinus. 
     All freeborn children plait their hair 
     until they reach manhood. It is the 
     exact opposite of the custom of our ances- 
     tors who thought it seemly for old men to 
     secure their hair with a gold brooch to 
     keep it in place.'31


--- PAGE 23 ---
(d) Apollodorus, first century before our 
era, Greek philosopher. 
'Aegyptos conquered the country of the black- 
footed ones and called it Egypt after himself.'32 
 
(e) Aeschylus, -525(?) to -456, tragic poet and 
creator of Greek tragedy. 
In The Suppliants, Danaos, fleeing with his daughters, the 
Danaids, and 
pursued by his brother Aegyptos with his sons, the Aegyptiads, 
who seek to 
wed their cousins by force, climbs a hillock, looks out to sea 
and describes 
the Aegyptiads at the oars afar off in these terms: 'I can see 
the crew with 
their black limbs and white tunics.'33 
 
A similar description of the Egyptian type of man recurs a few 
lines later 
in verse 745. 
 
(f) Achilles Tatius of Alexandria. 
 
He compares the herdsmen of the Delta to the Ethiopians and 
explains that 
they are blackish, like half-castes. 
 
(g) Strabo, -58 to about +25. 
 
Strabo visited Egypt and almost all the countries of the Roman 
empire. He


--- PAGE 24 ---
concurs in the theory that the Egyptians and the Colchoi are of 
the same 
race but holds that the migrations to Ethiopia and Colchoi had 
been from 
Egypt only 
 
'Egyptians settled in Ethiopia and in Colchoi.'34 There is no 
doubt whatever 
as to Strabo's notion of the Egyptian's race for he seeks 
elsewhere to 
explain why the Egyptians are darker than the Hindus, a 
circumstance which 
would permit the refutation, if needed, of any attempt at 
confusing 'the 
Hindu and Egyptian races'. 
 
(h) Diodorus of Sicily, about -63 to +14, Greek historian and 
contemporary 
of Caesar Augustus. 
 
According to Diodorus it was probably Ethiopia which colonized 
Egypt (in the 
Athenian sense of the term, signifying that, with 
overpopulation, a 
proportion of the people emigrate to new territory). 
 
     The Ethiopians say that the Egyptians 
     `are one of their colonies,35 which was 
     led into Egypt by Osiris. They claim that 
     at the beginning of the world Egypt was 
     simply a sea but that the Nile, carrying 
     down vast quantities of loam from Ethiopia 
     in its flood waters, finally filled it in


--- PAGE 25 ---
and made it part of the continent. . . They 
     add that the Egyptians have received from 
     them, as from authors and their ancestors, 
     the greater part of their laws.36 
 
(i) Diogenes Laertius. 
 
He wrote the following about Zeno, founder of the stoic School 
(-333 to 
-261): 'Zeno son of Mnaseas or Demeas was a native of Citium in 
Cyprus, a 
Greek city which has taken in some Phoenician colonists.' In 
his Lives, 
Timotheus of Athens describes Zeno as having a twisted neck. 
Apollonius of 
Tyre says of him that he was gaunt, very tall and black, hence 
the fact 
that, according to Chrysippus in the First Book of his 
Proverbs, certain 
people called him an Egyptian vine-shoot.37 
 
(j) Ammianus Marcellinus, about +33 to +100, Latin historian 
and friend of 
the Emperor Julian. 
 
With him we reach the sunset of the Roman empire and the end of 
classical 
antiquity. There are about nine centuries between the birth of 
Aeschylus and 
Herodotus and the death of Ammianus Marcellinus, nine centuries 
during which 
the Egyptians, amid a sea of white races, steadily crossbred. 
It can be said


--- PAGE 26 ---
without exaggeration that in Egypt one household in ten 
included a white 
Asiatic or Indo-European slave.39 
 
It is remarkable that, despite its intensity, all this 
crossbreeding should 
not have succeeded in upsetting the racial constants. Indeed 
Ammianus 
Marcellinus writes: ". . .the men of Egypt are mostly brown and 
black with a 
skinny and desiccated look."39 He also confirms the evidence 
already cited 
about the Colchoi: 'Beyond these lands are the heartlands of 
the Camaritae40 
and the Phasis with its swifter stream borders the country of 
the Colchoi, 
an ancient race of Egyptian origin.'41 
 
This cursory review of the evidence of the ancient Graeco-Latin 
writers on 
the Egyptians' race shows that the extent of agreement between 
them is 
impressive and is an objective fact difficult to minimize or 
conceal, the 
two alternatives between which present-day Egyptology 
constantly oscillates. 
 
An exception is the evidence of an honest savant. Volney, who 
travelled in 
Egypt between +1783 and +1785, i.e. at the peak period of negro 
slavery, and 
made the following observations on the true Egyptian race, the 
same which 
produced the Pharaohs, namely the Copts:


--- PAGE 27 ---
All of them are puffy-faced, heavy eyed and 
     thick-lipped, in a word, real mulatto faces. 
     I was tempted to attribute this to the climate 
     until, on visiting the Sphinx, the look of it 
     gave me the clue to the egnima. Beholding 
     that head characteristically Negro in all 
     its features, I recalled the well-known passage 
     of Herodotus which reads: 'For my part I 
     consider the Colchoi are a colony of the Egyptians 
 
     because, like them, they are black skinned 
     and kinky-haired.' In other words the 
     ancient Egyptians were true negroes of the same 
     stock as all the autochthonous peoples of Africa 
     and from that datum one sees how their race, 
     after some centuries of mixing with the blood 
     of Romans and Greeks, must have lost the full 
     blackness of its original colour but retained 
     the impress of its original mould. It is even 
     possible to apply this observation very widely 
     and posit in principle that physiognomy is a 
     kind of record usable in many cases for disputing 
     or elucidating the evidence of history on the 
     origins of the peoples . . . 
 
After illustrating this proposition citing the case of the 
Normans, who 900 
years after the conquest of Normandy still look like Danes, 
Volney adds:


--- PAGE 28 ---
but reverting to Egypt, its contributions 
     to history afford many subjects for philosophic 
reflection. What a 
     subject for meditation is 
     the present-day barbarity and ignorance of the 
     Copts who were considered, born of the alliance 
     of the deep genius of the Egyptians and the 
     brilliance of the Greeks, that this race of 
     blacks who nowadays are slaves and the objects 
     of our scorn is the very one to which we owe our 
     arts, our sciences, and even the use of spoken word; 
     and finally recollect that it is in the midst of the 
peoples 
     claiming to be the greatest friends of liberty and 
humanity that 
     the most barbarous of enslavements 
     has been sanctioned and the question raised whether 
 
     black men have brains of the same quality as those of 
white men!42 
 
To this testimony of Volney, Champollion-Figeac, brother of 
Champollion the 
Younger, was to reply in the following terms: 'The two physical 
traits of 
black skin and kinky hair are not enough to stamp a race as 
negro and 
Volney's conclusion as to the negro origin of the ancient 
population of 
Egypt is glaringly forced and inadmissible.'43


--- PAGE 29 ---
Being black from head to foot and having kinky hair is not 
enough to make a 
man a negro! This shows us the kind of specious argumentation 
to which 
Egyptology has had to resort since its birth as a science. Some 
scholars 
maintain that Volney was seeking to shift the discussion to a 
philisophic 
plane. But we have only to re-read Volney: he is simply drawing 
the 
inferences from crude material facts forcing themselves on his 
eyes and his 
conscience as proofs. 
"The Egyptians had only one term to designate 
themselves: 
kmt=the negroes (literally)." 
 
 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
 
ORIGIN OF THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS (Cont,) 
 
 
by Cheikh Anta Diop 
 
 
 
The Egyptians as They Saw Themselves 
 
It is no waste of time to get the views of those principally 
concerned. How 
did the ancient Egyptians see themselves? Into which ethnic 
category did


--- PAGE 30 ---
they put themselves? What did they call themselves? The 
language and 
literature left to us by the Egyptians of the Pharaonic epoch 
supply 
explicit answers to these questions which the scholars cannot 
refrain from 
minimizing, twisting or 'interpreting.' 
 
The Egyptians had only one term to designate themselves: 
[hieroglyphics]=kmt=the negroes (literally).44 This is the 
strongest term 
existing in the Pharaonic tongue to indicate blackness; it is 
accordingly 
written with a hieroglyph representing a length of wood charred 
at the end 
and not crocodile scales.45 This word is the etymological 
origin of the 
well-known root Kamit which has proliferated in modern 
anthropological 
literature. The biblical root kam is probably derived from it 
and it has 
therefore been necessary to distort the facts to enable this 
root today to 
mean 'white' in Egyptological terms whereas, in the Pharaonic 
mother tongue 
which gave it birth, it meant 'coal black.' 
 
In the Egyptian language, a word of assembly is formed from an 
adjective or 
a noun by putting it in the feminine singular. 'kmt' from the 
adjective 
[hieroglyphics] =km=black; it therefore means strictly negroes 
or at the 
very least black men. The term is a collective noun which thus 
described the 
whole people of Pharaonic Egypt as a black people.


--- PAGE 31 ---
In other words, on the purely grammatical plane, if one wishes 
to indicate 
negroes in the Pharaonic tongue, one cannot use any other word 
than the very 
one which the Egyptians used of themselves. Furthermore, the 
language offers 
us another term, [hieroglyphics] kmtjw=the negroes, the black 
men 
(literally)=the Egyptians, as opposed to 'foreigners' which 
comes from the 
same root km and which the Egyptians also used to describe 
themselves as a 
people as distinguished from all foreign peoples.46 These are 
the only 
adjectives of nationality used by the Egyptians to designate 
themselves and 
both mean 'negro' or 'black' in the Pharonic language. Scholars 
hardly ever 
mention them or when they do it is to translate them by 
euphemisms such as 
the 'Egyptians' while remaining completely silent about their 
etymological 
sense.47 They prefer the expression [hieroglyphics] Rmt kmt=the 
men of the 
country of the black men or the men of the black country. 
 
In Egyptian, words are normally followed by a determinative 
which indicates 
their exact sense, and for this particuar expression 
Egyptologists suggest 
that [heiroglyphics] km=black and that the colour qualifies the 
determinative which follows it and which signifies 'country'. 
Accordingly, 
they claim, the translation should be 'the black earth' from 
the colour of


--- PAGE 32 ---
the loam, or the 'black country', and not 'the country of the 
black men' as 
we should be inclined to render it today with black Africa and 
white Africa 
in mind. Perhaps so, but if we apply this rule rigorously to 
[hieroglyphics] 
=kmit, we are forced to 'concede that here the adjective 
"black" qualifies 
the determinative which signifies the whole people of Egypt 
shown by the two 
symbols for "man" and "woman" and the three strokes below them 
which 
indicate the plural'. Thus, if it is possible to voice a doubt 
as regards 
the expression [hieroglyphics] =Kme, it is not possible to do 
so in the case 
of the two adjectives of nationality [hieroglyphics] kmt and 
kmtjw unless 
one is picking one's arguments completely at random. 
 
It is a remarkable circumstance that the ancient Egyptians 
should never have 
had the idea of applying these qualificatives to the Nubians 
and other 
populations of Africa to distinguish them from themselves; any 
more than a 
Roman at the apogee of the empire could use a 'colour' 
adjective to 
distinguish himself from the Germani on the other bank of the 
Danube, of the 
same stock but still in the prehistoric age of development. 
 
In either case both sides were of the same world in terms of 
physical 
anthropology, and accordingly the distinguishing terms used 
related to level


--- PAGE 33 ---
of civilization or moral sense. For the civilized Romans, the 
Germans, of 
the same stock, were barbarians. The Egyptians used the 
expression 
[hieroglyphics] =na-has to designate the Nubians; and nahas48 
is the name of 
a people, with no colour connotation in Egyptian. it is a 
deliberate 
mistranslation to render it as negro as is done in almost all 
present-day 
publications. 
 
The Divine Epithets 
 
Finally, black or negro is the divine epithet invariably 
 
used for the chief beneficent gods of Egypt, whereas all the 
malevolent 
spirits are qualified as desret=red; we also know that to 
Africans this form 
applies to the white nations; it is practically certain that 
this held good 
for Egypt too but I want in this chapter to keep to the least 
debatable 
facts. 
 
The surnames of the gods are these: 
 
[hieroglyphics] =kmwr=the 'Great Negro' for Osiris49 
 
[hieroglyphics] =km=the black + the name of the god50 
 
[hieroglyphics] =kmt=the black + the name of the goddess51


--- PAGE 34 ---
The km (black) [hieroglyphics] qualificative is applied to 
Hathor, Apis, 
Min, Thoth, etc52 [hieroglyphics] set kmt=the black 
woman=Isis53 On the 
other hand 'seth', the sterile desert, is qualified by the term 
desret=red. 
54 The wild animals which Horus fought to create civilization 
are qualified 
as desret=red, especially the hippopotamus.55 Similarly the 
maleficent 
beings wiped out by Thoth are Des= [hieroglyphics] =desrtjw=thr 
red ones; 
this term is the grammatical converse of Kmtjw and its 
construction follows 
the same rule for the formation of 'nisbes'. 
 
Witness of the Bible 
 
The Bible tells us. ' . . .the sons of Ham [were] Cush, and 
Mizraim [i.e. 
Egypt], and Phut, and Canaan. And the sons of Cush; Seba, and 
Havilah, and 
Sabtah, and Raamah, and Sabtechah.56 
 
Generally speaking all Semitic tradition (Jewish and Arab) 
classes ancient 
Egypt with the countries of the blacks. 
 
The importance of these depositions cannot be ignored, for 
these are peoples 
(the Jews) which lived side by side with the ancient Egyptians 
and sometimes 
in symbiosis with them and have nothing to gain by presenting a 
false ethnic


--- PAGE 35 ---
picture of them. Nor is the notion of an erroneous 
interpretation of the 
facts any more tenable.57 
 
Cultural Data 
 
Among the innumerable identical cultural traits recorded in 
Egypt and in 
present-day black Africa, it is proposed to refer only to 
circumcision and 
totemism. 
 
According to the extract from Herodotus quoted earlier, 
circumcision is of 
African origin. Archaeology has confirmed the judgment of the 
Father of 
History for Elliott-Smith was able to determine from the 
examination of 
well-preserved mummies that circumcision was the rule among the 
Egyptians as 
long ago as the protohistoric era,58 i.e. earlier than -4000. 
 
Egyptian totemism retained its vitality down to the Roman 
period59 and 
Plutarch also mentions it. The researches of Amelineau6,60 
Loret, Moret and 
Adolphe Reinach have clearly demonstrated the existence of an 
Egyptian 
totemic system, in refutation of the champions of the zoolatric 
thesis. 
 
     If we reduce the notion of the totem to that 
     of a fetish, usually representing an animal 
     of a species with which the tribe believes


--- PAGE 36 ---
it has special ties formally renewed at 
     fixed intervals, and which is carried into 
     battle like a standard; if we accept this 
     minimal but adequate definition of a totem, 
     it can be said that there was no country 
     where totemism had a more brilliant reign 
     than in Egypt and certainly nowhere where 
     it could be better studied.61 
 
Linguistic Affinity 
 
Walaf,62 a Senegalese language spoken in the extreme west of 
Africa on the 
Atlantic Ocean, is perhaps as close to ancient Egyptian as 
Coptic. An 
exhaustive study of this question has recently been carried 
out.63 In this 
chapter enough is presented to show that the kinship between 
ancient 
Egyptian and the languages of Africa is not hypothetical but a 
demonstrable 
fact which it is impossible for modern scholarship to thrust 
aside. 
 
As we shall see, the kinship is genealogical in nature. 
 
Egyptian               Coptic                          
Walaf


--- PAGE 37 ---
=kef=to grasp,      (Saidique dialect)            
kef=seize a prey 
to take a strip        keh=to tame 65 
(of something)64 
 
PRESENT                 PRESENT                         
PRESENT 
 
kef i                   keh                             
kef  na 
kef ek                  keh  ek                         
kef  nga 
kef et                  keh  ere                        
kef  na 
kef ef                  kef  ef 
 
kef es                  keh es                          
kef ef na 
                                                        
kef es 
 
kef n                   keh en                          
kef nanu 
kef ton                 keh etetu                       
kef ngen 
kef sen                 keh ey                          
kef nanu 
 
PAST                    PAST                            
PAST


--- PAGE 38 ---
kef ni                  keh nei                         
kef (on) na 
kef (o) nek             keh nek                         
kef (on) nga 
kef (o) net             keh nere                        
kef (on) na 
 
kef (o) nef             keh nef                         
kef (on) ef na 
kef (o) nes             keh nes                         
kef (on) es 
 
kef (o) nen             keh nen                         
kef (on) nanu 
kef (o) n ten           keh netsten                     
kef (on) ngen 
kef (o) n sen67         keh ney68                       
kef (on) nanu 
 
 
 
 
 
                EGYPTIAN                        
WALAF 
 
           (symbol) =feh=go away            feh=rush 
off 
 
        We have the following correspondences between the verb 
forms,


--- PAGE 39 ---
with identity of similarity of meaning: all the Egyptian verb 
forms, except for two, are also recorded in Walaf. 
 
                EGYPTIAN                        
WALAF 
 
                feh-ef                          feh-
ef 
                feh-es                          feh-
es 
                feh-n-ef                        feh-
on-ef 
                feh-n-es                        feh-
ones 
 
                feh-w                           feh-
w 
 
                feh-wef                         feh-
w-ef 
                feh-w-es                        feh-
w-es 
 
                feh-w-a-ef                      feh-
il-ef 
                feh-w-n-es                      feh-
w-on-es 
 
                feh-in-ef                       feh-
il-ef 
                feh-in-es                       fen-
il-es


--- PAGE 40 ---
feh-t-ef                        feh-
t-ef 
                feh-t-es                        feh-
es 
                feh-tyfy                        feh-
ati-fy 
                feh-tysy                        feh-
at-ef 
 
                feh-tw-ef                       mar-
tw-ef 
                feh-tw-es                       mar-
tw-es 
 
                feh-kw(i)                       
fahi-kw 
 
                feh-n-tw-ef                     feh-
an-tw-ef 
                feh-a-tw-es                     feh-
an-tw-es 
 
                feh-y-ef                        feh-
y-ef 
                feh-y-es                        fey-
y-es 
 
                EGYPTIAN                        
WALAF


--- PAGE 41 ---
[symbol]        =mer=love                       
mar=lick (symbol) 
                 mer-ef                         mar-
ef 
                 mer-es                         mar-
es 
                 mer-n-el                       mar-
on-ef 
                 mer-n-es                       mar-
on-es 
 
                mer-w                           mar-
w 
 
                mer-w-ef                        mar-
w-ef 
 
                mer-w-n-f                       mar-
w-on-ef 
                mer-w-n-es                      mar-
w-on-es 
 
                mer-in-ef                       mar-
il-ef 
                mer-in-es                       mar-
il-es 
 
                mer-t-ef                        mar-
t-ef 
                mer-t-es                        mar-
t-es


--- PAGE 42 ---
mer-tw-ef                       mar-
tw-ef 
                mer-tw-es                       mar-
tw-es 
 
                mer-tyfy                        mar-
at-ef 
                mer-t-tysy                      mar-
aty-es 
                                                mar-
aty-s 
                                                mar-
aty-sy 
 
                mar-kwi                         
mari-kw 
                mer-y-ef                        mar-
y-ef 
                mer-y-es                        mar-
y-es 
                mer-n-tw-ef                     mar-
an-tw-ef 
                mer-n-tw-es                     mar-
antw-es 
                                                mar-
tw-on-ef 
                                                mar-
tw-on-es


--- PAGE 43 ---
Egyptian and Walaf Demonstratives 
 
There are the following phonetic correspondents between 
Egyptian and Walaf 
demonstratives; 
 
[This section was omitted because of the difficulty of 
reproducing the 
symbols on the Internet] 
 
These phonetic correspondences are not ascriable either to 
elementary 
affinity or to the general laws of the human mind for they are 
regular 
correspondences on outstanding points extending through an 
entire system, 
that of the demonstratives in the two languages and that of the 
verbal 
languages. It is through the application of such laws that it 
was possible 
to demonstrate the existence of the Indo-European linguistic 
family. 
 
The comparison could be carried to show that the majority of 
the phonemes 
remain unchanged between the two languages. The few changes 
which are of 
great interest are the following: 
 
[This section was omitted because of the difficulty of 
reproducing the 
symbols on the Internet]


--- PAGE 44 ---
It is still early to talk with precision of the vocalic 
accompaniment of the 
Egyptian phonemes. But the way is open for the rediscovery of 
the vocalics 
of ancient Egyptian from comparative studies with the languages 
of Africa. 
 
Conclusion 
 
The structure of African royalty, with the king put to death, 
either really 
or symbolically, after a reign which varied in length but was 
in the region 
of eight years, recalls the ceremony of the Pharaoh's 
regeneration through 
the Sed feast. Also reminiscent of Egypt are the circumcision 
rites 
mentioned earlier and the totemism, cosmogonies, architecture, 
musical 
instruments, etc., of Africa.71 Egyptian antiquity is to 
African culture 
what Graceo-Roman antiquity is to Western culture. The building 
up of a 
corpus of African humanities should be based on this fact. 
 
It will be understood how difficult it is to write such a 
chapter in a work 
of this kind, where euphemism and compromise are the rule. In 
an attempt to 
avoid sacrificing scientific truth, therefore, we made a point 
of suggesting 
three preliminaries to the preparation of this volume, all of 
which were 
agreed to at the plenary session held in 1971. 72 The first two 
led to the 
holding of the Cairo Symposium from 28 January to 3 February 
1974. 73 In


--- PAGE 45 ---
this connection I should like to refer to certain passages in 
the report of 
that symposium. Professor Vercoutter, who had been commissioned 
by Unesco to 
write the introductory report, acknowledged after a thorough 
discussion that 
the conventional idea that the Egyptian population was equally 
divided 
between blacks, whites and half-castes could not be upheld.. 
'Professor 
Vercoutter agreed that no attempt should be made to estimate 
percentages, 
which meant nothing, as it was impossible to establish them 
without reliable 
statistical data'. On the subject of Egyptian culture: 
'Professor Vercoutter 
remarked that, in his view, Egypt was African in its way of 
writing, in its 
cullture and in its way of thinking'. 
 
Professor Lecant, for his part, 'recognized the same African 
character in 
the Egyptian temperament and way of thinking'. 
 
In regard to linguistics, it is stated in the report that 'this 
item, in 
contrast to those previously discussed, revealed a large 
measure of 
agreement among the participants. The outline by Professor Diop 
and the 
report by Professor Obenga were regarded as being very 
constructive'. 
 
Similarly, the symposium rejected the idea that Pharaonic 
Egyptian was a 
Semitic language. 'Turning to wider issues, Professor Sauneron 
drew


--- PAGE 46 ---
attention to the interest of the method suggested by Professor 
Obenga 
following Professor Diop. Egyptian remained a stable language 
for a period 
of at least 4500 years. Egypt was situated at the point of 
convergence of 
outside influences and it was to be expected that borrowing had 
been made 
from foreign languages, but the Semitic roots numbered only a 
few hundred as 
compared with a total of several thousand words. The Egyptian 
language could 
not be isolated from its African context and its origin could 
not be fully 
explained in terms of Semitic, it was thus quite normal to 
expect to find 
related languages in Africa'. 
 
The genetic, that is, non-accidental relationship between 
Egyptian and the 
African languages was recognized: 'Professor Sauneron noted 
that the method 
which had been used was of considerable interest, since it 
could not be 
purely fortuitous that there was a similarity between the third 
person 
singular suffixed pronouns in Ancient Egyptian and in Wolof, he 
hoped that 
an attempt would be made to reconstitute a palaeo-African 
language, using 
present-day languages as a starting point'. 
 
In the general conclusion to the report it was stated that: 
'Although the 
preparatory working paper sent out by Unesco gave particulars 
of what was


--- PAGE 47 ---
desired, not all participants had prepared communications 
comparable with 
the painstakingly researched contributions of Professors Cheikh 
Anta Diop 
and Obenga. There was consequently a real lack of balance in 
the 
discussions'. 
 
A new page of African historiography was accordingly written in 
Cairo. The 
symposium recommended that further studies be made on the 
concept of race. 
Such studies have since been carried out, but they have not 
contributed 
anything new to the historical discussion. They tell us that 
molecular 
biology and genetics recognize the existence of populations 
alone, the 
concept of race being no longer meaningful. Yet whenever there 
is any 
question of the transmission of a hereditary taint, the concept 
of race in 
the most classic sense of the term comes into its own again, 
for genetics 
tells us that 'sickle-cell anaemia occurs only in negroes'. The 
truth is 
that all these 'anthropologists' have already in their own 
minds drawn the 
conclusions deriving from the triumph of the monogenetic theory 
of mankind 
without venturing to put them into explicit terms, for if 
mankind originated 
in Africa, it was necessarily negroid becoming white through 
mutation and 
adaptation at the end of the last glaciation in Europe in the 
Upper 
Palaeolithic; and is not more understandable why the Grimaldian 
negroids


--- PAGE 48 ---
first occupied Europe for 10,000 years before Cro-Magnon Man-
the prototype 
of the white race-appeared (around -2,000). 
 
The idealogical standpoint is also evident in apparently 
objective studies. 
In history and in social relations, it is the phenotype, that 
is, the 
individual or the people as that individual or people is 
perceived, which is 
the dominant factor, as opposed to the genotype. For present-
day genetics, a 
Zulu with the 'same' genotype as Vorster is not impossible. 
Does this mean 
that the history we are witnessing will put the two phenotypes, 
that is, the 
two individuals, on the same footing in all their national and 
social 
activities? Certainly not -- the opposition will remain not 
social but 
ethnic. 
 
This study makes it necessary to rewrite world history from a 
more 
scientific standpoint, taking into account the Negro-African 
component which 
was for a long time preponderant. It means that it is now 
possible to build 
up a corpus of Negro-African humanities resting on a sound 
historical basis 
instead of being suspended in mid-air. Finally, if it is true 
that only 
truth is revolutionary, it may be added that only rapprochement 
brought 
about on a basis of truth can endure. The cause of human 
progress is not 
well served by casting a veil over the fact.


--- PAGE 49 ---
The rediscovery of the true past of the African peoples should 
not be a 
divisive factor but should contribute to uniting them, each and 
all, binding 
them together from the north to the south of the continent so 
as to enable 
them to carry out together a new historical mission for the 
greater good of 
mankind; and that is in keeping with the ideal of Unesco. 
 
 
"Footnotes to: 
 ORIGIN OF THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS" 
 
 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
 
ORIGIN OF THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS (Cont,) 
 
 
by Cheikh Anta Diop 
 
 
 
 
NOTES 
 
1. Proceedings of the Seventh Pan-African Congress of Pre-
History and 
Quaternary Studies, December 1971


--- PAGE 50 ---
2. M.F.A. Montagu, 1960, p. 390. 
 
3. The study of this race's pigmentation can be carried farther 
by the 
method described; actually Elliott-Smith often found patches of 
skin on the 
bodies and the mummification methods which cause skin 
deterioration were not 
yet in use. 
 
1 
 
4. D.P. de Pedrals, p.6. 
 
5. Geographie, classe de 5, 1950. 
 
6. In his 'Lutte des races" (1883) L. Gumplovicz asserts that 
the diverse 
classes making up a people always represent different races, of 
which one 
has established its domination over the others by conquest. G. 
deLapounge in 
an article published in 1897 postulated no less than a dozen 
'fundamental 
laws of anthropo-sociology' of which the following are typical; 
his 'law of 
distribution of wealth' posits that, in countries of mixed 
European-Alpine 
populations, wealth is greater in inverse proportions to the 
cephalic index; 
the 'law of urban indices' given prominence by Ammon in 
connexion with his


--- PAGE 51 ---
research on Badener conscripts asserted that town dwellers 
exhibit greater 
dolichocephaly than the people in the adjacent countryside; the 
'law of 
stratification' was formulated in the following terms: 'the 
cephalic index 
decreases and the proportion of dolichocephalics rises the 
higher the social 
class, in each locality'. In his Selections sociales' the same 
writer had no 
hesitation in asserting that 'the dominant class in the feudal 
epoch belongs 
almost exclusively to the variety "Homo Europaeus" so that it 
is not pure 
chance which has kept the poor at the foot of the social ladder 
but their 
congenital inferiority'. 
 
We thus see that German racism was inventing nothing new, when 
Alfred 
Rosenberg asserted that the French Revolution must be deemed a 
revolt of the 
brachycephalics of the Alpine stock against the 
dolichocephalics of the 
Nordic race.' (A. Cuvillier, p. 155) 
 
7. W.M.F. Petrie, 1939, Fig. 1. 
 
8. ibid., p. 69. 
 
9. ibid., p. 68. 
 
10. E. Amelineau, 1908, p. 174.


--- PAGE 52 ---
11. Pl. 1.2. 
 
12. Pl. 1.3. 
 
13. W.M.F. Petrie, 1939, p.67. 
 
14. Pl. 1.11. 
 
15. Pl. 1.5. 
 
16. pl. 1.8. 
 
17. Pl. 1.7 I know that 'Indo-European' is usually said to be a 
language, 
not a race, but I prefer this term to 'Aryan' wherever its use 
causes no 
confusion. 
 
18. Pl. 1.2. 
 
19. Pl. 1.13. 
 
20. R.A. Nicolaus, p. 11. 
 
21. T.J. Pettigrew, 1834, pp. 70-71. 
 
22. C.A. Diop, 1977. 
 
23. M.E. Fontant, pp. 44-5 (see reproduction: T).


--- PAGE 53 ---
24. M.F.A. Montagu, p. 337. 
 
25. In the fifth century before our era, at the time when 
Herodotus visited 
Egypt, a black-skinned people, the Colchians, were still living 
in Colchis 
on the Armenian shore of the Black Sea, East of the ancient 
port of 
Trebizond, surrounded by white-skinned nations. 
 
The scholars of antiquity wondered about this people's origins 
and Herodotus 
in "Euterpe', the second book of his history on Egypt, tries to 
prove that 
the Colchians were Egyptians, whence the arguments we quote. 
Herodotus, on 
the strength of commemorative stelae, erected by Sesostris in 
conquered 
countries, asserts that this monarch had got as far as Thrace 
and Seythia, 
where stelae would seem to have been still standing in his day 
(Book II, 
103). 
 
26. Herodotus, Book II, 104. As with many peoples in black 
Africa, Egyptian 
women underwent excision of the clitoris: ef. Strabo, 
Geography, Book XVII, 
Ch. I. 
 
27. Herodotus, Book II, 57. 
 
28. Seneca, Questions of Nature, Book IV, 17.


--- PAGE 54 ---
29. Herodotus, Book II, 22. 
 
30. Aristotle, Physiognomy, 6. 
 
31. Lucian, Navigations, paras 2-3. 
 
32. Apollodoros, Book II, 'The Family of Inachus', paras 3 and 
4. 
 
33. Aeschylus, The Suppliants, vv. 719-20. See also v. 745. 
 
34. Strabo, Geography, Book I, ch. 3, para. 10. 
 
35. My italics. 
 
36. Diodorus, Universal History, Book III. The antiquity of the 
Ethiopian 
civilization is attested by the most ancient and most venerable 
Greek 
writer, Homer, in both the Lliad and the Odessey: 'Jupiter 
followed today by 
all the gods receives the sacrifices of the Ethiopians' (Iliad, 
I, 422). 
'Yesterday to visit holy Ethiopia Jupiter betook himself to the 
ocean shore' 
(lliad, I, 423). 
 
37. Diogenes Laertius, Book VII,i. 
 
38. The Egyptian notables liked to have a Syrian or Cretan 
female slave in


--- PAGE 55 ---
their harems. 
 
39. Ammianus Marcellinus, Book XXII, para 16 (23). 
 
40. Pirate gangs who worked from small ships called Camare. 
 
41. Ammianus Marcellinus, Book XXII, para. 8 (24). 
 
42. M.C.F. Volney, Voyages en Syrie et en Egypte, Paris, 1787, 
Vol. I, pp. 
74-7. 
 
43. J.J. Champollion-Figeac, 1839, pp. 26-7. 
 
44. This important discovery was made, on the African side, by 
Sossou 
Nsougan, who was to compile this part of the present chapter. 
For the sense 
of the word see Worterbuch der Aegyptischen Sprache, Vol 5, 
1971, pp. 122 
and 127. 
 
45. ibid., p. 122. 
 
46. ibid., p. 128. 
 
47. R.O. Faulkner, 1962, p. 286. 
 
48. Worterbuch der agyptischen Sprache, p. 128.


--- PAGE 56 ---
49. ibid. p. 124. 
 
50. ibid., p. 125. 
 
51. ibid., p. 123. 
 
52. It should be noted that set-kem=black wife in Walaf. 
 
53. Worterbuch der agyptischen Sprache, p. 492. 
 
54. ibid., p. 493. 
 
55. Desret= blood in Egyptian; deret=blood in Walaf; ibid., p. 
494. 
 
56. Genesis, 10:6-7. 
 
57. C.A. Diop, 1955, pp. 33ff. 
 
58. E. Massoulard, 1949, p. 386. 
 
59. Juvenal, Satire XV, vv. 1-14. 
 
60. E. Amelineau, op. cit. 
 
61. A. Recnach, 1913, p. 17. 
 
62 Often spelt Wolof.


--- PAGE 57 ---
63. C.A. diop, 1977. 
 
64. R. Lambert, 1925, p. 129. 
 
65. A. Mallon, pp. 207-34. 
 
66. A. de Buck, 1952. 
 
67. ibid. 
 
68. A. Mallon, pp. 207-34. 
 
69. By extension=love intensely (hence the verb mar-maral) 
after the fashion 
of a female animal licking the cub which she has just borne. 
This sense does 
not conflict with the other notion which the determinative may 
convey of a 
man raising hand to mouth. 
 
70. See below for the explanation of this important law. 
 
71. See C.A. Diop, 1967. 
 
72. See final Report of the First Plenary Session of the 
International 
Scientific Committee for the Drafting of a general History of 
Africa, 
UNESCO, 30 March-8 April 1974.


--- PAGE 58 ---
73. Symposium of 'The peopling of ancient Egypt and the 
deciphering of the Meriotic script'. Cf. Studies and Documents 
No. I UNESCO, 1978.

