=== EXTRACTED TEXT FROM: The Black God Anthology.pdf ===
Extraction Method: PyPDFLoader
Total Pages: 60
Timestamp: 2026-01-04T17:27:20.148903
================================================================================


--- PAGE 1 ---
The Black God: An Anthology of Truth


--- PAGE 2 ---
The Black God: An Anthology of Truth 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
 
Introduction...............................................................................................................................................3 
What We Teach.........................................................................................................................................4 
What We Will Achieve.............................................................................................................................4 
Why is the Black Man God?.....................................................................................................................5 
Believe in Jesus and Lose Your Mind!...................................................................................................10 
Why I Don’t Believe in a Mystery God..................................................................................................14 
Where Did the Universe Come From?....................................................................................................15 
Why I am a Poor Righteous Teacher ......................................................................................................18 
What is an Earth?....................................................................................................................................20 
To Be or Born the Earth..........................................................................................................................20 
Who is BLACK and Who is Not?...........................................................................................................23 
What God Is vs. What God Is Not ..........................................................................................................24 
So…who then is the Devil? ....................................................................................................................25 
Making of the Whiteman ........................................................................................................................28 
No Pork on the Fork or Swine in the Mind.............................................................................................30 
Pork and Pork-by-Product Consumption................................................................................................31 
The Names We Give Ourselves..............................................................................................................34 
Hail Lakeesha: Part I...............................................................................................................................35 
Hail Lakeesha: Part II .............................................................................................................................36 
Save the Babies.......................................................................................................................................37 
Who is the 5%? .......................................................................................................................................38 
Civilization Studies.................................................................................................................................43 
Is the Nation of Gods and Earths a Muslim Community?......................................................................44 
The Universal Flag..................................................................................................................................46 
Poor Righteous Teaching........................................................................................................................47 
Recommended Reading ..........................................................................................................................60 
 
      The Original Man is God                                    The Original Woman is the Earth 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
…The BABIES are the 
Greatest


--- PAGE 3 ---
The Black God: An Anthology of Truth 
 
Introduction 
 
Peace, 
Shortly before completing my doctoral dissertation, I envisioned assembling a book of information 
that could change the world…and  if not change the world, change a community…and  if not change a 
community, change a mind. If you learn something –anything‐ from this text, then it was worth it.  
 
This anthology is simply a collection of essays from individuals who know how to keep it simple and 
teach it real. The purpose of this work is to enlighten original people from here in Atlanta, Georgia to 
as far as this book will make it.  
 
If you’re not sure about whether you’re the type of individual who would benefit from reading this 
anthology, I’ll give you a few hints on how to tell.  
 
This book is meant for you if: 
 You’ve always been intelligent, but hated school because they only teach bullshit. 
 You’ve questioned your religion, or abandoned it altogether because it didn’t make sense. 
 You see the injustices and wrongs going on all around you, and it’s driving you nuts. 
 You want to change something in the world or in yourself, but haven’t figured out how. 
 You know you’re not just another “nigga.”  
 You’re trying to turn your life around, but without church or the military! 
 You’re not waiting on Jesus to come back and save you. 
 You wonder why other people are such followers and hypocrites. 
 You know there’s more to life than this. 
 You’re ALWAYS questioning things. 
 
If you answered “yeah” to any of these questions, then do yourself a favor and read this from cover to 
cover. If nothing in here sparks your mind, either you know it all already, or you’re braindead. More 
likely though, you’re going to want to seriously pursue getting the Knowledge of Self after you read 
this. These essays are a reflection of what we teach. The authors are representations of what our 
culture produces. In this culture, everyone from the teenagers to the college students to the drug 
dealers and killers becomes God. Sure, it takes time. But if you’ve ever met a True and Living God, 
you  know  this  ain’t  no  game.  We  don’t produce  no  suckas  or  fruitcakes.  We  produce  strong, 
intelligent, dedicated men, and righteous, sincere, beautiful women. Be one. If you answered yes to 
the items above, it’s already you anyway. 
 
Finally, the life‐giving teachings of the Nation of Gods and Earths are found in their purest form in 
two mediums: (1) from the mouths of actual Gods and Earths themselves, and (2) in our Lessons. If 
you want to seriously undertake the study of yourself and the world as it really is, contact the Gods 
and Earths in your city. If there’s no contact information at the end of this book, finding Gods and 
Earths is as easy as doing a search on the Internet or Myspace. 
 
Peace, 
Dr. Supreme Understanding Allah


--- PAGE 4 ---
The Black God: An Anthology of Truth 
What We Teach 
 
1. That Black people ar e the original people 
of the planet earth. 
2. That Black people are the fathers and 
mothers of civilization. 
3. That the science of Supreme 
Mathematics is the key to understanding 
man's relationship to the universe. 
4. Islam is a natural  way of life, not a 
religion. 
5. That education should be fashioned to 
enable us to be self sufficient as a 
people. 
6. That each one should teach one 
according to their knowledge. 
7. That the Blackman is God and his proper 
name is ALLAH.  Arm, Leg, Leg, Arm, Head. 
8. That our children are our link to the 
future and they must be nurtured, 
respected, loved, protected and 
educated. 
9. That the unified Black family is the vital 
building block of the nation. 
 
 
What We Will Achieve 
 
1. National Consciousness:  National 
Consciousness is the consciousness of 
our origin in this world, which is divine. 
As a nation of people we are the first in 
existence and all ot her peoples derived 
from us. National Consciousness is the 
awareness of the unique history and 
culture of Black people and the 
unequaled contributions we have made 
to world civilization, by being the fathers 
and mothers of civilization. National 
Consciousness is the awareness that we 
are all one people regardless to our 
geographical origins and that we must 
work and struggle as one if we are to 
liberate ourselves from the domination of 
outside forces and bring into existence a 
Universal Government of Love, Peace 
and Happiness for all the people of the 
planet.  
 
2. Community Control:  Community 
Control of the educational, economic, 
political, media and h ealth institutions on 
our community. Our demand for 
Community Control flows naturally out of 
our science of life, which teaches that we 
are the Supreme Being in person and the 
sole controllers of our own destiny; thus 
we must have same control on the 
collective level that we strive to attain on 
the individual level. It  is prerequisite to 
our survival that we take control of the 
life sustaining goods and services that 
every community needs in order to 
maintain and advance itself and advance 
civilization. Only when we have achieved 
complete Community Control will we be 
able to prove to the world the greatness 
and majesty of our Divine Culture, which 
is Freedom.  
 
3. Peace. Peace is the absence of 
confusion (chaos) and the absence of 
confusion is Order. Law and Order is the 
very foundation upon which our Science 
of Life rest.  Supreme Mathematics is the 
Law and Order of the Universe, this is 
the Science of Islam, which is Peace. 
Peace is Supreme Understanding 
between people for th e benefit of the 
whole. We will ac hieve Peace, in 
ourselves, in our communities, in our 
nation and in the world. This is our 
ultimate goal.  
                                 
PEACE


--- PAGE 5 ---
The Black God: An Anthology of Truth 
Why is the Black Man God? 
  
 5
  TTHHEE  SSUUPPRREEMMEE  UUNNDDEERRSSTTAANNDDIINNGG  AALLLLAAHH  
AALLLLAAHH’’SS  GGAARRDDEENN  ((AATTLLAANNTTAA,,  GGAA))  
 
Introduction  
 The following booklet is a brief attempt to present 
and explain the godhood of the Black man for 
contemporary readers. I have made significant effort to 
limit the technical vocabulary, so as to ease the pace of 
reading, and to avoid clogging the passages with overly 
technical details and footnotes. The following arguments 
are summaries, and not meant to cover the immense body 
of knowledge and wisdom available on these topics. 
Although some references are provided, the reader is 
encouraged to seek further information on their own. Good 
questions produce good answers. To be fair, I have also 
included a few of the common counter-arguments I have 
heard, as well as brief responses. The reader is encouraged, 
above all, to read with an open mind.  
 
The Black Man is the Original Man 
 It is important that we first establish that the 
Black man is the first man, or the original man. Several 
major anthropological studies have documented this 
widely accepted fact.  All peoples descend from him, 
either naturally or unnaturally. Europeans have even 
created fake fossils like the Piltdown man to try to 
discredit and distort the origins of humanity and place the 
first man in Europe.  The earliest fossils of man have been 
found in South Africa and East Africa. Further information 
can be found in The African Origin of Civilization by 
Cheikh Anta Diop. Forbidden Archaeology: The Hidden 
History of the Human Race by Michael Cremo contains a 
wealth of evidence detailing the earliest existence of 
highly-advanced humans throughout the world, far 
predating even the earliest accepted date of three million 
years ago. 
 Original means the origin of all that follows. In 
stating that the Black man is the original man, many of the 
references that appear in the following pages, referring to 
“man,” can be understood to refer to the archetype of man 
himself, the Black man. Some authors have advocated that 
the true human is the hue-man, or man of color, and that 
mankind refers to the “kind of man” that followed. 
 
The Black Man is the Father of Civilization 
 Blacks developed the first civilizations.  
Throughout the ancient and prehistoric world, Blacks have 
been the founders of all known civilizations.  Examples 
include:  
• the first dynasties of ancient China,  
• the pre-Hellenic Minoan and Mycenean civilizations 
which birthed ancient Greece and Rome,  
• the ancient Egyptians of course,  
• the pre-Semitic Chaldeans, Babylonians, Sumerians, 
and their other middle Eastern neighbors,  
• the Kushites and other obviously Black civilizations in 
the continent known as Africa,  
• the Olmecs, the early Mayans and other Black pre-
Columbian civilizations of the Americas (including 
the Black Indians Columbus met upon his initial 
voyages here),  
• the ancient Black civilizations of the Indus river valley 
in India,  
• and the Black 
civilizations of ancient 
Europe.  
 Evidence of these 
claims can be found in, 
African Presence in Early 
Asia edited by Runoko 
Rashidi, African Presence 
in Early Europe, African 
Presence in Early America, 
and They Came Before 
Columbus by Ivan Van 
Sertima, and The African 
Origin of Civilization by 
Cheikh Anta Diop.  Further evidence can be found on 
numerous articles, available on the internet, authored by 
Clyde Ahmad Winters or Runoko Rashidi.  Much of this 
information, and more, should also be available online at 
the Global African Presence website at 
http://www.cwo.com/~lucumi/runoko.html
 
The Black Man is the Source of the World’s Learning 
 Until the contemporary attempts by Europeans to 
discredit the capabilities of Blacks, the Black man has 
been regarded as surpassing all people and nations in his 
wisdom and intellect.  Visitors from far-off lands studied 
among the Black teachers of Ancient Egypt in the Mystery 
Schools.  Socrates and other Greeks regarded as the fathers 
of European philosophy were trained at these schools by 
Blacks.  Plato, Socrates’ student, challenged the Greek 
concept of God, which was in fact a Europeanized version 
of the Black gods of Egypt. Plato, not having met the true 
and living Gods himself, appeared disgruntled with the 
human flaws of the otherwise supreme Greek gods.  
 The Greeks were, until the era of Plato, still 
praising and worshipping the Black men of Egypt.  These 
facts are documented in George G. M. James’ Stolen 
Legacy and Martin Bernal’s Black Athena. Examples 
include Zeus and Hercules, who were modeled after Osiris 
and Horus, and the Black god Imhotep, who is revered in 
the primary creed of medicine, the Hippocratic Oath.


--- PAGE 6 ---
The Black God: An Anthology of Truth 
 6
These Black individuals were not mythical figures, but 
historical men of note.  After Plato, the idea of a 
transcendant, immaterial deity became popular.  This is 
known as Neo-Platonic thought.  Most of the religious 
traditions of this region (Judaism, Christianity, and Islam) 
were influenced heavily by this way of thinking.   
 Other examples of the Black man’s reputation as 
the source for the wisdom of sages are the famed Library 
of Alexandria in Egypt (burned by Europeans), and the 
Universities of Timbuktu.  Also important is the learning 
of the Black Moors, who ruled Spain for 700 years (711-
1492 AD) and taught the Europeans much of what they 
know now.  It was in fact the Moors who brought Europe 
out of its Dark Ages, much as it was Blacks who brought 
Europeans out of the caves to teach and civilize them some 
four thousand years ago.  Books on these topics include 
Ivan Van Sertima’s Golden Age of the Moor and Paul 
Lawrence Guthrie’s Making of the Whiteman. 
 
The Black Man is the Supreme Being 
 All living matter is subservient to the Black 
man’s rule.  Given the premise of Darwin’s theories 
regarding the survival of species, it is evident that all life 
until this point has culminated in the development of the 
supreme Black man, beginning with the simplest one-
celled organism.  All living things are bound to the 
universal laws of mathematics, the language in which God, 
as the creator, wrote the universe, and in which God, as 
man, speaks and lives. 
 
The Black man is Dominant  
 The Black gene is dominant.  Most unbiased 
human biology textbooks will explain this assertion in 
detail.  The Black man’s genetic legacy, even after 
generations of imposed race-mixed, have consistently 
proven him physically superior.  Any observer of 
contemporary sports can testify to that fact.  God upon 
designing a home for himself (the universe, and 
specifically the Earth), chose a supreme vehicle in which 
to inhabit it. Although flesh, the Black man’s physical 
body was designed to be the original and greatest form 
possible. This is where the phrase “the physique of a Greek 
God” came from. Keep in mind that the true Greek gods 
were Black men from Egypt. 
 
God is REAL, not UNREAL 
 The term “Supreme Being” suggests two things, 
one that God is Supreme, and the other, that He is actually 
a being that exists.  In terms of beings that we can actually 
validate and verify, the Black man has never heard, seen, 
felt, tasted, or smelled anything greater than HIMSELF.  
While, there are things that exist that are unseen, they can 
be verified, even measured.  We cannot see the 
temperature, or the wind, but there are scientific 
instruments we can use to document their actual existence.  
On the other hand, an unreal God is ascribed as the cause 
of very real circumstances.  This defies the laws of cause 
and effect.  
  People credit God for natural disasters, but 
investigations can be done to determine the actual physical 
or natural causes.  An invisible God does not make it rain; 
rain is produced from a well-known process known as the 
water cycle.  In essence, nothing can be proven to be 
supreme over the Black man.  While believers will claim 
that their feeling is proof enough, people’s feelings have 
never proven anything.  People have felt the presence of 
ghosts, aliens, witches, warlocks, mermaids, imaginary 
friends, and Santa Claus.  Many of these people have been 
very adamant, even forceful, about having others believe 
what they believe in.  Does that prove that it is real? 
 
The Black Man is the God of Scripture 
 The God of all religious traditions has been a 
Black man.  The authors of the scriptures have recorded 
numerous instances where God is described either as a 
man (Genesis 2: 8, 18:1-3, Exodus 15:3, 24:9-11, 33:11, ), 
as Black (Daniel 7:9, Revelation 1:15), a group of men 
(Genesis 3:22, 11:7), or man himself (Psalms 82:6, John 
10:34). One of the words used for God in the Old 
Testament is Elohim, which means “Gods” in Hebrew.  
Actually Elohim is the plural of Eloh, a popular name for 
the God of the Old Testament. Eloh, or El, is merely a 
botched transliteration of the original Hebrew name. The 
vowel points were added later, changing the “A” (or 
Aleph) to “E” and thus turning Al or Allah into El or Eloh. 
This was the work of the Jewish Masoretic scribes who 
were given the task of rewriting (and editing) the 
Pentateuch by hand around the sixth century AD. This can 
be found in several texts on the history of the Bible.  
 The world Allahim, or Elohim, is also used to 
refer to the group of men who were regarded as the leaders 
of the Hebrew people, the Judges.  The other popular term 
for God in the Old Testament is YHWH.  YHWH is not 
meant to be pronounced as “Jehovah.”  YHWH, when 
written in Hebrew from top to bottom, represents the form 
of a man.  This is why the tetragrammmaton YHWH was 
referred to as the “Ineffable Name” which means it could 
not be said. Even today, orthodox Jews refuse to utter this 
name. It is because these letters do not represent a phonetic 
word, but pictorially represent the reality of a man, as in a 
hieroglyphic.  
 Similarly, the name Allah, which has made it 
from its origins among the Black Arabs of Mecca to the 
pre-Columbian Blacks of America AND the first Black 
slaves and finally to the mainstream of Blacks in America 
is a name best understood in the present context of Arm-
Leg-Leg-Arm-Head. The name Allah was also used as the 
word for “man” amongst the Black people of ancient 
Harappan civilization in India. 
 The New Testament’s message is clear.  Jesus, a 
Black man (Revelation 1:15), attempts to redeliver a 
message of righteousness to the people.  One can see, upon 
thorough reading of the Bible, that his message is not 
about praising and worshipping him (John 14:12), but 
about manifesting the God within and improving their 
lives.  Jesus explains to his followers that they are Gods 
also (John 10:34), but to no avail.  The people insist on 
following him and making him their God.  An interesting 
article on Christianity and the Black Christ can be found at 
http://melanet.com/clegg_series/wasjesusblack.html The


--- PAGE 7 ---
The Black God: An Anthology of Truth 
fact that the God of the Bible is Black is also well 
documented at 
http://www.allahteam.info/god_of_the_bible_is_black.htm
 7
 In the Qur’an, Allah is described as having a face 
that believers will see in the last days (presumably after 
death).  The Qur’an makes mentions of Allah’s “hands” 
being tied down, but  otherwise, the Neo-Platonic 
influence on Islam is strong.  Still, Allah makes Adam out 
of Black mud to be His Khalifa, or vicegerent, on Earth.  A 
vicegerent is a successor responsible for handling the 
duties of his predecessor. The concept of Allah as man in 
early Islam is detailed in a journal article at 
http://www.allahteam.info/ijmespdf.pdf
 Nearly all religious and spiritual 
traditions teaching the doctrine of God as 
man and man as God. This paradigm, 
however, is usually reserved for the 
esoteric (hidden) side of the teaching.  For 
example, there is mainstream Christianity, 
and then there is Gnostic Christianity, 
which teaches of man as God and God as 
man.  Islam has Sufism, Judaism has the 
Kaballah, Buddhism has the Hinayana 
school, and Hinduism has the tradition 
found in the Upanishads.  All of these are considered the 
lesser-known aspect of these major traditions, and all teach 
that the Black man is God.  Even in African religions, 
there is a tradition regarding the transcendent God that is 
removed from human affairs, and the immanent God, who 
is physically present, but people are not allowed to 
personally see him.  Of course, the earlier traditions were 
very explicit that all of their Gods came in the form of 
men.  Godfrey Higgins’ Anacalypsis is an old, rare work 
with several references to the Black Christ, the Black 
Krishna (of Hinduism), the Black Buddha, the Black gods 
of Egypt, and other Black gods throughout the world. 
 Christianity, the most popular religion among 
American Blacks, was given to Blacks before slavery by 
European missionaries employed to soften up the native 
people’s defenses.  Thus the saying, “First they had the 
Bible and we had the land. Now we have the Bible and 
they have the land.” Small conflicts were then magnified 
into fullscale wars while guns were poured into these 
countries.  Prisoners of war and other kidnapped Blacks 
then became slaves for white landowners.  These white 
landowners noticed that the Muslim slaves were always 
fighting back and leading rebellions.  They began 
systematically stripping Blacks of their old culture, 
language, history and traditions and supplanting these with 
European ideals and programmed fear.  Along with this, 
they taught their slaves Christianity to keep them pacified 
in hopes of one day attaining heaven after death.  The 
slaves were told of a white Jesus, son of a white God, and 
the white chosen people of God.  They were taught to be 
obedient and serve as slaves and take their beatings.  If 
they rebelled, they’d go to hell, but if they’d submit to 
what was in effect hell on earth, they’d have heaven after 
death.  Today our practice the same kind of religion on the 
same premise.  Though white pictures of Jesus are not as 
popular among American Blacks as they are in Africa 
(where they are the norm), the Christianity practiced is still 
a slave religion designed to keep the suffering and 
enslaved from questioning, challenging, or changing their 
conditions on earth. 
 
The Black Man is the Maker and Owner of the 
Universe 
 The world’s learned initiates have always 
regarded Blackness as the source or original of all people 
and all things.  Dr. Richard King’s The Black Dot explains 
this phenomenon.  The Black man’s skin typically contains 
of high concentrations of melanin, thus giving him a dark 
appearance.  The brain also produces a similar chemical 
known as neuromelanin, which is vital to brain processing.  
Melanin is even present in the atmosphere and throughout 
the universe in the blackness of space.  Research regarding 
this can be found at 
http://www.tightrope.it/nicolaus/melanin95.htm People, 
usually Europeans, who are devoid of melanin are more 
likely to suffer and die from diseases like skin cancer. The 
first man was naturally high in melanin, and dark skin is a 
natural condition.  White skin is an unnatural anomaly, 
produced by selective breeding, not nature.  More 
information on melanin in the Black man’s body can be 
found in Melanin: The Chemical Key to Black Greatness 
or Melanin: A Key to Freedom. 
 Before the creation of the physical universe, 
Allah was present as the creative intelligence that spawned 
itself and began developing all life and matter from an 
initial atom.  This first ATOM, imbibed with the innate 
intelligence of God, was Allah The Original Man.  The 
Sun replaced this atom as the representation of the Black 
man until ultimately God himself could take dominion 
over the earth in the flesh.  Intelligence still exists on a 
subatomic level, as is evident from experiments conducted 
on light particles which were able to consciously change 
their course.  Man’s sperm is consciously able to 
determine which direction to travel to reach the egg, 
without a brain.  This universal, infinite intelligence is 
active in its highest form in the individual mind of the 
Black man.  The Black man is the primary conduit for the 
intelligence that once created the universe, as he is the 
Creator himself.  Elijah Muhammad has written about this 
self-creation process in depth in The Theology of Time.  A 
fair approach to the issue of the universe’s birth can be 
found in The Left Hand of Creation and a number of other 
texts on the topic. 
 
The Modern Context 
 Considering the ubiquitous and inhuman attempts 
by Europeans to systematically destroy the Black man, it is 
evident that there is more to the true nature of the Black 
man than an ex-slave whose services are no longer needed.  
While Europeans have no qualms with promoting 
education and healthy habits among college-bound Black 
women, Black men have been pushed increasingly towards 
jails and early death.  The white-led media perpetuates and 
promotes images of criminality and ignorance among 
Black youth.  Black men are consistently targeted and 
discriminated against in nearly every American institution,


--- PAGE 8 ---
The Black God: An Anthology of Truth 
 8
from law enforcement to education to employment.  Black 
men are characterized as overly aggressive, mentally 
inferior, prone to criminal behavior and wanton violence, 
devoid of any moral character, and incapable of alleviating 
their negative circumstances.  Throughout the world, the 
situation is the same for Black males.  In regions where 
Blacks are the dominant population group, the whole 
region is usually being ravaged and decimated by war, 
famine, or AIDS.  When these factors are still not enough 
to keep the Black population from growing, as was the 
case in Black India, birth control and forced sterilization 
has been implemented.  The global agenda for world white 
supremacy is clear.  The Black man, God, has been and 
still is the only impediment to that mission. 
 
Is it clear yet? 
 
 
COUNTER-ARGUMENTS 
 
There is only one God, not many. 
 As polytheistic as it sounds to say that Black men 
are Gods, the statement is anything but. There is only one 
God, and that God is THE Black man. The Black man is a 
unified whole, much as the water on the earth is in reality 
one connected body that is split into different regions, or 
containers. We share a mind at its highest level. This mind 
is the one that designed the universe in the language of 
mathematics, and set the processes by which all natural 
systems would continue to operate. While, at our 
conscious level, many of us are focused on eating and 
talking, there is a higher level to our consciousness that 
functions on the wavelength of intelligent design.  
 
It sounds racist to say the Black man is God. 
 God is the Original Man. The primordial man, the 
first physical vehicle for God’s immanent presence on 
Earth, was a Black body. Throughout the universe, 
Blackness prevails as the origin of all things. Black body 
radiation, Black holes, and the presence of melanin in 
space tell us a great deal. The first humans, of course, were 
Black. Today, the Black man is found throughout the Earth 
in a variety of shades and hues. Many of them are natural 
descendants of the original Black genotype, while others 
are admixtures resulting from miscegenation with whites. 
Who are whites then? Paul Lawrence Guthrie, in Making 
of the Whiteman, documents the creation and exile of the 
white race, who would forever change the course of human 
and social development on this planet. Numerous theories 
abound as to the origins of the white race, none of them 
entirely plausible. The vast differences between white 
people and Black people could only result from selective 
breeding, as Darwin noted, not from any evolutionary 
process. And certainly not simply due to cold weather, as 
African Presence in Early Europe by Ivan Van Sertima 
documents the presence of Blacks having lived in arctic 
regions for thousands of years without their skin 
lightening. At any rate, the statement of Black Godhood is 
a positive statement and one of affirmation, not of 
condemnation of other people.  
 
It sounds chauvinist to say the Black man is God. 
 Just as the Sun and Moon occupy important 
places and roles in the solar system, so do Man and 
Woman.  An immense body of scientific research details 
the significant physical, mental, emotional, and social 
differences between males and females. Stating that the 
Black man is God is not meant to degrade or debase the 
Black woman, but to affirm HIS role, and not take 
anything away from hers. God represents the creative force 
in the universe. In all scriptural and mythological accounts, 
God somehow “impregnates” either the Earth, the celestial 
void, or the blackness of space, to produce life and/or the 
universe. The planting of the seed would be futile without 
the fertile soil in which to plant it. Early mythology related 
the woman to the Earth, the receiver and bearer of life. 
Many of these ancient societies eventually abandoned the 
worship of the Black God, the Father God, as He was 
described as distant and unconcerned with human affairs.  
Instead, the focus shifted to the Earth Mother, who was 
celebrated and praised for her fertility and the sustenance 
she provided. Today, we refer to the Black woman as a 
Queen, as the Mother of Civilization, and as the Earth.  
 
There is no God. 
 Several authors have addressed the debate 
between intelligent design and the possibility that this 
universe, this Earth, and humanity, were the products of 
chance and coincidence. The likelihood of just one atom 
simply phasing into existence by chance is so remote that 
it can’t be calculated fairly. The evidence for intelligent 
design is great. However, it doesn’t point to the 
immaterial, invisible God of the Creationists, but to the 
culmination of God on Earth, the Black man, as its source. 
Much as a computer program can be written to repeat in 
cycles, or concentric spirals, of activity, history has 
followed a natural set of laws and patterns to produce this 
exact stage of development. The original writer for this 
program, or history, was the infinite (since the beginning) 
Black mind, present in the ultimate (final) Black man. An 
examination of history will lead one to question the 
probability of coincidental events, the aligning of real 
events and prophecy, the cyclical or spiral nature of all 
development, and why on earth is the same spiral that one 
can find in the formation of the universe’s galaxies and the 
currents of the Earth’s waters, present in our own 
fingertips? 
 
The Black man can’t be God or the Black man 
wouldn’t be living in such depraved conditions. 
 This argument appears to make a great deal of 
sense. Why on earth would GOD be dancing around on 
BET like a clown, flashing guns and money amidst a 
bunch of gyrating scantily-clad women? Or why would 
GOD be trapped in the slums in abject poverty, with the 
highest incarceration rates in the country, failing to educate 
himself or uplift his people, and instead choosing to 
smoke, drink, and fornicate his life away?  
 Well, for beginners, this deplorable image of the 
Black man is, in great part, more of a construction of the


--- PAGE 9 ---
The Black God: An Anthology of Truth 
media, than an accurate representation of the GLOBAL 
Black man. The Black man is a unified whole, comprised 
of peoples of color from all over the world, representing a 
multitude of different behaviors, attitudes and lifestyles. 
One thing these peoples have in common is their 
oppression by white supremacy (also known as European 
imperialism, British colonization, American capitalism, 
manifest destiny, the Crusades, Christian conversion, etc.).  
 The results of this system in America have been 
especially tragic. Black people, kidnapped from peaceful 
and prosperous homelands, were sold in the Americas, 
stripped of their language, ideologies, and culture, and 
brainwashed. The brainwashing never ceased. In fact, 
examination of the Willie Lynch letters shows us that 
further brainwashing was instrumental in continuing the 
oppression of the Black male beyond his physical bondage.  
 In the Bible it states that “the last shall be first 
and the first shall be last.” During the time the Egyptians 
were building pyramids, Europeans were creating large 
mounds of waste in Europe. The garbage piles these 
cavemen created were often so large, there have evolved 
into modern-day hillsides. Today, the reverse seems true. 
But there is a sleeping giant awaiting awakening. Even in 
the worst of conditions, in jails and ghettos throughout the 
U.S., Black men continue to awaken to the knowledge of 
themselves and begin the journey back to their true nature. 
For every individual walking in darkness and chasing the 
American dream of money and sex, there is another 
individual walking up out of that sleep and seeing God in 
the mirror. 
 
PEACE! 
(Proper Education Achieves Constant Elevation) 
 
 
 
 
 
The way of the superior man may be found, in its simple elements, in the intercourse of common men and women; but in its 
utmost reaches, it shines brightly through Heaven and Earth. Confucius
  
In Serbia a lot of people hate me because they want to westernize, not understanding that the western world is bipolar, with 
very good things and very bad things. Since they don't have experience of the west, they even believe that western shit is 
pie. 
Emir Kusturica
  
The inhabitants of the earth are of two sorts: 
Those with brains, but no religion, 
And those with religion, but no brains.  
Abu'l-`Ala' al-Ma`arri poet of Ma`arra, quoted in Maalouf, Amin (1989). Crusades Through Arab Eyes.  
  
I'm an atheist, and that's it. I believe there's nothing we can know except that we should be kind to each other and do what 
we can for other people. Katharine Hepburn, Ladies' Home Journal (October 1991) 
  
God was invented to explain mystery. God is always invented to explain those things that you do not understand. Now, 
when you finally discover how something works, you get some laws which you're taking away from God; you don't need 
him anymore. But you need him for the other mysteries. So therefore you leave him to create the universe because we 
haven't figured that out yet; you need him for understanding those things which you don't believe the laws will explain, 
such as consciousness, or why you only live to a certain length of time—life and death—stuff like that. God is always 
associated with those things that you do not understand.. 
Richard Feynman, quoted in Davies, P.C.W. and J. Brown. 
Superstrings: A Theory of Everything, 208.  
  
No one saves us but ourselves, no one can and no one may. From the Dhammapada of Siddhartha Gautama, one of 
many Buddhas 
  
 9
You believe in a book that has talking animals, wizards, witches, demons, sticks turning into snakes, food falling from the 
sky, people walking on water, and all sorts of magical, absurd and primitive stories, and you say that we are the ones that 
need help?  Dan Barker, co-president of the Freedom from Religion Foundation, in Losing Faith in Faith: From 
Preacher to Atheist 
  
Adults have imaginary friends too. Alan Jay Weiner
  
I prayed for freedom twenty years, but received no 
answer until I prayed with my legs. Frederick 
Douglass


--- PAGE 10 ---
The Black God: An Anthology of Truth 
 10
 
Believe in Jesus and Lose Your Mind! 
By Supreme Scientist Allah 
Cream City (Milwaukee, WI) 
 
"It is better to know only one thing and tell the world, than to 
believe in everything and lie to the one's own self." - Supreme 
Scientist Allah  
 
Peace, 
 
When someone proudly declares to me that they are "a 
religious person", I very quickly switch into the so-called 
'primitive' fight-or-flight mode that are our ancestors 
once instinctively relied upon in the presence of a wild 
beast. As insulting as such a statement may appear, I 
don't really see a difference. Therefore, when someone 
asserts that they "
believe in god", I have no other 
alternative than to interpret that they are simply 
warning me that they are a very, very crazy person. 
They have, in effect, lost their mind! 
 
Let me explain.. 
 
Religion unabashedly asserts that we are entirely 
incapable of successfully thinking for ourselves. The 
theology of Christianity, for instance, implies that, if we 
do not allow the mystery god, jesus, or holy ghost to 
make up our minds for us, we are bound to fail and/or be 
punished in everything we do. We are not capable of 
making the right choices in life and we must depend on 
the mystery god to think for at all times. So, we are 
encouraged to "
pray to god" constantly, adopt certain 
religious customs and traditions and immerse ourselves 
in a particular religious lifestyle to remain on the 'right 
path.' 
 
This belief creates the impression that our own 
intelligence is actually an obstacle, rather than an asset. 
It implies that mental consideration and investigation is 
a tremendous waste of ones time, energy and effort. 
Consequently, thinking itself soon becomes a hazard and 
our brain becomes our worst enemy. Thus, it should be 
clearly understood that theists are offering that there is 
absolutely no opportunity for us to be victorious 
without having the mystery god program our brains. In 
fact, in the event that we even attempt to think for 
ourselves, we will be punished with a severe punishment. 
This is because a 'true', or 'good' theist, believes without 
question. There can be no doubt that holding this belief 
is self-destructive and dangerous. Interesting enough, 
however, is the fact that theists spend a tremendous 
amount of time, energy and effort articles attempting to 
make an argument that their way of life is supreme. 
However, simply by asking us to consider submitting to 
the mystery god, theists are calling on us to utilize the 
very instrument they assert is faulty and unreliable: 
our 
intelligence. They are asking us to make a 'life saving' 
decision. 
 
Aha! 
 
How can one 'decide' that a particular doctrine is the 
'true religion' or that there is a so-called god without 
some degree of mental deliberation? For example, how 
did Christian theists come to believe that there exists a 
"
Jesus Christ?" Did he use his intellect or was it through 
some other means? Was he compelled to accept this idea 
by threats of force, ignorance, haste, or was there a 
sound, rational line of information to lead him to the 
said conclusion? 
THIS IS IMPORTANT TO CONSIDER 
because the common theist will behave as if his beliefs, 
or faith, simply fell into his head unknowingly. The 
theist will happily confide that he "
just has faith" and 
that you should "just have faith" and "accept your lord 
and savior jesus christ", as well. Why? Because "just 
having faith" breaks the natural decision making process. 
It, essentially, asks you to make a decision NOT to make 
a decision! 
 
With all of these so-called arguments for the "
Jesus 
Christ, the savior" is not the Christian community 
attempting to appeal to our intelligence? If not, then 
what? If we are capable of making a rational and right 
choice before accepting 'jesus', what does this reveal 
about our decision making ability? For one, it proves 
that Christian theists know very well that man is fully 
capable of making intelligent decisions independently of 
'god', 'jesus' or a 'holy ghost's' guidance and control.  
 
Therefore, one can only question, "
Why is our intelligence 
necessary and reliable only when confirming the decisions 
that support us adopting and propagating their belief 
system
?" And, " If we are capable of determining whether or 
not to be a slave to 'jesus', why aren’t we capable of 
successfully determining the best for ourselves in other 
matters in life?" The answer is simple: we are! However, 
this is feared by theists, because thinking for ourselves 
will ultimately result in acting by and for ourselves. This 
would surely threaten the slaves’ dependency on his 
master. 
 
Now.. 
 
It should now be understandable as to why the 
advocates of religion seek to hurl such hazardous 
constraints on our brains and body. Critical thinking


--- PAGE 11 ---
The Black God: An Anthology of Truth 
 11
and free thought are formidable opponents to anyone 
wanting to make a person docile and submissive, 
mentally and/or physically. To counter our natural 
tendency to want to think things through, weigh our 
options and make the best decision, religion introduces 
and encourages various thought-interrupting 
mechanisms. Namely: belief and faith. Therefore, I offer, 
once more, that anyone who adopts, defends and 
celebrates these kinds of psychological destructive 
practices is dangerous both in principle and in practice.  
 
I don't 'kick it' with wild beasts. Fight or flight.. 
 
How can we be certain that believing in a mystery god 
and is the right decision, if we can not rely on our mind 
to make the right choice anyway? A common reply by 
the Christian theist and, in fact, nearly all religious 
institutions, is that we should 'just believe' and we will 
be rewarded later for our obedience. It is this 'die and go 
to heaven', 'look before you leap', 'trust me I know what 
I’m doing' type of attitude that seduces so many people 
to give their lives for the proverbial 'pie in the sky' 
nonsense of religion. By asking us to 'just believe', or 
'have faith', theists are essentially asking us to act 
without thinking and to behave without considering the 
consequences of our actions. We are encouraged not to 
trouble ourselves by critically analyzing our religious 
doctrines and practices. We are 'reassured' by theists 
that, by not questioning now, we will be rewarded later. 
Therefore, if you are fishing for religion, your only 
definite guarantee of success is virtually leaping out of 
the boat head first and into the pool of beliefs, customs 
and traditions. It should be no question that the theist is 
giving us all a colorful invitation to exercise our 
gullibility! 
 
Our father who art in heaven…  
 
Many theists offer that their mystery god is our 'creator' 
and, thus, rightfully deserves our obedience. Thus, we 
must submit to the so-called mystery god in order to 
avoid punishment and receive reward. In this way, we, 
again, become very much like little children trying to 
'make daddy happy.' The theist will even suggest that 
we are the 'children of god' and 'jesus' is a kind of 
parental figure. 
 
Consider the following: 
 
My Earth and I decide to begin a family. Within ten 
years, we birth ten children. I decide that I would like 
all of my children to attend college and obtain degrees in 
Engineering and Physics for the purpose of establishing 
the solar energy company for inner-city residents. This is 
my will. After my children reach adulthood, one by one, 
they decide they would rather be rap artists instead. Do 
I have the right to sabotage their lives, subject them to 
endless torment and cause them intense psychological 
anguish to them if they fail to accept my will? Do your 
parents? No. As adults, they have the ability and 
responsibility to manifest their own will. This analogy, 
once again, may fail to convey the complete message. 
This is because, to begin with, the parental 'god' in 
theology is no where to be found. 'He' is a mystery. 
Additionally, unlike our personal parents, there is no 
objective proof that 'he' is our creator or has crafted a 
'will' for us to follow/obey. Unfortunately, theists must 
make believe other reasons why we are required to 
submit to their mystery god.  
 
Ooh, you gon' get a whuppin'... 
 
It doesn’t matter if a person is civilized and does right in 
all his undertakings. If he is unwilling to accept the so-
called 'god' as his maker and owner, then he will be 
punished with a severe punishment. It is this line of 
emotional 'reasoning' that is often reserved for the 
individual who is intellectually established enough to 
recognize the weak foundation of religious beliefs. 
Intimidation is mental coercion. Consciously or 
subconsciously, religion attempts to chisel away at mans 
confidence in himself until he becomes docile, timid and 
doubtful of his own self-control.  
 
Decisions are generally based on one or more of four 
basic elements: 1) 
Knowledge, 2) Emotion, 3) Ignorance 
and 4) Urgency. As already discussed in previous blogs, 
knowledge is always the most reliable factor for 
determining a course of action. Emotions, ignorance and 
haste are all unsound bridges to successful decision 
making. While we are constantly being compelled to 
utilize factors #2, #3, #4, rarely are we exposed to 
factor #1 as a viable avenue of action. We are given 
everything, but a strong foundation to make decisions 
and, hence, structure our lives. 
 
die, Die, DIE…you doubting thomas!  
 
Theology requires that we must believe without 
question or be tagged as evil, immoral, amoral or damn 
to hell. Extreme as it may seem, in the religious 
paradigm, to 'doubt' literally means to die. Perhaps not 
doubting was a simple matter in the days before easy 
access to scientific thinking and living. Unfortunately, 
events like blood turning into wine, rods turning into 
snakes, men walking on water, angels, demons and 
monsters are just not a visible part of mans existence 
now-a-days. (
As if they ever were) 
 
The act of making a decision itself involves identifying 
and evaluating all alternatives and choosing the most 
rational option from a given selection. Theology often 
attempts to disrupt the natural process of decision 
making by setting up unnecessary emotional time 
constraints on its believers. For instance, it is the 
position of the Christian community that the so-called


--- PAGE 12 ---
The Black God: An Anthology of Truth 
 12
"Jesus" is en route from behind the clouds in the sky 
(coming to 'get' all of us non-believers) and we must 
choose now to submit or we will be punished upon his 
arrival. Perhaps a few Christians actually believe 
"Jesus" really IS coming to save or destroy those who do 
not believe their theology and this is their reason for 
insisting that making a decision to submit is such an 
urgent matter? However, what is this so-called urgency 
founded on? Why is man told that he must choose at 
this point, in this time and on this day? Is it because the 
bible, written quran, "jesus", or the so-called mystery 
god said so? Or maybe someone else gave this instruction 
to us? Wouldn’t it be a risky to rush this kind of 
decision? If it is such an important matter, then a 
detailed and thorough investigation and evaluation, 
regardless of the said impending danger, is warranted, is 
it not? 
 
In fact, delaying making a decision can be an important 
and necessary aspect of being successful in our 
undertakings. However, delaying the decision making 
process and not automatically believing in the teachings 
of Christianity allows us to search for additional 
information, wait for more suitable alternatives to arise, 
or even to change our minds. This means that it would 
be a disadvantage for Christians to encourage us to be 
careful, investigate all we can, and, in our own good 
time, decide to 'accept jesus.' Instead, the Christian 
community sabotages our ability to make sound 
decisions by inducing fear in the weak and rushing them 
to believe. Also by establishing social institutions and 
practices which insulate its believers and further 
reinforces the idea of embracing ignorance. 
 
Indeed, there will be numerous occasions when we will 
be required to act without complete certainty of the 
outcome. However, this does not mean that we should 
put our feet in the 'circle of belief' and 'eenie meenie 
minie mo' our decisions in life. We still are obliged to 
make a decision based on our knowledge and 
understanding of the best available evidence. 
Unfortunately for theists, the best avenue available to 
us now-a-days is not within the confines of the bible, 
written quran, or any religious leader or doctrine. It is a 
scientific method which allows us to make corrections, 
try new possible solutions, and discard the course of 
action that is not all-wise and right and exact. All things 
which are not compatible with the rigid, dogmatic 
doctrine of 'have faith or else!' 
 
Make no mistake, when the theist asks us to believe in 
his religious teachings, he is ultimately demanding us to 
believe or suffer the consequences. What a choice. Once 
again, in the religious paradigm, the command itself is 
not the stimulus for obedience. When the theist offers 
that they are obeying god because faith is an 
outstanding practice or 'god said so', it is not the whole 
truth. Instead, their ultimate motivation is the 
psychological promise of sanction. 
 
Offering that we will be punished or destroyed is only 
poor substitution for concise explanation and sound 
argumentation. Threats do not compel mentally grown 
people into action. We have to break the rope of 
arbitrary, irrational and emotion action. If theology 
declares that something is right, wrong, evil, or immoral, 
then we demand a more thorough explanation than 
because 'god says so' or the 'bible tells me so.' 
 
The theist trains himself to believe that it is wrong to 
question the so-called 'authority' of their 'god', religious 
book, or any leader of their religious institution. This 
actually tricks the theist into blindly accepting whatever 
a person tells them they must believe. Thus, they expect 
to be punished for independent thought and 
investigation. They are programmed to feel guilty if 
they do not habitually involve themselves in religious 
customs. And they believe they rightly deserve hard 
times and headaches for the very thought of leaving the 
hold of their mystery god. This internal guilt and lack of 
self-confidence combined with a promise of eternal 
reprimand and punishment, keeps the theist 'in his 
place.' In fact, the theist happily and wholeheartedly 
blindly accepts the notion that it is 'meant' for him to be 
a slave or servant to his 'god.' Therefore, learning how to 
be a 'true believer' really means learning how to think 
and act like a victim. Helplessness, whether feigned or 
real, is the prerequisite of receiving help from their so-
called mystery god. 
 
Questions: 
 
- On what grounds should we consider forfeiting our evident 
self-control to become directed by the not-so-evident mystery 
god of religion?  
 
- Where is the evidence to show that we are incompetent and 
a threat to ourselves in the absence of that mystery god's 
direction and guidance? 
 
- Where is the proof that the theist is receiving any success 
in life that is outside of the grasps of the secular individual?
  
 
Unfortunately, I can assure you that no theist will 
sincerely address, or consider, the above questions as 
long as they remain satisfied with 'just believing?' 
 
The constant insistence of there being a mystery god 
who is superior to us, but unseen only works to produce 
a weak, slave minded people. What if religious people 
directed as much time and energy trying to discover and 
learn about themselves as they do their mystery god? 
What would happen if each theist would simply make a 
more earnest effort to improve their decision making 
process, instead of devaluing themselves and their 
abilities by surrendering to their beliefs? It should be


--- PAGE 13 ---
The Black God: An Anthology of Truth 
clear that theology tries to 'convince' us that we are 
unable to guide ourselves, protect our families, and 
control our environment (i.e. homes, neighborhood, etc.) 
without tagging the problem-solving palm of the 
invisible "Jesus" in the sky. 
 
I don't fault religion for being the product of 
superstitious and unaware minds. I, also, do not hate 
theists for holding the beliefs that they do. However, I 
am very skeptical of the man or woman who will 
continue to rely on religion as his or her guide and 
measure in life after they have been exposed to scientific 
and mathematical evidence that contradicts their belief 
system. Why would I expect someone to deal equally 
with me in any other area of life, if they have already 
expressed a bias in favor of belief and mysteries? If 
someone proposes that myths and assumptions about 
themselves and the universe hold a greater importance 
and authority than their own observation, experience 
and logic, then such a person is a certified weak link in 
the chain of civilization.  
 
Any rule, command or law must be understood before 
one acts. We are not absent-minded children. 
Unfortunately, because the Nation of Gods and Earths 
demand evidence of the mystery god and the reason for 
'his' religious rules before we comply, we are cited as 
being negative, evil, rebellious, and oppositional or 
wicked. It is for this reason, the members of the Nation 
of Gods and Earths are so often portrayed as being 
pitted against morals and ethics. I would ask the theist 
who holds this position, "
Does the so-called mystery god 
submit to the rules and commandments of your religion?" 
"Are his regulations simply for us or does he abide by them 
as well?" The fact is, the mystery god cannot submit to 
himself. If he is the author of the theist's moral code, 
then he simply does not have to comply with it. 
Therefore, what is keeping that so-called mystery god 
civilized, moral and upright? Obviously, the same thing 
that is keeping the Nation of Gods and Earths civilized, 
our own intelligence. 
 
But, of course, not too many people can understand this 
because they have LOST THEIR MIND!!! 
 
Thank you Jesus! : P 
 
Peace 
 
“Religion is excellent stuff for keeping common people quiet."   Napoleon Bonaparte 
 
"It ain't the parts of the Bible that I can't understand that bother me, it is the parts that I do understand." 
 Mark Twain 
 
"The invisible and the non-existent look very much alike." Delos B. McKown, Ph.D.,  U.S. professor, philosopher, 
author    Former clergyman 
 
"A man's ethical behavior should be based effectually on sympathy, education, and social ties; no religious basis is 
necessary. Man would indeed be in a poor way if he had to be restrained by fear of punishment and hope of 
reward after death."  Albert Einstein 
 
"The sailor does not pray for wind, he learns to sail"  Gustaf Lindborg 
 
“I distrust those people who know so well what God wants them to do because I notice it always coincides with 
their own desires.” Susan B. Anthony (1820-1906)  U.S. reformer, suffragist  
 
“Every man thinks God is on his side. The rich and powerful know he is.” Jean Anouilh (1910- )  French dramatist, playwright 
 
“Unconditional love is a characteristic of the Christian faith, such as that demonstrated by God in the form of a 
place of eternal torture for the unsaved.” Anonymous 
 
“If you were taught that elves caused rain, every time it rained, you’d see the proof of elves.”  Anonymous  
 
“If your young, unmarried daughter, Mary, told you that she was pregnant but still a virgin, having been told by 
an angel that she had been impregnated by God himself, would you believe her?”  Anonymous 
 
“When you repeat the same thing over and over, Sunday after Sunday, that makes people believe it whether it is 
true or not. It also makes writing theology easy.”   Franz Bibfeldt  
 
"Any idiot can believe in Jesus H. Christ. To truly understand all that confusion in the gospels takes a real 
contortionist scholar."    Franz Bibfeldt, German theologian 
 
 13
“Believe nothing, O monks, merely because you have been told it ... or because it is traditional, or because you 
yourselves have imagined it.  Do not believe what your teacher tells you merely out of respect for the teacher. 
But whatsoever, after due examination and analysis, you find to be conducive to the good, the benefit, the 
welfare of all beings – that doctrine believe and cling to, and take it as your guide.”   Gautama Buddha


--- PAGE 14 ---
The Black God: An Anthology of Truth 
 14
Why I Don’t Believe in a Mystery God 
The Supreme Understanding Allah 
Allah’s Garden (Atlanta, GA) 
 
Many people agree with me that the Black man is 
God, that he is "godly", that we are "divine", or that 
God "inhabits" man (ie, temple of God), or that "His" 
spirit is in "us". I'm not saying that when I say the 
Blackman is God. I'm saying the Black man is God. 
I'm saying God is the Blackman. I'm saying there is 
NO mystery God. Here are some reasons why: 
 
20. You can have a conversation with God and get bad 
advice. Guess who you're talking to? Must be you. 
Otherwise how can serial killers and psychopaths 
claim God told them what to do? If they aren't 
credible, is ANYBODY who claims to hear from God? 
Think about it. Ever noticed that people always claim 
they “know” God is real because they made it through 
some crazy situation alive? Well what about the 
people that don’t make it? You can have a personal 
relationship with ANYTHING you imagine or believe 
in. That doesn’t make it real. 
 
19. How could this Mystery Being be omniscient and 
change his mind at whim? You mean to tell me God 
made man and then realized he made a mistake? Just 
look through the Old Testament and see how many 
times he changed his mind in talking to Moses alone. 
And this is not unique to the OT. God changes his 
mind in every people's belief system. Why? People 
make mistakes. But a spirit? How? 
 
18. If you were trying to get a life or death message to 
EVERYONE on the planet, would you send ONE guy 
(the religious "savior") who only reaches a couple 
thousand in his life, then leave the rest up to chance? 
 
17. Why create a heaven and hell for people to suffer 
due to the free will you gave them as well? Especially 
when the hell we endure on earth pushes many of us 
to follow the "wrong" path. How much of that is 
"fair"? 
 
16. Why can't an omnipotent God destroy the 
invisible devil? And if he CAN but doesn't, why does 
he want his poor believers to continue to suffer? 
 
15. If there is a scientific explanation for everyday 
phenomena (ie, rain comes from the water cycle, the 
reproductive process produces children), why do we 
still have this "backwater" concept of God, a God who 
sends floods and gives and takes life? It’s funny to 
hear grown, educated people speak on their God as 
what wakes them up daily. How simple-minded. 
Either your alarm clock or biological clock wakes you. 
The human body sleeps to wake up. That’s the nature 
of the biological process we call “sleep.” If you don’t 
wake up, it’s because you are dead. There is no Divine 
Intervention necessary in that process. 
 
14. People seem to manipulate God's actions and 
intentions to fit the course of events as they happen. If 
someone has cancer, the believers say God will bring 
them out of it, and so they pray. If that person dies, 
the believers say it was that person's time. If you pray 
for rent money, and get some money, you thank God. 
If you don’t get your money, you take the blame and 
pray for something else. 
 
13. How does an omnipotent God allow so much evil 
and bloodshed to occur specifically in his name?  
 
12. Why does the same God allow for so many 
religions (many of which predate the Bible), and even 
so many different versions of the Bible and Christian 
theology? Can't he just send his one true religion into 
our brains? If the idea is that we must choose (free 
will!), shouldn’t God provide better evidence? Jesus 
was a great guy, but the Christian church also 
ordained slavery. Not very convincing. And there are 
tons of people who have never seen a Bible or Quran 
or any other scripture to this day, not to mention the 
billions of people who came BEFORE the organized 
theologies of the present age. What about them? 
 
11. If we know Santa Claus is a myth with a purpose 
(behavioral control of children), why cant we 
conclude the same for the Mystery God (behavioral 
control of the masses)? 
 
10. Isn’t it curious that poor and disenfranchised 
people are the most religious? Meanwhile wealthy 
white folks don’t wait for, or give credit to, God on 
ANYTHING. The people that have the LEAST, pray 
the MOST. Hmmm. Everyone knows you can’t get 
SOMETHING out of NOTHING…except religious 
people. Religion is the ultimate pyramid scheme. 
 
9. Karl Marx said religion is the opium of the masses. 
We escape into believing in something that will one 
day relieve us of our daily suffering. Especially when 
you think about slavery and the religious ideas given 
to the slaves (hell on earth, pray and submit for


--- PAGE 15 ---
The Black God: An Anthology of Truth 
heaven when you die), and the religion given to 
people when white people take over their land. 
 
8. Freud said religion provides an idealized father 
figure for people. Maybe you believe in a Mystery 
God because you need a better daddy, or a better 
"man". 
 
7. All of the above is caused by the Sun of Man/Son of 
Man. We are the creators of life and the universe. We 
wrote the universe in a language that perpetuates 
itself and there is nothing that occurs outside of our 
original programming. 
 
6. White people fear the rise of a Black Messiah from 
the Black community (according to COINTELPRO 
documents). Black people are awaiting a white 
Messiah from heaven. How dumb. Look in the mirror. 
You are the Son of Man. 
 
5. The Black man has never seen heard tasted or felt 
ANYTHING greater than himself. Ever. 
 
4. If you leave a group of kids in the woods and allow 
them to raise themselves without outside info, they 
WON’T pray or wait on a "god" for ANYTHING. The 
Mystery God has to be TAUGHT. 
 
3. Then again, after some generations those kids may 
have made up a god or two to explain the things they 
cant because of limited knowledge. But damn, we 
know WAY too much to have a God of fire, or rain, or 
a God of life and death (oops, we DO!) 
 
2. Supreme Being means the highest level of existence. 
Anything that exists can be measured. Even air 
pressure and magnetism can be scientifically 
identified. Spooks, spirits, and gods aren't real. 
They're ideas. The Black man is Supreme. 
 
1. Your God is your imaginary friend. You are free to 
believe in him. But damn you should know better by 
now! 
 
 
Where Did the Universe Come From? 
By Supreme Scientist Allah 
Cream City (Milwaukee, WI) 
 
Most people have been taught to believe that their "God" is 
the creator of the natural world and, thus, is not subject to 
the laws of nature. 
 
Therefore, if this so-called "God" is supposed to have been 
in existence BEFORE the natural universe, "he" must be 
interpreted as being "super" Natural. This is fundamental 
in our understanding of the claim of the believer. The 
natural world includes more than just our planet or solar 
system. It is the entire Universe. In other words, the so-
called "God" is not merely said to be in some distant 
location "within" the Universe, "he" is, in fact, "beyond" or 
"outside" of the Universe itself. 
 
This belief positions this "God" tactically outside the 
requirement of "submission". Understanding that the 
physical composition of the Universe is essentially energy 
and matter, the idea of such a "God" simply disintegrates 
into a nothingness that tis beyond the comprehension of 
Man and the tools of Science. The "God" then has an 
"existence" that is foreign to our concept of existence. If 
the so-called "God" is a Man, or possesses 
anthropomorphic qualities, as most religious people teach, 
then he must be a physical being who interacts with energy 
and Matter. 
 15
 
Suppose, for the sake of argument and ignorance, that we 
agree that we must surrender ourselves to the "laws of 
nature". Firstly, this does not even begin to demonstrate 
that this so-called "God" exists at all. For example, let's 
say that I discovered a group of icicles outside of my 
bedroom window one winter morning and a clergyman 
was to insist that Frosty the Snowman put them there while 
I was sleeping. By only looking at the icicles themselves is 
neither evidence of a Frosty the Snowman nor the capacity 
of "Mr. Frosty" to accomplish such an act. This example 
on a small level is what religious people attempt to argue 
on a Universal level. That is to say, that a Mystery God put 
the Universe here. Furthermore, the clergyman should not 
feel insulted when I laugh emphatically at their request that 
I "submit to Frosty" based on this flimsy and fantastic 
"evidence". 
 
In the same manner, the "laws of nature" do not qualify as 
reliable evidence to confirm the existence of a so-called 
"mystery God". Just as any scientist would require Frosty 
to reveal himself and reproduce the icicles outside of my 
window, we are motivated to request that the so-called 
"God" show himself and 
prove to be the "creator" of 
the Universe. Otherwise, we 
are forced to make the 
"mystery God" and "Frosty" 
join hands together and waltz 
back into the wonderland of 
fantasy and imagination.


--- PAGE 16 ---
The Black God: An Anthology of Truth 
 16
The "laws of nature" are no more evidence for a "missing 
God" than they are for a Supreme Ra, Quetzalcoatl, Ogun, 
Holy Ghost, Legba, Jesus, Shiva, Unkulunkulu, Elohim, 
Zeus, or Yama of any other religion. In actuality, often the 
"believer" is only asserting that the "mystery God" is the 
cause of the natural world because he does not know why 
natural phenomena operate the way it does. This is what 
the believer is really expresses when he is saying that the 
Original Man must "submit" to the "laws of the Universe". 
 
The believer will say that the mysterious "power" of the 
so-called "God" sustains all the life on Earth, the planets 
that orbit the sun and, even, the sun that is traveling 
through the galaxy and all things therein. Therefore, with 
the "mystery God's" so-called "power", the Universe 
would regress into a series of chaotic and unorganized 
events. The oceans would overrun the land, the planets 
would collide in a violent cataclysm, the mountains would 
crumble into pieces, and all the know laws of physics and 
mathematics would disappear into thin air. By some 
unknown means, the religious Community believes the so-
called "God" keeps the Universe in order. 
 
There is often the confusion that a "creator" of the 
Universe is implying that, at one time or another, the 
Universe was not in existence. It is common for the 
believer and the 85o ask "where did the Universe come 
from" or "how was the Universe created"? These types of 
questions coincide with the general attitude of a one-time 
"creation" of the Universe. We should obviously state that 
by "Universe", we mean the totality of all things which 
exist (Energy/Matter). 
 
It should be clear that we do not gain the advantage of 
Understanding by thinking the so-called "God" is the 
creator of the Universe. Sadly enough, the fact that the 
Universe has always been in existence is not already a 
"given" in this argument with the religious community. 
The believer assumes the Universe had a definite 
beginning some time in the past. To be clear, again, this is 
not referring to our present "solar system", they propose 
that there was a "time" where energy and matter itself was 
once non-existent. However, this is an obvious 
contradiction of the Law of Conservation, which states: 
 
Energy and Matter can neither be created nor destroyed, 
only transformed from state to state. 
 
Understanding this reality requires the believer to operate 
within a paradigm foreign to the religion mind. Suddenly, 
no longer can we rely on a temporal creation of life and 
matter. We are now forced to think in a method that better 
resembles the nature of the Universe itself: Cyclical. How 
could the "God" create what was already here? If we 
destroy the myth of a temporal beginning of the Universe, 
the so-called "mystery God" becomes impotent and 
obsolete. Pointing to a "super" natural cause of the 
Universe leads our minds away from ever seeking a natural 
cause of the Universe. This is literally a trick, in that it 
attempts to assert a physical effect without a physical 
cause. 
 
The very idea that we must appeal to a so-called "mystery 
God" in order to Understand the world around us reflects 
our ignorance and fear of science. By asserting that the so-
called "mystery God" is the creator of the Universe, it 
destroys the will of a person to want to explore and 
investigate the "natural" world. This is the case when they 
continue daily to program the 85 that all that the "true 
origin and operation" of the universe is "super" natural. 
This automatically places a false limitation 
on science. It implies that a person is free to experiment 
and investigate the natural world all they want but, 
eventually, everyone must consult religion for the truth. 
With this type of attitude, we fall off the ledge before we 
even begin to move in the right direction. Regardless is 
someone introduces natural evidence about how the world 
operates, the believer's preconceived notion of a 
"mysterious God" being the "cause" of all things will blind 
them from the actual facts. 
 
The attempt of the "believer" to call upon this Mystery of 
Missing god to rescue them from their ignorance is 
obvious to the wise and intelligent. It should be noted that 
before one can offer with confidence that a thing is "super" 
natural, they must have a proper Understanding of what is 
NATURAL. 
 
For example: let's suppose that the electricity "goes out" in 
your home. Before you should suggest, to the Scientific 
Community, it was a signal from a "super" natural god, 
you first would have to be certain that you could not 
connect this occurrence with your fuse box in the basement 
of your home. Even if you could not discover the cause of 
the blackout through your initial investigation, attributing 
it to a Mystery God does not explain it either. The cause 
might not be discovered by you until you familiarize 
yourself with electrical engineering or discover that your 
local power plant was experiencing difficulties. Perhaps it 
will not be until that time that you will have learned that 
the invisible "hand" of the mystery god did not pull the 
"off switch". But, instead, it was actually your brain that 
was temporarily "off" when you fell a victim to belief. 
 
In the same manner, our discoveries in science and 
mathematics are constantly retiring that so-called "mystery 
God" from his position as the supreme being. We are 
becoming aware that all things have a natural and logical 
explanation. However, those who utilize "belief" will 
continue to attribute a "super" natural cause to various 
phenomena in life, because they will not learn who causing 
all that above to happen by letting The Gods and Earths 
teach them the science of Life. 
 
The concept of the infinity of energy and matter is difficult 
to understand by many (This is ironic when it is often said 
that the mystery god was "always here"). Oftentimes, when 
people think of the "big bang" or great expansion, they 
assume that it happened in a specific location within the


--- PAGE 17 ---
The Black God: An Anthology of Truth 
 17
Universe and then spread outwards from that particular 
place. When the truth of the matter is, the great expansion 
occurred everywhere. It was the entire volume of the 
Universe expanding from a highly dense and temperate 
state. So it is not that there was an beginning of the energy 
and matter itself, because the basic constituents necessary 
for life where already in existence before the so-called 
"bang" or expansion began. The fact that 
this event is known as the "big bang" by some at all only 
continues to cloud this phenomenon in misunderstanding. 
As we are aware in nature, a bang normally has a definite 
beginning and ending, regardless it be sound or explosion. 
Whereas the term expansion trains our mentality to 
conceptualize this is as what is truly is; an on-going event, 
even to the date of this writing. We are still living in the 
Great Expansion. The matter and energy which constitutes 
our physical bodies and our surroundings was once a part 
of that dense plasma and continues to expand and create 
and make other phenomena in the Universe. Thus, we can 
understand what the believer commonly and clumsily calls 
a "beginning" of the Universe, only points to a new phase 
of the Universe. The Black Man is the primarily "creator" 
of the Universe simply because he is the Supreme Mover 
or motivator of change on all levels. In other words, the 
Universe did not begin with some spook playing with his 
magic wand or "uttering" words in some mystical realm. 
We are only required to do a minimal degree of resource to 
discover that that is "utterly" ridiculous to interpret as 
being literally true and absolutely fascinating when one 
utilizes the Science of Life to interpret. 
 
As already pointed out, creating a so-called "mystery god" 
as the "creator", does not aid the believer in understanding 
the Universe. The Nation of Gods and Earths recognize 
that the Universe (energy and matter regardless of form or 
location) itself includes everything within the Sun, Moon 
and The Stars and does require an independent cause. For 
something to be the cause of a given effect, it must exist, 
which means it must be either energy or matter also. 
Therefore, it must already be a part of the Universe. To say 
that something caused (or created) the universe is to make 
that mystery "thing" outside, beyond and before energy 
and matter. We have already discussed the problems with 
such a belief. The Natural Universe is everything, so 
questions such as "how did the universe get here" or 
"where did animals or people come from", can be referred 
to the Born degree of the 1-10 (part of the Eight Point 
Curriculum of the Nation of Gods and Earths) and the Law 
of Conservation of Energy. After it is Understood that 
"everything" was already here, just not in its present form 
or condition, we can begin to address the question in 
regards to how the Universe evolved or was "made" into 
the state they detect now-a-days. This is where the 
Understanding of the true concept of "creator" can be 
applied, that is to say how Allah, the Original Man shapes 
and molds his environment. Hence, we can begin to 
eliminate the need to 911 the so-called "mystery god" to 
understand the natural world. 
 
To the average citizen, there is no fundamental difference 
between a religious "law", a social "law", or a "law" of 
nature. It is generally agreed that, for the purpose of 
establishing and maintaining orderly conduct among 
citizens in society, there is a need to implement and 
enforce a set of principles, rules and regulations. Whether 
statutes, ordinances, canons, or commandments, our lives 
our permeated with the idea of an established order and an 
external agent whose purpose is to enforce the said order. 
What is not understood, however, is that attaching a 
legislature, judge, jury and cop to the concept of law is 
only useful when describing laws of a society. We can see 
the root of this misunderstanding and why such analogies 
fail when they are assigned to phenomena in nature. There 
is no "outside" enforcer of the laws of mathematics. 
Mathematics itself, or rather violating the laws of 
Mathematics will compel you to right yourself or destroy 
yourself. You decide. 
 
The believer holds that the laws of nature are dominating 
forces and, thus, we are required to submit to them. 
Whereas the Nation of Gods and Earths know and 
understand that the said laws are inherent in the Black 
Man's body (The Universe) and the Original Man can 
manipulate and use them to his advantage (Building 
Civilization) or disadvantage (Destroying Civilization) 
through study, experiment and understanding. What we 
call the "Universe" is not a "thing" that can be observed 
separately from ourselves or our environment. It is 
EVERYTHING. The Universe is our collective concept of 
our environment. What we call "laws" are based on our 
supreme understanding of the Universe and the forces 
operative within it. Thus, the "laws" develop and change as 
our Understanding of the Universe develops and changes. 
There was once a time when Man assumed that the Earth 
was the center of the Universe, and that the Sun and other 
planets revolved around the Earth. It was with this Earth 
centered perspective that we founded our "laws". 
However, the more we made observations and performed 
experiments in our world, we came to see that this was not 
the reality. The same applies to our prior understanding of 
the atom or many aspects of physics and mathematics. It is 
not as though the behavior of the Universe has changed, 
but rather our Understanding of the said behavior. The 
Law is a mental description. When an average person sees 
an apple fall from a tree, they do not see the law of gravity. 
They only observe the motion of an object. But a physicist 
or mathematician, with UNDERSTANDING, will see the 
underlying principles (equations) behind the event which is 
taking place. The law is the description that you draw up in 
the mind that gives order to the physical manifestation. 
The greater your Understanding is of the Universe and the 
behavior of the Universe, the greater you can order that 
Universe. We Understand that the Black Man is the first 
and the best observer (The Best Knower) of the operations 
of the Universe and that he is responsible for showing 
other people in Civilization how to see the laws of the 
Universe, therefore, he is the "creator" of the Universe. 
This is not to say that the laws of nature are products of 
our imagination. They are very real, in the sense that they


--- PAGE 18 ---
The Black God: An Anthology of Truth 
 18
give us the most accurate description of the behavior of 
real life events. But the laws do not "cause" the events, 
they are inherent in the events themselves. 
 
A scientific law is a description of a regularly repeating 
action in nature and is founded upon extensive periods of 
observation and experimentation. There is so much reliable 
evidence for a Law that it is recognized as being 
immutable. A religious or societal "law" is not to be 
confused with a scientific law of nature. The laws of a 
society describe how Man SHOULD act. The laws of 
nature describe how nature DOES act. If a Man breaks a 
law in a given society or religion (and is caught), he is 
usually punished through sanction. This law remains 
despite Man's violation. On the other hand, a Man can not 
"break" a scientific law of nature. If a Man jumps off of 
Allah School In Mecca and "falls" upwards, he would have 
introduced evidence to contradict the known "laws" of 
gravity. By demonstrating that the "law" of gravity is not 
as regular or consistent as Our measurements have shown, 
the only thing he would have "broken" would be our 
current UNDERSTANDING of the tendency of bodies to 
falls towards the center of the Earth. In Science, a Law is 
without contradiction. Therefore, by demonstrating a 
contradiction, the "law of gravity" would no longer be 
recognized as a "law". Given such evidence, it would then 
be the goal of scientists to further observe and experiment 
for the purpose of better grasping the nature of how gravity 
operates. 
 
If we would have agreed that we must submit to the 
Universe based on our prior understanding of the "laws" of 
nature, there would not have been any growth and 
development in Civilization. The list is far too extensive to 
even briefly begin to account for in terms of the advances 
Man has gained in life through our diligent exploration and 
conquer of the world around us. If we would have accepted 
the restrictions often cited by the religious Community, we 
may have never elevated beyond the wheel and chariot 
Civilizations of the past. 
 
Every Black Man and Woman carries the capacity to 
establish and execute his own will. This must be actualized 
by one ownself before one can even begin to want to 
escape from the assumed dominion of their environment. 
When one fully Understands the foundation degree of the 
Student Enrollment, one will see that attributing the 
environment as a limiting factor is no longer an intelligent 
option. If you truly Understand yourself to be "the maker, 
the owner, the cream of the planet Earth, father of 
civilization and God the Universe", then you are 
unquestionably stating that you are the supreme and 
direct cause of your environment. If you the Black Man 
and you allow the Planet Earth to shape and mold your 
environment, it is inevitable that you will be bound by 
certain limitations. 
 
To bow to our surroundings is a disgrace to Man's ability 
to govern. The Earth is precisely the Energy Allah Reveals 
Through Her. The Earth was not made by our Self for the 
purpose of being a terrestrial "prayer mat" for the Black 
Man. But rather it is a home for I Self Lord And Master, so 
that we can manifest a peaceful environment through the 
use of Mathematics. But is 
apparent that some would rather be a hostage in their Own 
House. Regardless of what we have been "told" in regards 
to Man's nature, what is the REALITY? It is "said" that 
Man is a slave to his environment, but the reality is Black 
Men are positively sculpting their neighborhoods, 
communities, cities, planet and Universe everyday and 
everywhere. Show me a 
Black Man who is a Slave (submitting) to the Earth and I 
will show you a Man who does not Understand himself. It 
is "said" that the Black Man is a savage, fool, and threat to 
himself without the mystery god, but the reality is We are 
shattering these myths of men through supreme acts and 
deeds just as quickly as they spew from the mouths of the 
ignorant 
 
Peace 
Why I am a Poor Righteous Teacher 
By True Mathematics Allah 
Mecca (Harlem, NY) 
 
Well, what does that mean? Lets define the phrase PRT. 
Poor means to have the lack of something in a certain 
criteria. 
 
I am poor because I lack greed; I am poor because I lack 
selfishness. I am Poor because I lack Ignorance. I am poor 
because I lack the need to keep my people ignorant to 
themselves. 
  
Those who teach mathematics, we don’t get glory or 
medals or money for our actions. We will gladly do this 
for free, our only reward is to save another person from 
lies and remove the weakness off their cipher. The reason 
why we are poor is because we sacrifice everything that 
we have in order for the big picture to come into fruition. I 
study a lot of things I read so much I wonder if it becomes 
selfish and then I always say I don’t keep it, I give it all 
away to all those who want to learn. 
 
That’s the sacrifice that we in the NGE make. We don’t 
keep anything hidden from the masses. 
 
When ones mind is consumed with every worldly device, 
one cannot truly build a strong mental. I care about food 
clothing and shelter, not excess of the above said, to the 
degree where I am spending 500 dollars on a pair of jeans 
or buying a million dollar house. I don’t need these things. 
If I have a mansion with 40 rooms in it, bet that I will be


--- PAGE 19 ---
The Black God: An Anthology of Truth 
 19
housing families and not having rooms just to say I got 
mad rooms in my house! There are blacks who have over 
400 million in their bank account and are doing nothing 
with it. They have it just to say ‘yo I got cake.’ We can 
change our own situations in this wilderness. There are 
enough black dollars to make a real change in the 
communities that we are in. Those athletes, movie stars, 
rappers and such have enough gold to make a serious 
change, but nobody wants to put their money together and 
do something big with it. If the white man can pool his 
bread to start big time companies, so can we. Status in 
America is based upon having a lot of one thing and not 
sharing the wealth with others in ways that can make a true 
change. Since this practice is common among most whites, 
the black people who have made it have accepted the same 
mindset. For example, Jay Z has all that bread, yet Bed-
Stuy is in shambles. He thinks giving out toys on 
Christmas is something? That’s that fake Mafia so called 
‘giving back’ routine. If you’re going to give back, really 
give back! He is using his money to enter in the ownership 
business of a NBA team. That does nothing at all for your 
community. 
 
The foundation of what a PRT is: Sacrifice. It’s the 
knowledge, as I see it, to the equation Of PRT. Equality is 
the fairness of the cipher and knowledge borns equality. 
 
For instance, carbon is the sixth element in the periodic 
table. It’s the most fairly distributed element in the 
universe. Everything has a level of carbon in it. 
 
So what does this tell us? 
 
That carbon is a necessity to Life and it deals with equality 
to all things so they can function properly. 
 
So the original people who study the truth, understand that 
it’s a necessity to tell those who don’t know and this deals 
with equality. Knowledge of self for the black family is a 
must in life, something all need equally. 
 
Now lets define righteous, which I see as the wisdom in 
the equation of PRT. I see it as acting in accord with moral 
thinking. Righteousness does not mean one free from 
error. We are not robots. It means that we strive for what’s 
right at all times and never lose focus of what’s right and 
what’s wrong in the world and with ourselves. 
 
Having knowledge of self, I am morally obligated to those 
who don’t have it. Righteousness is action. So ones actions 
must strive to be right and in accord with the truth at all 
times. The actions of the sacrifice that I have made for my 
people can bring about change to all those I meet and 
speak to. The nature of black people is to deal with 
equality amongst each other, that’s why you see black love 
can be the strongest, yet we are so distorted and divided it 
never truly comes into fruition. 
 
A lot of people always want to do right, yet they never act 
on these thoughts so nothing ever gets done. What is the 
sense of having a righteous thought if you don’t act upon 
it? 
 
Let’s define teacher, which I see as the understanding in 
the equation of PRT. We all know understanding is the 
best part of the learning process. A teacher with 
knowledge of self is the best one to facilitate this process 
to those who lack the understanding of themselves in the 
universe. 
 
I see a teacher as one who gives knowledge and 
understanding to those who lack it on any given thing in 
life to allow them to make progress. 
 
I have stood on my square and went through many ciphers 
in Harlem and BK and Queens to teach that the Blackman 
is God. I see black males wasting their lives away on the 
corner and can be found stepping to one and saying certain 
things to get him thinking. My whole purpose in doing 
this, is to get them thinking. 
 
I love the feeling when I hear, ‘hmm....’ when I am making 
knowledge born. I love the feeling when somebody says 
‘let me get your number so we can build.’ I love the 
feeling of knowing I am making a change in someone’s 
mind state. 
 
The main issues in the black community are that the right 
things are not being taught to us. We are bombarded with 
images and substances that will bring about no growth and 
development to make any real changes to our current 
condition. We don’t have enough teachers in the "hood" 
teaching the truth. Drug dealers and such are doing the 
teaching to the youth. When one is ignorant one eats to die 
and not to live. 
 
When one is ignorant, one deals with weapons of mass 
destruction and not weapons of mass construction. 
 
All I care about in life is the black family knowing their 
identity. Health care and Education are the pillars of any 
working civilization. 
 
Once we as blacks take control of these things we can take 
back our right full claim on this planet. This all starts with 
sacrifice, the application of moral thinking and telling the 
world why we are doing these things so they can do it also. 
 
Thus, all of the above is why I am a Poor Righteous 
Teacher. 
 
Peace.
ISLAM - In Self Lies All Mathematics 
PEACE - Please Educate All Children Equally 
ATOM - Allah The Original Man


--- PAGE 20 ---
The Black God: An Anthology of Truth 
 
What is an Earth? 
By Shabazz Adew Allah  
Mecca (Harlem, NY) 
 
What is an Earth? An Earth is a righteous Blackwoman who 
adheres to her true culture which is Islam. In this Nation of 
Gods and Earths (and since earliest history in such places as 
ancient India and Sumeria), the Blackman is God, symbolic 
to the Sun, while the Blackwoman (Queen of the Universe) 
is the Earth. 
 
The Earth is the 3rd planet from the sun. She is the only 
planet in the Solar System that is capable of bringing forth 
life. This is through the process of the Sun providing light 
and heat for the Earth to absorb (and the Moon to reflect, as 
this is the second nature of the Blackwoman. However the 
Moon lacks Wisdom (water) and has no life on it). This is 
reproduced exactly in the Blackmans relation to the woman. 
Just as the Earth brings forth life, or fruits of the seeds that 
God plants - The Blackwoman brings forth a child from the 
Blackman, which comes through her after 9 months. 
 
The Earth is approximately covered on its surface by 3/4ths 
of water. The Blackwoman, out of respect for herself, her 
culture, her children and her God, covers herself the same 
way. There are no veils worn in this nation, however the 
hair is usually, if not always, worn in a wrap or covering. 
An additional fact, which happens to be in support of 
keeping the hair natural and in a covering, is that Perms and 
straighteners, although well known to damage and destroy 
(kill) the hair - also cause cancer. Inquisitive (or doubtful) 
minds can research this. The Blackwoman is a Queen, and 
is treated as such in this nation, as in the Best Part. She was 
made by God to procreate the Human family. Without her, 
we have no us.
 
To Be or Born the Earth 
By Eboni Joy Asiatic Earth 
Allah’s Garden (Atlanta, GA) 
 
Earth is a title unique to women of the Nation of Gods 
and Earths.  We Earths refer to ourselves as such 
because as the original (Indigenous) women of this 
planet all human life was spawned from our womb; 
just as all life on the planet earth was born from her 
habitable properties – an extended water supply that is 
drinkable, oxygenated, and supports the generation 
and stability of cellular structures, large land masses, 
moderate temperatures, a breathable atmosphere, 
volcanic conditions, and gravitation.  These 
characteristics of our home planet can all be either 
literally or figuratively applied to the first home of man 
– his mother – because we original women’s bodies are 
naturally created suitable for habitation, as is the land 
and water of the planet Earth.  This is why we 
honorably carry the same name, because we bear 
many of our home planet’s traits and shoulder many of 
the equal responsibilities.   
 
 
There are 75 billion tons of biomass (living matter) on 
our planet, including humans, plants, animals, fungi, 
protests, archaea and bacteria.  The total weight of the 
planet is 6 sextillion tons 
(6,000,000,000,000,000,000,000).  The planet Earth 
reflects, refracts, and absorbs the light of the sun.  
There are seven continents (large divisions of land 
mass) on the planet and five oceans (large bodies of 
salt water that cover nearly three fourths of the earth’s 
surface).  Of the planet’s entire mass, 57,255,000 
square miles of it is land, and 139,685,000 square 
miles are water.  With all of these terrestrial beings and 
objects inhabiting the planet a great weight of 
responsibility comes with it.  The planet is accountable 
for maintaining the rotation of its satellite, the moon, 
through the reciprocal gravitational pull of both 
celestial bodies, as the planet itself is attracted to the 
sun due to it having the most powerful gravitational 
force in the solar system.  The earth is responsible for 
continuing to rotate around the sun while 
simultaneously traveling at 1,037 and 1/3
rd mph on its 
axial rotation.  And the planet earth must also shelter 
its organic life within an atmosphere that absorbs 
ultraviolet solar radiation, in which temperatures 
remain relatively moderate, and an atmosphere in 
which water that evaporates cannot escape the 
troposphere, and instead, distills back to the planet as 
water or ice to replenish her natural resources.   
 20
So how is it that a mortal woman can define herself as 
one as mighty as our home planet?  I understand we 
original Asiatic Black women to be Earth because we 
possess a womb perfectly organized to house eggs,


--- PAGE 21 ---
The Black God: An Anthology of Truth 
 21
release them monthly, receive sperm for the purpose of 
the egg’s fertilization, gestate embryos for nine months, 
and give birth to humanity.  Our life-bearing properties 
don’t stop there, however.  Before producing milk, our 
breasts secrete colostrum that provides our children 
with the immunoglobin, an antibody needed to fight 
bacteria and viruses until their own immune system 
becomes fully functioning, colostrum also coats their 
gastrointestinal track to help expel meconium (an 
infant’s first stool composed of materials ingested while 
in the uterus) and prevent jaundice.  Soon, our breast 
milk flows, and that provides every nutrient needed to 
sustain a growing infant’s life, including protein, fats, 
carbohydrates, vitamins, minerals, digestive enzymes, 
and hormones.  Breast milk is also a natural 
vaccination, providing antibodies that help infants and 
toddlers resist infection.  In the meantime, while 
nurturing our children with their first nutritious meal, 
we are getting them acclimated to the world around 
them – teaching them all about their environment and 
how to survive in it with a high quality of life.   
 
The Honorable Elijah Muhammad said, “A nation can 
rise no higher than its woman.”  That is because 
women are the first teachers of the seeds, and what we 
know to be valuable, right, and just, we instill in them, 
ensuring a bright future for our nation collectively.  We 
are inherently nurturing and empathetic, which makes 
us superb caretakers; promoting our child’s physical 
growth and development, the enhancement of our 
baby’s gross and fine motor skills, and ensuring their 
healthy psychological, emotional, cognitive, language, 
and social development.  We first instill in our children 
the basics – knowledge (reading, writing, and 
arithmetic).  Then we teach them how knowledge is 
functional and should be applied in their lives so that 
it is made useful and they become wise.  Then, based 
on the repercussions of their words and outcome of 
their actions, we teach our seeds critical thinking 
skills, so that with thorough examination they develop 
for themselves an understanding of the who’s, what’s, 
where’s, when’s, why’s and how’s.  With knowledge as 
their foundation and understanding as their guide our 
children begin to be molded into their own image and 
likeness, they become their own person, choosing their 
culture and determining how to live it of their own free 
will.  Through acts and deeds, whether right or wrong, 
we see our children’s display of power as they use their 
strength-of-will, self-awareness, and confidence to test 
the boundaries between the rules and regulations we 
enforce on them and those they desire to set for 
themselves, make ethical choices for themselves, and 
become influential among their peer group.  As they 
begin to live in accord with their truth, what they know 
through experience and observation to be right and 
just, our children become sole controllers of their own 
destiny, elevating to their fullest equality – infinity if 
they so choose – as they judge themselves and others, 
enact justice, and face their just rewards and penalties 
maturely.  Standing on their own square, founded in 
what’s true, right and just, they become God, and 
reflective of God, through righteous act and deed, not 
merely by nature.  They become their own man and 
woman, and we see God and Earth lived through them 
as they concurrently hold their post in building Allah’s 
World Manifest and destroying the devil’s civilization 
that exists all around and would seek to hinder them.  
As mothers of civilization, we see our children borne 
into fathers and mothers of civilization because of all 
the right foods, sustenance, and nurturance we 
instilled in them.  By choosing to be righteous and live 
righteously, we see our daughters become mothers of 
civilization in their own right, and watch our boys grow 
into men, and as the late, great Nina Simone said “Man 
becomes his God.”   
 
As sisters with knowledge of self, who are aware of our 
origins in this world and labor to regain our 
civilization, our role of Earth is greatest displayed in 
our rearing of the babies, however, it is not limited to 
that role alone.  We are held accountable for living in 
accord to Supreme Mathematics and the moral, ethical 
principles that the math entails.  By living the math, 
portraying it in our ways and actions, verbalizing it in 
our wise choice of words, we become living examples of 
earthliness and show forth the power of God by 
reflecting knowledge of self in the physical, as stated 
above, through wise words, ways and actions, and in 
righteous deeds.  We reflect God, the Asiatic Black man 
with knowledge of self, as the moon reflects the light of 
the sun, showing that the sun always shines by 
teaching knowledge of self and the science of life to 
those who have yet to be mentally born.  An Earth is a 
teacher to the physical seeds, our babies, and the 
mental seeds, those brothers and sisters who are not 
yet as intelligent and wise as we.  Yes, we original 
women with knowledge of self bear life physically, 
though we also present the truth to and exchange 
knowledge and wisdom with all human families, 
birthing them out of a mental death, thus we are life-
bearers in the mental sense as well. 
 
Being an Earth means being the best woman that you 
can possibly be, being a mother to the young, a role 
model to those yet to reach their full maturity, and first 
and foremost a student, sister, and wife to Allah God – 
the original (Indigenous) man with knowledge of 
himself as the supreme being in the universe and who 
lives in agreement with that truth.  Sisters live out the 
culture of Supreme Mathematics in many different 
ways.  We, as a nation, have our agreed upon 
restrictions – no pork, no marrying/mating with 
Caucasians.  Outside of that, we are free to live our 
culture through the proper application of the math.  
How I choose to be Earth in comparison to how my 
sister chooses to be Earth may be vastly different.  In 
having knowledge of self we are required to see and 
acknowledge our best parts, poor parts, and worst 
parts – refine the poor parts into useful land and 
destroy the worst parts of our character and behavior, 
being re-born as a true and living Earth. 
 
In January of 1997, a sister-friend of mine not of the 
NGE first showed me the Supreme Mathematics.  She 
had written down the principles and their basic 
meaning, her unique understanding of them in regards 
to her personality, emotional state, and also related


--- PAGE 22 ---
The Black God: An Anthology of Truth 
them to her zodiac sign.  I was immediately attracted to 
the math.  In retrospect, I know it was because the 
principles that compose it had been ingrained in me 
throughout my childhood.  They fell right in line with 
my own inherent and learned value system, and 
quenched my undying thirst for knowledge.  I copied 
the Supreme Mathematics into my own journal, 
looked-up the principles in a dictionary, and added my 
own understanding to the dictionary’s basic 
explanation of each axiom.  I meditated on each word, 
to see how the axioms could collectively help to 
enlighten me and strengthen my moral code.  This 
attraction to the truth led me, on the born day of 
February in that same year, to the Gods in C-Medina, 
who aided in my growth and development into a true 
and living Earth.  My desire to be the best woman I 
could be, one knowledgeable of history and culture, 
and wise to my role as a Queen, is what compelled me 
to study my lessons so that I could learn, live, and 
understand the purpose they served.  My stance as an 
atheist for 7 years leading up to my meeting the Gods, 
promoted my ability to accept the reality of God in 
person as the original Asiatic Black man.  My educator, 
Cincur Allah, p
rovided me with the Supreme Alphabet 
after testing my mastery of the Supreme Mathematics.  
He continued to test my knowledge and understanding 
as I progressed through my studies of the 120 Lessons, 
never holding my hand, ensuring that I was about this 
culture for the message, not the messenger, for 
knowledge and understanding of self, not to master the 
Black man.  He did, however, remain a constant guide 
and source of reference through my journey into 
Earthdom.  The Gods I was around allowed me to be a 
self-evaluator, and to refine in my own due time, once 
my I saw that certain aspects of my physical (be it 
dress or actions abroad) were not on the same level as 
my mental development.   
 22
 
It was me who determined when the time was right to 
evolve from civilized to completely righteous, wearing 
headwraps and three fourths of cloth.  Not a single God 
told me to wrap my head; it was a conscious choice of 
my own making.  And none of them had to suggest that 
I go natural because my hair had been chemical free 
for 3 years at the time I started living this culture.  I 
didn’t have to be convinced not to eat pork, because I 
had been a vegetarian for almost 5 years when I came 
into the knowledge of Supreme Mathematics and 
started dong my part to build Allah’s World Manifest.  
My interests were Black history, Indigenous cultures 
(so-called Indians), holistic health, and the book I was 
reading when I met the Gods was the Metu Neter.  You 
see, I had Earth in me from the start, as all original 
women have the potential for greatness by realizing the 
Earth in them.  However, what the Gods saw was my 
receptiveness to gaining the knowledge of who the true 
and living God is and insight into our natural way of 
life, they saw my interest in the science they were 
sharing with me and my appreciation for the 
knowledge of self they were instilling in me.  All of the 
above tells me that the universe aligned itself perfectly 
for me to come into the knowledge of the culture of 
Supreme Mathematics at just the right time, among 
the right people.  As this was, and still is, the culture 
that’s right for me, supports my ideologies, my moral 
code, my interests, 
this culture 
encouraged and 
strengthened my 
love for and 
dedication to all 
original people, 
and provided the 
necessary 
motivation to keep 
me ever-focused 
on my refinement 
and mental 
elevation. 
 
I have had my hell 
in this, crossed 
paths with devils 
in disguise as God, using the name of Allah to shield 
their dirty religion; had to send back sisters who were 
God groupies and amongst us for the man rather than 
the plan.  However, I chose to keep the best part 
preserved for myself knowing that there is no 
unrighteousness in the true and living.  I kept my 
focus on being among those brothers and sisters who I 
could study amongst, learn from, and manifest with.  
My constant goal in having knowledge of self has been 
the achievement of supreme enlightenment, and 
knowing the truth of God has enabled me to continue 
being led in the right direction, never misled by outside 
forces.  I traveled among the Gods and Earths, and 
with knowledge of self was born again as an Earth for 
the knowledge, wisdom, and understanding that 
Supreme Mathematics and 120 Lessons presented to 
me.  This culture and our lessons have led me to the 
study of so many other sciences, cultures, and 
righteous aspects of life, that I can confidently say I 
know what the meaning of life is because I know and 
understand who I am – a Nation Builder adding to 
positive productivity of the collective; a Poor Righteous 
Teacher leading by example with the knowledge of 
when to be the teacher and when it’s time to take the 
role of student, maintaining a chaos-free existence by 
treating people how I want to be treated; and a True 
and Living Earth – true, because I heed the truth once 
aware of it, also because I’m honest to others and 
myself (even if it means seeing the poor parts of me); 
living, because to be living is to be seen and heard and 
everything from my topics of conversation and 
intonations, to my dress, hair style, lack of make-up, 
my vegan diet, continued studies of Indigenous people 
throughout the Diaspora to show and prove our 
likeness and destroy the differences that have 
perpetrated our division… all of this is how I live my 
culture as an Earth.   
 
 
 
Sources: 
http://www.livescience.com/othernews/051118_early_
earth.html
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Life


--- PAGE 23 ---
The Black God: An Anthology of Truth 
 23
Who is BLACK and Who is Not? 
Are you confused about being Black? 
By Self Kingdom Allah 
Cream City (Milwaukee, WI) 
 
Peace to the Gods & Earths, the 5% and all who read this build.  
 
(BEFORE I go any further, I do know some of you do not know the NGE Lessons. So I will write this in a way that all can 
follow.) 
 
The devil is made from the original people by grafting and separating the germs. 
 
In the act of making the devil, the original people who were Yacub or part of Yacub 600 year process, birthed nationalities. 
The historical articles about making the devil, the process of grafting usually are the subject. When the separation process is 
ignored the understanding is missed. The understanding is not the only thing missed, but answers to other questions become 
more trivial.  
 
One of the most common question we come across, those of us with Knowledge of Self , is what and who are original 
(black). The answer to this question is no longer common sense, because of the SEPARATION process. What made the 
separation process just as important as the grafting process was its power to restrict grafting in. This is why we chose not to 
loose time. The separation was not solely based on skin tone.  It is apparent to us all, that some of us have a darker or lighter 
complexion than each other. We were also separated by hair texture, facial structure, beliefs, cultures, geographical location 
and language. 
 
Many of us have seen and heard Haitians, Jamaicans, Dominicans, Nigerians, Ghanaians, Puerto Ricans; Brazilians say that 
they are not black. A lot of them speak on their nationality as if it is their identity. The above so called Nationalities are mere 
products of the separation process.  Original people were separated by the different languages we speak, and mentally 
confined to a geographical location. I noticed with most Puerto Ricans, no matter how dark complexioned they are, they look 
at blacks in America as not their Nation, unless that person speaks fluent Spanish. Me having a Father who was born in the 
Dominican republic, noticed the difference between how Spanish speaking people treated me in comparison to how they 
treated my Spanish speaking cousins. This experience in itself, even as a young man, made me realize that some blacks do 
not even know they are black. They think they are not black because the language they speak. 
 
After studying this pattern it is only obvious to see that language is a tool used to enforce separation amongst the original 
people that come in all shades of black. 
 
When separating a group of people from another group of people because they speak different languages, to be successful 
you would put physical distance between them. 
 
The physical distance is called separation through land. I can't recall how many times I called a Laotian person a Vietnamese, 
a North Korean person a South Korean or vice versa. Even though the complexion, hair texture, facial features are the same, 
these people believe they are different. In certain areas in Korea you can walk to a South Korean town from a North Korean 
town within a couple of hours, yet the distance is enough to cause a mental separation between the people.  
 
All over the world the caste system is set up to give the colored man (Caucasian) a strong hold on the land. In places like 
Brazil, when taking a government census the blacks can put themselves down as white, majority do. They do this, because 
they have a want to be other than black. This causes the kids to grow up and desire to reproduce with whites or blacks whose 
complexion is near white. This is also a trend in Puerto Rico. The caste system is Yacub as a machine that keeps the grafting 
process going. The PELAN that exist today is the mind state of the original people who want to be white or lighter in 
complexion. They are still killing the black gene with that idea. There is no place where the caste system is more prevalent 
than INDIA. In India the darker you are the less opportunities are giving to you. The darkest original inhabitants of India, the 
Dravidians are forced to live below the poverty line and forced to live in Southern India. They must walk in alleys, also the 
best job they can get is street cleaners, and this includes cleaning fecal matter out of the street. These black people are treated 
less than the animals of that country. These people are black, but in the U.S, on the census they are able to put their ethnicity 
down as white. Can we not see the pattern? 
 
Yacub exists today, and Pelan (Patmos) is an Institutional way of thinking.


--- PAGE 24 ---
The Black God: An Anthology of Truth 
 24
To my light skinned brothers and sisters, those of you claiming to be Puerto-Rican, Dominican, Haitian, Jamaican, Hawaiian, 
Philippines stop falling victim to the Yacub process by speaking on these Nationalities as if its your race. REMEMBER 
BLACK does not mean you have to be dark-skinned. Those dark-skinned blacks with curly or stringy hair must realize black 
does not mean you must have kinked hair. 
 
Peace 
What God Is vs. What God Is Not 
By Kuahmel Allah 
Love Allah (Los Angeles, CA) 
 
God is the Black Man. 
God is living mathematics. 
 
God does first things first. 
God handles business. 
God is not irresponsible.  
 
God fights the good fight. 
God knows his role. God is a good 
sport and a team player. 
God is not a sore loser. 
 
God is informed and in tune. 
God doesn't speak what he doesn't 
know. God is not paranoid. 
 
God is assertive. 
God is not passive-aggressive. 
God is a go-getter. 
God is not a procrastinator. 
 
God owns his issues and screw-ups.  
God is not an excuse maker.  
 
God is an authority, not an 
authoritarian. God is pragmatic. 
God is reasonable, not a blowhard. 
God is a thoughtful policymaker. 
God covers all the bases, because 
he is thorough. 
 
God is a good student of life. 
God learns from his mistakes. 
God is the best learner, yet not a 
follower. God is one people want to 
learn from. 
God strives to be the best at 
anything he does. 
 
God has empathy. 
God is not inconsiderate of others.  
 
God doesn't let the infrastructure 
fall apart.  
God keeps the house in order. 
God is head of the household and 
of the family.  
God is not an abuser or batterer. 
God is polite to all people, not just 
the women and the babies, not just 
Black people, and not just other 
Gods and Earths. 
God is not vulgar. 
God is not rowdy or disruptive. 
God is humble. 
 
God thinks positive. 
God makes the most of all things. 
God is creative. 
God sees endless possibilities. 
God is inspired and inspiring. 
God is progressive. 
 
God is not emotional unstable.  
God is not a maniac.  
God is the rock, sturdy and sure. 
God is one of strong will. 
God knows when to take control. 
 
God is not a tyrant. 
God is a servant of the people. 
 
God is not representative of a state 
of perfection. 
God is representative of the process 
of perfection. 
 
God is not a thief. 
God is not a thug. 
God is not a murderer. 
God is not a criminal of any kind. 
God is a law abiding citizen. 
God is the law personified. 
 
God is not an oppressor of the 
unalike. God is not a racist. 
God is not a chauvinist.  
 
God is not unethical. 
God is not immoral. 
God is not wasteful.  
God is productive. 
God is not a user.  
God is a contributor. 
 
God is talented. 
God is skilled. 
God is a mover and shaker. 
God does not try to dominate, 
because he is naturally dominant.  
God is not only in charge, but in 
control. God is confident. 
God is not mediocre. 
God is not pathetic. 
God is not a loser. 
 
God is merciful without being 
weak. God can destroy, but is not 
destructive. 
 
God is not holy. 
God is not religious. 
God is righteous. 
God does what must be done. 
 
God is a good listener. 
God is one others can relate to. 
God knows when to be serious and 
when to lighten up. 
God does not hate people.  
God is not a savage in pursuit of 
good times. 
Yet God is the life of the party.  
 
God is not pretentious. 
God is not an unrealistic airhead. 
God is not an eccentric. 
God is not disingenuous. 
God is not trifling. 
God is not funny-style. 
 
God is not an outcast or an elite. 
God is one of the people. 
 
God is not a predator.  
God is a protector. 
 
God is not a mysterious, magical 
fairy tale. 
God is real.  
God is as real as you can get. 
 
PEACE.


--- PAGE 25 ---
The Black God: An Anthology of Truth 
 25
 
So…who then is the Devil? 
Supreme Understanding Allah 
Allah’s Garden (Atlanta, GA)
I know I've already offended dozens of you with the title 
alone, so I'll be clear about a few things upfront. I make no 
apologies for any of the statements I will make in the 
following paragraphs, but I want to be clear about what I am 
NOT saying. 
 First, I am neither pro-Black nor anti-white. I am not against 
every individual white person. I am against white supremacy 
and its many manifestations. I will elaborate on that, but I 
need you to understand I do not intend on spewing hateful 
inflammatory rhetoric. I am not trying to move a crowd into 
action. I am simply clarifying a condition of reality. Finally, 
I do not find any value into spending time "blaming" white 
people for the problems of people with color. However, I 
think it is useless to attempt to treat a disease without 
knowing its cause(s). People of color DO need to understand 
WHY things are the way they are before they can effectively 
begin to solve their problems. Otherwise, we will easily fall 
victims to the same predatory conditions. 
 I will address each aspect of my argument separately. I may 
mention a source here and there, but will not attempt to cite 
for each statement because I am typing this as I think it. Yes, 
this is how I think. 
 Let's begin. First, let's identify what exactly a devil is. We 
don't need to consult a dictionary. Common sense serves us 
well in telling us that a devil is one who lives in opposition 
to God; a force of evil; a source of wickedness and misery 
on Earth. The very existence of the devil is dependent on the 
existence of God. In every theology where a devil exists, he 
exists in opposition to the Supreme Being, God. Elsewhere, 
you may have read about why the Blackman is God, so I will 
not dedicate space to that topic here. When we talk about 
God and the devil, these constructs come to us pre-packaged 
as religious concepts, each pair unique to its respective 
theology. 
 In Western religions, God is good and the Devil is evil. 
Typically the devil is a servant or creation of God gone bad. 
Either the devil wanted too much power, was too arrogant, 
or was jealous of the true Supreme Being, God. In other 
world traditions, the devil is a sort of "trickster" or conniving 
and clever fellow that employs deceit, illusion, and other 
ruses for his own gain, benefit, or amusement. The reasons 
for these phenomena are tied directly to the history of these 
areas. 
Religions develop from the historical goings-on of the 
region where they develop. In the Near East, where Judaism, 
Christianity, Islam, and the Egyptian/Kemetic religions 
emerged, not to mention Zoroastrianism and the ancient 
Sumerian and Babylonian systems of worship, we see a very 
stark contrast between God and the devil, as described 
above. Let's look at the history of the region. Paul Lawrence 
Guthrie, in Making of the Whiteman, described extensive 
research he conducted to verify the teachings of the 
Honorable Elijah Muhammad in regards to the white man 
being a "made man." This fact is one of the most significant 
factors impacting white supremacy today, and must be 
understood in order to understand any of what is happening 
in the world now. As Neely Fuller, Jr. has said, "If you do 
not understand white supremacy, what it is, and how it 
works, then everything else will only confuse you." 
 History began for white people about 6,000 years ago on a 
small island in the Aegean sea. Yes, only 6,000 years ago. 
Of course, at this point you have questions, or you've 
stopped reading entirely. What are your questions? Here's a 
FAQ: 
 1. How could a people who've only been around for 6,000 
years accomplish so much more than everyone else? 
Ans. By stealing from and exploiting everyone else, and then 
denying anyone else ever did anything first. 
 2. Weren't there cavemen in Europe before 6,000 years ago? 
Ans. Yes. There's no indication they were white. Van 
Sertima and Rashidi's book African Presence in Early 
Europe documents the ancient BLACK presence in Europe, 
as do other books like Ancient and Modern Britons. 
Europeans DID forge a FAKE fossil remain known as the 
"Piltdown Man" to PRETEND white humans were in Europe 
for thousands of years, but it was soon proven a hoax.  
 3. How do you know it was 6,000 years ago, and not 7 or 8 
thousand? 
Ans. First, I didn't say EXACTLY 6,000. It's been a little 
more than that now. And there's a lot of history that 
STARTS at that time. Even the Bible's creation of man goes 
back only to about 4,000 BC. For centuries, Europeans 
wrote history only going back that far, then struggled to fit 
the Egyptians and other Original people into this limited 
timeline. In the end, some early scholars conceded that 
Blacks were original people who predated the making of the 
white Adam and Eve circa 4,000 BC. 
Back to the issue. Who made them? Why? Why on earth 
make a people to be your enemy? Whose bright idea was 
that? Well, THIS topic requires a pretty detailed answer, and 
I'll do my best to sum everything up as matter-of-factly as 
possible. The Blackman is the Original Man. The Original 
Man is God -the maker and owner of the planet Earth, father 
of civilization, God of the Universe. Materialized as Man on


--- PAGE 26 ---
The Black God: An Anthology of Truth 
 26
Earth, God nonetheless comes with shortcomings. The flesh 
is home to imperfection. Thats the nature of ALL things 
physical. The original man devised the idea of devil to exist 
in opposition to god with the intention of bringing out the 
best, and weeding out the worst. By manufacturing - from 
within himself - a 100% manifestation of weakness and 
wickedness - he could accomplish two things: (1) see what 
he needed to eliminate within himself (2) grow strong 
enough as a collective to eliminate it. In the Near East, the 
devil comes from God, and was once amongst him. The 
devil is expelled, takes power and begins inflicting misery 
upon the people of God. God must simultaneously fight for 
the minds and hearts of his people as he fights against the 
growing power of the devil. This isn't myth. This is life. God 
and devil occupy the same roles and behaviors in Near 
Eastern mythologies as they do in race relations among 
Blacks and whites today. Think about it. 
Who made white people? How? An original man who was a 
scientist named Yacub led the endeavor. Was his actual 
name Yacub? Probably not. In scripture, names are assigned 
to roles in history, so whoever functions in that role is thus 
identified with that scriptural personage. Jesus' name wasn't 
actually Jesus. It may very well have been Yeshuah, 
Yehoshuah, or some other - entirely different - Hebrew 
name. Yacub became "Yacub" when he led thousands of 
people with him into one the world's first planned eugenics 
movement. Yacub, in Hebrew, means "the supplanter," as in, 
his function/role was to supplant a new people for the 
dominant ruling group of the world. In Egyptian, Ya-cub 
means "moon circuit," a period which is 6,000 years and 
coincides with the rule of whites. It is quite difficult to find 
any usable anthropological or archaeological evidence from 
6 millennia ago, but there are records that speak of a god 
named "Yacub-El" or "Yacub Allah" predating the Biblical 
Jacob. Try typing "yakub-el" "yacob-el" or another variant 
into the search engine at print.google.com and see what you 
find. Speaking of which, the Biblical Jacob is of utmost 
importance. Read his story in Genesis 32, to see how he was 
renamed Israel, which means "fought/struggled against 
God." Who is it that fight and struggle against God?  
After selective breeding for several generations finally 
produced a generation that was completely genetically 
recessive, these whites were reintroduced to the Black 
population at the root of civilization. Around this time 
records from Egypt record King Menes reunifying Egypt 
after expelling a divisive band on white intruders. These 
white intruders would later be reintroduced to Near Eastern 
civilization 2,000 years later. Except this time, it would fall 
at their hands.  
Historical evidence shows us that these whites were expelled 
to live in the Caucasus Mountains (hence the name 
Caucasian), where they reverted to primitive behavior while 
sustaining and feeding their predatory tendencies. There are 
records of individual children living like this even in the 
modern era, on www.feralchildren.com. Very interesting, if 
you think it can't happen. Michael Bradley's The Iceman 
Inheritance details what life was like in the caves for these 
people, and the aggressive and warlike behaviors it 
developed in them as a result. Many of the traditions that 
have lasted even until this day in European culture stem 
from this epoch of history. For example, the Western 
marriage ceremony is rooted in the practice of one 
caveman's tribe kidnapping a woman from another tribe, 
binding her, and carrying her into their cave - thus the ring 
(to bind), the throwing of the rice (rocks) during the 
getaway, the carrying over the threshold, and the immediate 
sexual gratification of the honeymoon. Another of these 
entrenched cultural practices is eugenics, a fascination 
among whites who have desired to produce the Supreme 
Whiteman, as most notably attempted during Hitler's 
campaign for a pure Aryan nation. 
If you've every read a World History textbook, you'll 
remember that European history always begins sometime 
around 2,000 BC in the Caucasus Mountain region. It was 
from here that they emerged, wreaking havoc to every 
civilization they encountered in the area. You may have also 
read further to see that every Black and Brown civilization 
was pillaged and destroyed by "foreign invaders."  
Who were these foreign invaders? The Egyptians called 
them Hyksos, and history says these people eventually 
became known as the Hebrews after mixing with the Black 
Egyptian population. Indian scripture records them as the 
self-described Aryans, or noble people. Further east in 
China, where they finally arrived about 1500 BC, they were 
the Chou people, who conquering and displaced the Blacks 
of the previously ruling Xia and Shang dynasties, giving 
birth to a new yellow (mixed) China. Everywhere these 
people went, they brought many familiar things along. Most 
notable in terms of physical artifacts were the sword and the 
chariot, probably "borrowed" from the designs of Egypt and 
the Near East. However, more significant were cultural 
nuances like the aggressive and ferocious style of war and 
conquest that most Original people had never before 
witnessed. Everywhere they went these people: 
a.         took over the most important cities then 
sought to spread out their rule as far as possible, 
dividing up geographic regions as they saw fit 
b.         used religion to supplant themselves as the 
favored people of an invisible god (Yacub) 
c.         introduced the religious ideas of heaven and 
hell, used as a system of reward and punishment for 
obedience 
d.         disputed any idea that they came from 
another region, and claimed to be native heirs to the 
land 
e.         introduced white gods and black 
devils/demons into the mythology 
f.          began replacing the indigenous language with 
an Indo-European variant


--- PAGE 27 ---
The Black God: An Anthology of Truth 
g.         began rapidly transforming local industry and 
bureaucracy to fit with their ruling style  
Does this sound similar to what has happened when whites 
colonized Africa or when whites "settled" America? Not 
much has changed, of course, and history is indeed cyclical.  
So let's look at the modern era. Conspiracy theories abound, 
on every topic from 9/11 to the CIA/Crack-cocaine 
connection. Unless these fragmented theories are seen 
through the unified lens of the global conspiracy for white 
supremacy, they all are simply confusing and disconnected. 
In fact, what the white pundits who rant and rave about 9/11 
and "constitutional freedoms" love to ignore is that the "New 
World Order" and the "Illuminati" are about white power 
and the devil more than anything else. When Bush and the 
rest of the Skull and Bones crew are engaging in what 
appears to be Satanic rituals, please don't think that the most 
elite whites on this Earth are dumb enough to be so religious 
and primitive. They are hailing themselves and their direct 
"descent" from Yacub.  
These people know who God is. They know the Original 
Man is God. They are informed enough to be aware of the 
obvious. It is only Original People who are too blind to 
know it. Did you know that the when Masons attain their 
32nd and 33rd degrees they are introduced to the worship of 
the "true God," Allah?  Ask any old Shriner why they wear a 
Muslim fez with a sword at the top. Of course he won't tell 
you! 
 27
They know who they are. And I'm not referring to Sally and 
Joe Pimple from down the street. I'm referring to those who 
function on the higher echelons of society. Sally and Joe 
Pimple, on the other hand, are just passive participants in the 
global plague of white supremacy. Sure, their son Trevor is a 
nice guy who never calls you the "n-word" and listens to hip 
hop nonstop. He can even dance! That doesn't disqualify 
him.  
White people are typically either active or passive 
participants in this racist system of white supremacy, and 
while its very hard for them to simply escape being a 
participant, its impossible for them to escape their nature. 
"Devil" is not just what you do, its who you are. A man can 
act like a woman, dress like a woman, and even get surgery 
to fool nearly everyone…but at the end of the day, he's 
naturally a man. White people were not created to be our 
saviors or our benefactors, no matter how many trees they 
hug or African squirrels they campaign to save. They were 
made to be who, as a whole, they are today.  
I could spend the next ten-thousand pages detailing every ill 
this planet is currently faced with and how it goes back to 
whites, but I don't think that's a productive use of literature. 
If you are genuinely interested, pick a topic and research it 
thoroughly until you get to the bottom of who is responsible. 
For example, try finding the answers to some of these 
questions on your own, so that you too, can understand why 
the white man is the devil (unless you're already conditioned 
and too scared to say such a thing): 
a.         Why did the Hutus and Tutsis go to war in 
Rwanda, resulting in an African genocide? Why is 
there a hole in the ozone layer?  
b.         Who is currently toppling governments, 
creating unrest and civil war, and murdering 
countless civilians over land and oil?  
c.         What were the Crusades fought over?  
d.         What is manifest destiny? 
e.         What is the history of eugenics? 
f.          What non-white nation or people has 
interacted with whites and benefited positively?  
g.         What was so bad about Communism and 
Socialism and why did they have to be crushed? 
h.         Why are scientists exploring the possibilities 
for moving to other planets? 
i.          Why do so many people think racism is going 
away when all the evidence says the opposite?  
j.          Has Christianity 
helped liberate or 
suppress people of color? 
k.         What is Lothrop 
Stoddard's 1920 book, 
The Rising Tide of Color 
Against White-World 
Supremacy about? 
l.          What is 
population control? 
m.        What is The Lord of the Rings really about? 
n.         Who are/will be the enemies in the current 
war on terrorism? 
o.         How did the tsunami in South-East Asia 
occur? 
p.         Why did American nuke Japan in WWII? 
q.         What happened to the aboriginal Black 
natives of Australia, the Pacific Islands, Asia, and the 
Americas? 
 As a final note, remember, the word "devil" is not meant to 
be used as an epithet, insult, or slur. It is a real term, 
grounded in real history. Know your facts. Learn your Self.


--- PAGE 28 ---
The Black God: An Anthology of Truth 
 28
Making of the Whiteman 
Excerpts from MAKING OF THE WHITE MAN by Paul Lawrence Guthrie 
 
This book examines a series of events that took place long ago in and 
around the region of the Near East. Those events include the 
disruption of civilization, the sudden arrival of white people in the 
vicinity of the Caucasus Mountains and what happened 2,000 years 
later when they unexpectedly came out of the hills and attacked the 
centers of civilization. By examining these events we will be able to 
better determine to what extent the facts of history agree with the 
teachings of Elijah Muhammad. 
 
AN OVERVIEW OF ANCIENT HISTORY 
 
Between six and seven thousand years ago, signs of disruption began to 
appear throughout the ancient civilization of the Near East. For nearly 
a thousand years the cultures of that region underwent a change; a 
period of regression. As chaos and dissatisfaction grew, problems 
intensified and the ancient societies of the Near East slipped deeper 
into despair. Then about 6,000 years ago, the inevitable happened--
civilization fell apart. 
 
What caused the breakup of civilization six thousand years ago? Some 
historians had speculated that a natural disaster, such as an earthquake 
or some similar event took place, but they were unable to find any 
evidence to support their claims. Besides, all of the clues pointed in the 
direction of an event quite different from that of an earthquake - a 
condition that grew over an extended period of time. The picture is on 
of communities in turmoil, of societies collapsing and falling apart 
from within; of chaos, dissatisfaction and unrest. The most accurate 
summation would be to say that the people just began fighting and 
killing one another - this is the best way to describe what was 
happening in the Near East 6,000 years ago. 
 
Soon after the unsettling of civilization, another interesting change 
began to take place. This change occurred in the area of the Caucasus 
Mountains. There, in West Asia, a previously unknown group of 
people suddenly appeared as if from out nowhere. Collectively they are 
known as the Indo-Europeans, Caucasians or white people. The facts 
show that they first entered the area around 6,000 years ago. 2,000 
years later their invasions would bring them into contact with the 
civilized nations to the south. Because they had no fixed homes and 
wandered about from place to place, historians usually describe their 
way of life as 'nomadic'. 
 
Since they were so backward, it is very difficult to use archaeological 
evidence to help pin down the original home of the Indo-European 
tongues. 
 
With the arrival of the Caucasians into that cold and sparsely 
populated area of the world, the few older communities, which earlier 
had been established there in Europe were either abandoned or 
destroyed. The evidence clearly suggests that the original inhabitants 
of those settlements either fled or were killed off by the newly arriving 
whites. After the whites showed up, drastic changes started to occur in 
the region north of the Caucasus. 
 
A time period around 3500 B.C. forms a caesura between Old Europe 
and Indo- European Europe. It is a time when life in the large villages 
and townships either stops or is markedly changed. The degenerative 
changes in the settlements of the Old European Civilization may be 
assumed to indicate the beginning of the Indo-European presence. 
 
Following the breakup of the ancient societies and the arrival of the 
whiteman in Europe, the people of the Near East worked to re-
establish the level of peace and security they had once known. Slowly, 
over time, communities were rebuilt, prosperity was restored and signs 
of new live started to emerge. 
 
In Africa, along the banks of the Nile River, Egypt blossomed into the 
Pyramid Age. In Mesopotamia, between the Tigris and Euphrates 
Rivers, the Sumerians too, established a civilization reknown for its 
high level of culture and refinement. Even as far away as India, along 
the tributaries of the Indus River, the Dravidians constructed the 
magnificent twin cities of Mohoenjo-Daro and Harrapa. Rich in arts, 
sciences and the necessities of life these civilizations laid the 
foundation for trade and finance, architecture, geometry, mathematics 
and astronomy, philosophy, law and government, writing and religion. 
 
Throughout the period of reconstruction, not much attention was paid 
to the nomads of the north; the threat never seemed significant. From 
time to time, a few nomadic bands would wander down into the center 
of civilization, but their activities never amounted to more than 
occasional raids or skirmishes. In the course of time small groups of 
the whites were able to establish camps along the hills and deserts 
outside of Mesopotamia. Although such camps survived mainly by 
robbing and scavenging, their overall impact upon civilization 
remained minimal; most of the whites were at that time still beyond 
range up in the hills. 
 
But the Caucasians of the north were not to remain a distant novelty 
forever. 2,000 years after their arrival, the nomadic tribes began to 
move away from what for years had been their home. As they swarmed 
down, out of the hills, some of them began to travel west, toward the 
Aegean Sea. At the same time another large group trudged southward, 
in the direction of the centers of civilization. "for unknown reasons, 
the group went into a ferment shortly before 2000 B.C. and started 
spilling out all over Europe and western Asia. 
 
As they moved southward, they were joined by smaller groups - 
members of their own who had earlier taken up positions along the 
hills and caravan routes ouside of Mesopotamia. As they advanced 
toward the centers of civilization, they began a series of violent and 
devastating attacks. One by one the great cities of the ancient world 
began to topple. So complete was the effect of the onslaught that when 
it was all over, nothing was left standing. 
 
During a period of about three hundred years, beginning soon after 
1700 B.C., the civilized world was overrun by barbarian conquerors. 
Hill peoples living north and east of Mesopotamia, tribesmen from the 
desert fringes of Syria, Palestine and northern Arabia, together with 
wide ranging war bands originating from the northern steppe 
combined in varying proportions to attack all existing centers of 
civilized life. The range of these barbarian conquests was never again 
equaled...At the two extremes of civilized world, in Crete and in India, 
little but smoking ruins remained. 
 
So the facts show that after the reconstruction of civilization, the 
whites came out of the hills and destroyed it all. Every historian agrees 
that the uprooting of those civilizations were the result of attacks from 
white barbarians who came rushing down, out of the hills of West


--- PAGE 29 ---
The Black God: An Anthology of Truth 
 29
Asia. In India, Mohenjo-daro was sacked and its people were enslaved 
or killed. The outcome was the same for those of Mesopotamia and 
Egypt too.  
 
HISTORY AND THE TEACHINGS OF ELIJAH 
MUHAMMAD 
 
The disruption of the ancient civilization of the Near East, the sudden 
arrivial of white people in the vicinity of the Caucasus Mountains and 
what took place 2,000 years later are among the teachings of Elijah 
Muhammad. 
 
Elijah Muhammad says that 6,000 years ago a new race of people 
showed up in the region of the Near East. The new race, Muhammad 
says that 6,000 years ago a new race of people showed up in the region 
of the Near East. The new race, Muhammad says were white people. 
He says that the whites first appeared 6,000 years ago on the Island of 
Pelan, in the Aegean Sea, where they had been "made" by the process 
of selective breeding called "grafting". According to Muhammad, it 
was black people, living on the Island if Pelan who gave birth to the 
whites. Under their leader Yakub, the blacks of Pelan were placed 
under a system of laws by which marriage was based on skin color and 
in which only lighter complexioned babies were allowed to survive. 
Over a course of many generations, the population of Pelan began to 
grow lighter and lighter until, after 600 years of grafting, the people 
became very pale and white. 
 
When some of the whites from Pelan showed up in the Near East, 
their presence created a calamity. As a result were driven out, away 
from the people and into the hills of West Asia. There they remained 
for the next 2,000 years. 
 
Following the driving away of the whites, they became isolated and cut 
off; without proper guidance and the things to start a civilization of 
their own, they slipped into a life of savagery. 
 
Since history shows that a disruption had occurred in the Near East 
just prior to the sudden appearance of the whit people in the hills of 
West Asia is it possible that the teachings of Elijah Muhammad is 
indeed rooted in fact? Inasmuch as no other explanation has been 
presented to explain these occurrences, and since the evidence is 
consistent with what Muhammad says took place, is it reasonable to 
suggest that what Muhammad teaches is in fact true? 
 
A SEARCH FOR SIMILARITIES 
 
The most popularly known traditional account which shares 
similarities with the teachings of Elijah Muhammad is the Bible's story 
of Adam and Eve. According to the Old Testament, Adam was made 
6,000 years ago. (This date is arrived at by adding together the ages of 
all of Patriarchs from Adam to Abraham as they appear in the 5th and 
11th chapters of the book of Genesis.) Accordingly, the time of 
Adam's "creation" corresponds with the time which Muhammad says 
white people first appeared on the planet. Elijah Muhammad explains 
that the Bible's account of Adam and Eve is in actuality a narrative of 
early history of the Caucasian race. A review of the traditions of the 
making of Man as they exist around the world shows a surprising 
number of them to be in full agreement with Muhammad - they relate 
that Adam and Eve had white complexions. Some depict the new man-
made as starting out with a darker complexion, then later being 
transformed to white. 
 
One such account has been handed down in the traditions of the 
Maidu Indians. Similar tradition, from India explain that the first 
Caucasians were made when a group of dark-skinned people gave birth 
to light complexioned babies who in turn gave birth to a nation of 
albinos from whom other whites were born. L. Bolk wrote in Origin of 
Racial Characteristics in Man "White skin...started from an ancestor 
with a black skin, in whose offspring hair and iris color were 
suppressed more and more. Charles Darwin, he too expressed the 
opinion that selection over the course of many generations, had to 
have been used in bringing about what he called "the characteristic 
differences between the races of man" He even went on to concluded 
that without some form of selective breeding, such racial differences 
simply "cannot be accounted for in a satisfactory manner. James 
Cowles Prichard, concluded that the physical differences between the 
races of Man could only have resulted from a method comparable to 
"the process of artificial selection carried on by plant and animal 
breeders. This too is consistent with the words of Elijah Muhammad. 
Dr Edwin Grant Conklin The Evolution of Man wrote: "It is evident 
that distinct races could not have been established and perpetuated 
except by the aid of isolation, chiefly geographical. Dr. Ramm who 
admitted: "By scientific breeding we can shuffle these genes with their 
characteristics and breed traits in or breed them out...The laws of 
heredity plus principles of separation or selection operating over a 
period of time will produce the various races of the world." 
 
Another ancient traditional account that shares similarities with the 
teachings of Muhammad is the biblical account of Jacob's grafted 
flock. Genesis 30:35 says that Jacob (English translation of the name 
Yakub) was able to produce unusually colored flocks of sheep and 
goat through the use of a skillful breeding technique. According to the 
bible it took Jacob six years to successfully change the color of the 
flock (Genesis 31:41). That Bible's story of Jacob's grafted flock is 
related to the birth of white people from Black parents is attested to 
by the ancient book of Jewish traditions called the Midrash Rabbah. 
 
In his book, Message to the Blackman, Elijah includes the name 
"Azazel" to be one of many used to describe the white race. According 
to Hebrew tradition, Azazel is one of the names given to the leader of 
the devils - it is the Hebrew name for Iblis, leader of the Jinn. Once a 
year, on the eve of the Jewish Day of Atonement, a ceremony is 
traditionally performed in which a goat (Azazel) is tied to a rope and 
led away from the people, out into the desert and abandoned in a place 
of hills and rocks. The ceremony of the atonement, handed down from 
generation to generation, is a re-enactment of the early history of the 
Caucasian people. 
 
A more thorough understanding of the history of Azazel can be had 
by examining the The Book of Enoch which for 500 years was 
accepted as part of the Bible. This book along with the Book of Adam 
and Eve and many more book which was removed from the Bible can 
be found in THE LOST BOOKS OF THE BIBLE and THE 
FORGOTTEN BOOKS OF EDEN (ISBN0-452-00944-8). 
 
Making of the Whiteman by Paul Lawrence Guthrie is an innovative 
and well-documented study. Today many people are beginning to re-
examine the teachings of Elijah Muhammad. They are taking a closer 
look at the facts. Many are beginning to ask: "Could the teachings of 
Muhammad be correct?" This book looks at the facts of history and 
the writings of ancient traditional accounts and compares both with 
what has been taught by Muhammad. The result is a unique view into 
the historical significance of Black America's most controversial leader. 
READ IT AND RECOMMEND IT TO OTHERS! 
 
Making of the Whiteman is published by Beacon Communications 
4951 Clairemont Square Suite 137 San Diego, Ca 92117.


--- PAGE 30 ---
The Black God: An Anthology of Truth 
No Pork on the Fork or Swine in the Mind 
By Freedom Allah 
Love Allah (Los Angeles, CA) 
 
It’s the new millennium and heads are STILL eating 
pork???!!! 
 
It is nasty. That beast is filthy. If you won’t take my word 
for it, go take a nature hike to a farm and watch it in 
action. The pork just ain’t good for you in any shape, form 
or fashion. Here are some bullet points to consider: 
 
• Out of the land animals that are most often consumed 
in the United States (beef, lamb, chicken, and turkey 
being the others) it is the only animal that is an 
omnivore, which means it eats anything. It is a 
scavenger also. 
 
• It has ducts at the base of its legs that constantly let 
out puss.  
 
• You can feed it practically anything (garbage, poison, 
etc..) and it won’t die. 
 
• The Bible and Koran have prohibitions against eating 
it. 
 
• Why would you eating something that has to be 
‘cured’? 
 
• And for those who say that ‘cooking it kills the 
trichinosis worm’ why the funk do you want to eat 
cooked WORMS??!!! 
 
• Wait…you’re a Christian and don’t think that the ban 
on eating pork applies to you? Read The Hog: Should 
It Be Used For Food? by C. Leonard Vories, a 
Christian minister. 
 
• African Americans are more prone to high blood 
pressure. It may be a genetically selective trait, so stop 
eating salt ‘cured’ pork. Duh. 
 
• Cysticercosis (tapeworm egg infection) is the primary 
type of parasitic infection of the brain. Also the #1 
cause of seizures world wide is due to Cysticercosis 
 
• Want to know more about Cysticercosis? Read The 
Woman with the Worm in her Head by Pamela 
Nagami.  
 
• The rate of Cysticercosis is so high in the Hispanic 
community that they automatically check for 
tapeworm infection if they come into the doctor’s 
office with certain symptoms. 
 
• Chitterling??!!! You mean you won’t kiss a woman’s 
feet or eat her out, yet you will eat where pig feces 
pass through??!! PLUS you have to clean it first with 
bleach??!!! 
 
• Most likely the pig was domesticated NOT for food. It 
was probably domesticated to be a living trash 
disposal unit (want to know more about this 
hypothesis? I wrote a paper on it and can send you a 
copy…just e-mail me) 
 
• Pork SKINS???!!! Have you ever felt raw skin? What 
are you - Hannibal Lecter? 
 
• It’s a glutton. It won’t stop eating unless you stop 
feeding it, taking in all of those toxins, viruses, 
parasites, bacteria, garbage, feces, decaying flesh, and 
eating its own young sometimes.  
 
• It has a high fat ratio and fat is where the toxins dwell 
in. A lot of the ‘meats’ from the pig such as bologna, 
bacon, etc..are all fatty. 
 
The two most played out excuses: 
 
• ‘We’re all going to die’—Then why don’t you just 
shoot yourself now…hmmm? 
 
• ‘My grandmother ate pork and lived to be a gizillion’ 
– well, my uncle Charlie got a bum leg and lived to be 
a bagizillion…what’s the point? We work to be living 
at the freshest level (quantity (age) AND quality). 
 30
 
If you eat sausage, you are better off not knowing the inner workings of 
sausage factories, and if you are a Christian, that of the Christian church.  
    Rev. Donald Morgan  
 
You have seen how a man was made a slave; you shall see how a slave 
was made a man.  
Frederick Douglass (1818?-1895)


--- PAGE 31 ---
The Black God: An Anthology of Truth 
Pork and Pork-by-Product Consumption 
By Supreme U. Allah 
Allah’s Garden (Atlanta, GA) 
December 5, 1997 
 
Introduction 
There exists a peculiar phenomenon in 
today’s culture.  The widespread practice of taking 
into one’s system whatever one desires, regardless 
of the future consequences, is an odd, however 
devastating, comment on the current state of our 
society.  It almost seems as if inhibitions have been 
thrown into the wind, rules and regulations have 
been cast aside, and self-discipline is a lost art.  
How else can the once-great peoples of so many 
cultures come together under one flag and become 
alcoholics, drug-addicts and gluttons?   
Of course it is not solely the individual to 
blame in many of these cases, as there is a 
centuries-deep process of conditioning behind this 
end result.  However, there is a dynamic behind the 
reality of one being confronted by the painful truth, 
and still looking the other way, usually back in the 
direction of their addiction.  We cannot exist as a 
people with the vices and dependencies we have 
as individuals, holding us back from progressing 
past our internal and external destruction. 
People still eat pork.  Of  course, there exist 
many other resilient issues to contend with, but pork 
is of another shade in terms of its entailing and 
underlying consequences and significance.  We 
encounter here a dilemma in the minds of the 
misled masses:  
1. It tastes good.  
2. It hasn’t killed me yet. 
3. It obviously doesn’t do any harm. 
 Though these arguments pale in 
comparison with the truth to the swine, its flesh and 
their consumption, ma ny of us encounter a 
stubbornness in our kin, not only in giving up old 
(bad) habits, but in accepting new information when 
it shatters much of what we once believed to be 
true.  Given, we now have the means with which to 
cook the pork longer and better, we are able to 
freeze and store the meat more efficiently, there are 
now authorities to guarantee the quality of our food, 
and of course, we are no longer eating the brains, 
etc. as was done in the days of bondage.  But in 
relativity, most of this means basically nothing.  The 
pig has been unclean since its appearance on the 
planet, and will remain so.  It was never intended to 
be consumed, nor will it ever be.  Times change, 
but swine doesn’t. 
 
A Condensed History of the Pig 
 It is quite hard to trace the origins of an 
animal such as the pig, and to plot its place either in 
an evolutionary timeline or taxonomic chart.  The 
pig in itself contradicts much of natural science by 
its bare presence and nature.  In terms of its 
digestive system, the pig has but one poorly 
constructed stomach, and very limited excretory 
organs.  In contrast, all clean animals that “cheweth 
the cud and divideth the hoof,” have almost three 
stomachs, as the cow has four.  Even the chicken, 
which also has filthy habits about the yard, has two 
stomachs to aid in its digestion.  The pig, being a 
scavenger, eats “any kind of food, including dead 
insects, worms, rotting carcasses, excreta 
(including their own), garbage and other pigs” 
(Almighty) There is a small abrasion at the hog’s 
front foot which, if scraped off and squeezed, will 
release about a teaspoon 
of filth.  This attests to the 
fact that the pig’s anatomy 
is constructed like sewer, 
and the animal will act as 
such.   
 The flesh of the 
swine was outlawed by 
the commands of the Old 
Testament (Leviticus 
11:7,8, Genesis 1:29, 
Isaiah 65:2-4, Isaiah 
66:15-17) and further 
banned in the Qur’an (Surah 2:172-173, as well as 
many others).  It was known as “The abomination of 
Horus the Godhead” in Kemet (Ancient Egypt) and 
the people of these societies (Hebrew, Muslim, 
Kemetan) who handled the swine ( swineherds) 
were outcast as “filthy” and “despicable.”   
 When traveling European missionaries 
encountered many ancient cannibalistic societies, 
they substituted the eating of the boar and hog for 
that of humans.  In all early civilizations, the pig was 
viewed as a filthy beast, or rather scavenger, and 
was legally banned over time from the repeated 
occurrences of great outbreaks of disease following 
any feast going against tradition and involving their 
flesh (Gould 1994).  Since their very first mention in 
history, the swine has been known as poison.   
 The Honorable Elijah Muhammad taught 
that the pig was genetica lly manufactured around 
2000 BCE from the seeds of the rat, cat and dog.
i  
The author has encountered accounts of the pig 
being altered and bred to clea n the streets of early 
Spain, as its diet restrict s nothing and it will readily 
consume filth.  In fact, during the 50s, they were 
used, en masse, to cleanse the sewers of Chicago. 
 
Brief Discourse on Physiology of the Pig 
 31
 The pig’s body contains a multitude of 
toxins, worms and latent diseases.  The meat itself


--- PAGE 32 ---
The Black God: An Anthology of Truth 
contains excessive quantities of histamine and 
imidazole compounds - leading to itching and 
inflammation, sulphur-containing mesenchymal 
mucus - which leads to swelling and deposits of 
mucus in tendons and cartilage, resulting in 
arthritis, rheumatism, etc.  Sulphur helps cause firm 
human tendons and ligaments to be replaced by the 
pig’s soft mesenchymal tissues. The sulphur also 
causes the degeneration of human cartilage. Of 
course there is also the high cholesterol and 
saturated fat content - which leads to gallstones 
and obesity.   
The pig carries the taenia sodium worm - 
a tapeworm found in the flesh.  They occur in 
human intestines in greater frequency in countries 
where pork is consumed, and the relation is 
undeniable.  This type of worm is not only capable 
of spreading to other organs, but is incurable after 
passing a certain stage. 
The flesh also is infested by the trichinae 
nematode worm - which causes trichinosis.  
Trichinosis is a disease one can incur from eating 
insufficiently cooked pork.  The results are cramps, 
aches and stiffness; later nausea and vomiting; and 
sometimes headaches and nervous disorders.  The 
trichina worm is able to burrow through tissues and 
invade neighboring organs or the bloodstream.  
After this point, they are often known to invade the 
brain or nervous system.  Approximately one in six 
people in the U.S. and Canada has trichinosis and 
may not know it.  Swine are also known to harbor 
the kidney worm , the lungworm, the thorn-
headed worm, the roundworm and many others.   
 32
Furthermore the pig is commonly 
diagnosed with genital papilloma - which can be 
transmitted by flies and mosquitoes, infectious 
porcine encephalomyelitis (or Teschen disease, 
porcine poliomyelitis, Talfan disease, 
(picornavirus))-which caused serious losses in 
several European countries, with mild strains 
present in the U.S. and Canada (Bruner 1966), 
swine erysipelas - which, along with mouse 
septiciemia bacillus , is a variant of Erysipelothrix 
insidiosa, hog cholera  (or swine fever, HC ) - 
which is acute and highly contagious.  It first 
appeared in an 1833 Ohio stock, and from there 
spread to all parts of the U.S., but mainly the North 
Central states (the “corn-belt”), where there is the 
greatest concentration of swine.  
The pig is also well-known to carry African 
swine fever - which is similar to hog cholera, but is 
a “hyperacute form” and is highly fatal, Hemophilus 
influenza (or swine influenza, swine flu, hog flu ) 
- which was named such because it is shared so 
closely between pig and man that it is now 
impossible to deny the relation, swine plague - 
which is caused by other diseases such as cholera 
and influenza, malnutrition from poor feeds and 
internal parasites, and unsanitary crowded 
conditions, enzootic pneumonia , swineherd’s 
disease - named such because of the cases where 
man gets it from his contact with infected pigs.  With 
this disease, the animal (and possible man also) 
may show no symptoms at all. To conclude a list 
that could continue indefinitely we come to 
swinepox - which is reported heavily in the U.S., 
Europe and Japan.   
Obviously, the pig is an unclean animal and 
should not be consumed for the sake of our good 
health.  But upon this realization comes 
responsibility.  We must take it upon ourselves to 
stop eating this filth and alle viate ourselves of such 
aforementioned illnesses.  However the 
phenomenon persists. 
Beginning in a time of the Europeans’ 
greatest overt hostility towards humanity, that is, the 
era of slavery, an institution began forcing itself into 
the minds of the people.  Th is institution, with its 
own structure and schema (along with a built-in 
plan with which to perpetuate itself), is known as 
mental conditioning.  For over 330 years, that 
conditioning took firm root within the subconscious 
thinking of our families,  passed on from generation 
to generation in encoded form to keep itself going.  
Within this structure there exists the propensity to 
consume a meat 
which in all reality 
should not even 
be called a meat.  
Bringing 
ourselves to the 
origin of this 
phenomenon we 
find the slave 
owner and his 
family casting 
their leftovers 
and unused parts 
to the slaves who had no other choice but to starve.  
So the intestines were consumed, the feet were 
consumed, the ears were consumed, even the 
brains were consumed, but these had to be mixed 
with cornmeal for their foulness.  Unsurprisingly, 
this system which lasted for centuries while legally 
enforced has managed to continue to exist on its 
own as a result of the above-mentioned 
conditioning so well implemented.  Today those 
Europeans profit the same as they did those 
centuries past, and at the same cost to humanity, 
but in a whole different ball game. 
 
Breakdown of Pork and Pork-by-Products 
 Pig, Hog, Boar, Sow, Barrow, Swine, etc.  It 
makes little difference what name one applies.  
There exists about as much need for differentiation 
and preferential treatment between the various 
classifications of swine as there is between cocaine 
and heroin.  It is poison all the same.  The various 
meats of the swine flesh are generally the 
porkchop, bacon, pork sausage, ham, bologna
ii,


--- PAGE 33 ---
The Black God: An Anthology of Truth 
 33
and a few others.  The major by-products include 
lard and pork tallow.  
Shocking to some, there exist not only trace 
amounts of pork in most food products, but often 
they make up the main ingredients.  To begin, the 
gelatin used to make Jell-O is obtained by boiling 
the cartilage, bones, tendons and ligaments of pigs 
in water and attaining a partial hydrolysis of the 
collagen.  It (gelatin) is not only of poor biological 
value but is considered an incomplete protein and 
lacks an essential amino acid.  
The enzymes rennin, rennet, pepsin  and 
others are often prepared from the stomach walls of 
small animals.  The animal used in the U.S. is 
usually the pig, because of its availability and cheap 
cost. 
Rather than delve into any greater detail on 
the many other by-products commonly deriving 
from swine such as inisitol, keratin (used to coat 
enzyme pills), glycogen, glycerol, glycerin, etc., 
we move on the actual products using pork or such 
by-products. 
Colgate toothpaste is made with lard.  Ivory 
soap is made with pork tallow.  Pepperidge Farms 
cakes are made with pigskin gelatin.  Brillo soap 
pads are made with lard.  Vaseline Intensive Care 
is made with lard.  Starburst Fruit Chews are made 
with gelatin containing lard.  Palmolive soap is 
made with pork tallow.  In fact, a surprisingly 
immense number of toothpastes, soaps, candies, 
and snack foods (along with a number of pizzas 
and ice creams) are made with some sort of pork-
by-product.  If the author were to enumerate them 
as such on the questionnaire of the survey 
conducted, the results would not only show an 
almost 100 percent positive reply to the question of  
“Do you eat pork or por k-by-products?” if 
completed, but would be entirely too lengthy to 
complete anyway.  However it is necessary for one 
to have a good understanding of the ingredients put 
into the foods which register stronger in one 
demographic than the other, because there is a 
reason behind everything.  Furthermore, it would 
hardly make sense to sniff “just a little bit” of 
cocaine, wouldn’t it? 
 
Pork Production, Consumption and Income in 
the United States 
 This poison is a 10-b illion-dollar industry.  
In 1995, the gross income from sales of hogs, pork, 
and lard was a little over 10 billion dollars.  From 
1986 to 1995, the U.S. has gone from producing 
14,063,000,000 pounds of Pork (and 876,000,000 
of Lard) to 17,849,000,000 pounds (1,040,000,000 
of Lard), and from consuming 15,135,000,000 
pounds (417,000,000 of Lard) to consuming 
17,784,000,000 pounds (585,000,000 of Lard).  
These are literally billions of pounds of a flesh that 
has been proven to kill slowly, and the numbers 
only increase with each year that passes. 
 As of 1994, the Hog and Pig Inventory have 
been decreasing somewhat rapidly, while the value 
increases dramatically.   In 1996, for a little over 56 
million head, the value was about 5.3 billion dollars.  
Bear in mind that the charts for Hog and Pig 
statistics do not match with those of Cattle and 
Calves or any other meat for that matter. No, pork is 
a phenomenon of its own, and operates within its 
own parameters.  However it is our behavior, as 
consumers, which causes trends such as these. 
Second only to China, which produces an 
astounding 36,484,000 metric tons of Pork, the U.S. 
is a world leader in Pork production, churning out 
8,097,000 metric tons in 1995.  Obviously, this (the 
U.S.) is not a Muslim country, where all swine 
would be outlawed.  Nonetheless, in an era of 
supposed “national consciousness” where the 
country is beginning to learn more about itself and 
others, shouldn’t there be a certain level of “health 
consciousness”?  More relevantly, in a time when 
the downtrodden masses of humanity are rising up 
to shake off both the physical and mental shackles 
of their European oppressors, why are we still 
eating their filth?  If the country was as worried 
about its people as it is about its economy, there 
wouldn’t be these mass epidemics and, on the 
individual level, slow dragging deaths suffered by 
our people who would know better and eat better.  
But as said before, poison makes profit so it stays 
on the market.  We lust learn to stop killing 
ourselves for them.
 
   
Works Cited 
1. Shabazz, Masjid Malcolm.  “Por k Content in National Food Brands 
Researched.” Community News Bulletin Vol. 6, 1981 
2. Muhammad, Elijah.  1972.  How to Eat to Live Book No. 2. 
3. Ali, Shaharazad. 1986. How Not to Eat Pork.  
4. Gould, Sylvester E., MD, D.Sc.  1994.  Trichinosis, Charles C. 
Thomas  
5. Allah, Melquan God Infinite Almighty.  Pork, Swine, Hog: Devil of 
the Animal Kingdom. 
6. Food Ingredients: Main Source and Origin (source unknown) 
7. Vories, Leonard. The Hog!  Should You Eat It? 
8. United States Government Department of Agriculture. 1997.  
Agricultural Statistics 1997.  United States Government Printing 
Office, Washington. 
9. Bruner, Dorsey William, BS, DVM, PhD and Gillespie, James 
Howard, VMD. 1966.  Hagan’s Infectious Diseases of Domestic 
Animals Fifth Edition , Comstock Publishing Associates: Cornell 
University Press. 
10. Parker, W.H., B.Sc., MRCVS, NDA.  1966. Health and Disease in 
Farm Animals.  Pergamon Press. 
 
Endnotes 
i Aside from the obvious appearance of a rat’s tail, cat’s whiskers and dog’s ears, one may note that the highest incidence of trichinosis in the animal kingdom is between the pig, the 
human, the cat, rat and dog.  The disease seems to transmit between these parties in several relationships i.e. the rat, being one the primary initial sources of the parasite, is eaten by the 
worm.  The rat is then eaten by the pig or by the cat.  The relationships between cat and dog are well known.  The only link into the physiology of man is through his consumption of the 
pig’s flesh. 
ii It is this meat that is the freak of all other abominations.  It is the end result of a process which begins with all the pig’s leftovers, that is, what is leftover after the ears, feet, tail, etc. have 
been removed to sold individually.  This should give some suggestion as to the character of the contents.  These parts (eyes, inner organs, genitalia, etc.) are basically put into a grinder 
and pressed out in a flat sheet which is then cut into circular shapes for distribution as what we know as bologna/baloney.


--- PAGE 34 ---
The Black God: An Anthology of Truth 
 
The Names We Give Ourselves 
The Supreme Understanding Allah 
Allah’s Garden (Atlanta, GA) 
 
Have you ever noticed that we degrade ourselves like no other community of people? It’s an indicator of low self-esteem, 
low self-worth, negative self-image, and a self-destructive mindset....and we love it. I’ll explain. 
 
Here are some of the things we call ourselves and each other...and why. 
 
Animals - we call each other by every LOWLY member of the animal kingdom out there (cat, dog, snake, rat, bitch, 
monkey, bird, duck, pigeon, pig, etc.). Are we really subhuman? Who was the first person to call us animals? Think about 
it. 
 
Dime, Silver Dolla, etc. - Women think their worth is measured on a monetary scaled. And yes the word dime came from 
the idea of a woman being a ten. That ten was still a measurement of looks, given by men. Is that what determines your 
beauty? And is that how you gon’ measure it? In monetary terms? 
 
Bitch - a term given to Black women by white men and made popular in the 17th century. She was seen as a sexual being, 
good for breeding and animalistic pleasures. And you call yourself that because its cute. 
 
Nigga - No it’s not different because its spelled different. Its spelled the way we say it. White people say it that way too, 
during the commission of hate crimes, and get OFF THE HOOK now 
because its the "OK" way to say NIGGER. You call yourself by a 
term used to dehumanize and debase you because its a term of 
endearment now? I don’t see white people callin each other "cavey" 
or "cracka" or "devil" as a term of endearment. 
 
boy – that’s your boy huh? Read the ISIS PAPERS by Francis Cress 
Welsing. Or watch Baby Boy. Some of y’all gotta grow up. 
 
motherfucker - Oedipus complex. see above. 
 
hoe - a hoe is a gardening tool, used to till the soil. The word fuck 
comes from the Saxon word meaning to till the soil to plant seeds in 
it. See back in the day, we knew a woman was the Earth, the bearer of 
life. Now shes just a slut, as far as we're concerned. 
 
G - G used to be short for God. Now its short for Gangsta? 
 
Gangsta - a "gangster" was a mob figure, like Al Capone or Lucky 
Luciano. We supposedly appropriated that image and made it our 
own. But a gangster is supposed to be someone who CONTROLS an 
operation, not a GOON who SERVES in an operation that is bigger than him. And drugs is bigger than you. It’s CIA big. 
 
Thug - before Tupac, a thug was another word for a goon. A mindless muscle, esp. in criminal endeavors. Now its a 
lifestyle. The word thug actually comes from India. It was the name of a bloodthirsty gang that killed all their victims. Look 
it up: Thugee cult of India 
 
Diva - It kills me when women call themselves a diva. You don’t sing opera. You’re not a diva. A diva is another word for 
an operatic prima donna. The other meaning of prima donna is a temperamental, conceited person. And you're wearin’ that 
like a badge of honor? 
 
That’s all for now, if you can think of any more, add on.  
 
___________ - ______________________________________________________________________________________ 
 
 34
___________ - ______________________________________________________________________________________


--- PAGE 35 ---
The Black God: An Anthology of Truth 
 35
 
Hail Lakeesha: Part I 
by Harold M. Clemens 
The following article was originally posted at www.blackelectorate.com 
 
"…with names like Shaniqua, Ta liqua and Mohammed and all of 
that crap, and all of them are in jail.” – Bill Cosby quoted at the 
gala event honoring the 50th anniversary of Brown v Board of 
Education, May 17, 2004 
 
On the topic of “black” names, many brothers and sisters 
think parents should abandon names like Lakeesha, 
DeShawn, and others Bill Cosby would hate, because they 
could doom our children to poor job prospects and inferior 
social networks. Many would also argue we should discard 
such names because they are just plain ridiculous. Luckily, 
the smart and the brave ones amongst us refuse to limit our 
personal choices to earn white favor and/or avoid white 
scorn. 
 
Africans in the Americas are likely the only people on 
Earth with no knowledge of our true family names and no 
means to discover them. For the greater portion of our stay 
here in the Americas, we haven’t even enjoyed the 
privilege to choose our given names, since our captors had 
seized that right for almost three centuries in some places. 
At this juncture, arrived at through the ceaseless, often 
violent, struggle and persistent suffering of our ancestors, 
where we can now name ourselves freely, it’s a shame that 
some of us would relinquish this blood-borne privilege to 
succumb to white hegemony.  
 
If the accommodationists amongst us had their way, we 
would all repudiate names that don't have Anglo, Hebrew, 
Greek, etc. (read: white) origin to avoid discrimination. 
But is entrance into middle-America worth relinquishing a 
piece of our identity? After all, so many non-European 
names, dubbed deviant, laughable, awkward, or “super-
black” (as economist, Stephen Levitt, refers to them in his 
article “A Roshanda by Any Other Name”) by the 
mainstream bear meaning to us; for example: Jamal, means 
“beauty,” Malik means “master,” Aisha means “lively” or 
“life,” and Aaliyah means “high exalted” or “to ascend” in 
Arabic, respectively. Prejudiced whites and similarly 
prejudiced, uppity blacks and anxious Asians would see 
those names on a job application or hear them in 
conversation and immediately envision thugs and “welfare 
mothers.” Someone from one of the groups mentioned, 
ignorant of its origin, would probably frown upon a name 
like Amani, which means “peace,” or “loveable” in 
Swahili. 
 
Undoubtedly, the character above would probably dislike a 
name like Amani, not only because (s)he didn’t know its 
meaning, but also because the naming controversy is 
essentially rooted in disdain and contempt for anything 
associated with African-Americans. This truism is 
evidenced by the phenomenon where names with 
European origins gain infamy once they become popular 
amongst black folks. Take Tyrone for instance. Even 
though it’s an Irish name, meaning “from Owen's territory; 
County Tyrone in Ireland,” many now look down on it as 
“ghetto,” or at least, typically “black.” Dante’, the name of 
one Italy’s greatest poets, has suffered a similar fate. 
 
Again, the conservatives amongst us would likely suggest 
that, this author’s identity question notwithstanding, we 
relinquish names that identify us as black in order to 
survive and thrive. But perhaps worse than surrendering 
our privilege to name ourselves freely and ignoring our 
legacy, if we gave our children names that "didn't make 
waves," we would also relegate them to inferior status 
consequently. Suppose someone named his child James, 
instead of Ogun, and James’ counterparts' parents named 
their children (James’ classmates, playmates, neighbors, 
coworkers, etc.) whatever they wanted to without concern 
for his, or any other black person’s, impressions. 
Meanwhile James bears a name given him so that he could 
fit in with vanilla company. Is this conditional acceptance 
the “equality” we strive for? 
 
Some readers will say it’s not names like Jamal and Aisha 
that they have beef with, instead it’s names like Alize’, 
TreShaun, and others, which sound like they were 
conceived in the shower, that they laugh at. Perhaps they 
wouldn’t laugh as hard if they remembered that most of 
our surnames don’t have any lofty origin. According to 
Wikipedia, surnames generally refer to the occupation (e.g. 
Baker, Smith), personal characteristics (e.g. Goodman, 
Brown), location/origin (e.g. Scott, Rivers) and ancestry 
(typically father's name, e.g. Johnson meaning “John’s 
son”) of the distant ancestor to whom the surname was 
first applied. If you are of African descent, yet live in the 
Americas that means that you probably bear the name of 
the “gentle” man that tormented and tortured your 
grandfathers and degraded and violated your 
grandmothers. Appropriately then, if Ronteefa and 
Nevonte’ make you laugh, your own last name should 
make you cry. 
 
Given this base and/or ignominious history of last names, 
why shouldn’t one give her child a name that has 
significance to her, regardless of how awkward it is? 
Beyond that, “white” names don’t encounter scrutiny 
about meaning, awkwardness, and etc. so why should 
ours? No one ever asks what Marcia means, so why ask 
about Laquanna?! No one cares Marcia means “martial,” 
nor will anyone ask a parent how his/her daughter is 
warlike, or relates to war (the definition of martial), so 
why the condescending concerning about Shaniqua?


--- PAGE 36 ---
The Black God: An Anthology of Truth 
If the accomodationists had their way, our country would 
only contain Ashleys and Johnathans. Fortunately, there 
are smart and brave ones amongst us who refuse to limit 
our personal choices to earn white favor and/or avoid 
white scorn. We understand that the progress we have 
made came from struggle, not acquiescence; from a strong 
sense of identity, not imitation; from creativity in 
expression, not uniformity. 
 
 
Hail Lakeesha: Part II 
By C’BS Alife Allah 
New Heaven (New Haven, CT) 
 
My honorable name is Absalom (for the record the Gods 
and Earths as a whole do not refer to the names given to us 
at birth as ‘slave’ names or ‘government’ names. They are 
referred to as honorable names. As 1st Born ABG#7 told 
me (as Allah told him), we bring honor to the names our 
parents gave us because that is all that they had to give us. 
That is why if one committed a crime Allah told his sons 
to turn their self in, serve their sentence and clear their 
name). I know what it is to not have a ‘normal’ name. 
Ironically, it is a ‘good ‘ol’ biblical name. The reality is 
that the majority of Christians who I run into are ignorant 
of their own religious text thus they are always asking me 
if my name is muslim. Shoot even nowadays when I give 
my righteous name people think that I’m muslim if they 
aren’t familiar with the Gods and Earths.  
 
Anyway my name never prevented me from getting 
anywhere in society that I wanted to. If a person was racist 
then my name didn’t make a difference. I was taught to 
uphold my name and to be proud of it.  
 
The point that the above article makes is interesting. 
People have names in this society and don’t know what 
they mean. Adam means ‘ruddy red’. Luke means ‘white’. 
I know some coal black brothers with said name. Mary 
means ‘bitter’. Peter means ‘rock’. I know ‘Alize’ may 
seem ‘odd’ yet there are plenty names that people have 
that mean ‘water’ or ‘wine’.  
 
The Gods and Earths know all about different names. 
Many times our names are straight English words such as 
Justice, Wisdom, or Intelligent. Interestingly enough the 
names that people have in this society sometimes mean 
those same things in another foreign language (especially 
Hebrew since a lot of people have names from the Bible). 
It is ‘okay’ though because it is accepted by society.  
 
My name is……. 
 
Whatever I tell you it is. 
 
Peace 
 
 
I do not believe in belief.  
    Edward M. Forster (1878-1970)   
 
A true idea has no need of any faith.  
    Ken Harding  
 
Why did god bother creating all the generations between Adam and Noah?  I 
mean, if he was going to kill everyone off, all the humans (men, women, 
innocent children and babies), guiltless animals, and all the plants too, and HE 
KNEW IT IN ADVANCE, why in the hell didn’t he just start with Noah in the first 
place?  
     Ken Harding  
 
I have never seen the slightest scientific proof of the religious theories of heaven and hell, of future life for 
individuals, or of a personal God.  
    Thomas Edison (1847-1931) U.S. inventor 
 36
 
Worship God. It’s easier than thinking. 
Chapman Cohen (1868-1954)  
 
People go to church for the same reasons they go to a tavern: to stupefy 
themselves, to forget their misery, to imagine themselves, for a few minutes 
anyway, free and happy.  
Mikhail Aleksandrovich Bakunin (1814-1876)


--- PAGE 37 ---
The Black God: An Anthology of Truth 
 37
Save the Babies 
BY C’BS ALIFE ALLAH 
NEW HEAVEN (NEW HAVEN, CT) 
 
Here are fifty things that one can to assist in the growth and development of the youth in one's Kingdom. 
 
1-Make time for them 
 
2-Listen to them 
 
3-If you are bi-lingual, teach them a 
second language 
 
4-Teach them a trade such as carpentry, 
electrician, or plumbing 
 
5-Teach them how to cook, sew, or about 
hygiene 
 
6-Teach them how to write 
 
7-Teach them how to research 
 
8-Teach them the difference between fact 
and opinion 
 
9-Encourage them to stay aware of the 
news (at home and abroad) 
 
10-Walk them through 120 (Don't just 
"give" it to them on a piece of paper) 
 
11-Volunteer to be a mentor/big 
brother/sister 
 
12-Teach them how to eat to live and the 
effect of things that go into their bodies 
 
13-Teach them how to walk safely 
through the "ghetto" (ie…how to traverse 
that land) 
 
14-Take them on trips out of the city 
 
15-Take them to a movie and talk about it 
afterwards 
 
16-Teach them to excel in whatever they 
do 
 
17-Spend enough time with them to 
recognize their weaknesses and come up 
with a plan together on how to overcome 
them 
 
18-Teach them about conservation 
whether it be on an ecological level 
(recycling) or on an economical level 
(savings) 
 
19-Show them, by example, how to 
interact with all of the human families of 
the planet Earth no matter what ethnic 
group, nationality or caste 
 
20-Teach them history and show the 
connection between the past and present 
 
21-Perform science experiments with 
them that relate to 120 
 
22-Teach them the difference between 
male and Man....female and Woman 
 
23-Buy them a book, have them read it 
and then discuss it with them 
 
24-Show them the science of urban 
survival (how to stretch a minimum 
amount of money the maximum length. 
How to secure food, clothing and shelter) 
 
25-Show them how to observe and record 
police misconduct in their Kingdom 
 
26-Teach them how to interact with the 
police 
 
27-Make sure that they don't become a 
slave to mis-economics (credit cards, 
loans, etc...). Make sure they pursue 
grants, scholarships, etc.. 
 
28-Show them how to maintain their 
health as a man or woman 
 
29-Teach them chess 
 
30-Encourage them to develop a specific 
artform (writing, drawing, music, dance, 
etc...) Also teach them to be responsible 
on the art forms’ content. Also it's ability 
to cause social change. 
 
31-Teach them a martial art 
 
32-Have them walk their neighborhood in 
a 5 block radius so that they can know 
their neighborhood 
 
33-If you live in the "suburbs" then take 
them to the "ghetto". If you live in the 
"ghetto" then take them into the "suburbs" 
 
34-Get them a pen pal/e-mail pal abroad 
in a war torn country 
 
35-Challenge them to make positive 
things happen in their neighborhoods 
 
36-Show them how to produce something 
(soap, candles, paper, incense, etc...) 
 
37-Take them to the children's ward at the 
hospital and have them interact with the 
children there to teach them compassion 
 
38-Teach them the difference between 
wants and needs 
 
39-Teach them the difference between 
imagination and illusion 
 
40-Teach them to stand on Square for 
what is right and you won't have to worry 
about them falling for that which is wrong 
 
41-Teach them to take responsibility for 
success and failure 
 
42-Teach them to avoid the symptoms of 
becoming religious 
 
43-Teach them how to Knowledge for 
themself so that they will Love Self and 
respect Self and won't look for it in others 
 
44-Teach them how to find the best part 
in any person, place or thing 
 
45-Teach them how to find all of the free 
services in their Kingdom 
 
46-Teach them not to take things on face 
value 
 
47-Teach them the science of a strong 
family unit (man, woman, child) 
especially if they don't have their own 
 
48-Teach them that the Blackman is God 
and that the Blackwoman is Earth through 
example and not through philosophies, 
theologies, rhetoric, etc... 
 
49-Listen to them 
 
50-Make time for them


--- PAGE 38 ---
The Black God: An Anthology of Truth 
Who is the 5%? 
 
* THE NATION OF GODS AND EARTHS * 
 
Freedom Allah 
Love Allah (Los Angeles, CA) 
 
     The Nation of God and Earth is built upon the teachings 
of Allah, our founder.  We know and teach that the 
Supreme Being, God (Allah), is the Black man.  Supreme 
means most high and being means something that exists.  
We do not believe that God is an invisible being existing 
somewhere outside of man.  Allah is real.  This is our most 
profound teaching, it is often rejected by the masses of the 
people because they have been subjected to the teachings of 
the deceitful religious leaders for thousands of years.   
 
     The prophets and messengers of old have all hinted at 
the reality of God.  Many keys are found in the scriptures 
and teachings of the various religions; however the real 
secret of God was not to be revealed to the masses until the 
last days of the devil’s rule.  Those of us with the 
knowledge of ourselves are now living in the hereafter.  We 
have been blessed by the coming of Allah who has taught 
us how to ‘born God’, that is, how to grow into God 
ourselves.  We live and learn in Allah’s world.  In Allah’s 
world, the righteous are becoming victorious.  It is the 
birthright of the Black man (which includes all people of 
so-called black, brown and yellow descent) to be God.  We 
teach that the Black woman is the Earth.  God and Earth go 
together like sun and moon.  The sun is symbolic to man 
and the moon is symbolic to woman.  Each God must be 
the foundation of his family or universe.  He gives light 
(knowledge) and life (sperm) to his Earth so that their 
family can continue on after they both return to their 
essence.  The true and living God is the original man with 
knowledge of his own reality.  He is an upright and 
civilized man.  He knows who he is and teaches the world 
true freedom, justice and equality through example.   
 
     Supreme Mathematics is order, the natural order of the 
universe.  In order to reach completeness, everything that 
exists must start at knowledge and be taken to born.  
Supreme Mathematics is the language of the Gods and 
Earths.  They are the foundation of our culture.  It is 
evident that the devil is still ruling the masses of the 
people.  He is running in overtime.  The rich are ripping off 
the poor and cataclysmically destroying the Earth.  The 
devil does not rest.  He causes trouble and manipulates all 
that he can.  To be victorious we must talk and walk our 
language daily.  Each of us has to take the devil off our 
own planet – else we may fall victim to his deceit.  The only 
power the devil has nowadays is the power we give to him.  
Knowing this is one of the steps to understanding how 
Allah is truly God. 
 
     Even though we utilize the ‘Islamic’ name of God, Allah, 
the Gods and Earths do not practice the religion of Islam.  
We are not Muslims.  Islam, as we live it out, is a culture.  It 
has no beginning nor ending, it is not a religion, it is 
mathematics.  All religions have a beginning and things 
that have beginnings have endings.  For us, all religions 
expired in 1964 which is year one of the Five Percent 
Nation (now known as the Nation of God and Earth).  We 
use the name Allah because that is the name of our 
founder.   
 
     The religion of Islam was started in the 7th century, 
Common Era.  It is now made up of over seventy sects 
which are usually categorized into two factions, Sunni and 
Shi’a.  These two are commonly called orthodox Islam.  
They make up the majority of the Muslim population.  
There are other forms of Islam that exist such as the Sufis 
and the Nation of Islam.  In the Arabic language, Islam 
literally means surrender and in its religious connotation it 
means the peace that comes when one submits or 
surrenders their will to Allah.  For us, ISLAM means I Self 
Lord Allah Master, or I Sincerely Love Allah’s 
Mathematics.  Though we are not Sufis, we do hold some 
commonalities with them.  The Sufis teach an esoteric 
version of Islam that combines the teachings of orthodox 
Islam with the Eastern mysticism traditions.  There are 
some groups of Sufis who are not Muslim at all; they 
practice a secular form of Sufism.  Some of the Sunni and 
Shi’a Muslims accept the teachings of the Sufis while some 
of them reject them as heretical.   
 
 
 
 
 38


--- PAGE 39 ---
The Black God: An Anthology of Truth 
* The Nation of Islam * 
 39
 
     The Nation of Islam, in its face value exoteric meaning, 
is an organization started in the early 20th century by 
Prophet W.D. Fard Muhammad.  The Nation of Islam is 
rejected by the majority of the orthodox Muslims, primarily 
because they teach that Allah appeared in the person of 
Wallace Fard Muhammad.  Orthodox Muslims believe God 
is an unseen being existing somewhere far, far away, even 
though their scriptures teach that Allah is closer than our 
jugular vein.   
 
     The Nation of Islam teaches that Wallace Fard 
Muhammad is the Supreme Being.  There are several 
Nation of Islam sects, most notable is the Nation of Islam 
led by Minister Louis Farrakhan.  Many authors write that 
the Five Percenters are a sect of the Nation of Islam, this is 
not true.  We are not part of the organization, the Nation of 
Islam; we are not Muslims, we have no ministers, captains 
or lieutenants and we are not required to follow the 
restrictive law of the Nation of Islam.   
 
     We do however memorize, internalize, and bring the 
lessons of the Nation of Islam to life by relating them to our 
present circumstance with the proper application of 
Supreme Mathematics.  And like the Nation of Islam, Five 
Percenters do teach that God came in the person of Fard 
Muhammad.  Though for us it means that the knowledge, 
wisdom and power of Allah came in the person of Fard 
Muhammad.  In other words, Fard Muhammad was a God, 
but not exclusively Allah.  Fard Muhammad prepared the 
way for the ‘coming’ of Allah by raising a messenger.  We 
do not attribute any supernatural characteristics to him or 
to any other man.  In other words, we are not spooky. 
 
     The last book of the Old Testament, Malachi, speaks on 
the last days (of the devil’s rule, not literally the last days of 
the Earth) and the coming of God.  The scriptures say that 
God will come to Elijah’s temple in the last days.  This 
Elijah is referring to Elijah Muhammad, the messenger 
Fard Muhammad prepared and this temple is the Nation of 
Islam’s temple number seven (Harlem, New York City).     
 
* Allah * 
 
     Allah, born Clarence Smith, joined the Nation of Islam in 
the mid 20th century.  Allah was not born with the 
knowledge of himself.  As it is written in the scripture in 
Malachi, God came to Elijah’s temple.  When Clarence 
realized his own godhood, he told a few of his Nation of 
Islam brothers.  Leadership in the temple did not take too 
kind of that.  Allah was expelled from the Nation of Islam.  
Some say that Allah was kicked out of the temple for 
gambling and drinking liquor, two prohibited acts in the 
Nation of Islam.  Others say that he was kicked out because 
he was teaching that he was God and the leaders of the 
temple did not like that.  The former usually grants a 
suspension, not a permanent expulsion so there is more 
likelihood in the latter.  Like the Jesus of the bible, they 
threw stones at him for teaching what was already in their 
book (lessons).  Regardless to how it went down, that was 
the end of Clarence’s presence in the temple.  He changed 
his name to Allah and began teaching people who the true 
and living God is, publicly.  For us, that was the end of the 
need for religious belief.  Allah was now here.  He hit the 
streets and taught his teachings to the adults in Harlem.  
Most of them rejected his teachings so he began to teach the 
youth.  His first student was named Matthew.  Allah 
renamed him Karriem which means noble or generous 
though later he would become Black Messiah. We now 
enter Allah’s world manifest.  Allah taught other young 
men in Harlem and together, Black Messiah and Allah’s 
other sons became known as the Sons of Almighty God 
Allah, also known as Allah’s Five Percent.  His first 
teaching was not that we are all Gods.  His first teachings 
were simple; that we should be clean, righteous, upright 
teachers of knowledge and wisdom.  He taught them that 
they were all brothers.  He discovered order within the 
universe and called this order Supreme Mathematics.  And 
with the help of his brother, Justice, he put together our 
Supreme Alphabet which is a set of principles we live by.  
The Supreme Mathematics and Supreme Alphabet make 
up the language of the Gods.  Supreme Mathematics allows 
us to measure all things in their proper perspectives while 
Supreme Alphabet allows us to describe all things.  Allah 
instructed the brothers to teach the people of Harlem,


--- PAGE 40 ---
The Black God: An Anthology of Truth 
 40
which he renamed Mecca.  Eventually they spread 
throughout all five New York City boroughs as well as 
other major cities in the tri-state area.  Now we are located 
in all the major cities of the United States as well as some 
cities in Canada, Puerto Rico, the United Kingdom, the 
continent of Africa and even Asia thanks to those traveling 
and doing their duty. 
 
* Who are the Eighty-Five, Ten and Five Percent? * 
 
     The term five percent comes from the lessons of the 
Nation of Islam.  Before we can talk about the Five Percent, 
we must first explain the other two groups of people.  The 
masses of the people, the eighty-five percent, are ignorant.  
They eat unhealthy foods, foods that are even outlawed in 
their scripture.  They are slaves of a mental death, they are 
people who do not know their origin in this world, they 
worship deity blindly and are easily led in the wrong 
direction but hard to lead in the right.   
 
     The ten percent were originally described as religious 
leaders but are not limited to religion alone.  The ten 
percent are the rich who enslave the masses.  The religious 
ten percent teach that God is an unseen being who we will 
either meet after we die or maybe never meet because we 
were disbelievers or sinners in this life and therefore 
sentenced to eternal hellfire.  The ten percent can be 
summed up as corrupt leaders.  The ten percent control 
four major institutions; EDUCATIONAL, ECONOMICAL, 
POLITICAL and RELIGIOUS.  
     The public educational system presents a fallacious 
account of history.  Many textbooks are teaching the myth 
that European civilization and culture was the first on this 
planet.  Europeans did not build the first world 
civilizations.  Europeans were not the first civilized nation, 
however, under the United States public school system, we 
are taught that the original inhabitants of the planet (black 
brown and yellow shades) were backwards until 
Europeans came into contact with them.  We are taught 
that our people were and are still primitive, savage and 
inferior to Europeans.  The public schools teach our 
children to honor George Washington, Christopher 
Columbus, Thomas Jefferson, Abraham Lincoln etc.  
However, they are not giving a true account of the stories 
that have taken place; history is simply his-story.  If you 
ask a Black child in America who Marcus Garvey or Elijah 
Muhammad was, they will most likely tell you that they do 
not know.  The schools do not teach about Benjamin 
Banneker, Cesar Chavez or Malcolm X.  They teach lies 
about history and emphasize irrelevant subjects while 
omitting relevant ones.  The United States’ public 
education system also honors mythology.  I remember 
celebrating Valentines Day, Easter, Thanksgiving and 
Christmas when I was in school.  Many schools even have 
Halloween parades.  Public schools teach our children that 
Abraham Lincoln freed the slaves.  What they do not teach 
is that Abraham Lincoln thought Blacks were not people, 
just property.  When he "freed the slaves" he was saying 
that Black people are not people, but slaves, and now they 
will be free slaves.  He saw all blacks as inferior to whites.  
On August 14, 1852, Abraham Lincoln said "Not a single 
man of your race is made equal to a single man of ours," 
but this is never taught in the schools to the children.  They 
do not teach that "Thanksgiving" was actually a slaughter 
of the natives or that the acts of Columbus and other 
European ‘explorers’ and ‘settlers’ were horrific and 
terrifying.  Their acts are seen as a victory for God, a 
victory to be held in high esteem for all United States 
citizens.  The school system does not teach us how to 
implement change.  They do not present any working 
solutions to fix our condition economic wise, health wise or 
any other way.  It teaches us what to think instead of how 
to think creatively.       
     The economical institutions are run by the 10%.  They 
control how the masses live by manipulating the decisions 
they make.  They are money lenders and big business 
owners.  A 1996 study revealed that 68% of the total net 
worth of all U.S. families is owned by just 10% of those 
families.  Although the 10% run the major businesses and 
institutions that enslave the masses, it is the masses who 
keep the 10% in power by working for them and accepting 
the system.  Wealth, power and prestige are maintained by 
the puppet masters by way of mass manipulation.  The 
economical institutions' main tool for manipulation and 
programming of the masses is the television.  What are 
television shows called?  Programs!  The masses are 
influenced at an early age by cartoons, music, television 
programs and movies.  Corporations like FOX, NBC, HBO, 
etc. indoctrinate the masses mentally while corporations 
like McDonalds, Taco Bell, Coca-Cola and Pepsi feed them 
the wrong physical foods which all contribute to keeping 
them enslaved.  There is a large percentage of children 
watching videos after school on MTV and BET.  These 
channels influence what healthcare products people buy, 
how they dress, and how they carry themselves.  
Nowadays it is not surprising to hear a young Black 
woman call herself and/or her friends "bitch(es)"  Do you 
know who/what is molding your child? 
     Politics have a large influence on society, especially here 
in the United States.  The ruling class, which is the 10%, 
gets elected by the masses of people.  The politicians smile


--- PAGE 41 ---
The Black God: An Anthology of Truth 
for cameras, kiss babies, and claim to be in their position 
for the interest of the masses.  Laws are formed by these 
politicians to keep the other three institutions running 
well.  Once in a while, a member of the power elite gets 
caught breaking the law and will actually be prosecuted.  
This trick is done to make the masses believe that the 
criminal justice system maintains fairness, giving the 
masses a reason not to overthrow their oppressive 
government.  One governmental agency is called the Food 
and Drug Administration, it regulates what can and cannot 
be done in the businesses of food and drugs.  Drugs go 
with the foods because you will need something in your 
old age to cure you from all the poison contained in the 
meat, the preservatives and the artificial sugars eaten 
throughout your lifetime.  The political institutions have 
important roles that keep the eight-five percent 
manipulated and the system of extreme inequality 
functioning.  The political bodies work closely with the 
other bodies to keep the people enslaved.  
More than 60% 
of all U.S. companies paid no federal tax at all during the 
economic boom under Clinton’s presidency (1996 to 2000) 
and eighty-two of the United States’ largest profitable 
corporations paid no federal income tax for at least one 
year of the Bush’s first three years of presidency (2001 to 
2003).   
     Religion is defined as "belief in a divine or superhuman 
power or powers to be obeyed and worshipped as the 
creator(s) and ruler(s) of the universe."  The word religion 
comes from "religare" which means to restrain or tie back.  
What are people being restrained from?  What are they 
being tied back from?  The full knowledge of God.  In order 
for religion to exist, you need followers, a "God" (or Gods) 
and someone to link the followers to that God.  It's a 
hierarchy where the popes, bishops, reverends, swamis, 
rabbis, imams and other preachers lead and teach the 
followers about this God (or Gods).  The truth is, God has 
always been one with man.  Most religious preachers know 
this; however, they desire to make slaves out of their 
followers.  So they teach lies.  It is said that Christianity has 
over one billion adherents.  Christian preachers teach that 
God came in the form of a man, but they say God is not a 
man.  The last messenger of Allah, the Honorable Elijah 
Muhammad, said: 
The Christians do not believe in God as being a human 
being, yet they believe in Him as being the Father of all 
human beings. They also refer to God as He, Him, 
Man, King and The Ruler. They teach that God sees, 
hears, talks, walks, stands, sits, rides, and flies; that He 
grieves or sorrows; and that He is interested in the 
affairs of human beings. They also teach that once upon 
a time He made the first man like Himself in the image 
and likeness of Himself, but yet they believe that He, 
Himself, is not a man or human. They preach and 
prophesy of His coming and that He will be seen on the 
Judgment Day but is not man. They cannot tell us what 
He looks like, yet man is made like Him and in the 
image of God, and yet they still say that He is a 
mystery (unknown). 
     The religious leaders make God a mystery to the masses 
in order to keep control over them.  If the followers knew 
everything that the preachers know, there would be no 
reason to go to church.  Therefore, the preachers do not 
share all of their knowledge with the followers.  The 
preachers know that they need followers in order to get 
paid.  The religious institutions are connected to the other 
institutions.  In school, children are taught to quote "...one 
nation, under God...."  Whose God?  Where is He?  When 
testifying in court, you are told to put your hand on the 
Bible and we are sworn under an oath in the name of God.  
The truth is, and has always been, that the only God is 
man.  A definition of God is Supreme Being.  Supreme 
means most high, and being means to be or to exist.  The 
most high being that exists is man.  You can not prove that 
there is any being more supreme than man.  People ask, 
"What about when man was not?  Where was God then?"  
There never has been a 
time when man was not.  
Most people hear the 
word man and 
automatically think head, 
two arms, torso and two 
legs.  That is physical 
man, yes, however man 
is more than a physical 
body.  The cells, tissues 
and bones I have now are 
not the same as the cells, 
tissues and bones I had when I was a baby.  Yet I am still 
the same person.  That is because the physical body is not 
my essence.  Man is intelligence.  That is what God is.  The 
mind has always been here and always will be.  Religious 
people say "in the beginning God created....."  Who's 
beginning?  Everything that has a beginning, has an 
ending.  There is no beginning for the Original Man.   
* Who is the Original Man? * 
 41
     When asked this, the Honorable Elijah Muhammad 
answered "The Original Man is the Asiatic Blackman, the 
maker, the owner, the cream of the planet Earth, God of the 
Universe."  This is not something he just made up.  The 
knowledge of God has always been known to those "in the 
know," but it has been concealed from the masses for a 
very long time.  Societies like the freemasons have kept the 
knowledge of God bottled up in their higher degrees.  
Shriners bear witness to the Black man being God.  They


--- PAGE 42 ---
The Black God: An Anthology of Truth 
 42
know that there is no mystery God, outside of man.  The 
Shriners even call God by his name, Allah.  In public 
however, they deny the knowledge that they have 
acquired, and some even go to church on Sundays to 
preach about a mystery God that is the father of Jesus, 
outright liars.  They know this isn't true, but they will teach 
it in order to keep their power.   
     People also ask the question, "If man is God, who made 
the physical man?"  Man has always been in some 
form…there is no ‘who’ that created him, he is self-created.  
From the ‘time’ of sub-atomic particles to atoms to 
molecules to organelles to cells to tissues to organs to organ 
systems to organisms, man has always existed in one form 
or another.  The evolution of man has been carried out by 
his own will, just like your evolution is carried out by your 
will.  You create your own destiny by choosing what you 
will and will not do, what you will and will not eat, how 
long you will rest, what you will study, etc.  The Original 
Man is the Asiatic Blackman, meaning, the Blackman from 
Asia.  We are taught not to separate Africa from Asia and 
not to limit the Blackman as an African, for Africa is not the 
Blackman's only home.  The planet Earth is the Blackman's 
home and the Blackman has fathered civilizations all over 
the world.  We call the Earth Asia, us being Asiatic makes 
us people of and relating to the Earth.  Asiatic also signifies 
an esoteric meaning.  Within the teachings of Kaballah, 
Assiah is described as the world of expression. It is not 
only the people of African descent that are Black.  We teach 
that all Asiatic (non-white) people are Original or Black 
people.  We do not fall victim to the European's teaching 
that we are all different, that is something they want us to 
believe, so that they can divide and conquer us.      
     The term 5% refers to a small percentage of the world 
that knows and teaches who the true and living God is.  
This small group of people teach that God is the son of 
man, the Supreme Being, Black man from Asia.  The 
knowledge of the Asiatic Black man being God is kept 
hidden from the masses in order to control them.  Some 
people know who the true and living God is, from the Pope 
in Rome to the Freemasons in your local Masonic Temple.  
Your local church preacher may even bear witness to the 
true and living God, however, keep in mind that everyone 
who knows who God is does not teach the truth about 
God.  The 10% teach of God as a mystery, unknown and 
unseen God.   
     God is usually described in theology as being a “He”.  
The Bible, Qur’an, Bhagavad-Gita, Upanishads and 
Coming Forth By Day (Egyptian Book of the Dead) all refer 
to God in this masculine gender, first person singular 
description.  In addition, the Bible also quotes God 
referring to himself/themselves with the term “Us” and the 
Qur’an uses the term “We”.  This He, We and Us are all 
speaking about the Asiatic Black man with knowledge of 
himself, the true royalty deserving of the “royal plural”.   
     The Honorable Elijah Muhammad taught that God is a 
man.  He, like the Jesus of the Bible, taught that we are all 
Gods (John 10:34).  The masses of the world believe God is 
some unseen, supernatural, being existing somewhere out 
in space.  Allah is not unseen; he is seen and heard 
everywhere.  In theological texts, God sees, hears, speaks, 
walks and feels.  In Genesis, Adam heard God walking 
through the garden (Genesis 3:8).  Three men appeared to 
Abraham in the plains of Mamre, one was the Lord and 
Abraham fed him (Genesis 19:1-33). 
     Allah, the founder of the Five Percent Nation, was not 
hateful and neither are we.  He taught that we should not 
fear competing against nor interacting with Caucasian 
people.  He taught us that it is fine to socialize with them 
however, we should not mix our seed with them, for that 
would be grafting out the originality of our seed.  Unlike 
the Nation of Islam, Allah taught Caucasian people.  The 
F.B.I. report on Allah quotes Azreal, a Caucasian Five 
Percenter as saying "He gave me the knowledge of 
myself.....Allah loved everybody."  Allah was also a close 
friend of the Caucasian Barry Gottehrer, an assistant to 
Mayor Lindsay and head of the Mayor's urban task force.  
Barry Gottehrer provided Allah with busses to transport 
the young Gods and Earths to rallies where Allah would 
teach the youth.   
     The Honorable Elijah Muhammad was taught by Master 
Fard Muhammad, who came to North America with the 
challenging job of resurrecting the mentally dead lost but 
now found, Nation of Original people.  He has his hard 
times, but with hard work he proved to be successful.  In 
1964, Allah came to us and with the help of Justice (his 
right hand man), Shahid, Ebeka, and the first borns Black 
Messiah, Bisme, Uhuru, Kihiem, Prince, Jamil, ABG, Akbar 
and Salaam he began what is now known as the Nation of 
God and Earth.  The 10% claim that it is impossible for God 
to be the Black man, however, the Bible and Qur'an cite 
various passages revealing who the true and living God is.  
     It is true that the Asiatic Black man is God, however, as I 
mentioned above, the 10% make God into a mystery.  The 
5% are the poor righteous teachers who do not believe in 
the teachings of the 10%.  They are all-wise and know who 
the true and living God is, and they teach that the true and 
living God is the son of man, the Supreme Being, the Black 
man.


--- PAGE 43 ---
The Black God: An Anthology of Truth 
 43
Civilization Studies:  
CIVILIZED ACTS AND UNCIVILIZED ACTS 
 
1) God must carry himself in a unique manner.  
2) The use of bad (profane) language comes from 
one who has no proper wisdom.  
3) A wise man does not seek violence, but if 
violence comes to him he must defend himself.  
4) Two Gods must never fight unless one must die. 
5) The Gods must never debate with one another, 
but instead, research to find out.  
6) The Gods must always be and deal equally with 
each other.  
7) The Gods must always perform their duty, which 
is to teach civilization to others.  
8) Never mock those who do not understand, but 
instead give them the teaching of understanding.  
9) A true God will always help his brother in time of 
need, mentally as well as physically.  
10) God must always keep himself refined, mentally 
as well as physically.  
11) The Gods must never lie, cheat or steal from one 
another for that is devilishment.  
12) God is the most high and merciful, therefore has 
forgiveness for ones errors.  
13) Allah is all wise and does everything right and 
exact.  
14) God must never serve justice to a man for 
something he does not know.  
15) You can always distinguish a wise man from a 
fool, for he is almighty God Allah.  
16) Always knowledge before you speak, your 
wisdom will gain power and strength.  
17) Allah does not seek revenge, but strives for 
justice.  
18) Always seek positive, leave negative people 
alone.  
19) If you ever see an error in a brother's ways and 
actions, then you must correct it.  
20) Allah never forces anyone to do anything at 
anytime.  
21) Allah always admits when he does not know.  
22) A true God never uses math as a shield to cover 
his negative ways, for that is a form of trick-
knowledge.  
23) Allah does not do anything negative at any time.  
24) Never deny your brothers, always teach one 
another.  
25) Destroy all negative thoughts from the mind, for a 
negative thought only brings about a negative 
reaction.  
26) God is never afraid to ask his alikes a question, 
for he is only seeking knowledge.  
27) A wise man never portrays the ways and actions 
of a savage, for it only makes you look bad.  
28) A true and living God will always show his love 
for his brothers by being equal with his jewels.  
29) People look at you by the way you speak and act, 
so if you speak and act negative, surely you will 
be considered negative.  
30) Watch out for black snakes, for they are the worst 
kind and if ever you find one, then destroy it as 
soon as possible.  
31) Allah must always respect the wisdom (woman) 
for she is necessary to produce life.  
32) Study your lessons as much as possible, for the 
more you study, the wiser you'll get. 
 
Peace


--- PAGE 44 ---
The Black God: An Anthology of Truth 
Is the Nation of Gods and Earths a Muslim Community? 
 
By I Majestic Allah 
Power Born (Pittsburgh, PA) 
 
 
Within and outside the Nation of Gods and Earths 
(NGE), many are unsure as to the relation of the NGE 
to the religion of Islam as practiced by over 1 billion 
adherents throughout the world.  Understandably, 
perspectives on the matter are varied, ranging from 
inclusion (those who see the NGE within the Islamic 
scope) to total exclusion (those who see the NGE 
having no relation to the religion of Islam).  There are 
also thinkers who see the NGE not as Muslims, but a 
group with ideas in the vein of Shiite and Sufi sects.  
The primary consequence of this argument is the way 
in which we see ourselves in relation to other 
cultures/religions on the planet.  Furthermore, it 
begs the question:  is the NGE merely an offshoot of 
the Nation of Islam (NOI), or is it a new value 
system?  The answer to this question is not a static 
yes/no; but rather an answer that incorporates many 
factors and connects varied  cultural and social 
dynamics. 
 
 44
In order to look deeper into the question, it is 
imperative that we first evaluate the ideas and value 
system of the respective cultures/religions to see if 
they are indeed similar.  The primary reason that 
many accuse the NGE of being Quasi-and Proto-
Islamic is the use of the terms Allah and Islam.  
Although the terms are indeed used by both groups, 
the meanings and context in which they are used are 
strikingly dissimilar.  In the traditional Islamic 
context, Allah is used to refer to an omnipotent, 
omniscient, astral God who is the object of adoration 
and worship in western monotheistic thought 
(Judaism, Christianity, Islam).  God in Arabic is Ilah, 
so the prefix Al (meaning the) was added on to 
indicate a shift away from polytheistic 
culture/religion, as was the norm in pre-Islamic 
A r a b i a .   I n  t h e  p a r a d i g m  o f  t h e  N G E ,  A l l a h  i s  t h e  
Blackman, who after gaining an acute awareness of 
his positive qualities, history, and the world around 
him, actualizes these positive qualities in order to be 
the creator of his own destiny and a positive 
enriching influence in his family and community 
(global or local).  This worldview is not unlike the 
concept of the “perfect man” in Sufism and the 
Kabbalah.  While many woul d hold that Allah is an 
Islamic term, it is actually an Arabic term that is also 
used by Arab Jews and Christians when speaking of 
God.  Our use of the Arabic term is not only related 
to the history of the NGE, but also on the profound 
affect that the term carries when speaking of a 
change in the worldview from the Christian 
perspective held previous b y  m a n y  i n  t h e  A f r i c a n -
American and Latino community.  The term Islam in 
the traditional Islamic context means “submission to 
the will of Allah”, and refers to the religion and 
worldview revealed by Mu hammad Ibn Abdullah in 
7
th century Arabia.  From the perspective of the NGE, 
Islam bespeaks the cultural filament of high 
civilization practiced and maintained by people of 
the Afro-Asiatic Diaspora.  Even in orthodox Islam, it 
is acknowledged that Islam as an ideal championing 
the existence of the oneness of God predated the 
emergence of 
Islam as a 
religion.  
Similar to the 
term Allah, the 
NGE does not 
use the term 
Islam to be seen as Muslims, but to underscore the 
correlation between a civilization’s development of 
human behavior, and its development of science.  It 
is well documented that the religion of Islam was a 
catalyst for the development of science, mathematics, 
and philosophy for hundreds of years, even 
influencing the enlightenment period in Europe.  
Within Africa, cities such as Djenne and Timbuktu 
are testimonies to Afro-Islamic achievements in 
mathematics and science, as well as human 
development and spirituality.  By seeing oneself 
within this ethno-cultura l framework, the mental 
paradigm is developed where people of color all over 
the world can transform the behaviors that many of 
us suffer from (lack of motivation, defeatist behavior, 
anti-intellectualism).  This is why within the NGE 
community, you will find terms such as 
“science/scientist”, “mathematics”, “right and 
exact”, and so forth.  The NGE use of the term 
“Mathematics” is of particular importance as it 
relates to the Hindu-Arabic  n u m e r a l s  w e  u s e .   T h e  
history of the Hindu-Arabic number system is an 
example of the historical and social bond that 
connects civilizations and promotes human 
development by way of cultural and intellectual


--- PAGE 45 ---
The Black God: An Anthology of Truth 
exchange.  
By seeing 
the filament 
that runs 
through the 
high 
civilizations 
of people of color, we develop a universal worldview 
that champions and relates to the achievements of 
people of color all over the planet.  While some may 
dismiss this framework as underdeveloped and 
imaginary, it is no more fantastic than the Zion of 
Rastafarian thought, or the ancient Kemet of some 
Afrocentrists.  On a religious level, however it is 
important to note that orthodox Islam and the NGE 
are in no way the same.  There is no veneration of 
Muhammad as the last prophet in the NGE, and the 
NGE has no set amount that is required to be 
distributed to the poor.  Due to the view that man is 
the creator of his individual and collective destiny, 
prayer in the form of Salat is not required.  Fasting is 
encouraged in the NGE, but not in a structured and 
mandated form as is Ramadan in orthodox Islam.  
Conversely, most Muslims would consider it 
anathema to call themselves God, and there is no 
outward expression of ethnocentrism present in the 
religion of Islam.  Hist orically, there have been 
Islamic groups/sects that held views similar to the 
NGE, such the Zaydis of Yemen, and the Druze of 
Lebanon, but these groups are the exception and not 
the rule.  While comparisons to Sufism are fair, it is 
important to note that many of the Sufis that 
advocated self-actualized Godhood identified with 
Gnostic and Neo-Platonic thought and often ran 
afoul of Islamic tenets. 
 
While it is understandable why the NGE is identified 
with Orthodox Islam given the history of the NGE as 
well as the usage of selected terms by both groups, 
the truth is that the NGE espouses many concepts 
that do not fit neatly within an Islamic scope.  In fact, 
after Allah, the founder of the NGE left the NOI, he 
went to great lengths to identify the NGE as a 
separate community, even going so far as to order 
sweeping name changes so that the Gods and Earths 
would not be mistaken for Muslims of the NOI.  
While one may be tempted to dismiss this change as 
slight, it is no less indicative of a new worldview 
than Muhammad changing the direction of prayer 
from Jerusalem to Mecca.  It is also important to note 
that Allah, when asked about Islam, remarked, 
“that’s just I-Self-Lord-And-Master”, again speaking 
to the process of self-actualization rather than 
submission.  Ultimately, to place the NGE in an 
Islamic scope does a disservice to both groups.  One, 
it forces the NGE to fit it’s values within a previous 
but unparallel framework.  Secondly, It compels 
Islam to include a group with values that are 
dissimilar to their own.  It also infers that there will 
be no “new” value systems, and that no 
cultural/religious development can take place after 
the last revelation of the western monotheistic 
tradition (Islam).  Following this train of thought, 
Christianity can be seen as “Quasi-Judaic”, and 
Protestants are “Pseudo-Catholic”.  The NGE is a 
new value system that has similarities to and 
influences from a variety of Cultures/Religions 
(Islam, Buddhism, Gnosticism), but is a unique 
ethno-cultural response to the condition of people of 
color in contemporary society.  It is no less valid due 
to it originating from another group than Christianity 
and Buddhism, both extensions and reactions to the 
excesses of previous groups (Judaism and Hinduism, 
respectively).  Building upon the legacy of Cultural/ 
Religious Nationalism left by the Moorish Science 
Temple and the NOI, the NGE and the ethno-
Cultural worldview that we espouse deserves the 
respect and consideration afforded to other 
Cultures/Value Systems and should be seen as 
adding another dimension to the contemporary Afro-
Asiatic Diaspora.  Already, within the last thirty 
years, the NGE has made a considerable impact on 
urban youth worldwide and is well known through 
its influence on Hip-Hop Culture.  The ideas and 
values projected by many NGE musicians has 
influenced youth culture, serving as the impetus for 
many to learn about 
people and ideas 
outside their previous 
perspective.  Viewing 
the NGE outside the 
limited parameters of 
“Proto-Islam” will 
allow many to gain 
greater understanding 
and appreciation for 
the ideas and concepts 
found therein.    
 
 
Could a being create the fifty billion galaxies, each with two hundred billion stars, then rejoice  
in the smell of burning goat flesh?  
 45
    Ron Patterson


--- PAGE 46 ---
The Black God: An Anthology of Truth 
 
The Universal Flag 
Universal Shaamgaud Allah 
Medina (Brooklyn, NY) 
 
The five pointed star symbolizes Knowledge, the seed 
the child with the power the Supreme Knowledge that 
was manifested by W. F. Muhammad as revealed to us 
by almighty God ALLAH, it is solid Black ! The 
Crescent Moon symbolizes Wisdom the women 
(without child). It shows reflected light (Truth or 
Knowledge) and is not yet at its fullest Equality. It also 
symbolizes the Divine Wisdom that was manifested by 
the honorable Elijah Muhammad and revealed to us by 
Almighty God ALLAH , it is solid yellow ! Together the 
Star and Crescent stands for Knowledge and Wisdom 
which is the unity of knowing it and speaking it (teaching). It also symbolized the Earth (Woman with 
Child) a Planet that has Life, and the dominance the woman has over the Seed (the child or the 
Knowledge) while it is young, and has been the symbol of Freedom, Justice and Equality since the 
awakening of Islam in the West of North America. 
 
The seven has seven sides, it symbolizes the Original Man, the True and Living God, the Supreme 
Being, Almighty God ALLAH. Since the very creation of mathematics 7 has been the mathematical 
terminology for the Creator of the Universe. It is solid Black. Together this stands for the Supreme 
Understanding that was revealed to us by Almighty God ALLAH himself, it shows a unification of 
Knowledge, Wisdom and Understanding. Man, Woman and Child. It shows the authority of ALLAH 
over the planets and Stars and the proper order of the Universe. The seven symbolizes the male seed in 
full bloom, it shows that God must be the most high. The Master of Wisdom, Culture and Equality at 
all times, because they are six and can never dominate ALLAH, so they must remain in six or distill 
back to whence they came! Thus no part of the crescent moon should ever show over the top of the 
seven!!! 
 
The white background symbolizes the white clouds of deception that have drowned our people in a sea 
of ignorance, and the feeble attempts of the wicked to conceal the true and living God which is the Son 
of Man ! 
 
The Cipher around the Allah Crescent Star is Black, the Original color of the Sun (anything that burns 
that hot and that long cant be yellow !). This symbolizes the Sun, the Universal symbol of Truth and 
Light; and who’s power can evaporate all clouds of deception (lies). 
 
The Eight Points are the symbol of the ever expanding Universe, and symbolizes the rays of the Sun, 
and the speed and distance that the Truth is capable of traveling. There are two sides to each point, the 
left is Black. This represents the Original Black Man, the right side is Gold. The Gold represents 
Brown and Yellow seeds. The eight points are a sign of he who is the Master Builder of Rain, Hail, 
Snow and Earthquakes ! 
 
A Word To The Wise ! 
Beware of False Knowledge; 
It is more dangerous than ignorance! 
 
 46
Universal Shaamgaud Allah


--- PAGE 47 ---
The Black God: An Anthology of Truth 
 47
 
Poor Righteous Teaching 
The Story of the FBI and the Five Percenters 
Bradley R. Gooding 
The author of this research article was a Caucasian university student in San Francisco who was heavily influenced by the teachings of the Nation 
of Gods and Earths, commonly known as the Five Percenters. The original paper appeared in the academic journal Ex Post Facto. 
On a personal level, the legacy of the Five Percenters is 
impossible for me to ignore. Growing up in the predominantly 
African-American community of Richmond, California in the 
early 1990s, my cultural universe revolved around rap music. 
Among my favorites at the time was a group known as the Poor 
Righteous Teachers. Time and again, I found myself hitting 
rewind on the tape deck trying to dissect the potent lyrics of their 
debut album, “Holy Intellect,” in which the Poor Righteous 
Teachers repeatedly spoke of abstract principles such as the five 
percent, ten percent, 85 percent, and a metaphysical foundation 
called Supreme Mathematics and Alphabets. Although I could 
recite their rhymes word for word, I often felt a sense of 
frustration due to my inability to decipher the meaning of these 
apparent code-words. Yet at the very least, it was abundantly clear 
that the Poor Righteous Teachers’ message rested on some sort of 
deeper philosophy that encouraged a tremendous sense of self-
empowerment and pride. 
Ten years later, in a graduate seminar on 1960s Black Nationalism 
at San Francisco State University, two developments helped me 
begin to understand the meanings of the Poor Righteous Teachers’ 
music. First, I learned that the widely popular ‘consciousness rap’ 
of the 1990s derived from a 1960s group called the Five 
Percenters. The initial clue came from Hip Hop America, in which 
author Nelson George asserts, “since at least the 70’s, Five 
Percenters have been a strong underground force,” whose message 
eventually “spilled over into hip-hop.”
[1] This notion was affirmed 
by forays onto the Internet, where followers who comprise the 
direct descendants of the Five Percenters -- the Nation of Gods 
and Earths -- have constructed a number of promotional pages, 
including an official Five Percenter website.
[2] One Internet author 
in particular, Beloved Allah, notes the significant impact of the 
Five Percenters as he observes that because of their message, 
“there are thousands of young black men and women... Whose 
lives have been affected in some positive way from learning the 
knowledge of themselves.”
[3] In other words, the teachings of the 
Five Percenters, manifested in rap lyrics, were a shared experience 
of uplift that helped to shape a worldview for many youths 
immersed in African-American culture of the 1990s. 
With regard to the second development, I discovered that between 
June 1,1965 and June 25, 1969 the Federal Bureau of Investigation 
(FBI) kept classified surveillance files on the activities of the Five 
Percenters and their leader, Clarence 13X Smith. Now unclassified 
and available to the public at the FBI's Freedom of Information 
Act Reading Room on the Internet, these files -- #157-6-34 on the 
Five Percenters and #100-444636 on Clarence 13X Smith -- offer 
a rare opportunity to understand the formative years of a 
contemporary African-American cultural movement.
[4] Upon 
seizing the opportunity to read these documents, not only can we 
appreciate the present legacy of the Five Percenters, but we can 
also assess the FBI's ability to repress a distinct cultural 
movement. Perhaps most significantly, this is a chance to draw 
conclusions about uncharted historical territory. As yet, no 
historian has examined the FBI’s file son the Five Percenters. 
Furthermore, in spite of their substantial contribution to African-
American culture, the academic community has given scarcely a 
cursory glance to the history and impact of the Five Percenters. 
Indeed, scholars have devoted almost no energy to understanding 
the formative years of the group or their mentor, Clarence 13X. 
Secondary accounts are nonexistent and along with the FBI files, 
the only source of information comes from the Internet. As a 
result, Beloved Allah has described the dynamic Clarence 13X 
Smith as a “man history has yet to remember.”
[5]
Beginning to remember Clarence 13X Smith and the Five 
Percenters requires starting with an understanding of the context 
of the relationship between the Five Percenters and FBI. On the 
FBI's side, the broad, contextual evidence is ample and clear. 
Previous works on Black Nationalism and the FBI such as 
Kenneth O'Reilly's Racial Matters, Churchill and Vander Wall's 
Agents of Repression, and Karl Evanzz's The Judas Factor make it 
apparent that the modus operandi of the FBI in the 1960's was to 
surreptitiously foil the operations of the Black Power Movement. 
As articulated by the Bureau’s own words in a 1967 
interdepartmental memo, the purpose of the FBI was to "expose, 
disrupt, misdirect, discredit, or otherwise neutralize the activities 
of black nationalist" groups.
[6] Because this was the case, there is 
little question that the actions of the FBI towards the Five 
Percenters were unsuccessful. As we shall see, although the 
Bureau tried to “neutralize the activities” of the Five Percenters, it 
failed to make an enduring negative impact on the group. 
The notion that the effect of the FBI on the Five Percenters was 
negligible is best understood through a discussion of themes 
generated by the FBI files. First, we must consider the FBI’s 
general perception of the Five Percenters, including the Bureau’s 
overall strategy for surveillance, which incorporated trying to 
establish the Five Percenters’ potential for violence, their 
organizational structure, and especially their connections to other 
Black Nationalist groups. Second, it is important to see the ways 
in which the FBI misjudged or underestimated the structure and 
powerful message of the Five Percenters. Then, we must assess 
the feasibility of the idea that the FBI deliberately railroaded 
Clarence 13X in order to get him “out of the picture.” The files 
provide convincing evidence that Clarence 13X fell victim to an 
interdepartmental plot that trumped up charges against Smith, sent 
him to a mental hospital, and possibly killed him. Next, we should 
weigh the integral role of the press in the relationship between the 
FBI and Five Percenters. Finally, mention of items noticeably 
missing and most notable in the files will be relevant. However, 
before exploring these themes, it is necessary to briefly discuss the 
context of the Five Percenters in the 1960s and the general 
theories at work in this study. 
The Five Percenter organization was formed in Harlem in 1964 by 
Clarence 13X Smith as a splinter group of the Nation of Islam 
(NOI). The Five Percenter moniker, in fact, was directly inspired 
by the “Lost Found Moslem Lesson #2,” an essay penned by NOI 
founder W.D. Fard in 1934. In Lesson #2, Fard wrote that 85% of


--- PAGE 48 ---
The Black God: An Anthology of Truth 
 48
the earth was inhabited by "uncivilized people, poison animal 
eaters, slaves from mental death and power"; 10% were "slave 
makers: of the poor who lie by teaching that the almighty true god 
is a spook and cannot be seen by the physical eyes"; and the 
remaining 5% were "poor righteous teachers [who knew] that the 
living god is the Son of Man, the supreme being, the black man of 
Asia."[7] Yet, despite their name being derived from Fard, the Five 
Percenters made it clear that they were not Muslims, nor followers 
of the NOI. 
The Five Percenters made at least two important distinctions 
between themselves and the NOI. First, there was a debate over 
the place and meaning of God. "A Muslim" according to a 
University of North Carolina website, "by definition, submits 
himself to Allah" and Allah is the only God.
[8] Furthermore, in the 
NOI scheme of thinking, W.D. Fard represented Allah in person, 
Elijah Muhammad acted as Allah's messenger and thus, all 
followers had to submit to Muhammad's will. Conversely, in the 
Five Percenter scheme, a singular God did not exist, rather, the 
individual black man was defined as God. This debate over God 
led to the second philosophical difference between the Five 
Percenters and NOI. That is, unlike the NOI, who adhered to the 
religion of Islam, the Five Percenters were only devoted to the 
“science of Islam.” 
The distinctions drawn by the Five Percenters had far-reaching 
consequences for the application of their message. The Five 
Percenter conception of a personal God translated into a focus on 
individual self-empowerment, not the empowerment of Elijah 
Muhammad. Self-empowerment was gained through metaphysics 
-- the philosophy of being and knowing -- with an emphasis on 
“knowledge of self” and the black man's place in the universe. By 
thinking in this manner, followers were educated with a strong 
black consciousness, enabling them, it was hoped, to survive and 
succeed in American society. Thus, the Five Percenters were not a 
“typical street gang” as the FBI would later observe. In fact, they 
did not preach or advocate aggressive violence. Instead, the Five 
Percenters were “poor righteous teachers” of a specific kind of 
cultural movement, the roots of which were planted in the science 
of Islam. 
The glorification of the science of Islam over the religion of Islam 
was perhaps the most significant reason for the Five Percenters’ 
subsequent growth and success into the 1970s, 80s, and 90s. To 
the Five Percenters, the religious symbolism of Islam was 
irrelevant and as a consequence, members were not prohibited 
from smoking, drinking, gambling, or eating and dressing as they 
pleased. In this way, it is fair to say that the Five Percenters were a 
more “user-friendly” form of the NOI. Indeed, the Five Percenters 
did follow many teachings of the NOI, but whereas the NOI was 
predicated on Fard and the Qu'ran, the source of scripture for the 
Five Percenters was found in the “Science of Supreme 
Mathematics and Alphabets.” 
Supreme Mathematics and Alphabets were the creation of 
Clarence 13X and they were his method of spreading the Five 
Percenter movement. Essentially, it was a system wherein each 
letter or number (0-9) denoted a concept with an accompanying 
principle. For example, the numbers 1-2-3 stood for knowledge, 
wisdom, and understanding respectively, while the letter “I” stood 
for Islam, which meant “I-self-lord-am-master.” Each science 
rested on a specific premise. Supreme Mathematics incorporated 
the "mental, physical, and spiritual law of cause and effect. Once 
meditated upon . . . they basically provide a reference point and 
ruler to measure and weigh judgments in everyday life." In 
juxtaposition, "the basic premise of Supreme Alphabets is the 
qualities required to manifest a righteous civilization."
[9]
All of the Five Percenter frameworks were particularly appealing 
to urban black youth. It is no coincidence that the Five Percenters 
were almost entirely comprised of teenagers. As members, 
youngsters could achieve a liberating, Islamic-type consciousness 
without adhering to the strict discipline of the religion. Of crucial 
significance is the fact that Clarence 13X targeted the youth. His 
motivation, according to biographer Beloved Allah, stemmed from 
the desire "to teach [the science of] Islam to the masses of black 
youth who had not been reached by Muslims."
[10] Clarence 13X 
focused his message on "poor, delinquent, . . . hard-core street 
youth"[11] and often won them over with "his slow methodical 
cadence speaking style of stressing syllables not normally 
stressed, causing audiences to be held spellbound in a trance-like 
state."[12] Moreover, Supreme Mathematics and Alphabets were 
the "key to unlock[ing] the minds of the black youth"[13] and so 
their message was "delivered in a staccato 'rap' that mesmerized 
New York City Youth. Members were trained to deliver their rap, 
and the group won converts by the hundreds."
[14]
The staccato rap was an integral part of the street-level 
organization of the Five Percenters. Indeed, most people 
encountered the rap's message on the streets or in the parks of 
Harlem. At the same time, the Five Percenters also developed a 
clear structural organization starting at the top. Clarence 13X, or 
“Allah” as he was known to his followers, was the leader. Below 
him were the "very powerful and dynamic" nine disciples of the 
“First Born.”
[15] The First Born were "each required to teach 10 
children or people younger than themselves and they shall be the 
fruit."[16] The fruit, in turn, would flower, teach another ten youths, 
and the process would repeat itself. Taken as a whole, because 
teachings were conducted on the streets rather than at a fixed, 
arbitrary meeting place, the Five Percenters were a highly flexible 
organization, well equipped to convert a great number of Harlem 
youth. Their membership numbers in the 1960s are not quite clear, 
but a 1968 article from New York Magazine estimated a "group of 
800 or so followers."[17] However, perhaps a more accurate 
number comes from the 1967 “Universal Parliament” at Mount 
Morris Park to celebrate Allah's release from incarceration, where 
onlookers recalled seeing thousands of Five Percenters.[18]
Having established the context of the Five Percenters and the FBI, 
it is prudent at this point to mention the theoretical framework 
employed in this study. Predetirminately, it is a paper that takes 
the “linguistic turn” of historical study.
[19] This linguistic turn is 
the result of our focus on a singular text, which, in turn, yields one 
significant consequence. That is, the conclusions and observations 
of this paper are almost entirely based on the language of the Five 
Percenter files. In dealing with the language of the FBI files, this 
study has applied a simple, conglomerated linguistic theory. First, 
there is the “constitutive theory of language,” which asserts hat 
language "constitutes rather than reflects reality."[20] In more 
precise terms, language is the key to understanding history 
because language functions to create experience in any historical 
setting. Applied to the FBI files, the language of the files did not 
come close to reflecting the reality of the Five Percenter situation, 
however, it did constitute the FBI's experience and relationship 
with the Five Percenters. Because of this reliance on text and 
language, every effort will be made to quote statements often and 
in their entirety. 
A secondary, yet related theory of language at play is attributed to 
Marxism. The “Marxist theory of language” holds that language is 
an ideological tool which functions to mask the reality that is 
being created.[21] Stated otherwise, language is constructed as a 
smokescreen in order to benefit those in power. Again, when 
applied to the FBI files, because the language can have a masking 
effect, Marx's framework helps to uncover the FBI's hidden


--- PAGE 49 ---
The Black God: An Anthology of Truth 
 49
meanings. In addition, we must look for ideas regarding the Five 
Percenters that the FBI is unable or unwilling to perceive as well 
as items that are noticeably absent from the text. 
Lastly, regardless of a text's masking or overt character, because 
language constitutes reality, it can be said that text is a cultural 
representation. As a result, a historian can extract cultural meaning 
from a text by simply asking “What is the purpose of this text?”, 
or more succinctly, “What does this text do?” Meaning, of course, 
is the motivation for this study. We want to make meaning out of 
the relationship between the Bureau and the Five Percenters. To 
do so, we must first appreciate the context of the relationship and 
then make an interpretation of the language in the FBI files. 
Undoubtedly, each organization perceived the other as an 
antagonist, and thus, a full comprehension of their adversarial 
relationship can reveal the historical consciousness of both the 
Five Percenters and the FBI. Accordingly, this study will work to 
that end, in an effort to understand the exact nature of the FBI's 
surveillance of the Five Percenters. With respect to the “nature of 
surveillance,” the goal of my investigation into the FBI files is to 
answer specific questions that reflect upon the cultural 
representation created by the Bureau’s repressive relationship with 
the Five Percenters. Among these are: How did the FBI perceive 
the Five Percenters and what actions did the Bureau take against 
them? Also, what were the characteristics of the Five Percenters in 
the 1960s and how did they react to the FBI's treatment of them? 
Finally, what was the source of the Bureau's fear of the Five 
Percenters? 
The thematic and linguistic construction of this study does not 
mean to indicate that the chronology of the files is not important. 
To be sure, every effort will be made to appreciate the process of 
time in this case. To that end, a brief chronological overview of 
the FBI files has been included. 
The bulk of the Five Percenter files consists of events from 
Clarence 13X Smith’s arrest on May 31, 1965 until his release 
from confinement in the Spring of 1967. Within that period, the 
files generally concentrate on disturbances by Five Percenter 
members in the summer of 1965, publicity produced by the group 
in October of the same year, and the concurrent incarceration of 
Clarence 13X. Afterwards, the files are dominated by potential 
threats of violence by the Five Percenters in the subsequent winter 
and disturbances by alleged members in the summer of 1966. In 
both files, there is almost no documentation of the time from 
Smith's release up to his death in 1969. The Smith file, which 
opens September 17, 1965 and culminates on June 25, 1969 after 
his death, contains sixteen Special Agent in Charge (SAC) 
Memos, one thirty-page synopsis report, two attached Letter Head 
Memos, newspaper clippings of Smith's murder, and one memo 
from Director Hoover on March 3, 1967. The larger Five 
Percenter file, which runs from June 1, 1965 until October 4, 
1967, contains twenty-two SAC Memos, twelve of which have 
attached Letter Head Memos, various appendices and newspaper 
clippings, and two memos from Hoover on October 22, 1965, and 
August 24, 1966. Together, these files consist of nearly 400 pages. 
Despite their combined size, however, the files present a 
condensed form of information. Descriptions are often 
uncreatively repeated and many of the documents are rough drafts 
of the duplicated final product. That notwithstanding, the files do 
provide a wealth of meaning and their condensed format clarifies 
that almost every page is related to the FBI's general 
understanding, or misunderstanding, of the Five Percenters, the 
incarceration of Clarence 13X Smith, or the role of the press. 
Based on the language of the files, it is apparent that the FBI 
related to the Five Percenters in four basic ways. First, there was a 
general strategy, wherein the FBI identified its target and 
established the goals and methods of its surveillance. Second, the 
FBI had concerns with the Five Percenters early penchant for 
violence. Third, the Bureau made a concerted effort to link the 
Five Percenters with a larger, more sinister organization. In this 
effort, the FBI failed to associate the Five Percenters with any 
known Muslim groups, but the Bureau did uncover evidence that 
tied them to prominent activist LeRoi Jones and his pro-
Communist organization. Finally, the FBI sought to evaluate the 
fundamental structure of the Five Percenters. Taken as a whole, it 
is also clear that the FBI conceived of its relationship to the Five 
Percenters as one that was based on race. Every document was 
filed under the heading of “Racial Matters.” 
On June 2, 1965, two days after the arrest of Clarence 13X Smith 
and after recognizing the Bureau had no information on the Five 
Percenters, FBI Director J. Edgar Hoover immediately established 
a plan of action for the new Five Percenter threat. In a brief 
“Informative Note,'” Hoover stated, "New York office [is] 
instructed to conduct investigation to completely identify leaders 
and to determine policy of this group."
[22] Thus, the FBI had a dual 
goal with its surveillance of the Five Percenters. They wanted to 
understand the Five Percenter message and who was distributing 
it. By June 9, the New York Office of the Bureau included an 
additional goal. In his memo to Hoover, the New York SAC wrote 
that his office would try "to determine the extent of influence or 
infiltration by subversive type black nationalist groups into the 
'Five Percenters.'"
[23]
The New York Office was quick to identify Clarence 13X Smith, 
yet, at the same time, it had trouble gathering a definition of the 
Five Percenter philosophy. In a June 2, 1965 SAC Memo, 
Clarence 13X Smith, also described as “Allah,” was identified as 
the ringleader of the Five Percenters. Apparently, the Bureau had 
some previous information that linked Clarence 13X to the NOI 
and Muslim Mosque Incorporated (MMI), but neither allegation 
could be verified and the SAC concluded, "The NYO [New York 
Office] does not feel that the Bureau should become involved with 
every ordinary Harlem rowdy and street fighter who shouts 
invectives."
[24] There was a similar type of downplaying effect in 
regard to the Five Percenters’ philosophy. After a month of 
investigation, the New York Office could only deduce that the 
Five Percenters were "a loosely knit group of Negro youth gangs" 
from Harlem. Additionally, the SAC wrote, "these youths are 
typical of the numerous street type gangs . . . except that they have 
been influenced by an individual who refers to himself as 'Allah' 
and has indoctrinated them in the distorted teachings of . . . Elijah 
Muhammad."[25] To the FBI then, the Five Percenters represented 
little more than a common gang. A year later, the Bureau still had 
little more to say than that the Five Percenters were "young Negro 
teenagers who have no respect for law and order."
[26]
In spite of their “gang” status, the Five Percenters were subject to 
an established surveillance method by the FBI. Six months into 
the file, the New York SAC wrote of the operative method,  
The NYCPD [New York City Police Department] is continuing to 
conduct a full-time, extensive investigation of the 'Five 
Percenters', which includes interrogation of gang members and 
nightly surveillance of them. . . The NYCPD feels that this 
extensive coverage has succeeded in deterring the activity of the 
gang and has opened the way for numerous arrests for assaults, 
mugging and marijuana smoking charges.
[27]
The statement suggests both an around-the-clock operation and a 
measure of success. While it is hard to question the tenacity of the 
surveillance (unless we consider the relative paucity of


--- PAGE 50 ---
The Black God: An Anthology of Truth 
 50
information yielded from the ‘nightly surveillance”), the success 
of the operation is subject to debate and will be discussed further 
at the conclusion of this paper. 
One result of the full-time investigation of the Five Percenters was 
the FBI's decision to place Clarence 13X Smith on the Security 
Index. Dating back to 1939, the Security Index operated as 
Hoover's personal card catalog intended to hasten the mass arrest 
of radical subversives in the event of wartime.[28] By the 1960s, 
however, the Index's real purpose was to keep track of "racial 
agitators."[29] What began as a communist measuring stick had 
evolved into a black measuring stick, and in the 1960s, the index 
contained the names of 1,497 African-Americans. One of them 
was Clarence 13X Smith, whose January 17, 1966, thirty page 
“Synopsis Report” concluded that the "subject be included on the 
Security Index."
[30] The Director summarily granted the request 
and even though Clarence 13X was imprisoned for most of the 
time subsequent to the request, his name remained on the Index 
for close to eighteen months.[31]
Although it was a common practice in the 1960s, the evidence 
does not suggest a strategy of intrusion by the FBI. For instance, 
the Bureau's strategy did not include the practice of sending 
anonymous and deliberately divisive letters, though the file does 
mention one such letter being sent to the NOI in 1963. 
Furthermore, there was no documentation of police raids designed 
to disrupt the operations of the Five Percenters. Be that as it may, 
we know the FBI at least considered the option of police raids. On 
September 18, 1967, a police department source told the New 
York SAC that "the NYCPD is planning a secret raid on the Five 
Percenters . . . during the midnight to 8:00 AM shift . . . on Clay 
Avenue . . . It is expected this raid will result in the discovery of 
numerous weapons."
[32] By the next day, however, the New York 
SAC had learned the raid was either called off or a fabrication. 
Though today we know the Five Percent Nation has never 
condoned or endorsed violence, it is not ironic that the aim of the 
proposed police raid in 1967 was to discover weapons. From the 
beginning, a major concentration of the FBI focused on 
understanding the extent of violence associated with the Five 
Percenters. In their early stages, the files suggest that the FBI was 
on-target with their focus on the group’s violent acts. However, as 
the files progressed, incidents of Five Percenter aggression 
became less and less frequent. 
The high point of violence by the Five Percenters came in the 
Summer of 1965. First, there was the May 31 arrest of Clarence 
13X where "a mob of Negroes had two patrolmen pinned up in 
Hotel Theresa . . . and were threatening them."
[33] When the group 
was told to move along, they responded by calling "on bystanders 
to attack the officers."[34] As a result, additional police were 
brought in and during the forced removal "two of the officers were 
bitten."
[35] Then, in late June, eight youths were arrested for 
"unlawful possession combustible material, namely a gallon can of 
gasoline, four empty bottles, cloth, a funnel, and a piece of hose. . 
. They all gave 'Muslim-type' aliases and appear to be members . . 
. of the . . . 'Five Percenters', however, they denied this affiliation 
during questioning."[36] Finally, on July 30, while trying to make 
an arrest, an unidentified officer "was set upon by sixteen . . . 
Negro youths, who threw garbage cans and bottles at him. These 
disorderly youths were described by police as belonging to the 
'Five Percenters.'"
[37]
After this short, two-month period, the violence stopped. In 
October of 1965, the New York SAC admitted, "the investigation 
has developed nothing to indicate that this gang is armed or has a 
cache of arms and weapons stored in Harlem."[38] Nevertheless, 
the FBI persisted in their approach, hoping to connect the Five 
Percenters with violence. In late November, confidential sources 
advised the SAC "that on January 15, 1966, the Harlem area of 
New York City will experience an unknown event which will 
make 'Watts appear to be a minor accident.'"
[39] Apparently, on at 
least four occasions around January 15, the source claimed 
"reference was always made to Harlem youth gangs, such as the 
'Five Percenters.'"
[40] Ultimately, however, the sources’ 
information turned out to be false. Lastly, late in the summer of 
1966, the FBI tried to link the Five Percenters to a string of violent 
outbursts. Between August 21 and 23, in the Bedford-Stuyvesant 
area of New York, there were separate reports of "clashes between 
ethnic groups,"
[41] an officer being "jumped" by black youths,[42] 
and an incident in which a "rowdy band of approximately 200 
Negro youths . . . created incidents in the area involving clashes 
with patrolman, bottle throwing and breaking windows."
[43] 
Subsequently, even though hundreds of arrests were made, only 
two youths were identified as members of the Five Percenters.[44]  
It is interesting to note how violence directly connected to the Five 
Percenters ceased after the Summer of 1965. This can only mean 
that at some point, Clarence 13X sent out the call to end the 
violence. The likelihood of this happening is plausible, for "while 
at Bellevue he [Smith] continued to teach the youth," and after 
their leader’s transfer, his "Five Percent disciples traveled to see 
him in Matteawan Hospital in Beacon, N.Y."
[45] According to 
Beloved Allah, Smith's essential message was simple: "He told 
them that they did not need guns . . . because their tongue was 
their sword and . . . they could take more heads with the word than 
any army with machine guns could ever do."
[46]
By all accounts, Clarence 13X Smith was an extremely pragmatic 
man and from his experience with the justice system he probably 
knew the authorities were trying to subdue his organization. 
Furthermore, he likely recognized that acts of violence were an 
open invitation for the destruction of the Five Percenters by law 
enforcement agencies like the FBI, hence the command to stop the 
violence and stymie at least part of the FBI's strategy. Indeed, it is 
not a stretch to suggest that the Bureau's operatives led themselves 
astray by focusing much of their energy on violence, for it limited 
their ability to see the broader picture of the Five Percenters. 
Without question, a foremost goal of the FBI revolved around 
discovering if there was any relationship between the Five 
Percenters and any other established group which the Bureau 
perceived as threatening. As mentioned in a previous section, an 
initial goal of the FBI was to understand the degree “of infiltration 
by black nationalist groups into the Five Percenters.”
[47] 
Subsequently, the Bureau could not link the Five Percenters to any 
established Muslim organization, but it did recover evidence that 
connected the Five Percenters to a significant faction of the anti-
government movement. 
Gradually, the FBI came to appreciate that the Five Percenters 
were not affiliated with the NOI, MMI, or Organization for Afro-
American Unity (OAAU). On June 31, 1965, the Bureau verified 
that although Smith "denied being an NOI member at present, he 
is known to have been a member in the past where he received his 
'X name.'"
[48] On July 9 they learned that Smith "definitely was 
never a member of the MMI or OAAU," and that "he has not been 
observed at NOI meetings in New York City for several 
months."[49] Then, in the January 1966, thirty-page synopsis 
report, the FBI made a concerted effort to nail down Smith's 
Muslim affiliations. Part II of the outlined report was entitled 
"Affiliation With the Nation of Islam." The section subheadings 
read: "A. Attendance at NOI Meetings"; "B. Attendance at FOI 
Meetings"; "C. Attendance at NOI Rallies"; "D. Attendance at


--- PAGE 51 ---
The Black God: An Anthology of Truth 
 51
NOI Unity Meetings"; "E. Attendance at NOI African Asian 
Bazaars"; "F. NOI Miscellaneous"; and "G. MMI 
Miscellaneous."[50] In each section, the report chronicled every 
instance where Clarence 13X appeared at a function of the Black 
Muslims from 1960-64 and oftentimes documented speech 
highlights from the various meetings. However, it was all a wasted 
effort, for the FBI had no concrete evidence with which they could 
connect the Five Percenters to the Black Muslim operations. By 
August of 1966, the Bureau acquiesced; it had "no information to 
the effect that the 'Five Percenters' are tied in with any subversive 
organization."
[51] Clearly, the FBI recognized it had to deal with a 
new breed of movement. 
Interestingly, rather than appreciating the precedence of the Five 
Percenters, the FBI instead decided to ignore the group. As a 
result, following the August 1966 acquiescence, the Five Percenter 
files are almost empty. For a week in late August, agents were sent 
to the streets to ascertain what they could about the Five 
Percenters; however, these forays failed to divulge any new 
information. In addition, during the winter, there was a rumor of 
violence that was quickly dispelled and then, there were no 
correspondences until the time of Smith's release in April of 1967. 
It was as if the FBI was breathing a sigh of relief after it had 
established the independence of the Five Percenters. Apparently, 
the Bureau believed that because the Five Percenters were not 
affiliated with the Black Muslims, they were not a threat. In this 
way, it can be said that the success of the NOI, MMI, and OAAU 
had an effect of masking the abilities of the Five Percenters. 
Consequently, the FBI downplayed the threat posed by the Five 
Percenters. This disrespect can be inferred by the Bureau's 
common practice of writing the words Five Percenters in 
quotation marks throughout the files. 
On November 4, 1965, the FBI expanded the scope of the Five 
Percenters investigation beyond the Muslim organizations. Two 
months later, the Bureau uncovered evidence which suggested the 
Five Percenters had a connection to the larger anti-government 
movement. In a memo to Hoover, the New York SAC wrote that 
his office would "canvass NY sources in Black Nationalist, 
Cuban, and Chinese Communist activity to determine if these 
subversive and racist elements are linked in any way to the 'Five 
Percenters.'"
[52] In late November, the Bureau learned that the Five 
Percenters were allegedly "making efforts to infiltrate and 
subvert" the Youth Cadet Corps, a federally funded anti-poverty 
program in Harlem; however, the rumor could not be subsequently 
verified. 
Then came a breakthrough. In a December 29 Letter Head Memo, 
FBI sources revealed that "a number of Negro youths . . . who 
claim to be Five Percenters, are affiliating and hanging around 
with Negro playwright LeRoi Jones and his Black Arts Repertory 
Theater, a black nationalist anti-white type theater group in 
Harlem operated by Jones."[53] To add weight to the danger posed 
by Jones, the memo included a few items of relevant background 
information. For instance, the memo cited a 1964 speech by Jones 
at a Workers World Party meeting, where he "urged Negroes to 
disassociate themselves from 'the American way of life'" and told 
"children to despise everything this country stands for."
[54] 
Additionally, the memo highlighted that "as of August, 1962, 
LeRoi Jones was President of the Fair Play for Cuba 
Committee."[55]
Indeed, the evidence about LeRoi Jones, who later became 
nationally known as Amiri Baraka, represented a breakthrough in 
terms of connecting the Five Percenters to a larger movement. 
LeRoi Jones was a prominent poet/activist who expressed and 
promoted his political views through his art. To him, "art was 
politics and politics art."[56] In 1965, he moved to Harlem after the 
death of Malcolm X had convinced him "of the absolute evil of 
white society" and publicly announced himself as a cultural 
nationalist.
[57] While in Harlem, he opened the Black Arts 
Repertory Theater for the "education and cultural awakening of 
the Black People in America."[58] Though short-lived, Jones's 
theater served as a model for other black nationalist theaters that 
began to spring up across the country. Also while in Harlem, 
Jones began to associate with other powerful black intellectuals 
like Larry Neal and Ron Karenga.[59]
As indicated by the FBI files, LeRoi Jones was also directly 
connected to the Fair Play for Cuba Committee (FPCC). 
Throughout the 1960s, the FPCC was the target of repressive 
measures by the American government. The FBI had a 
surveillance file on the FPCC dating back to 1960, wherein the 
Bureau claimed the FPCC operated as the "chief public relations 
instrument of the Castro network in the United States" and 
garnered its funding directly from the Cuban government.
[60] 
Furthermore, between 1961-63, there were four separate 
congressional subcommittee hearings on the FPCC. In a 1962 
hearing, Congress cited the name of LeRoi Jones as a major 
contributor to the group.[61] Undoubtedly then, the New York 
Office was correct in their suspicion of Jones. In 1960, Jones had 
traveled to Cuba with the FPCC. The trip changed Jones's 
worldview and brought him "further into the world of political 
commitment."[62] Additionally, with his 1994 autobiography, 
Jones corroborated the FBI's information on his presidency by 
stating, "I [eventually] became . . . chairman of the New York 
chapter [of the FPCC]."[63] Thus, with their stated goal of linking 
the Five Percenters to other subversive elements, it is reasonable 
to expect that the name LeRoi Jones and his connection to broader 
anti-government movements should have triggered a reaction by 
the FBI. Curiously however, no response was forthcoming and 
LeRoi Jones was not mentioned again in the Five Percenter files. 
The last element in the FBI's basic understanding of the Five 
Percenters involved the Bureau's focus on the organizational 
structure of the group. In many ways, piecing together the 
structural organization of a group served as standard protocol for 
the FBI when dealing with subversive groups of any nature. 
Particularly, the Bureau wanted to establish: a) the locations of 
any meeting places; b) sources of the Five Percenters’ funding and 
how the group used the money; c) the manner in which orders 
were given and instructions taken; d) the size of the group and 
how its membership increased. To be sure, the FBI's Five 
Percenter operation reflected the execution of the Bureau’s 
protocol for understanding an organization. At one point, the issue 
of structure even garnered an immediate response from Director 
Hoover. 
At the inception of the Five Percenter files, it is clear that the FBI 
was concerned with Five Percenter structure. In the first 
correspondence between the New York Office and FBI 
Headquarters, the SAC concluded page three by observing, "They 
have no headquarters and 'hang out' on the street corners in 
Harlem."[64] Eight days later, the SAC reported, "The total number 
is not believed to be more than 80 to 100."[65] Then, in October, 
the New York SAC disclosed, "No information has been 
developed that money obtained from muggings and assaults by 
gang members is turned over to any specific leader or fund."
[66] In 
the same memo, the SAC also readjusted the number of Five 
Percenters to 200. Overall, the memos represented standard 
procedure for organizational structure by the New York Office, 
one that they would employ until the following summer.


--- PAGE 52 ---
The Black God: An Anthology of Truth 
 52
In August 1966, Director Hoover vigorously contacted the New 
York Office and demanded that agency fill in the holes regarding 
the Five Percenter organizational structure. Hoover's response was 
a reaction to a Letter Head Memo included in the report on the 
aforementioned “Racial Incidents in the Beford Stuyvesant Area.” 
Apparently, during a police interrogation, one youth charged with 
malicious mischief and disorderly conduct "admitted to police that 
he had been taking 'instructions' from the 'Five Percenters' for one 
week and [another arrested subject] admitted taking instructions 
for two weeks."[67] Hoover's memo to the SAC on August 24, 
1966 commanded the New York Office to delve deeper into the 
organizational structure of the Five Percenters. 
Information furnished by [arrested subjects] to the New York City 
Police Department that they had taken 'instructions' from the Five 
Percenters for one and two weeks respectively should be 
immediately defined and resolved. In absence of information 
being available to you to the contrary, you should interview 
[arrested subjects] to determine what was meant by 'instructions.' 
In view of tense racial situation, information indicating organized 
training or schooling to teach riot techniques must receive 
intensive attention and be fully resolved.
[68]
While we cannot know what Hoover meant by ”resolving” the 
situation, it is clear that he was threatened by evidence that 
suggested the Five Percenters were a sophisticated organization, 
complete with a hierarchy and methods of schooling. 
In response to the Director's concern, agents of the New York 
Office sprang into motion to see what they could learn. On the 
same day, the SAC wrote back that a reliable source advised that 
the Five Percenters had an "estimated membership of 300 youths. 
He stated that they were a very loose organization with no real 
leadership."
[69] Then on September 1, another source furnished a 
description of the basic pattern of Five Percenter meetings: 
These type of gatherings in the park are not necessarily planned 
but take place at any given hour when someone decides to discuss 
anything at the park. The audience, which is comprised of over 80 
teenagers, may simply be sitting in the park awaiting a turn on the 
basketball court, a deal at cards or simply a game of softball. At 
these various gatherings no individual is considered the floor 
chairman and that anyone who desires to discuss anything simply 
stands and can be heard. As for receiving actual instructions from 
any organization, [source] indicated that this was not true.
[70]
Afterward, the FBI was content with its follow-up investigation of 
the organizational structure of the Five Percenters. Based on its 
evidence, the FBI regarded the Five Percenter organization as 
weak. At one point, the SAC said that because the Five Percenters 
had no "real organizational setup," there was no need for an 
"extensive investigation."
[71]
Ultimately, during the course of its two-year surveillance, the FBI 
mustered little discouraging effect against the Five Percenters. 
Indeed, with respect the Bureau's belief that they had 'succeeded in 
deterring' the Five Percenters, the facts suggest otherwise. Perhaps 
the strongest written evidence comes from Beloved Allah, who 
contends that in spite of the file, surveillance, interrogations, and 
arrests, the Five Percenters "continued to grow" during the mid-
1960s.
[72] By the time Clarence 13X was released in the spring of 
1967, "thousands of Five Percenters turned out to welcome Allah's 
return."[73] In retrospect, what the FBI regarded as weaknesses 
were actually cornerstones of Five Percenter strength. This notion 
leads us to the next theme, for throughout the file, the FBI failed 
to acknowledge the vast potential of the Five Percenters. 
Having become acquainted with the surveillance strategies of the 
Bureau and the contemporary history of the Five Percent Nation, it 
is possible to appreciate the ways in which the FBI underestimated 
the Five Percenters. At least six times, the Bureau had documented 
information that suggested the Five Percenters were a 
sophisticated organization with an unprecedented philosophy. 
However, in every instance, the FBI failed to supply the necessary 
intuitive energy for peering into the heart of the Five Percenters. 
In addition, the decision about who would be responsible for the 
surveillance of the Five Percenters happened almost immediately. 
In the end, the only one who came close to understanding the true 
nature of the Five Percenters was Hoover himself. 
Returning to the issue of organization, the FBI had its chances to 
see the structural power of the Five Percenters. On June 9, 1965, 
the New York Office reiterated that the Five Percenters "do not 
have any central meeting place or headquarters" and then 
proceeded to say, "Although each of the individual youth gangs 
formed from their respective neighborhoods has its own leader, 
they do not have any organizational set up."
[74] Indeed this 
statement is an oxymoron. It suggests a lack of structure even 
though each neighborhood had a known leader. With a little effort, 
the FBI could have learned of the 'First Born' and understood the 
Five Percenter idea of spreading the message like seeds of fruit. 
Similarly, in July, the Bureau could have recognized they were 
dealing with a well-informed adversary. Despite the efforts of the 
courts to reschedule the hearings of Clarence 13X, his trials were 
always known to a "number of young Negro supporters . . . that 
continually show up at the various court hearings."
[75] Finally, in 
September, the SAC wrote of Smith's former activities, "He is 
unemployed and spends his time hanging around . . . where he 
indoctrinates the youth of the area."[76] Embedded in all of the 
statements were strong hints of Five Percenter potential. The 
Bureau should have realized the Five Percenters were a youthful 
movement that was highly accessible on the street. Instead, the 
FBI overlooked the novel phenomenon of this combination and 
made little effort to understand Smith's method of indoctrination. 
Had they done so, they would have discovered perhaps the 
greatest strength of the Five Percenters -- their self-liberating 
message was repeatedly delivered in a catchy, mesmerizing rap. 
Another underestimation by the FBI was its misunderstanding of 
the appeal and philosophy of the Five Percenters. Perhaps as a 
rouse, after their arrest on May 31, 1965, Clarence 13X and his 
accomplices told police "they are members of [an] organization 
called [the] 'Five Percenters' which means . . . the five percent of 
Muslims who smoke and drink."
[77] Then, on June 9, the New 
York Office wrote of Clarence 13X's followers, "they like to 
consider themselves 'Muslim' and many of them shave their heads 
and take Arabic sounding names. In fact, [however,] none of them 
follow the tenets of Orthodox Islamic religion."[78] On the one 
hand, it might have been easy for the FBI to interpret the Five 
Percenters as naive, dope-smoking, Muslims impersonators. On 
the other hand, the FBI completely neglected the implications of 
what it already knew. An alternate interpretation of these early 
SAC documents describes the Five Percenters as a more user-
friendly form of the NOI; one which certainly had an infinitely 
more appealing message to the youth culture than the strict, 
disciplined platform of Elijah Muhammad. 
As a result of press exposure of the Five Percenters in October of 
1965, the FBI finally came to understand the meaning of the 
moniker and the source of Five Percenter strength. In an October 
18 memo to the Director, the New York SAC informed Hoover, 
"the current meaning of 'Five Percenters' is that 85% of Negroes 
are cattle, 10% are Uncle Toms, and the remaining 5%, which 
they are, are the real leaders of the Negro people."
[79] In the same


--- PAGE 53 ---
The Black God: An Anthology of Truth 
 53
memo, a "[source] described the 'Five Percenters' as a particularly 
viscous type of street gang that has found in this Muslim overtone 
a mysterious type of ideology that seems to ignite and inspire 
them."
[80] In spite of this obvious evidence of a distinct and 
inspiring ideology, the FBI never came close to comprehending 
the explosive, youthful appeal of the Five Percenter philosophy or 
indoctrination rap. Had this been done, the Five Percenter files 
might have been much thicker. 
At the very least, with an accurate estimation of the Five 
Percenters, the FBI might have taken a more hands-on approach; 
instead, the Bureau quickly decided to delegate responsibility. As 
early as June 9, 1965, the SAC wrote, "Because the 'Five 
Percenters' are a loose bunch of teenage street gangs and because 
their mentor is in jail, the NYO feels they represent a local police 
problem and not a threat to internal security."[81] Over and over 
throughout the files, the SAC portrayed the Five Percenters as a 
“local police problem.” By October, the Bureau clarified the angle 
taken by police: "The investigation is being handled by a special 
squad of the NYCPD. . . known as the 'Special Unit.'"
[82] The 
'Special Unit' was otherwise known as the Bureau of Special 
Services (BSS or BOSSI) and indeed, the initials BSS can be 
repeatedly observed over the course of the Five Percenter files. 
BOSSI was notorious for their work in opposition to the Black 
Power Movement. A New York City police officer once 
anonymously revealed, “they [NYCPD] have a group called Bossi 
that is a special service group which does a lot of undercover 
work. They are the group that infiltrates all of these radical groups 
like the Black Panthers or any kind of subversive group. And these 
guys find out a hell of a lot of information.”
[83] To be sure, almost 
all of the FBI's information came from New York/BOSSI and the 
Bureau was content to let BOSSI directly handle the Five 
Percenters. Thus, as we shall see again in the next section, the 
Bureau wanted to keep its hands clean of the situation in case of a 
discovery of the illegal surveillance against the Five Percenters. 
Irrespective of BOSSI's reputation, no one in the New York Office 
ever furnished an accurate description of the Five Percenters. In 
fact, the only person who somewhat gauged the Five Percenters 
was Director Hoover. First, in an October 25, 1965, Director 
Memo to the SAC, Hoover noted the "Five Percenters is a gang of 
approximately 200. . . The leaders have given instructions to each 
other in Muslim type ideology."
[84] Then, at the end of the 1966 
Synopsis Report from the Smith file, Hoover handwrote a personal 
summary: "There are approximately 200 members of the 'Five 
Percenters' and subject is their leader. He had extensive activity in 
NOI from 9/61 to 3/25/65. He left NOI to follow Malcolm X and 
joined MMI. He presently indoctrinates his followers in a distorted 
version of Muslim teachings."
[85] Finally, in the aforementioned 
1966 Director Memo to the SAC, the note read, "The Five 
Percenters have been a constant source of trouble to the NYCPD. 
They are not members of the Nation of Islam; however, they affect 
Islamic names and symbols."
[86] From these three items, it is 
apparent that Hoover knew the Five Percenters were a derivative 
of the NOI, an organization he feared. Also, he understood the 
Five Percenters practiced a distinct, more youthful ideology than 
the Black Muslims. As a consequence, he probably appreciated the 
potential appeal of the Five Percenters. For this reason, it is 
reasonable to assume that Hoover had a master plan to repress the 
Clarence 13X's group, and this notion serves as the subject for the 
remainder of this study. 
Although not conclusive, the evidence from the Five Percenter 
files overwhelmingly suggests that the FBI had a deliberate plan to 
keep Clarence 13X Smith off the streets and behind bars. If true, 
the Bureau executed its plan with a succession of devious steps. 
First, the charges and bail against Smith were trumped up and his 
journey through the court system was constantly delayed. Then, In 
order to keep Clarence 13X in custody, Hoover devised what can 
be labeled as his “interdepartmental strategy.” Finally, as a result 
of Hoover's strategy, the courts sent Clarence 13X off to a mental 
hospital for a period of “indefinite confinement.” The FBI's 
actions in this regard should not come as a surprise; after all, 
Clarence 13X was the admitted leader of the Five Percenters and 
more often than not, part of the Bureau's protocol to diffuse Black 
Nationalist groups necessitated neutralizing the leaders. In effect, 
Kenneth O'Reilly's Racial Matters and Karl Evanzz The Judas 
Factor are case studies of this very protocol. O'Reilly's book 
explains how the FBI specifically targeted Martin Luther King, 
Huey Newton, and Bobby Seale to bring down their respective 
movements. Likewise, Evanzz's book presents the Bureau's 
complex web of repression aimed at Malcolm X. Correspondingly, 
based on the Five Percenter files, similar forces were working 
against Clarence 13X.  
Almost immediately, events conspired against Clarence 13X. 
Smith and five cohorts first attracted police attention on May 31, 
1965, outside the Hotel Theresa for "interfering with street 
traffic," calling "on bystanders to attack police," and shouting 
"anti-white and anti-police invectives."
[87] Although he engaged in 
little more than angry self-expression, the charges against Smith 
were representative of more serious offenses. On June 2, the SAC 
informed Hoover that "all six were charged with felonious assault, 
conspiracy to commit same, resisting arrest, assault with a deadly 
weapon and disorderly conduct. In addition, 'Allah' was charged 
with possession of a marijuana cigarette and malicious 
mischief."
[88] The assault charges almost certainly stemmed from 
police witness, Wilbert Lee, who claimed the group had tried to 
attack him with sticks earlier in the evening.
[89] Indeed, it was 
convenient for the police to produce Lee after the fact. The bail 
situation for Clarence 13X was also curious. On June 1, the SAC 
noted "all [six subjects] held in three thousand to five thousand 
bail . . . Allah received additional charge . . . since he had a 
marijuana cigarette."
[90] Interestingly, on the following day in a 
Letter Head Memo, bail was "ranging from $2000.00 to $9500.00, 
the latter being the bail for Allah."[91] In both cases, someone had 
made very quick decisions to single out Clarence 13X. 
Clarence 13X's court experience exhibited similar signs of 
railroading. At the trial, a source observed, "During the hearing 
'Allah' claimed that he was God and stated that the Court could not 
charge them with anything since 'you can't charge Allah.'"
[92] 
According to Beloved Allah, Smith's subsequent custodianship by 
"Bellevue Hospital for psychiatric treatment . . . was the result of 
him proclaiming himself to be God."
[93] Though flimsy, this 
contention may be accurate, for in the next correspondence to the 
Director, the SAC offered an intriguing proposition: "Due to 
Smith's actions, rantings and ravings, particularly in front of the 
judge at his hearing, he appears to have a 'psychological problem', 
but the court has taken no action in this regard."[94] Thus 
undoubtedly, Clarence 13X made a strong impression on the New 
York SAC and a month later, the court took action. Apparently, 
the SAC's proposition of “psychological problems” was somehow 
absorbed by the court system because "Smith was committed to 
Bellevue Hospital, New York City for psychiatric examination" on 
July 9, 1965.
[95]
Afterwards, authorities put the brakes on the process. Following 
his committal to Bellevue, Clarence 13X endured repeated delays 
in the justice system. On the occasion of a scheduled court date, 
the SAC noted, "the District Attorney and the Court appear to be 
continually adjourning these hearings to a later date."
[96] In the 
meantime, Smith's psychiatric evaluation dragged slowly. He 
remained at Bellevue for three months without an actual, official


--- PAGE 54 ---
The Black God: An Anthology of Truth 
 54
sentence from the courts. Then, to add further insult, "on 10/15/65 
. . . Bellevue Hospital officials advised the presiding judge that 
they needed 10 additional days to complete their psychiatric 
treatment of subject [Smith]."[97]
It was during these ten days that J Edgar Hoover entered the 
picture. A significant portion of the first Director Memo to SAC 
on October 22, 1965 appears to be directly related to Clarence 
13X's experience in the justice and mental health systems. 
As you are aware, the proper utilization of information received by 
the Bureau is foremost among our responsibilities. . . Whenever 
information comes to the attention of the Bureau which appears to 
be of interest to another agency, that information should be 
forwarded to interested agencies. You should contact [black-out] 
and advise him of the Bureau's responsibility with regard to the 
dissemination of pertinent information to other agencies and that 
the Bureau desires that the information . . . be disseminated to 
military services, the Department, and Secret Service.
[98]
From this memo, it is clear that Hoover wanted other government 
agencies to be aware of the Five Percenters.[99] More importantly, 
Hoover's words were the outline for the interdepartmental strategy 
to foil Clarence 13X. With Clarence 13X in custody, the FBI had 
an opportunity to wield a decisive blow against his activities as 
leader of the Five Percenters. In this context, the FBI needed to 
inform and coordinate other agencies so that the Bureau could 
continue to surreptitiously work against Clarence 13X. 
On the surface, Hoover's words seem innocent enough, but the 
subsequent events and files shed light on how and why the 
interdepartmental strategy was to be executed. First, as Hoover 
demanded, the New York Office had to change its procedure and 
let other relevant agencies in the loop. Accordingly, in the 
November 4 SAC Memo, the cover sheet stated, "Copies of this 
LHM are being furnished in NYC to G-2 and Secret Service."
[100] 
Likewise, a later SAC Memo stated, "Information copies are also 
being furnished locally to G-2, ONI, OSI, Secret Service and the 
U.S. Attorney, SDNY."[101] Next came the desired effect of the 
interdepartmentalism, which was manifested in the November 16 
SAC Memo. While informing Hoover of a hearing for Clarence 
13X on the same day, the New York SAC wrote, "it is expected 
that when subject appears in above court on 11/16/65, subject will 
be adjudged criminally insane and will be committed to a mental 
institution."
[102]
Unquestionably, the November 16, 1965 SAC Memo is the most 
curious document in the Five Percenter files. How could the FBI 
“expect” that Clarence 13X “will” be sent to a mental hospital? 
One would expect the SAC to use more uncertain, ambiguous 
words such as “may be” or “could be”; but the words “will be 
adjudged” clearly imply some prior knowledge of the verdict. The 
only way the SAC could have had prior knowledge was if he had 
some form of interdepartmental contact with Bellevue Hospital, 
the District Attorney, and possibly the presiding judge. If this was 
true, then one can ascertain the purpose of interdepartmentalism. 
In essence, Hoover's orders in his October 22nd memo could have 
been sly code words for ‘contact the appropriate agencies” and 
“see that Clarence 13X is sent to a mental institution for being 
criminally insane.” 
The incarceration of Clarence 13X in a mental institution serves as 
another indication of railroading. Though trumped up, the charges 
and evidence against Clarence 13X probably would not have 
landed him in prison for a long time. Smith was a decorated 
veteran of the Korean War and undoubtedly, this too would have 
helped his cause during sentencing. However, if Clarence 13X 
could be diagnosed as having a “psychological problem,” the law 
said the sentence of time did not apply. Therefore, he could be 
"remanded to the New York State Department of Mental Hygiene 
for an indefinite confinement."
[103] This was the Bureau's ultimate 
goal. With Clarence 13X in a mental institution with no recourse 
for release, he would, so the theory went, be out of the picture for 
good. 
A problem ensnared this scenario, however, because Clarence 13X 
never had complications with his mind. Based on his original 
philosophies and accomplishments as a leader, Clarence 13X was 
a man of high intelligence. Yet, the court tried to pass him off in 
the November 16 hearing as being "unable to understand the 
charges against him."
[104] Indeed, the veracity of this statement is 
doubtful. Then, in April of 1966, Matteawan State Hospital "made 
available [to the New York Office] the institution file relating to 
the captioned subject [Smith]."[105] Even to the layman, this file 
hardly made for a clinical diagnosis. In his synopsis, the SAC 
wrote, "The file reflects that the subject's original diagnosis was 
described as schizophrenic reaction, paranoid type. He expressed 
delusions of grandeur of a religious nature and of persecution." 
Indeed, both of these diagnoses seem purposefully ambiguous. 
More than likely, their ambiguity was designed to fabricate and 
promulgate Clarence 13X's mental illness. 
Because he could not be classified as a true mental patient, the 
hospital eventually had to let Clarence 13X Smith free on April 
12, 1967. Another factor in this decision may have been the 
growing frustration of the Harlem youth. On January 1, 1967, the 
SAC warned Hoover of "actions, disorders, [and] riots" by Five 
Percenters on January 2 if Clarence 13X was not released. 
Whatever the reason for his freedom, by the time of Smith's 
release, the Bureau was developing a secondary course of action to 
monitor his actions. In midwinter, after there had been no 
disturbances on January 2, the New York SAC proposed, "As 
subject [Smith] has been in continuous confinement since rerep, 
there has been no reportable activity on his part. In view of this, 
NY will not submit an annual report at this time. In the event 
subject is released from the hospital, this case will be reopened for 
appropriate investigation."
[106]
Hoover was not at all satisfied with the SAC's proposal and as a 
consequence, he plaintively refined the plan for Clarence 13X's 
release. In his third and final Director Memo of the files, the 
Hoover responded: 
In view of the subject's background and his current mental 
condition, the Bureau feels that upon his release from 
incarceration at Matteawan . . . you should determine his 
whereabouts and ascertain whether he resumes his participation in 
Black Nationalist activities. Therefore, New York should place a 
stop with appropriate officials at the above hospital, in order that 
you will be promptly advised of any action indicating that the 
subject may be released from confinement.
[107]
Without question, the New York Office followed Hoover's order 
and then produced the final correspondence of the files until 
Smith's murder in 1969. On May 16, 1967, the SAC provided 
Hoover the basic facts of Smith's freedom. Of most consequence 
to the Bureau was that Clarence 13X was "unemployed and has no 
permanent residence, but can almost always be located on 127th 
Street."[108] Moreover, Smith had not participated in any 
altercations with police and "sources familiar with many phases of 
'Black Nationalist' activity have not reported any additional 
activity on the subject's part."[109]


--- PAGE 55 ---
The Black God: An Anthology of Truth 
 55
Of course, railroading would have reached its furthest extent if the 
FBI had any involvement with the murder of Clarence 13X, who, 
like Malcolm X, foreshadowed his own death. According to 
legend, on the morning of June 12, 1967, the Five Percenter 
founder told his mother, "when they are ready, they will kill 
you."
[110] By the evening, Clarence 13X's words proved prophetic 
when he was gunned down by "three unknown negroes" on the 
front stoop of his apartment.[111] Details of this information were 
sent to Hoover along with four newspaper articles and a pledge to 
open an investigation. By June 25, the Bureau had their answer. 
Based on the investigation, Clarence 13X, "may have been shot by 
a small group of extortionists who are 'shaking down' businessmen 
in the NY ghetto area and 'leaning' on anyone who opposes 
them."
[112] Supposedly, the extortionists were comprised of ten 
men (listed but blacked out) who were "active in [the] Fair Play 
Committee."[113] The conjecture was that the "Fair Play Committee 
hired [three assailants] . . . to assassinate . . . Smith" because the 
"Committee wanted Smith . . . 'out of the picture' because [he was] 
working for Mayor Lindsay or 'cutting into territory' of 
Committee."
[114]
The FBI's explanation for Smith's murder gives pause for a little 
suspicion. Once again, the file is mired with ambiguous phrases. 
Furthermore, if we assume the Fair Play Committee is a derivative 
or the same as the FPCC, then there are three more reasons to 
question the files. First, the FBI had used the FPCC as a scapegoat 
before; in 1963, the "government . . . implicate[d] Fair Play for 
Cuba in the Kennedy assassination."
[115] Second, the Five 
Percenters allegedly had a previous, friendly relationship with 
LeRoi Jones who was deeply involved with the FPCC. Third, and 
most suspiciously, according to the FBI's own files, the "FPCC 
had been dissolved" since April 1964.
[116] Consequently, it would 
have been unlikely and undesirable for the FPCC to orchestrate 
the murder of Clarence 13X. Thus, it is possible that the FBI's 
investigation of Smith's death was part of a cover up, which in 
turn, may indicate that the Bureau was somehow involved in the 
murder. For his part, Beloved Allah believes this to be the case: 
The one who killed Allah is the one who feared his power the 
most. The one who would stand to gain the most by black youth 
not being awakened to the knowledge of themselves. The one who 
enters our communities with the expressed purpose of concern for 
those in need . . . but with hidden motives of monitoring and 
sabotaging. And now I ask you, who killed Allah?
[117]
While the subject of the FBI railroading Clarence 13X is mostly a 
matter of speculation, the text of the FBI files leaves little doubt 
that a major part of the Bureau's master plan involved keeping the 
Five Percenters out of the public eye. Accordingly, over the course 
of the files, the FBI kept a constant tab on the preeminent conduit 
of the public's information -- the press. Especially with respect to 
the Black Power Movement, the Bureau was well aware of the 
power of the press. In fact, the press was often used in "the FBI 
effort to discredit black dissidents. . . Bureau officials hoped to 
accomplish their goal here by developing 'news media' contacts 
from coast to coast."
[118] And, whereas the FBI appreciated the 
media's ability to harm subversives, they were also cognizant of 
the reverse scenario. That is, the Bureau knew press reports could 
also have the effect of bringing notoriety to black groups and 
apprehension to the public. Apparently, this was the FBI's fear in 
the Five Percenter file. Thus, it should come as no shock that the 
first Director Memo from Hoover was the direct result of 
newspaper articles. 
From the start of the files, the FBI made it a goal to keep the Five 
Percenters name away from the public's knowledge. For instance, 
a Letter Head Memo after the arrest of Clarence 13X stated, "The 
June 2, 1965 editions of the 'New York Times' . . . and 'Daily 
News' . . . contained articles on the above incident and 
arraignment. These articles described the six as 'Black Muslims', a 
term generally used to refer to members of the NOI."
[119] Here, 
one gets the sense that this item was included because the FBI was 
pleased to have the six subjects described as “Black Muslims.” 
Had they been identified as “Five Percenters,” the public would 
have become aware and possibly fearful of a brand new Black 
Nationalist group. Afterwards, the Bureau exhibited a similar kind 
of idea in the June 22 SAC Memo. Therein, the SAC forwarded an 
arrest report of eight youths 
because of the publicity received in NYC and their possible 
affiliation with the 'Five Percenters.' It is felt that because of the 
present racial tension in NYC, the arrest of any members of these 
Harlem youth street gangs, particularly those who have adopted a 
'Muslim-type' alias, will bring newspaper publicity which implies 
that these youths are part of some anti-white black nationalist 
movement.
[120]
Indeed, this embodied a circumstance the FBI wished to avoid. 
In this context, the Bureau's apparent desire to keep the Five 
Percenters out of the press came to a halt on October 15, 1965. On 
that day, three separate articles on the Five Percenters appeared in 
the New York Times, New York Herald Tribune, and New York 
Daily News. All of the articles, which were included within the 
file, shed a negative and threatening shadow on the Five 
Percenters. For example, the Daily News described the Five 
Percenters as a group who were "only too happy to turn the 
community into chaos and turmoil."
[121] The Herald Tribune 
compared the Five Percenters organization to the Ku Klux Klan 
and Hitler Youth and then proceeded to implicate them in a string 
of recent assaults on teachers in New York public schools. Then, 
as if to fan the flames of fear, the article stated the Five Percenters 
were not connected to the NOI and added, "Harlem residents 
claim to see Five Percenters everywhere. . . [People have] talked 
to police. They [are] scared, they know the facts."
[122] Finally, in 
the Times article, which claimed to be based on a three-week 
independent investigation, the Five Percenters were said to be 
receiving "funds and advise from outside the United States, 
possibly from Cuban or Communist groups."[123]
Each of the three articles were triggered by the inflammatory 
words of Livingstone Wingate, president of Harlem Youth 
Opportunities Unlimited-Associated Community Teams 
(HARYOU-ACT). In the files, the FBI called HARYOU-ACT a 
federally funded "anti-poverty program,"[124] but at other times, 
the Bureau described it as a "hate school."[125] This negative 
perspective likely resulted from a known relationship between 
HARYOU-ACT and LeRoi Jones. It is safe to assume that the 
Bureau was aware that Jones "must have got[ten] away with a 
couple hundred grand and even more in services" from 
HARYOU-ACT in 1965.[126] Thus, when HARYOU-ACT 
president Wingate made a speech alluding to the Five Percenters 
as a violent military group, he had the attention of the FBI. 
The New York SAC summarized the Wingate speech and 
newspaper articles as follows: 
"His main theme was that if anything happened to HARYOU-
ACT, there would definitely be racial violence. On this latter 
point, Wingate referred to a mysterious 'armed' group of Negro 
youth who are 'prepared to die' in a struggle against white people. 
He refused to identify by name this group stating he feared for his 
life if he talked too much. . . [The] articles indicated that Wingate 
was apparently speaking of a Black Muslim-oriented extremist


--- PAGE 56 ---
The Black God: An Anthology of Truth 
 56
youth group known as the 'Five Percenters'. . . [One article] set 
forth observations . . . developed in an 'independent 
investigation.'"[127]
Undoubtedly, the New York SAC was concerned that the 
informed public would perceive the Five Percenters as an 
ominous, new threat. As a consequence, a response from the 
Bureau was imminent. 
Following the October 15 articles, the FBI immediately stepped up 
their investigation of the Five Percenters. For instance, the 
subsequent October 18 SAC Memo represented the most thorough 
portrait of the Five Percenters to date and had a girth of seven 
pages. Therein, the SAC concluded, "In view of the publicity of 
the 'Five Percenters' in the attached articles as a result of the 
Wingate speech and particularly because of the allegations 
outlined in the Tribune article, SAC . . . [remaining paragraph 
blacked-out]."
[128] The context and timing of the black out hints at 
some subsequent action that was or would be taken against the 
Five Percenters in order to resolve the situation. Fortunately, we 
can observe the scope of that action in the rough draft of the same 
memo from Part II of the Five Percenter file. There, the memo 
continued, " . . SAC [name blacked out] conferred on 10/15/65 
with [agent from] Bureau of Special Services, New York City 
Police Department (BSS, NYCPD) and [other agents] of BSS."
[129] 
Thus, as a result of the articles, the New York Office felt 
compelled to have an emergency conference with local authorities. 
Of the decisions made at the conference, the SAC said, "The 
results of this conference are not being set forth in an LHM on the 
specific request of [blacked-out] that none of the information be 
disseminated outside of the FBI, in view of the continuing 
investigation by NYCPD into the 'Five Percenters' and the recent 
publicity thereon."
[130] While it is possible that the conference 
served as the source of the FBI's plan to railroad Clarence 13X, 
that decision more than likely came from Hoover. 
The articles in the press were apparently a matter of grave concern 
to the Director. Based on their information, Hoover made two 
important decisions. First, he articulated the design of the 
interdepartmental strategy to contain Clarence 13X and the Five 
Percenters. Second, Hoover used the opportunity to redefine the 
goals of the Five Percenter operation. In both cases, he applied 
evidence from the newspapers to justify his course of action. 
As evidence for the former decision, Hoover wrote, the  
Tribune . . . sets out that ranking police officers in Harlem have 
been briefing leaders . . . regarding the 'Five Percenters' and have 
asked their cooperation in fighting what they described as a very 
dangerous group. This article also sets out that two Harlem weekly 
newspapers . . . published stories regarding the menace posed by 
the 'Five Percenters' reportedly at the request of police.
[131]
This was a subtle way of saying that the police were doing a 
sloppy job with the Five Percenter operation and that their 
surveillance system had to be fixed or obscured. Not 
coincidentally, in the subsequent paragraphs, Hoover implemented 
the interdepartmental approach that would temporarily doom 
Clarence 13X. 
With regard to Hoover's latter decision, Hoover observed, the 
"Tribune article continued with a comment to the effect that one 
source linked the 'Five Percenters' to the Chinese and Cuban 
Communists and to the group recently convicted of attempting to 
dynamite the Statue of Liberty."
[132] If true, then the Five 
Percenters truly were a threat to Hoover's America. Thus, he made 
a point to reiterate the operation's focus on the bigger picture. 
"The Bureau agrees that the activities of the' Five Percenters' 
represent a local police problem; however, in view of the 
allegations that the 'Five Percenters' may be linked with certain 
subversive and racist elements, as indicated in the newspaper 
articles, your continuing investigation of these subversive and 
racist elements should specifically determine whether or not the 
'Five Percenters' are actually linked to these elements."
[133]
Undoubtedly, in late December, this order led the New York 
Office straight to LeRoi Jones and his connection to the Five 
Percenters. 
Hoover wrote to the New York Office on three occasions: 1) after 
the preceding situation revolving around the press, during which 
he implemented the interdepartmental strategy; 2) a year later after 
there was evidence of hierarchical instructions; 3) in Spring of 
1967 when Clarence 13X was due to be released. In this regard, 
what is odd is not when these memos were sent, but rather, when 
Hoover failed to send a Director Memo. Most striking was the 
case of LeRoi Jones in the Winter of 1965. 
In conjunction with the articles from the New York Times and 
Herald Tribune, the possible affiliation to LeRoi Jones just three 
months later represented the second piece of evidence that the 
Five Percenters were connected to the Cuban/Communist 
movement. The FBI was aware that Jones was once president of 
the FPCC. Moreover, the Bureau also knew that "Leroi Jones 
[was] . . . then with Haryou," which was the organization 
responsible for the newspaper articles in the first place.
[134] Thus, 
the FBI had evidence that the FPCC, LeRoi Jones, HARYOU-
ACT, and the Five Percenters were all tangled in the same web. 
Based on his stated goal of linking the Five Percenters to the 
larger subversive picture, it is indeed surprising that Hoover did 
not want to delve deeper into this issue. Perhaps however, the 
reason for Hoover's lack of interest stems from the idea that the 
Bureau already had a plan to break the web. 
There is evidence to suggest that by the winter of 1965, authorities 
had orchestrated a coordinated effort to bring down HARYOU-
ACT, LeRoi Jones, and the Five Percenters. First, as covered in 
this paper, various agencies conspired to incarcerate Clarence 13X 
in a mental hospital. Also in Autumn of 1965, federal funding to 
HARYOU-ACT ceased abruptly and then, the Manhattan District 
Attorney's Office, along with federal authorities, placed the group, 
including leader Livingstone Wingate, under investigation 
following charges of fiscal mismanagement.[135] Interestingly, "it 
was about this [same] time that words of the 'racist' Black Arts 
program began to surface in the media -- 'teaching racism with 
government funds'!"[136] From what we know of the Five Percenter 
files, the correspondence relating these three events is very 
suspicious and each seems to suggest against covert FBI’s actions. 
In the same time frame, funding was cut, the press was used as a 
weapon, leaders were railroaded, and in each case, an 
interdepartmental strategy was employed. 
Another glaring omission from the Five Percenter files is the 
nature of the relationship between the Five Percenters and the 
NOI. According to an article from New York Magazine in 1968, a 
substantial rift existed between Clarence 13X and Elijah 
Muhhamed. The article described it as an "older animosity" that 
stemmed from Clarence 13X "considering himself the real Allah, 
believed Elijah Muhammed should be his messenger, which the 
Black Muslim leader felt was sacrilege."
[137] Then, authors Gloria 
Steinem and Lloyd Weaver implicated the NOI in a 1964 murder 
attempt on Clarence 13X and asserted that he was "on the list after 
Malcolm X."[138] If this was the case, then it is fair to expect that 
the FBI might have wanted to exacerbate the rift between the NOI


--- PAGE 57 ---
The Black God: An Anthology of Truth 
 57
and Five Percenters. Yet, there was no evidence to this effect in 
the files. Out of the numerous occasions when NOI sources were 
contacted, only one derogatory comment about the Five Percenters 
was recorded from a NOI member. That was, in October of 1965, 
a NOI source from Savannah described the Five Percenters as 
"instigators of violence."
[139]
One explanation for Hoover's reluctance to exacerbate the rift 
between the NOI and Five Percenters could be that they did not 
feel the need for “hands-on” interference with what the Bureau 
perceived as little more than a street gang. Another explanation is 
that rift between the NOI and Five Percenters did not exist. In an 
impromptu question and answer phase of a lecture given in 1977 
at Arizona State University, Minister Louis Farakhan remarked of 
the relationship: 
Brother, I'm telling you that the Honorable Elijah Muhammed 
respected those young brothers and sisters who called themselves 
the Five Percenters. Now, I talked to the Honorable Elijah 
Muhammed about that group that was developing in New York 
and now spreading. He said, 'That's good. That is good. They are 
studying that which Allah questioned me on and they are studying 
my answers to those questions.
[140]
Assuming the Clarence 13X files concerning his murder are some 
sort of cover-up, perhaps the FBI in 1969 already had a sense of 
what Minister Farakhan later said. It may be that the Bureau knew 
there was no rift to exacerbate; therefore, they could not logically 
pin Clarence 13X's death on the NOI without someone crying 
foul. Consequently, they chose an unlikely patsy -- the FPCC. 
Finally, it is interesting to note the point at which the surveillance 
of the Five Percenters ceased in the files. The FBI stopped their 
active operation against the Five Percenters and Clarence 13X 
Smith in May of 1967. Shortly thereafter in September, perhaps as 
a response to their experience with Five Percenters, the FBI 
launched the Ghetto Informant Program "designed to establish 
listening posts in black areas of virtually every major city."
[141] 
The program "required all field agents to develop ghetto 
informants" and by 1968, the Bureau had recruited 3,248 such 
people. Thus, with the Ghetto Informant Program, the Bureau had 
no need for the file and it could keep an eye on the Five Percenters 
without tying up the New York Office. Around the same time, 
Clarence 13X substantially increased his power and became a 
fixture in the public eye. Correspondingly, after 1967, the Five 
Percenter Movement emerged as a major player in urban-New 
York culture and the FBI could have easily followed their progress 
out in the open public. If, as Beloved Allah contends, the "white 
power structure still viewed [Clarence 13X] as a dangerous man," 
they at least had no need for a secret surveillance system anymore. 
Indeed, in the years 1967-1968, Clarence 13X and the Five 
Percenters were able to overcome all of the obstacles previously 
presented to them by the FBI. In the Summer of 1967, New York 
Mayor, John Lindsay, felt compelled to develop ties with 
community leaders by creating an Urban Task Force and Clarence 
13X was "high on the Mayor's list of priorities."
[142] As a result of 
the ensuing association, the Mayor's Office came to learn "that 
what Allah really wanted was some education for his young 
disciples" and afterwards, the Mayor's top aide convinced the New 
York Times to print a retraction and "change a story referring to 
them [Five Percenters] as 'anti-white.'"
[143] In the same summer, 
the Mayor's Office informed the Five Percenters "they had plans 
to secure a building for them at Seventh and 126th Street."[144] A 
month later, Allah opened the Five Percenters Street Academy at 
2122 Seventh Avenue (where it still stands and operates today). 
Then, most significantly, on the night of Martin Luther King's 
shooting, Clarence 13X and a group of Five Percenters walked 
with Mayor Lindsay through Harlem in order to dissuade rioting. 
Afterwards, Clarence 13X "received public and media praises for 
his participation in maintaining peace" as well as a 
"commendation from Mayor Lindsay."
[145] On his plaque, the 
"inscription read, 'To Allah, thanks a lot, John V. Lindsay.'"[146]
Thus, in the short run, the FBI failed miserably in their attempt to 
subvert the Five Percenters. Theirs was an effort to railroad 
Clarence 13X and keep the Five Percenters name out of the press. 
Yet, as a result of perseverance and the events of 1967-1968, 
Clarence 13X became powerful civic leader and the Five 
Percenters were known all throughout the city. Moreover, in 
retrospect, the FBI did not only fall short of their objectives in the 
short run. Over the long haul, the Bureau's relationship with the 
Five Percenters ultimately contributed to the ability of the Five 
Percenters to become a permanent, nationwide organization. Upon 
return from his unholy experience with the justice system, 
Clarence 13X changed the power structure of the Five Percenters 
for the better. He "told his Five Percenters before he left them that 
his death would born the Nation of Gods and Earths" and "that 
they did not need a leader because they were all leaders of 
themselves."
[147] Indeed, these words were precautionary measures 
designed to ensure the propagation of the Five Percenters. 
Clarence 13X did not want to replicate the oppressive power 
relations of hierarchy for a specific reason. In his own words, 
"when black people have leaders the devil can easily execute them 
to derail the movement."
[148]
As Clarence 13X foretold, his death did bring about the 
reconfiguration of the Five Percenters into the Nation of Gods and 
Earths. Thirty years later, the Nation of Gods and Earths has 
become a cultural experience for thousands of followers who cut 
across class and race lines throughout the country. As evidence, 
their webpage cites official membership at over 25,000 people. 
Additionally, the Five Percenter message of self-knowledge has 
become a powerful force of resistance for prison inmates. This is 
all largely the result of the Five Percenters becoming prolific in 
rap music. Taking up where the 1960's indoctrination rap left off, 
in the late 1980's the rap industry began spreading the word of the 
Five Percenters; in 1990, Brand Nubian completely based the 
rhymes of their breakthrough album, “One For All,” on Five 
Percenter philosophy; on their album inlet, the Poor Righteous 
Teachers gave, “a Universal Greeting to the Father of our Nation, 
Clarence 13X Smith”; and legendary lyricist Rakim once credited 
his inspiration to the Five Percenters
[149]. Indeed, by the early 
1990s, these rappers and countless others had brought Clarence 
13X's vision into popular culture. Returning to the personal aspect 
of this study, the ideas of the Five Percenters were so pervasive 
and appealing that they became an integral part of my own 
youthful experience. 
That in 1991, a teenage, middle-class Caucasian could learn self-
knowledge and truths about American society from Five Percenter 
rap music must have had J. Edgar Hoover turning in his grave. 
The Director, however had his chances to stop the Five Percenter 
movement from 1965-1967. During this time, the files strongly 
suggest that his Bureau attempted to strip Clarence 13X and 
publicity away from the Five Percenters. But, ultimately, it was all 
in vain, because from the beginning the FBI had misunderstood 
and underestimated the Five Percenters. In no way could the FBI 
comprehend the cultural force that the Five Percenters would 
eventually become, for they were unable to appreciate the power 
of the Five Percenter structure and message. It goes to show, that 
while the FBI had proven methods to stop political movements, 
they were not well equipped to handle a cultural movement.


--- PAGE 58 ---
The Black God: An Anthology of Truth 
Endnotes 
[1] Nelson George, Hip Hop America (Middlesex, England: 
Viking Penguin, 1998), 68.  
[2] <http://www.worldwd.com/allahtea. 
[3] Beloved Allah, "'The Bomb': The Greatest Story Never 
Told," The WORD: National Newspaper of the Nation of 
Gods and Earths, July-November 1987, lkd. Gangs or Us 
Page, <http://www.metalab.unc.edu/nge/thebomb.html>, 4. 
Heretofore, will cite as 'The Word.’ 
[4] Freedom of Information Act Reading Room, 
http://www.fbi.gov. 
[5] The Word, 1. 
[6] James Krikpatrick Davis, Spying on America: The FBI's 
Domestic Counterintelligence Program, (New York: Praeger, 
1992), 101. 
[7] George, 68. 
[8]"Why We Are Not Muslims," lkd. Gangs or Us Page, 
<http://www.metalab.unc.edu.nge/notmuslims.htm>, l. 
[9]El Amar Supreme, "Supreme Mathematics and 
Alphabets," lkd. Knowledge This! Page, 
<http://www.73.cyberhost.net/allahtea/Amarsupreme.htm>, 
1-2. 
[10] The Word, 1. 
[11] Ibid., 5. 
[12] Alex Tordorovic, "They Call Themselves Five 
Percenters: The Department of Corrections Calls Them 
Trouble," lkd. Gangs or Us Page, 
<http://www.mindspring.com/~scpoint/point/9604/p06.html>
, 3. 
[13] The Word, 4. 
[14] Tordorovic, 3. 
[15] The Word, 6. 
[16] Ibid., 5. 
[17] Gloria Steinem and Lloyd Weaver, "Special Report: The 
City on the Eve of Destruction," New York Magazine, April 
22, 1968, lkd. Knowledge This! Page, 
<http://www.73.cyberhost.net/allahtea/Thecity.htm>, 6. 
Heretofore will cite as 'New York Magazine.’ 
[18] The Word, 6. 
[19] David Harlan, "Intellectual History and the Return of 
Literature," American Historical Review, 94, 3, (June 1989). 
[20] Harlan, 585. 
[21] Frank Kidner, professor of history, class lecture, San 
Francisco State University, History 700, 22 November, 1999. 
[22] Federal Bureau of Investigation, "Informative Note," 
Five Percenters, #157-6-34, part I, June 2, 1965, lkd. 
Freedom of Information Act Reading Room Page, 
<http:www.fbi.gov>, 1. 
[23] Federal Bureau of Investigation, "SAC New York to 
Director," Five Percenters, #157-6-34, part I, June 9, 1965, 
lkd. Freedom of Information Act Reading Room Page, 
<http:www.fbi.gov>, 2. 
[24] Federal Bureau of Investigation, "SAC New York to 
Director," Five Percenters, #157-6-34, part 1, June 2, 1965, 
lkd. Freedom of Information Act Reading Room Page, 
<http://www.fbi.gov>, 2. 
[25] Federal Bureau of Investigation, "Letter Head Memo," 
Five Percenters, #157-6-34, part 1, June 31, 1965, lkd. 
Freedom of Information Act Reading Room Page, 
<http://www.fbi.gov>, 2. 
[26] Federal Bureau of Investigation, "Letter Head Memo," 
Five Percenters, #157-6-34, part 2, August 23, 1966, lkd. 
Freedom of Information Act Reading Room Page, 
<http://www.fbi.gov>, 4. 
[27] Federal Bureau of Investigation, "SAC New York to 
Director," Five Percenters, #157-6-34, part 2, October 18, 
1965, lkd. Freedom of Information Act Reading Room Page, 
<http://www.fbi.gov>, 4. 
[28] Kenneth O'Reilly, "Racial Matters": The FBI's Secret 
File on Black America, 1960-1972 (New York: The Free 
Press, 1989), 274-275. 
[29] Ibid., 274. 
[30] Federal Bureau of Investigation, "SAC New York to 
Director -- Synopsis Report," Clarence 13X Smith, #100-
444636, January 17,1966, lkd. Freedom of Information Act 
Reading Room Page, <http://www.fbi.gov>, 33/2.  
[31] Federal Bureau of Investigation, "Assistant Attorney 
General, Internal Security Division to Director," Clarence 
13X, #100-444636, March 17, 1965, lkd. Freedom of 
Information Act Reading Room Page, <http://www.fbi.gov>, 
1. 
[32] Federal Bureau of Investigation, "SAC New York to 
Director," Five Percenters, #157-6-34, part 2, September 25, 
1967, lkd. Freedom of Information Act Reading Room Page, 
<http://www.fbi.gov>, 1. 
[33] Federal Bureau of Investigation, "SAC New York to 
Director," Five Percenters, #157-6-34, part 2, June 1, 1965, 
lkd. Freedom of Information Act Reading Room Page, 
<http://www.fbi.gov>, 1. 
[34] Federal Bureau of Investigation, "Letter Head Memo," 
Five Percenters, #157-6-34, part 2, June 2, 1965, lkd. 
Freedom of Information Act Reading Room Page, 
<http://www.fbi.gov>, 1. 
[35] Ibid. 
[36] Federal Bureau of Investigation, "Letter Head Memo," 
Five Percenters, #157-6-34, part 2, June 22, 1965, lkd. 
Freedom of Information Act Reading Room Page, 
<http://www.fbi.gov>, 2. 
[37] Federal Bureau of Investigation, "Letter Head Memo," 
Five Percenters, #157-6-34, part 2, July 31, 1965, lkd. 
Freedom of Information Act Reading Room Page, 
<http://www.fbi.gov>, 1. 
[38] Federal Bureau of Investigation, "SAC New York to 
Director," Five Percenters, #157-6-34, part 2, October 18, 
1965, lkd. Freedom of Information Act Reading Room Page, 
<http://www.fbi.gov>, 6. 
[39] Federal Bureau of Investigation, "Letter Head Memo," 
Five Percenters, #157-6-34, part 2, November 24, 1965, lkd. 
Freedom of Information Act Reading Room Page, 
<http://www.fbi.gov>, 1. 
[40] Ibid., 2. 
[41] Federal Bureau of Investigation, "Letter Head Memo," 
Five Percenters, #157-6-34, part 2, August 23, 1966, lkd. 
Freedom of Information Act Reading Room Page, 
<http://www.fbi.gov>, 1. 
[42] Ibid. 
[43] Ibid., 3. 
[44] Ibid., 3-4. 
[45] The Word, 6. 
[46] Ibid., 5. 
[47] see note 22. 
[48] Federal Bureau of Investigation, "Letter Head Memo," 
Five Percenters, #157-6-34, part 1, July 31, 1965, lkd. 
Freedom of Information Act Reading Room Page, 
<http://www.fbi.gov>, 1. 
[49] Federal Bureau of Investigation, "SAC New York to 
Director," Five Percenters, #157-6-34, part 2, July 9, 1965, 
lkd. Freedom of Information Act Reading Room Page, 
<http://www.fbi.gov>, 3. 
[50] Federal Bureau of Investigation, "SAC New York to 
Director, Synopsis Report" Clarence 13X Smith, #100-
444636, January 17, 1966, lkd. Freedom of Information Act 
Reading Room Page, <http://www.fbi.gov>, 7-17. 
[51] Federal Bureau of Investigation, "Letter Head Memo," 
Five Percenters, #157-6-34, part 2, August 23, 1966, lkd. 
Freedom of Information Act Reading Room Page, 
<http://www.fbi.gov>, 4. 
[52] Federal Bureau of Investigation, "SAC New York to 
Director," Five Percenters, #157-6-34, part 1, November 4, 
1965, lkd. Freedom of Information Act Reading Room Page, 
<http://www.fbi.gov>, 2. 
[53] Federal Bureau of Investigation, "Letter Head Memo," 
Five Percenters, #157-6-34, part 1, December 29, 1965, lkd. 
Freedom of Information Act Reading Room Page, 
<http://www.fbi.gov>, 1. 
[54] Ibid., 2. 
[55] Federal Bureau of Investigation, "Letter Head Memo," 
Five Percenters, #157-6-34, part 2, December 29, 1965, lkd. 
Freedom of Information Act Reading Room Page, 
<http://www.fbi.gov> 1. 
[56] William L. Van DeBurg, New Day in Babylon: The 
Black Power Movement and American Culture (Chicago: 
The University of Chicago Press, 1992), 177. 
[57] William J. Harris, The Poetry and Poetics of Amiri 
Baraka: The Jazz Aesthetic (Columbia: University of 
Missouri Press, 1985), 9. 
[58] Van DeBurg, 177. 
[59] Harris, 9. 
[60] Federal Bureau of Investigation, "Appendix on the 
FPCC," Five Percenters, #157-6-34, part 1, December 29, 
1965, lkd. Freedom of Information Act Reading Room Page, 
<http://www.fbi.gov>, 2. 
[61] United States Congress, Senate, Committee on the 
Judiciary, Castro's Network in the United States (Fair Play 
For Cuba Committee), Hearing Before the Subcommittee to 
Investigate the Administration of the Internal Security Act 
and Other Internal Security Laws of the Committee on the 
Judiciary, 88th Congress, session 1, April 10, 1962 
(Washington D.C.: Government Printing Office, 1963), 28. 
[62] Amiri Baraka, The Autobiography of LeRoi Jones 
(Chicago: Lawrence Hill Books, 1997), 249 
[63] Ibid., 250. Unfortunately, no corroborative evidence was 
found in the book to verify the FBIs' evidence of a 
connection between Jones and the Five Percenters. 
[64] Federal Bureau of Investigation, "SAC New York to 
Director," Five Percenters, #157-6-34, part 1, June 1, 1965, 
lkd. Freedom of Information Act Reading Room Page, 
<http://www.fbi.gov>, 3. 
[65] Federal Bureau of Investigation, "Letter Head Memo," 
Five Percenters, #157-6-34, part 1, June 9, 1965, lkd. 
Freedom of Information Act Reading Room Page, 
<http://www.fbi.gov>, 2. 
[66] Federal Bureau of Investigation, "SAC New York to 
Director," Five Percenters, #157-6-34, part 1, October 18, 
1965, lkd. Freedom of Information Act Reading Room Page, 
<http://www.fbi.gov>, 6. 
[67] Federal Bureau of Investigation, "Letter Head Memo," 
Five Percenters, #157-6-34, part 2, August 23, 1966, lkd. 
Freedom of Information Act Reading Room Page, 
<http://www.fbi.gov>, 2. 
[68] Federal Bureau of Investigation, "Director to SAC New 
York," Five Percenters, #157-6-34, part 2, August 24, 1966, 
lkd. Freedom of Information Act Reading Room Page, 
<http://www.fbi.gov>, 1. 
[69] Federal Bureau of Investigation, "Letter Head Memo," 
Five Percenters, #157-6-34, part 1, August 23, 1966, lkd. 
Freedom of Information Act Reading Room Page, 
<http://www.fbi.gov>, 4. 
[70] Federal Bureau of Investigation, "SAC New York to 
Director," Five Percenters, #157-6-34, part 1, September 1, 
1965, lkd. Freedom of Information Act Reading Room Page, 
<http://www.fbi.gov>, 2. 
[71] Federal Bureau of Investigation, "SAC New York to 
Director," Five Percenters, #157-6-34, part 1, October 18, 
1965, lkd. Freedom of Information Act Reading Room Page, 
<http://www.fbi.gov>, 3. 
[72] The Word, 6. 
[73] Ibid. 
[74]Federal Bureau of Investigation, "Letter Head Memo," 
Five Percenters, #157-6-34, part 1, June 9, 1965, lkd. 
Freedom of Information Act Reading Room Page, 
<http://www.fbi.gov>, 2. 
[75]Federal Bureau of Investigation, "Letter Head Memo," 
Five Percenters, #157-6-34, part 1, July 9, 1965, lkd. 
Freedom of Information Act Reading Room Page, 
<http://www.fbi.gov>, 2. 
[76] Federal Bureau of Investigation, "Letter Head Memo," 
Five Percenters, #157-6-34, part 1, September 20, 1965, lkd. 
Freedom of Information Act Reading Room Page, 
<http://www.fbi.gov>, 2. 
[77] Federal Bureau of Investigation, "SAC New York to 
Director," Five Percenters, #157-6-34, part 1, June 1, 1965, 
lkd. Freedom of Information Act Reading Room Page, 
<http://www.fbi.gov>, 3. 
[78] Federal Bureau of Investigation, "Letter Head Memo," 
Five Percenters, #157-6-34, part 1, June 9, 1965, lkd. 
Freedom of Information Act Reading Room Page, 
<http://www.fbi.gov>, 2. 
[79] Federal Bureau of Investigation, "SAC New York to 
Director," Five Percenters, #157-6-34, part 1, October 18, 
1965, lkd. Freedom of Information Act Reading Room Page, 
<http://www.fbi.gov>, 5. 
[80] Ibid., 7. 
[81] Federal Bureau of Investigation, "SAC New York to 
Director," Five Percenters, #157-6-34, part 1, June 9, 1965, 
lkd. Freedom of Information Act Reading Room Page, 
<http://www.fbi.gov>, 2. 
[82] Federal Bureau of Investigation, "SAC New York to 
Director," Five Percenters, #157-6-34, part 2, October 18, 
1965, lkd. Freedom of Information Act Reading Room Page, 
<http://www.fbi.gov>, 4. 
[83] Nicholas Alex, New York Cops Talk Back: A Study of a 
Beleaguered Minority (New York: John Wiley and Sons, 
1976), 157. 
[84] Federal Bureau of Investigation, "Director to New York 
SAC," Five Percenters, #157-6-34, part 1, October 22, 1965, 
lkd. Freedom of Information Act Reading Room Page, 
<http://www.fbi.gov>, 3. 
[85] Federal Bureau of Investigation, "SAC New York to 
Director, Synopsis Report" Clarence 13X Smith, #100-
444636, January 17, 1966, lkd. Freedom of Information Act 
Reading Room Page, <http://www.fbi.gov>, 33/2. 
[86] Federal Bureau of Investigation, "Director to SAC New 
York," Five Percenters, #157-6-34, part 2, August 24, 1966, 
lkd. Freedom of Information Act Reading Room Page, 
<http://www.fbi.gov>, 2. 
[87] Federal Bureau of Investigation, "Letter Head Memo," 
Five Percenters, #157-6-34, part 1, June 2, 1965, lkd. 
Freedom of Information Act Reading Room Page, 
<http://www.fbi.gov>, 1. 
[88] Ibid., 3. 
[89] Ibid., 1. 
[90] Federal Bureau of Investigation, "SAC New York to 
Director," Five Percenters, #157-6-34, part 1, June 1, 1965, 
lkd. Freedom of Information Act Reading Room Page, 
<http://www.fbi.gov>, 3. 
[91] Federal Bureau of Investigation, "Letter Head Memo," 
Five Percenters, #157-6-34, part 1, June 2, 1965, lkd. 
Freedom of Information Act Reading Room Page, 
<http://www.fbi.gov>, 3. 
 58


--- PAGE 59 ---
The Black God: An Anthology of Truth 
 59
[92] Ibid. [107] Federal Bureau of Investigation, "Director to SAC New 
York," Clarence 13X Smith, #100-444636, March 23, 1967, 
lkd. Freedom of Information Act Reading Room Page, 
<http://www.fbi.gov>, 1. 
[93] The Word, 6. 
[94] Federal Bureau of Investigation, "SAC New York to 
Director," Five Percenters, #157-6-34, part 2, June 9, 1965, 
lkd. Freedom of Information Act Reading Room Page, 
<http://www.fbi.gov>, 2. 
[95] Federal Bureau of Investigation, "Letter Head Memo," 
Five Percenters, #157-6-34, part 1, July 9, 1965, lkd. 
Freedom of Information Act Reading Room Page, 
<http://www.fbi.gov>, 1. 
[96] Ibid., 2. 
[97] Federal Bureau of Investigation, "SAC New York to 
Director," Clarence 13X Smith, #100-444636, October 19, 
1965, lkd. Freedom of Information Act Reading Room Page, 
<http://www.fbi.gov>, 1. 
[98] Federal Bureau of Investigation, "Director to SAC New 
York," Five Percenters, #157-6-34, part 2, October 22, 1965, 
lkd. Freedom of Information Act Reading Room Page, 
<http://www.fbi.gov>, 2. 
[99] In order to conceal evidence of collaboration between 
state and federal government, Hoover could not list the New 
York City District Attorney's Office as one of the desired 
agencies, though it is probable that the New York City D.A. 
had a role in the interdepartmentalsim. 
[100] Federal Bureau of Investigation, "SAC New York to 
Director," Five Percenters, #157-6-34, part 1, November 4, 
1965, lkd. Freedom of Information Act Reading Room Page, 
<http://www.fbi.gov>, 1. 
[101] Federal Bureau of Investigation, "SAC New York to 
Director," Five Percenters, #157-6-34, part 1, November 24, 
1965 & part 2, December 31, 1966, lkd. Freedom of 
Information Act Reading Room Page, <http://www.fbi.gov>, 
1. 
[102] Federal Bureau of Investigation, "SAC New York to 
Director," Five Percenters, #157-6-34, part 2, November 16, 
1965, lkd. Freedom of Information Act Reading Room Page, 
<http://www.fbi.gov>, 1. 
[103] Federal Bureau of Investigation, "SAC New York to 
Director," Clarence 13X Smith, #100-444636, November 26, 
1965 & December 1, 1965, lkd. Freedom of Information Act 
Reading Room Page, <http://www.fbi.gov>, 1. 
[104] Federal Bureau of Investigation, "SAC New York to 
Director," Clarence 13X Smith, #100-444636, November 26, 
1965, lkd. Freedom of Information Act Reading Room Page, 
<http://www.fbi.gov>, 1. 
[105] Federal Bureau of Investigation, "SAC New York to 
Director," Clarence 13X Smith, #100-444636, April 4, 1966, 
lkd. Freedom of Information Act Reading Room Page, 
<http://www.fbi.gov>, 1. 
[106] Federal Bureau of Investigation, "SAC New York to 
Director," Clarence 13X Smith, #100-444636, January 12, 
1967, lkd. Freedom of Information Act Reading Room Page, 
<http://www.fbi.gov>, 1. 
[108] Federal Bureau of Investigation, "Letter Head Memo," 
Clarence 13X Smith, #100-444636, May 16, 1967, lkd. 
Freedom of Information Act Reading Room Page, 
<http://www.fbi.gov>, 2. 
[109] Ibid., 3. 
[110] The Word, 8. 
[111] Federal Bureau of Investigation, "SAC New York to 
Director," Clarence 13X Smith, #100-444636, June 13, 1969, 
lkd. Freedom of Information Act Reading Room Page, 
<http://www.fbi.gov>, 1. 
[112] Federal Bureau of Investigation, "SAC New York to 
Director," Clarence 13X Smith, #100-444636, June 25, 1969, 
lkd. Freedom of Information Act Reading Room Page, 
<http://www.fbi.gov>, 1. 
[113] Ibid., 2. 
[114] Ibid. 
[115] Baraka, 271. 
[116] Federal Bureau of Investigation, "Appendix on the 
FPCC," Five Percenters, #157-6-34, part 1, December 29, 
1965, lkd. Freedom of Information Act Reading Room Page, 
<http://www.fbi.gov>, 2. 
[117] The Word, 10. 
[118] O'Reilly, 283. 
[119] Federal Bureau of Investigation, "Letter Head Memo," 
Five Percenters, #157-6-34, part 1, June 2, 1965, lkd. 
Freedom of Information Act Reading Room Page, 
<http://www.fbi.gov>, 3. 
[120] Federal Bureau of Investigation, "SAC New York to 
Director," Five Percenters, #157-6-34, part 1, June 22, 1965, 
lkd. Freedom of Information Act Reading Room Page, 
<http://www.fbi.gov>, 1. 
[121] Theodore Jones, "5 Percenters Called Hoodlums; 
Actions Blamed on Frustration," New York Daily News, 
October 15, 1965; from Federal Bureau of Investigation, 
"SAC New York to Director, Enclosure" Five Percenters, 
#157-6-34, part 1, October 18, 1965, lkd. Freedom of 
Information Act Reading Room Page, <http://www.fbi.gov>, 
12. 
[122] James W. Sullivan, "Harlem '5 Percenters' -- Terror 
Group Revealed," New York Herald Tribune, October 15, 
1965; from Federal Bureau of Investigation, "SAC New York 
to Director, Enclosure" Five Percenters, #157-6-34, part 1, 
October 18, 1965, lkd. Freedom of Information Act Reading 
Room Page, <http://www.fbi.gov>, 9. 
[123] Homer Bigart, "Wingate Warns of Negro Revolt if 
Haryou's Program is Curbed," New York Times, October 15, 
1965; from Federal Bureau of Investigation, "SAC New York 
to Director, Enclosure" Five Percenters, #157-6-34, part 1, 
October 18, 1965, lkd. Freedom of Information Act Reading 
Room Page, <http://www.fbi.gov>, 15. 
[124] Federal Bureau of Investigation, "SAC New York to 
Director," Five Percenters, #157-6-34, part 1, October 18, 
1965, lkd. Freedom of Information Act Reading Room Page, 
<http://www.fbi.gov>, 2. 
[125] O'Reilly, 248. 
[126] Baraka, 307. 
[127] Federal Bureau of Investigation, "SAC New York to 
Director," Five Percenters, #157-6-34, part 1, October 18, 
1965, lkd. Freedom of Information Act Reading Room Page, 
<http://www.fbi.gov>, 2. 
[128] Ibid., 3. 
[129] Federal Bureau of Investigation, "SAC New York to 
Director," Five Percenters, #157-6-34, part 2, October 18, 
1965, lkd. Freedom of Information Act Reading Room Page, 
<http://www.fbi.gov>, 3. 
[130] Ibid. 
[131] Federal Bureau of Investigation, "Director to SAC New 
York," Five Percenters, #157-6-34, part 2, October 22, 1965, 
lkd. Freedom of Information Act Reading Room Page, 
<http://www.fbi.gov>, 2. 
[132] Ibid. 
[133] Ibid. 
[134] O'Reilly, 248. 
[135] O'Reilly, 401 & Federal Bureau of Investigation, "SAC 
New York to Director," Five Percenters, #157-6-34, part 2, 
October 18, 1965, lkd. Freedom of Information Act Reading 
Room Page, <http://www.fbi.gov>, 2. 
[136] Baraka, 311. 
[137] New York Magazine, 8. 
[138] Ibid., 10. 
[139] Federal Bureau of Investigation, "SAC New York to 
Director," Clarence 13X Smith, #100-444636, October 11, 
1965, lkd. Freedom of Information Act Reading Room Page, 
<http://www.fbi.gov>, 1. 
[140] Louis Farakhan, lecture at Arizona State University, 
October 1977; from Wakeel Allah, "Did the Most Honorable 
Elijah Muhammed Recognize the Five Percenters?," lkd. 
Knowledge This! Page, 
<http://73.cyberspace.net/allahtea/5percentprops.htm>, 3. 
[141] Davis, 102. 
[142] The Word, 7. 
[143] New York Magazine, 6. 
[144] The Word, 7. 
[145] Ibid., 8. 
[146] New York Magazine, 10. 
[147] The Word, 10. 
[148] Ibid. 
[149] Poor Righteous Teachers, "Holy Intellect" (New York: 
Profile Records, 1990). 
 
If we don't stand for something, we 
may fall for anything." 
Malcolm X 
 
"Early in life I had learned that if you 
want something, you had better make 
some noise." 
Malcolm X 
 
"My alma mater was books, a good 
library.... I could spend the rest of my 
life reading, just satisfying my 
curiosity." 
Malcolm X 
 
"Anytime you see someone more 
successful than you are, they are doing 
something you aren't." 
Malcolm X 
 
"History is a people's memory, and without a memory, man 
is demoted to the lower animals." 
Malcolm X


--- PAGE 60 ---
The Black God: An Anthology of Truth 
 
Recommended Reading 
 
African Presence in Early America by Ivan Van Sertima 
African Presence in Early Asia by Runoko Rashidi 
African Presence in Early Europe by Ivan Van Sertima 
Black Athena by Martin Bernal 
Blacked Out through Whitewash by SuZar 
Breaking the Chains of Psychological Slavery by Naim Akbar 
Countering the Conspiracy to Destroy Black Boys by Jawanza Kunjufu 
Egypt Revisited by Ivan Van Sertima 
Faces at the Bottom of the Well by Derrick Bell 
Fall of America by Elijah Muhammad 
From Niggas to Gods by Bro. Akil 
From the Browder Files by Anthony Browder 
How to Make a Slave by William Lynch 
Making of the Whiteman by Paul Lawrence Guthrie 
Message to the Blackman by Elijah Muhammad 
Nile Valley Contributions to Civilization by Anthony Browder 
Stolen Legacy by George G. M. James 
Stupid White Men by Michael Moore 
The 48 Laws of Power by Robert Greene 
The African Origin of Civilization by Cheikh Anta Diop 
The Art of War by Sun Tzu 
The Autobiography of Malcolm X by Malcolm X and Alex Haley 
The Iceman Inheritance by Michael Bradley 
The Isis Papers by Frances Cress Welsing 
The Spook Who Sat by the Door by Sam Greenlee 
The World’s Sixteen Crucified Saviors by Kersey Graves 
Theology of Time by Elijah Muhammad 
There is a River by Vincent Harding 
They Came Before Columbus by Ivan Van Sertima 
To Be a Slave by Julius Lester 
 
_________________________________________________________ 
 
_________________________________________________________ 
 
_________________________________________________________ 
 
_________________________________________________________ 
 
_________________________________________________________ 
 
_________________________________________________________ 
 
 
 
 
 60
Contact:

