=== EXTRACTED TEXT FROM: The Code to the Matrix.pdf ===
Extraction Method: PyPDFLoader
Total Pages: 231
Timestamp: 2026-01-04T17:27:14.843956
================================================================================


--- PAGE 1 ---
1 | Page  
 
 
 
THE CODE 
TO THE MATRIX 
 
FIRST EDITION 
 
THE GOLDEN RULE 
 
૚૙૙
૙૚૙
૙૙૚
 
 
James Evans Bomær III  
JEB³  
1080˚Arch Chariot 
Observer of Spheres Prime Mobile


--- PAGE 2 ---
2 | Page  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
To all the Youth of the World so you may see the path to Ascen-Sion.


--- PAGE 3 ---
3 | Page  
 
4 
Foreword  
Forward 
Four Word  
The race was not given to the quick or the swift, but to the one who could endure till the end, then we 
found out there was no end. 
The unwary soul, who fails to grapple with the Mocking Demon of Illusion, will return to the Earth as 
the slave of Illusion. To become a true master of fate you must first become a “Knower of Self”. 
In a time much too distant to consider we as Humans splitting from the single Source entered 
Duality. Spiraling away from the Creator some spun in the direction of 6 while others spun in the 
opposite direction of 9, this is the “Spiral Force”. These two forms contain complete opposites, 
however, it is with their Union something new can be born, this is the sequence of life. Our Solar 
System houses various Binary or Dual worlds and Earth called first Tiamat is one of them. Once 
entering this realm the Spirit begin to develop its very narrow definition of things, as in most cases, 
besides twins, they are lacking their other side. In extinct we create a “stand in” which we call the ego. 
The ego is wholly constructed of astral energy in which we create and breathe life into everyday. At 
times not knowing “power” we birth a Monster which we love and care for since after all it is a part of 
us, our baby. 
At some point in incarnations or loops one realizes they must begin the quest of taming the 
Monster. They realize they must flip it over and ride it. At that moment they also see how strong it has 
become as it is stuck in its ways, rigid in form, brutish and ineloquent. In that condition we can take it 
nowhere just as you never take a street dog into a royal party. The work before us then was to take this 
rough cut stone and form it into a chariot of fire that could propel us through the center of the 
Universe, it is there we will meet our other half. In this realm that is the meaning to life.  
To help us through this whole process and all of its components the Most High developed a 
system based upon the energies of the entire Universe. Seeing that Humans are smaller composites of 
the Celestial Spheres it became possible for one to know how to guide their particular life in the 
direction that would equal the greatest amount of potential for their unique design. In each person 
lies the pearl of the highest potential, if developed it is a treasure to all existence visible and invisible. 
This wondrous Metamorphosis was possible of the Human creation, however, as you see in some parts 
of nature, not every creation has been given this ability. Thus there arose a challenge from lower forms


--- PAGE 4 ---
4 | P
 
of co
the “
disco
but 
 
 
two?
each
If so
them
Re
div
tw
ca
wi
P age  
onsciousnes
“Limits”. O
over their t
knew. 
 
 
Conside
? Not to me
h having a p
omeone cam
m they were
Reason 1: En
iverse contin
wo worlds th
all stasis.  Ou
ith. It also r
ss that man
Once again 
true form w
er hot cold l
ention in te
particular u
me to your d
e inside or w
ntire Univer
inuation. Th
hat one con
Our own par
remains jus
nifested as Je
at the close
which is not
light and da
emperature
use, some be
door lookin
would you l
rses are kno
The figure 8 
ntinues to re
rallel actuall
st as clueless
ealousy and
e of this tim
t a Word an
ark, is there
 there is ho
eing very be
ng for a per
lie and say 
own to be B
8 which is th
reincarnate 
lly exists in 
s as you are
d thus Spiri
me segment 
nd comes be
e not warm
ot, cold, war
eneficial for
son that yo
they were n
Binary, this 
he sign used
 through on
 this otherw
e right now 
ituality and
the masses 
efore even t
m and grey w
rm, vapor, 
r a certain m
ou loved to d
not around?
s gives the p
d for infinity
ne after the 
world simul
 to its existe
d Religion w
 will have an
thought. It 
which can e
freezing, an
moment, an
do them ha
? If you lied
possibility of
ty is actually
e other in an
ltaneously u
ence. 
were created
n opportun
 is the High
asily fit bet
nd many m
nd useless fo
arm, would
d to protect
of balance an
ly the sign of
n infinite lo
until it is m
d, these are 
nity to 
hest. If you 
 
 
tween the 
ore stages 
or others. 
d you tell 
t that 
nd 
of the 
oop We 
merged


--- PAGE 5 ---
5 | Page  
 
person is that good or bad? If you ask a Pastor of a Church they will say it is evil to tell lies period, but 
is better to allow the loved one to be hurt? As you see everything is a matter of perspective. So there 
can be no good and bad only reason and reason has so many parameters if all things are not 
considered a person could be left confused, not knowing what decision to make from time to time 
thus they are left and lost in time. Whatever you do in life let it be endowed with meaning and 
purpose. 
The world is lodged in the phase of opposites right now, thus we face wars, racism, and 
extinction of our natural life. What I’m presenting here is the information of the inner workings of 
the World along with its Creeds, Cultures, and Religions that have shaped our thoughts and actions 
since antiquity extending several incarnations. We will see how ideas grow over time and sometimes 
lose their true meaning altogether. In this we will see also how we were taken off track. This due in 
part by the “controllers” knowing if you take humans from their original cycle they are easy to confuse 
and enslave. Let us not forget we faced many conquerors in the past, intending to usurp the order of 
the world and bring it under their sway, this they accomplished, and it should not be forgotten no 
matter how much the Illusion tells you it does not exist.  
The foolish think of Me, the Un-manifest, as having manifestation, knowing not My Higher, 
immutable and most excellent form. Fools disregard Me as clad in human shape not knowing flesh 
cannot withstand Me. They have empty hopes, vain actions, of vain knowledge and senseless they 
verily are possessed of deceitful nature and become un-divine Beings. I hurl these evil-doers into the 
womb of distortion deluded birth after birth, not attaining Me they thus fall into a condition even 
lower, without the slightest suspension, proving they are not using the reason and senses We gave 
them.          The Most High 
There exist certain systems, mainly language and religion that perpetuate this fallacy of Illusion 
in a subliminal way. If you happen to be aligned with any of the religions or ideas being discussed, do 
be careful not to think of it as bad if you happen to hear something that makes you uneasy, after all, 
many of us at one time or another in this life or in past lives have avowed ourselves to something only 
to later find out we have outgrown it because we now possess an entirely different set of key 
knowledge. Every time we learn something new that is the truth we should celebrate, we are closer to 
home. 
 
THE OTHERS 
This world we are in is fully animate, it has been constructed by an “Ability” so powerful it has 
missed no details. Challenge in life equals substantial growth. It is after all the constant lifting of 
heavier weights that makes a person strong. Those weights we must lift are actually other life forms


--- PAGE 6 ---
6 | Page  
 
that are very dense slow moving vibrations. These weights when attached to us make us wait right here 
on Earth burdened down and unable to fly. Those of us who are Divine Positive are attracted to the 
Light thus we must get lite by releasing the weight.  
But wait, the complexity of the Creator exist within its Creations and there are many of us. On 
3rd Density we all appear to be about the same. Two arms, two legs, a head, etc. although if you had 
the ability to see each individuals astral form no two forms would look the same. Some you would see 
infused with animal natures, extraterrestrial life, unknown elements and essences, and everything else 
they had accumulated in past existences all comprised in one Auric Field. When that field is placed in 
a humanoid body the outer shell looks similar enough to allow you to get along in society. We are all 
something much more different then what is seen in the mirror, so we must never be confused that 
the reflection is the complete you. 
On other dimensions there are so many life forms they cannot be cataloged. It would be much 
more difficult than listing every type of insect, plant, fish, mammal etc. which exist on such a small 
Planet as Earth. On their dimension they have a spirit form, the “Breathe” flows through all living 
creatures. When they take physical form, as we have, they combine with what is most like their 
character. The ancient knowledge was to know how they appeared in the “Seen World”, how to 
communicate with them, and which ones to avoid. Many of these Beings had no concern for the 
Humanoids whatsoever themselves being either much too dense to comprehend human life or much 
to developed to waste thought on something so distant and primitive. 
There are Beings who in fact are closer to us in proximity of Creation and also endowed with 
reason. They possessed a fiery and airy nature they are known now as the Serpents. Mankind’s history 
with the Serpents is undeniable, for example: 
In Columbian Mythology Bachue the primordial woman was called “Serpeinte Celestial” (Celestial 
Snake). Mesoamerican cultures worshipped Quetzcoatl the feathered Serpents and they await His 
return just as Christians wait for Jesus. 
The Egyptians called them Neteru and said they came on heavenly boats and set up Priesthoods whose 
Priest were called Djedhi, sound familiar? 
The Sumerians claimed their ancestors where Reptilian Annunaki who genetically modified them to 
be slaves. It is of value to keep in mind the Sumerians say they where hybridized and made as slaves 
while other legends simply say they intermingled with their population.  
In Ethiopia stories and ancient statues can be found of the Serpents known as Naga. These Naga also 
went into Persia and China. Nagasaki was named after the Serpents who migrated there.  
In Japan the Dragon Yasha is the protector of Buddhism. The Celts make mention of the Druid 
Adders or great serpents that came to instruct them in mystical arts.


--- PAGE 7 ---
7 | Page  
 
The Hebrews speak of the Serpent Nakash who was ever giving them trouble and misguiding their 
people. 
The Arabs produced thousands of codex warning of the Serpent Shaitan and his cunning ways of 
making man and woman fall short. 
 It is safe to say that we can identify at least on e non-humanoid Being that in fact interfaces with 
our life cycle, and this is only one but there are many more. Thus we should be able to establish that 
we are not alone. 
 
 
Reason 2: The Maya clearly show they had 
already pledged allegiance to a group of 
“Masculine” Serpents. The Serpent races are just 
as vast as our own. Many of the Serpents are on a 
“collective mind” thus they are generally out to 
accomplish there own agenda and stop at nothing 
to see it through. Humans are looked at as a 
resource to most of them, they are a Supremacist 
warrior class, also some have mated with the 
Human race and try to protect their “Hybrids” as 
extended family. Many of the Ancient Reptilians 
despise this union and thus a war has ensued 
amongst the Elders and the Siblings. 
Reason 3: In the Egyptian Glyphs it clearly shows 
much larger Humanoids inhabited the land. 
They are the Nephalim bent on world 
domination and enslaving what they called 
inferior Humans. They exist now in spirit form. 
This is beyond Alexander the Great and 
Constantine in fact this is where they drew their 
power and destiny from. They were just the 
Human catalyst, Hybrids themselves although 
there Legends are so shrouded in myth it does 
them little credit to the truth of their origin. 
Alexander was known as “Great Two Horn” and 
by the Arabs Dhul-Qarnayn who built the wall.


--- PAGE 8 ---
8 | Page  
 
The correct knowledge actually makes your spirit larger. Knowledge is the food for the Spirit. 
When this happens just like a fish that has gotten too big for its tank, you must move on. This is no 
different than having a small bike as a child that takes you everywhere you need to go, as a child your 
range is a lot smaller. When you get older you may need a car, plane, or even a ship depending on 
where you are intending to travel. The body itself when developed is the vehicle to traverse the cosmos 
and it must now be prepared to do such a thing, this is a vastly populated territory we speak of and it 
contains the experiences you will need to continue growth. We will discover that all the things we 
have gone through in life have served to get us to that point, it is only of value to realize that since 
nothing is absolutely still you must continue to move, this is the nature of our entire Universe 
nothing dies even if you blow it up it will still become an infinite amount of pieces of whatever it was 
before.  
It is a wondrous age we have entered as we watch the mist of the Illusion dissipate, the hot 
spiral of reality permeates the globe. We are awakening as children of giants from a long slumber 
realizing that we have been living a long dream. As a Planet we have seen many ages that are part of a 
larger cycle of growth, this is the process of turning dirt into Gold. One thing that we can be sure of 
since man and woman have triumphed through the Stone Age to now meet the end of the Space Age 
we most certainly intend to continue on to what is next. 
  
Like a game of chess you anticipate the player’s next move, so we see that it is the Age of Ether 
we are arriving into or more simply put, Spirit.  Now we can begin to do the things that only made up 
the fiction portion of our previous ideas and imagination. The weight of the body, which is now the 
cube, will be shed and we will be open once more to higher senses. We would do well to develop and 
train these senses now. As we speed up and things take place it will not be time to practice. There is no 
doubt that we will experience a new aeon we are all Adepts of Motion, Acolytes of the Flux, we 
populate the Galaxy and thus we have solidified our wave through the harmonic cosmos. We are 
Vessels of known and unknown energies untold being ourselves convertors for multiple life forms to 
assimilate and grow not only on Earth but also in space as above so below.  
Reason 4: From the Stone Age 
to the Space Age was made to 
look so easy a caveman could 
do it. Have you asked yourself 
where our world is headed 
next? What do you think 
organizations like NASA, 
Lucent, and Sony are really 
doing with now Trillions of 
dollars?


--- PAGE 9 ---
9 | Page  
 
This energy field cannot be seen with the untrained eye but exist all around you as a standing 
column wave. With the science of sound which is vibration we can venture to know that if a large 
wave is made by anything in the same pool, it will only make the smallest waves speed up and increase 
in size, thus the small are supported by the Great and coaxed to become bigger. Since these Greater 
Forces are now sending out stronger waves than ever our choice is when we face that big wave, can we 
ride it, or will we wipe out and hope to catch another. We can be sure that we cannot be destroyed 
because the soul within us, a gift by the Most High, is Immortal and without end, but ye can be made 
to forget which is called the second death.   
 
 
 
 
When a person really assimilates there are other “Sentient” things in existence it opens them 
up to better Innerstanding the Most High through diversity. This also allows us to make a sober 
estimate of ourselves and where we personally stand in the levels of Matter. When one remains 
insolent to a fact of such magnitude, there are sure to be repercussions.  Those repercussions cause a 
Supremacist nature; never considering what we think is the top is actually the bottom for another 
Being. We would assume we are on an elated level which really does even more damage than good 
since the sub-conscious mind factors in that we are poisoning the same air we breathe, so as the most 
intelligent we are really the most ignorant. Anything built on that kind of foundation will go through 
successions of destruction and chaos, now we have Earth’s full historical description. When this 
changes, which it will very soon, everything will be different, fast. 
Figure 5: An actual NASA photo of what appears to be a very conscious form in the Galactic 
looking back at us. Phillip’s Astronomy Atlas Page 194. Other sentient life forms are found on 
Earth all the time but we have now been trained to reject clear proof separating us more from 
the reality of the existence of other Creations, many of whom are very intelligent.


--- PAGE 10 ---
10 | Page  
 
My first experience with the “Others” was when I unknowingly started a purification 
procedure and became Enlightened. I had no doubt heard of accelerated thinking and higher abilities, 
however, my intention at the time was to just seek answers from a Higher Source, not to mention 
trusting if whether a Higher Source could actually be contacted. I knew something Higher existed, 
that became obvious by seriously taking into account man did not create man, it’s at least 
mathematically not possible.  I had done this by chanting until my body had changed its complete 
vibrational frequency which took about 2 hours and some extreme desire. The desire I called (HSM) 
Heart, Soul, and Mind something I found in the Torah that was worth extracting. It was said to be the 
real formula of contacting the Most High, a focal point to interface with if One came to such a 
moment that contact would need to be made. Once I started to activate all the metal in the room was 
shaking I had to remove my watch, belt, and anything that contained metal. I had no idea this was 
going to be the outcome, the energy was far more than I anticipated thus I was extremely unprepared 
and confused but strong nonetheless, I had become the portal for Higher Selves.  
As the camera continued to run on my PS3 catching these moments I knew we had something 
special, finally I had vividly captured my proof of the paranormal. I can only explain it as I went up 
and came back down very fast and I could feel the Essence of were I had gone inside of me, especially 
in my hands. My friend, who is now my witness was even less prepared, he had also experienced the 
phenomena by simply touching me once I reached High Vibration, this he did by accident or fear of 
the metal situation. This prompted him to grab me and ask me what was happening, like I knew. That 
caused it to spread to him instantly and later he said “he went down deep into somewhere, saw 
himself, grabbed himself, and started making an ascension back out with Things hot on his trail”. He 
was, what I later figured out, in some lower dimension being ruled by some Dominion. This was 
defiantly a result of his current character although he was given a chance nonetheless.


--- PAGE 11 ---
11 | Page  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Breaking through the Netherworld with obviously his Ka in tow, my friend got stuck. How this 
appeared in our Realm was he looked to me to be gone, wacko, done, goosed. I was gathering myself 
fast, still feeling the strength, but also thinking of the full parameters of what just occurred. I knew 
that I had to do something fast because my friend (fiend) was saying the same two words over and over 
so loud eventually the neighbors would call the cops, he seemed to be in a mental loop. Using the 
“WORD” I yelled It into his mouth, it was all I could think to do. Later he said at that moment he 
saw a light and he was able to hurry to it. That brought him back to this Plane. That was my second 
vivid Spiritual encounter.  
We will now mention with no more delay our Source, the Exact One with no Equation, 
beyond capacity and function, Jubilant Magnetaur Dispersed in Realities Self Generated. We swoon in 
ecstasy when You touch us, and we guard thy Beloved with our life as no cost. The charge is to 
admonish the Guided with exact knowledge of this time sequence and its mysteries we will expose as 
they lay bare before us. This is so all things may be made clear and the Path may be made level for thy 
feet.  Think not these works are those of my own, nay, I was found by the Source headed swiftly in the 
wrong direction, it was then I was visited. In that state I was strengthened by the Hosts who perceiving 
in me such a lowly state but a subtle glow as we all posses the remnants of a Brighter Star in our 
Reason 6: What the many ancient tribes have been explaining to Westerners since time 
memorial is that we are actually located on a lower plane that is being ruled by various Entities. 
The sub-Planes are indicated above by the triangles in the center. The pictures of Beings you see 
are of various Ascended Masters or Gods who rule different parts of the Planes. The 4 outer 
points are the Gates. The Kabbalah reflects the same thing indicating the Planes as Spheres or 
Hexagrams. They also served as Calendars because the alignment of everything from above and 
below is perfectly in order.


--- PAGE 12 ---
12 | Page  
 
hearts. It was through Them it was conveyed to me my mishaps. It was in such joy of returning to the 
true Path and turning from the Abyss that I light ultra rays Resplendid that will exhaust Plutonium 
fuel cells so all in the darkness may know of and come to receive the real Light. 
It was then I knew that the world could raise its entire vibration by contact with just one 
person who could hold the frequency.  The voice that entered inside of my head after “the charge” 
started to tell me things that I had never read or seen before. I also felt the activation of the opposite 
hemisphere of my brain which came first as a separate voice with a mind of its own. At first I thought 
I had gone crazy or had broken something in my brain, as I settled down I realized it was my other 
half so excited to be heard finally. I spent weeks on Google checking the information after it was made 
known to me and I was fascinated with such a breakthrough as everything that was being spoken into 
my mind was accurate, not to mention the personal hidden things it revealed. For me at that moment 
I knew there was something they were not telling us, this should be the first subject in school! I 
imagined how much the encounter would enliven the Youth this is what we wanted.  
Later when I was able to enter Higher States through simple whole body breathing techniques I 
realized our potential as a Species is definitely a threat to anything that seeks to rule over the Human 
Race. It would not be possible, the energy of freedom is too great and when felt, ones life means 
nothing if they cannot constantly feel it again. If the Humans were to unlock their true self thus 
broadcasting a higher signal or frequency that would permeate the globe, it would surely burn holes in 
the nets and webs created to surround our atmosphere (At Most Fear) that’s keeping us trapped 
within. They admit the eye can see thousands of miles when there is no atmosphere, this was another 
phenomena they recorder when in Space.  
This is the time one is now free to feel and receive the truth from the thin air which contains a 
stream of information of now, past, future and most valuably who we really are. Who we really are is 
the biggest secret period, any wise man thinking on that will agree. What I also felt more than I 
understood was that it was harder to destroy a Planet than it was to keep it in harmony and peace. 
The Planet was so strong, I watched how much She took payloads of nuclear arsenals “H” Bombs and 
“A” Bombs all while keeping the children snug on the other side of the world, spinning lightly on her 
axis with only a slight wobble. This is the true food for thought. I was convinced that the majority 
would want to be on a Higher Vibration and I set out almost immediately on that Quest. 
What was conveyed to me then was that many people in our history all the way until our 
current day claiming spiritual enlightenment, especially the New Agers, were talking to Angels and 
Masters that had in fact corrupted our world long ago. Many of these Beings at a certain point were 
workers of a much Greater Force thus they learned various mental and spiritual techniques that 
appear Godlike to humans. In time, pride, jealousy, selfishness, and scarcity crept in the Order and 
ideas that they should divvy up everything that was resourceful to them became prevalent. This is in 
part due to the nature of the Most High which does not watch all its Creations like a micro manager.


--- PAGE 13 ---
13 | Page  
 
Once the design is put in place It’s off Creating more Universes and all in time will eventually take its 
proper form, however, there are phases in between. The Creations make up the entire construct of 
allowing those “in between phases” to be possible, we sharpen each other.  
 As with all things some Beings have more senses thus more power than others. These Beings 
are often times given the name Angels, although there classification is much vaster and the term Angel 
is far from the word that should be used. Consider this, most modern Angels names end in EL. EL is 
the Name given by the Hebrews of their God which corresponds to our Planet Saturn, this means all 
the Angels work for El and this you will see is true on various levels as we go on. You will learn to 
trace the Origin of a Name using a system that is infallible. Through the correct procedure you can 
seriously have a Guide to the Universe and a map to other worlds beside Earth Dimension 3. Breaking 
down Saturn you have Sat and Urn or Sa and Turn. The word with the most practical use out of these 
combinations is Sat and Urn. As we go on you will learn who Sat is. As said before the original name 
for this Planet was El thus the new Name given in English signifies some type of unity between this 
Being “Sat” and another simply called “Urn”. When we drop the “N” to see if we can get anymore 
clarity since an Urn’s basic meaning is just something you use to put the ashes of the cremated dead 
in, we find a place that syncs up Ur. “Ur” was known as Chaldea, also known as Samaria, also known 
as Babylon.  
History says Ur of Chaldea, home of Marduk, Chaldean Magic and the Necromicon spell book 
was also home of a young boy known as Abram, later Abraham. According to the story Abram’s father 
Terah made idols known as Teraphim and it was Abram’s responsibility to peddle those idols to the 
people. It was said Abram rejected the worship of the idols because they had no power. He later 
discovered the true God and thus became the father of all Mankind, just like that. Logically this story 
has to have so type of hidden meaning because its literal definition is preposterous although almost all 
people believe in the literal meaning; they believe Abraham is their ancestral father even when their 
genealogy places them somewhere like Africa or Asia.  
These household Teraphim caused much trouble throughout the Bible even after Abrams exit 
from Ur. Rachel stole Teraphim from her father and he could not rest until they were returned, a few 
other similar stories exist like this. It is revealed that the Sylphs, Serpent spirits of the Air whom I call 
Siths, inhabited these items and would bring forth Oracles of the future. Abraham wife is Sarah his 
father is Terah. It is obvious the real story here is about the unity of the Seraphim and the Teraphim 
both being spirit forms. Again, since the Bible is a partial account of various stories, only those who 
really have dissected the clay tablets are able to cross all these characters back over to their original 
Sumarian Archetypes along with putting together the details of their story about what went on. When 
we are simply looking for truth and spiritual growth this all becomes too much. So many have never 
researched any of this and are at the alters blindly saying AMEN, they mind as well add Ra after that, 
its still the same Being. Amen-Ra. Blindly they are dragged about.


--- PAGE 14 ---
14 | Page  
 
All the stories from the Sumarian Tablets are retold in the Torah after a few alterations mainly 
with the Names of the individuals involved. By changing the Names it became virtually impossible for 
the “common” people of the times, most of whom could not read nor write, to realize they were 
actually still following the religion of the Chaldeans long after being lead from captivity. The Hebrews 
became enslaved by the Babylonians, along with many other Nations afterward. As more cultures are 
put into the melting pot of Babylon, facts become blurred with fiction and languages are turned to 
Babel. Terah, Abraham’s Father and Torah the first 5 books of the Bible are so close together in 
spelling it begs one to wonder what is meant by all this? You will soon see that many of the stories 
being told are the events of the cross-breading that took place with mankind. 
 Amazingly many ancient nations such as the Phoenicians had no written language or culture 
of their own, instead they borrowed from everyone they conquered. They altered the original cultures 
and languages of these people saying they were “perfecting” them, what audacity. In the Western 
world we credit our language, English, much of our symbolism like the Phoenix, our current death 
and resurrection doctrine, and many other things to the Phoenicians who were really the Philistines. 
Philadelphia was the original state capitol of the United States. The biggest mistake a conquered 
people can make is to begin to imagine they were never defeated, thus placing their trust in the 
assailant. We are seeing the results of that now, our Government, Spiritual Leaders, and Instructors 
have been telling a multitude of lies many without the slightest knowledge of it.  Some are sworn 
traitors avowed to something much more sinister. We mistakenly have trusted the same system that 
once brutally annihilated everything that had its own will so they could indoctrinate their falsehood. 
  
What now has to be done in order for us to discover our true potential is we have to put our 
real past back together. During the times Pharaohs, Czars, Kings, and Shahs despoiled the lands they 
found it most important to alter the history, culture, and language of the people they conquered. This 
is how they gained a monopoly over social and spiritual power, the later being the controller of the 
former. Most of these factions served the “Unseen Hand” very far back in our history so they generally 
Reason 7: There are traitors amongst 
us with phenomenal resources that 
have avowed to something far more 
devious then can normally be 
conceived. Left unchecked for 
centuries they have finally come to 
the conclusion of an agenda 
scheduled for the near future. Who 
will face them?


--- PAGE 15 ---
15 | Page  
 
had the same agenda. Removing a persons spiritual belief in themselves leaves them powerless. All of 
Mysticism has effect based on the belief of the Welder of such power. In ancient times many had such 
exemplary belief in their Internal Power, Symbols, and Talismans they where very difficult to conquer 
much less indoctrinate. The tyrants of ancient times sent entire armies to subdue them and often 
entire armies were laid to waste, many eluded those armies by going underground, deep into the 
mountains, and some even left this dimension, after all what does killing mind controlled soldiers 
really solve?  
The greatest adversary to the human race has been the human race. No matter how much 
evidence we find that links Devils, Aliens, Spirits and various other life forms to the corrosion of our 
natural state, in all these stories you will find human traitors that gave them access to our inner circles. 
The entire human race was a collective brother and sisterhood capable of maintaining contact with 
one another across entire planetary systems. We were grouped more commonly as all Humanoids, not 
black man, white man, yellow man, etc. It is virtually impossible to break apart from the outside 
anything as strong as human will. This book is not about pointing the finger, this book is about 
Innerstanding our original state, how it was altered, how to grow back into it, and even excel beyond 
its original potential. At this moment we are in a degraded state, it is only pride that keeps the 
individual from admitting this. Power now lies mostly in monetary wealth, not spiritual essence one 
will always pass away the other is eternal. Common sense is not common. 
This may sound a little confusing especially this early on, however, the earlier you see this the 
better. When they decided to make the Names for the Planets in English they really did began to turn 
things in an opposite direction. Searching for other Names indigenous tribes used for the Planets will 
turn up almost nothing. Some may think this is because in Ancients times we had no knowledge of 
the Cosmos, and of course this proves to be untrue. We are told the Sumerians, Egyptians, and a few 
indigenous tribes from Africa have the only details of the Names given to the Planets in ancient times. 
Whatever the case we can be sure that what we call the Planet Saturn in modern times may not be 
actually referring to the Planet with the rings, but more of an idea of Evil Sat, bought forth from Ur.  
Our consciousness, when not hindered, will always look to the sky for answers. Our Spirit is 
from the sky or rather far out in space while our bodies are indeed flesh and will remain here as dust. 
When we innocently inquire about the names of Planets, Stars, and Moons wanting to learn more, we 
get names that are tainted with deception. The vibration of Ur is that of an animal, in fact so-called 
early man depicted the entire Cosmos as animal forms rather than the much greater concept Space 
stands for which is beyond normal life on Earth. It is highly unlikely we will find a horse on the Moon 
but this has not stopped them from naming the quadrants of the Moon Mare, like night”mare”.


--- PAGE 16 ---
16 | Page  
 
 
 
 Unlike most modern church participants those Initiated into various magical societies evoke 
Angels and Spirits all the time. They do this by various means; one key element involves drawing 
perfect stars inside of circles or squares. A symbol drawn is physical proof of ones intent. A perfect star 
is often made with a tool used by the Elite called an Angle. This word Angle is an anagram for Angel. 
The tool itself is the shape of an “L”, that’s right EL. If you notice when drawing a star it consist of 
straight lines, straight lines are opposite to nature which itself is a composite of spheres and circles, the 
body itself contains no straight lines. These straight lines are known as masculine while the curved 
lines are feminine. It is known that fleshly beings are categorized as Feminine despite there sexual 
orientation while heavenly Beings are known as Masculine due to their strong ethereal nature which 
can even withstand the force of being in close proximity to the Sun. 
Reason 8: 
Quadrants 
of the 
Moon are 
called Mare 
the 
commoner 
would 
pronounce 
this just as it 
sounds, 
esoterically 
it is 
pronounced 
MARY, the 
names of 
spots on the  
Moon are 
riddled with 
a deep 
significance 
to its origin 
and use.


--- PAGE 17 ---
17 | Page  
 
 
   
 
 
There is recorded knowledge of 1/3 of the Angels in the Sphere of Saturn, rebelling. Those 
fallen ones came to Earth and intermingled with woman thus creating the term “Mankind” meaning 
kind of like man but not entirely. No matter how fictitious this may seem it is in fact true. These 
Beings go under the names of Rephaim, Nephalim, Annunaki, Titans, Giants, and Danites along with 
their offspring they make up the legends of various mythological creatures of various titles. This 
resulted from the union of the Angels with not only the women but also with the animals. These 
offspring became known as Demigods meaning half God, half man or animal. They possessed various 
powers that caused the indigenous tribes of the time to worship the Supreme Creators which was far 
from true.  
The head of the Fallen Angels would place the Demigods over the people to rule them in a 
hierarchy or Pyramid structure. They would remain in contact with the Demigods from their 
habitations in various Constellations such as Orion. Ancient Aram indicates the Name of Orion 
originally being Nephila meaning Nephalim. Orion is depicted as a Giant man for this reason. There 
will be lots of Orion sync’s as we go on, they have guided much of what we have seen in the media as  
children growing up until this very day. As a child I remember watching a cartoon called Fraggle Rock 
which was about the life of the Fraggles especially their encounters with the Giants called Ogres of the 
land.  In Pre-Christian Scandinavian Orion’s Belt is known as Friggles Rock, no doubt the Origin of 
Reason : An Angle, the tool seen below the Masonic “G” in the shape of an “L” is used to draw 
straight lines while the protractor above is used to make the perfect circle to create Talismans.


--- PAGE 18 ---
18 | Page  
 
the Name of the cartoon. There is a heavy amount of Scandinavian in our language. 
 
 
Entire Material and Ethereal Kingdoms below the third heaven were erected and hewn for 
their spiritual and physical residence. The task of building these lofty havens fell to the Humans in 
this world and the one to come, what a cruel treatment. Expansive kingdoms the slaves did build, but 
the fact was the Humans were in the lower dimensions with a bad case of memory loss only being 
allowed at times just to worship the God and bask in its false light. Those were the favored ones, the 
others lived much worse then when truly alive in unity with the Most High thus these lower planes 
became know as the Netherworld/Arralu//Amenti/Duat/Elysium/Sheol/Hades/Oz/The 
Matrix/Imperishable Devachanic Plane/Malkuth/Maya/Lemuria a place were injustice was allowed to 
rule through Igigi, Neters, Baalim, Valkries, Mares, and Manes for a time, since everything has its 
place in contrast.  
Reason 9: The Daughters of 
Cain with whom the fallen 
Angels had companied, 
conceived but they were unable 
to bring forth their children, 
and many died. Of the children 
in the womb, some died and 
others split open the bellies of 
their mothers coming forth by 
the navel…..they thought evil 
continually and God bore with 
them for a time.


--- PAGE 19 ---
19 | Page  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reason 10: Man has been the constructor for these Gods building them High Places so they may 
enjoy. What the Humans have gotten in return are lifetimes of being a servant with little 
reward. Their structures are always placed on Leylines to control the energy in the area. In 
order for many Regions to be free some building must be removed from the Leylines. They are 
binding the energy of freedom and suppressing clear thought. In history when structures bind 
the leylines for too long cataclysms occur to shake everything off of them.


--- PAGE 20 ---
20 | Page  
 
 
“We sent men, women, and even the Pure Ones to them to persuade them that there where multiple 
heavens and they were caught up in the lower dimensions deceived by the Stars, they were, and they 
would not listen.” They would not forsake the Partners they had subscribed with The Most High 
imagining them to be in favor of their growth, in spite, the Gods gave them little and blocked the Path 
of Ascension. Thus there was a silence of man and woman’s great deeds in the heavens and there was 
little to harvest, truly the people were not guided trading paper for life. Then the veil began to lift and 
once again man and woman recognized each other as the only source of harmony, we were all together 
then man and woman shaping and forming a new world. Truly our work is not in vain and just as the 
trees, we are numerous and patient, as We provide man and women their substance just as we all must 
live. 
We are currently positioned in a place Kabbalistically known as Malkuth which means 
foundation. This is why the Gods often say the Earth is their footstool. Indeed some of the Spirit 
energies are so large it is true that Earth could be in fact used as a footstool by them. Malkuth consists 
of various life forms with limited senses, thus they are vibrating at a lower frequency in order to form 
something as solid as a Foundation. To make this easier to understand a rock is actually in motion 
although it is vibrating so slow it is heavy, hard, and what appears to be unmovable although it is just 
moving so slow you do not have the time to see its movement.  
The more senses we lose we become more like a rock, which means our emotional movement 
and idea of things lesson as we descend. This is also the secret to why Gargoyles, The Sumerian Stone 
Cherubs, The Sphinx and various other stone figures that have survived from antiquity are all known 
Reason 11: The 2012 Olympics 
logo says Zion, even more 
diabolical is the final Olympian 
Ritual will return “home” to 
London on the leylines of their 
old monoliths. The Greek 
Olympians Hesta, Hephaestus, 
Aphrodite, Ares, Demeter, 
Hermes, Poseidon, Athena, Zeus, 
Artemis, and Apollo where their 
chief Gods most of them 
bloodthirsty 
Titans/Giants/Nephalim. Not 
many will see this all coming, 
only a few will escape. 
Disbelievers block their own way.


--- PAGE 21 ---
21 | Page  
 
to be in fact alive and resonating a certain type of energy. Lower life forms are also on a low vibration 
like rocks thus they at times inhabit stones. These figures are kept around for protection against other 
Entities by Magicians.


--- PAGE 22 ---
22 | Page  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
There were also those who just signed up for the Pantheism since the ladder is ascending and 
descending, they naturally gravitated towards the negative. The lower dimensional Beings, which also 
make up the foundation we stand on, had its way with them while their “channel” was open and they 
spoke whatever message that would bring more energy and treasure to their coffers, they where led by 
distortion. Man and woman involved themselves with Beings that possessed and incarnated into their 
Human bodies. Some of these Beings either never had a vocal box or are no longer in possession of 
Reason 12: Pictured above are statues that have been passed from Magician to Magician. As you 
see here J.K. Rowling Author of the Harry Potter series in possession of the same Gargoyle John 
Dee, a well known magician used to keep in his possession. The spirit lives within the stone. The 
strength of stone is obvious by its durability. An Adept is familiar with all types of stones and the 
Elemental Gnomes who have wisdom of Earth and fashioning things out of Earth. Here are just a 
few buildings that are positioned on major Leylines. Leylines have been known since ancient 
times discovered by dowsing and also witnessing how things grow in certain areas. A spiraling tree 
is often on a Leyline. Below you see the Earth Grid of Major Leylines which you will find 
structures build upon. The smaller leylines are generally not mapped in such detail.


--- PAGE 23 ---
23 | Page  
 
one nor a corporeal body to operate on the 3rd physical plane.  Numerous they are and they could not 
be counted as if opening a sealed vault of misshaped things that spawn amongst themselves in what 
would seem like an instant. Pandora’s Box, tricks of the God Pan Lord of Panic and Pandemic. 
Those who were more interested in the fast route imagining that Spiritual work was a road to 
riches would inherit the curse of Ammon/Amon one of the first names given to Planet Jupiter and is 
in fact a very active Egyptian God.  Jupiter is one of the largest Planets in this system. From here we 
will refer to Jupiter or Ammon as Amon so we can keep track of this Being. Even the Bible scripture 
gives a clue when it says “Thou canst serve both God and Mammon”, unfortunately it didn’t leave 
more detailed information. The “Am” in Amon is where the “Am” in America comes from and is the 
great I AM. You will find an advanced intelligent  “Am”phibian called Oanes the fish God amongst 
them along with its offspring such as Dagon, they crossed into our world a long time ago under the 
Sumarian name E.A. (pronounced Aya) Lord and King of the S”ea”. One of the greatest questions 
that will ultimately come to mind is; are the actual Planets themselves doing this, or are these 
malevolent Beings with various powers who have fooled man into believing they are the Planets?  
To answer that we will have to consider a few things, the Planets themselves are in a fixed 
movement everything interacting together. I personally know there are many more Planets in our 
immediate system that most know nothing of such as Vulcan. The heaviest spiritual involvement from 
these “Sat”ellites seems to come from the Asteroids like Venus and Ceres along with what we call 
Meteorites ,“falling stars”, and comets, that seem to cause many of the problems. There are also 
hollowed artificial satellites such as our Moon Sin, and Phobos which are bases of some sort.  
Think of this also, the Bible is supposed to be a Holy Book and in the end you find a passage 
that says something like “Whoa to the one who adds or takes away from what is written in this book, 
We will add to him the plagues of this Book and take away his Name from the Book of Life”. There is 
obviously a faction that cares nothing of this warning because every time a new addition of the Bible 
comes out, there are serious changes. People need to start seeing that the ones who are changing it 
care nothing for the curses because there are none and the Book itself has stories borrowed from 
everywhere, such was the way of these people. 
The negative forces are infamous for lying, if a Being says “I AM Amon I AM Jupiter the 
Planet you know as the biggest”, I find this no different from a man who says “I AM the Son of the 
Sun and because of that I have leave to destroy everything in my path”. Man has been notorious for 
blindly following these possessed deluded traitors who are blurred by their own desire to iconoclast 
themselves in the mold of time and usurp the Throne of the Great One which is unreachable and 
immeasurable. Surely a man can charge into battle with great strength imagining he will vanquish his 
foes and then the next thing, he awakes in evil Elysium Jahannon for such foolish thoughts. 
Everything material will pass away at some point thus it is only wise to seek immortality with 
everything at your disposal letting nothing impede your way. Around you at all times are those who


--- PAGE 24 ---
24 | Page  
 
will never see what’s coming they do not desire it nor believe it thus they have shut the door on 
themselves and they are wandering in the dark. Protect yourself from becoming enveloped in their 
aura of deluded drunkenness where everyday for them is the same as the last and they see it not that 
time draws nigh, what a waste.  
The Judgment itself is taking place now, we are in 2012 at this moment because of the delay of 
the Gregorian calendar. Many have knowingly forfeited their chance to ascend and thus they are like 
crabs in the bucket pulling everyone else they can around them into the same prison they created for 
themselves. Beware of those who you know are involved in some form of dark occult practice it is now 
time for the Unseen Hand or Dark Lord to exact recompense from them. They are now being used to 
betray even those they were the closest to. Many of them did not expect this time to come and were 
lied to. They imagined the Ritual a game a mere fraternity hazing, now they have Phantoms as their 
companions that fill their dreams with absurd visions, there is no rest for the wicked. 
A Sorceress had done all the bidding for the Dark Lord and took pride in it. The Dark Lord promised 
her he would award her deeds in the Underworld. With this promise she worked more vigorously 
causing division and setting traps for those who found themselves in her web. On her untimely death 
she was transferred to the Underworld where the negative forces seized her and commenced to 
torturing her pulling her soul apart. She cursed them profusely and demanded to speak with the ruler 
of Dominions who was watching from afar. When approaching she said, “I have done everything you 
have required of me and even more, a have sown discord with the peaceful, and separated many from 
love and happiness. This I have done for you and the reward you promised me, where is it”? He said, I 
lied, did they not tell you I was the Father of Lies? I find more pleasure in betrayal than I do in honor, 
think not my titles go without proof and he waved his hand for his minions to commence as he watch.  
 
 
 
Reason 13: The Greek God Jupiter and his consort Juno, indeed this is not a Planet this is a 
man, imposter! Obviously not a God for daughters. Planets do something entirely different 
then impersonate themselves as men who have women, nor do they ever appear as men. Think.


--- PAGE 25 ---
25 | Page  
 
As will be made clear what we are dealing with at times is interplanetary, extra dimensional, 
highly intelligent space skum. One simply has to think that although some may perceive already that 
we are alone in this Universe, which is profoundly un-true, if we blew up Earth it would cause a chain 
reaction of cataclysms for the entire galaxy thus we have been governed by higher forces that oversee 
the timing of events so the crazy Dictator doesn’t slip on the nuclear kill switch. There are 
Principalities, Rulers, Forces, and Dominions in place working out an entirely larger scheme that 
makes Earth more of a value subdued, not destroyed. Think of the loss of resources and biological 
data. Earth is a storehouse of genes working together well enough. For one moment do not doubt all 
these genes are in criyo tubes fully cataloged and ready to implant into other worlds which is a part of 
Terraforming a Planet and getting it prepared for higher life forms like me and you. 
Since we know there are other Beings with other senses we can endeavor to obtain those senses 
also. This separates us from animals who seldom openly enlist the help of humans. This also means 
that some who have higher senses have already discovered harmony, the benefits of a collective mind, 
the power in Numbers, the Elements, etc. thus there is a place to go. It is entirely possible that the 
knowledge of even how to alter an entire planetary frequency with just insects that also emit sound 
frequency is in the Orion arsenal of technology. This moves us further into the intelligence of Beings 
who are more advanced in some ways than us. We could go so far in imagining what they have and 
what they can do and we would more than likely be right, however, what is of value here is to show 
that they are not the Creator of all things. They to had a Creator and if we find ourselves in service, it 
should be to That only. They are no doubt involved in our evolution; there can be no question of it. 
Just as the wheel has saved us endless amounts of time and effort so we may travel further, faster. If 
these Beings gave us T.V. or should I say things like the Cathode Ray Tube and the Integrated Circuit 
that’s enough altering right there, case closed. 
The way many Beings feel about Earth is they would not give something that looks like dust 
compared to Antares and Betelgeuse the honor of destroying this whole Galaxy. Everything must 
evolve in time and for this segment of the Human race that time is long overdue. The lower 
dimension now awaits occupying the spot we are in now. Since the information vault is now open you 
can gain a higher level of esoteric intelligence, without being fully Initiated, and thus stuck in some 
lower dimension slave world ruled by jealous megalomaniacs because you joined the wrong group 
chanting Namaste, “Name Sat”. Some of the most valuable portions of this information has come 
from Higher Beings still reaching back to help along the children which we all are, they gave no 
names, and they demanded no worship save to the Original Creator in which all things will eventually 
have to face and it is patient Shrouded within itself Majestic and Wise. Many of the forces that have 
invisibly protected and guided the Human race have long since ascended beyond points where they 
can any longer interact with the Earth because of contamination and its lack of pure ideas thus there 
is a heavy need for new Ethereal Planetary workers, not Golden Age materialist.


--- PAGE 26 ---
26 | Page  
 
On the flip side there are those working with the dark force that have kept the masses in this 
recent segment of time away from the true wisdom. Their doctrine is to Know, Dare, Will, and keep 
Silent. One should understand their Oath to keep silent, they are all around and they would never 
reveal their identity. Those who have read works like the Art of War and the Law of Seduction should 
get a general idea of how they operate in business much less in the Spiritual World. These particular 
books written by Sun Zhu along with works by Machiavelli such as the Prince and various other 
shrewd titles are required reading for the upcoming business Elite. In addition they do not just read 
but put into play the methods being elaborated upon as if the world is only a giant chess board with 
human pieces.  
Even now this particular work which you hold in your hands is allowed to reach the 
mainstream not because they could not easily stop it, but because it fulfills another one of the 
Prophecies, thus they cannot plug the loop hole that has been made. Although they plan unceasingly 
the Most High is the greatest planner. Have you not noticed the forces that seek to hinder always tell 
what is to come in the future before it happens? Even in the Bible there is always a solemn warning by 
the Prophet before the destruction. This is in fact a Law of the Universe which exist so that all 
conscious Beings on a Planet may have a choice of whether they want to participate in the collectively 
planned future of that Planet, attempt to do something to prevent it, or emancipate themselves from 
it entirely which is always an option. We do hold the master button on our personal Earth life if we 
want to really exit, we can make it happen, some type of choice always clings to us. Our future is the 
beautiful fractalised shape of a myriad of choices. 
As you see within the word “Planet” there is a “Plan” here which we will just call “Planned Net 
10” which means the end of one world and of course many new worlds will begin after. Our status in 
the ungoverned worlds beyond has much to do with our accolades and milestones that we have crossed 
in our previous world of origin. This information always remains on our Aura even if we are unaware 
of it. Think of yourself known throughout the whole Universe as someone who assisted your race in 
Ascension.  As all things are recorded that’s what the record will reflect once the deed is accomplished. 
Every action we make will always be contained somewhere, it determines what we are to face next on 
various levels of action and reaction, it can always be accessed and cannot be erased just balanced. If 
you were strong did you protect the weak? If you were truly wise did you share your knowledge to 
your best ability? If you possessed wealth did you distribute the goods committed to your charge?  
It was known that each segment of astrological time is controlled by a particular Planet. That 
Planet is responsible for emitting the energy that is necessary to accomplish what has to be done 
during that cycle. The Universe can be looked at as a big clock in which the Planets rotate positions as 
if on massive cogs. It is known that Mars was once in the position we are occupying now in the 
Cosmos, they were the 3rd Planet with a lush surface, oceans, etc. What is left now after their wars is 
just their core in which we still find war torn life, Mars was 3 times larger than Earth, a sad story that 
was. The name Mars and Wars make it not hard to piece together what happened on the scorched red


--- PAGE 27 ---
27 | Page  
 
Planet known to be the Martial Planet of this system. The Planet was split into two warring factions 
that went to a stage of war we would call biologically nuclear. The effects were far reaching creating a 
ghost world of infected souls.  Lemuria in fact means “Ghost World”. A remnant of one of the 
Martian factions were sent to Earth just in case their race faced total oblivion, they are today known as 
the Zulu Tribe of Ifrika. In their legends you will find the history of their advent from Mars, they 
were warriors they have no shame in admitting this. The wars fought on Mars continue here on Earth 
between the two factions called Atlantians and Lemurians. We find Shaka Zulu as one of the earliest 
African films introduced into our physic for a reason that will be obvious later. The original 
Phoenicians were also of darker skin tone. 
It may be of value for you to start seeing these Deities, Gods, Spirits, Daemons, as Beings alien 
to you because there are many of them that did not originate here on Earth. In ancient times people 
had gained the knowledge of this and began to emulate the movement of Energies, Stars, and Planets, 
and thus some became completely alienated from the people. This is also when the Elitist religions of 
the “Chosen People” began to flourish.  Those who wished to be in power during a certain era would 
make pacts and oaths with the Spirit energies and from there they would become fleshly vessels doing 
the bidding of these rouges by declaring war on all unbelieving infidels. Even the word “Peace” means 
something must be split up and only a portion remains. The word Unity also means a unit or part, 
not the whole thing. We have grown so accustomed to these words we don’t see that every time 
nations use it as a reason to go to war, we get exactly what we ask for, sending in the Units to tear 
things to Peaces. The world has now been divided into so many pieces we have all become isolated 
from one another and thus we think our true enemy is our fellow man and women and silently in the 
Cabal rules one who is not Human at all. I shall smite its face. 
These factions were often at war; they began through submission and then continued with 
religion. This brought about complete conversion of the captor. Those who became initiated into the 
dark Brother and Sisterhoods Cults where taught the finer details of the Spirit World and how it 
works.  Vile Beings in the Realm of afterlife betwixt dimensions began hording the Human souls after 
death. Other times we were made while living to go to physical war in the Name of the Gods which 
only hurt us, fragile flesh is. This was forbidden times, man was lost worshipping Gods, Stars, 
Asteroids, and Moons, thus Destiny was created. Just as you see in the story of Jesus, the Essenes, 
known then as the Magi, were following a Star that indicated to them the birth of what they had been 
waiting for. You will find many sects of ancient men that follow the Stars. The Ishmaelite Arabs along 
with the Egyptians had extensive knowledge of such things due to the clarity of the Stars in the desert 
on a clear Arabian Night. Of course the knowledge and Genius of the Genie which was a Jinn or Jann. 
Many of which are trapped in desert regions in the sand. Sand is glass they were confined there 
encased under sheets of it until men “removed them from the bottle”. They could beyond doubt 
prove that when a baby was born a star appeared first thus they had knowledge of when someone 
important was born.


--- PAGE 28 ---
28 | Page  
 
  
 
 
 
Subtly this becomes another reason why we as a people become servants of Kings, Queens, 
Presidents, Dictators, and Icons who all follow the Procession.  I will not bore the reader with tales 
that can seem as myth in this primitive time with a futuristic coating we live in. We will just dive right 
into things as they are now, this way you have little to research because it is happening all around you 
as you live the truth.  The world has now become a very large version of the boy who cried wolf, now 
that the wolf is upon us few believe that there is even such a thing. So many have come saying they 
know what the future holds, only to disappoint those who felt foolish to believe them and this has 
made the people weary of warning and preparation. In this I know you will find an energy that will 
arouse you once more.  
Reason 14: The Egyptians were given extensive star charts of animalistic nature in which they 
emulated. The Priesthood itself was in such complexity the people were made to dedicate every 
act of daily life to a separate Star or Deity leaving little room for natural growth and 
unadulterated consciousness expansion.


--- PAGE 29 ---
29 | Page  
 
Listen and I will instruct thee once more how to turn this language in thy favor. Gird thy 
comprehension and fail not to seek innerstanding in these words.  Humans have grown indeed 
complex and have no simple answer for their troubles so look not for something easy in explanation. 
The time grows nigh and many are at the end of their cycle, some raising to eternal beauty and others 
to layers of retribution, sheets of fire in which they must be passed through with no end, miserable. If 
you say “I am saved” Lo you are in error, none can be sure, if you say “I will bow down now” Nay it 
will be impossible to stand up. It is wise to make haste in embedding your mind with exact knowledge 
beyond reproach so you may position yourself to receive a fair judgment as you have been already 
observed. The faithful will find these words sweet to their ears while the faithless will be made to listen 
fore their Jinn even seek a way to escape what is to come and it will most surely not delay past its 
appointed time. 
El A.K.A Saturn A.K.A. Father Time for short was the God known to rule the Age of Aquarius 
which we now find ourselves in again as of February 14, 2009 Valentines Day. The symbol of 
Valentines day is a heart being pierced by and arrow, it is the esoteric symbolism of when our 
Universe known as the Sagittarius Dwarf would be passing through the heart of the Milky Way 
crossing into the Parallel Universe B for a Galactic lineup. At this very moment while we are crossing 
the Great Divide an opportunity that has been proclaimed for Aeons is taking place for those who are 
in the know.  
 
Reason 15: This is by far not the 
first Aquarian or Golden Age, 
in fact this only represents the 
time of a shift. The energy of 
the Cosmos actually assists a 
person, if they do a little 
seeking, to find Higher Truth. 
Once that time passes those who 
have not seized Enlightenment 
will come around the cycle again 
after death remembering little 
of what happened before. The 
Golden Age Movement is 
designed to get the whole world 
to rewind and re-live a time long 
past. The most recent Golden 
Age in our history was the times 
of Hitler and Nazi Germany.


--- PAGE 30 ---
30 | Page  
 
The opportunity is the merging of collective minds and frequencies allowing an individual to 
become the portal for higher essence and their higher purpose, purpose equals energy. This other 
world is what we glimpse ourselves in at times while we are sleep or in vision, in this world everything 
appears as it really is and there are few limits. One has higher senses, can fly through the Ether, 
considers not time, and can make contact with multiple Beings. Omnipresence, the art of being in 
more than one place at a time, is possible in this parallel realm thus you can visit multiple people all in 
one moment. This is why it is easier to contact other Beings while in Lucid Sleep, so the controllers do 
their best to keep us from being conscious while in that world, even more than they do in this one. 
We tend to watch our dreams rather than control them, as in society we have a tendency to take 
things as they come and react accordingly rather than getting directly involved in the big picture. 
On the 3rd dimension there are physical laws against Omnipresence generally you can only 
separate your body into 2 parts while on 3rd dimension. One of those two when split is basically a 
vegetable, the body, when lacking a soul will appear limp with shallow life signs until the Spirit 
reinters it, the technique itself when not a natural gift takes proper training as Dr. Monroe revealed in 
his Hemisphere Synchronization techniques before the CIA gained control of his work and altered it, 
or maybe he was the CIA all along especially since his father was a known CIA agent.   
When you are “Lucid” riding the dream like a wave you can call forth Beings and if you have 
the might to withstand them they will appear, then you will see what they really are and you will learn 
why many of them we should not be worshipping. Destruction is a main part of keeping up the Chaos 
on Earth and many of these Beings are destroyers. Now that the Hindu Pantheism is the preference 
for the New World Order they have unleashed a whole retinue of Destroyers like Shiva, Kali, and 
Latchme. They con “Khan” the person by telling them to think they must be destroyed completely to 
be made new again as they dissolve into nothingness. They are instructed to chant and meditate on 
the Destroyer which is a weakening tool. This is no different than nonsense like boiling frogs’ eyes in 
pigeon’s blood which Agrippa used to recommend to Caesar. The end if these things could never be 
positive because it began in negativity. Kali is bedecked in the severed heads of the victims she has 
destroyed. We will have to learn again how to judge with common sense and take things at face value. 
 For many of us our life is attached to time, th e clock is one of the most valuable tools in 
controlling the mind. The Elite know there becomes no use in counting time unless you plan on it 
running out. Imagine in immortality and infinity someone actually counting the hours and minutes, 
talking about useless. Saturn, also known as Cronos, which is where words like Chronological and 
Chronograph come from, was elected for time because of His rings which signified like an old tree His 
length of time in the Galaxy. In other words those attempting to learn the age of this Universe looked 
first to Saturn and the debris in its rings containing residue of lost Planets that entered the Golden


--- PAGE 31 ---
31 | Page  
 
Age of Destruction and Chaos now long forgotten although their essence still remains. 
 
 
 
The sign of Aquarius or the Golden Age bears witness with two wavy lines in which some say 
are signs of water and others that of lightning bolts. Known as the Age of Man the Water being 
dumped out signifies the cleansing or deluge. The mystery of lightening was shown by shooting an 
electron in sterile water and watching as a single cell life form appeared out of thin air or a portal 
depending upon your perspective. That showed us that life could be created from nowhere out of 
virtually nothing except energy, this of course destroys the Evolution Theory. At this point there are 
many Beings leeching from the Human race, under many guises. 
 
Reason 16: The stunning rings of El, rich with the debris of forgotten Planets. Planets such as 
Maldek and Vulcan are seen clearly on ancient star maps but are now somehow gone. Some I 
believe are still in existence, others have left this Galaxy, and some were destroyed in wars. 
Reason 17: The classic white 
bearded depiction of Saturn. 
Few on the outer circle have 
figured out Saturn is affiliated 
with the Serpent. Notice the 
larger Serpent underneath 
Saturn’s arm, not to mention 
what is happening to the 
child. They also refer to the 
Bearded God as the Great 
Architect although He 
destroys everything He builds. 
This is why Santa and the 
Wizard of Oz fit this motif.


--- PAGE 32 ---
32 | Page  
 
 
Long before the Third Reich, Amon was worshipped as the chief Deity of many nations. The 
knowledge of Amon being one of the largest Planet in this solar system was known since ancient 
times. You can then see why many wanted to find favor with Amon since they believed it was the 
biggest thus it was also the strongest. Again, it is the name changes that sometimes throw us off the 
trail and that is of course if we have even decided to investigate what could be going on beyond the 
level of petty politics. Amon is also Pa, Thor, Jove, and Pater pronounced Potter.  
 
Reason 18: The Brotherhood of Saturn is in big 
service today underpinning various organizations. 
Depicted below are the Inner Circle. The Outer 
Circle consist of all of the religious projects 
erected for global domination this is Sat. Saturday, 
Satan, Santa (Satan), Saint (Satins), Sabbath, etc. 
Sir, Sur, Sar, Ser, and Sor are all Names for the 
Serpent energy ye shall know them by their works.  
Reason 19:  
When you see 
the Bearded 
depiction you 
already know 
who is 
involved. 
George Lucas is 
a Saturnalian.


--- PAGE 33 ---
33 | Page  
 
Europa, a Moon in Amon’s orbit is where Europe got her name from. This Goddess from Crete 
daughter of the Giant Sidon set up a civilization where we now find Europe. Many of the Beings are 
referred to as Giants because in other civilizations their home Planets are much bigger than Earth. It 
can be assumed that their height proportion is in conjunction with the size of their Planet. Amon has 
63 moons orbiting it while we have only one and that one Moon has a lot of influence over the minds 
of our planetary inhabitants because of the magnetic energy. As will be seen more and more Humans 
are energy and we have a magnetic core and poles just the same as a Planet hence the term Bi-Polar. 
To show a brief link we will talk of another tool used against us which is money. This is by far 
the most effective tool so I will discuss its “Spirit Origin”. The money we use now is “Pa”per we are 
no longer really using currency made of metals as you may have notice. In the old days if you had lots 
of Silver or Gold you at least had the energy of these metals around you and they carried certain types 
of strength that gave one certain spiritual advantages, now we are on paper. Why? The main advent of 
this was with the first Pope of whom his parents were “Pa”pists. A Papist is a person who makes paper 
or “Pa”rchment. This magical art was known to be taught by one of the fallen Angels and is discussed 
in the book of Enoch under, cutting of roots. Certain trees when blended together and formed into 
parchment have a binding effect. This is the basis for the special paper a talisman must be inscribed 
on. When you look at the currency of the world, which has been revealed with the U.S. one dollar 
bill, you will see many magical symbols, especially Stars, and even a magnetic strip to give it power. 
The paper itself holds a binding energy that perpetuates our desire for it; this was one of many wicked 
things done by the “Pa”pacy by direction of the esoteric knowledge of the Jesuits.  
 
Reason 20: While pretending to teach moderation and piety 
the vice generates for the Wicked One spew their poison of 
money/Mammon over the Earth. Few know of the Black 
Pope which controls the Jesuit arm of the Papacy. Money has 
become the stumbling block of the world. I’ve heard many 
say “he is our Pope” indeed they will share his lot. To the left 
is an “astral depiction of the Pope” the use of trees for magic 
has been their main tactic. Tree, Three, Word, Wood.


--- PAGE 34 ---
34 | Page  
 
Looking at our world today one should not be surprised that destruction and chaos beyond 
preconceived proportion could be possibly looming in the future. We have the NWO Zionist who no 
longer want money only blood, The Annunaki Ship Nibiru or Planet X which can be seen from the 
South Pole lazily headed this way, the End of the 13 Moon Mayan Calendar, Global Warming beyond 
reversal, Anti-Christ’s in Las Vegas and India, Quetzalcoatl the feather serpent scheduling a tour, the 
proposed Alien Invasion warming their ships, The Galactic Line up clicking into place, a population 
doubling by 2012 and a host of other wild cards to give us a jolt into the future. It is safe to say maybe 
one should start tuning in to Higher Energy and phone home just in case on of these things just 
happens or maybe even all of them all at the same time.  
In any event this book will serve to prepare the sincere, while still making a good read for the 
ever remaining skeptic which I began as myself. It is better to think of it this way, since the Earth 
continues to be polluted and mistreated with no clear sign of massive reversal, we can move a step 
ahead and just come to the conclusion that all this is happening to promote us to wake up from the 
“s”mothering and see what else is out there. We must connect with our other half then with Spirit 
newly mended we can go to the next wave length. With this formulation we are now wholly prepared 
or re-“membered”, everything we need being internal, thus we are self sufficient to move about the 
Galaxy to meet new life which equals new experience. This ensures our proper growth and of course 
that we don’t get bored in Immortality caught in infinite loops of Qlipoth.  
Just how long can we as a people really wake up every morning, battle traffic, suck fresh smog, 
get to work, give half of what we earn to Fascist, come home and eat Codex Alimentarius infested 
food, get digitally mind controlled by the Flat Screen, go to sleep, not remember our dreams and start 
over again the next day. C’mon have you noticed that for many it seems like the movie Ground Hogs 
Day, February 2, the 33rd day of the year, and why are we taking this? There is something that has not 
been figured out, not because of the lack of intelligence, but rather the height of distraction. I 
personally believe that right now in your hands is what you need to get your perspective focused once 
again on the main picture.    
The census says our population will actually double by the year 2012 the reader should highly 
consider if the Earth can handle double the trouble it is in now. It is due time that the world change 
and the same energy used to destroy for so long will now consume those who used it in vain as they are 
consumed in the reflux current. The Elite knew there would be those that would come able to convert 
their negative energy they spewed upon us into positive. They tried to tell us it was only One, the 
anagram for Neo, that could do it which is far from the truth. They feared and anticipated that the 
younger generation, who seem to have the unique ability of converting bad into good, would catch on 
at some point and Break the Matrix. This term The Matrix comes from the head of the Greek 
Goddess Pantheon known as Medeatrix of whom their descendants come from Medea/Media.


--- PAGE 35 ---
35 | Page  
 
  
 
 
There are those who serve consolidated dark energies under a Elitist pretense and thus have 
been eating away at society for centuries. We will uncover their deeds and their involvement in this 
Golden Age amongst many other things it behooves you to know as they are trampled beneath our 
feet. This will not be to stop them, no it is too late for that, the judgment is Set for the children of 
Seth and they would just as soon push all the nuclear buttons before they would cease and desist, what 
a miserable brood they are, even now our Government looms over 50 pounds of weapons grade 
Plutonium in which it would take only one to blow up the whole Earth. This Plutonium is being kept 
in the satellites we have in orbit over the Planet. This serves as a way to keep the benevolent forces 
from entering our atmosphere and saving the many species besides Humans that exist here, not to 
mention it is our responsibility to emancipate our own race.  
The world government has proclaimed to benevolent extraterrestrials that if they seek to 
“physically” intervene then they can pick up the ashes. This is why you don’t see vivid aid from other 
Benevolent Humanoid factions, they remain at the status of “unseen”, they show us the way through 
signs and seldom materialize. I have personally viewed videos recorded by NASA showing the use of 
the Plasma Cannon developed by Nikoli Tesla to shoot at other space craft seeking to enter our 
atmosphere. Whether those craft were friendly or hostile cannot be determined by the video, 
however, it is safe to say that the prison Planet is being guarded. Our minds now serve as the only link 
to those who seek to give us assistance, internal clarity is all they need to contact us, it is good this is 
all. It takes millions to go in space by physical ship, but it is free with your body. What a treat the 
Most High gave us a million dollar ethereal vacation vehicle.  
Reason 21: The youth of today withstand heavy bombardments of mind control and degradation 
some becoming stronger and smarter than their predecessors while others hopelessly face early 
termination if the mental and physical poisoning of the Elite continues.


--- PAGE 36 ---
36 | 
 
to w
evad
worl
are f
 
We 
crazy
eyes 
cent
truth
the N
them
Re
tru
Re
 Page  
This is w
what comes 
ding what yo
ld leaders a
fully anima
 sent Warne
zy and delud
s and not th
ter of their 
th and they 
Name of yo
m so they st
 
Reason 23: W
uly is. 
Reason 22: P
written so y
after the de
ou will see 
are not the a
ated and can
ners to them
ded were is 
he one given
 heads. So th
y fell under c
our God an
toned him, 
When the T
Politics is all
ou will be a
estruction a
 so many ge
allies they h
n put on qu
m and they t
s It we cann
n to them b
they where d
 conviction.
nd we shall s
 raised him 
Third Eye is 
ll a game, th
able to reco
and chaos w
et caught up
have showed
uite a show 
taunted the
not see It, th
by the Creat
 divided am
. They retur
see” but ala
m as a Marty
 activated th
he joke is on
ognize friend
which is sur
p in because
d on numer
 that often d
em saying “S
hus they ima
tor which th
mongst them
urned to one
as the Warn
yr, and inven
the Illusion 
n us. Time a
d from foe 
rely new wo
e of disbelie
rous occasio
deludes the
“Show us thi
magined they
they kept clo
mselves wond
e of the Wa
ner could no
ented a Nam
 collapses an
 and again t
 allowing yo
orlds. You w
ef and none
ons they ar
e non-obser
his God you 
y could see 
losed and be
ndering if wh
arners with 
not provide a
me that was 
and then you
the masses f
ou to steer y
will do all of
e preparatio
e merely pu
rvant. 
u speak of, y
 Pure Energ
beyond func
what was spo
h threats sayi
 a Vibration
s pleasing to
u see the wo
fall for the t
your course
f this while
on. The 
uppets that 
you are 
gy with two
ction in the 
oken was 
ying “give us
n familiar to
o them.  
world as it 
 trick. 
e 
e 
 
 
o 
e 
us 
o


--- PAGE 37 ---
37 | Page  
 
The Oath of Silence has kept many people from telling you what is detailed here in this 
fabulous work. The first reason most were told to keep this under the strictest confidence was the 
ability for it to allow a powerful system to continue unchecked and running with few interruptions. 
Those keeping the secrets could only benefit as long as what they were doing, in its totality, remained 
a secret. Most organizations especially secret societies are compartmentalized in a way where each 
group is only holding a fraction of the truth thus the new initiates never know the complete plan. 
 
 
 
Reason 24:  All important positions of 
power even past the Presidency are run 
by individuals who are initiated into 
Secret Societies. They don’t keep their 
involvement a secret just their 
practices. One only needs to go back 
200 years and they will find the entire 
“civilized” world involved in dark 
magic and Grimores. Countless novels 
were written by men who had made 
pacts with demoniac life forms to 
represent them and do their bidding. 
This became so popular demons 
trapped in jars, talismans, gems, and 
various tools of dark magic were sold 
on the black market at high value. The 
underworld operates in the dark, it is 
hidden from plain view. 
Reason: Old plans are now coming to their 
completion and all the workers for the 
Unseen Hand are in key places of 
Government waiting to carry out the next 
part of the plan.


--- PAGE 38 ---
38 | Page  
 
The leaders of this world go about every day with ease and receive little attention by the masses 
as they crush the weak expressing no remorse. A simple look at the Criminal News Network “CNN” 
and you will see glorified slaughter in high definition. Many that have risen in efforts to oppose the 
tyrants have often been unsuccessful due to their lack of knowledge about the High Places and also in 
regards to how the Elite possess and control power. It is time that we admit we are not dealing with 
dummies that just need to be voted out of office, there is more evidence of a massive plot that need be 
put to ruin. 
Leaders like Martin Luther King arose attempting to free the people but still remained trapped 
to the Religion that did little for those he represented. The first ship that brought Nubians to America 
was named Jesus. The most Christianity seemed to do for the Africans was make them more passive 
brainwashed servants. In fact pacifist movements always come into play when the people were finally 
ready to rebel against the oppressor at the cost of their lives. There is a certain power that possesses a 
person when they are willing to lay down their life so that the children may have one. This power 
often preserves the life of the courageous; this is the true act of unselfishness, a noble deed. After all, 
the adults that have lived till at least 30 in our current era have seen so much of life already. We have 
enjoyed what it took lifetimes for our predecessors to experience all in one vacation. We should thus 
do our duty in carving out a world for the innocent youth who already bare the gifts of the future in 
their complexly beautiful minds. This is something I believe our earliest ancestors attempted to do 
thus we must finish what they started.


--- PAGE 39 ---
39 | Page  
 
 
 
 
 
 
When looking today at those that still rule, their high ranks have been depleted thus they are 
making new pacts and selling what does not even belong to them. This extends beyond material 
resources and has crossed into Plasmic and Ethereal supplies bartered throughout the trade routes 
that extend beyond Earth.  All the miles that have been walked, all the pain that has been endured, all 
the walls that have been torn down we have but one final task by delivering the final blow to the 
tyrants before they reinforce or re-legion.  
The soldier can no longer continue in this present day since he knows what he is doing is 
obviously not for patriotism. So they now put him behind a screen to kill and make it look like a video 
game as he flies the drone like its on Playstation 3. What he kills no longer brings a feeling since even 
the victims appear as just white light’s or blobs of infrared on the screen in the tank, plane, or 
battleship. Since the world is now in the information age every soldier has access to Zeitgeist and many 
more publications revealing the intention behind the hideous wars of the past. This makes him 
question his role in such disasters since he sees that it is not to protect the country that we continue to 
kill thousands. Since they foresaw this happening the chemicals already put into the soldier’s diet to 
keep him subservient were increased, he was removed from the frontline and put behind the 
computer to deal out death still remaining under the foot of the “Gen”eral.  
 
 
Reason 25: Martin Luther King receives an award from Illuminist Jacob Rothschild. The 
Illuminati planned Pro-Peace agendas all over the world to make the people docile while they put 
the finishing touches on the New World Order. The tactics often used remain the same; many 
have become traitors to their people for a moment of power that they will forever regret but they 
lack reason deluded by promises of great material wealth which will corrode under the inevitable 
pressure of time. We shall take up account with their souls.


--- PAGE 40 ---
40 | Page  
 
 
 
 
 
The biggest issue we have with overpopulation is people seldom greet each other anymore. 
When passing by on the street, jogging in a park, walking on the beach or pretty much anywhere 
unless people are drinking and then nothing is clear. Truly if we are prepared to see a one-eyed green 
Alien and accept them before we can see our own neighbor who may be of different ethnicity but a 
Human nonetheless, we have missed the mark. There was a time that if you happen to see another 
Human while in transit you immediately greeted each other with hugs and kisses of astonishment as 
you tried to communicate by first giving gifts and showing them things you had found on your 
journey as they did the same. You would explain to them the various territories you have crossed, 
what resources were there, and what to be aware of. Often times you learned their customs and came 
to respect their individuality marveling at how the Creator made things so diverse. Now that has faded 
away and people are looked at as expendable, some even as worthless by others as racism increases. 
They have forgotten if you have climbed up on the ladder you are in a perfect position to help the 
person below you. Instead they give them a boot in the face knocking them down further. We must re-
establish communication. When you look around you if you see someone is lonely or troubled, speak 
to them. I find it amazing men will speak with devils, demons, and brutes but not their own Kin. 
 
Reason 27: The unique 
blend of ethnicities is one of 
the greatest assets of Earth. 
We have so many things to 
share with one another 
while religion has kept us 
divided, teaching us not to 
mingle with one another. 
Our souls are all unique and 
none are the same thus we 
operate as a team with 
multiple functions endowed 
with splendor and beauty, it 
is only the blind that cannot 
see this. 
Reason 26: With movies like Zeitgeist, Fahrenheit 911, and numerous Youtube videos the 
modern soldier is well informed of the internal plots and “Black Bag” jobs of the Elite. Soon the 
true Hero, which is given another name entirely, will rise from amongst their ranks turning the 
tide against the negative forces. Injustice will not continue forever. Even a broken clock is right 
at least two times a day. The HERO-HORE-WHORE was a temple prostitute esoteric story 
character. We are much greater, encrusted seven fold with positive energy as armor, the Mighty.


--- PAGE 41 ---
41 | Page  
 
People, no matter the color, never overcame and they still face a constant barrage of self 
degrading tactics especially by the sell outs of the Music industry bombarding the world with low 
frequency sounds. This is not just exclusive to the African Americans but all races that have members 
who in thinking of only of themselves have become the catalyst used by the dark Elite to deceive their 
people. The Brotherhood of Ma sent “Ma”hat”ma” Ghandi a firm contact of the Theosophical 
Society, as the Mahatmas and “Ma”treiahs have always been. They where sent to quell the 
disturbances in India with a pro-peace movement so the British could regain control as the uprisings 
began. The Indians, a people tired of being enslaved on their own territory by the British, finally 
reached boiling point. They pacified them through Mahatmas pro-peace teachings and kept them 
from taking back Persia until England could regain strength from spreading itself too thin in its hasty 
plans for complete world domination. Now they have turned their country into a giant telemarketing 
call center. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
If you ask me did these men and women know how they are being used, I will tell you that I 
believe some do not. It seems they believed in peace so much it filled them completely beyond 
understanding of bigger pictures. They could not be themselves if it was under some type of false 
pretense, to me this is no different from the Pastor of the church, the Congressman with the beautiful 
Reason 28: Modern research in behavioral science and gestures has shown all the individuals on 
the left to be insincere. The latest Lord Matrieya positioned in the center of Globalist Benjamin 
Crème is scheduled to make his advent once the U.S. Economy collapses. Lord Matrieya has 
already appeared in several countries of the Orient and all the Spiritual leaders are endorsing 
him. Matrieya says he is the Matrieya, Messiah, and Mahdi that all religions have proclaimed to 
be awaiting the arrival of. His miracles so far have been magnetizing water in which people can 
enter and become healed. There will be no limit to these types of deceptions in the last days as 
the science and energy of the body produces what appears to be miracles to people who don’t’ 
know they can do the same thing.


--- PAGE 42 ---
42 | Page  
 
family and the great smile, the Bartender, or the inspired Musician who bring forth the works of 
degradation.  
                   
 
 
 
 
There are others who are very conscious of what they are doing. We find people like Emperor 
Hallie Salassie still revered by the war torn Ethiopians of Nubia who are clueless to the paramount 
role he played in subduing that once rich fertile country. He turned their remaining resources over to 
the Queen who he was in constant retinue with. You see the Jamaicans jammin’ to Rastafarian tunes 
with little if no knowledge of who Ras is. Ras is another form of Ra/Marduk a God introduced into 
Nubia by Ramses II on his maddening mission to be the greatest Pharaoh to bring about conquest of 
the whole world. That position he never achieved thus he defaced the Temples and Shrines of the 
Egyptian ancestors removing the names and bodies of the previous inhabitants. Surely this was a dark 
man that would do anything for his personal gain thus he prostituted the people to the Gods of the 
Underworld more than any in his lineage.  
Reason 29: Media Mogul Shawn Combs is actually wearing the Maltese cross which symbolizes a 
heavier involvement in the Zionist Agenda. This cross cannot be worn unless you are an Initiate. 
Even Rapper Jay-Z under the label Rockafella Records could not use that name without some type 
of “granted” affiliation by civil law. They are willing puppets selling out to the Illuminists to push 
“Rape Music” that gradually destroys the mental and physical moral of the listener. Rock has 
always been a Tool and right now the pieces fit on why all this is coming about.


--- PAGE 43 ---
43 | Page  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
When you see and study all this you begin to realize why not much progress in the right 
direction has been made for Humanity. The people we are taught to idolize, our Revolutionaries, 
Presidents, Dictators, Religion Leaders etc. are placed in front of us like a carrot dangles in front of a 
rabbit. We want to believe we can elect one person to handle all the troubles of the world so we can go 
back to our daily programs. It is decreed that until we come together and take control of our world, 
those in power now who do not care about Humanity like me and you, will continue to decimate it. 
As long as we keep trusting them and remaining lazy and insolent to what we get to do, which is take 
our world into harmony, we will not feel the yoke lift. As good people we want to believe that 
someone like Obama could change our course although every indicator told us he would not. This is 
no different than thinking Christopher Columbus discovered America when there where already 
entire maps conscribed before he was even spermatozoa detailing the whole world from an aerial view 
and it was not flat.  
Reason 30: First Hallie Sallassie was exiled from Nubia and reared as a child by Zionist. He is 
given a first class education and then reinserted back into Nubia where he becomes Emperor. 
He then proceeds to divide the land and relinquish its resources to the Monarchy. He is seen 
here with a Young Queen Elizabeth, Theodore Roosevelt, and the Pope.


--- PAGE 44 ---
44 | Page  
 
 
 
 
It is safe to say that what is put directly in front of us, especially through popular media, needs 
our personal investigation and common sense before it can be trusted. The shear energy of crowds 
envelops all who are in the midst. As hearts begin to sync up all are in the hands of the so-called world 
leaders and in the past, few have lead in the right direction as they grope about the darkness of Kali 
Yuga gathering all the resources for their private groups consuming far more than the average citizen 
and never loosening the yoke. We cannot continue to be looked at as resources rather than Human 
Beings. Taking the mainstreams word for it seems to always prove unintelligent, they are liars and 
they will say and do anything to make the masses disbelieve in what we have felt for so long which is 
that Religion, Politics, Social, and Educational structures are developed to hinder, not free the people 
less they raise the whole Earth which can be seen itself as a large ship, into the higher heavens that 
those that have fallen cannot ascend because it burns away all impurities.  
The Gods need not money it is man who needs the money while the Gods divvy up what is 
more precious to them, the Gold or the Soul. With taxes taking 40% and church taking 10% what is 
one to do about the baby? The religion of Christianity has done enough on its own for anyone with a 
keen eye to see something may need to be questioned. Even the scripture says “the proof of wisdom 
will be within the type of people it produces”.  As I often say many of those who are in church are 
only there because of the “con”viction of the Lord, whatever that statement really means, it sounds 
more like a jail sentence. Anyone who does not see religion as simply stairs to the top will often get 
stuck on one level or another thus never entering complete enlightenment and only perceiving its 
premature phases. Enlightenment itself comes with having a firm foundation of truth, unshakable, 
Reason 31: As shown on CNN Obama has more Elitist in his lineage than most Presidents in 
U.S. History. Zionism is not a color it is an idea that is not even Hebrew.


--- PAGE 45 ---
45 | Page  
 
not able to be moved as it is fortified in exactness. That exactness comes when the real truth of 
whatever faith you elect falls upon your ears. At least at that moment you have an opportunity to 
really serve the God you claim to worship. You will now have the hidden doctrine of these faiths 
which is generally reserved for the Priests.  
 
In 1999 a movie titled the Matrix was released and made its way to the top as the box office 
churned the propaganda machine with numbers rivaling Star Wars. The city of freedom they gave the 
name Zion, blatant Zionist propaganda as even churches pride themselves on being called Mount 
Zion. Just as Bob Marley heads sway to the tunes as he sings about Zion the city depicted as having no 
worries and this is anything but true. The defeat of the mind of the masses was subtle, not by force, 
when the flutes, cymbals, and lyres play then the formidable human force is lulled to sleep.  
 
Reason 32: When Rome merged with Egypt 
they borrowed the Rites of Isis casting Jesus 
known as Iesu as the new Horus. We are not 
saying this individual did not exist he in fact 
did, however, what we are questioning is the 
final destination of the Christian soul which 
is the Underworld just like it was with the 
Rites of Isis. Ra is ruler of the Underworld he 
is better known as Amen-Ra. This is why all 
Christian p”ra”yers are concluded with 
Amen.  The Latin word for prayer which is 
Oration indicates their power is in Orion.


--- PAGE 46 ---
46 | Page  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
There were of course many things hinted and eluded to in the movie the Matrix itself that we 
now in fact find to be true from various levels.  It leads one to ponder the exact design of what we are 
really faced with currently and in our not to distant future. What kind of force would show us in 
something we are supposed to find entertaining, that it has us trapped in an Oz like mechanical 
Netherworld where our senses and abilities are limited and our energy harvested? It beckons one to 
ask “Are we really in a Matrix”? Can we be pulled out of the Matrix? Is there an actual Code to the 
Matrix? This book will show beyond the shadow of doubt that the answer to the questions being 
proposed above is yes, and that is not all.  
This book will awaken your memory and quicken you thus causing your DNA to reformulate 
which I will prove to be possible by the end of this composition. DNA itself is manipulated by the 
mental state, surroundings, and acquaintances of the individual subject. When any these are altered 
for a constant period the DNA itself also alters and reformulates according to its environment. This 
means that once you become firm about what you know to be true, especially about your special 
abilities that have been dormant, the DNA will reconstruct itself to make what you will believe again 
to be possible, happen. That is one of the main secrets of creating the Superhuman, you have to give it 
“Reason” to activate itself. This takes consistency and as we talked about earlier a firm foundation 
grounded in truth to what reality is, not what Maya or Illusion attempts to make you perceive.  
The value of this to your future would be of catamount benefit especially in the world of today 
where knowledge is power. You can thus remove yourself from the cubes known as the hexagon or the 
bee hive. At one point long ago a jealous force recognized that certain types of knowledge meant 
unlimited power to those in possession of it thus much of the valuable knowledge was removed. All 
written copies were burned although at least one copy was placed in the 5 mile library under the 
Vatican. In replacement we received lies mixed with truth which does a horrible job on the mind as 
we watch the masses plug about clueless, still searching for themselves because religion has fulfilled 
almost none of its promises.  
Reason 33: Many love the flow of Bob Marley’s Rastafarian music, never once noticing the 
Zionist connection. When the shields of the mind are down the enemy is sure to invade. The 
New Age movement now insists there is no enemy and this is just a figment of a mental 
hologram, poisonous vipers their words are sly. We need to take back Earth or get ready to leave 
it entirely. What is to come can not be escaped this was set in motion a long time ago and does 
not reverse so we must work beyond it. They say humans unlock their true abilities under the 
scenario of fight or flight through the adrenals. Learn to simulate those expressions and began 
to work on you. Remember what is happening does not come from a particular race of people it 
is an idea that many are aligned with and has consumed their rational senses.


--- PAGE 47 ---
47 | Page  
 
 
 
We are talking about the level of foreknowledge which gives you the ability to know what will 
happen before it takes place, this is the time it is most useful as things speed up. You will be able to do 
this without the aid of books and scholars thus you will be placed back in the driver’s seat of life 
exiting the checkered cab. The issue we all individually face is that we wait to see what is going to 
happen next before we react; this is called reactionary. This leaves you with no preparation and little 
time or ability to shape the future. I say that one should confront danger and fear before they become 
closed in by it instead of allowing it to greet you on your doorstep while your loved ones are inside. 
Run and face it so you may prevent it or at least prolong it. This may in fact give those you care for the 
edge they will need to prepare. Again think of the 7 year old who will have to live at least another 10 
years in this world and what they are to face in those 10 years. What kind of monsters have we left for 
them to battle?  Supplying people with this information will at least allow you to say that you did the 
best you could, which is also why I write this to you before my departure. 
 When comprising this particular work what came across my mind, since I had long since 
discovered “The Code”, was to write a book that even when the reader is finished they could continue 
to write their own unique personal novel of experience. Due to the fact that we are all entwined in 
some way or another to what we are experiencing now in the world you will find amazing syncs in 
Reason 34: The 
Elite depict the 
world full of 
worker Bee’s, 
trying to be 
something but they 
are trapped in 
Hexagonal cubes. 
This Platonic 
knowledge 
introduced the 
dark square or 
cube. Pythagoras 
introduced several 
methods of 
trapping Organic 
Spirit into 
Matter/Cubes. We 
will speak more of 
this later.


--- PAGE 48 ---
48 | Page  
 
your life that all roll into why you are here. Just because few are using the collective consciousness 
channel does not mean that it is not always broadcasting, we are always linked to it. In fact it is more 
like two lovers who have both fallen asleep on the phone and the lines remain open although there is 
no one speaking.  
It is time you begin to unlock all the mysteries and most importantly yourself. Often I began 
lengthy writings only to leave them incomplete, pieces of these writing you will find in Italics 
throughout the book they serve as tidbits of poetry to ponder. The rabbit hole is far deeper than I 
expected in the beginning, not to mention the fact that after you get deep into the rabbit hole you 
must climb back out, which they forgot to mention. You do not want to be in any hole, trust me. 
When you learn the whole system, you will have so much knowledge you will not be incapable of 
fitting it all in one book. What should be kept in mind is once you start to “unlock” you will see what 
used to remain hidden, everywhere in plain view. This also means that everything is not contained 
here, only the framework that is needed for you to build your own ladder out of the Cube of Flesh 
into the Sphere of Spirit. After that the statement will come true that if the oceans were ink and the 
trees were pens you could still not write about everything that you will know in fact to be true. 
 With that being said I have done my best to narrow the book down to what is of highest worth 
to know. It was originally meant to show how words themselves play one of the most valuable roles in 
your individual awakening. That later morphed into a detailed story of our true past, present, and 
future. Even the Elite cannot simply say “the old language is no good anymore so from today you will 
use this new language”. That only happened one time in history in the confusion of Babel, when 
tracing the story of Babel or “The Gates of Ishtar” a far more complex story arises than the brief 
chapters dedicated to it in the Bible. In the ancient texts one story holds about Babel. This Tower or 
Ziggurat had multiple purposes and it was also connected to a Gate, the two went hand in hand. 
In most ancient tribes some type of structure was built to serve as the portal of communication 
between the presiding God/Goddess and the people. You will find a precise geometric layout of some 
type of construction whether stone alter, pillar, temple, hollowed tree, or various other portals. You 
will learn that the geometric structure, especially its number of sides, has everything to do with the 
type of energies being evoked and from what dimension, plane, expanse, or abyss they hail from. In 
Reason 35 you will see a rare picture of pre-historic London now synchromystically called 
Babylondon. It seems the Atlantian style art deco is preferred. The Pyramids have four sides because 
they are massive Gates to the 4th and 8th dimension. These dimensions although very different from 
the 3rd, are functioning and highly populated unbeknownst to the masses. It is time to innerstand that 
multiple worlds exist already functioning, some far worst then the one we are currently in, and some 
in complete harmony (Harm Money) like a Utopia but not by that word, let’s get there.


--- PAGE 49 ---
49 | Page  
 
 
  
 
 
What is most amazing is how the obvious goes totally unnoticed, this would mean that we are 
out of focus and we need to actually zoom in or scale down to look at what is right in front of our face, 
for example: Christmas is a anagram for Mithras once you remove the “C”. Mithras Day was 
December 25. Do you think it would be of value on various levels to at least investigate who this 
individual is? What I find is those who think an inkling about their souls want to prepare it for 
afterlife. This would mean knowing as much as you can about what that involves rather than just 
imagining that being a servant in the afterlife forever would actually be a reward. This is what 
determines whether or not you end up in a place that will mean total freedom, or the opposite. 
Servants are always slaves to something. It is already obvious that our current Overseers seem to be 
very detached from the people, so this means you must build yourself to learn of the higher things. 
The future can only be the future for so long and then it becomes the present. 
Another ploy is the fight we get dragged into all the time with these Two Brother Archetypes 
that appear in many religious texts whether it’s the Astrological Jupiter Vs Saturn, Sumerian Allalu Vs 
Anu, Egyptian Osiris Vs Set, Hebraic Ishmael Vs  Israel, and my all time favorite classic mind job Cain 
Vs Able. This is the roots of Duality. 
After reading hundreds of Testaments, Vedras, Hieroglyphs, Steles, Tablets, and spending 
months in meditation on what had been gathered a very clear picture began emerge. When this quest 
began it was in earnest desire to find God. My ideas have never been to disapprove the existence of 
God or other Beings, only to create a clear path that I may enter in constant communion with them. 
There can be no benefit in falsely disapproving something that could emancipate us all. In addition I 
not only studied these faiths I immersed myself in them. There can be nothing more unnerving than 
someone ousting a religion that they have not even studied, much less participated in. What I did also 
since I was very serious about the quest was I sought to become the highest in each faith I was deluging 
Reason 35:  Ancient London was more like a rather large Stonehenge/Atlantis. Few know of this 
part of London’s history and the ongoing attempt to restore its sacred layout. Notice the model 
of Atlantis as seen on the right. Later you will see this particular design can be found everywhere 
you find Atlantis affiliates especially in Government and Parliament.


--- PAGE 50 ---
50 | Page  
 
in. So while I was a Christian, I was a Pastor and Prophet, while I was a Muslim I was also an Imam 
and Sufi, etc. 
There can be nothing more positively life changing then following the truth even when it goes 
against everything you have been taught. I believe many headlong in their religion have discovered 
through one book or another the true origin of their proclaimed faith. At that moment and 
subsequent times after, the person enters a strong duality phase. One side insists that it is the Wicked 
One who is trying to steal their faith. This side tends to use no facts only emotions barraging a person 
with memories of past divine experiences. The other side finds constant facts that debunk what the 
emotional side is suggesting. It often shows that paranormal experience should not be the only gauge 
of determining if something is true or false, especially positive or negative. Sadly the emotional side 
tends to win because a person has also gained friends in the religion, a home or fellowship place, and 
all these novelties weigh heavier on making the correct decision to disavow. As a Pastor it was hard for 
me to walk away from Christianity, however, since I was also infused with the Spirit of Truth it was 
even more difficult to keep denying the obvious which was its demoniac esoteric doctrine.  
Once engulfing the Spiritual terrain there is indeed a common story, it is only the names that 
change. We will examine this story once and for all because it is the backbone of all belief systems 
which we will call ME’s (pronounced Mays). Belief Systems and Words are ME’s. In the Sumarian text 
it talks about something described as only ME’s. If one gains possession of the knowledge of these 
ME’s they can control large parts of this dimension. All authors on Sumarian religion never present a 
definition of what these ME’s are just that they are very powerful. It is noted that the ME is not a 
weapon, they describe various weapons that belong to the Gods in the Sumarian text but they are sure 
to keep the ME’s separate. The only hint they give of them is that they are written on Tablets.  The 
resin of information that remains coated on our Aura of what happened in past existences will always 
serve as mental triggers for our minds. This is how stories of the our past is linked to religion in order 
to bring about devoutness, fear, resonance, and loyalty under false pretenses. I cruel mental scheme 
designed around ethereal based historical facts.


--- PAGE 51 ---
51 | 
 
inco
First
rein
in ev
phen
Heb
unco
thes
war,
Aur
fact
 
wate
to es
Re
ant
we
ins
eng
 Page  
 
 
 
 
I learne
d
orporated ar
t we will ex
ncarnations 
very ancien
nomena. Th
brew text wh
onditional 
e groups we
, vengeance
a thus all st
 the flood w
er because o
The Ark
scape somet
eason 36: Th
ntiquity. All 
ere known t
scribed by t
ngraving from
d that some
round thos
xamine the d
 cannot com
nt text altho
he “punish
hich mainly
love, this is
ere always w
e and favori
tories that b
was true, the
of the last fl
k is the othe
thing that i
The Sumeria
l the stories 
to be inscrib
the God YH
om before th
 
e ME’s were
e words. Th
doctrine. T
mpletely era
ough it was 
hment for m
y operated o
s obviously 
warring wit
itism was m
begin with f
e details are
lood.    
er part of th
is fearful an
ans inscribe
s of the Tora
ibed on such
HVH/Tetrag
he flood and
e certain wo
he one who
There are th
ase the mem
not said to 
mans sins” s
on fear and
the produc
th surround
more ideal. T
floods are e
e of course 
he sublimin
nd impendi
ed their relig
rah were firs
h Tablets ju
agrammaton
nd conceals i
ords of pow
o controlled
hings that h
mory of and
 be related t
story did no
d reverence 
ct of guilt. T
ding countr
The occurre
entertained 
 not availab
nal entrainm
ing such as t
igion on sto
rst Sumarian
ust as Moses
n. Shem, No
 it from his 
wer encomp
d the Name
ave happen
d that is the
to man’s sin
ot come abo
 of a Terrib
The main re
ries so love w
ence of the 
 by the subc
ble. Many pe
ment of doc
the Dark. I
one tablets t
n minus the
s was propo
Noah’s son, a
 brothers la
passed by a d
s could con
ned on our P
e flood. The
n but rathe
out until th
ble God rath
eason for th
was not a g
 last flood h
conscious b
eople have 
ctrines. The
It was know
that have su
he name cha
osed to rece
also finds a 
ater to use it
doctrine th
ntrol whole 
Planet that
e flood is m
er a natural 
he Sumarian
her than 
his being th
ood angle f
has left resid
because it k
 a phobia of
e word itsel
wn that you 
urvived sinc
anges. The M
eive Tablets 
 secret stone
its magical f
 
at could be
 nations. 
t even 
mentioned 
 
n and 
he leaders of
for them, 
due in our 
knows for a 
f deep 
lf resonates 
 could 
ce 
ME’s 
s  
ne with 
formulas. 
e 
f


--- PAGE 52 ---
52 | Page  
 
traverse the Netherworld on a Bark which meant a special boat. There were few who made it onto the 
Ark and those that did were given a Mark to show they had been saved. After the Dark came the Sun 
which we unconsciously assume will rise every morning. The Sun awakes the whole world and gets the 
next day started. The Sun and Son were made synonymous in English because of this. The Babylonia 
name being Sam, Son of Sam or is it Samson? The Son God religions embed themselves in the natural 
occurrences of nature. There is always a Mother sometimes two since we are in a binary system this 
always leads to one good Mother and one Evil or surrogate mother, Eve and Lilith. The Mother 
Archetype will always survive because the Planet can never be seen as anything different than a 
nourishing Mother, thus when a name for the Mother Earth was given all would revere it as they do 
their physical Mother. The name was spoken as Gaia then Maia/Maya then a thousand more. Often 
the Origin of the name was never examined; the people remained always too trusting of their rulers.  
The dying and resurrecting Sun theme was all in a days work the Sun died at night and 
resurrected in the morning. This always left the door open for a host of nighttime nightmare creatures 
that played the role as adversary to the Son, thus the Devil became night/knights or Set as in Sunset 
still a Sun God nonetheless with a host of worshippers that gravitate towards darkness. Once this 
began the idea of a City with eternal light was hatched, a place that was never dark and of course there 
were requirements of how to get there. Those requirements where made known by the numerous 
Prophets, Shamans, Seers, Holy Men, Gurus, Yogis and various others playing the role of predictors of 
time. They later became just as revered and reversed as the God itself. Notice how in Christianity Jesus 
is now worshipped more than YHVH, many in church don’t even known who that is nor do they care 
Jesus has it all covered. In Buddhism there is more discussions about Buddha than the Devine concept 
of the focal point which Buddha presented, this is no wonder since they say his mothers name was 
Maia/Maya, all around the world the same song. Various sects of Islam suffer form the same problem 
revering Caliphs, Imams, and Mohammad more than Ilah at times. The Rabbis get more air time than 
Ain Soph especially since they are convinced “He” is incomprehensible and cannot be conceived by 
impure flesh.   
Last but far from least comes the chaos and destruction. Since mankind is not immortal in this 
physical state many assume a time will come for everything to die thus we falsely decree the Earth’s 
time will come also. It should be obvious by now the Earth is immortal and passes through various 
phases. We watch it happen everyday as animals die, bugs die, we age, the house or neighborhood gets 
rundown. Decay is inevitable, however, the glass half empty approach of modern religion in which the 
whole world and most of its inhabitants must be utterly destroyed by plagues and horrors falling from 
the sky distorts an act that should otherwise be looked at as the entrance to a Greater Phase. The truth 
is the heaven and hell these distorted belief systems propose are one in the same. With their Spiritual 
technologies they have mastered how to keep the soul in stasis, true Spirituality is the growth of the 
Soul. This allows it to become quite the opponent to forces that would attempt to capture it once it 
escapes the body. Any Shaman can tell you this, when he/she enters the Spirit world there are various


--- PAGE 53 ---
53 | Page  
 
things its inhabitants consider before they interact with the Shaman. Many Shaman have various types 
of protection but their main asset is the strength of their Totem. The Human soul is a force to be 
reckoned with when it is fully in tune, this leads to other Beings just leaving you alone so you can live.    
 
   
 
 
 
 
The doctrines of today are combined in more or less a religious buffet based on collected 
information gathered over time. Some systems more creative and poetic than others although the 
story itself only served to captivate and implore the Neophyte, it was the names which are vibrations 
that created the “staying power”. All throughout this work we will be examining various names of 
Reason 37: Religion has constructed an entire ideology of afterlife that plagues the believers mind 
with absurdities giving birth to distorted forms and the imbalance of fear. When consecrated belief 
is put into such things they are given the energy to materialize and believe me they have already. 
Places like Purgatory, the Fields of Elysium, Hyades, Abaddon, the Netherworld, and many others 
really exist. Remember there are now billions of people who believe in these places and most end 
up in them.


--- PAGE 54 ---
54 | Page  
 
power. The commoner is enticed to a place of worship for one reason or another. The High Priest, 
however, must understand how it all works especially the Spiritual realm. Chanting is a major part of 
Priestly duties beyond ritualistic observances. What chanting does is bring the body into the frequency 
of whatever Name is being chanted, once the frequency match is accomplished the portal is open. We 
are the fifth element being comprised of Earth/Flesh, Water/Mucus, Air/Breathe, Fire/Blood and the 
Fifth which is the Devine Breath liken unto fire none can produce save the Most High. Many have 
tried and reasonless abominations they continue to bring forth when “Practicing” as Doctors and 
Magicians tend to call their Art of non-perfection. 
One of the real reasons this is happening is the Most High has decreed all will eventually return 
to the Source and it does not exist in time thus it is extremely patient. It also says it is sufficient 
enough to rule its Creations and does not need representatives that claim to magnify but in all 
actuality block the way. If man or woman wanders off the true Path they easily lose focus by being 
divided amongst Gods vying for power splitting the person’s energy at least 3 ways which they call the 
Trinity. Instead of following these Gods who want sacrifices and servants all the time I went to look 
for something that is not as petty and sadistic and guess what I found it and I’m giving it to you. 
When you give something good out you get the same in return. That is what we were supposed to do 
no matter what everyone else is doing. Just remember if they don’t know “The Code” their entire 
form as it exist before you is being effected in more ways than you can even conceive so you can afford 
to give those you have grudges against a pass. 
 This is pre-history, however, Gods abound across the globe in various lands and they are 
increasing. This is because the term God is being used so loosely you even have people saying that they 
are God. I know the popular argument is God is experiencing itself through us. This is another one of 
those things that just sounds good and is never questioned. The Most High brought forth all 
experience from Itself and shared it with us as a gift, there in no need for The Most High to live 
through us, I’m sure better things are entertainment for an All Powerful Being building multiple 
galaxies with a spiral force than playing the Sims with Its Human creations.  
The truth is sayings like this are fuel for the ego, which can make us think a little too much of 
ourselves while still not in constant contact with the Most High. We are living in a society where most 
things related to paranormal and esoteric matters that have been proven are still hidden from us, 
imagine our maturity rate compared to freed societies. With the Entities the stronger eventually 
becomes the victor and they are warlike Gods. The Most High is not involved in such debased and 
petty things; this is the key to proper distinguishment. With the Gods their strength comes in 
numbers, those numbers are individual Souls who get caught up in the religion and die with it freshly 
on their mind and aura. Its time you finally get the truth so you can be what your dreams used to say 
you were when you were a child traveling worlds with endless imagination creating things in your 
perfect undistorted image.


--- PAGE 55 ---
55 | Page  
 
I will make it clear if it wasn’t for the brain screwing by those sinister groups that administer 
Medical Drugs and Procedures, Cartoons, Candies, Toys and Education to kids while they are in their 
most sensitive growing phases, naturally we would have a beautiful world full of joy. For those that 
came out ill they would be showered with love and positive vibration. This would bring up their 
frequency thus curing them, simple. So there is someone to point a finger at and this is exactly why 
the New Age movement has hatched, because people once again are rising up as the burden is getting 
heavy. One now has to work 2 or 3 jobs to keep things going, not to mention their habits and they are 
tired of this and with just cause. Silently we know this is not our fault and when I found the Code in 
the language at that moment I knew it wasn’t the peoples fault, before then religion had me thinking 
that it was because they didn’t worship the right God so they were suffering, or it was some past karma 
form another life so they were paying in this life, I would silently think, what, can we be sure of that?  
 
This is what I came to stop, the misinterpretation of the Most High and I give my life proudly 
exposing everything that I can to make the world better and to restore the power to the people for 
free. Why not it is a noble deed, what else do we really have if we lose the Earth and don’t know where 
our next home will be? People expect the afterlife to be some big happy festival where something 
invites you into a higher realm with rivers of warm Honey and Milk, streets of fine Ophaz Gold with 
Reason 38: There 
can be no doubt 
the Elite are 
implanting the 
children with 
corrupt ideas. 
They propagate 
and insinuate war 
while the child is 
still growing; thus 
it becomes more 
natural later on in 
life. It is no 
“Sur”prise to see 
the Dragon and 
Skulls mixed in 
with this poor 
child’s cache of 
death dealing 
plastic.


--- PAGE 56 ---
56 | Page  
 
Gems and Diadems running through the current of Sweet Water cool to the touch as compatible 
Mates are all around you basking in the glow of the God. You can see how that can lull a person into a 
deeper sleep then they already are in. What is being described here is something you can have on 
Earth, the real Heaven is much much more, if you but knew.          
Medical drugs are now, according to rehabilitation institutions, far worst than street drugs. 
This is not suggesting one should use street drugs, however, we should find it daunting that our 
organization formed to look after our health are actually the orchestrators of a slow mental and 
physical arsenic death cycle. It is now known that Alzheimer’s disease, the disease that makes the 
elderly forget all their precious memories, is mainly accredited to the cocktail of drugs given to them 
prescribed by the doctors intentionally. These drugs contain high amounts of Mercury which melts 
the brain as chemical ether melts the soul away. Even the word retire (Re-Tire) tells a person to go 
back to sleep, incredible! The chemicals in baby formula are mostly metals exhausting the child’s 
natural nutrients like enzymes in which never develop again once they are depleted. 
     
Many of the individuals who work for the organizations that administer these things are 
unaware from the sense that they have been compartmentalized in the mind. The dream of being the 
doctor with the white coat, sloppy handwriting, Rolex, and BMW infested the grid that we all plug 
into. Compartmentalization is done through the language. It takes at times thousands of years to alter 
a language and since words are really vibration the actual true meaning can never be destroyed, you 
feel it through emotion. Of course many things will be exposed and made known to the reader that is 
riveting. I would only ask that one should not concentrate on what they do not know but rather what 
they will and should know. When something is introduced that is new it is often times rejected at 
first, this rejection is really fear. It seems we often forget that this is how we learned everything that we 
Reason 39: This man 
was prescribed all these 
drugs over time for 
chronic pain, the more 
he would take the more 
they would prescribe. 
Since the doctor is only 
interested in billing the 
insurance company they 
don’t really care. The 
medicines in fact caused 
the continuous pain.


--- PAGE 57 ---
57 | Page  
 
know right now. At first it was new, then you learned and practiced it, and some things you even 
perfected. New always equals fear at first, something like your first on stage recital especially if you had 
a speaking role.   
I will tell the reader now, nothing will be the same after you finish this book, it cannot be. The 
world itself will open for you and you will be given back what we have unknowingly given up or lost 
which is true choice. I will also say that what I offer is the truth, nothing more, it is the persons own 
unique decision, after it has been restored, that although the facts will be made clear beyond doubt, to 
ultimately believe and react to what surrounds you at every moment is your own individual 
responsibility. The system itself is comprised in a way to make the individual feel a dependency upon 
it and a false love for it; this is what keeps an Illusion solid. This becomes the key to determining 
whether or not you are prepared for ascension (Ascend Sion) during this lifetime or whether you need 
to come around the loop again. So wasting no time at all you may accompany Us in a journey through 
the rabbit hole, trust We know our way around as true light does at times pass through the lower 
regions of Hyades as a box is the final residence of all foolish men, Kings included. 
The Word 
How this all came about this thing we call the Matrix was through a play of words. Language is 
the Microsoft Windows or Unix for the brain. The Bible says, “In the beginning was the Word”. This 
did not mean the whole book because it would have read “In the beginning there was a Book” but 
instead it refers to an actual Word that can create things. This ability is referenced here in the first 
book known as Genesis. Since we are in the Image of the Creator we can do smaller versions of the 
same thing depending upon how well we understand the ability and how to use it. Although the need 
to create a new World/Word is now at hand the gap between creating multiple Worlds and creating 
the things within worlds is vast, thus the original keepers of this knowledge used this ability to form 
many things after the first creation; we will call them “Secondary Creations”. These Secondary 
Creations were not created by the Most High but created by the Beings the Most High created, this is 
of value to remember how to distinguish one from the other.  Through the real Kabbalah, that 4 letter 
Word, and its many formulations were made known to a few men and that gave the original man the 
ability to step onto the level as baby creators.  
The word Kabbalah itself means Oral Resuscitation which means that the true Kabbalah can 
only be given verbally due to correct pronunciation of these words of power, it is never written. When 
this knowledge of such magnitude came to be known across the land two more Kabbalah’s where 
introduced, the first being the Abjad, the Arabic Kabbalah, then came the Kabbalah of Canaan or the 
Grimores of which the latter can be easily downloaded from the internet, while the former has 
remained hidden. Imagine how many people downloaded a copy of the much more common Cabalist 
Grimores when Madonna proclaimed she was studying Kabbalah.


--- PAGE 58 ---
58 | 
 
 Page  
 
Re
Sh
an
leg
DI
wh
th
ho
ma
An
th
In
sh
bu
th
th
a s
Su
sep
of 
ut
ap
wh
th
str
Reason 41: T
hemhampho
ntiquity alth
gible. You c
DIOS on the 
heel. In ma
hey refer to G
owever He i
many Names 
Ancient Kabb
hese Names 
neffable mea
hould never 
ut should on
hem in their
hem off the 
 sin because 
uch tales kep
eparated fro
f these Bein
ttered they a
ppear at som
hen they ar
hemselves to
range overw
 
This chart kn
horesh surviv
hough not v
can see the 
e right side o
any Latin co
 God as DIO
 is but one o
s constructe
bbalah. Man
 are reporte
aning that o
r utter them
nly contemp
r mind. Utt
 mouth is sa
e the flesh is
ept the peop
om the true 
ngs since wh
 are enlisted
me point, ho
rrive one mu
o deal with s
whelming fo
Reason
YHVH
also as 
Tetract
Tetragr
n is the
Judaism
Christi
revere a
Father.
means 
Forefat
known as 
ives from 
very 
 Name 
 of the 
ountries 
OS 
out of the 
ed in 
ny of 
ed to be 
 one 
m verbally 
mplate 
ttering 
aid to be 
s impure. 
ple 
e Origin 
hen 
d to 
however 
must gird 
 such 
forces. 
n 40: 
H known 
 the 
tys or 
rammato
e Name 
m and 
ianity 
 as their 
. Tetra 
 four 4. 
thers


--- PAGE 59 ---
59 | Page  
 
 
This particular Kabbalah which we will call the Written Kabbalah of Cain was known through 
circles as the Lesser Keys this work was eventually identified as a text of dark magic responsible for 
uniting man with horrid beings from the lower dimensions. This did not stop its reproduction, just as 
books like the Necromicon, the Book of Shadows, and the 6th and 7th Books of Moses are easily 
available and many have become possessed reading books such as Sepher Raziel, Sepher Yetzirah, and 
Sepher Hashmoth which are still in mainstream production as people are subtly coerced to lend an 
open ear to the dangerous degenerating Art of Goetia, the evoking of departed Souls and lesser Jinn.  
 
 
 
 
Let us keep this in mind, if you are a powerful high vibration Being and someone from Earth is 
summoning you its obvious you have no time to fool with the Earthlings to do their selfish bidding 
which generally involves controlling people and making money. Being very different the lower Forms 
Reason 42: Various Cabala’s were formed as many descended the inverted tree of life which as 
can be seen here lead to heavy serpent and beast worship. It is unmistakably obvious that this 
has gone beyond some mere hobby for wise men; this has become an Art that has corrupted 
minds and made men into the pawns of spooks.


--- PAGE 60 ---
60 | Page  
 
have something to gain by making pacts and acquaintances with Humans because they are on lower 
dimensions some of whom have forfeited their chance of ascending, what a loss they have lava to 
drink.  
To sum up Kabbalah for the reader I will give this explanation. The original oral Kabbalah 
consist of only one word that masters every spirit energy on this dimension. The entire body was put 
into formulation to pronounce this word. The written Kabbalahs have been proven to a degree to 
teach the Magus how to control droves of elementals that can be bent to the will of the Magus, 
however one should keep in mind that the use of these Beings to gain advantage in everyday life rather 
than doing it naturally always “spells” trouble. It has been documented several times that these Beings 
are very different from Humans, being lower life forms they have only one ability, thus their name 
Elemental meaning simple or base, a controller of one element. They are referred to as Sylphs, 
Undines, Gnomes, and Salamanders which correspond to Water, Air, Earth and Fire. It is known that 
they often play tricks on the Magus, hiding things, and breaking things, which becomes a can of 
worms that the Practitioner wishes they had never opened, those are the normal experiences. Deeper 
forms of this Practice have lead to haunting, unknown strangulations and death, as the otherworld 
will continue to entreat the Magus driving him or her mad especially in Goetia were the departed 
souls drain the life force from anything alive in the vicinity when evoked, especially the Magus.  
 
Reason 43: A classic depiction of a Magician 
who has evoked too many elementals. The art 
of magic itself is very real, dark magic is 
dangerous and leads to encounters that can 
stunt the Seekers growth. Magicians have been 
known to also create two part Beings known as 
Golem to do their biddings, there is now 
concern in certain esoteric circles in regards to 
Golem who are said to be revolting  because 
they to are evolving and want to be free. Stories 
such as Solomon controlling Jinn has 
fascinated many into believing that it is mans 
right to control the Jinn. The attitude of 
seeking to master something you do not 
understand will always lead to trouble. There is 
generally no trial and error or learning curve in 
magic. One mistake can lead to a lifetime of 
problems.


--- PAGE 61 ---
61 | Page  
 
That one Word mentioned above and its correct pronunciation was lost because of abuse and 
was before then only known by the High Priest who learned it from the High Priest before him. The 
Name was said to be pronounced only once a year during ceremony. The Name itself when 
pronounced responded instantly with no delay thus the Name was alive and not dead like the many 
slow responding Idol Gods of the time. Although I believe the true Name was removed long before 
then, the Holy Name possessed by the Hebrews was recorded as lost during the time the Romans 
sacked the temple of Jerusalem. It is said in legend that the High Priest was caught up by a fiery 
chariot into the sky just so the Name could not fall into the hands of the profane. The Arabs 
protected their secret Name so tightly that few know the Abjad (Arab Kabbalah) even existed. The 
Shriners’, Aleppo and various Secret Societies for Spiritual adepts studied under the Arabs.  
 
The written Kabbalah of Cain was purported to be the Path of recovering the original true 
Name of the Lesser God after you descended the Tree of Life like a serpent and met the Pantheon of 
Reason 44: 
Westerners 
went to Arabia 
to learn the 
esoteric 
wisdom of the 
Arabs. When 
they returned 
to America 
they used what 
they learned to 
gain control of 
the whole 
country. As 
can be seen in 
this rare book, 
they own all 
things of 
importance 
like the 
Railroads. 
Even Forbes 
grandfather is 
in this book!


--- PAGE 62 ---
62 | Page  
 
hosts of whose Names and position could be deciphered by working through combinations and 
equations. It is safe to say many became lost and possessed as they attempted to make brutes as allies. 
Its claim that one could arrive at the original name through contemplation of 72 Letters and Numbers 
has remained unverifiable. In Holy Languages the letters also double for the Numbers. In the end 
many became insane moving the letters and numbers around and bringing forth energies untold. The 
Art itself gave birth to what we know now as Sorcery the control key being the Tetragrammaton a 4 
sided cubic diamond also known as the Tetractys made of letters and Numbers with 18 functions or 
Luciphers, I mean Ciphers. Kabbalah is a life study so explaining anymore of Kabbalah here would 
only be confusing for the reader, but not for me and I will tell you just as you see the word Tetra 
meaning four, Grams, and Tons, these units of Spirit energies can overwhelm the mind and if the 
person is not strong their senses leave them forever and the body becomes the host of 4 counterparts. 
The have named this state of insanity the Jerusalem Syndrome. 
 
 
 
The deepest and darkest part of Spiritual knowledge lied within the Art of Goetia and 
Necromancy. Apparently this ancient knowledge from Sumeria eventually spread to the Western 
schools of thought creating multiple offshoots. The Necromicon, the Sumerian Spell book of 
Marduk/Ra was the Initiated Doctrine of dark occults, few Initiates knew this. What I find even more 
interesting is Marduk had three main enemies one was Tiamat. Tiamat was the old Name for Earth 
before Earth had its last encounter with Nibiru also called Planet X. One of its orbiting Moons 
slammed into what is now Earth but was then Tiamat. This indicates even more that a war took place 
Reason 45: This is the symbol of the Magus once he has joined with the 4 animal traits he will no 
longer be the ally of normal men he feels elated over his fellows.


--- PAGE 63 ---
63 | Page  
 
in the past involving these invaders who had some issue with the Planet we now call Earth. Even 
known powerful Adepts like Eliphaz Levi who many believe along with himself was the thrice born 
Hermes/Thoth in his last incarnation advised to stay away from Goetia, and this comes from a man 
who practiced almost all forms of dark magic. He purported that this was the worst and had extreme 
negative results that were far reaching extending into the Spirit planes of past and future.  
 
Necromancy as a game entered the U.S. through the Parker Brothers and Milton Bradley who 
where Illuminist themselves. First it came as the Ouija board and then the game Séance. Once the 
organic portals, “Humans that sometimes have unknowingly formed pacts with Spirits per game 
instructions” were open, it became something of a greater proportion. This was the knowledge of the 
Ghost World which was populated with lost dismembered souls looking for answers and various other 
2 dimensional Spirits. These were those who had spent life in vain and thought death was the end, 
many Warners we sent to them and they rejected them. As you notice in Christianity they speak of a 
Gospel (Ghost Spell) and entreat the Holy Ghost. What business does the church have with these 
Ghosts? Someone call the Ghostbusters. 
Again the only one really responsible is the individual person. There is definitely a point of no 
return and that point is reached at times within the first ceremony. If you could see the spirit world, 
which some already can, you will see that many are watching and waiting for the opportunity to weave 
their way into your world. These days many have already let them in. Look around your whole 
habituation and see how much evil is resident manifesting in the forms of skulls, guns, horror, harsh 
music, and killing games. All this carries energy and at a certain point it can overwhelm your 
atmosphere unknowingly if you don’t keep balance. Why do you think media is still stored on 
magnetic disk? What do you think happens when these disks are stacked or even spun at high rates of 
speed? Negative magnetic information generates and emits a field of binary aura that fills large areas. 
Reason 46: This is the Seal of the 
Necromicon of Marduk the sworn 
enemy of man, if you see it, head the 
other way, Necromancers are lower life 
forms looking to gain energy. They are 
distorted and not fully developed thus 
they know not what they do and have 
no guidance save their dark lord who is 
blind, We shall use his body to stir the 
Lake of Fire. The sigil is a series of 
imperfect pentagrams meaning flawed.


--- PAGE 64 ---
64 | Page  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Looking deeper we find an ancient text explaining the final termination of the first round of 
early Earth Gods that ruled mortals through Oracles and Pagan practices. Along with the captured 
Gods more than 8 million Warring Angels were carried altogether to Makavishtu, in hand, the Most 
High says: We cast them into the unquenchable fire where there was already more than ten million 
who were in chaos and madness. For awhile the Earth was clear of the Gods, whose chief labor had 
been for thousands of years to capture the Spirits of the recently dead, and make slaves of them for the 
glory of the lesser kingdoms. Their end was swift just as one rises and falls in power, however, the 
cursed Magicians invited them back into this realm once more, and the people, ever lacking in reason, 
welcomed them back by their abhorred actions and impurities to no extent. 
Some of these Beings are further along the evolutionary cycle than we are, thus they appear as 
Gods to the primitive. The Art of Deifying or creating Gods was perfected in Egypt. They discovered 
upon death that if a person knew the secrets of the soul they could become like Gods to the mortals, 
Reason 47: Most never questioned why these games entered the U.S, who brought them there, 
and for what purpose? This dark Art was made to look like fun and was everything but that. All 
the tools were in the box to open a portal to the lower dimension or your money back.


--- PAGE 65 ---
65 | Page  
 
living on the dimensions below them. This feat involved forever relinquishing a chance to ascend 
which believe it or not many have accepted. The gravity of dissention at a certain level is too strong to 
turn around. Notice Grave and Gravity are almost the same word not to mention you go “6” feet 
down in an 8 sided box. The “Dimensional Transport Ritual” still stands today in the western world. 
If you notice in the Arab countries the dead are buried immediately in a white sheet, no box, and 
faced toward the East. 
 
The God making business set some men up to became Lords of the Underworld and its 
grotesque inhabitants. Egypt was first known as Kem the descendants of the lost Atlantis then Ogygia 
in esoteric circles a name long forgotten. Also called Sidian by the Mystics where we get our English 
word City, then Egypt by the commoner. Much later it was found out that the word Genesis actually 
was formulated from the words “Genes of Isis” or “Generation of Isis”. None of these are Hebrew 
terms. Even the word Bible comes from the word Byblos which is the place Isis set up worship to 
mourn Osiris. Likewise Ishtar did the same with Adonis long before the Holy Bible and King James 
were thought of. The Hebrews now refer to their God as Adonai, this is Adonis. Decoding the Bible 
you will find that all the prophecies are occurring exactly as they have been foretold. This is because 
millions of people believe the prophecies of the Book will come true due to their religious preference, 
thus they are actually happening because we manifest what we think collectively out of thin air. I for 
one know that prophecies are for profit and that will become more evident later. Many have 
attempted to authenticate when the Books of the Bible were written, after many investigations it was 
Reason 48: The Saturnalian ritual 
of the eight sided rectangular box 
insured the departed soul was 
transported to their dimension or 
sealed. It exists today without the 
slightest notice as people are 
unknowingly being boxed up and 
transported. As the scripture says 
“the day the dead will come out of 
their grave”, because many are 
trapped there. We should ascend 
the moment we are released from 
the body however the disposal of 
our shell must be back in the dirt, 
from dust the body comes so it 
must return.


--- PAGE 66 ---
66 | Page  
 
at least safe to say many of the Books were written long after the actual events took place, thus the 
details are solely dependant upon at least second hand information which is always partial to who is 
telling the story. 
 I once read an ancient transcript of a meetin g that took place between Kings and Emperors in 
regards to powerful languages. Being a person that sought to model myself after wise men I was 
curious of why there was such emphasis put on the formation of languages. I soon discovered that 
language codes and directs the mind and this was known at least since the time of the ancient Arabs 
although evidence proves way before then. According to the Bible at the Tower of Babel man faces a 
confusion of languages by the God and that is the word used, confusion. A few chapters later the same 
God remarks that He is not the author of confusion. Huh? What is all this about? This made for quite 
a puzzle for me that made no sense.  
 
 Parts of the puzzle we will unrave l slowly so nothing is missed. The Ishtar Gate is one of the 
most controversial relics known to man. Just as the pyramids are gates, the Gate of the Ishtar also 
known as the Gates of Ilu were first located in Ur. This was the first gate ever constructed to open the 
Portal of Inanna/Ishtar/Ashtoreth/Astarte/Asherah/Venus a channel to androgynous vampric 
serpents and various other life forms that hang out in Club Shemhamphoresh. She is Inanna consort 
of Marduk/Ra also called She-Ra and Rat, connected to the Seven Sisters in the Pleiades their 
protector the Dog Hyades/Anubis they are Ma, Maia, Ma’at, Mag and Mary who give power to the 
Magus with them is the Serpent Sor who is the Source of the Sorcerers power of Hathor. This is the 
Dragon its first depiction then called SUSA our abbreviation USA land of the Serpents who guard the 
Sedona time portal to SIAM. Their Art is sedation which brings about delusion and seduction. When 
Reason 49: The Dragon  
Hath Horns of a Stag, 
Head of a Camel, Eyes of 
a Demon, Neck of a 
Snake, Belly of a Clam, 
Scales of a Carp, Claws of 
a Eagle, Soles of a Tiger, 
and Ears of a Cow, by 
these symbols you will 
know them.


--- PAGE 67 ---
67 | Page  
 
approached by these Beings one feels a pressure around the anus they are androgens thus they 
masquerade as female and male this is God “S”, Dragon Queen or Drag Queen. 
They falsely Illuminate men to the wisdom of the Serpent thus eliminating them from the 
Great Race, this is the Gate of Ilu. Many Men have made Ishtar their consort and then have been 
betrayed such as Sumerian Gilgamesh and Solomon. As the scripture says “Solomon went after 
Ashtoreth and sacrificed in the Groves and the High Places and after this his wisdom was naught”. 
This is the Bacchanalia, Temple Prostitutes, the Cult of Yoni. They have connected with many of the 
daughters of the Gods called Fates, Ferts, Nymphs such as Morganus, Medusa the Gorgon, 
Persephone, Europa, Nemesis, Sothis or Sirius, Sekhmet, Saba, Sofia, Nepthys, Nut, Kadesh, they 
have legions with them they are Succubae draining vigor from their captives. 
 Many an overambitious power hu ngry fool has wandered down the path of false Illumination 
and few have return. In Ancient times men would war against each other to find favor with Ishtar 
then erect a High Place in her name to serve as a gate or portal, this is key to know now because you 
will see them everywhere. 
 
 Another use of Ziggurats like the Tower of Babe l seen in Reason 10 were as Arks in which 
several had been constructed through various times to escape floods. People of the time seemed to 
always have a foreknowledge of these floods whether is was through the Adepts or by records left by 
Reason 50: The Gates of 
Ishtar the main reason 
we went into Baghdad 
above the oil. Who ever 
controls the main Gate 
controls all subsequent 
Gates. Those on the 
ground in Baghdad said 
“the first thing they 
went for was the 
museum with a team of 
individuals that looked 
like they stepped out of 
a James Bond film. 
They were definitely 
looking for something, 
some type of artifact or 
relic”.


--- PAGE 68 ---
68 | 
 
prev
of th
the w
it se
spac
Dub
in th
actu
 Page  
vious civiliza
he informat
world adjus
ldom leaks 
ce cities, and
bai, Marduk
he world. T
ually oceans 
ations. As s
tion in rega
sts during t
 out. Instea
d terra form
k/Ra finally
Through anc
 before and
said before 
ards to not o
the Shift, th
ad they cont
ming other 
y accomplis
cient geogr
d you are lo
the Ziggura
only future
hey will give
tinue to ext
 Planets sec
shed what h
aphy we lea
oking at th
ats had vari
e floods but
e none of th
tend the un
curing their
he set out to
arn that ma
he sandy bot
ous uses. O
t also which
his informa
nderground
r future. Th
o do which 
any regions 
ttom of the
Our current 
h land masse
ation to the 
d caverns fo
he new Tow
 was to buil
 that are de
em. 
 
 world lead
es will subm
 common p
or themselve
wer of Babel
ld the talles
eserts now w
 
Reason 
indigeno
left seve
warning
Earth’s f
cycles. T
had high
consciou
astral tra
other pl
before su
things o
The Elit
expandi
undergr
domain 
preparat
future 
cataclysm
machine
3 miles p
and pave
behind t
the same
Inner Ea
cities are
beautifu
  
ders have all
merge as 
people and 
es, building
l is in 
t building 
where 
 51: Many 
nous tribes 
eral 
gs about 
 flood 
They also 
her 
usness to 
ravel to 
laces 
such 
occurred. 
ite are 
ing their 
round 
n in 
ation of 
ms; these 
es borrow 
 per day 
ve the wall 
 them at 
me time. 
Earth 
re 
ul. 
l 
g


--- PAGE 69 ---
69 | Page  
 
 
Language allows us to communicate and express ourselves embedding itself in the framework of 
our mind or mental Matrix. When the words we use are manipulated by the developer of the 
language, it is possible for us to think and feel like we are saying one thing but in all actuality we are 
saying another which would change the outcome of our intended desire. The most damaging thing 
about many languages of today is they are not only backwards “Back Words” as the word indicates but 
they are also heavily laden with the names of various Deities from our past fetish with Pantheism. It is 
now evident that many words with certain vibrations pull energy while others restore energy; this was 
shown through water crystals. Our body, being 70% water, is extremely sensitive to vibration.  
Thought is also vibration and this is how thought forms are created and given life. 
It is apparent that in the history of man and women there has been lots of meddling with 
negative energies which can be seen within our warlike nature and bloody history. The development 
Reason 52: The new Tower of Babel the tallest building 
in the world, built by the construction company 
“Wafi” which means “One who is Loyal to Pharaoh” 
that Pharaoh is Ramses who was the fleshly vessel for 
Ra. Keep in mind these Spirit energies are immortal 
and they incarnate into willing vessels who are all 
connected by bloodline. In the last Olympics the 
Chinese Government showed their alignment with the 
plan of a new world order as they danced around the 
Tower. This is why many of the Chinese people 
protested, unfortunately to no avail. What the world 
leaders have done however is revealed their true 
identity. This is priceless for the Guided, truly a big 
answer in a world full of questions.


--- PAGE 70 ---
70 | Page  
 
of weapons began the downward spiral. This art was blamed on the Fallen Angel Tubal-Cain the 
Kenite Goat God who in legend taught man how to fashion the first sword from a plow share. From 
that point man looked for anything to make a better weapon to pummel and plunder his brother. The 
discovery of gun powder and various other explosives by the Alchemists produced a fatal time of 
misuse of energy that continues more now than ever. It has also morphed into genetics. Everything is 
alive so imagine what Radiations character is. Our “Kind” have become fascinated with force, not 
energy and ability which is entirely different. It can be looked at this way: Some things are passive like 
steel, we can fashion it into a plow, till the soil, and bring forth abundant food or we can make it into 
a gun. This is my definition of “Passive Energy”. Then you have things like Mercury and Radiation 
that have no nurturing assimilation for Human beings they are what I call “the Force”. Their use is 
generally to deteriorate anything they come in contact with.   
When asking about the various fuels that are used as food for different energies and spirits I 
learned that first it was Plasma the lower vibration Beings fed on, the wars were fought with swords 
and the blood was up to the bridle. Many ancient accounts note that the battlefield when war was 
finished would glow with an eerie light and you could see gaseous life forms absorbing the energy of 
the blood. In time “Ra”diation was in preference, the nastier the element the more degraded the Host 
that feed upon it, this is the wisdom taught by “Es”. Now you see they are using depleted “Ur”anium 
and you should know enough by now to get the clue on where the Hosts that feed on that energy 
come from.    
Our history also shows that many have had a fondness for worshipping and serving rather than 
mastering and leading. True Spirituality benefits the one who is able to enact such rare talent as 
communion with the Most High. What remains is religion which for the most part borrows from 
everywhere orthodox faiths and tales of Villains and Heroes may have sprang up. Where most people 
get lost is being able to imagine this unseen world is real. The world we live in now is very populated 
with other forms of life. In history these Beings were given names in which many people, especially 
those that speak the languages of the Latin Vulgate, evoke everyday. As the wise men always knew 
behind your words lies a certain force depending upon how serious you take it. If you speak only idly 
there are those who take that as an opportunity to release you of your power and use it at their 
advantage, they understand how it works. Of course the biggest move is to detach you from belief that 
such things could be possible. The names used for these Entities have survived without the slightest bit 
of notice by the average person, until now. The one that can control the tongue is on the path to 
controlling their thought, and not before then.  
Reading a book from the 1800’s in regards to making Spiritual contact will shine light on just 
how lost and off track many have been. This book proposed that you must wait for the New Moon, 
burn some wheat, be sure to face the west, wait for a certain star to appear, look up to the heavens and 
say this prayer while gripping firmly the throat of a frog. The prayer itself was a combination of Holy 
Names some I recognized to be in direct conflict of each other. I thought to myself then, surely if one


--- PAGE 71 ---
71 | Page  
 
must do all this to contact the Most High then maybe we are lost. Of course one does not have to do 
all of what was described to make contact but let us not believe someone has not tried this recipe of 
foolishness and reaped the results. In addition when the unseen negative forces perceive that one will 
go to extremely barbaric lengths to make contact, they normally lead the person into a whole host of 
rituals which tend to involve sacrifice and blood thus they never meet the Most High and are headed 
in the direction of a place foreign to anything made of flesh, with no light to guide their steps.  
We are now living in a time that it is almost necessary for the religious system to “re-boot” due 
to the amount of legends, myths, and fables that have been all rolled under the subject of Spiritual 
Ascension. This book to me was a final effort to get a rope around all the belief systems as they 
continue to merge becoming more and more difficult to weed through and track the origins of. I’m 
sure that if something is not done now, the future generations will have a very difficult time telling 
truth from falsehood if this is allowed to continue. This book is a key underground tool for 
innerstanding  whatever happens in the near future and getting through it. History books continue to 
be revised as more incorrect information is added. If you notice the hive mind mainframe, Wikipedia, 
now the number one portal for information, constantly updates their data and they are owned and 
operated by the Elite. I’ve witnessed various alterations to certain topics which take a person 
completely off the mark of Truth of the topics of high importance. 
  Before we move further I will state again that I’m not at all an advocate of Christianity but it 
is now a fact that the Catholic and Christian religions have restarted a much older design and have 
introduced it to the world under new packaging. Some addition name changes and a sprinkle of 
hyperdimensional magic is all that’s needed to mislead the masses. This makes it of value to dissect 
certain things that we know about the religion in order to fully perceive what is really going on today. 
You should keep in mind the amount of followers dedicated to each belief system thus the direction of 
energy and how it flows about the world you currently live in.  
Although you may have opened your mind to search for whether or not there is more truth out 
there, many refuse to read anything related to the subject of Spirituality. Another portion will not 
read anything else unless it is the Bible, Koran, or the particular book attached to their Faith such as 
the Book of Mormon. In fact these religions teach that one should not read anything else less they 
become lead astray or should they say, led to the real truth. One is looked at as a devil when asking too 
many questions and they are often rebuked. There are the others who get lost in all of the complex 
disinformation produced in works such as Liber 777 and various other novels that claim to be 
references on the meaning of esoteric knowledge, its symbols, etc. Besides avoiding falling asleep while 
reading these tales one is sure to get the feeling they are following someone who has no eyes, guide 
dog, or cane, they bring a whole new meaning to lost.  
That of course is for the confused wishing to be witches, the Illumed knows of things entirely 
different. It is nothing like the exhausting sagas and ceremonies of the witches. Direct and constant


--- PAGE 72 ---
72 | Page  
 
contact is necessary and thus I will reveal how it is accomplished. The Eight Pointed Star is that of Ilu. 
To the Illuminati this also signifies all Eight legged insects, such as Spiders who weave webs. At the 
entrance of the Bohemian Grove where their rituals take place it says, “Spiders weave not your webs 
here” indicating they cannot use magic on brothers, however, the masses they prey upon. This Star is 
also used in their evocation and transportation to Venus and various affiliated locations.   
 
 
 
 
 
The word we must introduce in the Code first is the “OR”. The “OR” has meant since ancient 
times the Gold. As a people we have always been mining Gold whether it was the mines of Nubia, the 
Gold Rush of North America, or many of the indigenous tribes throughout Central and South 
America. It was also known to other Beings that the Human soul was the real Gold, they sought after 
it within our mind “Mine”. The Element gold itself was known to carry a special vibration due to its 
conductivity which made it in fact alive and able to channel wealth and material energy. Gold emitted 
Reason 53: This is the cross of Ilu. What should be drawn from this is the Elite use an 8 sided 
portal for hyper- dimensional travel and as their insignia. An Eight is also known as a double 
cube or Solomon’s Temple. 4+4=8. This star is generally behind the head of Jesus when he is 
depicted. 
Reason 54: 
The gate 
configuration 
of the Dome 
of the Rock 
and CERN 
both are 
portals.


--- PAGE 73 ---
73 | Page  
 
a certain type of energy that kept one on top in the material realm not to mention what it did to the 
soul when it was ingested in its Monatomic state. Monatomics also known as ORMES was the 
preferred Spirit enhancing elements of the Alchemist. Against common belief one did not have to be a 
chemist in order to make Monatomics, they were often located in the desert in dry lake beds that the 
Sun had cooked for hundreds of years. Caravans would collect this substance and peddle it as secret 
salts at values higher than Gold. This is the legendary Salt worth more than Gold.   
This is also why the Pharaoh’s entombed themselves in Gold and were found in bask reliefs 
consuming it or being offered it by the people in cones. It has always been the most common standard 
for currency despite the introduction of more expensive metals such as Titanium and Platinum. Gold 
symbolizes the Lion who you even hear R”oar”. The Hebrew word “Ori” means golden light, and 
there is also the “Or” and “Ori” in Orion the most known part of our galaxy next to the Milky Way. 
In Yoruba or Voodoo they evoke Orishas, Gods who do their bidding at the cost of various sacrifices. I 
will not heavily elaborate on this word now. You will soon see in time why the “OR” leads to 
everything going on here in the w”or”ld. You have the words “Ori”ginat”or”and  Creat”or” could any 
words be more powerful than these? This is how the trail leads right back to who fashioned it and they 
cannot escape it as you will find. One of the first Egyptian Gods Ptah is anagram for Path which is the 
word we use to refer to our Spiritual quest or personal road. In order for the system to work and in 
“or”der for our minds to be fooled we are made to subconsciously believe they are the creators 
through word play, which they are not. So the next question would be of course who are “they” and 
this we will get to in due time. 
 
Reason 55: These Talismans’ are Voodoo veves. Amazingly the Elite are also using Voodoo which is 
another Venusian dark Art. The dark forces are in leagues together, the common symbols we use 
everyday mean things much different than we assume. For instance the heart is the sign of Erzulie 
another name for Venus. The heart is not a symbol of love but evol/evil. You will see these two 
snakes associated with the Goddess even more as we go, and of course the M.


--- PAGE 74 ---
74 | Page  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reason 56: Another Golden Age was the time of the dominion of the Pharaohs. Eating the 
Gold/ORMES/Philosopher’s Stone amplified their Spiritual stature. ORMES changes the cellular 
structure of the DNA to various fractal patterns of Sacred Geometry.  Aegyptus who escaped the 
catastrophe of Atlantis is who Egypt owes it current name to, he was Atlanto-African. In Atlantis 
Venus was the head Mistress being worshipped among the Daughters of Poseidon they were 
known as Hesperides which also linked to the Seven Sisters of Pleiades. Amongst them are Aegle 
Mistress of Magic, Erythea Mistress of Earth, Arethusa of Hades, vestals attending the shrine 
which was a Tree which bought forth “Golden Apples” set in the middle garden of Atlantis.


--- PAGE 75 ---
75 | Page  
 
 
I will take a moment to elaborate a little more on the Code Breaking witch is Spell Breaking. 
What you search for first is the smallest word of importance that you can think of let’s take for 
example: JAIL. Now it is actually the guttural tone and key spelling that you are searching for as 
everything is a vibration. That would then make the word, JAEL. It is of value to go to this extent so 
you can see all the words that are not so positive but used everyday as such. So let us begin. 
AEL- Ale: This is the wo rd for the intoxicating mind numbing dr ink of poison bluntly and rightfully 
called Spirits. 
 
BAEL-Bail: This is not only one of the main Deitie s of the Babylonians but also the term used when 
you need to get released from JAIL you must be bailed out by the bail bondsman. It also means to run 
like never before. 
CAEL- The “K” and the “C” make th e same sound when solo thus there is a more deeper meaning 
not to mention “X” can be manipula ted to make this same vibration . What you have here is one of 
the most dangerous words. KAEL, KILL, to temporarily terminate life. 
DAEL-Deal: Of course everyone l oves a deal but this is what got us into the financia l mess we are in 
now. Think of this, in antiquity there was such abundance barter was not even the form of transaction 
it was giving. We had no reason to  even keep food because it grew everywhere and we loved it fresh, 
especially when we were on the right diets. No wheeling and dealing. 
E A L - E L  o r  L :  A s  y o u  s e e  t h i s  i s  t h e  k e y w o r d ,  i t is also a one Letter word  which makes it a “Core 
Word” when pronounced. The bible says “and the Elohim said, let us  make man in our image”. This 
is the controller of the Matrix from multiple angles pe rsonifying itself as variou s Deities.  L is also an 
upside-down 7 which is the sacred number of most belief systems. 
Reason 57: We 
have never had a 
President in 
history that showed 
bluntly he was a 
drunk. This was to 
send the subliminal 
message “you can 
drink and still be 
President.”


--- PAGE 76 ---
76 | Page  
 
 
FAEL: Fail: Besides its obvious meaning which is to no t succeed it is also the past tense of Fallen. The 
story is really here. The Angels that fell they are the fallen ones. I will bring up now that most 
religions still share the sa me 4 Angels from Catholicism, Islam,  and Christianity even in Hinduism 
they talk of Michael, Gabriel, Rapheal, and Uriel. 
GAEL: The Gael with their mystical Ogam script can be found in  various parts of interesting history 
as their leader Wooten was known to discover Amer ica and parts of Canada setting up trade routes 
before Columbus was thought of. Wooten is where our word Wednesday or Wooten’s Day comes 
from. This is also the name given to a destructive wind.  
HAEL- Hell Hail: Again besides its obvious meaning, this is also a term used to salute various high 
rank officials’ especially in th e German army. Since in ancient ti mes you would name your forces 
according to where their power “hailed” from. As yo u see in the Bible they sa y the good Angels come 
in Myriads and the bad Angels come in Legions. Wh at would it mean to re-legion? Would this not 
mean to gather more troops to a previously depleted Legion? Even deeper how did their Legions 
become depleted anyway? Could it be that that various beings such as the Venusians had been defeated 
before and fled to our Galaxy? I believe so and that is why we have to make sure to not join their ranks 
and if we know we have joined them through one folly or another, disavow. 
IEL- Ill: As in not well, sick, like the so-called Illuminated Illuminati and their Illusions. 
JAEL- Pathetic these losers are using magic to impris on people thus most criminals are really victims. 
The Code is so heavy it is a wond er we all aren’t insane criminals even though many are and silently 
act it out in their mind or on video games. Behold look what thin gs have come to man traps his 
brother in cages like animals for profi t. The legal system itself I took personal interest in. All the Post 
Offices and Court Houses that belo ng to the United States are all built with the same Granite no 
matter how far they have to ship it. This granite comes from “E l”berton Georgia. Crystals and Stones 
Reason: Another depiction of El 
Saturn gliding through always 
sure to keep the serpent 
affiliation somewhere in the 
depiction. This is Sat, Sam, San, 
Sar, Sab, Sac, Sad, Sag, Sal, etc. 
Saturday, Samael, Salamander, 
Sabbath, etc. Many of us have 
these words as the roots of our 
Names, colonization was truly 
about deluding bloodlines. 
Reason 58: Another depiction of El 
Saturn gliding through always sure to 
keep the serpent affiliation 
somewhere in His depiction. This is 
Sat, Sam, San, Sar, Sab, Sac, Sad, Sag, 
Sal, etc. Sargon, Satan, Santa, 
Sacrifice, Samael, Salamander, 
Sabbath, Sadistic, Sage, etc. Many of 
us have these words as the roots of our 
names, colonization was truly about 
deluding and mixing bloodlines.


--- PAGE 77 ---
77 | Page  
 
can be programmed with intent, and since all the stones come form the same place it all holds the 
same unique frequency. The police officer is a Ma son, the Judge is a Mason, the Lawyer is a Mason 
and the Prison Guard is a Mason. Fr om the time one gets in the syst em they are in the hands of the 
Masons modern day slavery chain.    
 
Reason 59: One of the 
Unseen Hands of the real 
Illuminati. This is how they 
have received information 
of such high caliper on the 
subject of Galactic 
domination they do abide 
by a strict Hierarchy. Those 
who join are so far on the 
bottom of the pyramid they 
get crushed by the Titans on 
the top thus they are putty 
in the hands of these Beings 
who must be dealt with by 
the “Enlightened Human” 
on Astral Planes. One 
cannot concentrate too long 
on why they are doing this 
the Light does not 
comprehend the darkness.


--- PAGE 78 ---
78 | Page  
 
 
 
 
 
 
LAEL-Leo: The Lion who has been “Lying” since the beginning proposi ng to be the “Li”ght of the 
world and the King of the Beasts. The best depictio n of the Lion is on the Wizard of Oz” and they 
now lack the courage to face what they have done. 
MAEL- Male-Mail: This is the exciting part about the Code. Sometimes you crack into things that have 
such a deeper meaning that you know you still have a lot to learn. This  is a powerful term all the way 
around. It is used to denote the masculine sex and its relationship to Ma. A book written on Secret 
Societies spoke of a Brotherhood of Ma that predated most Secret Societies, period. This Brotherhood 
Reason 60: Another part of the Unseen hand is the Red Dragon they are not shy in telling you 
they serve him. Their symbol is also the Lion and the Serpent, false Wisdom and Nobility. 
                                                   
                                                  “Evil has found a willing servant.” 
                                                                                           Spoken by George Bush


--- PAGE 79 ---
79 | Page  
 
was said to be in conjunction with Mars and Maldek a Planet in our system that was destroyed. This is 
also a form of communication and a form of armor as in “Chain Mail”. 
NAEL-Nail: I was in deep medit ation one time and I was asking about the “T” and why it was so 
important to Christianity as in th e Trinity. When I finally got a resp onse it said “the “T” is a nail 
James and that blew my mind, obviously I get excited easily, but seri ously I knew there was defiantly a 
connection with Jesus being nailed to the cross whic h is what they emphasis the most when they re-
enact that whole terrible scene of the sacrifice.  Nails and hooks in magic all have some weird dark use. 
What is being clearly shown is sh arp objects that poke like forks “T he Devils Fork” Swords, Daggers 
are all tools of darkness. The Devil is often call “The Nail”. This does n’t mean to freak out next time 
your at the dinner table but what you will find is most indigenous cultures eat with their hands. 
Cutting and poking things clearly has its own subconscious effects and was the real sign of savagery. 
OEL-Oil: The destruction of mank ind on Earth. I was swimming th e other day in the Ocean and I 
could not help but to notice the amount of plastic washing up on the shore. Since I feast on vegetables 
and fruit I can throw the rinds and peelings in th e compost but the plastic must be thrown in the 
trash. I started noticing just how much plastic is really in circulation just between bags for nuts, 
groceries, zip locks etc. Every time someone tries to  disarm your intent on changing things attempting 
to make you believe that everything is okay and its just all in you mind, think of the plastic, when they 
try to Namaste love and light you telling you to consider only yourself, consider the plastic and how its 
choking and suffocating our Mother . The Government could ban plas tic right now and big industry 
would be forced to use the alternati ve that has already been laid out for them but they will not do it 
because we have to overthrow them on the Spiritual Pl ane first. It is there th ings can be handled, it 
only takes one of us and thousands of them fall by the waste side, mighty we are, Immortalis. 
PAEL-Pale: An Angel that spends more than seven days on Earth is  substantialized and becomes pale 
and opaque. Many of them disperse d into Canaan called afterwards, “Pale’stine which is now Israel. 
They swept the world with terror those who also came  from the Isles of Albion which is Britain they 
looked lifeless this is where the term Albino comes from. Venusians have this same appearance. 
QAEL-Quail-Still wondering why this is the state bird of California? 
RAEL-Real: This is as real as it ge ts as you see you are on the target, th is is what is really going on not 
the Illusion and of course their latest addition to unguided Spiritual mayhem, Rael, who is most 
assuredly down with the diabolical plan inciting his followers to all out blasphemy and hedonism. In 
this condition they can do little for the world.


--- PAGE 80 ---
80 | Page  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
SAEL-Sale-Seal: What you will find wi th the Serpent energy since each “S” is a symbol for a serpent 
like Hitler’s SS. Cracking the Code when you come to the “S” words, Swords, they always are deeply 
embedded with meaning. Now Sale and Deal go together and that makes business, the art of swindling 
our poor fellows. On the other hand when it comes down to it magical Seals are the most powerful. 
The purpose of a Seal is to close something in thus trapping it to do bidding or holding it so it won’t 
escape. Solomon’s Seal which is the Star of David was designed to do just that, trap things. When 
Solomon would Seal Jinn in bottles he would put th e Star of David on top. Once again you can see 
that even Metatron’s cube which has hit the #1 spot in Sacred Geometry is none other than a hex used 
time and time again to keep souls which are seekin g higher truth passing back  and forth between this 
demented dimension and Saturn. It is a mental weak ening tool as many have already admitted since 
its main purpose is only to weaken the cube it should never be placed in the mind.  
Reason 61: The Country of Canada is actually funding Rael to go about his Ministry of basically 
“do whatever you want there is no God”, just another hedonist cult on the surface however 
because they are linked with Thule as you can see by their Medallions I knew they had to be up 
to more. Sure enough they run an actual baby cloning facility where a mother who has suffered 
a miscarriage can actually have the baby. They use the Blood and DNA of the deceased baby 
and make a new one. Of course this is a very expensive procedure so they attract very wealthy 
candidates. This is like the movie Omen where these evil babies were put into wealthy 
households to later control major companies. Earthier way this is big time E.T. action Rael has 
at least a dozen surrogate mothers on staff waiting to hatch a baby. Their website promotes all 
of this, no legal problems whatsoever, pure Zionist breaking all the rules they enforce.


--- PAGE 81 ---
81 | Page  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
TAEL-Tale- Tail- We come to our favorite Reptilian appendage the ta il along with the word always 
used for the erroneous stories we are told especially as children i.e. Fairy Ta les, Wives Tales, and Tall 
Tales. 
VAEL-Veil: A very powerful word fr om my point of view, this is wh at creates the Illusion. The world 
walks about Veiled meaning unable to see the truth.   
WAEL-Wail-Whale: To continuously cry and our aq uatic friends known to originate on the Aquatic 
Moon Europa and also Sirius along with Dolphins.  
YAEL- Yale-Yell: To scream and also the famous Un iversity which still has th e Seal of the Urim and 
the Thummim, the ancient Hebraic Rune Stones. These are objects of magic used by the Levite Priest. 
This is also the home of Skull and Bones code number (322) March 22 turn of the Equinox. 
 
 
 
Reason 62: The knowledge of the organic cube was taken from Egypt now given the title the 
Flower of Life. The Egyptians used this to visually encase matter within in it. Then it was used to 
move things, especially large objects, around with their minds. Meditating on this Geometric 
Shape incorrectly will help solidify the Cubic frame of the body we are already trapped in thus it is 
not the chariot. The real purpose for these shapes is an Art called Tesseract, which is the shape 
you see on the right. This is for bringing things into this dimension from the 4th. 6 Protons 6 
Electrons 6 Neutrons, our body is the Carbon structure of the Cube, the Beast, but not our Spirit. 
The Flower of Life later became Metatron’s Cube when the lines were made straight.


--- PAGE 82 ---
82 | Page  
 
 
 
ZAEL-Zeal: It is noted in the Bible a man named Phin ehas showed “Zeal” meaning in this case lots of 
aggressive energy to rain destruction upon the Gentiles and go to murder for God and this was shined 
upon. There are numerous ancestral tribes with an abundance of blood on their hands. If we chose to 
follow their religions we will share their same fate. Keep in mind ma ny indigenous tribes claim to 
learn the worship of the serpent from Atlantians wh o arrived on their coasts with abnormal powers 
after the destruction of their city  in the late month of Aether wh ich is our October, Aeth is  
pronounced, Eight. October is our 10 th month but Octo means eight. This shows you how purposely 
off the Gregorian calendar is. As I said above 2012 is happening now.  
 As you see with this simple (4) letter word th at we have examined there is a lot more to be 
extracted from language. Due to the Truth itself ne ver being written nowhere near its entirety, this 
provides one of the only ways to extract the manifold story of wh at happened here on Earth, it 
survives in the language. Societies like the Druids never wrote anything down thus everything of value 
Reason 63: The Name was placed 
under the Breastplate and would cause 
it to glow opening communication to 
the Tetragrammaton. Lucifer also had 
his body encrusted with special stones.


--- PAGE 83 ---
83 | Page  
 
was committed to memory. As it stat es in several places the memory banks of man and woman were a 
lot more vast then they are now, they did not have to write things down. Even looking in Egypt it has 
been discovered that even the Hieroglyphs where a product of latter times in Egypt, the original 
inhabitants left no written record s just Djedhi Priests. This lend s more credit to the results of 
magnetic shifts which is extensive memory loss. I believe if a person does not have a strong sound aura, 
magnetic shifts can erase most past, present, and future information pertaining to the person. 
 
 People that can really see Aura s can read things off a persons Aura, not just the mood of the 
person. It is known that information like where they have been, who their descendants are, and 
various other deeply enligh tening things about their character.  When examining the controllers of 
this system I did come across extens ive information indicating that pole shifts could now be caused by 
the technology in their possession which had been used before in previous times to reverse the effects 
of a natural pole shift. Seeing 2012 line up as the Zionist Code it would indicate not only the ability to 
possibly cause shifts but also the ab ility to traverse the space time continuum. Most make the mistake 
of calculating what everyone in the world is capable of based on their personal intelligence level not 
realizing there are men who spend their every waking moment solving complex problems of Quantum 
Physics and various forms of Science. One who spends their time in the club and drinking should not 
believe they are on the same caliper as these grea t minds, that is the ego that would believe such 
foolishness. It makes sense that they are doing nothing in vain and have truly discovered something far 
beyond the imagination of the common slacker. 
Reason 64: Our Ancestors had at times 
larger brains and greater memory capacity. 
This is never talked about because of course 
it would destroy the Theory of Evolution. 
These skulls date back millions of years ago. 
The Bible starts the first Creation of man at 
roughly 8,500 years ago, what a hindering 
lie. Sometimes when you are dreaming you 
may even see people you knew in elementary 
school however if you are asked while 
conscious if you remember them in such 
detail the answer for most will be no. 
Because so many quadrants of the brain are 
powered down ultimately most people are 
walking about with a bad case of amnesia. 
When one forgets who they are they become 
clones behaving like everyone else.


--- PAGE 84 ---
84 | Page  
 
  
These topics are never covered and our strictly out of the box. A long debate will go on amongst 
individuals questioning whet her or not time travel is possible. Sometimes they will go a little deeper 
and report things like the Philadelphia Experiment where it was purported a major project took place 
to create a jump hole between 1 940 and 1980 approximat ely. Few ever make it to the point of 
questioning what was being done with this “Time Gate ”. Let us ask the questi on, with the ability to 
traverse time still under the laws of physics wh at would the Elite want to change? That is a big 
question but to me there is one simple answer, they  would want to make them selves rule as long as 
possible and anything that could disrupt that they would thwart somehow as long as possible.  
 
Reason 65: The date 2012 is actually the numeric 
Code for Zion used across encrypted machines 
like the German Enigma and the Code of the 
Psyconaut. The 2 is a Z, S, or N as you can see the 
obvious similarities, the 01 is binary and can be 
interchanged and finally the N. Tis true they will 
reach completion at least by 2012 although 2010 
is the “vivid” beginning of the shift. The Elite 
used Zion as the logo for the Olympics scheduled 
for Babylondon in 2012. They are bluntly 
pushing forward.


--- PAGE 85 ---
85 | Page  
 
  
 
 
 
We will talk a little of traversing space and time  and how one can get in a position to even be 
able to accomplish such a feat unle ss they were Spiritually incline. It is known that if you are carrying 
a low vibration you cannot physically travel through higher vibratory fields wi th the body, obviously, 
but you can get to other Planes, Pl anets and various territories with capable ships. This is what is 
meant by the term “External Merkaba”. When the space race began it  was Russia and th e U.S. Let us 
start looking at all of the Russian Territory known as “the Great Bear” as under one very divisive 
Monarchy in which the people are expendable. Let us include even Germany in this although many 
think the Russians don’t like the Germans that was something created by their mutual governments to 
formulate a plan of divide and conquer which the Elite do everywhere, they are all still Aryans. VENE 
VINI VECE we just call it “The V”. 
 
Reason 66: On the left a fresh jump gate installed right outside of downtown Detroit without the 
least bit of curiosity, of course who’s looking at Detroit these days. On the right the jump gate on 
Stargate SG1 equipped with Enochian writing. You should begin to see how fact and what seems at 
times to be fiction blur together. Everything we can think does in fact already exist. 
Reason 67: Russia, a long standing Occult and 
Technological Powerhouse made it to the 
Moon first with ease. Their space technology 
was far more superior than the U.S. as they had 
already made deals with the Gizans. One would 
need to keep in mind Russia had one of the 
first Inner Circles. True they lost many people 
in depressions and civil wars but their Elite 
continued to increase their ranks, again, the 
people are expendable to them. Lennon, 
Trotsky, Stalin, Gorbachev, Putin and many 
others fed from Mother Russia like Vampires 
at a blood bank. Not to mention that’s where 
those that choose Plasma as their diet get it 
from, no time to be hunting people in the 
night when you have to be in a fortune 500 
meeting in the morning.


--- PAGE 86 ---
86 | Page  
 
 The race was to the moon, as they say. One sh ould start thinking what was really happening on 
the Moon since we know a silly race isn’t the reason these two Juggernauts take off on a goal. 
Furthermore trust they would use every “Channel” th ey could to be sure they could make the trips 
with the least amount of error. They would need  star maps, statistics, temperatures, pressures, 
permissions and various ot her guides. Many think we  just logically came across this information 
through trail and error which would create enormous time issues for explaining how fast we prepared 
for the mission. Here is what really happened.  
In the Spiritual circles of Thule during Third Reich NAZI Germany the greatest magicians of 
all time had come together. Blavatsky was only a co mponent of this group. Me n like Dietrich Eckart, 
who trained Hitler, where far above her. Madame Bl avatsky possessed an array of esoteric goodies she 
picked up from the Black Tibetans during her trip to Agharta/Shamba llah. In such a male dominant 
society Blavatsky entransed the mind of various key individuals with obviously not her physical charm. 
Books writing her off as a quack are disinformation. She begins her Book “Isis Unveiled” with a stout 
beginning making her allegiance in BATH KOL ISIS known. 
 
 
 
 
 
Reason 68: Madam Petrova Blavatsky mother of the Society of Thule recruited the best 
Magicians of the time. She made contact with the Black Tibetans known as the “Green Gloves” 
found later scattered throughout defeated Nazi Germany in houses where they had committed 
mass suicides. The “Green Gloves” were hyperdimensional Tibetan Masters. They showed 
Blavatsky Shamballah/Agharta, the Inner world. She made the pacts with them and thus the 
Third Reich became the heavy instrument of the Dark Tibetans all aligned with the Gizans.


--- PAGE 87 ---
87 | Page  
 
This is how the Swastika of the Black Sun got into circulation in Germany. Since once again we 
are in a binary world we also have another Sun direct ly on the opposite side of this Sun. You have to 
be in special locations to see it, th ey refer to it as a Sun Dog. The Black Sun is the opposite energy, a 
taker of life for strength rather than a giver. Ma dame Blavatsky had Master El Morya, St. Germaine, 
Koot Hoomi, Sanat Kama ra, Sananda, Aliester Crowley, McGregor Mather, Frater Achad, 
Krishnamurti, Leadbetter, and Besant all Immortal Masters of Astral Travel and devoted members of 
Great White Brotherhood.   
 
  
 
 
With this arsenal Thule hatched a deeper plan in conjunction with the Paranormal Division of 
the Third Reich. Deros, their co ntact who wrote the new Emerald Ta bles of Thoth, dwelled in the 
underground city of Agharta. The Paranormal Division was said to receive more funding than Hitler’s 
total Armament Division due to its importance to  the Reich. They lay burdened with the task of 
gathering all the powerful Shrines from around the world which eventually ended up in the vaults of 
the British Museum. Those who have done study on holy artifacts will note that most of them are in 
the British Museum, not in their original place of origin, they won’t allow it. Many of these objects do 
strange things when placed back on their corresponding leylines. It is known you can only get into the 
vaults of the British Museum if you are a memb er of The Golden Dawn. The Golden Dawn was a 
Society setup by Thule in which Aliester Crowley was made head of, he ha d Frater Achad as his 
apprentice. Crowley and Mathers were always in comp etition with one another, this is how Blavatsky 
penned them against each  other to broaden their potential. Th ese two Adepts birthed the greatest 
horrors mankind has witnessed in this era. Many of  their works were publis hed by Blavatsky’s Lucis 
Trust, again another obvious clue she was part of the Luciferian agenda. 
Reason 69: Rare images of a Sundog, the view of our Binary Sun sometimes even appearing as 
three suns. These are government facilities fully staffed located far away from civilization on the 
poles which are the only places you can see this phenomena. These places don’t get visitors often 
and if they do they are not civilians.


--- PAGE 88 ---
88 | Page  
 
 
  
 
 
  
Aliester was far more sadistic then McGregor it was he the Beast decided to incarnate in. That 
did not go without the key use of McGregor who had a gift for languages. McGregor was set to the task 
of translating the Keys of Solomon from ancient He brew to Latin and Englis h. This had never been 
done and it was awaited by every Magician of the time, especially since not many had access to the 
libraries in the British Museum. After translation McGregor’s life was very short and his scribe admits 
he had been affected by  some curse which the book even warns of called the “Reflux Current”. Dan 
B r o w n  i s  s c h e d u l e  t o  r e l e a s e  h i s  r e n d i t i o n  o f  T h e  K e y s  o f  S o l o m o n  t o  f o l l o w  u p  h i s  A n g e l s  a n d  
Demons. I sure hope you are off th is Plane when this hi ts the media and people in their curiosity 
download the original book, which is also availabl e for free. The Beast has incarnated in several men 
such as Jack Parsons the creator of the nuclear bomb who was also a Satanist, Albert Pike the 
33˚Mason responsible for bringing new forms of the corrupted Brotherhood to the U.S. and of course 
Crowley who set Leviathan free. 
As they completed the circle of ceremony all was silent, everything that needed to be said was said, the 
order, perfect, the incense, in measure, the offerings received, in vestments they waited and as time 
past they assumed the ritual to be barren. Then there was a flash of energy as the portal opened, a 
green trapezoid, many collapsed with the sudden change in temperature as the deep cold permeated 
the room, they had done it, they had unleashed the Ancient Forbidden One. What have they done, 
they have released Leviathan who is C”thul”u. Aliester Crowley’s ritualistic experiments in Loch Ness. 
Reason 70: The Holy Grail and the Spear of Longinus, which was said to pierce the side of Christ, 
where both seized by Hitler. These artifacts are charged with energy due to the belief millions of 
people put in them. Childhood stories of Knights, Princesses, and Dragons all serve to mold the 
mind for future indoctrination. Most of these items had much different histories. The real Grail 
was not even the Chalice it was a succession of women carrying pure bloodlines, like Mary.


--- PAGE 89 ---
89 | Page  
 
 
 I will take a moment to elaborate on this book th e Keys to Solomon since I personally believe it 
will play a huge role in the reality shift of this dimension for a few reasons. When Dan Brown released 
The Davinchi Code it was instantly a Best Seller , meaning the media pushed it to the top fast. He 
followed up with Angels and Demons and that solidified his career, they had the perfect Puppet Icon. 
Anything else he releases people  are going to swarm to. They warm ed everyone back up again when 
they did the Davinchi Code Movie with everyone’s favorite Mr. Forest Gump Tom Hanks. This gave 
Dan more prestige. Now they are finished with th e Angels and Demons movie and the subtitle is 
Revenge of the Nephalim which you can do your own book on all of what that entails by now. So next 
of course will be the Keys to Solomon.  
 The original book, the Key to Solo mon, does not read like a story book it is strictly Talismans, 
Prayers, Repentances, Evocations, and illustrations of Ceremonial Magic. It is not wise to speak 
against anything you do not understand. This book I Innerstand  very clearly as a horrible danger. 
Why? During the time I was a fresh Pastor I was fa scinated with Solomon, he  was who I chose as my 
Archetype as many men of the cloth often do. Solomo n has all the wisdom and most affectionately all 
the ladies, something abolished after Solomon’s time but still it allows the deprived Pastor to dream a 
little. I wanted to read everything  Solomon wrote especially since it actually says in Proverbs Solomon 
wrote over 5000 books. I wondered why if So lomon wrote 5000 books we only had (3) Psalms, 
Proverbs, and the Song of Solomon one of which was not written by Solomon but by Lemuel. Some 
say Lemuel, Solomon, and Jedidiah were all the same person.  
I began to search and came acro ss two more books, The Testaments of Solomon and the Keys 
to Solomon. Both were full of demons. In th e Testament of Solomon, Solomon is actually 
interrogating demons under the powe r of the Ring which he says was given to him by YHVH. The 
Keys to Solomon had the names of demons inscribed in the Talismans that it instructed you to make. 
Of course I didn’t know the names were those of Demons failing to do the translation from Hebrew 
to English at the moment in addition my Dictionary of Angels by Gustav was still on the way. But that 
wasn’t going to stop me from exploring a little of Solomon’s wondrous Talismans eh.   
Reason 71: Left 
to Right 
Crowley, Pike, 
and Parson the 
fleshly Hosts of 
the Beast.


--- PAGE 90 ---
90 | Page  
 
 In short after doing all of the rigorous work of  constructing a Talisman for wisdom this is what 
happened. First I will note that some of the ritu als in the book involved animals blood which made 
me think a little deeper about So lomon, however, their were plen ty that did not involve blood and 
since there was also a warning in the beginning of the book about using anim als blood I came to the 
terms that someone had maliciously put the spells th ere since they were towards the back of the book. 
When I would fall asleep with the Talisman or B ook around me I would be transported to another 
world. Once I realized I was watchi ng the dream I could begin to cont rol it thus starting the lucid 
phase. From there some monstrous form would appear and we would do battle of which I noticed the 
Seals from the Key to Solomon played a heavy roll in trapping these Demons once they had been 
subdued. Sustaining any kind of bl ow from them would resu lt in real physical damage in this world. 
On one occasion a Demon got hold of me and slam med me before I could br eak the dream. When I 
woke up I had the pain and the bruises, after th at I learned not to get grabbed. All along I was 
imagining I was doing the Lords work, in the Army now. 
  The dreams could always be broke by Holy Names in which I kept a complete arsenal in 
memory. I also noted their where a lot of other people there all invol ved in doing something in this 
strange world full of Spirits. The Demons got bigger and bigger and I se emed to get better and better 
at dealing with them and then the Dictionary arri ved. I was horrified to find that the Talismans 
contained the names of Demons. What I now know is that all the Demons I was fighting I had evoked 
and if I had lost they could have done damage to my soul. I will tell the reader now, I was born on the 
22nd which is a Master Number so I have a buffer that allows me to dissect these things without 
immediate danger to my soul due to positive intent, however, I kn ow beyond doubt many have been 
taken by this book, maybe my work  about it will reach the peoples ha nds in time so they can steer 
clear of it. 
 Back to the plans of Thule. With the Talismans of Solomon in hand they  began to travel the 
opposite Plane which anyone trained in Lucid Sleep ca n do. In this Plane you can go to various places 
and the main feature is you can call forth Beings and they appear. Apparent ly they called forth the 
Enochian Enchained sons of Cain and they appeared  to them. They consulted with them about world 
domination and how it could be br ought about. They gave them firs t a special language of power to 
use amongst themselves in conjunct ion with Vril power. They gave them the strategy for using young 
minds as processors in (“Universe  City’s) Universities. The idea wa s to use the brightest minds to 
develop devices to create external Merkaba. This vehicle could be us ed to travel dimensions, a real 
time machine. The alchemist became the physicist. 
 Following this in the “seen” wo rld we find Germany at the head  of jet propulsion technology. 
The Allies and Axis where in the bed together behind  the scenes, but in plain view they pretended to 
be enemies. The Black Su n Cults, White Brotherhoods, Lucife rian, Saturnalian, Atlanteans, and 
Venusians all had a mutual cause, Galactic domination. Of course de classified CIA Project Paperclip 
indicates the transferring of the German Scientist during the staged fall of the Third Reich to U.S. soil


--- PAGE 91 ---
91 | 
 
to w
date
they
 
 
 
Re
the
spa
 Page  
work for N A
e, the Hol o
y continued
eason 72: Se
he NASA um
pace shuttles
ASA. Basic
ocaust, to f e
d a plan few
Several Nazi
mbrella to h
s but to kill
cally they d
eed the V a
w would even
i’s scientist w
help with ro
l innocent p
destroyed G
alkries and 
n venture t
 were impor
ocket propu
people by th
Germany set
other de m
to believe. 
rted into th
ulsion. Thes
he thousand
t up the b i
moniac force
he U.S. The
ese rockets w
nds.  
iggest Hum
es they wh e
em they wer
where not u
man sacrifice
ere workin g
re brought u
used to pow
e known t o
g with, an d
 
 
 under 
wer 
o 
d


--- PAGE 92 ---
92 | Page  
 
 
 
 
 
 
The idea was to rearrange occurrences in history to erect new Saviors. We will call this Project 
Eighth Ray which I will get into more  in the Second Edition, if there is a Second Edition. It takes at 
times to be showed this by Higher Beings to be lieve, my Word can only stand for the Guided who 
know of some of the things I have already spoken of and thus will venture to trust me further as I will 
still show how it all fits together, so reason, not be lief, is needed. In many of  the ancient paintings it 
shows what appears to be Spaceships in the atmosphere during the crucifixion of Jesus. Those ships 
bare the 8
 pointed Star of Ilu. These Ilu are very advanc ed, which is why they co ntrol the world. Jesus 
was a “NAZA”RITE a special sect of whom Samson and almost all Prop hets of the Bible belonged to; 
this is the Rites of NAZA who all leave this world at 33 years old. The part of the Oath of the Nazarite 
is to never cut your hair. Samson and Jesus both left the world at Age 33.  
When the German Scientists came to the U.S. they joined up with NASA the “S” of course is a 
backwards “Z”. They formed the new NAZI party who now have many angles they work from because 
they have unlocked the ability of  hyperdimensional travel. Always  remember the technology they 
show us in the open is the old stuff, look how long the Militar y was using microwave technology 
before they decided to let everyone else give it a spin introducing the Microwave into the home. When 
the Microwave hit the market people were amazed, look how fast it he ats things, at a price of course, 
“Ra”diation which will always cause some form of cancer or tumor most times undetected.  
 
This means large pro-peace movements similar to the times of the Hippies may have been 
removed from our memories. There may have been a lot more uprising in history then currently 
Reason 73: The Hyperdimensional Being known as Aiwass channeled through Crowley gave him 
a coded language of power to use amongst the Psyconauts which they came to be known as. Aiwass 
is also the sign of the Single Bolt in Ancient Germanic which can be found in (Letters and 
Numbers). Aiwass was the classic “Gray” alien sent by the dark side as an extraterrestrial imposter. 
They are more similar to Golem, two part Beings created by Sorcerers that just follow orders. 
Reason 74: We will see a lot more of 
the Project 8th Ray and their 
hyperdimensional capabilities.


--- PAGE 93 ---
93 | 
 
rem
how
little
perc
cann
exce
drop
happ
Re
“I
its
be
mo
be
 Page  
membered, e
wever, I’m a
e work, and
ceive thing s
not rememb
eptional jo b
pped by t h
pened are w
 
 
 
 
Reason 76: SO
I”. Of cours
s greatest tec
e adjusting t
more one can
e dulled out
especially t
aware it is o
d then they 
s different 
ber Bob M
b at showi n
he Elite be c
watching. T
SONY which
se it makes s
echnological
 the viewers 
n do to expl
t and contro
he Great B
only excepti
 are remove
in the fut
Marley in h e
ng the cau s
cause it m a
This occurs a
h is an anag
 sense comin
al gadgets of 
s DNA with
lain anythin
rolled, embe
Battle. I d o
ional people
ed as if they
ure which  
er memory,
se and eff e
akes them 
a lot in Hol
gram for SIO
ing from the
f the time. A
h the new di
ing to the m
edded with 
on’t think 
e who really
y never exis
 is shown o
 just Dam e
ects of alte r
laugh on t
llywood Mo
 
Reason 7
knows th
various d
them fro
mind con
control i
more fro
the new 
completi
of progra
 
ION since in
he company 
As they are 
digital upgra
masses, they 
h layers of di
I’m the fir
y discover t
sted in this 
on the m o
eon Marley
ring the p a
the other e
ovies.  
 75: The mo
he T.V. is a 
degrees how
om watchin
ontrol. Many
 is only sugg
om a techno
 digital netw
tion in the U
ramming wi
in English th
 that has int
 already lett
ades. When 
 simply will
digitized men
rst person 
the truth to
 world. A sl
ovie I AM 
y. The T.V.
ast. These 
end when t
ost common
a mind cont
wever that d
ng it. This is
ny believe th
gestive howe
ological stan
work is reac
U.S. a very 
ill ensue. 
the “Y” is su
troduced th
tting it beco
n this begins
ll not be inte
ntal program
to figure a
o the Matrix
light little a
Legend w e
 series He r
subtle hin t
those who 
n person 
trol tool by 
does not sto
is part of the
he mind 
ever it is do
ndpoint. As
ching 
 different ki
ubstituted f
he world to
ome known 
s there will 
terested. Th
amming. 
all this ou t
ix, they do a
alter and we
ere the lad y
roes does a n
ts are ofte n
know wh a
 
y 
op 
he 
one 
As 
kind 
for an 
o some of 
n they will 
l be little 
hey will 
t, 
a 
e 
y 
n 
n 
at


--- PAGE 94 ---
94 | 
 
take
the 
reali
bein
worl
the 
Lay
e
wise
dire
 Page  
It is sai d
e place. Ma n
power of c
ity on a m e
ng able to ta
ld in which
Buddha’s o
ers of wha t
e for one t o
ction versu
d that the t
ny will be c
reating rea
ental bridge
ake untrain
h the Yogi w
on the De v
t we cal l Pl
o seek how  
us the negati
true purpo
coming and
alities, whic
e. I know a
ned student
was ruler. M
vachanic pla
anes, Expan
 to escape t
ive.  If you 
se of a Ga l
d going fr o
ch can be d
a person w h
s into their
Madame Bla
anes above 
nses, Dime
this whole 
 do not mak
 
lactic line u
om this di m
done in the  
ho went to
r minds. Th
avatsky did 
 us thus p l
ensions, and
matter alto
ke a decisio
Reason
halluci
Drugs,
gateway
closed 
suffer f
taking 
the kno
OOBE
childre
up, is to al l
mension onc
 mind, can
 India and  
hen the stud
 say that the
lacing us i n
d Realms. S
ogether or a
on, one will 
n 77: Mushr
inogens like
, meaning th
ay of your so
 by default. 
 from severa
 these subst
nowledge of 
E. As you se
en into taki
low ascendi
ce this hap
n transfer s o
 then Peru
dent was tra
e lower dim
n more of a
Since this i
at least ho w
 be made fo
 
hrooms alon
ke Ayahuasca
that once ta
oul which is
 An inexper
al types of p
tances if the
f out of body
ee Dr. Mario
ing Psilocyb
Reaso
lets us
time t
snake
Plane
key, a
Caduc
implic
culpri
ing and de
pens. Thos
ouls/minds
u and testif i
ansferred in
mensions we
an Onion o
is the case 
w to go in 
or you. 
ng with 
ca are Gatew
aken they op
is normally 
erienced per
possessions w
hey are not tr
dy experienc
io lured mil
bin Mushro
on 78: Holly
us know one
 that there a
es on the Ea
e. The symb
as you can se
uceus is bein
icated as one
rits. 
scending to
se who hol d
s to anothe r
ied of Yogi
nto another
ere ruled by
of Realities
it would b e
the positive
way 
pen the 
 kept 
rson can 
 when 
trained in 
ce 
llions of 
ooms. 
lywood 
e more 
are 
arth 
bolism is 
see the 
ng 
ne of the 
o 
d 
r 
s 
r 
y 
s. 
e 
e


--- PAGE 95 ---
95 | Page  
 
 I know for a fact that we ha ve now descended 2 dimensions al ready. What Leonardo Davinchi 
was explaining in his paintings which are full of sacred geometry is the Human body has a 5 fold 
nature. Five senses, 5 fingers on ea ch hand etc. There is an actual  seam running do wn the middle of 
the body showing we are two five fold sides put to gether. What is happening now is most people are 
operating on 3 senses versus the 5 senses they thin k they have. How this occurs is many people think 
they see but in fact they are not seeing true reality just illusion , some taste but they  need seasoning to 
even enjoy the food not to mention the kind of f ood they eat for nourishment. Some would rather 
talk thus they don’t hear well, and others touch but don’t feel the energy of what they are examining. 
For each person the mixing and matc hing is different. The drawback is if we can’t operate on all five 
senses not only can we not “unlock”  the 6 sense, which is how you feel  when all five senses are being 
used at their height simultaneously. In additi on it takes the six senses to unlock the 7 th and so on. As 
explained above the perception of various dimensions is within the amount of senses you have. A good 
example of this is when the 3rd eye is open you are immediately perceptive of another dimension. 
To clarify the statement of many languages being backwards I will bring forth a few facts: Fact 
one is that all holy languages, as they are called, like Arabic, Hebrew, Amharic, Aramaic, and Sanskrit 
are written from right to left. English, Latin, French, and Spanish, also known as the Latin Vulgate, 
are all written in the opposite direction from left to right. The reason for this is the direction you read 
and write plays a heavy role in the direction your mind is moving since the mind turns more of a 
wheel in thought. Also this effects what side of the brain you predominantly use. Many of the words 
in these languages, especially the Vulgates, when looked at backwards or sounded out the vibration 
when taken literal gives you the actual origin of the word and its manifold involvement in the erosion 
of the intelligence of the Human race.  
AMOR is the word for love in Spanish. AMOR is the son of Venus. When you look at it 
backwards it spells ROMA which is of course ROME. This proves that when you turn the word 
backwards you don’t get the opposite meaning you just get more of the meaning. That is another 
valuable key to learn. Since letters are truly Numbers lets say ABC is 123. No matter how you move 
the words around it will still equal 6. In English LOVE comes from JOVE wife of Jupiter. We can 
conclude a J is also an L just facing the other direction. 
 At times what will be uncovered will be shocking and hard to believe, if you remain patient 
and strengthen your courage you will see that this will become the key to your emancipation and self 
empowerment. The system in place redundifies to the lowest degree, once you are on the trail you will 
find multiple connections. The Art of magic itself involves an accurate system that cannot be altered 
too much or else it will have no effect. Much power lies in repetition this is why so many words are 
often spelled the same, but each is given a different meaning to increase its use. For this reason it is 
easier to spot them once you know the basic parameters does this make sense, since, cents, sins?


--- PAGE 96 ---
96 | Page  
 
 If you may think for one moment that your mind is not directional consider for a moment 
that the eyes see everything upside down first. They then must flip the image you see before it sends it 
to your brain, all of which happens so fast you never notice. As we may at times forget we are actually 
standing on a globe that rotates and our feet are stuck to it by gravity less we just float off in space so 
in fact we are at times upside down. If we are only using the two eyes as a gauge to authenticating 
higher life forms we will remain disappointed at our discoveries, one must use other abilities in 
conjunction with their eyes. Such as the third eye or Pineal Gland. Most have calcified Pineal Glands 
due mainly to fluoride intake, meat, processed starches and artificial sugars. To reverse this one will 
need to ingest good amounts of Gota Kola, Alfalfa, Parsley, Wood Betony, and Mugwort. Gota Kola is 
by far the most effective of all these.   
 
 
 
 
Reason 79: The eyes are easy to be 
tricked, in fact many places in our 
Matrix have Optical Illusions over 
them so you cannot perceive what is 
really there with you naked eye. As 
seen in folklore they often spoke of 
hidden doorways to other dimensions.  
Focus your eyes on the dot in the 
center of this Illustration. Now move 
your head back and forth, notice the 
wheels spinning? Your perception can 
easily be manipulated by those who 
innerstand the complete body down to 
the atomic and cellular levels.


--- PAGE 97 ---
97 | Page  
 
 
 
There are a few things that should become obvious to the individual about many of the Gods. 
There Worlds have run far longer than most can fathom especially since we have a hard time 
remembering what we did last Saturday. I call this the war against the machines except it didn’t 
involve the Terminator it was the Terminal they used. The computer has the feature of a huge 
memory bank. I’ve seen computer hard drives into the Terabytes which is at least 999 Gigabytes. The 
Cray 6, a government computer, has in its memory banks the dial tone of every phone in the United 
States. It’s funny that to our ears when you pick up the phone the tone sounds the same as any other 
phone but in fact they are all different.  
Part of what is happening to our short term memory, which is very important because it makes 
the transfer to our long term memory, is we store on computers everything we should remember on 
our own thus our memory wilts down because it is unused. Even numbers of our close family 
members are stored in the phone memory banks not our personal memory. Now people change 
numbers so much it becomes no use in remembering their number. When we stop logging numbers 
and watching them, an entire would of fact is closed to us. If you could watch the random numbers of 
the day your every step would be guided in perfection. Numbers are what we call the “Master 
Language” there will always be a 1,2,3 in every culture thus it is the strongest language. As you see in 
the Kabbalah and the Abjad there exist numeric magical cubes, boxes that equal the same amount no 
matter which way you add them. In short we lost the battle of the machines on various levels, this is 
Reason 80: When looking at Gates 
like the one pictured in Reason 66 in 
Detroit you will never see anything 
enter or exit the Gate they remain on 
a frequency none detectable by the 
eye, this is not very hard, they have 
mastered invisibility because of the 
inaccuracy of the two eyes, the Third 
Eye however cannot be easily fooled. 
Focus on the cross in the center of 
the Illustration, you will notice the 
dots disappear altogether, if you 
focus longer they will reappear and 
then change color to green.


--- PAGE 98 ---
98 | Page  
 
just one. We must regain the desire to pay attention to Letters, Numbers, and Names. This is the 
actual exposed program to the Matrix, you can read it if you can decode it.  
 
  
 
 
For the first time that I have seen directly we will reveal what is at the end of 4th dimension. 
You may see this as a briefing since we will all reach a point where we must guide our Spirit through 
the Planes. Those that have become masters of astral travel report that when encountering and passing 
through 4th dimension they knew not to stop. They reported heavy reptilian E.T. activity of a weird 
unwelcoming kind. Upon reaching the end of the 4th region their appeared what seemed to be an 
Artificially Intelligent computer barrier. Something like a giant computer that was alive that made a 
noise as if some type of giant engine was running within it. Some would wave this off as absurd and of 
course I would to if I didn’t have something more to ad about another strange sync with this 
“Ma”chine.  
First off we will note on the last Matrix movie it came down to Neo talking to the A.I. 
(Artificial Intelligence) and making some sort of deal in order to free the people from the Matrix, but 
that is just a movie right? AI is actually an important city in ancient Sumeria this word is pronounced 
(EYE) like the all-seeing-eye. The Atlantians were also known as the Borgians which is where the 
French term Bourgeoisie comes from, they claim to be descendants of Ancient Atlantians.  A BORG 
is known to be part Human part organic technology. If you have read any Atlantis lure you will see 
their affinity for first Crystals and then Technology. We also report for those who had made it to the 
Reason 80: The war against the Machines took place in the office building not on the 
Battlefield. The real Terminator, Arnold Schwarzenegger, is busy at work dismantling our 
future. Sources say the Elite are considering making him the next U.S. President.


--- PAGE 99 ---
99 | Page  
 
point of the Gate, if they could go that far they had no trouble getting through, it had to open. I 
wonder if Bill knows about that Gate. Oops (Ops) 
 
The truth is the masses have still been worshipping the same pagan Gods throughout history 
clueless to the outcome of such carelessness for the soul. When we fail to investigate the eternal 
destination of our Spirit it is most certain that it will end up in the hands of the vile, they want it, they 
known its value. This after life is serious, it is this world that is the Illusion and yet you even see in this 
world the innocent pay penalties in which we would think is unfair. This is not about fair and unfair 
this is about you taking the training wheels off and becoming firm about what is your greatest 
possession rather than trusting it in the hands of some money loving Guru less they lead you astray as 
they have done many. Did I mention Guru actually means Jupiter/Amon in Hindi. 
Ideas of saving the whole world are obsolete. People are at various stages of their own personal 
growth thus in the beginning you may have to be a little selfish with your time and attention as you 
gain new balance. Many are still earth bound and ideas of even leaving their hometown may seem like 
too long of a journey, they cannot be forced to grasp concepts of space. This book is written for those 
who feel their future is in the cosmos and in fact many things will not make sense if a person is 
Reason 81: This Synchromistic Tarot card 
is right on the money featuring as number 
17 BORG. 17 is a favorite Masonic number 
since 1+7=8. As you see they deal with the 
double cube and the cube is evil just like 
they showed you in the Hell Raiser Movies. 
The Masons sent to the U.S. where charged 
with building the new Atlantis. Atlanta 
Georgia has a Lodge next to just about 
every church if not the church itself. You 
have great Athena “Athens” right up the 
road not to mention the Georgia Guide 
Stones, Dr Malachi York’s Pyramids in 
Eatonton Georgia, the Olympic arrival of 
1996 and many more things linking Atlanta 
as a key location for numerous plans 
brought forth throughout history to arrive 
us at were we are now. The tree in the 
middle of the Garden with Apples is wholly 
an Atlantean concept, just like the flood.


--- PAGE 100 ---
100 | Page  
 
looking to remain on Earth. There is no reason for one to accept the truth of the future if they want 
to remain on Earth, thus they will believe nothing you tell them. These people are making plans for 
several years in advance as if they knew of the hour We would release their souls. Many make plans in 
vain their highest goals are riddled with limits and they have forgotten that we are not the body.   
 
We shall put a barrier betwixt them so none may cross, on one side they will see what they forfeited 
and on the other they can see what they escaped, contemplate this in wisdom. 
Real Gurus travel the Buddhic and Devachanic Planes that many already inhabit, they are 
doing the bidding for the Beings who control the Regions. They’ve promised to serve them during 
their initiations. I’m speaking here of the initiated Yogi, Guru, Llama, etc. as far as the Pastors the 
Holy Ghost suffices for them and the Witches have their 13 Covens. Paranormal feelings and 
experiences do not denote that you have reached the True Path and one should carefully access all of 
what is happening in the surroundings when they begin to occur, especially in the future, they will be 
widespread as many activate.  Due to the level of mind control and suppression of thought many 
individuals never get the opportunity to truly ponder this stuff in fear that they may be struck by 
lightening for offending the Gods thus they become stuck on the step of what appears to be an 
enormous religious Pyramid fully animated. I’ve wanted at times to feel the charge of lightening so I 
will present the facts and you remain as the judge.  
Reason 82: Many people have confused 
Spirituality with monetary prosperity 
in which the two are almost complete 
opposites. Consumption is the enemy 
of compassion. If you notice the main 
trait we have been given as Humans is 
reason, this keeps us from acting like 
insects and animals being at times 
purely instinctual. When one charges 
money to give a Seeker knowledge they 
are in gross error and the Truth will 
elude them even if it is in plain view, 
many will not believe this. Their deeds 
are written thus We will declare them 
back faithfully to them on that Day in 
which it will be too late to balance. 
That day comes for everyone at some 
point it is the only guarantee in this 
world.


--- PAGE 101 ---
101 | Page  
 
It becomes obvious that if the Gods could do something about this world to make it better they 
would have done it a long time ago before many innocent humans and animals have perished many of 
whom are now extinct. I feel I am in the position to make these statements because I have traveled 
many paths to their completion somehow escaping the irreversible initiations. As many great men 
have put it, if you need to be initiated into it, it cannot be wholesome for the people. Was not our 
first command to give freely of what is the best for us to our neighbor who are like mothers, fathers, 
sisters, and brothers to us? So why keep a secret from them?  Indeed these men and women have 
something that needs to be kept a secret due to its abhorred nature.  
 
Reason 83: There is an inclination within us all, no matter how minute, that wishes to be part of 
something mystical and elite. These leechers of life feed upon that craving that exist within us as a 
residue of who we really are, except they distort the image to their favor. A Midget standing on a 
giants shoulder can see much further than the Giant however if the Giant fails to see the Midget 
below him the Midget will be trampled beneath his feet. Joining secret societies always gets one 
trampled. The moment you relinquish yourself to such a hierarchy you are admitting you are in a 
lowly state, this places the strong above the weak and this is how they operate. Most never 
obtained what they where looking for and even forgot what that was.


--- PAGE 102 ---
102 | Page  
 
 
It is sad that in the end I found most religious Dogma’s, or should I say Ma’s Dogs, along with 
their characters to be inexplicably linked to a common cause of keeping us ignorant and under the 
yoke. At great lengths I wanted to believe the world was perfect because “God” was perfect and this 
was the highest form of teaching. Then true knowledge rebutted and said we are the active creation in 
which the Creator passes knowledge through, if we can no longer see what is in plain view and use our 
senses to react against it, if it be judged harmful to innocence, then we have forfeited our gift which is 
the right of good choice. The Creator is perfect however the creation is started from a state where it 
must learn perfection amongst many other things. Part of the practice is repairing society with the 
ability that is bestowed upon us. One may write, paint, teach, sculpture, speak, fund, volunteer, and 
many more things to bring about perfection that will at least reflect on their own personal self which 
is the world, but we cannot sit back and do nothing, this is insolence. 
We have above us now rulers that are killing everything we love with their filth like oil. Has one 
sat down lately and thought about how many family members and close friends we have lost to this 
system from all the diameters it takes hold of such as its medical poisons? They are the real causalities 
to a silent war that takes place on the battlefield of Illusion where we sometimes forget to look around 
us to see those that have fallen. It is easy to ignore it as long as it wasn’t someone that you may have 
known, but when it is your Uncle that gets called to the meaningless war, your Aunt who dies in the 
Twin Tower Ritual, your Sister who gets abducted into a Cult, your Brother who overdoses, or your 
Baby who is born deformed due to the chemicals they gave you as the Mother, then you feel like doing 
something, and it is then you will find you are alone. No longer do we rally together I saw a woman 
speak to a stray dog and then look at me and say nothing. 
Reason 84: Their Oath is to keep silent; the ritual keeps the 
Oath in place. As you see above the Pyramid is full of the 
Spiritual Leaders, Bankers, Businessmen, and various 
others in key places. Joining would place a person on the 
bottom of the Pyramid to be crushed. Their capstone has 
yet to descend, meaning they are waiting on their God to 
return to this realm this will be in 2012, possibly 2010.


--- PAGE 103 ---
103 | Page  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The night was unforgiving since we could not find wood the fire did not carry. We lost another to the 
wolves in the night, a new child, the world was not deserving of her. I’ m not sure how much longer 
we can hold on, as the Older I must lead because I have escaped death often and although my limbs 
have long since given way but I cannot show it. Hopefully we find others who know this strange land 
less we perish in it with no story of our existence.          My Pre-Adamic Life 
A little old lady that did everything the Bible told her to do had an issue with God. Good old 
Mother Love was praying for the innocent girl next door to be healed but instead the little girl got 
sicker and God forbid, she died. Being a Pastor I was faced with dealing with this situation. Of course 
the ones who play the role as Spiritual leaders are taught to stay on their toes and have some default 
answers always ready. If all else fails a solemn “It is Gods Will” will suffice but of course you only use 
that one in emergencies, creativity is key. Adding more fluff I came up with “Everything is by the will 
of God and He does what He pleases which will ultimately work out for the good because everything 
God does is good”, nice one eh?  
Since God does both good and evil as it states in the Bible what can you really do but just hope 
they haven’t read that one and come back wanting more answers. Most Christians have never read the 
complete Bible thus they lack the big picture. When they get into the vicinity of the Pastor it’s seldom 
question time just time to shake hands and smile. P”raise” the Lord brother! Why would the Lord 
need to be raised? Could that be what the final plan is, to raise their Lord, we will see.  
Reason 85: The silent battle still goes on with oil. The Elite have placed war and disease at the 
forefront while the contamination still continues in the background. The Arabs discovered oil 
looking for water, how ironic, before then they considered the desert cursed. After they found 
the oil they perceived it as a gift from their God to make them rulers of all lands especially over 
their brother Israel thus they suffer from mental delusion and greed prostrating ritualistically at 
90 degrees as if We hear them not knowing the Most High examines the Heart and the 
knowledge of man is foolishness on Height.


--- PAGE 104 ---
104 | Page  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
I learned default answers that I picked up along the way from other Ministers that were quite 
sinister. Of course I had to learn all these things if I intended to be a good Pastor and bare fruit. We 
will skip for now that the Christian God is a male which is the obvious clue that it isn’t the Most High. 
The Ultimate Creator being gendered is erroneous seeing that it would have to be way more than a He 
or She to create multiple universes, but we will go with it for now not wanting to begin digging into 
history “His Story”.  
So this God did not find it important to save a family from grief and increase an old ladies 
faith. He would rather not heal the child and leave the old lady hanging on a limb which made no 
sense to me. We will examine what happens here more closely as we take this journey together into 
the doghouse. I would like to state that it is clear that only one of two things are happening. Either the 
God cannot do it because of lack of power or it does not want to just wave its hand and remove the 
problem for some unknown and strange reason called the W”ill”. After all, the God described in the 
Bible has so much power it can just wave its pinky and poof a better world.  
The easier route would of course be to heal the child, which would build the old ladies faith 
even more, thus possibly convincing the parents of the sick child to attend church. But that is often 
what does not happen in fact seldom any real miracles anymore, but lots of new cars, why? My 
personal favorite was always “God gave me a new car” I would think oh really did he give you a gas 
card for that new Hummer to? As you can see Pastor Bomær just wasn’t cut out to carry the cloth 
after awhile and if I hadn’t already made contact with Shekinah and various other unexplained 
Beings, by that point I would have been out the door. Due to the paranormal experiences I had with 
Reason 86: The Phoenix is used in the Occult Symbolism due to a hidden story of all the Saviors 
that have descended to the Underworld will rise and return. This is Tammuz, Mithras, Jesus, 
Quetzacoatl, Horus, Adonis and others. The American eagle was going to be a Phoenix but this 
was deemed too obvious since Europe has always used the Phoenix as its insignia and they did not 
want the settlers to know that the British were silently orchestrating the development of the 
Americas. The Phoenix is also the hidden sign of the Phoenicians who designed much of our 
corrupted language; this is where we get the term Phonetics.


--- PAGE 105 ---
105 | Page  
 
these Beings inside of the church I was able to at least come to the conclusion that there was still 
something alive invisibly orchestrating itself in the church. It wasn’t all Catharsis as they would like to 
make you believe, Spirits actually made contact. So then I learned a valuable lesson which is what 
looks Good does not always come from Good. 
First off because the language is backwards when you say God you really say Dog, don’t laugh 
this is something very serious “Sirius”. Many people have always been curious as to why God’s Name 
backwards spells dog. For a moment while carrying the Cross I tried to make sense of it so I leaned on 
the notion that the Dog was God’s opposite because Dogs were very bad. This made no sense 
whatsoever since many Dogs are very kind and plus there are much more evil things than Dogs 
described in the Bible like Demons or the Devil which would be more like Gods opposite. I could 
only conclude for awhile that they all begin with D. 
Let us just think for a moment, if you where an all intelligent God and you intended for your 
Name to always mean good, you should probably make it something like YAY, that way no matter if a 
person pronounced it backwards or forwards they would still get the same thing, right? Surely the 
Creator of multiple universes re-splendid and furnished would know this if his lowly creation could 
figure it out. Not to mention the Creator of everything cannot be confined within Names, Numbers, 
Vibrations, emitted from the human mouth and if it did it would be much too powerful for us to 
assimilate and then reproduce. It would be worth it to conclude that the Gods, who are separate from 
the Most High, know exactly what they are doing down to a quantum level.     
 
 
 
 
Reason 87: This is the Dog Star Sirius A, the star of Illumination for many Secret Societies 
including the Egyptians. They called it Sothis its symbol is the 5 pointed Star. There is also Sirius 
B called the pup or esoterically “Great Five” this is Anubis, 5 was the Sacred number of Atlantis.


--- PAGE 106 ---
106 | Page  
 
As I began to look at a lot of the terminology being used in certain places it seemed to take me 
closer to the truth as long as I was willing to take it literally. Our ability to discern what is happening 
is deteriorating because we think everything is just a coincidence even though there is no such thing. 
It is of value to make note of the syncs or déjà vu’s of your life, also dreams. This is how the Unseen 
Ones communicate without swooping down on you in full flight scarring the crap out of you which 
would not accomplish the purpose intended.  
Many ask why the Most High does not just come down here and straighten things out? We say, 
“Shall the Creation ask the Creator why did you make me this way”? Some even further claim that 
“He” did. I will venture out for a quick moment to imagine what the Most High is. This of course is 
very unwise since I’m now trying to comprehend such a storehouse of catamount vesants of 
condescend Aeonic beams, the Wise, with five puny senses and to add insult to injury I have to use 
English words, but here it goes. PURE UNRESTRICTED ENERGY, thus if the Most High arrives 
anywhere near our Galaxy well welcome to the next life because nothing can withstand such force 
based on common sense, Physics, and Mathematics.  
Anything that has come saying it is the Most High is a Deceiver and the truth cannot be found 
with them and their works prove it along with their words.  Notice that when people “Pray” as the 
word indicates they actually are saying they are becoming the victim and are being hunted, that is after 
all what pray is, so who is the predator, could it be a wolf? Were the Pastor stands is called the Pulpit, 
but what is being pulled into the pit? They call themselves Saints which is an anagram for Satins? All 
books of power indicate the Most High is inside of you so why do so many people when they pray 
imagine that God lives outside of them, possibly in the sky? This becomes one of many errors we make 
when we channel our energy to make contact. As it teaches in religions where chakra systems are at 
least discussed, focusing internally and concentrating on certain energy centers located in your body is 
one sure way to Enlightenment. Once you have accomplished that you begin to manipulate the energy 
through your Chakras which are the organs of your soul. Full activation of the Chakras will bring an 
individual to clear unadulterated contact with the Most High.  
The real miracle is performed by the one who has trained their mind to bring about such 
phenomena without the assistance of an external Being of invisibility causing the phenomena to take 
place. This does take a certain level of dedication that many have tried to get around. The result of 
cutting spiritual corners has always been an even greater setback to ones growth. There is no easy way 
because it is not hard, it has just been made to seem like it is. Once finally emancipated from being 
dependant upon the rules and false impedances of natural growth you will clearly see our purpose 
here is to become complete. Not fused and packed together with followers who posses nothing of their 
own creative thoughts and are just reciting like robots what they learned from those before them that 
where also incorrectly being lead about behaving like clones.


--- PAGE 107 ---
107 | Page  
 
On the flip side when a person prays they are in fact relinquishing their power and beginning a 
process of Servant and Master. Our Planetary Ether is saturated with multiple Beings on various 
frequencies above what the untrained eye can see. The ear can detect some of the Beings which will 
sound like a ringing in the ear. These Beings have developed an outer Aura incasing their body that 
makes them invisible thus they can carry out their work on the material realm without notice. Their 
voices are whispers that people imagine as their own thoughts unless they are Guided. The prayer of 
the individual which is often known before the request is even made is taken into account and a 
design begins, this is one of the powers of the All Seeing Eye.  
We have way too much evidence linking the Christian faith to Atlantian, Egyptian, and 
Sumerian Rites sometimes being directly plagiarized from the originals. What I am saying in this case 
is if a person does their research, which can be done on the internet, and they still do not find the 
above statement to be true, they could be a victim of mind control which is okay we can work through 
that. Let us remember that the secret to mind control is never letting the person realize they are under 
its influence. When the ego is created it will never admit that something like that could happen, it 
thinks it is too smart. Thus a perpetual system is in place keeping you stagnant, Mind Control, and 
the Ego/Eagle. Its time that we realize steel sharpens steel the only person that can fix you is you. So as 
the Book says one should make a “sober” estimate of themselves everyday to be sure they are not off 
the path and have not deluded themselves all puffed up with pride which comes before destruction.  
 
Let us examine why it could be possible that the term God is more of a hidden term which 
traces to the land of Canaan and many other trails. Throughout our recent history lots of attention 
has been put on the land of Canaan. This is the so-called Promise Land of the Hebrews. Most 
literature on Canaan is very non-descriptive as to the people that originally lived there and this of 
course is done on purpose. There religious beliefs, artifacts along with its true name often remain 
hidden and obscure. After much Guidance pieces began to come together.  
Reason 88: 
Every part of 
the physical 
mind has been 
mapped, one 
will have to 
work with 
their spiritual 
mind to avoid 
delusions.


--- PAGE 108 ---
108 | Page  
 
According to the story when the cursed Cain slew his brother Able he was marked with a sign 
so that all who see Cain would know that he had been marked by God thus they could not destroy 
Cain. It should seem odd that although Cain has killed his brother he is then given a symbol of great 
protection, just another one of those Bible concoctions where the true story is an esoteric mystery 
embedded with hidden symbolism thus taking it literally makes no sense. They do so much of this in 
the Bible it’s a wonder the book is legible at this point. Generally the member is trained heavily in 
blind faith to counteract the feelings which occur when continuously uncovering inconstancies. 
Enoch son of Cain who wrote more literature relating to the “Fall” for a profound reason noted that 
this was the double cross. This cross was used in Gnosticism taught in Gnosis, Crete. What is also odd 
is according to the Bible at this point only 4 people have been created one of which is dead. So Adam 
and Eve and Cain are the only people spoke of. Here is the scripture: 
Genesis Chapter 4:16-17 
And Jehovah set up a sign for Cain in order that anyone finding him would not strike him. With that 
Cain went away from the face of Jehovah and took up residence in Nod the Land of fugitiveness to the 
East of Eden. 
Afterward Cain had intercourse with his wife and she became pregnant and gave birth to Enoch. Then 
he engaged in building a city and called the city’s name by the name of his son Enoch.  
  Once Cain is evicted it says he left into the la nd of Nod, the land of fugitiveness, and he knew a 
wife. This mysterious land of Nod I have traced to the land of Canaan which became Palestine than 
Israel. In Palestine they have discovered caves completely excavated by what appears to be a very 
advance race for the time that must have been of great stature according to how the caves were laid 
out. Our biblical story of Abraham also starts off in Ur of Chaldea and Abraham when leaving Ur 
enters Canaan where he experiences his first encounters with the God of the Bible. This is also the 
reason the Children of Israel deemed Canaan the land that was promised to them through the 
covenants made with Abraham by Jehovah that had to be fulfilled. 
 Beside the Bible’s report the record reflects th at after the destruction of Atlantis the few that 
survived set out on ships. It goes on to say many of them reached land in the area we now know as 
Canaan. They began rebuilding their Empire warring with the various people currently inhabiting the 
land. It goes on to report that many sailed further into indigenous territories inhabited by various 
Indian tribes. Many of these tribes recorded the arrival of the Atlanteans and report that they taught 
them various sciences, mathematics, and of course a new religion. Being more technologically and 
spiritually advanced the natives began to worship them as Gods and knew them as Feathered Serpents 
because of the religion they taught and the appearance of their Deity.  
 Since there has been so much talk of these se rpents we have to at some moment approach the 
question, are all serpents and reptilians evil? I can only answer this as are all men evil? What follows


--- PAGE 109 ---
109 | Page  
 
now is perspective, think of this. If you where born a lion is it natural for you to behave like a sheep? 
Obviously not so we all have different characters that at times directly oppose the nature of other 
species. Just as when ants invade your kitchen because you spilled some sugar, you become their 
apocalypse when you wipe out hundreds of them with the sweep of a clothe, drowning them as you 
clean the rag watching them go down the drain. Many would say this is different they are not sentient, 
We would say all things that move are endowed with the Divine Spark and if you could split it, it will 
create an explosion such as you have never seen this was done so you could marvel at the Creation and 
them reflect back upon the Creator. 
 I tell you the truth there are high life forms that  still call Earth home, they are interwoven in its 
fabric, and to separate from it would be spiritual death to them. Earth is also our current reference 
point, if it is removed it is possible our memories will be disposed of when we reincarnate again. This 
is of course if we continue to reincarnate after what happens in the future. The best most could hope 
for is another repeat of life with no memories in which I’m not really up for. We must admit Earth 
life is dangerous after awhile in our current atmosphere of illusion. It is easy to bring about so many 
excesses we not only destroy things around us, but we also bring about the degradation and 
degeneration of our Souls. Experience is not the only thing the soul needs to grow; in fact experience 
is a relatively small portion when you consider the Soul can eat Elements, Essence, and Gaseous things 
found in the atmospheres. We must now build a superhighway down the Path of Truth. Why? 
 During the invasion of the Anu known also as Ana, life forms from another constellation called 
Nibiru came to Tiamat/Earth to subdue it. Tiamat known as the Dragon fought the Annunaki who 
fought back using highly advanced weapons that ultimately split Tiamat. This is the story in the Bible 
of the Dragon fighting the Angels. Many of our religions are Annunaki propaganda. Their main 
interest was our natural elements especially the Spirit of man and woman termed, the Gold. Several 
situations ensued amongst these Beings even a mutiny amongst themselves. These Beings are 
responsible for the Nephalim stories of the Bible, they altered a race of what appeared to be then pure 
spiritual Beings of various types, into spirit forms incased in flesh in which they could slave and 
master over.  
 There was said to be a few amongst them that did not like the way humans were being abused 
and thus they began to teach “their favorites” the ways of enhancing their bodies by linking them to 
their spirit to become as powerful as the Annunaki, if not even more powerful since we had the spirit 
element in us given by the Most High. These mysteries of enhancing the body later became known as 
“the Wisdom of the Serpent”. The correct term would be “the Wisdom of the Spirit” who many 
relate to the serpent because of its spiraling movement and fiery nature.  
 As things began to intensify word got back to Anu the leader of the Annunaki about the 
humans and their new abilities. Anu sent Marduk in a ship which is Planet X to handle Tiamat called 
the Great Serpent and her offspring the humans once and for all. This ship the size of a Planet similar


--- PAGE 110 ---
110 | Page  
 
to George Lucas’s Death Star entered orbit around our Sun as the 12th Planet in the 10th position from 
the Sun hence its name Planet X. This marked the last crossing of Nibiru. Marduk used a weapon 
known in the Tablets as a Net called also the Net of Indra. This is some type of atmospheric net that 
keeps souls trapped on Earth/Tiamat not allowing them to continue their evolution. Marduk who is 
Ra set up the Pyramid systems which I explained above as the first Matrix. Ra then became ruler of 
the Underworld which is the place where souls go when they remain trapped in the net but have 
expired their current physical body thus they are waiting on a new one, this is re-incarnation, a curse.  
You can clearly see the Egyptian God Anubis serves Anu and is one of them. The Queen of 
England, who is the ruler of this world, has instilled the worship of Ra, Anubis, and the rest of the 
Annunaki pantheism under various Sumerian, Egyptian, and Hebraic guises. This is why religion is 
now so limited except for the few who become high initiates. It is them their duty to continue to 
suppress us. They are doing this at the bidding of their God Anu who they say is returning with Planet 
X by 2012. There are many more in high places who also serve Ra such as the Arabs in Dubai. 
 
 
   
  
 
 
 
Reason 89: Parliaments are tools for the Annunaki, they run mystery schools, governments, and 
practically the entire globe. I have yet to find anyone who opposes this force. They are 
supremacist such as the ideas the Talmud discusses about Gentiles thus if you are not in leagues 
with them, you are only a resource that can be abused. Christianity was hatched to seem as if it 
opposed all of this however it was just another plan to keep humans powerless thus continuing 
to stall anyone from activating by denying them information of Chakras. We will face the 
Annunaki in what will appear to be the first extraterrestrial contact on Earth, currently it seems 
Earth will face utter destruction and enslavement by them, however the Most High holds the key 
Element of setting such plans to ruin. You must at least individually entreat the Most High.


--- PAGE 111 ---
111 | Page  
 
The Annunaki themselves appear to be originally Reptilian, however, they have blended with 
various life essences and thus their appearances vary. In addition the Annunaki themselves seldom 
interact with humans directly, they use their underlings who are humans infused with Annunaki 
genes and in that state they are wholly indebted to the Annunaki and are controlled by them through 
a mentally collective cellular connection.  
Other names of the Annunaki and their offspring are Anakim, this is why Anakin Skywalker is 
Dark Vader in the Star Wars Series. They are the Celtic Tuatha de Danaan Sons Dan or the Danu. 
They are offspring and servants of Sumarian E.A. (pronounced Aya). This is why the new name for 
our planet is “Ea”rth, three wise men came from the “Ea”st, and the major Christian celebration is 
called “Ea”ster. They are the Sumerian EL, Akkadian ILU, Babylonian ELLU, and English ELF called 
by their worshippers the “Shining Ones” or is it Sinning Ones? They altered man, a downgrade, 
calling them Lulu meaning “mixed one” and Adapa, “model man” who the Hebrews call Adam. 
According to the Sumerian text Tiamat’s seas were full of souls that could be harvested. This is 
the hidden meaning behind the Fisher King and Jesus being called “the Fisher of Men”. When Planet 
X divided Tiamat into two parts she released an ocean of souls or cosmic essence into the cosmos. The 
Greek version of Tiamat was Demeter which is where we get the term Diameter, the cutting or 
dividing a circle in two, or split. This is how we became separated from our other half. The Egyptian 
termed these two parts the Ka and the Ba. Ka’bah. 
 
Reason 90: Indara is seen in this rare Plate 
carrying the Double Cross/Net. Indara is Cain 
and plays the role of Ra/Marduk. Their 
descendants are a different breed created on 
the 8th day from dust, offspring of the ones 
who beguiled the pure world.


--- PAGE 112 ---
112 | Page  
 
What self aware spiritual entity would agree to a life of slavery? I was enlightened and made 
aware of what is transpiring and since my eyes have been open, I would rather die on my feet than live 
on my knees. The Annunaki see the Earth bound souls as slaves, criminals, deviates, prisoners of war, 
detested social and racial groups, non-conformist and undesirables. Hammurabi’s Code, which later 
became the Ten Commandments found also in the Egyptian Book of the Dead became the guidelines 
issued to this race of souls to give them rules and conformity. Various plans have existed to keep us 
from reaching our real potential through the Art of Conviction. 
Ninharsag the Sumerian Hathor or Isis was called the Great Cow. Legend says she is the true 
power behind E.A./Aya. She was called the Carpenter, the Coppersmith, and the Lady Potter. Later 
her name was changed to Gabriel feminine such as Gabriella. Gabriel appeared to the Virgin Mary 
alerting her of the birth of the Christ Child Jesus. In 600 A.D. she visited Muhammad dictating 
Koran to him. She is a Seraphim, meaning serpent of Raphim or Rephaim another Nephalim Hybrid 
connection. Gabriel used the caduceus rod to translate the soul of Christ along with “the Holy Ghost” 
into the body of Mary. It helps to see this as advanced technology of Spirit insemination. 
    
 
 Reason 91: The caduceus staff was in fact some type of Annunaki technology used to transfer 
spirits into matter and manipulate energy through the tuned vibrations of the carrier.


--- PAGE 113 ---
113 | Page  
 
Again the level of mind control brought forth here is profound since we are taught that we are 
all children of Abraham and we have all descended from the Twelve Tribes of Israel. For some this 
may be true but let us not forget that Abraham had a father also and while they where all in Ur of the 
Chaldeas you had Nubians populating Africa, Asians in the Orient, and various other races that had 
never heard of Abraham. The Bible speaks of in Genesis a Man and Woman created on the 6th day in 
the Image of God and another set created on the 8th day from dust. The difference between these two 
creations was one had spirit/compassion, while the other was very base. This is the main drawback of 
the genetic manipulation. Many underlings are of the other race of Adams of whom care more for 
material prosperity and could care less about a dying world, helping children, etc. Still others are now 
mixed with both. There is obviously a silent war going on between at least 2 separate races. 
Looking deeper into the K-9 affiliations to clarify the Dog itself is a domesticated Wolf so what 
we are really dealing with here are Wolves which fits the term, Wolves in Sheep’s clothing. Sheep’s 
clothing is a metaphor for a human body. In Canaan which has its roots in the words Cain, Canine, K-
9, and others relating to the Canine species there had obviously been some interaction with the Wolf 
later domesticated into the Dog. This interaction can be looked at no different then the Chinese and 
the Dragon in which they claim in there ancient tales where their original descendants. To explain 
many things that have drawn a blank to most historians it may be necessary to look further into the 
true meaning of the Animist involvement in various Nations.   
Following the pagan tradition many would leave their young in the woods around packs of 
wolves to see if they would take the baby as their own. Of course this lead to hundreds of babies being 
torn apart by packs wolves. It is said some were taken into the pacts of wolves and the she-wolf would 
care for them. It is said at times when seeing these youth full grown in the forest they had inherited all 
the traits of the wolf, just as the shaman follow certain animals around to gain their traits. This gave 
birth to the mythology of the Werewolf or Liken.  
 
Reason 92: Romulus, where Rome gets its name from 
killed his brother Remus. They both where suckled by a 
she-wolf who found them abandoned in the wild.


--- PAGE 114 ---
114 | Page  
 
The scriptures say the Nephalim that roamed the Earth during the time Humans were created 
sinned against woman and then began to sin against the Beasts. What I have more than enough 
evidence to prove is that statement meant some type of insemination between animal and Demi-God 
that brought forth what we would now call mythological creatures. In the old days they became 
revered, feared and worshipped. It can be proven that many of these Beings make up the tales of 
Ancient Mythology when Centaurs, Cyclops, Cthulhu, and various other part man/part God/part 
animal creatures were roaming about, this was known as the abomination. In addition it states in the 
ancient text that when these Creatures died they had Souls thus they did not perish but roamed upon 
the face of the Earth and man called them evil Spirits and they could be evoked. This is the accounts 
that can be found in the books of Enoch the first man to write about the God of the Bible and what 
was taking place during those times. Interesting enough his books did not make it into publication 
and remained in the esoteric circles for hundreds of years. The list of the names of the Fallen Angels 
located in the books of Enoch were very important to the Elite for evocation.  
            
 
 
 
Since the ruling powers have clearly sprang forth from Ancient Egypt a little Egypt 101 
wouldn’t hurt. The Great Pyramids point to the Sirius Star system more commonly called the Dog 
Star in Canis Major. On January 1
st Sirius reaches the Meridian Point at exactly midnight. This is of 
course the beginning of the Gregorian Year. In Egypt this was the most important star, it is not only 
the brightest star in the sky it can also be seen from anywhere in the world which many stars cannot. 
Reason 93: Some of the offspring of the Nephalim that were reptilian and amphibian hybrids 
lived much longer and became kings. This is how the bloodlines began. The intermingling with 
woman continued in order to spawn successors.


--- PAGE 115 ---
115 
 
The 
time
this 
Illum
Jesu
Egyp
Naza
 
Egyp
the a
surr
devo
Con
left p
out 
subd
a tra
Re
On
po
At
At
| Page  
 Egyptians 
es as an actu
 same star a
mination. S
us used to br
ptian text Is
areth. As th
 
 
 
It is a fac
ptians had o
advent of so
rounding tr
out worship
nsider how m
powerless a
and coming
due the peo
ail of blood 
eason 94: T
Once again Si
ointed stars 
tlantians bu
tlantis. Atla
called this s
ual Dog. Sh
as Sothis an
Sophia was 
ring about m
sis/Sothis is
he Bust of I
ct that Pan
over 3000 G
o many peo
ribes who ad
ppers. Ther
many serva
and made to
gled setting
ople by war.
 from the D
The Pyramid
Sirius is indi
 are evoking
uilt the Egyp
antis means 
star the Go
he is known
nd Sophis w
the exact eq
miracles alo
s noted givi
Isis says, I A
theism can 
Gods and G
ople enterin
dmired Egy
re is a const
nts are in th
o serve. The
g up hierarc
. They roam
Delta to the
ids of Egypt 
dicated by th
ng energy fro
yptian pyram
s “Is” daugh
ddess Sopd
n as the wife
which is were
quivalent to
ong with th
ing birth to
AM Isis I ha
 be confusin
Goddesses th
ng Egypt the
ypt’s success
ant sea-sawi
his world v
ese Serpent
chies and py
med/Rome 
e Americas. 
t are the por
he 5 pointed
om Sirius w
mids as temp
hter of Atlan
det pictured
e of Osiris w
e the Greek
o the Holy G
he wooded s
o the Morni
ave brought
ng at times
here was lot
e local God
s accreditin
ing back an
versus Maste
t Dynasties 
yramid syst
 about the l
 
rtal to Siriu
d star. This 
which spells 
mples and po
an.   
d riding side
who is Orio
ks got the te
Ghost and 
staff passed 
ing Star Ven
t forth the S
 which it w
ts of confus
ds of the Egy
ng it to their
nd forth bet
ers, the God
 never stopp
tems of con
land seekin
us and also A
s would mea
s the Under
ortals to the
e saddle on 
on. She was 
erm Sophia
Shekinah w
 from Aaro
nus. The M
Sun/Son.  
was created t
sion all the 
yptians wer
r patron Go
tween Osiri
ds abound a
ped ruling t
ntrol everyw
g who they 
 Amenti the
an all those
rworld in th
he Deities wo
 a large Dog
 also known
a from their
which is the
on. In the ac
Morning Sta
to do and si
 time in Egy
re always pi
od and thus
is, Horus, I
and the Hu
they simply
where they c
 could devo
e Underwor
e using the 5
he afterlife. 
orshipped in
g and at 
n under 
r channel o
e power 
ctual 
ar is Jesus of
 
ince the 
ypt. With 
icked up by
s becoming 
sis, and Ra.
umans are 
y branched 
could 
our leaving 
rld. 
 5 
 The 
in 
f 
f 
y 
 
.


--- PAGE 116 ---
116 | Page  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Everything that is living first examines what it was before, so it knows what to become next and 
this can be seen even with microscopic life forms. This means that if they tell us lies about what 
happened in the history of this world, as a race we face not only heavy mental alteration but also 
Reason 95: The various Demigods of Egypt were of the lineage of ancient Atlantis. Other 
Deities such as the African Bes became part of the Pantheism due to the power accredited to 
him by worshipers in Africa. Egypt absorbed all the powerful Deities throughout the land and 
thus the people where wholly dependent upon serving and carrying for the Gods who often 
manifested as the royal families. Generally they where trained in techniques of mental power, 
then given a rod to intensify those powers. To the people they had the power of Gods.


--- PAGE 117 ---
117 | Page  
 
possible extinction. We are not continuing on our true cycle as I explained above about descending. 
Real Zodiac does give a pretty accurate layout of your character but we have the ability to change our 
ways permanently thus altering our DNA, this is the marvel of the Human race. Considering how 
long this charade of playing God has been going on, this may be the first time at least in this segment 
that such knowledge of the inner workings of our society has been placed in our hands. Not to 
mention this is probably the first time a mass of people are at a comprehension level to at least grasp 
what is happening. In the history of man the masses have been powerless with little intellect. 
The Human mind which I mentioned before is more like a wheel turning. When we get set 
into habits it creates a groove in the brain. Deeper grooves are habits that have been practiced for 
longer periods. This is where terms like “stuck in a cycle” or “getting into the groove of things” come 
from since a cycle can also be looked at as a wheel. It has been also observed that it takes 22 days to 
make or break a habit, good or bad, which has the effect of allowing the grooves to flatten back out. So 
the Human mind becomes a record with grooves playing often times the same vibrational song 
everyday. The first thing you realize during astral travel is that you are not the body, you are more like 
the Alien on the movie Men In Black that is very small but powerful sitting in the operations seat of a 
giant body, something like an organic Montauk chair. The other thing you will notice when you look 
down upon your body is that obviously your memory and senses are not contained in your body 
because you are still using them.  
This is one secret of obtaining Higher Character, even if you have not astral traveled before, 
knowing that you are not the body releases you from the many expectancies of normal life and gives 
you another framework, the soul, to build upon. When you have dreams if you notice the shear detail 
that is involved in the environment you realize that we are a lot more than they are letting on about. 
We are capable of doing amazing things. There is even a part in our mouth that makes 3 different 
types of saliva for different situations. It becomes obvious that we are not in a Ford with the standard 
parts we have been fashioned with bells and whistles that we have not even explored. This knowledge 
of enhancing the body has been held selfishly by the Elite Alchemist but now we are hacking 
Morpheus/Orpheus and in a moment he will tell us everything. 
Most are completely unconscious of who they were in former lives. Sometimes we catch 
glimpses of it in dreams, often smells and sounds remind us of something that we remember but 
cannot wholly identify. The Sacred Order of the Mary’s in fact had unlocked the secret of certain 
essential oils that had the ability to regress anyone smelling them into memories of their past. The loss 
of collective life memory has everything to do with how strong your Spirit is when it departs from this 
world. We are living in a time where if you look deep enough you can find most of this information. 
This is all we need and possibly all we will get. I see it as useless to keep coming into lives in which we 
have no full knowledge of our previous experiences. The best advice I can give the reader is to begin to 
work on growing your Spirit which we will talk about as we go along.


--- PAGE 118 ---
118 | Page  
 
SYMBOLS 
The Elite communicate in Symbols and Designs which are far more powerful than words. 
These markings are embedded in our consciousness and serve as triggers for various emotions and 
concepts. I will take this time to tell you that you should not become a warrior when you begin to 
discover what is going on and anger or vengeance moves you to combat it directly. You should always 
keep your weapons in your mind and not in your hand. Warrior also means a person who 
worries/worrier so much once they figure out how much strength and cunning the other side 
possesses that they actually send energy to the negative forces when they become overwhelmed and 
behave foolishly.  
Remember what we face as a society is something that we all must confront at some point; one 
person can not fix this world on their own but each person can do their part in getting out 
information of the Truth. This way those who are still confused can make up their mind as to which 
side truly resonates with them so they can go about it fully and not half heartedly. The whole 
construct of this Book is not to down any religion race or belief system. It should be seen as a detailed 
observation and not a judgment. In the Book of Revelations it says “how I wish you were hot or cold 
but you are lukewarm and I shall vomit you out of my mouth”. This means that individuals should 
not straddle the fence, whatever they are going to be they should get on with it. This whole activity of 
truth seeking does wonders for our complete growth so it should be looked at as such.  Everything that 
you have experienced will all come to your aid one way or another when you have purpose. Let 
everything you do have purpose. 
 With this information you now have a chance at saving yourself and others. The last thing you 
want to do is become so scared you no longer want to know anymore. In the unknown you can be 
found because you have not yet discovered your true self obviously because you are not even flying or 
at least floating yet. I give this pointer very sternly; fear is indeed the mind controller. You are stopped 
at times from learning anything more because of the internal feeling of death and the lies about what 
really happens after death. Many people hold on to their religious preferences because they feel it will 
save them in the end even though they break most of the rules of the religion. It would suffice to 
know that when you die you go to the place corresponding to your mentality or frequency hence the 
term Judgment or a Judging of the Mental. 
Society has been trained to love lure and ceremony thus the preacher with a “fiery sermon” gets 
more attention than the sometimes boring metaphysic who is explaining how the body can really work 
the miracle they are so busy ranting about to make it seem like such a big deal. Individuals will begin 
to need their powers in order to survive, that is the pressure placed upon us in the end of this 
segment, evolve or face extinction. Once the mental portal is reopened and the person becomes “open 
minded” again, most of the instructions, activations, and experiences will happen during sleep. If you


--- PAGE 119 ---
119 | Page  
 
where completely transported from this world never to return, it would take place in your sleep. It is 
unclear what happens to your body here, some say it continues as if it’s you and behaves just like you 
through residual memories action and reaction, people never know you are really gone. ☺ 
In Egypt where much of this is amplified we find the Cult of Isis. Many believe with the 
masculinity of the Pharaohs the women played only roles as normal Queens called by them, Ferts. In 
all actuality the Egyptian Empire functioned as a Trinity and the female part of the Trinity became 
absorbed under Isis. To maintain it as a Trinity all the other Gods and Goddesses were summed up 
under the main ennead. Cleary Osiris-Horus-and Isis make up the Egyptian Trinity.  Sin, Shamash, 
and Ishtar make up the Babylonian. Isis represented Ninhursag, Nin-Ella, Inanna, Ishtar, Ma’at, 
Mare, Mary, Mut, Nephthys, Hathor, Nut, Diana, Asteroth, Astarte, Aphrodite, Athena, Tuart, Bast, 
Usertesen, Ida, Mylitta, Baalath, Anahita, Ashur, Aasith, Kodesh, Sophia, Sothis, Sodet, Shekina, 
Magdelina, Europa, Ganeymead and many others.  
This became possible because it was the so-called God “S” “female energy” that equated to the 
enlightened portion of Spiritual training so when an Initiate came in contact with the actual Spirit of 
the religion it often personified itself in one of these Goddesses who all remained under the same 
umbrella. This is why even to this day Isis under many forms is worshipped heavily. Our statue of 
liberty is a rendition of Isis. Her main sign is ($) which is the word ISIS compressed into one symbol. 
Some of the countries of their origin are Assyrian Ishtar, Phoenician Ashtoreth (Astarte), Syrian 
Atargatis (Derketo), Babylonian Belit (Mylitta) Arabian Ilat (Al-Ilat). Again their home is the Asteroid 
Venus, Sirius, and the Pleiades. 
Their species seems to be completely foreign hiding under the guise of Illuminating Warrior 
Goddesses. In the ancient text it says a fragment landed in the river Euphrates shaped like an egg. 
Somehow those who interacted with this egg became infused and infected with its essence. Those 
infected became the first communicators of the knowledge and message these Beings brought to 
Earth. These are also the Beings movies like “the V” and “the Knowing” are describing. They have an 
agenda to take over the world completely and they have major assistance from just about every main 
religious and social group. This is due in part to the powerful role they play in religion.  
The natural instinct for man to gravitate toward a “Mother Goddess” figure comes from the 
separation of our other half. The want to interact with this magical feminine Being is played on and 
exploited by these imposters, some of whom are responsible for the initial split or Maya as it is more 
properly called. In addition for the woman, since the God “S” is androgynous, he gives her the Son of 
the Sun. She begins to see this as her husband, protector, and father figure. Most women are deprived 
of one or the other if not both in today’s common society. There is obviously not just one faction 
doing all this. You would have to think, man and woman are a very advanced species it would take a 
collaborative effort to keep them in the darkness of what the true reality is.


--- PAGE 120 ---
120 | Page  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
We as Human Beings are utterly ruled over in this dimension, our needs are extremely meager 
compared to what we are originally entitled to and yet those needs are seldom fulfilled. These Forces 
also extend into the Dream World and the Afterlife so there is no rest for the weary. Until they are 
confronted they are consistently hatching plans to make an individual believe none of this is going on, 
somewhat of a strange zombie phase. I will tell you now you can live every day in such a high state of 
energy and these Beings are jealous they cannot do the same, they are forbidden from it. It has gone 
Reason 96: There was a saying “the devil has many names” I first found that to be untrue when 
learning who Satan was. Especially since Satan and Lucifer are actually two different Beings. 
When considering ISIS however it all makes since, this is how the re-occurring Savior theme 
exists, and the key component is always the mother with Immaculate Conception. Immaculate 
Conception is really the Deity having some type of intercourse with the woman producing an 
offspring. This offspring then attempts to become ruler of the world in his father, “the King’s”, 
steed. Many of the hyperdimensional Beings want the title “Lord of the Earth”, so they never 
cease these “divine conception stories”. This happens now through the royal families such as 
Prince William becoming the next King. Their family history however is riddled with the 
involvement of various Forces. They are carrying the “Bloodline” so they most certainly are not 
completely human. I do believe we have something in our constitution about that, what a joke.


--- PAGE 121 ---
121 | Page  
 
asleep in them never to awaken again because of their corruption. All the blending, enhancements, 
and greed for power has made them numb they don’t even feel alive, they are the undead. 
This state I speak of that you can return to is not just the feeling of everything going well, but 
the feeling of having the perfect companion. Something so gratifying that everything external does not 
take an inkling of attention from it as if it does not exist. You become wholly endowed with it 
spiraling together forming endless states of ecstasy. Their most powerful weapons are their religions, 
this gives the power to them directly from our own Souls; it is time they are removed. I’m not sure if 
this will take place in large numbers however I am sure that it does not matter, it is what you do 
individually that counts. 
There is a lesser light which emanates from below that spawns countless distorted images, soon they 
will be placed in Shoel in which We fixed a door for entrance and none for exit, then the world will 
see Freedom, if you but knew. Many looking now will say “he is joking” but We do not jest. 
Now unveiling the Goddess will take place as Madam Blavatsky claimed to do when she wrote 
her book Isis Unveiled. She of course was in no position to do such a thing being fully initiated herself 
and remember their oath is to keep silent. However, they are allowed to push propaganda and 
disinformation. Once again the Goddess as we know it was a play on words. There is actually a 
symbolic story being told about Adam and Eve in the garden with the Serpent. It is known that this 
story should not be taken literally but has a much deeper meaning. It started with this uneasy feeling 
that there was something that was a big secret about the word women. You find Omen in the 
remaining part of the name meaning a deep hidden meaning. Eve is the root to the word evening. The 
Hebrew version is even weirder since the name used for Eve in Hebrew, Haveh, actually means 
serpent.  
According to the original Zohar, a major root of the creation story, it makes it clear that the 
Serpent in the Garden was a female serpent not a male like it is commonly believed. Pre-Adamites or 
“before Adam” were Masculine Spirit Beings called Sons of the Sun who took physical form and 
mated with these women. These female Serpents known as the race of Namaah and Lilith, caused 
Chief Angels like Aza and Azrael to fall from their post and mix with them. 
The Zohar continues to blame AMALEC as the wicked Seraphim while Metatron is called 
literally “The Good Serpent”. This is incredible, it admits Metatron is actually a serpent and goes on 
to admit that Enoch became Metatron once he was translated to heaven thus Enoch was also a 
Serpent. Several times the tribe of Shem makes it clear to indicate they are inbred with serpents. This 
makes it concrete that the Enochians are linked to the Serpents. It says “the Priest came forth from 
the dead Sophanim who died in labor. The baby was born with the sign of the Priesthood which was a 
lustrous (scaly) hide. The baby had just been brought forth but sat upright immediately and showed 
the sign of the Priesthood and they where struck with terror.” In the many Hebrew texts where it says


--- PAGE 122 ---
122 | Page  
 
“He created Man”. To them HE is the feminine attribute. The Tetragrammaton is Yod-He-Vau-He. 
The “Yod/Yah” is the Masculine fire entering the Feminine “He” birthing the Child “Vau” ”V” and 
the world will return to “HE”, so they believe. Cohen, Hebrew for priest is an anagram for Enoch. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Someone once said that if you ask a person for an explanation and it becomes very confusing it 
means they do not know themselves or they are hiding the truth. When asking someone in India 
teaching through Hinduism or someone in Judaism teaching Kabbalah how to increase union with 
the Most High you are buried in thousand page Gitas with confusing Sanskrit words or mile long 
scrolls of Rabbis with nothing better to do than take one passage from the Talmud and make a 
thousand page explanation. Truly do you believe it is that hard to enhance the spirit? Of course not 
these people are placed in the way to make the journey lengthy and hard. As I said above many have 
not obtained what they originally sought, which was freedom. Now they are enslaved by the religion 
and their subconscious  wishes to have company in their misery.  
Reason 97: Thousands of children every year are indoctrinated into Animist religions 
depriving them of their true potential. One of the most widespread religions in the world, 
Judaism, still keeps Moses’ depiction with horns on his head. The Kabbalistic Tree of Life is 
the same tree from the Garden the Serpent offered the so-called fruit from. This fruit was 
signified as an apple which has a Pentagram in its center when cut in half. As said earlier that 
Pentagram is the symbol of  Isis/Sirius/Sothis and her consorts, also her opposite, when 
inverted and they are together not separate which we will address when its proper?


--- PAGE 123 ---
123 | Page  
 
 
 
 
 
Looking through ancient times the Moon was actually not feminine but masculine. The Moon 
went by the name Sin and Ah. In so many ways the God “ES” shows that it is actually an androgynous 
serpent. Many women become Moon Goddesses to link with more women that are about healing and 
tapping into the feminine power which of course is wonderful. However, I have seen the start and 
finish of many of these groups and it almost always leads to initiations and then if you reach the 
height of these organizations like those in Mount “S”hasta or “S”edona just like ancient “S”aqqarra 
they go into deeper forms of Yoga like Hatha/Hathor. Giving the neophyte strange names with false 
meanings to chant while opening chakras. Doing things such as imagining thousands of Buddhas 
filling their soul. Then they tell you that it’s really all Hinduism and the power of “Sam”ahdhi and 
learning to wield “S”hakti, the serpent energy comes into play heavy with “S”iva. The person is subtly 
lulled to sleep while the flute plays with the lies that the Serpent just means complete wisdom. Yes the 
serpent has a lot of wisdom and it has been fooling man and woman with it with the helps of Hybrids 
and Traitors. 
 Of course many men joined the cult of the Goddess imagining that it was a haven for beautiful 
forest queens who when approaching or should I say flowing towards you, bathed you in swells of 
spring Marigolds as rabbits and dear bound behind them joyously laughing and singing in delicate 
waves of  Solfeggio. The Serpents could of course create that Illusion long enough for the person to be 
lulled into the trap. They eventually become so laden with negative Spirits they are deluded and 
confused. The Masons, Rosicrucian, and Ishmaili Hassassin’s are a primary example of organizations 
that have tricked the spiritual arm of men with this type of nonsense. The most they could produce 
was a debased Bacchanalia. I encourage woman to keep yourselves on guard. Just to show you how 
much the serpent is suggesting that it made things look at these words of power.  
Reason 98: The Five Pointed Star is not the symbol of the perfect man it is the star of contact for 
Sirius and all the various Beings that make up the Pentagram including the Inverted. These 
“feather weights” think the Most High has left this world never to return, and they are having a 
free-for-all. They know not we even watch the All-Seeing-Eye.


--- PAGE 124 ---
124 | Page  
 
“S”piral: When you go out to the ocean and look at the shells you will see the spiral force, when you 
watch waves of energy you will see the spiral force, when you look at your fingerprint you will see the 
spiral force, all the way to the “S”wirl” in your head you will see a spiral force. It’s safe to say our 
Creator uses a spiral force when making things, no straight lines. 
 “S”pirit- The Ethereal Being of consciousness. 
“S”phere: Our cellular level exists entirely of spheres. 
“S”pin: Another word to describe the spiraling motion. 
“S”oul-“S”ol: The life force of heat, warmth, and vitality. 
 As discussed before the “S” is the primary symbol  of the Serpent in the English alphabet. All of 
these forces, like the Sun, Soul, and Spiral had other names that did not begin with “S” it was simply 
motion, however, when the 70 languages where introduced across the world they all received this 
indoctrination of “S”’s vibration and thus a false relation to the Serpent that has permeated the 
subconscious mind. This mind control technique makes it easier for us to go with the story that is 
being told more and more which is the serpents are our creators. A serpent has no voice box and can 
only whisper thus everything they say sounds like Sssssss. They are sometimes called the Whispering 
Ones. A famous prayer in Islam says “Allah protect me from the whispers of Shatian”.


--- PAGE 125 ---
125 | Page  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
To understand these Entities is to realize that the world is a lot more diverse then they are 
revealing to you and we are not the only intelligent life form here by far. Here is a big example. When 
the United States went to the Moon, which happened although not when they filmed it, the speech 
that was written for Neil Armstrong read thus, “one small step for man, one giant leap for mankind”. 
What is this difference between man and mankind that they must be separated? Could they be 
possibly alluding to something here about another race like we pointed out in Genesis? Furthermore 
what kind of man leaps? Of course I know the answer but I’ll leave you to do the brainwork. If you 
can’t figure it out, read on and it will come to you.  
In legend Isis is always with Anubis a dog-faced God sent to be her protector. Nepthys Isis’s 
sister is said to be a female dog also. What is also interesting about this tail were their strange relations 
with one another. It is said that Osiris mated with Nepthys by accident birthing Anubis. Nepthys was 
Isis’s sister thus connecting Isis to also being part dog part serpent. The child between Osiris and Isis 
became Horus/Horse/Mane/, Isis did not suckle the child but instead allowed the child to suckle from 
Anubis the Dog. Isis relocated to Byblos and wept that she could not bring Osiris back to life after he 
was cut into 14 pieces by his brother Set, until a certain time since the 14 pieces signified the 14 
phases of strength of the Moon.  
The story continues, it was during one of these crying sessions that a woman named Astarte 
appeared to her from the Court of the God “S”. Astarte is where we get the word star from. The 
arrangements made between these Beings have always been kept a secret until now, not to mention 
this whole story in completely allegorical. On the Masonic tracing board at the top of the middle pillar 
sits a seven pointed star known as the Star of the Pleiades also called the Seven Sisters or Seven 
Hathors. It becomes evident that there is actually a group of female spirits, who are immortal, that are 
enlisted by the God “S” who have been attempting to steer the destiny of the Human race, these 
women are better known as the Fates.  
These Fates are the key women who mated with the Nephalim and produced the offspring of 
heroes and villains with various forms and powers. Originally the cult itself was under APIS the Bull 
Reason 99: ADDA NARI is androgynous and keeps a serpent around the neck as most all Hindu 
figures. Hermes the thrice born who is Thoth was also androgynous. The joining of the masculine 
and feminine where taken to these vulgar “literal” levels as another deterrent from true spiritual 
unity. In Hindu teachings one is taught to work from the root Chakra up, thus much of their 
teachings are based on Tantrics and the manipulation of sexual energy. Many are now saying the 
proper ancient teaching was from the crown Chakra down thus the person escapes the traps of 
getting stuck in an animalistic carnal phases which often happen when lower chakras are turned 
on before the higher ones. This is also why many New Age leaders such as Rael are heavily into 
sexual expression rather than mental and spiritual enlightenment. Their doctrines are based on 
sexual freedom which feels good but does not feed the original desire of enhancement.


--- PAGE 126 ---
126 | Page  
 
thus many of these women where depicted as cow goddesses. Later that morphed into something 
entirely different including them now being looked at as some space faring group of Illuminating 
Goddesses rather than a cult that would sacrifice a Bull while the vestal virgins bathed in the blood. 
How soon they try to make us forget as old forms attempt to take on new ones but We have the 
records as the Agents of the Most High will always dictate faithfully.   
 
 
 
 
 
Reason 100: The inside story is the Initiates were betrayed by the Goddess who sold them out to 
the Serpent. As you can see by the Masonic tracing board this stems all the way back to Mars. 
There is no telling the extent of what is really going on and what kind of trouble the Elite have 
gotten us all in to, even worst their code of silence keeps their lips sealed.


--- PAGE 127 ---
127 | Page  
 
 Let us keep in mind men cannot bring forth child whether immaculate or through 
inseminations thus the creatures that are part humanoid resulted from the union of woman and 
various Beings. It is no doubt this was sometimes done by force. Alchemy was the title given to the Art 
of blending elements. These elements were not always base chemicals, many where organic. The 
blending of plants and animals to see the results was something of a religious science in Atlantis. This 
is why many of the creatures have aquatic appendages. 
 
  
 Before we get back to Sirius business I will say that the human has extreme potential. I will 
show you how it is clear that the knowledge of who we are is being hidden. Even while writing this I 
can feel the doubt of the people that will read, but it will lessen as the realization sets in. This is also 
what symbols do on a very deep level. I have purposely embedded this novel with certain symbols that 
will allow you to remember who you are. Be sure to think of my definition of remembering which is 
Reason 101: This may all seem a little weird now because 
this part of our past has been placed in the dark for 
obvious reasons however these Beings Deified, meaning 
they are worshipped and are still alive today. Many 
creatures where part amphibian part beast with incredible 
spans of life and Spiritual energy. The Ocean is vast 
unexplored territory. One could not amass the resources 
to attempt to find their kingdoms and even if they did 
they would never return. At the current level of human 
intelligence there really is no reason for other life forms to 
take interest in such an uneducated limited species we 
have been turned into. The real mystery of Atlantis is the 
Island was submersible it never sank they rule from below. 
Under Sea, Davy Jones’s Locker, David and Oanes.


--- PAGE 128 ---
128 | Page  
 
reconnecting your various scattered members as if you were also cut into 14 pieces and had to find all 
of them to become whole again. Smaller in number we are but great in mind.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
There are certain abilities that come by default when the body is fully activated they are: Make 
oneself small in an instant. Become infinitely large at will. Defy gravity with a levitation field. Touch 
any object at any distance. Dive through solid ground like water. Total control over all the elements. 
Create and destroy matter. Instant materialization of thought. It is also clear why such abilities may 
Reason 102: From what I have studied thus far it is highly possible for a company like Sony to 
make a game that would activate and balance your entire chakra system all while you where trying 
to break your previous high score, its that easy. The body has a system of various energy wheels. 
When they begin to oscillate, it is unexplainable the things that you can do. Laying crystals on 
Chakra centers and going to sleep is another way to get Chakras at least cleared. There is a big 
difference between cleared and activated Chakras. When one Chakra opens, even if it is the root 
Chakra it will be accompanied with a paranormal ability. The system can be powered up through 
breathing techniques such as whole body breathing. The Chakras are the Jewels encrusted inside 
our bodies, once they began to shine again the true splendor of the Diamond Body will be seen.


--- PAGE 129 ---
129 | Page  
 
need correct training and also correct judgment on timing of when to bestow such gifts on a person. If 
this was the norm in society we would be an entirely different race. Giving a person these abilities with 
the mentality they have now developed due to our world status quo would be a problem. So this 
makes something of a catch 22. This is why one has to work on separating themselves from the normal 
mold of thought. Something is always watching and always guiding. The moment the student is ready, 
the master will appear. 
A few important facts about the Binary Star Sirius: Sirius is a white Sun many times bigger 
than our own Sun. One looking at the size of Earth compared to many of the other Planets may be 
left with a dismal effect.   
 
 
Reason 103: Be sure to keep in 
mind Venus is an Asteroid 
almost the size of Earth. Mars 
was three times larger than the 
Earth and now this is all that 
remains.  Amazingly each 
human corresponds to some 
Quasar or Star.


--- PAGE 130 ---
130 | Page


--- PAGE 131 ---
131 | Page  
 
 
In Roman times Sirius was known as the Red Star and they sacrificed red dogs to the star.  
Sirius B contains the entire mass of our Sun in a globe only 4 times bigger than the Earth. Sirius B’s 
surface is 300 time harder than a diamond while the core is 3,000 times harder than a diamond. This 
Planet makes “23” rotations on its Axis per minute thus generating a huge magnetic force. Every 50 
years Sirius A and B come so close together they begin to spiral around each other at enormous rates. 
Once huge tidal forces are generated by these two Stars they eventually flip-flop positions.  This energy 
is eventually released to flow on magnetic lines to the Sun, which transmits it like a lens to all the 
Planets. Sirius B is the far more massive out of the 2, in Harry Potter the evil character Sirius Black or 
Sirius B is introduced. Despite that Sirius plays the bad guy one should not believe Harry and the rest 
of the Witches and Warlocks are good. This is a game the Elite love to play. They make two sides that 
I like to call bad and worst, then they make people chose, either way they win, like Democrat and 
Republican. 
 Earths cycles have been full of  various creatures of a different variety as you have already seen. 
Some have died out and only their Spirit remains. Some have been hunted and killed for various 
reasons and still others remain underground. The floods did from time to time wipe out many land 
mammals, however, aquatic Beings such as amphibians always survived thus the oldest kingdoms 
remain under the Ocean. The primary oceanic race to come forth was Atlantis. There species include 
that of Oanes known as the Fish God. Oanes was Father of Poseidon and Dagon. Many say he had 12


--- PAGE 132 ---
132 | Page  
 
sons. These Amphibians had at times war with the Reptilians and that’s why through history it 
appears the Serpents are actually fighting each other. True, the Serpents do at times quarrel amongst 
themselves with a survival of the fittest dominancy embedded in their cultures, however, they heavily 
quarrel with the “Am”phibians which all look the same to the commoner.


--- PAGE 133 ---
133 | Page  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
This is how they control you in the Matrix by illusive consent which cannot be reversed unless 
you are aware of it. This is the doctrine of the Holy Sea. The Soul is seen as a Fish/Ishim out of water 
when it enters into Earth the material square. The instant the mother’s “water” breaks her 
ARGO/Cargo descends the birth/berth canal. There is a Doc/Dock on hand to take the delivery. 
Once born the baby is under Earth jurisdiction of “Mari”time Law as opposed to Natural Law. These 
are the laws of the Matrix one must abide by. A certificate of Birth or “Manifest” is written itemizing 
the condition and specifics of the ARGO/Cargo. The baby or Vessel is given a “SS” number then 
granted privilege to go ashore. If it gets in trouble the accused Soul finds itself in court once again 
standing on the dock/docket. The Soul is considered dead while sailing in the “Earthy Container”. It 
is a ship in the bottle seeking the dock that will allow it to unload its cargo, the human biological 
transformational apparatus, and re-enter the Cosmic Ocean. If all this doesn’t seem fishy to you keep 
reading. 
Reason 104: Oaness God of the Sea who connects with all aquatic creatures, dolphins, whales, 
octopus, etc. Dagon the Son of Oaness is pictured here also, the fish being the reason why the 
Pope wears a Fish Hat, they worship Dagon and various others. Remember Pantheism is the 
belief and worship of more than one God. A hidden mystery is in the Holy Sea/See. They are 
referring to the Sea in which Oaness rose from. In addition Caesar means Sea (Cae) Snake 
(Sar). The Mother of King Dagobart was said to be rapped by Dagon while taking a swim in 
the Sea. His name means Priest King of the House of Fish. This was the beginning of the 
Merovingian Bloodlines. The Mer is the root of words such as Mermaid. Mer means a special 
light they are called Meropes who also connect with Mount Meru.


--- PAGE 134 ---
134 | Page  
 
To perceive in all this that one Human has value without personally doing Spiritual work is a 
drastic mistake in proportion to size. The current theme is that we are all connected and the Human 
is very valuable to the future of the Universe because of that connection. It would be better to perceive 
it this way, we are all connected to something, how that something effects the complete system is 
what’s of value, meaning are we just one screw in the device or are we the generator? Surely we can 
lose screws and replace them easily but the generator is another matter. What part we play will be 
determined by whether we educate ourselves to the highest potential possible to reach our full 
magnitude to gain the choice that exists beyond the influence of such large celestial bodies in space 
and the diabolical fiends of Earth, this is called the Great Reward.  
The Fleur-de-lis which is one of the most popular symbols of today has many meanings as you 
can see above even Dagon has it on his crown. First it symbolizes the three pieces of Holy Wood of the 
cross. This is the deepest meaning. Apparently this Tree of Life was actually a real Tree and pieces of it 
were taken about through history by important personages until finally they crucified Jesus on it. The 
Tree had more meaning than Jesus in the Gnostic sects as Jesus twin sister “Ma”gdelena would carry 
the Bloodline and birth the future Anti-Christ. This lineage has birthed a succession of Anti-Christ 
and Christ personages through history. To have an Anti-Christ you must first have a Christ so they 
created both. Symbolically the Tree is also the Three which is the Trinity the Triangle, or the top of 
the Pyramid. “The Cornerstone the Builders Rejected”, which is Masonic jargon. 
           
 
 Reason 105: On the left Jesus is seen using the Holy wood to heal. On the right Thoth is 
building energy with the rods and transferring that energy through the Ankh.


--- PAGE 135 ---
135 | Page  
 
Below you will find a story that barely survives written or should I say carved in 1483 before the 
King James Bible was written in 1611. This reveals the true origin of the Christ and the Cross less they 
continue to lie and deny it altogether and have us all confused in the Lake of Fire with them groping 
about wishing a drop of water would be given to cool the tongue. The latest ploy is Jesus had a cousin 
named Jesus also who was from Gamala and he was the imposter, not the real Jesus. They will 
continue to create more and more explanations until every knee shall bow and every tongue shall 
confess Jesus is Lord. There is no way a story can survive for thousands of years with the exact 
description of what occurred. It is a fact that the story of the Savior created through immaculate 
conception along with special healing powers who dies and is resurrected is shared by Chrishna, 
Hindoo Sakia, Thammuz, Hesus, Adonis, Alcestos, Atys, Crite, IAO, Indra, Aeschylus, Bali, Mithra, 
Quexalcoate, Quirinius, Thulis, and Wittoba. Do not be unwise and believe all these figures where 
attempting to imitate Christ. Christ was attempting to imitate them.  
 
 
 
 
Reason 106: The letter that looks like an “f” with no cross is an “s” so this reads Seth buries 
Adam and puts three “seeds” of the Tree of Life under his tongue.


--- PAGE 136 ---
136 | Page


--- PAGE 137 ---
137 | Page


--- PAGE 138 ---
138 | Page


--- PAGE 139 ---
139 
 
| Page


--- PAGE 140 ---
140 | Page


--- PAGE 141 ---
141 | Page  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reason: I only took the time to place these 
woodcuts here because they are on the verge of 
being lost, the originals remains in the British 
Museum. This story concludes with a peace of 
the Wood being taken to Rome and used for 
magical purposes. All those in possession of the 
wood became world rulers. The last Czar of 
Russia had a piece of the wood in his ring. This 
is Aaron’s Staff that Budded, and the Staff that 
turned into a Snake and swallowed that of the 
Egyptians. Symbolically this story is all about the 
Tree of Life which made men magicians, and 
gave them supreme dominance connecting their 
lineage back to Set, I mean Seth. As you can also 
see the 4 beast surround Christ on the Cross in 
the final cut. INRI, Igen Natura Renovatura 
Intergra.  
Reason 107: As you can see by these three artifacts predating the arrival of Jesus the story of the 
crucified divine savior on a cross is nothing new. Even the picture on the right which seems like 
an exact depiction of Jesus on the cross is actually Osiris conscribed way before the story of Jesus 
on the cross. Every era has been accompanied by a crucified savior story, there is no use in 
reinventing the wheel it always serves to disarm the people making them believers of something 
that is coming to save them and wash all their sins away. Your sins and wrongdoings are your 
own past get over them and balance them out in the present by your deeds. Nothing or no one 
can do this for you. Adults are behaving as children with such naive beliefs. People will soon see 
where all this leads and who these men really are.


--- PAGE 142 ---
142 | Page  
 
The Fleur-de-lis was also the symbol of the exotic Blue Lily. This was a flower that grew out of 
the marshes of the Nile. The Kemets/Egyptians were masters of chemistry and Alchemy this was the 
core religion of the Priest. Kem is where these words derive from in fact, the Egyptians had extensive 
knowledge about minerals, plants, and animals this is the meaning of each side of the triangle.  
A little digging uncovered that during the Initiation Rites, the Kemites, would procure 
concentrated doses of the Blue Lily and administer it to the Initiates. They would then place the 
vibration rod more commonly called an Ankh against the back of the Initiate’s neck to transfer 
vibration. After this the Initiate would be lead through the inner chambers of the great Pyramid, each 
room carried a particular frequency that would prepare the body to go into an astral death state.  
Finally they would be placed in the Sarcophagus and depending on the initiation his or her soul 
would descend to the underworld, Mars, or Sirius due to the Zero Point field of the Great Pyramid 
lined up on the Van Hallen Belt on 6 major ley lines. In that moment they would meet the Lord Dog 
of the Underworld Anubis, Bael, and others all surrounded by the hounds of hell and many other 
goons like Ra hanging out in the Netherworld of Dar which is were we get the word Dark.  
The Fleur-de-lis is also the symbol of the Jester’s Hat or simply the Trickster or Magician who 
concocts magic and illusions. Just as you see the Three Wise Men come from the East also known as 
the Magi. You will begin to see that although it is profusely banned in the Bible for all others, often 
time people who are in the “Grace of God” are affiliated and acclimated with magic. It goes further to 
admit that Moses himself was schooled in all the wisdom of the Egyptians. Even in Egyptian legend 
there are stories of other men parting large bodies of water just to find jewels that had been accidently 
dropped in the sea by the women were rowing the boats. Janus and Jambres had no problem 
duplicating Moses’ magic when it came to turning the staff into a Serpent his magic seemed to be a 
little more powerful. These acts are also symbolic but are mistakenly taken literal. It also mentions 
Dathan a well known name in Adept circles connected also to the Nephalim. In the Bible it says it was 
Dathan who caused the Hebrews to make the calf again. Tis true the Nephilim have enticed man to do 
foolish things like worshipping a calf. Of course this also has far reaching issues that effect the Spirit 
but let us just consider what this does on a basic level. How much time will one waste and how dense 
will it eventually make them if they consider their Ultimate God, a calf? Then they turn around and 
eat it.   
The true meaning of the word Magi is lost at times in the modern pronunciation. It was 
originally pronounced Magus like maggot the larvae of a fly. A Magus also known as a Mage, Magi, or 
Magician gave themselves this name because they worshipped Bel-zubub the Lord of the Flies better 
known as Baal and Bael. Many names like Baal, Jahovah, and Moses are Titles and not actually names 
of individuals, they form collective energy. Those who followed a certain God would change their 
personal name thus joining themselves to the God. Ezekiel and Daniel were both servants of El while 
Isaiah and Nehemiah for example where servants of Iah called also Jah. Many of these Names 
connected to the same Godhead.


--- PAGE 143 ---
143 | Page  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reason 108: The Mage and Jester played an important part in the King’s retinue as it was their 
responsibility to keep the King entertained and informed of things of the spirit nature. Eventually 
the King would be hypnotized by the Magician thus the Magician was really the King. In this 
picture you see the Magician standing behind the King and the Jester at his side.


--- PAGE 144 ---
144 | Page  
 
The Beings of the Underworld are the overseers of the Illuminate and they give all the orders as 
part of the Unseen Hand. It was understood that a person would never disavow because these Beings 
were capable of hyperdimensional travel, shape-shifting, etc. Once the predestined time elapsed the 
Initiate was resuscitated by the Kemetan Adepts and that was the beginning of the induction into 
higher degrees. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
If you came to these areas in the old days and asked for Moses they would laugh at you because 
of how many where initiated into the Art of being a Moses, like Thutmoses III. The same thing is true 
with the title Jesus which was an entire Egyptian Mystery School in conjunction with the Nazarites. 
Looking for Jesus in those times would turn up various characters with magical powers even in the 
Bible Jesus himself runs across another man named Bar Jesus the Magician. Even Jesus warns that 
when he leaves another will come with the same Name as him saying he is him but do not go and see 
him. Jesus alternates as this rouge character that doesn’t even want to get crucified as seen in the 
Garden of Gethsemane. There was no limit to the pretenders of the old days attempting to create new 
Reason 109: The Pyramids are constructed to produce a Zero Point Field. What you see above 
ground is duplicated below ground giving the whole structure the shape of a Diamond or 
Platohedron. The lowest point of the Pyramid is known as Amenti or the Underworld. These 
Pyramids also link up to the Plateau on Mars creating Gates for hyperdimensional travel 
through a series of Wormholes.


--- PAGE 145 ---
145 | Page  
 
religions to find worshipers and servants for their Gods; some were far more convincing than others. 
Many of these schools connected under Solar and Lunar Brotherhoods sharing common Gods, Goals, 
and Ghouls. Others were in direct opposition wanting to create their own religion to harvest members 
at least for monetarily purposes, many times spreading of the new religion came down to the “purse” 
or money issues which it took more members to increase.  
The scripture says the Serpent took a third of the host from Heaven and they fell to the Earth. 
If you see how numerous the stars are which all correspond to living Entities, you began to realize how 
many of them are here and they never tire in fooling man and women into worshipping them. This 
story of the Serpent even survives within the stars as a star chart will reveal Alpha Draconis (One 
Female Dracon) wrapped around 1/3 of the stars including our Pole star Polaris. It is said this begins 
the importance of the number 33 or a third.  
Old tales from England concluded that you had to defeat the Dragon if you wanted to exit this 
Universe because it guarded the Pole Star which corresponds to the exit and entrance points of our 
immediate Solar System. Later it was found out by western thinkers through Hitler’s Paranormal 
division and Madame Blavatsky’s meetings with the dark Tibetans that the stars also corresponded to 
actual places on Earth the Pole star was thus in Antarctica. An opening was found there that lead to a 
jump gate with various uses especially instantaneous travel throughout the Planet through wormholes.


--- PAGE 146 ---
146 | Page  
 
 
 
 
 
The 33
rd Parallel located 33˚ longitude on the Planet Earth has been the main spot of esoteric 
activity. The Roswell crash that began the Alien phenomena was mapped on the 33rd parallel. 
Nazareth the birthplace of Jesus is on the 33rd Parallel, Nagasaki is on the 33rd Parallel, Babylon in 
modern day Iraq is on the 33rd Parallel, The Mother Lodge of American Freemasonry lies on the 33rd 
Parallel, Bill Clinton was born in Hope, a Town on the 33rd Parallel, U.S. Highway 666 is on the 33rd 
Parallel, The no fly Zone for Baghdad was on the 33rd Parallel, “S”idon the seat of time on Earth and 
the Temples of Baal Bek are located on the 33rd Parallel. The White House is on the 33rd Parallel. The 
Twin Towers fell exactly 33 years after their ground breaking ceremony in 1966. Samson and Jesus 
both died at age 33. The Number 3 was sacred to the Egyptians and in the Code it is also another form 
of an S.  3+3=6 “S”ix which is also the Letter G. Notice the similarity in Black Letter “Luc”inda and 
Algerian G, G, 6. This is of course another hidden meaning to the “G” in Masonry beyond 
“Geometry” and “Generation”. Much of this will make a lot more sense, if it already doesn’t, when 
you get further along. You will begin to see the Matrix fall everywhere right in front of your face.  
 
Reason 110: The Pole star has been mapped since ancient times. The Earth contains various 
entrances to the center of the Earth. In other places natural wormholes have been located that 
have served as portals or gates entering and exiting Earth.


--- PAGE 147 ---
147 | Page  
 
        
A hierarchy system exist amongst these Beings just like the one set up in our military, except 
much more animated. Demigods like Beelzebub, Baphomet, and Quetzacoatl have their own 
Reason 111: The use of Sacred Geometry 
has profound effects when it comes to 
binding and controlling regions. There is a 
perfect relation in Color, Shape, Sound, and 
Number. If we were taught only these things 
and not the garbage of the Curriculum, we 
would all be extremely intelligent and gifted 
in a high degree. The Elite have taken this 
knowledge and used it against us. Unless we 
begin to have a firm grasp on how all this 
works at some point in the near future the 
Positive will eventually have to face, or risk 
being wiped out, by the Negative. In true 
Reason one does not assume good will 
always triumph, they morph into the role of 
good and insure they have put in motion 
some type of “true” energy to bring that 
idea about. We should always ask ourselves 
“Did we do our best”? The answer to that 
should be based on a point in life when you 
really know you had done your best, that’s 
called a point of reference it is of great value 
especially in meditations.


--- PAGE 148 ---
148 
 
follo
peop
they
Man
word
you 
say n
phar
Som
proc
the o
don
Que
resid
of il
abou
and 
doub
time
was 
| Page  
owers althou
ple any way
y often tell y
ny of these B
ds here is o
 how they a
now that it 
rmaceutical
me will ask, 
cedure, con
 other side o
n’t know the
eens. Your c
ide in Hyper
The wor
lusion whic
ut cutting u
 our contac
ble exists. T
e does not e
 a downgrad
ugh they al
y they can a
you this wo
Beings are r
obvious for e
are all relate
 is very “ill”
l company 
 “why all th
nsider this: E
of the board
hey are pawn
current wor
rborea. Thi
rd Maya act
ch happens
us off from 
ct with the o
This world t
exist there. 
de. Deactiva
ll answer to
and the divi
orld is more
responsible
example. Il
ed and who
” as you can
is Lilly-Illy.
his to take th
 Every pawn
d where it c
ns thus they
orld is run a
his is the Ma
tually mean
 after the fo
 our other s
other world
that I speak
 Many peop
ating our P
 something
iding of Pow
e of an Illus
e for creatin
lluminati, I
o is the culp
n see by the
  
 
the soul”, I w
n has the op
can become
y make “ille
as a 64bit Hy
atrix. And y
nt to divide 
ormer takes
side which i
d where our
k of is actua
ple believe t
Pineal Gland
Re
wo
Isa
th
of
Im
Li
m
tim
Th
th
esp
po
en
su
g even “lowe
wer goes on
sion until yo
ng this so-ca
Illusion, Ill,
prit behind 
 words it us
 will say che
pportunity, 
e any piece i
egal moves”
Hypercube d
you say you 
 or split in t
s place. In t
included ou
r closest par
ally the wor
the Reptilia
d and genet
Reason 112: 
word. The or
sabella Aldo
he Ordinati,
f Esquilina,
mmobili, Ri
Liturgica to n
make the Illu
ime We che
The underwo
hings you w
specially if y
osition. Wh
nhance them
uch as Baph
er” than th
n in the dar
ou “wake u
alled Illusio
 Illegal, Pil
 such illitera
ses to expre
ess does not 
 no matter 
 it wants. Al
” imagining 
designed by 
 can handle
two first, th
the ancient 
ur right bra
rallel also k
rld that prec
an Annunak
tically inser
 The Illumi
rganization 
obrandini P
i, Intrepidi,
 Infecondi,
Richelieu, Ly
 name a few
uminati loo
ecked they h
world has rem
will never see
you don’t en
hen these gr
mselves with
homet/Tem
hem. Their j
rkness wher
up” to what
n or Maya/
ll and Kill, 
ate treacher
ess itself. Th
t begin with
 how slim it
All around yo
g they are K
 Hybrid Qu
e the truth? 
hen occurs i
 books its st
ain, our oth
known as ou
cedes this o
ki upgraded
rting and ac
inati is actu
n founded by
Pallavicino. 
, Umoristi, 
i, Occulti, D
Lynxes, Arca
w. Some of t
ok like the Y
had thousan
mained cloa
ee and never
enhance you
roups Illum
th the strong
mophab/Mo
job is to gat
re you cann
’s really goi
/Maia. The 
in time I w
ry. It would
he world’s l
h checkmate
it may be, to
you are pawn
Knights or ev
ueen Hydra
?   
its modern 
tates the div
her soul call
ur doppelga
one in time 
d us, in all a
ctivating a R
ually an Ital
by Marchesa
 There is sti
 the Academ
Deboli, 
adia, and 
these group
YMCA. Las
nds of mem
aked, and m
r know, 
ur spiritual 
minate they 
ngest of Arch
ohamet.  
ther the 
not see.  As 
ing on. 
 play on 
will show 
d suffice to 
largest 
te, it is a 
o make it to
wns who 
even 
as that 
 meaning 
vision was 
led the Ba, 
anger or 
 because 
actuality it 
Reptilian 
lian 
a 
till 
mies 
ps 
st 
mbers. 
many 
l 
 
chons 
 
o


--- PAGE 149 ---
149 | Page  
 
portion in our brains that’s attached to ceremony. There has been a large amount of research on the 
Reptilian portion of the brain. It makes us only think of survival, food, clothes, shelter and basic 
instinct. It begins to deactivate the much more creative Human portion of the brain that conceives 
beyond daily life into Art, Feeling, Creativity, and Expression. 
When you can operate in both worlds you can move things around because time does not exist 
in the other world like it does here. When you come back into this world things manifest immediately 
which is called keeping a foot in both worlds and was shown being done in Egyptian art. This world 
could be naturally reached through the dream state if there weren’t so many nets and webs that ones 
astral body gets entangled in when they go to sleep thus keeping them from traveling beyond the 
immediate globe of influence. This is why the Maya depicted 2012 as being the end of the Illusion 
because all this would be found out. The gig is up. 
 
 
 
 
Reason 113: The Maya, more correctly known as Maia which is one of the seven stars in the 
Pleiades did much of the Leyline work for the Serpents. Other tribes like the Aztecs, Yucatán, 
Toltec, Incas, Tezcaucans, Peruvians and Araucannians all built Pyramids or other structures on 
the Leylines and began human and child sacrifice by instruction of their perceived Masters.


--- PAGE 150 ---
150 | Page  
 
People tend to forget that the Maya also predicted their own destruction 500 years before it 
happened, this occurred because they where taught to believe in destiny so much they could not avoid 
it. The shear fact that Destiny has Tiny at the end of it turns me off; this word is too small for me to 
dissect. Our future should never be associated as such, it’s despicable this kind of degrading. Their 
extensive knowledge of time was given to them by the Serpent. This is mainly evident because it wasn’t 
even a time chart for Earth’s processions but Sirius. They are often seen in sculptures and pictures 
bowing down to these Serpents who gave them this faulty system of time. Let us think clearly, the one 
who gave us time was the culprit known as the Watcher or “Watch” just like a time piece this is 
another name for the Nephalim.  We find lots of hope also in the indigenous tribes many of whom 
had unlocked the ability  to disappear totally from a reality in a blink of an eye which can be done 
when groups of people get together and pull all of their energy in collectively, thus creating a Gate to 
other worlds formed within the collective mind of the group.   
   
 
 
 
I will take this moment to elaborate on the damage of the split mind. First with the mind split 
there will always be some type of internal duality within the individual, a constant pulling from one 
side to the other depending upon what time of the season it is. This Duality was remarked by the 
ancients as the two Horses pulling your chariot as can be seen on the #7 Tarot card. Unless you could 
get them to run together, they will go in separate directions eventually ripping you in two. This other 
side has a lot to do with being complete in our thinking; it is given the term masculine or feminine 
depending on you sex. There is no space in this book to elaborate on what is masculine and what is 
Reason 114: The Maia long count calendar functioned as a clock of the Universal time of 
Earth’s evolutionary development based on the energies of Sirius/Sothis. As you can see on the 
right this watch maker obviously is in the know.


--- PAGE 151 ---
151 | Page  
 
feminine because of the complexity of the individual Creation, but there are a couple things that can 
be of value to consider. 
  
Feminine energy is intuitive while masculine energy is analytical power of reason and strength. 
Women say men need to be more sensitive to their surroundings in order to get in tune, which is 
true. There is seldom any response by men on what woman get to do. This is what I’ve learned, if we 
“sense” all the time without “analyzing” we will just go with the flow of life. That current flow of life 
in our present world condition is actually going in the opposite direction of progress, it is headed 
towards decay as anything material will, it just is, and this is something that has happened before. It is 
also true when we become too analytical all we have is mountains of data that are not attached to 
feeling thus higher senses cannot be activated so there can be no power to do anything about your 
findings.  Especially when it comes to divining the “real truth” or the “root” of what is going on in 
your individual life so it can be adjusted properly so you can have a stable foundation. 
 For males it is of value to know that females make at least 50% more paranormal contact than 
males. One main reason these Beings can communicate with woman better than men is because they 
possess a womb, this is known as a “Soul Matrix”. The fluid is highly magnetic and as any Yogi can tell 
you there is actually brain tissue around the stomach region, in short the stomach area is the keeper of 
Chi/Force/Power this is where it is harnessed and stored. Women have a high generative cycle of this 
magnetic fluid in their Menstrual Blood or Plasma which is also a high energy substance. This was 
known by the Knights Templar as Sangrail which they would drink in their rituals of the Holy Blood 
the Holy Grail/”Mag”delena. Unfortunately this also results in more women being used to harness the 
Reason 115: The Chariot is 
the body comprising two 
different sides that are the 
energy +/- just like a battery. 
When the sides are balanced 
progress is made, when one 
side is unbalance there will be 
no movement as one side will 
always pull or drain the other. 
As far as the first card all the 
symbolism is indoctrination. 
The 8 Pointed Star of Ilu, the 
Sphinx, the Square, the 
Egyptian Solar Disk, Crescent 
Moons, etc.


--- PAGE 152 ---
152 | Page  
 
dark powers without questioning whether or not it’s correct, they just go with the “flow”. As the 
“New Age” woman develops more analysis she will again deal a heavy blow to the Wicked One who is 
no match for the Fury of Woman but is ever seeking to use her prowess.  
 
Men are no better, without the feminine side they personally need to see the physical result of 
their Spiritual practice, if it be any, in order to believe. Due to many practicing for personal gain they 
only engage in the arts that produce fast and vivid results. This form of magic is the most dangerous as 
it is not a graceful energy but a magic based on receiving not giving thus various pacts are formed by 
men with lesser Spirits whose presence can be felt easier because they are dense slow moving 
vibrations, Chaos Magic. This is called the Gambling of the soul which is why gambling is forbidden 
by wise men. Even the numbers on the Rolette table added up equal 666. What gambling does is it 
allows the person to jump to a higher phase in this material world without proper preparation. If a 
person has many bad habits and they happen to “strike it rich” the latter condition is far worst than 
the former, they now have money to feed their every corrupt desire.  
 
Reason 116: This type of 
propaganda is being directed at the 
young women so they can imagine 
Witchcraft is a coven of woman 
sticking together. In all actuality it is 
to place one under the service and 
spells of the Horney Gods, this 
reflects in how women’s bodies are 
desecrated and disrespected by these 
cults. These are also called Corn 
Gods which is a term coined in 
Egypt were there entire economy 
depended on Corn at times. As you 
watch the “Orn” continue it is 
obviously wicked like we talked 
about with the “Or” you have words 
like Torn, Porn, Morn, Worn, etc. 
all implicating the culprit once 
more.


--- PAGE 153 ---
153 | Page  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The balance comes in play when you are open to the emotional, sensual side of the world thus 
giving you extra perception, while your analytical mind is able to place it in its proper category due to 
previous experience and research. These two become the perfect self sustained match being capable of 
handling energies the proper way, expelling darkness and elaborating on the true light. It is also of 
value to realize that to become a teacher you will need both of these in order to deal with the “two 
states of mind” if you expect to mend them. I will also remark that masculine and feminine 
Reason 117: This is Baphomet the Horned God of Mendes. When inverting the Pentagram this 
Being and Legions of others are evoked. As you see with the propaganda above Witches and 
Warlocks use both sides of the Pentagram and both sides bring about various energies we will 
call Negative Feminine and Negative Masculine. These are extremely unbalanced distorted 
energies. The flute in the hand of Sothis is the same flute Pan, another Horned Goat God, is 
often seen with.


--- PAGE 154 ---
154 | Page  
 
personalities are not limited to any particular sex. You will find many individuals with a mix and 
match of these traits and it will be your task, if you choose it, to replace what is missing like a Surgeon.  
With that being said do make a mental note that SIR which is a title given to a member of the 
high court and SUR normally used as the root of words like Surgeon along with SER as in Serpent, 
SAR as in Sargon, and SOR as in Sorcerer all are head serpent terms meaning that this is the common 
acronym they refer to themselves by on this dimension. Also keep in mind most Surgeons have no 
idea of the root of the word, nor do they care. The Caduceus is the only hint at times they get that the 
whole medical institution is none other than a Lab belonging to the Hybrid Serpents set up for the 
various manipulations of the human body such as vaccines.   
This also gives us a better resolve about choosing the proper companion. There is seldom a 
bigger hindrance when you are on the first levels of the Path than the “un-significant” other. Many 
times two people have paired up for a prolonged period and are now only together because of the 
amount of time they have been with each other. I overheard a person once say, “Well we have been 
together for 6 years and I owe it to try and make it work”. When leaving this Earth there will be just 
you, unless your mate is on the same frequency. Of course in this life we desire to find compatible 
partners, however if we are personally just beginning to learn the truth of things, how can we expect 
our “old selves” to had chose anything good and balanced for us?  
I was able to sum the whole relationship paradigm with this mode of thought. If he or she is 
concerned about their soul and its growth then there is a chance the relationship will work. If they are 
not concerned then the other conscious party will most assuredly be dragged down. This will come 
about often times not in the intent of the idle individual, but rather the things they engage in. For 
example, if you are cleansing your mind and body seeking more clarity and a mate comes home after 
being in a bar for hours they are actually carrying a great deal of negative energy. When you share a 
bed with them you are even more vulnerable than they are since they as a vessel no longer matter to 
the Spirits, it is your fresh energy the Spirits want, they already have the other individual. Even deeper 
than this, as long as you are “yoked” to them you are not only carrying them, but also the load that 
each of you acquire through life along with yourself. So in short if a person does not care about their 
soul, which is of the highest value, how can they care about you?  
Although there may appear to be something there, it is not complete thus it will falter at a 
certain point, most assured when you need it most. The weak link on a chain only breaks when 
extreme pressure is applied. This is the danger of the Illusion, many people are pretending, and this 
makes them very unstable in certain key areas. One of the main tactics of the Deceiver is to match 
you, the Seeker, with an unbalanced mate that may only have an exterior show of compatibility. This 
is why lustful pictures, flirtatious men and women, risqué scenes, and various types of propaganda all 
are put in place to distract the Seeker and convince them to first try to find eternal happiness outside 
of themselves which is not possible. Of course you attract what you are so if you are incomplete but


--- PAGE 155 ---
155 
 
searc
blin
and 
they
are c
since
with
reali
also 
pres
toda
Elite
rem
may
sub-c
ever
The
cont
| Page  
ching, you 
d until they
This Ma
 woman a lo
y will “Reig
closer to th
e the first in
h the collect
ize the horr
 belong to t
Many m
sented with 
ay’s youth w
e do not ne
member that
y be a little d
consciously
rything mus
re is no sha
trol of their
 attract ano
y both fall i
agician or M
ong time ag
n” over ma
e top of the
nterminglin
tive hive mi
rible truth w
them  in th
may say they
 such a dea
will do anyt
eed a person
t although y
down on hi
y make an a
st stay in m
ame in it, a 
r life which
ther incom
into a pit.  
Magi who I c
go in exchan
an and wom
e pyramid g
ng. This is c
ind. Those 
which is the
e lower dim
y would nev
l; they wou
hing just to
n to join the
you would n
is luck that 
agreement t
motion. Thes
 person can
h comes first
mplete perso
call the Wiz
nge for ind
man and wil
generally ar
called Holy
 further dow
ey not only
mension, a m
ver make su
uld be asham
o become a 
eir team the
never do it 
 will. Until
to also align
se people ar
n be used an
t in knowin
on that is als
zards who w
dividual favo
ll make up 
re of the pu
y Blood or H
wn the Pyr
y have to do
maddening
uch an agree
med at what
 star in Hol
ey have a w
 there is alw
l a person k
n with the n
re often use
nd manipul
ng what’s re
so searchin
worship Liz
oritism. Th
the group w
re bloodlin
Holy Grail. 
amid and d
o these Deit
g reality that
ement, how
t the result 
llywood. It 
waiting list. A
ways some Jo
knows what’
negative for
ed unknow
lated in vari
eally going o
g and thus 
zards collab
he pact simp
we called th
nes that have
 They main
degrees afte
ties bidding
t consumes
wever, they j
 may be. Im
is of value t
Also you w
oe Smo aro
’s fully goin
rce, there is 
wingly but ar
ious ways u
on.  
 the blind fo
borated agai
ply reads th
he Elite. Th
e remained
ntain a cons
r initiation
g in this life 
s from with
just have ne
magine how
to understa
will do well t
ound the co
ng on everyd
 no neutral
re just as ef
until they ta
ollow the 
inst man 
at in 6 lives
hose who 
d the same 
stant link 
n sometimes
 but they 
hin.  
ever been 
w many of 
and that the
to 
orner who 
day they 
l grey area, 
ffectively. 
ake back 
 
s 
s 
e


--- PAGE 156 ---
156 | Page  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Since this Matrix is based on Colors, Sounds, Shapes, and Numbers you have an opportunity to 
“view” the program. Thousand if not millions of Americans faced heavy levels of mind control in the 
80’s and 90’s just by leaving their T.V. on after the last show and falling asleep for a good 3 hours of 
low vibration frequency which was the prolonged sound you would hear before the station went off 
the air. It is of value to also point out that these Entities are not ignorant, doomed possibly, but not 
ignorant. They have been here for Aeons and carry the wisdom of Aeons and many in exchange for 
that wisdom have sold their very souls.  
 
 As you see with words like Sly, Slick, Sneaky, Sick, Seduced, Slain, and way too many to 
itemize here all these words have one thing in common. They all begin with “S,” so now you are 
beginning to learn about the Symbols of the English language. In the English language there are words 
that are kept as triggers to use by the Elite. Words that are laden with “S”’s always tend to be bad news 
like Possession, Hitler’s SS, and men like Hallie Salassie, Samuel, Saturn, Satan, Shamash, Santa, 
Sananda, Sodom etc. We call what belongs to us our possessions although this word has a dual 
meaning as many words do, possession means also to have something that is taking over you thus 
changing your character. We find this true with rock and rap CD’s, horror movies, violent video 
Reason 118: Again, there is no limit to how many people will join the Illuminati Circus if they 
are given the opportunity. As I said before once you are in “the know” you will see it 
everywhere. Imagine, these two artist both released CD’s related to the Circus, the home of the 
Animist. One is called Womanizer, clearly a term that should not be respected and yet 
thousands of women bought the CD upon its release. T-Pain whose name is enough explanation 
shows the “33” on his cover and of course the Skull. All this is looked over by the fan who just 
wants to hear the tunes. Pan and his flute win again. All this is for a reason. Stay Alert 
Reason 119: Max Headrooms aired sometime 
in the mid 80’s in the United States, few 
remember this show however so much mind 
control went across every episode with the 
colors, shapes, and design of the background 
along with Max’s Frequency enhanced voice, 
there is no telling how extensive the 
programming could have been. Coding like 
this has everything to do with why people are 
clueless to reality.


--- PAGE 157 ---
157 | Page  
 
games, risqué clothing, weapons, idols and many other things really possess a person which makes it of 
value to rid yourself of things that are carrying negative energy. 
  
 
 
 
 
 
At this point some may say the word thing may be a little too excessive. As things speed up 
there will be much more addressed with the words as the story unfolds. You must know how to piece 
it all together and this makes it that much easier to explain to all the people you will have to tell. After 
you are finished with the book reading it again will unlock even more things you did not see before. 
When they teach you how to write in school they call it learning to “Spell”. This word “Spell” can not 
be confused with anything else besides a Magical Incantation which is what it means. To go further to 
show no coincidence is being made here they go on to teach you how to write in “Cursive” in which 
the root of the word is “Curse”. In writing I can leave no moments to think but that is pretty 
profound. What we are instructed to do from the time we enter grade school is become little dark 
magicians along with a little help from people like Disney. 
Reason 120: Idols have always been a problem throughout time. No matter what one may think 
the idol represents the true origin of many idols are unknown by the possessor. Think of this, if 
the statues and depictions of Jesus and Mary used in Christianity are of Anglo descent but Jesus 
was supposed to be Hebrew, who do you think they are the renditions of? Do you think it 
matters? In addition the subconscious mind can sustain heavy altering when put to the extent of 
placing the subjects of belief, deliverance, and assistance in an inanimate object.


--- PAGE 158 ---
158 | Page  
 
          
 
Reason 121: The Illuminist Walt Disney 
introduced the young mind to a world of 
Magic and strange characters. Movies like 
Alice in Wonderland had entirely 
different meaning. Seeing movies like 
Angels in the Outfield analyzed by Film 
Expert Lennon Honor on Youtube 
revealed profound amounts of 
Pedophilia. It is clear Disney and his 
group of Dark Magicians are out to hurt 
children, introduce dark magic into the 
household, and bring about the 
continued plan of population mind 
control. KEEP YOUR KIDS AWAY 
FROM DISNEY FILMS! 
www.lennonhonorfilms.com  see for 
yourself.


--- PAGE 159 ---
159 | Page  
 
Just as we faced as children a constant array of sick suggestive media indoctrination, the new 
generation faces a hybrid version of the same thing. Parents are unknowingly opening the gate of 
negative forces to the children at an early age. It may be fun to watch the baby dance to your favorite 
hip/hop or rock song, but what is it actually doing to such an innocent unprotected mind? Especially 
since it is not condoned but promoted by the only person the child may know as its guide at such a 
young age. I’m not saying this needs to change, I believe its to late for that, most children now run 
their parents, what I am bringing light to is the results of such things. Like I said before the hybrid 
version of indoctrination wants more than just the innocent body, it wants the Soul. Many parents are 
responsible for delivering it to the Deity on a silver saucer because they are themselves under illusions. 
                       
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reason 122: The original story of Pan’s Labyrinth in dark esoteric works was that of Pan 
molesting little girls placed in his labyrinth by sadistic worshippers. The story gets a rendition, 
some graphical enhancements, then comes out in theatre and wins tons of awards. Once again the 
Ill’s have fooled thousands into loving their sworn enemy. You have learned enough about Deities 
now to innerstand that this card of Persephone, used in this children’s game, actually encourages a 
young girl to evoke the dark Queen damned to the Underworld. People are still acting like none 
of this is going on. Many are sitting back watching the children get hurt and won’t life a finger, it’s 
amazing I have received little “human” support on the Path, mostly ridicule, and I do this for 
their children. Indeed the weight is heavy lifting the world and Atlas. So it be written let it be 
done. Unsluggish strength We have.


--- PAGE 160 ---
160 | Page  
 
We have a little sign amongst those that I share thoughts with which is when we crack into 
something because the Code is constantly revealing new stuff, we often put our hand very close to our 
faces, that is where all the information is hidden, right in front of our faces. Of course being that it 
would be the last place that you would ever look. As you see the Great Pyramids are four sided 
pyramids not three. If you notice everything around you such as doors, windows, rooms and even 
work cubicles have all adapted the 4 sided 2D or 8 sided 3D cuboid shape or box.  
There are certain words I call “power words” like instead of going backwards we should be 
going forwards but what are the “Four Words”. Are there Four Words that give us foreknowledge 
“Four Knowledge”? We are even told that our ancestors or forefathers “Four Fathers” made history. 
The Tetragrammaton (YHVH), which is the Hebrew world that remains as the root to many esoteric 
Names such as JeHoVaH and YaHWeH, consists also of only Four Words. As we continue to see there 
is something diabolical going on here with the 4 which in sacred geometry is a 2 Dimensional square, 
4 dimensional cube, and 8 dimensional Octagon this is how worlds connect. All words like Dionysus, 
Dios, Diana, Diamond, Die, Divide, Diabolical, and Diablo, are all intertwined and related with a 
story in antiquity.  
The “D” itself in the English language is the symbol of a circle divided in two. If you open you 
breaker box right now and look at the manufacturer of the breaker you will see the company Square 
D, the logo is a D inside a square. They control everything related to power, as will be shown. The 
esoteric Masonic studies were focused on what they called squaring the circle. Since all organic life 
contains no straight edges and is always curved and circular this was the art of trapping organic life 
and holding them in various forms of stasis. Trapping natural organic matter like me and you in 
Inorganic Cubes like the cubicles we are sent to work in everyday and the houses we are given to live 
in or sometimes foolishly build ourselves in the wrong designs. Putting ourselves into cubes and 
calling them home, this is another fine example of subtle programming. They are Masters of the 2D  
primitive world of Matter which is black and white no color thus the black in white checkered pattern 
is one of their signs.


--- PAGE 161 ---
161 | Page


--- PAGE 162 ---
162 | Page  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
All of the Pyramids at one point in history were connected and they had functioning capstones 
on top. Not to mention many of the Pyramids where completely coated with a substance that was 
washed away during the last flood, this substance allowed these great structures to reflect the Sun’s 
energy giving them the ability to become like large solar panels generating various energies depending 
upon the tuning. In deeper writings it states that the Gods would land their ships on the top of these 
structures and they would serve as charging stations. Those traveling the desert could navigate their 
way by the shining light of the Great Pyramid which could be seen for thousands of miles. 
The much older Hindu Paranas and Vedras describe detailed accounts of ships used by 
hyperdimensional Beings. When the Gods visited Earth they would arrive in large ships which were in 
other written accounts as large flying beasts because they made such monstrous noises, obviously the 
sound from the engines. Then they would set themselves up in the temples man had built for them, 
lounge, and get served.  This was one of the earlier versions of the Matrix that was washed away by the 
last Aquarian Age flood. It seems that the destruction and chaos of these Aquarian Ages are not 
limited to just the unsuspecting people but often the Deities themselves get destroyed by the Forces of 
Nature. When I say false I don’t mean they don’t exist I mean they lie and what they say is false as in 
not true because they never make good on their word.   
Reason 123: As what is hidden comes into plain view you will see their signs everywhere they 
own huge companies such as the Checkered Cab of New York. He makes the sign of the “L” as 
the Owl, the sacred bird of Isis is also in the picture. Some are still human, some are not 
however we will face them. Their plan is almost complete even “Sir” Winston Churchill was in 
on it but that should not “sur”prise you. Their magic is that of mastering the cube as the world 
is treated as grand chess board. They also master knowing how to move about the square 
without getting caught in the web. Have you ever seen a spider get trapped in its own web?


--- PAGE 163 ---
163 | Page  
 
This is how the whole Cosmic Clock is tuned, right at the time things are about to reach critical 
mass and all hope has vanished. Right at the time were people think there isn’t even a Most High. 
Right at the time Deities, People, Beings and every created thing is in motion, a click happens that 
expands or contracts the experience, it is up to you to choose. The Egyptians actually admitted that 
there was a Most High Being greater than the Gods but because they had not made contact with it, 
probably because of there dominant attitudes, they choose to obey the Entities that they were already 
familiar with. They are called “Familiar Spirits”. 
It becomes clear with the sign of Aquarius that the water bearer is dumping out a bucket of 
water upon the earth thus cleansing the earth from its current pesky inhabitants and getting it 
prepared for the next edition. The Great Pyramid itself in Egypt is said to have had 18 inches of 
special coating washed away from its surface. Many people look at the Pharaohs of Egypt and try to 
grasp how such an ancient empire was so far advanced. You will also see how the Feline which is the 
Sphinx plays an important role. The sign of the Lioness is used in modern symbolism relating to the 
ruling Monarch. Female, Fertility, Feline, and Feminine all begin with “Fe” for a reason. As you see 
on the crest of England the ruling power personifies itself as a Lion which can also be mapped in the 
cosmos by the constellation Leo. The females were hidden by direct order and the female role 
remained hidden and protected or simply put, veiled.  
As can be seen in Egyptology the Egyptian Female Goddess Ma’at was the third eye of all 
Egyptian Gods also known as Wadjet. This means that the eye on top of the pyramid is actually the 
eye of Ma’at. They keep the Female Sphinx in front of all their main lodges for protection against 
various Spiritual forces the Elite are at war with. Egyptians kept large amounts of cats in their temples. 
Cats carry lots of Prana and are very sensitive to other life forms. They are known to contain an Astral 
Spirit that can be trained. As you will be delighted to find out, since it gives you power and strength to 
know, this is none other than one of “Ma’s Tricks” or simply the Matrix that we are caught up in 
now.  
The Egyptian worshipped Matter as the primal cause. Our word for matter comes from the 
word Ma’at. The Atlantians perfected the ability to take matter, which is flesh formed and fashioned 
into a human body, and then take a soul and animate the body with the soul. The matter was their 
creation and the soul was of course the creation of the Most High. To do this they would have to pull 
souls from lower dimensions, other worlds, or wherever they could get souls. Finding souls was like 
mining for Gold. This whole art is called Necromancy thus one cannot simply die and think it is over 
they must somehow bypass reincarnation which was always considered a curse as if you had been 
netted like a fish and pulled back into the Planet/Planned Net. Cloning makes it possible to make the 
body, Necromancy makes it possible to animate the body with a spirit, this is the other variation of the 
Philosopher’s Stone, in which the Alchemist used his body as the test subject. He would then add 
more elements/forces/spirits to his own body to enhance his abilities. If the Alchemist did not have


--- PAGE 164 ---
164 | Page  
 
the correct formula of how to control the Matter while the process was taking, it would result in his 
own death or complete possession and that my good friend is the Alchemical Key. 
You can trace the most recent use of this soul tampering to the Sumerian Annunaki who are 
now professing they are the Creators of man and woman and created them to be slaves. The true story 
is the Danu also known as Tuatha de Dannan, the Tribe of Dan, the Danites who where known to be 
giants did discover the secret to DNA/DAN. The old Celtic doctrines speak of the Danu and some of 
their origin in which they are clearly part of the Atlantean Club which explains how they also had the 
knowledge of how to alter humans. They are also known as simply AN. The “A” in the English 
language is the symbol of Atlantis omitting the crossing of the A. The crossing makes it a pyramid 
with a capstone. It was normally written to look like an upside down V which still meant 5. Mary’s 
mother was named Ann, she was carrying the lineage of the bloodline so they could erect a world 
savior that all would eventually bow to no matter how many they needed to create, this has been going 
on at least since Mithras. 
 
 
 
 
      
How the Elite work is they expand their rule like a pyramid and elect many consorts in a 
system of hierarchy. Then they consolidate all of the power that they pull from the people back into 
the main Deity and close the top through the Hierophant, seldom distributing anything of true value. 
When Beings come to a new Planet they first set up a Gate. When gates are destroyed, which has been 
happening, a Being can no longer come into this dimension, trapping those who originally came 
through the Gate on the Planet until they are able to reconstruct the gate on the proper Leyline and 
Reason 124: The Egyptians symbolized the spirit as a snake. In this glyph they have already 
trapped the spirit inside of these holding tubes, they are now placing the spirits in the 
clones/matter/golem so they may be endowed with the intelligence and reason of the soul thus 
they make better servants rather than organic machines which need to take orders before they 
will engage.


--- PAGE 165 ---
165 | Page  
 
make the “jump” back to their original Planet. This is often referenced in many chronicles, annuals, 
and even the Bible. It often reads, “they tore down their Gates and dispersed their Gods”.  
 
 
 
The Great Pyramids wormhole/zero point configuration is probably how continuous 
reincarnation or should I say “soul snatching” is happening on Earth. Necromancy obviously became 
primitive when new ways to harvest departed souls was discovered. There are smaller cult groups still 
practicing Goetia the old way. Due to the information already known about the Pyramids, if you 
happened to come out of your body while in the vicinity of the Pyramid, it would eventually suck you 
in like going down a sink; this is called a vortex/wormhole/black hole. When that happens you would 
come out somewhere and as I mentioned briefly it seems the Pyramid could be tuned to determine 
were those entering its Vortex would come out. Those with strong spirits have the “thrust” to trust 
they can jettison away from the whirlpool. World Pull 
This book is being composed as Greater Israel is being realized, of course at the expense of 
thousands of Palestinian children’s lives who have no clue of the significance of their land and 
bloodline. Even in Baghdad soldiers were issued swords and began cutting off heads of the people with 
certain last names by instruction of their Commanding Officers. The people of Baghdad still contain 
the bloodline of the Ancient Annunaki, however, organizations such as Thule who have now the U.N. 
and several world leaders behind them intend to take over all Gates for their purposes.   
Saddam Hussein went rogue after he began excavation and restoration of the Ancient City of 
Babylon located in Iraq. He was noted to spend at least 300 million using the best archeologists money 
could buy. This is what the U.S. wanted so they allowed Saddam to get to a certain point. Once he 
compared himself to Nebechnezzar they knew it was time to remove him since Nebechnezzar 
Reason 125: The Eyes of Wadjet/Ma’at always shown separate so you cannot visualize what the 
complete Being would look like but now you see it is not Human it is more like the Predator.


--- PAGE 166 ---
166 | Page  
 
conquered the world and the U.S. was not going to see another rendition of that. Everything that is 
going on in Baghdad has to do with the Stargate of the Babylonians and the Tower of Babel. Babylon 
is on a very powerful Leyline that has the ability of becoming a portal to cross dimensions with proper 
geometric setup. Marduk/Ra declared Babylon his eternal city and coated everything in Gold. 
 
 
 
 As we have already discussed Pa ntheism is the belief and worship of more than one God so we 
will review a few popular Gods amongst the people. Marduk who is Ra takes most of the spotlight, he 
is at times head over the Demoniac Pantheism of the inverted Tree of the Underworld or 
Netherworld/Neterworld. All world leaders are now rebuilding towers to Ra who is their Lord. Here 
are a few of his Generals, we will call them The Dark Side. Abaddon, Adremelech, Ah, Ahiriman, 
Amon, Apollyon, Asmodeus, Asteroth, Azazel, Baal and the Baalim (not a singing group), Baphomet, 
Bast, Beelzebub, Behemoth, Beherit, Bile, Chemosh, Cimeries, Coyote, Dagon, Damballa, Demo-
Gorgon, Diablos, Dracula, Emm-O, Euronymous, Fenriz, Gorgo, Haborym, Hecate, Ishtar, Kali, 
Reason 126: Here is a rendition of the Babylonian Ziggurat or Tower. The King resided in the 
top with the Gods in the clouds.


--- PAGE 167 ---
167 | Page  
 
Latchme, Lilith, Loki, Mammon, Mania, Mantus, Marduk, Mastema, Melek Taus, Mephistopheles, 
Metztli, Midgard, Milcom, Moloch, Morm, Naamah, Nihasa, Nija, Oyam, Pan, Pluto, Persephone, 
Pwcca, Rimmon, Sabazios, Saitan, Samael, Samnu, Sedit, Sekhmet, Set, Shaitan, Shiva, Supay, T’AN-
MO, Tchort, Tzezcatlipoca, Thames, Thoth, Tunrida, Typhon, Yaotzin, YEN LO WANG. There are 
of course many more then these mentioned, however, these in particular are in the German Satanic 
Bible so their should be no questions with the Beings listed here if whether they are good or bad, they 
are the orchestrators of evil and 100% darksiders keep them and anyone representing them away from 
anything you love and care about. They are a sad lot We shall place great chains around their necks 
and drag them about in ridicule before they are particlized and dispersed to the winds. 
 
It was even more fascinating to see Vin Diesel the Actor with a tattoo of the Necromicon Sigil 
on his neck in the movie Babylon A.D. In another movie The Chronicles of Riddick he actually 
battles Necromongers, holy half—deads from the Underworld who take over worlds by combining 
their souls with Humans through non-voluntary possession. In Babylon A.D., his role is to protect a 
woman who will birth the final seed of Babylon, the Anti-Christ twins with genetically enhanced 
powers.  What is being said in secret circles is once the line-up happens the Gates will be open and 
many Beings will have the opportunity to go into different Planes and Dimensions through Portals. 
This is a time of great going and coming. 
Reason 127: As you see they are not really 
hiding their affiliation with 
Babylon/Bel/Ra/Marduk. The picture on 
the left has inverted pentagrams and the 
people are shaped like cubes. These types of 
images are rich with symbolism. The Tower 
itself is complete and several other Towers 
are nearing completion.


--- PAGE 168 ---
168 
 
the a
can 
mov
is all
Holl
awar
walk
takin
Chr
Um
man
prop
cere
up i
patt
bec
o
| Page  
The star
acting indu
 be found p
vies like the
l a part of t
lywood are 
 Madonn
rd show wh
king down a
ng place. W
istina becam
brella Vide
ny other ast
This par
paganda thr
monies, ind
n to the mo
erns that in
ome so pop
rs of Hollyw
ustry and es
playing the s
e Matrix, Jo
the heavy pr
 initiates an
na who we 
hile dismissi
a 13 step Py
Watching Br
me Miss Te
eo which Le
onishingly 
rticular top
rough histo
ductions, cu
odern title 
nvolve esote
ular a Sync
wood are “a
tablishes a c
same type o
hnny Mnem
rogrammin
nd know for
 talked abou
ing Britney
yramid in f
ritney’s care
een, Cover G
ennonHono
 things abou
ic about ho
ory are all b
urrent info
Synchromy
eric activity 
chromistic W
as below” re
career unle
of role such
monic, the 
ng being don
r a fact the 
ut briefly ac
y Spears wit
front of a m
eer after tha
Girl, etc. Th
orFilms on 
ut the film 
ow movies, c
eing used to
ormation, an
ysticism. Th
 embedded
Wikipedia h
esonators of
ess they are 
h as the savio
 Day the Ea
ne to the vi
 roles they p
ctually initi
th a holy kis
million view
at night wa
he same thi
 Youtube di
 industry.  
cartoons, co
o commun
nd the statu
his word me
d within the
has now bee
f the stars a
 “in tune” w
or role Kea
arth Stood S
iewer. It is a
play are at t
iated Cristin
ss just as th
wers who on
as like watch
ing is witne
id a profou
omics, and 
icate and p
us of world 
eans the cle
e media for 
en formed.
above. A per
with their p
anu Reeves 
Still, and A
a fact that m
times initia
na Aguilera
he ritual ent
nly a few kn
hing a horro
essed with R
und job at ex
 various oth
ortray Maso
 dominatio
ear identific
 various rea
 
rson seldom
position. M
is often giv
A Scanner D
many peopl
ations. 
a on stage d
tails. She be
ew what wa
or show wh
Rianna in h
xposing am
her types of
onic and El
n has all be
cation of ce
asons.  This
m gets into 
any actors 
en in 
Darkly. This
le in 
during an 
egins by 
as actually 
hile 
her 
mongst 
f 
litist 
een rolled 
rtain 
 has 
 
s


--- PAGE 169 ---
169 | Page  
 
 
With this unraveling of secrets that seemed to begin after the Twin Towers collapsed those who 
have begun investigating under the pretense of conspiracy have uncovered a trail of immense 
proportion. Many things reveal that not only are we dealing with a force that has the ability to traverse 
space and time it also has the supreme intelligence of a Master Architect or Master Builder. When you 
begin to look into these matters you find an inner network of people from various nationalities and 
backgrounds all “in the know”, which allows them to be more mentally, financially, and physically 
superior than the average person. When the Twin Towers collapsed, which was the Tower Card #16, 
the consciousness of the Planet shifted starting in OZ/NY. The Twin Towers themselves were giant 
tuning forks with the base of the structure infused into the chambers that kept the Gold Reserve.  
   
 
Reason 128: The Media 
keeps a constant broadcast of 
esoteric information going 
which works two-fold. It 
serves to keep various 
members of the Elite in the 
know of current situations, 
while making the average 
person continue to believe its 
all a part of the 
entertainment. The year 
2010 will be anything but 
entertainment for those who 
are not prepared. Watch.


--- PAGE 170 ---
170 | Page  
 
 
 
 
There has been profound amounts of publications found that date back as far as 1960 
indicating that the tower would eventually be collapsed in some massive Masonic Mega Ritual. There 
are enough books and movies on the full details of the 9/11 plot so I will only discuss what many of 
the conspiracy researchers have missed. Now that 9/11 has past it is for many just another moment in 
time because they did not lose any loved ones. For those families that lost a loved one they are torn 
between this conspiracy and that conspiracy. It is fact that this was an orchestrated event that signaled 
the dawn of a new view of how we see our leaders. I will also say that I believe those people did not die 
in vain. It was that single event that made many wake up and see things deeper. Thousands of lives are 
lost everyday due to plans that we could interpret, interrupt, and prevent if we would wake up and 
learn how the spiritual world functions, along with its signs and symbols. 
    
 
Reason 129: The Twin Towers which we will call Jaochin and Boaz were tuning forks setting the 
frequency and consciousness for the City which is silently the Capitol of the United States, New 
York the Land of Oz. The globe placed at the base of the fallen towers is now the controlling 
device until the Freedom Towers are complete in 2012.


--- PAGE 171 ---
171 | Page  
 
 
 
 
 
The Gold that was contained in the WTC Towers was moved to Dubai. In fact most of the 
Gold in the world is now in Dubai. If one has investments in Gold bullion and would like to take 
delivery, it has to come from Dubai. In Dubai it is clear by the architecture they are expecting the 
arrival of a Being. Since the Annunaki bloodlines trace mainly through the regions of what is now the 
Arab world it is almost guaranteed they are expecting the return of Marduk and have gathered the 
Gold as instructed. These Beings are at the root of the mental and physical enslavement that has faced 
man and woman, it is also their bloodlines the Elite are attempting to keep preserved. It is also clear 
the Annunaki are masters at keeping their identity unknown. Although the Sumerian tablets are some 
of the oldest writings discovered, stories of the Annunaki which are contained on Cuneiform Tablets 
did not start to really leak until after 9/11. Zacharia Sitchen wrote extensive books on their workings, 
these books did not get much attention from those who did not already know about the Sumerians 
and the Annunaki until recently. 
 
Reason 130: Since the Elite are notorious for following the 22 card Tarot deck it was already 
divined that they would cause the Tower to fall. In this FEMA Terrorism self-study manual the 
Towers are shown with the Bulls Eye/Aldabaren over the South Tower. This manual was 
published in June 1999 way before the Towers fell, they already knew it was going to happen.


--- PAGE 172 ---
172 | Page  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Before we move from the subject of the Annunaki there is one more thing that must be 
known. Its apparent that the interaction with the Annunaki males and the Earth females seems to 
parallel Genesis, especially since all these stories are Sumerian and of course the Sumerians had the 
Fallen Angel story first. These Angels were actually advanced winged Reptilians. There is definitely a 
link here. Furthermore these bloodlines have now claimed to be the Blue Blood Elite that have been 
ruling like tyrants, Blue is the color of the Serpents blood.  
Magdalena was said to be the twin sister of Jesus who was carrying the bloodline. She was 
married into the House of Windsor/Hanover/Mero/Goth/Viso etc. these are all Blue Bloods. Finally 
the Grail became Princess Diana and as planned she bought forth Prince William of whom many are 
implicating as the Anti-Christ. It is of value to remember that the Anti-Christ does not have the Power 
it is the Beast and the False Prophet who he teams up with and they form a trinity. Lord Matrieya was 
Reason 131: The Annunaki are possibly the oldest Reptilian faction to infiltrate Earth. The 
elder Annunaki eventually left Earth with the ship Nibiru to return once there Ship makes its 
next pass by Earth as it does every 26,000 years. They left their sibling and offspring in charge 
while they were gone. It just so happens that 26,000 years comes to completion on December 
21, 2012 at 11:11 a.m. Reports say Nibiru can now be seen approaching from the South Pole. 
The Annunaki are shape shifters so they can take on many form such as Birdmen, Cherubs, and 
Dracons. Their offspring such as the Danu Nimrod became the Kings of Sumeria, they were of 
large stature.


--- PAGE 173 ---
173 | Page  
 
seen on the boat when a major meeting of the world’s top secret societies, such as the Knights of 
Malta, took place. It is highly possible Lord Matrieya will be the False Prophet. The Pope has agreed 
to take the position after Matrieya rather than before. The Beast is the Red Dragon and I don’t feel it 
is time to reveal who that really is due to the amount of disbelief which will occur. If the “Second 
Edition” is allowed to come forth I will reveal it then and by that time much of what I’m talking about 
now you will already see. 
When Princess Diana began to date Doti Fayed it seemed the Royal House was very sore about 
this, or was all this part of the plan to mix the Reptilian Bloodlines with Annunaki? Another name 
for the Annunaki is Annu”doti”. When Diana’s autopsy came forward it stated she was pregnant with 
twins before her death. It is known also by those who meditate day and night and expect their Maker 
at any moment, that the Jesuit Priests are now training one group of twins. Twins have the specialty of 
both parallels being born in the same womb thus combined they have heightened Spiritual ability if 
they pursue it.


--- PAGE 174 ---
174 | Page  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
There is another Planet that used to be in our system known as Meldek that is no longer with 
us due to another civil war which went nuclear on their surface. I personally believe this is a very big 
connection that will put pieces together for many who have already engage in finding out what’s going 
on but can’t connect certain things. Here is what I know; Salt Lake City is located on top of a vast 
underground cavern system predating this interim of man. Those cavern systems connect through 
underground Nevada Area 60, 13, 51, and probably every major underground hub up into Mount 
Shasta and various regions of Alaska. Generally when they dig underground it is to extend this system. 
This system is controlled by the Unseen Hand built by the Atlantians; it can be seen as the backbone 
of the Matrix. Zion is already running and is underground which can not ne seen the movie Matrix 
but also the movie Ember. 
When entering a Mormon sanctuary the highest priority is to trace your genealogy, they 
contain the world’s largest database of genealogy rivaled by only Israel’s. The Jews keep extensive 
records to prove their lineage and bloodline. You cannot enter inside the Temple unless your 
genealogy can be verified by them.  We will continue to establish the link between the Annunaki the 
Hibiru’s, Nibiru, Meldek, and the Melchizedeks as we go on. The entire priesthood of the Earth reside 
under one roof. The divisions between religions are now mending because they were always together 
in the background. One part of the design was to get the people to continue to quarrel which is chaos 
called in Latin CHAO, this buys time. Chaos produces a mist or smoke screen. When chaos is 
breaking out anything can go on because everyone’s attention is on something else.  
Reason 132: As can be seen here by this statue made by instruction, Prince Charles has no 
problem depicting himself as the Prince Lucifer who was cast out of heaven. The royal family 
are the laymen of the demonic Pantheism and they now control most of the world. The Bible 
makes sure to include that Satan is the Ruler of this World. As I said before they will have to be 
faced or they will continue to decimate everything innocent and pure as their ranks increase 
with the youth who are conned into practicing the things abhorred in the High Heavens. 
Prince William “The Golden Boy” is continuously prepped for his role as the new world Anti-
Christ ruler, surely he will be struck so hard his jewels will fall from his crown.


--- PAGE 175 ---
175 | Page  
 
Let us look at the division of the minds of the world for a moment to see why there are not 
many coming to the aid of those who really wish to go beyond this Universe/University and into the 
Cosmos because the course is over. Some have the knowledge while other have the resources, they 
must join or it is left for ones individual self to make your body a ship, activating a portal and exit the 
dimension. When you head to the Arab world they are Monotheist and are waiting on the Mahdi the 
Twelver or Twelfth Imam. Hmmm why is it taking these Masters so long to show up, their people are 
dying by the masses. In reason there should be no way the U.S., who they call the cursed Dajjal a 
serpent beast known also as Nakash, should be able to infiltrate the Great Orient and murder 
everything in sight unless their power has somehow waned and they have been fooled to believe things 
that are not true thus depleting their spiritual shield which is the real personal barrier before the 
physical.  
Many are angry and have taken up arms against Tubal-Cain! I ask the Arabs and Jihadist did 
not your great Master say Tubal Cain the Black Smith was the Lord of weapons of great destruction, 
you cannot beat him at his own Great Art. Our strength does not lie in weapons fashioned of metal it 
is with Spirit, Crystal Power and control of the Ability particle energy which moveth massive stones 
even mountains with the mind, lay to waste powerful Beast, and keeping malignant Jinn at bay. We 
learned this from the Most High, the Wise who will always remain above all things. The quarrel is 
between Archons like Jaldabaoth, Dominions such as Jesu, Rulers such as the Queen Lizard Elizabeth 
of England, Principalities like Lucifer, and Kings like Asmodeus.


--- PAGE 176 ---
176 | Page  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Here is another thing to think about. If everything is based on sound and every combination of 
those sounds can be found on a piano scale there are then 12 octaves on the scale and a 13th overtone. 
If we are at 3 which is C we are 2 scales away from the lowest dimension. When you hear the low keys 
on a piano you can feel the vibration of danger those keys emit. It is time to wake up and really 
innerstand where you are in this whole thing rather than just imaging everything will work itself out. 
We must begin to engage life the proper way or face the results of such negligence as things run 
amuck.  
Continuing on the trail we find that the Arabs contained detailed information in regards to the 
involvement of these invaders and us. They have accounts that have survived for ages of ships they 
called the Shams visiting Earth. It is safe to say that the Arabs had already familiarized themselves with 
these Beings and even worshipped them. I find an uncanny similarity in the name of Allalu the first 
Annunaki to find Earth before his brother Anu, and the Muslim God Allah. The story of Allalu’s 
Reason 133: Top Left, this is the Official Seal of the “Dominion” of the Order of Melchizedek 
the High Priesthood. This links Christianity, Judaism, and Islam altogether. The Jewel of the 
33rd Order out of Chaos. I still find it amazing that although a few people have already made it 
known, the 33rd Degree is made to look like the highest degree when it is not. I know of 90 
Degrees by Title and there are 360 in which only one can hold the title of each.


--- PAGE 177 ---
177 | Page  
 
discovery of the Earth is the first part of the Sumerian Tablets which is seldom mentioned amongst 
scholars since Anu becomes the chief God of the Tablets. They immediately go into the story of Anu 
as ruler, Enlil, E.A, Marduk, Inanna, Ningursag, Gilgamesh, etc.  
This also lets us know these Beings are not referred to as Annunaki amongst themselves since it 
is clear Anu the brother of Allalu earned the right, because of his victory over his brother in battle, to 
name their lineage on Earth Annunaki. The Sumerian Tablets that proceeds the one in common 
publication states that Allalu made the journey from the home Planet of the Annunaki first in order 
to find a Planet that contained the resources to save their World. He was then considered the bravest 
for accomplishing an almost impossible task. After lengthy travel through the solar system Tiamat was 
discovered and Allalu set a course to enter the atmosphere in which ended in a crash landing into the 
ocean. With atmosphere suits he came upon land not knowing if the air was yet breathable. Once 
Gold was found Allalu send communication back to the home Planet of his find.  
When I think of all this the movie Predator comes to mind again. Apparently the second to 
arrive was Anu, Allalu’s brother who challenges him for the new found territory by a wrestling match. 
It says Allalu lost this match and was exiled along with his trusty companion. Later it says that Allalu 
challenged Anu again and lost a second time. It says that Allalu was so angry about this that he bit off 
his brother’s penis. For this the council of the Gods banished Allalu to Mars a world that was only 
inhabitable underground. The face on Mars is said to be the face of Allalu a shrine to Him who found 
Tiamat first and saved their home Planet. Amazingly the story of Osiris and his Brother Set are 
somewhat similar missing penis and all.  
Could the Muslims be worshipping Allalu as the one and only God because He was the first of 
the Gods to come to Earth? Getting back to the Gold we find that all the Gold of the world has now 
been transported to the UAE Dubai the strongest financial superstructure in the world right now. For 
those who can truly appreciate architecture and sacred geometry they will find the structures of Dubai 
spell binding. A brand new version of the Tower of Babel has been constructed boasting itself as the 
tallest building in the world shaped just like a modern ziggurat. The Gates of Ishtar have been 
reconstructed to be in at least three times their Original proportion. You find 8 sided pyramids rather 
than the old four sided pyramids which makes it clear that everything is evolving they now have 
crossed into the 16.  
As I said above when the Gods return their Spirit often takes up habitants in the Temples man 
constructs for them. It is clear after awhile that those who were Pharaohs allowed their bodies to 
become  vessels for the Gods so thus the Deity spoke through them. It makes sense that no common 
man will become ruler of this world, he would have to be in close association with the Powers and 
Dominions that be.


--- PAGE 178 ---
178 | Page  
 
The world sits and watches powerless as the Elite in the U.N. play like they cannot stop Israel 
from bombing Gaza back into the Stone Age. Why is it that they really don’t want to hold back Israel 
even after they bombed a U.N. convoy? It is as simple as the name, “Is” “Ra” “El” “Is” stands for Isis 
and of course her consort “Ra” Lord of the underworld from the land of Dar and “El” who is Saturn 
the “The Lord of the Rings”.  The Star of David carries the hexagram in its center, words like Elect, 
Elite, Elevated, Elohim, Elysium and many more are all Saturnalian words. Just as Earth is alive as 
people often forget, other Planets are alive also and can be contacted through frequency, shapes, and 
colors tied into a perfect system. Pythagoras the old Python from Samos taught this in his schools. The 
Elite have coveted this information and have used it to rule the people thus barring the way to 
Ascension, while not getting through themselves what joy will come when they shall prevail no longer.  
   
 
 
 
 
A branch of Hyksos Shepherd Kings left Egypt under Thutmoses III a.k.a. Moses to take over 
the land of Canaan which became Palestine then Israel. This is told in the tales of Egyptology as the 
story of Ra deciding to depart from Egypt. This was the time the cult of Ra left Egypt and spread 
Reason 134: Saturn has Hexagonal North and South Poles. NASA pretends to be baffled by this 
phenomena. This is also why the Seal of Solomon, also called the Star of David is a Hexagon Star 
because it evokes the Spirits from the Sphere of Saturn. Other Planets also have geometric 
correspondents that serve for evocation purposes.


--- PAGE 179 ---
179 | Page  
 
through most of the world. Even the other day I overheard a Bob Marley song with him saying in the 
beginning “If a man does not serve “Ras”, he will never see no peace,” what kind of talk is this? The 
takeover was initiated and much blood was wrought up to the bridle. Once they gained a foothold it 
gave birth to Zionism.  These bloodlines all connect by way of Babylon, Sumeria, Egypt, Chaldea, 
Syria and even Nubia and together the Brotherhood of the Snake began to expand and divvy up the 
world and its resources and the Humans remained completely unsuspecting, for a time. 
When bad things happen in this world people begin to pray, this gives the Deities more energy 
to make more bad things happen so the people can pray more, a vicious cycle. All main religions use 
these Beings as their backbone and seldom teach self empowerment through the manipulation of 
body energy. They say “true you can reach higher states, but not without the aid of so-and-so”. There 
are two separate doctrines, one for you and one for them. Generally if the Spirit is alive it will 
manifest that is the doctrine of the Elite. The people are taught to remain in blind faith never seeing 
the God and only maintaining a one sided dialog with a crucified Lord. All real Prophets, Yogis, and 
Brahmas maintained vivid contact with the Spiritual realm. The doctrine of the Elite gives them 
power which is instilled by communing with these Beings. The belief system for the commoner leaves 
them powerless. As they say the more prayers go up the more blessings come down. “Be Lessed”? 
These are the words that have to be analyzed by the individual believer if they expect to discover why 
they are still waiting on something that should have already come.  
So the truth behind Israel is they are evoking the assistance of Entities they discovered while 
playing with written Kabbalah along with some creepy residue from Ancient Egypt all the way back to 
the Groves of Ur. Although thousands of people from different countries are protesting the Gaza 
situation they find their governments doing nothing because in secrecy they are all working on a plan 
that has NOW the name of the NWO or simply OWN a.k.a ZIONISM. “Own” is actually the correct 
pronunciation of the word we know as “ON”. “ON” was Oanes the main Deity worshipped in 
Babylon and Heliopolis. The “ON” has embedded itself so deep into our words we find when we need 
a light we must turn it “ON” thus a false light is created. All units of energy contain the word “ON” 
in it because “ON” is a type of power for the Elite for example Neutron, Proton, Electron, Tachyon, 
and Orgone, to name only a few.  
The real mind control is people are not dealing with their Spiritual condition they are holding 
on to Spiritual beliefs that they in fact live contrary to everyday. Many Spiritual beliefs contradict each 
other all in the same book and since the sub-conscious mind has picked this up by more of intuition, 
it is generally not dedicated to religion, while the conscious mind which becomes diseased by the ego, 
is. Thus it will “play church” just to say that it is better than most and will be slaved, I mean saved by 
the God when He returns.


--- PAGE 180 ---
180 | Page  
 
 
 
 
 
In Genesis Chapter 3 it says and then the Sons of God, plural, saw the daughters of women. 
Since it is clearly indicated that there is more than one “Son of God” why does the New Testament 
insist all of a sudden that there is only one Son. Not to mention in the Book of Hebrews located in the 
New Testament it even says that Jesus was from the Order of Melchizedeks the Priests of Ha Elyon 
also indicating that he was an Initiate and not even the most powerful of his Order. These 
Melchizedeks lead directly to Sirius. The Melchizedeks have always been involved in the deeper 
esoteric course of our future. Those who have come into the spotlight representing the Melchizedeks 
have always been on a higher Spiritual level bringing portents of an impending visitation by the 
Sirians and the Annunaki. The two men of our time openly representing the Melchizedeks are 
Drunvalo Melchizedeks and Dr. Malachi Z. York the former is still conducting deep initiations in 
Peru, last time I checked, and the later is jailed in Denver Colorado super max for 140 years for 
several counts of child molestation which I know for a fact he committed. It took the F.B.I. 30 years  
to find that out but they can catch a bootlegger in a minute. 
It is clear the extraterrestrial card is about to be played. There are several documents about a 
future staged invasion by the Beings that have already been here that are not humanoid. Basically it 
seems the Unseen Hand wants to step a little from the shadows for the next phase of their plan. The 
“arrivals” will serve to unite the world under one common enemy, the Aliens. This will bring about 
various systems that will ensure everyone remains safe, traceable, and immune to foreign viruses 
through vaccine. Just recently the Swine Flu scare made millions go and get injected with not only a 
foreign virus but whatever else is in the vaccine. One should be very careful of these types of scares 
that force you to go and get vaccinated because of fear of catching the disease. In the vaccination there 
Reason 135: Contrary to what most people believe Jewish “Holy Men” do not support Zionism, 
they recognize it as an infesting plague rotting away the morals and culture of the 12 Tribes.  
However they are not part of the Israeli political party so their words are not heard.


--- PAGE 181 ---
181 | Page  
 
are mind, DNA, and health altering drugs that will have various effects as we continue into the New 
Age.  
 
 
When one takes a look at the Bible in the Old Testament you are immediately confronted with 
a God who demands large sacrifices of animals. Still many fail to make the connection that animal 
sacrifice is Black Magic. Those closely involved in the inner order tend to have dark characteristics 
because they must participate in these senseless sacrifices of cruelty. I noticed even in the Islamic faith 
an animal must be sacrificed during weddings, holidays, and various occasions. Why do we continue 
such practices? The ancient law even says if it can run from you don’t eat it, look upon it, can it feel 
pain, now see yourself taste death. The Creator made many things for man and woman to marvel and 
cherish so their character may be pleasing and entertaining to you.   
Reason 136: The 
Melchizedeks are similar 
to the Levite Priest put 
over taking care of the 
personal needs of the 
Unseen One. When they 
manifest into flesh they 
are always carrying out a 
main agenda and their 
information tends to be 
several cuts above the 
rest. Drunvalo states that 
we should expect the 
Sirians to begin 
returning by the end of 
this year. Malachi York 
was one of the first men 
to bring information of 
Nibiru.  Dr. York 
introduced the religion 
Nawabu to the world 
thus bringing light to the 
whole Sumerian ennead 
of Anu a great 
misguidance to African 
Americans.


--- PAGE 182 ---
182 | Page  
 
Now would be the time to get to the root of where much of the power of the Zionist movement 
lies. That becomes as easy as looking at the name Solomon to see how all this connects. When the 
works of Solomon were introduced it involved the evoking of demons. The more popular book is the 
Keys to Solomon removed from his sepulcher. Solomon himself proclaims in the Bible that he built 
the Temple with the assistance of demons in which he had subdued and put under control with a ring 
that was given to him by the God of the Bible. “Sol” is Latin for the Sun, “Om” is Sanskrit for the 
alternate Sun, and “On” is Sumerian/Babylonian for Oanes. Many adepts learn that the name is a 
sign of collaboration between three different Brotherhoods that decided to combine forces and 
knowledge to achieve complete dominance over the world. Solomon brought it all together. Solomon 
not only wandered after Ashtoreth he also sacrificed once a year to Bel. Jewish works further claim 
that Solomon was rebuked for doing these things but was absolved nonetheless.   
While Solomon was ruler Kings and Wise Men came from all over just to hear his words and 
see his accomplishments thus many were induced into a deeper version of mysticism that involved 
commanding the lower Genii. When one thinks the Solar Deities are the Evil ones and the Moon 
Deities are the nice ones they still haven’t gotten the picture. All of these Energies seek to master what 
will serve them often times by fooling the worshipper into actually believing they are in control. As I 
was told by someone very wise Demons are strong enough to hurl men far lengths, they are not your 
companions and you cannot trust them. They are jealous and seek respite until the Day if you but 
knew Iblis (Satan) said he was made of Smokeless Fire, stronger than flesh, thus he would not be a 
friend to man. Failing to realize we are created in the Image of the Most High showed he lacked 
reason and was deluded by pride so We stripped him of his Jewels and his Beauty and placed him in 
the darkness. 
Indeed we where made aware that when trying to duplicate the power of our Most High Majesty ” the 
imposter Nakash”, pointed all the people who found themselves not sure of their origin, to the 
direction of a dying Sun who is Shamash called also Samael. Yes it was that dismal light which 
proclaims itself as sustainer of this Earth and rises every morning in full 90 degrees. This faint hue the 
“uncounted” perceived as the Splendid One incessantly wanting to make their God visible and not 
seeking sensibility and reason. Even great Egypt was caught worshiping only what they perceived in 
clear view impatient they where and they failed utterly, trapped in the world of no return thus they 
beckon others to join them in misery. They are still known by the wise and chaste to be misguided 
death dealers residing even now by ritual and pact in the lowest places. Their abode is nothingness 
they are leechers of life and feast on those who are misled into the wants of material matter.  
 Just as always the female role is kept secret. It was actually Saba/Sheba who is Balkis who taught 
Solomon the Wisdom of the Stars. Saba actually means Star or Seven thus the Seven Stars or Pleiades. 
The Koran tells of a people called the Sabians who would make good converts. I found that Saba was 
more of a energy like Sothis, and not an actual woman. Sheba was a temple in Ethiopia not a physical 
Queen. The physical Queen of the time was Makedah who had as her consort the converted Eunuch


--- PAGE 183 ---
183 | Page  
 
Candace who commanded Elephants. The Elephant was a sacred Deity in Ethiopia they have many 
temples to commemorate the Elephant although all books say the meaning of these temples have been 
lost. The ancient elephant is called Mastodon this is where our word Master comes from. This is like 
the woolly Mammoth looking Elephant. Even hearing the name Makedah brings Oprah Winfrey’s 
movie The Color Purple to mind. In the movie when they go back to Africa they are singing this song 
“Ain’t no ocean ain’t no seas, Makedah dah, can keep my sister away from me, Makedah dah”. This 
was sung while a blood letting ritual and scarring was taking place. 
 There is nothing new under th is Sun. Now that information portals are opening it is much 
easier to connect the dots and see that we have been lied to profusely since day one. This should be 
enough for one to realize they cannot trust what others say and must investigate it for themselves. 
Everything that I bring forth I can prove even at times down to the Quantum level. Those who are at 
the head of many religious circles are pushing propaganda that they cannot validate the origin of thus 
everyone is told to have blind faith. If my charge is allowed to continue it will be amazing to watch 
them attempt to answer questions about their connections with what you have seen so far. Now is the 
time media such as Myspace, Facebook, Youtube, Scribd, and various other free information channels 
can be exploited to actually reverse their otherwise useless brain high jacking effects. 
 Once information like this begins to leak th ere are others who are the siblings, spouses, and 
workers of various individuals they will now know are affiliated with spiritual corruption. When they 
figure out they have been used and lied to, they will began releasing information that could have never 
been obtained by any other means. Such as a Masters copy of a High Initiates Protocols that may have 
been kept in the private possession of the family of a long deceased Master Mason. As I said before we 
are hacking Morpheus and soon he will tell us everything.  Their devilish doings will bring forth their 
ruin just in time for the Cosmic showdown.


--- PAGE 184 ---
184 | Page  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Oprah Winfrey we know to be Initiated. Not only did she endorse Barack Obama which gave 
him the edge over McCain, she also has an entertainment company called Harpo which is her name 
backwards this is known as backwords magic. Horus, is the Christ-like savior of Egypt in which Barack 
emulates. Horus is also called Harpocrates. In Chicago where Oprah and Obama both hail from they 
have the famous “L” or EL Train. This train runs across the ley lines of Chicago in some type of 
Masonic pattern. Obviously this book will have to expand out into other editions where I can detail 
more of what’s going on. The more I write the more I see how much has to be written, however, 
something must get to the people now. I want the reader to know that even if some of this seems hazy 
now just keep with it and you will see the pieces connect. I’m not telling you anything but what has 
been unveiled to me. With that being said I’m intentionally cutting the book short and we will call 
this the first edition. 
 Several mind control “Triggers” were used when the Elite made the moves to make Barack 
Obama President. In several movies that made it to the box office before Barack came into the 
spotlight they showed the President of the United States as an African American. Those movies were 
made to be favorable box office hits and the viewer was then set in the fertile soil for the future move. 
This way it almost seems like it already happened when the actual scenario starts to take place. This 
makes people more comfortable in thinking it was their idea. Many of these types of methods were 
Reason 137: This Temple of Sheba is actually below ground. Nubia became Lower Egypt 
maintaining the Pantheism of the Pharaohs even when it was lost to the common world. 
Solomon, who was clearly of Hibiru descent, entreated Balkis to give him the Wisdom of the 
Stars and the doctrines of the Underworld. With these instructions what is now modern 
Christianity was given more form. The Ethiopic books of the Bible predated all other works. The 
Ethiopic books became the main resource for writing many versions of the Bible in other 
languages. The most recent story of the death and resurrection seems to be plagiarized from their 
books of another Savior and his Virgin mother who was black. Mary and Jesus are modeled after 
them.


--- PAGE 185 ---
185 | Page  
 
learned from German mind control scientist and were put to the test in the CIA’s Project MKUltra. 
Their work on compartmentalizing the brain was phenomenally riveting.  
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
We will discuss briefly a topic that is way out of the box, my hangout. Since the inner core of 
these societies have mastered death and resurrection they known how to reincarnate into this world 
again and assume various roles of leadership. Below I’m showing profound proof of this. Remember 
Reason 138: This is how suggestive mind control works. The “Dream” poster was to “Trigger” 
the feeling of Martin Luther King Jr. getting African Americans to believe that they would finally 
be treated with justice when Barack came into Office. Since African Americans don’t generally 
vote, not believing in such nonsense as politics, this time they showed up at the pools which 
caused the Republican Party, who always vote, to be outnumbered. Although they could always 
just cheat and rig the vote, it is better when it is a conscious decision by the people. This way a 
pact or agreement is made thus the outcome will be entirely the fault of the Voter for 
participating in the “El”ection. As also seen here they prepped everyone first through the Media 
for the African American President who is really an incarnate of Pharonic energy.


--- PAGE 186 ---
186 | Page  
 
many people were lured into these Occult Circles by the promise of consecutive lives. I believe for 
some that promise was kept due to their particular position on the Pyramid. I doubt that those on the 
bottom of the Pyramid enjoyed such mystical prestige; let us look at those who may be closer to the 
top of the Pyramid. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Some of the Secret organizati ons were known to possess the secret of bringing one back in 
contact with their double. This was of the greatest value because it gave the Initiate the natural powers 
associated with being completely balanced and assembled or re-membered. This also took place in the 
Pyramid while lying in the Sarcophagus. This also gives the Initiate the ability to sing, dance, and act 
Reason 139: Once you hear real truth it’s much stranger than fiction. When addressing the 
Nation from the Whitehouse Obama will stand in a Pyramid which will be on the floor below 
the podium traced in Gold. In the magic evocation of Entities the Apparition will appear in the 
Triangle drawn by the Magician, if the Magician stands in the Triangle he becomes the vessel 
for the apparition to communicate through. For a novice, standing inside the Triangle can 
result in death as the Spirits that are not trained, then tamed, will tear apart the Magician. The 
Adept strikes fear in the heart of the Spirits by having in their possession certain things such as 
daggers, swords, jewels, crooks, rings, herbs, and various other consecrated magical items 
designed for such purposes.


--- PAGE 187 ---
187 | Page  
 
to an amazing degree of perfection since they are now using the side associated with perfect 
articulation and true genius. Those who are still “split” marvel at the accomplishments of these people 
and become fans, groupies, gopis, and worshippers of these false idols who use the secret to their 
advantage.


--- PAGE 188 ---
188 | Page  
 
 
                                     
 
 
 
 
When King Nebuchadnezzar entered Jerusalem he set the Temple of Solomon on fire. When 
asked about it he said he was carrying out the will of Marduk. This would solve one of the biggest 
issues we face with deciphering who is on what side because this shows that although both of these 
Sects appeared to worship the Sun, Planets, and Serpents it is in all actuality some worship Serpents, 
and others Amphibians. Still others worship the Horned Gods like the Ram, Ramses, Ra, Mendes, 
Tet, etc. The Bible says that the dragon had several heads and they began to devour one another until 
two remained. Of course we find the tales of Solomon in much of the Hebraic lore and in the Masonic 
Rites in which they confess that Solomon was the first Master Mason. The Temple itself was known as 
the “Double Square”.  
When locating the ancient depictions of the real Solomon, which are very hard to locate, I 
came across two, one by the Russians, and the other by the Rastafarians. Solomon is depicted in both 
the motif and the bask relief as half man half reptilian or amphibian. Religions like Islam, 
Catholicism, Christianity, and Judaism all support and defend Solomon as the wisest King, so it is 
better to throw them all in the bag together. When reading works like the Testament of Solomon 
which details his dealings with nefarious demons who are made to confess their crimes and then put 
in service of building the temple, it becomes obvious all who studied the Gnostic doctrines of these 
groups became Magicians, Wizards, called then Wizar and various other types of Mystics. 
Reason 140: In my studies into the Occult there can be only two explanations for this type of 
“Doppelganger Effect”. Either the same Spirit has possessed the same individuals that look 
similar to each other, as strong Spirits are known to change the facial appearance and sometimes 
bodily features of the Host. Or they have actually pulled their Doppelgangers from the parallel 
and are living double lives. Both of these scenarios can be accomplished by a very skilled Adept. 
In each photo there are 2 different people.


--- PAGE 189 ---
189 | Page  
 
Once Israel subdues the complete portion of the Promised Land it fulfills a much awaited 
prophecy which is obtaining all the land that was originally promised to them by the God of the Bible. 
It becomes obvious that the God of the Bible promotes the Israelites to kill in order to obtain what 
clearly belonged to someone else before they invaded. This becomes no different then what the so-
called founding father of the Americas did to the indigenous that were there first. Even the Hebrew 
Book of Light states that the Children of Israel who wandered around the wilderness and never made 
it to the Promise Land were those who found favor with the true God thus they gained an attachment 
to the wilderness and nature verses a city flowing with Milk and Honey. Milk and Honey were just 
symbolism for the Cow and the Bee the two animals sacred to the Egyptians. We now see returning to 
the Promise Land was more like becoming the Egyptians for the Hebrews based upon the way they are 
ruling now. There is absolutely no excuse for such barbaric behavior unless of course you are serving a 
blood thirsty Deity which brings up the point again about sacrifice. 
How can it escape a person’s judgment that if something is asking you to slaughter thousands of 
cattle and various other animals into a huge furnace of fire it could possibly not be something 
negative? Putting yourself in the moment is key. Throwing a living cow in a furnace 10 times heated 
would sound horrible. Just think of thousands of them back to back mooing to the Moon like crazy. 
This would not smell like the drive through at Burger King since the fur was not removed. Some will 
say “Well Jesus did away with animal sacrifice” and I will say so we moved on to child sacrifice?  This 
God now tells his so-called only son to sacrifice himself? No parent in their right mind would 
participate in such demonic activity, thus many in history not in their “right” mind did, this is the 
drawback of only using your “left” mind. This does not come up only once but at least twice in the 
modern Bible where Abraham is also told to sacrifice Isaac paying no mind to the strict rules against 
child sacrifice in the Bible. For the God to even use this as some test seems unethical and hypocritical. 
The behavior of an individual will ultimately determine what they are about, so through 
treachery and subterfuge the world has been set in array. Once the prophecy is fulfilled of Greater 
Israel it indicates it will be time for their next move which is to rebuild the third temple of Solomon 
in Jerusalem using the demons again of course. The New Jerusalem is spoken of in Revelations coming 
down from the sky and that cannot be fulfilled until the third Temple is complete. What remains of 
the last Temple of Solomon in Jerusalem is only the Wailing Wall which is why the Zionist are so fond 
of it. Obama was even instructed to pay a trip to it yamiluke and all. The proposed location of the new 
temple is where the Dome of the Rock, a sacred Islamic Mosque, sits now. It is known that if 
something happens to the Dome of the Rock, Muslims beyond number will become extremely violent 
and spread real terror upon the Earth such as it has never been seen.


--- PAGE 190 ---
190 | Page  
 
 
This becomes the ultimate setup for the Humans by these bloodthirsty Deities. The Islamic 
prophecy reads that when the “Ma”hdi returns he must have his feast in the Dome of the Rock before 
he emancipates the Muslims. The Muslims are charged with making sure the Dome of the Rock is 
available at all times just in case he returns. On the flip side unless the Dome of the Rock is removed 
and the Temple of Solomon rebuilt, New Jerusalem cannot descend from the Mount.  
This of course the Zionist will not stand for and neither will the Muslims. So this equals a no 
win situation for these two brothers who have been fighting forever and the clock is ticking down for 
them both. They have also dragged everyone else into their battle through religion although they 
refuse to give the masses the full details of what took place on Tiamat the enemy of Marduk. So let us 
look closer at the similarities of these faiths to see that this has gone far beyond belief in the Most 
High and is about domination, destruction, and chaos. Do keep in mind this is all an inside job and 
the people that war with each other are the sacrifice. 
Reason 141: The Zionist, who are now making 
the rules as they go, intend to rebuild the Final 
Temple of Jerusalem. If this Temple is allowed 
to be completed it marks the end of this world 
as we know it. This of course is in the prophecy 
that has so far been correct up until this very 
moment. All that is left is to remove the Dome 
of the Rock.


--- PAGE 191 ---
191 | Page  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
First off the Temple of Solomon has already been reconstructed and I will show you two of 
them although many more exist, they serve as portals. The wormhole amongst many things allows a 
person to travel anywhere on Earth in an instant. Not just anyone can travel through the wormhole. 
The Auric field of the person has to be enhanced. It is said the elements on the wall of the wormhole 
dissolve anything they come in contact with that is not geometrically configured properly, this is 
necessary to disassemble and reassemble the atoms in perfect form.  The common worshiper is told 
the Temple it yet to be rebuilt, what a hoax. One of those Temples is the Rosslyn Chapel and the 
other is in Winnipeg Manitoba the heart connection of Canada and North America. In sacred 
geometry a double square makes 8 points thus linking the double square to the 8 pointed Star of Ilu. 
The Rosslyn Chapel founded by “Sir” William Saint Claire called Sinclair (Prodigus) Knight of 
the Cockle and Golden Fleece changed their name to Roskeyln which later became Rosslyn, Sir 
Henry, and “Pent”land. This is also the lineage of Sir William, the first Grand Master Mason of 
Scotland. The Chapel contains 22 Masonic marks. The rights of Master Mason was granted to William 
Reason 142: The Dome of the Rock. This is the most sensitive spot in the world. If it’s touched it 
will be like getting into a small box with thousands of Queen Hornets who are protecting their 
larvae. Many Muslims have lost the focal point, their language was one of the first codes to the 
Matrix so they face a different matter that the Most High will have to deal with personally. I will 
just say when one is wise and ready to grow they will be flexible like a reed thus they will bend a 
little for Innerstanding, this is growth. If One is brittle they will break the moment something 
comes that blows surprise towards them thus in a world full of surprises they do not fair well and 
the Experience eludes them. I know this because I was the most brittle and the Most High soaked 
me first so that I would not break under the Truth which is heavy for man and woman and must 
be given in stages. On this ladder there are those who are coming up and those who are going 
down. They now use “El”evators so if the Guided do not rally behind the one with the Idea which 
comes before the Name then they will not see “ABAD” eternity, without end and may find their 
Companions in the Fire which is Purification. I’m just an agent myself dictating faithfully what 
has been revealed to me by the Most High who controls all things and which all must draw their 
substance as all expect to take their next breath but see it not before it is goes into the body.


--- PAGE 192 ---
192 | Page  
 
by King James II, the two were great friends.  This family became so famous and respected they were 
even allowed to coin money. Passing three times around the linestone or boundary stone of Rosslyn 
was known to grant whoever was allowed to do it, unique abilities. The Temple was always guarded to 
prevent anyone from doing this without the leave of the hierarchy until the Chalice was removed. The 
Temple was a great resort for Gypsies who ever inhabited the place and the “physical” Holy Grail was 
stored for some time in the Chapel until it became unsafe and had to be moved. 
  
 
 
 
   
Reason 143: Most are un-invited to the hyperdimensional party, how I see it is the Earth is near 
its regeneration cycle just like after the close of Atlantis and Lemuria when the Earth laid 
dormant on the surface for thousands of years before it could be habitable again. The Elite are 
only taking care of their own thus a few must come together and make a bridge to higher planes 
or get left behind.


--- PAGE 193 ---
193 | Page  
 
The Muslims and Jews bear witness that Abraham was their father and all races descend from 
him, which I pointed out earlier is absurd. I found the stories of Abraham and Sarah to be none other 
than the stories of “Ab” meaning Father and “Braham”, a Brahman. Brahman and his wife Saraswati 
can also be found in the Hindu Paranas which is much older than the Bible and of course the Koran. 
The Brahman’s were a group of Beings that leaned more toward the masculine side and may be some 
of the first Sun worshippers themselves being Sons of the Son which meant endowed with 
“discovered” immortality. This also means they have completed a succession of incarnations in which 
they know of their previous existence and are continuing their cycle of Ethereal Development. Beings 
that are aware of this are far more advanced than those who cannot remember past lives. Imagine 
what another 100 years of memory would do for your perspective of things.    
The Bible’s composition itself is a hodgepodge of several ancient books and powerful works 
accomplished by various individuals, especially of Sumerian origin, all combined in one final novel 
next to the Koran. Both of these books say pretty much the same thing. The Koran is a book of 
repetition, repeating the same poetic words over and over in various ways about the penalties for not 
serving Allah. It pretty much boils down to being completely obliterated by fire and demons that ripe 
the flesh apart, then brought back to life, and obliterated again for the sake of the pain. This is to take 
place for an eternity; talking about scare tactics. Other penalties for sins are described in such ghastly 
detail the Believer is generally in fear of Allah. Both religions maintain they have delivered the final 
book and all other books that do not bear witness should not be entertained by the Believer. The 
Koran bears witness to the Old Testament and what it calls the Injil which is the New Testament as 
being authentic works of the same God, thus whirling the two faiths together even tighter.  
Both Books claim to be storehouses of Numeric and Alpha Numeric Codes in which only those 
who are trained in Kabbalah or Abjad can decipher. I read the Bible three times from cover to cover 
and it was only until the third time that the book “unlocked” one must agree that most Christians 
have never read the complete Bible. They may have come close, but skip books like Leviticus and 
“Numbers”. In these books there is lengthy detailing of numbers especially in the section concerning 
the building of the Temple.  
All these numbers are actually the Codes that can be deciphered to bring forth immense 
amounts of Gnostic information. All letters in Hebrew double as numbers so the numbers actually 
spell words. Those words were the names of various Energies related to controlling whatever was being 
discussed in that particular scripture in some symbolic way. For example if it was 13 bushels of wheat, 
whatever that translated to in Hebrew was the God or Goddess of wheat lets say IS. Furthermore it 
should not escape the reader’s attention that the Priests of this time had to be from the tribe of Levi, 
Levi is also an anagram for Evil which makes even more sense when you consider the role of the 
Leviathan that seems to be playing a heavy role in controlling our mind especially while sleep. 
Leviathan is said to also be Cthulhu. This name Levi given to the Priests called in Hebrew Cohen,


--- PAGE 194 ---
194 | Page  
 
another anagram for Enoch, can’t get anymore obvious but as the Yogis say people are sleep walking in 
an illusion. The Spanish word Noche which is Night is also an anagram for Enoch.


--- PAGE 195 ---
195 | Page  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The dispute between these two nations remains partly due to the issue of the birthright that 
was stolen from Ishmael although he was the eldest son. It goes on that Abraham built the first Alter 
with the assistance of his eldest son Ishmael who later became the father of the 12 Tribes of the Arabs 
Ad, Samud, Jadis, Tasm etc. This alter was known as the Ka’bah of Mecca. In the Koran Solomon 
talks to Birds and even commands a Jinn, Ifrit, to go and steal the throne of Queen Makedah of 
Ethiopia who was said to be worshipping the Sun.  
Solomon’s gift for communicating with birds can also be compared to the highly mysterious 
Language of the Birds which was known to be given to those who had reached higher Spiritual levels 
and thus received instruction from angels. In certain books I’ve watched Magician after Magician 
stumble over the origin of this language most saying it was bequeathed by the Angels. This language is 
really The Language of the Bards more properly known in the highest circles as 
SKALDSKAPARMAL. This is said to be the language spoken before the confusion at the Tower of 
Babel. The knowledge of this language bequeaths the possessor with the ability to communicate with 
all animals. The original Bards were half man half bird just like you see in Reason 131. Because they 
Reason 144: There are in fact several Arks constructed for the purpose of keeping items Sacred 
to the Deity. There was the Ark of the Covenant, the Ark of Ra, the Ark of Mary and numerous 
others. The word Arch means Bo or a vessel such as Noah’s Ark thus the original Arks were used 
as crafts. Contact could also be accomplished by these devices through transport, hologram, or 
wormhole. Just as we upgrade constantly these Beings have upgraded also, imagine the difference 
in a Cessna and a Stealth Bomber.


--- PAGE 196 ---
196 | Page  
 
had wings they became easily associated with Angels but they are the Fallen Ones the beginning and 
end of our troubles.  
When studying Islam I noticed certain inconsistencies right away. The main one being the 
story concerning the intelligence level of Prophet Mohammad. It is said that Mohammad could 
neither read nor write and this put special emphasis on the Miracle, the Koran, purported to be given 
to him by an the Angel Gabril/Gabriel. After all, it lends a lot more credibility if a man who can 
neither read nor write all of a sudden appears with one of the greatest Spiritual works of the time, rich 
in poetic meaning and Spiritual dialog. The original Book was said to be numerically equivalent to the 
number 19 and was never translated into the vulgar languages. This book remains protected by the 
Sudanese till this day. 
 Many anomalies exist within the book itself like all the chapters when added up produce a 
number divisible by the number 19. How many times Allah is mention in the whole Koran that 
number is divisible by 19. The first chapter Al-Fatiha when said correctly causes the tongue to touch 
the roof of the mouth 19 times. It exceeds a normal person’s capability after awhile to keep the 
consistencies of 19’s going. Even our modern computers could not do it since a story is also unfolding 
while the perfect numbers roll in place. This became the sign of the Muslims that Muhammad was 
Guided and in contact with the Great Deity Allah through His Host the Angel Gabril. The Angel 
Gabril is known to be the of the Moon Gabriel. It seems where most of the Scholars and Spiritual 
leaders of today get lost is thinking that these religions are so separate.  
Also in question is the mandatory ceremony of Aqiqah established by Muhammad himself 
which consist of a sacrifice to Allah in the name of the child, two he-goats for a boy, and one he-goat 
for a girl. This incantation must be said during the sacrifice and feast “O Allah! I offer to thee instead 
of my own offspring life for life, blood for blood, head for head, bone for bone, hair for hair, and skin 
for skin. In the Name of the Great Allah, I do sacrifice this goat”. Why does it appear that Allah 
would even want a child to be sacrificed and something must expiate that? This is something that 
continues to reoccur in the history of mans involvement with these Gods. All of this I believe shows 
the reasoning of mankind is deluded. Even the people who are said to be the most devote in purity. If 
there is a God that wants us to sacrifice our children to Him then we have a war at hand. I’m saying 
this after millions of children have already been sacrificed and thousands continue to disappear. Who 
will face this foe? Bomar has fastened his Armor and who will join him? 
In Islam it says that Muhammad married Khadejah who was a rich businesswoman who choose 
Muhammad to run all of her business dealings because he was a wiz with numbers. This begins to 
shake the foundation of Muhammad being illiterate seeing that if he knew how to add and subtract he 
also knew how to read and write, remember Arabic also has the same letters for numbers. There was 
no doubt two Mohammads existed during that time. One was teaching pure Monotheism and the 
other was an invention of a man named Musalymit, a political leader who saw the charisma of the real


--- PAGE 197 ---
197 | Page  
 
Muhammad and attempted to entice him to be a political leader. Muhammad, they said, would have 
no of it so Musalymit became his sworn enemy ultimately succeeding in getting Muhammad poisoned 
or was it the other Muhammad? Do you think they could poison the Guided? Did they not say We 
could drink the poison of vipers and it would hath no effect? We are not the body it is only the vehicle 
to traverse this dimension and it is sluggish and moveth about like a square wheel going uphill. 
The Ka’bah itself in history was used at various times for idol worship although it is said the 
Mohammad came to do away with such things. The Ka’bah had been destroyed several times by razes, 
fires, and natural causes through history. On those occasions it was always men from Egypt of High 
Nobility who paid to rebuild it. The connection between Egypt and the Ka’bah is very heavy. It is 
known better as “the Shrine” and has been an object of veneration for hundreds of years. Laws exist 
such as if you walk around it 70 times all your sins are forgiven, if you pray in special section you get a 
better position in Paradise. As children these stories can be fascinating but as adults we should know 
better. No amount of times walking around a cube will expiate you from wrong doing; life itself is the 
biggest example of that. Things are taken at times from the Ka’bah and sold, like the water from the 
well of Zem Zem and dust from the covering.  
 
Reason 145: A great deal of “Illumination” 
came from the Arabs and their affiliations with 
the Genies and Jinns called also in Hindu, 
Jaan meaning Devils. The religions of the 
world all connect and it is only the blinded 
that hold fast to their faith while talking about 
another. The true belief is internal. Pictured 
here Ila-Al-Ilahu, the Muslims are forbidden to 
carve images of the God for purposes of 
secrecy and sanctity. They used designs and 
their rich language to express what they 
viewed. Notice the Swastika on the Medallion. 
We see the same thing with Rael. Are you 
beginning to see that the inner circle is not as 
separate as they claim? It is the people who are 
divided defending the Gods as if they need the 
protection of Man, offering to them as if they 
eat food and spend money.


--- PAGE 198 ---
198 | Page  
 
 
On of the most sacred parts of the Ka’bah is the Stone Jewel placed in the corner as seen above. 
In another more detailed account of jewels falling from the sky Lucifer in legend was struck by the 
Great Angel so hard it knocked the jewels out of his crown and they fell to Earth and those who 
Reason 146: There is 
no doubt that the 
Ka’bah itself is on a 
major Leyline. Islam 
contains so many Sects 
from Sunni, Shiite, 
Sufi, Wahab, etc. its 
inner circle of 
mysticism remains 
unable to be included 
in the general religion 
itself. By this I mean 
the Arab world 
abounds with Sorcery, 
and many such 
practices however it is 
easy to pin that on the 
individual not the 
Believer since the 
Koran forbids such 
things. I believe one of 
the Four Gates of the 
world to be contained 
here. The belief in one 
God is also found in 
this faith however I 
question if the 1 God 
has a 5 letter name that 
is tossed about before 
acts of vengeance. 
Likewise the sacrifices 
are senseless and 
should be treated as 
such.


--- PAGE 199 ---
199 | Page  
 
recovered them were said to gain magical powers. This does sound a little more like a camp fire tale 
however there are 12 known Synergy Crystals that are said to enhance the human ability, they are 
Moldavite, Danburite, Tanzanite, Azuztulite, Phenacite, Herderite, Tibetan Tektite, Satyaloka 
Quartz, Petalite, Brookite, Natrolite, and Scolecite. Most of these stones are Meteorites that have 
fallen from space throughout time. Whether they came out of the crowns of Angels could be 
metaphoric. They are made of foreign elements hardened into glass while entering our atmosphere.   
In Catholicism there are four great Angels Michael, Gabriel, Raphael, and Uriel of whom the 
latter is sometimes swapped for other Angels but at least the other three stay the same. If you go to a 
Baptist church they will assure you they have nothing in common with Catholicism yet when the 
main prayers are taking place the names of the Angels are sometimes mentioned and they are of 
course the same. In Islam the same thing happens and even in the New Age movement one often 
receives emails from someone who has channeled the Arch Angel Michael who sends light into the 
grid as we make our transcendence into the beyond and all that mumbo jumbo. So what does this tell 
you? It’s obvious that if the main workers for the religions have remained the same then all of the 
religions are in some way linked to the same source. Even deeper you will find that the name Michael 
means “one who is like God”. If I remember correctly there was only one who pretended he was like 
the Most High and We hurled him from space. Some may believe this is a stretch to advocate that 
Michael may be a Fallen Angel, however, let us think again where the term Angel really comes from. 
 
 
 
 
 
Reason 147: This is a well known painting of the Angel Gabril and Mohammad that has 
survived since antiquity. It strikes me as odd that Gabril has black wings, which signifies a fallen 
Angel. In addition to this in several texts many men who went to the East to become mystics say 
that Baphomet and Mahomet where the same Being and were worshipped in mystic Islam. A 
Muslim would call such statements sacrilegious however Baphomet also has black wings. It 
seems that all the old religions are tied to horned Gods some way or another, the Age of Ram.


--- PAGE 200 ---
200 | Page  
 
First off it should be mentioned that in the Hebrew doctrines they classify their Angelic Beings 
as Aralim, Chesmalim, Aphanim, Ophanim, Malachim, Chioth Haqudush, etc. This means they do 
not group all their Spirit forces together and just call them all Angels in fact that term is foreign to 
them. This is because in encountering these Beings through evocation the Magicians and Cabbalist 
learned that many of them were very different from the others so they categorized them as such. Again 
the term Angel comes from the word Angle. It appears only Fallen Angels respond when evoked. In 
other writings it says many tribes wandered after what they called the Chaldean Baalim, although it 
has not been determined that all the “IM’S” mentioned above can be grouped under that one title it 
seems highly possible. In other cultures Angels are given names such as Sukallin and Amesha Spentas. 
The main concern is the actual uses given for these Beings. It describes that some reveal 
treasure, some make women fall in love with you, some give you amnesty etc. I would highly consider 
again why would a High Vibration Being want to grant a human undeserved favors just because they 
knew how to do a ritual. There is of course much more at stake when entering into leagues with these 
types of Spirits and most have unleashed a never ending karmic sea-saw for tampering with spiritual 
forces for selfish means.  
 
Reason 148: Since their plans have reached 
completion they are now prepared to tell the 
world bluntly about their involvement with 
Angels, Demons, Baalim, Gregori, Nephalim, 
Rephaim, and who knows what else. We can 
assume there are always things that will not be 
talked about until they happen, just as its never 
good to tell anyone your desires before they come 
to pass. Be watchful of these Watchers. Some 
things I have put direct emphasis on and may 
have been a little repetitive, I have done this on 
purpose so that it may stick with you. Spirituality 
and Science as a couple have first birthed 
monsters just as Cain was the first child of Adam 
and Eve. It is these monsters that have become 
very strong thought forms moving about on their 
own will and totally uncontrollable by those who 
originally brought them forth. We have been 
given the task of removing them. Intel has now 
released it Nehalem/Nepalim computer chip.


--- PAGE 201 ---
201 | Page  
 
The Geometry which has now been placed over our Earth Grid through Crop Circles created 
by sound devices like the HAARP, have allowed the Elite to erect a new grid which has been termed 
“The Earth Consciousness Grid”. This keeps Humans somewhat trapped in the Matrix until they 
learn the methods of building up strength to break out. As you see they call the new system the 
Internet or “Internal Net”. The biggest hint is the Ethernet cable, why is it given such a Name? Ether 
itself means Spirit so why is a term like that being used in comparison to computers? Since the Ozone 
“Oz Zone” layer is melting there is no telling what the potential is if it’s dissolved. Favor is often 
disguised as misfortune. 
 
 
 
 
Reason 149: 
These shapes are 
created by 
Advanced Sound 
Devices used by 
the Elite to place 
frequencies into 
the Earth grid. 
Those frequencies 
effect, health, 
mentality, belief, 
etc. When really 
studying these 
designs in Sacred 
Geometry we find 
them to be 
insignias and 
logos of the Dark 
Side, designs 
caused by 
extremely low 
frequencies or 
ELF’s research 
Chlandi Plates.


--- PAGE 202 ---
202 | Page  
 
 
 
 
 
After examining the two faiths of Islam and Judaism it became obvious the one was holding the 
power of an older God from the Age of the Ram, the other the power of the Lion and the Serpent. 
Getting all the details becomes burdensome as many lies are woven in with the truth to discredit the 
other side much like the modern Republican and Democrat candidate scenario. This becomes the 
power one has over you once they can tell you what happened in the past and you have no way of 
proving it. They even tell a person how long a second is thus what time it is. That type of control is 
mind control in its purest degree very hard to notice due to its subtlety and necessity.  
       
 
 
Reason 150: It becomes obvious that Crop Circles are not created by benevolent Alien forces 
from space trying to communicate to us. They are created by the same Hyperdimensional 
Tricksters that plague are Planet and continue to fool us with their lies and God-like Technology. 
Reason 151: The Elite are playing mind games on a stage wasting our time, they will assume any 
role to sway opinions as necessary, and this is master chess with an occasional Gambit, Lincoln.


--- PAGE 203 ---
203 | Page  
 
This false light that has come to the world has deceived many. It is the same false light that says 
it has come to Illuminate those who are humble and worship it. Light in the Latin is Luce named after 
Lucifer the bright mourning star or Venus. The strategy they are using is to give you two choices in 
which both are no good. The word Democratic taking its root from the Arabic word Demos or 
Demon and Republican taking its root from the word Reptile or Rephaim. So the choice is Reptiles or 
Demons you choose. To prove this one simply has to note how many times leaders and Presidents 
have been photographed making the sign of Baphomet the Goat God of Mendes. Due to bloodlines of 
the Presidents of the U.S. having Merovingian origin they are definitely blue blood reptilian hybrids 
walking around the White House and Parliament hailing from the Orion constellation, Venus, 
Agharta, Mars, Vulcan and who knows where else. Ruling over us pretending they are like us. This is 
why they continue with this bloodbath with the slightest show of regret or resolution. I’m sure many 
reading this are familiar with David Icke’s work so it is unnecessary to reiterate what he has been 
explaining for years in detail thus I have been mainly  covering how the blending took place. 
 
Reason 152: Here is what commonly 
happens. Because the Light cannot 
comprehend the Darkness many who do 
not have such strong evil inclinations 
refuse to believe anyone, especially their 
leaders who have such charisma, could 
be involved in such a vile plot of 
enslaving humanity. The recent Zeitgeist 
movie, obviously directed by the Elite, 
shifts the blame of our current world 
state on the by product of humanity 
making the wrong decisions in regards 
to how the Planet is preserved, thus 
their solution is the “Venus” Project. 
Anything related to Venus you will find 
the Dark Lord in the midst of. This is 
why it gives you power to know such 
things so you cannot be easily fooled as 
the masses often are. The same 
companies that were talked about on the 
first Zeitgeist were those who funded it, 
they have no shame in admitting that. 
Highlight the problem, provide a 
solution.


--- PAGE 204 ---
204 | Page  
 
First off the term itself is Animist. An Animist is a person that emulates worships, and 
sometimes mates with animals in order to gain the ability of that particular animal. In Africa there 
was no limit to how many tribes were Animist and much of the information on how to do such things 
came from Africa. The ancients played a dot-to-dot with the stars in the heavens making animal 
outlines in the constellations based on the energy they “felt” was emitting from the stars. One of the 
main tribes known to do this were the Nubians from the Temple of Sheba discussed earlier. It is true 
the actual Garden of E.DIN was somewhere in Kush the lush land of Nubia where the 4 Rivers flowed 
and the Queen of the South was in position as ruler over the “horn” of Africa.  
Remember Nubia had all the gold mines that made the Pharaohs rich beyond their 
imaginations, that is of course when they could subdue it and collect Tribute. The Nubians proved to 
be a challenge as the Annuals record lengthy wars between the Nubians and Egypt. Even Alexander 
the Great, the Legendary “Two Horn”, known by the Arabs as Dul Qurnain who built the wall to 
keep the hordes away from the Holy Land was turned back at Nubia when faced with Candace 
commanding Elephants in legions for war. This I believe fueled much of the “animosity” between the 
Europeans and the darker Nubians which they later enslaved and dragged the Americas.  
In the end Nubia took over Egypt completely right around the time it was due to crumble 
anyway, just as Obama has taken over the U.S. The Nubians later inherited the “new version” of 
Christianity by Missionaries infesting their country. It is said in Arabian Prophecy that the Nubians 
will rise again and destroy the Ka’bah and it will never be restored. Ethiopia has Ether as its root, the 
people have smooth dark beautiful skin, silky hair, and lulling eyes. The first stories of the serpent 
who were called Nagas, were in Nubia first and then they migrated to Persia. They are called by the 
Nubians Negusi, which is a well respected last name in their country till this day.  
  
Reason 153: The Naga are more 
in the image of the Serpents 
described in Japan and China 
rather than bipedal hybrids. As 
I said before the Serpent races 
are as vast as our own possibly a 
lot more diverse. It is clear man 
has inhabited this Planet, along 
with the serpents for thousands 
of years intermingling, we easily 
forget the Dinosaurs. Will there 
ever be a truce?


--- PAGE 205 ---
205 | Page  
 
Walt Disney put so much work and emphasis on Animation because he was deeply involved in 
creating the framework for the new wave of animalistic mind control that began on a person as a 
child. Let us examine one story of the biggest cartoon maker in history Walt Disney. The story itself 
begins before Walt Disney steps on the scene but has to do with a certain man that Walt Disney was 
well acquainted with. This man grew up in Russia during hard times. In order for one to even seek 
the audience of the Queen or the Royal Court in these times, you had to discover something 
exceptionally useful for the Empire. If you were not of wealthy stock this was the only way to turn 
around an otherwise miserable life for you and your family as the Black Plague swept over the land. 
This gentleman deemed he would do it through the Occult and soon enough he discovered what was 
later called Phantasmagoria with the tag line “Optical Illusions and Mechanical works of Art”.


--- PAGE 206 ---
206 | Page  
 
 
 
 
 
Since I’m really in this for the children I have a special assignment to dethrone this Devil 
Disney. If we pull together as a people it should be because of things like this that hurt children no 
matter the color or race. He not only used Pedophilic suggestive mind control techniques in his films, 
his organization, obviously run by the Dark Lord himself, continues to put forth mind altering media 
that gets worse as time goes on. Phantasmagoria is the Art of evoking Demoniac Spirits which 
obviously Disney knew all about since he wrote Fantasia. Taking a look at that movie now with your 
eyes open will reveal an entirely different picture versus what you may have perceived before. In the 
English language the play on the word “Kid” is obvious. A kid is a baby goat.  
In the days when Phantasmagoria first began they lacked the T.V. so they accomplished it by 
smoke, pre-recorded sounds of actual torture, and lights. Showed above, many participants claimed 
they had never seen or heard anything so horrifying. They could not tell if the Demons were real or 
still a part of the light show. Of course the demons were real. On the back of many Disney titles it still 
contains the Trademark Phantasmagoria meaning this special art was used while making the film. Of 
course people thought this was incredible becoming lovers of horror. That was all an outward scheme 
and many suffered mental and spiritual damage while trenched in the frames of Wonderland. 
This brings us to the Gregorian Chants. A long time ago it was discovered that when singing 
certain twisted hymnals you could actually bring the lower forms forth by sound. One would have to 
be a Master at singing these hymns perfectly and to this end the Masters of the Gregorian Chants were 
created. When you are listening to certain music from Gothic times always featured on the 
soundtracks of Disney films and many others, it is actually the Gregorian Chants playing at least in the 
background. Remember Gregori is another name for the Fallen Angels and is actually the creature 
Nimrod is always seen holding in his hand. 
I cannot put enough emphasis on how powerful sound is and how it effects humans, animals, 
and even other Beings. The Chants have lead to possession in humans just as the Serpent can be 
charmed with a flute. Rap is now wrapping up the mind of the youth so their minds are so tied up 
they are immobilized, but not for long. Sound is also a key ability we can use. A frequency can be fired 
at the body causing all shells, lower life forms, to break free from the body. It is at that moment a 
person knows that they were actually on them. One can never know what it is like to be clean until 
they are truly washed, but not in the blood of a lamb, come on look what they are saying. This is not 
just a figure of speech, the sub-conscious mind has to make sense of it all and it does it literally. 
Reason 155: People are made to believe Disney was a big kid like we all wish to be playing in a 
fantasy world of Castles of Medieval lure with Dragons, Princesses, and talking mice. Disney, along 
with other very sick men positioned themselves to be the corrupters of the innocent youth. The 
fantasy world of Disney was the fantasy of a satanic pedophile that we all had to visit because our 
parents knew no better. What you don’t know “can” hurt you.


--- PAGE 207 ---
207 | Page


--- PAGE 208 ---
208 | Page  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
As said above many factions have come together under one roof by intermingling bloodlines. 
We will just call them the “V”. The V as a symbol is the Roman numeral 5. Five is more properly 
called “Penta” the “Pent” on Penta has the same meaning as the “Pent” on Ser”pent”. The original 
origin of the word “Pent” is a feather thus the word “Serpent” actually means “feathered snake”. This 
also links to our main strategic defense building the Pentagon which still means “feathered 
dragon/snake”. If you remember the movie The V the story line goes that some reptilian like Beings 
from another Planet came to Earth saying they could help us with technology but in all actuality they 
had come to take over our Planet and enslave everyone. They did this by infiltrating the government 
replacing various key people with clones until they could make willing servants of the rest. The only 
force opposing this was “The Resistance” the name of my first website before I even knew all of what I 
know now. 
During the times of Oracles unity between the woman and the serpent was elevated and many 
women became worshippers of the God “S”. One of the most popular was Europa who was 
worshipped in Sidon. The time center of the Earth the Serpent wrapped itself around they call him 
Ouraborus. Europa moved to the island of Crete to establish a full serpent worship and occult training 
center. If you don’t believe this is a fact I will tell you a secret. The word is actually “Se”Crete” which 
also means venom that comes from the pores, a white puss or emission. The island of Crete also 
contains a place known as Gnosis and of course this is where the whole Gnosticism movement began 
which is where you find more roots of the Serpent. When looking at a statue of the Goddess Europa 
you will see her holding snakes in each hand. She is simply another part of the pyramid and the “Is” 
in Gnosis is the sign that Isis is present. Know Isis/Know Sis? 
JESUS/IOSUS/ISIS/OSIS/OSIRUS/SIRIUS.   
Reason 156: On the top left you will see the Ancient Gregorian Hymnal used by the Holy See, 3 
Horned Fleur de lis in correct position above the Venusian heart of Voodun. There is now one 
group of Masters of the Gregorian Chants that even perform in Las Vegas, people think it 
sounds just like good Opera. One of the Four Patriarchs of Catholicism was Gregori; he was with 
no doubt incarnate Gregori. He wrote the Hymnals, also keep it mind it was the evil Gregori 
who created the Calendar we are on, the Gregorian Solar Calendar. It is also known that when 
the Arabs visited the Russians to see if they would pay for mystical secrets the Russians made a 
large Banquet for the Shah, the actual menu I will be sure to put in the second edition, if there 
is one. While the Shah was stuffing himself the Russians were playing the Gregorian Chants in 
the other room. The Shah was put into a trance also known as Mesmerism and his tongue went 
lose telling them all the Secrets of Arabia. It was not long after that the Hoard covered their land 
and many feel before them, the wall could hold them no longer, its weakness revealed.


--- PAGE 209 ---
209 | Page  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The word “Present” is actually an anagram for Serpent. This means that every time you say to 
someone “I have a present for you” you are telling them you have a snake for them. This is why I 
became so persistent at cracking The Code because I realized that we owe our children to stand against 
this. Some adults will read this book and due to the mental and physical damage that each person has 
been put through all their life this work may at times fall on deaf ears, but the youth of today are 
clever and they sense something is up so this lets them know. Remember if they get our youth we have 
lost our greatest result, we must free them from the loop known also as the Halo. 
With that being said I will explain a little of what has happened during our days as a child that 
has lead ultimately to most not being able to perceive what is right in front of them. This of course 
starts as a baby the moment that you exit the womb of your mother. While a child is in the womb it is 
in all actuality seeing in 5D. The reason this is possible is due to the baby looking through the water 
Reason 157: Indeed Old Ouraborus knows many things but it is a Deceiver trapped in the abyss 
of the Universe and will never ascend. Here is a secret, the planetary symbols you see on the 
right are all the Planets that are already in on the Agenda. On the left you will see the cycle of 
life. This cycle can be moved about fast or slow forward or reverse depending upon your 
outellect and intention, it is the wheel. Is it not better to be an ant when you need to eat and a 
mountain when you wish to rest? I will give you some advice, never serve anything that has been 
created and you will get far. Keep the Most High as your focal point only and you will fare well 
in the future. If you come to a fork in the road, go straight. I will not be with you long already 
my place has been prepared, I see it, and I long for it, if I must taste death I will dine with all 
courses.


--- PAGE 210 ---
210 | Page  
 
bag or amniotic fluid of the mother. Anyone that has seen Spirits often note that they appear more 
superfluous with no clear edges and at times gaseous. This is what the baby is seeing so it becomes easy 
for them to recognize the mother. They are looking more at the mothers design or pattern rather than 
her actual physical appearance.  
When the child is born the damage begins through the procedures the doctors are using. 
Remember that Doctors are under the Oath of Caduceus and have sworn to uphold many things 
detailed in the Oath that most Doctors don’t even understand what they really mean. It is almost like 
putting your right hand over your heart and pledging your allegiance to the flag. You don’t really 
know what you just did, but that will not stop it from having an effect. WHAT YOU DON’T KNOW 
CAN HURT YOU. If the eye on a stove is on but you do not know it and put your hand on it, will it 
still burn you, of course. This is by no means saying that all Doctors are initiated into some Serpent 
mystery school and intend to kill off the youth, of course that would be extreme, but what they do has 
an effect and this is its ultimate intention whether they know it or not.  
Those that created the backbone of the studies entailed, along with the procedures of medical 
care, were completely aware of what they set out to do as far as hindering the mental, physical, and 
Spiritual growth of people seeking their help. This has been done through their constant introduction 
of new medicinal “potions” more properly called “poisons”. Along the way many practitioners notice 
several things that can be done much better and some even switch to becoming Naturopathic Doctors. 
Most remain involved and when they become Doctors they simply become prescribers of medication 
not healers. It becomes as easy as locating the symptom and then prescribing the drug. The drug 
company will be sure to let them know which drug takes care of what along with at times free 
vacations if they promote the drug.  
I don’t need to remark here about the many side effects of drugs, however, there is greater 
damaged done to the actual Chakra system of the person than anything else. For example when a 
person experiences heart problems Rejuvenators know that there is some type of blockage in the heart 
Chakra. This could be due to a lost loved one, intense stress, or various situations related to the heart. 
The correct healing method is to begin working on the persons heart Chakra so they can get clearance. 
This removes the Spiritual ailment from the soul which will in turn remove the physical ailment from 
the body. The physical ailment itself is just another method the body uses to tell a person about a 
mental or spiritual problem when it is not getting a solution for it.  
This fact was known heavily in the mystery schools of the ancients, especially Egypt. These types 
of treatments free a person however and that is not the goal. They would rather begin to administer 
medicines that actually block Chakra centers giving the person a false sense of temporary relief. There 
are many more Chakra centers than just 7 and each play a unique roll. Blocking them will bring 
temporary relief but cause long term damage over time.


--- PAGE 211 ---
211 | Page  
 
Another example is when one takes an Aspirin for headaches the Aspirin tells the brain to kill 
the headache sensation. This does not fix the reason why the headache originally occurred. When you 
do this too many times whatever was initially causing the headache will choose another center to 
convey the information of the problem which could then be the stomach. So the person may begin to 
experience stomach aches, then they will take something like Pepto Bismal which is more like a liquid 
Aspirin that dulls the stomachs senses blocking the Chakra and not curing the original problem. This 
goes on and on until the person is now taking drugs for everything, which will of course increase the 
problem. After awhile the over-the-counter drugs cease to work and the person finds they are very sick 
being totally polluted by over-the-counter drugs. So they move on to stronger prescription drugs. 
 
 
 
When a baby is born the incandescent light located on most birth tables does extensive damage 
to the child’s retina. This begins the process of stopping the child from naturally seeing other 
dimensions thus other life forms. Full spectrum lights are the only lights found not to cause damage to 
the eyes. If the child remains able to see other dimensions when it gets older it can easily see that this 
world is an Illusion.  They can see all the different Entities that inhabit the world on a different 
Reason 158: Traditional Chinese Medicine, Reflexology, Colon Therapy, and several other 
techniques have showed Western Medicine is about Psychotropic Mind Drugs not Wellness.


--- PAGE 212 ---
212 | Page  
 
vibration, children often call them “special friends”. Of course the agenda is to take this ability away 
from the child.  
Next they begin the shots which lower the child’s vibration dramatically through the injection 
of viruses that are foreign to the system. All vaccines contain the actual virus it is designed to prevent 
in lower dosages in order to so-called “develop” your systems immunity to it. It also means the virus is 
now in your body at low levels and that can’t be good for the natural system especially as a child. Not 
to mention the Doctors hands all over the babies head during the time the “soft spot” is still fresh. 
Many doctors are stressed and have been delivering several babies in one day. Some even smoke 
cigarettes between deliveries and when they touch the child’s soft spot all of that energy is transferred 
to the child. The delivery procedure has now reached a state of barbarism with the advent of the 
Caesarian Section/Caesar/Sea Snake. The child no longer experiences even coming through the 
mother’s birth canal which is a very sacred time for a baby which prepares them for entry into this 
world. Instead the baby is cut out. 
 
After the horror show the baby arrives at the home. If they are put on Formulas and not breast 
fed the Formula changes much of the genetic makeup of the baby. As one can see this stuff is not 
called milk but a Formula indicating some type of special mixture for transformation. The mother’s 
Reason 159: The 
body consist of 
wheels of Chakras all 
sensitive to light and 
energy. The Chakras 
control the images 
and sensations that 
are projected to your 
mind. The thread or 
cables that connect 
us all plug into the 
Chakra centers. 
Learning how to 
stimulate and 
manipulate Chakras 
is a major part of 
dissolving Indra’s 
Net.


--- PAGE 213 ---
213 | Page  
 
breast milk contains all the specific nutrients needed for the baby that are uniquely calibrated for it. 
Anything else besides water or pure juices will alter the babies Ph balance on many levels.  
Next the baby is placed in a crib which normally is fitted with bars. The baby has its first 
maddening experience with the cage/cube. Most parents place the same toy that was placed over their 
cribs when they were babies, that circling chiming toy with the animals dangling. What this toy does is 
begin the frequency programming. Has one never noticed that the nursery rhymes from long ago still 
survive today being played by these chime boxes? The famous “Go to sleep, Go to sleep, go to sleep 
little baby,” you can hear it even now. With this thing spinning over the babies head in a circular 
motion using certain sounds the baby is tuned even more. One can imagine the results of thousands of 
hours the baby spends alone with this insane toy in the cube. 
As the tot begins to get older it is introduced to cartoons. The word begs one to ask what 
exactly is being “Tuned”. A quick search will show that “Car” was actually a blood thirsty Deity that 
abused children but is that such a stretch to what’s really going on in an innocent children’s cartoon?  
When the cathode ray tube was invented many men including Disney used it as a catalyst to the 
next level of mind control through Hexagonal Color Embedding. Next the Widescreen Digital 
Television was introduced. The key is the “aspect ratio” which is a way to “open the mind” of the 
viewer. When a person is viewing a widescreen their eyes become slightly cocked in separate directions 
in order for them to be able to view the whole screen. Those studying Metaphysics know that the 
position of the eyes equate to different states of consciousness. When your eyes are spread wide your 
third eye is stretched open. This is a much more effective portal for mind control. 
Even now many tribes maintain that they are descendants from Serpent races, however, what 
they are always excluding is that the Serpent races generally cross bred with them in a forcible manner. 
These types of Serpents, which are not your common garden snake, do not stay on the surface but 
remain in underground cavern systems; few report actually encountering these Beings face-to-face 
although some have, like myself. I will tell you they are Shape Shifters and take on a Humanoid form 
however it still becomes evident by the shape of their skull and brow, which is something like a 
diamond, that they are Reptilian. It would be of value to know that the Serpent races are far more 
advanced than we are at this particular moment. They bought many things that made them appear as 
Gods to the indigenous people who were discovering a new world after the flood. These Entities were 
so far ahead they had already accomplished hyperdimensional space travel. The Serpent races are 
resource gatherers and it is known they have been robbing the Earth and other Planets in this system 
of various resources since day one. They have interfered “Enter Fear” with our natural cycle.  
Pyramid means Fire “Pyra” in the Center. This symbolizes the flame or fiery nature of the 
Serpent. These Pyramids the Serpent races used to not only access there underground cavern systems 
but also as way points for hyperdimensional jumps much like what’s depicted on the movie Stargate.


--- PAGE 214 ---
214 | Page  
 
Earth has a history of great cataclysms that not only put many of the pyramids underwater but also 
removed their capstones. The Earth itself has a cleansing mechanism that seems to activate 
approximately every 12,600 years. During these times the Earth is inundated with water or scorched 
by fire. Many of the members of the Serpent races during these times simply burrow deeper into the 
ground towards the center of the Earth in order to escape the damage that is wreaked on the surface. 
Even as this is being written deeper tunnels are being constructed to house more underground 
facilities due to the fact that the Earth is currently due for another cleaning.


--- PAGE 215 ---
215 | Page  
 
 
 
Reason 160: The Pyramids are everywhere not because it was just a popular style. This was the 
pattern of construction given by the Serpent Races in order to allow energy to be harnessed 
developing working portals that could transport more than one Being or person. When the 
stars realign the feathered serpents known also as Pendragon/Quetzacoatl will return to this 
dimension to escalate chaos. If you remain, you must be spiritually equipped to fend them off. 
Basically the Elite members of R1 A1 haplogroup such as Serbs, Poles, Slavs, Goths, Ashkenaz, 
and many others have sealed their fate in being servants of the Dark Lord. They see themselves 
as creations of the Dark Lord and are awaiting the line-up for the return. They believe they will 
“morph” into the same type of creature the Dark Lord is and will commence to the feast upon 
flesh. No matter how sick and sadistic this may sound this is the backbone of their belief in the 
Old Ones. The entire structure built on duality it is scheduling its next showdown or 
Armageddon within the next year and a half. This is an age old battle that existed before our 
consciousness evolved so we have little internal memory of our role in all of this. The darksiders 
have however accepted their role, sealed their fates, and are willing servants.


--- PAGE 216 ---
216 | Page  
 
 
The Earth has a fail-safe due to the type of Beings that are living on and inside of it. Because 
many races do not get along for reasons that I will explain next, Planets tend to go through many 
wars. A large set of visitors came from the Sirius Star System better known as the Dog Star.  To 
understand how these races have become more advanced then Humanoid Earthlings is a matter of 1. 
Their Star Systems in distance which is time have been around Light Years longer than ours and life 
has developed similar to the way we are now evolving on their worlds but much earlier. 2. Just as you 
may see an insect go through an entire metamorphosis phase within the span of only one month while 
it may take a Human several lifetimes to go through that same genetic leap, some Beings evolve faster 
than others especially when they are unhindered. 
A word on time, the English language does work two-fold. When not knowing what the words 
really mean it does begin a sequence of mind control. On the other hand when knowing what the 
words mean it puts you in the loop of secrets. It is obvious that we should exist outside of time, this is 
immortality. The mistake many Magicians have made when being offered Immortality is not 
considering these two things. 1. We are already immortal and if we were not purposely made to forget 
that profound fact, we would know that. 2. Just because you are immortal does not mean anything 
more than ye shall not perish, it says nothing of the details of your lifestyle in immortality.  
What does it mean to be locked in a perpetual cage for eternity? The conditions of solitude may 
have been lifted however I have seen several lions trapped in one cage and those born in captivity lack 
Reason 161: Time travel is a thing 
of the past, lol, it has already been 
discovered and is in constant use. 
Disinformation has tried to make 
us believe the Pyramids were 
tombs and it is true many wanted 
to be buried in the Pyramids to 
ensure their soul would have no 
problem making the trip into 
their next existence, memory 
intact. The next existence for us is 
supposed to be Ethereal not taking 
on another physical body, what a 
drag, this has been happening 
since the Elite have been 
manipulating this technology and 
using it to hold souls in stasis.


--- PAGE 217 ---
217 | Page  
 
the images to imagine what it was like to be free, thus they cannot conceive it and perceive the current 
condition has always been as such. They think they are really free, an illusion. This is what it also 
means not to fly and have hyperdimensional and extraspacial capability you are grounded your wings 
stripped and you now think you always walked because you don’t have images of you flying, except in 
your dreams and you think they are just you imagination. The Most High said I will make them in my 
Image/Imagination so thus your imagination is not to be taken lightly. 
Many think they have time so they may give it another week they are too weak, not knowing 
they are in a daze they go about this for days not knowing time does not actually exist for the 
Immortal. Master knowledge is knowing that the movements of things hold great external knowledge, 
but there are parts of that knowledge that should never be placed internal as it will effect the Host as 
something foreign, changing the entire makeup of the Host. Imagine if the Sun never rose again, 
would people sleep all the time because it was dark? Of course not, however, people still consider 
when the Sun goes up and then back down one day can be counted. They age themselves with ideas of 
their birthday but we will not stray to far down the path of the wisdom of agelessness.          
It is known that the Moon better known by the ancients as “Sin” was placed into our solar 
system at some point in time however it was not originally here. Many of the indigenous tribes who 
had already made contact with other constellations had maps that did not include the Moon on them. 
Then at a certain time in history all of a sudden the Moon begins to appear on astrological outlines. 
One should innerstand the effects of this particular Moon on this Earth. The Moon controls 
“Moo”ds. The Moon controls tides, the Moon controls growth and thus decay, and most importantly 
things like gravity and magnetic energy. I noticed when the Moon eclipses it is easy to get out of the 
body. So it is easy to see that there would be a big difference in the energy of our world if the Moon 
was not here. Many do not know that the change would actually be positive. Many have done studies 
on the notion that the Moon was somehow towed here and by the size of many of the ships belonging 
to these Entities that is entirely possible. 
So I know you may be saying the Moon, okay maybe it could be towed because it is not hot but 
nothing can tow the Sun. Today you will find information on a top secret project known as the 
Lucifer Project. In this project an attempt is being made to detonate a plutonium payload into Saturn 
thus causing it to go Super Nova and become a Sun. Other Planets have also been considered. This 
was already put into trial when NASA detonated the Cassini Space Probe with Plutonium on board 
into Jupiter creating a whole the size of Earth. The idea was to create a chain reaction; it is good that 
did not succeed or maybe it did. It would then appear as if we had two Suns in our sky and we would 
begin to receive lots of Planetary energy through the rays emitting from the new Son.  
One would have to look deeper into things to understand where man received this type of 
knowledge from. If our current Sun was not transported here through black holes it could have been 
another Planet already, perhaps Vulcan, that had been given a boost by detonating various types of


--- PAGE 218 ---
218 | Page  
 
elements that make Planets go from frigid worlds of Ice, to Suns, let there be light! Our word Ice 
comes from Isis in their theories men are Suns and women are Ice, not Moons, two opposites. This 
entire matter becomes a little more difficult to exactly pinpoint due to the fact that most of us have 
never traveled into the cosmos thus all the information we receive is second and third hand and surely 
altered. The Elite of course have never been famous for telling the truth. 
 
 
  
 
There are Planets and Beings that have long since graduated beyond such petty things as what 
we are now experiencing on Earth thus we take notes from them. They are entirely self-sustained like a 
person can become when they are fully “unlocked”. In these stages one does not need to eat food or 
breathe air thus his or her higher dimensional imprint has reached a phase of totality. Once that phase 
has been reached you will “Awake”, currently most are asleep literally walking around a dream world, 
a dream within a dream, or a T.V. displaying another T.V. displaying another T.V. ad infinite. Strong 
persistence is necessary to be revived out of such a debased state. Inside of you, there are those that 
want to work, those that want to play, and those that want to disrupt your work. Be mindful of which 
Reason 162: There are so many habitable Planetary bodies in Space it is hard to know what is 
going on until we have the opportunity to travel the Cosmos which can be done with the body.


--- PAGE 219 ---
219 | Page  
 
one is controlling you. There is The World, You, and the Outer Forces. You must consider your 
Arrival, Transition, and Breakthroughs. Your states are Physical, Emotional, and Intellectual. Being 
conscious of how you perceive things through all of these channels is key.   
One can easily see that dissecting the Gnostic story in the Bible takes heavy pondering. It would 
be good to remember that when the Bible came into wider circulation in 1611 most people could not 
read. The Bible was kept as a Talisman or something of the sort that was believed to ward of evil by 
having it around. This is the clear indicator that when they begun swashbuckling lands and beating 
the people into submission they where in no position to examine anything about Iesu, Nazarites, 
Grails, Illuminati, Jesuits or anything of the sort. They were following blindly their lusts for riches and 
rank.  So truly it is only recently that the Bible has ever been properly dissected by someone who is 
none partial and not in fear of death and excommunication, after all that is already happening. The 
path our parents chose was generally what their parent chose and so on down the line. 
Another point is what takes place in the Universities. This is normally where lots of trickery 
begins. Often times many embark on professions that really contain no skill without the aid of some 
type of Machine. This is the other part of the war against the Machines. A false sense of intelligence is 
created when a person learns how to operate lets say an Electron Microscope or Array Device. 
Without this device however there would be no place for their particular skill. Having the ability to 
operate it proficiently falsely elevates them in mental status. The person usually cannot build these 
devices from scratch because they lack the knowledge and especially the equipment for fabrication. If 
they ever go into a country where the basic skills like agriculture, irrigation, construction, and other 
core abilities are required they will go from Rocket Scientist to Janitor. Nothing they have learned is 
really of value; they have not learned or understood the true inner workings to things. This is very 
similar to how many people view the world, all the real information about what really controls things 
they simply don’t possess, that’s now about to change. 
We have witnessed this with the fall of Silicon or should I say “Silly Con”. In places like the 
United States the Elite find the people very hard to control now and much too independent. This is 
why jobs have been moved to places like India and China where the people are much more passive and 
less opinionated due to thousands of years of Dominant Monarchist rule. Even now there are plans 
being discussed about a population decrease. You can imagine the Elite have made the people build a 
world to its capacity and now they want to enjoy it all for themselves and remove those that are not a 
part of their groups from the more pristine places. In the event there is all out chaos they will watch 
from the Moon.  
All major cities are located on energy centers, the middle of the vortex being given the name 
“Down Town” alluding to the center of a vortex. People are naturally attracted to these energy centers 
like pigeons, so they tend to pile up in cities. When looking at states like Texas you see miles and miles 
of unused fertile land that could ease the tension of the masses if they were allowed to inhabit these


--- PAGE 220 ---
220 | Page  
 
territories. When going to some of these places you will find one or two people own thousands of 
acres that they are doing nothing with. What kind of buffoonery is this when a person can just come 
and say “this is my land and if you want it, it will cost you “X” amount of dollars” when that land was 
stolen from the original inhabitants in the first place.   
In various countries were there are limited resources and harsh weather, if borders did not exist 
they could easily inhabit other parts of the world. The Elite have created a false sense of prejudice that 
makes the people hate each other but love their Leaders and I”cons”. When the United States joined 
World War II which seemed to turned the tides, the stage was set for America to appear as if it had 
saved the world from the terrible Anti-Christ Hitler. Nothing could be further from the truth. As 
thousands of soldiers died on both sides the rulers of many countries began to orchestrate the division 
of the people, drawing new borders and boundaries.  
When the war was over high ranking officials from the Nazi party depending on rank went to 
other places to enjoy their plunder. Hitler and members of the Theosophical Society went into 
Antarctica after long stays in Argentina sipping the finest wine from Argentinean Vineyards. They 
eventually returned to the Hyperborean entrance to the Pole. Other officials went from Argentina 
and traveled through South and Central America through the extensive cavern systems located there 
also. The only ones who did not get an upgrade where the regular people who succeeded in only 
killing each other. They received a war torn nation that had been reduced to rubble, a sound hatred 
for their neighbor, and a secularism that has yet repair itself.  
While the Elite laugh and toast a job well done they began another phase. The Theosophical 
Society set up right in the United Nations and proclaimed itself the religion of the future. This will be 
how the world is prepared for the Beast, the Dragon, and the False Prophet. Thule/Cthulhu is the 
brain behind the New Age Movement and the return of the Golden Age of Aquarius. All decisions are 
made by the Ascended Masters of Thule and those decisions are then passed to their proper 
representatives in the U.N. This is already going on so this is not a warning of something to come. 
This is something that is already happening. The 800 Billion borrowed by Obama was to allow those 
high enough on the Pyramid to go abroad, change over the currency, and set up elsewhere before they 
snatch the carpet from underneath the U.S. They are only waiting for the green light that most in the 
inner circle have secured themselves. When the U.S. market crashes the spiritual leaders of the world 
will come together once more like they did in 1986 is Assisi Italy at St. Francis Basilica. They will once 
again play the show of all coming together and the belief in the same God. Then they will unveil God’s 
new representative to everyone. The Power behind this individual will be Sanat Kumara I anagram 
this as “A Mark Satan” there is a U “You” left over.  When these Beings come on the scene if one did 
not prepare before you saw their actual arrival, it is too late.  
In known interviews that where done with the gentleman on the left in Reason 21 with 
Matrieya in the middle. He does the traveling about bringing portents of Matrieya. When I personally


--- PAGE 221 ---
221 | Page  
 
saw the turn out I was amazed. Not to mention this was done in one of the nicest Convention Centers 
in NY. His current talent is he can “oversoul” Matrieya. This means when he is talking he will shift to 
Matrieya although the two, of course, look nothing alike. Then he will change back at certain points. I 
tell you the truth people will wander astray when they see these signs and wonders which can be done 
through spiritual powers or technology and they have both. Look at how they show up for Chris Angel 
and he doesn’t have an ilk of charisma compared to the Ascended Masters.  
In all works it speaks of this time when humans will have a final moment in making a choice to 
give there freedom and souls up for what will appear to be an answer to their problems. It will appear 
there are no other options for those who do not begin to prepare now. Most will accept it no problem 
as they see their leaders and Icons direct them to it, just like they did when they wanted to endorse 
Obama, that was a test run, but not without its drawbacks. It will last for only a moment if it is a 
second and then they will see why they should have listened to all the redundant warnings that 
everyone keeps getting and ignoring on some level or another. 
I believe this also to be a pivotal point in our future existence on a level extending into our 
afterlife. This is all happening now in you primary reality, so no matter who tells you “it’s a 
hologram” or “it’s your perception”, if I pinch you will it hurt? Our world needs us to begin to act 
like who we really are. Simply imagine if you were “fully activated” all Chakras on, could you not 
make a difference that would echo across the world? Indeed you witness it now before you. This was 
my first move and do believe I have gone straight through demons to get to you my beloved. The 
world is in desperate need of anyone who will have the courage and take the time to see what their 
talent may be and how they can use it to rescue more from the fate of the future.  
We are in Malkuth the Kingdom, ancient law states this dimension to be lower than the higher 
9 Steps on the Tree, one still must consider the Inverted Tree which has also been created and is 
indeed functioning, it is the Demon world. Below us it extends 10 “mapped” dimensions down, the 
Abyss being uncharted. This is the point also in religion where the confusion of adding terms like 
Netzach and Geburah in addition to what those terms really mean according to Rabbi Lietman, 
however Rabbi Ashlog says entirely different his analysis from the Kether while Illumed in Shekinah, 
but let us not forget Rabbi Weisman who was in mystical Daath the hidden 11 Sephiroth blah blah 
blah. See this is what religion has done to something that is plain and simple. Live Human and uphold 
your race and your kind with all your strength and in it you will learn to ascend continuously, this is 
the Great Reward in which eludes Kings and rest in the hands at times of Slaves who We disguise as 
such for a test to man and woman. They know the last will come first, say it isn’t so, the Most High 
can make a crippled a climber of Trees. 
The Final Warning had been set upon the chariot and rode through the land day and night, the 
ancient books had been sealed and I could open them no longer less I become infested again with the 
horrors spoken within whispering in my mind night and day continuously, but I had to know. The


--- PAGE 222 ---
222 | Page  
 
new message was spoke to me and I wrote it down and as I wrote the words began to disappear off the 
page. A Voice said “Do not write that which is for those who will escape the great test that shall come 
upon man, woman, beast, and jinn. I have placed this before them as a mirror that they may see who 
they are inside and cease from pretending that they have vanquished darkness but in reality have 
nursed it. Now it shall rear up and devour. Lo, there is no Honor amongst the wicked”.  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Dag Hammearskjold, “Secret”ary General of the U.N. placed “the Black Stone of Light” in the 
United Nations in 1953. It is a six-and-a-half ton block of “programmed” iron ore. It is polished on 
the top such that it brings forth a sheet of minute lights that shine like billions of tiny stars. It is a 
natural magnet emitting waves of energy. This is the “foundation” of the New World. In Stanley 
Kubricks Film 
2001: A Space Odyssey the main character of the story, David Bowman, discovers that 
such a stone serves as a space portal leading to a distant part of the universe. In the movie it is placed 
on Earth from the stars and brings technological enlightenment to an otherwise ape man tribe who 
live at the “dawn” of true humanity. 
 
Reason 163: This is the Symbol of Thule of course bringing us right to the Serpents as usual. 
This meditation room has been placed inside of the U.N. Many world leaders visit the room 
before they make world decisions. The room is shaped like a Trapezoid, a Pyramid with no 
capstone. The lighting is recessive as you go away from the Mural. The Mural is clearly 
Saturnalian as you can see the scythe of Saturn along with the staff and the Serpent twinning 
around it. The stone has been removed from their sacred mountain and placed inside the room 
for its frequency. Many of the darksiders are seeking revenge for what happened during the 
Inquisition, they are releasing this anger upon the masses and feel no remorse or compassion.


--- PAGE 223 ---
223 | Page  
 
 
 
 
Our greatest ability as humans is we create our Destiny, there is no pre-determined future for 
us no matter how much someone tries to tell you it is. If you perceive everything about you already 
written, this means you are in fact moving backwards not forward. If you where moving forward what 
you will achieve next is based on you and cannot be recorded until you make the actual decision. This 
is Supreme Knowledge. Our individual worlds are set in motion by a series of our own thoughts. This 
cycle delivers our expectancies at various times depending upon how powerful our thoughts are. For 
example a person could concentrate on getting a new job and it still take a year to get one. This is due 
to the amount of energy they carry that manifests thoughts. A person fully alkalized, breathing 
properly, and with a clear mind can think “I want a new job” and get fired at that moment beginning 
the chain reaction.  
When we control our reality what we focus on begins to take its steps into our primary world. 
Many beginning to unlock this power are surprised that things just come out of thin air. Then begins 
the training of thinking things fully through in detail for optimal results. In addition learning how 
not to think about things that when they manifest they will actually hinder you thus creating your 
worst nightmares. There is a fail safe so this type of thing doesn’t happen often, they call it powerless. 
Reason 164: Thule is not the run of the mill cult, they have perfected channeling, astral travel, 
evocation, and as you see they are the willing servants of the Unseen Hand.


--- PAGE 224 ---
224 | Page  
 
 The biggest fear the Elite have of releasing the secrets of power are the result of what a capitalist 
minded world would create. How many people would immediately use the power to make themselves 
rich to have lots of lovers, and be irresistibly beautiful? If everyone had the power to create their own 
reality within this reality there would not be enough metal for all the cars they would have, enough 
plastic for all the gadgets they would have, enough water for the pools and waste of water that would 
go on. One should just ask for Knowledge, Wisdom, and Innerstand then you can decipher anything. 
Knowledge is all the information, non-partial, Wisdom is the ability to sort through that information 
and find the perfect calibration for your life, Innerstanding is coming to terms with why all things 
happen and thus you escape Duality. Duality will always exist on this dimension. 
Some may ask does this book represent Duality, since I’m clearly challenging the Gods and 
Devils. I will say yes this is Duality which takes place when you reach back from higher dimensions 
into Binary Worlds. The Creation of the strong will always be to protect the weak just as a house built 
of stone will securely shelter its fleshly inhabitants. We should never shrink away from what is right 
no matter how Enlightened we become. In certain meditations you can get so high you don’t know 
your name or even where you are, but when you come back you are in this primary reality thus the 
Most High has placed us here for a reason. I know my reason; I’ve given the reader now several to 
determine theirs. This is only to give you a fuller life of meaning rather than the redundant cycle of 
time where humans are harvested for energy and go about Feeding, Fearing, and Fornicating until 
they perish back into atoms. 
This system which exist has with it certain secretes that allow it to carry on as such. We can call 
them the rules of the Matrix in which some can be bent and others broken. This is also the secret to 
the “ME’s”. One of those ME’s is called the Tablet of Destiny and remains in the possession of the 
Elite. It was said that whoever had it could control many things. These ME’s where the names, relics, 
and even spirits of power. Amongst all the Gods stories it describes a plot by the Female Goddess 
Inanna to obtain the Tablet of Destiny from the Gods by cunning. In the society of the Annunaki the 
female of their breed are not allowed to rule. Without taking you through the whole story which can 
be found in the Sumerian tablets it will suffice to say that one female of their species gained control 
over the Tablets of Destiny. Isis in legend slips a Serpent on Ra to poison him and he cannot cure 
himself. Isis then makes Ra promise to give her His true creative name in this case an actual Spirit or 
Ba of Ra. Ra agrees and Isis cures him and then the power is transferred to her bosom. 
This Ba/Spirit has now been placed in a stone called the Stone of Scone. The Queen of 
England sits upon it as if it’s an egg waiting to hatch. In fact it is also referred to as the Ben Ben stone 
named after the Benu bird that was in legend the Ba/Spirit of Ra/Marduk. This relic along with many 
others, are all in the possession of the Queen of England who rules just about the whole world. In 
secret societies and religious circles various types of worship and sacrifices take place that continue to 
give these relics power. This is how one group can rule such a vast amount of people, it is done 
through devices, vices that they implore and make the people pray to. They are kept by the rulers who


--- PAGE 225 ---
225 | Page  
 
know how to extract the power of these devices and use it to continuously elevate themselves over the 
people. 
 
 
 
 
Ultimately reserved for the highest ranking dark initiate the Leontocephales or Lions Penis and 
the Pahanuk or Penis of the Dragon equated with Mithras, Phanes and Ahriman, the Zorostrian 
devil, all as one God. According to Orpheus/Morpheus who I still have chained down and being 
hacked to pieces, there would be One Zeus, One Hades/Underworld, One Sun and One Dionysus. 
This is Saturn called also Zurvan and Mithras Helios the nocturnal Sun beneath the Earth voyaging 
round the invisible world, doubt it not.    
According to the rites of Mithras which is Christian Gnosticism not written but divined, the 
beginning of all things was the Law which proclaimed Christ, and the Holy Spirit existed at the 
Creation. The Brazen Serpent was a Symbol of Christ. Abraham was a type of God the Father, and 
Isaac a Symbol of Christ the Ram of Sacrifice. Eve slew mankind, but the Virgin Mary gave them life. 
Mary was the “door” and that it was closed symbolized her virginity, which was God’s Seal upon her. 
She was the Burning Bush described by Moses; she was also the censer used by High Cohen, the coals 
were Christ, and the perfume of the incense was his perfume the Myrrh of the Martyr, on which 
prayer ascended to Heaven. The Chains of the censer were Jacob’s ladder. Aaron’s rod was Mary, and 
the bud thereof was Christ. The Ark made by Moses was the abode of God on Earth; it symbolized 
Mary, and the indestructible wood of which it was made symbolized the indestructible Christ who will 
Reason 165: The Ben Ben Stone rests underneath the Coronation Chair where all from the 
Royal Bloodlines have been crowned King or Queen. The Stone was carried by Tamar from 
Israel into Europe when the bloodlines began to mix.


--- PAGE 226 ---
226 | Page  
 
rise every time he is Crucified. The pot that held the Manna was Mary, and the Manna inside was the 
body of Christ; the Words of the Law also were Christ. The Pearl in Mary’s body was Christ. The rock 
smitten by Moses was Christ, and Moses smote it longwise and breadthwise to symbolize the Cross. 
Moses’ rod was the Cross, the water that flowed from the rock was the teaching of the Apostles. The 
darkness brought upon Egypt for three days symbolized the darkness of the Crucifixion. The 
Amalekites symbolized the devils, Aaron and Hor, who held up Moses’ hands, symbolized the two 
thieves who were crucified with Christ. Thus the entire Bible feeds from one story placed in several 
allegories and parables. I bore of the Riddler who does nothing more then confuse what is simple. 
A man develops the fertilizer while a woman makes the egg. Many never sit and think how 
mystical this is that an actual egg is inside of the woman’s body at various stages. Now we get to the 
meat of things. The Adepts know that when a woman is due to bring forth a special child the fertilized 
egg itself contains the child before it “hatches”. The period of incubation that takes place before it 
cracks open is called “ruling from the Egg”. How many remember the tale of the Goose who laid the 
Golden Egg? Of course that tale had a hidden meaning.  
There is an egg that is about to hatch as some already have and inside those eggs are things I’m 
not even at leisure to discuss, since We have shined light on more than enough to keep one up 
thinking long into the night. I will say that those who will come from these eggs will be different then 
the normal human and possess abilities that we can unlock, but most do not use at this moment and 
trust you will need them. You can see this all as a way used to give you a sense of urgency. Reptiles lay 
eggs thus they have to wait for the eggs to hatch, some take longer than other depending upon what is 
being brought forth. 
 
Reason 166: We can not deny what has been placed in stone, the reptilian affiliation is clear. 
Knowing all this now, what will you chose to do?


--- PAGE 227 ---
227 | Page  
 
 
   
 
 
  
 
 
 
Reason 167: Unlike Mammals Serpents and Amphibians lay eggs. The incubation period of that 
egg is dependant what type of creature laid the egg. Some eggs can stay in incubation for 
hundreds of years before they are ready to hatch. If you look closely at the picture of Mary 
above, you will see a silhouette of a Dragon on the shawl covering her hair. Gnostic Christianity 
is about bringing forth the seeds or eggs and to raise the Brazen Serpent for everyone to fall 
down and worship, it appears that whole plan is happening now. They only await the final 
arrival of the “Feathered Serpent”, Quetzacoatl. The return of Q.


--- PAGE 228 ---
228 | Page  
 
We are looking for more ways to get this information across, the Author, who is 30, is ready 
and willing to speak to the people whether it is one or thousands. The writer is currently doing this 
with little Human assistance to save our race. If you would like to contribute in any way there are 
multiple portals to contact me. Remember we are asking for nothing, if you feel like giving that is up 
to you, money is by far not the only way you can be of aid, if you have rare pictures, rare books, 
contacts, groups that you need spoken to or you would like me to include something in future 
editions, if there are future additions, contact me. All contributions can be made discreet however I 
will tell you there is nothing to fear a loophole has been created, in every horror movie someone 
always gets away, we have never lost our love for a happy ending. 
In all this knowledge I have also discovered ways to enhance the body and open pure energy 
portals. This cannot be done with only one person and needs infrastructure such as a facility and 
certain devices that change the consistency of the air and atmosphere we breathe. If you can seriously 
entertain this project contact me by the information provided at the very end of this document. If you 
have questions We will give you answers.  
All these cycles are only dreamlike moments of time in the divine consciousness we call Life. The 
individual souls are myriad fragments in self realization, the individual consciousness goes beyond this 
duality of subject and object and is subsumed in a timeless and blissful divine consciousness 
independent of time, space, and causality, which melt away after the illusion is destroyed and the 
Matrix is broken.  
Even before I inscribed this note to you my beloved I was fast in contemplation of the Most Exquisite 
Source.  Keeping in continuation I will never tire in mentioning my Sustainer which is Inexhaustibly 
Cherished by High Emanations beyond Perception which can be sometimes grasped by mortals. It is 
indeed good it can be gleamed and harvested by the wise to pollinate the minds of the Guided. The 
field is plentiful and the harvest ripe, intelligent minds are waiting for counsel and it shall be granted 
to them.  We tarry too long already and We will wait no longer in bringing the news to you of your 
evolution. I will explain your sequence which is not foreign to all living things.  You must first know 
what you where before, in order for you to calculate what you desire is to be next. I would suggest 
addition only, we do not like to subtract, that will decrease our ranks, we do not divide because we 
will never suffer a conqueror, and we do not multiply into an unexpected stage which is premature. 
Addition is the true and only math for us that are intelligent and wise. Did I ever fail in bringing forth 
profound truth beyond fear or emotion? Nay I shall never fail to arise to the noble cause of bringing 
the most precious elixir of rare essence to all corners of the earth. If you but knew its true value.


--- PAGE 229 ---
229 | Page  
 
THE LETTERS & NUMBERS


--- PAGE 230 ---
230 | Page


--- PAGE 231 ---
231 | Page  
 
 
 
Website : www.thewords.ning.com  Email: 7bomer3@hushmail.com  Skype: Innerstand

