=== EXTRACTED TEXT FROM: The Isis Papers The Keys to the Colors [Dr. Frances Cress Welsing].pdf ===
Extraction Method: PyPDFLoader
Total Pages: 163
Timestamp: 2026-01-04T17:04:52.442512
================================================================================


--- PAGE 1 ---



--- PAGE 2 ---
The Isis (Yssis) Papers 
The Keys To The Colors 
Frances Cress Welsing, M.D. 
Third World Press, Chicago


--- PAGE 3 ---
Third World Press, Chicago 
© 1991 by Frances Cress We1sing 
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be r~produced or. 
transmitted in any form or by any means, e1ectromc or mechamcal, 
including photocopying, recording, or by any i~o~ation sto~age 
and retrieval system, without prior written permtsston except m. 
the case of brief quotations embodied in critical articles and rev1ews. 
Inquires should be addressed to Third World Press, P.O. Box 19730, 
Chicago, IL 60619. 
Printed in the United States of America 
10 09 08 07 06 05 04 03 02 20 19 18 17 16 15 14 
ISBN: 0-88378-104-2 (paper) 
Library of Congress Catalog Card Number: 
90-71890 r~ 
I 
L 
Dedication 
This work is dedicated to the victims of the global system of white 
supremacy (racism), all non-white people worldwide, past and present, 
who have resolved to end this great travesty and bring justice, then peace 
to planet Earth. 
"If you do not understand White Supremacy (Racism)- what it is, and 
how it works -everything else that you understand, will only confuse 
you." 
-Neely Fuller, Jr. (1971). 
The United Independent Compensatory Code/System/Concept 
No persons who classify themselves as white living in the area of the 
world referred to as the United States of America (or for that matter, in 
any other area of the world) should presume to tell any Black person (or 
other non-white person) what racism is or is not, until they have read J 
completely Kennvth O'Reilley's Racial Matters: The FBI's Secret File 
onBlackAmerica,l960-19n. 
No Black person living in the area of the world referred to as the United 
States of America should discourse on racism or deny the conspiratorial 
dimensions of the local and global system of racism until he/she has read 
Racial Matters completely. 
All non-white people (black, brown, red and yellow) should read and 
discuss the implications of the book, Racial Matters; the implications for 
themselves as individuals and the implications for their collective should 
be discussed in depth. Then, all non-white people should view the 
docudrama videotape, The Wannsee Conference (which can be rented), 
to observe exactly how a white supremacy government calmly sits and 
plans the destruction of a people that it classifies as non-white. The 
W annsee Conference took place in Germany, in 1941, to fmalize the plans


--- PAGE 4 ---
for the destruction of 11,000,000 Semites (non-whites) of the Jewish 
religion. The German white supremacists succeeded in killing six million. 
After the above steps have been taken, all non-white people worldwide 
should read Neely Fuller's work, The United Jndependenr Compensatory C 0 NTENTS 
Code/System/Concept: a text book/workbook for thought, speech and/or 
action for victims of racism (white supremacy). 
Frances Cress Welsing Preface ......................................................................................... i 
Washington, D.C. 
August, 1989 Introduction ................................................................................. ix 
1 The Cress Theory of Color-Confrontation and Racism 
(White Supremacy) ..................................................................... 1 
2 The Origin of Alienation, Anxiety and Narcissism .................... 17 
3 Unified Field Theory Psychiatry ................................................. 39 
4 Learning to Look at Symbols ...................................................... 53 
5 The Symbolism of Christ, the Cross, the Crucifix, 
the Communion and Christian Holidays ..................................... 61 
6 The Politics Behind Black Male Passivity, Effeminization, 
Bisexuality and Homosexuality .................................................. 81 
7 What Freud was Really Talking About ... the Concept 
of "Penis Envy" ........................................................................... 93 
8 Guns as Symbols ......................................................................... 103 
9 The Mother Pucker and the Original Mother Fucker ................. 119 
10 Ball Games as Symbols: The War of the Balls ........................... l31


--- PAGE 5 ---
11 The Symbolism of Smoking Objects .......................................... 145 
12 Black Fear and the Failure of Black Analytical 
(Ideological) Commibllent .........•.................•.............•.•.............• 153 
13 The Concept and the Color of God and Black 
Mental Health .............................................................................. 163 
14 The Symbolism and Meaning ofRape ........................................ l75 
15 The Symbolism, Logic and Meaning of"Justifiable 
Homicide" in the 1980s ............................................................... l83 
16 Paper Money and Gold as Symbols ............................................ 193 
17 The Symbolism of Boxing and BlackLeather ............................ 209 
18 The Cress Theory of the Holocaust ............................................. 219 
19 The Neurochemical Basis for Evil .............................................. 231 
20 Black Children and the Process of lnferiorization ..................... 239 
21 Racism and Black Child and Youth Inferiorization ................... 251 
22 Black Child-Parents: the New Factor in Black Genocide ......... 259 
23 The Crises in Black Male/Black Female Relationships: 
Is it a False Problem'? .................................................................. 275 
24 Black Women Moving Towards the 21st Century ..................... 283 
25 The White Supremacy System, the White Supremacy 
Mind-Set and the AIDS Holocaust ............................................. 291 
Preface 
We now are nearing the final decade of the 20th century. The great 
Mrican in America, the sociologist-historian W.E.B DuBois, identified 
the problem of this century as the "problem of the color-line" (Souls of 
BlackFolk,l903). Thus, it is fortunate that in thefmal decade of the 20th 
century a basis for the solution to the problem of the color-line has been 
produced. This basis rests in an adequate analysis of the nature of the 
color-line- the exact nature of local and global racism. Ultimately, the 
conscious decision by people of color worldwide (the overwhelming 
majority of the world's population) to base their behavior in relationships 
on an exact analysis and defmition of racism as white supremacy will 
change its appearance and activity on planet Earth. Just as the problem 
of the color-line (racism) has controlled events in the 20th century (and 
prior centuries), the solution to the problem will regulate events in the 21st 
century and beyond as we enter the era of justice. 
Recently, there has been an unraveling and an analysis of the core issue 
of the first global power system of mass oppression - the power system 
of racism (white supremacy). Once the collective victim understands this 
fundamental issue, the ultimate organizing of all of the appropriate 
behaviors necessary to neutralize the great injustice of the white 
supremacy power system will be only a matter of time. The length of time 
required to neutralize global white supremacy will be inversely propor­
tional to 1) the level of understanding of the phenomenon; plus 2) the 
evolution of self-and group-respect, the will, determination and discipline 
to practice the appropriate counter-racist behaviors- on the part of the 
non-white victims of white supremacy. Thus, the 21st century, and indeed 
the end of the 20th century, will be a time perhaps of great devastation. 
But, undoubtedly, it will be a time of great change. And the most critical 
factor in that change of circumstances will be non-white people's ever-


--- PAGE 6 ---
The Isis Papers 
increasing understanding of the behavioral phenomenon of white 
supremacy as a global, terroristic power system. 
However, it must be understood that high levels of self-respect, will 
and determination, without an adequate understanding, analysis and 
definition of racism as the oppressing power system, will not be sufficient 
to bring the long-sought goal of neutralizing that injustice and establishing 
justice and peace for all people. Therefore, it is critical to have a 
comprehensive analysis and defmition of the opposing force. As a Black 
behavioral scientist and practicing general and child psychiatrist, my 
current functional defmition of racism (white supremacy) is as follows: ,., 
the local and global power system struciiiredantfmalntain~d by pers;;;; .. 
who classify themselves as white, whether consciously or subconsciously 
determined; this system consists of patterns of perception, logic. symbol 
formation. thought, speech, action and emotional response. as conducted 
simultaneously in all areas of people activity (economics. education, 
entertainment,labor, law, politics, religion, sex and war). The ultimate 
purpose of the system is to prevent white genetic annihilation on Earth -
a planet in which the overwhelming majority of people are classified as 
non-white (black, brown, red and yellow) by white-skinned people. All of 
the non-white people are genetically dominant (in terms of skin colora­
tion) compared to the genetically recessive white-skinned people. 
When this defmition of racism as a strategy for white genetic survival 
is mastered, one can understand precisely not only the present global 
power fonnations and realignments (i.e., U.S.A./U.S.S.R. linkage and 
European unification), but also all present urban (non-white) center 
epidemics. I am speaking of the concurrent urban crises of drug use, drug 
addiction, drug-related murder, teenage pregnancy, infant mortality, 
Black academic under-achievement, Black teenage unemployment, 
Black adult male unemployment, Black male incarceration, single parent 
(female-headed) households, chronic welfare dependency, poverty, AIDS 
and homelessness. (See Diagram 1.) These very disturbing individual­
and group-destructive pathological forms of behavior are the direct and 
indirect by-products of a behavioral power system fundamentally struc­
tured for white genetic survival, locally and globally. 
ii 
!~!J~ 
JlJJ~ 
t 11d j:u 
fl1 ~~~ 
J fJ 
~~ Jlf hi ~ ,, 1lj 
Jl !! J'l 
11 p 
!J 
~jj 
Jl 
r 
·~ . •j l J j 
~~ Uim~1 
~ 
I 
jJ! . fj tUf In Jfl 
\ 
\ 
\


--- PAGE 7 ---
The Isis Papers 
White supremacy domination and oppression of all non-white people 
is essential for global white genetic survival. The prevention of white 
genetic annihilation is pursued through all means, including chemical and 
biological warfare. Today, the white genetic survival imperative, instead 
of using chemicals in gas chambers, is using chemicals on the streets -
crack, crank, cocaine, ecstasy, PCP, heroin and methadon (all"designer 
chemicals"). Ultimately, these chemicals are produced by whites and 
made available to urban Blacks, particularly Black males -upon whom 
the future of Black people is dependent. The core dynamic of white 
genetic survival eventually leads whites to a major act of genocide 
(destruction of the genes of non-white people), or toward genocidal 
imperatives. Such a genocide occurred in Nazi Germany (1933-1945}, 
wherein the Semite and gypsy populations were classified as non-white 
and therefore were destroyed. 
The reason that the Black male (as recently symbolized by Willie 
Horton) is and always has been central to the issue of white supremacy is 
clarified by the definition of racism as white genetic survival. In the 
collective white pysche, Black males represent the greatest threat to white 
genetic survival because only males (of any color) can impose sexual 
intercourse, and Black males have the greatest genetic potential (of all 
non-white males) to cause white genetic annihilation. Thus, Black males 
must be attacked and destroyed in a power system designed to assure white 
genetic survival. In the white supremacy mind-set, consciously or sub­
consciously, Black males must be destroyed in significant numbers -just 
as they were in earlier days when there was widespread open lynching 
and castration of Black males, or during the Tuskegee Syphilis Study from 
1932 to 1972 when a large number of Black males were used and 
destroyed by whites. 
Today we are witnessing a more subtle systemic approach to white 
genetic survival. The destruction of Black males now is indirect, so that 
the Black male victims themselves can be led to participate in - and then 
be blamed for- their own mass deaths. However, through close examina­
tion and an understanding of the ultimate objective of white supremacy 
as collective white genetic survival, the steps to massive Black male death 
iv 
Preface 
can be charted. The chain of events begins with the denial of full scale 
employment and advancement to Black males so that they cannot ade­
quately support themselves, their wives and their children. In tum, large 
numbers of Black male children grow up without their fathers' guidance. 
This leads to frustration, depression and failure in school. Once this 
atmosphere is established, drugs are placed deliberately in the Black 
community. The drugs are then used to "street-treat" Black male frustra­
tion and depression. The high prices for which drugs are sold provide the 
Black male population with the illusion that finally they are beginning to 
make some money and to share in the "American dream." Guns are then 
placed at the disposal of the same Black male persons, supposedly to aid 
them in enforcing payment for drug sales. More important, the strategy 
is for Black males to kill and destroy one another and then carry the blame. 
(It must be realized that no Black males manufacture the chemicals for 
drug use, nor do any Black males manufacture guns.) 
The same power system of racism has so ingrained a negative image 
and connotation of Blackness in general (i.e., Black Monday, blackmail, 
black sheep, black day), and of the Black male in particular, that for Black 
males to slaughter one another in the streets daily means next to nothing; 
indeed, it is treated as desirable and acceptable. "Good riddance of bad 
rubbish." This is in stark contrast to the urgency, alarm and concern that 
is generated in the same society when only 25 young white males commit 
suicide in the course of a 24-month period. 
Failing to comprehend the environmental context of the white 
supremacy system and its ultimate goal of white genetic survival, Black 
people also fail to grasp the deeper sense of what actually is occurring in 
front of our eyes. We do not realize that the massive deaths of Black males 
constitute the genocide of Black people (as it takes Black males to make 
Black babies and ensure future Black generations). 
The destruction of Black males for the purpose of white genetic 
survival is the reason behind the ever-increasing disparity between the 
\ 
number of Black females entering and graduating from high schools and 
institutions of higher education compared to the far lesser number of 
Black males. This becomes an additional facet of Black genocide. Fur-
v


--- PAGE 8 ---
The Isis Papers 
thermore, white genetic survival is the dynamic behind the high incarcera­
tion rate of Black males in the U.S., which is second only to that of South 
Africa. The high rate of Black male incarceration contributes in genocidal 
fashion to the prevention of Black births and the Black male-supported 
development of all Black children, particularly boys. 
The genocide of non-whites must be understood as a necessary tactic 
of a people (white) that is a minority of the world's population and that, 
because it lacks the genetic capacity to produce significant levels of 
melanin, is genetically recessive in terms of skin coloration, compared to 
the black, brown, red and yellow world majority. Thus, the global white 
minority must act genocidally against people of color for the purpose of 
white genetic survival. This is the "kill or be killed" mentality. This is 
the reason that persons who classified themselves as "white" behaved 
genocidally towards Semites in the holocaust in Nazi Germany and 
Europe (1933-1945). (fhe word Semite is from the Latin preftx, semi 
meaning "half' - half Black and half white, and that means mulatto 
(non-white). This is also the reason that persons who classified them­
selves as "white" behaved (and still behave) genocidally towards the 
indigenous inhabitants of the Western Hemisphere who were classified 
as red (non-white). 
Only the willingness of non-white peoples worldwide to recognize, 
analyze, understand and discuss openly the genocidal dynamic will bring 
this injustice to an end. Most important, Black males must help one 
another to understand that they are being led by the dynamic of white 
supremacy to inflict extreme damage upon themselves, one another and 
ultimately the Black race. Black males must understand that, contrary to 
what is said, the war being conducted in urban centers is not against drugs 
but against Black males- for the purpose of white genetic survival. Drugs 
are used simply as the means to achieve that end. That is why drugs are 
plentiful, while Black males are dying in ever-increasing numbers! (The 
recent proposal to treat drug addicts at military bases is only the ftrst stage 
towards a more formal concentration camp placement, more formal than 
the ghetto.) 
vi 
Preface 
Mastering the above definition of racism as a strategy for neutralizing 
white supremacy will permit one to decode accurately the symbolism in 
the new Madonna video "Like a Prayer," designed consciously and/or 
subconsciously by whites to massage, stimulate and enhance further the 
collective instinct for white genetic survival. The same could be said 
about the recent films Betrayal and Mississippi Burning. Furthermore, 
such an understanding will help clarify the persistent and even violent 
behaviors on the part of persons associated with the so-called "right to life 
movement," which seeks to prevent abortions, especially amongst whites. 
Recognizing racism as the struggle for white genetic survival helps one 
to understand what is happening in South Africa; what is euphemistically 
referred to as "apartheid" is only the tactics and strategies of the minority 
white population, numbering only four million persons, attempting to 
survive genetically while surrounded by a majority lllack population of 
26 to 30 million. This is a microcosm of what is happening on the entire 
planet. 
Finally, the time has come for unveiling the true nature of white 
supreq1acy (racism). For this reason, I have entitled this work, The Isis 
(YSSIS) Papers: The Keys to the Colors. Isis was the most important 
goddess of ancient Africa (specifically, Egypt). She was the sister/wife 
of the most important Egyptian god, Osiris ("Lord of the perfect Black"), 
and the mother of Horus. In the astral interpretation of the Egyptian gods, 
Isis was equated with the dog star Sirius (Sothis). According to the ancient 
African story, after the murder and dismemberment of Osiris by his evil 
brother Set (Seth), Isis discovered the crime, recovered the pieces of the 
body of Osiris, and put them together again, restoring his existence and 
his power. According to legend, Isis admired truth and justice and made 
justice stronger than gold and silver. 
In the present era, truth and justice have been crushed by the global 
power system of white supremacy, making the existence of peace on the 
planet impossible under this reign of terror. The attempt in this work to 
reveal some aspects of the in-depth truth about the white supremacy power 
system for the ultimate purpose of establishing justice and peace in the 
world is in the tradition of the great African goddess, Isis. 
vii


--- PAGE 9 ---
The Isis Papers 
I hope that with this knowledge the world's non-white people (black, 
brown, red and yellow) will work more effectively to neutralize this global 
and most monstrous form of injustice and chaos. Any person not inter­
ested in a definition, analysis and deeper understanding of worldwide 
white supremacy must have an interest (conscious or subconsciou'l) in 
maintaining the same. 
The subtitle of this work, The Keys to the Colors, came from a statement 
made to me by a patient in a Washington, D.C. public mental health clinic 
in the late 1960s. The patient was a tall, thin, middle-aged, Black-skinned 
man who, in a somewhat confused manner, talked earnestly to me about 
the problems he had experienced in his life. He said, "Doctor, if we could 
just find the keys to the colors!" And be repeated it slowly. It was a 
statement I never have been able to forget. This work is a portion of my 
response. 
Frances Cress Welsing, M.D. 
Washington, D.C. 
1989 
viii 
Introduction 
The Isis (YSSIS) Papers: The Keys to the Colors is a collection of 
essays I have written over the past 18 years, following the presentation 
and publication of my first work, The Cress Theory of Color-Confronta­
tion and Racism (White Supremacy). That first paper was a theoretical 
statement, a psychogenetic theory and world outlook on the origin and 
meaning of the global white supremacy system. The theory summarizes 
and clarifies our experience as Black (non-white) people on a planet 
presently dominated by people who classify themselves as "white" and 
who are a minority of the world's people. 
The Cress Theory was based upon the insightful work of Neely Fuller 
Jr., author of The United Independent Compensatory Code/System/Con­
cept- a textbook/workbook for thought, speech and/or action for victims 
of racism (white supremacy). Fuller, the founder of the racism/counter· 
racism concept, was the very first victim of racism to understand it as a 
global system of organized behavior (thought, speech and action) for 
white supremacy domination in all areas of people activity (economics, 
education, entertainment, labor, law, politics, religion, sex and war). In 
other words, he recognized that all activity and behavior encompassed by 
the white supremacy system had and has its origin in the dynamic of 
racism. Additionally, Fuller understood that racism contained the seeds 
and origin of counter-racism, the behavior dynamic of liberation for the 
non-white victims of white supremacy. His work led me to question the 
necessity of the global white collective to evolve such a system of unjust 
behavior. The result was The Cress Theory of Color Confrontation and 
Racism (White Supremacy). (Cress is my maiden name.) 
This thesis provided me with a "unified field theory" approach and 
understanding, in the Einsteinian sense, to all behavioral phenomena 
manifested with high frequency in the local and global system of racism. 
ix


--- PAGE 10 ---
The Isis Papers 
The great physicist, Albert Einstein, in The Meaning of Relativity (1922) 
had the following to say about the "unified field." 
The object of all sciences, whether natural sciences or psychology, is 
to co-ordinate our experiences and to bring them into a logical system 
-the only justification for our concepts and system of concepts is that 
they serve to represent the complex of our experiences; beyond this 
they have no legitimacy. 
The Cress Theory pennitted me to see and understand many forms of 
activity (on the part of whites and their non-white victims) that have been 
either ignored or taken for granted. These behaviors, which can be viewed 
as symbolic of the fundamental objective of white genetic survival, are 
found in the social reflection of the white supremacy power system - the 
white supremacy culture. Together, the system and culture of white 
supremacy produce the phenomenon of racism. Thus, throughout this 
book, the terms system and culture, in reference to white supremacy, are 
used interchangeably. 
This deep investigation and understanding is essential if Black and 
other non-white peoples are to succeed in playing the "black side of the 
chess board" (defense-offense) in contrast to the "white side of the chess 
board" (offense-defense) in the planetary game of chess (white 
supremacy) being played out between white and non-white. Currently, 
the players on the black side of the chess board are in a continuous state 
of checkmate (a losing streak that is centuries long). This has happened 
because of our failure to understand the game. Heretofore, non-white 
people have not decoded white genetic survival. 
After presenting The Cress Theory, my brain-computer was flooded 
with new understandings specifically related to the global white 
supremacy system. Many things that I - as most people - viewed as 
commonplace, I began to see in a different light. It was as though an 
enormous window was opened in a room that had been without sunlight. 
I recognized many of the items I saw anew as symbols in the white 
supremacy system. Perhaps because I am a general and child psychiatrist 
with considerable experience in interpreting the symbolic play of children 
X 
Introduction 
and the symbols in the dreams of children and adults, I was sensitive to 
the symbols in the behavior system of white supremacy once it had been 
defined and decoded. 
Though symbols are usually visual entities, they also take the form of 
speech, or can be found in activities-such as games. Symbols are specific 
to people and their experiences, their evolved cultures and circumstances. 
As such, symbols are the entities that carry highly compacted messages 
pertaining to the origin, identity and survival of individuals and collective 
peoples. 
In the form of visual entities, patterns of speech and/or activity, 
symbols contain complex messages distilled from the conscious levels of 
the brain-computer. These messages have been reduced to their essence 
in the subconscious functioning; there, these highly coded messages are 
stored and continuously referred to for existence and survival. Once a 
symbol evolves in a person's subconscious, that person uses the symbol 
with high frequency and has little or no necessary conscious under­
standing of its meaning. 
A shared symbol speaks volumes, although contained in a relatively 
small visual or auditory package. A symbol speaks loudly, or even shouts 
its meaning without, uttering a sound. Symbols communicate from one 
person's subconscious to the subconscious of another who shares the same 
identity and survival necessity. Such communication transpires at sub­
conscious levels when the conscious levels of brain-computer functioning 
cannot bear to address certain issues. White supremacy is a topic that few 
can or dare discuss in depth at the conscious level of brain-computer 
functioning. Few dare to probe or research white supremacy as this could 
lead to the dismantling of the system. Therefore, it is not surprising that 
there are many symbols in the system of white supremacy that reveal its 
roots in the struggle for white genetic survival. 
In the white supremacy system (often referred to as Western culture or 
civilization), there is little conscious focusing on symbols, their formation, 
use and interpretation. To the contrary, non-white peoples in their original 
cultures tend to focus on symbols and dream interpretation as essential 
aspects of their lives (i.e., African cultural objects referred to as African 
xi


--- PAGE 11 ---
The Isis Papers 
art, the Egyptian [African] systems of hieroglyphs and the symbols and 
interpretation of dreams in Biblical stories). Therefore, as an African, it 
is difficult for me to explain the ability to see and understand symbols; 
however, I am aware of making a certain shift to a lower frequency of 
brain-computer functioning (away from that frequency required for ordi­
nary, day to day, conscious functioning) in order to see and interpret 
symbols. But I must repeat that my ability to explain a process for sym~l 
interpretation is derived from my ongoing search for a firm understand~g 
of the overall context in which these symbols evolved - the white 
supremacy system/culture. 
Perhaps there will be persons, Black as well as white, who fail to 
appreciate the language of symbols. There will be those ":ho demea~ the 
attempt to decode symbols and ridicule their value and my mterpr~tauons. 
Also, there will be those who seek to identify and to decode symbols but 
fail. Nevertheless, I am presenting certain symbolic aspects of the white 
supremacy system/culture in an effort to increase our understanding of 
racism and thereby assist in bringing justice to the world. 
An examination of the Washington Monument in Washington, D.C. 
and recognition of it as a symbol of white power- specifically, white male 
power (thus, a gigantic white penis or phallic symbol) - may ~si~t o~e 
who has difficulty understanding symbols. The law that no buildmg m 
the District of Columbia can be taller than the white phallus-shaped 
Washington Monument (which, by the way, looks like a robed Ku Klux 
Klan) is not coincidental. The underlying meaning of the monument and 
law is that there can be no challenge to white power. It is not without 
significance that the Washington Monument, as a phallic symbol, towers 
over a predominantly Black population in the capital city of the most 
powerful government in the global white supremacy system. 
If this is not sufficient, those who fail to understand the symbol should 
go to the East Wing of the National Gallery of Art in Was~n~ton, D.C. 
and view the painting (specifically commissioned for that buildmg) by the 
artist Robert Motherwell entitled "Reconciliation Elegy." This work is a 
continuation of Motherwell's earlier series of paintings, "Elegy to the 
Spanish Republic." The entire "Elegy" series consists of massive black 
xii 
Introduction 
forms, some round or oval, some massive and vertical, positioned next to 
one another. All of the forms are black against a white background. In 
the book, Reconciliation Elegy, Motherwell states: 
White has always conveyed to me the radiance of life, so that if one­
though this is too literal - if one takes the Elegies as a metaphor for 
'life and death,' then obviously a sense of life as freedom and of death 
as the terminal vivifier, can be an endless obsession and 
preoccupation. In a curious way in the Reconciliation Elegy my black 
forms, the life-death forms, are becoming personages, instead of black 
stones ... the black and white are beginning to merge .... Death has been 
a continual living presence to me. 
The word elegy means a poem of lament or praise for the dead. The 
massive black oval and vertical forms, symbolic forms representing death, 
obsessively painted throughout the entire "Elegy" series were immedi­
ately seen by my eyes (the eyes of a Black person) as the imposing 
genitalia (testicles and phallus) of the Black male, dominating a white 
background (symbolic of the global white collective). While referring to 
the round objects he has painted as "stones," Motherwell seemed unaware 
that the word "stone" is an ancient term for testicles. However, in his own 
description Motherwell speaks of the black and white painting as a 
"metaphor for life and death" (white as life and black as death)_ Certainly 
he is not thinking consciously of his paintings of Black male genitalia as 
symbols of white death through white genetic annihilation (caused by 
Black male genitalia and Black genetic material). But symbols do not 
arise from conscious levels of thought. Still, however, it is astonishing 
that Motherwell is unable to see his forms as Black male genitalia and 
name them overtly as such. But does Motherwell consciously understand 
white supremacy? 
According to Motherwell, the flrst part of his series, "Elegy to the 
Spanish Republic" (at the level of his conscious thought), refers to the 
aftermath of the defeat of the Spanish Republican Army by the Spanish 
fascists in the 1935 Spanish Civil War. However, at a much deeper level 
it occurred to me that Spain also was conquered for 700 years (from the 
eighth to the 15th century, C.E.) by Black men from northern Africa, the 
xiii


--- PAGE 12 ---
The Isis Papers 
Moors. During their occupation of Spain, the Moors damaged the efforts 
of white genetic survival, causing Spaniards to become darker in skin 
color (compared to the rest of the Europeans} because of the long-term 
admixture of African {black) genetic material. Only with this under­
standing does the obsessive painting of the symbolic forms of the black 
phallus and testicles in a series entitled "Elegy" (poem for the dead) make 
fatal sense. Not understanding the underlying fear of white genetic 
annihilation (in the individual and collective white psyche) causes a mere 
surface interpretation of the paintings (even in the mind of the artist 
himself). Failure to reach the core issue of white genetic survival (resonat­
ing in the subconscious), which is most threatened by the genetic power 
in the genitalia of the Black male, relegates interpretation to superficial 
levels with a failure to see and understand the symbols arising from that 
subconscious core. 
Motherwell addressed the issue of white (Western) survival in his 
comments on the "Elegy" series, specifically on "Reconciliation Elegy." 
Against the background of possible nuclear holocaust, we must even 
reconcile ourselves to the fact that western man in choosing centuries 
ago to exploit nature rather than to marry her, has doomed himself­
with an industrial technology for which there is neither the wisdom 
nor the political mechanism to control... 
Yet, after having said all of the above, Motherwell still remains 
unconscious of the symbolic forms in his paintings. Indeed, the industrial 
technology and the nuclear weapons of which Motherwell speaks are 
designed by the Western (white) collective as protection against white 
genetic annihilation. Other Motherwell paintings of black figures against 
white backgrounds bear such titles as "Africa," "Study for Kilimanjaro" 
and "Ancestral Presence." 
This same concern and subconsciously perceived threat (in the white 
psyche) of the Black male (via black male genitalia) to white genetic 
survival is played out in the symbolism of the bullfight. In the bull ring, 
the bull is usually black. The bullfighter is usually a white male or any 
male in a "suit of lights," meaning white. The bull is chased and tormented 
xiv 
Introduction 
until. it i~ killed. This killing goes on obsessively, as a symbol of white 
Survival m the presence of the Black male threat; symbolic of white males 
conquering. Black males or of white survival in a world populated mostly 
by ~on-~hite people. Further, we must understand symbols of com­
mumon" .m the Christian religion; the wine and bread that are eaten by the 
co~~umcants are symbolic of the blood and body of Jesus, respectively. 
It IS Important to keep in mind that Jesus was an African, a Black male 
whose ~olor ~ been changed to conform with the white supremacy 
percepuon and Ideology. Finally, King Kong, the film in which a gigantic 
black ape plays opposite a white female, addresses in symbolic form the 
~at of the Black male to white genetic survival. Of course, King Kong 
IS killed by the end of the film. 
The papers. in this collection were written over the past 19 years. They 
are dated to give the reader some appreciation of the order in which they 
ev~lve~ in my thought processes. They are of a whole cloth; all are 
denvauves of the white supremacy power system/culture, which before 
now. has not been understood in sufficient depth. Several essays address 
s~ecific symbols in the white supremacy system/culture. I did not con­
tnve these symbols. On the contrary, I looked and there they were. 
Some have asked, "Why is it that others have not penetrated these deep 
symbols of Western culture? Why only you?" My answer is that I neither 
saw these symbols nor understood their meaning until I had written The 
Cress Theory ofColor-Conjrontalion and Racism. That analysis gave me 
access to. the total spectrum of collective brain-computer products (sym­
bols, log1c, thought, speech, action, emotional response and perception) 
that emanate from those who have established and maintained Western 
civilization. Having probed to the central core of Western civilization 1 
was a~le to see into (intuition= in-to-it) the myriad energy phenome~ 
that s~m off fro~ that dynamic core. Recognizing the specific injustice 
committed agamst non-white people in the framework of Western 
civilization and culture, it became clear that the entire Western civilization 
dynamic is fundamentally linked to the fear of white genetic annihilation 
and the sub.sequent need (as experienced by the global white collective) 
for the continuous battle against the genetically dominant global majority 
XV


--- PAGE 13 ---
The Isis Papers 
of black, brown, red and yellow peoples. The organization for that 
survival is none other than the white race, which carries out the global 
system of white supremacy. 
Although initially it came as a great surprise, it is only logical that the 
myriad symbolic nwnifestations of the struggle for white genetic survival 
abound throughout the historic and global structure of white supremacy. 
These symbols ma11ifest wherever one looks, wherever one steps and 
wherever one turns. That these subtle and once hidden symbols are 
everywhere serves as the strongest evidence of the validity of The Cress 
Theory. 
It is as though I had written, "If The Cress Theory is correct, symbols 
so informing us will be found throughout the whole of Western civiliza­
tion and culture." Indeed, without the specific theory, one can look at the 
symbols for decades and truly not know what one is looking at, even when 
one is handling the symbol in one's bare hands. 
One then might ask, "Why is it necessary to read a civilization or power 
system at deep levels?" Western culture has produced much violence and 
destruction on the planet. It is like a cancer destroying the body. A 
physician attempting to treat or cure a disease (i.e., cancer) must examine 
the patient at deep levels. It is inadequate to stop at what is seen with the 
unaided eye. The physician attempting to solve the problem of a persist­
ent and troubling cough in a particular patient may order x-ray studies to 
view the inside of the lungs and the chest cavity. He/she might perform 
a microscopic examination and bacterial culture studies on. the sputum 
that comes from the lungs in order to understand the cause of the cough. 
When the cause is understood, chances that the disease can be treated 
effectively and cured are improved greatly, while that which is not 
understood in depth rarely can be treated or cured. Similarly, there are 
serious problems posed for the vast majority of humankind by the specific 
dynamic of Western (white supremacy) culture. 
I hope that this collection of essays will assist Blacks and all other 
people - who have as their cosmic responsibility the resolution of the 
problem of injustice in the world - in identifying the problem of that 
specific injustice more clearly than ever before. Instead of engaging in f 
I' 
F 
~ 
f 
xvi i. 
(; 
l 
Introduction 
our p~t practices of complaining, moaning, crying, groaning, begging, 
clappmg hands and singing "We shall Overcome" when confronted with 
these death-causing,life-stultifying problems posed by h"t Bl k . w 1 e supremacy, 
ac pe_ople ~n the U.S. must dissect and analyze those problems to their 
core. WJth this knowledge Black people can take the . . , necessary steps to ehmmate the problem. 
_Those ~ho will to work for justice and who understand that work as 
the~ consc10us responsibility will be found in all places and in all walks 
of ltfe, at all levels of formal education and at all income levels. There 
are no cl~s. divisions nor language barriers for those who do this cosmic 
work. It IS time to solve this problem once and f,or all It ·s n· ~ · · 
th I . 1 me 10r JUstice on e p anet Earth. 
.xvii


--- PAGE 14 ---
1 
The Cress Theory of Color-Confrontation 
and Racism (White Supremacy): 
A Psychogenetic Theory and World Outlook 
(1970) 
Unlike religion, the body of knowledge known as science takes the 
position that all observable phenomena can be explained, or, at least, is 
grist for the mill of investigation, analysis and understanding by the 
human mind. 
In today's very small world at least three-quarters of the people are 
"non-white," and the members of this "non-white" majority population 
are subjected to domination throughout their lives, either directly or 
indirectly, by a tiny minority of the world's people who classify them­
selves as "white." Racism (white supremacy) then, is revealed as one of, 
if not the most important observable phenomenon in the world today for 
which social, behavioral and all other scientists should be seeking an 
explanation. 
Heretofore, racism has been defined and described variously, (see 
Gullattee, Comer, Butts and Pinderhughes). Yet in my view, the com­
ment made by Oliver C. Cox in his 1959 award winning text, "Caste, Class 
and Race" (Monthly Review Press), still prevails: 
It is not ordinarily realized that, of all the great mass of writing on race 
relations, there is available no consistent theory of race relations. The 
need for such a sociological explanation is so great that recently, when 
one author succeeded, with some degree of superficial logic, in 
explaining the phenomena in terms of caste relations, the college 
textbooks and social-science journals, almost unanimously and 
unquestioningly, hurriedly adopted his theory. 
1


--- PAGE 15 ---
I I' 
The Isis Papers 
Perhaps social and behavioral scientists have failed to develop a sound 
and consistent theory of racism because of their tendency to be less 
demanding and less stringently disciplined in sticking to observable and 
measurable data than the so-called "physical" scientists are required to be 
in formulating hypotheses. Frequently, contrary to all the basic premises 
of modem science, statements are made by some of these scientists "a 
priori" -that is to say, claimed as valid independent of observation. 
Similarly, society, in general, fails to impose a significant amount of 
pressure on behavioral and social scientists to yield viable theories and 
definitions. Such theories and definitions subsequently can stand and 
function as efficient and effective tools to be utilized by social engineers 
as guides for changing social reality. However, the contrary seems to be 
the case; if there is any pressure at all, it is to maintain the social status 
quo. And all too often, institutions of the society reward the superficial, 
inconsistent and dysfunctional theories of societal dynamics. 
Neely Fuller, in his 1969 copyrighted The United Independent Com­
pensatory Code/System/Concept: a textbook/workbook for thought, 
speech and/or actionforvictims of racism (white supremacy), recognized 
the need for a functional statement on racism, one that could be utilized 
daily by those earnestly seeking to bring about social change. Fuller 
observed that, contrary to most present thinking, there is only one 
functioning racism in the known world- white supremacy. He challen­
ges his readers to identify and then to demonstrate the superiority or 
functional supremacy of any of the world's "non-white" peoples over 
anyone. Concluding that since there is no operational supremacy of any 
"colored" people, Fuller reveals that the only valid operational definition 
of racism is white supremacy. He observes that in spite of any and all 
statements the world's "non-white" peoples may make about themselves 
having economic and/or political independence and the like, in the final 
analysis, they are all victims of the white supremacy process. He places 
major emphasis on the present realities of the world that can be verified 
and tested, rather than on what one could imagine to be the case (such as 
a black or yellow supremacy). He further emphasizes that, instead of 
focusing on individual cases or on specific locations, a perspective that 
2 
1.-,. 
[, 
f' 
~~ 
l 
The Cress Theory 
examines the patterns of relationships between whites and "non-whites" 
worldwide must be developed. 
Fuller explains that racism is not merely a pattern of individual and/or 
institutional practice; it is a universally operating "system" of white 
supremacy and domination in which the majority of the world's white 
people P~icipate. He discounts the validity of theories that recognize 
the evolution of economic systems as the origin of this state of affairs. 
Instead, _he reveals th~ inadequate analysis of such theories by suggesting 
that vanous econom1c systems - such as capitalism, communism and 
socialism - have been devised, used and refmed in the effort to achieve 
the. primary goal of white domination. In other words, the goal of the 
white supremacy system is none other than the establishment, main­
tenance, expansion and refinement of world domination by members of 
a group that classifies itself as the white "race." Fuller then suggests that 
the word "race, 
11 
in this sense, has little biological validity but is translated 
more correct! y as "organization, II the sole purpose of which is to maintain 
white domination and world control. Fuller's emphasis on the concept of 
color amplifies the assertion made in 1903 by W.E.B. DuBois (perhaps 
the greatest American social scientist) in The Souls of Bl~ck Folk, that the 
great problem facing the 20th century is that of the color-line. 
Whether or not one is emotionally comfortable with Fuller's thesis and 
assessment is not gennane. The question of such comfort never has been 
the important concern of scientific investigation. Of great significance in 
Fuller's work is the description of relationships between "non-white" and 
white peoples. Fuller defines and elucidates these relationships as a 
means of accounting for and illuminating many past and present observ­
able social practices. Also, this examination reveals that, despite all kinds 
of programs and pronouncements to the contrary, for the past several 
hundred years, white supremacist social conditions have remained intact 
as the dominant social reality. 
Impressed that the concept of a "system" of white domination over the 
world's "non-white" peoples could explain the seeming predicament and 
dilemma of "non-white" social reality ,I tended to focus, as a psychiatrist, 
on what possible motivational force, operative at both the individual and 
3


--- PAGE 16 ---
The Isis Papers 
£ r the evolution of these patterns of social 
group .levels, co~ld account -o ntl function in all areas of human activity 
behavwral pracuce that appare Y li · religion sex · t rtainment labor, law, po ucs, • (economics, educauon, en e ' th 1 this "system" consists of 
) While Fuller clearly suggests a 
:..:~!:.:~~;r.c:::;:~.==:::.:::::y':: 
makes is that: 
k o le The reason that most white 
Most white people hate Bl~ pe p .bites are not Black people. If 
people hate Black people is ecause w ed know little else If you 
kn this bout white people you ne . you ow a . ,1 irtually all else that you know do not know this about white peop e, v 
about them will only confuse you. 
furth · t hould be noted that, in the To take Fuller's account a step er, I s . ed . . urotic drive for superiority usually IS found 
majonty ofmstances, any ne . d inferiority. Is it not 
upon a deep and pervading sense of mad~quacy an small minority. 
. 1 resent in numencal terms a very true that wh1te peop e rep f dly is not "white" itself the very 
of the world's peo~~e? And more pr~o~~nl re:.Son, then, that the quality of 
absence of any abihty to pr~~ce :eqo ua~y or a relative genetic deficiency 
whiteness is indeed a geneuc ma . . f 
state, based upon the genetic inability. to produce the sk:::=e: ~e 
lanin (which is responsible for all skm color). The vast J . Y al 
me . d h" h suggests that color 1s nonn 
world's people are not so afflicte ' ~ lC 1 Additionally' this state . 
~ human beings and color absence 1s abnorma · . . 
~or . ive to the dominant geneuc 
of color absence acts always as a geneuc re~~=nihilates" (phenotypically-. 
factor of color-produ~tion. Color alwl ays bite Black people possess the. 
· all peaking) the non-co or, w · and geneuc y-s . 'th b red and yellow peoples possessing 
greatest color potenual, Wl rown, . a1 
.. respectively This is the genetic and psychologic 'lesserquant1Ues, · d Racism 
for The Cress Theory of Color-Confrontation an . 
Supremacy). . 
The Color-Confrontation theory states that the white or 
Europeans responded psychologically, with a ~ofound se~se of 'th 
cal inadequacy and color inferiority' in therr confrontatlo~s Wl 
,? majority of the world's people- all of whom possessed varymg 
'~-·-
4 
The Cress Theory 
of color-producing capacity. This psychological response, whether con­
scious or unconscious, revealed an inadequacy based on the most obvious 
and fundamental part of their being, their external appearance. As might 
be anticipated in terms of modem psychological theories, whites defen­
sively developed an uncontrollable sense of hostility and aggression. This 
attitude has continued to manifest itself throughout the history of mass 
confrontations between whites and people of color. That the initial 
hostility and aggression came only from whites is recorded in innumerable 
diaries, journals and books written by whites. Also, records indicate that 
only after long periods of great abuse have non-whites responded defen­
sively with any form of counterattack. This perplexing psychological 
reaction of whites has been directed towards all peoples with the capacity 
to produce melanin. However, the most profound aggressions have been 
directed towards Black people, who have the greatest color potential and, 
therefore, are the most envied and feared in genetic color competition. 
The experience of numerical inadequacy and genetic color inferiority 
led whites to implement a number of interesting, although devastating (to 
non-white peoples), psychological defense mechanisms. The initial 
psychological defense maneuver was the repression of the initial painful 
awareness of inadequacy. This primary ego defense was reinforced by a 
host of other defense mechanisms. 
-One of the most important of these defense mechanisms was reaction 
formation, a response that converts (at the psychological level) something 
desired and envied but wholly unattainable, into something discredited 
despised. The whites, desiring to have skin color but unable to attain 
,~,••""'~""'uvu (consciously or unconsciously) that skin color was disgusting 
, and began attributing negative qualities to color- especially to 
Interestingly, the tenn "non-white" is a double negative result-
.. .a positive statement. This is perhaps a Freudian slip, wherein the 
QJ J:an~~ua!~e ultimately reveals the primary psychological dynamic. 
to have colored skin can be observed at the very first signs 
or summer when they begin to strip off their clothes (as many 
law will allow), often pennitting their skins to be burned 
attempt to add some color to their pale bodies and rendering 
5


--- PAGE 17 ---
The Isis Papers 
themselves vulnerable to skin cancer in the process. Most cosmetics are 
also an attempt to add color to white skin. Such coloring makeup is 
provided for the white male as well as female. And finally, untold 
millions are spent annually on chemicals that are advertised as being able 
to increase the tanning potential of whites. 
The fact that some Blacks have attempted to change the color of their 
skin to white does not mitigate the force of t..~is argument, as it can be 
demonstrated readily that these non-whites are responding to the already 
established social conditions of white supremacy. Such a process, as seen 
in Blacks and other non-whites, may be described as identification with 
the oppressor. 
Another example of the reaction formation defense is the elaboration 
of the myth of white genetic superiority, which continues to be reinforced 
assiduously (note Jensen's latest elaborations and their acceptance at all 
levels of the white social structure). Acutely aware of their inferior 
genetic ability to produce skin color, whites built the elaborate myth of 
white genetic superiority. Furthermore, whites set about the huge task of 
evolving a social, political and economic structure that would support the 
myth of the inferiority of Blacks and other non-whites. 
An additional psychological defense maneuver utilized by whites has 
been that of projection. Feeling extreme hostility and hate towards 
non-whites, whites began the pattern of stating that non-whites hated 
them. In many instances, this mechanism has served to mitigate the guilt 
whites occasionally experience for their impulse to aggress against Blacks 
and other people of color. 
Another, perhaps special, instance of the use of projection is the historic 
and continuing desire of whites for sexual alliances with non-whites -a 
desire indulged by white males throughout the world. This deep desire 
has been projected onto Black males and females, and is manifest in the 
notion that people of color have sexual desires for white males and 
females. The Color-Confrontation theory postulates that whites desired 
and still do desire sexual alliances with non-whites, both male and female, 
because it is only through this route that whites can achieve the illusion 
of being able to produce color. The extreme rage vented against even the 
6 
The Cress Theory 
idea of a sexual alliance between the Black male and the white female, 
which has long been a dominant theme in the white supremacy culture, is 
viewed by th~ Color-Confrontation theory as a result of the white male's 
intense fear of the Black male's capacity to fulftll the greatest longing of 
the white female- that of conceiving and birthing a product of color. 
1 nere are other sexual behaviors practiced by some whites that can be 
illuminated by the Color-Confrontation t.llesis. For example, in his 
autobiography, Malcolm X stated that the sexual perversion he was asked 
to perform most often by white men was for him, as a Black male, to have 
sexual intercourse with white females in their presence, while they (white 
men) looked on. This behavioral pattern on the part of white males, 
instead of being dismissed as a perversion, can be understood when 
viewed as white males' fantasized identification with Black males' 
capacity to give conceptual products of color to white females- some­
thing white females desperately desire but white males cannot fulfill. 
Further vivid testimony is given by Black males who have engaged in 
sexual intercourse with white females. These men report that a frequent 
utterance of white females is that they wish to have Black babies. 
The Color-Confrontation theory also explains why Black males' 
testicles were the body parts that white males attacked in most lynchings: 
the testicles store powerful color-producing genetic material. Likewise, 
the repeated and consistent focus on the size of Black males' penises by 
both white males and females is viewed by this theory as a displacement 
of the fundamental concern with the genetic color-producing capacity 
residing in the testicles. Since the fact of color-erivy must remain 
repressed, color-desire can never be mentioned or the entire white 
psychological structure collapses. Therefore, attention is displaced to a 
less threatening object or symbol- the penis. 
Finatly, the degradation of sex in the white supremacy culture allows 
for yet another area of insight into the fundamental psychological 
dynamics of whites and their self-alienation regarding their physical 
appearance. At the most primordial level, sex can be viewed as the 
reproduction of one's own image, of self and of kind. According to the 
Color-Confrontation theory, white supremacy culture degrades the act of 
7


--- PAGE 18 ---
The Isis Papers 
sex and the process of self-reproduction because for whites both ru:e 
reflective of whiteness and, in turn, their inabilitiy to produce color. This 
self-deficiency clearly is despised and is stated most explicitly in the 
religious and moral philosophies of the white supremacy culture. Yet, 
this manner of degrading the sexual act is not found in non-white cultures. 
In fact, the very opposite is the case: the act of reproduction is h~ld in the 
highest esteem, as reflected in non-white arts and religious pracuces. The 
artistic and religious practices of India and Africa give strong and con­
tinuous testimony to this fact. In whites, this initial core feeling of 
alienation from themselves and from the act that produced their image 
found subsequent expression in their thought processes, religious 
philosophies, moral codes, social acts, and the entire social structure. 
Psychiatrists and other behavioral scientists frequently use the patterns 
of overt behavior towards others as indications of what is felt fundamen­
tally about the self. If hate and lack of respect are manifested towards 
others hate and lack of respect are felt most often at deeper levels towards 
the seif. Facets of other behavioral patterns within the white supremacy 
cultural framework support this thesis. For example, many white writers, 
in all areas of the world, experience and write about their profound sense 
of self-alienation. Additionally, some of the current political, social and 
behavioral activity enacted by whites against the ideology and values of 
the white social structure, although not spoken of in the terminology used 
here, can be appreciated at one level as an expression of the same kernel 
of alienation against whiteness. Thus, the hippies and yippies, by allow­
ing dirt to accumulate on themselves, in one sense, are adding color to 
their skins. They also, by allowing their head and facial hair to prolife~te, 
cover themselves with the only part of their bodies that has substantive 
color, their hair. The present frantic attempts made by whites to counter 
this sense of alienation take the form of free and open sexual practices and 
sexual orgies. Such attempts will be unsuccessful because, again, the core 
problem is a sense of alienation primarily from their own ~olorlessne~s, 
and secondarily from the social practices and structure whites have bmlt 
around that psychological core over the centuries. 
8 
The Cress Theory 
Racism (white supremacy), having begun as a form of self-alienation, 
has evolved into the most highly refined form of alienation from others 
as well. The Color-Confrontation theory views all of the present battle­
grounds in the world as vivid reflections of this reality; the destructive 
and aggressive behavioral patterns being displayed by white peoples 
towards all non-white peoples is evidence of the inner hate, hostility and 
rejection they feel towards themselves and of the depth of self-alienation 
that has evolved from the genetic and psychological kernel of color 
inadequacy. 
The mass inability of whites to live and attend school in the presence 
of non-whites is expressed in the patterns of Black and white housing and 
education throughout this country and the world. In terms of the Color­
Confrontation thesis, this inability is seen as the apparent psychological 
discomfort experienced by whites in situations where, in confronting their 
neighbors of color, they must face their color inadequacy daily . Also, 
the myth of white superiority is exploded in the presence of equitable 
social and economic opportunity. The white personality, in the presence 
of color, can be stabilized only by keeping Blacks and other non-whites 
in obviously inferior positions. The situation of mass proximity to Blacks 
is intolerable to whites because Blacks are inherently more than equal. 
People of color always will have something highly visible that whites 
never can have or produce- the genetic factor of color. Always, in the 
presence of color, whites will feel genetically inferior. 
The difficulty whites have in according non-whites socio-political and 
economic equality within the white supremacy structure stems neither 
from a moral issue nor from political or economic need, but from the 
fundamental sense of their own unequal condition - in regards to their 
numerical inadequacy and color deficiency. They can compensate for 
color inadequacy only by placing themselves in socially superior 
P0S:itio1ns. The color inadequacy of whiteness necessitates a social struc-
based on white superiority. Only tokenism can be tolerated by such 
·a:IInotJtvational psychological state, wherein the pvolution of the myth of 
thee:Kc:eDiion.al non-white is used, again, as a defense mechanism. 
9


--- PAGE 19 ---
The/sis Papers 
The thrust towards superiority over peoples of color, the drive towards 
material accumulation, the drive towards a technological culture and the 
drive towards power are all cornerstones of the universal white supremacy 
culture, and they are viewed- in terms of the Color-Confrontation thesis 
- as responses to the core psychological sense of inadequacy. This 
inadequacy is not measured in terms of infant size as compared with that 
of the adult, as postulated by Alfred Adler. Rather, it is an inadequacy 
rooted in the inability to produce melanin. This genetic state is, in 
actuality, a variant of albinism. 
The Color-Confrontation theory further postulates that whites are 
vulnerable to their sense of numerical inadequacy. This inadequacy is 
apparent in their drive to divide the vast majority of non-whites into 
fractional, as well as frictional, minorities. This is viewed as a funda­
mental behavioral response of whites to their own minority status. The 
white "race" has structured and manipulated their own thought processes 
and conceptual patterns, as well as those of the entire non-white world 
majority, so that the real numerical minority (whites) illusionally feels and 
represents itself as the world's majority, while the true numerical majority 
(non-whites) illusionally feels and views itself as the minority. Interest­
ingly, the white collective, whenever discussing the question of color, 
never discusses any of its own particular ethnic groups as minorities, but 
constantly focuses on the various ethnic, language and religious groups 
I 
of non-white peoples as minorities. Then great efforts are made to initiate 
conflict between these arbitrary groups. This is one of the key methods 
by which a minority can remain in power. The "divide, frictionalize and 
conquer" pattern, observable throughout history wherever non-whites are 
confronted by whites, results primarily from whites' sense of color 
deficiency and secondarily from their sense of numerical inadequacy. 
This pattern, then, is a compensatory adjustment to permit psychological 
comfort through dominance and control. (See Diagram 1.) Similarly, the 
present-day frantic focus on birth control for the entire non-white world 
is another example of white peoples' conscious or unconscious awareness 
of their numerical deficiency status. There is never great emphasis on 
10 
The Cress Theory 
The psychogenetic and social dynamic 
of racism (white supremacy) 
Genetic Factor: color inadequacy state (white) 
an albinism or variant 
Individual and group psychological response: 
development of psychological defense mechanisms 
Compensatory logic system: white supremacy 
Compensat?ry behavioral practices: (economics, education, enter­
tamment, labor, law, politics, religion, sex, war) 
White supremacy behavioral "system" and culture 
on worldwide scale 
Syst~matic oppresion, domination and inferiorization of aU 
peo~le ~•th the capacity to produce significant amounts of' melanin 
skm pigment: black, brown, red and yellow peoples of the Earth 
Diagram I 
11


--- PAGE 20 ---
The 1 sis Papers 
controlling the births of whites; in fact, there are some white governmental 
groups that give dividends to citizens for increased procreation. 
The above are but a few examples selected from millions of large and 
small behavioral patterns practiced by whites in varying quantities. Yet, 
these examples effectively demonstrate the individual and collective 
neurotic need to focus on color, sex, genetics, numbers, superiority/in­
feriority, white supremacy and power. The Color-Confrontation theory 
contends that all of the above can be explained on the basis of the core 
psychological sense of color-deficiency and numerical inadequacy. The 
individual patterns of behavior that, over time, evolved into collective, 
social, institutional and now systemic patterns are seen as the origin of the 
"system of white supremacy," which operates at a universal level and is 
the only effective and functional racism existent in the world today. 
·Further, racism (white supremacy), in this historical epoch, is viewed as 
a full-blown social contradiction and the major social dynamic superced­
ing all others in influencing universal social practices and decisions. The 
Color Confrontation theory recongizes racism as one of the dominating 
forces determining character development, personality and formation 
type. Therefore, a functional definition of racism (white supremacy), is 
the behavioral syndrome of individual and collective color inferiority and 
numerical inadequacy that includes patterns of thought, speech and action, 
as seen in members of the white organization (race). 
What then are the practical implications of this theory? Of major 
importance is the fact that for the first time in centuries non-white peoples 
throughout the world will have a rational basis for understanding the 
motivational nuances of individual and collective white behavior. The 
Color-Confrontation thesis theorizes that the majority of the world's 
people, non-whites, were manipulated into subordinate positions because, 
never having experienced such a state in tenns of their own thought and 
logic processes and premises, they were unprepared to understand pat­
terns of behavior predicated upon a sense of color deficiency and numeri­
cal inadequacy. This is analogous to the man with two eyes fmding it 
difficult, if not impossible, to understand the behavioral pauerns and 
12 
i' ',' 
The Cress Theory 
motivations of the congenitally one-eyed man, who always looked upon 
the two-eyed state with jealous antagonism and, perhaps, aggression. 
Armed with such insight, knowledge and understanding, non-whites 
will cease to be vulnerable to the behavioral rnaneuverings of individual 
or collective whites. Non-whites will be less vulnerable to the messages 
of white superiority that radiate throughout the known universe and 
permeate world cultures, which are dominated by the white supremacy 
system. This understanding will have profound effects on the developing 
egos and self-images of all non-white children, who suffer severe damage 
under the white supremacy culture. Moreover, whenever they are con­
fronted by the ideology of white superiority/supremacy, non-whites will 
understand that it is only a compensatory psychological adjustment for a 
genetic, numerical deficiency state; thus the white supremacy message 
can be evaluated and negated more readily. This allows non-whites to 
gain psychological liberation from the white ideological domination that 
negatively affects the total functioning of non-whites. Further, non­
whites will be less vulnerable to being maneuvered into conflict with one 
another, thus weakening the continued domination of the white 
supremacy system. 
Also, white peoples of the world presumably also could benefit from 
such an awareness of the motivation behind behaviors that often baffle 
them. If they are sincere in their attempts to stop the practices of white 
supremacy (racism), whites may be able to find methods to do so once the 
cause is understood. Perhaps some psychiatrist will develop a method of 
mass psychotherapy (i.e., therapeutic counter-racist theater) to help 
whites become comfortable with their color and their numbers. However, 
one can foresee a major problem arising from the possible difficulty of 
motivating whites to release the secondary gains historically derived from 
the racist system. 
The possibility of white people accepting this analysis of the white 
problem in human relations is not for me to answer. I do know that the 
majority of the world's people are looking for an answer to the dilemma 
that was once called the "American Dilemma." They are looking for a 
change. Perhaps The Cress Theory ofColor-C onfrontation will help them 
13


--- PAGE 21 ---
The I sis Papers 
to make lhat change. In any event, I am reminded of a statement made by 
Freud's biographer, Ernst Jones: "In the last analysis, the justification of 
every scientific generalization is that it enables us to comprehend some­
thing that is otherwise obscure." 6 
And, as James B. Conant has stated: 
The test of a new idea is ... not only its success in correlating the 
then-known facts but much more its success or failure in stimulating 
further experimentation or observation which in tum is fruitful. This 
dynamic aspect of science, viewed not as practical undertaking but as 
development of conceptual schemes, seems to me to be close to the 
heart of the best def"mition of science. 7 
This essay analyzes the unique universal behavioral phenomenon of 
white supremacy (racism), and places it in a conceptual framework and 
context of a theoretical formulation. The fundamentals of the dynamics 
inherent in the spectrum of relations cover all areas oflife activity between 
people who classify themselves as white, and those people whom whites 
have classified as non-whites. 
14 
The Cress Theory 
REFERENCES 
1. Gullattee, A.C ... The Subtleties of White Racism. A paper 
presented to the American Psychiatric Association 
Annual Meeting, Miami Beach, Florida, May 1969. 
2. Comer, J ... "White Racism: Its Roots, form and Function," The 
American Journal of P~ychiatry, Vol. 26: No. 6, December 
1969. 
3. Harrison, P.A., Butts, H.F .. "White Psychiatrists' Racism in 
Referral Practices to Black Psychiatrists," Journal of the 
National Medical Association, Vol. 62, No.4, July 1970 
4. Pinderhughes, Charles A. "Understanding Black Power: 
Processes and Proposals," American Journal of Psychiatry, 
Vol. 125: 1552-1557, 1969. 
5. Cox, O.C .. "Caste, Class and Race," New York: Monthly 
Review Press, 1959, p. ix 
6. Fuller, N. The United Independent Compensatory 
Code/System/Concept, Copyrighted, Library of 
Congress, 1969 
7. Fuller, N. The United Independent Compensatory 
Code/System/Concept., Copyrighted, Library of 
Congress, 1969 
8. X, Malcolm, The Autobiography of Malcolm X (with the 
assistance of Alex Haley). New York: Grove Press, 1966, 
p.l20. 
15


--- PAGE 22 ---
The I sis Papers 
9. Jones, E. Papers of Psychoanalysis, Boston: Beacon Press, 
1961, p. 73. 
10. Conant, J .B. On Understanding Science, New York Mentor, 
1953. 
16 
2 
The Origin of Alienation, Anxiety 
and Narcissism 
(August 1980) 
Dedication 
This essay is dedicated to Genevieve Ekaete, a Nigerian journalist who, 
because of the profound pain of alienation, took her life on June 25, 1978 
while residing in the United States of America. The world lost a brilliant 
mind and a generous person. Shortly before ller death she stated, "My 
superstructure is solid. I need a formidable foundation ... " This essay is 
my contribution to our understanding of the destructive dynamic of 
alienation. 
Psychiatry as a discipline is floundering on its previously established 
conceptual and theoretical foundation imported from 19th century 
Europe. My continuing question to myself as a late 20th century precau­
tionary in general and child psychiatry, practicing in the power capital of 
the world (Washington, D.C.) is, "Can a greater understanding be 
achieved in the study of human behavior as it is organized and manifested 
in the world's dominant power system/culture?" 
My answer is affrrmative. We can derive an ever increasing level of 
order out of the existing chaos, a diagnostic and statistical manual that 
gets heavier and wordier with each effort. Thereby, we can enhance our 
diagnostic and treatment skills and increase the possibility of prevention, 
allowing us to serve a suffering humanity better. 
In Have Astronomers Found God?. Robert J astrow states, "There is a 
kind of religion in science; it is the religion of a person who believes there 
17


--- PAGE 23 ---
The Isis Papers 
is order and harmony in the universe, and every event can be explained 
in a rational way as the product of some previous event; eV,ery effort must 
have its cause." Jastrow continues, taking a quotation from Albert 
Einstein, "The scientist is possessed by the sense of universal causation." 
As a social and behavioral scientist, I am convinced it is possible to 
understand, in depth, the patterns and system of behavior encountered in 
the individual and in the broad collective. My further conviction is that 
we can serve humankind maximally as behavioral scientists and 
physicians only when we adequately analyze the fundamental causation 
and logic of these patterns of behavior. 
Three major foci of attention in Western social and behavioral science, 
particularly in psychiatry- alienation, anxiety and narcissism- are not 
unrelated, isolated syndrome abstractions, as they have been discussed by 
Western social and behavioral scientists. These separately described 
phenomena are not only interrelated, but they have a common origin and 
cause; they are derivatives of the same causal dynamic. Although that 
causal dynamic has remained unidentified, the source of these three 
phenomena is the origin of Western civilization itself. 
Alienation. In the Color-Confrontation theory, I stated that racism 
(white supremacy), having begun as a form of alienation towards the self, 
now has evolved into the most highly refined form of alienation towards 
others as well. The Color-Confrontation theory views all of the present 
battle-grounds in the world today as vivid reflections of this alienation 
towards others. The destructive and aggressive behavioral patterns dis­
played throughout the world by white peoples towards all non-white 
peoples is the evidence of the inner hate, hostility and rejection they feel 
towards themselves and of the deep self-alienation that has evolved from · 
their genetic inadequacy. 
My extended defmition of alienation centers around the recognition ..•. 
that it is a fundamental behavioral dynamic in Western civilization and· 
culture. Alienation is a powerful centrifugal, genetic-psychological and · ·· 
societal dynamic that, over time, drives human beings further and 
away from all effective, meaningful, emotionally supportive and truthful 
communications amongst one another. The alienation dynamic increas~ . 
18 
Alienation, Anxiety and Narcissism 
ingly forces people away from one another as Western civilization and 
culture evolves, as seen through each successive generation since its 
origin- including Greek civilization and the Roman Empire. Alienation 
is the very same dynamic that pushes human beings away from respectful 
and harmonious relationships with the physical environment, leading to 
the pollution and destruction of the planet. Most important, the alienation 
dynamic forces the individual away from all manifestations of self-under­
standing and self-respect, including the most fundamental respect -
respect for one's genetic makeup. 
The Encyclopedia Britannica records that the roots of the idea of 
alienation are found in the works of Plotinus, a Roman philosopher born 
in Egypt, who lived between 205 and 270 A.D., as well as in the theology 
of both St. Augustine and Martin Luther. The latter addressed the struggle 
to alienate oneself from one's own imperfections by identification with a 
transcendental perfect Being. 
Entries on alienation did not appear in major reference books of the 
social sciences until 1935, but the concept of alienation was present in 
classical sociological texts of the 19th and early 20th centuries in the 
works of Marx, Durkheim, Tonnies, Weber and Simmel. Eric and Mary 
Josephson, in their Man Alone: Alienation in Modern Society, had the 
following to say about alienation: 
Indeed, ever since the great teclmological and political revolutions of 
the late eighteenth century, with their shattering impact on a rigid 
social order and their promise of individual freedom, one of the most 
disturbing phenomena of Western culture has been man's sense of 
estrangement from the world he himself has made or inherited - in a 
word, man's alienation from himself and from others. This theme of 
the alienation of modern man runs through the literature and drama of 
two continents; it can be traced in the content as well as the form of 
modern art; it preoccupies theologians and philosophers, and to many 
psychologists and sociologists it is the central problem of our time. In 
various ways they tell us that ties have snapped that formerly bound 
Western man to himself and to the world about him. In diverse 
language they say that man in modem industrial societies is rapidly 
becoming detached from nature, from his old gods, from the 
c technology that has transformed his environment and now threatens 
to destroy it; from his work and its products, and from his leisure; from 
19


--- PAGE 24 ---
The Isis Papers 
the complex social institutions that presumably serve but are more 
likely to manipulate him; from the community in which he lives; and 
above all from himself- from his body and his sex, from his feelings 
of love and tenderness, and from his art - his creative and productive 
potential. 
Contemporary contributors to the defmition of alienation include such 
thinkers as psychoanalyst Erick Fromm; philosophers Lewis Mumford 
and Herbert Marc use; existentialists Jean Paul Sartre, Albert Camus, Paul 
Tillich and Martin Buber; and sociologists David Riesman, Robert K. 
Merton and Talcott Parsons. 
In summary, there are at least five causal theories concerning aliena­
tion: the economic, the technological, the sociological, the philosophic/ 
existential and the psychological. Karl Marx is identified with the 
economic theory. Marx viewed alienation as a result of the private 
ownership of the means of production and the expropriation of man's 
labor by the capitalists -resulting in worker exploitation and class-strug­
gle, money and commodities becoming the most meaningful things in 
man's existence and thus man's alienation from man. Technological 
theories attribute alienation to man's adjusted life-style to machines and 
automation. Sociological theories view the decline of the limited local 
community, the emergence of mass society and the simultaneous increas­
ing sense of individual powerlessness as the cause of alienation. 
Philosophic/existential theories emphasize that alienation is inherent in 
the finite and isolated character of man's existence as a stranger and an 
alien in the world. Psychologic theories are dominated by the views of 
Sigmund Freud, who viewed alienation or self-estrangement as a resultant 
of the split between the unconscious and the conscious forces in the 
personality -the individual thus being out of touch, in the sense that 
repressed and unacknowledged desires motivate his behavior. More 
specifically, Freud pinpointed the Oedipal conflict and the frustrations 
inherent in Civilized society, as expressed in his Civilization and Its 
Discontents. as the source of alienation. 
The following are but a few items from a long list of suggested 
manifestations of alienation: child abuse, psychosis, suicide, neurotic 
20 
Alienation, Anxiety and Narcissism 
depression, delinquency, psychosomatic disorders, prejudice, civil riots, 
wildcat strikes and the rise of fascism. All are believed to have derived 
from one or more of the following states: social isolation, self-estrange­
ment, a sense of powerlessness, meaninglessness, normlessness, and 
cultural estrangement. 
Whereas I agree with the existence of the alienation dynamic in 
Western civilization and culture, I disagree with all of the aforementioned 
theories of its causation. These theories remain superficial in their 
analyses, as each fails to reach the core of the origin of Western civiliza­
tion. The multiplicity of theories on such a basic and pervasive dynamic 
as alienation reflects the failure to comprehend the origin and nature of 
Western man, who has created- at conscious and unconscious levels­
the totality of the Western cultural imperative. 
With a sufficiently deep investigation, the myriad aspects of the 
alienation dynamic that on the surface appear unconnected are recognized 
as highly interrelated and tied to a central core - a unitary causation. 
Anxiety and narcissism are tied to that same fundamental core, as il­
lustrated in the following diagram. The three-dimensional cone-shaped 
figure represents the multiple levels at which reality (phenomena) may be 
decoded. The dots on the surface at Level 5 represent the seemingly 
isolated, multiple phenomena that can be examined at ever increasing 
levels of depth, indicated by Levels 4 through 1. The basic interconnec­
tions between the isolated phenomena are less apparent at Level 5 than at 
Level 2 or Level 1. The interconnections, however, become increasingly 
clear as a greater depth of phenomena penetration is achieved. (See 
Diagram 1.) 
21


--- PAGE 25 ---
Level 5 
level 4 
Level .5 
Levd 2 
Level 1 
Reality and Comprehension Levels 
Diagram I 
Alienation, Anxiety and Narcissism 
The term Western means "white." "Western" has become a comfort­
able (and for some, confusing), obfuscating euphemism or code for the 
word "white." The terms "Western civilization" and "Western culture" 
specifically refer to the civilization and culture evolved, detennined, 
directed, developed and controlled by people who classify themselves as 
"white." 
As mentioned in the Color-Confrontation theory, white-skinned 
people, who lack any substantial level of permanent melanin in their skin, 
historically have contrasted themselves with all people in the world who 
have substantial, recognizable and permanent levels of melanin. These 
skin-pigmented persons are referred to by the whites as "non-white" 
people, or when they are subdivided by the whites, they are referred to as 
"bta'ck," "brown," "red" and "yellow" peoples. Non-white peoples col­
lectively constitute the global numerical majority. This skin-pigmented 
global majority is genetically dominant to the genetically recessive 
whites, and genetically they can annihiliate the whites. These facts are 
essential to a thorough understanding of not only alienation but anxiety 
and narcissism as well. One cannot comprehend alienation, anxiety and 
narcissism as major phenomena in Western civilization and culture 
without an understanding of the origin of white-skinned people and their 
evolved thoughts and feelings (conscious and unconscious) about them-
White skin is a form of albinism. There is no difference, microscopi­
cally speaking, between the white skin of a white person and the skin of 
a person designated as an albino. My central thesis here is that white­
skinned peoples came into existence thousands of years ago as the albino 
mutant offsprings of black-skinned mothers and fathers in Africa. A 
sizeable number of these Black parents had produced, rejected and then 
cast out of the community their genetic defective albino offspring, to live 
away from the normal black skin-pigmented population with the aware­
ness of their rejection and alienation (as in leper colonies). 
The white tribe's eventual migration northward, to escape the intensity 
of the equatorial sun of the Southern hemisphere, left the albinos even­
tually situated in the area of the world known as Europe- now recognized 
23


--- PAGE 26 ---
The Isis Papers 
as the home of the white tribes. This early rejection of the albino 
offsprings might be viewed as a prehistoric (pre-Western civilization) 
instance of parental rejection, child neglect and abuse. 
Sexual intercourse between the isolated albino mutants produced a 
white race - understanding race as an isolated population sharing a 
significant number of common identifying genes. This pattern of isolat­
ing individuals with defective genetic patterns is no different than the 
present-day practice of placing genetically abnormal individuals in in­
stitutions, away from the "normal" population group; another current 
practice is the isolation of those who are genetically different into "ghet­
tos," which is an exact parallel to the albino isolation. 
Support for my position is found in an article entitled "Albinism," by 
Carl Witkop, Jr., in the 1975 issue of Natural History Magazine. 
Historically, people with various depigmeming conditions, including 
albinism, have occupied a spectrum of social positions, ranging from 
outcasts to semigods. Montezuma, emperor of the Aztecs at the time 
of Cortez's conquest, maintained a· museum of living human 
biological curiosities; prominent among these people were numerous 
albinos. Peoples with leprosy, which frequently causes a spotty 
depigmentation of the skin and hair, are described in biblicalliteratur~ 
as the lowest outcasts ... Among the San Bias, albinos are 
semi-outcasts; they participate less in daytime tribal activity and are 
not permitted to marry. Biological investigations show that as a group 
they are somewhat smaller and their muscles are not as well developed 
as those of pigmented San Bias.* 
Similarly, in his article entitled "Cuna Moon-Child Albinism," in The 
Journal of Heredity, Clyde Keeler notes (among other fmdings on al­
binism): 
The voice quality of albino males is soft and higher pitched than in 
moreno (normal brown) males. In addition, they appear to be deficient 
in male sex hormone, and while they may be fertile, they have a lower 
phallic posture, due to flaccidity. Albinos usually have flabby muscles 
*The San Blas are an Indian group in Panama, Central America. 
24 
Alienation, Anxiety and Narcissism 
and reduced muscular strength as shown by manometer 
readings .... Psychiatric examination of six albinos showed their work 
to be generally in an intellectual sphere where overcompensation is 
the rule. Religion serves as a major support for many albinos who 
take a fatalistic view of life and blame their failures on their albinism 
which is God's will. As a usual thing sexual experience is much more 
~ted in.the albinos, who until recently, were not allowed to marry. 
Whlle albmo males have the reputation of being weakly sexed, albino 
females are said to be as active sexually as morenos, and they 
frequently have illegitimate children. 
It should be noted that many of the San Bias albinos were indistinguish­
able from Scandinavians or other northern Europeans. 
The 19th century German philosopher, Arthur Schopenhauer, made 
the following statement about white skin, in The Philosophy of Schopen­
haur, Metaphysics of Love of Sexes, which illuminates both Witkop's and 
Keller's fmdings: · 
... ilie white colour of skin is not natural to man, but that by nature he 
has a black or brown skin, like our forefathers the Hindus; that 
consequently a white man has never originally sprung from the womb 
of nature, and that thus there is no such thing as a white race, as much 
as this is talked of, but every white man is a faded or bleached one. 
Additional support is found in the work of Dr. Cheikh Anta Diop, the 
highly respected Senegalese anthropologist and Egyptologist, founder of 
the Radiocarbon Institute of the Fundamental Institute of Black Africa 
(Dakar, Senegal). Dr. Diop, in an interview in the winter 1976 issue of 
Black Books Bulletin, stated, "There is absolutely no doubt the white race 
which appeared for the first time during the upper Paleolithic - around 
20,000 B.C.- was the product of a process depigmentation." Further, 
Dr. Diop infonns us that much later the whites commenced their migratory 
movements towards the southern areas around 1500 B.C. Therefore, it 
should not be surprising that deep within the historic and current mythol­
ogy and symbolism of Western civilization and culture (white supremacy 
system/culture) is evidence to strongly support the above outlined mode 
of origin as that actually traversed by the global albino (white) collective. 
25


--- PAGE 27 ---
The Isis Papers 
Major evidence for this theory of albinism (whiteness) is found in the 
symbolism of the Adam and Eve biblical mythology. Western civilization 
looks to this mythology in the Book of Genesis as the account of its 
beginning. The essential elements of the Adam and Eve story are that 
Adam and Eve were in the Garden of Eden, ate the forbidden fruit (the 
apple), had sexual intercourse, became ashamed of their nakedness and 
were chased from the Garden of Eden. 
My decoding of that fundamental mytllology and symbolism for 
Western civilization is as follows: Adam and Eve are tlle symbolic figures 
oftlle early albino mutants produced by Black parents; tlle Garden of Eden 
is Africa, the place where all knowledgeable antllropologists and paleon­
tologists are informing us tllat human life began (and tllat the first human 
beings were black-skinned); the apple eaten by Adam and Eve is the 
presumed, orally ingested poison, looked upon as the cause of the muta­
tion to albinism; this ingestion was followed by the act of sexual inter­
course, which is also viewed as being responsible for the mutation to 
albinism and, therefore, the original sin; Adam and Eve's shame for their 
nakedness indicates their rejection and shame of their pale white bodies 
-colorless or naked- when compared to the black- and brown-skinned 
normals; their use of fig leaves to cover their genitals (as they are depicted) 
implies the shame and rejection of their genital apparatus, including their 
genes; their expulsion from the Garden of Eden represents the isolation 
of tlle albino mutants away from the skin-pigmented normals and tlleir 
voluntary or involuntary migration out of Africa, northward into Europe. 
Western culture goes funher in the symbolism of its religious 
philosophy to pinpoint the eating of tlle apple by Adam and Eve, followed 
by their act of sexual intercourse, as "the act of original sin." Because of 
this act, Western culture conceives of all its people as being "born in sin" 
and in need of being "born again." Similarly, there are several other 
biblical references to skin-color change through God's punishment and 
leprosy, wherein the skin is described as becoming "white as snow" (2 
Kings 5: 27). Of course, the further implication is tllat the skin originally 
must have been black, meaning melanin pigmented. Otherwise, how 
could it tum white? Numbers 12:10 states, 
26 
Alienation, Anxiety and Narcissism 
And the cloud departed from off the tabernacle; and, behold, Miriam 
became leprous, white as snow: and Aaron looked upon Miriam, and 
behold, she was leprous. And Aaron said unto Moses, Alas, my lord, 
I beseech thee, lay not the sin upon us, wherein we have done foolishly 
and wherein we have sinned. ' 
Contrary to this Western philosophy, there are no accounts of 
skin-pigme~t~ peoples, in their basic religious and/or philosophical 
tex~, conceiVmg of themselves as being born in sin or viewing their 
gemtal apparatus (and therefore their genes) as the basis of sin and evil. 
. Further, ~~stern civilization's religious and secular philosophy pin­
~omts the actlVlty of Adam and Eve in the Garden of Eden as the point of 
the f~ll of m~·". "The fall" is the symbolic expression for the genetic 
m~tation to ~bmism and the negative projections regarding the white­
skmned self m a global population where the norm was black or brown 
skin color. Likewise, today, the modem science of genetics views most 
spontaneous mutations as negative and deleterious in terms of the welfare 
of the ~r~anism in the environment, at least in the human population. 
Additional symbolism in Western civilization and culture lends further 
~uppor~ to this thesis. For example, the dog rather than God proverbially 
IS co~sid~red Western man's best friend. This is contrary to the beliefs 
of skm-pigmented peoples regarding their relationship to God. This 
Western conc.ept of the dog as man's best friend is linked to the mythology 
of the foundmg of Rome. According to this mythology, Rome was 
founded by two orphans, Romulus and Remus, who were suckled by a 
wo~f. ~Both the wolf and the dog are canines.) These two presumably 
~h~t~ I~fants are said to have founded the state that began Western 
CIVlhzation and culture. When this is decoded, Romulus and Remus are 
the.symbolic representatives of the early albinos who were abandoned by 
therr Black mothers in Africa as genetic mutant defectives and in the 
process of their northward migration for survival, were "left to th~ dogs" 
-suckled by wolves. This decoding explains the worship and love of the 
dog (canine) in Western civilization. 
. Western man's affection for the dog is reflected in the fact that in 1978 
m New York City, dogs were permitted to put 250,000 pounds of fecal 
27


--- PAGE 28 ---
The Isis Papers 
matter on the streets each day, defiling the environment for human 
beings. And, is this love and worship of the dog reflected in the mirror­
image of the words "God" and "dog" -even at this "advanced" stage in 
the expression and evolution ofW estern civilization and culture? Further, 
as relationships among people become more alienated, Western peoples 
and those non-white peoples who have been influenced most heavily by 
Western culture are gaining more satisfaction from feeding, clothing, 
loving and kissing canines than in feeding, clothing, loving and kissing 
human beings. 
Western civilization's original symbolized relationship to the canine, 
following the African (Black) mothers' rejection of the albino mutant 
offsprings, undoubtedly has influenced the frequent use of the cursing 
expressions "bitch" and "son-of-a-bitch." These degrading expressions 
are used perjoratively because deep within the unconscious Western 
(white, albino) psyche, their rejected, mutant status is viewed perjora­
tively (in a world where the human norm is to have "hue"). 
Greater insight into the sense of alienation in Western culture is 
provided by the use of the word "mammy" when whites refer to a Black 
female caretaker, while referring to the white female caretaker as "nanny." 
Clearly, "nanny" is something less than "mammy." Also, the words 
"uncle" and "auntie," used by whites towards Blacks, bespeak an uncon­
scious awareness of a deep and ancient familial relationship. The dis­
rupted relationship is the origin of alienation, as supported by the symbolic 
rituals of Western fraternal organizations, such as the Masons and the 
Greek fraternities and sororities. The acting out of the "crossing of the 
burning sands" gives reference to the albino mutants' expulsion from 
Africa, across the burning sands of the Sahara Desert, out of Africa and 
into Europe. This was the original alienation experience of the albino 
whites first spawned in Africa. 
From a more recent literary work than the Bible, the famous 19th 
century novelist Herman Melville, in his profoundly symbolic work about 
the white supremacy system/culture, Moby l!>ick, states: 
What is it that in the Albino man so peculiarly repels and often shocks 
the eye, as that sometimes he is loathed by his own kith and kin! It is 
28 
Alienation, Anxiety and Narcissism 
that whiteness which invests him, a thing expressed by th h bear Th Alb· . e name e s. . e mo IS as well made as other men- has no substantive 
d~fonnuy- and yet th~ mere aspect of all-pervading whiteness makes 
hi~ more strangely hideous than the ugliest abortion: Why should 
this be so? 
. Anoth~r famous American author, Mark Twain, in a collection of 
articl~s ~ntided Mark Twain on the Damned Human Race' compliments 
Melville s assessm~nt in. his essay, "Skin Deep." Twain's analysis sug­
gests the depth of alienatiOn experienced by whiles (albinos). 
... ~e:n-ly all black and brown skins are beautiful, but a beautiful white 
sk~ IS rare. How rare, one may learn by walking down a street in 
PariS, .New York or London on a weekday - particularly an 
unfashionable street - and keeping count of th · f 
I . e satlS actory camp exwns encountered in the course of a mile Wh d k I' · erear camp exlOns are massed, they make the whites look bleached out 
unwholesome, and sometimes frankly ghastly. I could notice this~ 
a boy, d~wn ~outh in the slavery days before the war. The splendid 
black satm skm of the South African Zulus of Durban seemed to me 
to come very close to perfection. I can see those Zulus yet 
handsome and intensely black creatures, rnoderately clothed in loo~~ 
summer stuffs whose snowy whiteness made the black all the bl k 
by contrast. Keeping that group in my mind I can co thac er 1 · · • mpare ose c~mp ex!Ons Wlth the white ones which are streaming past this London 
wmdownow ... 
Twain continues, detailing the negative attributes of white skin: 
The adv:mtage i~ w~th the ~ulu, I think. He starts with a beautiful 
complexiOn and lt wll.llast hun through. And as for the Indian, brown 
-finn, smooth, blem1shless, pleasant and restful to the eye afraid f 
~0 :olor, har~onizing with all colors, and adding grace to fuem alt-
~nk there _IS no sort of chance for the average white complexion 
agamst that nch and perfect tint. 
·. ~inally, major documentation in Western literary symbolism that 
.• explams the origin of the global white collective's alienation - and 
. awareness of this fact - is the stark symbolism of the 
proltourldlv Important work of Edgar Rice Burroughs, the author of the 
29


--- PAGE 29 ---
The Isis Papers 
Tarzan series. The fust of this series, Tarzan of the Apes, was copyrighted 
in 1912 and published in 1914. Before Burroughs died in 1950, he had 
produced 26 Tarzan books. So significant is the Tarzan symbolism for 
Western civilization and culture that Burroughs' company remains a 
multi-million dollar industry worldwide. 
Edgar Rice Burroughs is one of the largest selling authors in the world. 
In 197 5, his company estimated that more than 150 million copies of his 
books had been printed in 50 languages around the world. By 1980, the 
entire Tarzan series was being reissued. Tarzan is the story of a British 
baby, Lord Greystoke, who was abandoned in Africa at the age of nine 
months after his parents died. The great black "apes" then took care of 
him, as a passage from Tarzan of the Apes relates: "The hunger closed the 
gap between them and [Lord Greystoke] nursed at the breast of Kala, the 
great ape." It is a short leap through the symbolism to decode that nine 
months after conception, a white albino mutant was born to African 
(Black) parents and then abandoned. The child, in its anger and aliena­
tion, later returns to the scene of its rejection to dominate the Mricans and 
all other non-white peoples. 
Burroughs stated that the name Tarzan meant "white-skin" in the 
language of the apes. In the 1929 copyrighted Tarzan at the Earth's Core 
(13th in the series), Burrough's explains in more detail: 
The sun beating down upon his naked body, had no such effect upon 
his skin as would the sun of the outer world under like conditions. But 
it did impart to him a new confidence similar to that which he would 
have felt had he been able to retrieve his lost apparel. And in this fact 
he saw what he believed to be the real cause of his first embarrassment 
at his nakedness- it had been the whiteness of his skin that had made 
him se~ so naked by contrast with other creatures, for this whiteness 
had suggested softness and weakness, arousing within him a 
disturbing sensation of inferiority; but now as he took on his heavy 
coat of tan and his feet became hardened and accustomed to the new 
conditions, he walked no longer in constant realization of his 
nakedness. 
Just as Burroughs reveals this deep preoccupation of the white collective 
in Tarzan, we still find the white collective neurotically concerned with 
30 
Alienation, Anxiety and Narcissism 
their white skin nakedness, developing suntanning parlors so as to produce 
a permanent state of brown skin coloration. For example, Newsweek 
printed an article in December, 1979 entitled "90-Second Suntans" in 
which one sunlamp devotee, when reminded of the hazards of suntan~ing 
stated, "If tanning is going to kill me at least I '11 be a good-looking corpse." 
The American Cancer Society estimates that the 1980 figure for new 
cases of skin cancer is 14,001, while an estimated 6,200 persons will die 
from the specific skin cancer melanoma. Despite these warnings, sun­
~ning p~rsists. A cursory glance at any beach or swimming pool today 
Will provide a clear indication of the present number of white-skinned 
persons who are self-alienated even to the point of increasing their 
potential for cancer-caused death. They continue to pursue temporary 
skin pigmentation, even unto death, to become members of the "hue-man" 
family. 
The symbolic profundity of all of the above should leave little doubt 
that whites' awareness of the origin of their alienation is in no sense 
superficial. This awareness goes deep to the genetic core of white 
peoples' status as mutated albinism variants and to the core of their 
c~~cept and image of self as such. The Western brain-computer (in­
dividual and collective) then spawns patterns of its specific alienation in 
its myths, symbols, logic, thought speech, action, emotional response and 
perception in all areas of people activity: economics, education, enter­
tainment, labor, law, politics, religion, sex and war. 
Anxiety. More briefly, the core aspects of anxiety and narcissism in 
Western civilization and culture, which are integrally associated with the 
dynamic of alienation, must be discussed. Dr. Rollo May in his book, The 
Meaning of Anxiety, correctly informs us in the foreword to the 1950 
edition: 
F~r ~e past hundred years, ... psychologists, philosophers, social 
his ton~, and. other. students of humanity have been increasingly 
preoccupied Wlth this nameless and formless uneasiness that has 
dogged the footsteps of modem man. Yet in all that time, to my 
knowledge, only two attempts have been made in book form- one 
essay by Kierhegaard and one by Freud - to present an objective 
31


--- PAGE 30 ---
The isis Papers 
picture of anxiety and to indicate constructive methods of dealing with 
it. 
Twenty-seven years later, in the foreword to the revised edition, Dr. 
May states, 
I believe a bold theory is necessary that will comprehend not only our 
normal and neurotic anxiety but anxiety in literature, art and 
philosophy as well. This theory must be formulated at our highest 
level of abstraction. I propose that this theory be founded on the 
definition that anxiety is the experience of Being affirming itself 
against Nonbeing. The latter is that which would r~uce or destroy 
Being, such as aggression, fatigue, bore~om, an? ul.tJ.mat~ly ~e~. I 
have rewritten this book in the hope that 1ts publication wdl a1d m the 
forming of this theory of anxiety. 
Dr. May continues in his statement of the book's purpose: 
Despite the fact that anxiety has become a central problem to so many 
diverse areas in our culture, the attack on the problem has been 
handicapped by the fact that the various theories and studies of anxiety 
have to date been uncoordinated. In spite of the industrious work by 
skill~d psychologists, this is as true in 1977 as it ~as in 1950. ~ is 
evident to anyone reading the papers from vanous sympos1a on 
anxiety, we do not even use the same language. Freud'~ description 
of the state of the problem in the opening paragraph of his chapter on 
anxiety published in 1935 is still largely accurat~: 'Yo~ ~ill not_be 
surprised to hear that I have a great deal of new mformatJ.on to g1ve 
you about our hypotheses on the subject ofanxiety .... and also that none 
of the information claims to provide a fmal solution to these doubtful 
problems.' What is necessary at the present stage of the understandin~ 
of anxiety is, the introduction of the right abstract ideas, and of theu 
application to the raw material of observation so as to bring order and 
lucidity into it. 
It is clear that the distinguished Dr. May, in regarding neurotic anxiety, 
took into account Freud's discussion of neurotic anxiety as most fun­
damentally related to the birth trauma and to the fear of castration. Dr. 
May later broadened the concept, writing: "It is very suggestive too that 
the first anxiety state arose on the occasion of the separation from the 
32 
Alienation, Anxiety and Narcissism 
mother." Dr. May continues, referring to the danger of castration as" ... a 
reaction to a loss, to a separation, of which the prototype is the birth 
experience." He also includes the analyses of other noted psychologists 
concerning anxiety: Otto Rank's view of anxiety as steming from the 
central problem of individuation- and then the fear oflife and the fear of 
death; Alfred Adler's view of anxiety as related to feelings of inferiority; 
I ung' s belief that anxiety is the individual's reaction to the invasion of his 
conscious mind by irrational forces and images from the collective 
unconscious; Karen Homey's view of anxiety as a reaction to a threat to 
something belonging to the core of the personality coupled with a hostility 
response; and, finally, Harry Stack Sullivan's view of anxiety as ap­
prehension of interpersonal disapproval. However, Dr. May recognized 
that these theories, including his own ("Being affuming itself against 
Nonbeing"), remain insufficient. 
I also view these approaches as insufficient and conclude, as argued in 
my ~lier discussion of alienation, that anxiety in the Western civilization 
and culture, stems from the origin of that culture - which rests most 
fundamentally in the production of albino mutants from Black parents in 
Africa. Anxiety, like alienation in Western culture, is the result of the 
rejection of these albinos because of their genetic deficiency status and 
their subsequent abandonment and migration northward to form what is 
now recognized as the white race. This global white collective maintains 
a different appearance from the rest of humankind, and they dislike this 
difference. Therefore, they tan and use makeup. They remain a minority 
of the world's people, surrounded globally by a black, brown, red and 
yellow global majority. The white global collective remains genetically 
recessive to the black, brown, red and yellow global majority and lives 
each day and each minute of every hour in the continuous fear of white 
annihilation by the global majority of genetic dominants. This fundamen­
tal fear of albino isolation, abandonment and genetic annihilation, is at the 
core of Western civilization- a civilization structured to ensure white 
genetic survival. This survival plan necessitates the subjugation and 
control of all non-white peoples. I define this subjugation and control as 
the white supremacy system. 
33


--- PAGE 31 ---
The Isis Papers 
Because the conscious overt dialogue in the whole of Western civiliza­
tion and culture is never about its global white minority status, its 
recessive (therefore vulnerable) genetic status, or its initial rejection by 
the Black parents and the Black majority, these feelings about self and 
fears of inadequacy and vulnerability reside underground in the brain­
computer. These subconscious and unconscious thoughts become the 
basis for the pervasive neurotic anxiety that characterizes Western culture. 
Such is the specific nature and cause of this "nameless and formless 
tmeasiness that has dogged the footsteps of modem man." Modern man 
means Western man, means white man, means the global white collective. 
This is the reason that valium (diazepam) is the most prescribed drug 
in the U.S., the key unit of Western civilization and culture. It is this same 
anxiety that causes Western civilization's preoccupation with weapons, 
spending more money on armaments than on any other single budgetary 
item. These weapons surround all of the world's non-white peoples. The 
whites hope that the weapons will prevent white genetic annihilation and 
thereby ensure white genetic survival, but then whites hold the pervasive 
attendant fear that they will be destroyed in the conflagration also. 
This fundamental anxiety relative to global white genetic annihilation 
pervades all patterns of symbols, logic, thought, speech, action, emotional 
response and perception in all areas of people activity within Western 
culture and civilization. Also, it pervades all aspects of family life, for 
whites and all non-white victims of white supremacy. All of the aforemen­
tioned theories of anxiety -::::: by Freud, Jung, Rank, Adler, Homey, 
Sullivan and May- are encompassed in the above stated Cress-Welsing 
thesis on anxiety in Western civilization and culture. 
Narcissism. Just as alienation and anxiety have become key foci of 
attention for Western behavioral and social scientists and other scholars, 
narcissism has become the most recent abstraction for intense intellectual 
involvement. 
A January 30, 1978 Newsweek article entitled "The New Narcissism" 
outlines several qualities of narcissism: 
Long before social critic Tom Woefe labeled the '70s 'The Me 
Decade', scholars were exploring narcissism as a new- perhaps even 
34 
Alienation, Anxiety and Narcissism 
dominant - psychological pattern of both individual and social 
behavior. According to this theory, the New Narcissus suffers and 
emotionally dies because -like his mythological proto type_ he cannot 
return anyone's affection. His fatal flaw, however, is not really self 
love but a grandiose expectation of himself that cannot be sustained 
and makes him vulnerable to chronic bouts of boredom and inner 
emptiness. In the eyes of the New Narcissus, the outside world is 
essentially a .mirror that reflects his own alternating feelings of 
personal ommpotence and disintegration. 
!o ~·. E~est Wolf of the Chicago Institute of Psychoanalysis, the 
1dent1fiCat10n of the new narcissism signals 'a major revolution in 
psych~analysis', in which self-esteem is seen as just as important as 
sexuahty. For social historian Christopher Lasch, narcissism is the 
key to understanding why 'self preservation and psychic survival' 
pervade the moral climate of contemporary society ... At a recent 
co~~rence on 'Narcissism in Modern Society' at the University of 
M1ch1gan, several psychiatrists argued that there are still no solid 
clinical data proving that narcissism has increased in relation to 
traditional neuroses. Others, such as psychologist Kenneth Keniston, 
wonder whether a clinical term like narcissism can properly explain 
patterns of social behavior ... Nonetheless, through a series of books, 
~ssays and symposiums, the new narcissism has emerged as a central 
~tell~tual concern. A post-Freudian school of psychoanalysis, based 
m Ch1cago, has proclaimed pathological narcissism the besetting 
psrchological disorder of modem Western culture and has developed 
a psychology of the self' to explain its causes. And some social 
scien~ists have adopted clinical descriptions of narci~sism to help 
ex?laJ.n the declining interest in politics, social action and 
child-rearing, and the corresponding rise of an individual survival 
ethic. 
'Pa~ologic~lnarcissists simply cannot depend upon others, which for 
me lS a cruc1al characteristic,' says New York psychoanalyst Otto F. 
Kernberg, author of an influential study, 'Borderline Conditions and 
Pathological Narcissism.' Much as they crave admiration, says Dr. 
Kernberg, narcissists systematically exploit and devalue others. 
Freq~ently charming and charismatic, they tend to enjoy only fleeting 
emo~o~al contacts, .rather than genuine, long-term intimacy. 
Narc~s1sts are often h1ghly successful in business, bureaucracies, or 
othenmpersonal organizations; typically, such situations reward those 
who can manipulate others, while discouraging personal attachments 
and providing enough emotional feedback to satisfy self-esteem. 
35


--- PAGE 32 ---
The Isis Papers 
The third Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders 
(1980), published by the American Psychiatric Association, contains a 
description of the narcissistic personality disorder, with the following 
stated criteria: 
A. Grandiose sense of self importance or uniqueness 
B. Preoccupation with fantasies of unlimited success, 
power, brilliance, beauty, or ideal love 
C. Exhibitionistic: Requires constant attention and 
admiration 
D. Responds to criticism, indifference of others, or 
defeat with either cool indifference or with marked 
feelings of rage, inferiority, shame, humiliation, 
or emptiness 
E. Two of the following: 
1. Lack of empathy: Inability to recognize how others 
feel 
2. Entitlement: Expectation of special favors with 
reactions or surprise and anger when others don't 
comply 
3. Interpersonal exploitiveness: Takes advantage of 
others to indulge his own desires or for 
self-aggrandizement, with disregard for the 
personal integrity and rights of others 
4. Relationships characteristically vacillate between 
the extremes of over-idealization and devaluation. 
Any non-white person who has had extensive experience with whites, 
collectively or as individuals, will find in the above a description of those 
relationships. At a superficial level, it seems ironic that those responsible 
for including this disorder in the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual have 
failed to recognize this as a statement that characterizes the global 
36 
Alienation, Anxiety and Narcissism 
relationship of whites to non-whites, a description of the white supremacy 
dynamic (racism). 
For further understanding of this perceptual failure, let us return to the 
Greek myth of Narcissus. According to Greek mythology, Narcissus was 
the son of the river god, Cephissus, and the nymph, Leiriope; he was 
distinguished for his beauty. His mother was told that he would have a 
long life, provided he never looked upon his own features. However, his 
rejection of the love of the nymph Echo or of his lover Anemias drew 
upon him the vengeance of the gods. He fell in love with his own 
reflection in the waters of a spring and pined away (or killed himself). 
This ancient mythological symbolism displays the difficulty the white 
collective has in looking in the mirror to see itself for what it truly is in 
relationship to the vast majority of the world's people. Indeed, if it faces 
itself, with its puffed up attitude of white superiority, it will disintegrate. 
Narcissism, as described but not deeply understood by Freud, is 
germain to this thesis. Freud viewed narcissism as a character disorder in 
. which there was fixation of libidinal energy upon the self. Because of a 
lack of love or response on the part of the parents, the libidinal energy 
never can be discharged upon another person with satisfacton. Distrust 
of the other person in relationships persists into adult life, so that the 
narcissistic character prefers autoeroticism (i.e., masturbation) to normal 
sexual intercourse. 
Freud and others have failed to understand that the failure of parental 
love is rooted in the original rejection by the Black mothers and Black 
fathers in Africa of their albino (white) mutant offspring, who were forced 
to try to love themselves if they were to survive; but they could not arrive 
at a point of true self-acceptance because there was never parental and 
group acceptance or validation at the time that the whites mutated from 
the Blacks. Because whites failed to be accepted by the original Black 
parents, they evolved the subsequent compensatory pattern of white 
supremacy. Yet, beneath the stance of white supremacy and white gran­
diosity, the insecurity of inadequacy, inferiority and vulnerability remains 
to be displayed alternately. Long, long ago, the Greeks were cautioned 
by the Oracle of Delphi - whom the Greeks portrayed in the eponymous 
37


--- PAGE 33 ---
The Isis Papers 
hero Delphas, as a Negro- to "Know Thy Self." Clearly, to date, the 
Western collective has failed in this task. 
38 
3 
Unified Field Theory Psychiatry 
(1980) 
Yet do I marvel at this curious thing, to make a poet Black and bid him 
sing. 
- Countee Cullen 
Is it conceivable that a Black who is also a woman can critique and 
dismantle the whole of Western psychiatry? 
I will begin this essay somewhat differently than it was originally 
conceived several years ago. This alteration is occasioned by having read 
the iuticle, "Retreat Behind New Walls Seen Posing Danger for 
Psychiatry," which appeared in the June 1980 issue of Clinical Psychiatry 
News. It is a report from San Francisco on the address given by Dr. Alan 
M. Stone, as outgoing president at the annual meeting of the American 
Psychiatric Association. Dr. Stone stated: 
The new walls are being built as psychiatrists attempt to deal with the 
issues of racism. homosexuality, and the situation of women .... These 
are all issues which have confronted us in our practice, challenged the 
moral assumptions that lie concealed in our theories, and confounded 
us with disputes and acrimony in our association. It is no accident that 
each (issue) invites psychiatry to take a stand on human values. 
Human values, l!fter all, are a crucial link in the chain that binds the 
self to society. To take a stand on them reveals something about our 
own selves, our own relations to society, and our own vision of what 
it means to love and to work. Many psychiatrists believe that the AP A 
should limit itself to issues that are clearly psychiatric, but many others 
believe that these social issues are clearly psychiatric. I shall claim 
that what separates these two groups can only be understood as part 
of the deep theoretical dilemma in which American psychiatry finds 
39


--- PAGE 34 ---
The Isis Papers 
itself: its lack of conceptual clarity. This theoretical ambiguity is the 
core of the conflict that confronts psychiany. As pragmatic eclectics, 
uncertain that we have put the pieces of the picture together correctly, 
we can never be confident that we can distinguish between the sick 
patient and the sick society. Psychiatry's contribution to what it means 
to be a person is its most powerful aspect. That contribution cannot 
be under psychiany's control in a free society. However, the 
profession has a responsibility for the hidden values in its theories and 
therapies, which contribute to the shaping of 'contemporary 
consciousness.' It is in the issues surrounding the subject of women 
that perhaps the most convincing attack on the hidden values in 
psychiany has been made. 
Dr. Stone continued this discussion, asking if these issues cut deeper 
into American psychiatry than racism and homosexuality: 
As far as I can see, the case against psychiatry as it regards women is 
far more damaging, requires far more than a minor adjustment of our 
composite sketch; indeed, it compels each of us to reexamine not only 
our theories, but also our lives and relationships. There can be no new 
psychology of women that does not require a new psychology of men. 
That makes necessary a new conception of all our human values and 
all the paradigms of psychiatry. Psychiatry does not stand outside of 
history or morality, but how do psychiatrists decide which history and 
which morality to accept? The rules about which history and which 
morality to accept are not clearly described in the biologic, 
psychodynamic, and behavioral paradigms. What is required of us is 
moral ambition. Until our composite sketch becomes a true portrait 
of humanity, we must live with our uncertainty. We will grope; we 
will struggle; and our compassion may be our only guide and comfort. 
Originally, my essay began with the statement, "It is clear to many that 
grave problems are confronting the field of psychiatry at theoretical and 
conceptual levels. This crisis has important implications for treatment as 
well as problems encountered in formulating diagnostic categories as 
evidenced in the controversies surrounding the task of developing Diag· 
nostic and Statistical Manual III." But who better should state the 
problems facing psychiatry in America than an outgoing president of the 
American Psychiatric Association? Indeed, who would be more readily 
believed than he? 
40 
Unified Field Theory Psychiatry 
While not accepting all that was said by Dr. Stone (most specifically 
his view of sexism as a more problematic issue than racism), I do share 
his awareness of a floundering chaos in psychiatry's current theoretical 
and conceptual state. It was this very awareness that, led me to the 
consideration of a unified field theory in psychiatry. 
The concept of a unified field theory is derived from the work of the 
great physicist Alben Einstein (March 14, 1879 - April 18, 1955). 
Einstein, a mathematical physicist, the most recognized and highly 
renowned scientist in the history of Western civilization, spent the greater 
portion of his productive years in search of a unified field theory, a theory 
that, in mathematical terms (by a single set of equations), would combine 
all of the different manifestations of energy phenomena in the universe. 
Einstein studied the force of gravity and produced the General Theory 
of Relativity. He studied the forces of electromagnetism and produced 
the Special Theory ofRelati vity, which became a more accurate yardstick 
for measuring the characteristics of the physical world. Then, Einstein 
questioned the possibility of generalizing the mathematical foundations 
of the theory to derive not only the properties of the gravitational field, 
but also those of the electromagnetic field. 
His work is reviewed in Ronald Clarke's 1971 Einstein: The Life and 
Times. In Einstein's own words: 
For years, it has been my greatest ambition to resolve the duality of 
natural laws into unity. This duality lies in the fact that physicists have 
hitherto been compelled to postulate two sets of laws- those which 
control gravitation and those which control the phenomena of 
electricity and magnetism ... Many physicists have suspected that two 
sets of laws must be based upon one genenl law. but neither 
experiment nor theory has until now, succeeded in formulating this 
law .... The relativity theory reduced to one formula all laws which 
govern space, time and gravitation, and thus it corresponded to the 
demand for simplification of our physical concepts. The purpose of 
my work is to further this simplification, and particularly to reduce to 
one formula the explanation of the field of grllvity and the field of 
electromagnetism. For this reason I call it a contribution to 'a unified 
field theory' ... Now, but only now, we know that the force which 
moves electrons in their ellipse about the nuclei of atoms is the same 
force which moves our earth in its annual course about the sun, and is 
41


--- PAGE 35 ---
The I sis Papers 
the same force which brings us the rays of light and heat which make 
life possible on this planet. 
Not only did Einstein die before achieving this goal, but prior to his 
death his conceptualization of a unified field theory was being dismissed 
by younger physicists as the ideas of an old man whose scientific useful­
ness had passed long ago. Quantum physics and the physics of chance 
and statistical probabilities (the physics of Born and Heisenberg) were 
supplanting the Einsteinian physics of the whole. This was the new 
physics of indeterminacy. This new physics could be characterized by Sir 
George Thompson's following statements, which appear in Einstein: The 
Life and Times: 
Wherever a system is really complicated, as in the brain or in an 
organized conununity, indeterminacy comes in, not necessarily 
because of 'h' (Planck's constant) but because to make a prediction, 
so many things must be known that the stray consequences of studying 
ttem will disturb the status quo, which can never therefore be 
discovered. History is not and cannot be determinant. The supposed 
causes only may produce the consequences we expect. 
I am almost certain that most workers in the field of psychiatry are not 
consciously aware that they too have assured a position in the respective 
scientific camps of either Albert Einstein or that of Born and Heisenberg. 
The camp of indeterminacy holds, as articulated by Sir George Thompson, 
that (in a system as complicated as the brain or in an organized com­
munity) one cannot uncover a unitary law or a unitary cause of the many 
complex forms of behavior, knowledge of which would enable prediction 
of expected consequences. On the contrary, the camp of detenninacy 
concludes that in any fmite energy system - no matter how seemingly 
complex at the surface level - a unitary law can be discerned simply 
because there is specific order in the universe and thus there is order in 
any given energy system. A unitary law would reveal the nature of that 
specific order. I reside in the Albert Einstein camp - the camp of 
determinacy. 
Einstein's effort towards uncovering the unified field has great mean-
ing to me as a psychiatrist/behavioral scientist because it is my developing 
42 
Unified Field Theory Psychiatry 
conviction that the present confusion is largely a result of our failure to 
see the interconnections that exist between many seemingly isolated, 
disconnected behavior-energy phenomena in Western culture. Actually 
there are very few, if any, workers in behavioral science who perceive the 
necessity to search out, on the one hand, these interconnections and, on 
the other hand, to unveil the total unified fonn that is structured by these 
interconnections and their fundamental cause (etiology). This may be 
said in the reverse order: because there is the failure on the part of most 
investigators to perceive the total outline of the Western cultural dynamic, 
it is difficult, if not impossible, for them to make sense of the isolated 
behavioral patterns within the total behavioral system framework. Be­
havioral scientists, thus frustrated, have tried to fmd the answers in 
statistics, neurochemical molecules and genes. It was this same limitation 
and dependence on the statistical method of analyzing energy phenomena 
that depressed Einstein in the work of his colleagues in physics. He 
lamented that they just could not see the larger picture. They lacked his 
intuitive faculty to see at a deeper and more encompassing level. 
This may best be understood if we look at the scattered pieces of a 
1 ,000-piece jigsaw puzle for which the outlining border has not yet been 
set in place. Generally speaking, one cannot make heads or tails of the 
scattered, tiny pieces. Once the outline or context has been established, 
the order in which the small pieces are to be placed immediately becomes 
clear. I use this particular introduction for this brief essay because a total 
behavior-energy system also can be seen and understood as a unified field 
of energy phenomena. Once that unified field of behavior-energy is 
perceived and described, setting forth its etiology and dynamic, the once 
seemingly isolated, little understood, often unexamined, individual 
phenomena of behavior-energy within the field, are seen in brilliant 
·coherence, whereas before, they were neither visualized nor understood 
. adequately. A parallel process can be seen in the recent discoveries in 
of strange celestial objects such as quasars, pulsars and black 
the discovery of which can be seen as dependent upon Einstein's 
of a unified field- the framework of his relativity concept. 
43


--- PAGE 36 ---
The Isis Papers 
The global white supremacy system (racism) is a highly specific system 
of behavior-energy. The force and energy of this system, through its 
ultimate goal objective and its patterns of logic, thought, speech, action, 
emotional response, perception and symbols, in all areas of people activity 
(economics, education, entertainment, labor, law, politics, religion, sex 
and war), determines the dominant patterns of behavior in the world today. 
The global system of white supremacy is euphemistically referred to as 
"Western civilization." 
In Chapter 1, I explained that the global behavior patterns of racism 
are a survival necessity for the white collective. This racist activity is a 
compensatory attempt to prevent white genetic annihilation on a planet 
where the vast majority of peoples are genetically dominant to the 
melanin-deficient whites. The awareness of self (in the white global 
collective) as a white, genetic mutant population that was rejected by their 
Black parents in Africa (see Chapter 2), and the subsequent conscious 
and/or unconscious determination to survive as a global minority became 
the underlying law that determined the evolution of the now global white 
supremacy system/culture. 
All major and minor behavior-energy crystallizations or behavior-units 
in the global white collective- no matter how simple or complex, old or 
new, short-or long-lived- must conform, in the final analysis, to the basic 
behavior-energy equation of white over non-white (or white power over 
non-white powerlessness). This is the necessary power or energy equa­
tion for white genetic survival. This behavior-energy equation is ex­
pressed in energy manifestations of patterns of logic, thought, speech, 
action, emotional response and perception in all areas of people activity. 
From this basic law, it becomes possible to predict the ultimate output 
of individual and collective white brain-computers at the local and global 
levels. In energy terms, this means that it is possible to predict the 
fundamental patterns ("the bottom line") of all energy that flows from the 
white collective in its dynamic interactions with the non-white collective. 
That sum total of behavior-energy expression is always the energy crys­
tallization of white supremacy (white genetic survival) - irrespective of 
the gross or subtle myriad behavior forms it assumes. Also, this energy 
44 
Unified Field Theory Psychiatry 
formation can be understood as a finite unified energy field or force field, 
albeit that the force is behavior-energy. 
This new theory of psychialry is what I refer to as Unified Field Theory 
Psychiatry. It is a psychialry that perceives a definable whole, global 
system of behavior-energy, wherein the behavior events lend themselves 
to prediction because the ultimate objective of the system remains con­
stant. The basic considerations that Einstein proposed for physical energy 
in his concept of a unified field theory can be applied readily to behavior­
energy in the concept of Unified Field Theory Psychiatry. Thus, the role 
of all major and minor patterns of behavior within the field can be 
understood and even predicted. 
Now, the underlying interrelationships between seemingly uncon­
nected patterns of behavior are visible. It is as though the end of a knotted 
ball or skein yam has been discovered that, with patience, permits com­
plete unraveling without breaks in the yam. Heretofore, no Western 
behavioral scientist had recognized the single connecting thread of logic 
permeating seemingly unrelated phenomena such as lynchings, smoking 
objects, bullfights, chocolate candy with nuts, coffee, guns, umbrellas, 
automobiles, skiing, race, races and racing (horse, foot and car), the Adam 
and Eve mythology, Moby Dick, Dracula, Frankenstein, the play "Equus" 
by Peter Schafer, paper money, gold, Christian religious symbolism, the 
Nazi Swastika, anti-Semitism, sexual perversions, apartheid, child abuse, 
capitalism, nudism, the Holocaust, alienation, sexism, homosexuality, 
pornography, narcissism, gambling, rape, flags, men's ties, etc. All of the 
above are but a few of the major behavior-energy entities, myths and 
symbols included in the white supremacy system/culture that are related 
to the single underlying law governing the origin and continued existence 
of Western civilization. 
Western social and behavioral science, particularly psychiatry, has 
been content with behavior fragment analyses and multiple theoretical 
explanations for different behaviors. This demonstrates a failure to com­
prehend the entire forest, while focusing on isolated trees or clumps of 
trees. Failure to comprehend the whole behavior-energy force field has 
resulted in isolated behavior modification techniques and programs, the 
45


--- PAGE 37 ---
The Isis Papers 
inability to grasp the manner in which the total Social structure determines 
the behavior of the individual personality, and the tendency to focus on 
isolated neurochemical sequences and mechanisms as causing certain 
behavior pattem constellations. This limited pattern of perception and the 
apparently necessary pattern of endless abstracting, with an inability to 
synthesize the whole, may be predicated upon a pattern of data reception 
in the nervous system of persons who possess insufficient levels of 
melanin in their nervous systems. The lack of melanin results from the 
genetic deficiency state of albinism or its variants, which in turn influen­
ces basic patterns of perception of energy messages from the physical/ 
social environment. (I will examine this possibility in a future work.) 
Understanding this, it is clear that current Western psychiatry's inability 
to identify the interrelationships existing between racism, homosexuality 
and sexism (articulated by Dr. Alan Stone) is due to an inadequate 
conceptual and theoretical base. 
As stated previously, racism is the evolved behavior-energy system 
predicated upon the need for white genetic survival. Both homosexuality 
and sexism are derivatives of that fundamental dynamic. The forces in 
the white supremacy system that lead to a massive increase of passivity, 
effeminization, bisexuality and homosexuality in the Black male popula­
tion as necessities for white genetic survival are discussed in Chapter 6. 
However, to specifically focus on white male homosexuality in the white 
supremacy system/culture, we must return to the male albino mutant's 
awareness of himself in contrast to the prototypic human male- the Black 
male, the father of the early albirlo mutants. Indeed, this fact is the true 
basis for the Oedipus mythology. 
Historically, white males worldwide have suffered the deep sense of 
male inferiority and inadequacy because they represent a mutant, geneti­
cally recessive, minority population that can be genetically annihilated by 
all non-white people- males and females. Ultimately, this awareness in 
the whi!C collective has produced high levels of masculine self-doubt, 
fear, anxiety and self-aliention. These difficulties have been intensified 
by the awareness that white reproductivity is far lower than the natural 
reproductivity of any non-white population. 
46 
Unified Field Theory Psychiatry 
Thus, the white male collective feels vulnerable to the global non-white 
male collective but most specifically to the Black male collective because 
of Blacks' ability to produce the highest levels of melanin and thereby the 
~eatest pot~ntial for white genetic annihilation. This basic logic of disgust 
wtth the whtte genetic and genital self drives the brain-computer in the 
white male collective to self-negating patterns of behavior. Also, it is the 
basis for the continuing question in the white collective, "Who has the 
largest penis- the Black or the white male?" 
At another level, white male homosexuality may be viewed as the 
symbolic attempt to incorporate into the white male body more male 
substance by either sucking the penis of another male and orally ingesting 
the semen, or by having male ejaculate deposited in the other end of the 
alimentary canal. Through anal intercourse, the self-debasing white male 
may fantasize that he can produce a product of color, albeit that the 
product of color is fecal matter. This fantasy is significant for white males 
because the males who are able to produce skin color are viewed as the 
real men. 
This same sense of maleness-deficiency in the white supremacy culture 
causes the behavior patterns of smoking either small white phallic sym­
bols called cigarettes, large dark brown or black phallic symbols known 
as cigars, pipes and the long brown cigarettes called Mores. (Or does it 
~ean Moors?) These are sucked, swallowed, puffed and otherwise bodily 
mgested, ultimately leading to self-negation through potential cancer­
caused deaths. Also, it should be noted that for the white male collective, 
the greatest sense of male power comes from smoking the large, dark 
brown, ?hallie smoking objects- cigars and pipes. Thus, cigars are given 
at the brrth of a son! (See Chapter 11.) Similarly, this sense M maleness­
deficiency elevates the gun to such important status in the white 
supremacy culture. (See Chapter 8.) 
Wh~te male homosexuality is reinforced in ~he white family, wherein 
the whtte male's sense of genetic inadequacy causes him to project his 
sense of genetic inferiority onto the white female. She is forced to accept 
the concept of her own genetic inferiority compared to white males. In 
angry reaction to the white male attack, she causes her white sons to negate 
47


--- PAGE 38 ---
The Isis Papers 
their masculinity and to become more like herself as a female. Also, the 
white male must oppress the white female because the latter proclaims 
that her ideal sex partner is, "tall, dark and handsome." Should the white 
female be permitted to have her freedom and to sexually aggress against 
the dark man (the non-white male), white genetic annihilation will occur. 
The two above factors - 1) white males projecting their sense of genelic 
inferiority onto white females, and 2) white males' fear that white females 
(in their preference for Black and other non-white males) will become 
participants in white genetic annihilation -have resulted in what Western 
culture now refers to as "sexism"- the repression of white females by 
white males in the white supremacy system/culture. 
Presently, white females are responding collectively to white males' 
imposed sense of genetic inferiority through their struggle for "equality" 
with white males. Large numbers of white females are proclaiming 
themselves lesbians, believing that this is a constructive response to their 
sense of inadequacy. They, of course, fail to realize that these behaviors 
arise from the fact that they have been taught to degrade their genetic 
makeup as white females in the subtle dynamics of white family life. 
Thus, they move into behaviors of non-self-reproduction and self-nega­
tion. 
Also, in white females' drive to be "equal" to white males, they have 
increased greatly the practice of sucking on the white phallic symbols­
cigarettes - causing a sharp increase in their incidence of self-negation 
through lung cancer. White females fail to understand that while they 
strive to become "the same as" white males, they become more alienated 
from their genetic selves. Thus, they fall victim to the dynamic of genetic 
alienation (the central core of racism) as they participate in the finite, 
unified energy field of white genetic survival. 
Whether one examines the microcosm of the individual white 
sonality or the macrocosm of the global white collective, the law of white 
genetic survival stands. That law can be stated in the following equation: 
white :pOwer over non-white powerlessness, or !,. Nonetheless, the 
implication of the law for whites is a failure of individual and collective 
white self-respect, based upon the negative image and concept of the 
48 
Unified Field Theory Psychiatry 
In the white collective, there is self-esteem, which is a compensatory 
inflated sense of the self, but there is not fundamental respect for the 
genetic white self. The implications for psychiatry are as follows: on the 
basis of a negative image and concept of the self, the brain-computer 
evolves patterns of neurochemistry, logic, thought, speech, action, emo­
tional response and perception that are self- and group-negating and 
productive of disharmony in the universe. These are patterns of 
neurochemistry and behavior consistent with various degrees of mental 
illness. On the basis of a positive self-image and self-concept, the brain­
computer evolves patterns of neurochemistry, logic, thought, speech, 
action, emotional response and perception that are self- and group-sup­
porting and productive of harmony in the universe. These are patterns of 
neurochemistry and behavior consistent with mental health. 
The following diagram shows the environmental factors that act upon 
the genetic and constitutional base to forin the self-image and self-con­
cept Factors that support the self lead to positive self-images and self­
concepts, whereas factors that deny the self lead to negative self-images 
and self-concepts. 
/, 
49


--- PAGE 39 ---
Unified Field Theory Psychiatry 
The task of psychiatry is to help the individual and the collective 
achieve genuine genetic self-respect and thereby respect for others and 
for all aspects of the universe. Psychiatry's further task is to demonstrate 
that the white supremacy system (Western civilization) is unable to 
produce an environment in which mental health can evolve and flourish. 
Therefore, that power system needs to be abandoned for a more productive 
one. 
This Unified Field Theory Psychiatry concept of mental health and 
mental illness challenges the dictum of Sigmund Freud - that mental 
health is the ability to work and to love, The global white supremacy 
system/culture constitutes a finite, unified behavior-energy field. The 
single, unitary law of white genetic survival governs its origin and its 
continuance. Homosexuality and sexism are necessary derivatives of this 
energy field and, just like all other significant behaviors in the global and 
local white collective, can be understood as derivatives of this finite, 
unified behavior-energy field. It is knowledge of the unitary, causative 
law that governs this field and enables the prediction of future behavior­
energy patterns within it. 
The above discussion then serves as background to the essays which 
follow. All dominant behaviors in the white supremacy system/culture 
are derivatives of this central concern and its secondary and tertiary 
elaborations and compensations, which also are concerned with white 
genetic survival. Together, these behavior patterns produce the white 
supremacy unified behavior field. Albert Einstein realized that we needed 
a law to guide us in and around the phenomena in the organized energy 
.system of the physical universe, so that our movements and interactions 
in that universe could be facilitated. Similarly, we need a law to guide us 
in the evolved energy system of white supremacy behavior organization, 
in order to facilitate our movement in that system, with the ultimate goal 
being truth, justice, harmony and peace. Contrary to the fears of Dr. Alan 
Stone, new walls are being built in psychiatry. The old walls of artificial 
abstractions are being tom down, and in their place stands a new edifice, 
a unified field, which can be used to diagnose, treat and cure. 
51


--- PAGE 40 ---
4 
Learning to Look at Symbols 
(February 1979) 
A culture can be likened to a quilt of intricate geometrical design in 
which all of the many colored pieces, their shapes and stitching flow into 
one another, constitute the whole. This analogy is apt for yet a second 
reason. Often, the design on the uppec side of the quilt is different from 
the undersurface pattern. Still, the undersurface design is essential for the 
outward surface appearance. 
I have given myself the task of decoding the culture in which I find 
myself in time and space. That culture is the dominating global power 
system/culture of white supremacy (racism). This decoding amounts to 
turning over, examining and laying bare the _intricate pattern pieces 
undeflying the culture and power system - showing in sharp relief its lines 
of force and determination and thus its overall design. Only by so doing · 
is it possible to see where we are going in the existing dense white fog. 
Counter-racist psychiatry defmes mental health as patterns of logic, 
thought, speech, action, emotional response and perception consciously 
practiced by the victims of white supremacy (racism)- with the objective 
· of eradicating racism at the global level. Functionally speaking, for the 
of white supremacy, this means to act in a self/group-respecting 
supporting manner in all areas of people activity, despite the specific 
conditions of racist domination and oppression. Submission to and 
·C<J<>pe~:aticm with victimization and oppression are signs of individual or 
mental illness or self-negation. 
Once the victims of oppression accurately and completely decode the 
and its objective of oppression and once they fully analyze the 
53


--- PAGE 41 ---
The Isis Papers 
symbols and patterns oflogic, thought, speech, action, emotional response 
and perception (consciously or unconsciously determined) that constitute 
the system, the oppressed will be able to reorganize their own behavior 
effectively. This reorganization will result in self/group-respect and 
support, and thereby end their oppression. 
The process of decoding a power system and its culture is a necessary 
first step to achieve behavioral mastery over that system/culture. The 
attainment of such mastery is an essential step in the process of total 
liberation for the victims who wish to end that oppression and regain their 
self-respect and mental health. Without this process of decoding, the 
C oppressed fail to fully understand what they are dealing with; they have 
minimal levels of consciousness and self/group-respect, and they are, 
functionally speaking, mentally ill. 
This decoding activity entails the unraveling and analysis of all the 
various products of individual and collective brain-activity within the 
given culture. These brain products appear and are reflected in all areas 
of people activity: economics, education, entertainment (including games 
and sports), labor, law, politics, religion, sex and war. This means 
analyses of products of conscious as well as unconscious brain activity­
patterns oflogic, thought, speech, action, emotional response, perception, 
dreams, symbols and intuition - will be required. Of special importance 
are the brain products that issue forth from those who are white and who 
presently control the power balance in the global power system of white 
supremacy, and who thus produce the dominant themes and trends within 
the system and cultural framework. 
Symbols are highly abstracteQ, condensed and coded messa~es that are 
developed by the activity of the brain-computer in the human organism. 
These messages are developed and evolved from energy (sensory) data 
receiyed in the brain from the external environment. Various lines of 
energy data form the total environmental coverage on the brain-computer 
via the nervous system, which can then, under the proper circumstances, 
lead to the development of a symbol. Thus, symbols reflect certairi 
aspects of the external environment and the total body's internal environ­
mental response to the external environment. 
54 
Learning To Look At Symbols 
Musical notes on paper, as well as written and spoken words, are 
symbols. There are other kinds of symbols that are not as immediately 
translated or fully understood because of their highly abstract forms and 
complexity. The impact of these complex symbols reach subconscious 
and unconscious levels of brain activity. These complex symbols are, in 
effect, full sentences, paragraphs or entire books of data stated in a highly 
abstracted single image or line configuration. 
Once the symbol is formed, it is capable of acting upon the brain-com­
puter, which receives it as an energy or data message. This message 
effects the end-product of behavior as carried forth in any area of human 
activity. The symbol, in turn, acts upon the external environment. These 
"single-picture-sentences" or "single-picture-paragraphs" commence in 
the brain-computer and act as powerful undetected persuaders, and thus, 
as powerful determinants of behavioral patterns. 
These complex symbols are usually related to the deepest cultural 
themes of a people and have significant messages to convey about the 
people's and culture's reason for being. Furthermore, these reasons are 
passed on uncensored in the unconscious, via the total environmental 
experience, from the beginning of "people-time," generation to genera­
tion. In this manner, the symbols act as a stirring rod that agitates the 
unconscious, sending out energy responses in the form of thought, speech, 
action and emotions. In the opinion of the Hindu philosopher, Ananda K. 
Coomaraswamy, 
... symbolism is 'the art of thinking in images,' an art now lost to 
civilized man - However, this loss, as anthropology and 
psychoanalysis has shown, is limited to consciousness and not to the 
'unconscious,' which to compensate, is perhaps now overloaded with 
symbolic material. 
goes on to state, "To know the rational in the deeply irrational is the 
mark of truthful living, that is, of fully alive perception of the conditions 
one's life." 
· The major forms of symbolism in a power system/culture constitute 
and subtle messages about how and why the culture came into 
and what the people must do to survive and maintain itself. 
55


--- PAGE 42 ---
The Isis Papers 
Symbolism is thus the glue that holds the individual and collective psyche 
of the people and its culture together. The keys to the system/culture are 
found in the decoded symbolism of that system/culture. 
Symbols and Brain Process 
Carl Gustave Jung was the major European behavioral scientist to 
emphasize the importance of symbols, their production and their meaning 
in the brain's total process and behavioral output. Nevertheless, his 
massive volume of work has taken a lesser place to that accorded Sigmund 
Freud in the late 19th and 20th centuries of Western (white) thought. 
However, it should be remembered that the understanding and use of 
symbols (including the interpretation of dreams), reached their highest 
developfnent in African and Asian cultures and was of major significance 
in these cultures dating back to the earliest time (prehistory) -long before 
there was any European cultural development. 
According to Jung, "the symbol is the primitive expression to the 
unconscious, but at the same time it is also an idea corresponding to the 
highest intuition produced by consciousness." Additionally, in his work 
Psyche and Symbols, he had the following to say about symbols: 
Since the symbol is the most complete expression of that which in any 
given epoch is as yet unknown- and cannot be replaced by any other 
statement at the time - it must proceed from the complex and subtle 
strata of the contemporary psychological atmosphere. Conversely, the 
effective living symbol must also contain something which is shared 
by considerable numbers of men: it embraces that which is commql) 
to a larger group. Consequently, it must include those primitive 
elements, emotional and otherwise, whose omnipresence stands 
beyond all doubt. Only when the symbol comprehends all those and 
conveys them with ultimate force can it evoke a universal response. 
Therein resides the powerful and redeeming effect of the living social 
symbol. 
Also, it has been said that symbols are always paradoxical since they 
contain elements that do not exist in logic. J ung thought that the elements 
combined within symbols are contradictory only to the logic of conscious­
ness, but that, nonetheless, they conform to a basic reality that eludes 
56 
Learning To Look At Symbols 
conscious thought processes. "A genuine symbol- is an image which 
. possesses two essential features: it originates within the archetypal ground 
of the psyche, and secondly, there exists a consciousness to apprehend it." 
In an article entitled "Contribution of Jungian Psychotherapy Towards 
Understanding the Creative Process" (Creative Psychology, No. 4), 
George Boas states, "The beauty of myth and symbol lies in their synthetic 
power; they can combine in one presentation disparate elements which 
would be self-contradictory if put in a declarative sentence." Norman 0. 
Brown, in Love's Body, has stated, "The axis on which world history turns 
is symbolism. From figura to veritas." Translation: from symbol to truth. 
"The axis of world history is making conscious the unconscious." Brown 
further states, "Symbolism is between conscious and unconscious." 
Jung explains in his book Man and His Symbols (Approaching the 
Unconscious), "A symbol is a term, a name, or even a picture that may be 
familiar in daily life, yet that possesses specific connotations in addition 
to its conventional and obvious meaning. It implies something vague, 
unknown or hidden from us." He continues, "A word or an image is 
symbolic when it implies something more than its obvious and immediate 
meaning. It has a wider unconscious aspect that is never precisely defined 
or fully explained." He further informs us that, "As the mind explores the 
symbol, it is led to ideas that lie beyond the grasp of reason." 
Jung's work indicates that a true symbol appears only when there is a 
need to express a thought one cannot openly think or what is only divined 
or felt. 
Recent neurological studies suggest that the "silent" right cerebral 
hemisphere is the source of activity leading to phenomena such as symbol 
formation. Other studies demonstrate that the left cerebral hemisphere 
seems more concerned with the logical processes of directed, more 
consciously controlled thinking. By contrast, the activities of the right 
cerebral hemisphere may be subject to different laws that are, as yet, little 
understood. In addition, the right and left hemispheres appear capable of 
independent, simultaneous thought. Also, it has been suggested that 
collaboration of the two contradictory modes associated with right and 
57


--- PAGE 43 ---
The Isis Papers 
left hemispheric activity may account for the symbolic process and for 
creativity. . b · puter uses D. I illustrates the process by which the ram-com 
Iagram . d from the surrounding environment, to form sym-sensory data, recetve 
bois and other brain-computer products. 
Total Environment 
Physical 
Social-Political 
Cultural 
Brain-Computer 
l 
Symbols 
Logic 
Thought 
Speech 
Action 
Emotional Response 
Perception 
Dreams 
Diagram I 
Learning To Look At Symbols 
Clearly, many forms and levels of data messages from the physical and 
social environment are input in the brain -computer. Some of this sensory 
data is coded at the level of consciousness. But because of the large scope 
of unattended perceptions, much of the data is coded at the unconscious 
levels of brain activity. As some neurologist would state, this data is 
dispursed between the left and right cerebral hemispheres respective! y. 
For example, within the framework of a given system and culture, 
certain perceptions may exist that never are acknowledged overtly and 
certain ideas, thoughts, concepts and theories that are uttered rarely, if 
ever. These perceptions, words, ideas, concepts and theories that are 
repressed or channeled into the unconscious level of the brain-computer 
becomes an entire world of ideas treated as though they never existed in 
the form of concrete reality. 
Nonetheless, the data from the environment that is encoded at the 
unconscious level of the brain-computer actually does not disappear- just 
as the objective data that produced the repressed ideas and concepts do 
not disappear. There simply ceases to be a clear focus on this body of 
data. This repressed data becomes the substratum from which symbols 
can be formed. 
As stated previously, the dominant aspect of the total environmental 
reality on the planet is that the overwhelming majority of people are black, 
brown, red and yellow. This fact has created the most fundamental 
collective preoccupation and, perhaps, fear in the global white collective: 
white genetic survival - a survival that is threatened by the genetic 
material contained in the genitals of Black and other non-white men. 
Non-white people are genetically dominant to whites, and, thus, are 
potential genetic annihilators of the minority white collective. Due to this 
fear of white genetic annihilation, the global white collective has evolved, 
during the last 2,000 years, the global white supremacy system and culture 
that dominates all black, brown, red and yellow peoples in the world, 
determining their behavior in all areas of people activity. 
59


--- PAGE 44 ---
The Isis Papers 
REFERENCES 
dH. S-.... "ols (Approaching the Unconscious). New Jung, e.G. Man an IS JIIIU 
York: Dell Press, 1%8. 
he d S m/Jols Edited by Violet S. de Laszlo. New Jung, C.G. Psyc an Y · 
York: Doubleday, 1958. 
. p h therapy Towards Under-McCully,R.S. "ContributionsofJungtan syc ~ . Pub-
standing the Creative Process," Creative Psychiatry, No.4. Geigy 
lications. 
60 
5 
The Symbolism of Christ, the Cross, 
the Crucifix, the Communion 
and Christian holidays 
(August 1977, February 1979) 
Dedication 
This essay is dedicated to all of the Black men who are in "greater 
confinement" (prisons and jails) with the hope that they will be en­
couraged never to give up the struggle against white supremacy domina­
tion (injustice) once they understand what the struggle is truly all about. 
Then they never will return to jail, and their behavior no longer will be 
anti-racist (blind reaction to stress from ignorance, anger and fear), but 
effectively counter-racist. Many of these Black men, in their letters to 
me, also have given me great enouragement, support and help towards 
continuing our fight for justice. All Black people are still in confmement! 
Foreword 
This essay is not intended to be sacrilegious or offensive to anyone. I 
was baptized in the Baptist church and christened in the African Methodist 
Episcopal Church. This essay was written only to address the question 
Black people have been raising for a long time- "What's happening?" 
We ask that question of everyone that we meet because we truly have not 
understood and presently do not understand what really is going on. It is 
the responsibility of Black behavioral scientists in general, and Black 
psychiatrists in particular, to provide this answer. 
61


--- PAGE 45 ---
The Isis Papers 
The basic discussion of white genetic smvival (through the possession 
and control of the Black male's genital apparatus) is carried forth uncon­
sciously in the precepts and practices of the global white supremacy 
system's primary religion -Christianity. These fundamental concepts 
are manifested in Christianity's central pattern of symbols. In fact, it is 
in religious activity that the highest level of symbolic discussion emerges. 
Whereas the testicles are those aspects of the male anatomy that contain 
the dominant genetic material, the penis is the aspect that transports the 
genetic material, which initiates the production of life and skin color. If 
one were to make a simple schematic diagram of the genital organs of the 
male anatomy, that diagram might look like Diagram I. 
The Male Genitalia (~matic sketch) 
Penis and Testicles 
Front View 
Diagram I 
62 
Symbolism of Christ 
A further abstraction of the same . Diagram 11. drawmg could be represented as 
Or, if further abstmcted, it could be . 
one vertical, the other horizontal -one rep~sented sunply as two lines, 
(See Diagram III.) crossmg near the top of the other. 
Drawingabstrac" • tioiU of male genitalia· 
pe~~clea · 
Highly abstracted line dra . male genitalia th wmg of the • e penis 
and the testicles 
Diagram Ill 
63


--- PAGE 46 ---
The Isis Papers 
It is clear that Diagram lll, a highly abstracted line drawing of the male 
genitalia, is a "cross." 
I submit that the cross, as an important and provocative symbol in the 
white supremacy system/culture, is none other than a brain-computer 
distillate of the white collective's fear-induced obsession with the genitals 
of all non-white men (of Black men in particular), who have the potential 
to genetically annihilate the white race. Furthermore, the cross represents 
the Black male's genitals removed from the Black male's body- meaning 
castrated genitals. Thus, the cross is a critical symbol in the thought 
processes of the white supremacy system, beginning its evolution almost 
2,000 years ago during early white aggression against Blacks in Africa 
and Asia. This particular interpretation of the cross never has been given 
before. 
Support for this interpretation may be found in the examination of the 
sword as a secondary critical symbol in the white supremacy culture. 
Here I am referring to the so-called "Western" sword with its straight 
blade, in contrast to the "Oriental" sword, which has a curved blade. J .E. 
Cirlot' sA Dictionary of Symbols, relating to the symbolism of the sword, 
states, "Here one must recall the general meaning of weapons, which is 
the antithesis of the monster." In the same discussion, he notes, "There 
can be no doubt that there is a sociological factor in sword-symbolism, 
since the sword is an instrument proper to the knight, who is the defender 
of the forces of light against the forces of darkness." In the white 
supremacy system/culture, the "monster" is always the Black male (e.g., 
King Kong) and, more specifically, his white-genetic-annihilating geni­
tals. As the white male (the knight) moves to control the monster (Black 
male genitalia), indeed he does become" the defender of the forces of light 
against the forces of darkness." The Western sword is shaped exactly as 
"the cross," the brain-computer distillate of the male genitalia. 
In an article entitled "Values, Myths and Symbols," which appeared in 
the July 1973 issue of the American Journal of Psychiatry, Rollo May 
had the following to say about the cross: "For example, the Christian cross 
draws together the horizontal and vertical dimensions of life and unites 
them perpendicularly to each other, embracing their conflict." However, 
64 
Symbolism of Christ 
thi~ is a sup~rficial de~cription of a cross, and it is totally inadequate as 
an m-depth mterpretatlOn of this major symbol in the white supremacy 
system/culture. The white collective seems unable to decode their 0 
boll wn sym . sm completely. Their own translations of their major symbols, 
and therr analyses of their unconscious,remain superficial incoherent and 
unconvincing. Therefore, the white collective remains u~aware of itself 
and unpre~ictable to ~tself and to others who lack deep understanding. 
If my mterpretation of the cross symbol is correct (that in the white 
male psyc~e it represents the Black male genitalia in the context of the 
global white supremacy system), then it is possible to understand the 
portrayal of the white female in the popular book and fllm, The Exorcist. 
Here, the female used the cross to masturbate herself when she was 
possessed by.the devil (i.e., the black monster). This symbolic portrayal 
emerged dunng a time period in which increasing numbers of white 
fe~ales were selecting Black males as "mates" or, more correctly stated, 
white females began sexually aggressing against socially powerless Black 
males to gain possession of the Black phallus. 
The use of the cross as a symbolic object in white female masturbation 
als~ ~curred when large numbers of white females actively were fan­
~Izmg abou~ b~ing raped by Black males and were establishing organiza­
tiOns and soc1et1es to prevent it. This was a reaction formation to their 
own uncons~ious desires. The white female's preoccupation with writing 
books on,,bemg raped also occured during this time period. In the white 
supremacy culture, the historic symbol of the rapist of white females is 
the Black male. The white female, until recently, has been held back in 
her sexual desires of the Black male by white male constraint. Since 
"white-female-liberation" has been granted to white women in small 
measure, the white female fmds herself unable to hold her own desires 
and aggressions in check. Still she is unable to admit these desires and 
aggressions consciously. (It is common knowledge that the ideal male£ 
the white ~emale is "~I, d~rk and handsome.") Interestingly, followi:: 
The Exorcw, the movie Kmg Kong became a major focus of attention in 
1976. The entire movie suggests an impending sexual attack on the white 
female by the giant black ape (the symbol of the Black male). Finally, 
65


--- PAGE 47 ---
The Isis Papers 
the black ape is shot dead by white males. The gun is also a phallic 
symbol in the white supremacy culture. (See Chapter 8.) 
At yet another level of the white supremacy cultural dynamic, white 
females (Jane Goodall, Diane Fossey and Birute Galdikas Brindamour) 
in the role of "scientists" are tracking (chasing) down large black apes in 
the African and Asian jungles (e.g., Tanzania). Some of these white 
females actually have attempted to get very, very close to these great black 
apes so that they can touch the apes and, perhaps unconsciously, so that 
the great black apes can touch them! 
It is of further interest that the above mentioned films, The Exorcist and 
King Kong, simultaneously emerged in an atmosphere where increasing 
attention had been given to Christian symbolism and religion, and during 
the period when the man who was elected to occupy the "White House" 
referred to himself as a "born again Christian"- making frequent refer­
ences to Christian symbols and scriptures. Thus, the culture simul­
taneously focused on the threat (Black male genitals) and the need to 
control the threat via castration of the Black genitals (the cross symbol). 
This discussion of the cross as a symbol of the Black male genitalia, 
in the context of the white supremacy system/culture, would not be 
complete without noting that some of the most outspoken and aggressive 
white male arid female members of the white supremacy system refer to 
themselves as the Ku Klux Klan. Since the termination of formal enslave­
ment of Blacks, the Klan openly has espoused white genetic purity and 
survival via the castration, lynching and killing of Black men. The 
historic symbol for this group in the white supremacy culture is "the cross" 
and, more specifically, the burning cross. Mter Black men were lynched 
and castrated, they often were burned, thereby reinforcing the interpreta­
tion that the cross symbolically is tied to the Black male's genitalia and 
that the burning cross is the burning Black male and his genitals. When 
the Black male genitalia with the dominant Black genes are burned, cut 
off or otherwise destroyed, white genetic survival is assured. 
Constantine I ("The Great"), the Roman emperor who ruled 306-337 
A.D., built Constantinople and made Christian worship lawful in the 
beginnings of the white supremacy system, had the following words 
66 
Symbolism of Christ 
placed on the cross, "In Hoc Signa Vinces" . " 
will conquer"). Indeed b '. (meanmg, In this sign you 
• Y controllmg the Black (non hi tals, which the cross symbolize . -w te) male geni-
entire non-white world m . . s, whites have conquered Blacks and the a.JOnty. Currently the · · Christian churches is non- hi ' ~aJOnty membership of 
of the cross . The auth w. te,. and ~I are held m control under the sign 
· onty IS mamtained b h · supremacy white purity and h' . Y w lles, under white ' w 1te surv1 val 
More recently, the fury of the wh't . 
in the form of Nazism Th d . 1 e supremacy dynamic was expressed 
· e ommant symbol sed b th. white supremacy system was and is the u ~ IS group in the 
element of the swastika is th b.la~ swastika. The central e cross. A spmnmg o h' I' cross in motion) gives the visual ill . r w II' mg cross (the 
IV.) Hill , . usion of the swastika. (See Diagra . er sand the Nazi movement's central . .m 
~enetic purity and the elimination of all th~e was White racml 
(1.e., Semites and g · ) persons classified as non-whites yps1es , who were view d h . heritage from Afri e as avmg Black genetic ca and who were consid ed . the Aryans (whites). e~< gen.etically dominant to 
The symbol of the swastika, the cross in m . 
to destroy those who were classified .otlon, spurred the whites on 
as genetically dominant non-whites. 
I 
I 
I 
I 
-- - -
-- --
I 
I 
I


--- PAGE 48 ---
The Isis Papers 
To the extent that it can be accepted that a man named Jesus lived in 
Africa some 2,000 years ago and that he was a member of the indigenous 
peoples, that man was undoubtedly a Black man, a man with skin 
pigmentation- not a white man lacking in skin pigmentation. Albinism, 
like leprosy, causes the skin to turn white and was considered a serious 
disease in ancient Africa. The victims of albinism and leprosy were cast 
out from the skin-pigmented peoples. Jesus never was discussed as 
having such a disease state. (Recall that pigmented skin is the norm for 
the hue-man race, not albinism.) 
In contrast to this Black man and the Black peoples of Africa, the 
peoples on the northern side of the Mediterranean Sea, some of whom 
referred to themselves as Romans, were then aggressing against and 
establishing conquests in Africa. They were men without skin pigmenta-
tion (white men). The most likely essence of the story of Jesus, who only later was 
referred to as "Christ," was that he was a poor Black man, a carpenter, a 
member of the non-white oppressed population, whose ideas as expressed 
in the Beatitudes threatened the power, control and authority of the 
conquering Romans. If Jesus and the other Blacks got out of control, the 
Romans (the whites) could be annihilated genetically. Of course, then as 
now, under white supremacy domination, Jesus (the non-white) was 
turned over to the white oppressors who then used some of his fellow-vic­
timized (self-hating non-whites who wished to ingratiate themselves to 
the white oppressors) to kill him. Jesus, this Black man, was then hung 
on a cross, a peculiar invention of the Roman (white) psyche. In other 
words, the white bmin-computer that feared annihilation by the Black 
male genitals unconsciously invented an instrument or weapon of Black 
male destruction, exactly (in abstract form) analogous to the part of the 
Black male's anatomy that whites knew could destroy them. Jesus was 
not only hung on the cross and stabbed, but undoubtedly, was also 
castrated. In Christian religious tradition, it is stated that Jesus died on the cross 
and suffered so that "we" (whites) can be "saved" (survive). White 
(Christian) theology goes even further to speak of Jesus "shedding his 
68 
Symbolism of Christ 
blood" so that we (whites) c "li " in recent years has genetic C:t . ve and hav~ "everlasting life." Only 
Always there has been (a d . enal ~eased bemg referred to as "blood." n m some cucles it · ) . individuals having "black bl od" " . contmues discussion about o or white blood" h 
meant was Black or white genetic material o w en wh~t was really Th C . . r genes, respectively 
us, hristian (white supremac ) th 1 · 
(a Black man) shed his Black geneti~ m eo ~g~ can be ~n~lated: Jesus 
reality was a castration and a killin so atenalm a c.rucifixiOn, which in 
population, in fear of its genetic an~~il ~at the white genetic recessive 
suivive). Thus, Jesus is called "savior"a:o~ cou!~ be sav~d ~genetically 
that the holy day celebrated for th d th yf e w ~tes. Is It httle wonder 
Friday?" And 1 . . . e ea o Jesus IS referred to as "Good 
· a te evision senes that re ed . ly castrated Bl k 
1 
· . present a socially and political-
ac rna e Similarly was referred .. 
historically "good nigger" h be th " ~ as Good Times." The . . as en e dead mgger." 
In keepmg With this symbolic order th . . religion called "Noth' B T ' ere IS a song m the Christian mg ut he Blood of J .. follows: esus. The chorus is as 
Oh precious is the flow 
That makes me white ~ snow 
No other font I know 
Nothing but the blood of Jesus. 
This can be translated as "As lo . male is spill' th • ng as the genetic material from the Black 
mg on e ground from castrati h' as snow." on, w Ites can remain white 
The pattern of worshipping a sufferin . fully comprehended 1 h . g, dymg Jesus on the cross is on Y w en It is understood th J ' man and that the black ood at esus was a Black w en cross represents the Bl k separated from the man Onl b ac male genitalia 
male genitals can whi~s ha:e .. ~::::~;~if::.~ de~truction of the Black 
genetic sense. Jesus of course h d . m e most fundamental 
thi 
.. • • a to be rationalized as ·u· s castration-sacrifice" . . . WI mg to make 
There is a profound and-=g up his genes so that whites might live. 
lion of the crucifixion and th d g p~el between the above interpreta-e estruction of black bulls with swords at 
69


--- PAGE 49 ---
The Isis Papers 
bullfights. Bullfighting became a prominent sport in Spain after the 
Moors (Black men) finally had been chased out of Europe, back across 
the Mediterranean, into Africa. The Moors had conquered Spain for seven 
hundred years. By the time they left, the once white population had 
become dark (via the dominant Black genetic material): dark skin, dark 
hair and dark eyes. Cirlot' s A Dictionary of Symbols states that the bull 
as an historic symbol represents the superiority of the Aryan over the 
Negro. This could not possibly be the logically correct meaning of the 
symbol. If this analysis were correct, there would be rio need for "whites" 
to kill a black bull with a sword. Obviously, a more logical and accurate 
interpretation of the bull symbol is the opposite ofCirlot's interpretation 
- the bull represents the superiority or genetic dominance of the Blacks 
over the genetic recessive whites. Again, the sword used to kill the black 
bull, as Cirlot also noted, comes into play as the weapon of the "forces of 
light" over the "forces of darkness." The sword signifies the weapon of 
the possessor of the white genitals or recessive white genetic material, 
against the dominant Black genitals and their genetic material. 
By the fourth century A.D., Jesus had been changed in color from Black 
"Jesus" to white "Christ" (then to be known as "Jesus Christ" or simply, 
"Christ"). This was the conscious or unconscious attempt to further 
repress from the collective white consciousness the true source of white 
anxiety and fear - the Black male and his genitals. Instead of a lynched 
Black Jesus, a frail, weak, effeminate, suffering and dying white Christ 
was hung against a black wooden cross as the dominant symbol in the 
religious practices of the white supremacy system/culture. Instead of the 
woolly, kinky head of the "Lamb of God," there was the straight, almost 
blond hair of the white Christ hung up against the black wooden cross. 
However, this symbolic image achieved a more important goal. In a 
single-picture-paragraph it states, "The weak, genetic recessive, white 
male, will be destroyed genetically-speaking, when up against the white­
annihilating, genetically dominant, Black male genital apparatus (the 
cross)." 
Arnold Toynbee, in Mankind and Mother Earth, states, 
70 
Symbolism of Christ 
Fifteenth Century western Christians were obsessed with the horror 
of death (the antitheses of the Pharonic Egyptian's pleasurable 
anticipation of a post-mortem eternity), and they were fascinated by 
the physical suffering of Christ on the Cross. Contemporary western 
painters, engravers and sculptors - especially in the Transalpine 
countries - extended their art to portray these themes with gruesome realism. 
The 15th century also heralded the Europeans • (the whites) world travel 
to conquer and control the entire non-white world, in order to prevent 
white genetic annihilation and death. This horrendous fear was then 
translated in European art. 
Joel Kovel, in his book White Racism (A Psychohistory) writes: 
Christianity spread over theW est and created a community out of what 
had been barbarian splinters. It did this through the power of a 
concrete institution, the Catholic Church, It was the church's 
immediate influence that held aloft the subliminatory ideal of Christ 
and, through· that ideal, gave Europeans a scaffold of identification 
with which to bind themselves into a unified civilization. 
Men, however, remained men, tom and driven by their obscure 
passions into striving for greed and domination which culture could 
scarcely regulate. Intense aggression resisted the Church's 
unification, continued to plague European culture, and delayed its 
growth. Within the original world-view, there was no way to 
rationalize or include the striving for greed and domination that 
persisted within civilization. Mter al~ the Christian revolution was 
superimposed upon a basically dominative way of life. It could only 
account for the guilt that arose from the dominative style of society by 
turning away from the given world. 
What Kovel fails to understand is that the fundamental reason Catholic 
Christianity, from its early days of European organization and interpreta­
tion of the Jesus theology, was able to unite the global white collective 
(then the warring white tribes of Europe) was because of the cross 
symbolism and the deep meaning it projected. When Christianity 
projected "the cross," especially the cross with the limp, pale body of 
71


--- PAGE 50 ---
The Isis Papers 
Christ hung on it, everyone in the global white collective unconsciously 
understood that they must unite against the threat of Black (non-white) 
male genital material, which the black wooden cross represented. White 
genetic survival could be achieved only by a united, continuous offensive 
attack by the global white minority. This organized attack is now at least 
2000 years old. The greed and the strivings for domination, which Kovel 
fails to fully understand, were compensation for a profound sense of 
genetic inadequacy. Only in this context of symbol translation can the Christian hymn, 
"Onward Christian Soldier," be appreciated. This is not only an important 
religious song, but also a significant battle song in the white supremacy 
culture. One stanZa of the song is as follows: 
Onward Christian Soldier, 
Marching as to war, 
With the cross of Jesus, 
going on before. 
Christ our loyal master, 
leads against the foe, 
Forward into battle, 
see his banners glow. 
Chorus 
Onward Christian Soldier, 
Marching as to war 
With the cross of Jesus 
going on before. 
My translation in prose of the above words and symbol-images in this 
song is, "Onward white male (and white female) soldiers, marching to war 
to establish and maintain white genetic survival. You have the symbol of 
the Black male genitals before you keeping your true purpose in mind so 
that you can unite to subdue this common threat. Christ (the white male 
image) is your loyal master, who is leading you in the attack against the 
n 
Symbolism ofCiuist 
Black male genital-monster enemy. The white male leads you into battle 
behind our glowing flags (phallic symbols)." 
With the picture of a dying, weak white man held fmnly in mind, 
white people fully understand what they must prevent from occurring, and 
why they must fight and, if necessary, die so that whites can survive. 
"Onward Christian Soldier" is a marching religious song for the white 
supremacy culture, but "Were You There When They Crucified My 
Lord?" in stark contrast, is a song of deep pain and sorrow about the 
castration and destruction of the Black male by the marching white 
supremacy army or its individual storm troopers. 
In modem times, the gun has become the contemporary symbolic 
weapon used against the non-white male and his white annihilating 
genetic potential. Also, the gun is an abstraction of the male genitalia, 
functioning exactly like the male genital apparatus. (See Chapter 8.) 
Thus, it is no accident that Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. -the modem day 
Jesus- was killed by a gun after being brought into focus on the cross of 
the cross hairs on the telescopic gun site. Dr. King brought only love to 
the white collective, but mating love (Black with white) causes white 
genetic annihilation, so he had to be destroyed. 
The Communion 
Since the 16th century, Protestants have believed that the act of 
communion is a symbolic reenactment of the crucifixion, with the bread 
and wine becoming the body and blood of Jesus. The Christian worship­
per ingests the bread and wine as an act to remove sin (not to internalize 
divinity). The Orthodox Christian believed that the communion was a 
spiritual act that could not be explained. In August 1976, the Catholic 
Church, the Orthodox Christians and the Protestants came together and 
agreed that the communion, or the Eucharist, conveys Christ's real 
presence and represents his sacrifice(the giving up of his body and blood), 
although it is not to be viewed as an actual reenactment of the crucifixion. 
The author's analysis of this symbolism of the communion, in the 
context of the white supremacy system/culture in which itevolved,reveals 
that the white population has had an historic awareness (albeit now largely 
73


--- PAGE 51 ---
The Isis Papers 
unconscious) that they suffered bodily or genetic impairment, which made 
them .different and separated them from the "hue-man" majority of black, 
brown, red and yellow peoples. They were not whole. This same genetic 
deficiency was the basis for the consideration of "original sin" and the 
shame of body "nakedness" (body whiteness), as discussed in the Biblical 
mythology of Adam and Eve, an important myth in the white supremacy 
culture. The view that the act of sex was the original sin is an extension 
of this same logic because the sex act produces the body and its appearance 
via genetic transfer and/or genetic mutation. 
Having rejected the appearance of the white body as the equivalent of 
"sin" and "shame," the white psyche attempted to correct the white body's 
defect. Thus emerged the symbolic and ritualized acts of ingesting the 
body and blood (genes) of Jesus (the Black male), in the unconscious 
desire to correct the existing color deficiency. The symbolic attempt to 
correct the genetic deficiency state of skin albinism (skin whiteness), as 
performed in the Eucharist, is the central religious rite in the religion of 
the white supremacy system/culture. Therefore, it is not surprising that 
wearing black or dark-colored clothing, generally covering the entire 
body, is the primary and most acceptable pattern of dress for Christian 
religious leaders: priests, ministers, nuns, etc. 
One finds curious the over-determined, highly intense abhorrence that 
many in the white collective continue to verbalize over the idea of 
cannibalism, always relating acts of cannibalism to so-called "primitive" 
Blacks in Africa. This continuing discussion is most interesting behavior 
on the part of those who symbolically practice cannibalism in the central 
rite of their own religious practice on a weekly or monthly basis. Even 
more significant is the fact that the Blacks are portrayed as eating 
missionaries (Christians) when it is the "Christians" who always are 
concerning themselves with their own ingestion of the body and blood of 
an African- Jesus. This is a classic example of projection. 
Reinforcement for this interpretation of the communion symbolism 
comes not only from whites' obsessive pattern of suntanning to make their 
bodies colored, but also from major eating practices in the white 
supremacy culture, especially in the U.S. The most favored drinks are all 
74 
Symbolism of Christ 
dark brown in color: coffee, tea, coke, beer, and whiskey. These are all 
symbolic of the blood or genes of Jesus. A favorite meat is steak, which 
com.es from the bull or cattle. (See Chapter 7.) We need not mention the 
hot dogs, half smokes and all the other varieties of sausages. Also, are 
not bulls castrated to make them taste better when eaten? Are not football 
players fed steak before they attempt to go out and capture the large brown 
balls? (See Chapter 10.) I further understand that "hull's balls" are eaten 
as delicacies in some bars and other eating establishments in the white 
supremacy culture. The favorite candy is chocolate candy (chocolate 
comes mainly from Africa), preferably with nuts. Recall chocolate kisses 
and all of the myriad chocolate candy bars. Nuts are also important in the 
white supremacy culture. Some have focused on peanuts and become 
millionaires and the most powerful persons in the world. Finally, given 
the symbolism behind such eating practices, it follows that oral sexual 
practices would be a favorite in the white supremacy system/culture. 
Likewise, the symbolism in the major holidays of the Christian 
religion is supportive of my interpretations. At Christmas, the tree is one 
of the most important symbols. The Christmas tree is, in its abstracted 
fonn, a cross- the symbol of the Black male genitals. (See Diagram V.) 
First, the Christmas tree is chopped down in the forest. Then it is taken 
home. In the U.S., when the Christmas tree is decorated, colored "balls" 
are hung on the tree. When the tree is taken down and burned, the "balls" 
are first taken off. Then all can dream of a "white Christmas" and a 
surviving white Christ. 
I \ 
I \ 
I \ 
I \ 
I \ 
I \ 
(a) (b) 
The Xmas Tree and 
Its Abstraction 
Dia v 
(Cross is ~pside down)


--- PAGE 52 ---
The Isis Papers 
Similarity in Europe, small white wax candles were placed on the 
Christmas ttee. In the Catholic religion, the Christmas ttee is said to 
represent "the ttee of the cross," while the wax candles are thought to 
represent the "body of Christ." 
Thus, again, we have the symbol of the white, weak (melting) Christ 
hung on the symbol of Black male genitalia. At the Easter holiday in the 
U.S., it is ttaditional to have colored eggs, colored jelly beans and a 
chocolate rabbit and eggs in an "Easter basket." These colored items are 
eaten. The white albino bunny rabbit that sits amongst the colored eggs 
as though he laid them generally is not eaten. By ingesting the colored 
items, the sin of being without color is symbolically removed - being 
"born again whole" has been achieved through symbols. 
Other important holidays in the white supremacy culture further reveal 
the intricate workings of this symbolism. On both St. Valentine's Day and 
Mother's Day, the white male gives gifts of chocolate candy with nuts. 
In the first instance, he gives it to his sweetheart, and in the second to his 
mother. If his sweetheart ingests "chocolate with nuts," the white male 
can fantasize that he is genetically equal to the Black male. And if his 
mother had ingested "chocolate with nuts," he would not have to worry 
about white genetic annihilation- as he would have been "colored" and 
then could be an annihilator of white genes like the feared and envied 
Black male. Both the valentine shape and the chocolate candy have a 
symbolic meaning not previously recognized, examined nor understood 
by Western culture investigators. However, once the unified field of the 
Western culture dynamic (behavior dynamic) is set forth, it will be seen 
that these fragments of symbolism take on a brilliant clarity. The En­
cyclopedia Britannica defines valentine as, 
a special form of greeting card exchanged in observance of St. 
Valentine's Day (February 14), a day set aside as a lover's festival. 
The custom has no connection with the two St. Valentines or with 
known incidents in their lives. It is probably that the valentine was 
the fust of all greeting cards. The paper valentine dates from the 16th 
century; by 1800 hand-painted copperplates were produced to meet 
large demands. These were followed by woodcuts and 
lithographs .... St. Valentine's Day as a lover's festival and the modem 
76 
Symbolis~ of Christ 
tradition of sending valentine cards have no relation to the Saint but, 
rather, seem to be connected with either the Roman fertility festival of 
the Lupercalia (February 15) or with the mating season of birds. 
The relationship of the valentine to an ancient fertility rite suggests that 
the so-called "heart" shape of the valentine may be less associated with 
the anatomical heart of the human body, as is commonly thought, than 
with the symbolic drawing of the female genital organ, the vaginal 
opening. As explained in Ajit Mookerjee's and Madhu Khanna's The 
Tantric Way, in Tanttic worship in India, this organ is frequently drawn 
in the form of a heart or an upside down triangle, with the base upward. 
It is clear that the organ of the heart in the human body has much less an 
association with fertility than the vagina or the vaginal orifice. 
Cirlot states, "The importance of love in the mystic doctrine of unity 
explains how it is that love-symbolism came to be closely linked with 
heart-symbolism, for to love is only to experience a force which urges the 
lover towards a given centte." Indeed, in Tantric philosophy and art, the 
symbol of unity was the union of the male and female genital organs, and 
this unity was reverently portrayed in sculpture and graphic arts. 
An explanation of the symbolism of chocolate in Western culmre will 
expose further the significance of heart-shaped valentines as well as the 
importance of chocolate. In an article entitled "The Sweet Taste of Sin" 
(The Washington Post, February 8, 1979), Marion Burros quotes food 
critic Gael Greene: "I have always thought a good chocolate mousse is 
an aphrodisiac, the more intense the taste of chocolate, the more erotic the 
spell." Marion Burros continues, "Some chocolate mousse lovers go even 
further. 'It's not a food, it's a concept,' says one indulgent male. 'It's like 
illicit sex. It's so good but so fattening. It gives you pimples. It's a sin.'" 
Burros concludes quoting Gael Greene, " ... wonderful, wicked deeply 
chocolate." One certainly must question why, in a culture produced by a 
people that refers to itself as the "white race" and that historically has 
denounced people with natural chocolate complexions, a dark brown 
food, namely chocolate, causes such orgasm-like ecstacy and is associated 
with eroticism when orally ingested. 
77


--- PAGE 53 ---
The Isis Papers 
This pattern oflogic and thought surrounding chocolate (dark brown) 
candy and other deserts most certainly cannot be held in isolation from 
the previously mentioned preoccupations over suntanning and the white 
female preference for males who are tall and dark or the preoccupation in 
sports of placing large brown balls (testicle symbols) in white net (vaginal) 
orifices and between goal posts (white upright legs). A unified field 
theory in the behavorial sciences demands that gross and subtle intercon­
nections, between behavioral phenomena, be perceived before they can 
be understood. 
That there should be myriad behaviors in the white supremacy behavior 
system that reflect a deep desire to counteract and compensate for the 
perceived genetic deficiency of white skin should not be at all surprising. 
Thus, the customary and traditional little packets of chocolate candy 
(often with nuts), placed inside of the heart or vaginal orifice shaped box, 
are like little sperm packages of Black genetic material being placed in 
the vaginal orifice. When presented by the white male to the white female, 
in the context of the skin color deficient culture, the act is the exact parallel 
to the white male coaches who coach their Black basketball and football 
players to place dark brown balls in white net orifices or in white upright 
legs. (See Chapter 10.) One must conclude that the white male realizes 
consciously or unconsciously that the most desired mate for the white 
female is the Black male, just as he realizes that his most desired sexual 
mate is the Black female. This illuminates the white male's fascination 
with black· stockings, black underwear and black negligees as sexual 
symbols. 
Conclusions 
The conscious and/or unconscious acceptance and internalization of a 
symbol system based upon the castrated Black male genitalia is essential 
to the global system of white genetic survival. This symbol system 
necessitates the oppression of Blacks and all other non-whites in the 
global context of white supremacy. Generally. the victims of a system of 
oppression have no alternative other than to accept blindly the patterns of 
symbols, logic, thought, speech, emotional responses and perceptions that 
78 
Symbolism of Christ 
are imposed forcefully upon them b th . 
years of oppression the o f1 y err oppressors. After hundreds of 
identity • begin to beiieve ::t ~se:, ~ving lost the sense of their own 
one and the same with their o e f: ;-products of their oppressors are 
do not control their own b ':n, a mg completely to realize that they 
output The slave's fate is notrtoam-computers nor their brain-computers' 
see nor reason wh b 1 . However, the process oflibe ti . Y • ut on Y to do or die. 
clearly distinguish their perce;ti~~:;~~: wherein the oppressed begin to 
oppressors •. The op d th g . and thought processes from the presse ' en, begm to res d . perceptions and their logic and th h pect an validate their 
can never free themselves with tho~ t processes, realizing fully that they 
were a pan of th . e ought processes and perceptions that e process of therr enslavement 
As long as the Black ( . · 
sciously accepts a pow:~:thited )dcollec~ve consciously and/or uncon-
. an ynam1c symbolism f Bla k castration, they never will be If/ o c male 
remain mentally ill. Mental! i~ group-respecting and forever will 
themselves and have self/ y peo~le, persons who do not respect 
speech, action, emotional r=~:e::ng pat~rns of logic, thought, 
themselves from th · perceptions, never can liberate err oppressors Black hi . sibility of clarif · fi · psyc atrists have the respon-ymg or Black people all 
dynamic of white genetic survi al Thi . aspects of the oppressive 
all v · s mcludes expos· g d d . of that power system's m . . m an ecodmg aJor symbolism. 
79


--- PAGE 54 ---
6 
The Politics Behind Black Male 
Passivity, Effeminization, Bisexuality, 
and Homosexuality 
(August 197 4) 
Black male passivity, effeminization, bisexuality and homosexuality 
are being encountered increasingly by Black psychiatrists working with 
Black patient populations. These issues are being presented by family 
members, personnel worldng in schools and other social institutions or by 
Black men themselves. Many in the Black population are reaching the 
conclusion that such issues have become a problem of epidemic propor­
tion amongst Black people in the U.S., although it was an almost nonex­
istent behavioral phenomenon amongst indigenous Blacks in Africa. 
As Black psychiatrists and behavioral scientists, we need to understand 
fully the individual and social dynamics involved in these patterns of 
behavior. We must be able to help our patients understand their conduct 
and change it if they so desire. Also, we should be in a position to comment 
on the ultimate implications of these behaviors for the well-being of Black 
people - not simply as individuals, but as a whole organism of people 
seeking life and maximal development. 
In the final analysis, behavior is not simply an individual affair, for 
when multiplied by thousands, it has profound effects on the life, future 
existence and well-being of the total people. 
In 1973, I presented my definition of Black mental health: 
81


--- PAGE 55 ---
The Isis Papers 
The practice of those unit patterns of behavior (i.e., logic, thought, 
speech, action and emotional response) in all areas of people activity: 
economics, education, entertainment, labor, law, politics, religion, sex 
and war- which are simultaneously self-and group-supporting under 
the social and political conditions of worldwide white supremacy 
domination (racism). In brief, this means Black behavioral practice 
which resists self- and group-negation and desttuction. 
The above are the criteria used to judge Black mental health or Black 
mental illness. The reader should be forewarned that my con­
ceptualizations do not rely on the currently utilized, late 19th and early 
20th century "European" psychoanalytic theories of Sigmund Freud. If 
Freud's insights into behavior were truly adequate, they would have aided 
his six million fellow Semites in preventing their destruction by the 
anti-Semitic white supremacy power organization of Nazi Germany. 
Failing to understand this major behavioral dynamic, Freud had to flee to 
save his life. Furthermore, my conceptualizations do not rely on the recent 
position taken by the American Psychiatric Association - that 
homosexuality is no longer categorized as a form of behavioral illness. 
This pronouncement has nothing to do with the mental health of Black 
people. 
The human brain - the organ responsible for all patterns of logic, 
thought, speech, action and emotional response - is an organ of the 
nervous system that evolved over many thousands of years. Its purpose 
has been to decode and solve problems in the external environment- both 
its physical and social aspects. Thus, specific patterns of behavior may be 
looked upon as functional or dysfunctional solutions to the problems 
posed by the external environment. 
When the brain's purpose is understood, patterns of male passivity, 
effeminization, bisexuality and homosexuality may be looked upon as 
functional or dysfunctional solutions to specific problems posed in the 
environment, even though consciously they are not understood as such. 
But for what environmental problems are these behaviors considered 
answers- functional or dysfunctional- and for whom? 
82 
Black Male Passivity 
These questions cannot be answered without frrst understanding the 
nature of the environment (the specific dynamic and structure of the social 
system) in which these behaviors occur. 
As explained in Chapter 1, racism (white supremacy) is the dominant 
social system in today's world. Its fundamental dynamic is predicated 
upon the genetic recessive deficiency state of albinism, which is respon­
sible for skin whiteness and thus the so-called "white race." This genetic 
recessive trait is dominated by the genetic capacity to produce any of the 
various degrees of skin melanination - whether black, brown, red or 
yellow. In other words, it can be annihilated as a phenotypic condition. 
Control of this potential for genetic domination and annihilation 
throughout the world is absolutely essential if the condition of skin 
whiteness is to survive. "White" survival is predicated upon aggressive­
ness and muscle mass in the form of technology directed against the 
"non-white" melaninated men on the planet Earth who constitute the 
numerical majority. Therefore, white survival and white power are de­
pendent upon the various methodologies, tactics and strategies developed 
to control all "non-white" men, as well as bring them into cooperative 
submission. This is especially important in the case of Black men because 
they have the greatest capacity to produce melanin and, in turn, the 
greatest genetic potential for the annihilation of skin albinism or skin whiteness. 
During the past 400 years, Black men in the U.S. have been forced into 
passive and cooperative submission to white men. The major strategy has 
been the installation of an overwhelming/ear. Specific tactics range from 
actual physical castration and lynching, to other oven and more subtle 
forms of abuse, violence and cruelty. We should not be ashamed to 
recognize these tactics used to oppress Black men. It is the truth. It is 
reality. Ultimately, this is the meaning of Black oppression. 
All Black people are oppressed. I emphasize here that Black men are 
oppressed because ultimately, it is male muscle mass that oppresses a 
people, and only male muscle mass has the potential for achieving 
liberation. If the men of a people are oppressed, the women are brought 
under oppression- as they are dependent on their men for protection and 
83


--- PAGE 56 ---
The Isis Papers 
the muscle mass to liberate a people and 
defense. Women do not have l th ng buttheirmenmustprovide 
protect the young. Women deve op e you ' 
the protection and the security ap~tus. d tands the priority of white 
bal h'te male collecttve un ers The glo w t consciously or unconsciously' the 
domination. They fully understan!, Also white males realize that in 
threat that Black men represent~ . em.f fem~es must submit to males 
the final analysis, the vast maJonty o Add'tionally white males fully 
because of their lesser muscle mass. to :dentify 'as females will be 
understand that males who ~e forcb~ . on to the males they call "The 
grammed simultaneously mto su mtsst 
pro · gainst those same men. 
Man," as oppos~ to.aggressmg a have at least a vague, perhaps uncon-
White men m thts world area . ,400years) malepassivity 
. th t after 20 generattons \: • scious, understandmg a . . . bisexuality and homosexuality· 
has evolved into male. effemt~za~o:~ ressions of male self -submission 
These patterns ofbehavtor are stmp Y . P. called "sex " Males also can . th of people acuvtty · to other males m e area th e"tght areas of people activity -. 1 · any of the o er . submtt to rna es m . labor law politics religton and . d t" entertamment, • • ' economtcs, e uca ton, . . d peration in any of the areas 
war. Oppression is forced submtsston an coo 
of people activity. . male arrives at his deeply repressed sense of 
However, the whtte he be dominated genetically by all 
"femininity" because not only can found from the white male 
Black and other men of color, but m~re pro . all by all Black and 
. . tha he is dommated genettc Y . perspecuve ts the fact t ff . . of a white male and non-whtte 
othernon-whitefemales. Fortheo spnng th than white like their · lik their mother ra er female will be non-white . e enetically dominant in respect to the 
white father; thus, the offspnng are .g ~~,,.. when compared to the hi e of genettc weur-uess, white male. T s sens 1 the white male to project weak-
majority of the world'~ ~o~en, p~::u~it and homosexuality onto the 
ness, passivity, e~fe~mtZaUon, b:ru halienger. Furthermore, the white 
Black male, who ts hts archthpoten. al ~nvironment to transfer this mental 
male collective strUCtures e soc• 
protection into a functional reality. 
84 
Black Male Passivity 
The more the Black male strives to stand, the weaker the white male 
feels by comparison, and the greater the white male's thrust to effeminize 
the Black male- to weaken the Black male's psychological potential for 
aggressive and assertive challenge, forcing him to remain submissive to 
"The Man." 
The American Psychiatric Association's decision to remove 
homosexuality from the list of mental (behavioral) disturbances resulted 
from the increasing number of white males seeking this mode of sexual 
expression, due to an increasing consciousness of true white male weak­
ness. Male bisexuality and homosexuality can be viewed as the sexual 
expression of male weakness, passivity and effeminization. The motiva­
tion for these feelings and their sexual expression results primarily from 
the developing challenge by "non-white" men throughout the world to 
white male power and projected superiority. This challenge has assumed 
various subtle and overt forms during recent decades. 
For example, in the U.S., heavyweight boxing, basketball, baseball and 
football have all been taken away from white males (by Black males) as 
symbolic expressions of white male virility and manhood. White males 
have been left with only two major sports wherein they dominate (tennis 
and golt), and both consist of hitting small white balls. I need not even 
mention that Black men have been blocked effectively from participating 
in these remaining white stronghold sports. {See Chapter 10.) 
It is also crushing to the collective white male ego and sense of power 
to be told by "colored" men called Arabs that the whites cannot have any 
oil to run their machines to maintain and extend their technology - their 
,major control apparatus. Increasingly, the white male is being forced to 
see himself as he really is. 
The white females' liberation movement is another disturbing threat 
to the white male's sense of power and masculinity, helping to push him 
to a weakened and homosexual stance. However, white females are 
reacting to the oppression imposed on them by white males. Feeling 
inferior to "non-white" males and females, the white male said to the white 
female, "Well, at least I am going to be superior to you." The white female 
reaction in the form of women's liberation is contributing further to white 
85


--- PAGE 57 ---
The Isis Papers 
male/female alienation, pushing white males further into the homosexual 
position and, incidentally, pushing white females in that direction also. 
The long-standing white male/female alienation in the white family 
has pushed the white female, perhaps unconsciously, to mold her sons to 
be more like herself than like their father. Thus, she creates a female with 
a penis. Additionally, she proceeds to fight back at the male and fmally 
achieves, symbolically, a penis for herself- resolving the white female's 
penis envy complex, a compensation for her sense of inferiority imposed 
by men. In a similar way, she fights back at the white male when she 
captures a Black male's penis and taunts the white male, who believes 
"her" black penis is stronger than his own. 
From another perspective, white male and female homosexuality can 
be viewed as the final expression of their dislike of their genetic albinism 
in a world numerically dominated by colored people. This dislike of their 
appearance, though deeply repressed, causes a negation of the act of 
self-reproduction (sex), in various forms. This is the eventual origin of 
homosexuality. It is a parallel activity to the all familiar discussions of 
"population zero" and "birth control," now current articulations in the 
white supremacy culture. 
All of the aforementioned dynamics are components of the total 
dynamic of racism. Some of the methodologies used to achieve Black 
male submission or effeminization warrant further examination. Uqlike 
the white male, the Blac~ male does not arrive at the effeminate bisexual 
or homosexual stance from any deeply repressed sense of genetic weak­
ness, inadequacy or disgust, which I refer to as primary effeminacy 
(effeminacy that is self-derived and not imposed forcibly by others). 
Instead, the Black male arrives at this position secondarily, as the result 
of the imposed power and cruelty of the white male and the totality of the 
y;hite supremacy social and political apparatus that has forced 20 g~ne.ra­
tions of Black males into submission. This pattern of imposed submiSSIOn 
is reinforced through every institution within the white supremacy system, 
but especially in the fundamental social mstitution of the family or, in this 
case, the Black survival-unit. 
86 
Black Male Passivity 
I make the distinction in terminology between family and survival-unit 
because "the family," by defmition, is a social institution that functions to 
suppon maximal development and protection of the young. However, 
under white supremacy, Blacks and other non-whites are not to be 
developed maximally; they are permitted to survive as functional in­
feriors, alienated from self and from their own kind. The non-white 
survival-unit is not permitted to defend itself or its young. The survival­
unit functions accordingly. 
The imposed internal dynamics of the survival-unit, as within the racist 
system in general, function to negate Black manhood, as fundamentally 
expressed in the relationship between breadwinning and true power 
potential. Even when high level income is allowed, there is no true power 
in its ultimate sense- meaning to suppon, protect and defend the lives of 
one's self, one's wife and one's children. Under any serious system of 
oppression, this right is denied the oppressed male, and with its denial 
there is a concomitant and proportionate loss of respect for manhood in 
the oppressed population. This attitude begins first within the oppressed 
man himself and radiates to all other members of the survival-unit. The 
resultant frustration of Black manhood potential - a pressure and 
grievance that cannot be redressed directly at its source under fear of death 
-forces behavior into dysfunctional, non-satisfying, circular, obsessive­
compulsive patterns, in areas of people activity where greater degrees of 
maleness are permitted to be expressed (i.e., sex, sports and entertain­
ment). 
Under the white supremacy slavery system, the identity of "sex 
machines" was imposed upon Black males, especially as many hands were 
needed in the fields for toil and labor. The many babies that were produced 
gave Black males their most open avenue for at least a limited sense of 
manhood. Presently, with the birth control pills and with the pressure for 
population-zero for all non-whites, this major male ego-suppon also has 
been taken away. Without jobs, income, power or even babies, there is 
no proof of sexual functioning. When this reality is coupled with the 
awareness that many women can receive more from a welfare check than 
they can from their male partners, the reasons for women respecting men 
87


--- PAGE 58 ---
The Isis Papers 
and staying with them steadily decline, and Black male/female alienation 
increases. 
Recent statistics reveal that today (1974), 34% of Black families are 
headed by females as compared to 10% of white families, and this figure 
is increasing each year. In the metropolitan area of Washington, D.C., 
there are 61,000 Black male children growing up in homes without their 
fathers or other father surrogates, while 90% of their teachers in the public 
schools are also females. This produces a massive deficiency in adult 
males for role modeling and imprinting. Such role modeling and imprint­
ing are essential for Black male children to understand adult male role 
functioning.· 
As Black males and females become more and more alienated, as our 
current rates of separation and divorce indicate, and as Black females are 
bei~g .left to rear Black male children alone, the alienation, hate and 
disgust felt towards adult males are visited upon their sons subtly. A 
female alienated from males is hard-pressed to reinforce patterns of 
conduct in a male child that remind her of unhappiness and pain. She is 
much more inclined to say, "There you go looking and acting like that no 
good nigger father of yours." The Black female teacher ~t sch~l ~ho 
also may be experiencing alienation from her Black man, tf not mclmed 
to make the same statement in such a direct manner, only says it more 
subtly, says nothing, or simply acts out her hate, disgust and distrust of 
Black males, achieving the same end result. 
It is little wonder that 98% of all of the Black male children I talk with, 
who have reached the junior high school level, hate school. Schools and 
their personnel, like all other aspects of the racist system, do their share 
to alienate Black males from maximal functioning and thus further the 
ultimate alienation of Black males from themselves and their manhood. 
As a result of this pattern of socialization, Black males soon learQ that it 
is easier to be a female child than a male child, and more promising to be 
an adult Black female than an adult Black male. 
In childhood, male children learn- whether at home or at school- that 
~Y can make mothers and female teachers happy (and they will shower 
88 
Black Male Passivity 
you with smiles and affection) when they act like "females" rather than like boys. 
The dearth of adult Black males in the homes, schools and neighbor­
hoods leaves Black male children no alternative models. Blindly they seek 
out one another as models, and in their blindness end up in trouble _ in 
ju~e~ile h~mes or prisons. But fate and the dynamics of racism again play 
a Vlctous trick because the young males only become more alienated from 
their manhood and more feminized in such settings. They are given orders 
by men to whom they must submit; they wait passively to be fed three 
meals a day by men; and fmally, they have sexual intercourse with men. 
It is no wonder that they are unable to play the role of Black men when 
they leave. 
One ex-prisoner patient told me, "It is easier to endure the life on the 
inside than to try to put up with the pressures of being a man, a husband 
and a father in the street." The intent of mcist programming had been 
achieved: "Give np trying to be a Black man. Why not be a woman?" 
Many Black males have answered unconsciously, "Why not!" The 
b~aided ~d curled hair, the earrings and bracelets, the midriff tops, the 
cmch wrusted pants, the flowered underwear, the high-heeled shoes with 
platforms and the pocketbooks are all behavioml answers to the above. 
They say in loud and clear language, "White man, I will never come after 
you. I cannot run in my high-heels- you know that. And I may mess up 
my hair." The white-run clothing industry is all too pleased to provide 
the costumes of feminine disguise for Black male escape. However, they 
never would provide uniforms or combat gear if customers were willing 
to pay $1000 per outfit. 
Television, which has become an important programmer of behavior 
in this social system and its culture, plays a further major role in alienating 
B.lack mal~s (especially children) from Black manhood. Flip Wilson, the 
htghest pmd Black male on television maintains his high ratings by 
dressing in great detail as a tough and coarse Black female. One of my 
seven-year-old Black male patients told me, "My Mommy likes Geral­
dine, and I think Geraldine is cute." "Good Times," the latest media fare 
for indoctrinating the Black oppressed, shows a pitiful adult Black male 
89


--- PAGE 59 ---
The Isis Papers 
who never can seem to find an adequate job and a Black adolescent male 
who is a criminal shoplifter and a complete clown. All of this takes place 
in the presence of a strong and powerful Black female, who periodically 
drops down on her knees to pray to a white Jesus whose miracles save the 
situation. 
These weekly insults to Black manhood that we have been 
programmed to believe are entertainment and not direct racist warfare, 
further reinforce, perhaps in the unconscious thinking of Black people, a 
loss of respect for Black manhood while carrying that loss to ever deeper 
levels. One 12-year-old Black male summed it up in this manner when I 
questioned him about working hard and studying in school: "No, I do not 
want to study so I can help Black people. If you try to help !3lack people, 
you will be killed. Look at Martin Luther King, Malcolm X and George 
Jackson. I don't want to die." 
This reality of white supremacy oppression must be approached either 
linearly (head-on) or with circular patterns of behavior to escape this 
horrendous reality of death. Sex, having been granted as the one (though 
limited) area wherein Black males could express manhood, became the 
area of behavior where circular patterns of escape were acted out. Sym­
bolically speaking, attempts were made to hide in the dark Black vaginal 
orifice. When that closed down, the white vaginal orifice was tried. 
When that also proved unsatisfactory as a hiding place or passage to 
freedom, Black and white male anuses were tried. Or one might say, these 
became the hoped for "undercover" railroads to freedom- the under­
ground railroads as escape from the white man no longer being operative. 
Because Black men are forced into patterns of both conscious and 
unconscious logic, ever-increasing incidents of Black male passivity, 
effeminization, bisexuality and homosexuality can be understood logical­
ly and accurately predicted. There is only one solution- that Black males 
collectively face the horrendous presence of white males and conquer the 
accompanying fear engendered by this act. After the white man is faced, 
he must be resisted steadfastly and fought if he continues to wage war on 
Black people- as he has demonstrated historically that he intends to do. 
And it is Black males and not females who must do the fighting. 
90 
Black Male Passivity 
Black male homosexuality and bisexuali 
by-products of males submitting in tl ty are .only the long-run 
they fail to resist because death is :to other males. m the social arena; 
number of Black male hom I ~ult of resistance. The large 
h osexua s and btsexuals who re ad and have little or no respect for their fath . pon that they 
ly different life histories had the e~s mtght have had complete­
fathers died while in defense f ~~own up With the knowledge that their 
h II . o e~r manhood when it was ttacked c a enged by the oppressor Th' . . a and · IS IS especially tru if th · admired and respected the fathers, manhood. Th e eir mothers also 
been viewed as something so precious th ~n, ~anhood would have 
is a quite different input into the child' :t o.ne dies m defense of it. This 
no good trifling laz . s ram-computer than "He was a 
Tha th, . , Y.~lgger, and you should never want to be like h. " 
t e soctal/poliucal dynami f · · un. 
white male's alienation tirom h' co ract~m, uself predicated upon the 
1S own geneuc statu h 1 · others to be alienated f: . s, s ou d In turn cause rom therr own genetic stat d . . sexual orientation, should not cause s . us, etermmmg color or 
such a dynamic on the alen so that =nse. I~ should put the ~ictims of 
counter this destrucu· 1 . Y efficiently and effectively can ve assau t against the . . genetic status. apprectauon of their own total 
. All Black children should be protected b Black . 
alienated against any of th . Y people from bemg err genes - be tho gender or sickle cell aneml·a R . . se genes of color, sexual · acists w11l attempt t b · genetic alienation, but Black peo le h 0 nng about such 
Black psychiatris· t P s ould be prepared to coumer it. s must understand tbat h · homosexuality for tbemselves b t w Ites may condone 
for destroying Black peopl th• u we as Blacks, must see it as a strategy 
. e at must be counte ed H btsexuals should neither be d r · omosexuals or . con emned nor degrad d . decide that they would be e • as they did not so programmed in childh d . should be held responsible 0 k . 00 · The ractst system 
and increasing occurre . ur tas IS to treat and prevent its continuing nee. 
One method I have been using with all BI k . 
their particular disorder b . . ac male patlents - whether e passiVIty effem · · · · homosexuality or other- is to ha th ' uuzation, biSexuality' 
approaching and opposing . v~ em relax and envision themselves 
'm actua combat, the collective of white males 
91


--- PAGE 60 ---
The Isis Papers 
and females (without apology or giving up in the crunch). The fear of 
such a confrontation is at the basis of most of today's Black male 
pathologies in patterns of logic, thought, speech, action and emotional 
res]JOnse as they participate in all areas of human activity. 
I have been working with Black mothers of Black male children, 
attempting to help them rid themselves of the fear of their sons and their 
men dying, which pushes them unconsciously to make babies of their sons 
and their husbands in an effort to try to protect and defend them. This 
response is the exact reverse of what is needed under the conditions of 
racism. Black women must learn to rear sons who will learn from the 
cradle that their major function as men is not to get a good job and a fine 
car, but to defend, protect and support their people (in that order), even 
should death be the consequence. That the Black male is not a sex 
machine but a protector and developer of Black people must be learned 
during the rearing process. There will be good jobs and self-respect (if 
not fine cars) once the people are liberated. ·There will be no true 
self-respect until that task is completed. 
As a people, we will need increasingly sttong men because we can 
expect that white males, driven into homosexuality from their sense of 
weakness compared to the world's majority of colored men, also will 
move towards others (non-whites), which is always an attempt to com­
pensate for the awareness of true weakness. Black male bisexuality and 
homosexuality has been used by the white collective in its effort to survive 
genetically in a world dominated by colored people, and Black acceptance 
of this imposition does not solve the major problem of our oppression but 
only further retards its ultimate solution. 
92 
7 
What Freud Was Really Talking About 
The Concept of "Penis Envy" ... 
(February 1975) 
. Every social system (includin its refl 
objective whether that obiecu· g. . ected culture) has a priority 
h . . J ve IS articulated cl I . . ypocnucally. In the fmal anal . . ear Y or disguised . ys1s, a SOCial system is a beh . consisting of specifically de . d av10ral system 
thought, speech action andsigne ~atterns of behavior- patterns oflogic 
. • emotional respo • SCiously and unconsciously h' h nse, structured both con-. • w •c are used as soc· I pnority objective of a people Th . 18 tools to achieve the 
in all areas of people a u· . . ese behavior patterns are carried forth c VIty: economics d · labor, law, politics reliaion d , e ucauon, entertainment 
. • c· • sex an war. • 
White supremacy is the sin le . . . . dominant social system' Th' g pnonty Objective of the world's · Is system has bee f · · several hundred years 1 d' . n uncttonmg for the past · · n ISCussmg the h · the white supremacy system, . . . psyc ogene tic motivations for 
presumptuous it may seem to s: on~n ~ Chapter 1, I fully realize how 
system/culture) that I- a Black ~=m:e e con~xt.of the white supremacy 
critique the thinking of S. d psychiatnst - should presume to 
. Igmun Freud one f th thmkers of the white supremac ' o e acknowledged major Y system. 
However, having been tau ht . 
decided long ago that most of: :d havm~ read Freudian theory, I 
sense. After studym· g h' reu s analysiS made little, if any real . IStory and carefull al · ' mg about me daily I ha 1 Y an yzmg what I see happen-. . • ve cone uded that I have eve 'gh · 
obligation and responsibility as a be. . ry n t, mdeed every mg on thiS planet, to set forth my 
93


--- PAGE 61 ---
The I sis Papers 
thinking on the furor that has been made on the subject of Freud's work 
and thought lfl should need further justification for my activity, 1 offer 
the following for whatever it is worth: 1) many white psychiatrists already 
are concluding and stating aloud that (their) psychiatry is dead, a psy­
chiatry that for the past 50 years has been based on Freudian theses 
(apparently they are recognizing from experience that the theory bas little 
practical use); and 2) if Sigmund Freud was really an astute behavioral 
analyst and scientist, why was he unable to decode or predict the behavior 
of those in the environment in which he (as a Jew) found himself- an 
environment in which a full one-third of the world's total Jewish popula-
tion would be destroyed? Certainly if Freud, as a Jew, was going to spend most of his energy 
thinking about and decoding behavior, he should have thought in greatest 
detail about why his people (the Semites) historically had been under 
attaCk throughout the whole of their European experience. That Freud 
should tell others what to do with their behavior while he failed to provide 
answers for himself and for his entire group suggests that one can only 
take his ideas with the proverbial gtain of salt But as I demonstrate, Freud 
-perhaps feebly and unconsciously- was suuggling to discuss the major 
issue of his existence as an oppressed "non-white" victim in a white 
supremacy culture. Therefore, his discussion, coming forth in the lan­
guage of abstraction and displacement, has remained completely obscure 
and, in the final analysis, useless. 
It is my view that the word Semite is derived from the Latin prefiX 
"semi," which means "half'. Semites of the Jewish religion are persons 
from Africa who were half black and half white. Black plus white always 
equals "colored," meaning persons carrying in their genetic makeup some 
capacity to produce melanin pigmentation and, in some instances, a 
genetic capacity to produce kinkY hair. Jews who left Africa and went to 
Europe were colored people when they arrived there hundreds of years 
ago. Europeans (whites) never have forgotten the Semite capacity for 
genetic dominance of the Aryan (white) population. Although after much 
intermixing many Jews lost much of their skin color, they have continued 
to be identified as a colored people from Africa by the whites! ibis is the 
94 
What Freud Was Really Talking About 
fundamental reaso '" th . . n ,or e htstonc op · . . supremacy system/culture Hitl ~resston of Semues Within the white · er articulated this the one hand, he insisted the Jews . most clearly when, on 
but on the other hand h . were genetically inferior to the Aryans e conunued to speak f th . . • over the Aryans (whites). 
0 
err genetic dominance 
Freud could not focus fully on thi be 
th 
· s cause he desired . 
e white supremacy culture and did . acceptance m 
psychoanalysis looked upon as a "J ish not want hiS science of 
1 
ew (degraded) sc · .. 
cou d not come to terms .th hi tence. Thus be WI s own identity th . ' 
those so identified by the surro di . ' nor e dynamic affecting un ng social syste 1 on the dynamic of "self . m. nstead of focusing -represSion," a v · . the brain-computerthathasanatural . ery convement displacement for 
and "self' (as se · th ' unmterrupted linkage between "sex" xIS e act respons"bl ti . the only act lhrough which the "~lf~ c:: existence of the "self' and 
Freud found bimselftiocUSI·ng on.. reproduced), as a Semite, . sex -repressio " s dtd occur in the white n. ex -repression indeed . supremacy culture as dem altenation from the condition of alb. . ' onstrated by the historic 
-which was viewed as responsible~: :d theactof"orig~ sin" (sex) 
world of colored people. 1 appearance of whiteness in a 
M . y concentral.lon here is the topic of" . " . of the Freudian edifice (I th pents envy' a maJor cornerstone 
plex" and "castra . . n _o er chapters, I discuss the "Oedipal com-
. non anXIety.") 1n brief . 
psychological theory' the little (white) . . , acco~ding _to Freudian 
ofloss and injury and with env of grr~ IS struck With an mtense sense 
her clitoris is an inferior Y the (white) male when she realizes that organ to the male's · ( · · 
had such a fine penis). Presumabl sh . pems . wtshmg that she too 
penis of her own or some symbol" yti, e IS not sausfied until she has a tc ormofapen· A . 
the female's personality is pre d _
1
s. maJOr segment of 
realization. sume to be predicated on this traumatic 
As previously mentioned, Freud w . . . . . 
sup~emacy culture, a culture that had its ;:ea Se~nc Vl~tlm m a white 
Africa. The fust albino mutations ( h. ) genesiS not m Greece but in 
. in Africa These albino I w Jtes were produced from Blacks 
s, suggest, were chased rth b 
wandered north away from th . no Y the Blacks or e mtense sun so that th ey could survive. (See 
95


--- PAGE 62 ---
The Isis Papers 
Chapter 2.) They ended their trek in Europe, directly north of Africa. 
From the very ftrst experiences of the mutant albino population, with the 
recognition that the condition of skin albinism (whiteness) could be 
annihilated genetically by those with black and brown skins (a 
phenomenon that is now known as genetic dominance over a genetic 
recessive state, such as albinism), there had been white fear of Black 
genetic power or white male fear and envy of the Black (penis) phallus 
and entire genital awaratus. This fear, in tum. produced a sense of 
inadequacy and inferiority in the white male as he compared himself to 
males of color. The total white group's conscious or unconscious awareness of their 
genetic weakness and .potential annihilation became even more 
pronounced- as a cultural theme- as Europeans (whites) began circum­
navigating the globe in the 15th centurY on. At this time, whites dis­
covered that they were a tinY minority on a planet wherein all others had 
colored skins. It did not take long for the group to realize that both colored 
males and females could annihilate the whites genetically. Thus, the 
white male felt genetically weaker, not only in comparison to the Black 
male but also to the Bla~ale. The Black male had to be feared more 
because it is males who initi8te the act of reproduction. 
The above genetic dynamics are, of course, never discussed directly 
and overtly within the white supremacy system/culture. Most overt 
discussions on genetics center around analysis of the "inferiority" of Black 
and other non-white peoples, which of course is a projective compensa­
tion. The full discussion, however, that continues covertly and uncon­
sciously permeates the logic sequences within the culture. Perhaps it will 
be fair to state that true awareness of the fundamental genetic issue is 
repressed. White envy of the black phallus is addressed unconsciously when· 
whites constantly concern themselves with the comparative size of the 
black phallus versus the size of the white phallus. This concern is raised 
in the form of the following question: "Is the Black male's penis really 
greater in size than that of the white male?" Any school child could 
96 
What Freud Was Really Talking About 
suggest that a simple tape measure can settle . 
all, unless the questioners and " the quesuon once and for researchers" are afraid 
In my practice, a Black mother infonn to measure. 
attending a predominantly wh'te 1 ed me that her six-year-old son 1 e ementary sch 1 ' 
one of his white male classmates had . oo ' reported to her that 
had a large penis. The mother statedtold hun that he (the Black child) 
response was. Her son told the hi !at she asked her son what his 
penises. w te Y that all Black boys had large 
It is obvious that in the above situatio . . white children, at shower or bathroom . n, m a sch~l Wlth a majority of 
have had ample opportunit to tl~e. the white male child would 
have had the same opponuru~t seet h the SIZe of white penises. He would Y a orne. His need to . 
of the Black child • s penl's 1·nd' th comment on the SIZe •cates at this Black · out by all of his other co . peniS must have stood 
certainly clear that the Blamckpansoalns, even at this tender age. It is also 
m e child had the adequacy of the Black mal ' . no concerns or fears about e s peniS. 
Furthennore, it is my interpretation th . power of the genetic material . th at the major concern is with the 
. m e black testicl d displaced to a less threate . b' es an that the concern is 
appreciate my analysis re rungbeo ~ect (the phallus) and its size. To , mem r that the m . males who have been lynched b hi ajor percentage of Black 
attacked, removed and taken awa Y b w : males h~ve had their genitals 
on their person) ThiS' beha . . Y Y w te males (I.e. • carried wilh them . · v1ons peculiar to h · . . ship to men of color. I inte ret thi . w lte males m lhelf relation-
genitalia. Thus, it must be a:!'acked s ~:avlOr as fear of the Black male 
and a desire for possession of an estroyed, but also there is envy 
Thi same. 
s should help to explain why white mal . them or wish to view themselves es who WISh others to view 
and suck on huge black cigars. 7n::g:werfu~ and important, puff 
others to believe they are th 1 ' • e more Important they wish • e .onger the c1gar p hap 
to draw the attention of others to the • er s the foul odor is 
(their symbolic phallus). mselves with their long black cigars 
. Also, the more powerful and im nan . hunself, the longer is his black lim ~ t the white male perceives ousme. Both the car and cigar can be 
97


--- PAGE 63 ---
The Isis Papers 
viewed as phallic symbols. Perhaps black and dark brown pipes also 
should be included as similar symbols. (See Chapter 11.) It is again little 
wonder that white men build missiles shaped in the form of phalluses, 
paint them white and use them to annihilate peoples of color around the 
globe. 
I have said all of the above to state that, yes, there is "penis envy" in 
the white supremacy culture, but it began with the white male's envy of 
the genetic power residing in the Black male's testicles and phallus. 
Perhaps there was also envy of the comparative longer length of the Black 
phallus. The sense of his relative genetic weakness or inferiority com­
pared to Black males (because Black is always genetically dominant to 
white) caused the white male to attempt to project "inferiority" on white 
females as well. (See Chapter 6.) The white male's insistence that he is 
superior to the white female and his forcing this psychological dynamic 
in white family life has caused the white female, in tum, to wish that she 
could share his power and his status and symbolically, to have a penis of 
her own. The extent to which white females as mothers play a role in 
helping to turn their sons into effeminate homosexuals (female-acting 
men with penises) is again an attempt to resolve an aspect of the conflict. 
Some white females react to this imposed sense of their genital 
inferiority by seeking to "liberate" themselves and secure black penises 
of their own, penises white males consider more powerful than their own. 
This is the dialogue that increasing numbers of white females covertly and 
perhaps unconsciously conduct with white males as they (white females) 
parade in front of white males with the Black male (black penis) they have 
captured for their own. The silent dialogue between the white male and 
white female in these social confrontations goes something like this, 
"Now I have one (a penis) that is bigger and stronger than yours, one that 
I know that you envy." 
As the mothers, wives and sisters of white males, white females 
consciously or unconsciously always have understood white males' envy 
of Black males, even though the envy was expressed in terms of white 
male hysteria over white women being "raped" by Black males. White 
males knew or suspected that the white female desired the black penis 
98 
What Freud Was Really Talking About 
more than the hi w te one because white m penis more than their own ( h en themselves desired the black 
them home). Thus 't . w Y els~ ~ut off the black genitals and take 
' I lS not swpnsmg th th female/Black male activity (t' 't' ed . at ere is increased white 
h 
m Iat m most · w o have signaled to Black al th mstances by white females · m es at they ar ·1 time, other white female . e avru able). At the same , s are saymg they ar . firemen" and "football la " ,. . e gomg to be "policemen" h · . P yers - JUSt like m " . ' t err lesbian inclinations openl en - and are dtscussing 
Whi y. te males, with Freud, s help have . . 
of loss, injury inadequac d, proJected therrown intense sense ' Y an envy as g · al mutants who are being annih'l d . enettc ly recessive albino 1 ate genetically b both males and females. It is th ( h' Y Black (non-white) . . ey w tte males) who ha th . envy, whtch IS manifested m' th . ve e pnmary penis 
th 
. err envy of Black 1 , . 
en proJect their sense of inf . . rna es pemses. They · enonty onto white fi al m turn, to develop secondary penis em es, causing them, 
accused! envy. The accuser now-stands himself 
These dynamics are at the root of the ti 
males feel towards Black m 1 th ear of all true competition white a es, us preventin . . 
areas of people activity: economics d . g true competitton in all 
politics, religion, sex and w Th, e ucabo~, entertainment, labor, law, 
1 
· ar. e obscunty of p d' . c anfled only if the system and 1 reu s Ideas can be cu turaldynam· f h' analyzed and understood full ti . . ICS o w Ite supremacy are 
suffered and died Freud y, o~ this IS the context in which Freud wrote . · , attempung to esc h. • (m the full meaning of that te ape ts own reality as a Semite 
seeing and experiencing abo trmh. ), was. unable to face fully what he was 
f hi u 1m, wh1ch was anti s .. 
0 w te supremacy) He £elt 't b - emiUsm (a dynamic 
· 1 , ut could not . perhaps because he feared for his life Th . . accurately describe it -
from his brain-computer as abstract~ us, ~~s life experience came forth 
To see clearly, Freud would have haand dtsplac~ concepts. 
as a "non-white" (a Semite- . " d t~ recogmze that he was viewed 
like "German" and "Am . 1.~;· mulatto ) and not an "Austrian" which en can, means pur h. • too desperately' like the th S . . e w tte. Freud was attempting . o er emites m Euro d 
mtegrated and accepted as "wh'te" Th pe an America, to be 
"through a glass darkly " or ~~ . er~fore, he ended by seeing only 
, re y not seemg at all Then ag"';n h · ... ,per aps 
99


--- PAGE 64 ---
The I sis Papers 
sensed that offending the Aryans (whites) by making. a fully 
Freud te analysis would have brought disaster before it fmally dtd come 
accura ed t his fear nor - in the Nazi holocaust Personally, I ~ no ne to repea 
his folly, even though the same danger extsts. 
100 
What Freud Was Really Talking About 
REFERENCES 
Cirlot, J.E .. A Dictionary of Symbols. New York: Philosophical Library, 1962. 
Freedman, A.M.. and Kaplan, H.I.. Comprehensive Textbook of 
Psychiatry. Baltimore: Williams and Wilkins Company, 1967. 
Hitler, A .. Mein Kampf. Costa Mesa: Noon Tide Press, 1986. 
Memmi, A .. Dominated Man. Boston: Beacon Press, 1968. 
101


--- PAGE 65 ---
8 
Guns As Symbols 
(1975-1977) 
Anthony Sampson, in his bookThe Arms Bazaar: From Lebanon to 
Lockheed (1977), infonns us that the word " ... weapon was until the 
founeenth century synonymous with penis ... " 
There are now 25,000 bandgun deaths per year in the United States of 
America. The President of the U.S., in 1975, was subjected to two 
assassination attempts in a time span of three weeks. Handguns were the 
instrument used in each assassination attempt. The same President was 
against handgun control. 
The above statements are laden with highly significant meaning, which 
is not immediately apparent and which can be understood fully only when 
the underlying psychodynamics of the collective white psyche and of the 
white supremacy power system and its culture are probed, dissected and 
revealed. 
Joseph Kraft, writing in the September 25, 1975 issue of The 
Washington Post stated, 
The starting point for analysis is the recognition that, for better or for 
worse, the United States is a country with a thing about guns. Prowess 
with firearms was critical to survival in the frontier days. The right to 
bear arms is guaranteed in the Constitution. Millions of Americans 
regard hunting as a favorite recreation. Thousands collect gWlS as 
souvenirs. I once visited the home in Mechanicsburg, Ohio of a 
prominent official. In this home no wall was uncovered by some kind 
of rifle, shotgun, pistol or musket. The owner, William Saxbe, 
eventually became Auomey General. 
103


--- PAGE 66 ---
The Isis Papers 
Mr. Kraft later used the tenn "pro-gun culture" to describe American 
culture and society, as he cited that there have been no fewer than five 
different Presidential commissions that have recommended more strin­
gent forms of gun control. 
While recognizing along with Mr. Kraft the predominant use of guns 
in the American frontier days, I strongly disagree that guns were needed 
for survival in the simple terms of the continuation of life. After all, the 
Native Americans taught the Europeans how to grow corn to feed them­
selves and survive. Ouns were needed, however, if Native (non-white) 
Americans were going to be removed successfully from the land that the 
Europeans (whites) wished to dominate and control. 
This essay is being written neither in review nor in protest of the 
horrendous carnage of Native American life in particular, nor in protest 
of the general path of carnage that has been tread in this area of the world. 
It is being written in hopes of shedding light on the seeming dilemma that, 
in spite of the past and present potential carnage from handguns, there is 
tremendous resistance amongst the dominant population to have goos as 
well as all other instruments of life destruction (including atomic, 
hydrogen and neutron bombs) brought under control. 
In my view, the gun is a critical symbol in the subconscious mind of 
white peoples everywhere. This symbol is primarily operative, as are all 
true symbols at the unconscious level of brain activity. 
Increasing numbers of Black behavioral scientists are beginning to 
understand that the dominant thrust in what has become known as 
"Western civilization" is racism. 
Once we become aware of the deep humiliation that is apparently felt 
by whites because of their skin whiteness (due to the genetic mutation to 
albinism) and because of their genetic vulnerability when compared to 
non-whites (black, brown, red and yellow peoples), it is possible to 
understand the historically degraded status of sex in the white supremacy 
system/culture. Sex is "the act of self-reproduction" and the act respon­
sible for "the production of the self' and "the appearance of the self." In 
the white brain-computer, if the white, pale, genetically vulnerable self is 
104 
Guns as Symbols 
bde~ded, then the act that produced that self will be degraded in th t 
ram-computer. a same 
co:~:a::~:; :a;;;:u:~W~stern" author of what whites have thought 
n IS presented by Ma.rlc T . h . essay "Skin Deep" from 0 T.'L wam w o, m his n rJe Damned Human Race, stated: 
... Then there would have been the added . 
complexion. It is not an unbearabl dxsadvantage of the white 
keeps to itself but h . ~ unpleasant complexion when it • w en 1t comes mto competiti ith brown and black the fact is betrayed th . . on w masses of 
we are used to it .... Nearly all black and a~ lt lS end~able only because 
a beautiful white skin is H rown skins are beautiful but 
rare. ow rare one may 1 b alk' down a street in Paris New y k • earn Y w mg 
particularly an unfashi • abl or or London on a weekday -on e street - and keep' 
~a~factory ~mplexions encountered in the course:: a ~U:t ~he the 
ar complexions are massed they ake th . . re 
unwholesome, and sometime; franldm h etlwhite look bleached out, y g as y. 
The acts of self-production and self-reprod . targets of degradation i . ucuon are not the only 
th h . n the white psyche (brain-computer). Within th 
oug t and logic processes of the white psyche,. the genitals th 1 e 
are degJaded -both male and female genitals - those parts of the emse ves 
~d physiology that are responsible for self-production and self an:m Y 
:~~~c~a:· the white male sexual apparatus is seen as ~;;~:r ;~ 
(See Chapter 7.r compared to the sexual apparatus of the Black male. 
arti~e ~:= ~.~: ~su: of Mfedical.Aspects of Human Sexuality, in an 
n s ear o Havmg Too Small A .P . " P Toussieng, M.D., writes "A surp . . I I ems, ovl W. 
their pe . ' nsmg Y arge number of men fear that mses are not of adequate size " Alth h ~ . 
re~e~ence to the race or color of the ~en he i~:~ie;::si~n~ ;:alces ~o 
clirucal practice that this is not a major fear of Black ' I His own m does state, men. owever, he 
It is hard to determin th . . e e exact ongm of the myth of the b' . 
many cultures such as ancient Egypt the penis did bee lg perus: _In 
symbol and was, consequently pictured 'th om~ a fenility In 1 · ' wx enonnous dunens· c asslc Greece, however, small geni•-•- . xons. 
~ were cons1dered more 
105


--- PAGE 67 ---
The Isis Papers 
beautiful than larger ones. Romans reversed this concept and Western 
culture appears by and large to have followed them. 
It is interesting that Toussieng makes no mention of any attempt to 
measure the penis size of white and Black men in a culture heavily laden 
with this specific white male preoccupation- a culture in which large 
numbers of white males are daily in close proximity to Black males and 
aware of their presence in the society, especially in the arena of sports 
(games symbolic of special male prowess and virility), where Black males 
dominate. 
Interestingly, Clyde Keeler, writing on albinism in an article entitled 
"Cuna Moon-Child Albinism, 1950-1970," (Journal of Heredity, No. 61, 
1970) states, 
The voice quality of albino males is soft and higher pitched than in 
moreno males. In addition, they appear to be deficient in sex. hormone, 
and while they may be fertile, they have a lower phallic posture, due 
to flaccidity. Albinos usually have flabby muscles and reduced 
muscular strength as shown by manumometer readings. 
This is of interest because, in my view, all skin whiteness is related to 
albinism or a variant thereof. Keeler's observation implies that there may 
be a genetic association between albino or white skin color and the 
appearance and posture of the penis (albinism influencing small penis size 
or lack of penis posture causing its appearance to be small). Also, it is 
known that in comparison to the Black population, whites have less 
muscle definition- thus, muscular flabbiness- compared to Blacks. 
It may be said that most fundamentally there is a genetic basis and 
secondarily an anatomic and physiologic basis for the white fear of white 
genetic annihilation. This, in turn, became the basis for the global system 
of white supremacy domination and its attendant culture - a system and 
culture evolved and structured to prevent white genetic annihilation and 
to ensure white genetic survival. 
Indeed, if the understood threat to white genetic survival was the Black 
male'sgenital apparatus,consciously or unconsciously, the white psyche 
106 
Guns as Symbols 
would be compelled to produce a weapon of defense, of comparable or 
greater power than that of the Black male's penis and testicles. 
It should be made clear here that Black males' genital apparatus is the 
most feared relative to the genital apparatus of other non-white males 
because in possessing the greatest potential to produce melanin _ the 
pigment responsible for all true skin coloration - Black males have the 
greatest genetic potential to annihilate the global white minority. 
The individual and collective white brain-computer, given that task of 
solving the global problem of white genetic survival, eventually evolved 
a solution in the form of a technology that would address the specific issue 
of white genetic and genital weakness or inadequacy. 
Technology always is developed to take over at the point of the human 
organism's anatomical and physiological limitation. Thus, the white 
brai~-computer printout was a weapon that would be the exact symbolic 
rep~1c~ o~ the male genitalia- a weapon that would take over at the point 
of lumtauon of the white male genital apparatus, an apparatus that had the 
very specific limitation of being unable to annihilate Blacks and other 
people of color genetically. Diagrams I-IV illustrate what I am stating. 
107


--- PAGE 68 ---
Diagram I 
The Male Genitalia (dia.granlmatic sketch) 
Penis and Testicles 
Front View 
The Male Geni~~matic sketch) 
Penis and Tesdcle 
Lateral View 
Diagram lll 
The Male Genitalia (diagrammatic sketch) 
Penis and Testicle 
Erect State 
Diagram IV 
The Gun (diagrammatic sketch)


--- PAGE 69 ---
The I sis Papers 
From the above four drawings, it is clear that the gun, in its essential 
shape and functioning, is the exact counterpart to the functioning genital 
apparatus and to the erect penis that is ejaculating. In other words, ~e 
handle and chamber are analogous to the testicles; the barrel of the gun ts 
analogous to the penis; the bullets are the spenn contained in ~e ejac_u~te 
with their genetic material. (In the white psyche, white geneuc annihila­
tion by Blacks or other non-whites is experienced as the destructi~n of 
life by the Black genital apparatus.) The firing gun in function achte~es 
for the whites the destruction of the lives of Blacks and other non-whtte 
~pies. . 
Thus, to the extent that the guns manufactured and made by the whtte 
collective in the context of the white supremacy system/culture were used 
against Blacks and other genetically dominant colored people on Earth, 
they became the answer (at least, a temporarily comforting answer) to the 
great fear of white genetic annihilation. The gun became not only the 
weapon, the developed technology to ensure white genetic survival, ~ut 
it also became the symbolic white penis. Thus, it is no accident that whtte 
males often refer to one another as "son-of-a gun." This is a symbolically 
determined pattern of speech, and I am certain that white males wh~ u~e 
it have not understood in depth why such a phrase entered and remams m 
their brain-computers. This phrase deprecates the white male genital 
apparatus that "fathers" white people with their genetically deficient sta~ 
of albinism. It says instead that the white male prefers the gun to be. hts 
phallus and the phallus of his father. The.gun then ~omes the d~stred 
all-powerful phallus of the white male, whtch he concetves of as bemg an 
equalizer to the phallus of Black and other non-white males.. . 
This symbolism underlying the production of the gun m the whtte 
psyche and the white supremacy system/culture also explains the Western 
expression "God did not create all men equal but Colonel Colt did," 
referring to the creator of the Colt revolver. Apparently white males were 
thinking, at ari unconscious level to be sure, th:u God did not create them 
to be genetically equal to men of color, but their technology of compen­
sation was the gun. 
110 
Guns as Symbols 
Understanding this gun symbolism also clarifies the observation of 
Anthony Sampson in the opening paragraph of this essay - that the word 
" .. ;weapon was up till the fourteenth century synonymous with penis ... " 
in Western (white) civilization. 
The gun is not the only weapon in the white supremacy system/culture 
that in form and function is symbolic of the functioning male genital 
apparatus. The cannon - with its cannon wheels and long black nozzle 
or tube and big black cannon balls shot out as projectiles- is one example. 
Similarly, bullets and bombs are dark-colored and resemble individual 
sperm in general shape and fonn. And it is of further importance that the 
gun and these other weapons usually are painted black or are at least dark 
in color. 
In contrast to these dark-colored weapons are the more recently 
developed missiles that are often painted white, but again shaped as 
gigantic white penises. These white phallic symbols are now the super 
weapons of the "superman" and the "superior" race. 
It is of great interest that these modem, large, white missiles surround 
the vast majority of non-white peoples on the planet and when used can 
counter the threat of white genetic annihilation. 
Knowledge and understanding of these symbols will make clear the 
meaning of the Washington Monument and, in addition, its proximity to 
the domed Jefferson Memorial in Washington, D.C. When these two 
architectural structures are viewed at a distance, they look like Diagram 
v. 
111


--- PAGE 70 ---
~v 
The Washington Monume!lt and 
The Jefferson Memorial 
View from a distance 
(diagrammatic sketch) 
Guns as Symbols 
Is it not apparent that this is the same side view of the penis and the 
testicles that are the basis for the fonn and structure of the gun? This same 
lateral view, in abstract fonn, of the penis and testicles was the symbol 
for the World Fair held in New York, 1941-1942. 
With all of the above in mind, let us again return to the gun. Upon 
brief reflection it will be noted that traditionally in the white supremacy 
culture guns were/are worn on one or both hips of the male, at the exact 
level of the male genitals. It is no accident that in this culture the act of 
ejaculating is often referred to as "shooting off." 
When the man wearing a gun in a holster is viewed laterally, the gun 
appears exactly as the side view of the penis and testicles. If guns are 
worn on both hips and brought together centrally on the beltto the vertical 
midline of the body, they present the full face view of the penis and both 
testicles. (See Diagram VI.) 
In the U.S., the most popular hero has been the gunfighter, now the 
present-day detective or lawman. The first chapter of Paul Trachtman's 
book The Gunfighters is entitled "The Deadly Brotherhood of the Gun." 
The "gunfighters" came into prominence following the close of the Civil 
War. Most of the gunfighters were Southerners who felt humiliated by 
the loss of their slaves and the war and by the temporary appearance of 
power held by Blacks who were their former Black slaves. 
Diagram VI 
Symbol for the World Fair 
New York, 1941-1942


--- PAGE 71 ---
The Isis Papers 
The resulting deep sense of white male insecurity and inadequacy was 
compensated for by the obsessive use of the gun. This was the era of Frank 
and Jesse James, Billy the Kid and a host of others for whom the gun made 
up for a sense of profound and deep inadequacy hidden by~ tho~ough and 
ruthless exterior. That the lives of others were treated w1th httle value 
merely reflected the failed sense of adequacy and diminished sense of 
importance in their own lives. 
During this same period, the gory sport of "cockfighting" was highly 
popular and important as a diversion among ranchers~ the. West;, Thu~: 
It is not surprising that the white male also referred to his pe~1s as a cock, 
or that when a gun (the symbol of the white male phallus) 1s prepared for 
firing it is flrst "cocked." In this area of the wor~d in the w.hite supremacy 
system a detective who always carries a gun 1s a most lffiportant her~. 
The de~ective with his gun has been referred to as a "dick." From ~1s 
came the long-time comic strip hero detective, "Die~ Tracy." Th~ whlte 
male also has referred to his penis as a "dick." And 1t cannot be 1gnored 
that the flrst child all American children still meet in primary public school 
is a white male child named "Dick" along with his sister "Jane." In effect, 
at this early age, the white male child is being instructed to re~og~ize that 
his identity is synonymous with penis (gun). These sym.bol.lc remfon:e­
rnents continue until his death. That is why there is a contmumg necessity 
for gun violence via television for American (white) children. 
All of the above has been stated not only to point out a basic 
preoccupation of the white supremacy system/culture with ~e threat of 
white genetic annihilation, but more importantly, to shed hght on why 
there cannot and will not be gun control or weapon control in the global 
white supremacy system/culture. . . 
With the gun being the symbolic genitalia of the wh1te male (hlS ans":er 
to the threat to white genetic survival), gun control would represent wh1te 
male (genital) castration. Such gun control would spell the immedi~te 
end of white genetic survival on Earth. John Ellis, in his book TheSocwl 
History of the Machine Gun. states, 
In Africa small parties of Europeans, soldiers and armed settlers ~ften 
had to face the resistance of large numbers of poorly armed nanves. 
114 
Guns as Symbols 
The odds were so in favor of the natives that the white men were 
obliged to adopt all weapons that would help to maximize their 
firepower .... In all parts of the continent, against Zulus, Dervishes, 
Hereros, Matabele and many other peoples, Gatlings, Gardners and 
Maxims scythed down anyone who dared to stand in the way of the 
imperialist advance .... Without the handful of machine guns, the 
British South Africa Company might have lost Rhodesia; Lugard 
might have been driven out of Uganda and the Germans out of 
Tanganyika. Without Hiram Maxim much of subsequent world 
history might have been very different. 
Ellis remarks further: 
In Africa automatic weapons were used to support the seizure of 
millions of square miles of land and to discipline those Wlfortunates 
who wished to eschew the benefits of European civilization. With 
machine guns in their armory, mere handfuls of white men, plunderers 
and visionaries, civilians and soldiers were able to scoff at the 
objections of the Africans themselves and impose their rule on a whole 
continent. 
Thus, in this area of the white supremacy system where in 197 5 there 
were 25,000 deaths callSed by guns, there cannot be gun control. Guns 
and missiles are viewed as essential aspects of white male anatomy and 
physiology. Is it an accident that in the U.S. white male children learn to 
use guns before they learn to use their penises, while Black male children 
learn to llSe their penises before they learn to use guns? 
I will close with further observations. Following a lecture that I 
presented in Los Angeles, California in May, 1977 in which I included a 
discussion on the symbolism of the gun in the white male psyche, a white 
male in the audience pointed out the parallel symbolism in the large black 
unbrella often carried by white males in the white supremacy culture. I 
agreed that his observation seemed to be a valid one. The long black 
umbrella, carried everywhere, became a part of the standard dress of the 
well-to-do Englishman at a time when it was said that "the sun never sets 
on the British Empire." Of course this great empire consisted of control 
over vast numbers of non-white men and their genitals that had the power 
to annihilate whites. The white man's traditional long black umbrella 
115


--- PAGE 72 ---
The Isis Papers 
said, in effect, "I also have a large black phallus or at least a phallic symbol 
that denotes my importance and power- and a power over the Black male 
genital apparatus. " 
The same symbolism explains a recent murder in Washington, D.C. 
A white male shot a white female companion in the mouth, as she was in 
bed with two other white females engaged in sexual activity that all four 
bad been involved in earlier. As the white female victim was engaged in 
being sexually "pleasured" by two white females, the white male who was 
left out - feeling genitally rejected and inadequate compared to two 
females - pulled out and used (consciously or unconsciously) his 
preferred symbolic penis, the gun. 
116 
Guns as Symbols 
REFERENCES 
Ellis, John, The Social History of the Machine Gun. New York: 
Pantheon, 1975. 
Keeler, Clyde. "Cuna Moon-Child Albinism, 1950-1970," Journal of 
Heredity. No. 61, 1970. 
Sampson, Anthony. The Arms Bazaar: From Lebanon to Lockheed. 
New York: Viking, 1977. 
Toussieng, Povl. "Men's Fear of Having Too Small a Penis," 
Medical Aspects of Human Sexuality. May, 1977. 
Trachtman, Paul. The Gunjighlers. Virginia: Time-Life, 1975. 
117


--- PAGE 73 ---
9 
The Mother Fucker and the Original 
Mother Fucker 
(June 1976) 
I have defined racism as the behavioral power system of logic, thought, 
speech, action, emotional response and perception - whether consciously 
or unconsciously determined - in persons who classify themselves as 
"white." The goal of racism is white domination over the vast majority 
of the world!s people whom the whites have classified as "non-whites" 
(black, brown, red and yellow) in order to ensure white genetic survival. 
My interest in the phenomenon of racism has resulted from my 
awaren~ss of ~e negative impact this destructive system has on the lives 
and behavior of th~ vast majority of people on this planet who are 
non-white, and who are the viftims of this power system. 
The specific nature of the destructiveness of racism was set forth by 
the Caucus of Black Psychiatrists at the 1969 Annual Meeting of the 
American Psychiatric Association (Miami Beach, Florida). The Black 
Caucus stated that racism was not only the number one mental health 
problem in this nation, but additionally WtlS the number one cause of all 
other mental health problems. 
Racism is carried· out in all areas of people activity: economics, 
education, entertainment, labor, law, politics, ~ligion, sex and war (as 
explaiped by Neely Fuller in his book The United Independent Compen­
satory Code/System/Concept). From the above, it follows that if the basic 
underlying psychodynamic motivations in the individual and collective 
white psyche are understood, that is, to sUrvive as a mutant, genetic 
119


--- PAGE 74 ---
The Isis Papers 
deficient minority (which includes the evolution of a power system to 
ensure that survival), then all patterns of white behavior eventually can 
be decoded and fully understood - whether they are patterns of logic, 
thought, speech, action, emotional response and/or perception in any of 
the nine areas of people activity. Similarly, because all non-white peoples 
on the planet Earth are now subject to and affected by the global white 
supremacy system, if the white psyche is decoded and understood fully, 
it is possible to decode and understand the present behavioral manifesta­
tions of all of those who are victims of white supremacy domination and 
oppression, the total non-white majority as a collective and as individuals. 
The term "mother fucker" is a pattern of speech used with extremely 
high frequency amongst Black people, specifically Black males in the 
U.S. In my attempt to decode and understand this particular pattern of 
high frequency behavior or language use, it was necessary to begin with 
the knowledge that all Black peoples, like all other non-white peoples, are 
relatively powerless victims of the white supremacy system, irrespective 
of their income levels. 
I then examined certain other specific patterns of language used by 
Black males within the white supremacy culture. To begin with, Black 
males in particular, but also Black females, refer to the white male as "The 
Man." Once this term "The Man" is thought or uttered, the brain computes 
that inasmuch as there are only five major categories of people ("man," 
"woman," "boy," "girl" and "baby"), if the white male is "The Man," 
meaning logically "The only Man," then any other male must be one of 
the four remaining people categories-"boy," "girl," "woman" or "baby." 
Historically, Black males have fought being referred to as "boy" by 
white males and females. Only recently has the use of this degrading 
appellation ceased to some extent, although there is a current television 
series called "Chico and The Man." The title implies "the boy" and "The 
Man." "The Man," of course, is white and "Chico" is a non-white male. 
Because the use of the word "boy" in reference to Black males ceased, 
it only meant that Black males could then refer to themselves as any one 
of the remaining three categories of people: "baby," "woman" or "girl." 
It certainly did not imply that Black males would be referred to as equals 
120 
The Mother Fucker and The Original Mother Fucker 
of white males. This never could occur under the system of white 
supremacy domination. 
When the use of the word "boy" was no longer the term of common 
reference for Black males by whites, Black males began referring to 
themselves as "baby." For until most recently, with the changes in dress 
and clothing styles, most Black males deeply resented any reference to 
t~emselves as "girl" or "woman." But the recent style changes towards 
htgh-heeled shoes, curled hair, hair curlers, braids, earrings, bracelets, 
necklaces, pocketbooks, midriff tops, cinch waisted pants etc., that many 
Blac~ males have adopted now suggest that there is a developing tenden­
cy.' wtdespr~d ~ongst Black males, to not mind (consciously or uncon­
SCiously) bemg mtstaken for a "girl" or a "woman." 
However, at present, the term "baby" is a fully accepted appellation 
for Black males in reference to one another. It is thus not uncommon to 
h~ ?ne Black male say to another, "Hey 'baby,' what's happening?" In 
addttion to Black males frequently referring to one another as "baby," 
many Black females often refer to their Black male peers and companions 
as "baby." While Black adult females refer to Black adult males as 
"baby," .Black adult males often refer to Black adult female peers and 
compantons as "momma," often expecting those "mommas" to provide 
food, clothes and shelter for them. It is not uncommon to hear "Hey 
momma, can I ride with you?" Further, Black adult males also refer to 
the place where they sleep as a "crib." The brain thus computes: an adult 
male who. refers to another adult male as "The Man" (meaning, the only 
man), to htmself as "baby," to the woman that he sleeps with as "momma," 
and to the place where he sleeps as a "crib," will call himself or any Black 
male reflection of himself a "mother fucker." 
. Thus it is clear that the origin of this specific pattern of speech begins 
Wtth the perhaps unconscious recognition that within the framework of 
the w.hite supremacy power system and its reflecting culture, power rests 
only m the hands of whites, more specifically, in the hands of the white 
male. And relative to the white male, the Black male is a powerless 
"baby." All babies everywhere are powerless compared to adult males or 
men. "Mother fucker" is therefore a profound political statement, as it 
121


--- PAGE 75 ---
The Isis Papers 
addresses itself to an existing and specific set of power relationships -
namely, the white male's continuing dominance over the Black male. 
It is the confrontation with the stated fact of his social and functional 
powerlessness in the total context of the white supremacy system that 
causes one Black male to explosively challenge and fight another Black 
male when called "mother fucker" with the proper negative vocal intona­
tion. This is true because Black males are totally uncomfortable with the 
reality of their relative powerlessness compared to white males, even 
though this awareness of powerlessness is more often unconsciously 
repressed than consciously dealt with in the Black male psyche. It is my 
estimate that 70% of the Black male on Black male homicides follow the 
use of the term "mother fucker" said in the specific tone that implies, at 
the unconscious gut level, "You are a powerless baby." 
The reality and awareness of Black male powerlessness in the context 
of the white supremacy system causes such gut and psychic pain for the 
Black male that the brain-computer switches over to the very deep levels 
of the unconscious mind, to the realm and region of symbolic word 
formation and thinking. Here the brain pieces together, in coded symbolic 
language, the phraseology that hides from the conscious mind the con­
tinuing existence and activity of a totally unacceptable reality. Indeed, 
there is no single term that is more emotionally charged nor a phrase that 
is used more often by Black males in the U.S. than "mother fucker." This 
suggests that the most obvious of all realities for Black males is their 
powerlessness relative to the power of the white male in the system and 
culture of racism. 
But, it is not sufficient to have decoded this particular word pattern in 
the white supremacy culture. The question indeed arises, why is this 
particular word formation and combination used to denote Black power­
lessness? This more fundamental question can be answered. Again, 
however, it is necessary to begin with the psyche of those who organized 
the white supremacy power system as well as the fundamental reasons 
and motivations behind its origin. 
The total world white collective has been involved in the establishment 
and maintenance of the white supremacy power system. It is, however, 
122 
The Mother Pucker and The Original Mother Pucker 
the w~ite male who has been involved most specifically in the system's 
establishment and maintenance. The system • s major characteristics thus 
reflect more of the projections of his psyche than those of his female 
counterpart. 
I ~tated in the tJ_eginning o~ this book that whites are undoubtedly a 
ge~~tic mutant albmo population. They are albino mutants from the 
ongmal Black (hue-man) beings, causing the formation of a mankind and 
a huemankind. This statement is given strong support by the worlc of the 
anthroP_Ologist Louis Leakey who stated in his book By The Evidence 
(Memotrs, 1932-1951) that human life began in Africa and that the first 
human beings were Black. 
~rom the modem ~cience of genetics, we know that it is possible for 
all pigmented population groups to produce white (albino) mutants. We 
also know that it is impossible for albino mutants to produce Black 
offsprings. 
As reported in National Geographic and Natural History magazines 
(se~ re~erences), recently found in Africa was the first known albino 
gonlla mfant who was the offspring of its coal black gorilla mother and 
fa~er. ~is ~vi~ence strongly supports the extrapolation that if a higher 
pnmate (m thiS mstance, a coal black gorilla pair) can produce a platinum 
blond, blue-eyed, pink-skinned (albino) then certainly this could also be 
the pattern by which blond, blue-eyed, pink-skinned (white) men and 
women also were produced- as genetic mutants or albino mutants from 
the B~ck ~orm. That the norm for the entire human family is to possess 
melanm-ptgmented skins supports that extrapolation. 
The albino mutants that easily could have evolved in Africa either 
c~uld have been chased northward by their pigmented parents and 
kms_men, or they could have migrated northward on their own, away from 
the mtensely sunny environment of Africa where their non-pigmented 
defe~tive ~ins would not be damaged by the less intense sun rays: 
Movm~ dlfectly northward from Africa, one lands in Europe, the now 
recogmzed home of the whites. 
The main point of this perhaps seemingly discursive discussion is that 
white-skinned (albino) persons were most probably the genetic mutant 
123


--- PAGE 76 ---
The Isis Papers 
offspring from Black parents. In other words, Black males and Black 
females were the parents, the original mothers and fathers, of the albino 
or white population. The marriage of albinos with one another sub­
sequently produced what is now known as the white race. If this de~crip­
tion of the origin of whites is accurate, as this writer strongly beheves, 
then deep within the unconscious psyche of the white collective is an 
awareness of their origin amongst Blacks, that Blacks were their parents 
and that they (whites) were the defective offsprings of Blacks. 
The white male, the prime organizer of the white supremacy sys­
tem/culture, is thus aware (although perhaps at deep unconscious levels) 
that his original mother was a Black woman (just as his original father 
was a Black man). Therefore, in spite of the overt psychological need to 
repress this fundamental knowledge of origin, the conscious recognition 
of which would necessitate a confrontation with the genetic mutant and 
genetic defective status of skin whiteness, white males have exposed their 
unconscious awareness by referring to Black women in this world area as 
"mammy," and "aunt" or"auntie" and referring to Black males as "pappy" 
and "uncle." These terms cannot reflect true simple endearment as they 
occur in the presence of degradation, enslavement, oppression and Black 
destruction. 
Further, white males strongly supported Black females suckling white 
babies and also endorsed Black men and women caring for white children 
(the extension of the white male himselt). This close contact of the white 
child particularly with the Black female was supported by the white male 
in spite of the degraded slave and oppressed status the white collective 
imposed upon the Black collective. Thus, as the white baby suckled the 
breast of the Black woman, the white adult male, as he watched the Black 
slave "mammy" suckle his white baby, could unconsciously fantasize 
himself as being at the breast of his original Black mother. 
Even more significant is the fact that the white male could not abstain 
from making sexual aggressions toward the Black female. Indeed, some 
of the most important founding fathers of the so-called United States of 
America were involved actively and continuously in relationships with 
Black women (i.e., George Washington and Thomas Jefferson). This 
124 
The Mother Pucker and The Original Mother Pucker 
pattern of sexual aggression of the white male towards the Black female 
continues unabated to this day. Ultimately, it is little wonder that black 
stockings, black underwear and black sleepwear are items of sexual 
stimulation for the white male collective. 
It should be noted that the term sexual aggression is used to imply a 
sexual relationship between political unequals. The white male has 
power, and the Black female, like the Black male, is powerless. Sexual 
favors are thus directly and/or indirectly forced from the powerless 
partner. Each time the white male imposed (imposes) himself sexually 
upon the Black female, at the deep levels of symbolic thought he can be 
viewed as having intercourse with the reflection of his original Black 
mother. Thus, within the deep and fundamental psychodynamics of the 
white supremacy system/culture, the white male becomes "the original 
mother fucker." 
Thus, through the subtle and intricate dynamics and the unconscious 
underweavings of the white supremacy system/culture, the white male has 
projected his image of himself as "mother fucker" on to the total Black 
collective throughout the world. Indeed, each time one Black male even 
utters the term "mother fucker" to another Black male, there is probably 
some white male on the planet who is having sexual intercourse with a 
Black or other non-white female - the symbolic representation of the 
white male's original Black mother. Even the white male's pornographic 
magazines are filled with pictures of white males having intercourse with 
Black females. 
This need to return to and to have intercourse with the Black mother 
is undoubtedly the true basis for the Greek myth, Oedipus Rex. It also 
explains why this symbolic story (myth) continues to have major sig­
nificance in the white supremacy system/culture. The myth of Oedipus 
t~lls of Oedipus sleeping with his mother (the Black female) and slaying 
hts father (the Black male). The myth of Oedipus parallels, in importance, 
the biblical myth of Adam and Eve, which in coded language depicts the 
origin of the frrst whites (albinos) from Black parents. 
At yet another level, the white male's desire to return to the Black 
female in a sexual encounter also can be viewed as a symbolic attempt to 
125


--- PAGE 77 ---
The Isis Papers 
re-enter her womb, in hopes of coming out again (being born again) 
non-defective. In other words, the white male harbors-1lil unconscious 
desire to be born again but without the genetic defect of melanin pigment 
deficiency or albinism. It must be noted here that "being born again" is a 
major concept in the most important religion in the white supremacy 
system/culture - Christianity. An extension of the concept of "being born 
again" without genetic defect is to be born without "sin" and to rid one's 
self of "the original sin". The original sin in white supremacy's Chris­
tianity, on close examination, is the act of sex that produced the ap­
pearance of nakedness or the genetic mutation of albinism or white skin. 
That the concept of sin, shame and guilt are related to the naked white 
body as perhaps an unconscious association was made manifest when a 
significant number of white males began to run about naked (body 
whiteness fully exposed) at the height of the Watergate scandal, when the 
evil doings of the highest ranked men in the global white supremacy 
system became exposed to the world. This behavioral phenomenon of 
white men running naked in public and the hiding in shame were called 
"streaking." It has been laughed at and discussed but never fully explained 
before now. It should be noted also in this context that the "good book" 
in the white supremacy system/culture (the Bible) is most often itself 
covered in black, almost never in white! 
But let's return from these asides to the main point of discussion: the 
white male as the original "mother fucker" and his Sexual return to the 
Black female as an expression of his unconscious desire to be reborn with 
Black skin. 
Within the context of the American segment of the white supremacy 
system/culture, one of the most popular white male entertainers was AI 
Jolson. Jolson became famous singing as a white male in black face, 
pretending that he was Black or having a fantasy that he was Black while 
the white audiences that enjoyed him, one can suspect, similarly were 
engrossed in the same fantasy. 
One of the most popular songs sung by Jolson was "Mammy." He was 
pretending to be the Black offspring of a Black woman, while singing 
about how much he loved his dear old mammy. Today, that song 
126 
The Mother Fucker and The Original Mother Fucker 
continues to stir the hearts (the unconscious) of many white males and, 1 
suppose, also some white females. Had I olson and any of the other white 
males in black face been simply thinking of a "Black mammy" who had 
nursed and cared for them, there would be little need to color their own 
faces black, leaving bare their white lips to reveal that the color defect 
was yet present. 
The unconscious need for the white male to return to the Black woman 
in the fantasy of being born again without genetic defect, more often than 
not, is perfonned in the context of degrading the non-white female. This 
~we~~l need to degrade the Black female who symbolically represents 
hts ongmal Black mother is primarily a result of the genetic dominance 
of the Black (and other non-white females) over the white male; she is 
able to cause his genetic annihilation because all of her offspring by the 
white male are non-white, like herself. 
Thus, the white male, with each and every encounter with the non­
white female, is confronted forcefully with the deficiency of his genetic 
status and is reminded of his true status as a recessive genetic mutant He 
feels degraded in the encounter with the Black female because of her 
genetic dominance and so must, in turn, seek to degrade her. Ultimately, 
the white male views the Black female as a threat to his survival on the 
planet. 
. A secondary factor causing the white male to feel the need to degrade 
the Black female in sexual encounters is the white male's (and female's) 
anger towards the original Black mother. Whites blame the original Black 
mother for giving birth to them with a genetic deficiency (albinism). That 
anger is still being acted out by the white male against the Black female. 
This anger is reflected in the reports of many Black females who have had 
sexual encounters with white males and report that white males often want 
not only to ejaculate in their faces and over their bodies, but they also want 
to urinate and to defecate on them as a part of the sexual encounter. (It is 
certainly clear that many white males relate to white females in this 
manner, but it is known to all that white males look down upon and 
degrade white females. This degradation of the white female by the white 
127


--- PAGE 78 ---



--- PAGE 79 ---
The Isis Papers 
male is the basis for the white female's current women's liberation 
movement.) 
The very high, perhaps unconscious, level of psychic pain experienced 
by the white male because of his genetic deficiency as an albino variant 
and his neurotic desire to be born again from the original Black mother is 
perhaps the reason why the phrase "mother fucker" is such an awesome 
phrase for the white male to utter. It is a phrase that the white male is 
almost unable to bring his vocal apparatus to form. This is in stark contrast 
to the frequent uttering of the phrase "mother fucker" by Black males. 
When translated, the term means functional powerlessness for the Black 
male in the context of the white supremacy system/culture; however, it is 
an externally imposed powerlessness. For the white male, on the other 
hand, the same phrase has an even more disturbing, frightening and 
devastating meaning in the same systemic and cultural context. For the 
white male, the term translates into, not functional powerlessness that is 
externally imposed, but his own "genetic powerlessness." Such a con­
sideration is totally unthinkable at the conscious level and even the 
unconscious level for the white male psyche. 
The basis for certain specific patterns of word usage in the white 
supremacy system/culture is impossible to fully comprehend without an 
understanding of the origin of that system/culture. White supremacy 
(racism) began with the production of the firSt albino mutants from Black 
mothers and fathers in Africa. Once isolated, these recessive genetic 
mutants began to mate with one another and multiply, producing what is 
now known as the white race. The white race historically has sought to 
hide its genetic origins in Africa amongst Blacks, just as it has sought to 
deny the origins of the white civilization from the culture of Blacks in 
Africa, seeking instead to proclaim an origin amongst the Greeks. His­
torically, whites also have sought to degrade Africa and everything Black. 
By doing so, whites can avoid confronting the true meaning of skin 
whiteness as a mutation and genetic deficiency state from the Black norm 
-the "hue-man" norm. 
128 
The Mother Fucker and The Original Mother Fucker 
REFERENCES 
1 
Fuller, N .. The United Independent Compensatory Code/System/Con 
cept. Published by author, 1969. 
Leakey, L.S.B .. By The Evidence (Memoirs, 1932-1951). 
San Diego: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, 1974. 
Riopelle, A.J .• Kuh, M .. "Growing Up With Snowflake," National 
Geographic. October 1970. Vol. 138, No.4. 
Riopelle, A.J.. Zahl,P.A .. '"Snowflake,' The World's First 
White Gorilla," National Geographic, March 1967. Vol. 131, No.3. 
Witkop, CJ. Jr .. "Albinism," Natural History. October 1975. 
Vol. LXXXIV, No. 8. 
129


--- PAGE 80 ---
Dedication 
10 
Ball Games As Symbols: 
The War of the Balls 
(August 1976) 
This chapter is dedicated to all of the Black men who, through sports 
and through ball games in particular, symbolically are recapturing "the 
balls" - for that is also a part of the struggle. They are forcing the 
oppressors of Black people up against the psychological wall and, thereby, 
heightening the contradiction. 
Sometimes, during certain periods, there is conscious focusing on 
certain segments of reality data, and later - due to the dynamics within 
the total environment - the same body of data slips into the realm of 
unconsciousness for individuals as well as for the total collective. For 
example, in the framework of the white supremacy system/culture, in its 
current phase of "refinement," it is no longer in vogue to lynch Black 
men, hang them on trees and castrate them. It is no longer the style to 
speak overtly in terms of "killing niggers." Thus, there are many who 
believe that these activities - these thoughts and acts- have ceased to be 
a part of reality within the culture. However, these modes of thought and 
behavior were handled consciously and overtly in the recent past only 
until"ball games" became fully established as the major national (indeed 
global) pastime in the "Western civilization." 
131


--- PAGE 81 ---
The Isis Papers 
Genetic Annihilation and the White Psyche 
The global white supremacy system/culture is the sum total of the 
conscious as well as the unconscious tactics, strategies and methodologies 
evolved in all areas of people activity. Additionally, these manuevers 
seek to prevent white genetic annihilation and attempt to resolve the 
psychological anxiety and tension related to that ever-present threat. 
Thus, the tasks of white supremacy domination require constant vigilance. 
The deep pervading fear of white genetic annihilation in the white 
psyche has caused a neurotic (unconscious) preoccupation with genes, 
genetic material, and those aspects of the human anatomy that either 
contain or transport the genetic material in the sexual act (the act of 
self-reproduction or self-annihilation as is a possibility in the case of the 
whites). Since Black or other males of color are the only ones who 
actually can initiate and carry forth the act of white genetic annihilation 
through sexual intercourse, the white preoccupation was/is specifically 
with male genetalia (as opposed to female), namely the testicles ("the 
balls") and the penis. The testicles contain the genetic material, and the 
penis transports the genetic material in the act of ejaculation. Thus, in the 
white brain-computer there is a dominant association between "balls" 
(testicles) and contests of power. Because this white genetic survival 
conflict is not handled overtly and consciously, there is a neurotic preoc­
cupation in the white psyche with genes, genetic material, testicles and 
penises. Yet at another level, the preoccupation was/is actually with 
"warfare." Continuous warfare is requried to prevent the genetic annihila­
tion of the global white minority. Warfare in this sense refers to the 
domination and destruction of all people of color, particularly Black males 
and their "balls," by every necessary means, which have included the 
initiation of "infertility epidemics" in Africa. 
Games 
Although there are commonly held views that games are merely a form 
of play and entertainment even when they are played professionally and 
that for most people the permanent fascination of games lies simply in the 
pure joy of playing them, the child psychiatrist realizes that for the young, 
132 
Ball Games As Symbols 
g~es and play are the "work of children." It is one of the means by 
W~Ich, through the handling of toys and objects in a symbolic way, 
chdm:en master adult role expectations and attempt to resolve unconscious 
conflicts brought about by the dynamics and interplay of factors in their 
surrounding environment. Play and games then become the child's 
unconscious attempt to master the environment, its conflicts and threats 
to the child's sense of security. 
~hose who have taken the trouble to study games throughout the world 
realize that. not only. the play ~~ games of children but most specifically 
~e games m adult life, as participated in by a given people, reflect their 
history, folklore, traditions and conflicts. Frederick V. Grunfeld, in his 
book Games of the World, has stated, 
Though the modes of gamesplay tend to remain constant their 
symbolisn_t .is often influenced by contemporary events, parti~ularly 
by the poliucs of the day. During the Napoleonic Wars, for example, 
chess sets were made showing Napoleon as General, Napoleon as First 
Couns~l, N apol~~ as Emperor -always, of course, with the Corsican 
assummg the poslUon of the white King. 
The sugges~o~ here is that all ball games in the white supremacy 
system/culture similarly play out, at an unconscious level dominant 
po~tical (i.e., power) concerns. The fundamental power co~cem in the 
whxte supremac~ sy~tem/culture is white genetic survival through white 
s~premacy ~omtnallon. Such domination can be established and main­
tamed only If white males and females (the total white collective) control 
all of the "balls" (testicles) of non-white men, off and on the playing fields 
and ball. co~. In other words, the name of the real game - the power 
game- IS continuous world-wide control of the testicles of all non-white 
men ~y whi~e ~ales and females as the only means of ensuring white 
genetic survxvalm a world where the melanin-producing genetic material 
of no~-whi«:s is ~ominant. Without control of the non-white genetic 
matenal, whites will be annihilated genetically. 
Since these facts of genetic reality can be neither denied nor discussed 
at ~e conscious level of brain activity, this dominant theme is manifested 
daily at the symbolic level via games with symbolic balls: footballs, 
133


--- PAGE 82 ---
The Isis Papers 
baseballs, soccer balls, hand balls, golf balls, ping pong balls, earth balls, 
hockey pucks, etc. These symbolic ball games have a highly impo~t 
role to play at the unconscious level, infonning all white males especially 
_but also females - to keep their attention and their eyes constantly fixed 
on the balls as a matter of life and death. 
The high level anxiety and fear assoCiated with the continuous threat 
to white genetic survival must be played out symbolically through.the 
numerous fonns of "ball games." Ali of these games are played mamly 
by men are centered on who has the ball and are concerned with who 
fmally ~ontrols the ball when the game (of power) ends. ~e anxiety ~d 
tension that accompanies ball games is parallel to the anxiety and tension 
experienced at the thought, in the white psyche, of white g~netic annihila­
tion. Similarly, the increasing violence that accompanies ball gam.es 
parallels the increasing level of violence needed~ ~ain~n global w~te 
supremacy, as the entire non-white world seeks itS liberauon from white 
domination. Some of these highly symbolic "ball games" are played with white balls 
and others are played with colored balls, usually black or brown. General­
ly, the white balls are small· in size, whereas the color~ balls ar~ much 
larger in size, paralleling the respective genetic power m the white and 
colored testicles. Currently, the most popular games, those that attract 
most male attention, are played with big brown balls (football~ ~d 
basketballs). This rise in popularity of colored balls parallels the nse m 
power, at the global level, of the Third World or non~ white n~tions. . 
Also as white females demand their liberation from whlte males m 
order to, become co-equals in running the global system of white 
supremacy, they simultaneously seek expression of this equality by par­
ticipating in all of the "ball games," including football and basketball. At 
the same time, white females step up their sexual aggression toward Bla~k 
and other non-white males, greatly increasing the incidence of whlte 
female/Black male marriages. In these arrangements, the white female 
obtains control of the Black and other non-white male "balls." (Non­
white males and females are powerless under the global system of white 
supremacy domination.) 
134 
Ball Games As Symbols 
A~ th~ threat to white domination and, thus, the threat to white genetic 
sum val mcrease at the global level, a mass hysteria develops overplaying 
with "~alls" until the entire society and social system is either watching 
~r pla~ng ball g~es. It is of little wonder that violence is becoming an 
mcreasmgly dommant aspect of ball games when it is understood that 
behind the symbolism of the ball games is the very survival of the white 
race. When war is in progress, the top priority is always the status of the 
war. White supremacy (racism) is war against all persons classified as 
non-white. In the meantime, the balls are passed, hit, bounced, dribbled, 
batted, punted, kicked, thrown, shot, rolled, struck, driven, caught and 
captured to see who is the final possessor of the balls, or to see who is the 
most agile, astute or strongest in mastering and controlling the balls. 
An~ther point that effectively reveals the relationship of ball games to 
the white psyche and emphasizes the extent to which balls are a symbolic 
preoccupation is the reference in the white supremacy system/culture to 
the act of sexual intercourse as "balling." The "ball" fantasy in the white 
psyche can best be stated as, "If the 'balls' can be controlled on the court 
or the playing field or through ownership, they can also be owned and 
controlled in real life." It is little wonder that in contrast to Black males 
white males play ball games as though they are a matter of "life and death': 
and not as though they are simply to be enjoyed. When whites lose control 
of the balls, whiteness becomes extinct. 
!tis no accident that the phrase "to blackball," in the language of the 
white supremacy culture, means to "exclude" and to have the power to 
exclude. Similar! y, the genetic material in the Black testicles (black balls) 
has the power to genetically "exclude" or annihilate the recessive genetic 
material in the white testicles. Hence, "one drop of Black blood (Black 
genetic material) makes you Black," a highly familiar expression in the 
white supremacy culture. 
Specific Ball Games 
Close examination of specific phenomena in ball games that are 
~pular in the white supremacy culture will support the preceding discus­
Sion. In the game of billiards or pool, there are eight colored balls, a white 
135


--- PAGE 83 ---
The Isis Papers 
ball and a long dark stick placed on a table. The object of the game is to 
use the long stick in causing the white ball to knock all of the colored balls 
under the table. The last colored ball knocked under the table is the black 
ball. When the game is over, the white ball is the only ball that remains 
on top of the table with the long dark stick. Then the game starts again. 
Bowling is also an interesting ball game in the white supremacy 
culture. Usually, this game is played with a Jarge black ball being rolled 
forcefully down an alley where it is expected to knock down 10 white 
pins; the central pin is referred to as the "kingpin." Clearly, the bowling 
pins are white and, in shape, are phallic symbols. In other words, the pins 
are white phallic symbols that are knocked asunder by a heavy black ball, 
over which the bowler attempts to gain mastery. In symbolic fantasy, the 
bowler sees himself as master and possessor of the larger black ball and 
thereby in control of the harm it can bring to the white male genital 
apparatus (the white pins). ,, 
Bowling was introduced to America by Dutch colonists in the 18th 
century. It is a derivative of the French game guilles that was brought to 
England in the 19th century and later to Germany. Games that consist of 
throwing balls of various sizes date back to ancient Rome and Greece, 
early cultures that had extensive contact with Black men in Africa. A 
modem French derivative of that ancient game is jen de boules. F.V. 
Grunfeld states, "The French (whites) play boules with what has been 
described as a mild fanaticism." It is well to recall that a considerable 
period of French history was spent controlling Black and brown men in 
Africa and Asia. 
Earth ball is a modern American version of an ancient game. It is 
played as a struggle between two teams or "tribes" who jostle, rush, push 
and elbow one another to move the large dark (colored) ball in the desired 
direction and to gain possession of it. The game attempts to develop a 
sense of common purpose amongst the members of the tribe or team. This 
game was started in California, with most, if not all, players being white. 
(See Grunfield's Games of The World.) 
The importance of games utilizing large brown balls in the white 
supremacy culture is of special interest. The most important of these 
136 
Ball Games As Symbols 
games are football and basketball. Is it only an accident that Black males, 
now that they have been allowed to play, have become the most outstand­
ing players in these sports, nationally and internationally? Is it only an 
accident that in the game offootball, the "field general" (the quarterback) 
almost always must be white, no matter the color of the other players? 
And, of course, the owners always must be white so that no matter who 
wins or who is the star, the white owners control the big brown balls and 
who gets to play with them. 
It is of symbolic importance that the large brown basketball is thrown 
into a circular opening (the basket- usually a white net) that can be viewed 
as a symbol of the white female vaginal orifice. Similarly, the large brown 
football is kicked through a white upright opening (the goal posts) that 
can be viewed, again symbolically, as the uplifted legs of a white female 
in the act of sexual intercourse. 
Perhaps unconsciously the white male psyche considers here that the 
white female's preferred sexual choice is "tall, dark and handsome." In 
tossing or kicking the large brown balls into the white net or the white 
goal posts, the white male is able to fantasize that he is satisfying the white 
female maximally via an identification with the Black male and the brown 
balls, which the white male - in play - believes he now possesses or 
controls. 
This writer is reminded here that a common "underground" thought 
and saying of white men is that they a..re not really men until they have had 
sexual intercourse with a Black female. This again is a demonstration of 
white males fantasizing that they are in the customary role of the Black 
males, whose genitals they apparently admire and envy. Thus, the Black 
male is their true standard of real manhood and genetic power - the 
ultimate controller of the Black "ball." As white males attempt to master 
the placement of these large brown "playing" balls in "openings," their 
activity can be viewed as attempts to resolve the dilemma of their 
self-questioned manhood. Their manhood is always in question because 
of their genetic recessive status compared to the genetic dominance of the 
world's majority. 
137


--- PAGE 84 ---
The Isis Papers 
In this regard, it is not surprising that large nwnbers of white females 
hang around Black basketball and football players and that these Black 
males often are trapped into sexual involvement by these white females. 
The Black male ball players, in turn, also are conditioned under white 
supremacy domination to want to place brown balls in white nets (white 
vaginal orifices) as a mark of supposed true Black manhood, since Black 
males refer to white males as "The Man." In placing brown balls in white 
nets and between white goal posts, the Black males in fantasy become 
"The Man." 
Hockey, a sport that Black men are not allowed to play in the white 
supremacy culture, also consists of attempting to place a round black 
object (the hockey puck) into a white net opening (symbolic of the white 
vaginal orifice). The object that is used to place the black puck in the 
opening is a long colored stick (symbolic of the black phallus). White 
males, fight ferociously among themselves to get the black round object 
in the white net opening (as a test of their strength or their manhood). 
Apparently, for the white male psyche, it is anathema to have to compete 
with a Black male (the possessor of real black balls and stick) in this 
challenge: controlling a black ball and a black stick and getting the black 
object into the symbolic white net opening on the white ice field. 
Soccer, or European football, traditionally is played with a white ball, 
smaller than the large brown football and basketball. This sport is less 
popular in the United States, but it is very popular in Central and South 
America. The white soccer ball is not to be touched with the hands; it is 
knocked and kicked. The kicking of the white ball becomes a very violent 
and vicious activity. Again, however, the greatest player, the master of 
the large white ball, turned out to be the Black Brazilian, Pele, who 
married a white female. The owners of the professional soccer teams also 
remain white, of course. 
Another popular ball game played with a smaller white ball is baseball. 
Baseball was the great all-time American (a.k.a., white) sport until a Black 
man, Hank Aaron, became the world's greatest hitter (controller) of that 
white ball, hitting it with a brown or black bat. It is little wonder that as 
he moved ever closer to taking the title of control away from the white 
138 
Ball Games As Symbols 
Babe Ruth, Aaron began to receive letters from white people threatening 
his life. This behavior remains incomprehensible (after all, it's only a 
game!) unless one is aware that the white ball is symbolic of the white 
testicles that a Black man had knocked out of the ball park. The Black 
man, in this manner, controls the symbolic small white testicles. This is 
not psychologically tolerable in the white supremacy culture - as it 
represents white genetic annihilation for which whites traditionally have 
killed to prevent. 
This unconscious response to non-whites controlling white balls 
clarifies the reason that a couple of years ago the American Little League 
Team (white), which consistently was being beaten by non-white children 
in Taiwan~ was prevented from competing further with these non-white 
children. And now the American children are prohibited from playing 
with the Taiwanese teams. White male children must not be confronted 
(in the white supremacy culture) with non-white children controlling 
white balls (testicles). Such a continuing experience is totally inconsistent 
with the optimal development of the white supremacy psyche, as well as 
with the white male's survival need to control all of the "balls" on the 
planet Earth. 
Next smaller in diameter in the "white ball" series is the tennis ball. 
To date, there has been only one Black male world champion controller 
of that small white ball- Arthur Ashe, although amongst Blacks, Althea 
Gibson became a master of the white ball before Ashe. Is it only a 
coincidence that when Ashe began to play tennis with champion force, 
the game then allowed the introduction of colored tennis balls in major 
tournaments? A Black male is just not supposed to bat a small white ball 
into total submission. Ashe became the number one world tennis cham­
pion in 1975, but he did not sustain that position in 1976. Ashe has been 
quoted as saying that he does not play just "to win," but for the enjoyment 
of the sport. This attitude is in stark contrast to that of Jimmy Conners 
(white), who has stated that he plays only to win and has described his 
approach to the game as a killer instinct. I can imagine the psychological 
pressure put on Arthur Ashe as long as he remained in the position of 
champion controlling the small white tennis "balls." I am certain that he 
139


--- PAGE 85 ---
The Isis Papers 
could be liked better, in the context of the white supremacy culture, as 
long as he held any position other than number one controller of the 
prestigious small white tennis "ball." 
The smallest ball in the popular "white ball" series is the golf ball. Like 
tennis, golf has been the ball game of the most powerful males in the white 
supremacy system/culture. However, like tennis, it is spreading slowly 
throughout the white supremacy culture to include large numbers of white 
and non-white females. 
Interestingly, golf, the most "elite" of all of the ball games in the white 
supremacy culture, is played with a long dark-colored stick or "iron" held 
between the legs. This iron is smashed against the side of a very small 
white ball. The object is to knock this small white ball into a hole in the 
black earth (black mother earth- the Black female?). By attempting to 
place his small white ball in the black earth, using a long dark stick, again 
the white male is attempting to identify with the possession of the genital 
equipment and privilege of the Black male, whose rightful partner is the 
Black female. If this pattern of play in golf does not qualify as the very 
essence of male genital symbolism and neurotic conflict in the white male 
psyche, as formulated in this specific discussion, then nothing does. 
Again, is it only a coincidence that the major event in golf competition 
should be called the Master's Tournament? Is this not a fitting title for 
the most elite of all ball games played by the masters of the "master race"? 
One final question: Is it a reflection of white male self-hate and 
self-rejection and rejection of the inadequacy of the white testicles 
("balls") that the games played with small white balls involve the balls 
being attacked, hit, struck and knocked far away from the body- in an act 
of masochism; whereas by contrast, the games played with large brown 
balls involve holding on to and possessing the balls? No large brown balls 
are struck with objects in the white supremacy culture's popular ball 
games. There is indeed significance in these facts. And even though the 
large black bowling ball is rolled away from the body, its aim is to knock 
down symbols of the white phallus. 
Further, is there parallel significance in the fact that the most powerful 
man in the global white supremacy system (Gerald Ford), on the day of 
140 
Ball Games As Symbols 
his departure from office after losing the presidential election, left imme­
diately to play golf- to beat the small white balls masochistically across 
the fairway in his hour of defeat and humiliation? It is of further note that 
his predecessor, who was forced from office in absolute disgmce, also 
spends much of his time on the golf course beating small white balls. 
It seems of interest that the more powerful the white male becomes in 
the context of the white supremacy culture, the smaller the ball that 
becomes his focus of attention. Is this because the more the white male 
achieves what he wanted to believe was real power, the greater the 
realization that his perception was only an inadequate compensation for 
a fundamental lack of true power- genetic power? 
Is it not also curious that when white males are young and vigorous, 
they attempt to master the large brown balls, but as they become older and 
wiser, they psychologically resign themselves to their inability to master 
the large brown balls? Their focus then shifts masochistically to hitting 
the tiny white golf balls in disgust and resignation- in full final realization 
of white genetic recessiveness. It would be of further interest to ascertain 
the number of army generals in the white supremacy system who play golf 
(demean white genetic material) while planning for race war or the 
destruction of non-white genetic material. After the Chinese, a non-white 
people under white supremacy domination for many decades, were able 
to chase the whites out their country, the most popular ball game in China 
became ping-pong. The object of this ball game is to smash a tiny white 
ball back and forth across a table, perhaps in unconscious retaliation for 
the humiliation imposed upon the Chinese people by the whites. The 
Chinese fmally mastered (beat) the white "balls." 
Similarly, golf and baseball, two "white ball" games, have become the 
most popular ball games in Japan, a country of non-white people con­
quered, attacked and humiliated in atomic war by white people. Perhaps 
at the conscious level, the Japanese (non-white) people believe they are 
imitating their conquerors, whom they admire. At the unconscious level, 
however, they are, in turn, humiliating the inadequacy of the white 
testicles or "balls." The dynamics that motivate the conquered and the 
conquerors are never the same. 
141


--- PAGE 86 ---
The Isis Papers 
Is there also a connection between the defeat of highly armed 
Americans (whites) in the Viemam War, wherein white males were beaten 
by a tiny nation of non-white people, and the fantastic increase in the 
popularity of tennis throughout the U.S.? The entire U.S. nation, since 
the close of the Viemam War, has begun to beat the small white tennis 
balls, the symbolic white testicles, following a humiliating defeat (loss of 
power) for the American (white) nation. Or did tennis just become 
popular after Watergate? 
Furthermore, is it just a coincidence that there was a greatly increased 
interest of white females in tennis at the same time that they began their 
women's liberation movement, a movement that attacks white males and 
their sense of superiority, a movement that has referred to white males as 
"male chauvinist pigs"? Through the game of tennis, white females 
symbolically can attack the white testicles - the part of the anatomy that 
is supposed to make the white male superior to the white female. Is this 
also why tennis is becoming increasingly popular among Blacks in 
America? 
Also, is there a relationship among the number of white males seeking 
sex change operations (to remove their hated male genitalia), the number 
of white male physicians willing to perform this surgery, and the white 
male's loss of the Vietnam War to non-white men, as well as the rise in 
power of non-white men in general on the planet? 
I wish an ever-increasing success to all Black males who participate 
in ball games, and I look forward to the day when the majority of 
quarterbacks are Black or at least in proportion to the number of Black 
football players. Still, the most important message in this essay is that in 
the last 100 years, the white collective simply has moved from the overt 
sport and entertainment of lynching and castrating Black men (removing 
their testicles). thereby controlling their "balls," to a more highly refined 
series of symbolic representations of the same act: ball games. And, 
whether through lynching and castration or modem ball games, the object 
and neurotic preoccupation is the same: the white male seeks to prevent 
non-white males from ever controlling white "balls," and therefore they 
must control the anatomical balls and the contents of the colored anatomi-
142 
Ball Games As Symbols 
cal ~s - the genes of non-white men - . Slll'VJ.val Ball that threaten white genetic 
fear of ~lack !7c~ess mtheree~Y reflect the white collective's admiration and 
' u contempt for white te . 1 ingness to fight - no matter how violent} s~c e~, and their will-
balls on all fields and CO" .. " hi h ~ - to ffialntain control of the '""'• w c symbolize every pi E neurotic preoccupation of whites is of ~eon arth. This 
survival of their race. ' course, essential for the genetic 
The rules may change, but the real arne is al 
significance of "balls" · th g ways the same. This deep m e context of the hi ture cannot be discussed overtl . th ~ te supremacy system/cui-
political and psychological wh~t Wl out CallSlng the collapse of the entire 1 e supremacy edifi E . of symbolism are far ahead of ev . ce. vents 1n the world 
because the former rep ents lD the world of conscious reality resents a more com Iete . of reality data in the b . P recordmg of the totality mm-computer. Thus thro h bolism, perhaps we can gain . . h . • ug the world of sym-
mastered By decod' d ms•g t mto the world of reality that must be • mg an translati aspects of realit tha ng symbols, we can confront those 
B , Y t generally we would prefer to ignore Norm 0 rown s statement in Love's B dy . · an · 
history turns is symboltS' m Tho _sumf s lt up: "The axis on which world 
- eax1so worldhisto · aki the unconscious." . ry ts m ng conscious 
BaD games = war of the balls = war of th . 
= race war. e testicles = war of the genes 
143


--- PAGE 87 ---
11 
The Symbolism of Smoking Objects 
(March 1977) 
As a psychiatrist and behavior analyst, I take the position that all major 
patterns of people behavior, within an evolved system ofbehavior, can be 
decoded and understood once the ultimate goal objective of the evolved 
system of behavior is decoded and understood. The failure to decode and 
comprehend the ultimate goal objective only permits behavioral units to 
be dealt with and described as isolated abstractions without in-depth 
meaning and eertainly without function within the system/culture as a 
whole. Furthermore, this failure makes it impossible to perceive the 
logical coherence and interconnectedness between all of the major pat­
terns of behavior in the behavioral system. 
To use an analogy in the physical sciences, the failure to decode and 
comprehend the ultimate goal objective of an evolved behavioral system 
is tantamount to present-day physicists attempting to analyze the physical 
universe without Einstein's equation E = MC2, the Theory of Relativity. 
Indeed, in the final analysis, an evolved behavioral system is also a 
system of energy and specific energy pattern configurations, no less than 
the "physical" universe is a system of energy and specific energy pattern 
configurations. 
Once the concept of a "unified field theory" of behavior (or evolved 
system of behavior) is understood adequately, all major behavioral pat­
terns that develop within the total behavioral system context are seen as 
having both meaning and function within the total behavioral system. 
Thus, these behavioral patterns partially express and eventually achieve 
the ultimate goal objective. 
145


--- PAGE 88 ---
The Isis Papers 
Today smoking, or the oral use of smoking objects, is a major pattern 
of people behavior in the dominant behavioral system on Earth. Six 
hundred eighty-eight billion cigarettes were manufactured in the U.S. 
alone in 1976. Fifty-three million American adults smoke some form of 
tobacco. Eighty-nine thousand Americans die annually from lung cancer, 
which is approximately 244 persons dying each day from this ravaging 
disease. Yet, since 1964, when the surgeon general's report fust linked 
cigarette smoking with disease, there has been a smoking controversy 
among Americans - for and against smoking. 
The above facts and health statistics alone, which do not include the 
number of deaths caused by fire through the mishandling of smoking 
objects, should make everyone alert to and curious about the behavioral 
pattern of smoking and the causes of this behavioral pattern. This essay 
seeks to pinpoint the perhaps unconscious, but major, underlying deter­
minants of this behavioral pattern that heretofore have not been under­
stood or probed adequately. By elevating the level of insight into the 
behavioral pattern and its causes, conscious control over the behavioral 
pattern may be enhanced, and the incidence of smoking may decrease. 
As I have stated previously, the existing global behavioral system/cul­
ture of racism (white supremacy) is the sum total of the conscious and 
unconscious patterns of symbols, logic, thought, speech, action, dreams, 
emotional response and perception. It includes the tactics, strategies and 
methodologies evolved by the global white collective in all areas of people 
activity (economics, education, entertainment, labor, law, politics, 
religion, sex and war) to resolve the psychological anxiety and tensions 
related to the threat to white genetic survival. 
Beyond the resolution of this anxiety and tension is the ultimate goal 
objective of preventing the ever present threat to white genetic survival 
from ever becoming a reality; this task requires constant and continuous 
vigilance by all members of the white collective. 
However, because of the minority status of the white collective on the 
planet and because of its genetic recessive status relative to the skin­
melaninated global majority, there exists in the collective white psyche a 
146 
The Symbolism of Smoking Objects 
profound sense of genetic and, therefore, genital weakness and inade­
quacy. 
Because it is males who are physically and physiologically responsible 
for the initiation of the act of self-production and self-reproduction, it is 
the white male in the white collective who most gread y senses (conscious­
ly or unconsciously) and experiences genetic and genital inadequacy. 
This is attested to strongly by the white male's and, indeed, the total white 
collective's continuously prevailing concern with ••who has the largest 
penis, the Black male or the white male?" Indeed, large numbers of white 
males today are preoccupied and concerned that their penises are too 
small, such a concern being reflective of the sense of genital and genetic 
inadequacy. Black males are not preoccupied similarly. (See Chapter 7 .) 
That the darker male is viewed as more powerful and more substan­
tially virile and masculine in the white supremacy system/culture is again 
attested to by the fact that the white female's idealized male is described 
by the white collective as "tall, dark and handsome!" The word dark does 
indeed refer to a high(er) level of melanin skin-pigmentation and hair­
pigmentation. 
The importance of the dark man as a symbol of genital and genetic 
adequacy in the white supremacy system/culture was the basis for the 
crowd-drawing power and significance of two of the most important 
movie heroes of the last century in the U.S.- Rudolph Valentino and Elvis 
Presley. The case of Presley removes all doubt from my thesis because 
his style of singing and of moving his genital area was strictly copied, as 
best he could, from Black male singers. In the case of Valentino, two of 
his mostimportantroles were in the movies The Shiek and Son of the Shiek, 
wherein he played non-white, North African men (Arabs). Subsequently, 
a very popular condom was brand-named Shiek. Valentino also portrayed 
the Moor. His great appeal to the white female (and male) was that he 
was dark and made up to appear even darker. Supposedly, he was also a 
master lover. 
Yet another instance of the importance of black as a symbol of male 
genital and genetic adequacy is the fact that the standard wedding attire 
147


--- PAGE 89 ---
The Isis Papers 
for the white male in Western (white) culture is black (and in the most 
formal weddings, males wear black tails), while the bride wears white. 
When dressed for most other important social occasions, the white 
male similarily dresses in black ~tails' and black tie. Although the "tails" 
hang in the back, they remain phallic symbols. Similarly ties (also usually 
dark colored) are phallic symbols in a behavioral system/culture that 
believes that "clothes make the man." The implication is that mother 
nature (in the case of the albinos) .failed in some respect. 
White males also believe that they look more virile and attractive when 
suntanned (brown and bronzed). This belief is maintained despite the fact 
that each year in the U.S. alone, there are 300,000 new cases of skin 
cancer caused primarily by whites attempting to tan their pale skin into 
greater attractiveness. 
In this area of the world, white males also have had a long nefarious 
history of lynching and castrating Black males and taking their genitals, 
as well as other parts, home as prized and desired souvenirs to be 
possessed- symbolically making them their own. 
Just as the important ball games fall into two series (large black and 
brown and small white), all major smoking objects in the white supremacy 
culture fall into the same two series: large brown (cigars and pipes) and 
small white (cigarettes). 
Furthermore, the ball games played by the supposedly more virile men 
entail the use of large brown balls, while the smoking objects chosen by 
those men who wish to view themselves and be viewed as powerful, virile 
and important are large brown smoking objects (cigars mainly, but also 
pipes). 
The late British Prime Minister, Winston Churchill, was estimated to 
have smoked 300,000 eight or nine inch double coronas. John F. Ken­
nedy also is reported to have loved Havana cigars. And Fidel Castro, who 
considers himself to be white, is never seen without a long cigar in his 
mouth. 
Whereas I maintain that the brown and white "balls" used in the ball 
games in the white supremacy culture are symbols of the black and white 
testicles, respectively, I maintain further that the brown and white smok-
148 
The Symbolism of Smoking Objects 
ing objects are similarly symbols of the black and white phallus (penis). 
Together, the balls in the ball games and the smoking objects constitute a 
highly important symbol package of the complete male genitalia - the 
penis and the testicles. 
The white supremacy system/culture is preoccupied most fundamen­
tally not with profit, but with its genital and genetic status and survival on 
the planet. It is only logical that since this great survival concern is not 
discussed at the culture's conscious level, it manifests in other major 
behavior activity within the system/culture, albeit largely at an uncon­
scious level. Thus, it is not surprising that these two important black and 
white symbol series (balls and smoking objects) should be a central 
preoccupation that cannot be curtailed in spite of the violence in ball 
games and the cancer associated with smoking. 
The white supremacy system/culture is dominated by white males. 
However, white males still experience a deep sense of male genital and 
genetic deficiency and inadequacy. This is due to the fact that white males 
fear genetic annihilation by men of color. Thus, major activity on the part 
of white males (via the system/culture they established) consists of the 
unconscious drive and desire to boost or supplement the level of one's 
maleness or masculinity and to internalize more male principle, element 
or substance by any means possible. This sense of deficiency in male 
principle also may be expressed in terms of sensed inadequacy and, 
therefore, dependency and male-principle dependency need gratification. 
In other words, in a culture and behavioral system where the most 
dominant feature is a sense of male genital and genetic inadequacy (on 
the part of albino males), the attempt to compensate for this sensed 
deficiency most certainly will be manifested in some manner and patterns 
of behavior. 
The habitual pattern of placing the symbolic phallus (penis) in the oral 
cavity is one example of symbolic compensation for sensed male genetic 
and genital inadequacy. Smoking, as previously stated, is placing a 
symbolic phallus in the oral cavity as a means of, again, internalizing more 
masculinity (as the penis is that which most obviously makes the male a 
male). 
149


--- PAGE 90 ---
The Isis Papers 
Male homosexual acts of placing the penis in the rectum or in the oral 
cavity also achieve symbolically the results of internalizing and ingesting, 
through a gastrointestinal tract opening, male substance. In this instance, 
what is internalized is the ejaculate, which parallels the inhalation of 
smoke and the swallowing of saliva when mouthing a cigar or pipe. 
It should be noted here that in the 1960s when Black people, behind 
Black male leadership, began to challenge the white supremacy status quo 
with cries of"Black Power," there was an increase in the number of cigars 
imported to the U.S. Cigar imports more than doubled from 30 million 
to 80 million per year between 1967 and 1974. Large numbers of people 
also began to smoke small, long, dark brown cigarettes (e.g., Mores). 
An interesting mythology surrounds the cigar: During their manufac­
ture, these smoking objects are hand-wrapped while held between the legs 
of Cuban (non-white) women. This reference to the proximity of the cigar 
(the brown smoking object and phallic symbol) to the non-white female's 
genital anatomy supports my contention of the symbolic function the cigar 
plays in the fantasy of the white male psyche. Here, one is also reminded 
of the underground saying in the white male culture that one is not a man 
until he has had sexual intercourse with a Black female, meaning, until he 
has demonstrated that his white phallus is as adequate as that of the Black 
male. 
Understanding the above symbolism will explain further an advertise­
ment for More cigarettes printed in the December 19, 1976 issue of The 
New York Times Magazine which read as follows: 
Why isn't More white? Because More is burnished brown. To make 
its longer, leaner design look as good as it tastes. And when it comes 
to the taste of More, you can enjoy its smooth mildness longer. 
Because More bums slower. So More doesn't end with just good 
looks. There's lots of good taste as well. It's like any really good 
cigarette. Only it's More." 
This ad carries an even greater significance because of the great 
emphasis placed on oral sex by the white supremacy system/culture, in 
contrast to the behaviors of non-white peoples. This ad also must be seen 
150 
The Symbolism of Smoking Objects 
in the context of the epidemic of pornographic magazines that place heavy 
emphasis on Black males as objects of oral sex for both white males and 
females. The above ad also allows the following question to be raised: 
Is the brand name More a substitute for "Moor"? 
With the above interpretation of symbols in the context of the white 
supremacy system/culture, it becomes increasingly apparent that there 
cannot be a ban on cigarette smoking in spite of its cancer causing 
potential. If indeed the basic dilemma in the white supremacy system and 
culture is genital and genetic inadequacy and the objects and acts symbolic 
of ingesting more phallus were banned, what behavioral substitutes would 
be suggested that could solve the basic anxiety-provoking dilemma of 
white genetic annihilation? Perhaps genital transplant surgery from Black 
males to white males? Hopefully, not frank cannibalism! 
In Chapter 8, I discussed the gun as a symbol in the white supremacy 
system/culture. I demonstrated that the gun similarly cannot be banned 
because it is the symbolic phallus substitute for the white male. The white 
male's penis and testicles genetically cannot annihilate Black and other 
non-white males, but his gun can. Therefore, to ban the gun for the white 
male is to castrate him symbolically, to remove his defense mechanism 
for the ever present threat of white genetic annihilation. 
We are now in a position to understand the inadequately explained and 
inadequately understood concepts of penis envy, castration anxiety and 
the castration complex, all key concepts in the Freudian psychoanalytic 
edifice. These concepts take on valid applicability in the context of the 
white supremacy system/culture, in that they all relate to anxieties, fears 
and tensions of the dominant members of the white supremacy culture -
the white males, who then project these tensions and fears in their various 
and sundry forms onto others (white females and Black and other non­
white males and females). 
In reality, it is the white male who basically envies the genital power 
and genetic status of Black and other non-white males. And without his 
guns or other weapons, the white male feels castrated in the presence of 
Black males and females and all other non-white peoples. 
151


--- PAGE 91 ---
The Isis Papers 
Castmtion anxiety, which Freud inadequately assumed had meaning 
only in the family context, now can be unders«_>>O as.~e b~ic fear in the 
global white supremacy system of white gene~c annih.dauon. . 
This fear has been evolving in magnitude smce albmos (whttes) were 
frrst developed as genetic mutants from Blacks in Africa many tho~~ds 
of years ago_ only a short period of time in the context of the 3.5 mtlhon 
years that Black people have been on Earth. 
The global white supremacy system is the evolv~ methodology of 
compensation for white male castration fears and. ~ety o~ the fear of 
white genetic annihilation based upon white geneuc msuffictency. 
This essay illuminates the major fallacy in the Wes.tem pattern of 
perception and thought - the failure to be able to reco~~e and decode 
the whole. Western perceptions are unfortunately bnuted and. frag­
mented, tending towards ever higher levels of abstraction and ~o~uon of 
what has been abstracted, but never fully and consciously percetvmg what 
has been abstracted in relationship to the whole (e.g., guns are always seen 
in their isolated abstraction, as are balls and smoking objects.) 
This failure (if not refusal) to perceive the whole is a result of the 
repressed conceptualization of the white self as the albino mutant (fra~­
ment of whole) offspring from Black (whole) progenitors. Thus, there 1S 
an inability to place the "white self' in the total pers~ti ~e of the hue-ma_n 
family and the totality of the universe, witho~t the adm~s10n of the geneuc 
defective status of skin whiteness. The white collecttve, therefore, m~st 
deny the meaning and reality of Africa as its own birth place and the pomt 
of origin of its own civilization. 
152 
12 
Black Fear and the Failure of Black 
Analytical (Ideological) Commitment 
(June 1979) 
~t is known that an extremely high level of fear and a profound sense 
of vulnerability of existence can lead the human bmin-computer into 
ineffectual patterns of circular thought. In such cases, problems perceived 
are avoided and never solved. This is in direct contrast to effective 
patterns of direct linear thought that move continuously forward in 
straight line progress, from problem perception and depth analysis to 
proposed conclusive modes of problem solution. This holds for in­
dividuals as well as collectives. The sense of powerlessness evolves out 
of fear and vulnerability and, with its imposed patterns of circular (as 
opposed to linear) thought, sets the stage for mental (behavioral and 
emotional) illness, which is always seen at levels of increased incidence 
amongst oppressed populations. 
Circular thought means moving from problem perception, away from 
problem solution (down a diversionary path), and back again to problem 
perception. This may then be followed by worrying and obsessive com­
plaining. There is never consistent motion towards problem solution 
because to do so would challenge and alter the power dynamic of oppres­
sion. Thus, high-level fear is set in motion. 
Circular thought describes the short-circuiting of logic networks in the 
brain-computer, an organ which has evolved by nature as a problem -solv­
ing instrument. 
153


--- PAGE 92 ---
The Isis Papers 
Linear thought suggests movement from problem perception progres­
sively towards problem solution, changing step-by-step whatever needs 
to be altered to achieve total problem solution- utilizing whatever means 
necessary to achieve this end. This form of thought is consistent with the 
function and structure of the brain as a problem-solving organ in the 
human organism. 
Black people throughout the world, live under the power of the white 
supremacy system of total oppression and domination, implying the 
absence of any true power to determine ultimately what happens to their 
individual and collective lives. This is the major and only problem facing 
Black and all other non-white peoples throughout the world. This is 
precisely why they are called and classified as Black and non-white, to set 
them specifically in oppositional contrast to, and in conflict with, the 
genetic reality of white. But because this is a frightening and painful 
reality upon which to focus Black and other non-white attention, we as 
Blacks, particularly in the U.S., succumb to circular thought. Likewise, 
there is not only a failure to approach problem solution, but there is a 
stubborn refusal even to look directly at the problem. IDtimately, there 
is a disturbance in problem perception. Therefore, Black people in the 
U.S. reject the conscious recognition of the global white supremacy 
system, its absolute necessity of non-white oppression and its very 
specific implications of a continuing powerlessness and potential destruc­
tion - as opposed to a natural death - for Blacks and other designated 
non-whites. 
Jonestown, Guyana is an outstanding example of the destruction that 
Blacks fear under the existing white supremacy system. In 1979, close to 
1,000 Blacks from the U.S. were relocated to Jonestown and then mur­
dered under Nazi concentration camp conditions through a process con­
trolled by white people. This extermination center was set up with the 
full knowledge of segments of the U.S. government. It is, thus, no accident 
that the year 1979 gives further witness to the near total collapse and loss 
amongst Blacks- individually as well as collectively - of the ability to 
effectively perceive, analyze and propose solutions to the problem of 
white supremacy and its implications for continuing Black powerlessness 
154 
Black Fear 
and social disintegration. In brief, it is clear in 1979, 21 short years before 
the year 2000, that there is no commitment by Blacks to analyze of the 
problem of white supremacy comprehensively. Blacks are without a 
perception or analysis of racism, or of a scientific counter-racism. Blacks, 
therefore do not know what to do with themselves. 
Thus, we are witnessing a collective Black floundering and an ideolo gi­
cal vacuwn and disorientation. All that remains is for Blacks to escalate 
tragically their activity of powerless arguing and squabbling amongst 
themselves and to compete with one another for white supremacy jobs 
and grant crwnbs. Or, Blacks can pretend, as a diversionary thought 
strategy, that the "real" struggle exists between imagined Black "classes" 
or between Black males and females. Every energy and psychological 
effort is expended, at both the individual and collective levels, to "black 
out" and avoid focusing on the true problem of white/Black confrontation 
-white supremacy. All Blacks realize, consciously and/or unconsciously, 
that to engage in such a realistic focus can mean certain death at the hands 
of white supremacists. 
The total Black collective in the U.S. has yet to confront consciously 
the "mind-blowing" logic and thought-distorting shock and fear that set 
in following the assassinations of practically all courageous Black male 
leaders: Malcolm X, Martin Luther King, Jr., Whitney Young, Medgar 
Evers and Fred Hampton, and then the holocaust of Jonestown, Guyana, 
which many conscious Blacks accept as a planned government action. 
Since all of these deliberate deaths have occurred, there has been a 
profound disinclination by surviving Blacks to confront the awesome and 
murderous reality ofwhite supremacy directly. The struggle for justice 
and true Black power now is perceived "through a glass darkly" and not 
face-to-face because there is overwhelming fear. In spite of their super­
ficial differences, the various analyses of the Black problem by the 
afforementioned men, if carried through to their ultimate implications, all 
lead ultimately to an eventual neutralization of white power control. 
Since the demise of these Black men, who all were aware of the 
necessity to resist and destroy white supremacy, the remaining rhetoric 
coming from our Black collective is consistent with submission to and/or 
155


--- PAGE 93 ---
The Isis Papers 
cooperation with the racist oppressive dynamic -albeit with an historical 
and continuing chorus of complaints. This behavior of submission to and 
cooperation with white supremacy is consistent with the illusion that there 
can be a complete integration of non-whites into the white supremacy 
system. In contrast to these modes of thought and action, the Black men 
cited above are examples of resistance to and destruction of white 
supremacy as an absolute form of injustice. These latter forms of behavior 
require high levels of self- and group-respect and can be sustained only 
when there is the willingness to give one's life for the achievement of 
justice, as each of these men demonstrated. 
However, it has been demonstrated (by the aforementioned men) that 
the almost certain consequence of a pattern of consciously-determined 
resistance to and destruction of white supremacy is death at the hands of 
white supremacy advocates - those who see and understand white 
supremacy as necessary to white survival. Even young Black children are 
able to perceive and articulate that "If you try to help Black people, you 
will be killed." When I asked a 10-year-old Black boy, "Don't you want 
to study hard in school so that you can help Black people?" he immediately 
answered "No," giving the above explanation. The chill of this reality 
inherent in the maintenance of white supremacy does not escape Black 
children, and it most certainly does not escape their elders, although the 
latter are more sophisticated and know better than to admit the same 
openly. 
This fear of death at the hands of the white supremacy collective -
because it cannot be admitted aloud by the adult Black population -has 
been repressed. The result of covering the fear has been the emergence 
of the sick, protective logic that there is no longer a problem of white 
supremacy, except in England perhaps and in Southern Africa; for Blacks 
in the U.S., all of that has been solved. Additionally, there is the claim 
that the only remaining stresses are Blacks rejecting other Blacks, be it 
male versus female and female versus male, female versus female and 
male versus male, or the fantasized Black middle class versus the fan­
tasized Black lower class. (Of course, the fact is that "class" does not refer 
to income alone but to actual existing power. And since Blacks across 
156 
Black Fear 
the board are oppressed and powerless under white supremacy, none of 
us have power. Therefore, there are no classes among Blacks.) 
.But~ return to the issue of Black defensive logic, these patterns of 
logtc, whtch emphasize that the existing problems are mainly between 
Blacks, are reflective of Black self-hate. This self-hatred is escalated and 
reinforced by increasing Black suicide, Black-on-Black homicide, child 
abuse and spouse abuse. 
In addition to the aforementioned non-productive behaviors there are 
also. increasing patterns of behavior that can be described as' inducing 
semt-trance states, such as rhythmic hand-clapping, singing, dancing, 
ex~e~sive "n~k" music playing, listening to radio music and shouting in 
rehg10us settmgs. These patterns of behavior are manifested continually 
by Black people to pitch themselves into possible altered cortical brain 
states. Likewise, such brain states seem to have the effect of dampening 
. the sense of an overwhelming external pain or danger over which Blacks 
conceive we have no control. These practices, of course, avoid problem 
confrontation and thereby prevent problem solution. 
Similarly, the increase in interracial marriages can be viewed as a 
means of escape and a means for Blacks to avoid the awareness of their 
continuing status as permanent outsiders - outside of the "white chalk 
circle" of white supremacy's numerical and genetic global necessity. It 
s~oul~ be no~ed ~at in the white supremacy societal unit of Nazi Germany 
the. highest InCidence of interracial marriage between Semites (non­
whttes) and Germans (whites) occurred just prior to the ultimate destruc­
tion of the Semites in the Holocaust. The Semites of the Jewish religion 
were looked upon as non-whites because their ancestors were Black and 
resided in Africa prior to entering Europe. (See Chapter 18.) 
Similarly, some Blacks have sought to escape the confrontation with 
white supremacy through Marxist doctrine, by attempting to conceive of 
themselves as members of the "working class." They fail to see that Marx 
who was a Semite (a non-white), was a victim of anti-Semitism. One third 
of the world po~ulation of Semites of the Jewish religion were destroyed 
by German white supremacy - meaning that millions of Marx • s own 
descendants were destroyed in this process. Still, not one word of Marx's 
157


--- PAGE 94 ---
The Isis Papers 
doctrine addresses itself to this potential fate of his own group. He did 
not understand that he was being classified as non-white, nor did he 
understand white/non-white color confrontation. Thus, he was :!11 
prepared to address it and its destructive implications. He too became 
confused in recognizing himself as a non-white, in the struggle that $oes 
on between the white classes: the upper, middle and lower classes. He 
failed to realize that, irrespective of income, education and position, he 
and all other fellow Semites constituted the powerless, non-white, non­
class victims in a white supremacy system. All non-whites, then as now, 
fall outside all three of the aforementioned white class groupings because 
the word "class" specifically refers to power - ultimately the power to 
protect one's life and the lives of one's group members in the framework 
of an existing power system. 
This attempted escape into Marxist doctrine falsely comforts some 
Blacks (as it did many Semites in Europe). In accepting this doctrine, 
they are convinced that there are some whites (the workers) who wish to 
unite with non-whites out of a supposed common interest. They further 
believe that these whites do not function under the white supremacy 
necessity (the global fear of white genetic annihilation by the genetically 
dominant non-whites) that governs the survival psyche of all who accept 
classification as "white" people. Though they have no proof that a sig­
nificant number of such whites exist, some Blacks persist in following the 
Marxist doctrine in order to avoid the fear-inducing awareness that Blacks 
and other non-whites are and always have been, weak and vulnerable in 
the context of the global white supremacy system. 
Like the 10-year-old Black male child I mentioned earlier, all Black 
adults will have to learn how to admit openly and honestly their fear of 
dying in the process of actively trying to destroy the injustice of global 
white supremacy. Only then will Black brain-computers cease patterns 
of circular logic, the logic of fear and escape, such that a firm Black 
analysis of the white supremacy dynamic can develop. With this estab­
lished, a long-term commitment to white supremacy neutralization can 
follow. 
158 
Black Fear 
A prerequisite to overcoming fear is the growth of self- and group­
respect. This respect cannot develop as Blacks strive to the blame one 
another for the symptoms of their common oppression. This respect 
cannot flourish in the presence of a belief that Blacks cannot develop their 
own analysis of and provide their own solutions to Black problems 
without the leadership, approval ami/or funding of non-Blacks. In keep­
ing with this goal, I recommend to the Black collective that we need not 
have any conferences other than to announce the existence of our fear of 
white supremacy and to share with one another all possible solutions for 
overcoming these fears. 
Solving the problem of political and social oppression of a people is 
fundamentally no different than solving a problem of illness in the human 
body. What is essential in the latter instance is an accwate diagnosis of 
the problem through observation, examination and various clinical tests 
and studies. The diagnosis represents a summarized statement of the 
specific pattern of physiologic derangement and a statement of the lllajor 
and minor causal factors. A program of treatment and cure is based upon 
producing the specific measures to counteract the causal factor(s) effi­
ciently and to alter any potential for the return of those factors permanent­
ly. Finally, the test of diagnostic accuracy is the effectiveness of the 
treatment and cure. 
The physician functions as a scientist to the extent that he or she bases 
the plan of treatment and cure on concrete observation, examination and 
analysis of the problem. This physician/scientist is more dependent upon 
his or her current observations and analysis than upon some previously 
written descriptions of "similar'' disease states found in some valued 
textbook written by learned and respected ancient authorities. The 
physician/scientist is ever-cognizant of the possibility of new disease 
states that never existed previously or of old disease states that never were 
described accwately and thus for which there are no established plans for 
treatment and cure. 
Physicians who lack fundamental self-respect and self-confidence are 
unable to make their own observations and analyses because they do not 
trust their own sensory apparatus, nor do they trust the ability of their own 
159


--- PAGE 95 ---
The Isis Papers 
brain-computers to make accurate correlations of the incoming sensory 
data. Therefore, they will be incompetent in observing and treating new 
problems, and they will be unable to perform adequately in the manage­
ment of new variations seen in previously recognized disease processes. 
External environmental dynamics, which affect the body in health and 
disease, are changing constantly, causing new and differing pictures of 
disease states. The major factor in diagnosis is the ability of the 
physician/scientist to make his or her own observations and for the brain 
to make critical analyses of the data of observation, which is experience. 
This series of acts, observation, experience and analysis then becomes the 
basis for all follow-up activity in treatment and problem solution. 
In summary, the physician/scientist, beginning with his or her obser­
vations, works to uncover the courses of disease. Through knowledge of 
the specific disease process, he or she works to affect treatment and cure. 
Just as the physician/scientist has to face the problem of physical disease, 
Black people and their scientists have to face and solve the problem of 
Black oppression under white supremacy. In fact, Black people seeking 
a scientific approach to the problem similarly must begin acting as 
scientists, observing their situation, recording their own data and follow­
ing up with their own analysis of their observations, experience and data. 
Their own analysis will then inform them of what it is that they, as Black 
people, need to do to achieve their goal objectives. 
To the extent that we fail to make our own fundamental observations 
and to validate our own sensory experience, we can conclude that Blacks 
lack the necessary levels of self-respect and self-confidence needed for 
independent functioning. To the extent that we believe we cannot depend 
100% upon our own sensory apparatus, we fail to have confidence in our 
ability to make encompassing analyses; and to that same extent, we are 
forced into dependency upon those whose brain-computers we believe to 
be superior to our own. 
If we do not have confidence in our ability to make independent Black 
observations, Black analyses and Black plans for Black action, why 
should we talk about or seek Black liberation? One never should seek 
independence from those upon whom one feels permanently dependent, 
160 
Black Fear 
for that would be an act of suicide. And, indeed, if that independence 
were won, it soon would be returned to the fonner state of dependence. 
Furthermore, if we believe that we are intellectually inferior to white 
people, as our distrust of our capacity to observe and make correlations 
would strongly imply, we simply should say this out loud for all the world 
to hear: "Blacks are genetically inferior in terms of their intellectual 
capacity as compared to their white counterparts." Then we should 
content ourselves quietly and politely to be totally and permanently 
dependent upon the white collective for all that we need, do, think and 
say. 
If Black behavioral, social and political scientists are supposed to be 
incapable of making accurate analyses of behavioral, social and political 
situations (local and worldwide), then Black physicians are also incapable 
of making accurate medical diagnoses, and all Black patients should seek 
white doctors. This would imply similarly that Black lawyers are in­
capable of successfully handling legal cases, and all Black law clients 
should seek white lawyers. Likewise, all Black students should seek 
white teachers. Furthennore, all Black women seeking husbands should 
seek white husbands, and all Black men seeking wives should seek white 
wives. This activity would carry such reasoning to its logical though 
absurd conclusions. If we do not wish to imply all of the above, let us get 
about the business of Black problem-solving, beginning with the problem 
of Black oppression under white supremacy. First and foremost, let it be 
the responsibility of every Black person to know and understand how the 
dynamic of white supremacy domination is expressed in all areas of 
people activity: economics, education, entertainment, labor, law, politics, 
religion, sex and war. 
161


--- PAGE 96 ---
13 
The Concept and the Color of God 
and Black Mental Health 
(November 1979) 
Agnostics doubt and question the existence of God. Atheists deny the 
existence of God. These two groups combined constitute a tiny minority 
of the world's people. The vast and overwhelming majority of the peoples 
on Earth have a conceptualizati'on of, and a belief in, the existence of God 
(no matter how named or defmed) as the supreme force or supreme being 
responsible for the creation of the universe. Therefore, this supreme being 
constitutes the highest and ultimate focus of their worship, devotion and 
obedience. 
In all but the agnostic and atheistic groups, the training and teaching 
of children about the concept of God, in a given culture, begin at the 
earliest possible age of comprehension and understanding. Customarily, 
long before children are capable of understanding any philosophical and 
abstract consideration of God, they are exposed to the system of rituals 
that the given people have evolved over thousands of years. The rituals 
form a part of their recognition of, worship of and obedience to their 
concepts of God. Thus, long before there is true cognitive understanding, 
• there is participation in the practice of recognizing God. This participa­
tion and practice becomes a part of children's (and ultimately adults') 
concept and image of self in relationship to the total environment, but also 
in relationship to the highest and ultimate focus of their worship, devotion 
and obedience to the God of the people. 
For it is the totality of experience in the environment from the moment 
ofbirth that forms the self-image and self-concept in the brain-computer 
163


--- PAGE 97 ---
The Isis Papers 
ofeach hwnan being. From this self-image and self-concept, all patterns 
of behavior evolve. Likewise, from the entire constellation of behavior 
in the individual, the determination of mental health or mental illness is 
made. 
As a practicing general and child psychiatrist, my defmition of mental 
health is as follows: patterns of logic, thought, speech, action and emo­
tional response, in all areas of people activity, that simultaneously reflect 
self-· and group-respect and respect for harmony in the universe. The 
critical question that arises now is, "What does the 'concept and color of 
God' have to do with Black 'self- and group-respect and respect for 
harmony in the universe'?" 
The oppression of Black and other non-white people means that there 
is no non-white self-determination. It also means, most fundamentally, 
that there can be no true and junctional Black self-respect. More specifi­
cally, this means that the existing levels of non-white functional self­
respect, as manifested in all areas of people activity, are extremely low. 
These low levels of functional self-respect imply that the self-image and 
self-concept are more negative than positive. Likewise, the impact of 
non-white individual and collective behavior in and on the total environ­
ment is more negative than positive. 
To have a negative impact on the total environment is a manifestation 
of behavioral powerlessness. To have a negative impact on the total 
environment is a manifestation of the self-image and self-concept as 
powerless. To have a negative impact on the total environment is a 
manifestation of having been shaped and molded by the total environment 
into a functional inferior through the process of i!iferiorization. (See 
Chapter 20.) The process of oppression is to mold the victims of oppres­
sion into functional inferiors. (See Diagrams I and II.) 
164 
Child's Brain­
Computer 
Child's Brain­
Computer 
Total En · Vli'Onment: economics educati' enteraainm t, labo • on sex, war en r, law, politics, religio~. 
r----.. Self.~ 
=-~ . Behavior "-'Uncept (neganve or positive) 
Diagram #I 
hig.Im~e and concept of God as the 
uest ~d ultimate foeus 
of worship, devotion and obedi ence. 
r----.. SeJf-~ 
=~e ---•Behavior ;concept (negative or poaitive} 
Diagram #U


--- PAGE 98 ---
The Isis Papers 
As previously stated, the global system of white supremacy oppression 
functions through all areas of people activity. The ultimate thrust 
(towards the victims of oppression), in all of the nine areas of people 
activity, is to cause and affect their universalizing. This is achieved 
equally in the area of religion as in sex. It is achieved equally in the area 
of war as in economics. It is achieved equally in entertainment as in labor. 
It is achieved equally in politics as in law. In other words, all nine areas 
of people activity are used equally in the system of non-white oppression 
to achieve the ultimate goal of non-white iriferiorization. 
The concept and the color of God are focused on most strongly in the 
area of religion, although all areas of people activity overlap, influence 
and fuse with one another. The global white supremacy system evolved 
a religion referred to as Christianity. However, it is referred to most 
appropriately as the dominant pattern of religious thought generated by 
the white supremacy system. Similarly, all fonns of economics within 
the global white supremacy system - whether referred to as capitalism, 
multi-nationalism, communism or socialism - are identified more ap­
propriately as the patterns of economic thought and practice generated 
by that system. Further, all forms of political organization within the 
global white supremacy system- whether referred to as democracy, 
nazism, Soviet hegemony ,fascism or nationalism-are referred to more 
appropriately as the various patterns of power relationships generated by 
that system. 
Absolutely critical to the white supremacy system of religious thought 
was the formation of the image of a white man as the "son" of God. This 
white male image then was referred to as "Christ" - no matter that the 
prophet Jesus was a Black man. Because the brain-computer functions 
most fundamentally on logic circuits, at deep unconscious levels it auto­
matically computes that God, the father, is also a white male. If God is 
other than white, he would have produced a Black (or other non-white) 
son. (See Diagram III.) 
Thus, any person programmed to accept the Christian religion, whether 
conscious of it or not, has the image and concept of God as a white man 
in the logic network of his/her brain-computer. 
166 
White Supremacy 
White Supremacy 
White Supremacy 
Politics 
White Supremacy


--- PAGE 99 ---
The Isis Papers 
Couple this image and concept of God as a white man with the white 
supremacy system's formal definition of God as 
"the supreme or ultimate 
reality; the Being perfect in power, wisdom and goodness whom ~en 
worship as creator and ruler of the universe." Then of absolute necessity, 
the logic circuits of the human brain-computer have to print out "The 
white man (as God, the father of the white male Christ) is the supreme or 
ultimate reality; the white man is the Being, perfect in power, wisdom 
and goodness whom all men should worship ~ creator and ruler of the 
universe." 
With this unconscious logic circuit of "God is a white man" flriDly in 
place, white domination over non-white people could last for one trill~on 
years. This would be true if this critical and essential logic connec~on 
could be implanted and plugged into the brain-computers of a sufficient 
number of black, brown, red and yellow peoples, who constitute the vast 
majority of the peoples on the planet With the wllite'man as God, the 
non-white global collective would be obedient to the white man always. 
It was the necessary duty of the vast army of white supremacy 
(Christian) missionaries sent out around the world, following the guns ~f 
white supremacy conquest, to implant- deep within the unconscious logic 
networks of non-white brain-computers- the critical image and concept 
of God as a white man. This unconscious implantation has been success­
ful to the extent that many non-white people on the planet conceive of 
themselves as members of the Christian (white supremacy) religion. In 
the U.S., the overwhelming majority of Black people, as well as a large 
portion of other non-white peoples, consider themselves Christian. 
Thus, all Black and other non-white peoples who profess to be 
members of the Christian (white supremacy) religion, whether they are 
conscious of it or not, worship the white man as God (not as "a" god, but 
as "the" God). And, in the unconscious logic networks of their individual 
brain-computers lies the logic that the white man is the supreme or 
ultimate reality- the Being perfect in power, wisdom and goodness whom 
men worship as creator and ruler of the universe. Although Black and 
other non-white peoples may understand that they are oppressed by the 
global white collective, of which the white males are the dominant 
168 
The Concept and the Color of God 
members, the brain-computer's cold logic circuits also unconsciously 
infonn the non-white (Christian) victim that it is impossible to free or 
liberate one's self from the supreme being who has created the universe! 
In other words, if in the deep, unconscious recesses of my brain-com­
puterrests the fundamental logic that God is a white man and that! should 
worship "God," all of my attempts at liberation will move me only in a 
circle. Indeed, the circumference of my "liberation movement circle" 
could be so wide that it really appears to me that I am moving in a straight 
line of progress. But moving in a circle, no matter how big the circle, is 
tantamount to standing absolutely still, marking time. Many Black people 
in the U.S. now are beginning to feel as though our liberation efforts (in 
spite of loss of life and whipped heads) have left us still standing on the 
same spot of white oppression. 
For the vast majority of Black and other non-white peoples today, the 
arrival of these ice cold facts of brain-computer logic at the conscious 
level will be experienced initially as shattering and self-disintegrating­
primarily because it is God the protector and the creator upon whom the 
self is taught (programmed) ultimately to depend. If the concept of God 
is removed from my brain-computer, upon whom or what am I to lean, 
especially ifl am feeling oppressed, depressed and overwhelmed? If there 
is nothing or no one to provide support, then I believe that I will collapse 
,and disintegrate. 
Nonetheless, as a general and child psychiatrist, I am fully aware of 
the destruction spawned by the unconscious logic implant "God is a white 
man." However, no matter what the level of initial trauma felt when this 
logic circuit is brought to conscious awareness, it must come fully to light 
··and be yanked out. Indeed, there can be no mental health, self-respect or 
· . positive self-concept for Black or other non-white peoples as long as this 
specious and destructive logic circuit remains in place. 
c It might be instructive at this juncture to recall that Christianity was 
based upon the life and activity of an African (Black) prophet named 
Jesus. That the white Romans recognized this fact is reflected in the early 
portrayals of Jesus and his mother as the Black madonna and Black child. 
Jo this day, a picture of the Black madonna and Black child secretly is 
169


--- PAGE 100 ---
The Isis Papers 
cherished as one of the most holy icons of the original Christian church, 
the Catholic church. 
What then necessitated changing the image of Black Jesus and Black 
Mary to white Christ and white Mary? To answer this question, we m~st 
return to the most fundamental fact in the existence of the global white 
collective: White-skinned peoples initially were the mutant albino of 
Black peoples in Africa. These white-skinned peoples were recognized 
as having a disease, just as today's modem science of genetics refers~ 
the condition of albinism (the lack of melanin pigmentation) as a genetic 
deficiency disease. The white-skinned early albinos were rejected by the 
normal pigmented majority. They were chased out and isolated fro~ the 
normal Black genetic groupings. Eventually, they had to m1grate 
northward to remove themselves from the intense African sun rays. 
Migrating northward fr,om Africa, the albino populations eventually set­
tled in the area of the world now referred to as Europe. There, they 
increased in n~ber and eventually returned to conquer the peoples of 
color in Africa, Asia and the rest of the world. They returned with the 
idea that they would conquer and no longer think of themselves as the 
rejected and diseased population; instead, they would think of themselves, 
in compensation, as the superior and supreme supermen and look upon 
all skin-pigmented peoples as the "genetic inferiors." 
With the necessity for such a compensatory ideology and concept of 
self as superior, the white psyche could tolerate no concept of anything 
higher than the white self- not even God. Thus, when the concept of the 
son of God was formulated, in their thinking, the "son" eventually took 
the form of a white man, which by brain-computer logic would mean that 
God himself had to be a white man. Thus, the white collective, in logical 
reality, is not in worship of any force beyond itself. 
Further, it is apparent that the collective white psyche felt ang~r 
towards God for bequeathing them what is now understood as a geneuc 
defect_ namely, white skin. In tum, they have spawned the thinking that 
doubts and denies the existence of God. Thus, they have conceived of ·· 
themselves as being at war with nature, which is the reflection of God. 
They function as though they are in a contest with God and try to 
170 
The Concept and the Color of God 
out-create God. Presently they are in a quest to produce genes and life 
itself. In fact, their dominant occupation is the destruction of the 
universe. And it is no accident that within the language system of the most 
highly evolved white supremacy unit, the word God is the exact mirror 
image of the word dog, and within the same language system, the dog -
not God- is said to be man's best friend. 
Blacks and all other non-white peoples who have operated under the 
concept of God as a white man for the past 2,000 years, should begin an 
immediate return to the fundamental concept of God as originally under­
stood in Africa before the input of the albino (white) collective. The 
African understvtding of God was that it was the only and ali-in-one 
energy force that created and simultaneously was all energy in the 
universe. This understanding recognized tlle God force as the source of 
all, the being responsible for all and the multiplicity of energy configura­
tions in the universe. Furthermore, the belief held that tllere are no energy 
configurations in the universe that are not from God and that are not God. 
It was the African way to respect completely this source of all energy 
manifest in and responsible for all things. This is African spirituality. 
Spirit is energy. Spirituality is the ability to get in touch witll, not only 
the ultimate source of all energy, but also tlle various multiplicity of 
energy configurations, which include matter, plants, animals, etc. This 
was, for Africans, the essential cosmic connection- the power connection. 
Since melanin is a superior absorber of all energy, it is essential to 
establish tlris understanding of God and "all energy." The fact that the 
albinos (whites) lack melanin may also help to explain why they have 
quite a different concept and understanding of God (all energy or all 
spirit), why they conceive of a trinity and why, in the view of many 
·.· non•white peoples, they (whites) lack "spirituality" and the capacity to 
in to, and tllereby establish harmony and justice in, the universe. 
•.J:1,;rth .... , because they lack the melariin sensory system, they cannot intuit 
all is one. 
However, at some unconscious level, tllere must be within the collec­
white psyche the awareness that the color black is essential to be in 
with the God force, justice and wisdom, and that is why they clothe 
171


--- PAGE 101 ---
The Isis Papers 
their men who are supposed to have knowledge of justice in black; and 
they clothe their scholars at the point of their scholastic (wisdom) achieve­
ment in black academic robes. Of course, one might cite a few exceptions, 
but black for ministers, priests, judges and scholars is the norm in thew bite 
supremacy system/culture worldwide. 
I recommend that Black and other non-white peoples begin to practice 
consciously removing the white image of the son of God from their 
brain-computers and, thus, removing the corollary logic that God is a 
white man. Secondly, Blacks and other non-white peoples must practice 
utilizing our particular energy crystalizations (bodies) as direct connec­
tions with the God force. (See Diagram IV.) This means we must learn 
to use our energy crystalization antennae to connect with the source from 
which all energy flows. It is the same as plugging an electric cord into a 
wall socket. By so learning to tune in to the cosmic energy source, it is 
possible to fmd the cosmic purpose of one's particular energy configura­
tion known as one's body. Then, it will be possible to use that cosmic 
energy for constructive purposes. 
I can say no more about how it can be done, but only that it can be 
done, just as I am saying that it is possible to break the logic circuit "God 
is a white man" in the rion-white brain-computer. 
To be Black and accept consciously or unconsciously the image of God 
as a white man is the highest possible form of self-negation and lack of 
self-respect under the specific conditions of white domination. Such 
perception, emotional response and thought are therefore insane. This 
logic circuit ensures that Black people always will look up to white people 
and, therefore, down upon themselves. Orily by breaking that logic circuit 
can the concept of Black and other non-white liberation become a reality. 
This is the direction in which we Blacks must propel ourselves as we enter 
the 21st century. 
172 
God 
(aU «;nergy) 
comuc energy 
Melanin Man 
an energ)'ilbsorbing Man r----------l~ 
Diagram#IV 
Use of 
cosmic energy


--- PAGE 102 ---
14 
The Symbolism and Meaning of Rape 
(October 1980) 
The symbol consists of multiple levels of energy data. The 
hieroglyphs, higher writings or writings concerning multiple levels of 
energy data, are written symbolic thought and language. Similarly, the 
parable is a statement of combined, multiple levels of energy data; it is 
also a statement of symbolic thought. 
Part of our ancient heritage as Black (African) people is the knowledge 
of the symbol. This working knowledge includes the ability to speak, 
write and decode symbolic language and thought. Melanin is essential 
for having deep knowledge of the symbol because melanin is capable of 
absorbing a broad spectrum of energy frequencies or data. 
Black is considered to be a perfect absorber of energy. There are 
inumerable facts that support this assertion. For example, Osiris, the great 
Egyptian (African) god, was referred to as "Lord of the Perfect Black"; 
Albert Einstein's great work on energy was based upon earlier knowledge 
in physics of the so-called "black box" energy absorption and mission 
experiments; black holes in cosmic space are so named because of their 
great power to absorb all forms of energy. 
Persons lacking high levels of melanin pigmentation in the nervous 
. .system, which includes the skin as its outermost manifestation. have great 
dif&culty in absorbing energy data from the universe at multiple frequen­
cies . deep energy levels. Therefore, these white-skinned peoples, the 
eJo,unclers of Western civilization and culture, experience great difficulty 
175


--- PAGE 103 ---
The Isis Papers 
in understanding and decoding the symbol. This is the most fundamental 
reason that "Westerners" have difficulty in thinking like "Easterners" 
(black and brown peoples- people with higher levels of melanin ~ ~eir 
nervous systems), and vice versa. Melaninated peoples are funcuom~g 
with a sixth sense, the additional sensory system being that of melanm 
P
·gmentation while Westerners function with only five senses. Thus, the 1 t • h II 
Western dictionaries defme hieroglyphs as "difficult to dec1p er. 
Similarly, the Western dictionaries define parable as "an obscure or 
enigmatic saying." . . . 
Black and other non-white peoples who have been tratned to think like 
westerners now have to retrain their brains and nervous systems to 
function at full capacity through conscious effort to use their melanin 
networks. This can be achieved through the practice of self-respect, 
wherein Black and other non-white peoples respect and pay close at~e~­
tion to what their own six-sense nervous systems inform them of. Thts 1s 
quite contrlUY to focusing on what white-skinned peoples are a~le to f~us 
on and what they train non-white peoples to focus on. Melanm-defictent 
"educators" can train non-white peoples to use only a portion of their 
nervous systems at best. Thus, it is the responsibility of ~on-whi~ peoples 
to take charge of developing the full use of their melanin potenttal. 
Familiarity with these issues are necessary for an examination of rape 
as a symbol in the white supremacy system/culture. Rape ~san unjust and 
sick pattern of behavior. It is a behavior pattern reflecuve of very low 
levels of self-respect and, therefore, of mental illness. Simultaneously, 
rape manifests very low levels of respect towards others. It is a horren-
dous violation of the selfhood of another. 
The most frequent form of rape is that in which a male aggressively 
and abusively imposes his genitals onto a female with the threat of 
destruction. This conduct is seen most frequently in situations of male 
confmement: in penal institutions, juvenile corrective institutions or 
psychiatric institutions - which are staffed and supervised ina~quately · 
A fundamental aspect of rape is the imposition of the male gemtals upon 
someone considered physically weaker or vulnerable by someone who (at 
least superficially) looks upon himself as being more powerful and 
176 
The Symbolism and Meaning of Rape 
capabl~ of subduing another. Condensed to the least common 
denomu~tor, rape is an act in which the genitals become a weapon. A 
w~apon 1s most fundamentally an instrument of aggression and is con­
~lVed of as an aide to the human body when the body alone is considered 
madequate for the task of subduing and conquering. 
. ~n today's world, rape is common. In the U.S., it is reported in highest 
mc~dence amongst members of the Black population, with Black males 
~pmg Black ~emales. There is said to be an approximately equal in­
Cidence of wh~te ~ales raping Black females as Black males raping white 
females. The mctdence of white males raping white females is lowest. In 
past decades, w bite male rape of Black females was of highest incidence. 
Instead of breaking into the hysteria of the women's liberation 
m?vement. regarding the issue of rape, I prefer to examine the meaning of 
this be~v10r, commencing with male use of male genitalia. As I have 
stated m all of my writings during the past 10 years, there is no behavior 
that can be adequately understood and decoded outside the context of the 
power relationships that exist amongst peoples. In today's world, the 
most fu~darnental of all power relationships is that of white power versus 
non,whlte (black, brown, red and yellow) powerlessness. The underlying 
factors and forces that have led to the evolution of this specific power 
system are 1) the numerical minority status of white-skinned peoples 
glo~y, and 2) the fact that white skin is genetically recessive to the 
. dommant genetic potential to produce melanin. If white-skinned peoples 
had not evolved a global system in which they established power over the 
wo~ld's non-white majority, the white collective would run the risk of 
. wh1te genetic annihilation. 
The fear of such annihilation has fnfluenced the white collective to 
·· evolve, over ~e centuries, massive weapon systems- from simple to gross 
mstruments of destruction and annihilation. This was done, 
fundamentally, to "equalize" the genetic power for white collective 
destruction, power possessed by the planet's men of color. 
The ability to decode symbols is essential to obtain an accurate 
. .· . _ of exactly what is happening in the surrounding environ­
:JilenL For example, the ability to decode helps us to understand deeper 
177


--- PAGE 104 ---
The I sis Papers 
meanings inherent in the major instruments evolved by the global white 
collective (to prevent white genetic annihilation) and the shaping of such 
instruments after the form of male genitalia: guns, bombs, cannons, 
cannon balls, airplanes and nuclear missiles. (See Diagram I.) It is little 
wonder, then, that the gun has been called "the great equalizer," or that a 
white male who is really supposed to be "something" is referred to as a 
"pistol." 
At the same time, the highest percentage of money expenditure is going 
towards the "arms race"- the race for accumulating sufficient weapons 
by both white superpowers, hopefully sufficient to prevent global white 
genetic annihilation. These weapons surround all of the world~s non­
white peoples. Of course, this is not what is said overtly. Overtly, whites 
claim that the white superpowers are arming against one another. But 
this is the language of the white lie, the great lie, the super or superior lie. 
In the depths of the language itself, it is possible to understand the exact 
meaning of the arms race. The arms race also means the "race" (genetic 
group) of people whose genetic existence is tied to weapons of violence 
(arms). Just as hidden within the word "America" (AMERICA), is the 
phrase, "I am race." Thus, it is a symbolic anagram. The whites are the 
only group on the planet to develop the word "race," and they have given 
this word maximum meaning. 
Clearly, in the global white supremacy system/culture, the highest 
percentage of energy is directed towards the construction of weapons out 
of a sense of genetic and genital weakness and inadequacy. Of all of the 
cultures in the world, Western (white supremacy) has the highest level of 
sensed male inadequacy and male awareness of genetic and genital 
vulnerability, thus the need for weapons of attack. This culture clearly 
has equated the male genitals with weapons and aggression. 
As mentioned in Chapter 10, the white collective looks upon the Black 
male specifically as the possessor of the genitals most capable of causing 
white genetic annihilation. This explains the expression, "to black ball," 
which means, "to exclude from social life." 
Thus, in the white supremacy system/culture, white females have been 
taught to focus on all Black males as potential rapists. At the same time, 
178 
The Gun ~ lketch) 
(The guo • a ~ oiv male geaiaalia) 
Bomb 
Weapons as = f the Phallus 
Missile


--- PAGE 105 ---
The Isis Papers 
white females are taught to describe the males that they have the greatest 
level of sexual attraction for as tall, dark and handsome. Clearly. it was 
no accident that once the white female began to petition for her liberation 
from the white male, she also began an all-out sexual aggression towards 
the Black male in particular, and other non-white males in general. 
Unable to admit her own sexual attraCtions and aggressions towards the 
Black male consCiously, she began to talk about developing anti-rape 
organizations to prevent rape - the projection being that white females 
were about to be attacked by Black males. Meanwhile, the greatest 
incidence of rape was being conducted by Black males against Black 
females. The above discussion is the best explanation for the white collective's 
(most specifically, the white male collective's) production of massive 
numbers and kinds of weapons of destruction (which land on Black 
mother Earth) that are symbolic substitutes for a genetic and genital 
apparatus perceived as inadequate. Simultaneously, it explains the use of 
the male genitals as weapons in the act of rape, most pronouncedly 
observed in the Black male population-a population forced into political 
(power) and functional inadequacy by the oppression of white supremacy· 
The weapons produced by the white supremacy system are the truly 
respected male genetic and genital apparatus of the global white collec­
tive. These symbolic weapons are perceived as countering the threat of 
white genetic annihilation by Black and other non-white male genitalia. 
These weapons then are used to rape and destroy Black mother earth, just 
as other technologies of the white supremacy system/culture rape and 
pollute the planet as a supposed statement of white male adequacy and 
power. In turn Black and other non-white males are forced by the same 
environme~t into thinking of their genital apparatus as destructive 
weapons of aggression through the act of rape. Black mal~~ engage in 
this activity out of their imposed frustration and sense of pohucal pow~r­
lessness and inadequacy. Non-white male genitals are used as destructive 
weapons primarily against Black and other non-white females. 
180 
The Symbolism and Meaning of Rape 
This behavior also can be viewed as paralleling white male collective • s 
sexual attacks on non-white women in the global white collective's wars 
of domination against non-white peoples. The white male's sense of 
genetic inadequacy contributed to the white male collective's need to 
continue to debase non-white women through rape and other forms of 
sexual abuse. Such abuse was necessary because the white male collec­
tive felt debased by the dominant genetic power of non-white women. 
Similarly, because within the context of white supremacy more stress 
and pressure is placed on the Black male than on the Black female, the 
B.lack male often perceives that the Black female has more power than 
hunself and that she therefore does not respect his manhood. In his sense 
of inadequacy, he strikes out in the rape of the Black female, seeking to 
debase her to the level to which he feels debased under the power system 
of white domination. 
Although there is no overt discussion of these dominating logic and 
thought sequences, they nonetheless act as powerful determiners of be­
havior patterns as seen in white and Black male populations. However, 
because there is no overt discussion of them, these behaviors have not 
come under conscious control wherein people consciously can think 
through their impulses to balance disturbing concepts and images of the 
male as inadequate. 
, •• Likewise, the global white collective and all of its non-white victims 
m the world, see no connection between the increased incidence of rape 
and the popularity of a singing group that calls itself the "Sex Pistols " 
thus ass~iating sex with violence. The same culture does not see ru:y 
connection between the numbers and shape of its missiles, bombs, guns 
·and male genital apparatus and the ever increasing incidence of sexual 
· . ,. the hi~hest level of violence being expressed in the act of rape. 
-In the magazme/ndia Today (Vol. 2 No.7, August 1-15, 1980, North 
edition), on one page there was an article on the epidemic of 
in India and on the very next page there was an article on the 
· " . of missiles and other nuclear weapons of destruction by the 
subconunent of India. The latter article was entitled "Soaring Into the 
181


--- PAGE 106 ---
The Isis Papers 
Space Age." Consciously, this page and subject association may be 
accidental, but unconsciously it is logical. 
India is one of the poorest countries in the world, with mass levels of 
unemployment and starVation. Those black and brown men are feeling 
debased and powerless under global white supremacy, which they still fail 
to understand after centuries of colonization. In India, there is a massive 
mental disease of people hating their skin color and wishing themselves 
to be as white as their early white (Aryan) invaders. They are obsessed 
with a caste system based on skin color. with the blackest people looked 
upon as "untouchables." They hate themselves and feel debased under 
white supremacy. Also, these non-white men have not discovered yet 
how to feed their people. Therefore, because of this debased view of self, 
they rape, just as the global white collective has raped the non-white 
women of the world and continues its rape of black mother Earth with 
weapons andpollution. 
Since the white supremacy system is predicated on the white 
collective's (most specifically, the white male collective's) sense of 
genetic and genital inadequacy and vulnerability, it reflects this sense of 
inadequacy and vulnerability in the raping of women, weaker men, and 
black mother Earth. Rape is most fundamentally a symptom in the entire 
syndrome of sensed male inadequacy. Therefore, those who wish to 
combat the world's epidemic of rape must wage counter-struggle against 
the global white supremacy system. 
Rape will cease as a dominant behavior amongst Black males once 
they begin to respect themselves fully as men, cease reacting unconscious­
ly to the white supremacy system's attack against them, and learn to 
struggle efficiently and effectively to neutralize and destroy this grave 
global injustice. 
182 
15 
T~e Sy~bolism, Logic and Meaning 
of Justifiable Homicide" in the 1980s 
Where there is no vision the people will perish 
- Proverbs 22:1 
Black people are afraid but Black 1 · their fear Black 
1 
d' peop e are gomg to have to get over 
· peop e o not know what ish · are going to have to 1 d appenmg, but Black people · earn an understand ha · h · · ·.· are not thinking, but Black w. tts appenmg. Black people 
. Bla people are gomg to have to begin think' 
. . ck people are not being quiet, but Black peo 1 . mg. 
start getting quiet so they can think Bla k P e are gomg to have to 
planning, but Bla k 1 . . c people are not analyzing and c peop e are gomg to have to begin anal · 
="!;. B: people do not undersl>nd deep self-respect, ;,:',1: 
. g g to have to learn the meanin d . self-respect. Black people . g an practice of deep 
children to play with parenth:d g~~g to have to sto~ permitting Black 
moaning kin . · ack people are gomg to have to stop 
... , roc g, crymg, complaining and b . goingtohavetostopthinkingth t h eggmg. Black people are 
Black people . a r yme and rhetoric will solve problems. 
1 ~e gomg to have to stop fmger-popping and singing Bla k 
peop e are gomg to have to stop dancing and clo · · c 
.. ·are going to have to stop laughing and and liste . wnmgl. Blac~ people 
·· of these behaviors and nmg to oud rad1os. All addr . th , many more, have absolutely nothing to do with 
essmg echallengesandconditionsoftheo e . 
, being waged against the Black collective. p n warfare contmuously 
183


--- PAGE 107 ---
The Isis Papers 
ar being waged against us because 
We Black people do not see thew afraid We are engaging in behavior 
we don't want to and because we are ~ness of the war - our true 
designed specifically to block out any ~wt the insanity of hoping and · th s forces us m o reality. Our behavtor u . al . pecific behavioral pattern edt the samty of an ysts, s . begging-asoppos o . f people activity: economtcs, 'fi duct mall areas o design and spect tc con la politics religion, sex and war. 
education, entertainment, labor, ~· th B~ck collective is the killing · the war agamst e . A major strategy m . kill d dai'ly in ever-increasmg k alsarebemg e ' · of Black males. Blac m e n wh'tte males also are pemg Other as no - . numbers, across the country. Th Black and other non-whtte · · numbers. ese killed in ever-mcreasmg . . iforms who have been killed b whtte males m un · males are being y . . ~~~ ~"arm of murder and slaughter ts 
S Thts parucuuu 1' 
authorized to carry gun · 
called justifiable homicide. ter understanding of this war 
Our Black collective today has no ~ea th . t di' d when Black males · · fi ble homtctde an 1 
and the phenomenon of JUSU ta dail 100 years ago in the period of 
were being lynched and cas~ated yf, white supremacy following the 
. , r reestabhshment o d' f "Reconstrucuon, 0 ll . have a greater understan mg 0 
Civil War. Nor does the Black c~ ec:;:kmales than itclid two and three 
the current" open hunting season on a 
decades ago. d what is going on, in our impotence 
Because we really do not understan d frustration, we start getting mad, 
. owerlessness an · d' and ignorance, m ourp . 'th 'cket signs rioting in rots rrec-. beggmg wt pt , . fussing, crying, rhymmg, . . our churches and preparing agam 
tion, hooping and hollering, moanm~lm t us even though he lies to us. 
bite man who smt es a . . d to vote for any w 1 Such behaviors are m vatn an . ll b lutely use ess. h These behav10rs are a a so aught and the problem - t e 
Th ill all come to n will take us nowhere. ey w . . 
. ti e and mtenstfy. . war- will stmply con nu n'ence of captivity out of Afnca ched in our expe The stage has been rea d strate a deep self-respect, · hallenged to emon ·ct wherein we are bemg c . -not J·ust the right Sl e, h le brrun-computers requiring us to use our w ~ . rh thm and rhyme. Now we must 
which pennits us to engage m rheton~d· yf our brain-computers, the left . d the left st e o begin to exerctse an use 
184 
Justifiable Homicide 
cerebral hemisphere, which pennits us to analyze critically and decode 
what is happening daily in front of our eyes and to organize a self- and 
group-respecting behavioral response to that which the environment is 
presenting us. We must have a disciplined, self- and group-respecting 
response to the specific war being waged against us. 
Without critical thinking, however, there is no self-respect. Without 
self-respect, there is no courage, no self-defense, no justice, no peace and 
no progress. 
In his struggle against white supremacy, the great leader of the 
Chinese-speaking non-white people, Chairman Mao Tse-Tung, accurate­
ly stated as recorded in The Collected Works of Mao Tse-Tung, "It is well 
known that when you do anything, unless you understand its actual 
circumstances, its nature and its relations to other things, you will not 
know the laws governing it, or know how to do it, or be able to do it well." 
With this in mind, all Black people everywhere must begin to under­
stand the exact and specific nature of the war that is being waged against 
the Black collective. All Black people must begin to understand in depth 
why we are witnessing Black males being shot dead almost daily by white 
males in uniforms and why it will soon escalate to more than one per day. 
Without the specific understanding of why we are seeing this behavior, 
we are unable to organize behaviors to meet this war strategy effectively. 
Furthennore, Black people everywhere must begin to understand why 
the Black collective, and Black males in particular, have been under 
intensive attack for the past 2,000 years. Indeed, Jesus was a Black male 
who was lynched by uniformed white male Roman soldiers 2,000 years 
ago, as a result of the same war that has continued into the present day 
extension of the same Roman (white) empire. 
Whenever there is a sense of increased vulnerability within the local 
global white collective - as, for example, caused by inflation 
: (CtiiiTencv devaluation), unemployment, loss of a war or counter-struggle 
non-white peoples (e.g., Arabs controlling and limiting oil supplies, 
taking white hostages, Black guerillas struggling in southern 
and the loss of the Vietnam War)- there will be an increase of the 
,:ev~:r-rn~ese.m "normal" daily slaughter and murder of Black and other 
185


--- PAGE 108 ---



--- PAGE 109 ---
The Isis Papers 
non-white males by those both legally and illegally authorized to do so. 
This murder and slaughter will be logically viewed as justified within the 
specific logic framework of the fear of white genetic annihilation. 
Within the historic framework of Western civilization and culture (the 
civilization and culture organized to prevent white genetic annihilation), 
all white peoples have the spoken or unspoken mandate to participate 
actively in their collective struggle for global white genetic survival. This 
specifically means, of necessity, the murder and slaughter of Black and 
other non-white males whenever it is felt within the white collective to be 
necessary and, therefore, justified. 
Because Black males, of all non-white males, have the greatest 
potential to genetically annihilate the white collective, Black males will 
experience the greatest ferocity of white supremacy's attack through 
justifiable homicide. Because Black and other non-white males have the 
potential to produce white genetic annihilation through the use of their 
genitalia and because genetic annihilation is the most fundamental fear of 
the global white collective, this collective (consciously or unconsciously) 
evolved a "counter" weapon or system of weapons, that theoretically 
could achieve non-white genetic annihilation. 
The sport of hunting animals (in most instances they have black or dark 
brown fur) in the white supremacy system/culture, wherein there is thrill, 
excitement and pleasure associated with the killing, is the way in which 
the white collective (most specifically, the white male collective), stays 
in physical and psychological readiness for killing Black and other 
non-white males Qustifiable homicide), aibeit that this obsessive practice 
may be functioning at unconscious levels of brain-computer activity. 
Unlike Black and other non-white peoples who killed animals for food 
and shelter purposes, the white collective engages in this activity as 
obsessive sport and play. By using the gun (the great equalizer) against 
helpless animals, they attempt to achieve a sense of manhood and security. 
A fleeting sense of manhood can be achieved by the white male sports 
hunter because in killing the large black or brown animal (the """nlv\ 1"" 
non-white male) there has been a symbolic destruction of the major 
to white genetic survival. Since the achievement, however, is 
186 
Justifiable Homicide 
symbolic, it must be re"""'ted d ·t · . ~""'" • an so as soon as th h . 1 IS time to hunt again. e untmg season opens, 
In the same pe "od · . . . n m whtch there has bee . . JUStifmble homicide there h al n an mcreasmg incidence of kiJ . ' as so been an · . lmg helpless animals makin h . mcreasmg enthusiasm for 
Pe • g sue huntmg 1 t" nnsy1vania world famous Whi oca tonsasPottersCounty 
f: • te adult mal h • athers to kill and destroy bel I . es ave been taught by their 
. P ess anunals for sport d · generation of white males . ta ' an m turn, the next . ts ught the means b h" genetic survival. Y w 1ch to ensure white 
Non-white males may say that the 
obviously hunting does not carry th Y also hunt ~d enjoy hunting, but 
non-white male as it does~ th e_same unconscious meaning for the 
h. 1ar e whtte male · th w lte supremacy p .. _.~.. 10 e context of the global 
• w u•ermore, Black mal from hunting down white mal . es never have gotten a thrill 
bee es wtth dogs and · fl n practiced by white males . n es, as has so frequently 
I · agamst Black mal tis absolutely critical that all BI k es .. 
the meaning of the following facts~c pethople examme and think through 
tw be" . at e very sam . e Ing shot down in the street . . e time Black males 
31 1980 10 ever mcreasing b • Washington Post has num ers, The August · reported that Pola d . mums. t country already is ask' th . n ' a so-called com-. mg e Umted Stat · gram purchases from $550 'lli . es to mcrease credits for "II" mt on m the cum fi mt ton in the fiscal year that b . ent tscal year to $670 
Or.>; • egins October 1 in 0 d f" 
c- ... n 11 needs to build up meat d . r er to mance the feed fi fi . pro uction. Do "e . " . ·. or eed gram to build up meat prod . nemtes provtde fmance 
uction for one another? 
On August 12, the press reported W 
designed 'to help bail Poland out a 
f . est German loan of $672 million 
Doder, The Washington Post.) 0: Alts economic difficulties' (Dusko 
Bank of America granted Pol d ugu~t ~2 a consortium led by the 
an an addttlonai $325 milli" on. 
A recent unclassified CIA stud 
a total of $21 billion, the bun/ ~e.v~als that theW est has lent Poland 
study reports that the West hasole~tm the l~t five years. The same 
as. tronomical $78 billt" the Sovtet block as a whole an on-anamounte ai the and General Motors combined Oth qu to total assets of Exxon 
well above $100 billion. . er experts put the total debt figure 
187


--- PAGE 110 ---
The I sis Papers 
Why are we bailing Poland and the Soviet Union out of their economic 
difficulties, feeding them massive transfusions of hard currency to buy 
bread for their restive masses and teclmology to boost their 
obsolescent centralized economies? Why are Western banks 
relieving the USSR of the expensive burden of propping up the Polish 
economy and regime'? 
The answer lies in a terse banker's paradox: Make a small loan and 
you have created a debtor; make a large loan and you have created a 
parmer . 
... The$1 billion which Westernbankshavefunneled to Poland during 
the current crisis is a startling political intervention on behalf of that 
country's communist regime ... 
The critical question for Black people is "who is the real enemy7" 
While massive numbers of Black males are unemployed and increasing 
numbers are being shot down in the streets in a presumably capitalist 
country, that same capitalist country is helping white communist countries 
and their workers retum to their jobs and have sufficient meats and other 
foods on their tables. Basically, the U.S. is supporting the whole white, 
so-called communist block. This does not include the Chinese-speaking 
non-white peoples. What is starklY illustrated here is that "capitalism" and "communism" 
are not two enemies. but simply the two extreme ends of the total spectrum 
of economic practices under the system of white supremacy, wherein it is 
of priority that all whites (males in particular) have jobs whether they are 
at the right or left economic ends of the white supremacy spectrum. The 
same would be true of the Democratic party/Republican party political. 
spectrum, which in this area of the world is the total political spectrum of. 
politics under white supremacy. Also, it must be noted that while Black males are being shot down ii. 
increasing numbers and experiencing high unemployment, white 
communists, in mass numbers, are being admitted to find their plac~"•J" 
and housing in this capitalist country and are referred to as "political 
refugees." Black Haitians, however, are not admitted and treated 
ly. 
188 
Justifiable Homicide 
In the global white supremacy system, all persons classified as non­
white are outside the white power spectrum and are, in effect, the real 
enemy. Thus, they are manipulated and/or eliminated at the will of that 
power system. In the context of global white supremacy, the only per­
manent enemies are those persons capable of white genetic annihilation, 
meaning Black and all other non-white peoples (most specifically males). 
In the most narrow perspective, justiftable homicide refers to the overt 
shooting murder of a Black male or Black males by white uniformed 
male(s). In a broader perspective, "justifiable homicide" also can refer to 
the numerous more subtle tactics of Black male control and destruction. 
To deny Black males jobs and genuine upward mobility is to deny them 
the functional roles of husband and father. To deny Black family units 
functional husbands and fathers on a mass level is to deny these families 
stability and to deny male children models for adult male functioning. 
Deprivation of male models for male functioning means permanent Black 
male social disfunctioning, affecting all areas of people activity for 
multiple generations. 
The massive increase of Black male bisexuality and homosexuality to 
epidemic proportions can be correlated directly to the debased functioning 
of adult Black males in Black family units by the racist system. The large 
of Black males engaging in drug use and abuse, including alcohol, 
is tied directly to the severely crippled Black family structure, brought 
through systematically denying Btack males functional roles as 
and fathers. The massive numbers of Black males trapped in 
· juvenile justice system and the penal system also are related directly 
absence of truly functional fathers and husbands in the homes from 
these victimized males have come. Current statistics (1980) indi-
.that among Blacks, the proportion of one-parent families is a stag-
49% (1.8 million families). This is 83% higher than a decade ago. 
rates among one-parent units are enormously higher than among 
units. 
television media also play a major role in reinforcing the debase­
the Black male. Bill Cosby is debased by always being depicted 
at the level of infants. Muhammed Ali is debased by always 
189


--- PAGE 111 ---
The Isis Papers 
. . roaches and biting into sandwiches in-
being shown clowmng, chasmg 1 • character "Mr. Jefferson" in 
1 ns Sherman Helms ey s . b' stead of waterme o . . . like a monkey and chm mg 
The Jeffersons is always clownmg, actm~ economic attainment. Mr. 
. 't of supposed supenor . over furniture, mspt e . 11' nt manly white male who ts ed to a more mte •ge , Jefferson is contrast . eall'~ 18. married to a white male). 
k ~ -~ 'e (who m r he is . married to a Blac .en~ sence of Black adult male mode ill 
With the massive failure and ab . . provides Black male youths . · real life teleVISIOn family constellanons m ' hi Shadow conditioning these 
f th odel of The ~ te ' k with the white a er m lack dult male models and to loo 
sed to the absence ofB a f'· ....... children to get u "the man .. This theme is advanced Ul u•er 
up to the white adult male as ·llai haise) and Different Strokes 
( · g Herve Ve c in Fantasy Island stamn ck le will look particularly at 
(starring Gary Coleman). Most Bla illi~~ .. e" However, both Gary 
d "He's a m o ........ · · · a1 G•n·v Coleman an say, hit males with constitution 
-J llai ha' earenon-w e , Coleman and Herve Ve c IS . th . hysical stature to be abnormal· . d fi . cies causmg err p . and/or genenc e Icten • but it is their genetic or · deed excellent actors, al ly short. Yes, they are 
1
~ irl site adult white males of norm 
constitutional abnonnahty' play g oppo presentation in both of 
. al h 'ght that is the core white supremacy phystc et ' . . . . 
these popular televtston senes. th Black and other non-white d truetive statement at . The profoundly es . . all defective compared to wh1te · all and constitunon Y th males are genenc Y . being propagated over e 
tl 10essage that 1s males is the sub e core . and constitutional abnor-
. This image of non-white male genetic d radios arrways. bile as background, newspapers an 
mality is set forth weekly, w . . f Nobel Prize winner Dr. on the discussiOn o give continuous coverage sed enetic inferiority of Black people 
Wl'Uiam Shockley about the suppo g S _, years aao the weekly . 'lization eveuu 0 ' 
and the need for therr sten . . f the Black male as a female 
. . resentation and promonon o . " as televiSIOn P . Fli W'lson's role of "Geraldine, w · portrayed m P 1 
a transvesnte, ~. fthe Black male's genetic makeup and 
similarundermmmg o. . ar weekly television portrayal of a we:ll-alfes:seu·· 
There was/is no such Slffiil tite in the white supremacy 
white male as a female and transves 
and culture. 
190 
Justifiable Homicide 
Blacks and other non-white people do not perceive these messages 
because they are blind to the context of the white supremacy power 
structure that surrounds thelD. They look at such programs and are 
pleased; they smile and laugh. Nonetheless, this continued presentation 
of Black genetic inferiority makes the fmal destruction of Blacks appear 
to Blacks themselves as a relief from the burden of their own genetic 
inadequacy. One can be assured thai there will never be a weekly 
television presentation of a constitutionally and genetically deformed 
blue-eyed, blond white male, playing opposite an irltelligently behaving 
Black male of normal stature, as long as the white supremacy system 
remains intact. 
. These more subtle means of achieving justifmble homicide all serve to 
advance the ultilDate goal of white genetic survival. For, with Black adult 
males unable to function as 10en (on drugs, in prison, as clowns and 
buffoons, as infants and perceived as genetic defectives, transvestites and 
homosexuals), there will not be a major threat of white genetic annihila­
tion, and white genetic survival is assured. The white collective cannot 
be asked to cease their drive for justifiable homicide in its gross and subtle 
forms. To do so would mean white suicide . 
It is therefore the self-respecting task of Blacks and all other non-whites 
to understand the war and the behavioral dynaiDic of white supremacy, in 
which they are presently trapped. Through this understanding, we must 
evolve our own behavior (in all areas of people activity) that will even­
tually checklDate this global white necessity and injustice. 
. Black people may begin by educating all Black male children to 
understand white supre10acy and by putting increased pressure on Black 
~males to recognize their role as husbands and fathers. This understanding 
means that Black men must work and provide support for their families, 
the white collective attempts to prevent them from doing. Males 
do not demand and fight, if necessary, to have jobs cannot become 
."uu~'Ullii'U:S or fathers. Most certainly, teenage male children cannot be­
parents, which means that Black females will have to learn when 
under what circumstances they should relate to Black 10ales in the act 
Ul sexu.i:IJ intercourse and self-reproduction. 
191


--- PAGE 112 ---
The Isis Papers 
This internal pressure to preserve the role of Black manhood becomes 
a means by which the concept of Black manhood is developed and 
preserved by Black peoples themselves. This activity will counter the 
thrust of the Black male as female, clown, infant, buffoon, transvestite, 
homosexual. Black males who are unwilling to fight for their manhood 
are thereby indicating that they debase Black manhood and will not be 
able to teach it to the next generation. These males do not deserve the 
privilege of procreating themselves, and this should be enforced by all 
Black females who are self-respecting. 
White supremacy is war against Black people in general and against 
Black males in particular, as embodied in such tactics and strategies as 
justifiable homicide. It will require a total commitment and counter war 
effort on the part of all Black peoples to neutralize, by every means at 
their disposal, this war of racist injustice. 
As Black people, we also can adopt the defmition that under the 
conditions of white supremacy, Black manhood does not mean macho or 
money, but instead it means warrior or soldier against white supremacy, 
embracing everything that the words warrior or soldier imply. Those who 
do not wish to be warriors or soldiers should not procreate themselves, as 
their offspring can be expected to be destroyed by white supremacy 
anyway. This is by no means a definitive statement on Black response to 
justiftable homicide, but it is an attempt to elevate the discussion on this 
specific white supremacy war strategy. Further discussion amongst Black 
people will help to define all necessary Black behavioral response. 
192 
16 
Paper Money and Gold As Symbols 
(1980) 
The image or concept of the self in the deep recesses of the brain-com­
puter, as programmed through the total environment interacting with the 
genetic and constitutional base, detennines all patterns of symbols, logic, 
thought, speech, action, emotional response and perception in all areas of 
people activity. As such, the self-image is the core from which all else 
.evolves in the brain-computer. Thus, the deep self-image is the key 
concern of the psychiatrist. 
Why should one focus on deep symbols? What do we achieve through 
· symbol analysis and understanding? Truth cannot be concealed. Truth 
is "that which is." It is specific energy in the universe. It literally begs to 
·. be revealed, especially when hypocrisy and deceit- distorted statements 
of "that which is" -move towards domination. Truth then reveals itself, 
. speaks and surfaces through the symbol. The symbol is the fonn through 
· which a highly dynamic idea or concept can "tunnel" underground 
through the unconscious to be expressed. The symbol is the product of 
. environmental energy condensation. 
R.A. Schwaller de Lubicz in his book, Symbol and the Symbolic, 
explains: 
... that true progress inhuman thought can be made only if we call upon 
the 'symbolizing' faculty of human intelligence, the faculty developed 
and refmed in the Temple Culture of ancient Egypt and reflected in 
the hieroglyphics that have come down to us undisturbed. The 
mentality of ancient Egypt helps to free us from our present intellectual 
impasse, while 'symbolism' must be recognized for what it is: the 
193


--- PAGE 113 ---
~~,...."'"'"-"""--'"'-..,...-="'-~" ~~---~---
The Isis Papers 
intuitive means of overcoming the limitations of reason and achieving 
a higher humanism. 
Schwaller de Lubicz also indicates ... 
Egypt and other cultures grounded in the symbolic method, were 
indeed, through symbols, educating the neurological structures of the 
brain to maintain an active, conscious connection not only between 
the bilateral lobes of the cerebral cortex, but also with the impulses 
and subliminal information received from the ancient and deeper 
limbic and reptilian centers, so that these aspects of our nature could 
be integrated into the activity of our reasoning mind. 
Symbols and the decoding of symbols has yet to become a major area 
of interest and study in Western civilization. This is regrettable at one 
level, yet very understandable at a deeper level. Decoding the symbol is 
an activity not unlike that of the physical scientist who places matter or 
living substance under the lens of a light microscope or an electromicro­
scope for the purpose of gaining deeper insight into and understanding of 
the structure and function of that matter. In both instances (decoding the 
symbol and examining matter under a microscope), the process of inves­
tigation serves to refine our knowledge and influence our behavior in the 
universe. Decoding the symbol also leads to a deeper understanding of 
the self, and so frees the self. There are few who would argue that in-depth 
knowledge is not superior to knowledge of the surface alone. 
The process of decoding and visualizing the symbol does not require 
the aid of a device beyond the human body, such as the microscope. Such 
a process requires fast and foremost the activity of the right cerebral 
hemisphere and those sensory, neuro-chemical channels that feed primari­
ly into this area of the human brain-computer. As a theoretical extension, 
I am convinced that the neuropigment melanin plays a crucial role in this 
right cerebral hemisphere sensory, neurochemical system. 
Melanin acts as an energy-data absorbing biological pigment in the 
nervous system leading specifically to the right cerebral hemisphere. 
Melanin as a neuropigment has the capacity to absorb levels of energy 
activity outside the spectrum of energy frequencies processed by the five 
194 
Paper Money and Gold 
traditional senses (sight, hearing, touch, taste and smell) recognized in 
Western civilization, the civilization evolved by the white skinned collec­
tive who lacks any substantial quality of melanin skin and nervous system 
pigmentation and likewise, who has a lesser energy-data gathering capacity. 
Let us now examine some views on money. 
For the Jove of money is the root of all evils; it is through this craving 
that some have wandered away from the faith and pierced their hearts 
with many fangs. (Holy Bible, Timothy 6: 11) 
Ernest Becker in Escape From Evil states: 
One of the fascinating chapters in history is the evolution of money -
all the more so since it has yet to be written.... One of the reasons it 
isn't written is that the origin of money is shrouded in prehistory; 
another is that its development must have varied, must not have 
followed a single universal line. Still a third reason touches closer to 
home: modern man seems to have trouble understanding money; it is 
too close to him, too much a part of his life. As someone once 
remarked, the last thing a flSh would discover is water, since it is so 
unconsciously and naturally a part of its life. But beyond all of this, 
[money] .... is still sacred, still a magical object on which we rely for 
our entrance to immortality. Or, put another way, money is obscure 
to analysis because it is still a living myth, a religion .... How else 
explain that we do not yet have a single history of money, despite the 
massive collection of anthropological and historical monographs, the 
observations by Plato and Aristotle themselves, those by Augustine 
on money fetishism ... the insights of Marx, and now, finally of modem psychoanalysis? 
... Death is overcome by accumulating time-defying monuments. 
These accumulations of stone and gold make possible the discovery 
of the immortal sourl...Death is overcome on condition that the real 
actuality of life pass into these immortal and dead things; money is the 
man; the inunortality of the estate or a corporation resides in the dead things which alone endure. "5 
195


--- PAGE 114 ---
The Isis Papers 
In Life Against Death, Norman 0. Brown asserts: 
No wonder economic quality is beyond the endurance of modem 
democratic man: the house, the car, the bank balance are his 
immortality symbols. Or, put another way, if a black man moves next 
door, it is not merely that your house diln]nishes in real estate value, 
but that you diminish in fullness on the level of visible immortality -
and so you die. 
, In his essay "The Ontogenesis of the Interest in Money" (The 
Psychology of Gambling, edited by Jon Halliday and Peter Fuller), Sandor 
Ferenczi states, 
Every psychoanalyst is familiar with the symbolic meaning of money 
that was discovered by Freud. Whenever the archaic way of thinking 
has prevailed or still prevails, in the old civilizations, in myths, 
fairytales, superstitions, in unconscious thinking, in dreams and in 
neuroses, money has been brought into the closest connection with 
filth! 
Ferenczi outlines in some detail his own view of the transformation of 
anal-erotic interest into monetarY interest, wherein the individual ends by 
being able to possess something of color that has value, is hard (and not 
soft), it neither has odor nor causes the person who touches it to be soiled 
or dirty. 
Edmund Bergler, author of Money and Emotional Conflict, states, 
Money neurosis can be found in every country. every culture, every 
group of any given society; therefore it cannot be used to prove 
anythmg against our system of free enterprise. For money neurosis is 
a by-product arising independently of any external system. 
In sharp contrast to the above quotations and viewpoints on 
Emest Becker, in his work Escape From Evil, relates an African view 
money: 
Recently I have heard Bantu of the old school say, with reference to 
our modem products, the Europeanized evolves, 'These are men of 
196 
Paper Money and Gold 
lupeto (money)'. They have explained young men of ours know nothin b to me that the Europeanized 
possessing any value ~ g ut money, that it is the only thing 
hil .or them Th . p osophy .. .for a philosophy of . ey ... give up their Bantu 
ideal, their end and th money. Money is their one and onl . e supreme ultimat .. Y actlOns .... Everything has be d e norm ... regulating their 
modem universal rule of con:~ct· esltroyed( by this new value, this · upeto money). 
These intriguing remarks can be understood beneath the surface to comprehe d h only when we probe deep 
at the unconscious level of th n w atmoney(papermoney)represents e symbol - a level f d 
suspected by Sigmund Freud T f 11 ar eeper than ever 
depth of the Western self-i . o u ~ un~e~tand, one must examine the 
N 
1 
mage and Its ongm 
o c earer statement of the Western . 
that expressed by essayist Samuel Lan :If-concept need be found than 
Made Twain. In "Skin Deep " o f g om Clemmens, .known to all as 
D • ne o a collecti f amned Human Race, Twain described on. o essays entitled The 
commenting on their costwn d a gathenng of people in India es an complexions as follows: , 
... The company 
fir 
present...made a fme sh eworks, so to speak · th ow, an exhibition of human 
brilliant color.... ' m e maners of costumes and cominglings of 
I could have wished to start a rival e ... and clothes. It would have b :mition there, of Christian hats 
devilish spectacle Th theen a deous exhibition, a thorough! 
did 
· en erewould th Y sa vantage of the white . no ave been the added un 1 complex10n It · p easantcomplexion when itk : lS not an unbearably 
?~petition with masses of bro~ps to Itself, but when it comes into 
It lS endurable only because we and black. the fact is betrayed that 
brown skins are beautiful b t beare ~ed to lt. Nearly all black and 
d k u a autiful hi · · ar complexions are massed the w te skin lS rare .... Where 
unwholesome, and sometimes :::::-e the whites look bleached out, 
down South in the slavery da b fi y ghastly. I could notice this 
satin skin of the SouthAfric ~ I e ore the war. The splendid black 
very close to perfection. an u us of Durban seemed to me to come 
heard from a 19th century Am . encan essay· t 1 . statement published in th fi IS • et us now hsten e mal quarter of the 20th century 
197


--- PAGE 115 ---
The Isis Papers 
. How to Get a Great Tan (Without (June 1979). Roger C. Sharpe, m 
Frying) explains: 
ff . ter's draining hold and . . To shake o wm It's time to feel alive agam. er SWl It's also the season get out into the reviving glow of thethsunun ho ~and those who wish 
kind of people: ose w ' . t when there are two s do ' be left out in the shade. It s ume or 
they could. This summer, n t Fr Memorial Day to Labor Day, 
you to glow with a healthy tan. ~g off those excess pounds, 
you'll be on display. That means d of Let's face it: a great tan 
and domring a new skin you'.ll be prouel .eel A bit of color can take 
sexter more r ax • d . makes you look younger, ' £ 1 better about yourself. An lt 
you a long way. It will make y~u ~ 'ally when there's more of Will make others look at you tWice, specl d things in life, getting a 
Y with most goo you that can be seen. et, as d For most of us, who have only 
great tan is a double-edged swor : there is never enough time to 
weekends or a brief summer vacau.on, t there we tend to overdo a 
spend in the SWl. So when we do get ?~y felt. • We stumble back to good thing. The consequenses are rap\"" What promised to be a ff. burned to a er-r· he O
ur homes and o lees, h k or streaks and splotc s. 
like a pate wor ks f gorgeous tan looks more h rt haircut) and the bac o 
Our earlobes are tender (another tooeks :e are plagued with flaking 
For the next we • d d 't our knees are sore. . We don't feel young an we on 
skin in the bedsheets. We ltch. d come home a mess. Surely 
d reat tan an we ' . d feel sexy. We wante a g . the a es that follow, we ve tne 
there's a better way! There.IS.ad In . pb!edonon-the-spotresearch 
d practical v tce, . . ts to give you some goo ' W lydiscuss theposltlve aspec 
and talks with medical experts. eso~ summer, be smart. Find out 
of tanning, as well as the dangers. £ ou go out there. you can get 
what happens to you in ~el SWl ;~~~~r~ a natural for tanning, you'll 
a great tan, more effecu.ve y. d keep - a better tan. And 
pick up pointers that will help you get -:able to catch the rays, this 
if you're the type who nev~r see~ to 
uld be your turning pomt. summer co 
. ter "Getting the Perfect Overall The same author continues m the chap 
Tan": 
. mind if you decide to go nude this Something you should keep m our body that have never been 
SUillffier is that there may be parts ~f~ throomlight. You don't want 
exposed to anything stronger~ . e :o some commonsense advice to rue the day you went back to astcs, 
198 
Paper Money and Gold 
is in orc:ler. Don't try to overdo your time in the SWl; keep your initial 
tanning time down to a minimum. Gently break in those fonnerly 
unexposed parts of your body to the idea that this is their year in the 
sun. Extra sunscreening for these areas are also in order to prevent 
any drying and urmecessary burning. Mter all, what's dte point of 
sunning aiJ over if one part of you gets golden brown and another 
bright red? So be careful. Take things a day at a time. 
Melanin is the black pigment which pennits skins to appear other than 
white (black, brown, red and yeliow). Melanin pigment coloration is the 
nonn for the hue-man family. If there are non-white readers who disagree 
with this presentation of white rejection of the white-skinned self, may I 
refer you to the literature on the currently developing sun-tanning parlors. 
In a Newsweek (December, 1979) article entitled, "90-Second Suntans," 
there is a picture of a heavily tanned girl clad in a bikini swimsuit. Under 
the picture the caption reads, "Los Angeles tanning booth: Brown at any price." The article concludes: 
For growing hordes of sunlamp worshippers, however, it seems to be 
a tan at any cost. 'Something is going to get all of us one day, so why 
worry about it?' rationalizes Robert Duncan, Manager of a fast-food 
restaurant in Costa Mesa, Calif. 'If tanning is going to kill me at least I'll be a good-looking corpse.' 
The above testimonies, from white persons writing perhaps a century 
apart, manifest the white collective's dissatisfaction with the white com­
plexion. Likewise, a pervasive and strong desire on the part of the white 
global collective to have skin that looks otherwise- skin that shines, skin 
tliat is satin black or golden brown in color, skin that does nor exhibit a 
,"'"'~'llluu'• pigment deficiency - is articulated clearly. 
In addition, Western culture has a folk saying, "Clothes make the man," 
implication being that the worth of the person is established ani y after 
body (shamefully white) is covered. This same symbolism was 
~prteSSt:o unconsciously at a mass level at the height of the Watergate 
- the only time in the history of America (the major unit in the 
" white organization) when a President was forced to resign because 
;,~fllltmeJ'" behavior. At the peak of this period of national shame, white 
199


--- PAGE 116 ---
l.-, 
The Isis Papers 
l began to dart about naked, running across open spaces, exposing maes . h' h their naked white bodies, and then hiding. This behaviOr, w .Ic was 
never decoded at deep levels, was called streaking. The behaviOr sym­
bolically represented that in the white collective brain-computer the nake.d 
white body is equated with shame. Thus, when deep national shame. Is 
exposed to the world, there is a compulsion to expose the naked white 
body. . th . f There is also a parallel with the present increase m e pracnce o 
nudism in this area of the world, when America is experiencing a lo~s of 
power and prestige at national and international levels.. At the nm~, 
America begins to reveal more and more of the naked white body. ThiS 
pattern of increased white body exposure also incl~des the ~pl~ss and 
bottomless bars that came into prominence followmg Amenca s great 
shame in the loss of the Vietnam War. . . 
Now examine a dollar bill. Note that the original p~per IS ba~Ically 
white. On one side, the printing and engraving is done w.tth ~reen mk ~n 
white paper. On the other side, the printing and engravmg .Is ~one with 
black ink on white paper. A major symbol on the dollar billts ~.so the 
African pyramid and the symbol of Osiris, the divine eye. Osms :'.as 
referred to as "Lord of the Perfect Black." Now recall. the. far~nli~ 
expression, "Money does not grow on trees." The surface. tmplicanon lS 
that money is not so readily available. At a deeper level m th~ Western 
psyche, the statement likens paper money to tree leaves. One stde ~f that 
paper money is green, and the money is in tum referred to as green 
backs." d To further decode the symbolism of paper money' o~e mu~t understan 
that all paper money in Western culture is the sym~hc equivalent of the 
proverbial fig leaves. Western artists always deptct fig leaves as the 
objects used to cover the genitals of the white bodies of Adam and Eve-
covering their nakedness, their bodily shame. . . 
The side of American paper money engraved and pnnted 1~ bt~ck 
symbolically (and unconsciously) represents the black (melanm. ptg­
mented) skin that the albinos or whites should have possessed, were lt not 
200 
Paper Money and Gold 
for their genetic defect of albinism (the reason for which they were 
originally cast out of Africa by their Black mothers and fathers). 
Further, it is no accident in the present day capital of the global white 
supremacy system- Washington, D.C- that the vast majority of the 
people in the city are Black and that the paper money is printed by a large 
majority of Black workers. In other words, Black backs are producing 
"green backs," which could equally be referred to as "black backs." For 
in the minds of the white collective, whites should have black backs 
instead of white backs and they should not need green backs to cover w bite 
backs. A similiar realization causes whites to tan, as though the hue 
achieved through tanning is "supposed" to be their true color. 
This decoding allows the slang (in this sense, symbolic) expression, 
frequently used by Blacks in America, "Give me some skin," to be placed 
in a more meaningful perspective. On the surface level this expression 
means, give me your hand - skin touching skin - to shake, as a greeting. 
At yet another level the implication is: "Give me some money." 
Blacks living amongst the white collective have internalized uncon­
sciously the symbolic equation of paper money with the covering for the 
degraded white skin. In fact, albinism is the origin for the unconscious 
development of this white equation of paper money with skin. 
In their book, Money Madness, Herb Goldberg and Robert T. Lewis 
state: 
Studies of self-made wealthy men, for example, show an extremely 
high incidence of parental death and parental divorce, which resulted 
in a high degree of insecurity early in life. Many of these men, as 
young boys, apparently set out to amass so much money that they 
would never be left stranded again. They also were faced with 
assuming adult responsibility while still children, and they tried to 
prove to themselves and others they didn't really need to depend on 
parents. 
Does this not parallel the experience of the rejected albino mutants who 
· Western civilization arid culture? 
With the symbolism of money in the white supremacy culture decoded, 
phenomena of gambling, monetary inflation cycles and other be-
201


--- PAGE 117 ---
The Isis Papers 
. ll areas of the Western civilization can be better haviors present m a 
· understood. . th s mbolic covering of white bodily 
Money, like the fig lea~es, IS e y f al e when no value is present. 
shame and is designed to giVe a selnse o vopeu rates at a level unavailable 
. . shame and value essness Its immerswn m . id red at surface levels of the white 
to conscious thought. Mone~ IS c:s ~which is like saying that white is 
or Western psyche to have hlgh v ubee m· deep reality money is 
. · ) However cause geneucally supenor · ' d resents shame the real value 
designed to cover white b~y shame an re~e latter m~ that in reality 
of the money will always nse an: ~e:_J~~ the same as tanning the white 
money is worthless and ~eb~e w. ~~ This reflects the fact that while 
skin after sayi~g that white IS s~pe~e). unconsciously feel inferior to the 
whites are saymg they arelsu~n~;' T:e concept of white skin superiority 
melanin pigmented globa maJon Y. 
is the same ~ inflate.d money' :~rthl~::omenon of gambling there is the 
Similarly ,m the highly sym. o c p bly has high value. Yet the most 
t oney because It presuma attempt to ge m . . . money but losing money and real't of gambling 1s not wmrung • common 1 Y . . bod hame literally and figuratively. 
being disgraced- revealmg white y st of ~e decoded symbolism of 
. mbling in the the contex By placmg g~ . itted b whites who lost their money during the 
money' the sw~Ides comm lai~ed· they had lost, albeit at unconscious 
recent depresswns can be e~p . ha . Blacks and other peoples of · g for wh1te body s me. levels, the cove~n . ed and not simply because they may not 
color were not similarly affect , in the first instance. Psychologically, 
have had that much money to lose kin melanin could handle better 
d th persons with permanents . Blacks an o er h fundamental body shame to •· 
being without money because they ave no •. · 
cover. al makes it possible to understand·• 
Decoding the symbolism of money so . . th fecal matter 
why Sigmund Freud and his followers assocmte;h:~:;tew;syche then (as.··. 
and filth, which are usually brown or black. of white body shame · .. 
now) could not confront s~l~-negation ~!~; s~::hite psyche to probe 
. 1 Therefore lt IS not possl consciOUS Y • ' . the cover for white body · deeply enough to see that paper money lS ·.· 
202 
Paper Money and Gold 
That same white psyche then displaces the association of money with 
melanin pigment to associate money with the only other brown and black 
pigment manufactured in the human body, the pigment responsible for the 
color of fecal material, coprobilirubins. 
This discussion brings to mind a seminar I attended while training to 
become a child psychiatrist. The esteemed "father of child psychiatry" 
and the program director of the seminar, Dr. Reginald Lourie concluded, 
while evaluating the case of a Black child, that the reason this child hated 
himself (and the reason Black people in general hated themselves) was 
because he was the color of feces. Of course, my strong objections at the 
time did not change the basic logic of Freudian psychoanalytic theory, 
which many Black professionals have learned by rote, internalized and 
projected onto their Black patients. What Dr. Lourie, following Dr. 
Freud, had done was state that melanin pigment was the equivalent of the 
coprobilirubins. It was easier for the white pysche to state consciously 
that it desired to be tan like fecal matter than to admit consciously a desire 
to have melanin pigment and to be like black people, whom whites in 
psychological compensation, had to debase. 
Decoding the symbolism theory further explains the reason why some 
whites in their sexual practices like to be smeared with human excrement. 
And likewise, this decoding illuminates the meaning behind one of the 
most common forms of expression in the white.culture, which is "SHIT," 
or to refer to someone as a "SHITHEAD." Also, it now should be more 
than crystal clear why, at unconscious levels in the white psyche, it is 
perceived that Black and other skin-pigmented peoples do not need money 
like white people do. White people need paper money to cover white body 
shame while Black and other skin-pigmented peoples do not have the need 
of such covering. 
•· " When Blacks and other non-whites are struggling to obtain equal pay 
for work done equal to that of whites, they are struggling against this 
Jmcontscious symbolism. As long as the system and culture of white 
Supremacy remains intact, non-whites will not have the same money to 
with as whites and their money will not be able to do what money 
the hands of whites is able to do. 
203


--- PAGE 118 ---
The Isis Papers 
Because Blacks and others with permanent melanin skin pigmentation 
do not feel a sense of white body shame, they do not have lhe same anxious 
motivation to acquire money as does the white-skinned global collective. 
Although some have sought to attribute this lesser general motivation to 
"genetic inferiority," "a lack of intelligence" or "laziness," these 
rationalizations cannot withstand deep analysis. 
The symbolism of gold in the white supremacy system is quite similar. 
Previously, I mentioned Mark Twain's reference to "The splendid black 
satin skin of the South African Zulus .•. " as well as Roger C. Sharpe's 
question, "After all, what's the point of sunning all over if one part of you 
gets golden brown and another bright red?" And, everyone in this culture 
is familiar with the many suntan lotions and creams that advertise their 
ability to help one acquire a golden tan. I therefore theorize that because: 
1) black and brown skin (melanin pigmented skin), with its natural oils, 
glistening and gleaming in the sunlight, looks like gold (as is attested to 
in the white supremacy culture by the frequent references to a "golden 
tan," meaning a golden brown or black color), and 2) that which was 
deeply desired more than anything else by the albino mutants in their white 
psyche (no matter how deeply repressed), was to have melanin pigmented 
skin, then the metal gold (the only metal substance with lasting luster and 
a color that approximates the color tones of melanin pigment) became the 
deeply unconscious symbol of the most desired substance in the entire 
global white supremacy system/culture. Gold is then the symbol for 
melanin skin pigment in the white psyche. The possession of gold in the 
white psyche is the unconscious equalizer for the absence in whites of 
melanin. That is the reason mulatoes, or Semites, of the Jewish religion 
always were accused of having all of the money and gold. 
The symbolism of gold explains the most fundamental reasons that, 
for a considerable period of time, Western paper money was backed by · 
the gold standard, which prevented general fluctuations in the value 
paper money. Symbolically, the gold standard meant that melanin 
and is the nonn and standard for human beings. Presently, the 
monetary system is on the dollar standard, but there are many 
national units pressuring for the return to the gold standard. 
204 
Paper Money and Gold 
The value of gold is tied unconscious! . . 
computer to the power of th 1 Y m the whtte collective brain-
- the black, brown, red and e e~: es who possess melanin in the world 
indicate that white is not realyl ~ples .. When global events shift to 
Y supenor-as m the k · h - the white-skinned collective . aruan ostage taking 
repressed sense of white genetic =nences se~-doubt and the deeply 
apparatus of the white psyche Then :uacy ~gms to break through the 
its symbol" . , e relative value of white skin and tc cover (the dollar) dro s and 
equivalent, gold, escalates as ex ress~ the value of the melanin 
the world market. It should be n~ted tha:y the value and cost of gold on 
the value of the paper monies in the h" as the value of gold moves up, 
th . w tte supremacy system d I" e whtte supremacy system 'cult hi . ec mes. In 
ki . '' ure, w te skin and melani · s nand their respective symbol· . al n ptgmented tc equtv ents alwa . anotherin value when the pa . , ys move opposlte one 
Th , per money IS not backed by the gold standard 
~ gold has long been associated with black- ki . . 
collective white psyche is aive furth s nned people m the 
c· n er strong support · G ogy, specifically in Jason's search forth G ld m reek mythol-
obtain the Golden Fleece from the C I ~. o en Fleece. Jason hoped to 
Herodotus (425? B.C. - 484? B C) o c tan~, whom the Greek historian 
S. . • • • , according to Robert 'T' 1 , mus Mystery discussed. ~ emp e s The 
My own idea on the subject was based fir 
Colchians) have black skins d st on the fact that they (the 
much, as other nations h anthwooly hair (not that that amounts to 
ave e same) and dl especially, on the fact that the C 1 hi • secon y, and more 
Bth" . o c ans the Egypti d Ioptans are the only races which fr •. . ans, an the 
circumcision.... om anCient tunes have practiced 
The phrase "Golden Fleece" is made u of . 
• people: "gold" d . p two words assoctated with 
, enotmg black or brown skin and "fleece" d wool or kink ha · Th , enot-
.... search for melanin. Y rr. e search for the Golden Fleece becomes 
i.E. Cirlot' s Dictionary 0 rs mb 1 ·. th 'J Y 0 s says that the Golden Fleec " · e symbols denoting the conquest of the . . e IS one 
•ann---'-' " ..., h" . unposstble or the ultra-ror W Ite-Sktnned peopl · · • 
or golden brown or black. es, It lS Impossible to produce 
205


--- PAGE 119 ---
The Isis Papers 
Later, in the Middle Ages, Western man (the white collective) con­
tinued his perhaps unconscious search to make oi: acquire melanin (satin 
black and golden brown) through the higly symbolic process called 
alchemy. Israel Regardie reveals in The Philiosopher' s Stone that the 
word alchemy is an Arabic term consisting of the article al and the noun 
khemi. The noun khemi refers to Egypt, whose Coptic or Ethiopian name 
is Khem. Alchemy would then be translated as, "the Egyptian matter" or 
"that which pertains to Egypt." The tenn al Khemi could also be translated 
and understood as "the Black matter," or "that which pertains to the 
Blacks" or "that which the Blacks are able to make or to do." Alchemy 
was essentially a symbolic process involving the endeavor to make gold, 
symbol of illumination and salvation. More specifically, the anempt was 
to convert lesser metals, such as silver and lead, into gold. The lesser 
metals can be translated as "a less desirable skin color or white skin color." 
These highly obsessive and fruitless laboratory experiments eventually 
led to the development of the science of chemistry, whose very name 
comes from alchemy. Chemistry later became the basis for the modem 
science of genetics, in which Western man continues his efforts to make 
new genetic material, hoping to create life (and possibly genes that can 
produce melanin). 
Again, what is revealed is Western man's search for that which the 
Egyptians and the Colchians (the Blacks) were able to achieve. The real 
mystery to the white psyche was that Blacks were able, with their genetic 
material, to produce the gleaming satin black and shining golden brown 
skin color through the presence of melanin in their skin, a pigment whites 
were unable to produce. However, then as now, whites deeply desired the 
ability to produce melanin colored skin. 
It is of even greater symbolic significance that the special wisdom, 
knowledge, power or abilities of the Eyptians, which the European 
alchemists had hoped to duplicate, was thought by Europeans to be 
associated with or contained in "the philosopher's stone." The alchemists 
desperately sought to find or get a fragment of "the philosopher's stone," 
as it was the prerequisite for turning lesser metals into gold. 
206 
Paper Money and Gold 
The Journal of Human Sexuality reponed in "Pelvic Congestion 
Syndrome in Men" that the word stone in the language of the ancients 
means "testicle." Testicles contain the genetic material. In the context of 
the decoded symbolism of gold, the alchemists' search for the 
"philosopher's stone" can be translated as the search for the testicles that 
contain the genetic potential to produce the satin black and golden brown 
skin color. The word stone, meaning testicle, even comes down to the 
present in such language expressions as "stone ache," which is a colloquial 
term used for "testicular ache." 
The foregoing discussion is presented in the hope of increasing 
professional understanding and appreciation of the world of symbols, 
logic, thought and behavioral dynamics in which we presently find 
ourselves. This world creates the functional pathologies that our patients 
expect us to be able to solve. 
The central pathology of logic and thought spawned· by Western 
civilization is the lack of white self-appreciation, predicated upon the 
fundamental inadquacy of the white genetic makeup. This lack of self­
respect has spread wherever Western civilization bas gone and now 
infects all of the peoples on the planet As we move through this period 
in which paper money and gold are increasingly difficult to obtain (even 
for many white-skinned people), it is now possible, with this symbolism 
decoded, to understand why Blacks and other non-whites will continue to 
experience difficulty obtaining paper money and gold. 
The psychiatrists working with Black patients will have the task of 
helping those patients understand paper money and gold as symbols in the 
culture and, most importantly, increase their sense of self-respect and 
self~worth - even in the face of the declining value of paper money and 
decreasing availability of gold. Indeed, Blacks and other non-whites 
already possess that for which gold and paper monies have become the 
symbols. Psychiatrists working with white patients also will have the task 
of helping those patients understand paper money and gold as deep 
symbols in the historic Western culture and, further, as substitutes for 
white self-respect. Psychiatrists must help those white patients struggle 
207


--- PAGE 120 ---
The Isis Papers 
. . If "espect despite their conditions as albino ain and mamtam se -· • . 
~u~ts in a world where the norm is to have ~~~~~~:;u~~~ have to be 
The price of gold, or the number oBf lpapek anr d other melanin pigmented 
·11 · seas long as ac spent for gold, WI mcrea. . . self-respect and black, brown, red 
peoples continue to exerc•se mcreas•.ng th power of white-skinned 
Earth relauve to e and yellow power on ' f the numbers of dollars spent per 
peoples. The price of gold, in t~rm~·o skinned peoples are able to force 
unit of gold, will decrease on~y lf ~ h•~- lace "as designated in the white 
skin pigmented peoples back mto t e~r ~ ' 
power equation of white over non-white. WfNW. 
208 
17 
The Symbolism of Boxing 
and Black Leather 
, (July 1982) 
The global practice of white supremacy encompasses all patterns of 
symbols, logic, thought, speech, action and emotional response in all areas 
of people activity, for those self-defmed (individually or collectively) as 
"white." Therefore, the system of global white supremacy can be most 
readily understood as a survival system, a system based upon the facts of 
the global white numerical minority status, white genetic recessiveness 
· and white genetic vulnerability. It is also important to comprehend that it 
is a "fear" system- a system that is consciously or unconsciously aware 
of its genetic vulnerability and fearful of its genetic annihilation. 
Like the symbols discussed in preceding chapters, the sport of boxing, 
Jn the white supremacy system and culture, is yet another instance of 
specific behavioral and object symbolism that manifests the collective 
}Vhite concern of its genetic vulnerability. Much of the motivation to write 
· essay came from the heavyweight boxing championship fight be­
Larry Holmes, the undefeated Black champion, and Gerry Cooney, 
. the number one white contender and subsequent loser. Race was the 
and overriding concern in this contest, with Cooney portrayed as 
"white hope." The real fight took place with the atmosphere created 
the series of "Rocky" movies. In these fantasies, Sylvester Stallone 
· the white fighter in the red, white and blue trunks who is always 
~IC'JtlnnnQ over his Black challenger. 
209


--- PAGE 121 ---
. 
), 
The Isis Papers 
Encyclopedia Britannica (15th Edition) states, 
Boxing is the art of attack and defense with the fists in which the two 
contestants wear padded gloves, box bouts of three to 15 rounds (each 
round normally of three minutes duration), and generally observe the 
code set forth in the Marquess of Queensbury rules .... Contestants are 
matched in weight and ability, each trying to land hard and often with 
his own flSts and to avoid the blows of his opponent. 
The term pugilism and prizefighting in 20th-century usage are 
. practically synonymous with boxing, though the first indicates the 
ancient origins of the sport in its derivation from the Latin 'pugil', "a 
fighter with the cestus (a hand covering)," related to the Latin pignus, 
'flSt,' and derived in turn from the Greek 'pyx' 'with clenched flSt'; 
while 'prize-fighting' emphasizes the pursuit of the sport for gain. 
SamueiJ ohnson in his Dictionary (1975) defmed a prizefighter as 'one 
that fights publicly for a reward.' 
Of the history of boxing, Encyclopedia Britannica continues 
There is evidence that boxing existed in ancient Crete, where a 
civilization was established by about 1500 BC. Centuries before the 
arrival of the Greeks, boxing was known in the Aegean .... In the early 
days, fighters wore thongs of soft leather bound around their fists and 
(often) two-thirds of the way up their forearms to protect hands and 
Wrists. Beginning in the 4th century BC, harder leather was used for 
the thongs, with the result that they became weapons as well as 
protection. And finally, late in the history of the Roman Empire, the 
Greeks adopted the hand covering called cestus, which was studded 
with iron or brass nuggets and was used in battles to the death in the 
Roman arenas .... The first Greek fighters were not paid; glory was the 
only reward they sought. Later, wealthy men trained their slaves as 
boxers and had them perfonn for special entertainments. In the 1st 
century AD, Romans forced cestus clad slaves to bludgeon one 
another to death in a gruesome perversion of sport for the 
entertainment of crowds who thronged to arenas to see the kill. With 
the rise of Christianity and the concurrent decline of the Roman 
Empire, pugilism as entertainment apparently ceased to exist. At least, 
there is no record of it. 
210 
Symbolism of Boxing 
In more modern times, with the rise of London as a major city in the 
17th and 18th centuries, prizefighting became a major sport there - the 
sport being bareknuckle in character. :Sill Richmond (1763 - 1829), an 
American-born former slave, became the flfStman born in America to win 
acclaim in England as a flfSt-class pugilist. Tom Cribb (1781-1848), the 
Englishman, is considered the first to win immortality in the sport of 
boxing. Cribb beat Richmond in 90 minutes in 1805. Later, after winning­
the English championship, he twice beat Tom Molineaux (1784-1818), 
another American-born former slave, in what were considered Cribb's 
greatest performances. 
As evidenced by the above, ethnic and racial considerations have long 
been a major theme in boxing. The first man considered a scientific 
fighter is described as "an English Jew" named Daniel Mendoza (1763-
1836). Other fighters remained associated with their ethnic and/or nation­
al origins. The waves of immigrants that came to America from the British 
Isles and Europe, all coming to America competing with one another for 
advancement, produced not only outstanding fighters identified as "Jews," 
but others identified as "Italian," "German," "Scandinavian," "Polish," 
"American Negroes" and "Foreign-born Negroes." Of course, the only 
group against which there was great prejudice at times was against the 
Black fighters, who presently dominate the ring in all weight categories. 
Amateur boxing began during the 19th century in Britain. In 1888, the 
Amateur Athletic Union (AAU) of the United States was founded. In 
1923, the Chicago Tribune newspaper founded an amateur competition 
called the Golden Gloves. The name, Golden Gloves, was first used in 
New York in 1927. It has now grown into a national competition rivalling 
the AAU. (See Chapter 16.) 
Although boxing as a sport is now worldwide, there is no accepted 
world-ruling body for professional boxing. Each country has its own 
rules, and in the U.S. each state has different rules. Most common, 
however, is that the bouts take place in a "ring"- which is in reality an 
14 to 20 feet square, surrounded by three strands of ropes. Profes-
sional bouts are from four to fifteen rounds in duration. 
211


--- PAGE 122 ---
The Isis Papers 
Key to this discussion is the general rule that disqualification may be 
made by the referee during a fight for fouls - such as hitting below the 
"belt," an imaginary line drawn across the body from the top of the hip 
bone. There are other rules for disqualification, but the above usually is 
recognized as the most crucial rule. Also significant for this discussion 
is the central aspect of technique that dictates the gloved hands must be 
held up in front of the body: the left hand shoulder high and extended 
about 12 inches. The left hand is slightly higher than the right, with the 
left forearm held across the chest, right fist almost touching it, and both 
elbows bent and resting lightly against the ribs. The right fist is held close 
to the chin for protection and tucked into the chest, and the shoulders are 
hunched. (Encyclopedia Britannica, 15th Edition). 
Whereas the above sets forth the specifics of the formal boxing match, 
it is the specific symbolism and the symbolic elements in the behavior of 
boxing that are the major concern. Awareness at the level of the symbol 
and the symbolic enables us to comprehend a more significant meaning 
of the dynamics of the world around us. 
Essentially, to the extent that the surrounding reality is not understood 
at the deeper levels- at the level of the symbolic- the individual and the 
collective remain relatively powerless. Symbols and symbolic activity 
impact at subconscious and unconscious levels of the brain-computer, 
escaping conscious level screening and control over the behavioral out­
flow that has been stimulated by the symbol and the symbolic. With 
in-depth understanding, the symbol and the symbolic can be decoded and 
made available for conscious use and disposal. increasing the individual's 
power over the self and the surrounding environment. (See Diagram I.) 
212 
Symbolism of Boxing 
Brain-Computer Level Brain-Computer Input and Output 
Conscious Overt-Surface 
Subconscious Symbolic-Symbolic 
Unconscious Symbolic-Symbolic 
Diagram I 
Brain-Computer Level of Functioning 
and Level of Input and Output 
of Environmental Data 
Decoding the symbols and the symbolic behaviors in boxing requires 
returning in time to ancient Africa, the birth place of human beings, and 
more specifically to the African country called Egypt - in the period 
antedating the invasions by the white tribes of Europe. The most impor­
tant Egyptian god was Osiris, referred to as "Lord of the Perfect Black," 
which I interpret as a reference to his skin color. The symbol by which 
Osiris was known was the black bull called Apis. J .E. Cirlot' sDictionary 
of ~ymbols refers to the bull as the historic symbol of white superiority 
over black. However, this seems to be a conscious or unconscious attempt 
by Cirlot to reverse the meaning of the bull symbol since the black bull 
was the symbol of Osiris, a Black god. Thus, in actuality, the bull must 
represent the opposite: black superiority over white in the psyche of the 
white collective. 
Moving forward in time, the sport of bullfighting became prominent 
on the continent of Europe, in Spain, shortly after the Moors (Black 
'* Africans) who had conquered Spain for seven hundred years, were finally 
. •. beaten and chased back into Africa. Of course, by that time, the skin color 
.. and hair of the peoples in Spain and in southern Europe had darkened 
· .because of the dominant black genetic material which the Africans 
h .. nnnht with them. However, the Spaniard response to being conquered 
213


--- PAGE 123 ---
The Isis Papers 
by the Africans, following the military but not the genetic defeat of the 
latter, was to begin the obsessive symbolic ritual of bullfighting. A ~ale 
person dressed in a "suit of lights" (which can be decoded as ~eanmg a 
light-or white-skinned person), daringly prances and parades m front of 
a black bull (acting as though he really wants to be gored) and, fmally, 
with the help of several others, kills the bull. The fighter (the toreador), 
then normally takes as souvenir the bull's ear or tail, both of which have 
been recognized as phallic symbols. Further, the bull is often eaten and 
its testicles, seen as giving power to the diner, are consumed as a delicacy· 
Following the Civil War in the U.S., a country whose development was 
based upon the slave labor of Blacks captured from the continent of 
Africa, the bull-steer again takes on major significance. The victory in 
that war went to "the North." "The South" and the slaveholders lost the 
war. they also lost their Black slaves through the emancipation process. 
Many of the white ex-slaveholders moved westward, initially, wantonly 
slaughtering the massive herds of black and dark brown buffalo. The 
indigenous inhabitants of America, who are incorrectly referred to ~ 
Indians, called the Black soldiers, "buffalo soldiers." The source of thts 
terminology likely stems from the similarities: the hair on the head ~f the 
buffalo is very curly, like the helix hair on the heads of the Africans 
(Blacks). Thus, these white cowboys and soldiers were slaughtering the 
symbols of Osiris, the Black god, and symbols of the Blacks. 
Once the buffalo were removed from the plains, in addition to the 
so-called Indians who were also killed, these whites began to raise (bree4) 
cattle (cows, ox, bull, steers). For for the most part, these cattle have been 
brown and black in coloration. The superior cattle, the angus, is mostly 
all black. Even more interesting is the fact that the whites who raised; 
bred and herded brown and black cattle, referred to themselves as "cow­
boys," a highly interesting word which doubly effeminizes these ~ales. 
The word "cow," while it can \)e used broadly to refer to any domesticated 
bovine, is used most specifically to refer to the mature female cattle. 
Similarly, the word "boy" historically has been used by whites in ~e U.S. 
to refer to the Black male as a means of minimizing and degrading .. 
masculinity. These cowboys, nonetheless, threw ropes (lassoes 
214 
Symbolism of Boxing 
lariats) around the necks of brown and black cattle (just as ropes were also 
placed around the necks of Black men in lynchings), and they also 
castrated the cattle-producing steer (as they castrated Black men who were 
lynched). 
Cattle-raising and cattle-herding operated under the ostensible purpose 
of producing beef for eating. The U.S. has become on~ of the major 
beef-eating nations in the world with its favored meats being steak and 
hamburgers. Beef is the preferred meat of the majority of whites in the 
. global white supremacy system and culture. Beef eaters are suppose to 
be or to become more powerful and more masculine. 
Cattle were also put to other uses, mainly the production of leather for 
shoes, gloves, clothes, luggage, etc. The wearing of leather, particularly 
black leather, is supposed to make one appear maximally masculine and 
powerful .. ~thers are used in the production of many articles of clothing 
for the m1htary. The German military (the Nazis) in the Second World 
War, perhaps, exceeded all other white supremacy forces in the utilization 
of black leather to give the appearance of power and might. 
As a result of the aforementioned facts, the black bull and its symbolic 
uses- clothing and food- have come to demonstrate the power that was 
orig.inally seen in Osiris ("Lord of the Perfect Black;'). The sport of 
boXIng assumes the same theme of power. In this specific instance the 
theme is expressed through the use of the leather gloved fists, contin~ing 
a practice begun in the days of the Roman Empire. 
In current times, the fists of the boxer are covered by rounded, padded, 
colored leather boxing gloves. These paired gloves, poised together in 
front ~f the b~ Y. at the beginning of the fight, are symbols of the genetic 
material containmg skin-covered testicles - the containers of the true 
power of the man, the genetic essence. 
The poised fiSts, are in direct parallel alignment with the testicles below 
,,. The critical off-limits body area, which the boxer is penalized 
s~g. is the area of the testicles or genitals - "below the belt." Of 
, course, this body area restriction in the boxing match is to prevent serious 
.· , and bodily damage. However, it also is necessary to prevent the 
association of the symbol with the true objects whose power is 
215


--- PAGE 124 ---
The Isis Papers 
really being contested, the genetic power residing in the testicles. It is as 
though the "below the belt" restriction states, "the testicles have nothing 
whatsoever to do with this contest." In reality, however, the contest is 
only about the genetic power of the testicles. Some investigators also 
view the paired feet (often leather-covered) as symbols of the testicles that 
are in parallel alignment above them. This awareness contributes to a 
deeper understanding of the foot and the shoe fetishes seen in the global 
white supremacy system/culture. 
Returning to the boxing arena, the symbolic contest of the genetic 
power of the testicles is staged in a "ring." It is referred to as a ring because 
it is symbolic of the female vaginal orifice. The bout also takes place on 
canvas, typically considered white in color. 
In the recent Holmes-Cooney fight, the canvas was colored red, white 
and blue. This is significant because these three colors: red, white and 
blue are the most important symbolic colors in the white supremacy 
system and culture, as manifested by the colors of the flags of the majority 
of white nation-states. The flag on a pole symbolizes the lateral view of 
the phallus and the testicles, the colored cloth representing the testicles. 
A red, white and blue cloth symbolizes genetic material that produces 
white skin, through which can be seen, red arterioles and blue veins, hence 
the expression "bluebloods," a phrase which means that the skin is white 
or pale enough for the blue veins to show through. Blue veins and 
arterioles typically are not visible through melanin-pigmented skins. 
Additionally, in Rocky, Stallone wears red, white and blue trunks that are 
designed to symbolize the American flag. The trunks cover the genitals 
and, in this instance, genitals that produce white skin through which red 
arterioles and blue veins can be seen. 
Fjnally, in regards to the boxing match, the gloved fists typically are 
covered with black, brown or other colored leather, as opposed to white 
leather. This fact reveals that, at the deep levels of the white individual 
and collective psyche, power is thought to be associated with color (skin 
color), as opposed to colorless (white) skin. In the final analysis, it does 
not matter which boxer (white or nonwhite) is the winner at the surface 
level. The color of the gloves of the winner are always non-white, and ·. 
216 
Symbolism of Boxing 
the white fighter who dons colored gloves simply identifies himself with 
the po.wer and color of the bull of Osiris, which is black- not white. Thus 
col~r IS always the winner at the deeper levels of the psyche- just as in 
reality black (skin color) is always genetically dominant to h't Add'. w I e . 
. lli~n~ ~up~ort for my thesis is found in an article entitled "M.D. 
Desc~bes Fis~g ~sCaring SexualPractice,"inPsychiatricNewso[the 
Amerzcan Psych~atrzc Association June 18 1982 The art' 1 • • • IC e reports on 
the wor~ of Thomas Lowry, M.D., Chief of the Psychiatry Department at 
the Kaiser Permanente Medical Center in ValleJ·o C l'c . G . . , a llOmia, and 
regory Williams, an occupational therapist living in San Francisco. 
Lowry created the tenn "brachioproctic eroticism II to desc 'b th . 
kn " . . .. n e epractice own as fiStmg. The article states, 
'The ultimate closeness' and 'the ecstatic and total tru t' . of the phr ed b s are JUSt two ase.s us y participants to describe their feelings during a 
sexual practtce that, although bizarre and seemingly unlik 1 . 
apparently engaged in by a sizeable number of persons. e y, IS 
This pra~tice consists of one person inserting his or her hand and 
foreann mto the rectum of another- In the first phase of their study 
Lowry and Williams distributed questionnaires at "leather" b , 
homosexual 
conventions, specialty nightclubs booksto arsd, 
doctor'sconsultingr 0 p th • res, an 
. . 0 ms.... rom ese data, the authors estimate that 
nat~onwtde, roughly 50,000 persons have incorporated flsting int~ 
th:u. regu~ar sexual repetoires. The study is reported by Lowry and 
~111~~ m the January 1981 issue of the British Journal of Sexual 
ed~cme and was presented by Lowry at the March 1982 annual 
:e~g of.the American Association of Sex Educators, Counselors 
eraptsts .... Themeanageoftherespondentswas341 d. their · · · years, an ~aJar occu~anonal groups included (in descending ordeb 
~ofessi~nals, busmessmen, skilled laborers, and unskilled laborers. 
:mety-s!X percent stated that they were exclusively or predominantly omosexual.. .. 
There is deep le~el symbolism involved in fisting, a practice that 
re~re~ents a form of chnical pathology of the self-concept and self-image 
It Is.directly related to the above translation of the symbolism inher t .. 
boxtng - wherein th llfi II bee en m e Ist omes symbolic of the testicles. Chapter 6 
217


--- PAGE 125 ---
The Isis Papers 
explains that male homosexuality is based upon the conscious an<l/or 
unconscious sense of "male-substance deficiency." This results in the 
highly symbolic and behavioral preoccupation with the internalization, at 
one or the other end of the gastrointestinal tract, of male substance in the 
form of semen. Lowry and Williams reveal that there is an increasing 
number of persons, the vast majority of whom are exclusively or 
predominantly homosexual, who in response to a deep sense of 'male­
substance deficiency • are motivated to have the fist and forearm of another 
inserted into the anal end of the gastrointestinal tract. 
For greater clarity, the fist and forearm in abstract form constitute a 
ball at the end of a road or stick. This abstract diagramatic form resembles 
the lateral view of the male genitalia. 
The questionnaires for the data collected by Lowry and Williams were 
distributed in "leather" bars, along with other places frequented by 
homosexuals. Leather bars are settings where mostly white male 
homosexuals dress in black leather and/or engage in various forms of 
sadomasochistic sexual activity involving the use of black leather, (e.g., 
whips). Having a leather whip inserted into the rectum is one form of symboli-
cally internalizing, not only male substance but, more specifically, Black 
male substance (the leather being symbolic of the Black male). Being 
beaten by a whip, or being "dominated" by someone dressed in black 
leather are other symbolic forms of internalizing Black male substance 
through the act of submission. 
The wearing of leather and the preoccupation with the use of leather 
objects, including boxing gloves, is the subconscious and unconscious 
return, through symbolism, to the white collective's perception of the 
dominant genetic power of the Black male. Therefore, for men who 
consciously and/or unconsciously sense themselves as def1cient in male­
substance, to act out symbolically and to don or to internalize symbols . 
representative of the highest standard of male power - blackness - is 
logically correct, if not logically necessary. 
218 
18 
The Cress Theory of the Holocaust 
(1980) 
the Hgeyrpe::~o~f thEe destruh ction of the Semites of the Jewish religion and 
urope ave been presented nti . Well there · as a co ounding puzzle 
' ls an answer, horrendous yes, but not at all diffi 1 . 
understand· and th · 1. . Icu t to ' e Imp Icatlons for Black people are profound 
The New York Time (J 8 19 . · Set Up Institut C s une , 80) m an article entitled "Brandeis to 
e on auses of Holocaust," reported: 
:andeis University will establish a research institute to stud 
m::~usem·no~ theJHolocaust, the 15 year period in which mo~ 
I Ion ews were killed in E 32-year-old Je · h urope .... By autumn the 
WIS sponsored but nonsectarian un. . 
expects to have a dozen junior and senior research Iversity 
P
lan · ~ ers at work 
mng c?nLerences, lectures and articles on the riod and 
~e approXImately 150 years of events leadin pe_ " Important as th g up to It..... As of m . ey ar_e, we n? longer need any more collections 
res~o~s b~survivors,_ pictures of concentration camps and 
Jews'" s~dtoMarve mechamsms of Hitler's 'fmal solution for the 
• ai er H Benstein 'de 'What's needed no · · . 'pres~ nt of the University. 
for what happened w :d rnl ~e future IS an attempt to account 
. , exp am why, and to give so . . h 
znto future events if possible" ( th , m~ mslg t B . . · au or s emphasis) Mr 
emstem swd the institute would be f'manced by an $800 000 
~~t from Drd. L~lo Tauber, a surgeon in the Washin~ton 
: . area an surviVor of a forced-labor cam in H , 
will be the only institute of its kind . th~ ungary. It m IS country, Mr. 
219


--- PAGE 126 ---
The Isis Papers 
Bernstein said, and the only one outside of Israel, where the 
Hebrew University in Jersusalem has a similar study group 
called, 'The Hand of God.' Unlike that research institute, 
which concentrates on the Holocaust years 1930-1945, the 
Brandeis Institute intends to look at the broader range of 
Western European history from about the time ofNapolean's 
emancipation of the French Jews in the flrst decades of the 
1800's. 
'We cannot bring them back,' Dr. Tauber said of the estimated 
20 million civilians, Jewish and non-Jewish, who died in Nazi 
labor and concentration camps, 'But I would like to see people 
educated to the realization that it can happen anywhere, 
anytime, again ... .' 
Whereas I am not an invited scholar nor a petitioner to attend the 
Tauber Institute at Brandeis University, I have been a student of anti­
Semitism in Europe and the destruction of the Semites of the Jewish 
religion since the mid-1950s. Throughout that time, I remained con­
vinced that the treatment of the Semites of the Jewish religion in Europe 
and in America was intimately related to the gradual destruction of Black 
people as well as the millions of native peoples found in the 'Americas' 
by the immigrating whites from Europe- a pattern which continues to the 
present. Further, I was convinced that the "flnal solution" for the Semites 
in Europe was associated with the "atomic bomb solution" for the 
Japanese peoples in World War II, and that the anti-semitism of Europe 
and America was intimately related to the "apartheid" of southern Africa 
and to the historic pattern of treatment (mistreatment) of all of the peoples 
classified as "non-white" or "non-aryan" peoples by the peoples who • 
classify themselves as "white" or "aryan." 
One of the serious flaws in Western logic, thought and scholarship 
the failure or inability to see things as a "whole.'' Rather, the tendency is 
to perceive fragmented "abstractions" that are never united as one. 
pattern of thought is sharply contrasted to the Eastern mode of ttnlliWtg 
and perception that begins with the perception and analysis of the 
220 
The Cress Theory of the Holocaust 
so as to place in accurate pers tive an be isolated from the whole. pee Y parts or fragments which may 
The focus on the destruction of the S . . an abstraction outside of th erwtes of the JewiSh religion as . . . e context of the totalityofth h' . 
ct vibzation and cultural impe ti' (th e IStonc Western 
h 
ra ve epast2 OOOye 1 w Y there has not been to da ' ars, at east) explains 
Semitic destruction in ~ t::_ a comprehensive understanding of the 
I 
· urope uom 1933 to 1945 I d d nsbtute at Brandeis Universt't .11 • n ee , the Tauber $SOO Y wt not find the an . ,000 grant, not withstandin ) wi . . . swers It seeks (the 
of only 150 years of history of Sge 'teth ~e limited htstorical perspective 
s . mt smEurope 
ometimes, at deep unconscious levels . fmd answers to problems that th b . ' people do not really wish to 
tha 
eyo sesstvelycomplai b t problem has caused the d th f . n a out, even when . ea o su million 1 conscious awareness perhap f th peop e. There is the ' s, o e need to know th h 1 
understand in depth; but below this surface . e w o e truth and to 
need to maintain th . , there ts the more powerful e status quo, whtch depth kn 1 would explode in volcanic f: hi . ow edge and awareness h as on. Specifically I am fi · 
aps, an unconscious need on th f . re emng to, per-
( d 
e part o Semttes of th J · · h . . 
an perhaps other Semites as well) t . . e ew1s rehg1on 
understanding their entire historic e: av~td confrontmg and, therefore, 
Europe, in addition to the· . penence amongst the whites in. . rr pnor experience with th h' still resided in Africa two th d e w Ites while they ousan years ago 
H~wever, I have no such unconscious n . perceive the existing chaos and i . . eed. To the exact contrary, I h nJUStice on the planet Earth t b 
orrendous magnitude that this gl b 1 .1 o e of such 
the surfacing of depth kno led o a e~t ~eeds to be broken asunder by . . w ge and mstght so that th 
.·greater JUStice can evolve and pre .1 I . . e true calm of a 
. forth the molten materials from i vru . t Is JUS~ as when a volcano spews 
oecc)m<~senriched and more ferti~s c;;re,th the sotl.upon which the ash falls Thi e om at which subsequ tl . 
. s essay, then, is for all Black 1 en y spnngs 
un,nP-r•ot<>••.t the d tru . peop e and for others who wish to . es cuon of the Semites and . . and 1945 It · . gypsies m Europe between 
· ts a presentation of th · · 1 , once and for all why the e .cntica datum that will totally ' re was anti-Semitism in Europe and why 
221


--- PAGE 127 ---
1':, 
!'' 
The Isis Papers 
a "final solution" for the Semites as well as for the gypsy population in 
Europe was needed. 
It is necessary at this point to reiterate the key issues of The Cress 
Theory of Color-Confrontation and Racism (White Supremacy): The 
white supremacy (white survival) necessity is to establish, maintain, 
expand and refine the power equation white over non-white (W/NW), 
white power over all peoples with an ancestral history of substantial 
melanin skin pigmentation that can be genetically transmitted. The wtlite 
genetic phenotype can be maintained on the planet Earth only through this 
means (intensive "genetic-watch"). 
The implications of the Cress Theory are that all behavioral patterns 
in the global white collective! begin and end with the consci~ms and/or 
unconscious consideration of white genetic survival and the corollary 
consideration of the global threat of white genetic annihilation by the 
non-white majority. Were this not the foremost consideration of the 
global white collective, a white population would not exist on the planet 
Earth; it would have succumbed to white genetic annihilation, and, 
therefore, never would have been an organized psychological and military 
defense. 
So, what does all of this have to do with the mass destruction of 
members of the Jewish religion living in Europe and the phenomenon of 
anti-Semitism? First, much confusion has arisen because of the conscious. 
and/or unconscious insistence of mixing a discussion of religion with a 
discussion of race, specifically as it concerns the Semitic population that 
practices the Judaic religion. This population migrated from Africa and· 
has resided in Europe for the past two thousand years. The "holocaust"· .• 
in Europe was the end result of the long-standing dynamic of anti-Semi­
tism. Semite refers to a racial group. Thus, anti-Semitism was a dynamic · 
directed specifically against a group with a distinct racial (genetic) back­
ground, which incidentally practiced a particular religion. 
A Semite is conventionally defined as "a member of any of the 
whose language is Semitic, including the Hebrews, Arabs, Assynan~ 
Phoenicians, Babylonians, etc." (Webster' sNew World Dictionary). 
adjective Semitic is defined as "1. of, characteristic of, or like a Semite 
222 
The Cress Theory of the Holocaust 
the Semites 2. designating or of a major group of languages of south­
western Asia and northern Africa, related to the Hamitic languages and 
divided into East Semitic (Akkadian), North West Semitic (Phoenician, 
Punic, Aramaic, Hebrew, Modern Hebrew, etc.) and South West Semitic 
(Arabic, Ethiopic, Amheric)." Webster's New World Dictionary also 
infonns us that the prefix, "semi - "(L., akin to Gr. hemi-, Sans. sami-, AS. 
sam), means half, as in semidiameter. 
Thus, both of the words Semite andHamite (the later from the Greek 
"Hemite") could refer to peoples who were Black, but a mulatto-type 
mixture of Black and white and combinations thereof, hence "semi-" or 
"hemi-"- half Black and half white- much like the present mixed Black 
or colored population in the U.S., or wherever white males have sexually 
aggressed against African (Black) females. A fine example is the Roman 
(white) soldiers' sexual aggression against African women. In my decod­
ing, the word Semite, as from the Latin prefix "semi-," means someone 
whose ancestry was a Black and white mixture, therefore Black (since Black is genetically dominant). 
In The Washington Post (May 4, 1979), in an article entitled "Pope to 
View Poland's Black Madonna," Sylvana Foa reports: 
.... The mysterious Black Madonna of Czestochowa is the most 
sacred icon in Poland. It is also one of the most haunting and 
beautiful works of religious art in the world. Pope John Paul 
II, a strong advocate of devotion to the Virgin Mary will travel 
to the hilltop monastery in June to show his special devotion to 
the strange painting depicting Christ's mother as a black 
woman .... Art experts believe the Madonna was painted 
between the 6th and 8th centuries and say the style is 
reminiscent of early Egyptian Christians .... many an historians, 
believe the Madonna is one of the rare black Madonnas still 
extant. Most of the Madonnas painted in the earliest centuries 
of Christiandom were black, according to historians and it 
wasn't until the Renaissance that it became popular to give the 
mother of Christ the features of a Florentine maiden ... " 
223


--- PAGE 128 ---
The Isis Papers 
The "features of a Florentine maiden" means the features and coloring 
of a white woman. Thus, religious and art history support the fact that the 
Semites were Black people, with the highly esteemed personage of Jesus 
and his mother as evidence. In the diaspora of the Semites of the Jewish religion after the 
Babylonian exile 2,000 or so years ago, Semites left Africa and went to 
Europe. With continuing genetic admixture with the European (white) 
population, operating under the defmition that a Jew is "anyone whose 
mother is a Jew," it was possible, if enough white males had sexual 
intercourse with a sufficient number of Semitic or colored women, for the 
once Black population of Semites to become progressively lighter and 
lighter. All offspring from these white males and Semitic women of the 
Jewish religion then would become Jews. 
Over 2,000 years or 100 generations, the population that was once 
Black became significantly lightened. Just examine how relatively light 
in color Black peoples in the U.S. have become after only 20 generations 
of white male sexual aggression against African (Black) women. Just 
think what we could achieve in 100 generations if our goal was to become 
lighter and lighter with each generation, using the well-known formula: 
Don't marry anyone darker than yourself! 
It is significant to this discussion that Karl Marx (1818-1883), another 
Semite of the Jewish religion, had such darlc skin that his children called 
him "The Moor," meaning of course, "the Black." Robert Heilbroner, in 
his book The Worldly Philosophers, states, in contrasting the appearance 
of Marx with his co-wm:ker Friedrich Engles, "They were very much . 
opposites in appearance. Marx looked like a revolutionary. His children · 
called him, 'The Moor,' for his skin was dark and his eyes deep-set and 
flashing." Prior to reading Heilbroner, I always had been impressed by the greai 
similarity in appearance of Frederick Douglas, the pre-Civil War 
orator, and Karl Marx. Frederick Douglas was the offspring of a 
woman and a sexually agressing white slave master - thus himself 
Semite or mulatto. 
224 
The Cress Theory of the Holocaust 
Another Semite of the Jewish religion who was identified as "a Black" 
was Albert Einstein. Albert Einstein (1879-1955), the great Nobel prize 
physicist, as documented by Robert Clark's Einstein: The Life and Times 
was once described as "1.76 meters tall .... broad shouldered, with a slight 
stoop. His short skull seems remarkably broad. His complexion is 
swarthy .... " (Webster's New World Dictionary defines the word "swarthy" 
as "having a dark skin; dusky; dark. SYN. see dusky." 
The same dictionary defmes dusky as, "1. somewhat dark in color; 
shadowy; swarthy; 2. lacking light .... dusky suggests a darkness of color 
or absence of light, verging on blackness. Swarthy and tawny both refer 
only to color, swarthy suggesting a dark brown verging on black .... " The 
Encyc/opediaBritannica, described Einstein as: " ... a young man, not very 
tall, with a wide and long face, and a great mane of crispy, frizzled and 
very black hair, sprinkled with gray and rising from a lofty brow. His 
nose is fleshy and prominent, his mouth small, his lips full, his cheeks 
plump ... " This was a description of Einstein in his middle thirties. Crispy 
and frizzled hair is one half step away from kinky hair. Again, we see in 
the person of a most prominent Semite descriptive features that are 
associated with the genetic stock of the Mrican continent: swanhy skin 
and crispy, frizzled hair. 
We now come to Sigmund Freud (1885 to 1939), a Semite of the Jewish 
religion, born in Austria, a physician and psychiatrist and founder of 
psychoanalysis. In a July 23,1979 Time book review of Freud: Biologist 
of the Mind entitled "Did Freud Build His Own Legend?" Frank Sulloway 
revealed, "Sigmund Freud idolized Hannibal. So much that for years he 
was psychologically unable to enter Rome because Hannibal had never 
set foot in the city .... " It is interesting that Sigmund Freud, a Semite of 
. the Jewish religion, should identify himself with Hannibal. Hannibal was 
aBiackman. 
. Encyclopedia Britannica states, 
Hannibal (b. 247 B.C., North Africa- d. 182 B.C., Libyssa, 
Bithynia, now Turkey), one of the great military leaders of 
antiquity, commanded the Carthaginian forces against Rome 
in the Second Punic War (218- 201 B.C) .... After the Romans 
225


--- PAGE 129 ---
The Isis Papers 
declared war in 219 B.C., Hannibal, at the command of a force 
of about 40,000 and a number of elephants, crossed the 
Pyrenees into southern Gaul. From there he executed an 
incredible fear to militarY enterprise proceeding across the Alps 
into northern Italy. In 217 B.C. at the Battle of Lake 
Trasimene, he inflicted one of the greatest defeats suffered by 
Rome .... 
I have quoted the above sources extensively because there is a sig­
nificant reason why three of the greatest Semitic thinkers of the Jewish 
religion have been described as dark in appearance or have identified 
themselves, as in the case of Freud, with Blackness. Freud even went 
further in his last work, Moses and Monotheism, written in part while 
fleeing from the Nazis, to describe the founder of the Jewish religion, 
Moses, as an Egyptian - meaning of course. a Black man. Each of these 
representative Semites of the Jewish religion either has identified himself 
or has been identified by others with Blackness. primarily because the 
Jews in Africa two thousand years ago were Black (African) people. That . 
is the reason that all of the earliest paintings of the Madonna and child 
(Jesus and his mother) were a Black madonna and child. They were 
The modem day, highly misconducted Semites of the European Africans. 
experience may want and may have wanted in the past to forget their Black 
ancestral heritage and suppress this truth. but the global white collective 
never has forgotten this critical fact. Always, the white collective, con­
sciously or unconsciously, must remember this fact in relationships with 
"Semites" and all other peoples whose genetic history causes the whites·· 
to classify them as non-whites, if there is to be white genetic survival.··· 
Adolph Hitler. other Germans and Europeans, all of whom are 
were aware (consciously, subconsciously or unconsciously) of the greater· 
origin of the "Semites" no matter how light-skinned many of them 
have become after 2,000 years of miscegenation with the whites 
"aryans." Hitler and his followers not only mandated the destruction 
the Semites, but also the destrUCtion of the gypsies. Webster's New 
Dictionary defines "gypsy" as "n. (pl. gypsies). (earlier gypscien, 
226 
The Cress Theory o-tthe u I 'J uo ocaust 
for Egypci E . en, gypuan: so called becau Egypt - a member of a wanderin C ~ thought to have come from 
black hair, found througho t th g aucasian people with dark skin and u eworld "Th falsely that the word "caucasl· " ... ereadershouldnotconclude an means " h' .. used to refer to dark skm' ( h' w lte. Often, "caucasian" I·s non-w Ite) peo 1 However, white means whit d p es who may have straight barr' e an caucas· · 
The reason Hitler gave for makin Ian m~~ms caucasian. 
on the list of destruction was th t ! the Semites and gypsies priorities 
(aryans) as "non-white" 1 a ey were classified by the whites 
no h' peop es, whose origin · n-w Ite peoples were considered geneticall . wa~ m Africa. These 
capable of causing whi•e . . y mfenor to the whites but . • genetic anmhila · • Sldered essential by those wh . non. Therefore, it was con-
to destroy those in their 'do were mterested in white genetic survival 
. m1 st whom they beli genetic annihilation All . eved could cause whi'te 
. . . · non-white 1 a_nmhilatlon because of their b'li peop es can cause white genetic 
tlon. Hitler made it absolutet \ ty to produce melanin skin pigmenta­
supremacy and white racial y ~ ear that his objective was global white 
Th 
punty. 
· e s 'fi . peel IC fear of white genetic annih· . m the global white collecti bee ilatlon, while always present 
frequently acted upon in ti ve, h omes more prominent and is more 
th 
· mes w en whites h 1 ere IS serious economic . ave ost a war and/or when 
~ . uncertamty At th . eels msecure because them . . ese tlmes the white collective 
d ~ . aJor props for the se f · . an or white genetic survival th . nse o white mvincibility 
failed. - err guns and money- seem to have 
~us, :Uter the German's loss of World . political mstability high I I 'nfl . War I (which was followed by th • eve I ation and hi h ere appeared on the scene a dyn . g level unemployment) 
10 desttoy !hose perceived anne spolresperson, aniculating the need 
In the United States as c~pable of ultimate white destruction we are m such a period Th . 
··. . War(a warlosttonon-white . ere has been the loss 
(Watergate, etc.), and there is :o:le), fo~owed by political 
~>.m•"'"'·~~--· Thus, we witness incr . g level mflation and un-
.. the Ku Kl Klan easmg levels of activity of N . . ux and other k azis, 
laureate, Dr. William Shockl . spo ~persons, such as Nobel y • artlculatmg the need to get rid of 
227


--- PAGE 130 ---
I 
The Isis Papers 
Black people and discussing Black genetic inferiority; some also focus in 
the Semites as a problem. 
This behavior must not be looked upon as immoral, as though it can 
be challenged by moral persuasion. This logic, thought, speech, action, 
emotional response and perception is of absolute logical necessity for a 
people who historically have been in fear of their genetic annihilation by 
Black and other non-white peoples. 
The term anti-Semitism means white supremacy (racism). A 
holocaust, the open destruction of non-white people by white people, 
occurs when: 1) there is a sufficient level of insecurity or anxiety in the 
white population relative to white genetic annihilation; 2) there is no 
longer a plan; or 3) it is considered too expensive to keep non-whites 
confined in "ghettos," "prisons," "barrios," "bantustans," "concentration 
camps," "on reservations" or "on welfare." Holocausts also occur when 
whites consider it necessary to relocate non-white peoples for labor 
purposes (e.g., Africans being brought to the Americas or Native 
Americans being moved off the land because whites want it). Presently, 
a holocaust is occurring in the jungles of Brazil, and the victims are the 
native peoples of the area, so-called Indians. 
The Semites of the Jewish religion always have referred to themselves 
as God's chosen people. However, they have debated amongst them­
selves the reason they were chosen and what they were chosen to do. I 
have answered these questions in the following way: they were chosen 
to help all of the other non-white peoples of the world living under white 
supremacy domination to understand that no matter how much you may 
mix with and intermarry with people who classify themselves as white; 
no matter how light-skinned you may become through loss of , .. .., ...... ~ .. , 
pigment, no matter how straight your hair may become, no matter 
much you may shrink the size of your nose, no matter how many uv\.-Lv•~ •• ~~ 
lawyers, judges, professors, scholars you may produce, no matter 
many Einsteins, Freuds, Marxs or Rubensteins you produce, no 
how much money, diamonds and gold you may obtain, if you are "'"""u'" 
as non-white under the conditions of white supremacy domination, 
the hammer of white supremacy falls, you will be under that hammer. 
228 
The Cress Theory o-~'the u l 
'I uo ocaust 
. The Semites of the Jewish reli . 
Important moral and that . . gion were chosen to teach a . ' 1s, never disres very genetlc heritage oif.Afr. pect or be ashamed of the B/ "· lea, and speak u fi ac"' 
that heritage with your very life h ~d or, own up to,protectand defend 
up~>n. you to do so. Be proud to~: ~~ck conditions and events ever can 
Ttus IS a profound lesson in self. and be proud to be non-white 
-respect for all of the people . th . m ewodd. 
229


--- PAGE 131 ---
19 
The Neurochemical Basis for Evil 
(1988) 
The American philosopher William James has stated, "There is no 
doubt that healthy mindedness is inadequate as a philosophical doctrine, 
because the evil facts which it positively refuses to account for are a 
genuine portion of reality, and they may after all be the best key to life's 
significance, and possibly the only openers of our eyes to the deepest level 
of truth." 
The Kabbalah, which literally means "lradition," is the sum of Jewish 
mysticism, the tradition of things divine. The Book Bahir, an 1180 A.D. 
document on the Kabbalah concerning Satan, states, 
It teaches that there is in God a principle that is called 'Evil', 
and it lies in the north of God, of it is written [Jer. 1:14]: 'Out 
of the north the evil shall break forth upon all the inhabitants 
of the land,' that is to say, all evil that comes upon all the 
inhabitants of the land breaks forth out of the north. And what 
principle is this? It is the form of the hand [one of the seven 
holy forms which represent God as the original man], and it has 
many messengers, and all are named 'Evil' .... And it is they that 
fling the world into guilt for the tobu is in the north, and the 
tobu means precisely the evil that confuses men until they sin, 
and it is the source of all man's evil impulses. 
In early Egyptian (African) tradition, evil was associated with Set, the 
. brother of Osiris ("Lord of the perfect black"). Set eventually killed his 
brother Osiris and dismembered his body, which his sister/wife (Isis) 
231


--- PAGE 132 ---
The Isis Papers 
helped restore to life. Osiris was the great Egyptian God figure. Set is 
considered the white brother. 
In contrast, the early Christian religion and the Bible related evil to the 
fallen angel Lucifer, a word that means light and that can be construed to 
mean white. However, in the Middle Ages, for some Europeans, the devil 
took on an appearance of a Black man with a long phallus, which has been 
modified as the present red colored figure with a long tail and a longfork. 
In keeping with each of the above perspectives of evil, Webster's 
Dictionary defines "evil" as: "1. morallybadorwrong; wicked, depraved, 
2. causing pain or trouble; harmful; injurious, 3. threatening or bringing 
misfortune; unlucky; disastrous; unfortunate; as an evil hour, 4. resulting 
from or based on conduct regarded as immoral; as an evil reputation." 
The Cress Theory of Color Confrontation and Racism (White 
Supremacy), links whites' unjust behavior towards people of color (black, 
brown, red and yellow) to whites' inability to produce melanin skin 
pigment in the skin melanocyte. The whites' numerical minority status 
in the world and, ultimately, their fear of global white genetic annihilation 
by the genetically dominant, skin melanin producing, non-white world 
majority are pointed out as additional reasons for white aggression 
towards people of color. This thesis helps to explain the evil "kill or be 
killed" behaviors of the global white collective in relation to non-white 
people. 
In 1972, I presented a paper entitled, Melanin:_ The Neurochemical 
Basis for Soul, at the annual meeting of the National Medical Association 
Section on Neurology and Psychiatry. I theorized that the presence of 
melanin in high concentrations in Blacks accounted for some of the 
observable differences in behavior between Black and white people (ie., 
religious responsiveness, rhythm, emotional responsiveness, sensitivity 
levels), noting the familiar saying amongst older Black people, "The 
blacker the berry, the sweeter the juice; if it ain't got no soul, it ain't got 
no use." Also, I emphasized the song by James Brown, "We Got More 
Soul." Further, I pointed out that the most sensitive body areas are the 
areas most highly pigmented. 
232 
Neurochemical Basis for Evil 
Fifteen years ago in a paper entitled, "Blacks, Hypertension and the 
Activ~ Skin Melanocyte" (Journal of Urban Health. 1975), I posited 
melanm, among other things, as a possible neurotransmitter and the skin 
melanocytes as the foundation of the sixth sense- the basis for know ledge 
of the unseen, including a deeper knowledge of "bad." I explained that if 
the melanocytes were sense receptors and melanin was a neuro transmit­
ter, then the darker the skin, the higher the levels of hypertensions found. 
Primarily, this is true because people with darker skins are more sensitive 
to the energy currents around them. If those energy currents are stressful 
they will be more stressed, increasing levels of hypertension. ' 
In 1987, at the first Melanin Conference, I discussed The Cress Theory 
on the George Washington Carver Phenomenon, suggesting that the skin 
melanocytes of this very Black-skinned scientist (high level concentration 
of melan~n skin pig~ent) enabled him to communicate with the energy 
frequencies emanatmg from plants. Thus, he was able to learn their 
secrets and purposes. 
Since my 1972 presentation on the neurochemical basis for soul the 
neuroche~ical basis of evil has periodically come to my mind, beg~ing 
that I outlme my thoughts on evil as the anti-thesis of soul. I relate soul 
to order, spirituality and the affirmation of life. I equate evil with chaos 
and destruction, especially the destruction of life. (The word evil when 
spelled backward is, live.) The discussion of evil takes on even more 
sig~ificant proportions in light of the increasing number of persons in this 
soc1ety who openly are proclaiming themselves to be worshippers of the 
Devil- Devil being the arch doer of evil- in contrast to worshipping God. 
Reportedly, these persons participate in the ritual murder of human 
beings. 
. The concept of evil is not at all unusual in religious and philosophical 
discourse. Also, evil has been a frequent subject for literary exploration. 
~e n~vel M oby Dick by Herman Mel ville is an example of the symbolic 
dlscussion. of evil in classical American literature.) Evil is approached 
less often m the natural sciences, including modem medicine. However 
psychiatry is the one branch of modem medicine that has major antece~ 
233


--- PAGE 133 ---
The Isis Papers 
dents in both religion and philosophy and thus, the topic of evil has found 
discussants who consider themselves scientists and scientific. 
The role of the psychiatric-physician or physician-scientist is to attempt 
to comprehend, bringing greater clarity and insight, the total spectr~ of 
human behavior, which would include the special category ofbehav1oral 
phenomena recognized as evil. Further, I believe that the challenge of 
modern psychiatry, like the challenge of modern physics, is to approach, 
if possible, a view of the "unified field." . 
Modem physics, since Albert Einstein, has sought to umte the spec~m 
of forces - gravity, electromagnetism, weak and strong forces - m a 
unified field, viewing these separate forces as out~owt_hs from or 
manifestations of a whole (a unified force field). Likew1se, modem 
psychiatry should seek to discover if there is a united _behavioral ~orce 
field that can explain evil as well as other dommant behav10ral 
phenomena. 
For the ant, the greatest evil consists of killing ants. For the h~~an 
being, the greatest evil consists of the obsessional degrading and ~ill~g 
of other human beings. All lesser evils are simply added to thlS (~e., 
destruction of other life forms, destruction of the planet and destruct10_n 
that extends beyond planet Earth). With evil so defmed, clearl~ there lS 
an overwhelming atmosphere of evil in the world. In fact, the e~tlre plan~t 
exists in an atmosphere of degradation and murder. To 1gnore th1s 
evidence of evil, this obsession with mass killing and death, is _only ~ 
participate in the establishment and the maintenance of its reahty - m 
effect, to participate in evil. On the other hand, to address this obsess~on 
with mass death and the degradation of human life in hopes of countenng 
it is to afflrm the dignity of human beings and the universe. 
Ernest Becker, in his book Escape From Evil, had the followin~ to say 
about evil: "All organisms want to perpetuate themselves, co~tlnu~ to 
experience and to live .... For all organisms, then, opposing and obbteraung 
power is evil- it threatens to stop experience." He continues, "So w~ see 
that as an organism man is fated to perpetuate himself and as a c~nsc1ous 
organism he is fated to identify evil as the threat to that perpetuation. And 
234 
Neurochemical Basis for Evil 
what then would be the highest development and use of those [man's] 
talents? To contribute to the struggle against evil." 
However, before there can be effective struggle against evil, the 
following questions must be answered: 1) What are the dynamic condi­
tions in a society or culture that would stimulate such activity as an­
nounced as devil worship? 2) What are the dynamics in a society and 
culture wherein increasing numbers of Black males are being killed 
daily/yearly at epidemic levels? 3) What are the exact causation dynamics 
in a society and culture wherein the greatest percentage of its resources 
are used in the development and production of instruments of death and 
destruction? 4) What are the exact dynamic conditions in a power system 
or culture wherein 50 million people can be destroyed in the course of 
slave trade, as on the continent of Africa? 5) What are the exact dynamic 
conditions in a power system or culture wherein six million Semites of 
~e Je~ish religion can be destroyed deliberately or 20 million people 
killed m the course of a war, such as in the Soviet Union during World 
War II? 6) What are the dynamics in a society and culture in which 
hundreds of thousands, possibly millions, are doomed to die of infection 
with a virus that increasing numbers are concluding was deliberately man-made? 
These are questions that the psychiatrist should be motivated to answer 
in the context of understanding the issue of evil, especially when it is 
recalled, as stated by Thomas Mecton in his Raids on the Unspeakable that, 
~ne of the ~ost disturbing facts that carne out in the [Adolph] 
Etchman trial was that a psychiatrist examined him and 
pronounced him perfectly sane. We equate sanity with a sense 
of justice, with humaneness, with prudence, with the capacity 
to love and understand other people. We rely on the sane 
people of the world to preserve it from barbarism, madness, 
destruction. And now it begins to dawn on us that it is precisely 
that sane ones who are the most dangerous. It is the sane one, 
the well adapted one, who can without qualms and without 
nausea aim the missiles and press the buttons that will initiate 
235


--- PAGE 134 ---
The I sis Papers 
the great festival of destruction that they, the sane ones, have 
prepared. 
·n his nationwide best selling book, People 
Psychiatrist M. Scott Peck, 1 E 'l contends II Science has also 
Th H for Healing Human vt • ' of the Lie. e ope f il because of the immensity of the 
steered clear of the problem o ehv body of scientific knowledge of 
. 1 ed we do not yet ave a mystery mvo v .... . h 1 
II He also states, 
human evil deserving of bemg called a psyc o ogy. 
Caucasians seem to have fewer 
Those of. us who ~~ blacks or Indians or Orientals than 
comp~cu~n.s about kil~:; white men. It is easier for a white 
we do m ktlhng our fe , d eck' The matter of the 
1 h 'nigger' than a re n .... man to ync a . . killing is yet another one 
racial aspects of mtraspe~•es. . . 
deserving significant scientific mvesugatiOn. 
f · 1 pride 
1 d "War today is at least as much a matter o nauona He cone u es, 
as of racial pride." . nee has steered clear of the subject 
Even though Peck suggests that scte . lved II Herman Melville, the 
ofevilbecauseofthe"immensemysterymvo ' . t1 thesub'ect 
19th century novelist, pe.~ha~~ :~:n~c~eu:~~=~:::~ th~ ~bite w~le, 
of evil. He approached evil g . . d him Ahab . and the crippled white shtp captam who pursue , . 
Moby Dtck, ed S tan) Melville uses an entire chapter of hts 
(who is often compar to a · 11 H b · s 
book to discourse on "The Whiteness of the Whale. e egm ' 
Wh. hale was to Ahab, has been hinted; what, at 
What the tte w . . · d Aside from those 
times, he was to me, as yet rematns u~sru . Dick which 
re Obvious considerations touchmg Moby • 1 mo ak · any man's sou some 
could not but occasi~all~awgh:no~ rather vague, nameless 
alarm, there wa~ anoh. er oh~ ch , at times by its intensity 
horror concernmg tm, w t . al d d all the rest; and yet so mystic ~ 
completely overpowere . th t I almost despair of putting ll m 
well nigh ineffable was tt, a h' f the whale that h 'bl form It was the w tteness o a compre e~st e all. d me But how can I hope to explain above all thmgs app e · 
236 
Neurochemical Basis for Evil 
myself here; and yet, in some dim, random way, explain myself 
I must, else all these chapters might be naught. 
Melville proceeds to detail many positive associations with whiteness: 
"and though this pre-eminence in it [whiteness] applies to the human race 
itself, giving the white man ideal mastership over every dusky tribe." He 
continues, 
.. .yet for all these accumulated associations, with whatever is 
sweet, and honorable, and sublime, there yet lurks an elusive 
something in the innermost idea of this hue, which strikes more 
of panic to the soul than that redness which affrights in blood .... 
That ghastly whiteness it is which imparts such an abhorrent 
mildness even more loathsome than terrific, to the dumb 
gloating of their aspect. So that not the fierce-fanged tiger in 
his heraldic coat can so stagger courage as the white-shrouded 
bear or shark. 
Further on, Melville contemplates, 
What is it that in the Albino man so peculiarly repels and often 
shocks the eye, as that sometimes he is loathed by his own kith 
and kin! It is that whiteness which invests him, a thing 
expressed by the name he bears, The Albino is as well made as 
other men - has no substantive deformity - and yet this mere 
aspect of all-pervading whiteness makes him more strangely 
hideous than the ugliest abortion. Why should this be so? 
. Again referring to whiteness, Melville writes, " ... it is at once the most 
meaning symbol of spiritual things, nay, the very veil of the Christian's 
and yet should be as it is, the intensifying agent in things the most 
"I'I""Uli&F, to mankind, 
11 
Melville's Captain Ahab sees the white whale as all evil of which he 
in pursuit. In a letter to Nathaniel Hawthorne, Melville referred to Moby 
as a "wicked book." My own interpretation of the symbolism in this 
which has been regarded as the greatest of all American novels, is 
237


--- PAGE 135 ---
The Isis Papers 
that the crippled white Captain Ahab represents the mutant (global) white 
population, afflicted with albinism (whiteness). The white whale is 
symbolic of racism (white supremacy), the major pursuit of the global 
white collective- the evil destructive goal of the global white collective. 
This furious, evil pursuit in Moby Dick ends in a disaster for all: a deadly 
end in which the white ship captain and all of his crew, whites and 
non-whites alike, are destroyed. Yet, one survived to tell the tale, foretell­
ing the end of white supremacy as a specified power dynamic. 
It is not surprising that this novel containing the symbolism of albinism 
and white supremacy was written prior to the great bloody conflict (The 
American Civil War) that had so much to do with the relationships 
between white (albino) and Black people. This conflict ended the power 
of the share holders as well as the formal enslavement of Black people by 
whites. 
Melville's linkage of evil and dread with the condition of albinism 
parallels my own thesis that the absence of the neuropeptide melanin -
the absence of this black pigment in the skin and other aspects of the 
nervous system - critically impairs the depth sensitivity of the nervous 
system and the ability to tune in to the total spectrum of energy frequencies 
in the universe. This deficiency of sensory awareness sets the stage for 
the absence ofhannony (the chaos and destruction), which is evil. Thus, 
the injustice and evil of white supremacy not only has its foundation in 
the numerical minority status of the global white population and its 
genetically recessive status in terms of melanin pigment production, but 
the very absence of melanin in the nervous system in significant degrees 
(deereasing sensory input and thus sensitivity) is an additional contribut­
ing factor in the problem of white supremacist injustice. White 
supremacy is the greatest known evil on Earth. Likewise, racism (white 
supremacy) is the Wlified force field that encompasses all of the lesser 
evils we now recognize. Indeed, if the absence of melanin obstructs the 
nervous system's ability to tune in to the total spectrum of frequencies in 
the universe, rendering those lacking melanin incapable of acting in 
harmony with those frequencies, then it becomes incumbent upon those 
possessing melanin to counteract the evil. 
238 
20 
Black Children and the Process of 
Inferiorization 
(June 1974) 
Black peopl~, as a collective, are becoming increasingly sophisticated. 
We are becommg strong enough to face many unpleasant realities and 
~ths about. ourselves and the social system and world that we live in, 
Without demal or panic. This ability to analyze ourselves, our behavior 
and our ~eality critically is one of the signs of true mental health. Another 
equally .u~~ortant aspect of mental health is our full acceptance of the 
respons1 bil1ty for reorganizing our own behavior in order to change things 
that are wrong. 
B~ck children are our most valuable possession and our greatest 
potential resource. Any meaningful discussion of the survival or the 
future o~ Black people must be predicated upon Black people's plan for 
the.maxtmal development of all Black children. Children are the only 
fu~e of any people. If the children's lives are squandered, and if the 
children of a ~ople are not fully developed at whatever cost and sacrifice, 
the people wtll hav.e consigned themselves to certain death. They will be 
de~troyed fr_om wtthout or from within - by the attack of their own 
children ag~nst them. And they may be destroyed by both. Black people 
now are ~mg attacked in the streets (from within) by our own youths, as 
we~ as bemg attacked (from without) by our collective oppressor. This 
reality reveals. the central questions of this essay, which Black people must 
answer: 1) Will Black children in the U.S. ever develop to their maximum 
239


--- PAGE 136 ---
The Isis Papers 
genetic potential? 2) If so, who will assume ultimate responsibility for 
bringing about that maximal development- Black pe~ple themselves or 
white people? 3) If Black children are not to be maximal~y developed, 
what do Black people really think is going to happen to tlns large Black 
undeveloped mass of human beings? And, 4) Are white peopl~ in a~y wa; 
looking to Black people for the maximal development of white chtldren. 
In trying to understand precisely what is happening to us, let us be very 
clear about the following: The function of the encounter b~tween the 
b m child and the various elements of the social/envrronmental new o · 'd al · experience, which continues throughout the life of the indtv~ u • IS .to 
shape and mold the newborn child to fit his or her pre~etermm~ socwl 
role. In effect, this is achieved by the total social expenence acting.upon 
the child's genetic potential. Any established social system has. asstgned 
social roles for every child born into the system, inasmuch as children are 
born to parents who already are occupying "their place" in the structured 
social system. Social roles are related most fundamentally to how much 
true power one will or will not have in a given social system. ~rue ~wer 
is the key factor in the determination of "identity," whtch ts the 
individual's relationship to actual power. In an oppressive social system, 
one's identity is either that of the oppressor or that of the oppressed. 
In a social system designed to achieve white domination, th.e e~- · 
perience of that system molds white children so that they may funcuon ~ 
the role of the oppressors, or the "functional superiors" (becaus~ th~t ts 
what white supremacy is supposed to mean: that whites will functiOn I~ a 
superior way as compared to non-whites). Through structur~ supenor 
functioning whites will be able to oppress others. The same soctal system 
simultaneo~sly will mold all children classified as "non-whites" or 
"others" to play the role of tlle "functional inferiors," or th~ OPIJires!;eu,-, 
This is why a white racist social system is completely mcapable 
providing total equality of opportunity to Blacks. Sue~ a. system 
for its maintenance, produce differential levels of funcuonmg .for 
and non-whites. If, for example, apparent equality is granted m the 
of education, it is denied in family background. If it is given in 
it is denied in housing opportunity. If it is granted in health care "'"'' •. ,....,,. 
240 
Black Children 
it is denied in terms of fathers' income levels. If it is granted by law 
(Brown, 1954), it is denied through social practice. Etcetera 
We must stress the use of the term "functional inferiority," which is in 
con~st to "genetic inferiority." "Functional" is uSed because the genetic 
m~terial of non-white children actually is not impaired, but the pre-deter­
mmed and established racist social experience is designed deliberately to 
destroy the genetic potential for social functioning. The destruction of 
non-white genetic material (which is the fundamental meaning of the 
word "genocide"- killing genes) leads to the appearance of inferiority in 
the non-whites. 
To describe the social process by which Black genetic potential is 
destroy~, thus profoundly influencing the whole life experience of every 
Black child, the term "inferiorization" is used. lnferiorization is the 
co~scious: deliberate and systematic process utilized specifically by a 
rac~t (white supremacy) social system, as conducted through all of its 
maJor and.minor institutions (including the institution of the family), to 
mold specific peoples within that system {namely, all peoples classified 
by ~e racist system as non-white) into "functional inferiors," in spite of 
therr true genetic potential for functioning. Under the white supremacy 
system, the more melanin pigmentation present in the skin and thus the 
darker the. individual, the greater the "inferiorization" pressure imposed 
by the racist system. Thus, amongst all non-white peoples, Blacks are 
.most victimized by this process. Particularly, darker Black people receive 
extreme victimization - even amongst Black people themselves. This 
skin coloration code established by the global white collective, like other 
methods of Black subjugation, is essential to white genetic survival. This 
same code causes Black people to say "Don't marry anyone darker than 
yourself," preferring light-skinned persons as mates. Such socially im­
~sed ~att~ms of thinking yield the Black infant its frrst direct experience 
With rejecuon and negation by the racist social system he or she is born 
Jnto; tllis negation will continue for the entire life span. 
Simply, inferiorization means that through the structuring of thought 
, ·Ul•ur::"'" and social experiences such as poor housing, poor healtlt care, 
school systems, broken families and low income levels, a 
241


--- PAGE 137 ---
The Isis Papers 
Black or other non-white child- who could be a genius based upon genetic 
endowment- can be turned into a criminal who must spend his productive 
years locked behind the bars of a prison cell. Inferiorization deliberately 
turns a Black child, who could become a brilliant, universal statesman, a 
strong supporting father and a loving, canng protector for his wife, into a 
drug addict. It turns a Black female child, who could become a physician, 
scientist and excellent mother, into a prostitute. It turns Black parents, 
who could be mature, supporting, loving and kind to their offspring, into 
immature child-batterers and sexual abusers of their own children. It turns 
some Black teachers, who could love and educate Black children, into 
teachers who hate and cannot educate. It structures the total social 
experience of Black young people so that they believe it is "cool" and 
more important to smoke marijuana, use foul language and learn to dance 
than to learn to read and become expert mathematicians. It turns Black 
people into "clowns," rather than into true nation-builders. It shapes many 
Blacks, who could give maximwn service to Black people, into persons 
whose major concern is the accwnulation of money and material posses­
sions. It makes men care more about wearing "Superfly" clothes than 
about learning to be excellent fathers and guides to their offspring, 
especially their sons. It makes Black people see themselves as sex 
machines rather than builders of a higher humanity. 
This social process of destructive distortion is achieved through the 
imposition, from birth todeath,ofastressful, negative and non-supportive 
social/environmental experience upon the people who are to be in­
teriorized. The negative and stressful social experience, which is struc­
tured to affect every aspect of life activity, leads to the development of a 
negative self-concept, a loss of self-respect and the development of self­
and group-destructive behavioral patterns. Some of these negative be­
havioral patterns rampant among Black people today include showing off. 
material possessions, gossiping about one-another, name-calling, cursing, 
squabbling, snitching and being discourteous and disrespectful to one . 
another. When these behaviors are directed toward people who are a 
reflection of self (i.e., Black people towards other Black people), they 
indicate self -dislike and self -dissatisfaction. The high rates of Black male . 
242 
Black Children 
homicide and suicide are extreme, but all-too-common examples of this 
phenomenon. Black people using drugs and selling them to one another 
is another example of the same homicide and suicide pattern. 
All of these patterns of self-and group-negating behavior, in addition 
to many others, become the invisible chains and shackles around the necks 
and ankles of the Black oppressed, holding all of us in a continuously 
destructive enslavement. With full justification, we can call all of these 
behaviors mental illness since they imply self- and group-destruction. 
These behaviors prevent group unity and efficient group effort. When 
parents, teachers and other adults practice these behaviors towards one 
another, they teach children how to practice them also. Black children 
learn that Black people do not respect each other, which also means Black 
people do not and should not respect themselves. The children, in turn, 
will teach those of following generations how to disrespect themselves 
and each other - thus, how to remain oppressed. 
Inferiorization is essential to the process of oppression. It ensures that 
the oppressors need not be troubled to hold the oppressed constant! y under 
gun and key to keep them in the oppressed state; it keeps the oppressed 
from effectively challenging the oppressive process and system. In this 
way, the oppressors mold the oppressed to share fully in the process of 
their own oppression. In the final analysis, the process of inferiorization 
is designed specifically to prevent the maximal development of the 
genetic potential of the non-white oppressed. Black people must learn 
that no system of oppression ever maximally develops those whom the 
system is specifically structured to dominate. Such a system only permits 
the oppressed to survive so that they can continue being oppressed. No 
system of oppression is structured consciously to destroy itself. The 
maximal development of all Black people would prove false the ideology 
of white superiority. Thus, if Black children and Black people as a whole 
are ever to be developed fully, Black people themselves will have to enact 
that development. Sufficient data and evidence are in: after 127 years of 
so-called emancipation, the white collective has demonstrated that it does 
not intend to develop Black children maximally. Still, whites are talking 
about Black children and Black people as being genetically inferior to 
243


--- PAGE 138 ---
The Isis Papers 
themselves, and they are developing extensive social policies based solely 
upon such a pattern of reasoning and logic. 
Instead of developing behavior patterns for further useless protest, 
Black people should be cultivating patterns of self-help for self-develop­
ment. Since the Black family setting is the first social institution under the 
racist system in which the Black child begins to experience inferiorization, 
it is of key importance that all Black people begin to understand I) the 
true function of family life, 2) how some of the most important aspects of 
inferiorization can occur there and 3) that the Black family is the one social 
institution over which we as Black people can begin to exercise some 
control. Control of the Black family will be evident once we gain some 
mastery over our individual lives. We will learn that dysfunctional 
behaviors can be changed through theexerciseofwillpower. Thus, within 
the family setting, Black people can begin to alter the inferiorization 
dynamic and create a process for the maximal development of Black 
children. 
The functional family unit is composed of the father, mother and 
offspring. The ultimate role of this vital social unit is to instruct the 
children as to how adult males and females function, usually and har­
moniously together for the maximal development of a people. Individual 
family units are but cellular units of a whole organism called a people or 
a nation. All of the units must function efficiently and effectively if the 
whole organism is to live a healthy existence. If a family unit cannot 
instruct the young in harmonious patterns of relating between adult males 
and females, then ultimately the people will perish because adult male and 
female alienation eventually leads to the end of the procreative process. 
Without the young, the people will have no future. 
The process of instructing the young in harmonious, mutually respect~ . 
ful patterns of relating as well as in appropriate and constructive patterns 
of functioning is called socialization-the molding of their behavior for 
maximal development and functioning in a given environmental setting .. 
The father's major task in relationship to the children is to teach adult 
male role-functioning through daily example, with love and kindness 
expressed towards the children - love and kindness being essential to 
244 
Black Children 
efficient learning. The adult male's major responsibility is "breadwin­
ning" and protection of the family unit and the total people. The mother's 
major task in relationship to the children is to teach adult female role­
functioning through daily example, love and kindness. The adult female's 
major responsibility is child socialization and care of the home. These 
divisions of labor are fundamental and necessary for efficient and effec­
tive family functioning under hostile social/environmental conditions, 
and racism is a hostile and aggressive social environment. 
Today there is much yelling and screaming about such role-functioning 
priorities, mostly by white women. However, we as Black people cannot 
allow whites to continue to set our priorities. If we ignore these necessities 
as Blacks, we will do so at our peril. And it serves well to remember that 
the intellectual performance of white children is directly proportional to 
the time their mothers have spent with them in socialization during the 
frrst five years of life, while white fathers play the role of primary family 
"breadwinners" and family and group protectors. White power has been 
predicated upon white male aggression and "breadwinning" activity, 
while white females take care of fundamental home and family-life 
responsibilities. 
Nature has endowed men with the greater muscle mass, which makes 
maJes more efficient and effective aggressors and protectors of people, 
just as females are more effective and efficient at giving birth and nursing 
the young. In the framework of any hostile and aggressive external 
environment, such as oppression, the most important family unit member 
is the one to whom nature has given the greatest muscle mass to ward off 
external physical attack, should that ever be necessary. The racist social 
system has understood that the most potent method for oppressing and 
inferiorizing a people is to attack the family unit structure, thereby 
decreasing its ability to function as a fundamental unit for developing and 
socializing the young. If there is deficient socialization, the behavior of 
the young will be chaotic and disorganized with dependent, weak and 
immature personality structure. This can be accomplished best through 
attacking and weakening the family unit's primary support and ultimate 
defense - the adult male. Females can be controlled by male oppressors 
245


--- PAGE 139 ---
The Isis Papers 
once the males of the oppressed group are weakened and/or destroyed. 
This is troe no matter how many college degrees the females may have; 
no matter how tough, loud or coarse their language may become; no matter 
how "strong" they may appear. In the final analysis, females must depend 
on the physical strength, discipline and willpower of their men for ultimate 
proteCtion. Thus, always the males represent the major potential threat 
and challenge to male oppressors. 
The system of racism in the U.S. specifically has labeled its number 
one target of attack as the Black male. The Black male is n~t only to be 
intimidated and oftentimes physically destroyed, but more Importantly. 
he must be destroyed functionally through the negation of his major 
breadwinning activity for the Black family. When men are not permitt~ 
to become the major breadwinners and troe functional protectors for their 
families, a major imbalance is created between the importance of the adult 
Black male and adult Black female roles. Likewise, the importance of 
male functioning is discredited and thus subtly disrespected. As a result, 
chaos and disorganization befalls family-life, leaving the family as .a 
dysfunctional "survival-unit," where mothers are forced to engage m 
full-time bread winning and protector activities and are not free to perform 
their major tasks of child-care and socialization. 
The subsequent imbalance produced between the money power and 
the pseudo-social (and family) power of the Black female, when com­
pared to the Black male, eventually leads to ~ienation be~ween the two 
of them. This alienation, followed by separauon and/or divorce, causes 
the imbalance that leads to the now epidemic Black social-pathologic 
· syndrome: the so-called strong Black female and weak Black male. The 
fundamental cause of the syndrome is the white supremacy power system. 
Also, this system leads to the "Black male womanizing syndrome," 
wherein Black males seek to compensate for a lost sense of manhood by 
attempting to prove they are still men via the number of women they can.··· 
seduce and conquer. But this syndrome only heightens the au•~""'"'V"'·~ 
between the Black male and female, and it fails to convince the male 
his manhood. 
246 
Black Children 
Increasingly, Black females are being left alone to rear the children. 
They, along with the myth of the so-called "strong Black female" are 
crumbling under this impossible burden. Nonetheless, the survival~units 
bec~~e dominated by adult female presence and all of the children are 
femm~ed, mal.es and females alike. Even when there is no physical 
separation or divorce (because the racist social system never attacks the 
Black female with the same ferocity as it does the Black male), a relative 
Black male passivity is produced, leaving an overall tone of greater female 
power than male power amongst Black people. 
This analysis should not be viewed as a condemnation of the Black 
male or the Black female. It is only a description of the intent of the 
op~essive system of racism. Most profoundly affected are Black 
children who grow up in this system, especially Black male children 
Black male children systematically are deprived of stong male model~ 
throu~h whom they can develop pride, useful self- and group-supporting 
behaVIoral patterns, and true respect for the Black adult male position. 
Lar.ge numbers of young Black male children can tell you that it is far 
easier and more rewarding to be a Black female than a Black male. (See 
Chapter6.) 
The racist social system can survive only if Black manhood is 
destroyed. It steadily has removed strong Black male images, such as 
. those presented by Malcolm X and Martin Luther King, Jr. Initially, it 
replaced those powerful, progressive and constructive images with the 
powerful television and movie images of "Geraldine" and "Superfl " 
The racist media then followed with the message to Blacks that it is "goy .d 
( " 0 . 1mes to see a pathetic Black adult male who never can seem to find a 
d~e~t paying .job and a teenage Black male son who is a clown and a 
~nmmal s~oplifter who never studies, but who now has an intense interest 
· m academic subjects. Innumerable like-examples followed. These weak 
male media images persist into the present. We return to the "pitiful 
. . of real life to face the fact that the average college-trained Black 
.female has a salary scale only $300 lower than her white college-trained 
. . whereas the Black male college graduate earns $3,000 less 
the white male high school graduate. 
247


--- PAGE 140 ---
The Isis Papers 
All of these factors are responsible for the now epidemic proportions 
of Black male passivity, effeminacy, transvestism, bisexuality and 
homosexuality (see Chapter 6), the root cause of which is the racist 
system's necessity to stamp out Black manhood through distorting the 
dynamics of Black family life. Black people should not view these 
patterns of behavior as isolated criminal o~ .immoral acts. ~ey must be 
recognized as the by-product of social/poliucal warfare agamst the max­
imal development of Black people as a whole. 
Black people can begin to halt the process of Black inferiorization if 
the now dysfunctional female-dominated survival-Wlits can be turned into 
true family units. A balance must be established between the adult male 
role ofbreadwinning and the female role of child socialization, with equal 
respect maintained for both roles. This cannot be accomplis~ed by m.ales 
attempting to force females to walk seven paces behind. Neither can it be 
achieved by males forcing females into silent submission. It can be 
achieved by Black males refusing to remain content with less than 
adequate breadwinning roles. Thus, all Black males will have to refuse 
being passive, dependent and female-supported to any degree. They will 
have to demand from the oppressor, and will to achieve, the right to be 
equal breadwinners with white males before white or Black females. are 
given equal breadwinner roles with white male~. There mu~t. begm a 
Black men's liberation movement for salary and JOb opportumues equal 
in all respects with that of white males. As a collective, Black males must 
realize that they have been fooled into believing that white females are 
their most loving allies. While white females are luring Black men into 
bed and to the altar, the white female collective is depriving Black men 
(through the white female's liberation movement) of their opportunity 
function fully as breadwinners and not just as "sex-machines." 
Black females must begin to struggle to achieve the "'•""",.tnnlTli>~c 
enjoyed by white females - to stay home while being adequately 
ported by their husbands, to proyide adequate socialization and 
care and attention to the children. Black females must not be fooled 
believing that a women's liberation movement is their salvation. 
must cease believing in the myth of the "strong Black female" who 
248 
Black Children 
capable of doing everything (breadwinning and socializing) all alone. 
Black females must understand that we always will be oppressed, as will 
our sons and daughters, unless Black men are liberated to defend them-
~elves, Black females and Black children from any and all attacks and msults. 
When these fundamental issues are placed in perspective, when Black 
men and women are struggling together for these objectives that have 
ev~rything.to do with the development of Black family-life, Black male 
children Will be able to grow up respecting themselves as future men. 
Thus, ~ey will recognize the pwpose of disciplined study to achieve 
academlCally, and they will cease desiring to be females. Black female 
children will grow up respecting themselves as future women supported, 
protected and respected by their own men, and they will learn to respect 
Black men as men. Focusing on these external common objectives, Black 
m~n and women will be freed from the present destructive competition 
Wtth one another and will, instead, learn to work as a team in order to 
compete successfully with their common oppressors for the maximal 
development of themselves and their children. 
. ~u~, B~ack people must not only commit themselves to combating 
mfenonzauon through the struggle for maximal development, we must, 
as ~ pan of that struggle, begin to establish standards of academic 
achievement and codes of behavioral conduct for Black children. These 
standards and codes will serve as the fundamental basis for developing 
Bla~k self- and group-respect. Without true self-respect, all efforts for 
achievement will be in vain. In keeping with that goal, all Black children, 
before the age of six, should be taught the following fundamental exer­
cises in Black self-respect by Black adult examples in the home school 
. church and neighborhood: ' ' 
Stop name-calling one another. 
Stop cursing at one another. 
Stop squabbling with one another. 
Stop gossiping about one another. 
Stop snitching on one another. 
249


--- PAGE 141 ---
The Isis Papers 
6. Stop being discourteOUS and disJeSpeCtful towards 
one another. 
7. Stop robbing one another. 
8. Stop stealing from one another. 
9. Stop fighting one another. 
10. Stop killing one another. 
11. Stop using and selling drugs to one another. 
12. Stop throwing traSh and dirt on the streets and in 
places where Black people live, work and learn. 
With this behavioral foundation in self-respect, Black children would 
be taught that academic achievement is the highest priority. Each neigh­
borhood should give annual awards for the children in each age group, 
based upon public performance in reading and math achievement. This 
would indicate to Black children that knowledge and information are the 
important bases of power, along with self -respect. 
Additionally, by age six, Black children must learn that Black people, 
as a nation, do notlook highly upon young people fathering and mothering 
Black children before they achieve emotional maturity and are capable of 
completely caring for the new Black life. Making a baby should no longer 
remain the criteria of Black manhood or womanhood .. Black manhood 
and womanhood should be determined solely on the basis of one's ability 
to be self-supporting and to function effectively under the pressures of 
white supremacy; These objectives are only a beginning, but they can be achieved if every 
Black adult views himself/herself as one of the many parents of all Black 
children. These parents must assume responsibility for the maximal 
development of each and every Black child. That responsibility can be 
expressed in as simple a manner as never displaying to any Black child 
any form of self-or group-negating ~havior. In effect, this practice will 
teach the child the most important lesson of all: that Black people respect 
themselves. 
250 
21 
Racism·and Black Child and Youth 
Inferiorization 
(July 1987) 
As we approach the 21st century, it is essential that Black physicians 
-scientists, researchers, clinicians, pediatricians and child psychiatrists­
understand exactly what is happening to the behavioral, emotional and 
physical health of Black people, specifically of Black infants, children 
and youth. We must know precisely where we are going and what we 
must do. Now, more than ever before, we need to apply a systematic 
understanding to our work in helping to solve the multitude of health 
problems (physical, emotional and behavioral) impacting Black infants, 
children, youth, parents and, thereby, families. By developing such a 
systematic approach in our perception of the seemingly myriad problems, 
it is possible to focus more effectively on what must be done to move 
towards problem solution, what must be done by ourselves as members 
of the healing profession, and what must be done by Black people to 
establish a level of health and total functioning (for the Black collective) 
that is second to none on this planet. 
It is now 1987. It is impossible to pick up a newspaper in the United 
States without seeing one or more articles and references addressing the 
ever-worsening plight of Black people across the entire age spectrum. 
There are seemingly non-reducible levels of infant mortality and mor­
bidity. There are Black infants being born with AIDS to parents who are 
:!rug-addicted and who have AIDS. There are massive numbers of Black 
;infant~; being born to children (teenagers and pre-teens) who never will 
251


--- PAGE 142 ---
The Isis Papers 
be able to parent them effectively. The same infants and children will 
experience physical, social and psychological neglect. These children 
will experience physical and sexual abuse. They will experience being 
inadequately housed, clothed and fed. They will experience abandonment 
to welfare systems and foster homes. They subsequently will experience 
failw-e to achieve academically, and then fail to perfonn adequately on 
scholastic achievement tests. Because of their frustration from being 
stressed and inadequately cared for, they will fail to attend school. 
Eventually they will drop out of school. Many Black children and youth 
will become involved with drugs- either to medicate often unrecognized 
major depression, or to sell drugs to solve their own or their family's 
financial difficulties. Perhaps both. The drugs will be used to suspend 
briefly a grinding sense of hopelessness and doom. Then addiction sets 
in. Other Black children and youth will become obsessed with sexual 
activity to compensate for a profound sense of unmet dependency needs 
that immature and overwhelmed parents could not and cannot address. 
The outcome from this will be AIDS, other venereal diseases, male and 
female prostitution and another generation of teenage pregnancy and 
inadequate parenting. The destroyed sense of self, the negative self­
image and self-concept that derive from these overwhelming and stressful 
circumstances lead these children and youth (who have been baby-sat by 
the television set), to conclude that it is acceptable to use drugs and to sell 
drugs to one another. And, in ever-increasing numbers, Black children 
and youth are concluding that it is perfectly alright to shoot and kill one 
another when drug deals go badly, or to kill one another for an expensive 
pair of shoes or sunglasses, designer sweat suits, leather gold chains or 
clothing. Both these activities lead to their certain incarceration. 
By now, every thinking Black person is familiar with these all-too­
common reports and their accompanying statistics. However, scientists 
and clinicians, as opposed to mere technicians, should not simply gather 
statistical data. The statistical data must be examined, understood and 
interpreted in depth, then placed in proper perspective. Such a process . 
allows for the problems that are reflected in the statistical data to be solved ·. 
and prevented from occurring in the future. 
252 
Racism and Black Child I nferiorization 
Generally, it is assumed that a society or soc· l 
support the development of all of .ts . f: ~ power system seeks to 1 m ants, children and th Th. . a totally erroneous assumpti' . . you . 1s IS on m a SOCial pow . for the purpose of h. . er system bmlt upon racism w Ite genetic survival. Th . . even when the white s e assumption IS erroneous 
Thus far Black 1 uphremacy system is highly refmed and masked 
' peop e ave failed to decoct f1 • 
established to maintam' wh't . e Ully the power system I e genetic survival And that we have failed to d . · • to the same extent un erstand white ge ti . supremacy we have r:·~aed t ne c survtval or white 
' I:Ul o control the sym to th . destructive power dynamic h' h . . . P ms at anse from this , w IC IS positioned . th . development of Black geneti d . . agamst e maxunal In . c an constitutional potential 
. a SOCial power system established fi . . . 
chtldren classified as non- h't (bl or white genetic survival, 
. 
. . w I e ack, brown red and 11 ) mfenonzedsystematically so thatth '11 ' ye ow are 
and susceptible to control throughoeuyt Wthl. becl' omeandremaindependent 
Erik err tves In the te · 1 H. Erikson, author of Childhood d S . . rmmo ogy of 
environment supports the de I . ~ an . OClety, when the social ve opmg 1etus mfant hild . adult existence, the child. s s ch . ' ' c and youth mto 
the following eight stages: PI~ b o~soctal development advances through 
industry, 5) identity 6) t'nu· a7st)c trust, 2) autonomy, 3) initiative, 4) 
' macy, genemtivity d fi 
However, each one of these eight sta es . 'an mal~y, 8? integrity. 
society fails to support the child g ~ Its counterpart m failure when 
systematically Inste d th . system subjects the infant child d · a • e socrnl power 
stress. Instead of basic m:st th an. y~uth to ~n overwhelming degree of 
. . ' ere ts mtstrust; mstead of au ton 1s shame and doubt· instead of . . . . omy, there 
cannot" "I ' . mttlative, there is guilt (the sense of "I versus can"); mstead of industry th . . . . gy); instead of ·d · . • ere Is mfenonty (or lethar-
• 1 entity • there ts role confusion· · d . . 
IS isolation; instead of generat' 't the . , mstea ofmtimacy, there 
tegrity, there is despair. lVI y, re IS stagnation; instead of in-
This process of failed psycho- . 1 d . 
by all levels of envrr· tal SOCia evelopment, whtch is brought on onmen stress that oc d . domination and impact Bla k 1 cur un er white supremacy c peop e most heavily fi . hers of Black infants hildre . ' orces massive num-' c n and youth mto th d · events that I have referred to th e estructtve chain of 
as e process of inferiorization: mistrust, 
253


--- PAGE 143 ---
The Isis Papers 
shame and doubt, guilt, inferiority, role confusion, isolation, stagnation 
and. fmally, despair. Thus, while large numbers of white infants, children 
and youth receiving societal and environmental support progress through 
the eight stages of psycho-social development, their Black counterparts. 
the recipients of high level environmental stress, progress through the 
stages offailed psycho-social development, or inferiorization. It is within 
this schema that the deteriorating picture of Black life (from infancy to 
adult age) must be understood. This is not the accidental development of 
an underclass. This is planned inferiorization for the purpose of white 
genetic survival. Most important, clinicians caring for Black infants, 
children, youth and their families must understand that this destructive 
dynamic is historicallY and solidly situated, and it is on-going. 
However, it is not possible to comprehend the process of inferiorization 
of Black youth and the seriously compromised functioning of the Black 
adult without a specific understanding of racism as the struggle for genetic 
survival on the part of the genetically recessive global white minority 
population that currently controls power in the world. Because few 
Blacks or other non-whites understand racism at this level, they fail to 
understand white supremacy as actual systematic warfare being con­
ducted by people who classify themselves as "white," against people 
whom whites classify as "non-whites." 
Few Blacks or other non-white people are aware that white people are 
conducting major discussions on the white birthrate. Few Blacks or other 
non-white people are aware that white scholarS and experts are discussing 
the projection that by the year 2073, whites will represent fewer than 3% 
of the people on the planet. Few Blacks or other non-white people are 
aware that white experts are projecting that within six to nine generations, 
non-white people will represent the majority of people in U.S. Few 
Blacks or other non-white people are aware that these white experts are 
concluding that they will be left in a state of peril if these facts are ignored. 
The war for white genetic survival is conducted simultaneously on nine 
battle fronts: economics, education, entertainment, labor, law, politics, 
religion, sex and (militarY) war. The war is conducted through all forms 
of behavior. In addition, within each of these areas of activity there have 
254 
Racism and Black Child lnferiorization 
evolved myriad institutions . supremacy. , all of which further the goal of white 
Because Blacks and other non-white I . racism as white . . peop e have faded to understand 
geneuc survival the could be integrated · to th .' y erroneously have believed that they 
m e white supremac depend upon whites to maximall de Y syste~ and that they could 
youth in the same mann thaty velop BJack infants, children and 
er white peop1 
development of white inf ts h" e promote the maximal an ' c ildren and youth Bla 
non-whites have failed to unders . . · cks and other 
it would mean active whi"te "",..; ~. tha~ if white people were to do this, _ ... cipaUon m white · 
must master this perception of racism genocide. Black people 
genetic survival, a system into whic(local and ~Iobal) as a war for white 
integrated. h non-white people never can be 
Under the stress of white su re possibility of adequately meet! r;;;cy, numerous offspring prevent the 
each child crowds out the oppon!u etineeds o~ each individual child, as 
Th
. ty or emotional nurture f th th 
IS crowding prevents high l I . o e o ers. taking place Th" . eve psycho-social development from 
• lS promotion and insuran . 
development is the process of inferio . . ce ~f ~ailed psycho-social 
ensures local and global wh'te ~on, which m tum promotes and 
1 genetic survival 
What then is to be done? What sho - . tactics do Blacks need to empl . d rt and long-range strategies and 
supremacy thrust for whi' te oy ~ o~ e~ to neutralize the ongoing white geneuc survival whi h · . Black infant, child and th inti . . . • c IS achieved through . . you enonzauon? As · · .al 
~s Important question, all Black le . an Iruti ~sponse to 
mtegration and face the diffi 1 ~p must abandon the Illusion of . ICU t reality that Bl Ignore: you do not win a ches if most ack people prefer to 
exact objective and rules ofth s game . ~ou have no knowledge of the e game. It IS 1mperati tha al 
understand they are not in a beni n en . ve t IBlackpeople 
support, and that the surro din h. g VITOnment of benevolence and 
a very specific warfare is:in g Ighlystru:turedenvironmentisdeadly; 
classified as non-white in this !:ged against Blacks and other people 
that the specific war is raciS· fi th system. Further, all must understand m or e purpose f h' . by any and all 0 w Ite genetic survival-necessary means . 1 . ' me usive of chemical and biological 
255


--- PAGE 144 ---
The Isis Papers 
warfare. (Chemical warfare is designer drugs, such as crack and PCP. 
Biological warfare entails the production of cultural and ethnic organisms 
in viruses such as AIDS.) 
Additionally, Black people must recognize the following points: 
1) The war of white genetic survival achieves a major effect through 
inferiorization or failed psycho-social development,creating dependency, 
negative self-image, negative self-concept and vulnerability. 
2) The war of white genetic survival attacks the functioning of Blacks in 
general, but most specifically attacks the Black male, as it is the Black 
male who most specifically threatens white genetic survival at a level the 
Black female is unable to approach. 
3) Blacks must learn to counter the thrust of white supremacy and Black 
inferiorization effectively. 
4) Blacks must discuss openly those means by which Black male infants, 
children and youth can be supported and developed maximally in order 
to counter the attack of white supremacy on Black male development and 
functioning. 
5) Black male infants, children and youth need their fathers constantly 
present to support the behavior and identity of Black male children. And, 
beCause of the historic removal of Black fathers from homes, classes are 
needed to promote high-level functioning of Black males in their roles as 
fathers. 
6) The white supremacy attack upon the Black male causes a collapse of 
Black family life and a distortion in the role of the Black female. This, in 
tum, causes a distortion and collapse of the support system for Black 
infants, children and youth, thereby beginning the process of inferioriza-
tion. 
256 
Racism and Black Child lnferiorization 
7) Blacks must think about and o n1 . people to stop racism (because wh: y disco~, not how to beg white 
efforts for white genetic . al) ~pie will have to continue their surviv , but Instead h B organize their own beha · . • ow lack people can v1oron an ongomg b · . white supremacy and its . asts, specifically to neutralize unpact on the development of Black offs . pong. 
8) It is futile to beg white people to . 
maximal development of Black five grants ~d funds to foster the 
to commit white genocide. peop e. To do so IS to ask white people 
9) Blacks must be able to disc . inferiorization in whites' struu glss ~penl~ the logical necessity for Black g e 1 or white genetic survival. 
10) The singing of "We Shall Overcom " . supremacy or Black infe . . . e will not combat white nonzabon any more than . . 
help to solve a problem in medi . . smgmg any song will cme or physics. 
11) Immature and overwhelmed fathers an 
psycho-social development and counter Bl d ~o~e~ ~nn~t promote generation. ack mfenonzabon m the next 
~2) Single female teenagers cannot romo . m male or female offs . p te psycho-socml development pnng. And, most certainl th 
~ale offspring. They only can re are y, e~ cannot develop 
hves in penal institutions hilp p these male offspnng to spend their • w e preparing th · teenage mothers. err own daughters to become 
13) No Black female should beco Black male should become a fath me :e mother before 30 years of age. No 
. family should have no more thane:Wo f~~~ 35 years of age. Each Black 
three years apart. And both dren, no closer together than 
. . • Black males and fi 1 mmunum, complete high sch 1 d ema es should, at a 
marriage and parenthood Thoo an become fully self-sufficient before 
. ese structures are specifically for the pur-
257


--- PAGE 145 ---
The Isis Papers 
. . . d failed psycho-. e thruSt of Black infenonzauon an 
pose of countenng th th ditions of white supremacy. 
social development, under e con 
collective Black genetic and constitu-
14) Maximal development of the th fforts of Black people alone-
. al otential will take place by e e . uon P d tanding and behaviOr. through their knowledge, un ers 
Black person in the healing 
It is my hope that eventually d:ve~f the etiologic chain that leads 
profession will master an understan m~t learly would be to the benefit . . . Furthermore, 1 c to Black infenonzauon. . ls . their efforts of healing, pass on 
of Black people if Black professi~na , m bl' the patients to neutralize · Bla k pauents- ena mg this knowledge to theu c . l' s and achieve a development . emacy on therr tve the impact of white supr . . al potential, second to none. 
of their Black genetic and consutuuon 
258 
22 
Black Child-Parents: 
The New Factor in Black Genocide 
The levels of collective self-consciousness and self-respect that a 
people carry can be determined accurately by the standard of care and 
development it demands for all of its young- the future of the people. It 
is virtually impossible, in the final quarter of the 20th century, for 99.9% 
of Black teenage male and female persons to raise children who will be 
emotionally strong, stable and capable of functioning effectively under 
the stress of a racist society. The very dynamic that produces the 
pathological situation wherein children attempt to have and rear children 
is designed to ensure Black functional inferiority. Yet, 25% of all Black 
children born today in the U.S. are born to Black teenagers. This means 
that, at the very least, 25% of all Black children will suffer in terms of 
their development and will be impaired in their potential to function 
effectively under the stress of racism. I refer to the failure to ensure the 
maximal development of the genetic potential of all Black children, as 
well as the ultimate waste of this genetic potential, as Black genocide. 
During the American slave era, Black teenage females were forced to 
breed baby after baby and were prevented from actively caring for the 
development of these slave babies. There was no concern for these human 
beings reaching maximal levels of their genetic potential. This lack of 
concern for the development of these young human beings was enforced 
by racist slavemasters and slavemistresses. Today, just as in the slave 
society, Black teenage girls are caught up in a similar destructive dynamic: 
producing human beings who subsequently are subjected to low-level 
. development and treated in inhuman ways. 
259


--- PAGE 146 ---
The Isis Papers 
. s stem beComes, the higher the level of 
The more complex a social y . needed to negotiate that system . · d formal education emononal matunty an . mate level of functioning reached by children 
successfully. Often, the ulu . a1 turity achieved by the parent(s) 
is correlated ":"ith the level ?f er:~~:f :;otionally immature and poorly 
prior to the birth of the child. h ' ore likely to fail than children · children w o are m educat~ parents rruse ell-educated parents. Although income is an 
of ernouonally ma.~e and w. rtant factor than emotional maturity in 
important factor, It IS a less Impo. h't child living under 
successfully rearing a child- particularly a non-w I e 
the conditions of white supremacy· d by Black teenagers . hvebeenmaetome 
Th~ followmdg chaomm::amae parents or are contemplating becoming 
who either alrea Y ve 
parents: , wn " 
1) "Dr. Welsing, I'm sixteen, I know I m gro . 's onna take my 
2) "Dr. Welsing, I'm gonna have my baby. No~dy !ab I'm not 
b f e I'm not going to let those doctors kill my Y. bayromm. 
gonn3)a'~Drave;~~:~grti:;~f my friends have babies; I wan~ something of 
· ' · I'm gomg to love my my own too. I'm not going to have an abortiOn. 
baby." . b b 's gonna love me. I want somebody to love 4) "Dr Welsmg, my a Y M 
M ~other and father don't love me. Nobody loves m~. "y 
me. Y , kn hat they are domg. 
ts . li've t"""fwgers they don t ow w paren acr ~ ""' ' b b t" 
" "Dr Welsing, I kriow I can take care of a a y. . ' 
~ "N~, Dr. Welsing, my boyfriend doesn't have an~J?\~ut~:.: 
of me and my baby. He says he can. e s . 
gonna take care t No we dido 't finish school; we don't go to 
nna get us an apartmen · ' , go but we don't go to no classes. 
school anymore. I mean we go, . I wouldn't have no baby 
7) "Dr. Welsing, if I had it to do over agam;, 
1 · didn't know no better. when I'm young. JUSt . ' e I thought he wanted the 
8) "Dr. Welsing, my boyfnend, he s gon . 
baby too." 
260 
Black Child-Parents 
9) "Dr. Welsing, l'm19 . My boyfriend, he's 19. He gets mad at my 
baby- it's our baby- when he cries. He hit the baby one time. Some­
times I feel like hitting the baby, too." 
10) "Dr. Welsing, I just didn't know how to be no father. I never had 
my own father at home." 
11) "Dr. Welsing, my girlfriend can take care of that baby by herself 
with the welfare." 
12) "Dr. Welsing, my mother had me when she was fifteen. I don't 
see why she's telling me I don't want my baby_ I don't see why I can't 
do what she did." 
All of the above statements have been made by teenage children. These 
are not unusual statements. Teachers, social workers, doctors and coun­
selors working with young people have heard similar comments as they 
talk to Black teenagers in the U.S., where the incidence of Black children 
parenting children has reached epidemic proportions. 
Elaborate programs are being established to counsel teenage parents 
(especially teenage mothers); special education and prenatal, obstetric and 
gynecological programs are being established to assist the child-mothers; 
classes on nutrition are being organized; courses on sex, anatomy and 
physiology are given. And, while all this is happening, no one is raising 
the most critical question: "Can Black children (teenagers) be effective 
mothers and fatt'iers i:o persons who must function in a highly complex, 
technological society that is extremely racist and oppressive to Black and 
other non-white peoples?" Another critical question that has not been 
answered is: "Why are so many teenage children engaging in this high 
degree of sexual activity and producing children f()r whom they are unable 
to provide sufficient care?'' Is there an underlying social dynamic that is 
forcing on children this pattern of destructive behavior that borders on 
homicide-most certainly, emotional and psychological homicide? If so, 
what is it? What are the implications for future generations if this pattern 
of behavior continues? Are we prepared to reap the whirlwind? 
In my clinical view, having functioned as a psychiatrist for adults and 
children for the past decade, I have found that there is an absolute 
261


--- PAGE 147 ---
The Isis Papers 
. . ·ve of the extent to which these The following stausucs are reflecu be of Blacks. 
. amongst large num rs limited definitions are operauve half of the out-of-wedlock children 
Teenage mothers account:.or a_bo~~76 Approximately 25% of all Black 
born to both Blacks and w ttes m the. Virtually all unwed teenage be. born to teenage mo rs. 
children are mg . . Twen -five percent of teenage mothers 
mothers (93%) k~p ~e~ babtes. after th~ir first baby and 15% within the 
get pregnant a gam Wltinn a year . . demns many girls to a life of This tendency of repeuuon con 
second year. . lf In all too many cases, teenage educauon and we are. 
poverty, poor . . hool and they fmd it more difficult to get 
mothers do not fimsh htgh sc d' d to lives of poverty and stress. 
jobs. Their children also are :::::~ny serious complications. Large 
Teenage motherhood P and i norant of medical needs. 
numbers of these teenage mothers are~ edicalgcare or nutrition. Those 
They do not receive adequate prenata m th s are not physically fully . 1 who become mo er girls in therr ear Y teens bl to bear the physical strains of th £ e they are less a e developed and, ere or ' fi from the Department of . Accordirlg to recent tgures 
havmg a baby. thers have higher death rates, · d Welfare, teenagemo . Health, Educauon an . h hage and lower-weight bab1es . ore toxemia, more emorr 
more anemm, m . AI th babies of teenage mothers are 
than women in their twe~ues.. ~·£ ~ than those of women irl their 
more likely to be born With buth ebeec . ed l·n the context of what is tat' sties must vtew twenties. The above s_ I . 've of the age of their mothers. For 
happening to Black children rrrespecu . bo . the U.S. during 
th n half of the Black children rn m example, more a ding to a new report by the · ed women accor 1976 were born to unmarn . . ' ears a 
0 
26% of all Black 
National Center for Healtll Statistics. Just 13 YToda g ~OCR of all Black 
arried women. Y • 0 
children were born_~ unm compared to about 12% for 
children live in families headed by w<Jme:,r Blacks was 30%. Female-
white children. Six years ago, the figure o . the U S 
bee the new poverty group m · · headed households now have orne . e benefits from Aid to 
Almost 33% of all Black children now recelV 
·li ·m Dependent Children. 
1 Famt es Wl . of the roblem facing Black peop e 
Another indicator of the magmtude o· ~ t of Columbia has a higher is reflected irl the facts that follow. The lStnc 
264 
Black Child-Parents 
percentage of Black citizens than any other major political unit in America 
today. It has a Black mayor and a city council that is predominantly Black. 
It has the highest percentage of educated Black people of any city in the 
world; it has a university that is referred to by some as "the capstone of 
Black education," and it has the major Black medical center and Black 
college of medicirle in the world; it has all of the highest level elected 
Black officials in ali of the U.S. working every day. Yet, this same city 
has the highest rate of infant mortality of any state in the country. Even 
the state of Mississippi has a lower rate of infant mortality. Further, there 
is a wide disparity in Washington, D.C. between Black and white irlfant 
mortality; 27.7 Black babies die for every 1,000 born, while there are 
only 7.5 white infant deaths per 1 ,000 births. This high number of infant 
deaths is not caused by teenage pregnancies alone. However, they do contribute. 
The point of this discussion about teenage parenthood is not to imply 
that teenage people engaging in sexual activity are dirty or immoral or 
that sex is dirty or immoral. This discussion is concerned with questioning 
whether Black children are capable of fully understanding and carrying 
forth effective parenthood. Particularly, are Black children prepared to 
function together as mothers and fathers under the conditions of racism, 
which is exceedingly complex and creates high-level stress for non-white people? 
Greater insight into this question is provided by the following con­
clusions: 1) Examining numerous case histories of current Black teenage 
parents, I have noted one major common denominator- a great percentage 
of the mothers of the current teenage mothers were themselves teenagers 
when their first children were born, just as their own mothers were 
teenagers when they were born. In other words, the prior generations 
consisted of child-parents. Many believe that parenthood, when it occurs 
· in childhood, causes the child-mother to achieve emotional maturity 
rapidly. 2) In actuality, the child-mother's emotional development stops 
progressing when she becomes responsible for another life. It may not 
resume until the child-mother is relieved of all responsibility for parenting 
and can continue her own maturation with the guidance and support of 
265


--- PAGE 148 ---
The Isis Papers 
mature adults outside of the family circle. If this burden is not removed, 
there even may be emotional regression due to the overwhelming sense 
of frustration brought on by the responsibility and stress for which the 
child-parent is unprepared. The child-parent may begin to act more 
immature than she did prior to the delivery. Any level of responsibility 
towards the newborn then becomes too great for the child-parent to 
handle. Some child-parents show a very short period of seeming respon­
sibility towards the newborn child, only to collapse after 6 to 12 months 
of "imposed" responsibility. Many of these child-mothers begin to 
develop resentment, anger and hatred towards their children. The 
children are aware of these negative feelings, although they are unable to 
articulate their experiences of emotional rejection and deprivation. 
The impact of this rejection and deprivation soon is displayed in the 
children's disturbed behavioral patterns, particularly in the school setting, 
where attention and behavioral controls are required. Eating problems, 
extreme temper tantrums, stubbornness, excessive activity and excessive 
crying may manifest before these children reach the age of school atten­
dance. This vicious cycle begins when the mothers, due to their own lack 
of emotional maturity, fail to meet the dependency and emotional 
demands of their newborn children. In 10 to 14 years, the new emotion­
ally starved children begin to act out sexually, attempting to have these 
long-standing dependency needs met via sexual intercourse. If it is a 
female child, very shortly thereafter she becomes pregnant. She blindly 
believes she needs and wants a baby to satisfy her needs. As a result, 
another generation of emotional starvation is set in motion. Another 
generation is prevented from achieving emotional growth and maturity. 
Often, the emotionally starved male child turns to drugs, frequently 
heroin. The penis in the vagina for the female child and the heroin needle 
in the vein of the male child are both symbolic substitutes for the desired 
breast or bottle in the mouth that failed to take place sufficiently in early 
infancy and childhood. When these methods fail, often the young person 
turns to alcohol. Sometimes alcohol is used from the beginning. All of 
these symbolic substitutes for the mother's care are destructive. 
266 
Black Child-Parents 
. Beyond these activities, the child who eventually is abandoned by the 
child-mother becomes convinced that he/she is worthless and not worthy 
of deep "mother-love." The child concludes that something must have 
been wrong with him/her from birth for the mother to have abandoned 
him/her. Either the mother released the baby to the care of relatives, the 
welfare agency, the adoption agency or foster parents. The child is not 
able to understand that the mother was too emotionally immature to 
become a parent The child only recognizes that 1) he/she was given away 
by the mother, 2) the mother could not provide him/her adequate care or 
3) the ~other ph ys~cally abused him/her (or allowed a boyfriend to do so). 
The child summanzes it all as "I must not be worth anything." All the 
substitute care in the world by grandparents and others does not remove 
this wound and deep-seated doubt about the self that remains with the 
child for the length of his/her life, producing a severe distrust of and 
alienation from others. This is one of the major reasons that many persons 
enter psychotherapy as adults, primarily with symptoms of depression 
Childre? m~st enter psychotherapy because of the same problem, but th~ 
depression Is masked by disturbed patterns of behavior. 
The emotional and psychological underdevelopment of an entire 
people can become chronic and permanent once this dynamic effects a 
sufficient pe~entage of the population. As I have previously stated, 25% 
of B~ck children being born in the U.S. are a part of this cycle of 
emotional underdevelopment-the basis for functional inferiority. Blacks 
would be horrified if anyone suggested the outright slaughtering of 25% 
of Black children. Again, Blacks scream genocide when outspoken white 
supremacists suggest sterilization of25% or more of the Black population. 
: et, the aforementioned pattern of child-parenting, presently widespread 
~~ the Bla~k popu~tion, achieves exactly the same results. The only 
difference IS that wtth Black child-parents, the Black child's death is more 
painful and ~awn out- a living death. It is a living death in this highly 
complex SOCtety to be left unable to sit still in school and achieve 
academically because of incorrect socialization. It is a living death for a 
~~ld to be shifted repeatedly from one foster home to another. It is a 
livmg death for a child to walk the streets addicted to drugs or alcohol. It 
267


--- PAGE 149 ---
The Isis Papers 
is a living death to be a school drop-out It is a living death to walk the 
streets as a prostitute. It is a living death to sneak around the street as a 
thief. It is a living death to suffer the depression of unemployment 
because you are uneducated and unskilled. It is a living death for a child 
to be attacked by teachers and others for being "bad," meaning his/her 
behavior is unsocialized. It is a living death for a child to be confined to 
a psychiatric hospital. It is a living death to spend. a lifetime locked. up 
behind the bars of a juvenile detention center or a pnson cell. Depress10n 
that results from not having had sufficient, patient and confident mother­
ing is also a living death. Many of these syndromes of living dea~ l~ad 
to forms of actual death such as suicide, drug overdose and hoffilclde. 
More often than not, these deaths are the direct result of children parenting 
children. 
All of the above are related directly and indirectly to the dynamic of 
white supremacy, which necessitates Black functional inferiority. How­
ever, many of the above patterns of living death can be controlled, 
countered and combated effectively only if the Black community - the 
entire Black collective - is determined to re-program its individual and 
collective knowledge, understanding and behavior toward the total 
elimination of Black child-parents. This re-thinking will increase the 
educational and emotional maturity levels of all Black parents maximally, 
f'mt by elevating the acceptable (meaning, acceptable to Black people) 
chronological age of Black parents for first births. In this way, B~ck 
people consciously can start to neutralize the emotional and psycholog1cal 
basis of Black functional inferiority that can begin as early emotional 
deprivation based on parental emotional immaturity. By solving the 
emotional and psychological basis of Black functional inferiority, we will 
be placing ourselves in the best possible position to solve the socio-~oliti­
cal basis of Black functional inferiority- racism. By flrst consc10usly 
controlling the emotional and psychological basis of functional in­
feriority, Blacks can begin to consciously and scientifically control and 
determine the future of the Black collective. 
All age groups in the Black population must understand that the ~ost 
critical factor in the development of a child is the level of emononal 
268 
Black Child-Parents 
maturity achieved by the parents prior to the year of birth of the first child. 
This level of emotional maturity is proven by tlle parents' mastery over 
the external conditions of racism, as expressed through patterns of be­
havior that are self- and group-supporting in all areas of people activity. 
The levels of emotional maturity of the mother and father, coupled witll 
their levels of functional respect for and cooperation with each oilier 
provides the foundation upon which emotional and psychologic~ 
development occurs in the child. The level of emotional maturity in the 
motller determines the degree of sustained patience witll which she can 
relate to the infant. The level of emotional maturity achieved by the father 
prior to the birth of the child determines tlle level of emotional support he 
is able to give the mother so tllat in tlle fust several years of life she can 
give high-level emotional support and attention to the child. This support 
will allow the mother to meet the child's dependency demands complete­
ly. Also, it is important that the father is capable of exercising patience 
with the child and capable of meeting the child's dependency demands. 
For example, oftentimes a person 14 to 18 years of age has achieved 
only three or fewer years of emotional maturity, particularly in the Black 
population where there have been many child-parents in previous genera­
tions and where many single mothers must leave young children in poor 
~are in order to go to work. In the event that the mother is emotionally 
Immature, she will be incapable of meeting the dependency demands of 
tho nh;l-1 cl·~;larl 'f th c •'- . . 1 . '"" """"· 0 uu y, 1 e 1au1er iS emotional y Immature, he will ex-
perience the child's dependency demands as an irritation and will fmd 
himself competing with the infant child for the mother/wife's attention. 
These two immature parents often place inordinate demands upon one 
another, as each is looking (unconsciously) to the oilier to be the idealized 
mother that he/she never had. These demands cannot be met, and thus 
these two child-persons end up witll extreme frustrations and irritation 
towards one another. Not only were they urutble to provide emotional 
support for one anotller at mature levels, but they were unable to provide 
a basis for the emotional and psychological growtll of the new generation. 
If the parents lack the emotional maturity 11eeded to meet the depend­
ency demands of the new born child throughout its early years of develop-
269


--- PAGE 150 ---
The Isis Papers 
ing. No teacher, no matter how highly motivated, can meet the unmet 
dependency demands of a classroom one quarter full of children who have 
been parented by children. Yet, these dependency demands must be met 
if the children are to pay full attention and learn. 
Further, it is the exceptional child-parent who can help a child with 
his/her homework patiently or encourage that child to be patient while 
he/she learns to read, write or do mathematics. And, it is the rare 
child-parent who is able to sacrifice personal desires in order to attend 
PTA meetings so that teachers and parents can work together in helping 
children to learn. The immature child-parents will find it far easier to get 
lost in the fantasies of television, drugs, alcohol or in the rhythmic beat 
of rock and roll music- the "rock" music being used, I am certain, in the 
attempt to make up for the mother's failure to hold, cuddle and rock the 
child in infancy and childhood. Child-parents, in general, are concerned 
with the normal interest of most children - simply fun and games and 
parties. Also, child-parents who have their own unmet dependency 
needs, often will find themselves too preoccupied with having these needs 
met through constant sexual activity. They are then useless for meeting 
the continuing needs of young children. 
Blacks, as a people, must understand that Black child-parenting under 
the stress of racism is group-destructive behavior, and as such it cannot 
be condoned by the people; it must be controlled. Only older Black 
persons can parent and instruct Black children toward success under the 
stress of racism. In others words, correct behavior for Black people 
attempting to end their oppression under racism is to prevent, by all 
possible means, children from giving birth to, or parenting, chi~dr~n. 
When the Black collective begins to understand that power 1s duectly 
related not to money but to correct behavior pattern organization, behavior 
discipline and behavior control on the part of the individual and the 
collective, the Black collective will be well on its way towards a new level 
of political understanding (power) and maturity. These attempts to ev~lve 
correct patterns of behavior under the specific circumstance of raclSm 
become the tactics and strategies in all areas of life activity to achieve the 
ultimate goal of liberation and justice. 
272 
Black Child-Parents 
It is inc~be~t u~n every Black person to begin to see the long-and 
short-range liDphcanons of all patterns of behavior in which Black in­
dividuals and the collective engage. This recognition is necessary in 
order to evaluate accurately whether the given pattern of conduct aids or 
detracts from the goal of Black liberation. If the behavior detracts from 
the long-range objective, it must be eliminated. If the behavior enhances 
the achievem~nt of ~e. ultimate goal, it must be reinforced among the 
people by theu own mdiVidual willpower. 
The Black collective must fmd ways to surround all Black children and 
young people with sufficient emotional support, warmth, encourage­
ment and consllllctive activity. When this is done, they will not have to 
abuse the act of self-reproduction, and they will mature to the point that 
they eventually will be able to dignify the birth of every Black child and 
lead those children toward full development. If Black people wait for 
grant funds to become available for this to be achieved, all will be lost. 
We should take it upon ourselves to establish a five-year plan for the 
to~ elimination of Black child-parenting, so that by the year 1984 there 
Wlll ~no Black child-parents in the U.S. Simultaneously, we should 
take It upon ourselves as a collective to decrease Black infant mortality 
and Black maternal illness and death drastically. We cannot say that we 
respect ourselves until such fundamental objectives have been achieved 
as they constitute the basis for developing a future for the collective. w: 
~ot state that we have reached maturity as a people until we are ready, 
WI~mg and able to take 100% internal responsibility for achieving our 
articulated goal of libertaion and justice. We cannot teach the children a 
level ~f maturity and responsibility that we, as older persons, have failed to achieve. 
273


--- PAGE 151 ---
23 
The Crisis in Black Male/Black Female 
Relationships: Is it a False Problem? 
(July 1985) 
Disenchantment with the institution of marriage. Disharmony. Dis­
respect. Separation. Divorce. Single female-headed households the 
nonn. The absence of male models for developing Black male children 
and youth. Epidemic levels of teenage pregnancy. Thousands of children 
abandoned to foster care and adoption. Black male bisexuality and 
homosexuality. Black female bisexuality and homosexuality. Increasing 
numbers of Black females with more education and income than their 
Black male counterparts. Hardly any Black persons knowing five happy 
Black couples. 
Given these dynamics as ever-present realities in the Black community, 
it would seem that there is a crisis of immense and serious proportions in 
the Black male/Black female relationship in the final decades of the 20th 
century. This crisis has far-reaching ramifications that touch every aspect 
Black life, extending into facets of the larger social order. During the past 
decade, this apparent problem has been seminared, dialogued, discussed, 
debated, probed and shouted about from every conceivable angle. In­
numerable remedies have been proposed. No matter from what angle this 
issue is approached, the problems don't disappear. Instead, they seem to 
multiply, and the alienation between the Black male and the Black female 
just increases. If Black male/Black female alienation is not resolved, is 
there hope for a meaningful future for the Black race? 
275


--- PAGE 152 ---
The Isis Papers 
Case in point: Already some Blacks are discussing "the relationship 
between the Black male and the white female" or "the Black female and 
the white male." These discussions indicate that alienation has grown to 
the point of Black racial suicide. 
In the title of this chapter, I ask if this dilemma between the Black male 
and the Black female is a "false" problem. Are we, perhaps, focusing on 
the wrong issues in the attempt to end Black male/Black female aliena­
tion? A "false" problem is one that, on the surface, appears to be valid, 
but upon closer scrutiny is only a symptom of the true problem. In the 
present discussion, this means that the discord between Black males and 
Black females and the failure to establish long-lasting harmonious 
relationships are caused by another problem. When the underlying 
dynamic is exposed, analyzed and understood, it is possible to remedy the 
symptom (false problem). Only then can short-term and long-term tactics 
be developed. When the underlying cause is discovered, addressed and 
neutralized, the false problem begins to wither away. If we are successful 
in finding the true cause of the alienation and neutralizing that cause, then 
Black male/Black female alienation will yield to true harmony. 
The largest unified movement presently occurring amongst Black 
people is the demonstrations against "apartheid" in South Africa. Al­
though many people use the word "apartheid" only in reference to South 
Africa, the fundamental meaning of apartheid is white supremacy- white 
rule and domination over Blacks and other non-whites. This very same 
dynamic (with its many variations depending upon the particular 
geographic location) - in its more highly refined forms - exists 
worldwide, wherever and whenever whites have come into contact with 
peoples who possess the genetic potential to produce melanin in their skin; 
Amongst many other horrible things, the system of white minority rule in 
South Africa "legally" enforces prolonged separation of the Black male 
and the Black female, causing fragmentation of Black family life. 
Similarly, under the American slavery system (a phase in the estab­
lishment of the white supremacy dynamic), Black males and Black 
females were forbidden by law to marry and stabilize their relationships. 
276 
Black Male/Black Female Relationships 
!o. further prevent their unity' often Black males and fi 
mtimate were sent to diffi I . emales who became B . d h erent p antattons by their slaveholders 
esi es t e example of South Africa th . 
rule, during the past 125 years ha be. ' e surface appearance of white 
tal • s en altered However th ti dam 
£ dynamic of white supremacy has remained ~touched 'T e ~~1 en-
ew people wish to come to tenns w'th . . ragic y, too 
behavioral phenomenon of h 'te I an m-depth analysis of the global 
of the world's people (non-:hi~) supr~m~~· although the vast majority 
life activity: economics educau· are VICbr~uzed by it in all areas of their 
1. . ' on, entertainment labor la li . re Igion, sex and war. • • w, po tics*, 
Failure to analyze the white su remac d . 
because this dynamic is the fu da p 1 y ynamtc deeply is a tragedy 
between Black males and Blac~ fe:~n: cause of the fail~ relationships 
males and Black females d . . ~tpreventedmarnagesofBiack 
separates the Black male and :n:la:;ncan slavery, and it currently 
year in South Africa Th' . emale for 11 months out of each . IS same whtte suprem d . Nelson and Winnie Mand 1 ti acy ynamic has kept B . e a apart or over 20 years. 
ecause whites fear white genetic 'hila. 
males can initiate sexual . te annt lion, and because only m rcourse forcefully duri Ia males were oppressed more harshl th. • ng s very Black 
Y an Black females Thi greater pressure on the non-white mal . . . . s pattern of 
explains why Black males are victimiz~~~ histone and ~ontinues. This 
arrest and also illuminates wh th . ~~Y by pohce brutality and 
educational system. Because :f the~ are vtctim~ed most harshly by the 
err extreme VICtimizatio · th areas, Black males have the highest levels of n m ese two 
employment, the highest rates f . . unemployment and under-
. 0 pnson mcarceration th h · h . c1dence of school failure d h • e tg est m-
of alcoholism, the highe: ra~~s ':-1 :p-::; rates, th~ h~ghest incidence 
homicide rates the most ra . dl . ~ and addiction, the highest 
' PI Y mcreasmg suicide rate and the shortest 
*Here the word "politics" includes 
male/female relationships are inclu: people ~elatio~ships. Black 
under the heading of sex Oth under thts headmg as well as 
any of the other heading~.. er aspects of these relationships fall under 
277


--- PAGE 153 ---
The Isis Papers 
life span. Also, the Black male most often fmds himself outside of the 
Black family structure in the epidemic condition of homelessness. 
This excessive and disproportionate pressure on the Black male by the 
global white supremacy system produces a grave imbalance between the 
Black male and the Black female, even though both are victimized by 
white supremacy. This imbalance has produced what some incorrectly 
call"the Black matriarchy." However, this is not Black matriarchy, but 
white genetic survival necessity and its fear of the potential for genetic 
annihilation that the Black male represents. 
This conscious and unconscious struggle for white genetic survival by 
the global white collective necessitates certain basic and specific relation­
ship patterns between whites and Black males and whites .and Bla~k 
females in all areas of life activity. An appropriate analogy iS found m 
the game of chess. The white king, the companion whi~ quee~ and al~ of 
the other white pieces on the chess board must move m certatn specifiC 
patterns against the black king, the black queen and all of the other black 
pieces if the white king is to checkmate the black king. That is, of co~, 
the main objective of the game of chess. And in the game of chess, white 
always makes the opening (aggressive) move. . . 
The black king and the black queen must move in tactical and strategic 
harmony with one another if they are to counter the white assault success­
fully and defend their side of the chess board effectively. This harmony 
is particularly crucial if they are to checkmate the white king! . 
If someone with no in-depth knowledge about the game of chess Sits 
down at the chess board to play the black side of the board while an expert 
in the game of chess sits down on the white side of the board, the play~r 
on the black side of the board surely will lose the game. He or she will 
be checkmated repeatedly. The player on the black side simply does not 
understand the game. 
If, however, that same person, who repeatedly has lost all previous 
games, takes it upon himself/herself to sit down and master the game of 
chess (and then to master playing on the black.side of the board), through 
continuous hard work and study, he/she will have an excellent chance of 
278 
Black Male/Black Female Relationships 
being victorious. With consistent and continuous study, he/she can be­
come ~ expert, establishing a pattern of continuous wins and successes. 
It Is much easier for white supremacy to control female-headed 
hous.eholds, wherein Black females must confront a white male­
dO~mated power system alone. Further, these female-headed survival 
unns event~lly p~oduce more passive and effeminized male offspring or 
male offspnng With dysfunctional behavioral patterns, who, in many 
cases, eventually will be incarcerated as anti-socials, continuing the 
necessary Black male/Black female separation. 
Stabilized union between the Black male and the Black female means 
the even~ual end to white supremacy. When the Black male and the Black 
~em~e SI~ply defme their joint struggle in terms of achieving education, 
ousmg, JObs an~ money, ~ather than as specifically countering the global 
and local dynamic for whne genetic survival (white supremacy) we are 
attempting to function with the wrong game manual and with ~I of th 
wr~ng rules. While we have remained confused, the global and loca~ 
White. collec.tives consciously and/or unconsciously have mastered white 
geneuc SUfY1 val strategies-in all areas oflife activity. Thus we as Bla ks 
are be~ng "checkmated" continuously by the local and 'global w~te 
colle~tives. We are the victims of white supremacy who spend most of 
our llme squabbling, struggling and fighting with one another. Thus, 
matters go from bad to worse, especially in such critical areas as the Black 
male/B~ack female relationship, the very foundation of the Black nation. 
Until now, we have attempted to function as united Black males and 
. Black ~emales w!th no knowledge of exactly how the white supremacy 
dynamic must drive the Black male and the Black female apart. There­
[;re, we have failed ~n the past and we continue to fail in this relationship. 
. we understood White supremacy, the number one priority for each Black 
~e and Black female would not be to reach out for one another with 
designs of dependency, love, lust or marriage. Instead, we would seek to 
mast~r specific patterns of perception, logic, thought, speech, action and 
e~ou~nal response that would counter the white supremacy dynamic 
SCien~cally. We would codify such behaviors and practice them day 
and filght. We would become single-minded in our activity, knowing that 
279


--- PAGE 154 ---
The Isis Papers 
unless global and local white supremacy is attacked continuously and 
effectively, the Black male/Black female relationship has no chance of 
surviving. 
Black males and Black females would be in a continuous exchange of 
information, knowledge and understanding (like true team members) 
about how to counter white supremacy more effectively. This quality of 
exchange could take place as much as we exchange phone numbers, jokes, 
dance steps, trivia and (in all too many instances) drugs. There would be 
much less time to look into each others eyes and become bored, and then 
start quarreling and fighting. Instead, both persons would be looking 
outward, beyond themselves, to counter local and global white 
supremacy, which is the real problem annihilating the Black collective. 
Actually, people grow closer together as long as they remain focused 
outwardly in the same direction. By maintaining a like-minded focus, 
Nelson and Winnie Mandela of South Africa have evolved possibly the 
strongest marriage known to Black people worldwide. They deserve 
recognition as the model for the Black male/Black female relationship. 
They are looking outward, beyond themselves, to fight white supremacy. 
By specifically fighting white supremacy, they prevent that force of 
injustice from driving them apart. 
When both the Black male and the Black female take up the struggle 
for justice against white supremacy, they are endowed with the strongest 
possible insurance that they will remain united. They are united in a 
common effort against injustice, and simultaneously they express the 
strongest possible statement about respect and love for themselves as 
individuals. In doing this, the Black male and Black female are declaring 
that they have conferred upon themselves the highest possible value, 
which is essential if there is to be self-and group-defense. 
The new answer to the Black male/Black female relationship dilemma 
is for the Black male and the Black female to make serious, conscious 
struggle against white supremacy their number one priority. Fortunately, 
Neely Fuller has written a textbook for victims of white supremacy (The 
United Independent Compensatory Code/System Concept) that details 
specific behaviors that the Black male and female must adopt in order to 
280 
Black Male/Black Female Relationships 
combat effectively the force that is driving them apart. Fuller suggests 
that the most critical question is how Black males and Black females 
spread their time (energy), how they use each of the 24 hours in the day. 
He recommends: 1) constructive conversation, 2) constructive work, 3) 
sufficient eating and sleeping, and 4) sexual intercourse no more than 
twice a week. These suggestions deserve our full consideration. If energy 
use was limited to just these activities by each Black male and Black 
female, certainly we would become more responsible towards ourselves 
as individuals, which would translate into more responsible interaction 
with one another. It is critical that we realize our present patterns of 
behavior permit white supremacy to exist. Directed radical change in 
Black behavior, as suggested above, will alter permanently the face of 
white supremacy, its victimization of the Black male and the Black female 
and the destruction of the Black male/Black female ielationship. 
281


--- PAGE 155 ---
24 
Black Women Moving Towards the 
21st Century 
(May 1975) 
Today, the world is going through a period of great turmoil and change. 
Individually, we are aware of this tunnoil because social and environmen­
tal chaos brings an attendant increase in the stress we feel in our daily 
lives as women workers in all capacities: wives, mothers and individual 
members of a total collective that for 400 years has been oppressed. Yes, 
this is a difficult period for all of us "hue-man" beings, and it would not 
be an exaggeration to say that we are in a time not only of tunnoil, but of 
crisis. 
During periods of crisis and stress, the ~asiest thing to do as an 
expression of our pain, despair and hopelessness is to moan, groan, cry or 
attempt to escape through alcohol, other drugs, fantasy, laughter or just 
fun and games. However, another possible behavioral response, which 
channels the body energy upward and onward as opposed to downward, 
is the use of the crisis as a stimulus for analysis, challenge, responsibility, 
growth and great creativity. 
The word crisis evolves from the Greek word, "krisis," which means 
decision. A period of crisis is a time for decision: an unstable or crucial 
time or state of affairs when the decisions that are made and acted upon 
become all-important for determining future events. Both men and 
women throughout the world have key roles to play in the resolution of 
this crisis, but my singular emphasis here is on the role of Black women. 
283


--- PAGE 156 ---
The Isis Papers 
Before specifically defming our present period of crisis and our 
response to it, we must contemplate our identity, the self-image that we 
carry in our brain-computers. For all that we can imagine doing and all 
that we will do or fail to do is a result of that picture of "self," derived 
from our total experiences from birth onward. That picture becomes the 
basis for all our behavioral patterns. Unfortunately, a major part of these 
self- and group-images for all too many of us Blacks consists of a brief 
and inaccurate history. Accordingly, this history began 400 years ago 
when we were brought to North America in the holds of slave ships by 
the "very advanced" Europeans (whites); it continues with the "advance­
ment" that we have made since our emancipation in 1863 in becoming 
full-fledged "Americans"; and, finally, this history insists that many of us 
now are just like the whites. There is a proverb that states, "The tree grows 
strong and tall only to the extent that its roots are deep and fmnly planted 
in the soil." If Black people are at all disappointed in our present level of 
achievement, it may be because our roots are not planted deeply enough 
in the past- resting upon such a shallow, inadequate and faulty data input 
of only 400 years of history. 
The facts of our true identity are that we, as Black people, are persons 
whose dominant genetic and historic roots extend to Africa, "the Ian~ of 
the Blacks." Men and women of science today, with few exceptions, are 
satisfied that Africa was the birth place of humankind and that for many 
hundreds of centuries thereafter Africans, meaning Black people, were in 
the forefront of all human progress. As John Henrik Clarke states, "It can 
be said with a strong degree of certainty that Africa has had three Golden 
Ages. The first two reached their climax and were in decline before 
Europe as a functioning entity in human society was born." 
Factually speaking, this means that Black women and Black men are 
the parents of the entire family of people -black, brown, red, yellow and 
white varieties. Black people can and have produced all of the colors of 
mankind, including white. White skin is simply the product of a recessive 
genetic mutation to skin albinism. Whites cannot be the parents of 
humankind because whites can only produce white. But Blacks can 
produce a range of colors from as black as the proverbial ace of spades, 
284 
Black Women Moving Towards the 21st Century 
to as white as the proverbial driven snow. Not only are Blacks the genetic 
parents of all people in the world today, but Blacks produced the first 
scientists, architects, musicians, Diathematicians, astronomers, 
astrologers, philosophers, statesman, priests, prophets and generals. In­
deed, Africa produced some of the first fighting women generals. 
I am reminded of some ancient and important wisdom of Africa, as 
seen in the following two proverbs: 1) "When you educate women, you 
educate a nation," and 2) "The hand that rocks the cradle rules the nation 
and its destiny." With this wisdom of our Black ancestors in mind, let us 
examine the current world crisis and the role of Black women in its 
resolution. What is the nature of this crisis? 
Critical in the history of white supremacy was the decision not to 
control Black and other women of color, but to control the men of color. 
Men are the initiaters of the act of reproduction. Ultimately, women are 
dependent upon their men for protection because of the greater physical 
strength of men compared to women. If one simply controls the men of 
a people, the women are controlled also. Thus, the white collective went 
about the business of systematically developing a plan and power 
mechanism worldwide to bring all of the world's men of color under their 
ultimate control. Once this was established, the men of color were 
informed overtly as well as subtly that if they ever should seek to alter the 
power relationship of white over non-white, they would have to fight and 
many would die. Thousands upon thousands of Black men in the U.S. 
were lynched and castrated to drive home the message that white men 
intended to control the "balls" in this world, both on and off of the court! 
White males understood that they needed white women as well as 
Black women to help them achieve and maintain this power relationship. 
White women always have known what they stood to gain - their own 
survival as whites. Black women have been confused and less clear in 
fully understanding how they have been led to cooperate in this deadly 
power game of white supremacy. Further, Black women do not under­
stand fully that they have nothing to gain and everything to lose if this 
deadly game continues. 
285


--- PAGE 157 ---
The Isis Papers 
The first lessons to Black women were harsh and cruel ones of sexual 
assault and abuse, taking their children away and forcing them to watch 
their men being lynched and castmted. But then these harsh lessons were 
followed by milder treatment of Black women as compared to Black men. 
Black women were given extra food, money, clothing and other gifts for 
their special personal favors to the masters. They were rewarded for 
correctly teaching their children to conform to the masters' wishes, as well 
as for telling their men to calm down and be patient so that they too could 
be rewarded. Perhaps we (Black worn:en) really became seduced by the 
illusion of power, being so close to white males. 
We have told ourselves that these behaviors were survival tactics and 
the only way that we could have "come this far." But as our survival 
increasingly is becOming threatened, we are forced to wonder if we have 
been mistaken in our analysis and our strategy. But, again, there is 
something to be learned from our African past. And we must never forget 
that those who do not learn from "history," "their-whole story," are bound 
to repeat it. 
The specific story to which I refer is that of the African (Black) queen, 
Cleopatra. Bam in 69 B.C., Cleopaua came to the throne that she shared 
with her brother, Ptolemy XIII, when she was 13 years old. Egypt was 
then a Roman proteCtorate. It was beSet with internal strife and intrigue. 
Cleopatra aligned herself with the Roman general, Julius Caesar, whom 
she thought would reinforce her power and help her people. She saw her 
political and sexual relationship with Caesar as a maneuver to save Egypt 
from the worst aspects of Roman domination. This maneuver failed in 
spite of her second Roman lover Mark Anthony, who came after Caesar's 
death. Her suicide is a profound statement about the series of decisions 
that she made. Egypt fell and became a Roman colony. And all of the 
harSher aspects of Roman rule, which Cleopatra had sought to prevent, 
settled over Egypt and the Middle East. 
'There were other Black queens in Africa who fought the white invaders 
to their death; they did not submit or cooperate with their oppressors. 
Instead, they moved to resist and destroy that oppressive process. They 
urged their men to do likewise, thus leaving their marks as heroines and 
286 
Black Women Moving Towards the 21st Century 
warriors for their people who died in honor These Black ha . • women ve 
not. been kn.own Simply as "beautiful" queens who committed suicide in 
therr own diSgrace. 
. This ~ngs us to the pertinent question: Should we continue our 
alliance With the present "Romans," or having learned from the past 
~auld we choose an alternate course? In the context of all that we rna; 
ant to call progress and material prosperity' we must face the reality that 
today, Black men die younger than white men, white women and Black 
warne~. B~k men are the most frequent victims of homicide and they 
are bemg killed by one another in increasing numbers. The suicide rate 
for y~ung Black men is the only Black suicide rate greater than the rates 
of whites. Black women and Black children are the most frequent victims 
of ra~ and other physical assa!Jll and violence. Black infant mortality 
remams two to three times the figure for whites. Black women are more 
often left alone to care for their children than any other female group in 
the country. Nearly one-third of our so-called "Black family units " hi h Irti " ,we e ~r to as survival-units," are single-parent families. In the 
W~hmgton, D.C. metropolitan area, there are over 60,000 Black male 
children growing. up in homes without fathers or other surrogate father 
figures. We contmue to have the highest rates of separation and di 
and, thus, family dissolution. We continue to have some of the hi;:r 
rates of teenage pare~thood, and thus, immatme and inadequate parenting 
of ~e next generation. We continue to have high levels of juvenile 
~elinquency, gang wars and drug addiction. Young Black people con­
Unue to leave school in record numbers prior to high school grad . Th · virtual uat:Ion. 
ere IS a epidemic of low reading and math scores amongst our 
young ~ple, and as a result, these youngsters are leaving school with 
total~ y mad~uate preparation for this highly technological, computerized 
and mdustrtalized social system. 
Bl~k people are in a very serious economic depression, while whites 
are s~l at ~e stage of recession. Blacks remain the last hired and first 
fired.' m spite of the supposed achievements of"affirmative action." Th~ 
relau ve le~els of Black unemployment and white unemployment have not 
changed smce 1945. The housing situation for urban Blacks is not 
287


--- PAGE 158 ---
The Isis Papers 
irnproving. Black men continue to be sent to prison in record numbers, 
out of proportion to our population percentage. Black men presently 
constitute 90% of the state prison population. And we now witness the 
nationwide retum of the death penalty. 
What must we as Black women do? It is my conviction that the African 
proverb "The hand that rocks the cradle rules the nation and its destiny" 
is troe. Black women are the mothers and, thus, the first teachers of Black 
females and Black males alike. With increased consciousness of their 
importance as the first teachers, Black women can determine whether 
future generations of Black children will be warriors or if we will continue 
to be slaves living in a highly refined state of psychological oppression, 
which is no less a death than direct physical destruction. Black women 
as mothers and teachers can teach the first powerful lessons in pride and 
respect for cultural, historical and genetic Blackness, while steadfastly 
refusing to impart any part of the white oppressors' lesson in Black 
self-hate that we learn as children: "If you're Black, stay back; if you're 
brown, stick around; if you're yellow, you're mellow; and if you're white, 
you are all right." Black mothers must cease making their first concero 
whether or not their babies will have light skin and straight hair. 
The newborn infant can tell from the mother's first touch whether she 
is pleased or disappointed with its color, appearance and gender. Certain­
ly later the child can tell the mother's respect for Blackness by the 
comments she makes about who is a pretty girl, who is a handsome boy 
and who has the proverbial "good" and "bad" hair. All of these lessons 
that we have been taught by our white oppressors to teach our young we 
must refuse to teach ever again! 
But Black women as mothers and first teachers can take their con-
sciousness to an even higher level. They can give the first lesson in what 
constitutes Black manhood. They can teach all of their sons that they are 
not their "babies" or their substitute lovers. Black women can be the first 
to inform their sons, with loving kindness, that they did not bring them 
into the world to be oppressed. Rather, they brought them into the world 
to be free men, warriors who have to war to be free, and to die if they so 
happen to die in the fight for their right to be full men under the starS. 
288 
Black Women Moving Towards the 21st Century 
Black women must cease saying to child psychiatrists, "I'll never tell my 
'baby' anything like that!" 
Black women can teach their sons and their daughters that the defmi­
tion of a Black man is not simply someone who can buy things (a nice 
home, a car, a yacht and clothes), but rather someone who will respect, 
support, protect and defend himself, his woman and his children. And 
fmally, Black men are those who will do whatever is necessary to ensure 
their families' respect, support, protection and defense. 
Black women as mothers and teachers consciously can teach their 
daughters that Black women, as the mothers of all mankind, are the alpha 
and the omega of women on this planet. They were here in the beginning, 
and if humankind remains, they will be present in the end. Black mothers 
can teach their daughters that they should never seek to look like or be 
like anything other than themselves. They can set the standards of what 
women will be like on this planet. For this is their responsibility, coming 
from the tradition of the first mothers and queens. Black women can teach 
their daughters that respect is not given to women by men, but that Black 
women carry in themselves the highest possible level of self-respect that 
commands respect from men and women of all races. Black women can 
teach their daughters how they possibly assist in the destruction of Black 
men and Black people by allowing Black men to hide out in the vagina. 
To allow this hiding out (attempts to climb in the womb to be babies or 
fetuses again) when they know the men should turn and face their 
oppressors, is an extreme level of self-destruction. 
Likewise, Black women can teach their daughters never to refer to 
Black men as "baby" and never to allow Black men to refer to them, when 
adult women, as "mamma." Thus, they systematically can refuse to 
reinforce the image the white man wants reinforced: an adult Black male 
baby and thus the proverbial "mother-fucker." It is clear that a "baby" 
will never track down "The Man." Finally, Black women can teach their 
daughters that they can change the tide of Black destiny by only giving 
their most intimate pleasures to the providers who also prove themselves 
as warriors against all enemies of the Black collective. 
289


--- PAGE 159 ---
The Isis Papers 
remote. Already the Nazi outburst has become historical. But this is 
a strange page in history. Few events of modem times were so filled 
with unpredicted action and unsuspected death. A primordial impulse 
had suddenly surfaced among the Western nations; it had been 
unfettered through their machines. From this moment, fundamental 
assumptions about our civilization have no longer stood unchallenged, 
for while the occurrence is past, the phenomenon remains. 
Before the emergence of the twentieth century and its teclmology, a 
destructive mind could not play in fantasy with the thoughts that the 
Nazi were able to translate into action. The administrator of earlier 
centuries did not have the tools. He did not possess the network of 
communications; he did not dispose over rapid small arms fire and 
quick working poison gases. The bureaucrat of tomorrow would not 
have these problems; already, he is better equipped than the German 
Nazis were. Killing is not as difficult as it used to be. The modem 
administrative apparatus has facilities forrapid, concerted movements 
and for efficient massive killings. These devices not only trap a larger 
number of victims; they also require a greater degree of specialization, 
and with that division of labour the moral burden too is fragmented 
among the participants. The perpetrators can now kill his victims 
without touching them, without hearing them, without seeing them. 
He may feel sure of his success and safe from its repercussions. This 
ever growing capacity for destruction cazmot be arrested anywhere. 
... we saw how the Nazis had built upon the experiences of the past. 
Now there are means which will allow still others to seize upon the 
Nazis' experience, so that it in tum may yet become a precedent for 
the future. 
... in the words of President Truman, 'Hitler's persecution of the Jews 
did much to awaken Americans to the dangerous extremes to which 
prejudice can be carried if allowed to control government actions.' 
With uncommon perception, ~e President saw that the retention in 
mid-twentieth century of discriminatory barriers signified the 
maintenance of a springboard, and the preservation of a target, for 
destruction. 
The New York Times editorial r~~iewing And the Band Played On, by 
Randy Shilts, states: 
292 
AIDS Holocaust 
And the ~and Played On applies withering hindsight to society's 
shortc~~~s, almost. none to its successes. It (the book) overlooks 
the. scientific fea~ of I~entifying _the AIDS virus and developing an 
an~~dy te~t, achi~ved m record tmle. It gives no credit to the equally 
striking SOClal achievements. Most Americans have so far refused to 
panic in the face of a terrifying disease, or to oppress the barely 
tolerated milwr ities that are its focus." (Emphasis mine.) 
In another article, The New York Times reported: 
Geneva, November 14 (Reuters)- The World Health Organization 
has raised it estimates of AIDS cases throughout the world by 50 
percent and says finding a vaccine may take longer than experts 
thought. 
.. :Halfdan Mahler, the organization's director general, painted a bleak 
picture at the ~tart of the conference on acquired immune deficiency 
syndrome, which destroys the body's ability to fend off disease and is 
always fatal. 
'My scientific sources tell me that a vaccine may be even further away 
than we thought a year ago, and development of therapeutic agents 
has been frustratingly slow,' he said. 
Mr. Mahler said, 'Available evidence irtdicates that the virus is 
continuing to spread and the number of AIDS cases climbs steadily. • 
The he~th agency estimates that 5 to 10 million people in the world 
are earners of the human immuno-deficiency virus, which caused 
AIDS, but have not as yet developed the disease . 
"If you do not understand White Supremacy (Racism) .:.. what it is and 
how it works - everything else that you think you understand, will ~nly 
confuse you." 
-Neely Fuller, Jr. 
The United Compensatory Code/System/Concept 
In the size of the lie there is always contained a cenain factor of 
c~e~ibility, since ~e great masses of people - will more easily fall 
VICtim to a great he than to a small one, since they themselves ... lie 
sometimes in little things ... Thus such an untruth will not at all enter 
293


--- PAGE 160 ---
The Isis Papers 
their heads ... therefore, just for this reason, some part of the most 
impudent lie will remain and stick. 
-Robert G L. Waite 
The Psychopathic God: Adolf Hitler 
"What's past is prologue." 
-William Shakespeare 
George Santayana, the American philosopher, has left to posterity the 
challenge, "Those who do not know history and do not learn from history, 
will repeat it." 
From the aforementioned information, I conclude the following: 
If you attempt to understand biological and chemical warfare without 
understanding white supremacy, you will only be confused. 
If you attempt to understand the killing of gypsies in Germany. under 
the leadership of Adolph Hitler, without understanding white supremacy, 
you will only be confused. 
If you attempt to understand the killing of homosexuals in Germany, 
under the leadership of Adolph Hitler, without understanding white 
supremacy, you will only be confused. 
If you attempt to understand the holocaust of Semites of the Jewish 
religion in Europe from 1933 to 1945, wherein 6,000,000 Semites were 
slaughtered under conditions of mass deceit with the awareness of other 
Western (white) powers, without understanding white supremacy 
(racism/anti-Semitism), you will only be bewildered and totally confused. 
Anyone who has not mastered an understanding of GermanY under the 
Adolph Hitler's leadership and the holocaust of Semites, cannot possibly 
understand the AIDS holocaust of 1980 to 1991, wherein 50,000,000 to 
75,000,000 deaths of Black people on the continent of Africa and else-
where have been planned and projected. 
If you attempt to understand the AIDS holocaust, without under-
standing white supremacy, you will only be confused; and you may be 
dead. The word holocaust is defined in this paper as "the massive, planned 
slaughtering (by whatever necessary means), under conditions of major 
294 
AIDS Holocaust 
dece~tion, of people classified as non-white, conducted by people who 
classify.themselves as white, for the specific purpose of depopulation of 
non-~hl~ people, under the specific conditions of white supremacy 
dommauon." 
All information, events and data that are not placed in proper context 
or do not establish precise relationships are only nonsense. Nonsense 
because it dec~ives and causes confusion, can be used for deadly purposes: 
~uch of the discussion heretofore about AIDS and much of the informa­
tion that has appeared in the electronic and print media about AIDS are 
expe~enced as largely nonsensical to increasing numbers of people, 
especially Black people, including those in the U.S., which thus far has 
the largest number of documented cases of AIDS, but also in Africa, which 
has the largest number of projected deaths. 
Most disturbing and most nonsensical is the obsessive insistence on 
the ~art of people who classify themselves as white, that Black peopl~ in 
Afnca caused the spread of the AIDS virus throughout the world from 
their contact with the Mrican Green Monkey (the Vervet Monkey). 
My effort, therefore, is to place the discussion of AIDS in what I 
consid~r to be its only proper and logical context. I am attempting to 
neutraliZe much of the nonsense that has developed worldwide concerning 
. this ~pic in the past five or so years. AIDS is a deadly disease, which 
aft~r ~~ su~den a~pearance has already killed thousands of people. The 
projection 1s that 1t will kill many, many thousands more indeed man .ll. , Y 
~~ IOn~. I hope thtat by cutting through the nonsense surrounding the 
diScusston of AIDS and taking a more logical approach to the epidemic 
(and now pandemic) disease, many lives throughout the world will be 
saved. 
. From 1933 to 1945, Germany- a leading coWltry in Western civiliza­
tio~ .u?der the leadership of Adolph Hitler - with the assistance of 
poliucu~ns, doctors, lawyers, professors, judges, scientists and the general 
~pulauon, _conducted open warfare against and planned the extermina­
tion of Semttes of the Jewish religion who were citizens of Germany and 
other countries of German-occupied Europe. 
295


--- PAGE 161 ---
The Isis Papers 
As persons who were referred to in Germany and throughout Europe 
as Semites, the Jews were not considered to be white people or aryans. 
As Semites they were considered to have their genetic roots amongst 
Africans- Black people on the continent of Africa. 
Indeed, the word Semite is derived from the Latin preflx "semi," which 
means half. Semites were the products of the genetic mixture produced 
when white Greek and Roman soldiers invaded Africa and raped African 
women, who of course were Black. Semite means the same as mulatto. 
Thus they were considered to be half Black and half white, or colored 
people. Thus, a yellow colored star was placed on their outer clothing by 
the German government in the Hitler era. 
The terms anti-Semite and anti-Semitism most fundamentally refer to 
a destructive ideological, psychological and behavioral state of "anti­
color" waged by people who classify themselves as white against those 
who are classified as non-white, even when those non-whites have lost 
much of their skin coloration in some instances. 
Semites who left Africa and eventually attempted to settle in Europe, 
miscegenated further with white-skinned people on the continent of 
Europe and continued to lose much of their melanin skin -pigmentation. 
However, because of the dominant character of the African (Black) 
genotype, including hair texture and type and facial features, there con­
tinued to exist evidence of African genetic heritage. Because of the 
dominance of African or Black genetic heritage, genetically recessive 
white-skinned people of Europe continued to fear the possibility of white 
genetic annihilation caused by the Semites. Thus, there was a 2,000 year 
history of white hostility towards Semites, or coloreds, of the Jewish 
religion on the continent of Europe, in spite of short periods in which the 
hostility of whites towards the Semites was less intense. 
Following Germany's loss of World War I and the major decline of 
the German economy, which caused a sense of extreme and profound 
dislocation and vulnerability amongst the German people, latent hostility 
began to escalate towards the Semites. Again, these people were long 
recognized as being able to cause white genetic annihilation because they 
296 
AIDS Holocaust 
carried the dominant Black genetic material from Africa, although it had 
been much diluted over a 2,000 year period. 
It should be noted that the most fundamental of all vulnerabilities is 
white genetic vulnerability or the fear of white annihilation. 
Hostility against the Semites intensified even though the Semites 
sought to identify with and be accepted as white people. They wanted to 
be Germans or other Europeans, but they were told they were Semites 
even if one their parents was white or even if they were married to white; 
(aryans). 
Hostility also was directed against gypsies who were also darker­
skinned people and whose very name means "out of Egypt." In addition, 
h~stility was directed against homosexuals because, in the logic of Adolph 
Httler and other white supremacists, homosexuals represented weakness 
on the part of the white (aryan) male, who already was feeling vulnerable. 
Adolph Hitler, who carne to power in Gennany in 1933, became the 
most forceful articulator of that most fundamental of all fears of the global 
and local white collective- the fear of white genetic annihilation caused 
by people classified as non-white. 
Indeed, it can be said that Adolph Hitler was the highest crystalization 
of the white supremacy mind-set based upon the fear of white genetic 
annihilation and its companion thought, white genetic survival by any 
necessary and conceivable means. 
Hitler, because he tapped into the deepest fear, was able to have the 
support and sympathy of masses of other people who, like himself, 
classified themselves as white- then and now. They understood Hitler's 
call, at conscious as well as deep subconscious levels, for white genetic 
survival. This is the perceived threat that the Semites of the Jewish 
religion residing in Europe represented to Germans and other Europeans 
(whites). 
Hitler and his followers referred to the Semites as tiermensch (German, 
for"subhuman"). Amongst many other horrendous accusations, Hider 
accused them of carrying and causing disease. Indeed, he referred to the 
Semites as being "viruses." 
297


--- PAGE 162 ---
The Isis Papers 
From the book The Psychopathic God: Adolph Hitler by Robert G.L. 
Waite, I quote: 
Toward the end of February 1942, just after theW armsee C~nfer~nce 
h. h rgaruz' ed the • final solution' to the jewish problem, Httler listed 
WlCO • had' 1 ed himself among the great benefactors of mankind w~o · . ts~ at 
dangerous disease germs: 'The discovery of the Jewtsh VlfUS ts one 
of the greatest revolutions that has ever taken place. The fight we are 
carrying on is of the same nature as that waged by Pas_ture .~d .Koch 
during the last century. How many diseases have ~e~ ongm m th~ 
Jewish virus! We shall retain our health when we eliminate the Jew. 
Hitler further accused the government that preceded his own, the 
Weimer Republic, of "surrendering the Gennan nation to 'syphilization' 
by Jews and Negroes." . 
And thus, in Hitler's pattern of perception and logic (the .wh1te 
supremacy mind-set), he planned for the extermination of the Sem1te~ as 
the "final solution" to the problem of white genetic survival, by getung 
rid of the source of white genetic annihilation. . 
Through a monstrous pattern of lying and deceit, promoting the "B1~ 
Lie" through a very sophisticated government propaganda apparatus, 1t 
was propagated that the Semites were the source of all of the problems 
that threatened the German and European peoples: . This 
Thus, mass level destruction was planned agamst the Semites. 
process was participated in by all levels of the German and Europe~ 
societies. Adolph Hitler's leadership ofGennany from 1933 to 19~5 m 
the war against the Semites has become the standard for the ulttmate 
conduct of governmental and state white supremacy· . 
In 1932, the year before Adolph Hitler came to power i~ Germany • m 
Tuskegee, Alabama, U.S.A., another destrUction was bemg condu~ted 
against people who were classified as non-white by people who.classifi~ 
themselves as white doctors, scientists and government officmls. ThiS 
planned destrUction was the Tuskegee Syphilis Study· . 
From 1932 to 1972, a total of 40 years, United States Pubhc He~th, 
Macon County Health Department, Tuskegee Institute, Veterans Hospital 
in Tuskegee and private physicians in and around Macon County 
298 
AIDS Holocaust 
deliberately planned to withhold treatment from more than 400 Black men 
who were suffering from syphilis. It was verbalized that the progmm 
would be a means for getting rid of the Black people in the U.S. (This 
destructive deception recently ended, under pressure, in the year 1972.) 
Very shortly thereafter, the disease which we now refer to as AIDS 
began to surface in the U.S. The populations focused upon as being 
infected with the AIDS virus were first the white male homosexuals and 
subsequently Black and Hispanic people. More specifically, the projected 
source of the virus was/is said to be African people who had been bitten 
by the African Green Monkey or the Vervet Monkey. 
In 1969,a book entitled ASurveyofChemica/ and Biological Warfare, 
by John Cookson and Judith Nottingham; was published by the Monthly 
Review Press. The book is described on its cover as follows: "Derived 
from a three year study conducted by a British biochemist and geneticist 
and a British political scientist, the text affords a comprehensive review 
of materials used, and policies adopted by authorities in the U.S., Canada, 
Great Britain and West Gennany." It also states that it " ... provides one of 
the most comprehensive views on the subject of chemical and biological 
warfare written for the layman. The authors, who are well qualified, 
produced a vast amount of documentation of the use and research on these 
types of weapons." On p. 322 at the bottom of the page, the authors state, 
The question of whether new diseases could be used is of considerable 
interest. Vervet monkey disease (African Green Monkey Disease) 
may well be an example of a whole new class of disease-causing 
organisms. Hartdling of blood and tissue without precaution causes 
infection. It is unaffected by any antibiotic substance so far tried and 
is unrelated to any other organism. It causes fatality in some cases and 
can be venereally transmitted in man. In the words of Dr. C .E. Gordon 
Smith, 'It has possible potential as an infectious disease of man. It 
presumably is also ofBW (biological warfare) interest. New diseases 
are continually appearing (chikungunya and o'nyong-nyong fever for 
example). In addition to these there are the possibilities of virus and 
bacteria being genetically manipulated to produce 'new' orgartism. 
On p. 110 in the same book (bottom of page), they state, 
299


--- PAGE 163 ---
The Isis Papers 
Just recently a great deal of useful work has been done on the V ervet 
Monkey Disease (African Green Monkey Disease) which caused 
seven deaths in Germany. Reports of progress were: 'sent to 40 
laboratories all over the world; 9 of these have been supplied with 
infective material and/or antisera [vaccine]: 4 in the USA and one each 
in Germany, Panama, South Africa, Uganda and the USSR. A 
non-infective complement fixing antigen has been prepared to the 
WHO (World Health organization) reference laboratories.' 
-Hansard, May 1968 
In another book, A Higher Form of Killing (The Secret Story of 
Chemical and Biological Warfare) by Robert Harris and Jeremy Paxman, 
published by Hill and Wang (1982), on p. 219, the authors state: 
The claims continued. In January 1978, a correspondent with Reuters 
news agency reported from NATO headquarters that 'scientific 
experts' had informed him that the Russians were developing 'three 
horrific new diseases for warfare ... Lassa Fever, which according to 
the sources, kills 35 out of every 100 people it strikes, Ebola fever, 
which kills 70 out of every 100, and the deadly Marburg fever (Green 
Monkey Disease). 
Over and over again the name "African Green Monkey" shows up. 
This is not a "monkey" biting Africans and causing disease, but a weapon 
of biological warfare developed in laboratories by people who classify 
themselves as white. This charge, however, is denied, and blame is 
projected on to African (Black) people. 
Adolph Hitler propagated his "Big Lie" against the Semites of the 
Jewish religion, which became his pretext for the planned slaughter of 11 
million. He actually succeeded in killing six million, all in the name of 
white supremacy (racism/anti-Semitism) for the express purpose of white 
genetic survival. 
In the late 1980s, there has been grave concern throughout the world 
that the white birthrate is declining as the birthrates of all non-white people 
continue to increase. It is at this time that we witness the sudden 
appearance of AIDS, primarily effecting Black people in Africa and Haiti. 
300 
AIDS Holocaust 
A~ truth always surfaces, in time we will know the full details of the 
massive deception of the AID~ holocaust, when the current "B" L' ". 
oo~~ ~re~ 
Recommended reading 
Cookson, John and Nottingham, Judith. A Survey of Chemical Biological 
Warfare. New York: Monthly Review Press, 1969. 
Jones, James H. Bad Blood: The Tuskegee Syphilis Experiment New 
York: The Free Press, 1982. · 
Lifton, R?bert Jay. The Nazi Doctors- Medical Killing & the Psycholo g 
ofGenoczde. New York: Basic Books, 1986. y 
301

