=== EXTRACTED TEXT FROM: The-Ultimate-Justice-of-the-People-Black-Liberation-Earl-Ofari-1969.pdf ===
Extraction Method: PyPDFLoader
Total Pages: 14
Timestamp: 2026-01-04T17:07:31.700256
================================================================================


--- PAGE 1 ---
Earl Ofari (1969)                                                                                                                                   Page 1 of 14 
 
THE ULTIMATE JUSTICE OF THE PEOPLE                                              BLACK LIBERATION 
 
THE ULTIMATE JUSTICE OF THE PEOPLE 
 
BLACK LIBERATION 
(CULTURAL & REVOLUTIONARY NATIONALISM) 
   
PUBLISHED BY THE RADICAL 
EDUCATION PROJECT  
REP publishes articles on imperialism, political 
economy, the black colony, the third world, 
labor, and the university, as well as Something 
Else, a forum for post -campus organizing. 
Write for a sample copy of the  News-letter and 
a list of all our publications.  
Radical Education Project 
Box 625 
Ann Arbor, Michigan 48107 
Earl Ofari (1969) 
 
 
 
 
Source: http://archive.lib.msu.edu/AFS/dmc/radicalism/public/all/blackliberation/AAN.html 
15c 
EARL OFARI helped to found and is vice -president of the Black Student Union at California  
State College At Los Angeles. He has worked with SNCC and other organizations in the black 
community in Los Angeles. He is working on his M.A. degree in Sociology at Cal State, L.A. He 
has written articles which have appeared in the L.A. Free Press , the Guardian, Negro Digest 
and Black Politics. He is also working on a book dealing with black capitalism to be published 
by Monthly Review Press.  
The recent murders of John Huggins and Alprentice "Bunchy" Carter of the Black Panther Party 
and the subsequent implication and arrest of several members of Ron Karenga’s US organization 
has served to dramatize the glaring ideological deficiencies inherent  in the thought of many of 
today’s so-called black cultural nationalist organizations.  
In this particular instance, the onus of cultural nationalism’s historic fallacy just happened to fall 
on Karenga and US organization. US, though representative of many  of the negative trends 
Editor’s Note: I find this essay to be a  very instructive read.  It 
goes to the old adage “Of all the disciplines of study, history is 
best qualified to reward all research. ” So much of what is 
written here about our history of struggle for liberation and the 
obstacles and mistakes made still rings true today. Hind sight is 
20/20. This article is provided as a retrospectoscope , as the  
correct path of New Afrikan people into the future is embedded 
in the errors of the past. RBGStreetScholar /Aug., 2011


--- PAGE 2 ---
Earl Ofari (1969)                                                                                                                                   Page 2 of 14 
 
THE ULTIMATE JUSTICE OF THE PEOPLE                                              BLACK LIBERATION 
 
embodied in much of cultural nationalism’s programmatic content, by no means should be 
viewed here as the sole malefactor. Before continuing though, it must be made clear that black 
cultural nationalism, in varied forms, historicall y (the Harlem arts renaissance of the 20’s being 
an excellent example) as well as in the contemporary black experience has been a positive force. 
It has played an extremely vital role at times in both heightening the level of the black liberation 
struggle while at the same instant increasing in stages the development of black radical 
consciousness.  
Nonetheless, at this critical point in the liberation struggle it is time for black people to make a 
thorough questioning analysis of many of the assumptions an d goals that have been put forth by 
many of the self -appointed "new-wave" black spokesmen. Such an analysis I feel will help to 
place in a more tenable perspective such as yet unsatisfactorily answered questions as: "what do 
we as black freedom fighters wa nt?" and more importantly "how do we go about getting it." For 
at present what is sorely needed is to move the liberation struggle from the trappings of personal 
ego-building phraseology to the collective development of productive ideology. This must be 
done if black people don’t want to see other Huggins’ and Carters’.  
As can readily be seen… The past half decade has seen awakened in the spirit of Afro -America a 
new found sense of spiritual and cultural awareness. Black people, in ever increasing numbers,  
have begun to turn the traditional racist myth of black inferiority around full cycle to the point 
where now, as the expressions go, black is both beautiful and superior. Symbolically 
representing the resurgence of black cultural awareness is the current popularity of such things as 
the "Afro" or natural hair styles, the wearing of traditional African dress, the adoption of African 
names and the vague attempts on the part of some black people to learn an African language. As 
Leroi Jones, one of the chief a rchitects of the new black cultural renaissance, has written: "The 
Black Man must aspire to Blackness." And "The Black Man must idealize himself as Black."    
 
 
 
 
 
The concepts and ideas embodied in the philosophy of black cultural nationalism have also laid 
the groundwork for the formation of many new black organizations in Afro -America. To a great 
extent, however, the existence of these organizations dedicated to the principles and precepts of 
cultural nationalism has a very defined and extended history. In f act, one would be correct in 
stating that cultural nationalism (at least the internalized felling [sic]) has been a component part 
of the black experience ever since the first slave ship from Africa arrived in the Western 
Hemisphere.


--- PAGE 3 ---
Earl Ofari (1969)                                                                                                                                   Page 3 of 14 
 
THE ULTIMATE JUSTICE OF THE PEOPLE                                              BLACK LIBERATION 
 
The emotive desire em bedded within the black masses in the Americas for a national existence 
and self-expression was the dominant force behind many of the early slave rebellions. Though 
Cultural nationalism was always present in the manner, ritual and song of black people duri ng 
slavery, it wasn’t until the mid -19th century in the U.S. that any substantive political or social 
organizational framework could be developed for its expression. The main impetus behind this 
development was the theoretical writings of a Harvard trained  black physician —Dr. Martin 
Delaney. Delaney, even at that early date, disdained the use of the term negro and preferred to be 
called black. Delaney, born of pure West African stock, took a pointed interest in the study of 
African history and culture. Dela ney, later, in his seminal work, The Condition, Elevation, 
Emigration and Destiny of the Colored People of the United States,  Politically Considered , 
published in 1852, outlined a program which he felt would speak to the immediate needs of 
black people. Pa rt of Delaney’s program called for the emigration to, and the colonization of 
Eastern Africa by black people. With this plan, Delaney became one of the first black leaders to 
advance the idea of a black mass exodus back to Africa. This idea, of course, was  to assume 
much greater proportions in the ideology of many later cultural nationalist organizations. 
Delaney also was the first to enunciate the idea that black people in their separate existence in 
America did, in fact, constitute a "Nation within a Nati on." Since Delaney, the thread of this 
ideal has been picked up and expounded by nearly every major Black Nationalist spokesman 
ranging from Garvey to Malcolm X.  
Nonetheless, Delaney in much of his planning revealed many of the theoretical weaknesses 
which have plagued to a large degree many of today’s black cultural groupings. One of the more 
obvious here being the tendency toward rank opportunism. As an example, Delaney in calling for 
black people to return to Africa actively sought the "aid" and "assist ance" of the European 
Nations; England and France in particular. This came at a time when both of these nations along 
with the rest of Europe were greedily trying to establish colonial hegemony over the Third World 
continents of Asia and Africa. Delaney further felt that the contacts with these Europeans nations 
should be made by certain select representatives of Afro -America which were to be chosen from 
a "confidential council." This was little more than a 19 th century 
version of the "black missionary comp lex," which today almost 
completely colors the outlook and mentality of the black elite in their 
dealings with the black masses.    
With the Civil War and "emancipation", the organized structure of 
the cultural nationalist movement collapsed. However, its  spirit 
remained a part of the latent character of the now "free" black 
masses. It wasn’t until the early 20 th century, with the establishment 
by Cyril V. Briggs of the African Blood Brotherhood, that cultural 
nationalism again received direct and open exp ression. The 
Brotherhood based its name on an African cultural rite of 
fraternization which demanded that the parties involved mingle their drops of blood. The 
Brotherhood from its beginning was a secrete [sic] black organization dedicated to black 
liberation through racial pride and equality. Included in the Brotherhood’s eight point program 
was the call for a black united front. Brigg’s movement, like Delaney’s before him, though, only 
served as a prelude to the grand’daddy of all the cultural nationalist movements. And that was, of 
course, Marcus Garvey’s Universal Negro Improvement Association’s (U.N.I.A.) "back to


--- PAGE 4 ---
Earl Ofari (1969)                                                                                                                                   Page 4 of 14 
 
THE ULTIMATE JUSTICE OF THE PEOPLE                                              BLACK LIBERATION 
 
Africa" movement. With the emergence of Marcus Garvey, cultural nationalism for the first time 
attained a legitimate wide -spread recognition from literally millions of black people throughout 
the world (for Garvey’s movement was truly international in both appeal and scope). Garvey’s 
skillful espousal of black nationalist tenets combined with his ability to organize black people 
into a mass bas e assured his U.N.I.A. of the largest membership every enjoyed by any black 
organization in America. Garvey’s movement added two new dimensions to the ideological 
framework of cultural nationalism. The first was anti -communism. Garvey indicated on several 
occasions that he considered "the white capitalist…to be the only convenient friend" of the black 
worker. In addition, Garvey stated: "Fundamentally what racial difference is there between a 
white Communist, Republican or Democrat?…On the appeal of race in terest the Communist is 
as ready as either to show his racial…superiority over the Negro."  
To a degree, what Garvey alludes to here is and has been true in all too many cases in the past. 
Often the white communist, in so far as black people have been conc erned, has been just that —
white first and then (if there is anything left) communist. Also, white racism, being the all -
powerful factor in American life that it is, Garvey’s mistrust of anything white was at least in 
part understandable. However, Garvey’s anti-communism was much more than just a defense or 
reaction against the omnipresence of white racism. It was a tactical ploy skillfully designed to 
cover up the personal exploitative designs held by the black elite themselves (many of whom 
formed a nucleus of Garvey’s organization) on the economy of the black communities. Garvey’s 
anti-communism, based on the mistrust of white people, was phony and misleading, particularly 
in light of the fact that he was more than willing to work with the Ku Klux Klan (wh o for the 
most part were nothing but Southern Democrats with sheets). According to Garvey: "I regard the 
Klan, the Anglo-Saxon Clubs and White American Societies as better friends of the race than all 
other groups of hypocritical whites put together."  
The second extension Garvey made in the framework of cultural nationalism was the greater 
emphasis put on the role of black business as a means for black liberation. Whether realized or 
not, the emphasis placed on black capitalist business, by Garvey, was the  direct complement of 
his position of anti -communism. It should not be a surprise, though, that Garvey did look to 
business as a source of strength for the building of his movement. For Garvey, as it is known, 
came to the U.S. in 1915 for the specific purp ose of meeting with Booker T. Washington and 
thereby joining his then Jamaica -based U.N.I.A. up with Washington’s movement for black 
(elite) economic "independence." As Garvey himself related: "I read ‘Up from Slavery’ by 
Booker T. Washington and then my d oom—if I may so call it —of being a race leader dawned 
upon me.."After Washington’s death, Garvey lost little time in trying to implement his black 
capitalist economic program which it must be said even at that early point was already outdated 
and valueless in so far as the practical needs of the black masses.  
Unperturbed, Garvey in 1919 set up both the Black Star Steamship Line and the Negro Factories 
Corporation which ostensibly was designed to promote business opportunities among black 
people. As expecte d, like his smokescreen anti -communism, Garvey’s emphasis on black 
business as a solution to the economic depression of black people played right into the hands of 
the black elite. As past practice has demonstrated, capitalist business enterprise whether w hite or 
black is based solely on the motive of profit; to be more specific, exploitative profit. The black 
elite, who in realty are little more than corporate enterprises front men in the black communities,


--- PAGE 5 ---
Earl Ofari (1969)                                                                                                                                   Page 5 of 14 
 
THE ULTIMATE JUSTICE OF THE PEOPLE                                              BLACK LIBERATION 
 
have gotten rich themselves off of the meagre ear nings of the black workers. Another aspect of 
the black elite’s pursuit of capitalist economics, is the intensification and broadening of the class 
cleavages within the black communities; thus preventing the attainment of a genuine black 
united front again st capitalist exploitation and racism. As can be seen then black capitalism’s 
proponents—the black elite —effects the corporate power structure’s main desire. It creates 
divisions while maintaining vested interest. So Garvey with his promotion of black busi ness 
enterprise laid the foundation for the future "Buy Black" and "support black" campaigns which 
the black elite over the years has so judiciously plugged in their quest for profit.  
 
 
 
 
After Garvey’s departure from the scene, the Nation of Islam under the leadership of the 
Honorable Elijah Muhammad, became the main standard bearer of the tradition of cultural 
nationalism. The Nation, since its founding, has, unlike the earlier cultural nationalism 
movements, placed an inordinate weight on the spiritual content of cultural nationalism.    
As should be apparent from this brief historical overview, cultural nationalism is deeply rooted 
in the black experience in white racist America. And like their historic forerunners, the new 
wave cultural nationalist organi zations have adopted, largely unrevised, the same negative 
theoretical flaws akin to the earlier movements. The only difference being that the scene and 
circumstance has changed. The Newark Black Power Conference of 1967 is an excellent 
illustration. Many of the individuals and organizations that played a prominent role in the 
planning of the conference were basically practitioners of cultural nationalism. As was the case 
with Garvey, (though on a more restricted basis) nearly fifty years earlier, much of t he financing 
for the activities of the conference itself came directly from some of America’s leading 
corporations. (Robert Allen has placed the number at 50. For a more comprehensive analysis of 
the role of corporations and foundations, especially Ford, i n the subversion of the black 
liberation movement, see: "Dialectics of Black Power.") The white corporate power structure has 
shown time and again that it is always ready to move in and either co -opt with money and 
promises or suppress and subvert with for ce and violence any movement that it perceives as 
being a threat to the maintenance of its self -interest, i.e. exploitation and oppression of 
America’s workers. With cultural nationalism, though, it seems American corporate enterprise 
has never had to cons ider the latter approach (force and violence). The organizers of the Black 
Power Conference, it appears, were more than receptive to overtures of assistance (pay -offs?) 
from white corporate enterprise. In noting some of the resolutions that the conference went on 
record as supporting, the indications are that the white corporations involved spent their money 
well. One of the first resolutions passed out of the conference which dealt with black economic 
planning called for the accerleration of "’buy black’ p olicies within all black communities." In 
other words more black capitalism. On the political front, one of the major resolutions passed 
called for the election of twelve more black congressmen in the 1968 elections. In passing this


--- PAGE 6 ---
Earl Ofari (1969)                                                                                                                                   Page 6 of 14 
 
THE ULTIMATE JUSTICE OF THE PEOPLE                                              BLACK LIBERATION 
 
resolution, it is assum ed that the conference agrees with Ebony magazine when it suggests that 
somehow a black face in a political office represents Black Power. The fact of the matter is that 
there is absolutely no equation between the two. Cleveland today has a black major, bu t don’t 
think for one minute that the black masses in Cleveland have any real control over the destinies 
of their lives. Black self -determination is no more a reality in Cleveland, or for that matter 
anywhere else in the country where black people are "rep resented" by a black political figure 
(head), today than it was before the election of Carl Stokes. The only thing that has changed in 
Cleveland is the color of the illusion. (Now black people during a rebellion can have the 
"pleasure," as was the case dur ing the rebellion there several months ago, of seeing a black, 
rather than a white, major call in the police and national guard.)  
As a final example of the cooperative pressure put on the Black Power Conference (read: cultural 
nationalism) let us examine what was undoubtedly one of the most negative proposals passed by 
the conference. This called for the assignment of "only black police captains to black 
neighborhoods." With the passage of this resolution, the conference again apparently feels that a 
black face, this time behind the badge (and the gun), equals Black Power. Sadly enough by now 
it should be obvious enough to black people from past experience that a black cop, when it 
comes to dealing with the problems of black people in the community, is no d ifferent or better 
than a white cop. In many instances a black cop has been known to go out of his way to make it 
tougher on black people. Make no mistake, this fact should be understood for exactly what it is. 
A black policeman, like his white counterpart , is still the street arm of the white corporate power 
structure. His job remains, as a matter of course, that of protector of the interests and welfare of 
the exploitative businesses and property located in the black communities. This as opposed to his 
stated purpose namely protecting and serving the people of the community. In America, as the 
system is presently constituted, the allegiance of the police regardless of both color and 
disposition, will always remain with the racist power structure. In case f or some this truth is hard 
to accept, one has only to observe the conditions in Harlem and Chicago where black police 
captains and officials are now, and have been for some time, a reality. The institutions of social 
oppression there remain unchanged. Or o ne can take the example of Lucius Amerson, the first 
black sheriff elected in the modern history of Alabama. Amerson was put in office in Macon 
county, Alabama by black votes. Amerson, nevertheless, consistently repudiated the black power 
movement. When bl ack students at Tuskeegee Institute (which is located in Tuskeegee, the 
Macon County seat) went on strike and occupied a building on campus in protest against the 
oppressive conditions at the college (imposed by a black elite controlled administration), 
Amerson called in the national guard. As one student there put it Amerson was "preoccupied 
with order." Amerson, of course, had no choice. As a bought and paid agent of the power 
structure he was forced to respond, like any other dutiful white racist major or police chief, to the 
situation which the ruling class had labeled dangerous.  
The resolutions passed by the Black Power Conference then, despite the hysterical scare tactics 
employed by the racist press, in a different context could generally have been c haracterized as 
minimal and mildy reformist. As such, they would have called for no great sacrifice on the part 
of America’s ruling elite to implement. However, if one is seriously concerned with the seizure 
of state power for the benefit of oppressed peop le in America, the resolutions passed in their 
present form by the conference were at the very least elitist in their orientation toward the black


--- PAGE 7 ---
Earl Ofari (1969)                                                                                                                                   Page 7 of 14 
 
THE ULTIMATE JUSTICE OF THE PEOPLE                                              BLACK LIBERATION 
 
elite. Therefore such a program, as the conference went on record as supporting, is not suitably 
geared toward eliciting or encouraging the support of the maximum number of black people.  
As a next step, let’s examine more closely the direction which some of the individual cultural 
nationalist organizations are headed at present. In Newark, Leroi Jones and his Un ited Brothers 
are actively involved in a campaign to take over black control of the municipal government in 
the city. As Jones put it: "Our aim is to bring about black self -government in Newark by 1970." 
It is reasoned that since Newark is 60% black, black  people should be the controling element in 
the city. Again the same problem arises that the Black Power Conference was unable to deal with 
regarding black political control. It is still totally unrealistic to think that by stocking a municipal 
administration with black faces is going to make any real difference in the power balance. The 
fact remains that today as a means of circumventing black political control, the real power over 
internal control and the decision making processes is being removed from th e large cities which 
have, or soon will have, black majorities. Real power today is strategically concentrated in the 
hands of both the racist run state legislatures and the corporate 
controlled federal government. As H. Rap Brown has aptly summed it 
up: " As long as the man controls the water or electricity coming into 
your community it does you no good to control that community…I think 
the real isse [sic] goes way beyond this idea of geographic control." If 
what rap is saying here is not clear, black people have only to look at the 
examples of the estimated twenty -five all black towns that exist in 
America today. In each instance, these towns are politically and 
economically backward precisely because of what Rap refers to. The 
control and management of th ese towns comes from outside. Richard 
Hatcher, the first black mayor of Gary, Indiana, has stated the problem 
even more clearly: "There is much talk about black control of the ghetto, what does that mean? I 
am mayor of a city of roughly 90,000 black people, but we do not control the possibilities of jobs 
for them, of money for their schools, or state funded social services. THESE THINGS ARE IN 
THE HANDS OF THE UNITED STATES STEEL CORPORATION AND THE COUNTY 
DEPARTMENT OF WELFARE OF THE STATE OF INDIANA (emph asis mine). Will the 
poor in Gary’s worst slums be helped because the pawn-shop owner is black, not white?  
If Jones is to be believed in his efforts then belief in blackness is all that is needed to break this 
effectual strength. On this theme Jones has gone even further. In a recent interview ( Black 
Theatre, 1968, p. 18), Jones expressed his contempt for black people who as he put it "are quick 
to run to a white European political reference "rather than" quote Nkrumah or Sekou Toure or 
Nyere." It may com e as a surprise to Jones (though I tend to doubt it) to know that the three 
African political figures that he mentions all at one time digested the works of Marx, Lenin, and 
other Marxist theoreticians. Each of the three has brilliantly applied the Marxist  meaning to the 
particular context and conditions of each of their respective countries. As a result today both 
Guinea under Toure and Tanzania under Nyerere, through the skillful blending of African 
Socialism, have become two of the most progressive countries on the African continent, and both 
are in the forefront of the fight against Western Imperialism.  
Similarly, Stokely Carmichael has used the same naïve reasoning as Jones when he proclaimed 
in his now famous dictum that "Every negro is a potential bl ack man." In reality, nothing could


--- PAGE 8 ---
Earl Ofari (1969)                                                                                                                                   Page 8 of 14 
 
THE ULTIMATE JUSTICE OF THE PEOPLE                                              BLACK LIBERATION 
 
be further from the truth. For this to be true it would have to be slightly amended as Rap has 
done to read that if anything "Every negro is a potential traitor." It is absurd, as long as vested 
interest is the dominant motif in America, to think that every black person in America can be 
brought around to the ideals of collective struggle and self -sacrifice for black liberation. If Mao 
Tse-Tung had naively taken it for granted that "Every Chinese is a potential communist"  he’d 
probably be still up in the caves of Northern China today —if not dead. Contradictions 
notwithstanding though, Leroi Jones and Stokely Carmichael are quite calculating in their 
analysis of the content and purpose of the black liberation movement. Jone s’ attempts to gain 
black political control of Newark are carefully designed to create both a base and the climate for 
his professed goal—the establishment of a separate black nation. As Jones has written: "And it is 
this that the Black Man must have. An a utonomous Nation. His own forms: treaties, agreements, 
laws."  
Cultural nationalism, as evidenced historically by Garvey, Delaney and the Nation of Islam has 
always contained the seed of separatism within its framework. Better perceived, though, the 
concept of black nationhood as it relates to cultural nationalism, at present, has perhaps found its 
greatest expression in the program of the L.A. based US organization. (The Nation of Islam must 
be excluded here. Over the past ten years there has been a subtle  but recognizable shift in the 
orientation of the Nation’s program. Though still advocating black nationhood as a solution to 
the problems of black people, the Nation is at present placing its prime emphasis on black 
business development rather than on the  promulgation of black aesthetic and cultural values as a 
basis for black nationhood.)  
Briefly, US is a relatively new cultural nationalist organization. The organization was founded in 
the latter part of 1965 by Ron Karenga. The cultural nationalist spir it is openly evident in one of 
US organization’s favorite expressions — "Just trying to be Black." US, like many other cultural 
nationalist organizations, has, instead of offering tangible programs of immediate significance to 
the black community, contented itself with the celebration of African festivals, holidays, and the 
promotion of African fashion shows. US also places strong emphasis on the adoption of a new 
language for black people. Swahili is the African language that has been chosen. As Karenga has  
explained it: "We need a new language to break the linguistic straitjacket of our masters.." The 
emphasis on language rather than program has done a great deal to create confusion among many 
black people. The study of a second language at this point in th e struggle is at best a peripheral 
issue in so far as the immediate needs of black people are concerned. Further, whether it is 
realized or not, English is the number one language in the world, and one of the 
major languages spoken in the Third World.    
Those then that are seriously concerned about building a national liberation 
movement in the U.S. capable of linking up with the liberation struggles in 
other countries must become aware of the need for a common language. With 
English, the base is partly t here. True Socialist (or communist, if you prefer) 
internationalism must have as its goal, as Marx maintained, the breaking down 
of all barriers and national boundaries that divide the revolutionary peoples of 
the world. And as it stands now, outside of U. S. Imperialism, racism and 
militarism, language differentials are one of the main obstacles to this process.


--- PAGE 9 ---
Earl Ofari (1969)                                                                                                                                   Page 9 of 14 
 
THE ULTIMATE JUSTICE OF THE PEOPLE                                              BLACK LIBERATION 
 
In the same context, US, like other cultural nationalist groups which include the Yorubas and the 
Mau Maus of Harlem, feel that it is essential to  relate to all the customs and traditions of Africa. 
Karenga has said: "To go back to tradition is the first step forward." As opposed to this Huey P. 
Newton, who embodies the spirit of the Black Panther Party, the main force behind revolutionary 
black nationalism in America, takes a different and much more pragmatic view when he points 
out: "We have to realize our black heritage in order to give us strength to move on and progress. 
But as far as returning to the old African culture, it’s unnecessary and it ’s not advantageous in 
many respects. We believe that CULTURE ITSELF WILL NOT LIBERATE US. We’re going 
to need some stronger stuff." By "stronger stuff" Huey of course is referring to the correct 
political and economic discipline based strictly on the needs of the black masses.  
Going back then to the concept of black nationhood as it involves cultural nationalism, we can 
see just how weak the premise on which it rests is. But as a final note on this question, neither 
US nor any of the other cultural nation alist organizations that are pushing the issue of black 
nationhood have yet shown just how they are prepared to deal with the certain prospect of 
American economic subversion. Political independence doesn’t necessarily mean political or 
economic control of  a national economy. It is an unquestioned fact that of the some forty 
independent nations in Africa, all of whom have their own black governments, legislature, flags 
and presidents, none of them including the aforementioned Guinea and Tanzania, are totall y self-
supporting. The same principle that is in operation regarding the 25 all -black towns, previously 
mentioned, applies on an international level with the African and other Third World countries. 
U.S. Imperialism is the major roadblock to the freedom an d independence of every individual 
and country in the Third World bloc.  
Cultural nationalism’s failure to comprehend adequately the scope of U.S. Imperialism stems 
mainly from the narrowness of its ideological framework. As a consequence, cultural 
nationalists, in the tradition of Garvey, have completely ruled out, for the most part, the class 
view of the struggle: And instead of relying solely on the racial analysis, Karenga again 
interprets the feelings of most cultural nationalists on this point: "The i nternational issue is 
racism not economics… RACISM RULES OUT ECONOMICS… Therefore we conceive of the 
problem today not as a class struggle but a global struggle against racism. "This view is of course 
based on an erroneous assumption. Race does not rule ou t economics. If anything, in America, 
racist oppression and division are to a great extent the outstanding outgrowth of white America’s 
four hundred year pursuit of capitalist economics. A pursuit that began with the wealth America 
derived from the African  slave trade and the justification for its existence being the rationalized 
myth of black inferiority. A pursuit that extends through the present with the corporate power 
structure today still relying on racism (despite the façade of laws, rhetoric and com missions to 
the contrary) as a weapon to divide black and white workers. This is not to say that white racism 
would be entirely eliminated if capitalism as a system was thoroughly transformed. For it is 
undeniably true that racism as a determinant componen t has completely permeated every 
institutional fiber in white American society. As a result, white racism as a distinctly separate on-
going process has in itself achieved the position of institutional status. Even so, it is still 
inaccurate to attempt to s eparate white racism as a process from its base of origin —capitalism. 
On their basic level, the two are inseparable. To deny the character of one is to deny the 
character of the other. In a proper perspective, the eradication of capitalism is a major requisite in 
any realistic effort to solve the problem of racism.


--- PAGE 10 ---
Earl Ofari (1969)                                                                                                                                   Page 10 of 14 
 
THE ULTIMATE JUSTICE OF THE PEOPLE                                              BLACK LIBERATION 
 
Eldridge Cleaver, as a leading theoretician of the Black Panther Party, has pointed up the dual 
nature of both the national and class questions in the oppression of black people in the U.S. As 
Cleaver has said: "We repudiate the capitalist economic system. We recognize the class nature of 
the capitalist economic system and we recognize the dynamics involved in the capitalist system. 
At the same time we recognize the national character of our stru ggle. We recognize the fact that 
we have been oppressed because we are black people even though we know this oppression was 
for the purpose of exploitation."  
Returning to US and Karenga, it is relevant to note that in keeping with cultural nationalism’s 
historic tradition of anti-Marxism, Karenga endorses its concommittant features of "Buy Black." 
"Buy Black" (always insert elite), in this case, has become one of the main points in Karenga’s 
"seven-fold path to ‘Blackness.’" Black capitalism and anti -communism are once again tightly 
joined.  
Finally, no discussion of cultural nationalism could possibly be considered complete without an 
analysis or at least a clarification of what is meant by culture and its particular relation to the 
black liberation struggle. Cultural nationalists, for the most part, are of the opinion that culture is 
or should be the determining factor in the struggle. Other theorists would of course disagree and 
take issue with this position. For the sake of discussion, though, let us dea l with only one –Franz 
Fanon. "Culture," as Fanon defines it, "is first the expression of a nation, the expression of its 
preferences, of its taboos and of its patterns." Fanon goes on to relate: "In the colonial situation, 
culture, which is doubly deprive d of the support of the nation and of the State, falls away and 
dies. THE CONDITION FOR ITS EXISTENCE IS THEREFORE NATIONAL LIBERATION 
AND THE RENAISSANCE OF THE STATE." Fanon then is saying that emphasis on culture 
should be a related but secondary featur e of any liberation struggle. Since it is agreed by nearly 
all involved in the black cultural nationalist movement that Afro -American is in fact a colonized 
nation and black people are a colonized people then Fanon’s assessment of the role of culture 
should apply to black America as readily as it would to the colonial countries of the Third World. 
As Fanon views it "national liberation of the State" is the prerequisite for the successful and 
permanent growth of genuine black national cultural values and con sciousness. As contemporary 
developments have proved, this has indeed been the case. China is an excellent example. Mao 
Tse-Tung’s Great Proletarian Cultural Revolution PROCEEDED NOT PRECEDED by nearly 
twenty years the seizures and consolidation of state p olitical and economic power. The 
development of mass-based political and economic power is always the first order of business in 
any campaign for national reconstruction. Similarly it took a socialist revolution in Cuba to 
legitimize within the Cuban natio nal spirit the interest in and the study of African cultural 
delineations. As a consequence, the Cuban revolutionary government has set up on a permanent 
basis an Institute of Ethnology and Folklore dedicated solely to the research and understanding 
of Afr ican customs, language and culture. Added to this, many all -black artist groups are 
presently flourishing in Cuba. Their major interest is, of course, the discovery and promotion of 
literature and plays based on African cultural creations. Contrary to the belief of many cultural 
nationalists, culture is largely a byproduct of a nation’s economic system. As Karl Marx summed 
it up: "The mode of production of material life determines the social, political and intellectual 
processes of life in general."


--- PAGE 11 ---
Earl Ofari (1969)                                                                                                                                   Page 11 of 14 
 
THE ULTIMATE JUSTICE OF THE PEOPLE                                              BLACK LIBERATION 
 
As a corollary to the question of culture, all too 
often it has been observed that many cultural 
nationalist organizations as a result of their 
misunderstanding of the correct role of culture at 
this state of the liberation struggle have become 
trapped in a cult of elitism and mysticism. Elitism 
and mysticism have produced disastrous results 
when it comes to these organizations actually 
relating to black people on a level of 
comprehension. Elitism, in a few instances, has 
found expression in the policies of c ultural 
nationalist organizations. Karenga himself has 
said: "Nationalism can not just go to the masses, 
it must make (masses) come to it." This bit of 
inverse (non)revolutionary logic, if followed out to its logical conclusion would insure the 
permanent failure of any progressive movement among black people toward organization. The 
plain fact is that it is the obligation of any sincere revolutionary to raise the level of 
consciousness of black people. An organization that has insulated and isolated itself from the 
people has taken itself out of position to do this. For such an endeavor requires a concerted, 
programmatic drive on all levels and at all times to reach, affect and involve people on a 
maximum scale of participation. If this is not done the organ ization will cut itself off from 
potential sources of support (which the community always represents) and thus become either 
non-functional in its social aloofness or actively counter -revolutionary. To be truly effective, as 
Mao has said, one must "go to the masses and learn from them."  
Cultural nationalism, as it is presently defined ideologically, must be opposed. At this juncture in 
the black liberation struggle, black unity and active attempts at alliances with all other oppressed 
groupings in America are of paramount importance. Nationalism, as history has shown, can 
potentially be a progressive force in bringing about a society’s social transformation, provided, 
of course, that it is not exploited for the selfish, narrow ends of a few individuals. As Fanon has 
warned: "…if nationalism…is not enriched and deepened by a very rapid transformation into a 
consciousness of social and political needs, in other words into humanism, it leads up a blind 
alley."  
Revolutionary nationalism, both in theory and practice, is a far reaching variant on the traditional 
concept of black nationalism. Revolutionary nationalist, unlike cultural nationalists, recognize 
that it is impossible to resolve the problems of black people under the structure of American 
Capitalism. Th is has led Huey Newton to correctly point out that one who adheres to the 
philosophy of revolutionary nationalism must of necessity be a socialist. For revolutionary 
nationalists, by and large, take the position that in order to oppose capitalism it is man datory that 
one adopt an outlook of international working class solidarity with particular emphasis on the 
struggles of Third World people against Imperialism. Generally speaking, cultural nationalists 
have a one -sided view of American society. The struggl e for black liberation to them would be 
won if only white racism were eliminated. Such a view is absurd. Revolutionary nationalists 
have clearly seen that white racism is only a convenient tool used by the corporate power 
structure to divide the working ma sses in America while maximizing profits. Cultural


--- PAGE 12 ---
Earl Ofari (1969)                                                                                                                                   Page 12 of 14 
 
THE ULTIMATE JUSTICE OF THE PEOPLE                                              BLACK LIBERATION 
 
nationalists also tend to identify only with the liberation struggles on the African continent rather 
than to see the need for a total world revolution. Any number of examples throughout the world 
of homogeneous national populations who are not discriminated against because of race but are 
nonetheless poor and exploited could readily cited as proof of refuting cultural nationalism’s 
claim that white racism is the only problem black people must deal with.  
At the same time, revolutionary nationalists realize that a simplistic Marxist approach to the 
question of American oppression is by itself limited. Corporate America’s superexploitation of 
the black working class, contrary to what certain Marxists [sic] gr oups such as the Progressive 
Labor party maintain, is not the sole obstacle in the path of black liberation. There are special 
problems of both a cultural and social nature which black people alone face. Most whites are 
oppressed because they are poor, i.e . from a Marxian class analysis they are exploited 
economically as workers: this as opposed to being oppressed as a racially distinct national 
minority group as are black people. It is apparent then that black people are oppressed in 
America both because t hey are poor and black. A pragmatic solution then would dictate that 
before any type of working class hook up can be effect [sic] to fight capitalism, it is first 
necessary to organize black people as a collective body, around the issue of their special 
economic and cultural needs, into a unified fighting force. This, while combating the racism of 
white workers. Then and only then can fruitful working class unity be discussed.  
Revolutionary nationalists also understand that a united working class in Americ a must be 
prepared to completely support national wars of liberation that are being, or soon will be, waged 
against Western Imperialism throughout the Third World.  
Further, revolutionary nationalists, like their Cuban and Vietnamese counterparts, realize the 
vital role which women must be prepared to play in any liberation struggle. This, then, requires 
the total liberation of women from both economic domination and male social chauvinism. 
Cultural nationalists, in opposition, tend to relegate black women to a secondary position 
oftentimes justifying this practice with the contention that this is in the natural tradition of 
ancient African customs.  
At this point it would be fair to say that the only black organization with any significant 
following which is presently working toward the dual objective of black liberation through black 
unity and organization AND NATIONAL REVOLUTION THROUGH PROLETARIAN 
CLASS CONSCIOUSNESS is the Black Panther Party. SNCC is for all practical purposes 
extinct. This largely due to its failure to adapt itself to the shift of the black struggle from the 
rural South to the Urban ghettos of the North. CORE, by contrast, has chosen to follow in the 
steps of Garvey and Booker T. Washington and pursue separate black business development  and 
capitalist economics as its solution to the problems of black people. Nearly every other black 
"militant" organization has gotten hung up in the pitfalls of their own, dead end rhetoric about 
"getting whitey" and "blowing away the man" and so on. The Panthers, on the other hand, have 
seen that rhetoric without program doesn’t mean a thing when it comes to dealing with the day to 
day problems that confront black and working people. With this in mind, the Panthers as part of 
their party platform have wor ked out in detail a comprehensive ten point program which speaks 
directly to the basic needs of black people in America.


--- PAGE 13 ---
Earl Ofari (1969)                                                                                                                                   Page 13 of 14 
 
THE ULTIMATE JUSTICE OF THE PEOPLE                                              BLACK LIBERATION 
 
The Panther program purely from an organizational standpoint is perhaps the most practical 
program ever devised by any black group for  black people. As such it deserves to be listed in its 
entirety for purposes of study and hopefully emulation by other black groups sincerely concerned 
about black community betterment.  
1. We want freedom. We want power to determine the destiny of our black community.  
2. We want full employment for our people.  
3. We want an end to the robbery by the white man of our black community.  
4. We want decent housing, fit for shelter of human beings.   
5. We want education for our people that exposes the true nature of this decadent American 
society. We want education that teaches us our true history and our role in the present 
society.  
6. We want all black men to be exempt from military service.  
7. We want an immediate end to police brutality and murder of black people.  
8. We want freedom for all black men held in Federal, State, County and City prisons and 
jails.  
9. We want all black people when brought to trial to be tried in court by a jury of their peer 
groups or people from their black communities, as defined by the constitution of the 
United States.  
10. We want land, bread, housing, education, clothing, justice and peace.  
To implement this program the Panthers have moved on several fronts. They have organized 
community boycotts against exploitative business in L.A. and Oakland. The Panthers currently 
are working on programs to feed hungry children and to establish free medical clinics within the 
black communities.


--- PAGE 14 ---
Earl Ofari (1969)                                                                                                                                   Page 14 of 14 
 
THE ULTIMATE JUSTICE OF THE PEOPLE                                              BLACK LIBERATION 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Photo credits: cover-David Fenton/LNS 
back page-Miriam Baker/LNS

