=== EXTRACTED TEXT FROM: The Michael Eric Dyson Reader.pdf ===
Extraction Method: PyPDFLoader
Total Pages: 576
Timestamp: 2026-01-04T17:05:12.190181
================================================================================


--- PAGE 1 ---



--- PAGE 2 ---
THE
MICHAEL ERIC DYSON
READER


--- PAGE 3 ---
ALSO BY MICHAEL ERIC DYSON
Mercy, Mercy Me
Why I Love Black Women
Open Mike
Holler If Ton Hear Me
I May Not Get There With You
Race Rules
Between God and Gangsta Rap
Making Malcolm
Reflecting Black


--- PAGE 4 ---
THE
MICHAEL ERIC DYSON
READER
Michael Eric Dyson
BASIC
CIVITAS
BOOKS
BASIC CIVITAS BOOKS
A MEMBER OF THE PERSEUS BOOKS GROUP
NEW YORK


--- PAGE 5 ---
Copyright © 2004 by Michael Eric Dyson
Published by Basic Civitas Books
A Member of the Perseus Books Group
All rights reserved. Printed in the United States of America. No part of this
book may be reproduced in any manner whatsoever without written permis-
sion except in the case of brief quotations embodied in critical articles and
reviews. For information, address Basic Civitas Books, 387 Park Avenue
South, New York, NY 10016-8810.
Books published by Basic Civitas are available at special discounts for bulk pur-
chases in the United States by corporations, institutions, and other organiza-
tions. For more information, please contact the Special Markets Department at
the Perseus Books Group, 11 Cambridge Center, Cambridge MA 02142, or call
(617) 252-5298, (800) 255-1514, or e-mail specialmarkets@perseusbooks.com.
Dyson, Michael Eric.
[Selections. 2004]
The Michael Eric Dyson reader / Michael Eric Dyson,
p. cm.
Includes bibliographical references.
ISBN 0-465-01768-1 (alk. paper)
1. African Americans—Race identity. 2. United States—Race relations.
3. African Americans-Intellectual life. 4. African American philosophy.
5. African Americans—Social conditions—1975- . 6. African Americans in
popular culture. 7. Popular culture—United States. I. Tide.
E185.625.D969 2004
305.896'073-dc22
2003017294
04 05 06 / 10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1


--- PAGE 6 ---
To Two EXTRAORDINARY WOMEN
Rosa Elizabeth Smith
(1921-2002)
Beloved matriarch
Wise counselor
Soulful confidante
and
Fiesty Mother-in-law
AND
Judith Rodin
President, the University of Pennsylvania, 1994-2004
Visionary leader
Brilliant thinker
Beautiful woman
and
Dear Friend


--- PAGE 7 ---
This page intentionally left blank


--- PAGE 8 ---
THE PARADOX OF EDUCATION IS PRECISELY THIS —THAT AS ONE BEGINS
TO BECOME CONSCIOUS ONE BEGINS TO EXAMINE THE SOCIETY IN
WHICH HE IS BEING EDUCATED. THE PURPOSE OF EDUCATION, FINALLY,
IS TO CREATE IN A PERSON THE ABILITY TO LOOK AT THE WORLD FOR
HIMSELF, TO MAKE HIS OWN DECISIONS, TO SAY TO HIMSELF THIS IS
BLACK OR THIS IS WHITE, TO DECIDE FOR HIMSELF WHETHER THERE
IS A GOD IN HEAVEN OR NOT. TO ASK QUESTIONS OF THE UNIVERSE,
AND THEN LEARN TO LIVE WITH THOSE QUESTIONS, IS THE WAY HE
ACHIEVES HIS OWN IDENTITY. BUT NO SOCIETY IS REALLY ANXIOUS
TO HAVE THAT KIND OF PERSON AROUND. WHAT SOCIETIES REALLY,
IDEALLY, WANT IS A CITIZENRY WHICH WILL SIMPLY OBEY THE RULES
OF SOCIETY. IF A SOCIETY SUCCEEDS IN THIS, THAT SOCIETY IS ABOUT
TO PERISH. THE OBLIGATION OF ANYONE WHO THINKS OF HIMSELF AS
RESPONSIBLE IS TO EXAMINE SOCIETY AND TRY TO CHANGE IT AND TO
FIGHT IT —AT NO MATTER WHAT RISK.
—James Baldwin
AGAINST THE URGENCY OF PEOPLE DYING IN THE STREETS, WHAT IN
GOD'S NAME IS THE POINT OF CULTURAL STUDIES? WHAT IS THE POINT
OF THE STUDY OF REPRESENTATIONS, IF THERE IS NO RESPONSE TO THE
QUESTION OF WHAT YOU SAY TO SOMEONE WHO WANTS TO KNOW IF THEY
SHOULD TAKE A DRUG AND IF THAT MEANS THEY'LL DIE TWO DAYS LATER
OR A FEW MONTHS EARLIER? AT THAT POINT, I THINK ANYBODY WHO IS
INTO CULTURAL STUDIES SERIOUSLY AS AN INTELLECTUAL PRACTICE,
MUST FEEL, ON THEIR PULSE, ITS EPHEM ERALITY, ITS INSUBSTANTIALITY,
HOW LITTLE IT REGISTERS, HOW LITTLE WE'VE BEEN ABLE TO CHANGE
ANYTHING OR GET ANYBODY TO DO ANYTHING. IF YOU DON'T FEEL THAT
AS ONE TENSION IN THE WORK THAT YOU ARE DOING, THEORY HAS LET
YOU OFF THE HOOK.
—Stuart Hall


--- PAGE 9 ---
This page intentionally left blank


--- PAGE 10 ---
CONTENTS
Foreword xiii
Preface xvii
Introduction: Why I Am an Intellectual xix
I D Y S O N O G R A P H Y
1 Not from Some Zeus's Head: My Intellectual Development 3
2 Letter to My Brother, Everett, in Prison 19
3 This I Believe 32
II THEORIES OF RACE
4 The Liberal Theory of Race 37
5 When You're a Credit to Your Race, the Bill Will Come Due:
O.J. Simpson and Our Trial by Fire 46
III AFFIRMATIVE ACTION
6 Debating Affirmative Action 69
7 A Reprieve for Affirmative Action 86
IV M U L T I C U L T U R A L I S M
8 Leonard Jeffries and the Struggle for the Black Mind 91
9 Shakespeare and Smokey Robinson: Revisiting
the Culture Wars 96
V WHITENESS STUDIES
10 The Labor of Whiteness, the Whiteness of Labor, and
the Perils of White wishing 107
11Giving Whiteness a Black Eye 113


--- PAGE 11 ---
x Contents
VI GENDER VIEWS
12 The Plight of Black Men 137
13 Another Saturday Night, or Have All the Brothers
Gone to White Women? 147
14 In O.J.'s Shadow: Kobe Bryant's Predicament 167
VII AFRO-BAPTIST RADICALISM AND RHETORIC
15 "God Almighty Has Spoken from Washington, B.C.":
American Society and Christian Faith 173
16 Gardner Taylor: The Poet Laureate of the American Pulpit 192
17 "Somewhere I Read of the Freedom of Speech":
Constructing a Unique Voice 202
VIII RELIGION AND SEXUALITY
18 When You Divide Body and Soul, Problems Multiply:
The Black Church and Sexuality 219
19 Homotextualities: The Bible, Sexual Ethics, and the
Theology of Homoeroticism 238
IX B l O C R I T I C I S M AND BLACK I C O N S
20 X Marks the Plots: A Critical Reading of Malcolm's Readers 261
21 Mixed Blessings: Martin Luther King, Jr., and the Lessons
of an Ambiguous Heroism 257
22 "Give Me a Paper and Pen": Tupac's Place in Hip-Hop 306
X C I N E M A N O I R
23 Spike Lee's Neonationalist Vision 327
24 Between Apocalypse and Redemption: John Singleton's
Boyz N the Hood 334
25 Ghettocentricity and the New Black Cinema 349
XI THE SOUL Musics OF BLACK FOLK
26 The Promise and Perils of Contemporary Gospel Music 363
27 Mariah Carey and "Authentic" Black Music 367
28 Aretha Franklin, Vanessa Bell Armstrong, and Me 370
29 The Great Next: Jazz Origins and the Anatomy of
Improvisation 376


--- PAGE 12 ---
Contents xi
XII Hip-Hop CULTURE
30 The Culture of Hip-Hop 401
31 Gangsta Rap and American Culture 411
32 We Never Were What We Used to Be: Black Youth, Pop
Culture, and the Politics of Nostalgia 418
XIII THE PREDICAMENT or POSTMODERNITY
33 Michael Jackson's Postmodern Spirituality 443
34 Be Like Mike? Michael Jordan and the Pedagogy of Desire 461
35 Is Postmodernism Just Modernism in Drag? 469
XIV CODA: THE LIFE OF THE MIND
36 It's Not What You Know, It's How You Show It:
Black Public Intellectuals 493
Notes 511
Credits 533
Index 535


--- PAGE 13 ---
This page intentionally left blank


--- PAGE 14 ---
FOREWORD
Robin D. G. Kelley
I first encountered Michael Eric Dyson on the page over ten years ago. I'd seen
a few of his essays in Z Magazine sometime around 1989 or 1990, but at that time
he was virtually unknown (to me, at least, but I was only two years out of grad-
uate school and didn't get out much). Then, in 1993, a copy of his first book, Re-
flecting Black: African-American Cultural Criticism, crossed my desk, and the Nation
magazine asked me to review it. Although it was a wide-ranging collection of es-
says, I found the book to be nicely organized, coherent, powerful, and critically
relevant to the moment.
The old folks might remember that 1993 was a period when the so-called
"black public intellectual" was coming into being, prompted largely by the publi-
cation of Cornel West's Race Matters that same year. West's collection of essays be-
came a runaway bestseller, opening up critical black radical thought to a wider au-
dience in an age when Los Angeles was still rebuilding from the rebellion of April
1992. But with West's mass appeal came a backlash, from the left and right,
against Race Matters and everything Professor West stood for. Of course, there
were legitimate debates and criticisms that shed light on crucial issues of race,
class, gender, and power, but much of the backlash was motivated by jealousy or
a confused notion that "real" radicals cannot attract a mass audience without sell-
ing out. Indeed, I remember multiple backlashes against black academics, as well
as some horrible battles between folks on the page that did not enlighten me or
my peers one bit. This was the context in which I read Dyson's first book. In my
review in the Nation I mentioned the "nasty ad hominem reviews, petty jealousies,
blanket condemnations of black scholarship, hateful and sinister commentaries."
"As I kick it down here widi the ordinary faculty folk," I complained, "writing
grant proposals and reading sorry undergraduate essays—and witness the war of
words—I have these perverse daydreams of Rodney King pleading with black in-
tellectuals to get along while The Pharcyde, that funny, funky, Thelonious
Monk-loving West Coast hip-hop group chant 'Who Is the Nigga in Charge?'"
Dyson's book was a welcome relief from the wars of blackademe. Of course,
he had his own debates to wage and own axes to grind, but for the most part he
wrote about black people, what we've created, what we've come to represent, and
why we should not be too quick to make snap judgments about what is "au-
thentically black." He warned against blind "race loyalty" and insisted diat real
liberation requires independent thinking and a willingness to criticize black lead-
ers, intellectuals, and cultural heroes. His voice was fresh, his language vibrant,


--- PAGE 15 ---
xiv Foreword
and to top it all off, he was a working-class kid from Detroit committed to ac-
tivism and the social gospel. "Evident in every essay," I observed at the time, "is
a belief that the Gospel is a lived struggle, not merely a popular compilation of
writings, folklore, and pithy slogans separate from everyday life. Thus Dyson,
like Cornel West, is concerned with what he sees as a spiritual crisis in America,
especially among young people. But rather than follow the common trend nowa-
days of chastising African-American youth for relinquishing some golden-age
spirituality and ethics of their parents' generation, he seeks signs of the spirit in
various secular cultural forms. Spirituality, Dyson recognizes, may be in crisis,
but it ain't gone. It looks different, and if we are going to locate it we must use
different interpretive tools."
So before I even met the man, I knew there was something special about him.
Given his writing style at the time, I imagined him to be a modern-day holy man,
meditative, contemplative, deeply spiritual. He probably talked slow like the old
preachers, but he was only thirty-four years old. When I finally did meet him, a
few weeks after the review appeared in the Nation, I wasn't prepared for this tor-
nado of a man who spoke faster than the speed of light and dropped more one-
liners than Richard Pryor on a good night. He was as agile with Western philos-
ophy as he was with soul, R&B, and hip-hop. It was as if W.E.B. DuBois and Fab
Five Freddy had been merged together in some Frankensteinian experiment. And
through it all, his lovely and brilliant wife, Marcia Dyson, kept him on the ground
and balanced. Both kept us in stitches. I laughed so much and learned so much
that night that the muscles in the back of my head cramped up.
The Michael Eric Dyson Reader will have some skeptics, to be sure. How could
anyone who experienced such a meteoric rise—from pastor to Ph.D. candidate to
Distinguished Professor in a little over a decade-claim to have produced enough
for a "reader"? He has published eight books in that short period, and he has
more in press soon to see the light of day. And if you put this book on the scale,
you'll see that this carefully selected fraction of his output competes in the heavy-
weight division. Nevertheless, quantity isn't everything, and his detractors will
continue to call him names like "race hustler" and "charlatan" and related adjec-
tives that suggest that Dyson doesn't do his work and just slides by on his quick
wit and glib tongue. (While I vehemently disagree with these assessments, I have
thought of Michael at times as somewhat of a magician; he has an uncanny abil-
ity to pull lyrics and quotes and dictionary definitions out of his head, and the
story of how he produced his dissertation, told in the first chapter of the Reader,
is worthy of David Blaine.)
The truth is, Michael Eric Dyson is an incredibly hardworking intellectual, one
who is on a mission to inspire the rest of us to remake the world. Most people,
fans and critics alike, don't realize how hard he works because he makes it look
easy and he writes a lot without footnotes. But dig deeper and one quickly real-
izes that beneath the surface of his wit and humor one finds intellectual depth,
scholarly integrity, and a startling level of erudition. As the works included here


--- PAGE 16 ---
Foreword xv
reveal, Dyson is one of the few scholars in the country who can honestly be called
multidisciplinary. His books and essays on black cultural production draw on the
most sophisticated literary and cultural criticism, critical theory, sociology, ethnog-
raphy, and history, and he brings to his work a rich and varied understanding of
music and music criticism. What's more, Dyson has been able to write for a gen-
eral audience without minimizing his scholarly tone and rigor.
His essays selected here examine a wide terrain of culture, politics, and social
criticism, and nearly all of his work is policy-oriented, immediate, and, I might add,
politically engaged. His essays should be read as efforts to understand the plight of
aggrieved populations—notably black working people, youth, and women—and
how their lives and cultures speak to the conditions they face. On the other hand,
he insists that people take responsibility for their behavior and criticizes black in-
stitutions for failing black communities. His essays on the Black Church, for ex-
ample, are bold challenges to the failure of black clerical leadership and the appar-
ent moral hypocrisy running through contemporary institutionalized religion. He
had nothing to gain by writing these pieces, and they are well-documented and
well-argued, and have played a crucial role in placing behind-the-scenes debates
into a wider realm. The same goes for his scintillating work on black public intel-
lectuals. He takes no prisoners, on the one hand, and yet offers smart, concise com-
mentary on the debate over black intellectuals that takes a long, historical view of
the work they have done over the past century. The "Coda," in particular, is not a
self-congratulatory essay but a call to arms, one that demands political engagement
as a component of our intellectual work. Finally, for all the efforts to place music
and other cultural forms within particular antiracist, class-conscious contexts, to
see contemporary black culture as subaltern social struggles generated by racist
backlash, poverty, and Reaganomics, Dyson refuses to over-interpret or romanti-
cize. Nor does he accept the dualism of "nihilism" vs. "black radicalism" that has
frozen too many writers.
As his work on Malcolm X and other political and cultural icons demon-
strates, Dyson has a gift for grasping the politics of representation. Rather than
quibble over the details of Malcolm's life or his self-representation, Dyson
chooses wisely to pay more attention to the meaning of Malcolm X for our time,
whether in the academy or the theater. He succinctly captures what Malcolm, the
icon, has meant to a rising generation of black nationalists. Unlike other com-
mentators who dismiss African-American youth wearing X-hats as suffering from
an infantile disorder, Dyson tries to make sense of these young people within the
context of their time. He does not try to speak for them but allows them to speak
for themselves. As he makes abundantly clear, the rise of hip-hop culture, the
resurgence of black nationalism, and the success of New Jack and ghettocentric
filmmakers are largely responsible for the return of the fallen minister to the pan-
theon of black heroes.
Ironically, the work that is represented with only one excerpt here happens to be
my personal favorite: I May Mot Get There With You: The True Martin Luther King, Jr.


--- PAGE 17 ---
xvi Foreword
(2000). I urge all of you who hold this book in your hand to add Dyson's master-
ful study of Dr. King to your collection. He doesn't attempt to find the "real" King,
but he does juxtapose the ways in which he's used politically (especially by right-
wing anti-Civil Rights activists, black nationalists, hip-hop generation youths, cor-
porate America, etc.) with King's own words, actions, and the movement histories
on which we've come to rely. He delves deeply into primary and secondary
sources and is not afraid to examine controversial issues such as King's sexual li-
aisons, patriarchal attitudes, and his left-wing turn. He succeeds in toppling the
icon of King and puts in his place a human being replete with flaws, weaknesses,
and youthful exuberance. In a world where Malcolm X is often promoted as the
embodiment of postwar black radicalism and King regarded as a safe voice in the
wilderness, Dyson demonstrates just how his socialist, class, and antiwar politics
persuaded the Civil Rights establishment to more or less silence him. And it was
that silence, that suppression of history, which allowed conservatives and corpo-
rate leaders to claim King's message as their own. While Dyson received a great
deal of (unfair) criticism for his willingness to deal with King's sexual escapades
and missteps, to me this is one of the strengths of the book and of all of Dyson's
scholarship. Rather than suppress or ignore what we don't like or what we might
think is not relevant to the "real" King, Dyson embraces it, dissects, and tries to
understand in the time and place of his subject, not from a presentist standpoint.
This is what Dyson is all about; it is a quality of his writing and speaking that
I recognized ten years ago, and it is as strong as ever. He is willing to take the crit-
icisms, the ribbing, the ridicule, because in the end speaking truth to power and
standing up for justice is far more important than garnering good reviews and
friends in high places. Among black academics, the battle royale still rages, but
Dyson doesn't jump into those three rings. Instead, he's working his ass off try-
ing to give white supremacy—and patriarchy, and classism, and youth bashing—a
black eye.


--- PAGE 18 ---
PREFACE
Over the last fifteen years, I have had the extraordinary privilege to be an aca-
demic and a public intellectual—an engaged and politically active scholar devoted
to changing the world as best I can with the gifts at hand. I was the first person
in my family to have the opportunity to pursue higher education and to live the
life of the mind. For ten years now, I have had a Ph.D. I believe that obligates me,
as a member of a historically oppressed group, to pursue social justice for those
who have been closed away from school doors and the halls of economic oppor-
tunity for far too long. But my privilege also summons me to think sharply and
substantively about a wide range of intellectual issues, and to address the social
and moral crises of the culture. I have never, not for even a second, believed that
one couldn't at the same time be smart and good, informed and involved,
thoughtful and active. They are for me flip sides of the same vocational coin.
For the last twenty-five years, I have had the high honor to be called "Reverend
Dyson." I found my calling in a black Baptist church in Detroit whose ministry
prized intellectual preparation as the hallmark of faithful service. Although tough
circumstances meant that I didn't enroll in college until I was twenty-one, I
learned very early—from my mother, Addie Mae; from my Sunday School in-
structors at church; and from my public school teachers—that education is the
doorway to life and liberty. In my case, it was as well a path to a sense of ministry
that embraces the head and heart. Even diough I haven't been a parish minister
for twenty years now, I consider my role as an engaged intellectual the extension
of my calling to "preach the gospel to the poor," and to "heal the broken-hearted,
to preach deliverance to the captives, and recovering of sight to the blind, to set at
liberty them that are bruised."
Since my second year of graduate school, I have written professionally for a
wide range of academic and popular journals, magazines, and newspapers. During
the last decade, I have also published eight books—some with scholars in mind,
others aimed at a literate general public—all with the intent of reflecting on im-
portant and interesting topics in the life of the mind, the life of the soul, the life of
the race, and the life of the nation. Because of my writing, I have lectured at uni-
versities and in union halls; held forth in junior colleges and in juvenile detention
centers; preached in churches and in synagogues, temples, and mosques; ad-
dressed civil rights groups and professional gatherings; spoken to public and pri-
vate grade schools, middle schools, and high schools; engaged adults and adoles-
cents in jails and prisons across America; and traveled over water to deliver talks
in Italy and Brazil, in Amsterdam and in Cuba, and in Jamaica and the Bahamas.
It is also because of my writing that I have appeared across the mediascape on


--- PAGE 19 ---
xviii Preface
radio and television programs throughout the land—and in cyberspace—to debate
current affairs and pressing social issues, and to hold up the banner of progressive
politics. In my mind, writing is thinking, struggling, fighting, imagining, loving,
hoping, preaching, crying, wishing, and inspiring, all at once.
This book charts the geography of my intellectual journey. It maps the regions
of my intellectual interests—religion and philosophy, race theory and rap music,
masculinity and multiculturalism, feminist thought and gender relations, black
identity and popular culture, moral thought and sexuality, cultural criticism and
critical theory, intellectual life and institutional racism, soul music and jazz history,
black film and postmodernism, and a great deal besides. This reader is a diagram
as well of the intellectual and rhetorical treasures I have mined over the years and
a record of the struggles I have waged to understand better, to think deeper, and
to write clearer about matters of life and death. What guides all of my thought
and action is the belief that human beings who think creatively and act boldly can
shape history and relieve suffering for the good of the neighborhood and the
planet. I hope you, the reader, enjoy this reader, and journey with me through the
intellectual and political wilderness of our international life in the hopes of finding
a city of moral beauty and justice for all.
As a pledge of my citizenship in such a city, I would like to thank those who
have helped me along the way. I would like to thank my wonderful editor Liz
Maguire, my dear friend and intellectual compatriot who works with me to real-
ize my vision in print. I would also like to thank Megan Hustad for all her con-
cern and hard work. I would also like to thank Kay Mariea and her team who
worked diligently and expertly to make this book appear. I would also like to
thank my Perm family for their love and support, especially Tukufu Zuberi, Ann
Matter, Sam Preston, Gale Garrison, Carol Davis, Onyx Finney, Marie Hudson—
and, of course, Judith Rodin, our leader who we all love and miss already, and
who is one-half of the dynamic duo to whom I dedicate this book. Finally, I would
like to thank my family-Marcia (who, as usual, sacrificed greatly and put aside
her own work to read mine; thanks so much), Michael, Maisha, and Mwata, and
my mother, Addie Mae Dyson, and my brothers, Anthony, Gregory, and Brian—
for their love and support. And to Everett Dyson-Bey, my brilliant and coura-
geous brother who remains incarcerated after fifteen years, I pray for your immi-
nent release and return to your family and to your work of enlightening and
uplifting the world. And to Doc, Marcia, Beverly, Elaine, Geraldine, Jimmy, and
Robert—with the memory of "Smally" and Michelle never far away—I hope the
dedication of this book to your magnificent wife and beloved mother, Rosa Eliza-
beth Smith, acknowledges how much we all miss her big heart, her big smile, and
her big spirit.


--- PAGE 20 ---
INTRODUCTION:
WHY I AM AN INTELLECTUAL
I can't remember when I decided I wanted to be an intellectual. I'm not even sure
if that's the sort of thing one fully determines before it happens. For that matter, I
can't remember when I became an intellectual—a person with a great passion to think
and study and to distribute the fruits of his labor in useful form. There was no bolt
of lightning for me; unlike St. Paul, I didn't have a dramatic conversion that saved
me from ignorance and put me on a path of learning. It simply dawned on me in
my various pursuits-as grade school spelling bee champ, as junior high school or-
ator, as high school renegade who skipped class in search of better education, as fac-
tory laborer who preferred books to welding, and as a failed pastor who returned
to college to complete my degree before heading to graduate school—that I had a
calling to what Hannah Arendt gracefully termed "the life of the mind."
I do remember when I became an academic—a scholar who makes a living as
an intellectual in higher education. Already I've used terms that some see as
roughly equivalent, but one might quibble with such a view. Not to be catty, but
there are differences in the terms used to describe what people do who operate in
higher education. An academic toils in the vineyards of higher learning, usually as
a teacher who may also focus on research. A scholar is an academic (only in this
case, since I'm referring to those who function within the academy; of course,
there are many scholars who work outside of its precincts) whose focus is on re-
search. And an intellectual in higher education is an academic or scholar who
swims beyond her specialty and embraces the surging waves of knowledge as
they wash against entrenched disciplines. It should be obvious that my take on
the distinctions between academics, intellectuals, and scholars is quite subjective
and more anecdotal than analytical. Of course, there's no linguistic cop watching
over these definitions to keep them from being mixed. No science lies behind my
observation, except, of course, the science of observation.
There is no great advantage in admitting that one is, or wants to be, an intel-
lectual. (For confirmation, one need only look at politics, where the current occu-
pant of the White House got big campaign returns on depicting his opponent as
an egghead elitist, even as he shrewdly played up his own bum-fumbling every-
dayness to identify with "the folk" and to preemptively strike against those who
protested his lack of intellectual fitness for office.) Nevertheless, on a day-to-day
basis, an intellectual is what I am—though, it must be noted, an intellectual whose
baptism in black religion shows up decisively in my work. But since I've been
booted out of the pastorate of a black church for attempting to ordain women,
and given that my extremely liberal views on homosexuality run counter to the


--- PAGE 21 ---
xx Why I Am an Intellectual
received wisdom of black theological lights, I must confess that my version of the
faidi might provoke as many cries of heresy as it may win converts. I've taken to
pulpits around the nation for a quarter century to proclaim my vision of the
gospel, one whose keystones are social revolution, racial and economic equality,
intergenerational understanding, and gender and sexual justice.
Except it's nearly as tough these days being a preacher as it is being an intel-
lectual, particularly with the ignorance that parades under the banner of religious
belief. (Witness the attempt of a self-proclaimed God-fearing chief judge to plop
down a two-ton replica of the Ten Commandments in a Montgomery, Alabama,
courthouse, surrounded by a cloud of witnesses unified in their bitter opposition
to secularists and errant believers like me who feel that God doesn't need the pro-
tection of the state. And all of this, mind you, at the time of the fourtieth an-
niversary of the 1963 March on Washington, whose leader, the Rev. Martin
Luther King, Jr., faced violent opposition to civil rights in Montgomery, in the
name of God, from the ancestors of some of the same folk who now want to ram
their view of God down the throats of their fellow citizens. Besides, many of the
protesters—supporters, no doubt, of the death penalty—wouldn't wish officers of
the court and justice system to obey at least one of the commandments, to wit,
not to kill. Maybe that's why King, an ordained Baptist pastor, was adamantly op-
posed to school prayer: he knew that many of the same folk who claimed to love
God would just as well send some of God's "other" children—those who don't
share their faith or even their race or nationality or politics—straight to hell.)
My religious background has a lot to do with how I see the life of the mind: not
as career but vocation, and not as a pursuit isolated from the joy and grief of or-
dinary folk, but as a calling to help hurting humanity. I suppose, in retrospect, it
would be fair to say that one of the reasons I became an intellectual was to talk
back to suffering-and if possible, to relieve it. I wanted to be as smart as I could
be about the pain and heartache of people I knew were unjustly oppressed. First
off, there were the poor, working poor, and working-class black folk I saw in my
own tribe and in the ghetto neighborhoods I lived in. Later, as I matured and
traveled around the country, there were the people who suffered because of the
skin or class into which they were born, or the way they had sex, or the way they
thought about it. And finally, as I have learned the world, there are the folk on
whom brutality descends because of their color, their native tongue, their religion,
or the region of land to which their lives are staked.
Of course, these might be good reasons for becoming a minister, that is, if you
embrace a social gospel, one that cares about people's bodies and health and
housing as much as it attends to their souls. But to many, these are poor grounds
on which to base an intellectual life. For me they spring from the same soil. The
intellectuals I admire most are just as eager to preach resistance to ignorance,
pain, and yes, evil, as evangelists are to promulgate spiritual salvation. I haven't
the slightest interest in using my academic perch to proselytize students or col-
leagues to my way of thinking about God. (Get me in a pulpit, and it's a different


--- PAGE 22 ---
Why I Am an Intellectual xxi
matter altogether, although I am now far less interested in saving men's souls
from the hell to come as I am in inspiring my listeners to relieve the suffering of
victims who live in hell in Detroit or Delhi.) In fact, some of the thinkers and ac-
tivists I am in lockstep with about the way the world should go share nothing of
my church or the Bible on which it rests. And, by turn, some of the same folk
who share communion with me would just as soon see my way of thinking about
race and politics perish in holy flames. (If I had to choose, I'd rather sink with
atheists who say they don't believe in God, yet love God's children, and show it
with the work they do and in their compassion for the vulnerable, than rise with
believers whose view of God is shriveled and vicious, and who punish others,
and themselves, ultimately, with hard-hearted moralizing, and a cruel indifference
to the suffering of the unwashed that grows from the despotic ill-temperedness of
the self-righteous.)
Intellectuals have an obligation to be as smart as we can possibly be, but we
have an even greater obligation to be good with the smarts we possess. We don't
have to apologize for not being factory laborers, sanitation workers, or even
politicians. There's no shame in thinking well about the mathematics of black
holes or the theory of social privilege, about the biology of evolution or the chem-
istry of genetic inheritance, about the philosophy of gender or the psychology of
race, since they contribute to the knowledge of ourselves and the world we in-
habit. But as for me and my house-those whose intellectual work takes a public
bent, and whose knowledge can combat the plagues on our social and moral lives,
and on our physical existence, too-we must consider the plight of factory labor-
ers and sanitation workers. We've got to think about those who work under de-
pressing and alienating conditions, and who suffer assaults on their worth in
economies that ignore or exploit them. While a laundry list of oppressions, bru-
talities, and sufferings is hardly sufficient, it may be a necessary start to healing
the ills of our fellow man and woman. Those who hurt because of race, class, sex-
uality, gender, age, health, environment, disability, religion, region, and the like
must disturb intellectuals into action.
If the goal is to do more than recite such lists, then intellectuals must join the
struggle to aid the vulnerable. I got the notion that struggle is key to the intellec-
tual's vocation from the communities I grew up in. In the fifth grade, I was trans-
formed by the teaching of Mrs. James, mosdy because she helped her students see
themselves in a fresh and powerful racial light. My birth certificate says I'm a
Negro, like all birth certificates of colored children born as I was in the late fifties.
But Mrs. James helped us to shed old definitions and to embrace a new grammar
of self-respect tied to what soul singer Curtis Mayfield called "a choice of colors."
She convinced us that we were black, not colored or Negro. Although what Mal-
colm X derisively called the "so-called Negro revolution" had altered the fate of
millions of black bodies, it hadn't changed nearly as many minds. Black was still
considered an epithet among many Negroes, especially those who resented the
kinky hairstyles and African pendants and clothing adopted by the youth. On


--- PAGE 23 ---
xxii Why I Am an Intellectual
many a day I heard black folk repeat a saw they didn't realize cut their psyches
and history in half: "Don't call me black; I ain't no African." To an outsider, and
even to some of us on the inside, it was tricky trying to negotiate the terms that
flocked to our identities. And there were quite a few choices, including colored,
Negro, black, Afro-American, and later, of course, African-American. Which one
you answered to depended a lot on how old you were, what part of the country
you lived in, and how willing you were to examine yourself in the wake of a huge
change in social status. Mrs. James took us on a whirlwind tour of black struggle.
She took special delight in pointing out the exuberant champions of our survival:
ministers and cowboys, lawyers and seamstresses, secretaries and inventors, rail-
road workers and politicians, folk who used their minds, pens, feet, mouths, and
deeds to prove that we weren't savages or coons and that we deserved respect for
our intelligence and morality. At the very least, their example showed that we
were the equals of our condescending "saviors."
In unfolding her lesson plan, Mrs. James persuaded me that my skills and tal-
ents, like those of our leaders, must help the struggle for black freedom. As long
as I have understood what an intellectual is—especially one who rises from a peo-
ple for whom history is not a blackboard, like it is for those with power, but a
skuzzy washrag with grime and stains-I have believed that she should combat
half-truths about the people she loves. To skeptics, that smacks of provincialism,
propaganda, and the hijacking of knowledge for ethnic therapy and consolation.
To be sure, if that's what we end up with, we're mere replicas of the very forces
we decry as inexorably biased. But such fear is relieved when we consider the
context in which our intellectual lives play out. The life of the mind is tied to the
public good, and unavoidably, at least initially, the promise of this good is defined
by the well-being of my tribe and kin. If there are insuperable barriers to our get-
ting a fair share of what everyone deserves, the public good is diminished. Under
diese circumstances, it is, at best, a disappointing abstraction of a social ideal that
is placed unjustly beyond our reach. The identification of the public good with
what's good for my group has limits and dangers, of course, since at times the
public good may run counter to my group's benefit. In fact, in many instances-
say, when the Voting Rights Act undercut the monopoly on political power for
Southern whites, or when the Equal Rights Amendment gave women the chance
to compete with men for jobs-the public good was served by cutting off an unjust
group privilege. We have to be willing to wish for every other group what we
wish for our own if we are to make the identification of the public good with the
good of our group work. The public good is hampered when we idolize our slice
of the social welfare and elevate our group above all others in the political order.
Such a thing is bad enough if groups simply aspire to unjust social dominance, but
if they've got the power to get it done, it greatly harms the commonweal.
If I say that as an intellectual I want to tell the truth about black culture and the
folk I love, and thus contribute to the black freedom struggle, I'm not seeking to
hog the social good for my group. I simply want to make society better by im-


--- PAGE 24 ---
Why I Am an Intellectual xxiii
proving the plight of black and other oppressed people. Our plight affects the
whole: if we prosper, society is better; if we go down, the larger culture suffers as
well. It's just as harmful for our society to embrace misinformation and half-truth
about black folk as it is for blacks to keep silent about it. On that misinformation
and half-truth rests public policies and social theories that take a yeoman's intel-
lectual effort to erode even a little. God knows what effort is needed to fight cen-
turies of racial distortion and the fear of black identity fueled by stereotypes,
myths, and outright lies. The struggle to specify the complex character of black
life—how it is far more flexible, durable, and intricate, and contradictory and elu-
sive too, than is usually acknowledged, even among some blacks-is part of the
black freedom struggle too. Protest marches were crucial to our liberation; sit-ins
and boycotts were fundamental to our freedom; and the court brief was decisive
in striking down legal barriers to our social flourishing. But the will to clarify our
aims and examine our identity is, in its own way, just as important to our freedom
as the blows struck in our defense by revolutionary stalwarts. Neither does love
cancel out criticism; nor should it prevent black intellectuals from publicly dis-
cussing hard truths about black life that might embarrass or anger us. The role of
the black intellectual is to discover, uncover, and recover truth as best we can, and
to subject our efforts to healthy debate and examination. I learned from Malcolm
X in particular that the black freedom struggle is no good without self-criticism
and holding each other morally accountable.
It must be admitted that the black intellectual is sometimes wary of being can-
did about our blemishes because the nation is in chronic denial about its flaws,
even as it can't seem to get enough of cataloguing black failure. That's why the
black intellectual's desire to tell the truth is seen by many blacks as naive and trai-
torous. To make matters worse, some mainstream critics argue that black intellec-
tuals pollute the quest for truth and knowledge when they use it to fight oppres-
sion. But if we're honest, we'll admit that the quest for truth and knowledge is
never free of social and cultural intrusions. Knowledge and truth are never di-
vorced from the ends for which they exist. Even those drunk on a belief in objec-
tivity must acknowledge that culture and custom are at war with the idea of an
unchanging reality that transcends our means to know it. That doesn't mean that
anything goes, that there are no moral landmarks to which we can point, that tra-
dition must be jettisoned and history arbitrarily revised, that truth is up for grabs
to the highest intellectual bidder, or that knowledge is hostage to emotion.
And neither am I trying to sidestep the paradox of the pursuit of knowledge for
its own sake. It is important, however, to rigorously question such an ideal; it is
much more difficult to achieve than we might imagine. Even when it looks as if
someone has successfully pulled it off—for instance, when Einstein huddled in a
Berne patent office to tackle Brownian motion and the theory of relativity—we
must look deeper. Einstein had no idea that he would be called upon to follow the
trail of his discovery to the killing grounds of Hiroshima and Nagasaki. And even
if we say that Einstein simply wanted to figure out the relationship of space and


--- PAGE 25 ---
xxiv Why I Am an Intellectual
time for knowledge's sake, that turns out not to be true either. He had bigger fish
to fry: through knowing the relation of time to space, Einstein wanted to know
how reason ordered the universe. That's why he famously disputed the view of
indeterminacy put forth by Heisenberg in his uncertainty principle by declaring,
"God does not play dice with the universe." What Einstein's example proves is
that hardly anyone pursues knowledge for its own sake, not now at least, and not
in our culture, even when they believe they do. We want to know things because
we want to do better, be better, or get better—or to do awful, hateful things to our
fellow citizens, to get back at traitors, to punish enemies, and to exact revenge on
conquerors.
Of course, the sheer pleasure of knowledge, of engaging great ideas and
wrestling with great thinkers, is not in dispute—Socrates's dialogues, Shakespeare's
sonnets, Beethoven's concertos, Newton's calculus, Douglass's autobiographies,
all have great intrinsic worth. I am not arguing for a crude instrumentalism to
every bit of knowledge; nor am I saying that every fact has to fit in place and serve
a concrete function. That sort of thinking suits a mechanical view of the world
long since demolished by science and common sense. There is something en-
nobling about reading lovely sentences that hang together because of poetry and
penetrating thought. There is, too, genuine joy in noting the elegance of a mathe-
matical equation. All of these good things need no justification outside of the fact
of their existence; their goodness is the reason for their existence, and vice versa.
But the pursuit of knowledge for its own sake can only be a good thing when it is
a possibility for everyone. Knowledge, after all, is not neutral, neither the getting
of it nor the keeping of it, or even the uses of it.
Besides the pleasures it brings, knowledge can also be dangerous, subversive,
and liberating. That's why slaves were legally prevented from reading; that's also
why tyrants and their governments are afraid of literate dissenters. Under
tyranny, and in many ostensibly free societies, reading and writing always mean
so much more than reading and writing. Even though, despite widespread mis-
quotation, Foucault never said it, and in fact meant quite the opposite, knowledge
is power, at least a kind of power that is instantly recognized, even when it's in the
hands of the dispossessed. Dictators and demagogues alike realize that knowledge
for its own sake never manages to end there. When I get knowledge, I get desire:
I get hungry for the same liberty I find in the books I read, the science I study, the
music I hear. I want my society as eloquent as the poetry I memorize. I want my
living conditions to match the beauty of the algebraic formula I work. I want my
people as blissful and harmonious as the symphony I listen to. I may also want to
stamp out the horrors I read about, put an end to the suffering I hear in the music
of the desperate, or use what I know to help the subjugated. I might get inspired
or enraged, mad or distraught, stumped or determined to act.
Try as we might to quarantine knowledge, it invariably sneezes on us far be-
yond its imposed limits. Knowledge exists for a lot more than its own sake. The
proponents of social injustice, whether in America or Eastern Europe, under-


--- PAGE 26 ---
Why I Am an Intellectual xxv
stand this all too well, but so do their victims. It's where Langston Hughes
reaches across space and time to embrace Vaclav Havel. It's also why Frederick
Douglass said that "knowledge unfits a child to be a slave." Or, as George Clin-
ton memorably phrased it, "free your mind, and your ass will follow." As an end
in itself, knowledge has much to recommend to the eager pursuer of truth, but
even the questions one wants answered—what is truth? does God exist? how
should I treat my fellow man? am I my neighbor's keeper?—say as much about
us as about the curiosity that drives us. We've got questions for reasons, and
those reasons are often bigger than mere curiosity or knowledge for its own sake.
What's often at stake is our identity, our sanity, our souls, our survival.
The pursuit of knowledge for its own sake can only make sense in a society
where knowledge, at least the ownership of it, makes no moral difference, and
where learning and thinking lack political value. I'm not saying that we live in an
Orwellian nightmare where free thought is corrupted and suppressed. Neither am
I saying that we live in a nation where thinking is only politically useful if it sup-
ports the interests of the state. But the liberty to think out loud as one wishes to,
without qualification or permission, is pretty rare, even in our society, and where
such freedom exists, it's the result of vigilant effort to unmask the official story,
the enshrined truth. The freedom to pursue truth wherever it leads, at least in so-
cial and political terms, depends on where you stand in the culture and how much
clout you have. A real freethinker can be shunned or silenced for straying too far
from the nation's political consensus. If, for example, one runs afoul of the attor-
ney general's pulverizing views of how terror should be defined and fought, he
might be harassed, stigmatized, or arrested. Knowledge is never just knowledge,
it can never simply be pursued without regard to context, and its results are just
as likely to upset as to unify us. All of which is to say that the black intellectual,
without even trying, is a threat to a society that subordinates his people. There is
little choice as to whether the black intellectual is involved in the struggle of black
folk; to be alive and black makes one a candidate for social animus, and thus, a
player in the theater of race.
I learned this lesson in Mrs. James's classroom and in the factories where I
worked before eventually going to college when I was twenty-one. My longest
tenure came in the wheel brake and drum factory where my father labored for
more than thirty years before being laid off and forced into maintenance work
and odd jobs, from painting houses to cutting grass and laying sod, all of which
his five sons joined him in. My father worked long, long hours. He got as much
overtime as he could to feed seven mouths and to tamp down the criminal allure
of the ghetto streets for his boys. Detroit was then known as the "murder capital
of the world," and the grisly homicide rate rode largely on the decimation of
black flesh in drug deals and acts motivated by severe privation. Both of these
forces loomed in the lives of our neighbors, and eventually, struck our own
house when, after our father's death, my younger brother got sent to prison for
second-degree murder, accused of killing a fellow drug dealer. My father and


--- PAGE 27 ---
xxvi Why I Am an Intellectual
mother waged soul-depleting war against the violence that surrounded us, hold-
ing out the prospect of hard work as the antidote to the devil's temptations.
Taking note of, but not completely understanding, and hence, not unqualifiedly
supporting my intellectual bent, my father nevertheless brought home encourage-
ment in the form of factory laborers he discovered were also attending college or
liked books like me. They were usually young, black (sometimes African) male
workers who saw the factory as a means to a larger end: enjoying upward mobil-
ity, bettering the lot of their family, financing college, and, in some cases, bringing
the worker's revolution closer to fulfillment. These men were usually active in the
same United Auto Workers (UAW) union where my father was a member. This
was in the late sixties and early seventies, when the League of Revolutionary
Black Workers (LRBW) and Dodge Revolutionary Union Movement (DRUM)
were agitating for social change in the Detroit automobile factories that were the
bloodline for the big three car companies: General Motors, Chrysler, and Ford. I
picked up some of their fervor during impromptu political lessons taught by my
father's co-workers on the lunch breaks they often spent at our house during the
afternoon shift. At other times, I caught dramatic glimpses of the social agenda of
black laborers when my father and his besieged co-workers walked the picket line
outside their company to demand higher wages and better benefits.
Later, when I went to work in the factory as a teen father fending off welfare,
and with the hope of saving money for college, I got provocative instruction from
workers who drilled the point in my head: learning is for liberation, and knowl-
edge must be turned to social benefit if we are to justify the faith placed in us by
our forbears. In between unloading brake drums, and welding and balancing
them, I got a strong dose of Marxism, but a homegrown version attuned to the
gritty particularities of black working life. That didn't mean there wasn't high the-
ory; there was theory aplenty, though it was tailored to our needs and driven by
our aspirations as a degraded and oppressed people-but a people who resolved to
rise up from their suffering through self-deterrnining struggle. I was awed by these
grassroots intellectuals who stood their ground and defended their lives with their
brains and words. There wasn't even a hint of anti-intellectualism among them.
They didn't pooh-pooh self-criticism like some do in the highest rungs of govern-
ment, saloons, malls, some sidewalk streets-and in major parts of the media.
The factory wasn't the only place I got a sense of intellectual vocation. I ab-
sorbed it in the sanctuary as well. My pastor, Frederick G. Sampson, was an
American original, a tall, commanding, impossibly literate dark-brown prince of
the pulpit who lived up to that tide when it still resonated in the world of homilet-
ics. It was Sampson, more than any figure in my life, who convinced me of the
service that intellectuals must render. Sampson believed that those who breathed
the life of the mind must serve the people in whose womb they came to exist. His
thinking made sense to me because of how faithfully he adhered to his own prin-
ciple. He wasn't a preacher who festooned his pulpit oratory with violent grunts
or theatrical posing, though he was a verbal master with dramatic flair. Sampson
unabashedly laced his rhetoric with the theology and poetry and philosophy he


--- PAGE 28 ---
Why I Am an Intellectual xxvii
ardently consumed. In the pulpit, he moved effortlessly from Bertrand Russell to
W.E.B. Du Bois, from Shakespeare to Paul Laurence Dunbar, and from the
King's English spoken to the Queen's taste to the wily black vernaculars that
bathed the tongues of his Southern kinsmen. Outside the pulpit, Sampson's insa-
tiable curiosity lead him to devour books and to traffic in ideas, wherever he
could get good ones, whether from the mouth of a learned colleague or the neigh-
borhood drunk. Critical encounter was nearly erotic to him, but the joy and pas-
sion he brought to intellectual life didn't obscure its necessary everydayness, its
practical application, its edifying repetitiveness, and most of all, its usefulness to
common folk.
Sampson believed that his preaching and thinking should open the minds and
hearts of the people who listened to him. They should, he believed, find surer
footing in their faith because of the words he carefully chose. At the same time,
he challenged the dogmatisms of all true believers, whether they were pew
dwellers or zealous ideologues. Sampson stirred things up by staring them down:
he refused to blink away the encroaching doubts that made belief improbable to
outsiders (and to more insiders than were willing to admit it), inviting his flock to
wrestle with feelings of divine abandonment and the unanswerable tragedies that
smear our existence. But none of this kept him from making the church a conduit
of social justice for ordinary folk who might never darken the doors of his sanc-
tuary. And above all, he believed that the black privileged should use their con-
siderable economic and intellectual resources to help those who lag far behind.
It is because of Sampson that I believe that intellectuals must serve the com-
munities we live and work in. We've got to look beyond a comfortable career, a
safe niche behind academe's protective walls, and a serene existence removed
from cultural and political battles that shape the nation's fate. But we must be will-
ing to shirk the contemptuous pose of distant observer—undoubtedly, we still
need observation, and it mustn't be fatally intertwined in the events or ideas we're
called on to examine, but intellectuals must at some point get our hands dirty as
we help our world become more just. We must even be willing to give up one of
academe's most self-serving bombasts: that "serious" thinkers stand apart from
the seductions of pop culture to dig into archives and render compelling histories
of events long before our time. That's all good, but it's surely not all-knowing
about what intellectuals are good for. In a show of remarkable adolescence, and
obsolescence too, there are many academics who believe that speaking in the
tongue of the common person betrays the profession. Well, perhaps that's so, but
it's a betrayal we should be proud of, and one that should spur us to resist the te-
dius professionalism that has noisily ripped through the academy's upper ranks.
(That's largely not the case for the thousands upon thousands of part-time teach-
ers whose plight is barely distinguishable from any group of maligned workers,
and the battalion of non-unionized graduate students who are depended on to
teach vast numbers of American undergraduates.)
It was Jesse Jackson who once remarked to me, "If you say something I can't
understand, that's a failure of your education, not mine," and he was right. No


--- PAGE 29 ---
xxviii Why I Am an Intellectual
sloppy thinker or lazy rhetorician himself, Jackson knows the intellectual effort it
takes to understand an idea so well that one can explain it to the learned and the
layman alike. To paraphrase Ecclesiastes, there is a time and place for every aca-
demic language under the sun-and for the jargons, obscurantisms, esoterica, di-
alects, glosses, and inside meanings that attend their path. But there is also the
need to write and speak clearly about important matters for the masses of folk
who will never make it to class.
There is in the academy today something akin to hip-hop's vexing quest for the
rapper who can "keep it real," that is, the rapper who best matches his lyrics with
a life of crime or ghetto glory, depending on which version of reality wins the day.
Many academics are caught up in trying to prove who's more audientic, who's
more academically hard core, who's the realest smart person around. That usu-
ally ends up being the scholar who is most "rigorous," and in academic circles
that's often the thinker who is least accessible or who eschews "public" scholar-
ship. But these debates break down on their own logic: academics and scholars
who are rigorous don't have to do work that panders to the mainstream in order
to be effective (after all, devoted students can carry their former professors, or
their work, with them to the State Department or to NewsweeK). Work that can be
widely understood or that is relevant to current affairs shouldn't be automatically
suspect or seen as second rate. As Jackson understood, our failure to make our
work accessible may be as much the fault of intellectuals as it is the problem of a
dumbed-down society.
These are the beliefs that guide my vision of the intellectual—the American in-
tellectual, the black intellectual, the engaged intellectual, the public intellectual
(and in a way, aren't all of us intellecuals in the academy public intellectuals, since
universities are among the biggest public spheres in the country?). Relieving suf-
fering, reinforcing struggle, and rendering service are not bad ways to live the life
of the mind.


--- PAGE 30 ---
PART ONE
D Y S O N O G R A P H Y
Although I have yet to write a memir, I have at times written about
my life as it relates to my work. I do this, in part, believe that
intellectuals and academics who have been poor or working class must
leslify to our experiences and struggles, and perhaps inspire others to
emulate, even exceed, our efforts. I also fine that the personal voice,
when its tones rise above grating narcissism, can emphaisze truths that
sound needlessly abstract in the academic's mouth. When enough of
these stories get out, perhaps folk who, on first blush, might seem un-
likely to succeed in higher education will get a fair chance.


--- PAGE 31 ---
This page intentionally left blank


--- PAGE 32 ---
One
NOT FROM SOME ZEUS'S HEAD:
MY INTELLECTUAL DEVELOPMENT
Of all the books I have written, Open Mike, a series of interviews conducted with me
over the past decade, best captures the oral traditions that have nurtured me since birth.
This interview sketches my intellectual evolution, personal odyssey, and vocational
development. It charts my path from ghetto youth, teen welfare father, factory laborer,
and street hustler to ordained Baptist pastor, Princeton graduate student, and Ivy
League professor. I hoped in the interview to underscore not only the racial character of
higher education, but to draw attention to the class dimensions that are often obscured,
even in some black academic circles. This interview, conducted by the talented journalist
and writer Lana Williams, also gave me the chance to explain my rather unusual route
to academic success: writing my dissertation before I submitted my proposal, writing my
fast book before I compkted my Ph.D. thesis, and garnering a doctorate and being
promoted to full professor in the same year. I have provoked no small controversy for
showing my class roots in the academy, and for bringing an unapologetically black
masculine style into the classroom. Deep inside—as this interview shows—I take pride in
trying to stay rooted in the streets and church sanctuaries that produced me, even as I
stretch my mind and soul through encounters with the wider world.
Michael, let's talk a little about your self-perception. I've seen articles de-
scribing you as an intellectual giant, a person who has created a rather
unique niche, as having one foot in the scholarly world and the other "on the
block," and somehow synthesizing the two. When I've seen you, you've been
very vocal in your opinions on issues or themes outside of yourself. But the
little I've heard about you as a man, a person ... how did you pull this off?
That "raising up from the bootstraps" thing is cool, but where we're from, a
lot of us have had to do that. Yet you are special and unique and obviously
on a distinct path that, on the one hand, you're carving, but on the other,
seems like it was laid out there for you. How did you have the good sense to
follow it, to take that dive? How'd you do that?
There's no question that nobody is self-made in America. All this mythology of
the rugged individual has to be deconstructed. We've got to get at the heart of the


--- PAGE 33 ---
4 THE MICHAEL ERIC DYSON READER
essential lie that America was founded on this ethic of personal and private indi-
vidual achievement. That has to be scrapped because a form of American Protes-
tant communalism is the basis of discourse about American democracy. Recent
studies in American political history evince a strong philosophical disagreement
with the underlying principles of this American mythology—that we came here as
solo artists and that we developed as individuals articulating ourselves against the
wilderness of the collective. That's really not the case. People are produced by cul-
tures and communities, by larger networks of association, love, kin, affection, and
so on. And the same is true for me. I was produced, first of all, in the womb of a
family that loved me, with my mother and father in the house. My father adopted
me when I was two years old. I called him daddy because I didn't know any other
man in my life. He was my daddy and my father. I'm one of five boys who grew
up together in our immediate family. There were four older brothers and sisters,
all of whom now are deceased.
When were you born?
October 23, 1958. Being born in what we would call the ghetto of Detroit had a
decisive influence on my life and an impact on how I understand the relationship
between scholarship and the street, between the world of the mind and the world
of concrete outside of the academy. I think being born in the ghetto and being
reared there, and dealing with the inner-city black community, connected me to
other African American people who were doing extraordinarily important things.
Detroit was a vibrant, vital black world teeming with possibility beyond the bally-
hooed violence that stalked poor and working-class blacks. It was a wonderfully
rich experience seeing black folk who lived meaningful lives, who ran their own
businesses, and who eventually ran the city. When I was still in my teens, Cole-
man Young was elected the first black mayor of Detroit. I encountered in the po-
litical landscape powerful figures like Kenneth Cockrel, a Marxist black lawyer
who was very important in my own rhetorical development, especially the stylis-
tic etiquette of joining black radical discourse to a powerful social criticism of the
forces of oppression. My pastor, Dr. Frederick Sampson, came to my church when
I was twelve years old. He was the decisive intellectual influence in my life, with
his fusion in his rhetorical repertoire of metaphysical poetry, racial uplift, and clas-
sical learning. Another pastor, Dr. Charles Adams, also thrilled us with his bril-
liant preaching and his exploration of the radical social implications of the Bible
and theology. My fifth-grade teacher, Mrs. James, was extraordinarily important
in my understanding of black people. She taught us about black history when
folks didn't want to hear that, even other black teachers at Wingert Elementary
School, which I attended from kindergarten through sixth grade. My Sunday
school teachers in church appreciated black history and black culture and ex-
posed us to the broad outlines of our people's sojourn in America, which gave us
a sense of somebodyness as black children. It wasn't done so much by my teach-


--- PAGE 34 ---
Not from Some Zeus's Head 5
ers deploying a formal didacticism or a pedagogy geared toward instilling pride,
but as they took for granted that black folk could achieve and love each other.
That had a huge influence on me. They gave us a sense of helping ourselves
while not harming others. We could love ourselves without hating anyone else, in-
cluding white brothers and sisters. It wasn't about them, it was about us. They
taught us to take for granted the existence of a black universe rooted in a black
psychic infrastructure that had no need to pay deference to white culture, em-
bracing all folk while defending black humanity and interests in the face of inim-
ical forces.
That was the kind of world in which I was reared. This framework of existen-
tial and spiritual nurture provided a rich background for me-Sampson with this
attention to the spiritual needs of African American people, Cockrel with his
black Marxist discourse, Adams with this attention to the social ramifications of
the gospel, and Mrs. James with her attention to the need for black history and
memory as a resource to stabilize the black present and to secure the black future.
They were among the folk who gave me a sense of self, who helped to create
Michael Eric Dyson, who helped me understand the different bricks that must be
laid at the foundation of my head and heart in order to have a healthy identity.
So, I didn't spring fully formed out of some racial Zeus's head; I was shaped and
molded in an environment where black achievement was taken for granted,
where black excellence was expected, where black aspiration was crucial, and
where black intellectual engagement was the norm of the day-on every level.
And I'm not primarily referring to formal education in school. I'm referring
largely to everyday life with brothers and sisters who were playing the numbers
and playing the dozens. They were trying to use their linguistic and rhetorical ca-
pacity to defend their interests and world views.
That's just what I was going to ask, if you had that duality even then, where
on the one hand, you were already processing what you were being given,
and exposed to from your elders, but I was thinking-what were you doing
with the fellas on the street, your peers? That's what you're talking about.
Oh yeah. There was at least a duality going on. I felt I belonged to many worlds.
I kicked it with the fellas on the street and spent a lot of time engaging the Mo-
town curriculum: Smokey Robinson, Stevie Wonder, Marvin Gaye, and so on.
And at the same time, I learned to engage Paul Laurence Dunbar, W.E.B. Du
Bois, Paul Robeson, and other great figures. Those interests didn't develop auto-
matically, but were encouraged by teachers like Mrs. James, who wanted to make
sure we knew about Jan Metzeliger and the shoe-lacing machine; Deadwood Dick
and Wild Bill Pickett and the hidden tradition of black cowboys; Garrett T Mor-
gan and the invention of the traffic signal; Daniel Hale Williams and open heart
surgery; Charles Drew and blood plasma; and Elijah McCoy and the lubricating
cup. Her interest in black life was contagious. At Webber Junior High School, I


--- PAGE 35 ---
6 THE MICHAEL ERIC DYSON READER
was fortunate to encounter teachers who were instrumental in my further devel-
opment. My seventh-grade English teacher, Mr. Burdette, enhanced my speaking
skills by encouraging me to become involved in oratorical contests sponsored by
the Detroit Optimist Club. And Mrs. Click taught me to type quickly and accu-
rately, and besides that, gave me tremendous affection as a growing young man
who had a huge crush on her. To tell the truth, I had crushes on many of my fe-
male teachers, starting with Mrs. Jefferson in kindergarten, to Mrs. Stewart and
Mrs. Williams at Webber, and Mrs. Ray and Mrs. Carter at Northwestern, almost
all of them English teachers. In my mind, love, language, and learning were pro-
foundly linked in what may be termed an erotics of epistemology.
When I got to Northwestern High School, I had a crush on yet another teacher,
Madame Black, who taught me French and so much more. She gave me a sense of
my burgeoning intellectual power and encouraged me to tutor other students in
French. She also gave me a sense that I should use language as a doorway into fur-
ther investigation of American and African American culture. So did her husband,
Dr. Cordell Black, whom I perceived then as my friendly competition! Dr. Black
was a professor at Oakland University who often came to pick up Madame Black
after school, and I'd still be there, and he'd see me trying to read Jean-Paul Sartre's
masterly philosophical tome, L'etre et k neant, in its original French, a book that, in
English, translates to Being and Nothingness. He'd laugh a laugh of wonder and en-
couragement and say, "Look at him, look at his aspiration and ambition." But most
important, he also encouraged me to read Du Bois and Fanon and other classics in
black letters. These figures gave important direction to my scholarly inclinations.
But I can't romanticize things. At the same time, there was quite a bit of pain
and conflict going on as well. There was the pain of being called by some of my
peers "brainiac," "Poindexter," and "Professor." Of course, it was their way of
slyly, sometimes harshly, complimenting what they thought of as my smarts. But
recognition and resentment were, in that beautiful phrase of Ralph Bunche's, "in-
exorably concomitant." To be sure, there was also a hierarchy of virtues estab-
lished, one that comedian Chris Rock refers to when he jokes in a routine that
black folk who get out of prison get much more "dap," or respect, from other
blacks than those who've just graduated with a master's degree from college. I
faced a version of that phenomenon, something that is termed in pedagogical the-
ory as "rival epistemologies," or competing schemes of understanding how the
world operates and the place of knowledge and formal training in its orbit. Some
blacks think you can't be simultaneously cool and smart, at least in the sense of
formal education. But I also experienced strong support in my peer group. Some
of my peers said, "This brother's destined for a different world than we are." Oth-
ers said, "He's in the ghetto, he's with us, but he's got something different. We
don't always understand it, we tease him about it, but we admire him too." Some
of my male peers—I'm thinking especially of a young man named Michael
Squirewell—sought to protect me from some of the worst elements in our neigh-
borhood. Unfortunately, that doesn't happen as often today as it did then.


--- PAGE 36 ---
Not from Some Zeus's Head 7
I grew up in Detroit during the restructuring of the automobile industry. My
father worked at Kelsey-Hayes Wheelbrake, and Drum Company, which I call his
alma mater, a place where I "matriculated" as well between the ages of nineteen
and twenty. I didn't go to college until I was twenty-one years old. I had been a
teen father, lived on welfare, and hustled several years before furthering my for-
mal education. I had gotten off track from the enabling tradition and heritage
handed on to me by my teachers. I had gone to Granbrook, one of the most
highly esteemed private schools in the country, located in Bloomfield Hills, a sub-
urb of Detroit. I was dating a young lady from my church, whose father, Damon
Keith, was a deacon there, as well as a federal judge and one of the city's most
prominent citizens. Judge Keith arranged for me to take the IQ,and entry exams,
and when I scored well, I was admitted, even though I couldn't afford the $11,000
annual tuition, which was damned near my father's yearly salary. Judge Keith
arranged for me to receive a partial scholarship from New Detroit, a local civic
and leadership organization, and to work for the other part of my tuition by trav-
eling the forty or so miles from what was then the second richest suburb in the
country to one of the bleakest neighborhoods in America, on the East Side of De-
troit, to fill bags with food items, and to do maintenance work, for a group that
aided the poor, Operation Hope, run by Bernard Parker. Two of Judge Keith's
daughters, including the young lady I dated, attended Kings wood, the female
complement to the all-boys Cranbrook. The schools have since merged.
I went to Cranbrook—where I agreed to repeat the eleventh grade in order to
get sufficient academic grounding and to get at least two years at this prestigious
institution under my belt, with an eye to getting into a quality college or univer-
sity-and in some ways, I had a tremendous experience, and in other ways, it was
a very painful one. I was seventeen years old, and I had never gone to school with
white kids before. Now here I was going to school with kids who were extremely
rich, many of them the sons and daughters of some of the wealthiest parents in
the country. I remember, for instance, doing a report with Bill Taubman, the son
of Alfred Taubman, one of the richest men in the nation. I was also the classmate
of an heir apparent to Rockwell International, and the half-brother, Robert Zim-
merman, of director Steven Spielberg. And at Kingswood, where we sometimes
took classes, things were no different, and I remember Ford Motor Company
head Lee laccoca's daughter, Kathy, was a student at the time. When I got out to
Cranbrook, which rested on over three hundred acres of verdant, prosperous ge-
ography, nestled in a city of extraordinary material blessing, I felt like the Jimmy
Stewart character in Hitchcock's Vertigo. My head began to spin.
As if that wasn't enough, there were strains of overt racism poisoning the
common good. This was during the time that Roots was being televised. I came
home to my dorm room one evening to find a newspaper cartoon of one of the
Roots characters tacked to my door, with the words scribbled on it: "Nigger, go
home." Some students also anonymously circulated a cassette tape about the
black students that we got hold of. On the tape, a voice says in exaggerated


--- PAGE 37 ---
8 THE MICHAEL ERIC DYSON READER
southern cadence, "We're going cigar fishing today. No we're not, we're going
'nigar' fishing. What's the bait? Hominy grits!" On another occasion, a white
student expressed the wish to place a bottle of sickle-cell anemia in the school's
quadrangle to "kill off all the undesirables." So it was very tough for me. I got
lost, did some crazy stuff—like helping to devise a system to dial out of the dorm
on a phone without a face, allowing me and some friends to call our girlfriends
and run up huge bills, which I had to get a second job to pay for while their par-
ents ponied up—didn't do well in school, got expelled, and went back to Detroit
a failure after being a golden boy. That was tough to handle. Then I finished
night school, which I don't think they have any more, and got my diploma from
Northwestern High School.
Almost immediately after I graduated, I met a woman, got her pregnant, mar-
ried her, and then divorced her. It was a very trying period in my life. I was eigh-
teen years old, she was twenty-six. She eventually had to give up her job as a wait-
ress when she started to show-she had one of those jobs where the waitresses
wore hot pants and tiny tops—and I was eventually fired from a job at Chrysler
that my wife's uncle helped me to secure (an unjust firing, I might add, as I'll
never forget my boss's words, "it had to be somebody's ass, and I'd rather it be
yours than mine"). We were forced to live on welfare, since I lost my job a little
more than a month before my son was to be born. We got food stamps and gov-
ernment medical assistance to pay the costs of delivering our baby. My wife was
enrolled in WIG, or Women, Infants, and Children, and I stood many a day in
those long lines and collected packets of powdered milk and artificial eggs—just as
I did at the welfare office, where the civil servants were often rude and loud, mak-
ing the experience that much more degrading.
Why did you marry her, Michael?
I married her because she was pregnant. I suppose those soudiern values were in
effect-my parents were from Alabama and Georgia-and I was, after all, a church
boy who believed that if you got a woman pregnant, you should marry her. I
didn't want my son to be born out of wedlock. Of course, that was a narrow,
naive view, but I suppose I had to learn the hard way. But I really did love Terrie,
the woman I got pregnant. I just discovered too late that she didn't love me. She
told me two months into our marriage that she didn't love me and should have
never married me. I was devastated. By that time, however, she was well into her
pregnancy. So we made as good a go of it as possible for young people who were
poor, stressed, often unemployed, on welfare, and unequally yoked in affection.
We had our son, a wonderful, beautiful boy who is now nineteen years old. I
spent quite a bit of time attending to him. I did much of the night duty. I loved
my son and wanted to bond with him.
That's a startling contrast to many black fathers today.


--- PAGE 38 ---
Not from Some Zeus's Head 9
I don't know. I think many more black men than are given credit want to love and
nurture their children. It is true that I lived in a moral universe with an ethical
framework that dictated that one should acknowledge one's responsibility, and in
my case, the obligation to marry in the belief that marriage itself would protect
and preserve the family. At this time in my life, I think such a belief can be down-
right wrong. Still, I suppose there's something to be said for wanting to assume re-
sponsibility for what one does. But that couldn't prevent our almost inevitable
breakup, so after working in a factory, husding, cutting grass, shoveling snow and
painting houses, working as an emergency substitute janitor for the public school
system, working as a maintenance man in a suburban hotel, doing construction
jobs, getting laid off, getting fired, going on welfare, and seeing my marriage dis-
solve, I decided right before my twenty-first birthday that I'd had enough, and I
wanted to go to college. I had in my late teens felt a call to ministry, and that call,
in tandem with my desire to better provide for my son's future, sent me to school.
Plus, my desire to fulfill my early promise, which had been greatly tarnished by
the events of my life after being kicked out of Cranbrook, goaded me to take my
destiny into my own hands.
To many onlookers, I suppose I looked like a loser, a typical, pathological, self-
defeating young black male. That may help explain why I empathize with such
youth in the hip-hop generation; I was one of those brothers that many social sci-
entists and cultural critics easily dismiss and effortlessly, perhaps literally, write off.
In any regard, there were two people in my church who had gone to Knoxville
College, a historically black college in Knoxville, Tennessee. I called the college
and asked the dean if they had space for a young black man from Detroit. When
he replied in the affirmative, the next day I "grabbed me an arm full of Grey-
hound," as Sam Cooke once sang, and took the fifteen-hour bus trip from Detroit
to Knoxville. I went to college there and initially worked in a factory, then pastored
three different churches as I completed my undergraduate studies at Carson-
Newman, a small, white southern Baptist school. I transferred from Knoxville Col-
lege because I wanted to study philosophy, and they didn't offer but a few courses
in the subject. Carson-Newman was a true baptism in Southern Baptist theology
and worldviews, many of which were problematic and sometimes racist, even as
members of the academic community encouraged students to nurture their spiri-
tual faculties. But my time in east Tennessee was crucial to my intellectual devel-
opment, and taught me to navigate some perilous racial and cultural waters.
During the time frame you became a Baptist minister, it seems like there
again you were operating on a number of levels. You were obviously fasci-
nated by theology and philosophy, but I detect something else stirred you to
commit yourself to that course of study.
No question. I was influenced to enter the ministry by having a pastor who was
broadly learned and extremely erudite, who reflected critically on social and


--- PAGE 39 ---
10 THE MICHAEL ERIC DYSON READER
spiritual issues and who had read widely and deeply in philosophy and theol-
ogy. Later on, as a burgeoning scholar, I was also influenced by scholars such
as religious historian James Melvin Washington, a renowned bibliophile whom
I met in the early '80s in Knoxville, and the great Cornel West, Washington's
colleague at New York's Union Theological Seminary, whom I met in early
1984 at Kalamazoo College in Michigan, during a lecture series West was giv-
ing at the college. I had driven there from Tennessee, when I was an under-
graduate student at Carson-Newman, a junior I believe, and he was a professor
of philosophy of religion on his way to teach at Yale Divinity School. Within
African American religious studies and theology, I was also influenced by the
work and example of scholars like James Cone, Charles Long, J. Deotis
Roberts, William R. Jones, Cecil Cone, Jacqueline Grant, and Riggins Earl.
These are figures whose commitment to black theology and, to a lesser degree,
to black philosophy, had whetted my appetite to study philosophy and religion.
At Carson-Newman, I experienced a growing desire to wed the life of the mind
to the life of the heart. As an undergraduate, I was getting quite an introduction
to the ministry in pastoring three different churches, and addressing the issues of
life and death: I was preaching to my congregation, counseling them, and marry-
ing and burying them. It was exciting, and at times quite stressful, but I increas-
ingly sought a stronger academic vocabulary to express my intellectual goals and
interests. Hence my sharpened focus on philosophy, social theory, literary criti-
cism, and what would later be termed critical race theory. But I have never been
one to think that religion dulled one's cutting edge or critical capacities. Of
course, if one is honest, there are some tremendous difficulties in maintaining
one's commitment to a religious tradition that says, "We know by faith and not
by sight," while maintaining habits of critical inquiry that rest on relentless inter-
rogation of the warrants, grounds, bases, and assertions of truth put forth in all
sorts of intellectual communities, including religious ones. So there are tensions
and, in fact, these multiple tensions define my intellectual projects and existential
identities: tensions between sacred and secular, tensions between the intellectual
and the religious, tensions between radical politics and mainstream institutions,
tensions between preaching and teaching, and so on. But I think they are useful,
edifying tensions, tensions that help reshape my ongoing evolution as a thinker,
writer, teacher, preacher, and activist.
In many ways, I see myself as a rhetorical acrobat, navigating through varied
communities of intellectual interest and pivoting around multiple centers of lin-
guistic engagement, since all of these commitments have their own languages,
rhetorics, and vocabularies. I view myself as a work in progress, an improvised
expression of identity that is constantly evolving through stages and vistas of self-
understanding. Such language owes several debts and has many sources, includ-
ing my religious tradition's plea to, as the James Cleveland song goes, "Please be
patient with me, God is not through with me yet"; my musical roots in jazz, and
now in hip-hop, where relendess improvisation and restless experimentation are


--- PAGE 40 ---
Not from Some Zeus's Head 11
artistic hallmarks; and postmodern philosophical ruminations on the fluidity of
identity. Plus, openness to new experience is critical, but you can't be so open that
you lose sight of the crucial references, the haunting paths, the transforming
traces, and the grounding marks of your identity. But one has got to constantly
evolve and regenerate, stretching the boundaries of identity in a way that permits
you to integrate new strains, new molds, new themes, and new ideas into the
evolving self-awareness that occupies your heart and mind.
When did you know, finally recognize that your star was rising? When did
all this start to take shape for you, Michael?
Good question. Throughout my college years, I struggled financially. Early on, I
had to live in my car for almost a month because I didn't have a place to live. My
pastor would dig into his pocket to help me out. My father was able to give me a
used station wagon after my raggedy old car died, but he had no money to give
me. For the most part, I paid for my own education. I borrowed money and had
loans that I only recently paid back because I was deep in debt as a result of sup-
porting myself through college. I had to make it on my own, which wasn't new
since I'd basically been living away from my parents' home after starting board-
ing school at sixteen. I knew I'd come a long way when I got to Knoxville and,
after working in a factory, I was able to get some acclaim for my preaching and
began to pastor. But in my third church, I was booted out for attempting to ordain
three women as deacons in the male supremacist black Baptist church, so I went
back to school. I had, ironically enough, been kicked out of Carson-Newman be-
cause I refused to attend chapel, a mandatory assignment every Tuesday morning.
I was protesting the dearth of black scholars and preachers who were invited to
campus, especially after it was explained to me by an administrator that, based on
the small number of blacks, one speaker a year was all we could expect.
But after my church let me go—and isn't this more than a little ironic, since it
was named Thankful Baptist Church?—with a month's severance pay, and with
nowhere to land to support my family, since I had remarried and got temporary
custody of my son, I headed back to Carson-Newman in 1983 to finish my stud-
ies. I received no scholarship money from the school, despite maintaining a
straight-A average in philosophy, so I borrowed more money and graduated
magna cum laude, and as outstanding graduate in philosophy, in 1985.1 applied and
got into Vanderbilt University's Ph.D. department of philosophy, and into Brown
and Princeton's departments of religion. I was interested in Vanderbilt because of
Robert Williams, a respected philosopher of black experience, and because I
wanted to study with Alisdair Maclntyre, a renowned philosopher whose book
After Virtue had recently made a huge splash in moral philosophy. I remember
meeting with him on my visit to Vanderbilt, and I remember him asking me why
anyone who had gotten into Princeton wanted to come to Vanderbilt to study. I
told him I was wrestling with whether to become a philosopher with an interest


--- PAGE 41 ---
12 THE MICHAEL ERIC DYSON READER
in religion, or a scholar of religion who took philosophy seriously. His eyes lit up,
and he uttered, "That's precisely the question you must answer."
I decided on the latter course, and after visiting Brown and Princeton, I chose
to attend Princeton. But there was a snag: Carson-Newman refused to release my
final transcript to Princeton because I owed them money, a little more than
$7,000, a sum that I knew wouldn't exist if they had given me the scholarship help
I thought I deserved. I was quite nervous until a dean at Princeton's graduate
school told me that I could come to Princeton without my final grades, since they
had already accepted me on my documented performance. It was the closing of a
widely gyrating circle of promise that had begun in the ghetto of Detroit where
my teachers, my pastor, and some of my peers had foreseen, and in many cases,
through their contributions, had assured my success. I realized at Princeton, as
great a school as it is, that my being there was nothing less than what I should be
doing in living out the early promise that they—my teachers, pastor, and peers-
detected in me.
As a second-year graduate student at Princeton in 1987, I began to write pro-
fessionally, if by that it is meant that one is compensated for one's work. I wrote
for religious journals of opinion, for newspapers, for scholarly journals, and for
mass-market magazines, much of this before completing my master's degree in
1991 and my Ph.D. in 1993. In fact, I wrote the lead review essay in the New York
T^mes Book Review, which ran longer than five thousand words, when they had
such a feature in the book review back in 1992. I had begun to write book re-
views for the New York Times in 1990, along with reviews for the Chicago Tribune
book review. I wrote the "Black America" column for the left-wing Z Magazine in
the late '80s and early '90s, which I inherited from Cornel West, and during this
time, I also wrote op-eds for the Nation and later for the New York Times, Washington
Post, Chicago Tribune, Los Angeles Times, and other papers. I also wrote essays and
chapters for several books. So I guess I took off pretty quickly after hitting grad-
uate school, which, while not unique, I suppose was nonetheless rare enough. In-
terestingly enough, I ended up writing my first book, Reflecting Black, before I
wrote my Ph.D. thesis. That fact encouraged me to complete my degree before
my book was published in 1993. In fact, I received my Ph.D. from Princeton in
June 1993, and my book was printed in late May 1993, and published later in
June. I just made it!
But weren't there some highly unusual circumstances surrounding your dis-
sertation, particularly the fashion in which you completed it? Rumor has it
that your legend still lives at Princeton because of how you finished.
Well, I don't know if "legend" is quite the word; "infamy" may be more like it.
The usual process of completing one's dissertation is the submission to one's doc-
toral committee of a prospectus, a document that details and outlines one's pro-
posed thesis, which can run up to twenty, thirty, or sometimes forty pages. After


--- PAGE 42 ---
Not from Some Zeus's Head 13
one is subject to a long, maybe three-hour, oral examination by one's committee
members, other professors, and one's peers, one is asked to step out of the room
while the committee votes to accept or reject one's prospectus. If it is accepted,
often with recommendations for changes, you are then permitted to go about the
business of working on the dissertation, which might take anywhere from two to
ten years to complete. You then submit the thesis to your committee (which re-
sponds with challenges and changes that are integrated into your work), sit for a
final oral examination, and, hopefully, your dissertation is approved.
My committee included Cornel West, whose name I had submitted to a search
committee to direct the Afro-American Studies program at Princeton before I left
to run an antipoverty project and teach at Hartford Seminary in 1988; Jeffrey
Stout, a well-respected religious ethicist, and the teacher with whom I spent the
most time in the rigors of writing and rewriting papers, taking courses, and criti-
cally reading challenging books; and Albert Raboteau, the well-regarded religious
historian and author of the classic work Slave Religion. Well, I submitted my
prospectus in April 1993, and after a three-hour public oral examination, consist-
ing of close questioning by my committee members and a few others in atten-
dance, I was asked to leave the room. Upon being invited back in and taking my
seat at the head of the examining table, I was informed that I had passed and that
my prospectus had been approved.
Needless to say, I was quite happy, but for more than the usual reasons of hav-
ing one's intellectual work approved by one's teachers. I had an even bigger in-
vestment than usual because of a big risk I had taken. As my teachers, and the
others in attendance, verbally congratulated me from where they sat, I reached
under the table and pulled out my completed dissertation, handed copies to my
committee members, and said, "Here it is." It is true that that was an electrifying
moment. There was a collective gasp that was articulated, an "ah" that reverber-
ated through the room, with some of the folk, including members of my commit-
tee, clearly stunned. I realized that it was a big risk to do what I had done. After
all, they could have rejected my prospectus or asked for huge changes that would
have necessitated significant revision of my work. Fortunately, it was approved,
and after I submitted my thesis, I responded to the criticisms, integrated them into
the final version of my dissertation, sat for my final oral examination, and was
awarded my doctoral degree. And it is true that after my prospectus performance,
some of my colleagues cornered me and said, "Day-am," in the black vernacular,
"that was unbelievable." And when I came back to defend my dissertation in my
final oral examination, some of my peers said that I had become a legend in the
department. I'm just glad that things turned out the way they did.
But your legend doesn't stop there. You also had a meteoric rise in academe
for one so young. Didn't you get your Ph.D. in 1993, and in the very next
year, you received tenure at Brown, also an Ivy League university, and be-
came a full professor at the University of North Carolina? That's almost


--- PAGE 43 ---
14 THE MICHAEL ERIC DYSON READER
unheard of in conservative academic circles, where promotion through the
ranks often takes years and years.
Yes, that's true. I had been pretty much teaching full time since 1989, when I left
Hartford Seminary to become an instructor of ethics, philosophy, and cultural
criticism at Chicago Theological Seminary. I taught at CTS for three years, two
as an instructor, and when I completed my master's degree in 1991, I got pro-
moted to an assistant professor. I left CTS in 1992 to become an assistant pro-
fessor of American civilization and Afro-American studies at Brown. In 1993, as
you know, I received my Ph.D. from Princeton, and my first book, Reflecting
Black, was published and received favorable critical attention from both the acad-
emy and the broader public, and I was offered several teaching positions, in-
cluding offers from Northwestern and Chapel Hill. Because of those offers,
Brown sped up my tenure decision by about six years, since one normally re-
ceives tenure in one's seventh year.
I was extremely gratified to be awarded tenure at Brown and, as it turns out, at
Chapel Hill. (Northwestern offered me tenure too, but the president intervened
and told me I could come to the university and essentially "try out" for two years;
and if after that time I fulfilled my promise, then I would be awarded tenure. He
based his decision, he said, on the fact that he had never known a scholar to be
awarded tenure less than a year after he completed his Ph.D., with one excep-
tion—a scholar who would go on to win a Nobel Prize in economics. I shot back
that, first, no one knew at the time the scholar was awarded tenure that he would
receive the Nobel Prize, so the decision to grant him tenure was, by those terms
at least, a risk, and second, since the president couldn't be sure that I wouldn't
achieve equal prominence in my field, it made no sense to deny me tenure either.
Needless to say, I rejected Northwestern's offer.) Chapel Hill made the extraordi-
nary step of offering me tenure and a full professorship, in light of the fact that I
had completed my next book, which would be published shortly, a study of Mal-
colm X.
Wait. If it normally takes seven years to get tenure in the first place, it must
take at least another seven years, if not longer, to become a full professor,
right?
Well, it certainly can. After seven years, a scholar who successfully obtains tenure
is usually made an associate professor. When you write the next book or two, de-
pending on where you teach, you can be granted full professorship. And that may
take seven to ten years, or in some cases not quite as long, and in other cases, sig-
nificantly longer. So yes, it's safe to say that I was fortunate enough to do in a year
what can in other circumstances take as long as seventeen to more than twenty
years to achieve. In a way, I have been driven by the sense that I have to make up
for lost tune, which, ironically enough, has put me ahead of the pace of some of


--- PAGE 44 ---
Not from Some Zeus's Head 15
my peers. Plus, I felt a sense of responsibility to my peers from my old neighbor-
hood who will never be able to achieve at the levels I have enjoyed, not because
they aren't talented, but because they lack opportunity. Or, on my block, most of
them are either in prison or dead. I felt blessed by God, and I didn't want to blow
it. Plus, a lot of the early writing and speaking I did-which, as it turns out, helped
me to climb the academic ladder rapidly—was not only driven by a sense of vo-
cation, but was done as well in the desperate attempt to raise funds for my
brother Everett's defense against the charge, and later the conviction, of second-
degree murder. Almost the month after I landed in Chicago to teach at GTS,
Everett was accused of murdering a young black man in Detroit. I believe he is in-
nocent, and I have expended quite a few resources in trying to prove his inno-
cence, and to free him from prison. He's been there now for eight years. That has
given me great incentive to work as hard as I can, and of course, I'm sure there's
a good bit of survivor guilt involved as well.
Have you ever talked with John Edgar Wideman? He crossed my mind; as
you know, he's had a similar circumstance with his brother.
We've talked, but not about our brothers. Yes, he too has had to deal with that
strange and haunting reality that often morphs into a tragic trope of black exis-
tence: one brother a prisoner, the other a professor. One of you free to move, the
other one caged like an animal. The effect of that thought on one's psyche is like
an enormous downward gravitational pull. But I'm grateful to God for the ability
to be able to do what I do, because I know it's a tremendous gift and pleasure and
leisure to be able to write and think. And I work hard, traveling around the coun-
try giving lectures, speeches, and sermons, writing books, articles, and essays, just
trying, as the hip-hoppers say, "to represent." So I spend long hours at what I do,
but I'm not complaining. I'm a well-paid, highly visible black public intellectual
who is grateful for what God has done for him and who wants to pass it on to
somebody else. I don't want to keep it for myself. I want to make sure that other
people get a chance to express their talents and their visions. I have no desire to
be the H.N.I.C., or the "Head Nigger In Charge."
Do you get a sense of that... when you are in your flow ... do you know the
impact you're having on a room?
That's a good question. Let's not have any false modesty: I'm a public speaker
and I've been trained from a very young age in the art of verbal articulation. I've
been seasoned to engage at the highest level of oral expression. So, I'm experi-
enced enough to know when I'm hitting my target and when I'm missing it.
There are times when I can feel the electricity of getting things right, because I've
known when I failed [laughs]. I know what that feels like. And even when other
people think I've done well, I often feel a great need for improvement. There have


--- PAGE 45 ---
16 THE MICHAEL ERIC DYSON READER
been very few times when I feel like I absolutely nailed it. There are some mo-
ments when I know I'm "representin"' because I know I'm a vehicle. I'm a vessel.
My religion teaches me that the gift is not in the vehicle, but in the giver of the
gift. I honestly hope to be an instrument of the Lord. I hope that I'm an instru-
ment of God. And I hope, therefore, that I work hard to stimulate the gift God
gave me. I'm constantly striving to get better, to get clearer, sharper, and more elo-
quent. I think one of the ways that occurs is through testing ourselves in situations
where people are unpersuaded by our beliefs and we have to make a case for
them with as much passion and precision as possible. Crossing swords rhetori-
cally is a great joy to me, and often a great learning experience.
At the same time, I'm attempting to excel at the height of my profession and at
the top of my game, like Michael Jordan. I have no bones about that. I want to
represent on that level where people go, "DAMN, did you hear what that brother
said?" 'Cause I want young people to say it ain't just got to be about sport, it
doesn't just have to be about some athletic achievement-as great as that may be-
or about Oprah or Bill Cosby, as great and ingenious as they are at what they do.
I want young people to say the same thing about intellectual engagement. I want
them to have a desire to deploy a variety of jargons, grammars, rhetorics, lan-
guages, and vocabularies to articulate views in defense of African American or
marginalized identities, as I attempt to do. I want young people to say, as the folk
in the '60s and '70s used to say, "Got to be mo' careful," in admiration of such lin-
guistic and intellectual skill. Not for show, but for war, against ignorance, misery,
and oppression. I want young folk to say, "I wish I could do that, I wish I could
be like Mike!" I have no qualms in hoping for that, because I want to seduce
young people unto excellence, since they've often been sabotaged by mediocrity.
I have no reservations in seeking to inspire young people to do what I do, only
better. So I constantly strive to deepen my vision, broaden my intellectual reach,
and expand my repertoire of verbal skills. And at times, you feel the pleasures of
the palpable responses you evoke in those who hear or read you.
On the other hand, you're always surprised by people who claim you have in-
fluenced them, because you can never accurately or adequately measure such a
thing. We are prevented by circumstance and environment and context from
knowing the true nature of our own influence, which is why we should really re-
main structurally humble. Not falsely modest, but structurally humble. For me that
means if I am wielding influence, it is because I have tried to be faithful to the gifts
God has given to me. Structural humility means that as a matter of principle, we
remain cognizant of the need to check our arrogance and bridle our vanity. This
recognition must be the very foundation, the very structure, of our public activity,
to keep us from taking credit for what only God can give. To be sure, we never
know the full extent of our influence, which is why we should also attempt to be
vigilant in exercising our gifts. As the rapper Guru says, we never know when
someone is watching or listening. I've had people around the country, folk who
read my books, articles, and essays, or hear my sermons, lectures, or commentary


--- PAGE 46 ---
Not from Some Zeus's Head 17
on radio or television, tell me that something I've said or done has changed their
lives. That's a huge responsibility, and we've got to accept it as part of our duties
as public intellectuals. And such responsibility doesn't stop at our national borders.
I just got a letter from Japan, and some intellectuals want me to come there because
they think I'm doing important cultural criticism. And I've just fielded an invita-
tion from London to speak on religion, and from Italy to speak on politics, and
from Cuba to talk about African American culture and politics.
In light of all of this, structural humility is surely in order. The best we can do
is to represent the truth as honestly and clearly as we understand it, with all the
skills at our disposal. Of course, nothing I'm saying means we can't feel good
about our achievements, or about the influence we might wield. From my per-
spective, if we truly believe that our vocations are manifestations of ultimate pur-
pose, we'll want to do our level best to stay at the top of our games as an ac-
knowledgment of the gifts God has given us.
One last thing that ties in is how you'll be able to do that. I can see very
clearly your intellectual path. But how are you going to be able to keep your
hand on the pulse of the street, because by necessity ... it doesn't have any-
thing to do with your commitment ... but, like you said, Japan, Italy, uni-
versities, busy ... How do you maintain that connection? I know that's vital
to you.
It is vital. That's one reason I still spend so much of my time on Sunday morn-
ings preaching, and going into communities as a public intellectual and political
activist.
You ever just go walk through the neighborhoods?
Lord yes. When I go to neighborhoods all over this country, I'm trying to find the
barbecue shack. I'm trying to find where the Negroes hang out. I hang with the
bloods. I want the local color, the local flavor, what Geertz calls local knowledge,
because black folks are so diverse and profoundly complex, even if we have sim-
ilarities that bind us together. Black folks fascinate me. I want to continue to learn
about us: the different vernaculars we have in different regions; the different
ideological and political subcultures we generate; the varied contexts that shape
our cultural identities; the varied sexualities we express, especially beneath the
radar of racial correctness or mainstream propriety; and the inflections of the
black diaspora in our food, fashion, and faith. So, I'm constantly trying to learn
more wherever I go. Of course, one of the critiques of intellectuals I often hear is
that we're out of touch with "the folk." Well, when I preach, I'm reaching "the
folk." Those critics who say that intellectuals per se-not particular intellectuals,
mind you, but intellectuals as a category-are out of touch, have often stereotyped
"the folk." Further, they feel free to speak for, and identify with, "the folk," and


--- PAGE 47 ---
18 THE MICHAEL ERIC DYSON READER
they feel free to attack intellectuals in the name of "the folk." But I've often dis-
covered that "the folk"—these very souls whom critics seek to protect through
claims of our irrelevance—are hungry for intellectual engagement.
In the meantime, "the folk" are out-reading, out-thinking, and out-intellectualizing
the very people who quite defensively and condescendingly argue in their name that
they won't get what we're doing, won't understand what we're up to, or will be au-
tomatically suspicious of our aspirations. Now don't get me wrong; there is more
than enough warrant for the skepticism, perhaps even the cynicism, which some
folk harbor toward intellectuals who've earned the tides Irrelevant, Pedantic, Didac-
tic, or Condescending. On the other hand, when intellectuals prove that they're se-
rious about helping people think deeply and clearly about the problems they con-
front, their advice, insight, and analysis is more than welcomed by "the folk." I think
we have to stop essentializing the folk, as if it's some mythic community. Well, I'm
the folk. They're the folk. So my preservation of connection is through the immedi-
ate context of preaching, teaching, and activist politics, as well as hanging out in the
'hood and going to the barber shop and the barbecue joint and hanging with "the
niggas." And not for edinographic titillation or andiropological voyeurism, but as a
legitimate participant in vibrant black folk culture, the kind from which I sprang and
in which I feel most comfortable.
I can't tell you how many black folk I've met who've said, "Brother, we read
your book, keep on writing," or, "We saw you on TV, keep on speaking." And
these are ordinary, average people, the so-called folk from whom ostensible grass-
roots gatekeepers attempt to divide us, almost by ontological fiat, as if we're a dif-
ferent species of people. These black folk say to me, "Man, you're speaking to
white folk, you're speaking to black folk, you're keeping it real on a level we often
don't see." That makes me feel good, when black folk say I'm speaking brilliantly,
insightfully, intelligendy. But that doesn't mean I can't disagree with what the ma-
jority of black folk think, that I'm somehow locked into a rigid perspective be-
cause I am committed to their amelioration. I love black folk, which is why I ain't
afraid of them. I'm not afraid to disagree with mass black opinion, to call into
question beliefs, habits, dispositions, traditions, and practices that I think need to
be criticized. I seek to speak truth to power in love, as the Bible suggests. I seek to
address the high and low, those on the inside and those locked out. That's my ob-
ligation and lifelong objective.
Interview by Lana Williams
Durham, North Carolina, 1997


--- PAGE 48 ---
Two
LETTER TO MY BROTHER, EVERETT,
IN PRISON
Soon after I arrived in Chicago in 1989 to teach ethics, philosophy, and cultural
criticism at the Chicago Theological Seminary, I learned that my younger brother Everett
was arrested and charged with murder. Of course, such a revelation deeply wounded my
family. But we rallied to Everett's defense as we concluded, after intense investigation,
that he was innocent. As the only college-educated son among jive brothers at the time—
though still four years from my Ph.D.—it fell to me to generate money to aid in Everett's
expensive criminal defense. The process of securing legal counsel., as well as keeping up
the family s morale, was genuinely harrowing. In order to raise funds, I took to lecturing,
preaching, and writingfor a variety of scholarly and popular venues. These efforts lead
in large part to the material collected for my first book in 1993, Reflecting Black.
During my brother's trial—he was eventually convicted of second-degree murder and
sentenced to twenty five years to life in prison—the family dog in Detroit was killed and
the family house was shot at, presumably in retaliation for my brother's alleged crime.
This prompted my mother to leave her job and house and live with me in Chicagofor
nearly two years before returning home. Everett has now been in prison for fifteen years.
He has converted to the Moorish Temple Muslim faith, changing his name to Everett
Dyson-Bey. I visit him regularly and continue to work for his release. This open letter to
him, though painful to write, was both emotionally cathartic and morally clarifying,
helping me to sort through critical domestic and social issues in both our lives.
Dear Everett:
How are you? I suppose since we've talked almost nonstop on the telephone over
the last five years, I haven't written too often. Perhaps that's because with writing
you have to confront yourself, stare down truths you would rather avoid altogether.
When you're freestyling in conversation, you can acrobatically dance around all
those issues that demand deep reflection. After five years, I guess it's time I got
down to that kind of, well, hard work, at least emotionally and spiritually.
I've been thinking about you a lot because I've been talking about black men
quite a bit—in my books, in various lectures I give around the country, in ser-
mons I preach, even on Oprah! Or is it the other way around, that I've been talk-
ing about black men because I've been thinking about you and your hellish


--- PAGE 49 ---
20 THE MICHAEL ERIC DYSON READER
confinement behind bars? I don't need to tell you—but maybe I'll repeat it to re-
mind myself-of the miserable plight of black men in America.
I am not suggesting that black women have it any better. They are not living in
the lap of luxury while their fathers, husbands, brothers, boyfriends, uncles,
grandfathers, nephews, and sons perish. Black women have it equally bad, and in
some cases, even worse than black males. That's one of the reasons I hesitate to
refer to black males as an "endangered species," as if black women are out of the
woods of racial and gender agony and into the clearing, free to create and explore
their complex identities. I don't believe that for a moment.
I just think black women have learned, more successfully than black men, to
absorb the pain of their predicament and to keep stepping. They've learned to
take the kind of mess that black men won't take, or feel they can't take, perhaps
never will take, and to turn it into something useful, something productive, some-
thing toughly beautiful after all. It must be socialization-it certainly isn't genetics
or gender, at least in biological terms. I think brothers need to think about this
more, to learn from black women about their politics of survival.
I can already hear some wag or politician using my words to justify their attacks
on black men, contending that our plight is our own fault. Or to criticize us for not
being as strong as black women. But we both know that to compare the circum-
stances of black men with black women, particularly those who are working class
and poor, is to compare our seats on a sinking ship. True, some of us are closer to
the hub, temporarily protected from the fierce winds of social ruin. And some of
us are directly exposed to the vicious waves of economic misery. But in the final
analysis, we're all going down together.
Still, it's undeniable that black men as a whole are in deplorable shape. The
most tragic symbol of that condition, I suppose, is the black prisoner. There are
so many brothers locked away in the "stone hotel," literally hundreds of thou-
sands of them, that it makes me sick to think of the talent they possess going to
waste. I constantly get letters from such men, and their intelligence and determi-
nation is remarkable, even heartening.
I realize that millions of Americans harbor an often unjustifiable fear toward
prisoners whom they believe to be, to a man, unrepentant, hardened criminals.
They certainly exist. But every prisoner is not a criminal, just as every criminal is
not in prison. That's not to say that I don't believe that men in prison who have
committed violent crimes can't turn around. I believe they can see the harm of
their past deeds and embrace a better life, through religious conversion, through
redemptive social intervention, or by the sheer will to live right.
The passion to protect ourselves from criminals, and the social policies which
that passion gives rise to, often obscure a crucial point: thousands of black men
are wrongfully imprisoned. Too many black men are jailed for no other reason
than that they fit the profile of a thug, a vision developed in fear and paranoia. Or
sometimes, black men get caught in the wrong place at the wrong time. Worse
yet, some males are literally arrested at a stage of development where, if they had


--- PAGE 50 ---
Letter to My Brother, Everett, in Prison 21
more time, more resources, more critical sympathy, they could learn to resist the
temptations that beckon them to a life of self-destruction. Crime is only the most
conspicuous sign of their surrender.
I guess some, or all, of this happened to you. I still remember the phone call
that came to me announcing that you had been arrested for murder. The disbe-
lief settled on me heavily. The thought that you might have shot another man to
death emotionally choked me. I instantly knew what E. B. White meant when he
said that the death of his pig caused him to cry internally. The tears didn't flow
down his cheeks. Instead, he cried "deep hemorrhagic tears." So did I.
Even so, a cold instinct to suspend my disbelief arose, an instinct I could hardly
suppress. I was willing, had to be willing, to entertain the possibility that the news
was true. Otherwise I couldn't offer you the kind of support you needed. After
all, if you really had killed someone, I didn't want to rush in to express sorrow at
your being wrongly accused of a crime you didn't commit. Such a gesture would
not only be morally noxious; it would desecrate the memory of the man who had
lost his life.
If I wasn't able to face the reality that you might be a murderer, then I would
have to surrender important Christian beliefs I preach and try to practice. I be-
lieve that all human beings are capable of good and evil. And regarding the latter,
wishing it wasn't the case won't make it so. Too often we deny that our loved
ones have the capacity or even inclination for wrongdoing, blinding us to the
harm they may inflict on themselves and others.
I eventually became convinced that you were innocent. Not simply because you
told me so. As one lawyer succincdy summarized it: "To hear prisoners tell it, there
are no are guilty prisoners." After discerning the controlled anger in your voice (an
anger that often haunts the wrongly accused) and after learning that the police had
discovered no weapon, motive, or even circumstantial evidence, I believed you
were telling me the truth. Plus, you had been candid with me about your past
wrongdoing. And in the wake of your confessions of guilt, you repeatedly bore the
sting of my heated reproach. For these reasons, I believed you were not guilty.
I realized then, as I do now, that these are a brother's reasons. They are the
fruit of an intimacy to which the public has no access and in which they place lit-
tle trust. Many of the reasons that led me to proclaim your innocence are not rea-
sons that convince judges or juries. Still, I felt the bare, brutal facts of the case
worked in your favor. A young black man with whom you were formerly ac-
quainted was tied up in a chair on the second floor of a sparsely furnished house.
He had tape tightly wrapped around his eyes. He was beaten on the head. He was
shot twice in the chest at extremely close range, producing "contact wounds."
After breaking free of his constraints, he stumbled down the flight of stairs inside
the house where he was shot. Once he made it down the stairs outside the house, he
collapsed on the front lawn of the house next door. As he gasped for breath while
bleeding profusely, he was asked, first by neighbors, then by relatives who had ar-
rived on the scene, and later by a policeman, "Who did this to you?" Something


--- PAGE 51 ---
22 THE MICHAEL ERIC DYSON READER
sounding close enough to your name was uttered. The badly wounded man was
pronounced dead a short time later after being rushed to an area hospital.
In the absence of any evidence of your participation, except the dying man's
words, I thought you'd be set free. After all, he could be mistaken. Given the
tragic conditions in which he lay dying, he might not have had full control of his
faculties. Was his perception affected by his gunshots? Was his mind confused be-
cause of the large amounts of blood he had lost? Unfortunately, there was no way
to be certain that he was right. There was no way to ask him if he was sure that
you were one of the culprits (he said "they" a couple of times) who had so bar-
barically assaulted him. But without his ability to answer such questions, I be-
lieved there was no way you would be imprisoned. Surely, I thought, it took more
than this to convict you, or anyone, of murder.
I was wrong. The murdered man's words, technically termed a "dying decla-
ration," were admitted into court testimony and proved, at least for the jury, to be
evidence enough. I was stunned. In retrospect, I shouldn't have been. Detroiters
were fed up with crime, including the ones who peopled the black jury that con-
victed you. How many times had this apparent scenario been repeated for them:
black men killing other black men, then seeking pardon from blacks sitting on a
jury in a mostly black city?
When it came time to sentence you, the judge allowed me to say a few words.
I felt more than a little awkward. Although I didn't believe you were guilty, I
knew that if I said so the judge would ignore my presentation. In his mind, the
jury had settled the issue of your culpability. I didn't know how much I should
refer to your past, or to the social forces that shape human action. I figured that
the last thing I needed to do was sound like a hot-shot intellectual trying to en-
lighten the masses.
I knew in my heart that I shouldn't avoid mentioning those beliefs I held to be
true, for instance, that economic misery can lead to criminal activity. At the same
time, I didn't want to be mistaken for defending the belief that social structures
alone determine human behavior. I also wanted to avoid inflicting any more pain
on the murdered man's family, most of whom believed that you were guilty as
sin. And I didn't want to be condescending. I didn't want to sound like the
brother who was righteous, who had made it good, making excuses for the
brother who had gone completely wrong. I wanted to speak from the heart, so I
didn't use a prepared text. I wonder if you remember what I said?
Your Honor, I'm a minister of the gospel and I'm also a scholar, and a teacher at a
theological seminary. I, of course, want to express first of all my deep sympathy to
the family of the man who died. They have endured enormous hurt and pain over
this past year. I want to say to you in my brief remarks that I am deeply aware, in an
ironic sense, of why we're here. Sentencing is a very difficult decision. I have been
deeply committed over the years to justice in American culture and also to examining
the workings of the legal system.


--- PAGE 52 ---
Letter to My Brother, Everett, in Prison 23
On the other hand, I also understand the societal forces such as poverty and
joblessness and structural unemployment and limited social options and oppor-
tunities for legitimate employment—that many people of our culture, particularly
black men, face. It is also ironic that I'm here because I write in my professional
life about... social forces which often leave young black men feeling they have
no other options but to engage in ... criminal activity in order to sustain their
lives. Unfortunately many make that choice.
I grew up in the urban poverty of Detroit, as did the other members of my
family. Therefore I understand not only from a scholarly viewpoint, but from a
personal viewpoint, limited life options and the kind of hopelessness and social
despair they can breed in a person.
I come here this morning pleading and praying for leniency in my brother's
case. As his lawyer has already stated, the mystery that surrounds the events
of that day continues to prevail. In any regard, I can attest to my brother's
character, that he is not a hardened criminal. He has made unwise choices
about the activity of his life in the past. He has made choices which have en-
couraged him to engage in a lifestyle that I'm sure at this point he is not proud
of. At the same time I think this penalty far exceeds any crime that he has
been involved in.
Above all, my brother is, I think, ripe for a productive future in our society. Al-
though he has indeed made a noticeable change in jail, a prolonged stay in
prison, I feel, will not greatly contribute to any sense of rehabilitation that the
Court might think prison offers.
Unfortunately the prisons of our land often reproduce the pathology that they
seek to eliminate. Because of his own poor beginnings in our city, the death of
our father at a crucial time in his life, and because he's been subjected to the
forces I've already referred to, my brother has made poor choices. But he's also
shown a remarkable strength of faith and renewed spiritual insight. He's shown
a remarkable sense of concern ... about all the people involved in this case and
not just himself.... In conclusion, Your Honor, I would plead and pray that...
your deepest discretion and most conscientious leniency prevail in your sentenc-
ing of my brother this morning.
I have rarely been more depressed, or more convinced that my words meant
absolutely nothing, than when the judge's words, all-powerful words, revealed
your future. Life. In prison. An oxymoron if I've ever heard one.
You have managed to squeeze an ounce of invention, or should I say, self-
reinvention, from the pound of cure that prison is said to represent. When I first
learned of your new identity, Everett Dyson-Bey, I was neither dismayed nor sur-
prised. Frankly, my position is simple: do whatever is necessary to maintain your
safety and sanity in prison without bringing undue harm to another person. You're
a strong, muscular fellow, and I didn't think you'd have much trouble staying safe.
I took your change of religions-from the Christianity you inherited as a child to


--- PAGE 53 ---
24 THE MICHAEL ERIC DYSON READER
die Moorish Temple Muslim belief of your new aduldiood—to be an encouraging,
even creative defense of your sanity.
I am disappointed, though, by the response of the black church to your predica-
ment. I suppose since I've been to see you coundess times over the last five years,
it could be claimed that those visits count for my church's mission to those locked
away. But we both know that's bogus. That line of reasoning insults the integrity
and slights the example of so many who've followed Jesus in "visit[ing] those who
are in prison." You haven't been visited a single time in prison by anyone visiting
as a Christian minister, or as a concerned church member. Thank God our pas-
tor visited you in jail before you went to prison. But the church is larger than him.
I spoke several times to the minister in charge of prison visitation about going to
see you. My requests were futile.
I don't know why so many black Christians avoid the prisons. Of course, I re-
alize that hundreds of black churches have prison ministries that make a real dif-
ference in inmates' lives. But the average pew sitting member, or for that matter,
the regular church minister, rarely gets into the thick of prison life in the same
way, say, as members and ministers of the Nation of Islam. Or the Moorish Tem-
ple. Perhaps it has somediing to do with how black Muslims with smaller num-
bers than black churches must proselytize when and where they can. Since many
of their members have served time, they may be more willing to reach back to
help those left behind. Then, too, the application to prisoners' lives of the strin-
gent ethical code taught in black Muslim settings often brings welcome relief to
the moral chaos into which so many inmates have descended.
Another reason for their success may be that black Muslims take seriously their
theological commitments to racial uplift and reconstruction, especially among the
poor and imprisoned who are most in need of that message. Perhaps it's a simple
class issue. The more legitimacy some black Christian denominations gain, the
higher class status they acquire, the less they appear inclined to take care of "the
least of these." In the end, I'm glad you've discovered in the Moorish Temple
what you couldn't find-or perhaps what couldn't be found in you-through
Christian belief.
Many people think the sort of religious change you have experienced is a "fox-
hole" conversion, a transformation brought on by desperate circumstances that
will be rejected as soon as you're set free. That may be the case. If it is true, you
certainly won't be the first person it has happened to. But hold on to the hope
your religion supplies as long as you can. There will be other desperate situations
after you leave prison. Besides, so-called normal religious people experience a se-
ries of crises and conversions over the years in setding down to a deeper faith.
Even those folk who don't walk through its doors every time church opens often
have meaningful conversations with God.
I think our father was one of those people. He was a complex man who
worked extraordinarily hard and who believed deeply in God. But he wasn't very
religious, at least not in any traditional way. When people discover I'm a Baptist


--- PAGE 54 ---
Letter to My Brother, Everett, in Prison 25
preacher, they often ask if preachers run in my family, if my father was a preacher.
I laugh inwardly, sometimes out loud, thinking of what an odd image that is,
Daddy as a preacher. It's not that he cussed like a sailor. I know too many preach-
ers who do that as well. And it's not because he had a short fuse. So do most
prophets, biblical and current ones too. I guess it's their righteous rage at evil,
their ill-tempered tirades translated as holy damnation. But the line between their
baptized fussiness and plain old invective is sometimes quite thin.
I think what causes my bemused response is Daddy's genuine humility. Most
preachers I know aren't that humble. I don't think that's all bad. Many can't af-
ford to be. The tribulations of their office are enough to shatter a fragile ego. But
the annoying hubris found in so many ministers was completely absent in Daddy.
Yet this humble man also displayed ferocious anger which frightened me. True, it
didn't last long when it surfaced. But its concentrated expression had devastating
consequences. And often—I think too often—it had its most harmful effects on his
children's behinds, not to mention on their minds.
To be honest, I don't completely understand why Daddy so readily turned to
the strap to discipline us. Perhaps he was treated the same way when he was a
child. Maybe the humiliations he suffered didn't have any other outlet. I remem-
ber once when he and I were working for "Sam's Drugs" as janitors. I was in my
middle teens, which meant Daddy was in his late '50s. A light fixture had been
broken in the ceiling of the drugstore. In order to reach it, Daddy climbed a step
ladder that I was holding as Ben, the Jewish owner, looked on. When Daddy mis-
stepped and slipped down a couple of rungs on the ladder, Ben became angry.
"Oh, Everett," he indignandy declaimed. "You're just like a little boy. Can't you
do anything right?"
Daddy didn't say a word. I was so mad at Ben, and humiliated for Daddy at
the same time. I remember thinking of how strong Daddy was, how physically
domineering he could be. Yet none of that mattered as Ben reduced his humanity,
and as I interpreted it then, attacked Daddy's manhood as well. If I felt that as a
teen, what did Daddy feel? Where did he put that anger? Is that at least part of
the reason he let his rage loose on us?
As you know, the debate about corporal punishment is raging in our nation.
There used to be a belief that there was a racial divide on these matters, at least when
we were growing up. Black folk in favor, white folk opposed. Even though I don't
think it's that simple (where one lives, either in the city or the suburbs, and one's
class identification, are important too). I don't deny that racial differences exist.
Recently, though, I think the gulf between black and white views on child rear-
ing has probably narrowed. A new generation of black parents has questioned
and often rejected the wisdom of whipping ass. To be sure, you still hear black
folk saying, "The problem with white folk is that they let their kids get away with
murder, let them talk and act any way they want to without keeping them in
check." You also hear black parents and the experts they listen to arguing that
corporal punishment encourages aggressive behavior, stymies the development


--- PAGE 55 ---
26 THE MICHAEL ERIC DYSON READER
of moral reasoning, hinders self-esteem, and even causes children to be de-
pressed. No such theories prevailed in our household.
I must admit, I tend toward the newfangled school of thought, even though I
haven't always put it into practice now that it's my turn to parent. In fact, during
your nephew Michael's childhood and early adolescence, I didn't know anything
about "time out." As a teen father, I had barely survived the pain of my own rear-
ing and the violence I'd encountered. I knew what I saw, repeated what was done
to me. And I regret it.
One of the most painful moments I experienced involving punishment oc-
curred when I was a teacher and assistant director of a poverty project at Hartford
Seminary. Brenda (then my wife), my son Mike, and I were in our car as I drove
to work to pick up some papers one evening. Down the street from the seminary,
Mike had behaved so badly in the car that I pulled over to the side of the road to
discipline him—three licks on his hands. In my view, it was a very light and well-
deserved spanking. After administering this punishment, I drove the single block
to the seminary.
Before I could park my car in front of the seminary two white policemen drove
up in a squad car. They got out of the car and one of the policemen approached
my door, instructing me to get out of the car. His partner walked up to Brenda's
side of our car.
"Can I ask you why you're stopping me, officer?" I asked politely and profes-
sionally. I'd learned to do this, as most black men in America have learned, to
keep the blue wrath from falling on my head.
"Just get out of the car," he insisted.
As I got out of my car, I informed the policeman that I worked at Hartford
Seminary.
"I'm a professor here," I said, pointing to the seminary behind me.
"Sure," the policeman shot back. "And I'm John Wayne."
The policeman instructed me to place my hands against the car and to lean for-
ward. I knew the drill. I'd done it too many times before. I could hear the other
policeman asking Brenda if everydiing was all right, if my son was harmed. Mike
was in the back seat crying, afraid of what the police were going to do to me.
"I'm fine, I'm fine," Mike cried. "Why are you doing this to my Dad?"
From the pieces of conversation I heard between the second cop and Brenda, I
gathered that someone—a well-meaning white person no doubt—had spotted me
spanking Mike and reported me as a child abuser.
Just as Brenda told the cop how ridiculous that was, two more police cars rolled
up with four more white men. "Damn," I thought, "if I had been mugged, I bet I
couldn't get a cop to respond within half an hour. And now, within five minutes
of spanking my son, I've got six policemen breathing down my neck."
As the other cops surrounded our car, the policeman hovering over me refused
to explain why he stopped me. He forcefully patted me down as we both listened
to Brenda and Mike explain that nothing was wrong, that Mike was fine.


--- PAGE 56 ---
Letter to My Brother, Everett, in Prison 27
"You sure everything's all right?" the cop talking to Brenda asked once again
for degrading emphasis. She angrily replied in the affirmative.
Finally my knight in shining armor spoke to me.
"We got a complaint that someone was hurting a child," he said.
"I can assure you that I love my son, and that I wasn't hurting him," I re-
sponded in a controlled tone.
"I spanked my child now so that he wouldn't one day end up being arrested
by you."
"We have to check on these things," the second cop offered. 'Just don't be
doing nothing wrong."
He shoved me against the car to make his point. With that, the six cops got
back into their cars, without apology, and drove off.
I don't have to tell you that the situation was utterly humiliating. I resented
how I'd been treated. I felt the cops had deliberately intimidated me. They em-
barrassed me in front of my family under the guise of protecting them. I think
their behavior is fairly typical of how many white men with authority treat black
men. They are unable to be humane in the exercise of power. They run
roughshod over black men in the name of serving a higher good, such as protect-
ing black women and children from our aggression. The irony of course is that
white men ignore how their violence against black men has already hurt millions
of black families, including black women and children. In fact, the effect of much
of white male hostility is not to help black women and children but to harm black
males. Fortunately for me, Brenda and Mike understood that truth. Neither of
them trusted the cops' motives for a moment.
Still, the incident forced me to imagine the impact my punishments had on
Mike. I thought about how he might interpret the discipline I gave him. I won-
dered how spankings made him feel, despite the reassurances of love I prefaced to
any punishments I gave him. The irony, too, is that I was reading social and cul-
tural theorists who were writing about discipline and punishment. While I found
many of them extremely enlightening about big social forces and how they
molded people's habits of life at home and in the world, I sometimes wondered if
they had any children. I continued to talk to Mike about these matters, apologiz-
ing to him about my past disciplinary practices, promising him, and mostly living
up to it, that I would look for alternatives to physical punishment.
Of course Daddy lived in a world where such considerations were impossible.
If you don't control your kids, they'll control you. That's the logic that informed
his decisions. If you don't beat their asses, they'll beat yours one day. I guess de-
pending on where you stand on such issues, the rash of recent slayings of parents
by their children either proves or undermines such a theory. In any case, I even-
tually grew to hate Daddy for the violence of his punishments. I can still hear him
saying "get me that 'hind pepper,'" referring to the quarter-inch-thick, twelve-inch-
long piece of leather he used to whip us. Occasionally, he'd plant his size twelve
foot right up my posterior.


--- PAGE 57 ---
28 THE MICHAEL ERIC DYSON READER
I know, of course, that no one on our block would have called that child
abuse. And neither did I. Given the black cultural logic of the time during
which he was reared, and during which he and Mama reared us, Daddy was
simply attempting to keep his brood in line. (What we must not forget is that
during an earlier time in our nation, black folk beat their children at home so
they wouldn't give white men lip in public. If a black child wasn't strictly disci-
plined, he might say or do something that might cause him untold danger away
from the protection of parents. Even though that logic may be long exhausted,
some habits die hard.)
My resentment of his whippings got so bad that he once told Mama that he
thought I hated him because he wasn't my biological father. When Mama told me
that, I was crushed.
For despite his discipline, I knew he loved me as if I was his very own, like I
was your full blood brother. For that reason, I have never made the distinction be-
tween any of us five boys who came up together. In my mind, not only did we
have the same mother, but we shared the same father. He was as much father as
most of my friends had, and often, much, much more. Since he adopted me when
I was two, he is the only father I have ever known. He was Daddy to me, just like
he was to you.
No, I was very specific about my beef with him. It wasn't blood, it was those
beatings. The same ones he gave to you, Anthony, Gregory, and Brian. And prob-
ably to John Everett, Etta James, Robert, and Annie Ruth, our late brothers and
sisters from Daddy's previous marriages.
My conflict with Daddy came to a head when I was sixteen, the same age Mike
is now. He had ordered me to do something, what I can't remember. I do re-
member feeling the familiar threat of physical punishment behind his words if I
didn't immediately obey. I had had enough. We were at the house, upstairs on the
second floor. He barked his orders, but I wasn't moving fast enough.
"Move, goddammit, when I speak to you," he bellowed.
The resentment weighed me down, and slowed my legs. I knew instandy that
we were heading for a showdown. Daddy jumped up from the bed in his room
and moved toward me. Even that gesture failed to speed my pace. This wasn't
worker slowdown, a domestic uprising against an unjust guardian. This was sheer
frustration, anger, and weariness.
"Move, I said," Daddy repeated. I didn't.
Then he grabbed me by the arm and pushed me against the wall. Something in
me exploded. Or did it snap? Either metaphor, or perhaps both of them, captured
my state of mind, my state of soul.
"Fuck it, man," I heaved. "You just gonna have to kill me, 'cause I refuse to be
scared any more."
I guess he took me seriously. He literally lifted me off the ground with his left
arm, his massive chocolate hand sunk deep into my yellow neck as he pinned me
against a hallway wall. They didn't call him "Muscles" for nothing. I thought for


--- PAGE 58 ---
Letter to My Brother, Everett, in Prison 29
sure that he might really kill me. I didn't care anymore. I was tired of running.
Mama saved me.
"Everett," she hollered. It was all she said. But it was enough to bring Daddy to
his senses, to make him drop me to the ground before he completely choked me.
Never mind my gasping. I felt free, delivered of some awful demon of fear that no
longer had power over me. It was my emancipation proclamation and declaration
of independence all rolled into one moment. It was a milestone in my relationship
to Daddy.
For the next seven years, his last on earth, Daddy and I got along much better.
After I got Terrie pregnant at eighteen and married her, and after Mike was born,
Daddy and I grew much closer. In fact, he'd often cook for me and Terrie because
we were so poor at times that we didn't eat every day. In fact, at times, we didn't
eat for two or three days in a row. But then we'd go by the house, and Daddy
would always give us a good meal. I even sent Daddy a Father's Day card in 1981
when I was in Knoxville attending college. I told him how much I loved him, and
how much I appreciated the fact that we had overcome our differences now that
I was a man with major responsibilities. A few weeks later, he was dead from a
heart attack at sixty-six. So young when you really think about it.
But I must confess, even now as a thirty-five-year-old man I have dreams of
Daddy doing violent deeds to me, whipping me in vicious ways. The lingering ef-
fects of the whippings Daddy administered are illustrated in a story I heard about
a boy and his father, who sought to rid his son of his habit of lying. The boy's fa-
ther hammered nails into a piece of wood for each lie his son told. Finally, when
the board was nearly full, the boy pledged to stop lying. And his father promised
to pull a nail out each time his son told the truth. When the board was completely
empty, the boy began to cry.
"What's wrong, son?" the boy's father asked. "You should be happy. You've
stopped lying, and the nails are all gone."
"Yes," the boy replied. "The nails are gone, but the holes are still there."
Well, the holes are still there for me as well. My psyche bears the marks of spir-
itual and psychological violence. But I am not bitter toward Daddy. I honestly be-
lieve he was a good man trying to do his best in a world that was often difficult
for him. The older I get, the more clearly I understand the forces he faced.
I guess I'm sharing all of this with you now because we never enjoyed this kind
of intimacy before your imprisonment. A shame, but it's true. And even though
we grew up in a household where we knew we were loved, we rarely, if ever, heard
the words, "I love you." Daddy taught us to be macho men, strong enough to take
care of ourselves on the mean streets of Detroit. And though Mama protested,
thinking Daddy was trying to make us too rough at times, I'm sure we both ap-
preciate many of his efforts to prepare us for an often cold-hearted, violent world.
I yearned for a home where we could be both strong and vulnerable, tough but
loving. Daddy's reading of the world led him to believe it was either one or the
other. He chose to teach us how to survive in a city that was known then, in the


--- PAGE 59 ---
30 THE MICHAEL ERIC DYSON READER
seventies, as the "Murder Capital of the World." And because I loved books, and
not the cars that you and Daddy and Brian loved to work on, he sometimes
thought I was "too soft." Daddy was really proud of me later when I excelled at
school. He wanted me to be better than he was.
I remember once when I was about eight years old, I was mimicking his pro-
nunciation of the number 4. He pronounced it "foe." I followed suit. But he
stopped me.
"Don't you go to school, boy?" he asked.
"Yes," I replied.
"Don't you know how to say that right?"
"Yes."
"Then do that from now on. Okay?"
I've never forgotten that exchange. He didn't have a great education, but he
sure wanted me to be learned. Indeed, he wanted the best for all his boys. I imag-
ine if he was alive he'd be heartbroken that you're in prison. Daddy was the com-
plete opposite of so much of what prison stands for. He rose every day before
dawn, even after he retired from the factory, and worked until evening, cutting
grass, laying sod, painting, or working as a maintenance man. I learned my work
ethic from him. I can still hear him saying, "Boy, if you gonna do a job, do it right
or don't do it at all." I've repeated that to Mike at least a million times. And of
course, his other famous saying was "If you start a job, finish it." That is, other
than his maxim: "Laziness will kill yo' ass."
And even when he worked those thirty-three years at Kelsey-Hayes Wheel-
brake, and Drum Factory, he often put in sixty or seventy hours. I swear I once
saw a stub where he had worked nearly eighty hours, pulling a double shift for
an entire week. It was Daddy's example that led me to work two full-time jobs
after Terrie got pregnant with Mike. (He warned me then, "The more money you
make, the more you spend." He was right, of course.) I'd go to a maintenance job
from 1:00 A.M. to 7:30 the next morning, and then work a menial "construction
job" (a misnomer, to be sure) from 7:30 to 4:30 in the evening. And I still had to
get food stamps while Terrie was enrolled in WIC (Women, Infants, and Chil-
dren). That stuff saved our lives.
I'm glad that you and I have learned to talk. To communicate. To express our
love for one another. It hasn't been easy seeing you cooped up like an animal
when I visit you. But the one good thing to come out of all of this is that at least
we're getting to know each other better. That's why I feel good about telling the
world about you.
Even as I talk about you on television and radio, though, I always try to im-
press on the audiences and interviewers in the short time I have that ours is no
"one son makes good and the other makes bad: what a tragedy" scenario. I'm not
trying to pimp your pain or commercialize your misery to make a name for my-
self. That's because, I believe in my heart, and hope you do too, that it could just
as easily be me in your cell. I don't want people using our story as a justification


--- PAGE 60 ---
Letter to My Brother, Everett, in Prison 31
for rewarding black men like me who are able to do well while punishing broth-
ers like you who've fallen on harder times.
No matter how much education I've got, this Ph.D. is no guarantee that I won't
be treated cruelly and unjustly, that I won't be seen as a threat because I refuse to
point the finger at "dem ghetto niggers" (a statement made by black and white
alike) who aren't like me. I'm not trying to erase class differences, to pretend
there's no difference in a black man with a Ph.D. and a black man who's a pris-
oner. I'm simply saying I can't be seduced into believing that because I've got this
degree I'm better.
How could I be? I was one of "dem ghetto niggers" myself. Even now I think
of myself as a ghetto boy, though I don't live there anymore, and I refuse to ro-
manticize its role in its inhabitants' lives. Not even survivor's guilt can make me
that blind. But being from the ghetto certainly leaves its marks on one's identity.
Don't get me wrong. I'm all for serious, redemptive criticism of black life at every
level, including the inner city. There's a difference between criticism that really
helps and castigation that only hurts.
I should close this letter for now. I fear I've touched on many sensitive spots,
and you may sharply disagree with some of the things I've written. But that's all
right. The important thing is that as black men, as black brothers, we learn to
embrace each other despite the differences that divide us. I hope you write me
back. I'd really like to know what you think about what I've said. In the mean-
time, stay strong, and stay determined to renew your spirit and mind at the altar
of devotion to God and our people. In the final analysis, it's the only thing that
can save us all.
Peace and Love,
Mike


--- PAGE 61 ---
Three
THIS I BELIEVE
This speech was written for an oratorical contest sponsored by the Detroit Optimist Club
when I was an eleven-year-old student at Webber Junior High School. I delivered the
oration as a twelve-year-old neophyte who saw his award-winning speech published later
that year in a Detroit educational magazine. I was also featured in the local newspaper,
I can still recall the photo of me gesturing underneath the Detroit News headlines:
"12 Tear Old Bey's Plea Against Racism Wins Award." I suppose my fight for social
justice and racial equality began quite early. The speech recalls the influence of Martin
Luther King's dream for racial harmony. It bears as well the imprint of the social unrest
and urban rebellion that seized the nation in the late '60s and early '70s. Given that I
spend more than 150 days annually delivering lectures, sermons, addresses., and speeches
across the nation, it is ironic to note that my vocation as a public speaker began in
trepidation. On Wenbber Junior High School's loudspeaker, the announcement went forth
about an "oratorical contest." After school, I made my way to English teacher Mr. Otis
Burdette's room as directed to discover what oratorical meant. When I was told that it
had to do with public speaking, I immediately demurred, but Mr. Burdette convinced me
to give it a try. I went on to win several contests over the next two years. Last year, I
reconnected with Mr. Burdette after not seeing him for nearly thirty years. He told me
then what he didn't have the heart to say to me as a twelve-year-old boy: that I had not
won a regional oratorical contest because of racist judges. Thus, there was a strange,
even poetic, symmetry between my speech, my life, and my subsequent vocation combating
injustice as an intellectual insurgent and rhetorical guerrilla.
NOT OFTEN IS THE SUBJECT OF BROTHERHOOD brought up. War, crime,
and other various things are often talked about, but not brotherhood. I believe that
one day we won't have discrimination or anything relating to it in the world. There
shall be, someday, a faith in all people that will make them see, if they have faith in
their country and its peace, that they are taking a step toward having a better world.
Our leaders of yesteryear, and our leaders of today all have tried to make a
profitable world for us. If we want peace and justice for ourselves, we must also
sacrifice to become profitable.
We must look ahead, never back. When I say this I mean we shouldn't think
of the time when a man was beaten, or had to go to jail because of the color of
his skin. Instead, we should look for a brighter future.


--- PAGE 62 ---
This I Believe 33
Our motive shall be to seek the day when all men, disregarding the color of
their skins, shall be able to stand up and say that they have overcome the act of
devaluating other people and that they can live together in continuing harmony,
a harmony that will accomplish what leaders before us have tried.
All people, at times, have dreams about how they can improve our world, but
some of us can't quite express ourselves because we are young and don't know
how to bring these dreams out. If this is your problem, you should get your ideas
across to someone who will act upon them, in a way that will make them sensible
and conspicuous.
We should construct an enduring faith within ourselves, a faith that can with-
stand the problems caused by man, a faith that can someday help man solve the
problems he has committed, and that faith should be entrenched in understanding!
We can't judge a person because of the way he looks or because he handles sit-
uations differently than us. I believe you should judge a person on what he at-
tempts to do, rather than on how he accomplishes it. I believe that he is putting
effort into what he is trying to accomplish. Leaders from many nations would
agree that it's not how you do it, but what you try to do. That's what counts.
The late Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr., provided many benefits for people,
but the night before he was assassinated he asked, when someone delivers the eu-
logy at his funeral, not to mention the many awards he won, but to mention that
he had tried to clothe, feed, and get equal rights for all people. Sometimes when
someone does something little, he looks for a lot of praise, but this brilliant man
only wanted people to remember him in a way knowing that he helped human-
ity. This sets an example for all people. Dr. King struggled for what he thought
was right.
If we have dreams that will benefit our world, we must bring them out, or get
them across to someone, because if you think they're worth hearing, they must be
heard!
All people, young and old, can at least be listened to, to see if they have any-
thing of meaning that will make our world a better place to live. An old saying
composed by Benjamin Franklin, "A penny earned is a penny saved," relates to
this, because "A dream gained is a dream made into reality."
I believe that true leadership in bringing people together in a way that is un-
derstandable and acceptable to them is the first step in having people respecting
and sharing their thoughts and beliefs with humanity. When people have reached
the time in their lives when they can accept others as they are, then we might have
a world fulfilled with tranquillity! This will be the day when all men will be able
to transform their oasis of belief into a quality of success.


--- PAGE 63 ---
This page intentionally left blank


--- PAGE 64 ---
PA R T TWO
THEORIES OF RACE
Racism remains the central problem in our culture; its brutal persistence
brings out the ugliest features of the national character. I have spent
quite a bit of time reading, writing, and thinking about race, and no
small effort opposing racism s malevolent expression. We must clearly
grasp the difference between race—the culturally determined base of
identity upon which social benefit and stigma rests—and racism—the
sordid expression of prejudice and hatred against a racial group with
the sanction of law' and social custom. Otherwise, we won '/ make much
headway in understanding why it is sometimes helpful to take race into
account, even as we continue to fight against white supremacy, one of
the most destructive forms of racism in history.


--- PAGE 65 ---
This page intentionally left blank


--- PAGE 66 ---
F o u r
THE LIBERAL THEORY OF RACE
In 1985, Edmund Perry, a Harlem youth who graduated with honors from Phillips
Exeter Academy, won a full scholarship to attend Stanford University. Ten days later, he
was killed on Mew York' s Upper West Side by a white undercover detective, Lee Van
Houten. The plainclothes policeman claimed that Perry and his brother, Jonah, then a
nineteen-year-old engineering student at Cornell, had viciously beaten him during a robbery
attempt. The story caused an immediate uproar. It also provoked a great deal of hand-
wringing about the difficulties of urban youth straddling two cultures—one black and poor,
the other rich and white. In fact, it is the Edmund Perry story that inspired Michael
Jackson's long-form video "Bad." Robert Sam Anson, a noted journalist, penned a book on
Perry that also addressed the racial and personal factors that may have driven him to self-
destructive behavior. I knew one of Perry's former teachers, the respected religious historian
David Daniels, who is interviewed in Anson s book. Daniels was uncomfortable with the
limiting racial lens through which Anson viewed the case. I wrote this review of Anson s
book to explore the intricacies and contradictions of the Perry case. I sought to engage the
liberal racial paradigm that may have ultimately prevented Anson from successfully
explaining a youth like Perry and the cultural and racial predicaments he confronted.
THE ABYSMAL STATE OF RACE RELATIONS in American culture is a continuing
source of bewilderment and frustration. The reappearance of overt racist activity,
especially on college and secondary school campuses, forces us to reevaluate our
understanding of race as we approach the last decade of the twentieth century. In
particular, the liberal theory of race, which has dominated the American under-
standing of race relations, has exhibited a crisis of explanation, manifested in its ex-
ponents' inability to elucidate persistent forms of Afro-American oppression.
Robert Anson's book Best Intentions: 'The Education and Killing of Edmund Perry (New
York: Random House, 1988), which recently appeared in paperback, reflects the
crisis in liberal race theory. Anson's perspective is rooted in a theory of race that
prevents him from understanding the complex ways in which racism continues to
exert profound influence over the lives of millions of black people. In particular, his
explanation of the social and personal forces that besieged Edmund Perry's life,
and caused his death, is severely limited by Anson's approach. By examining issues
raised in Anson's treatment of Perry's life and death, I want to comment upon the


--- PAGE 67 ---
38 THE MICHAEL ERIC DYSON READER
limits of the liberal theory of race and show how Anson's use of it distorts crucial
issues that need to be addressed.
In 1981, Edmund Perry, a black teenager "of exceptional promise," left Harlem
for Exeter, New Hampshire, in order to attend one of the nation's most presti-
gious prep schools. On June 2, 1985, he graduated from Phillips Exeter Academy
with honors, having been awarded a full scholarship to Stanford University. Ten
days later, a short distance from Harlem on New York City's Upper West Side,
Perry was killed by Lee Van Houten, a young white plainclothes police officer.
Van Houten reported that Perry and an accomplice had beaten him viciously dur-
ing a robbery attempt on the night of June 12.
Van Houten stated that after yelling that he was a police officer, he managed,
with blurred vision and failing consciousness, to pull his gun from its ankle hol-
ster and fire three shots. One attacker, who held him from behind, fled; Perry,
who assaulted him frontally, lay on his back on the sidewalk, stilled by a wound
to his stomach. At 12:55 A.M., after being taken to nearby St. Luke's Hospital,
Edmund Perry was pronounced dead. (Perry's brother Jonah, then a nineteen-
year-old engineering student at Cornell University, was said to have been the ac-
complice that night. Jonah Perry was later formally charged and cleared by a
grand jury.)
Robert Anson is a freelance magazine writer and author. At the time of Perry's
killing his son was also a student at Exeter and, in fact, had sat behind Perry
every day during school assembly. This connection accounts, in part, for Anson's
interest in the Perry story, even after widespread public shock over the shooting
subsided. An even more powerful motivation, however, was the apparent contra-
diction Edmund Perry represented. On the one hand, Perry had "all the things
anyone was supposed to need to climb out of poverty and make it in America."
On the other hand, if Perry had actually died trying to mug Van Houten, then
something had gone "dreadfully haywire," despite the "best intentions" of Harlem
and Exeter. Anson's book is his search for an understanding of Perry's life, edu-
cation, and killing, and thereby of racism in U.S. society.
Anson begins by looking for a conclusive account of what happened on the
night of June 12. His investigation is fatally compromised by the fact that Lee Van
Houten was the only eyewitness to the event. What Anson does is piece together
circumstantial evidence that he believes supports Van Houten's story. (The offi-
cial police inquiry ruled the killing of Edmund Perry "justifiable homicide" and
within departmental guidelines.)
Several factors—Perry's personal reputation, the number of shootings of black
men by New York City police, and especially the lack of concrete proof against
Edmund and Jonah Perry and Van Houten's inability to identify Jonah as one of
the two assailants—lead me to conclude we will never be certain about the events
of June 12. We should, however, still look seriously at other issues Anson raises
(and doesn't raise) in his search for an explanation of Perry's life: the position of
racial minorities in predominantly white institutions, the consequences of juggling


--- PAGE 68 ---
The Liberal Theory of Race 39
two cultures, the ongoing racism of American culture, and the inability of most
existing race theory to illuminate racism's malignant persistence.
Since Anson's investigation leads him to rule out foul play or police attempts at
cover-up, he follows the lead of one of the principal police investigators-a garru-
lous detective who tells him the streets had eaten Perry alive. Thus, Anson goes
to Harlem.
Through a set of interviews that are the greatest strength of the book, Anson
tries to piece together a picture of Edmund Perry's life and the environment that
produced and shaped him. We hear the proud voices of women who had driven
dope dealers from the streets by their sheer physical presence; the admiring
voices of friends who were inspired by Perry's discipline and dedication to his
ambitious goals; the knowing voices of former co-survivors of the vicious circle
of drugs, poverty, and violence, one of whom contended that "Edmund died a
natural death up here"; the perceptive voice of a pastor who appreciated Perry's
religious values and his ability to maneuver between two cultures; the empa-
thetic voices of other blacks who had struggled with the difficulty and guilt of
their departure from desolate and beleaguered circumstances; and the pained
voices of former teachers and mentors who identified and nurtured Perry's pow-
erful intelligence and talent.
Above all, we hear the strikingly ambitious and sacrificial voice of Perry's
mother. Veronica Perry emerges as a powerful woman who fought tooth and nail
the despair and cynicism that too often conform Harlem life to its ugly mold—
a woman who sent both her sons to prestigious prep schools, successfully ran
for the school board, and worked ceaselessly to raise the quality of life in her
neighborhood.
The picture of Edmund Perry that formed was one of an extremely bright,
hard worker who possessed a mature vision of life's purpose and an infectious
compassion for his people—a vision nurtured by strong religious beliefs. But
Anson, sensing a canonizing impulse at work in the stories of friends, teachers,
and mentors, searches for a fuller picture. He wants Edmund Perry, warts and all,
and so he begins interviewing classmates, teachers, and administrators at Exeter.
Many at Exeter spoke of Perry's intelligence, his eagerness to perform well, his
quick wit, his enormous love for his mother, his pride in (and rivalry with) his
brother, Jonah. Exeter's chaplain said Perry was guarded, rarely revealing much
about himself. Some black classmates, especially women, thought that initially
Perry could be "pushy" or "cocky," something they attributed to his neighbor-
hood roots. Some white classmates were disturbed by what they perceived to be
an extraordinary "racial sensitivity." David Daniels, then one of only three blacks
on the faculty and the adult closest to Perry at Exeter, conceded that point: Perry
"was sensitive about race, probably more so than the other black students. I never
saw any racial hostility though. Instead, there was frustration, exasperation."
Anson also reports on the year Perry spent in Barcelona, as well as his troubled
final year at Exeter. Perry told many people he experienced no racism in Spain,


--- PAGE 69 ---
40 THE MICHAEL ERIC DYSON READER
but Anson contends this was deliberate misrepresentation of the facts. He ob-
serves that in this case, as in others, "it was becoming apparent that Eddie had a
propensity for telling different stories to different people."
During his final year at Exeter, Perry's work fell off, and he became increas-
ingly hostile. Anson details Perry's participation in a club that demanded a sexual
initiation, and discusses his (and others') low-level drug dealing. Perry also deliv-
ered a "tough and angry" speech to a schoolwide assembly on Martin Luther
King's birthday. The speech, written immediately after King's assassination by a
former black Exeter student, used Black Power rhetoric to make a bristling decla-
ration of black independence.
Overall, the picture of Perry that emerged from Exeter was one of a deeply
troubled young man whose racial identity caused him and, by extension, those
around him a great deal of pain. Now Anson is sure: "Edmund Perry had indeed
been killed while trying to assault an officer of the law. Why he had done so was
less apparent to me."
Unfortunately, the assumptions that Anson brings to his search for an adequate
explanation of Perry's death guarantee that he will not find one. The backdrop
for most of his reflections on Perry is a scissors-and-paste version of the liberal
theory of race-a theory that even in its more sophisticated manifestations has
never come to terms with the reality of structural racism.
The liberal understanding of race in the United States is modeled on the white
European immigrant experience.1 In making this experience paradigmatic, liberal
theorists have lumped race together with other variables-religion, language, and
nationality, for example-and taken them all to constitute a larger ethnic identity
that is more crucial than race in explaining the condition of black people. The
focus on ethnicity means that liberal theories of race are primarily concerned ei-
ther with ethnic assimilation or with the maintenance of ethnic identity through
cultural pluralism.
Thus lawyer Madison Grant advanced his Anglo-conformity theory of ethnic-
ity in the 1920s, contending that there must be total assimilation and conformity
to Anglo-American fife in order for white Americans to retain their racial purity.
Historian Frederick J. Turner and Jewish immigrant Israel Zangwill composed the
melting-pot theory, which asserted that America is best seen as a pot in which all
ethnic groups are melting and merging together. Horace Kallen proposed the no-
tion of cultural pluralism, saying that each culture maintains its own character
while coexisting with other groups. And Moynihan and Glazer promoted the
emerging culture theory, maintaining that cultures interact and the resultant com-
bination produces a political and cultural tertium quid, the phenomenon of the hy-
phenated American (e.g., African-American).
The liberal theory of race has informed the party practices, jurisprudential rea-
soning, and legislative agendas of its most ardent and aggressive political propo-
nents, the liberal Democrats. Liberal race theory experienced a fragile inception
in FDR's New Deal, a tentative strengthening under Truman's Fair Deal, and a


--- PAGE 70 ---
The Liberal Theory of Race 41
substantial solidification in Kennedy's and Johnson's Great Society due to the
civil rights movement. In sociopolitical dress, liberal race theory has argued for a
greater black share in jobs, for integration of housing and education, and for de-
segregation of interstate transportation as strategies to assure black inclusion and
assimilation in the larger circle of American privilege.
The problem with the theory is that it encounters an insurmountable obsta-
cle: the irreducible reality of race. Because it conceives of race as merely a part
of one's broader ethnic identity, liberal race theory is unable to make sense of
the particular forms of oppression generated primarily by racial identity. Much
of the time, it cannot explain why blacks have failed to "assimilate" because it
has not acknowledged the unique structural character of racism or historical
content of racial oppression—slavery, Jim Crow laws, structural unemployment,
gentrification of black living space, deeply ingrained institutional racism. At this
point, however, instead of revising their fundamental assumptions, liberal race
theorists tend to explain blacks' failure to "assimilate" successfully by looking
almost exclusively at problems within black culture and by treating these prob-
lems as givens.
More specifically, liberal theory opts for an explanation of the debilitating ef-
fects of racism that reduces them to their psychological effects on the black per-
sonality. It does not weave its psychological analysis into a dynamic understand-
ing of the persistent social, historical, and political aspects of racism. While it is
undeniable that racism's effect on the black psyche is deleterious, to perceive that
as racism's primary damage obscures the persistent structural factors that enforce
and reinforce perceptions of personal inferiority, rage, and hostility. That kind of
reductionism hinders our understanding of personal identity as a construct of sev-
eral different elements—social, psychological, political, and historical—and makes
it likely that we will mislocate the causes of black failure to "assimilate."
This psychological reductionism is nowhere more apparent than in the second
half of Best Intentions. As Anson interviews Perry's classmates, teachers, and ad-
ministrators, he draws a psychological portrait of Perry as an angry, hostile, and
belligerent person. True, but Anson never really tells us why. He does not connect
his psychological portrait to any social structural analysis—either of Exeter or of
Harlem as Perry experienced them. When we do get hints of an explanation of
Perry's actions—from either his white classmates or Anson—they are usually by
way of further appeals to psychological factors. His classmates say Ed had a chip
on his shoulder because of race, indeed that he was a racist himself. Anson won-
ders whether the stories of white racism that Veronica Perry told Ed "shaped"
him, because he was "impressionable," possibly causing him to attempt to mug a
New York police officer.
To his credit, Anson considers the possibility that Ed's psychic turmoil was oc-
casioned by the clash of cultures between Harlem and Exeter. But aside from a
brief review of common understandings of race relations, liberal social policy, and
Harlem history of the last few decades, he doesn't even begin to cover the moral,


--- PAGE 71 ---
42 THE MICHAEL ERIC DYSON READER
political, socioeconomic, and historical ground that psychology shares in a plausi-
ble explanation of Perry's life and behavior. The condition of the black under-
class, the way in which gentrification of black living space continues to shrink
black life options, an understanding of the psychic, spiritual, and physical attack
on black men—all these factors would help chart a comprehensive approach to
Perry's life and death.
Such an approach would avoid merely personalistic explanations that totally
blame Perry. It would also avoid merely structural explanations that totally ab-
solve Perry of any responsibility for the choices he made. In short, it would pro-
vide the richest detail possible about the circumstances of Perry's life so that he is
rendered as a human being faced with difficult choices, choices that must be made
within a complicated configuration of personal and structural constraints. Anson
simply has not done this.
Instead, he gets mired in a great myth of liberal theory—the myth of meri-
tocracy—and fails to comprehend how a person of Perry's talent could have failed.
The dominant belief that legitimates the central place of achievement in U.S. cul-
ture and explains the distribution of goods and privileges is that all things being
relatively equal, one gets what one merits, based upon intelligence, industry, and
a host of other American character traits. The single most important social issue
that has focused the problems and contradictions of the meritocratic approach is
affirmative action.
Throughout Best Intentions Anson employs Perry as an example of the "legiti-
mate" complaints white Exeter students had against blacks for receiving "prefer-
ential treatment." He says that Perry's race helped him gain admission to Stanford
and Yale. Furthermore, Anson reports, several Exeter faculty members admitted
this point, referring to the experience of the white valedictorian in Perry's senior
year "who possessed an academic and extracurricular record far more distin-
guished than Eddie's," and who applied to Stanford, "but was not admitted." This
example is intriguing because throughout the book Anson reports that Perry was,
by most accounts, an extremely intelligent, articulate youngster "sought after by
name" by places like Princeton and Yale. But its importance lies elsewhere. It re-
flects the confusion of effect with cause that underlies Anson's view of Perry.
Anson seems to forget that affirmative action was instituted to redress inequality
of opportunity; whites who inherit the privileges of economic resources, old boy
networks, and the like are not making it on "merit" alone.
The kind of assumptions that inform Anson's thinking are precisely what ex-
acerbated Perry's situation as a black student at a predominantly white institution.
On the one hand, many "liberals" want to address past wrongs by admitting qual-
ified minority students to elite educational institutions. On the other hand, these
same students are then blamed for extending and perpetuating inequality by
being the recipients of "preferential treatment." Unfortunately the terrain on
which this battle is fought is the lives of minority students. How can Anson grasp
Perry when he, too, is a victim of the same limited understanding?


--- PAGE 72 ---
The Liberal Theory of Race 43
Anson might have overcome the limits of his approach if he had made a more
sustained attempt to acquaint himself with Afro-American culture. But as is clear
in several places in Best Intentions, he just doesn't understand the general concerns
or basic themes of Afro-American life.
Anson asks whether the stories Veronica Perry told her son, stories about the
evils of white racism and the need not to "judge all whites harshly," had made
Perry "racially proud" or "angry enough, possibly, to have vented that rage on a
seemingly innocuous white boy on a darkened city street." What Anson appar-
ently doesn't understand is that in telling her son these stories Veronica Perry was
performing the tragically necessary task most black parents face: telling her child
about the viciousness of racism while ratifying her Christian belief that hate is not
the proper response for victimized blacks. Thus, she was preparing Edmund
Perry to negotiate the difficult process of identifying and acknowledging racism
while channeling the resulting, and justifiable, anger into creative and redemptive
strategies for coping.
Anson remarks that Perry told different stories to different people, pointing to
the obvious fact that he was "pretending" in order to augment his image as a
ghetto street tough. But there is more. As is obvious throughout the book, Perry
more easily (although sometimes only after extensive scrutiny) formed close as-
sociations with other blacks and especially sympathetic whites, able to tell and
share one story with them and another with the rest of Exeter. Perry most likely
learned, as do most black people, that he could not afford to bare his soul often—
either because truth telling could not be borne by particular moods of the white
conscience or because it could not be tolerated by many aspects of the white
worldview. For example, when told by a teacher that he needed counseling, Perry
said there wasn't anyone on campus he could talk to, that the only people he
could talk to were black, and that "anytime he tried to open up to whites and be
honest, he always wound up hurting someone's feelings." Or again: a white stu-
dent who shared many classes with Perry told him that "people are just people,"
and that "some people are white and some people are black, and if you are going
to get bummed out about it, it's pretty dumb."
Thus, in order to avoid a discourse of perpetual blame (whose payoff is usually
only increased frustration) and the pain of having to explain oneself, to argue for
the logic or legitimacy of one's being, Perry adopted a familiar coping strategy: he
knew when, and when not, to open and reveal himself. While, as a maturing
youth, Perry undoubtedly "pretended" and lied, it is important not to confuse this
with strategies adopted to deal with an environment that is hostile and insensitive
to one's identity. Ironically, Anson's psychological perspective does not compre-
hend this crucial point.
More poignantly, throughout the book Anson quotes and refers to Veronica
Perry's strong religious beliefs, which Anson thinks are "extremely intense." He
sees Veronica Perry's swing from profound belief in the wisdom of God in taking
her son to a bitter denouncement of the police system that killed him as a possible


--- PAGE 73 ---
44 THE MICHAEL ERIC DYSON READER
indication of her emotional instability. (She had had a nervous breakdown.) In fact,
her "mood swing" may be understood as ad hoc theodicy, an attempt to come to
grips theologically as best she could with the evil that killed her child. It is an at-
tempt to vindicate-through faith-belief in a good and loving God who may appear
absent or silent in the face of human suffering, without at the same time excusing
the human beings who inflict that suffering. It is a theme that runs through the
Afro-American Christian engagement with the world, and it is a central problem in
Christian theology.
Finally, a most telling moment comes when, in speaking of what led to Perry's
death, Anson concludes, "The only villain I found was something amorphous,
not a person or thing, just a difference called race." He then checks his conclusion
with "the only black friend I really had." It happens that Anson's phantom friend
also knew Edmund Perry. The disturbing aspect of this is that Anson checks the
viability of his interpretive vision against the understanding, insight, and knowl-
edge of one black man, who, Anson says, offered to "guide me as my reporting
went along, not by providing specific leads, but by confirming whether or not
what I came up with was correct." We are thus left with the definite impression
that Anson does not know very much about the diversity of Afro-American
thought and culture. In what constitutes an irony of liberalism, he depends upon
his only black friend, thereby tokenizing that thought and culture and segregating
himself from a powerful tradition that might have deepened his reflections on
Perry's life and death.
The upshot of Anson's approach is that even though he unearths the conflicts
and consequences of being socially and culturally amphibious, of negotiating the
psychological demands of two different worlds, his findings just pass him by. He
cannot fashion an understanding of Edmund Perry's life and death. All we hear is
the restatement of a "difference called race" without any attempt to explain what
difference that difference makes.
Two other approaches to race might have helped Anson understand what made
Edmund Perry's life hell. The first is the racial formation theory advanced by
Michael Omi and Howard Winant in their book Racial Formation in the United States.
In going beyond liberal race theory, Omi and Winant want to avoid the economic
determinist and class reductionist elements in most progressive and leftist race
theory, and conceive race as an irreducible category, like gender and class, for so-
cial theorizing about oppression. Racial formation theory, then, seeks to capture
the process by which racial categories are formed, transformed, destroyed, and re-
formed. Furthermore, it treats race as a central axis of social relations that resists
being subsumed under a larger category like ethnicity. It takes seriously the psy-
chological, social, political, cultural, and historical as crucial explanatory strands
in a full-blown theory of race.
The second theory is Cornel West's analysis of race, first articulated in Prophesy
Deliverance! and now developed in an essay in his new book, Prophetic Fragments.2
West, like Winant and Omi, seeks to avoid reductionist accounts of racism. West's


--- PAGE 74 ---
T"he Liberal 'Theory of Race 45
theory permits him to trace the emergence and development (or genealogy) of the
idea of white racism and supremacy in modern Western discourse. Such an ap-
proach promotes the unearthing of the material, economic, political, cultural, psy-
chological, sexual, and spiritual forces that express and respond to the social prac-
tices of racism within the cultural traditions of Western civilization. West's theory
has three stages: (1) a radical historical investigation of the emergence, develop-
ment, and persistence of white supremacy; (2) an analysis of the mechanisms that
develop and maintain the logic of white supremacy in the everyday lives of people
of color; and (3) an examination of how class exploitation, state repression, and bu-
reaucratic domination operate in the lives of people of color. Both theories, then,
offer an analysis of racism that takes seriously the psychological, social, political,
cultural, and historical as crucial explanatory strands. They therefore offer a much
more comprehensive picture, in alliance with the broader and deeper perspective
of Afro-American culture, of the complex, stubborn reality Edmund Perry faced.
In a revealing passage early in the book, Anson tells of the time Martin Luther
King came to Chicago to march for open housing. It was the summer of 1966,
and Anson, fresh out of Notre Dame, was a correspondent for Time. He marched
with King and was present when King was hit on the head with a rock. He was
one of the people who "pulled him up and shielded him." The supreme irony may
be that twenty years later, while intending to shield King's legacy, Anson has left
it more vulnerable and exposed.


--- PAGE 75 ---
Five
WHEN YOU'RE A CREDIT TO YOUR
RACE, THE BILL WILL COME DUE:
O.J. SIMPSON AND OUR TRIAL BY FIRE
The cultural critic Mark Anthony Neal has written that I "became one of the brightest
lights among black public intellectuals in the aftermath of the O.J. Simpson trial,
providing commentary during the trial (and immediately after the jury decision) for
NPR and appearing as the 'color commentator' on BET, when Ed Gordon sat down
with Simpson after his acquittal." My participation that night on BET was surely
memorable—it was Simpson's first interview after vacating his famous Los Angeles jail
cell. Still, it wasn't as memorable as the call Simpson placed to me on the evening of the
fifth anniversary of the Nicole Simpson/Ron Goldman murders. I had appeared earlier
that day on NBC's Today Show, along with television host Geraldo Rivera and critic
Neal Gabler. "Should I call you Reverend, Professor, or Doctor Dyson?" the famous
voice politely quizzed me before launching into an animated forty-jive-minute discussion of
his innocence, the evidence in his criminal trial, the bias of Marica Clark, the false
accusation that most of his friends were white, and the unheralded work he did on behalf
of the black community—especially his participation in a golf tournament sponsored by
The Links, an elite black women s service organization. That conversation with Simpson
remains one of the most surreal moments I've experienced in all my years of punditry.
This chapter from Race Rules is my attempt to come to grips with one of the most
inglorious racial spectacles the nation has endured in the past jiffy years.
Now it says here, "And every white man shall be allowed to pet him-
self a Negro. Yea, he shall take a black man unto himself to pet and
to cherish, and this same Negro shall be perfect in his sight. ..." The
appointee has his reasons, personal or political. He can always point
to the beneficiary and say, "Look, Negroes, you have been taken care
of. Didn't I give a member of your group a big job?"
-ZORA NEALE HURSTON
"THE PET' NEGRO SYSTEM," 1943


--- PAGE 76 ---
O.J. Simpson and Our Trial by Fire 47
THE STUDIO CRACKLED WITH EXCITEMENT. Although I had appeared on
Black Entertainment Television (BET) a few times before, this night was special.
In fact, it was extraordinary. Former BET anchor Ed Gordon, my Detroit home-
boy, had snagged the first televised interview with O J. Simpson since his acquit-
tal for the murder of his ex-wife, Nicole, and her companion, Ron Goldman.
BET asked me to give "color commentary" before and after Simpson's appear-
ance. A large irony, indeed. I'd written about Simpson in my previous book, and
I'd discussed his trial on other national television shows. But there was poetic jus-
tice in me talking about Simpson's trials and tribulations, and those of black
America, on the only television station that caters to black folk.
I must confess that I was an O. J. addict. I watched the trial every day for hours
at a time. I was completely mesmerized. I knew it was a vulgar display of Ameri-
can excess. I knew it was the revelation of the gaudiness behind the lifestyles of
the rich and famous. (Of course, I took delight in seeing so many rich folk ex-
posed for the shallow people many of us hoped they'd be.) I knew it was the the-
ater of the absurd meets the Twilight Zone. I knew as well that the trial was a
painful choreography of black grief-that of O. J. and of every black person who
identified with him—before an international audience. I knew it was totally artifi-
cial, a sordid drama full of kitsch that fiendishly aspired to the status of morality
play. I knew it was the story of a black man who had made good but who had for-
gotten what made it possible, which made it bad. I knew it was all that and much,
much more. And I couldn't stop watching.
Even as questions about O.J.'s guilt or innocence fade from daily debate, we
continue to grapple with the wounds the trial exposed, with the trial's revelations
of the pernicious rules of race in America, '90s style. That night, as I viewed
Simpson on the big screen in BET's green room, I was struck again by how flaw-
less his face is, how smooth his skin is. But I was taken as well by the jagged hor-
rors his eyes never gaze on—how many white folk now hate his name, how they
wish he would disappear. And some wish him dead. And how black folk look at
him with a mix of pity and disdain. Like the member of the family you have to
recognize but hate to, because the recognition embarrasses him as well. I was
struck by the size of the denials by which Simpson lives, as if he must now draw
energy from the resentment that he can't afford to acknowledge, though its sheer
vehemence defines and confirms his every step. Seeing Simpson so resiliently
spiteful that night—not in any way bitter against whites, just against the idea that
they might not love him—made it painful for me to have to say anything after he
spoke. It was the final step in my loss of a hero who had once thrilled me, as he,
in Ralph Ellison's words, "slice[d] through an opposing line with a dancer's slith-
ering grace." A part of me was now gone. It was sad, and sadly disorienting.
Something of the same disorientation gripped America when Simpson was set
free. When the not-guilty verdicts in the O. J. Simpson double-murder case were
handed down, the compass of race went haywire. The Simpson case has made
many Americans doubt if we can all get along. The case has rudely reminded us


--- PAGE 77 ---
48 THE MICHAEL ERIC DYSON READER
of a gigantic and numbing racial divide. It reminds us, too, that boasting about
racial progress often hides racial pain. The response to the verdicts knocked down
the floodgates that hold back the waters of racial hostility The Simpson case also
taught us a tough lesson: the more settled race relations seem to be, the more
likely they are raging beneath the surface.
Americans have become addicted to the Simpson case for more than its
grotesque exaggeration of our secret racial fears. From its very beginning the case
was overloaded with huge social meanings we claim not to be able to understand
under normal circumstances. We have become dependent on the Simpson case to
represent complicated truths that we think can only be illustrated by catastrophe.
That dependence shows contempt for ordinary signs of ruin. It ignores the experi-
ence of common people, especially blacks, whose silent suffering is the most pow-
erful evidence of decay. What their experience shows us is this: a two-tiered uni-
verse of perception rotates around an axis defined by race. While good fortune
lights one side, despair darkens the other. It is rarely sunny at the same time in
white and black America. In a nutshell, that's what the Simpson case reminds us of.
That O. J. Simpson is at the heart of the most ugly racial spectacle to hit Amer-
ica in decades is a symptom of just how crazy things are. For a quarter century,
Simpson symbolized the icon-next-door. His athletic genius was revered by many
blacks. His athletic skill and "colorless" image were attractive to millions of whites.
Simpson's sleek form and catlike grace as a running back brought glamour to
a brutal sport. Simpson beautifully combined judgment and intuition. His sixth
sense for where his pursuers were likely to pounce on him allowed him to chisel
arteries of escape around heaving bodies.
As with many famous athletes, Simpson's athletic exploits gave him influence
beyond the boundaries of his sport. This is hardly natural. After all, why should
athletes receive tons of money and notoriety beyond the recognition and com-
pensation they earn in sports? The absurdity of this is masked by the fact that we
take for granted that such things should occur. That's not to say sports don't
teach us valuable lessons about life. Sports are often a powerful training ground
for moral excellence. Take the case of Willis Reed, the injured center for the
1969-1970 New York Knicks who was not expected to play in the seventh and de-
ciding game for the NBA championship. When Reed emerged from the locker
room, limping but determined to compete, several virtues were literally embod-
ied: sacrifice of self for the sake of the larger good; the courage to "play through
pain"; and the sort of moral leadership that rallies one's teammates and lifts their
level of expectation and achievement. These virtues transcend sport. They inspire
ordinary people to overcome obstacles in achieving their goals.
There's another way, one wholly beyond his choosing, that the rare athlete has
managed to rise beyond the limits of his sport. Some figures have served as heroic
symbols of national identity. Others have heroically represented achievement
against the artificial restrictions imposed on a group of people. In those cases, a re-
striction was also placed on competition as an ideal of democratic participation.


--- PAGE 78 ---
O.J. Simpson and Our Trial by Fire 49
Joe DiMaggio, of course, fit the first bill. His fifty-six-game hitting streak in base-
ball thrilled America in 1941, a colossal feat of endurance to which the nation
would turn its attention time and again as our preeminence as a world power
began to fade after World War II. Jackie Robinson fit the second meaning of hero-
ism. As major league baseball's first black player, Robinson performed gallantly in
the face of bitter opposition. His gifted play paved the way for blacks in his sport
and beyond the bounds of baseball.
Joe Louis managed the difficult art of fulfilling both sorts of heroism. He ex-
isted in a racial era just as complex—if more violent—as the one Robinson faced.
As was true of DiMaggio's Italian world, Louis's black community celebrated its
ethnic roots while affirming its American identity. Louis captured the genius of
American citizenship and the protest of blacks against their exclusion from full cit-
izenship in a single gesture: the punch that sunk German boxer Max Schmeling
at the height of Nazism. That punch transformed Louis into an American hero. It
also revealed the hidden meaning of Louis's heroic art: beating white men in the
ring was a substitute argument for social equality. Louis's prizefighting was an elo-
quent plea to play the game of American citizenship by one set of rules.
Simpson never aspired to that sort of heroism. In part, that's because the
times didn't demand it. Near the start of Simpson's pro career in the late '60s,
the tension between the older civil rights establishment and the newer black
power movement produced a more acerbic model of black heroism. Instead of
integration, many blacks preferred separating from white society to build black
institutions. Black antiheroism gave an angry face to the resentment that festered
in pockets of black life. To be an American and a Negro—later still, a black
man—were not considered flip sides of the same coin. They were different cur-
rency altogether.
Judging from Simpson's behavior during the height of his career, he had no in-
terest in claiming whatever remained of Louis's heroic inheritance. Neither was
Simpson attracted to the sort of antiheroism championed by his contemporary,
Muhammad Ali. Ali's self-promoting verse and brilliant boxing proved to be spar-
ring matches for his real battle: the defiance of white audiority because of his re-
ligious beliefs. And Simpson certainly wasn't drawn to the plainspoken demeanor
of fellow athlete-turned-actor Jim Brown. Brown's militant, studly image had
Crazy Negro written all over it. It was the opposite of everything Simpson seemed
to stand for. That is, until he was charged with brutally slashing his ex-wife and
her companion.
Simpson's appeal beyond sports rested on two related but distinct factors: com-
merce and the conscious crafting of a whitened image. Simpson came at the be-
ginning of an era when athletes began to make enormous sums of money inside
sports. (To be sure, Simpson's highest salary was pittance compared to what even
mediocre sports figures now make.) He also helped pioneer the entrepreneurial
athlete. Simpson hawked everything from tennis shoes to soft drinks. He turned
charisma into cash on television. Now that Michael Jordan has eclipsed everyone


--- PAGE 79 ---
50 THE MICHAEL ERIC DYSON READER
who came before him, it's easy to forget that Simpson's Hertz commercials used
to be the star that athletes aimed for in marketing their fame.
The wide adulation heaped on Simpson beyond his gridiron glory also owed
much to his absent, indeed anti-racial politics. Simpson soothed white anxieties
about the racial turmoil caused by black radicalism. Simpson's Teflon racelessness
assured white citizens and corporations that no negative, that is, exclusively black,
racial inference would stick to his image. That is Jordan's charm as well. He is a
latter-day Simpson of sorts. His universal appeal derives from a similar avoidance
of the entanglements of race. As the old black saying goes, it's alright to look black,
just don't act your color. As Simpson's case suggests, the Faustian bargain of trad-
ing color for commercial success may prove devastating in the long run.
Simpson's silence about race didn't necessarily have to be a bad thing. After all,
given the history of their relative powerlessness, blacks have a heroic tradition of
fighting in ways that cloak their rebellion. They adapt their speech and activity to
the language and styles of the dominant society. Silence in the presence of whites
was often a crucial weapon in the war to survive. If it looked like blacks were happy
to be oppressed, all the better. Such appearances greased the track of covert action
on which black freedom rolled. For instance, slaves sang spirituals both to entertain
their masters and to send each other coded messages about plans of escape.
Still, Simpson's privileged perch in white America led many blacks to hope that
he might cautiously speak about the troubles of ordinary blacks. It soon became
clear, however, that Simpson was having none of that. What many blacks wanted
from Simpson was no different from what was expected of other blacks. Simpson
was not expected to be a politician. At least not in any way that departed from the
political behavior required of all blacks in O.J.'s youth, who had to carry them-
selves with an acute awareness of their surroundings. To do less meant early
death. Or, more crushing, it meant a slow, painful surrender of life in gasps of
frustrated energy because you just didn't understand the rules of survival in a
white world.
It's easy to understand how O.J. and other blacks wanted to escape the de-
mands of being representatives of The Race, its shining symbols. Standing in for
the group was a burden. It was also risky. You could never be sure that your ef-
forts were taken seriously. In fact, a law of inversion seemed to apply. For most
blacks, only the negative acts seemed to count. Even the positive became a nega-
tive good: it only counted as a credit against black liability, against all the Wrong
things black folk inevitably did. The good you did simply meant that you, and,
by extension, all blacks, didn't mess up this time. When the good was allowed to
count, it only underscored one's uniqueness, that one was not like other black
folk. For many whites, excellence made blacks exceptions to, not examples of,
their race. Ironically, to be thought of as an exception to the race still denied a
pure consideration of individual merit. As long as race colored the yardstick, a
real measurement of individual achievement was impossible. It is a bitter paradox
that the evaluation of individual achievement that blacks yearned for was sub or-


--- PAGE 80 ---
O.J. Simpson and Our Trial by Fire 51
dinated to a consideration of any achievement's impact on, and relation to, the
race. Blacks were routinely denied the recognition of individual talent that is sup-
posed to define the American creed. This history is barely mentioned now that
blacks are made by many whites to look as if they duck individual assessment
while embracing group privilege.
The problem of representing The Race is compounded by whites who protest
its injustice to famous blacks. "Why should they be made to represent the race?"
well-meaning whites ask, as if anonymous blacks had more choice in the matter
than their well-known peers. (Besides, such protest releases these whites from the
awful burden of confronting racism in their own world. If the representative of
The Race is relieved of duty, everybody can party. It also obscures how the need
for racial representation was created by white racism to begin with.) The assump-
tion is that fame makes the burden of representation heavier for some blacks. In
many ways, that's true. There's more territory to cover. And there are certainly
more folk to deal with in countering or confirming destructive views of black life.
On the other hand, visible blacks have routes of escape that ordinary blacks will
never know. The well-known black can bask in fortunes of fate most blacks
will never be tempted by. They can make lots of money, join elite social clubs, live
in exclusive neighborhoods, send their kids to tony schools, enjoy the lifestyles of
the rich and famous. Famous blacks can cash in on their complaints about having
to represent all blacks. They can enjoy the fruits of a situation created by their
being black in the first place.
Simpson took the path of least resistance for those looking to dodge the burden
of being black: ignoring race. Although ignoring race is often mistaken for self-
hatred, they are not the same. Those who confuse them commit what philoso-
phers call a "category mistake." In such cases, shades of meaning slip off the edges
of sloppy distinctions. Those who ignore race, and those who hate themselves be-
cause they can't, do share self-defeating habits: both deny the differences race
makes and the lingering effects of racism. But not all blacks who have these habits
hate themselves or consciously set out to ignore race. Some blacks are simply
nonconformists who seek to defy the bitter boundaries of race, both within and
beyond black life.
Simpson has confessed (not exactly, I'm afraid, what millions of Americans
were hoping for) that it wasn't until he got hate mail in jail that he admitted
racism hadn't gone away. Simpson concedes that he simply ignored or denied
racism for most of his adult life. Simpson's denial, combined with his raceless
image, entitled him to a derisive honor: White Man's Negro. Simpson earned his
crown by avoiding and forgetting about race. He kept it by lusting after white ac-
ceptance at any cost. On the face of it—at least the side of his face he showed on
the BET interview-that lust continues to shape his sense of reality. On the BET
interview, Simpson said most whites don't believe he's guilty. That suggests more
than Simpson's delusional state of mind. It shows how his perception of events
squares with the logic of denial that made him useful to the white world. It is a


--- PAGE 81 ---
52 T H E M l C H A E L E R I C D Y S O N R E A D E R
vicious twist of fate for Simpson. The same technique of survival that brought
him praise from whites in the past-as he was lauded, no doubt, for bravely re-
sisting the demagogic demand to represent The Race—now causes those same
whites to view him as pathological. No wonder O. J. is confused.
Simpson has now been forced to claim his race by default. It is an act that un-
doubtedly fills him—at least it would the old Simpson—with great regret. And not
a little disdain. The blackness Simpson embraced during the trial was foreign to
him. Its unfamiliar feel made him clutch it with great desperation. That blackness
was molded for Simpson by Johnnie Cochran, who proved to be a shrewd con-
jurer of a "one size fits all" blackness. After all, it might complicate matters to ac-
knowledge the conflicting varieties of black identity. In Cochran's conjuring, the
complexity of race was skillfully shifted to a more narrow, but, on the surface at
least, universal meaning of blackness-as-oppression. When applied to Simpson,
such a meaning was laughable. It fit him even worse than the gloves prosecutor
Christopher Darden tried to make Simpson force over his arthritic joints. But be-
cause blackness-as-oppression is often true for most blacks, Simpson benefited
from its link to his case.
Darden, on the other hand, was unfairly stigmatized by Cochran's conjuring of
blackness during the trial. Darden was viewed by many blacks as a traitor be-
cause he dared to call narrow blackness a phony idea in full view of white Amer-
ica. Darden failed because he didn't have Cochran's oratorical or lawyerly skills.
(But Darden also had the thankless task of prosecuting a beloved, fallen American
hero who was, at the same time, seeking to make a comeback to his black roots.
Black folk are too often suckers for this sort of figure. Although blacks resent
racial infidelity, we are often open to reconciliation. Even if the forgiven black
continues to abuse the privilege of return, as Simpson has done. It's painfully
clear that black folk are his fallback, not his first choice.) Darden also goofed
when he argued that black jurors would be outdone if they had to hear the
dreaded "N" word, particularly if it leapt from the past of star prosecution wit-
ness, police detective Mark Fuhrman. Black folk endure that epithet and much
worse every day.
Darden's naivete and strategic mistakes made it easy to believe that he had lit-
tle understanding of the harsh realities black folk routinely face. Ironically, Dar-
den desperately tried to point out that it was Simpson who had avoided the hard-
ship most blacks confront. In the symbolic war of blackness being waged between
Darden and Cochran, Darden tried to make Simpson appear unworthy of the
knee-jerk black loyalty he enjoyed but from which Darden had been excluded.
But that point was skillfully shredded in rhetorical and legal crossfire with
Cochran, both in the courtroom and in the court of public opinion.
Simpson has largely sidestepped the indignities imposed on ordinary blacks.
His fame and fortune certainly helped. Equally important, Simpson has made a
career out of making white folk feel safe. He has been an emissary of blackness-
as-blandness. With O.J. present, there was no threat of black rage careening out


--- PAGE 82 ---
O.J. Simpson and Our Trial by Fire 53
of control. He made no unreasonable demands—or any reasonable ones for that
matter—for change of any sort. He blessed the civility and rightness of the status
quo. Indeed, O J. got a big bonus by comparing favorably not only to black "hot-
heads," but to figures like Hank Aaron, the baseball legend whose mellow thun-
der led him to speak gently but insistently about racism in sports. Once Simpson
put away his youthful law breaking in San Francisco's Potrero Hill projects, he
adopted a winning formula: he would play by the rules within the limits of the
Given. The Given amounts to whites being on top. To win, you must act and talk
white. In many interviews, Simpson has literally said so.
The extraordinary white hostility aimed at Simpson after the verdicts can
largely be explained by the equally extraordinary investment OJ. made in the
white world. He was a Good Negro who played by the rules. Many whites re-
turned the favor. They invested in Simpson as a surrogate white. That investment
explains their sense of betrayal by O.J. once he was charged, then cleared, of mur-
der. According to the rules of surrogate whiteness, Simpson should have con-
fessed his guilt and taken his punishment like a (white) man. Of course, by break-
ing the rules of surrogate whiteness, Simpson actually followed the rules of the
Given: Those on top—wealthy whites—are not accountable to the system of justice
in the same way as those on the bottom. The rules—of justice, fairness, equality-
work fine for privileged whites as long as they are applied to a world of experi-
ence whites are familiar with. Beyond that territory, their sense of how and when
the rules should apply is severely limited. That's the supreme paradox of white
power Simpson learned up close.
It's not that white people are inherently more unfair or unjust than others. It's
just that the rules are often applied in an arbitrary fashion to those outside the
realm of their understanding and sympathy. That's why the barbarity of police
brutality against blacks didn't faze many whites until the Rodney King beating
and the riots that followed his molesters' acquittal. (Even now many whites still
don't get it, as the response to the April 1996 beatings of illegal Mexican immi-
grants by deputies from the Riverside County Sheriff's office in Soudi El Monte,
California, proves.) Once O.J. lost his standing as a surrogate white, once he re-
verted back to a barbaric blackness, all bets were off. All rules were broken. Simp-
son began to see, perhaps for the first time, that he was worse than "just another
nigger." He was a spurned black member of the white elite, an honorary white
who had fallen from grace.
Simpson's celebrity, honorary whiteness, and wealth made him largely immune
to the treatment shown the run-of-the-mill black male suspect. He was partly ex-
empted by analogy: just the notion that a person like Simpson could murder his
wife was hard for many of us to believe. The glow of false familiarity that fit his
affable screen image helped too. (If one doubts the transfer between screen roles
and real life, ask soap stars, who are constantly taken for their television charac-
ters, sometimes with disastrous results.) For a long stretch, Simpson made nice on
television, both as a sports commentator and in typecast roles in a string of for-


--- PAGE 83 ---
54 THE MICHAEL ERIC DYSON READER
gettable films that occasionally surface on late-night rotation. Simpson had only
recently managed to find a role whose career benefit exceeded his paycheck: the
hilariously unlucky Lt. Nordberg in the three Naked Gun films highlighted Simp-
son's comedic talent.
The sum of Simpson's celebrated parts—plus an unnameably perverse addic-
tion to vicarious disintegration-moved his mostly white fans to cheer "the Juice"
as he and pal A.C. Cowlings halfheartedly fled the law up 1-5 and, later, the 1-405
freeway in Cowlings's infamous white Bronco. (Always wanting to be like Simp-
son but never quite measuring up, Cowlings, this one time, ended up in the
driver's seat.) Here privilege intervened. Any other black fugitive would most
likely have been shot or otherwise stomped before he could call his mother, or
swing by home to get a swig of orange juice. (At the time of Simpson's ungetaway
cruise, L.A.'s freeways had been the setting of the blockbuster adventure flick
Speed. The similarities are eerie: a chase with an uncertain conclusion; a spectacle
involving revenge, murder, and obsession; and the freeway itself as a metaphor
for both the resolution and realization of urban trauma.)
If Simpson's celebrity kept him from trauma, it attracted others to his trial to
compete for public attention. Understanding that there's only so much under-
standing to go around—witness the spread of "compassion fatigue" and the back-
lash against "PC"-abused women, blacks, feminists, and others lobbied for the
trial to be viewed through the lens of their suffering. While their pain was legiti-
mate, their perspectives were often depressingly narrow. The scamper for the
spotlight ruined some. Plain old greed and self-aggrandizement spoiled others.
Still, the Simpson trial and its aftermath reveal how nefarious social forces in-
tersect and collide, how the suffering these forces breed cuts across every imagin-
able line of social identity, and how the suffering of some groups outweighs the
suffering of others. Domestic violence made a cameo appearance at the trial's cen-
ter stage. It quickly became a bit player in the judicial drama that followed. It was
shattered and swept away by a hurricane of legal strategies and tactical maneu-
vers. It was clear that the bothes of battered women simply don't count where
they should matter most—in the public imagination, and in private spaces where
women live, work, play, and, too often, where they the.
True enough, the exposure of his ugly treatment of Nicole rightly shamed
Simpson. The halo Simpson wore blinded the public to the darker corners of his
character. The trial deglamorized Simpson's gentle, happy-go-lucky public de-
meanor. At the same time, a more telling symptom of our national hypocrisy
emerged. The attack on Simpson as a batterer often degenerated into scapegoat-
ing. Such a practice eases consciences. It does little, however, to erase harmful at-
titudes and behaviors. By demonizing Simpson, many felt they were proving the
moral enlightenment of a culture that refuses to tolerate such behavior. Such self-
congratulation is groundless. The demonization of Simpson amounted to little
more than moral posturing. We permit, sometimes condone, the abuse and killing
of women every day. We need look no further than coundess courtrooms and


--- PAGE 84 ---
O.J. Simpson and Our Trial by Fire 55
morgues for proof. Scapegoating allows us to avoid changing the beliefs and be-
havior that give domestic violence secret vitality.
If we were to really change our cultural habits, calling Simpson's behavior bar-
baric would ring true. It would be the extension of, not the exception to, our
everyday practice. In our present climate, labeling Simpson's behavior barbaric
revives, however remotely, ugly stereotypes of black men as beasts. The less so-
phisticated version of that stereotype has long been demolished. It is reborn, how-
ever, in images of young black males as social pariahs and older black males as
rootless, ruthless ne'er-do-wells. Plus, the labeling invokes the ancient taboo
against interracial love, whispering to all potential Nicoles: "See, that's what hap-
pens when you mess around with a black man."
Let's face it. Beating women is a manly sport in America. It is not a widely re-
viled practice, at least not before the Simpson trial. (It is helpful to remind our-
selves that for years many white stars in every major American sport have beat
their wives, too. But without a history of stereotypes to support white male beast-
liness, the wife-beating issue failed to catch on among the cause celebre set.) Simp-
son's treatment of Nicole—manhandling, stalking, surveilling, beating, and tyran-
nizing her—was vicious. It was the extreme but logical outgrowth of deeply
entrenched beliefs about the worth of women's bodies in our culture. Sadly, such
beliefs persist in the face of feminist activism.
Part of our problem is that we think we can have it both ways. We think we can
detest feminists while lauding the "good" women, those who wouldn't call them-
selves feminists to save their lives. And often don't. But most men are ignorant of
flesh and blood feminism and the lives of the women who fill its ranks. Feminism
is what women do when they realize they must struggle to protect the rights and
privileges most men take for granted.
Still, Gloria Steinem's appearance on the Charlie Rose show immediately after
the verdicts-where she recounted taking solace in an apology offered to her, and,
presumably, all whites, by an elderly black man who assured her that "not all of
us feel this way"—was disappointing. It showed a lack of appreciation for the
trial's complexity from a feminist who has heroically struggled for human rights.
Steinem's lapse was topped, however, by the pit bull meanness of NOW's Los
Angeles head, Tammy Bruce. She was later removed from office because of her
relentlessly racist attacks on Simpson.
Steinem's and Bruce's behavior underlines why it is difficult for even battered
black women to imagine themselves as feminists. They played the dangerous
game of ranking suffering without regard to context. They made their pain, and
the greater pain of abused women, the almost exclusive focus of their fiery out-
rage. Domestic abuse is a legitimate and largely neglected plague. But what
Steinem and Bruce overlooked was how race gives white women's pain, and the
bodies on which that pain is inflicted, more visibility than the suffering bodies of
black women. There are thousands of black women who have gone to their
graves at the hands of hateful men. Some of their deaths were more heinous than


--- PAGE 85 ---
56 THE MICHAEL ERIC DYSON READER
Nicole's. (True, they didn't have the dubious advantage of having a famous man
charged with their murder.) But these women remain invisible. Even to folk like
Steinem and Bruce, who are bravely committed to keeping the memory of abused
women alive.
No doubt some of this resentment of unspoken white privilege-of ranking
black bodies lower on the totem pole of distress-slid onto the tongues of black
women who claimed the Simpson case was not about domestic violence. Techni-
cally, that's true. But neither was it, technically, about race. The important ways
this case was about race are the same ways it was about domestic violence. And
about the benefits and liabilities of class, wealth, fame, and gender. The disavowal
of domestic abuse as an issue in the Simpson case by black women reinforces the
tragic refusal of many blacks to face the crushing convergence of issues that shape
black life. Their disavowal was not simply a way these women remained loyal to
the script they've been handed—race first, race finally, race foremost. It was a
telling example of how that script writes out their lives as well, often in their own
handwriting. The dispute between Clarence Thomas and Anita Hill showcased
the futility of thinking about our problems in strictly racial terms.
There is damning evidence too, that Nicole contributed to the brutality that
broke her. And in all likelihood, killed her. I'm not arguing that Nicole should
have simply left, got out at the first whiff of trouble. The destructive dance of
complicity and shame, of cooperation and resistance, of instigation and retalia-
tion, is too complex to blame victims for the brutal behavior of their abusers. And
the psychology of identifying with one's abuser is too well established to mock the
difficulty of leaving. But Nicole was also obsessed with O. J. Her huge appetites
for cash, cocaine, and convenience tied her to a destructive lifestyle that rivaled
her relationship to Simpson.
Equally tragic, Nicole's suffering was partially aided by her family's silence and
inaction. Time and again Simpson hurled Nicole's body across the room. He
crashed her face with his fists, leaving telltale signs almost as large as his anger.
Her family surely knew or suspected that there was big trouble between Nicole
and O.J. The Browns' not knowing is just as plausible as Simpson not having
murdered Ron and Nicole. After Nicole's death, her sister, Denise, insisted that
Nicole wasn't a battered woman. That's an excusable lie if we admit that silence,
secrecy, and shame choke domestic abuse victims and their families.
Nicole's martyrdom can certainly aid other victims of domestic abuse. Her
martyrdom might also help restore her family to wholeness. The Browns' help-
lessness and willed ignorance about Nicole's abuse—their neglect of her living
body, bought in part by O. J.'s generous patronage—helped to make her a symbol
of domestic violence. Her bloodied body obviously gave the Browns the energy
they needed to speak up, to act. Martyrdom lifts a person's life beyond her body.
Her suffering supports those who draw strength from her life's purpose-even if
that purpose is only fully realized after death. The Browns must now join with
others who identify, beyond blood ties or biology, with the fight against domestic


--- PAGE 86 ---
O.J. Simpson and Our Trial by Fire 57
violence to which Nicole's life and martyred body have become connected. With-
out the Browns' acknowledgment of complicity in Nicole's suffering, her mar-
tyred body becomes an empty tablet on which her family's guilt is written.
As serious as the Browns' failure was, Simpson's was by far the greater sin. His
beating of Nicole marked a vile sexual obsession. Simpson apparendy believed he
owned Nicole. She was a trophy. She was a commodity O.J. bought with his con-
siderable earnings. Such logic might suggest that Nicole was interchangeable with
most of the other women to whom Simpson was attracted. Like her, they had
blonde hair and big breasts.
But sexual obsession is not offset by potential—by what one might have or get
in the future to replace what one lost or can't have. This makes it difficult to de-
fend Simpson by saying that he didn't have to kill Nicole because he could have
had any woman he wanted. Sexual obsession can never be satisfied. The obses-
sor fixes on the object of desire as a way of realizing his own desire. Hence, sex-
ual obsession is a disguised form of narcissism. It ultimately refers back to itself.
Such self-reference contains the seed of the obsessor's dissatisfaction. By project-
ing his desire onto an erotic interest, the obsessor surrenders the means of achiev-
ing fulfillment to a force outside himself. Hence, the obsessor employs various
forms of control, including seduction and violence, to bring the erotic interest in
line with his wishes.
The obsessor ultimately requires the collapse of the erotic interest into himself.
This feat is rarely possible, and certainly not desirable, at least not from the
erotic interest's point of view. It means that the erotic interest will have to sur-
render her self and identity completely to the obsessor. In the obsessor's eye, to
be rejected by the erotic interest is to be rejected by himself. This is a narcissist's
nightmare. Such rejection is perceived as a form of self-mutilation. Or, more
painfully, it is a form of self-denial. Nicole's final rejection of the sickness of her
own, and O.J.'s, obsession a month before she died was the doorway to her free-
dom and her martyrdom. If the same act of independence led to her liberty and
her death, it suggests something of the lethal obsession that millions of women
live with and the from.
A similarly lethal obsession-compounded by an even more sinister and convo-
luted history-shapes the course of race in this country. The responses to the ver-
dicts were misrepresented in the media as an avalanche of emotion determined
exclusively by color. Such simple scribing must never be trusted. Nevertheless,
the responses showed just how sick and separate race makes us. O J.-the figure,
the trial, the spectacle, the aftermath—was a racequake. It crumbled racial plati-
tudes. It revealed the fault lines of bias, bigotry, and blindness that trace beneath
our social existence. The trial has at least forced us to talk about race. Even if we
speak defensively and with giant chips on our shoulders. Race remains our na-
tion's malevolent obsession. Race is the source of our harmony or disfavor with
one another. Black and white responses to O J. prove how different historical ex-
periences determine what we see and color what we believe about race.


--- PAGE 87 ---
58 THE MICHAEL ERIC DYSON READER
For instance, even as many blacks defended O.J., they knew he had never been
one of black America's favorite sons. He didn't remember his roots when his
fame and fortune carried him long beyond their influence. (Or, as a black woman
wrote to me, "O.J. didn't know he had roots until they started digging.") On the
surface, the black defense of Simpson can be positively interpreted. It can be
viewed as the refusal of blacks to play the race authenticity game, which, in this
instance, amounts to the belief that only "real" blacks deserve support when racial
difficulties arise. But black responses to O.J. can also be read less charitably. They
can be seen as the automatic embrace of a fallen figure simply because he is black.
If you buy this fine of reasoning, Simpson has a double advantage. He is eligible
for insurance against the liability of racism, and he is fully covered for all claims
made against him by whites, including a charge of murder. But all of these read-
ings are too narrow. Black responses to Simpson must be viewed in light of the
role race and racism have played in our nation's history. Race has been the most
cruelly dominant force in the fives of black Americans. Racism exists in its own
poisoned and protected world of misinformation and ignorance. Its fires of de-
struction are stoked by stereotype and crude mythology.
That history may help explain black support for figures like O.J. and Clarence
Thomas, who have denied the lingering impact of race. Many black folk know
that, in the long run, such figures remain trapped by race. Still, it is unprincipled
for blacks like Thomas and Simpson to appeal to race in their defense when they
opposed such appeals by other blacks in trouble. Many blacks support such fig-
ures because they think they discern, even in their exploitative behavior, a des-
peration, a possible seed of recognition, a begrudging concession even, that race
does make a difference.
The ugly irony is that such figures get into a position to do even more harm to
blacks because of the black help they receive. (Look at Thomas's judicial opinions
against affirmative action and historically black colleges and universities.) For
many whites, the example of race exploiters symbolizes how black Americans use
race in bad faith. The problem is many whites see this only when their interests
are being undermined. Simpson's offense—allowing race to be used on his behalf-
is as obvious to many whites as Thomas's injury to blacks is obscured. By con-
trast, Thomas looks just fine to many whites. His beliefs and judicial opinions
protect conservative white interests. But Thomas's cry of "high-tech lynching"
when he was seeking confirmation to the Supreme Court choked off critical dis-
cussion of his desperate dishonesty. Thomas's comment was a callous, calculated
attempt to win Senate votes and public sympathy by using race in a fashion he
had claimed was unjust, Thomas's dishonest behavior-gaining privilege because
of his blackness only to unfairly deny the same privilege to other blacks highlights
the absurdity of race for black Americans.
A small sense of the absurdity of race came crashing down on many whites when
the not-guilty verdicts were delivered. A surreal world prevailed. Clocks melted.
Time bent. Cows flew over the moon. The chronology of race was forever split: Be-


--- PAGE 88 ---
O.J. Simpson and Our Trial by Fire 59
fore Simpson and After Simpson. October 3, 1995, became a marker of tragedy. For
many whites, it is a day that will live in the same sort of infamy that Roosevelt pre-
dicted for the day Pearl Harbor was bombed. It is hard to adequately describe the
bewilderment many blacks felt at white rage over the verdicts. As difficult, perhaps,
as it is for whites to understand how so many blacks could be deliriously gleeful at
Simpson's acquittal. For perhaps the first time, the wide gulf between legality and
morality became real to many whites. At least real in a way that most blacks could
see whites cared about. That gulf is one blacks have bitterly protested for years,
with only moderate support from most whites. The day of the verdicts, many white
people were forced to think of themselves as a group-one denied special privilege
rather than guaranteed it-for the first time. As a group, these whites tasted the
dread, common to blacks, that follows the absolute rejection of the faith one has
placed in a judicial ruling's power to bring justice. The fact that the decision offi-
cially took four hours only heaped insult on the injured souls of white folk.
In reality, however, that decision was much longer in the making. That jury
decision was set in motion the first time an American citizen, acting on behalf of the state and
supported by public sentiment, made a legal judgment about a human being where an inter-
pretation of the facts was colored by a consideration of race. The O.J. verdicts are an
outgrowth of the system started in that moment. They are, too, a painful ex-
posure of, and a stinging rebuke to, the unjust operation of the judicial system
for blacks throughout the history of our nation.
One might conclude from what I've just said that I believe the jury's decision
was a rightful thumb in the justice system's eye. That it was sweet black revenge
for white wrongdoing. I don't. Nor do I believe that that's the best way to read
the jury's verdict. The confusion surrounding the verdicts, indeed the entire trial,
reflects the confusion about the meanings of race in our culture. As far as I can
see, race is being used in at least three different ways to explain the trial, especially
the meaning of the verdicts. But since we haven't taken the time to figure them
out, we end up collapsing them into one another in ways that are confusing and
harmful. That confusion exaggerates the differences between blacks and whites.
It also masks differences within black and white communities, especially where
class privilege and gender are concerned.
The three uses of race I have in mind are race as context, race as subtext, and race
as pretext. Race as context helps us to understand the facts of race and racism in
our society. Race as a subtext helps us to understand the forms of race and racism
in our culture. And race as a pretext helps us to understand the, junction of race and
racism in America. Of course, these categories are not absolute. They are impure
and flexible. They often bleed into one another. But if we're aware such distinc-
tions exist, we have a better chance of reducing the anxiety around a highly
charged subject. I'm using these categories as a tool to analyze race and as a way
to describe how race and racism have affected American life. I'll briefly explore
these uses of race before explaining how they might help us sort through the
racial mess that the verdicts revealed.


--- PAGE 89 ---
60 THE MICHAEL ERIC DYSON READER
Race as context shows how arguments have been used to clarify the role race and
racism have played in our nation's history. To view race as a context leads to racial
clarification. With racial clarification, we get down, as nearly as we can, to the facts of
race. When did the idea of race emerge? Why did America choose to make dis-
tinctions among people based on race? What happened during slavery? What was
Reconstruction really about? What were Abraham Lincoln's motives in freeing the
slaves? How did the civil rights movement get started? What was the role of black
women in the black freedom struggle of the '60s? How was black sexuality viewed
during the early part of this century? How many black men were lynched before
1950? When did affirmative action start? And so on. By having these facts in hand,
we're more likely to weave them into an accurate account of how race has shaped
our culture. Such an account helps us tell the complex, compelling story of how
race influenced ideas like democracy, justice, freedom, individuality, and equality. It
also helps us to understand how racism began and spread. The most valuable use
of racial clarification may be the vibrant historical framework it gives our discus-
sions about race. It is stunning how much ignorance about what really happened in
our racial past poisons present debates about race. Of course, we don't benefit from
a Joe Friday "just the facts, ma'am" perspective of the past. There will be disputes
about the facts and what they mean. But we certainly need to work as hard as pos-
sible to figure out what happened as we interpret the history of race.
Race as subtext highlights how arguments have been used to mystify, or delib-
erately obscure, the role of race and racism in our culture. To view race as a sub-
text aids our understanding of racial mystification. With this view of race, we can
describe the different forms that racism takes, the disguises it wears, the tricky,
subtle shapes it assumes. Race and racism are not static forces. They mutate,
grow, transform, and are redefined in complex ways. Understanding racial mystifi-
cation helps us grasp the hidden premises, buried perceptions, and cloaked mean-
ings of race as they show up throughout our culture. (I realize that race and
racism are not living organisms. But they have, besides an impersonal, institu-
tional form, a quality of fretful aliveness, an active agency, that I seek to capture.)
For instance, terms like "enlightened" and "subtle" racism have been used to
describe one transformation of racism: the shift from overt racism to covert forms
that thrive on codes, signals, and symbols. And racial mystification was certainly
at play when Charles Stuart in Boston and Susan Smith in South Carolina de-
flected attention from murders they had committed—Stuart of his wife, Smith of
her two sons-by claiming a black man was at fault. What made their stories be-
lievable was not the fact, but the perception, of black crime. Statistically speaking,
blacks overwhelmingly murder blacks, just as whites overwhelmingly murder
whites. Since black males have become racially coded symbols for pathological,
criminal behavior, the Stuart and Smith stories found millions of white believers.
Such beliefs about black males are subtle updates of an ancient belief about black
men as beasts and sexual predators. Race understood as a subtext allows us to get
a handle on the changing forms of racist belief and behavior in our culture.


--- PAGE 90 ---
O.J. Simpson and Our Trial by Fire 61
Finally, race as pretext shows how arguments have been used to justify racial be-
liefs and to defend racial interests. If the context of race is tied to history and the
subtext to culture, then the pretext of race is linked, broadly speaking, to science.
Race viewed as a pretext increases our understanding of racial justification. The stress
in racial justification is on how race functions to give legitimacy to racial ideas. The
proponents of racial justification drape their arguments about race in the finest
garbs of science: objectivity and neutrality. After all, they are dealing in the realm
of the empirical, those things that can be proved true or false by experiment and
observation. Their work is often developed in the name of the sciences, natural or
social. In some cases, racial justification simply seeks to supply a reasoned argu-
ment for racial preconceptions. Such arguments form a pretext to justify deeply
rooted racial passions, and often give a scientific glow to racist beliefs.
For instance, Charles Murray and Richard Herrnstein's "The Bell Curve claimed to
be a work of science, a work of cool, dispassionate reason. Murray and Herrnstein
simply translated racist beliefs into empirical arguments about the limits of black in-
telligence. Their book has been widely debunked as pseudoscience. But the enor-
mous interest that greeted it suggests the intellectual appeal of the claims they
make. The case of black psychiatrist Frances Cress-Welsing is instructive as well. In
her book, The his Papers, she argues for the Cress Theory of color—confrontation
and racism. She links the development of white supremacist ideology to white fear
of genetic annihilation. It is a biologically based argument, linked to the superiority
of black skin because of its ability to produce melanin, to explain the rise of white
supremacy. Cress-Welsing's theory is certainly an example of contorted reasoning
used to justify racial beliefs. Viewing race as a pretext helps us to identify scientific,
empirical work that attempts to justify racist beliefs.
These three uses of race and racism might help us figure out key elements of
the trial. Take the bitter dispute over the "mountain of evidence." For most whites
and some blacks, there was more than enough evidence to convict Simpson.
Simpson had brutally battered Nicole. The blood of the victims was in his
Bronco. Simpson's blood was at the crime scene. A bloody glove was found at the
crime scene, its match on Simpson's estate. And above all, there were highly so-
phisticated DNA tests that seemed to prove Simpson's guilt beyond a reasonable
doubt. But for most blacks and some whites, there was substantial doubt about
the validity of the evidence, for several reasons. The reckless manner in which the
evidence was collected and tested. Defense experts who testified that the evidence
was questionable, inconclusive, or plain contrary to the prosecution's interpreta-
tion. And above all, the star prosecution witness, police detective Mark Fuhrman,
a major collector of evidence against Simpson, who turned out to be a bigot of the
worst sort.
Most whites and blacks conceded that Fuhrman's bigotry was awful. Both whites
and blacks admitted that the police work was sloppy. But for most whites and a few
blacks, these factors didn't matter enough to keep them from believing in Simpson's
guilt. Most blacks and some whites believed that Fuhrman's mean-spirited bragging


--- PAGE 91 ---
62 THE MICHAEL ERIC DYSON READER
about harming, possibly killing, blacks in the past—plus the fact that he collected
crucial evidence—was reason enough to doubt Simpson's guilt.
What are we to make of how black folk viewed the evidence?
Right away, race as pretext, or racial justification, makes it clear that evidence
never speaks for itself. Evidence never exists in a vacuum. It is used for particu-
lar purposes.
In the Simpson case, as in any case where race is a source of contention, how
we see evidence is shaped by ideological and racial interests. Evidence must be
viewed through a lens of interpretation. Such a lens is surely colored by the his-
tory of race. Race as context, or racial clarification, helps us understand the facts
of race that might influence how blacks view the evidence in the Simpson case in
sharply different fashion from whites. There are many. The unjust treatment
thousands of blacks have received at the hands of the justice system. The manu-
facturing of evidence against black defendants in the past. Judicial indifference to
compelling evidence of a black defendant's innocence. The unequal application of
punishment to black and white defendants convicted of the same crime. And re-
peated instances of police brutality in black communities.
Of course, the Rodney King case had already made Los Angeles blacks, indeed
blacks throughout the nation, skeptical about the uses of evidence in the judicial
system. Particularly when black bodies were at stake. There was, as far as most
black folk were concerned, indisputable proof—if not quite the mountain of evi-
dence amassed in the Simpson case-that police brutality was the plague they
claimed it to be. After all, nobody saw Simpson murder two people. But the world
saw King getting his skull smashed over and over and over again. Millions of
black folk, along with the outrage they felt at the King beating, breathed a sigh of
relief. Finally, here was the case that would ring the death knell for police brutal-
ity and bring the curtain down on the terror that millions of blacks feel when
they're stopped by a white cop. But it was not to be. With a barrage of shrewd
legal arguments, lawyers for the cops accused of King's beating made the white
jury disbelieve what they saw with their own eyes. Neither could millions of
blacks believe what they saw. At the trial where King's molesters were acquitted,
the roar of evidence barely whimpered. Objectivity was crushed. Reason was sul-
lied. Racial justification abounded.
To be sure, Los Angeles didn't catch fire because of a highfalutin debate about
race as a pretext for the brutal treatment of blacks. It didn't erupt over intellectual
disputes about the twisted uses of reason, objectivity, and evidence in the justifi-
cation of racial violence. Yet these factors surely played their part in the L.A. riots
of 1992. The seams of black civility finally burst because black folk concluded
that even when they played by the rules, they could expect nothing in return-
when the evidence was clear as day, it could be explained away. Of course, race
as pretext and subtext converge at King's body. King was termed "bearlike,"
"hulklike," and "like a wounded animal" by his molesters. In view of King's as-
sault, these terms revealed a racially mystified description that appealed to old be-


--- PAGE 92 ---
O.J. Simpson and Our "Trial by Fire 63
liefs, as I've argued above, about black males as animals. And of course, by por-
traying him in such racially mystified terms, the cops were able to justify their vi-
cious treatment of King: treatment befitting a beast.
This history must be kept at the forefront of any discussion of how black folk-
including the jurors—viewed the evidence against Simpson. Black response to the
evidence in the Simpson case might be viewed as an example of reasonable black
suspicion of the uses—really misuses—of the Enlightenment and its towering off-
spring: objectivity and reason. Both have been used to justify black suffering and
death around the globe. Both, or at least twisted versions of the two, have led ra-
tional white folk to treat rational black folk in irrational, inhumane ways, or to
overlook evidence of such behavior in their fellow whites. Plus, many blacks are
suspicious of medical technology. Think of the infamous Tuskegee Study begun
in 1932, when three hundred black men were used as guinea pigs to test the long-
term effects of untreated syphilis. Of course, there's no direct link between such
cases and the Simpson case. But such cases leave millions of blacks suspicious of
the uses of sophisticated scientific technology. Especially when it is employed to
prove black inferiority or to experiment with blacks as animals. A potent mix
of reasonable suspicion, conspiracy theories, and paranoia thrives in pockets of
black America. In the light of real abuse and suspected offenses, it is not difficult
to understand how highly educated blacks could believe, for instance, that AIDS
was invented to destroy black folk. Or that evidence cooked up by sophisticated
science could be manufactured, distorted, or tainted to nab an innocent black
man. As remote as it might seem to whites, that possibility loomed large in the
Simpson case for millions of blacks. There are a thousand Mark Fuhrmans in
black history. Race as context makes that fact crystal clear.
The three uses of race I've sketched might also clear up confusion about the so-
called race card. The "race card" invariably referred to Johnnie Cochran's intro-
duction of race as a factor in Simpson's trial. It referred especially to the defense's
intended blasting of Mark Fuhrman, and to Cochran's statements outside the
court about the pervasive nature of race in our nation. But we should make dis-
tinctions. First, the charge that Cochran played the race card is a charge of racial
justification. That is, it is a charge that he used race as a pretext to argue Simpson's
lack of guilt because of Fuhrman's racist behavior. That charge against Cochran is
a separate issue from the validity of his point about the pervasiveness of race,
which is a question of the context of race—of whether the facts, or at least an in-
terpretation of the facts, warrant Cochran's assertion about how pervasive race is.
During the trial, and in commentary since the trial ended, the two meanings
have been blurred. Cochran's point about racial pervasiveness was taken as a jus-
tification for his use of race in Simpson's defense. In fact, I think it was an attempt
at racial clarification, an attempt to clarify the huge impact of race in our culture.
By discussing the pervasiveness of race, Cochran sought to do a difficult thing: to
talk about white racism and the privileges and penalties it bestows. It is certainly
possible to disagree with Cochran's use, or interpretation, of the facts. One can


--- PAGE 93 ---
64 THE MICHAEL ERIC DYSON READER
argue that Cochran used legitimate facts in a distorted way. But one cannot ignore
the truth of his statements about the prevalence of race in our culture. By keeping
the two meanings of race separate, we won't automatically confuse speaking
about the facts of race or racism with an attempt to justify unprincipled argu-
ments or exploitative behavior.
For many whites, racial clarification and racial justification are the same. This
is especially true when talking about race goes against white beliefs about the
disappearance or absence of racism. The question, of course, is whether race
made a difference in Simpson's case. For Cochran and millions of blacks, the rea-
sonable answer was yes. The reasonableness of that answer is partially deter-
mined by an undeniable fact: the bad treatment of blacks by the police. Mark
Fuhrman's bigoted behavior only reinforced the belief among millions of blacks
that he might have framed O.J.
If we look closely, it will become clear that the race card (racial justification)
was played in the Simpson trial from the beginning. The question of which jurors
to select was racially motivated. Both the defense and the prosecution took race
into account. The decision to bring Christopher Darden onto the prosecution
team was driven by race. The prosecution's decision to stick with Fuhrman, even
when it was apparent that he was a racist, carried racial overtones. The race card
had been drawn and dealt long before Cochran even came on the scene. It should
be evident that the "race card" metaphor is a limited way to understand how race
operates. As an instance of racial justification, the race card metaphor leaves aside
the context and the subtext of race. The race card metaphor fails to account for
the complexity of race. It fails to show how racism poisons civic life and denies
the worth of human beings because of their color. Race is not a card. It is a con-
dition. It is a set of beliefs and behaviors shaped by culture, rooted in history, and
fueled by passions that transcend reason.
Understanding the complexity of race can throw light on the actions of the
black jurors in the Simpson case. The jurors' verdicts were widely viewed as a fail-
ure to transcend race. They were also viewed, in the words of a '70s James Brown
hit, as the "big payback" to whites for all the wrong they've done. Furthermore,
the jurors were accused of failing to critically weigh the evidence in the case.
Racial clarification helps to identify a historical paradox of race for blacks relating
to claims of this sort: when dealing with their peers, blacks are seen as fair—that
is, neutral, just, and transcending race—only when they oppose perceived black in-
terests. For many whites, the black jurors could only transcend race, and satisfy
the demands of justice and good citizenship, by finding Simpson guilty of murder.
Because the jury found Simpson not guilty, many whites believed their decision
was an instance of racial justification, that the verdicts were a biased judgment, a
pretext for racial solidarity.
But blacks routinely convict black defendants. (I should know. I saw my brother
sentenced to life in prison by an all black jury.) Neither are whites viewed as unfair
when they fail to send a white defendant to jail. Whites are not viewed in such cases


--- PAGE 94 ---
O.J. Simpson and Our Trial by Fire 65
as expressing white solidarity. Unless, of course, the defendant is accused of a crime
against a black person. Even then, whites defend their decisions as just. They often
claim their decisions are made without regard to color. Whites are rarely asked to
consider the role race plays in the decisions they make. This is especially the case
when their decisions involve unconscious expressions of group loyalty.
Racial mystification may help to explain veiled, and not-so-veiled, references to
the black jurors' intelligence. The subtext of criticisms aimed at the black jurors
was drenched in race: they were uneducated, hence, intellectually inferior. It's in-
teresting to note how dismissed white juror Francine Florio-Bunten's story casts
light on racial mystification in the trial. Florio-Bunten claims she would have
voted to convict Simpson. She has been celebrated, in coded terms, as a white
heroine who would have saved the day by representing the "truth"—that is,
"white" interests. Florio-Bunten was lauded for being the only juror who knew
what "DNA" stood for at the beginning of the trial. (The subtext is that the black
jurors, by contrast, were dumb.) Florio-Bunten also claims diat she had decided
Simpson's guilt long before the trial had ended. Yet, unlike the black jurors, who
were viciously attacked for arriving at a hasty decision (after four hours of delib-
eration), Florio-Bunten has been exempt from harsh criticism. Florio-Bunten is
even more ingratiating to whites when she claims that no amount of deliberation
by her cohorts would have swayed her opinion. (Subtext: she would have resisted
"black interests" and stood firm for "white interests.") The stigma black jurors
wear—dumb, race loyalists, un-American—is the stigma attached to many blacks
who risk white rage by reaching decisions that upset white interests and beliefs.
In the final analysis, what race as context, race as subtext, and race as pretext
cannot help us gain is certainty about the motives that lurk in the hearts of human
beings. We don't know what intentions or motivations people have apart from the
behavior we can observe. (That is the frustration for blacks confronting subtle
forms of racism that are not manifest in overt action.) Despite every effort to ex-
plain the jury's actions, it may be that race, of whatever sort, was the motivation
for their decision in the Simpson trial. No amount of knowledge or insight can
protect against that possibility. Black folk already know this because they have
been on the losing end of that proposition too many times before. As this case
proves, it's a bitter lesson few whites are familiar widi. It may be that the jurors'
decision confirmed the worst fears of whites and blacks: Despite what many
whites think about blacks—diat they are morally inferior—or what many blacks
think about themselves—that they are morally superior to whites—blacks and
whites may be very much the same.
Oddly enough, that might be a basis for moving beyond the prism of race. Not
by denying race, but by taking it into account. That is the lesson we learn from
clarifying our understanding of race. Those whites who claim it is unfair, even ab-
surd, for blacks to enjoy racial preferences deny that whites have always enjoyed
such preferences on a much larger scale. Now that many whites seek to use the
absurdity of racial preferences as a justification for axing programs like affirmative


--- PAGE 95 ---
66 THE MICHAEL ERIC DYSON READER
action, they fail to make use of history. True enough, they highlight the absurdity
of the idea of race. But they remove it from a context—racial clarification—that ex-
plains its historical function—to justify white privilege. The bitter history of black
struggle, the facts, are what make the idea that race is absurd valid and com-
pelling. To take that idea out of context and to turn it against blacks without re-
gard for history is crass and dishonest.
Then too blacks must be honest about the manner in which we have been vul-
nerable to race exploiters who deny the importance of race. If racial justice is our
dominant concern, then the cases of prisoners Geronimo Pratt and Mumia Abu-
Jamal should have goaded us to action long before the superrich Simpson captured
our attention. And our large disinterest in the trials of rappers Snoop Doggy Dogg,
Tupac Shakur, and Dr. Dre reveals a huge class and generational bias in black
America. In fact, millions of blacks believed the hostile portrayals of these young
blacks in the media. (I'm not suggesting that each didn't deserve criticism for his
actions. I'm simply referring to hostile black reaction to the category of "young,
black male" or "rapper.") Millions of blacks believed in these rappers' probable
guilt simply because they were rappers. Millions of blacks didn't rally around these
rappers, who probably had more cash than Simpson. Many blacks wrote them off.
Why? They weren't the right kind of blacks. They weren't "our" kind of role mod-
els. Yet such figures, given the wide public hostility aimed at them, are more likely
to be targets of white fear and police misconduct than a rich, well-loved black
sports icon like O J. Class divisions in black life are huge and growing.
In the end, we can only have racial progress if we take the lessons of this case
seriously. Despite the undeniable advances we have made, despite the enormous
strides taken, we remain a deeply divided society. (Although this case framed our
racial problems in black and white, we must certainly realize that there are all
sorts of racial and ethnic tensions brewing that involve Asian, Native American,
and Latino communities.) We cannot wish our differences away. We must work
to increase our understanding of the contexts, pretexts, and subtexts of race.
Then we must do something concrete about racial suffering and racial injustice.
We have the negative examples of O J. Simpson and Mark Fuhrman, the two men
at the center of this trial, to spur us on past their, and our, tragic limitations and
failures. Simpson, in particular, is a man without a country. The white folk who
once adored him, and whose acceptance Simpson still seeks, now despise him.
The blacks Simpson has never shown much interest in, and who have welcomed
him, do not inspire his allegiance.
In perhaps one of the most tragic ironies this case has served up, a black man
who lived his life avoiding black culture was ultimately set free because of a white
bigot who hated blacks and worked at the core of urban black life. The cruel sym-
metry of their fates at the hands of a black culture that each, in his own way,
found troubling is nearly biblical. If we are not careful, their fates will be the na-
tion's as well.


--- PAGE 96 ---
P A R T T H R E E
A F F I R M A T I V E A C T I O N
There is little doubt that affirmative action is a controverisal public pol-
icy that has been bitterly debated in the nation's long and chaotic battle
for racial justice. I think it is best to tell the truth about affirmative ac-
tion: that it is not a cureall for our racial miasma; that it is not fair for
whites who have enjoyed centuries of unchallenged social advantage to
carp about the relatively small benefits distributed to minities; and that
too often the discussion of racial justice is yanked out of a truthful politi-
cal context and smothered by ammesia. If we ever ginned yp the courage
to speak honestly about race, we might also open up the courageof racial healing.


--- PAGE 97 ---
This page intentionally left blank


--- PAGE 98 ---
Six
DEBATING AFFIRMATIVE ACTION
A headline in the University of Pennsylvania's student newspaper, the Daily
Pennsylvanian, barely captured the tenor of the debate between me and University of
Michigan professor Carl Cohen when it declared: "Taping of'Justice Talking' Turns
Heated." T'he debate, moderated by Margot Adler, took place at Penn's Wistar Institute,
and was edited for broadcast on NPR's Justice Talking. Although the finished version
screened some of our most acrimonious exchanges, a vibrant measure of ourjundamental
disagreement survives on the pages of our transcribed and edited debate. Cohen, a
Michigan phiksophy professor, helped instigate the anti-affirmative action movement at
the university that led to two lawsuits targeting the institution s undergraduate and law
school admissions policies, both of which were heard before the Supreme Court in 2003.
I received quite a bit of correspondence after this debate aired shortly before the cases
were argued before the Supreme Court on April 1, and again after the Court's decision
in June. Besides a widely viewed debate on C-SPAN between me and black
conservative activist Ward Connerly, this encounter with Cohen provides my most
extensive response to the issues surrounding this critical racial policy.
Moderator: From the Annenberg Public Policy Center at the University of
Pennsylvania, I'm Margot Adler. Welcome to Justice Talking. Do we still
need affirmative action? The United States Supreme Court will rule this
term on whether the University of Michigan can consider race when
evaluating applicants to its undergraduate and law schools. Like many
prestigious colleges and universities, Michigan takes the position that di-
versity itself has an important educational value, and that the school
must maintain its academic freedom to create a student body with the
widest range of people, ideas, and experiences. U of M gives African
American applicants additional points just for being black, and whites
who didn't get in have sued, claiming reverse discrimination . .. Affir-
mative action—will it prevent the resegregation of our country's institu-
tions of higher learning? Is diversity a value so important in the twenty-
first century that colleges may discriminate against whites?
I'm joined by Carl Cohen, who has taught philosophy at the Univer-
sity of Michigan since 1955. Professor Cohen's request for these policies


--- PAGE 99 ---
70 THEMlCHAELERICDYSONREADER
under the Freedom of Information Act is credited with sparking the
movement to end race-based admissions at the university. He is the au-
thor of a book called Naked Racial Preference. Michael Eric Dyson is also
with us. He's the Avalon Foundation Professor in the Humanities at the
University of Pennsylvania. Known as a hip-hop intellectual, Professor
Dyson is also a Baptist minister and the author of Race Rules: Navigating
the Color Line. We're thrilled to have both of you here on Justice Talking.
Moderator: So Carl, how do the University of Michigan's affirmative action
policies work? And how does race figure into the equation?
Cohen: Race figures into the equation heavily, both on the undergraduate
level and in the law school. There are two different systems, and that's
why there are two different cases. In the undergraduate case, additional
points are actually given on a scale, which one hundred points eventually
assures admission. Twenty points are given for color of skin. I find that,
of course, deeply wrong. In the law school, a point system is not used,
but a critical mass of minority students is sought.
Moderator: Michael, President Bush criticized this policy as a quota system.
Is it? Is it discrimination?
Dyson: Absolutely not. Twenty points granted, as Professor Cohen has in-
dicated, is part of a number of points granted for a number of categories
and considerations other than color, or even academic achievement. So
that if we give twenty points for race, we give points for legacy; we give
points for being an athlete; we give points for being from a diverse part
of the country. So race is a consideration, a factor, not the exclusive fac-
tor, and certainly not the dominant factor.
Cohen: Of course it's not the exclusive factor. No one thinks that. But it is
wrong to consider race, morally wrong and legally wrong, to give pref-
erence in our country on the basis of skin color or national origin.
Dyson: I agree, and Carl, as a white man, you would understand that more
than anyone else in this room, because racial preferences have been pred-
icated upon pigment. We live in, as some scholars call it, a pigmentoc-
racy [where] the distribution of goods, like employment and education,
[is] based upon white skin privilege. So I certainly agree [we've got to
attack] racial preferences. However, speaking to affirmative action, that's
different than racial preference.
Cohen: Oh no, we're talking about racial preference. That's the issue before
the courts right now.
Dyson: Let me finish my point. Affirmative action is about conceding the
fact that the historical practices of white supremacy have excluded peo-
ple, unfairly, based upon race, and we cannot now pretend that race
shouldn't be a consideration in trying to redistribute those goods.
Moderator: Carl, U.S. Supreme Court Justice Powell, in the majority opin-
ion in the Bakke case, wrote that "achieving diversity on campus is an


--- PAGE 100 ---
Debating Affirmative Action 71
important and legitimate part of the university's educational mission."
Was he wrong?
Cohen: I think diversity is a very genuine value, and I think the university
is right to seek diversity of all kinds, not just racial and ethnic diversity,
but intellectual diversity. I think that's a genuine merit. But I don't think
that it justifies discriminating by race.
Moderator: Michael, isn't there something a little elitist and even patroniz-
ing in the university's argument? They seem to be implying that the
presence of minorities enhances the educational experience offered to the
white majority, and that blacks will get a better education in the presence
of whites. You're an African-American professor on a majority white cam-
pus. What do you think?
Dyson: Well, I think that in the abstract these arguments may appear to be
patronizing, condescending, and altogether typical of the liberal attempt
to engineer social diversity. But in the concrete context in which we find
ourselves, given the diminution of any intense interest in racial justice for
many students of color on predominantly white campuses, I think it's a
salient point that needs to be reinforced. And diversity in this case,
racially speaking, is a compelling interest, because A, it allows majority
students to interact with, yes, minority students; B, it does allow minor-
ity students to engage with those students with whom they will be work-
ing in the future; but [C], and most important, it provides an intellectual
context to demystify some of these prejudices and biases that feed racial
injustice. So I think that there are a variety of ways in which diversity is
a compelling interest, both to the college and the university, and to the
society at large.
Cohen: You don't want to suppose that absent these preferential programs
there would be no minorities on campus? There are a very substantial
number of very able minority students and faculty members who would
be, and who are, on our campus, quite without preference. What's at
issue is the increment in the degree of diversity which is provided, by a
degree of deliberate racial preference. And diat increment, it is supposed,
is sufficient to justify deliberate discrimination by race.
Dyson: No, I'm not suggesting that absent these so-called, what you termed
preferences, what I call racial modifications, black students will not
thrive. What it suggests is diat there are other considerations than intel-
ligence and test scores that play into the acceptance or rejection of stu-
dents of color. For instance, a recent study just showed that the name of
an African-American person is sufficient grounds for excluding them
from even being brought in to compete for the job. So don't tell me, Pro-
fessor Cohen, you've been living in a cocoon, somehow, in the United
States of Amnesia, where you have rejected the legitimacy of the fact that
racial preferences have historically accorded white men, first of all, and


--- PAGE 101 ---
72 THE MICHAEL ERIC DYSON READER
white people secondly, extraordinary access to the goods and resources
that are available.
Cohen: With respect, I am not being ahistorical. I am keenly aware of the
long history of racial discrimination in our country, and I think we can-
not approach this question without attending to it. I share with you,
Professor Dyson, a concern for the way in which race, as you put it in
your book, has poisoned the atmosphere in our country in many re-
spects. But the way to bring that to an end is not to take another dose
of the same medicine.
Moderator: Let me butt in here a second. Carl, you've been at the Univer-
sity of Michigan for nearly fifty years. Over the five decades that you've
been teaching, hasn't the growing presence of African-American students
in your courses made a qualitative difference to the kinds of discussions
your students had in class?
Cohen: I don't know that one could say a very substantial difference.
There's been a growing number of minority students over the years.
That's a good thing. There was a growing number of minority students
in the '60s before preferential programs began. One of my colleagues at
the University of Michigan Law School, Terrance Sandalow, remarked
after many years of teaching at the law school, that he never found that
any one of his minority students contributed in the discussion an idea or
a point of view that wasn't contributed by others.
Dyson: If you've been, for instance, subject to police brutality, and you're
discussing police brutality in your classroom, it makes a heck of a differ-
ence if you're a white man who has had the ability to teach at the Uni-
versity of Michigan for 50 years without the compunction of the law, as
opposed to a person of color who has been subject to police brutality,
like myself, where the marks are borne in the body. That makes a heck of
a difference epistemologically, as well as existentially.
Cohen: We are not going to be without that representation when preference
is done away with. It's not as though we were choosing between the pres-
ence of minorities and the absence of minorities. We're choosing between
the presence of minorities in a substantial degree, and the presence of mi-
norities in a somewhat greater degree. And that increment is the only
thing that can justify this system. Now I want to say, the way to tran-
scend our tradition, our unhappy tradition, of racial prejudice and dis-
crimination, is to cease to do it, to resolve never again to use race and
national origin as the criterion for judgment. That is what I think it is
time for us to resolve.
Dyson: I would agree with [the latter part of your statement], except to say
racism is a key distinction. Not race.
Moderator: Carl, some stuthes show that without affirmative action, enroll-
ment of African-Americans at highly selective schools like the U of M,


--- PAGE 102 ---
Debating Affirmative Action 73
would drop from 9 percent to 2 percent. The state of Michigan is 14 per-
cent black, has three of the ten most segregated cities in the country. Are
you saying that the university would be a better place with only a token
presence of black students?
Cohen: I don't believe that the result of the elimination of preference would
yield a token presence of minority students. The numbers will drop be-
cause they have been artificially inflated. I think they will drop, but there
will be a substantial number of minority students, as there were a sub-
stantial number of minority students before the introduction of prefer-
ence. But I do think the university will be a better place when the hostil-
ities and the tensions that are created by preference are no longer there,
and when all the minority students who are on campus are recognized as
being there on their own merits. I think we do the minorities a great ser-
vice when we eliminate preference in their behalf.
Dyson: Well, let me respond to that by saying, first of all, thank you so much
for your concern about the psychological state of African-American stu-
dents who, in the embrace of so-called racial preferences, are thought to
be somehow inferior. Surely Professor Cohen, as a teacher of philosophy,
is aware of the long legacy of the disbelief in the essential humanity and
intelligence of black people—long before affirmative action, I might re-
mind you. So when I went to Carson-Newman College, a historically
Southern Baptist school, [a] white school, I got a Ph.D. fellowship to go to
Princeton University. I made straight As in philosophy, [and] graduated
at the top of my class in philosophy. A white man—whose son was grad-
uating with me—at an awards banquet came up to me and said, "Son, you
know, you're not just going to Princeton because you're black." Now he
excluded all of the evidence and the data that suggested that my superior
academic standing was the basis, was indeed the engine that drove my ac-
ceptance into Princeton. I'm suggesting to you that if we ever stoop to per-
ceptions of minority students as the basis from which to include or ex-
clude them, we will reproduce the very pathology you're seeking to avoid.
I think that affirmative action has been a credible tool and a critical tool
to implement real diversity, and therefore real racial justice.
Moderator: Carl, Derek Bok, the former president of Harvard, wrote that
"no applicant has a right to a certain college. Instead the school has an
obligation to choose students carefully so as to advance the purposes it
seeks to serve." Aren't the white students suing the University of Michi-
gan, essentially asserting a right to go there?
Cohen: Most certainly not. These students—I happen to know them—are not
claiming that they have a right to enter the University of Michigan.
What they're claiming very clearly is they have a right to have their cre-
dentials viewed in a race-neutral system. They have a right not to have
the color of their skin counted against them.


--- PAGE 103 ---
74 THE MICHAEL ERIC DYSON READER
Moderator: Let's bring our authence now into the debate.
Question: My question is for Professor Cohen. If you believe that race should
be eliminated as a specific preference in college admissions, do you also be-
lieve that race affected factors like legacy students, or geography even,
should also be somehow altered to reflect the race-neutral idea that you
seem to be advocating? Is that something that you would also support?
Cohen: I would support the elimination of these other preferences. But you
really have to see that they are quite a different kettle of fish from race,
because race has a role-the Constitution speaks to race in a way it
doesn't speak to legacies, it doesn't speak to athletics or to playing music.
But I happen to believe, in fact, that the legacy is a bad sort of preference,
and I think we probably ought to eliminate it. But it's not something
which is constitutionally required.
Question: In view of the fact that I feel as though we are still suffering the
consequences of the African Holocaust, which was called slavery, which
lasted for over 300 and some odd years, how is it that you could have af-
firmative action for such a short period of time and feel as though it has
solved everything? And quite often there are situations where there is not
a painless solution, where some people might be inconvenienced. But
when you look at the greater majority of the people that were inconve-
nienced strictly on race, how is it all of a sudden race should not matter?
Moderator: Carl, I think that's for you.
Cohen: No one will deny that there has been a long history of racial op-
pression in our country. The issue before the Supreme Court is the use
of race preferences for admission in universities. And even the Univer-
sity of Michigan does not argue that those preferences can compensate
for the long history of oppression. The only issue before the Court is
whether the diversity of the class can justify special preference by race.
Dyson: If you look at the rhetorical legerdemain deployed by Professor
Cohen—who continues to talk about racial preferences, not in regard to
white supremacy, or racial preferences to white men-what's interesting
[is that] he avoids your question by engaging in what they call in philos-
ophy a logical fallacy. He refuses to acknowledge the legitimacy of your
claim by suggesting that what's before the Court is only a narrow con-
sideration. That he's absolutely right about. But what's interesting is that
in the broader picture of justice in America, of course . . . the legitimacy
of talking about the African Holocaust, or the incredible discrimination
that was suffered by African-American people, is already ruled out. I too
will focus my comments upon diversity, which for me, is a compelling in-
terest. But let it be noted that the broader picture cannot be talked about,
simply because those who dominate the conversation are the very people
who have historically been responsible for putting us in the position we
are in, in the first place.


--- PAGE 104 ---
Debating Affirmative Action 75
Question: Given that one of the goals of affirmative action is supposedly to
bring disadvantaged students access to higher education, I wonder if you
both could comment on the argument that the policies wrongly focus on
race when they should actually be focusing on class, for example.
Dyson: What's amazing to me is that many Americans who have been self-
confessed conservatives, even, become Marxist when it comes to race.
All of a sudden the incredible outpouring for poor white people-I've
never seen it [before]. The incredible upsurge of, "Oh, we're concerned
about the poor." [Yet we] devastate them every day; refuse to reinforce
their communities with economic policies that can uplift them. But when
it comes to race, all of a sudden there's a historic legacy of pitting poor
whites, and working-class whites, against poor blacks and working-class
blacks. It's not either/or, it's both/and.
Cohen: Whether we should give preference on the basis of socioeconomic
disadvantage as the question asked, is an important question. Certainly
there is no constitutional objection in doing so. There is a constitutional
objection to giving preference on the basis of race.
Moderator: Carl, let me ask you this: Even if this is not the question of the
past, and the question of, let's say, slavery, cannot be an argument before
the Supreme Court, on some level, isn't that still the point? Blacks and
whites don't yet have a level playing field. Affirmative action in higher
education might not be the first or best place to close the gap. But isn't it
in some way the last chance for justice?
Cohen: In the first place, those who get advantage from preference in admis-
sion to universities are not those who have been damaged by the tradition
of history. The advantage goes to the wrong people. And those who have
been damaged never get to apply to the law school at the University of
Michigan, so that the instruments do not address the issue of injury in the
first place. And the second reason is that these programs are instituted by
universities, and universities are not competent, they have not the au-
thority, to decide who has been hurt, and who shall be remethed. I mean,
Justice Powell in the Bakke decision made it clear that you can only award
compensation after a court or a legislature has made a finding that there
has been a constitutional injury, and universities are not in a position to
do that. The University of Michigan understands all of this very well, and
therefore does not make the compensatory argument at all.
Moderator: Let me ask Michael a question also. If diversity is critical to a
college education, how much diversity is optimal? When you say di-
verse, don't you really just mean black? For example, why shouldn't a
Vietnamese-American applicant be given the same number of points as
an African-American or Latino?
Dyson: Well, first of all, I believe in a diversity of diversities. I believe in a
cosmopolitan view of complex integration. But secondly, all diversities


--- PAGE 105 ---
76 THE MICHAEL ERIC DYSON READER
are not equal. Vietnamese people, who have certainly been subject to his-
torical forces of oppression, have not in this country been slaves, seen as
three-fifths human, [and] used as chattel to reproduce the mechanisms of
capitalism, and furthermore, to underwrite the very leisure to engage in
white supremacist thinking that slavery provided.
Question: When I think of getting rid of affirmative action, it's not that col-
leges shouldn't be able to decide who they want and who they don't
want. If the college wants more black people, then they accept more
black people. They already do that. They shouldn't get an automatic
point that makes it a rule that the college has to follow. It's not up to the
college anymore.
Dyson: Sure. When we talk about points, you say automatic. It's not auto-
matic. This is something that has been historically fought over for a long
time. The University of Michigan case has used a system of granting
points along a continuum, and that's the point I'm trying to reinforce
here, that race is but one consideration. If I saw white Americans who
were equally outraged at the fact that we have a president who himself
has been the recipient of legacy, geographical distribution—with patent
mediocrity, and yet is the president of the United States-if we had the
ability to acknowledge that . . . and go equally as aggressively after that
unfair distribution of a social good like an education and an admission
slot, I would say I would be much more willing to listen to the argument
[against considering race]. Unfortunately, for many of our white brothers
and sisters, they are not equally aggressive in pursuing litigation against
those who have been treated to unfair advantages that only reproduce
their already unfair advantage.
Moderator: Carl, Michael, what do you think about economic figures [cited
by Ted Cross of the Journal of Blacks in Higher Education, who argues that
for the last forty years, the median income of black families has been 60
percent of whites, but that when blacks hold a college diploma, their in-
come is 90 percent of whites, so that college is the engine of racial equal-
ity in the country]? How would you comment, Carl, on what Ted said?
Cohen: We have a fundamental social and economic problem, of course.
And we're going to change that only when we transform the education
of minorities in the public schools. We're not going to change that by
putting a thumb on the scale, as you put it, in admission to a University
of Michigan or similar universities. That's just a Band-Aid which is not
going to do any real good at all. And, in fact, is going to create hostility
and division within the universities, and more tension for the minorities
than would otherwise be the case.
Moderator: Michael.
Dyson: Well, I think what those statistics reveal—and they have been derived
from Oliver and Shapiro's study of the difference between black wealth


--- PAGE 106 ---
Debating Affirmative Action 77
and white wealth-reinforces the perception that affirmative action is part
of a larger piece of the pie here. When black students get an education,
they're still making only 90 percent of what whites are making. What that
statistic didn't tell you is that sometimes college-educated black people still
make less than what white people who have only gone to high school and
graduated make. So what it suggests to me, however, is that equaling the
playing field by a compelling interest in diversity is not only good for di-
versity as an inherent educational good; it's also good for redressing the
historic legacy of inequality in the society at large. And if we can get two
birds with one stone like that, what an amazing thing to do.
Question: During slavery, a system of classification was begun that estab-
lished that one drop of black blood rendered one black, and so I want to
sort of explore the ambiguity of the racial categories that affirmative ac-
tion sort of enforces. And I was wondering how black or Latino one
must be to garner the benefits of affirmative action.
Cohen: It is in fact a dreadful consequence of systems of preference by race
that the public institution is placed under the burden of deciding who is
a member of the minority being preferred. And indeed, what minorities
ought to be preferred, and whether they are to be preferred in equal de-
gree. How much to each? And how many drops of blood make one a
member of this or that race? That is the ugly and disgusting quality of
divisions by race that has permeated our society lo these many genera-
tions, and that is what we must transcend. No longer attending to
whether your grandfather or your great-grandfather, or your great-great
grandfather was black or Hispanic or whatever, or Hispanic from Spain,
or Hispanic from Argentina, or Hispanic from Mexico. It's crazy to draw
distinctions of that sort in a country of this sort and allow them to weigh
in admission to universities.
Question: Paul Dickler. I teach at University of Pennsylvania and
Nashaminy High School. Professor Cohen, you seem to be opposing the
Michigan plan because you see it as a quota plan. You have indicated be-
fore that you do approve of some affirmative action plans. I'd like our
two speakers to give an example of an affirmative action plan that they
both agree with, whether it's the state of Texas plan or some other.
Cohen: Well, that's easy. There are many affirmative action plans that I have
supported from the outset. Affirmative action is concrete steps taken to
eliminate discrimination. When President Johnson and his executive
order insisted upon affirmative action for federal contracts, he insisted
that the contractors say that they will not discriminate by race, to elimi-
nate residual discrimination. So, for example, [the nation was encouraged
to begin] eliminating examinations which are inappropriately biased. Or
eliminating old boy networks, which inappropriately keep people out, or
engaging in all sorts of activities, which under the table discriminate by


--- PAGE 107 ---
78 THE MICHAEL ERIC DYSON READER
race. Such elimination is affirmative action, honorable and right. What af-
firmative action is not, is deliberately using race. Affirmative action was
originally intended to eliminate the vestigial uses of race, the remnants of
race, and that honorable spirit I supported from the outset.
Dyson: Martin Luther King Jr. said, if the nation has done something spe-
cial against the Negro for 200 some odd years, the nation must now do
something special for the Negro. And I think . . . affirmative action . . .
was to address both the vestigial remnants of racial oppression, but also
to address concrete examples of present forms of racial discrimination, to
prevent them from poisoning the pool of resources from which minori-
ties could draw now in order to represent more equality in the country.
Moderator: What do you both think about programs like in Texas and
Florida that essentially take a percentage of the top students in high
schools, and therefore try to get a balance that way?
Dyson: Well, I think that on the face of them, prima facia evidence suggests
that that's an interesting [approach]. It may be a supplement to affirmative
action programs, but not a substitute for [them]. There's a kind of re-
segregation afoot in this country, and I think what we're not addressing
here is that the re-segregation of black and brown students in poor
schools that don't have equal resources only reproduces the very thing
he's worried about—that is, students who are not competent or capable of
competing or performing in our broader educational system. So I agree
with him in this sense, that we must not simply start at the higher edu-
cational level, we must begin at K-12 to fix the system. But, again, it's a
both/and, not an either/or.
Moderator: Carl do you believe . . .
Cohen: Do I get a chance to respond to that? Good.
Moderator: I just wanted to know whether you diink those systems are fair.
Cohen: The problem with these Texas-like plans, these 10 percent plans, is
first of all, that they are based on segregated high school systems. They
only work because the schools are segregated. And if we succeed in elim-
inating the segregation of the schools, these programs won't accomplish
what they were intended to. Moreover, they only work if you have a
state system. But the worst thing about these percentage plans is that
they are fundamentally ways of trying to do what you may not lawfully
do. And if these plans have been devised to achieve a certain amount of
deliberate racial preference without calling it that, then they are indeed
constitutionally weak, and I think probably will fall.
Question: Getting back to the question of admissions, Professor Cohen, I'm
curious, you say that you think that acceptance to a university is not a
right. But at the same time you advocate a system that depends on a def-
inition of merit, which reinforces white privilege, and at the same time
disallows minority students from presenting themselves and their experi-


--- PAGE 108 ---
Debating Affirmative Action 79
ences in an honest and respectful manner. I'm curious how you can kind
of reconcile that.
Cohen: With respect sir, I don't support a system of merit that specially ben-
efits white students. I support an admission system which is race neutral.
You want to consider leadership. You want to consider character. You
want to consider attainment. You want to consider socioeconomic disad-
vantage. Maybe all of those things admissions officers may appropriately
weigh if they think it applies for their institution. What they may not
under our Constitution, and under our civil rights laws, and under the
principles of morality themselves—what they may not weigh is the color
of people's skin.
Question: I'm an Asian-American person who went to a small private liberal
arts college. I have a couple of comments to make, one to Professor
Dyson: Your comment in regards to gauging how . . . the various mi-
norities have been persecuted by the white man, I don't think is relevant
in this conversation.
Dyson: Well, let me just say very quickly, I did not say that the "white man"
had held anybody down. That's an old boogie man deployed by black
nationalists from the '60s. I'm much more sophisticated about the detec-
tion of...
Question: You made a comment about the Vietnamese-Americans not hav-
ing been persecuted enough to warrant twenty points.
Dyson: No. I said as the basis of slavery and the reproduction of American
society and privilege. I'm saying Vietnamese people weren't here shuck-
ing corn and digging and planting . . .
Question: They were violated and raped in their own land.
Dyson: No doubt about that. And I'm saying affirmative action should be
going on in their own land. What I'm suggesting here in America is that
we deal with the people who have been historically.. .
Question: You just lost me. You lost everything. You lost me.
Dyson: God bless you, and I'm saying to you . . .
Question: I'm disappointed in you.
Dyson: I'm very disappointed that you're disappointed in me. But what I'm
suggesting to you . . .
Question: You're not. You don't care about me. All you care about is you
and the black population, and that's fine, because that's what you're ar-
guing for. But I'm here to represent Asian-Americans.
Dyson: Very good, and I want you to represent Asian-Americans in their di-
versity. And there's a diversity of viewpoints among Vietnamese people,
and Asian people. When we talk about Asians, we are talking about an
enormously broad swath of people. What I'm suggesting to you is that
I'm not insensitive to Asian-American or Asian claims about restitutional
justice . . .


--- PAGE 109 ---
80 THE MICHAEL ERIC DYSON READER
Question: But you made that comment.
Dyson: Let me finish. I made a comment that said Asian people were not
here in America as slaves. Professor Cohen continues to refer to the Con-
stitution, and the basis of race as a consideration of distribution of goods.
Question: Okay ...
Dyson: Let me finish ... I said specifically Vietnamese people were not here
as slaves in this country. I'm not denying the historic legacy of oppression.
Question: They don't deserve twenty points?
Dyson: I didn't say that Asians didn't deserve twenty points. In fact, the
quota system has been used against Asians in California to keep Asian
students out of the university system because white people could not
compete against Asian students. And therefore it would have been dis-
proportionate representation. I ain't the one ranting against Asians; that
is not me. I'm suggesting to you that you're conflating issues of personal
bias and perception of oppression—which I agree with . . .
Question: Personal bias?
Dyson: The perception of personal bias.
Question: Wow.
Cohen: Is it my turn, Professor Dyson?
Moderator: Okay.
Dyson: When you can jump in it will be your turn.
Moderator: Carl.
Cohen: My turn?
Moderator: Yes.
Cohen: The argument we just heard between our black speaker and our
Asian member of the audience . . .
Dyson: Our black speaker? Our black speaker? Are you a Jewish speaker?
What are you?
Cohen: Yes, that's right. You're the one who is calling attention to that. You
are the one who said I'm a black man. Now let me finish.
Dyson: I said black man, not black speaker.
Cohen: The argument we have just heard is an example of the kinds of
quarreling over racial lines to which preference leads. Because it is in-
evitable, once preference is given to one race or to one cultural group or
to another, [the other will say]: "Well what about us? How much are we
getting? You didn't get your share." It's just that kind of spoils system
that we ought to eliminate by seeking to pay attention to those lines.
Question: Professor Cohen, if you had two absolutely equally qualified ap-
plicants, one white, one black, would you flip a coin to determine who
gets in, or would you be willing to go with the black person?
Cohen: I don't know how I would respond in that situation. But I have
served on admissions committees, sir, both for the undergraduate college
at the University of Michigan, and for the medical school, and I've never


--- PAGE 110 ---
Debating Affirmative Action 81
seen a case in which we had two absolutely equal candidates. When we
got into difficulties about who should be admitted to medical school, we
sat there and we talked about these different candidates, and we looked
at their credentials, and we finally decided, largely by consensus that it
ought to be X rather than Y. And I don't think there is ever a case in
which two people are absolutely equal.
Moderator: Michael and Carl, brief response to [director of polling for ABC
News] Gary Langer's poll [which found that Americans support or op-
pose affirmative action, depending on how they are asked: two-thirds of
Americans oppose preferential programs, whereas more than two-thirds
of Americans supported programs of assistance for minorities, with
blacks expressing considerably greater support for such programs than
whites]. Carl.
Cohen: I think it's perfectly clear that most people do not want to give pref-
erence by race or color, and I think that will come to an end. The Court
won't have it, and the people won't have it. Whenever it's been put to a
public vote, the people don't want it and they won't have it. In this coun-
try race and national origin and color are not appropriate grounds for
preference.
Dyson: It's no surprise to me that many white Americans, when told it's a
preference versus assistance, are against it when it's preference, and for it
when it's an assistance, because of the altruism of the human spirit in
America. And I think that it's no surprise that African-Americans and all
others are much more supportive of these policies than others, because
after all, they have borne the brunt of discrimination upon which rests
the necessity for affirmative action.
Moderator: Michael, if universities did more to reach out, to recruit and re-
tain black students without race-based preferences in admissions, and not
just athletes, would you be willing to let go of affirmative action?
Dyson: No, because I don't think it addresses the fundamental issue here.
... A special outreach program is itself predicated upon at least racial
sensitivity, or racial consciousness. After all, we have to remember, it's
not just test scores, it's not just grade point average-there are other in-
tangible considerations that go into the makeup of a student body, and
that determine whether or not we accept or reject a student. Ten thou-
sand white people can apply for 1,000 slots at Harvard. . . . And if
they're all smart, with relatively equal grade point averages, you have to
recognize that there will be other kinds of considerations [determining
their admission]—legacy, athletics, whether they come from North
Dakota, because we only have one student from there, and we've got ten
from Iowa. All kinds of considerations play into the distribution of that
good, and I think we have to be honest about that.
Cohen: There is a difference between race and those other considerations.


--- PAGE 111 ---
82 THE MICHAEL ERIC DYSON READER
Dyson: Absolutely, because race has been the very tool to keep people out
more than those others.
Cohen: There's a constitutional difference.
Dyson: The constitutional difference ...
Cohen: There is a legal difference.
Dyson: The legal and constitutional difference is predicated upon the his-
tory of slavery, Carl.
Question: I wanted to speak directly to the legal question that's before the
Court: Does diversity increase how we learn in our culture? And I think
Professor Cohen, you said specifically that our society is segregated. Our
society has a history of racism that you will not deny. How is that going
to be fixed? It has to be fixed by the legislature, by public policy. If peo-
ple do not integrate, if they do not speak, if white students have never
met a student of color who has been discriminated against, how will we
fix those problems?
Cohen: But the problem is that you seem to suppose that without preference
there would be simply no opportunity for whites and blacks and other
minorities to mingle. That's simply not the case. It's almost to the con-
trary because the presence of these preferential programs, I have to tell
you in honesty often creates a certain amount of tension and hostility be-
tween the groups on campus and tends to divide and isolate them. Now
I've been at the University of Michigan for a long time, and I will tell
you that race relations at the University of Michigan are not all that good
today. They were much better before preferential programs became para-
mount. And the reason for that is that people in different racial groups
tend now less to trust one another than once they did. And do not credit
one another as once they did. So it's not the case that these programs are
really helpful in advancing the objective that you and I would share.
Dyson: Let me tell you this: [It is good] when we have classes, as the class I
teach here at the University of Pennsylvania, where we have Latino,
Native American, Asian, African-American, and a whole host of other
"others" congregating together, to hash out problems of difference ... of
talking about the vicious varieties of identity politics and those edifying
ones. When we talk about issues of class and culture in society, this is one
of the last few places where such conversation can be had without the vi-
cious consequences of racial animus that goes on. The race conversation
on the streets of Brooklyn or anyplace in New York, is about a young
black man reaching for his wallet, and four white policemen shooting at
him forty times, hitting him nineteen. That's the race conversation in the
larger society. The race conversation at a university is rather much more
interesting, insightful, enlightened, heated to be sure, but we also know
that this is one of the places where we can forge the sort of national soli-
darity that we claim we want in the aftermath of 9/11.


--- PAGE 112 ---
Debating Affirmative Action 83
Cohen: We can do it better without preference. We can do all of that much
better without preference.
Dyson: White preference does need to go, I agree absolutely. [Laughter]
Question: Tukufu Zuberi, University of Pennsylvania. I teach here. I'm a
professor here. It seems to me that Professor Cohen does admit that, for
example, his own position in life has been heavily influenced by the af-
firmative action which has been attributed to white men, especially when
he was going to school. His whiteness was a factor that actually aided
him in getting into school. Yet, now he ends with a point of saying, "Let's
not consider race"—understanding that the legacy of using race has con-
tributed to the differences in race that we see today. So if both speakers
could speak to the role of history and the continued practice, both in
their lives and in the society's life, of racism?
Cohen: Yes. The history of race in our country is painful and terribly im-
portant in understanding what is going on. As constitutional scholars
have remarked again and again, the great lessons of our history, the great
lessons of the Supreme Court decisions in this matter, has been again
and again that using race as a dividing line has been the source of mis-
ery and anger and hostility. And the great steps that have been taken in
our country, in the adoption of the Fourteenth Amendment, in the adop-
tion of the Civil Rights Act of '64, and in the Brown case, was the elimi-
nation of the race line. What I am urging is that at the universities also,
we eliminate the line that divides by race, and all history teaches us that
eliminating that race will improve our society, and using that racial cate-
gorization will injure us and set back the cause of racial relations.
Dyson: The substance of race in terms of its history would suggest [by anal-
ogy] that if we've denied tall people access to a certain kind of good, and
all of a sudden we say we're going to be equal, short and tall people can
come into consideration, and yet we've produced privileges, [for exam-
ple] where buildings are made for one [height category] of people, not the
other—you're going to have to adjust the size of your building to accom-
modate the people who now can get in! [Laughter] And I'm saying that
American society has to accommodate the ways in which race has played
a significantly detrimental factor in the distribution of a good like educa-
tion. And I'm glad that Professor Cohen is willing to admit that racial
preferences should go, because again, as a white man, he has historically
been able to take advantage of the preferences afforded to white men in
this society. The reality is that those racial preferences about which Pro-
fessor Cohen has spoken have continued to accumulate around white
men in predictable fashion. We live in the United States of Amnesia. The
theme song is provided by Barbra Streisand: "What's too painful to re-
member/ we simply choose to forget." [Laughter] And we have to over-
come that.


--- PAGE 113 ---
84 THE MICHAEL ERIC DYSON READER
Cohen: We do need to eliminate preference for whites as well as for blacks.
And since you make reference to me personally, Professor Dyson, I rise
to a point of personal privilege. I served for many years as chairman of
the American Civil Liberties Union in Washtenaw County in Michigan,
and then chairman of the Michigan ACLU, and then as a member of the
National Board of the American Civil Liberties Union. And I have strug-
gled all my life to eliminate preferences for whites. I have struggled
against preferences for whites, because I have believed all my life that
preference on the basis of skin color was wrong, whether it was whites or
blacks or greens or blues. And the way to begin the transcending process
is to stop doing it now.
Dyson: [Professor Cohen's statement evokes the memory of Dr. King's ar-
gument with white liberalism.] What I'm suggesting to you is that Mar-
tin Luther King Jr. said one of his great problems was the way in which
white liberals failed to understand the incredibly difficult process by
which racism operates in American society. It's not just the formal ways
in which racial restrictions operate; it's the informal collection of beliefs
and sentiments and passions that continue to inform the citizenry, and
that continue to pollute the population, vis-a-vis race. And I think that's
the thing we haven't dealt with here.
Question: Dr. Cohen, authors who are admittedly historians, and not
philosophers, have said that every day is affirmative action for white
men. And when you look at the preferential treatments that are accepted
in this country—farm subsithes, legacies, old boy networks, and taxpayer
benefits for homeowners—these benefits disproportionately benefit white
people. So how can you take race out of the equation?
Cohen: I think your question is fair, and I want to address it frankly. Ours
is a country which is beset by racism, still. It really is. And the unfair-
ness of racism in our country is very painful to one who reflects upon it,
and one who tries, as I have tried, to combat it. But most respectfully I
urge you to see you do not overcome that, or transcend it, by finding
new ways to give preferences to other groups. You and I want the same
thing. We want to eliminate preferences for groups by virtue of their
skin color or their group. The way to do that is to cease to use cate-
gories of that kind.
Moderator: It's time for us to give our debaters a chance to share a final
remark. First, Michael Eric Dyson.
Dyson: There's a compelling interest of the nation to continue to invest in
programs that recognize racial diversity as a common good, a common
good that is apparent, a common good that is worthy of support, and a
common good that will reinforce the best virtues of American democ-
racy. We live in a nation where the distribution of social goods like em-
ployment and education continues to be driven by racial preferences for


--- PAGE 114 ---
Debating Affirmative Action 85
white majorities, who often unconsciously, and without awareness, ben-
efit from those advantages. So I suggest that the compelling interests of
the state, and especially of the higher educational institutions that we
populate, and that we support, is that we will be able to engage in rea-
soned and reasonable dialogue about difference; come to an appreciation
for the radical ethnic, racial, moral, civil, gendered, sexual orientation
differences that constitute our nation at its best; and then appreciate the
beauty and harmony that may result from that diversity. But without tak-
ing race into consideration, I'm afraid, given the history of this country,
that that will not be achieved in our institutions of higher education.
Moderator: And now a word from Carl Cohen.
Cohen: The central issue before the Supreme Court of the United States in
the Michigan admissions cases now on their desks is discrimination by
race. Discrimination by race, by skin color, and by national origin is
wrong. It's a violation of the equal protection of the laws guaranteed by
the Constitution of the United States. And race preference is also a plain
violation of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, which unambiguously forbids
racial discrimination by institutions receiving federal financial assistance.
But above all, race preference is morally wrong—always was morally
wrong. And good motives do not make it right. We Americans, I think,
reject now, and will reject forever more, every form, every form of dis-
crimination by race. And the Michigan admissions cases, Grati and Grut-
ter, give our Supreme Court the opportunity to say this now crisply and
forcefully. And I think they will.
Moderator: University of Michigan Professor Carl Cohen and University
of Pennsylvania Professor Michael Eric Dyson. Thank you both and
thanks to our authence here at the Wistar Institute.. . . And before we
say goodbye, I'd like to leave you with this closing thought from Presi-
dent Theodore Roosevelt: "Our aim is to recognize what Lincoln
pointed out: The fact that there are some respects in which men are ob-
viously not equal, but also insist that there should be an equality of self-
respect and of mutual respect, an equality of rights before the law, and at
least an approximate equality in the conditions under which each man
obtains the chance to show the stuff that is in him when compared to his
fellows." I'm Margot Adler, thanks for listening to Justice Talking.


--- PAGE 115 ---
Seven
A REPRIEVE FOR AFFIRMATIVE ACTION
On April 1, 2003,1 traveled to Washington, D.C., to join thousands of other activists
surrounding the Supreme Court to voice our support for affirmative action as the nine
justices inside heard oral arguments on the two University of Michigan cases that severely
questioned the policy s legal standing. Along with figures like Reverend Al Sharpton,
Martin Luther King III, and Reverend Jesse Jackson, I spoke that day about the
poisonous legacy of white supremacy and the multiracial quest for racial justice, a fight
whose timing was even more poignant since it took place in the centennial year of the
publication of W.E.B. Du Bois's magisterial book, The Souls of Black Folk (1903).
The Michigan cases were the fiercest challenge to affirmative action in a generation,
dating bach to 1978 s Bakke case, when the Supreme Court held by a narrow margin
that race could play a factor in choosing a diverse student body. Once again in 2003, the
Supreme Court, by a 5-4 margin, contended that race could be one of many factors in the
admissions process to select a diverse student body. The policy is barely safe for the moment.
However, the intense opposition to affirmative action suggests that its advocates must double
their efforts to educate the publk about the value of educational diversity and enlarge the
fight for racial justice, points I make in this essay fiom the Philadelphia Inquirer.
WELL, THE SUPREME COURT GOT IT HALF RIGHT. It voted 5-4 to uphold
the use of race in University of Michigan law school admissions, but rejected by
a 6-3 margin the particular plan that Michigan was using to achieve diversity in
its undergraduate admissions. But in this political climate of racial amnesia com-
pounded by hostility to progressive and enlightened views of race, the Court's
split decision in the University of Michigan cases may be a greater victory than
appears with the law school, and not as great a defeat as it seems at the under-
graduate level.
The Court was right to uphold Michigan's law school admissions process that
seeks to enroll qualified minority students in the belief that diversity is a com-
pelling educational interest. Diversity is an educationally compelling interest be-
cause it helps to destroy racial stereotypes; it erodes the ignorance upon which
bias rests; it facilitates positive interracial experiences that establish lifelong pat-
terns of such interaction; and it enriches classroom discussion and learning.
As history has amply proved, without strategic pressure and clearly expressed
goals, there is little incentive for even educational institutions to act in their best


--- PAGE 116 ---
A Reprieve for Affirmative Action 87
long-term interests when it comes to race. And since diversity is a critical means
to maintain educational health, the interests of minority students dovetail nicely
with the interests of higher education to create viable and visionary learning
environments.
If this is the case, race-conscious remethes are an indispensable means to
achieve such diversity. The advocates of the race-conscious remedy known as af-
firmative action—including the leaders of the University of Michigan—contend
that considerable leeway in the use of race is necessary to implement the goals of
racial justice. Hence, educational institutions must be free to employ a creative
mix of programs and policies that bring them-and our society-closer to racial
parity.
The opponents of affirmative action contend that such programs and policies
are unjust. This conclusion results from a faulty premise: that the enemy of racial
justice is racial consciousness, and not the wretched uses of race in the past—and
sometimes, in the present. For affirmative action's opponents, any sign of racial
consciousness is wrong, even the awareness that our racial history is fatally flawed
and stands in need of remedying through racially conscious methods.
Further, the opponents of affirmative action believe that all forms of racial con-
sciousness are created equal, confusing democratic principle with constitutional
practice. They assert that the race-conscious remethes of affirmative action grow
from the same tree as lynching and Jim Crow law and housing segregation. Surely
we possess sufficient ethical insight to carefully distinguish between racial injustice
aimed at preventing minority progress and the conscientious efforts of good citi-
zens to combat the legacy of bigotry in our educational and social institutions.
Those who contend that there is no difference between the Ku Klux Klan and the
NAACP because they both evoke black identity in their respective attempts to
shape social policy and affect political change, are dead wrong. Fortunately, if by
a slim margin, the Supreme Court rejected such arguments in siding with Michi-
gan's law school that it is a legitimate and laudable goal to assemble "a class that
is both exceptionally academically qualified and broadly diverse."
In the undergraduate case, Michigan has sustained a blow, but it is far from a
fatal one. The Supreme Court ruled that awarding minority students points in the
admissions process undercuts the Court's precedent in the Bakke case of using
race in a flexible and fair fashion, and not, in the words of Justice Sandra Day
O'Connor—the swing vote in the law school case and the author of its majority
opinion—in a way that is "nonindividualized [and] mechanical."
But two things are overlooked by the Court. First, a fixed number of points
were also given to applicants for other factors, including geography, athletics, and
alumni connections. The Michigan undergraduate affirmative action admissions
program only used race as one of several considerations. They also took into ac-
count—as do most other colleges and universities—grade point averages, standard-
ized test scores, personal essays, musical talent, and teacher recommendations.
Moreover, despite the evaluation of these criteria, the admissions process is far


--- PAGE 117 ---
88 THE MICHAEL ERIC DYSON READER
from objective. A given admissions officer may place varying emphasis on one in-
grethent over the others. Also, each candidate for admission will be subject to a
given admissions officer's subjective evaluation of the student file. While wildly
aberrant admissions decisions rooted in obviously unfair criteria are easily spot-
ted, it is more likely that subtle gradations of judgment come into play. But it is
precisely those gradations that often determine the success or failure of potential
candidates for admission to colleges and universities.
Second, it is highly ironic that the Court should restrict Michigan's use of
points for minority status on the basis that such minorities—including blacks, Lati-
nos, and Native Americans—are not viewed as individuals. We must not forget
that the very basis of racial injustice is to stigmatize minority individuals in an un-
just fashion by treating all of them, regardless of merit, talent, or achievement, in
the same, unfair manner. It is both logically and morally confused to deny the le-
gitimacy of recognizing the group status imposed on minority groups through
racial prejudice, group bias, and social stigma. The only way in the present to
counteract such prejudice, bias, and stigma is to take group identity and interests
into account as we seek remethes for racial injustice's virulent persistence. We
must not fall prey to the notion that all forms of racial consciousness are identical.
Moreover, racial injustice is not simply a relic, but a living, breathing animal.
One of the greatest hindrances to the realization of true equality for racial mi-
norities is the dangerously persistent belief that unjust racial practices—and the
equally noxious ideas and perceptions that feed them—have been completely erad-
icated. Nothing could be further from the truth. As Justice Ruth Ginsburg elo-
quently reminds us in her dissenting opinion: "We are not far distant from an
overtly discriminatory past, and the effects of centuries of law-sanctioned in-
equality remain painfully evident in our communities and schools." But this rul-
ing is no reason for advocates of affirmative action to lose heart. It is true that
Michigan's method was rejected, but its mission remains constitutionally in place:
to achieve a racially diverse student population.
While the victory in the Michigan case should further embolden affirmative ac-
tion's advocates to stand tall, its slim margin should goad us to work hard to pro-
vide constitutional guarantee to its existence, and to deepen the public's aware-
ness of the extremely useful benefits that racial diversity entails.


--- PAGE 118 ---
P A R T F O U R
M U L T I C U L T U R A L I S M
In the October 2001 issue of the Village Literary Supplement. /
argued that the most vexing moment in the literary landscape over the
last twenty years was, "hands down, the publication of Allan Bloom's
The Closing of the American Mind. // made snobbishness fash-
ionable, bigotry acceptable, and intellectual imperialism a thing to be
imitated in a slew of trailing tomes." Bloom's book was indeed the ral-
lying cry to war against a host of "enemies" of Western culture: blacks,
lovers of rock & roll, leflists, feminists, and basically whoever else didn't
uncritically co-sign the superiority of dead white men. Although it is
true that even worthy causes sometimes flail in the crosswinds oj cultural
jads, our culture is helped by robust midticulturalists who pursue their
aims without apology—in part, because the love of dead white men is
not foreign to those who want to open the canon beyond their books. It
has never been a question for multiculturaluts of whether one should
love Whitman or Wright, but rather, how the resistance to widening
our view of greatness and nobility in the culture tells on onr flawed and
biased literary custodians.


--- PAGE 119 ---
This page intentionally left blank


--- PAGE 120 ---
Eight
LEONARD JEFFRIES AND THE
STRUGGLE FOR THE BLACK MIND
At the height of the culture wars in the early 1990s, Leonard Jeffries was a lightning
rod for controversy because of a widely thed speech he gave claiming that fews and
Italians had worked collaboratively to undermine the black image in Hollywood. He also
argued that Jews had financed the slave trade. Predictably, Jeffries became anathema to
the conservative junta in higher education even as he was embraced by certain groups of
black students and activists. In this chapter, I evaluate feffries's challenge to Eurocentric
biases in public and higher education. I also critique a claim advanced by feffries and
other scholars that skin pigment melanin plays a crucial role in shaping racial behavior
among blacks and whites. This chapter, which first appeared in the now defunct and
sorely missed Emerge magazine, earned me the 1992 award for magazine writing from
the National Association of Black Journalists.
THE WHIRLWIND OF CONTROVERSY THAT surrounds the figure of Dr.
Leonard Jeffries obscures the complex problems that must figure in an under-
standing of the nerve he has struck deep in the decadent cavity of race in Amer-
ica. The outspoken chairman of the black stuthes department of the City College
of New York is the lightning rod for a gaggle of issues that embody a contempo-
rary cultural crisis: theories of biological or environmental determinism, the rise
of Afrocentric education, and claims about the African origin of civilization.
A speech Jeffries made in July 1991, in which he said Jews and Italians had col-
laborated in Hollywood to denigrate blacks and that Jews had financed the slave
trade, drew outrage from many whites who felt that such alleged bigotry and anti-
Semitism warranted disciplinary action from the college. On October 28, 1991,
the trustees effectively put Jeffries on probation as department head, although his
employment was protected by his tenured status. However, further allegations
that Jeffries had also threatened the life of a Harvard student journalist during an
interview put Jeffries in danger of being dismissed for "conduct unbecoming a
member of the staff." City College had announced that it would investigate the al-
legations, which Jeffries called "scurrilous" and part of "a media lynching."
Jeffries continues to be a popular figure among black students on campus and
certain activists in the community. What seems to draw their interest are his alleged


--- PAGE 121 ---
92 THE MICHAEL ERIC DYSON READER
statements about the role of the skin pigment melanin in shaping culture and be-
havior and his provocative use of the metaphor of sun people (who are warm, co-
operative, and community-minded) versus ice people (who are cold, territorial, and
aggressive). Few realize that the popular contemporary source of the sun people/ice
people typology is a 1978 book, The Iceman Inheritance: Prehistoric Sources of Western
Man's Racism, Sexism, and Aggression, by white Canadian author Michael Bradley.1
The melanin theory, however, has its genesis in a broad body of literature pub-
lished mosdy by independent or black presses and in highly technical stuthes in
scientific and medical journals. Black authors like psychiatrist Richard King, in his
book tided African Origin of Biological Psychiatry? Carol Barnes in his privately pub-
lished monograph Melanin, and lecturers such as Baltimore psychiatrist Patricia
Newton have stimulated interest in the role of melanin in biological, mental, and
racial development. Newton and King have also been a motivating behind-the-
scenes force in organizing a series of "Melanin Conferences," held annually since
1987 in San Francisco, New York, Washington, D.C., Dallas, and Los Angeles.
Each conference has drawn more than five hundred participants—laypeople and
community activists joining with scholars.
But the most prominent figure to introduce a consideration of the possible be-
havioral and cultural consequences of melanin to broad public discussion has been
black psychiatrist Frances Cress-Welsing. Cress-Welsing first articulated in 1970 the
Cress Theory of color confrontation and racism (white racism), which links the de-
velopment of white supremacist ideology to white fear of genetic annihilation. Her
theory maintains that "whiteness is indeed a genetic inadequacy or a relative ge-
netic deficiency state, based upon the genetic inability to produce the skin pigments
of melanin (which is responsible for all skin color). The vast majority of the
world's people are not so afflicted, which suggests that color is normal for human
beings and color absence is abnormal.... Color always 'annihilates' (phenotypi-
cally and genetically speaking) the non-color, white."3 Cress-Welsing further states
that because of their "color inferiority," whites respond with a psychological
vengeance toward people of color, developing "an uncontrollable sense of hostility
and aggression," an attitude that has "continued to manifest itself throughout the
history of mass confrontations between whites and people of color."4
Ironically, Cress-Welsing now says she believes that the recent preoccupation
with her melanin theory is a diversion from the more immediate problem facing
people of color: white supremacy. "I put the discussion of melanin on the board
in order to [describe how pigmentation] was a factor in what white supremacy
behavior was all about," she says. "If I had my way, there wouldn't be all the dis-
cussion about melanin. I would say discuss white supremacy. White supremacy
has guided the discussion to multiculturalism, diversity, to anything [but white
supremacy]."5
Indeed, white supremacy is a theme diat Cress-Welsing single-mindedly pur-
sues in her book The Isis Papers: The Keys to the Colors, a text diat has sold nearly
40,000 copies, principally through black-owned retail oudets. But despite her cur-


--- PAGE 122 ---
Leonard Jeffries and the Struggle for the Black Mind 93
rently stated interest in refocusing her message on white supremacy, she contin-
ues to develop her melanin theory, for example, by expounding on the neuro-
chemical basis of soul and evil. Moreover, since her theory links white injustice
with the inability of whites to produce melanin, her focus on white racism leads
ineluctably to a concern with melanin.
Jeffries, too, has been attempting to distance himself from possible racist impli-
cations of the melanin theory. When he appeared on Donahue last fall, his first
time on a national TV show, he said, "We do not have a theory of melanin that
says black people are superior. It's a joke. But it's been run and run and run into
the ground." Jeffries contends that melanin is subsidiary to "the larger awakening
of African peoples in terms of their real history," because there is "an African pri-
macy to human experience."
But he just as often stressed the need for comprehending the crucial function of
melanin in cultural and biological evolution. Jeffries noted that Civilization or Bar-
barism: An Authentic Anthropology, the landmark book by the late Senegalese scholar
Cheikh Anta Diop, characterizes melanin as "the phenomenon which helps us es-
tablish that there's only one human race, and that human race is African. Melanin
is that phenomenon that comes about as a result of the sun factor."
Jeffries says Diop links the development of melanin to a more involved theory
about the origins of human civilization in Africa's Nile River valley, where im-
portant distinctions in the qualities of persons and cultures would have been de-
veloped-hence his use of the reductionist sun people/ice people dichotomy to ex-
plain perceived differences in persons from the northern and southern cradles.
"The value system of the northern cradle [ice people] . . . that rough survival
value system, produces a premium on male physical strength and has produced
this warrior value system," Jeffries opined, "whereas [in] the value system of the
south [sun people] where you can look at the spiritual relationship within the
human and the cosmic family .. . you see the male and female principle in har-
mony and balance, you see nature in harmony and balance, you see the relation-
ship of the sky and the moon and the sun to human development." This amounts
to biological, ecological, and racial determinism, and can hardly be substantiated.
Although Jeffries views himself as an Afrocentrist, Molefi Kete Asante, chair-
man of Temple University's Department of African American Stuthes and often
described as the "father of the theoretical and philosophical movement of Afro-
centricity" (he is the audior of Afrocentricity, published by Africa World Press), con-
tends that Afrocentricity itself "is not a theory of biological determinism [but] es-
sentially the idea that African people must be seen as subjects of history and of
human experience, rather than objects." Asante finds the melanin theory "intrigu-
ing" but disavows it as an Afrocentric theory.
Rigid categories based on essential, unvarying characteristics melt in the face of
actual experience and human history. "Blacks are just as intellectual [as whites],
and whites in some situations are just as feeling [as blacks]," says Cornell Univer-
sity professor Martin Bernal, author of Black Athena: T'he Afroasiatic Roots of Classical


--- PAGE 123 ---
94 THE MICHAEL ERIC DYSON READER
Civilization.6 "My study of human societies and the way in which whites and
blacks behave in their societies makes me believe that you can explain these
things more satisfactorily in terms of society and social relations than you can in
terms of physiology."
Bernal, a white Briton whose recent scholarship explores the Egyptian roots of
Greek civilization, admits a personal affinity for Egypt in part because "here is an
African culture [that is] analytical and intellectual. You can have African societies of
both types, just as you can have European societies of both types." Bernal says his
study of Egypt and Greece has taught him that both were such a "mixed culture."
Egypt was one of the great civilizations of the ancient world, but so were
China, Mesopotamia in the Middle East, and other cultures in Central America.
So in attempting to overcome the bruising absence of constructive discourse about
Africa, Jeffries and his cohorts have distorted the variety and legitimacy of other
ancient civilizations through the lens of a compensatory racial and cultural hier-
archy that assigns Africa artificial and romantic superiority.
Indeed, it wasjeffries's courageous attempt to reverse the harmful effects of Eu-
rocentrism through educational reform in the New York State school system that
first brought him to national attention. Jeffries served as a consultant to the first
of two task forces charged by the New York State Commission on Education with
correcting deficiencies in the curriculum in regard to people of color. Not surpris-
ingly, Jeffries and many of the task force members concluded that the experiences,
histories, and contributions of nonwhite people were gravely underrepresented in
New York's educational curriculum. Brutal internecine battles developed, espe-
cially between Jeffries and his ideological opponents, historian Arthur Schlesinger,
Jr., and educator Diane Ravitch, but many of Jeffries's ideas were adopted in the
committee's final report, "A Curriculum of Inclusion."
Schlesinger issued his dissenting opinions in The Disuniting of America: Reflections on
a Multicultural Society.7 In it he invoked the timeworn metaphor of national unity
forged as ethnic groups melted into the American character, in contrast to what he
saw as the vicious ethnic tribalism evinced by people of Jeffries's ilk. Apparently
for Schlesinger, anyone who appeals to racial or ethnic identity as the basis of mak-
ing radical social, political, or moral claims is what may be termed an ethnosaur, a
recalcitrant ethnic loyalist who has not acknowledged the legitimacy of a superior
and more sweeping national identity. Schlesinger contends that many Afrocentrists
"not only divert attention from the real needs but exacerbate the problems."
The call by Schlesinger and others for more "objective" historical scholarship
fails to address the persistent historical patterns of racist exclusion of minority per-
spectives that are manifest in varying degrees from the elementary school to uni-
versity education. "[Schlesinger] probably really believes that he and his contem-
poraries have been writing objective history," says Bernal. "He seems to me
remarkably lacking in self-consciousness and awareness and still sees white middle-
aged men as the only people capable of rendering acceptable historical judgments."


--- PAGE 124 ---
Leonard Jeffries and the Struggle for the Black Mind 95
In this context, Afrocentric attempts to articulate credible intellectual conceptions
of the nature and shape of black racial experiences and to express profound dis-
enchantment with the silence of majoritarian histories on the suffering and
achievements of minority peoples are praiseworthy indeed. But while Jeffries's di-
atribes against Eurocentrism are sometimes accurate, his embrace of various ideas
in support of his version of Afrocentrism seems plain wrongheaded. Jeffries is pro-
moting a rigid and romantic notion of racial identity.
Ironically, Jeffries is arguing for the same sort of unanimity of vision and expe-
rience that racism has artificially imposed upon African-American life. Perhaps he
would do well to heed the words of fellow Afrocentrist Asante that "the virtue of
Afrocentrism is pluralism without hierarchy." Asante emphasizes that "Afrocen-
tricity is not about valorizing your position and degrading other people. Whites
must not be seen as above anyone; but by the same token they've got to be seen
alongside everyone."
Moreover, Jeffries's romanticization of Egyptian culture as the seat of human
civilization incorrectly views history through the idyllic lens of uncritical racial
pride and narrow nationalist goals. Such simplistic distortions overlook the con-
flicts and corruption spawned by Egyptian civilization and repeat the fantastic
egocentrism and therapeutic fables of Eurocentric history at its worst. "Eurocen-
tric history as taught in schools and universities has had a very large ego-
boosting, if not therapeutic, purpose for whites," acknowledges Bernal. "It's in a
way normal for the idea that blacks should have some confidence building in their
pedagogy." But he cautions against an uncritical celebration of racial and cultural
roots. "I think there should be research history as well, and that will sometimes
reveal facts that you don't like."
As mature African-American scholars, teachers, students, and citizens, we must
embrace the rich and varied racial past that has contributed to our making. We
must also acknowledge the profound degree to which we have alternately enjoyed
and endured a terrible but sometimes fruitful symbiosis with European American
culture how we have helped shape many of its cultural gifts to the world, even
against its will; and how those expressions emerged in the crucible and turmoil of
our uniquely African American experience.


--- PAGE 125 ---
Nin
SHAKESPEARE AND SMOKEY ROBINSON
REVISITING THE CULTURE WARS
"This is one of my favorite essays. I first delivered it as a keynote address at a symposium on
language and identity held at the Mark Twain House in 199 4, featuring Frank Rich,
Christopher Hitchens, Jeff Greenfield, and Gloria Naylor. In this essay (an excerpted
version appeared on the backpage of the New York Times Book Review) I embrace
the vital intellectual and cultural traditions of African American and European American
life. At the same time, I nod to the vibrant popular cultures from which I learned a great
deal while appreciating the classics of literary culture. I see no essential contradiction in
embracing the poetry of Hughes and Tennyson, the novels of Morrison and Hemingway, the
essays of Baldwin and Ozick, the drama of Wilson and O'Neitt, the criticism of Gates and
Gass—or,for that matter, the insights of the Harvard Classics or hip-hop culture. "They all
help deepen one's awareness of what it means to be human and intellectually engaged with
the questions of truth, beauty, goodness, evil, suffering, life, and death.
I CAN HARDLY THINK OF A SUBJECT MORE strained by confusion and bit-
terness than the relation of race to identity. Our anguish about this matter is at
least three centuries older than the current turmoil stamped in the culture wars.
American views on race and identity have wearily tracked our Faustian bargain
with slavery, an accommodation of moral principle to material gain that has col-
ored national history ever since.
The paradox of our situation is that Americans are continually fatigued and
consumed by race. We sense, indeed fear, that its unavoidable presence is the
truest key to our national identity. Yet we are as easily prone to deny that race has
any but the most trivial affect on human affairs, and that it has little to do with
personal achievement or failure. Therefore, the people whose lives have been
shaped by the malicious meanings of race—to be sure, there are ennobling ones as
well—must now endure the irony of its alleged disappearance in silence.
If they speak of the continued effect of racial bigotry, for instance, they are
accused of exploiting unfairly their status as victims. If they talk of the injury
inflicted by coded speech that avows neutrality even as it reinforces bias, they
are called supporters of political correctness. If they appeal to black, or Latino,
or Native American heritage as a source of security in the face of hostility or
neglect, they are said to practice the distorting politics of identity. And if they


--- PAGE 126 ---
Shakespeare and Smokey Robinson 97
argue that Emerson be joined by, say Baldwin, in getting a fix on the pedigree
of American literary invention—if they insist that the canon jams, occasionally
backfires when stuffed with powerful material poorly placed—they are maligned
for trading in a dangerous multicultural currency.
All of this makes clear that language is crucial to understanding, perhaps solv-
ing, though at other times even intensifying, the quandaries of identity that vex
most blacks. Speaking and writing are not merely the record of our quest to con-
quer illiteracy or ignorance (they are not the same thing). Neither are they only
meant to hedge against the probability of being forgotten in the future by mark-
ing our stay with eloquent parts of speech that add up to immortality. Language
simply, supremely, reminds us that we exist at all.
Whether this is positive or negative, an uplifting or degrading experience, de-
pends largely on how language—plus the politics it reflects and the power it ex-
tends—is used on our behalf or set against us. This is especially true for blacks.
Early in American life the furious entanglements of ideology and commerce
caused disputes about black folk to follow a viciously circular logic; slaves de-
prived of the mechanics of literacy for fear of their use in seeking liberation were
judged inhuman and unintelligent because they could neither read nor write.
Even those blacks who managed to show rhetorical or literary mastery were
viewed as exceptional or hopelessly mediocre. However unfair, language became
the most important battlefield upon which black identity was fought. This is no
less true today.
The most important concerns of black life are intertwined in the politics of
language—from the canon to gangsta rap, from the debate about welfare reform
to the fracas about family values, from the roots of urban violence to the place
of black religion. In my view, a happy though unintended effect of the culture
wars is that they force Americans to see that from the beginning our language
has been indebted to political transaction.
It is not just now that ideological intimidation has allegedly ruined the prospect
of objective judgment, or that its advocates have crashed the party and lowered
the American standard of artistic achievement. Our literary traditions and rhetor-
ical cultures eloquently testify to the influence of class upon taste, and reveal how
power shapes the reception of art.
Black culture lives and thes by language. It thrives or slumps as its varied vi-
sions, and the means elected to pursue them, are carefully illumined or deliber-
ately distorted. The threats, of course, are not entirely from the outside. The bur-
den of complexity that rests at the heart of cultures across the black diaspora is
often avoided in narrow visions of racial identity within black life. Its earnest pro-
ponents evoke the same old vocabulary of authenticity and cry of purity in their
defense. But such moves echo as a hollow chant when voiced in league with the
resounding complexity of identities expressed in the literature and music, the
preaching and art of black culture.
Likewise, prolonged concentration on a fictitious, romantic black cultural pu-
rity obscures the virtues of complex black identity. An edifying impurity infuses


--- PAGE 127 ---
98 THE MICHAEL ERIC DYSON READER
black experiments with self-understanding and fires the urge to embrace and dis-
card selves shaped in the liberty of radical improvisation. Fiction and jazz, for in-
stance, urge us to savor the outer limits of our imagination as the sacred space of
cultural identity. When advocates of particular versions of Afrocentrism and
black nationalism claim a common uniqueness for black life, they deny the reper-
toire of difference that characterizes African cultures.
Such conflicts teach us to spell black culture and language in the plural, signi-
fying the diversity that continually expands the circumference of black identities.
If this is true for black culture, it is even more the case with American culture.
The two are intimately joined, forged into a sometimes reluctant symbiosis that
mocks the rigid lines of language and identity that set them apart. American cul-
ture is inconceivable without African-American life.
Can we imagine the high art of fusing religious rhetoric with secular complaint
without Martin Luther King Jr. and Malcolm X? Their craft lifted freedom and
democracy from their internment in ink and unleashed them as vital motives to
social action. Can we think of contemporary American fiction, and its fiercely
wrought negotiations with the cataclysmic forces of modernity, without the mag-
isterial art of Morrison, Naylor, Wideman, and Walker?
Can we imagine the will to spontaneity, and what anthropologist Melville Her-
skovits termed the "deification of Accidence," that threads through American
music without the artistry of Armstrong, Coltrane, and Ellington? And can we
think intelligently about the American essay, that venerable form of address that
splits the difference between opinion and art with felicitous abandon, without the
elegiac anger of Baldwin and the knowing sophistication of Ellison?
These few examples point up the resolute dismissiveness that mark knee-jerk
responses to multiculturalism at its best. Opponents to the opening of the Ameri-
can mind would have us believe that multiculturalism is the graffiti of inferior
black art scrawled against the pure white walls of the American canon. This claim
reveals how black cultural purists have nothing on the defenders of an equally
mythic American literary tradition.
Among other influences, the American voice carries a British accent, even as it
rallies to sublime expression the coarser popular elements of the times it both in-
habits and transcends. It must be remembered that Moby-Dick, claimed by critics
to be a work of Shakespearean magnitude by a writer of Shakespearean talent,
gained such stature because Melville hitched the bard's cosmic grandeur to the
motifs and genres of mid-nineteenth-century popular literature. Imagine Heming-
way doing a number on Jacqueline Susann, or Doctorow remaking Sidney Shel-
don. The hybrid textures of the American grain are the most powerful argument
for relinquishing beliefs in American orthodoxies and for celebrating the edifying
impurity behind democratic experiments with culture and identity.
In this strict sense, multiculturalism doesn't argue for a future state of affairs to
come into being. It simply seeks to bring to light the unacknowledged history of
the trading back and forth along racial, and by extension, gender, class, and sex-


--- PAGE 128 ---
Shakespeare and Smokey Robinson 99
ual lines. Multiculturalism is a request by minorities for this nation to come out of
the closet, to own up to its rich and creolized practice in every corner of Ameri-
can life. In such an environment, it makes sense to ask, as Shelly Fisher Fishkin's
poignant book about Twain's character does, "Was Huck Black?"
In a broader sense, though, multiculturalism cannot proceed painlessly. It must
topple conventions precisely because they are erected on myths that exclude tra-
ditions and distort histories. The struggle over language and identity—over which
work is legitimate and which is not, and over who gets to decide—is unmistakably
a struggle of power. Plus, all the naysaying and hem-hawing that goes on around
debates about multiculturalism neglect the manner in which African-American
artists have often investigated both sides of the hyphen.
Ellison owed the habit of a critical style of reading, and the title of his first book
of essays, to T. S. Eliot. Baldwin's essays draw equally from the gospel sensibili-
ties and moral trajectory of the black sermon and the elegant expression of the
King James Bible. And so on.
The fear of radical anti-multiculturalists that a democratized canon will trash
Western tradition is mostly unfounded. At their best, multiculturalists expose the
shifting contours of literary taste and the changing ways in which literacy is
judged. (For instance, Homer could neither read nor write, but he is hardly
frowned upon in our culture.) Multiculturalists also embrace the superior
achievements of talented, towering figures. Such an operation bears little resem-
blance to hyperventilated protests that an ethic of racial compensation guides the
selection of worthy work, and that its bad consequences will, in the words of
Harold Bloom, "ruin the canon." I think of my own early education as an illus-
tration of the possibility of black and white books together shaping a course of
wide learning.
In the fifth grade I experienced a profound introduction to the life and litera-
ture of black people. Mrs. James was my teacher, a full-cheeked, honey brown
skinned woman whose commitment to her students was remarkable. Mrs.
James's sole mission was to bathe her students in the vast ocean of black intellec-
tual and cultural life. She taught us to drink in the poetry of Paul Laurence Dun-
bar and Langston Hughes. In fact, I won my first contest of any sort when I re-
ceived a prized blue ribbon for reciting Dunbar's "Little Brown Baby." I still get
pleasure from reading Dunbar's vernacular vision:
Little brown baby wifspa 'klin' eyes,
Who s pappy s darlin' an' who spappy s chile?
Who is it all de day nevah once tires
Fu' to be cross, er once loses dat smile?
Whad did you get dem teef? My, you s a scamp!
Whah did dat dimple come f' om in yo' chin?
Pappy do' know you-1 b 'lieves you's a tramp;
Mammy, dis hyeah s some ol' straggler got in!


--- PAGE 129 ---
100 THE MICHAEL ERIC DYSON READER
Mrs. James also taught us to read Margaret Walker Alexander. I can still remem-
ber the thrill of listening to a chorus of fifth-grade black girls reciting, first in turn
and then in unison, the verses to Alexander's "For My People."
For the cramped bewildered years we went to school to learn to know the rea-
sons why and the answers to and the people who and the places where and the
days when, in memory of the bitter hours when we discovered we were black
and poor and small and different and nobody cared and nobody wondered and
nobody understood.
The girls' rhetorical staccatos and crescendos, their clear articulation and emo-
tional expressiveness, were taught and encouraged by Mrs. James.
Mrs. James also opened to us the lore and legend of the black West long before
it became stylish to do so. We read about the exploits of black cowboys like Dead-
wood Dick and Bill Pickett. We stuthed about great inventors like Jan Matzeliger,
Garrett Morgan, and Granville T. Woods. The artists and inventors we learned
about became for us more than mere names, more than dusty figures entombed in
historical memory. Mrs. James helped bring the people we stuthed off the page and
into our lives. She instructed us to paint their pictures, and to try our own hands
at writing poetry and sharpening our own rhetorical skills. Mrs. James instilled in
her students a pride of heritage and history that remains with me to this day.
Before it became popular, Mrs. James accented the multicultural nature of
American culture by emphasizing the contributions of black folk who loved ex-
cellence and who passionately and intelligently celebrated the genius of black cul-
ture. She told us of the debates between W.E.B. Du Bois and Booker T. Wash-
ington, and made us understand the crucial differences in their philosophical
approaches to educating black people. There was never a hint that we could skate
through school without studying hard. There was never a suggestion that the
artistic and intellectual work we investigated was not open to criticism and inter-
pretation. There was never even a whisper that the work we were doing was
second-rate. There was no talk of easing standards or lowering our sights.
On the contrary, Mrs. James taught us that to really be black we would have to
uphold the empowering intellectual and artistic traditions that we were being
taught to understand and explore. Mrs. James was extraordinarily demanding,
and insisted that our oral and written work aspire to a consistently high level of
expression. And neither did she reproduce some of the old class biases that
shaped black curricula around "high culture." She taught us the importance of
Roland Hayes and Bessie Smith. She taught us to appreciate Marian Anderson
and Mahalia Jackson. She encouraged us to revel in Paul Robeson and Louis
Armstrong.
This last element of Mrs. James's pedagogy was particularly important since so
many of her students lived in Detroit's inner city. She provided us a means of ap-
preciating the popular culture that shaped our lives, as well as extending the quest


--- PAGE 130 ---
Shakespeare and Smokey Robinson 101
for literacy by more traditional means. Thus, we never viewed The Temptations
or Smokey Robinson as the raw antithesis to cultured life. We were taught to be-
lieve that the same musical genius that animated Scott Joplin lighted as well on
Stevie Wonder. We saw no essential division between "I Know Why the Caged
Bird Sings" and "I Can't Get Next to You." Thus the postmodern came crashing
in on me before I gained sight of it in Derrida and Foucault.
But Mrs. James's approach to teaching her students about black folk did not go
over well with many of her black colleagues. Still bound to a radically tradition-
alist conception of elementary school curricula, many of Mrs. James's colleagues
blasted her for wasting our time in learning ideas we could never apply, in grasp-
ing realities that would never give us skills to get good jobs. (This was still the late
1960s, and the full impact of the civil rights revolution had not yet trickled down
to the classrooms, nor the psyches, of many black teachers.) But Mrs. James's out-
standing example of intellectual industry and imagination has shaped my ap-
proach to education to this day.
Another event in my adolescence also shaped my quest for knowledge. I can
vividly remember receiving a gift of 'The Harvard Classics by a generous neighbor,
Mrs. Bennett, when I was in my early teens. Her husband, a staunch Republican
(a fact which, despite my own politics, cautions against my wholesale reproach of
the right), had recently died, and while first inclined to donate his collection to a
local library, Mrs. Bennett gave them instead to a poor black boy who couldn't
otherwise afford to own them. I was certainly the only boy on my block, and un-
doubtedly in my entire ghetto neighborhood, who simultaneously devoured Mo-
town's music and Dana's Two Years Before the Mast.
I can barely describe my joy in owning Charles Eliot's monumental assembly
of the "world's great literature" as I waded, and often, drowned, in the knowledge
it offered. I memorized Tennyson's immortal closing lines from "Ulysses:"
Tho' much is taken, much abides; and tho'
We are not now that strength which in old days
Moved earth and heave, that which we are, we are;
One equal temper of heroic hearts,
Made weak by time and fate, but strong in will
To strive, to seek, to find, and not to yield.
I cherished as well the sad beauty of Thomas Gray's poem "Elegy (Written in a
Country Churchyard)," reading into one of its stanzas the expression of unreal-
ized promise for black children in my native Detroit:
Full many a gem of purest ray serene
"The dark unfathom'd caves of ocean bear;
Full many a flower is born to blush unseen,
And waste its sweetness on the desert air.


--- PAGE 131 ---
102 THE MICHAEL ERIC DYSON READER
I pored over Benjamin Franklin's Autobiography and exulted in Marcus Aurelius; I
drank in Milton's prose and followed Bunyan's Pilgrim's Progress. I read John Stuart
Mill's political philosophy and read endiusiastically Garlyle's essays (in part, I con-
fess, because his quote, "No lie can live forever" had become branded on my brain
from repeated listening to Martin Luther Kingjr.'s recorded speeches). I read Lin-
coln, Hobbes, and Plutarch; the metaphysical poets; and Elizabethan drama. (This
last indulgence led a reviewer of my first book to chide me for resorting to Victo-
rian phrases-which in his view was patently inauthentic-to describe a painful in-
cident of racism in my life; I was tempted to write him and explain the origin of
my faulty adaptation, but, alas, I concluded that "that way lies tears.")
The Harvard Classics whetted my appetite for more learning, and I was delighted
to discover that it opened an exciting world to me, a world beyond the buzz of
bullets and the whiplash of urban violence. One day, however, that learning led
me right to the den of danger. Inspired by reading the English translation of
Sartre's autobiography Les mots (The Words), I rushed to the corner store to buy a
cigar, diinking that its exotic odor would provide a whiff of the Parisian cafe life
where the aging master had hammered out his existential creed on the Left Bank.
My fourteen-year-old mind was reeling with anticipation as I approached the
counter to confidently ask for a stogie. Just then, I felt a jolt in my back; it was the
barrel of a sawed-off shotgun, and its owner ordered me and the other customers
to find the floor as he and his partners robbed the store. Luckily, we survived the
six guns brandished that day to take our money. Long before Marx and Gramsci
would remind me, I understood that consciousness is shaped by the material
realm, that learning takes place in a world of trouble.
I was later thrilled to know that the new pastor of my church, Frederick Samp-
son, a Shakespearean figure if there ever was one, shared my love of learning. An
erudite man trained to speak the King's English to the Queen's taste, he would,
at a moment's notice, embellish his sermons and conversation with long stretches
of Shakespeare or Wordswordi. Even at funerals, as he led the procession out of
the church, he would recite Longfellow;
Life is real! Life is earnest!
And the grave is not its goal;
Dust thou art, to dust returnest,
Was not spoken of the soul. . .
Let us, then, be up and doing,
With a heart for any fate;
Still achieving, still pursuing
Learn to labor and to wait.
But like Mrs. James, Dr. Sampson read widely in black letters. Time and again,
his eloquent pulpit art indexed the joys and frustrations of black and religious
identity. He ranged between unlikely sources to make his points. He called on


--- PAGE 132 ---
Shakespeare and Smokey Robinson 103
Bertrand Russell ("the center of me is a wild curious pain .. . [the search for God]
is like passionate love for a ghost") and W.E.B. Du Bois:
It is a peculiar sensation, this double-consciousness, this sense of always look-
ing at one's self through the eyes of others, of measuring one's soul by the tape
of a world that looks on in amused contempt and pity. One ever feels his
twoness—an American, a Negro; two souls, two thoughts, two unreconciled striv-
ings; two warring ideals in one dark body, whose dogged strength alone keeps it
from being torn asunder.
Mrs. James, Dr. Sampson, and my early habits of reading are to me models of
how the American canon can be made broad and deep enough to accommodate
the complex meanings of American identity. To embrace Shakespeare, we need
not malign Du Bois. To explore black identity, we need not forsake the learning
of the majority culture. And even if Dostoyevsky never appears among the pyg-
mies, great culture may nonetheless be produced in unexpected spots.
The difficulties of gaining clarity about cultural and racial identity are only in-
creased with the introduction of theory into the mix, a move bitterly debated
among black intellectuals. The application of theory to black culture has pro-
voked resistance from the right and left alike, mimicking patterns of response to
theory in larger literate culture. Now what is meant by theory is literary theory,
not a theory of progressive politics, say, or a theory of quantum mechanics,
though both have come under attack for sharply different reasons.
The notion of theory itself, however, is not suspect. How could it be? Even its
opponents have theories about the problems with theory. Some Marxists and
feminists have theories about why deconstructionists need to be more realistically
grounded in the world and politically engaged. Defenders of the Great Books
have ideas about why theorists romp in pedantry and obfuscation, their jargon a
sign of poor writing, or worse yet, muddled thinking. African-Americanists have
theories of why black intellectuals should spurn European theories and stick to
more traditional ways of criticizing books and culture. In their opposition to the-
ory, at least, usual opponents find full agreement. With some adjustments, I think
theory may help to explain black culture. We must have at least two skills to
make it a go.
The first skill is translation. What's said meaningfully in one place must often be
restated to make sense in another setting. Among initiates, subtleties of theory
will be transparent, while those outside the theoretical loop will inevitably miss
out. But if theory is to serve or undermine traditions of interpreting books and
culture, the moral of the story (even if the point is that there isn't one) must at
crucial points become clear. Admittedly, that is sometimes communicated by writ-
ers whose politics of expression lash out at simple, given meaning. In order to be
successful, though, such an act should not be hindered by sloppy execution. As
with all writing, there are good and bad ways to do theory.


--- PAGE 133 ---
104 THE MICHAEL ERIC DYSON READER
The second skill is baptism. I know the phrase evokes volatile responses because
of its religious association, but then I've got a theory or two about that. For Ly-
otard, Derrida, and Foucault to be useful to me, they can't be dragged whole-hog
into black intellectual debates without getting dipped in the waters of African-
American culture. Strategies of play, notions of "difference," and ideas about the
relation of knowledge to power can illumine aspects of black culture when applied
judiciously.
But theory must be reborn in the particular cultural forms that shape its use; it
must reflect the cultural figures fixed in its gaze. Jazz and science fiction, hip-hop
culture and collagist painting, and broad intellectual imagination—embodied in
folk like Betty Carter and Octavia Butler, Snoop Doggy Dogg and Romare Bear-
den, C. L. R.James and Zora Neale Hurston-all have something to gain from,
and to give to, theory. Bertrand Russell believed that the goal of education is to
help us resist the seductions of eloquence. At its best—in translation and baptized—
theory can do just that.
The controversies surrounding hip-hop bring us full circle in grappling with how
race, language, and identity are joined, and how their contradictory meanings
sometimes collide. Because of its extraordinary visibility, indeed, vilification in the
larger society-and because of the strong veto it has aroused in many black quar-
ters as well-rap perfectly symbolizes the failure of neat, pure analysis to illumine
the complex workings of black culture. The debates about hip-hop culture strike
the deepest nerves in black culture-how we name ourselves; how the white world
views us; how we shape images and identities that are tied to commerce and ex-
ploitation; how black culture preserves itself while continually evolving; and fi-
nally, and perhaps, most important, how survival is linked to the way words are
used for and against us. Like the black culture that produces it, rap is bodi a new
thing, and the same ol' same ol'. That is the crux of black culture's gift and burden.
As debates about the canon continue, and as currents of suspicion about the
wisdom of multiculturalism endlessly swirl, the example of black culture's con-
stant evolution and relentless self-re-creation is heartening. At its best, African
American culture provides an empowering model of education that combines
the impetus to broad learning and experimentation with new forms of cultural
expression. The ongoing controversies generated by identity politics, hip-hop
culture, and racial politics, and the insurgence of a host of other minority voices,
insures that African-American intellectual and cultural life remains an important
resource in addressing not only marginal traditions, but in reconceiving and ex-
panding the very framework of American literature and democracy.


--- PAGE 134 ---
P A R T F I V E
W H I T E N E S S S T U D I E S
Over the last decade, the recognition that white folk make up a racial
group, much like black and red and brown folk, has spurred some pow-
erful, progressive scholarship. Writers on whiteness have examined the
very notion of what makes someone white, as well as how that identity is
used to justify an alarming variety of destructive practices. Some of the
best insight has come form folk who have been the victinns of whiteness as
it has metastasized across the globe. I hope that as the scholarship on
whiteness grows, it will provide even greater inspiration to the nation to
turn away from the road of white supremacy and to follow the path of
racialjustice.


--- PAGE 135 ---
This page intentionally left blank


--- PAGE 136 ---
Ten
THE LABOR OF WHITENESS, THE WHITENESS
OF LABOR, AND THE PERILS OF WHITEWISHING
On October 3-4, 1996, at Columbia, University, a historic gathering of labor activists
and academics convened under the theme, The Fight for America 's Future: A Teach-in
with the Labor Movement. The two-day meeting included labor leaders like AFL-CIO
president John Sweeney, philosopher Richard Rorty, and feminist Betty Friedan. I was
privileged to speak on a panel entitled The Wages of Race: Unions and Racial Justice,
moderated by University of Pennsylvania historian Thomas Sugrue and featuring legal
theorist Derrick Bell, labor historian and whiteness stuthes pioneer David Roediger, and
activist Mae Ngai of the Asian Pacific American Labor Alliance of the AFL-CIO. The
teach-in also highlighted thinkers with profound disagreements. For instance, there was
also a panel on Culture, Identity, and Class Politics that featured, along with UNITE'S
Jo-Ann Mort, a vigorous exchange between NYU professors Robin D.G. Kelley, a
prominent historian,, and Todd Gitlin, a noted cultural critic. My paper actually addresses
a critical issue taken up by Kelky and Gitlin: the Junction of identity politics in the labor
movement, and in progressive circles more broadly. Too many critiques of identity politics
take minority communities to task for undermining ajictional national and ideological
unity while reinforcing the invisibility of white identities, thus exempting them from close
scrutiny. This chapter, which appeared in Audacious Democracy, a collection of
presentations from the teach-in, briefly provides a historical framework to the debate over
identity politics in the labor community.
BITTER CONFLICTS OVER THE POLITICS OF IDENTITY are at the heart of
contemporary debates about the labor movement, the political left, and the Amer-
ican academy. Such debates are often burdened by a truncated historical perspec-
tive that overlooks crucial features of the story of how identity politics, and the al-
leged special interests upon which such politics is said to rest, have come to
dominate our intellectual and cultural landscape. This essay, then, has a modest
ambition: to provide a small corrective to such stories by emphasizing how white-
ness—which has reflexively, if unconsciously, been denned in universal terms—is
composed of particular identities. These particular white identities have, until re-
cently, been spared the sort of aggressive criticism that minority identities routinely
receive. I will also argue that some critics of identity politics ignore these facts, and


--- PAGE 137 ---
108 THE MICHAEL ERIC DYSON READER
this ignorance smoothes the path for false accusations against blacks, women, and
other minorities as the source of strife and disunity in the labor movement. Finally,
I will suggest that, based on the uses of whiteness in the labor movement, the pol-
itics of identity was a problem long before the fuller participation of blacks and
other minorities. Indeed, identity politics is most vicious when it is invisible, when
it is simply part of the given, when it is what we take for granted.
One of the unforeseen, and certainly unintended, consequences of recent dis-
cussions of race is that we have come to question the identities, ideologies, and in-
stitutional expressions of whiteness.1 For most of our national history, the term
race has meant black. The collapse of the meanings of blackness into the term
race has led to a myriad of intellectual blind spots, not only in the narrow con-
ceptualization of black identity, but in the severe lack of attention paid to how
whiteness serves as a source of racial identity. The result of this is a cruel irony:
whiteness, the most dominant and visible of American racial identities, has been
rendered intellectually invisible, an ideological black hole that negates its self-
identification as one among many other racial identities. In the absence of view-
ing themselves as having a race, many whites latched onto citizenship as a vital
means of self-definition. Whites were individuals and Americans; blacks, Latinos,
Native Americans, and other minorities were collectively defined as members of
racial and ethnic subgroups. Whiteness had a doubly negative effect: it denied its
racial roots while denying racial minorities their American identities.
Prior to conceiving of whiteness as a social construct—as a historically mediated
cultural value that challenges the biological basis of white identity—most blacks
and whites viewed whiteness as a relatively fixed identity. For blacks, the mean-
ing of whiteness was singularly oppressive. The varied expressions of whiteness
were viewed as the elaboration of a single plot: to contain, control, and, at times,
to destroy black identity. For whites, their racial identities were never as con-
cretely evoked or sharply defined as when the meanings of blackness spilled be-
yond their assigned limitations to challenge white authority. In part, whiteness
was called into existence by blackness; a particular variety of whiteness was mar-
shaled as a defensive strategy against black transgression of sanctified racial bor-
ders. At the least, whiteness was tied to blackness, its hegemonic meanings sym-
bolically linked to a culture it sought to dominate. As a result, blackness helped
expose the dominant meanings of whiteness and helped reveal the meaning of
whiteness as domination.
To be sure, whiteness as domination had many faces, though the body of belief
they fronted shared profound similarities. White supremacist ideology united
poor whites in the hoods of the Ku Klux Klan and sophisticated scholars in robes
in the halls of academe. Still, if domination was the hub of the meaning of white-
ness, there were many spokes radiating from its center. First, there was whiteness as
the positive universal versus blackness as the negative particular. On this view, the invisi-
bility of whiteness preserved both its epistemic and ethical value as the embodi-
ment of norms against which blackness was measured. White styles of speech, be-


--- PAGE 138 ---
The Labor of Whiteness and the Whiteness of Labor 109
havior, belief, and the like were defined as universal standards of human achieve-
ment; their origins in particular ethnic communities were successfully masked.
Through this meaning of whiteness, whites were able to criticize blacks for their
failure to be human, not explicidy for their failure to be white, although in prin-
ciple the two were indistinguishable.
Then there was whiteness as ethnic cohesion and instrument of nation making. This
meaning of whiteness consolidated the fragmented cultures of white European
ethnics and gave social utility to the ethnic solidarity that the myth of whiteness
provided. The genius of unarticulated, invisible whiteness is that it was able to im-
pose its particularist perspective as normative. Thus, the resistance of blacks, Lati-
nos, and Native Americans to absorption into the white mainstream was viewed
by whites as viciously nationalistic, while white racial nationalism managed to re-
main virtuously opaque.
Next, there was whiteness as proxy for an absent blackness it helped to limit and distort.
The accent in this mode of whiteness is on its power to represent the ideals, in-
terests, and especially the images of a blackness it has frozen through stereotype,
hearsay, and conspiracy. In important ways, this use of whiteness parallels Renato
Rosaldo's description of imperialist nostalgia, where a colonial power destroys a
culture, only to lament its demise with colonialism's victims.2 In the present case,
whiteness claims the authority to represent what it has ruined. The exemplars of
this function of whiteness voice, instead of nostalgia, a presumptive right to speak
for a minority it has silenced. Thus, there is a coercive representation by white-
ness of the blackness it has contained. Needless to say, coercive representation
often presents images that are feeble, distorted, or the idealizations of domesti-
cated, colonized views of black life.
Finally, there was whiteness as thefabe victim of black power. This mode of whiteness
is the ultimate strategy of preserving power by protesting its usurpation by the
real victim. The process was driven as much by the psychic need of whites for
unifying inclusion as it was by a need to find a force to combat the exaggerated
threat of black power. Thus, whites were able to make themselves appear less
powerful than they were by overstating the threat posed by blacks. D. W. Grif-
fith's film Birth of a Nation exaggerated black male threats to white womanhood to
justify the lynching of black men and to increase membership in white hate
groups like the White Knights of Columbus. And in our own day, widely voiced
complaints by "angry white males" about unfair minority access to social goods
like education and employment often misrepresent the actual degree of minority
success in these areas.
These strategies of dominant whiteness, as well as the orthodox views of race on
which they are premised, held sway until the recent rise of constructivist views of
race. One fallout from such constructivist views—challenging the racial stereotyp-
ing of minorities by dominant communities, as well as criticizing the romantic rep-
resentations of minorities within their own communities—has been the wide de-
nunciation of identity politics. It is not, I believe, coincidental that identity politics,


--- PAGE 139 ---
110 THE MICHAEL ERIC DYSON READER
and its alleged ideological cousins, political correctness and multiculturalism, has
come under attack precisely at the moment that racial, sexual, and gender minori-
ties have gained more prominence in our culture.
Although I favor forceful criticism of vicious varieties of identity politics—the
sort where one's particular social identity is made a fetish, where one's group iden-
tification becomes an emblem of fascist insularity-the rush to indiscriminately
renounce group solidarity without fully investigating the historical contexts, ideo-
logical justifications, and intellectual reasons for identity politics is irresponsible
and destructive. If the labor movement, the left, the academy, and communities of
color are to enjoy a renewed alliance, such investigations are crucial.
Still, taking history into account is no guarantee that the outcome will be just,
or that it will profit the sort of balanced perspective for which I have called. Many
critics have launched sharp attacks on identity politics as, among other things, the
source of sin and suffering within the academy, the left, and the labor movement.3
Many critics argue that the left-including civil rights groups, feminists, gays and
lesbians, and elements of the labor movement-has, through its self-destructive
identity politics, undermined the possibility of progressive consensus and com-
munity. The Hobbesian war of all against all—pitting minority groups against the
majority, blacks against whites, gays against straights, and the handicapped
against the able-bothed—results in each group talking (or, more likely, hollering)
past the other, leading to a destructive politics of purity. Many critics suggest that
the energy squandered on identity politics is nothing less than an American
tragedy, because it negates a history of left universalism even as it supports a bit-
ter battle over select identities. On this view, the larger tragedy is that the right,
long identified with privileged interests, increases its appeal by claiming to defend
the common good.
Like these critics, I am certainly worried about the plague of the politics of
identity when it is unleashed without concern for the common good.4 I, too,
lament the petty infighting and shameless competition for victim status among
various groups. Still, such analyses inadequately explain how we got into the
mess of identity politics to begin with. Such critics of identity politics fail to grap-
ple with the historic meanings and functions of whiteness, especially the harsh
stigma that whiteness brings to those identities and social ideals which fall outside
its realm. Moreover, they do not account for the narrow definition of universality
and commonality on which such a project of left solidarity often hinges. To para-
phrase Alasdair Maclntyre, "Whose universality and which commonality?"
But if such critics' efforts at explicating our national malaise fall short, Michael
Tomasky's similar story falls far shorter.5 In trying to figure out where the left has
gone wrong, Tomasky is even more unrelenting in assailing the lefts "identity pol-
itics, and how those [intellectual] underpinnings fit and don't fit the notions about
a civil society that most Americans can support." According to Tomasky, "the left
has completely lost touch with the regular needs of regular Americans." He con-
tends that the left "is best described as tribal, and we're engaged in what essen-


--- PAGE 140 ---
The Labor of Whiteness and the Whiteness of Labor 111
tially has been reduced to a battle of interest-group tribalism." Further, Tomasky
claims that "solidarity based on race or ethnicity or any other such category al-
ways produces war, factionalism, fundamentalism." He concludes that "particu-
larist, interest-group politics—politics where we don't show potential allies how
they benefit from being on our side—is a sure loser." Tomasky warns that "will
never do the left any good, for example, to remonstrate against angry white men."
Tomasky says that this "is not to say angry white men don't exist. But what's the
use in carrying on about them?"
Tomasky is certainly right to criticize the left for its failure to show possible fel-
low travelers how they might be helped by tossing in with our project. And he's
within reason to decry the destructive tribalism of the left. But he fails to com-
prehend that creating a civil society that has the support of most Americans can-
not be the goal of any plausible left in America. The role of a marginalized but
morally energized American left is to occupy an ethical register that counters in-
justice, especially when such injustice passes for common sense. The welfare de-
bate is only the most recent example of how the left should gird its loins to defend
those who are unjustly stigmatized against the advocates of universal values and
common sense. But nowhere is Tomasky's fatal lack of balanced historical judg-
ment seen more clearly than in his dismissal of the political and social effect of
"angry white men." Tomasky fails to understand that such anger often grows
from the historical amnesia encouraged by the ideology of white supremacy and
by the politics of neoliberal race avoidance as well.
Tomasky, and other critics of his ilk, are, to varying degrees, victims of what I
term whitewishing. In my theory, whitewishing is the interpretation of social history
through an explanatory framework in which truth functions as an ideological pro-
jection of whiteness in the form of a universal identity. Whitewishing draws
equally from Freud and Feuerbach: it is the fulfillment of a fantasy of whiteness
as neutral and objective, the projection of a faith in whiteness as its own warrant
against the error of anti-universalism because it denies its own particularity.
Whitewishing is bathed, paradoxically enough, in a nostalgia for the future: too
sophisticated simply to lament a past now gone (and in some ways that never
was), it chides the present from an eschatological whiteness, the safest vantage
point from which to preserve and promote its own "identityless" identity.
Tomasky's and other critics' whitewishing permits them to play down and, at
times, erase three crucial facts when it comes to the labor movement. First, iden-
tity politics has always been at the heart of the labor movement, both to deny
black workers, for instance, their rightful place in unions and as wage earners in
the workplace, and to consolidate the class, racial, and gender interests of work-
ing elites against the masses of workers. The identity politics now allegedly rip-
ping apart the labor movement—as well as Balkanizing the academy and the left
in general-is a response to a predecessor politics of identity that was played out
without being identified as such because of its power to rebuff challenges
brought by racial, ethnic, and gender minorities. Even white proletarians enjoyed


--- PAGE 141 ---
112 THE MICHAEL ERIC DYSON READER
their secondhand brands of universalism. This shows how the move to decry
"special interests"—that is, blacks, Latinos, Asian Americans—within the labor
movement denies a fundamental fact: all interests are special if they're yours.
Second, as the work of David Roediger has shown,6 race and class were inte-
grally related in shaping the (white) working class in America. The class interests
of white workers were based on their developing a sense of whiteness to help al-
leviate their inferior social status: they derived benefits from not being black. This
simple fact is a reminder that, from the very beginning in the labor movement
and in working-class organizations, race played a significant role in determining
the distribution of social and economic goods. Such a fact flies in the face of ar-
guments that the labor movement must reclaim its identity by retreating from
identity politics to focus once again on class.
Finally, many debates about labor and identity politics are ahistorical in an-
other way: they presume a functional equivalency between the experiences of all
workers who are presently making claims about the weight certain features of
identity should carry in a consideration of getting work, keeping work, and job
advancement. The real history of racial and gender discrimination in the labor
movement, and in the job sector, means that the affirmative action claims of
blacks, Latinos, Asian Americans, Native Americans, and women are not special-
interest pleadings, but a recognition of their just due in arenas diat were segre-
gated by race and gender. To think and behave as if these differences are equal to
the forms of disadvantage that white workers face is to engage in another form of
whitewishing.
The only way beyond vicious identity politics is to go through it. As with race,
we can get beyond the nefarious meanings of racism only by taking race into ac-
count. We cannot pretend in the labor movement that significant barriers have not
been erected to prevent coalition and cooperation between minorities and the
mainstream. Many of those barriers remain. Only when we engage in honest con-
versation, accompanied by constructive changes in our social practices, will we be
able to forge connections between labor, the left, the academy, and communities of
color that have the ability to empower and transform each partner in the struggle.


--- PAGE 142 ---
Eleven
GIVING WHITENESS A BLACK EYE
"This interview, conducted by gifted DePaul University educational scholar Ronald E.
Chennault when he was a graduate student at Pern State, is my most in-depth exploration
of white identities, institutions, and ideologies. It situates the rise of whiteness stuthes in
America while exploring the philosophical and theoretical underpinnings of white racial
practices. The white scholars and activists associated with whiteness stuthes—especially
David Roediger, Mob Segrest, Theodore Allen, and Peggy Mdntosh—are among the most
courageous American intellectuals who seek to challenge the unquestioned superiority that
an investment in whiteness breeds. While I may have disagreements with some whiteness
stuthes thinkers at points, they are minor, strategic differences. Whiteness stuthes present a
unique opportunity for our nation to rethink the meanings of whiteness, and to resist easy
reliance on the destructive implications of whiteness.
Let me start by just talking a little bit about what other authors have done.
Generally, they have tried to describe what they understand whiteness to be
or what the content of whiteness is, identified some of the forms that white-
ness takes in the multiple locations in which it manifests itself, and at-
tempted either to redefine what whiteness should be or to spell out ways to
combat the oppressiveness that is a part of whiteness, thus trying to rescue
the productive content of whiteness. Based on that synopsis of the work of
the others, why don't we start, if it's okay with you, with what you perceive
whiteness to be or what you understand whiteness to mean.
I think when we talk about whiteness in the context of race in America, we have
to talk about whiteness as identity, whiteness as ideology, and whiteness as institution.
These three elements are complex and impure; they bleed into one another. Still,
as categories of analysis they can help us get a handle on the intensely variegated
manifestations of whiteness.
In speaking of whiteness as identity, I am referring to the self-understanding, so-
cial practices, and group beliefs that articulate whiteness in relationship to Ameri-
can race, especially in this case, to blackness. I think whiteness bears a particularly
symbiotic relationship to redness and blackness; in one sense, whiteness is called
into existence as a response to the presence of redness and blackness. Only when
red and black bothes—from colonial conquest and slavery on to the present—have


--- PAGE 143 ---
114 THE MICHAEL ERIC DYSON READER
existed on American terrain has whiteness been constituted as an idea and an
identity-based reality. White people's sense of themselves as being white is contin-
gent on a negation of a corollary redness and blackness, and, for my present pur-
poses, the assertion of that blackness as the basis of a competing racial identity.
White people who understand themselves through narratives of race often do
so in response to the presence of African "others" on American terrain. As a re-
sult, I think that white identities have been developed unconsciously and hence,
for the most part, invisibly, within the structures of domination in American soci-
ety. For the most part, whiteness has been an invisible identity within American
society, anal only recently—with the deconstruction and demythologization of
race in attacks on biologistic conceptions of racial identity—has whiteness been
constituted as a trisected terrain of contestation: over ethnicity, over ethnocen-
trism, and over the way groups manufacture and reproduce racial identity
through individual self-understanding. I think whiteness in that sense has only re-
cently been called into existence as a result of questions about the social con-
struction of race, the social reconstruction of biology, and, in general, how we
have come to talk about race in more complex terms.
When I talk about whiteness as ideology, I'm referring to the systematic repro-
duction of conceptions of whiteness as domination. Whiteness as domination has
been the most powerful, sustaining myth of American culture since its inception.
In other words, the ideological contamination of American democracy by struc-
tures of white domination is indivisible from the invention of America. Another
way of saying this is that the invention of America and the invention of whiteness
are ideologically intertwined because the construction of narratives of domination
are indissolubly linked to the expansion of the colonial empire: America as the
new colony. America found its roots in response to an intraradal struggle with Eu-
rope over the power of representation (i.e., how citizens should be granted official
voice and vote in the polls) and the representation of power (i.e., how cultural in-
stitutions like churches and schools should no longer be exclusively regulated by
the state). The United States was brought into existence as a result of an in-
traethnic war between white, Anglo-Saxon Protestants and American colonists
who rejected their political deference to Europe and defended their burgeoning
sense of nationhood and personal identity.
In that sense, there is a fissure in whiteness that is not articulated as such be-
cause it happens within the borders of ethnic similarity. This civil war of white
ethnicity generated the fissuring of the state at the behest of procreative energies
of emancipation. But that emancipation, at least in terms of its leaders' self-
understanding, was not ethnically or racially constituted; it was viewed as the in-
eluctable conclusion to a fatal disagreement over issues of primary political im-
portance, like freedom, justice, and equality.
At the same time, ironically enough, the expansion of American culture, espe-
cially the American state, was fostered primarily through the labor of black slaves
and, to a lesser degree, the exploitation of white indentured servants and the op-


--- PAGE 144 ---
Giving Whiteness a Black Eye 115
pression of white females. From the very beginning of our nation's existence, the
discursive defense and political logic of American democracy has spawned white
dominance as the foundational myth of American society—a myth whose ideo-
logical strength was made all the more powerful because it was rendered invisible.
After all, its defenders didn't have to be conscious of how white dominance and
later white supremacy shaped their world views, since there was little to challenge
their beliefs. Their ideas defined the intellectual and cultural status quo. In that
sense, the white race—its cultural habits, political practices, religious beliefs, and
intellectual affinities—was socially constructed as the foundation of American
democracy.
In terms of the genealogy of American nationality, whiteness and democracy
were coextensive because they were mutually reinforcing ideologies that under-
girded the state. When we look at the Constitution and the Declaration of Inde-
pendence, the implicit meanings of white domination were encoded in state dis-
course. State discourse was articulated in the intellectual architecture of the
Constitution and the Declaration of Independence; it was also written into the
laws of the land that eroded the social stability of African-American people, first
as slaves and then as subjugated victims of the state through debt peonage, share-
cropping, Jim Crow law, the assault on the welfare state, and so on.
Also written into the laws of the land was the explicit articulation of black racial
inferiority and the implicit assumption of white racial superiority. These two poles
were reproduced ideologically to justify white supremacy; the mutually reinforc-
ing structures of state-sponsored racial domination and the ideological expression
of white racial superiority solidified the power of white people, white perspectives,
and white practices. As a result, whiteness in its various expressions was made to
appear normative and natural, while other racial identities and ideologies were
viewed as deviant and unnatural.
The final component of my triad is the institutional expression of whiteness.
The institutions I have in mind—from the home to the school, from the govern-
ment to the church-compose the intellectual and ideological tablet on which has
been inscribed the meanings of American destiny. Let's focus on one example of
how whiteness has been institutionally expressed: the church. First, "manifest
destiny" found an institutional articulation in the church, even though our coun-
try's founders ingeniously disestablished state-sponsored religion and thereby en-
couraged radical heterogeneity within American religion. While ostensibly free
from state rule, religious communities were not impervious to secular beliefs; the
theological discourse of many faiths actively enunciated the ideology of white
domination.
Not only did manifest destiny bleed through the theological articulations of the
churches, but the belief in blackness as an innately inferior identity galvanized the
missionary activities of most religious communities as they sought to contain and
redeem the black slave's transgressive body; many believed blacks didn't have a
soul. With the overlay of theological verity added to embellish the ideology of


--- PAGE 145 ---
116 THE MICHAEL ERIC DYSON READER
white supremacy, black identity became the ontological template for the repro-
duction of discourses of racial primitivism and savagery. The black body became
a contested landscape on which the torturous intersections of theology and ideol-
ogy were traced: it was at once the salvific focus of the white missionizing project
and the foremost example of what unchecked transgression could lead to.
These elements of whiteness-identity, ideology, and institution-are articulated
and reinforced over space and time. They substantiate the argument that whites
don't understand themselves in abstraction from the cultural institutions and the
critical mythologies that accrete around whiteness. What we've witnessed over the
last decade is a crisis in the myth of whiteness; that is, it has been exposed as a vis-
ible and specific identity, not something that is invisible and universal. Whiteness
has been "outed," and as a consequence of its outing, it has to contend with its own
genealogy as one race among other races. We are now seeing a proliferation of
ideas, articles, books, plays, and conferences that question the meanings and signi-
fications of whiteness. As part of that process, we've got to understand what white-
ness has meant and specify what it can or should mean in the coming century.
Given this "outing" of whiteness, would it be your opinion that the concept
of whiteness will continue to be studied, that it won't be just a fleeting aca-
demic interest?
That's right. I think we can rest assured that the extraordinary interest in whiteness
won't taper off too much. First, there are masses of whites who are absorbed by the
subject, a sure index of its staying power. There are also a great number of African
Americans, Native Americans, Latinos, and Asians-as well as other subaltern, abo-
riginal, and colonized peoples—who are deeply invested in reversing the terror of
ethnography: of being the disciplined subject of an often intellectually poisonous
white anthropological scrutiny. Many minorities yearn to return the favor of inter-
rogation, if you will, though not in nearly as punishing a manner as they've re-
ceived. Many members of these groups simply seek to unveil the myths of univer-
sality and invisibility that have formed the ideological strata of white supremacy.
They also seek to reveal a fundamental strategy of white supremacy: forging
belief in the omnipotence of whiteness. This belief maintains that whiteness se-
cretes a racial epistemology whose function is akin to omnipotent narration in fic-
tion: it unifies the sprawling plot of white civilization; it articulates the hidden
logic of mysterious white behavior; it codifies the linguistic currency through
which the dramatis personae of white cultures detail their intellectual idiosyncrasies
and emotional yearnings; and it projects an edifying white racial denouement to
the apocalyptic conflict between whiteness and nonwhiteness. One consequence
of an investment in the omnipotence of whiteness, and in the unitary racial senti-
ment that it enforces, is that many minorities have been ontologically estranged
from what might be termed the Dasein of American race—the racial order of being
that defines national and, more fundamentally, human identity.


--- PAGE 146 ---
Giving Whiteness a Black Eye 117
The great irony of American race—within the discursive frame of whiteness as
an invisible entity—is that the condition for racial survival is racial concealment, a
state of affairs that produces a surreal racelessness that stigmatizes all nonwhite
identities. Thus racial and ethnic minorities face a triple challenge: they must
overcome the history and ongoing forces of oppression; they must eradicate the
demonization of racial identity-qua-identity that whiteness generates; and they
must help excavate the historical and ideological character of whiteness in the sed-
imenting fields of cultural and social practice.
Another reason I think that the examination of whiteness will not diminish
quickly is the sheer variety of white identities, behaviors, texts, and practices that
the current phase of whiteness studies has uncovered. Such variety gives the lie to
whiteness as a singular and fixed phenomenon. Whiteness must be viewed as
destabilized loci of contested meanings that depend on different articulatory pos-
sibilities to establish their identities and functions. Whiteness is now up for grabs;
it is being deeply retheorized and profoundly rearticulated. Whiteness is no
longer simply good or bad: either formulation is a reductio adabsurdum that under-
writes a rigid, essentialist view of race.
Contemporary studies of whiteness explore the complex character of white
racial identity and practice. Such studies examine whiteness in multifarious
modes: as domination and cooperation, as stability and instability, as hegemony
and subordination, and as appropriation and co-optation. By no means am I sug-
gesting that a narrow ideological binarism lies at the heart of whiteness; I simply
mean to accent the interactive, intersectional, and multilectical features of whiteness
with other racial and ethnic identities as they are elaborated in intellectual inquiry.
Even if such studies are viewed as faddish, we must remember that many sub-
stantive intellectual engagements began as trends.
One of the advantages of the subject(ed)s of whiteness now objecting it (constitut-
ing it as a legitimate object of discursive interrogation and thereby objecting to the
power of whiteness to iterate domination by remaining amorphous and invisible)
is that we demystify the mechanisms by which whiteness has reproduced its foun-
dational myths. We also get a better sense of how whiteness has helped construct
blackness, and how whiteness has helped to construct Latino/a, Native American,
and Asian identities as well.
We must recognize that current studies of whiteness—especially the ground-
breaking writings of white scholars such as David Roediger, Theodore Allen, Noel
Ignatiev, and others—are building on the often unacknowledged tradition of black
critical reflection on the ways and means of whiteness. To be sure, whiteness stud-
ies in its present modes—in terms of the scopes of interrogation, disciplinary
methodologies, paradigms of knowledge, theoretical tools of analysis, historical
conjunctions, and material supports that make this an ideal intellectual climate for
scrutinizing white identities—unquestionably marks a significant scholarly, perhaps
even disciplinary, departure in cultural studies of race and ethnicity. But such stud-
ies would be impossible, or at least highly unlikely, without the pioneering work of


--- PAGE 147 ---
118 THE MICHAEL ERIC DYSON READER
figures like W.E.B. Du Bois, Langston Hughes, Zora Neale Hurston, Fannie Lou
Hamer, and on and on.
To be fair, a number of the "new abolitionist" writers have scrupulously ac-
knowledged their debt to this hidden black intellectual tradition. For instance,
David Roediger acknowledges that Du Bois was the first to write, in his magiste-
rial tome Black Reconstruction, about the "psychic wages of whiteness," arguing that
even poor workers derived a psychological benefit from their whiteness. Current
whiteness stuthes will only be strengthened as they refer to those texts and figures
in black life, and in other minority communities, which have aided in the de-
mythologization of a homogeneous, uniform whiteness.
I think that the study of whiteness will be around for some time because it can
give us crucial historical insight into current cultural debates. For example, con-
tentious discussions about the labor movement and its relationship to identity pol-
itics would be greatly benefited from a vigorous examination of the role white
racial identity played in the formation of the American working class. Despite
their economic disadvantage, poor white workers appealed to the surplus value
that their whiteness allowed them to accumulate in the political economy of race.
Many poor workers invested their surplus valued whiteness into a fund of psychic
protection against the perverse, impure meanings of blackness. They drew from
their value-added whiteness to not only boost their self-esteem but to assert their
relative racial superiority by means of what may be termed a negative inculpability'.
poor whites derived pleasure and some cultural benefit by not being the nigger.
Their negative inculpability prevented poor whites from being viewed as the ul-
timate cause of harm to white civilization—despite the social problems to which
their poverty and class oppression gave rise. Their negative inculpability re-
deemed poor whites, at least partially, by granting them powers to deflect their de-
graded status through a comparative racial taxonomy: poor whites could articulate the
reasons for their superiority by naming all the ways they remained white despite
their economic hardship. Negative inculpability and comparative racial taxonomy
were racial strategies by which poor whites appropriated the dominant meanings
of whiteness, and the ideology of white domination, while obscuring the intellec-
tual and material roots of their own suffering. Of course, in objective, empirically
verifiable ways, poor whites had much more in common with poor blacks: de-
graded social status, depressed wages, and stigmatization through social narra-
tives of "the deserving poor" that blamed the poor for their plight. Such stuthes
are of utmost importance in explicating the complex intersections of race, gender,
and class in the labor movement, as well as in contemporary cultural politics.
In order to solidify the intellectual foundation of whiteness stuthes, we should
distinguish among at least three economies within whiteness: an economy of inven-
tion, an economy of representation, and an economy of articulation. Economies of invention
explore how and when the multiple meanings of whiteness are fashioned.
Economies of invention permit us to excavate, for instance, the construction of
Irish as a white ethnicity, as Noel Ignatiev has done; the making of the white


--- PAGE 148 ---
Giving Whiteness a Black Eye 119
working class, as David Roediger has done; and the invention of the white race,
about which Theodore Allen has written. Economies of invention address the
foundational myths of white ethnicity as they are articulated through metaphysi-
cal claims of white superiority. Economies of invention help us narrate the means
by which culture has colluded with ideology to reproduce whiteness. They help
us understand how cultural privilege is assigned to an accidental racial feature like
whiteness, and how such privilege gives credence to philosophical arguments
about the inherent goodness and supremacy of white identity.
Economies of invention encourage critics to stress how the project of whiteness
was constructed on a labor base of exploited indigenous Americans and enslaved
blacks. The irony is that enslaved blacks supplied material support and social
leisure to white elites as they constructed mythologies of black racial inferiority.
Economies of invention also accent a factor I discussed earlier: the symbiotic re-
lationship between white and black identities, practices, and cultures in the con-
struction of the material and cultural means to express whiteness.
In this matter, Orlando Patterson's important book Freedom is crucial in pinpoint-
ing the intellectual function of an economy of invention in interrogating the histori-
cally and socially constituted meanings of whiteness. Patterson argues that Western
conceptions of freedom—as well as the epistemic crucible of Western culture and
identity-are contingent on, indeed articulated against, the backdrop of slavery. In
other words, there's no such thing as Western freedom without a corresponding ar-
ticulation of slave identities; there's no ideal of freedom within American culture in
particular, and Western cultures in general, without the presence of the corollary
slave subject that was being constructed and contained within the narrative of free-
dom to begin with. Economies of invention help us comprehend the extraordinarily
intricate construction of white identities in the interstices of hybrid cultural contacts.
Economies of representation examine how whiteness has been manifest, how
it has been symbolized, how it has been made visible. Economies of representa-
tion highlight how whiteness has been embothed in films, visual art, and
branches of culture where public myths of white beauty and intelligence have
gained representative authority to rearticulate the superiority and especially the
desirability of whiteness. Economies of representation pay attention to the erotic
visibility of white identities and images-how whiteness has been fetishized as the
ideal expression of human identity.
Economies of representation also underscore the cultural deference paid to
white identities, images, styles, and behaviors even as they cast light on the scorn
heaped on nonwhite identities in a key strategy of defensive whiteness: demon-
izing the racialized other as a means of sanctifying the white self; devaluing non-
white racial identities through stereotypical representations as a means of idealiz-
ing white identities; and bestializing the expression of eroticism in nonwhite
cultures while eroticizing racial others for white pleasure and consumption.
Finally, economies of articulation name the specific sites of intellectual justifi-
cation for white superiority and supremacy. From selected writings of Thomas


--- PAGE 149 ---
120 THE MICHAEL ERIC DYSON READER
Jefferson, David Hume, Immanuel Kant, Abraham Lincoln, and Woodrow Wil-
son to the writings of Dinesh D'souza (a white superiorist in brown skin),
Charles Murray, Arthur Jensen, William Shockley, and Richard Herrnstein, be-
liefs in the pathologies and corruptions of black culture, and by extension in the
inherent Tightness of whiteness, have deluged our intellectual landscape.
Economies of articulation specify how, from the Enlightenment to "The Bell Curve,
ideas of black inferiority have been expressed with vicious consistency. Indeed, The
Bell Curve argues black intellectual inferiority through a tangle of pseudo-scientifically
manipulated data, leading to what Raymond Franklin has termed "statistical my-
opia." Economies of articulation isolate the philosophical architecture and rhetorical
scaffolding that joins white superiorist and supremacist thinking to social and cul-
tural practices. Economies of articulation show how myths of value neutrality, ideals
of Archimedean-like objectivity, conceptions of theory-free social science, notions of
bias-free scholarship, and beliefs in heroically blind moral explanations are deployed
to defend (and to coerce others outside of its ideological trajectory to defer to) white
civilization. These three economies help us determine, define, and demystify the
meanings of whiteness and make sure that the study of white identities, images, and
ideologies rests on a critical intellectual foundation.
What about whiteness being discussed outside the confines of academia, or
what about the influence of these scholarly discussions on others not in the
academy? How can that happen or how is that happening?
I think it certainly is happening. One flagrant example is in the cultural discourse
about "white male anger," which, according to its apologists, is the legitimate bit-
terness of white men who have been unfairly denied employment because of af-
firmative action. Debates about white male anger take place in employment are-
nas, especially fire and police stations, where white men, we are told, have had
enough. White male anger has focused on black bothes as its objet de tenor, its tar-
get of rage. In the minds of such men (and their wives and daughters), blacks oc-
cupy wrongful places of privilege in the job sector because of their color. Black
progress symbolized in affirmative action policies constitutes reverse racism for
many whites. This is an extremely volatile occasion outside of the academy where
the meanings of whiteness are being fiercely debated.
There were also discussions—sometimes explicit, more often veiled and coded—
about whiteness in the recent ordeal of the bombing of the Murrah federal build-
ing in Oklahoma City, and in its aftermath, the trial of Timothy McVeigh.
McVeigh became a flashpoint in the resurfacing of a virulent, violent whiteness
that had to be contained for at least three reasons. First, the racial violence that
McVeigh symbolized transgressed its historic ethnic limits by, in significant mea-
sure, being directed toward other whites. Second, by intentionally targeting the
American government, McVeigh's white racial violence shattered an implicit so-
cial contract where the nation absorbed (i.e., excused, overlooked, downplayed,


--- PAGE 150 ---
Giving Whiteness a Black Eye 121
underestimated, etc.) extralegal racial violence more readily if it was aimed at
black or other minority bothes. This was an ideological relic from earlier genera-
tions when extralegal white racial violence actually served the interests of the
state, or at least multitudes of its officials, by discouraging black insurrection,
protest, or rebellion against the legal strictures of white supremacy. Finally,
McVeigh's violence had to be contained, even eradicated, because his poor white
rebellion against state authority threatened to symbolically contaminate "purer,"
more elite expressions of white ethnicity.
One really gets a sense, from many of the white cultural discussions of McVeigh,
of the ethnic betrayal many whites feel in the Oklahoma City bombing. Judging by
what I've read, McVeigh viewed himself as part of a tiny outpost of pure patriotic
rebels whose patriotism was expressed in the logic of radical antipatriotism: one must
blow up the state as it is to get to the state as it should be. I think that McVeigh be-
lieved he was reviving a heroic vision of whiteness that he thought was being sup-
pressed within the institutional matrices of American democracy and "legitimate"
government. Apparently in McVeigh's thinking, the only legitimate government
was to be found in the guerrilla gangsterism of his supremacist, antistatist com-
rades. They are the real Americans, not the namby-pamby politicians and state of-
ficials who cater to racial minorities, who endanger the freedom of religious mi-
norities like the followers of the late cult leader David Koresh.
What's fascinating about McVeigh is that his actions articulate in the extreme
the logic of repressive, hegemonic whiteness that hibernates within the structures
of legitimate government: vicious attacks on welfare and its recipients; brutal at-
tacks on black progress and its advocates; heartless attacks on the crime-ridden
black ghetto; and exploitative attacks on the alleged pathologies of black culture.
All of these claims and more have been launched by governmental officials. The
cumulative effect of such attacks is the implementation of policies that punish the
black poor and stigmatize the black middle class as well as the legitimation of
crude cultural biases toward black citizens.
Figures like Timothy McVeigh become hugely discomfiting manifestations of
the hidden animus toward blackness and civility that such discourses of attack en-
courage. McVeigh is the rabid reification of the not too abstract narratives of ha-
tred that flood segments of white talk radio. Bob Grant, Rush Limbaugh, and
many other lesser lights discover a living embodiment of their vitriolic, vitupera-
tive verbiage in McVeigh. McVeigh is the monster created by the Frankensteins of
white hatred. And there's a great deal of shame in him because he's out of control
and destroying his creators. In this regard, it's crucial to remember a salient fact:
Frankenstein is not the name of the monster but the name of the monster's cre-
ator. The real terror, then, is the mechanisms of reproduction that sustain and
rearticulate ideologies of white supremacy, and that sanction the violent attack on
black and other minority identities.
Finally, debates on whiteness beyond the academy occur in the construction
of cultural conversations about "poor white trash." Interestingly enough, Bill


--- PAGE 151 ---
722 THE MICHAEL ERIC DYSON READER
Clinton figures as a key subject and subtext of such conversations. For many,
Clinton is our nation's First Bubba, our country's Trailer Trash Executive, our na-
tion's Poor White President. It tells on our bigoted cultural beliefs and social prej-
udices that Clinton—a Georgetown University alumnus, a Rhodes Scholar, an
Oxford University and Yale University Law School graduate, and a president of
the United States—could be construed in many quarters as a poor white trash,
"cracker" citizen. The study of whiteness prods us to examine the means by
which a highly intelligent man and gifted politician is transmuted into "Bubba"
for the purposes of intraethnic demonization.
Clinton, or at least his legal representatives, relied on the same prejudice that be-
fell the president in their legal battles over sexual harassment with a very different
victim in the poor white trash wars: Paula Jones. The intriguing subtext in Clin-
ton's fight against Jones's suit was not simply about the hierarchy of gender, where
a male's prerogative in defining a sexual relationship is under attack through the
discourse of sexual harassment. An even more powerful subtext is that Jones was
a "po'white trash'ho." By being so designated, Jones's claim to sexual ownership of
her body was much less prized in the popular mind-set than Clinton's ownership
of his sexual self. As a result, Jones's believability was unfairly compromised by
her degraded social and gender status. Beyond considerations of her relationship
to political forces that oppose Clinton, Jones's status reinforced the perception that
gender and class cause one to be assigned a lower niche on the totem pole of poor
white identity. And there are many, many more places where whiteness is being
discussed far beyond the boundaries of the academy in ways that scholarly stuthes
of whiteness are barely beginning to catch up to.
What do you think about President Clinton's addresses on this issue of race?
Did they serve in your mind as useful or productive means of expanding the
public discourse on whiteness and race?
I think it's important that the president of the United States help set the tone for
how discourse about race will proceed. If we have any chance of rescuing the pro-
ductive means by which race is articulated, we certainly have to have the "First
Pedagogue" in place. And Clinton in that sense became a figure of estimable sym-
bolic and even moral worth in setting a healthy tone for the debate about race.
The means that he ingeniously seized on (which has been discussed in not alto-
gether dissimilar ways in philosophical circles by Michael Oakeshott, Richard
Rorty, and others) is that of conversation. The will to converse about race is mo-
tivated by an overriding concern: How can we adjudicate competing claims about
race without tearing the essential fabric of American democracy that is embothed
in the slogan, E Pluribus Unum, "Out of many, one"? If we're already fractured at
the level of identity, and this fractured identity is reproduced through mythologies
of racial superiority and inferiority (or through narratives of whites being victim-
ized by blacks in identity politics, affirmative action, multiculturalism, or political


--- PAGE 152 ---
Giving Whiteness a Black Eye 123
correctness), how can we justly resolve disputes about relative victimization
within the larger framework of American democracy? It's a very messy business,
and one that certainly calls for the president to become a leader in these matters.
But his shouldn't be the only or even the dominant voice. Still, Clinton created
space for the conversation to take place.
It was important that Clinton open up the space of conversation about race; talk-
ing is infinitely better than shooting or stabbing or killing one another. It's better
than black men killing each other in the streets of Detroit or Chicago. It's bet-
ter than black people being beaten and killed by white policemen in New York or
Los Angeles. It's better than Latinas being victimized by the ideology and institu-
tional expressions of anti-immigrant sentiment. Conversation certainly is superior
to destroying one another and our nation.
Still, we mustn't be naive. One of the supreme difficulties of discussing race in
America is our belief in the possibility of morally equivalent views being reason-
ably articulated and justly examined. The implicit assumption of Clinton's ideol-
ogy of race conversation is debates among equals, or at least among people who
have been equally victimized in American culture. But this is a torturous belief
that obscures history and memory. We've got to unclog the arteries of collective
American political memory.
In regard to race, we are living in the United States of Amnesia. We've got to
revoke our citizenship in what Joseph Lowery terms "the 51st state, the state of
denial." That's an extraordinarily disconcerting process, partly because what is
demanded is the rejection of a key premise of liberal racial discourse: whites,
blacks, and others share a common moral conception of racial justice, an ideal
that regulates social practice and promotes the resolution of racial disputes. The
politics and history of race have not supported this belief. To shift metaphors,
what we've got to do is graft the skin of racial memory to the body of American
democracy. That demands skillful rhetorical surgery and the operation of an in-
tellectual commitment to truth over habit. In the conversation of race, we really
must be willing to discover new ideas and explore ancient emotions. We can't sim-
ply shout our prejudices louder than someone else's defense of their bigotry.
If we're going to have real progress in thinking and talking about race, we must
not reduce racial issues to black and white. Race in American culture is so much
more profound and complex than black and white, even though we know that
conflict has been a major artery through which has flowed the poisonous blood of
white supremacy and black subordination. There are other arteries of race and
ethnicity that trace through the body politic. The tricky part is acknowledging the
significant Latino, Asian, and Native American battles with whiteness that have
taken place in our nation while admitting that the major race war has involved
blacks and whites.
The political centrality and historical legitimacy of dealing with the mutual and
dominant relations of whiteness to blackness in the development of what Michael
Omi and Howard Winant call "racial formation" is simply undeniable. But such


--- PAGE 153 ---
124 THE MICHAEL ERIC DYSON READER
a view must be balanced by paving attention to other racial and ethnic conflicts,
as well as the intraracial, interethnic differences that reconstitute racial and ethnic
identity and practice. It's extremely important to get such a complex, heated, and
potentially useful dialogue started.
A nagging question, however, remains: Who gets a chance to come to the race
table to converse? Will poor people's voices be heard? What about young peo-
ple's voices? In the conversation on race, there is the danger that we merely re-
produce a liberal ideology of racial containment and mute the radical elements of
race that might really transform our conversation and practice. Such a prospect
appears inevitable if we refuse to shatter our ideological and intellectual grids in
order to hear the other. What we don't need is the crass and deceitful politics of
toleration that masks the sources of real power that conceals the roots of real in-
equality, that ignores the voices of the most hurt, and that is indifferent to the
faces of the most fractured. What we need is real conversation, the sort where hid-
den ambitions are brought to light, where masked motives are clarified to the
point of social discomfort.
Such an aim of honest, hard conversation is what the so-called opponents of po-
litical correctness should have in mind when they launch their sometimes pedantic,
always pejorative broadsides against the assertion of racial, ethnic, gender, class, and
sexual difference. Instead, their ostensible desire to push beyond received racial
truths ends up being an operation of rhetorical sleight of hand: they end up re-
asserting in new terms much older, biased beliefs. That's why I'm so skeptical about
many of the critics of so-called political correctness—they simply dress up bigotry in
socially acceptable form by calling it "anti-PC," when indeed it's the same old polit-
ical correctness: the poppycock of socially sanctioned racial disgust.
What we have to do, then, is to aim at a raucous debate where the impoliteness
of certain people must be permitted because their pain is deep and unheeded. We
must surely shatter the rituals of correctness and civility in order to hear from
those whose voices have been shut out, where the ability to even articulate pain
and rage has been delegitimized through social stigma. That's the only way we
have a chance of striking a just racial contract with our citizens. Taking all of what
I've discussed into consideration, I think the conversation on race is a step in the
right direction.
That gets us away from what Tbni Morrison refers to as the "graceful" lib-
eral practice-in the past, at least-of talking about people as if they were
raceless, which we at one time thought was the best way. But what you're
suggesting is that that doesn't work.
That's right, such a move simply doesn't work. As Du Bois said, there's no way
to deal with race without going through race; there's no way of overcoming race
without taking race into account. What we've had in our nation for too long is a
willed ignorance about race; on one reading, it's a perverse application of philoso-


--- PAGE 154 ---
Giving Whiteness a Black Eye 125
pher John Rawls's notion of the "original position" in the social contract where
we are placed behind a veil of ignorance in order to execute justice in the social
realm. When we've misapplied diis model to race, it has been quite disastrous. It's
failed primarily because we can't justly assume a statutory ignorance about race
and because the means to apply racial justice fall disproportionately into the
hands of those against whom claims of injustice have been convincingly levied.
Further, the assumption of racelessness fails to account for the contents and
identities of race that have always played a role in fashioning American views of
justice. This is why I think identity politics must be given a historicist, materialist,
and genealogical reading. Identity politics has been going on from the get-go in
American culture, indeed, in cultures the world over. Aristode and Plato and their
followers were ensconced in identity politics; Descartes and Kant and their follow-
ers merely negotiating identity politics; Foucault and Derrida and their followers
are embroiled in identity politics; and Julia Kristeva and Luce Irigaray and their
followers are unquestionably involved in identity politics, diough they, as I suspect
the others I've named, would vehemendy deny it.
That's because many of them are or were transfixed by the dream of transcen-
dental trudi, Enlightenment rationality, deconstructive practice, or semiotic analy-
sis diat, for the most part, severs questions of identity from questions of racial pol-
itics. What we must come to see is that even when we deal with intellectual or
theoretical issues, they refer to—although by no means are they reduced to or
equated widi—considerations of identity, even if such considerations are not ex-
plicitiy articulated. The disingenuous character of too many debates about iden-
tity in America is diat they deny this process.
After generating a genealogy of identity—which places our own accounts of uni-
versalism versus difference into historical context and acknowledges that identity
politics occur in a variety of intellectual and social settings—we can press forward
to an adequate and fair criticism of identity politics. As things stand, too many
critics wrongly argue that we must move beyond narrow frameworks of identity
to get to this universal identity. I have in mind the most recent writings of Todd
Gitlin and Michael Tomasky. I share some of Gitlin's and Tomasky's concerns
about the cultural dead ends of vicious identity politics that enshrine tribal pref-
erences over the common good. But right away I disagree with them about what
constitutes tribal preferences, how they can be jusdy eradicated, and what consti-
tutes successful expressions of universal identities in the social and cultural realm.
In regard to whiteness, Gitlin and Tomasky fail to acknowledge that the partic-
ular identities of white people were rendered universal by a cultural and political
process that punished blacks and other minorities for seeking to come into their
own: their own identities, their own cultural repertoires, their own linguistic and
rhetorical facilities, their own styles of survival, and so on. Until we are able to
concede this point, we won't get far in this debate about identity, about raceless-
ness, and about the proper role that race should play, bodi in the American pub-
lic sphere and in private institutions.


--- PAGE 155 ---
126 THE MICHAEL ERIC DYSON READER
Do you see any contradiction between Clinton's inviting everyone to the
table to talk about race and yet not listening to all those voices in making
policy—welfare reform, for instance—and excluding the very voices that we
need to be hearing from?
There's no question that there's a deep contradiction in Clinton's methodology.
Further, there's no question that in the past Clinton has not been above race baiting
through very subtle semantic distortions and ideological gyrations. This surfaced in
Clinton's first run for the presidency, when his crass opportunism got the best of
him as he attacked Sister Souljah for her violent racism without providing a thicker
account of the conditions that shaped her comments, something Clinton was clearly
capable of effectively pulling off. It surfaced when Clinton, during his first cam-
paign, sent coded signals to alleviate white fears by suggesting that he and Gore
would focus their policies on rescuing suburbia and middle America. It surfaced as
well when Clinton failed to justly read the complex writings of his close friend, Lani
Guinier, thereby encouraging her unjust demonization as a "quota queen." It sur-
faced with Clinton's support for a heinous crime bill that, like the welfare reform he
supported, targeted black men and women with vicious specificity. And on and on.
More important, Clinton failed to understand that if we as a nation are to have
a successful conversation about race, it must be seconded at the level of public
policy and political implementation. The conversation about race must perform a
crucial educational function as well. I think that too often Clinton caved in to the
American tendency to demonize what Malcolm X termed the "victims of democ-
racy." Clinton heartily advocated a neoliberal rearticulation of the ideology of
racial tolerance that has largely served to hurt the black and Latino poor. One of
the great problems with neoliberal race theory is that it writes the check of its loy-
alty to the black and Latino poor against the funds of conservative rhetoric and
social policy. Bill Clinton certainly has a troubled history when it comes to race,
a matter about which we must be forthright.
Clinton symbolizes, ironically enough, many white Americans who are well in-
tentioned about race but constantly make faux pas in their quest to do the right
thing. Of course, in Clinton's case, his mistakes have cost millions of blacks, Lati-
nas, Native Americans, and other minorities dearly. Clinton's political position,
his peripatetic bully pulpit, has given him the authority to amplify his intentions
as well as the contradictions of his racial beliefs. But he is as representative of the
misguided rhetoric of neoliberal race dunking as we're likely to get. The mixed
blessing of such representation is that we get a clear glimpse of just how difficult
it will be for the average white American to adequately confront the history and
continued function of white supremacy, especially as it is manifested in neoliberal
intolerance of radical black insurgence against racism. The bitter irony is that in
Clinton black folk are being hurt by friendly fire. The bitter reality is that we have
no choice but to find ways to work with him, as limiting as that may be, in the
hope of reconstructing racial destiny in American culture.


--- PAGE 156 ---
Giving Whiteness a Black Eye 127
In addition to what you've already mentioned, how do you in specific ways
talk about whiteness, such as in your writing, your public lectures, and your
classroom?
As I've lectured across the country, I've witnessed the resistance by many whites
to identify and name whiteness in its supremacist ideological mode. Many whites
believe that white supremacy is old news, which it is, but they fail to see how it's
also today's news. Many believe that pointing to it is divisive and adds to the
racial and cultural Balkanization that we're told we're living through. It's ex-
tremely difficult to break the hold such a perception has on many whites. So, one
of the strategies I try to adopt—in lectures, sermons, speeches, op-eds, articles,
book reviews, and books—is the imaginative redescription of white supremacy in
its cultural and ideological manifestations.
I also think it's important to emphasize the heterogeneity of whiteness, to stress
how the meanings of whiteness are not exhausted by discussions of domination
or supremacy. One of the good results of constructivist views of race—and in
American culture, "race" has usually signified "black"—is that whiteness is in-
creasingly viewed as a source and site of racial identities and practices. As much
as I admire and appreciate the important work of David Roediger, Noel Ignatiev,
Mab Segrest, and other new abolitionist thinkers, I think we have to proceed cau-
tiously with the project of reconstituting white identities through their abolition.
We have to pose a multipronged question: Do we want to abolish whiteness, or
do we want to destroy the negative meanings associated with white identities? I
think the latter is what we should aim for.
Of course, Roediger, Ignatiev, Segrest, Allen, and other new abolitionist writers
would concede that the whiteness they have in mind to abolish is precisely the so-
cially constructed, culturally sanctioned, ideologically legitimated value of white
supremacy that has been a scourge to our nation. In that sense, perhaps they'd
agree that we don't want to destroy white identity—because then we'd have to de-
stroy those meanings of whiteness that have been mobilized to resist supremacist
thought, or, for that matter, to abolish whiteness. Rather, we want to abolish the
lethal manifestations of white identity. The salient issue is whether we can com-
pletely and exclusively identify whiteness with destruction, negativity, and cor-
ruption. In any case, I applaud their desire to reject white skin privilege and to his-
toricize social and racial identities.
Moreover, Roediger, Allen, Ignatiev, and the new abolitionists have got an ex-
tremely useful point: whiteness has been manifest in our nation in hegemonic, de-
structive, and at times evil ways. Although many whites are loath to admit it, white-
ness in its supremacist mode, which has been its dominant mode, has polluted our
moral ecology through slavery, colonialism, imperialism, and genocide. Still, I'm un-
comfortable with the notion of destroying white folks and cultures, which, by the
way, isn't what Ignatiev and the folks around the journal Race Traitor have argued. I
do think we have a moral obligation to destroy white supremacy. We must speak


--- PAGE 157 ---
128 THE MICHAEL ERIC DYSON READER
and think about the rearticulation, reconstitution, and recasting of whiteness to ex-
pand, enhance, and embrace its more redemptive, productive features.
This is why cultural stuthes and theoretical interrogations of whiteness are cru-
cial. Besides the work of the new abolitionists—including Roediger, Allen, Ig-
natiev, Segrest, John Garvey, Alexander Saxton, and many others—we should
remember the important work of W.E.B. Du Bois, C.L.R. James, Thomas
Kochman, Eric Foner, Lerone Bennett Jr., bell hooks, Toni Morrison, George Lip-
sitz, Marilyn Frye, Vron Ware, Ruth Frankenberg, Adrienne Rich, and Peggy
Mclntosh. And much of the recent work on whiteness is indispensable in coming
to terms with its complex cultural manifestations: the brilliant books of Henry
Giroux and Tukufu Zuberi, and the important work of Fred Pfeil, Linda Powell,
Becky Thompson, Michelle Fine, John Dovidio, Lois Weis, John Hartiganjr.,
Robin D.G. Kelly, Annalee Newitz, Ron Sakolsky, James Koehnline, Jesse
Daniels, Melvin L. Oliver, Thomas M. Shapiro, Eric Lott, Michael Rogin, Upski
Wimsatt, Barbara Ching, Mike Hill, Paul Kivel, Patricia Hill Collins, Sean
Wilentz, Jennifer Hochschild, Nancy Hartsook, Michele Wallace, Jose Saldivar,
Matt Wray, Laura Kipnis, and on and on.
We should also scrutinize, for instance, white stuthes of the underclass, which
address, reflect, or extend the pathologization of the black poor. Many also reveal
how white critics make use of blackness-which is an intellectual strategy worthy
of examination—and how they construct the ghetto and articulate black identity
and moral norms against a rhetorical backdrop of implicit whiteness.
Or think of a brilliant text like Ann Douglas's Terrible Honesty: Mongrel Manhat-
tan in the 1920s. Douglas shows in her book how black and white figures were
working, playing, loving, and thinking together, how they were engaging across
the white-black divide in ways that have been relatively hidden. Douglas's book
is crucial to excavating a cultural tradition of interaction, exchange, appropria-
tion, and influence between various forms of whiteness and blackness. Such
works help us accent the stratified and complex character of whiteness while pay-
ing attention to the history of how whiteness became a socially useful, racially
valued, and culturally hybrid identity.
I'm glad you brought that up because I did want to talk about rescuing that
productive content because that's an important dimension, so that we get
away from some of the accusations of talking about whiteness hi terms of an
essentialized notion, or of oversimplifying what whiteness is, or of only ally-
ing it with domination.
That's right. The importance of the stuthes of whiteness I've discussed above is
that they uncover-indeed, recover-the contradictory, contested meanings of
whiteness from hidden histories of racial practice. If we don't speak about the pro-
ductive, transgressive, subversive, edifying meanings of whiteness, we're being in-
tellectually dishonest. If we don't narrate those stories, we're doing a great disser-


--- PAGE 158 ---
Giving Whiteness a Black Eye 129
vice to the moral trajectory that our work of historical reclamation often follows.
One of the most powerful ways of challenging and ultimately destroying the ide-
ology of white supremacy, the myth of white superiority, and the narrative of
white domination is to unearth sites of resistive memory, history, and practice.
One way to rescue the productive meanings of whiteness is to accent transgressive
whiteness: how whites cooperated widi racial "others" in the unmasking of white
skin privilege, the subversion of forms of white power, and the destabilization of
forces of white oppression.
I think that people tend to essentialize white identities because whiteness has
been a consistently malevolent force in a great number of cultures over a long
period of time. It is also true that white allies to racial emancipation have often
sacrificed blood and body in expressing a redemptive disloyalty to oppressive
meanings of whiteness. Hopefully, in a future that still appears too far away,
white disloyalty to unjust privilege and power will fuse with the liberation strug-
gles of oppressed people around the globe as we create a world where we can
lay down the burden of race.
I want to return to something you mentioned earlier: that is, some other
ways of discussing intragroup differences within whiteness, other than focus-
ing on ethnic variation, like, "I'm Irish and you're Italian," but focusing on
gender difference and class difference.
One of the benefits of, for instance, ethnographies of white cultures, practices,
and identities is that we begin to get a fuller picture of differentiated whiteness.
The fissuring and fracturing of whiteness, especially along axes of class and gen-
der, gives us greater insight into how white cultures have adapted, survived, and
struggled in conditions where their dominance was modified or muted.
It's also important to explore histories of white difference to highlight how white-
ness has not been made by whites alone. Part of what it means to be white in Amer-
ica is to be black. To paraphrase Ralph Ellison: "I don't want to know how 'white'
black folk are, I want to know how 'black' white folk are." If we completely, indis-
criminately destroy whiteness, we're also destroying what blacks and other racial
minorities contributed—sometimes covertly, sometimes symbiotically, often in hy-
brid interactions, and occasionally in extravagant fashion-to white behaviors, iden-
tities, styles, and intellectual traditions. One of the great paradoxes of race is that
whiteness is not exclusively owned or produced by whites. White is also black. As
we discover how black whiteness is, we discover how interesting and intricate white-
ness is. We discover how whites and blacks have cooperated in very shrewd ways
to produce alternative structures, rituals, and cultures to dominant whiteness.
Interrogating whiteness in the manner I've just outlined opens discursive space
for a post-appropriationist paradigm of cultural and racial exchange. Such a para-
digm accents the unbalanced power relations, racial inequality, and economic in-
justice that often mediates, say, black-white artistic exchanges, where black ideas,


--- PAGE 159 ---
130 THE MICHAEL ERIC DYSON READER
products, styles, and practices are stolen, borrowed, or appropriated without at-
tribution or reward. But it also accents the revisioning of whiteness through the
prism of black cultural practices, especially as white subjectivities are reconceived
and recast in the hues of transgressive blackness.
That's why it's important to explore racialized communitas and habitas where
whites live and commune-to understand the productive meanings of whiteness
through the reproduction and rearticulation of the productive meanings of black-
ness. In this connection, it makes sense to examine the phenomenon of the sub-
stitute nigger or the "wigger"—the white nigger, whites who have been viewed, or
view themselves, as black. What uses have they made of blackness? How has
blackness allowed them to alter dominant modes of whiteness? How have their
knowledges and cultural practices pitted ontological contents of racial identity
against strictly biological or phenotypical ones? All of these lines of inquiry are
opened up by fracturing and fissuring, by differentiating, whiteness.
In what ways has whiteness in the American context spread its tentacles
globally or had some effect at the international level, in productive or in op-
pressive ways?
Let me answer your question in two ways. First, I'll briefly address how the op-
pressive meanings of whiteness in the American context have global implications.
Then I will address black skepticism about the uses of even productive whiteness
to unmask and unmake itself.
There's no question that one of the most powerful claims-though it is often
dressed in racially essentialist terms—that certain postcolonialist, black separatists
make is that whiteness has screwed things up the world over. It's relatively easy
to supply historical verification for such a claim; after all, the oppressive meanings
of whiteness have destroyed minority hearth and home, and kith and kin, around
the globe. Wherever it has taken root, oppressive, colonizing, imperialistic white-
ness has subjugated or tyrannized native peoples, indigenous populations, and
aboriginal tribes. Along these lines, American visions of white supremacy have
exported well, inspiring, for instance, South African apartheid and modern vari-
eties of European neocolonialism.
The problem with certain criticisms of oppressive whiteness is that they are
grounded in discourses of biological determinism and genetic inheritance, turning
out to be The Bell Curve in reverse: whites are genetically incapable of humane be-
havior and sane social interaction. Other varieties of racial geneticism and bio-
logical determinism-such as that found in Frances Cress-Welsing's The his Papers,
a perennial best-seller in black communities—maintain that white supremacy
grows from whites' fear of genetic annihilation because they lack melanin, while
blacks, who possess it in abundance, are guaranteed survival. In such versions of
reductive pseudo-science, white supremacy is genetically encoded and biologically
reproduced. In light of such theories, it's understandable that antiracist critics of


--- PAGE 160 ---
Giving Whiteness a Black Eye 131
new abolitionism shudder when they hear of the need to abolish the white race,
even if it is conceded that it's a social construction the abolitionists aim to destroy.
One of the most ingenious, deceitful strategies deployed by white supremacists
is to insulate themselves from knowledge of white supremacy's evil, of its thor-
oughgoing funkiness. In this mode, a crucial function of whiteness is to blind it-
self to its worst tendencies, its most lethal consequences. And one of the ways that
dominant whiteness does this is by adopting a facade of ignorance, innocence, or
naivete in the face of claims of its destructiveness. Whether such a facade covers
the deep knowledge its advocates possess of white supremacy's ill effects is, and is
not, relevant to how racial or ethnic minorities interact with whites in general. On
one reading, such knowledge is irrelevant because even if the intent to harm does
not exist, the malevolent consequences of white supremacy are just as real.
On the other hand, such knowledge is relevant when racial or ethnic minorities
seek to forge coalitions with whites who reject the perspectives, practices, and
privileges of white supremacy. How can blacks or Latinas be sure that such a re-
jection is abiding? The immediate response, of course, is that one must judge
white allies, as one judges all people, by their actions. But this is precisely where
matters get tricky: it is sometimes the actions of even the most devoted white al-
lies that surprise, stun, shock, hurt, and disappoint blacks, Latinos, or Asians.
The claim to ignorance, innocence, or naivete by white allies in the face of offen-
sive action is the cause of no small degree of discomfort in the relations between
whites and racial minorities.
What is even more uncomfortable is when white allies make a merit badge of
their resistance to what is increasingly thought of as the hypersensitivity of racial
minorities. As a result, alleged white allies of blacks-for instance Bill Clinton-
parade their racial accomplishments as a gateway to legitimacy in black commu-
nities and as a passport to do harm. The new white abolitionists and other pro-
gressive white allies are the first to decry this variety of neoliberal racial
manipulation. A more difficult suspicion to overcome in many black communities
is the historic pressure of whiteness to make virtues of its vices—and vice versa-
even as it creates discursive space to deconstruct and demythologize its own so-
cially constructed meanings.
That may explain why some blacks are skeptical of even progressive versions
of white stuthes: it may be a sophisticated narcissism at work, another white hoax
to displace stuthes of, but especially by, The Others at the height of their popu-
larity and power with an encroaching obsession with the meanings, identities,
practices, anxieties, and subjectivities—and hence the agendas, priorities, and pref-
erences—of The Whites. On such a view, whiteness once again becomes supreme
by trumpeting its need for demystification, dismantling, or abolition. Thus the
cultural capital of otherness is bleached; to thoroughly mix metaphors, the gaze
of race is returned to sender.
We've got to keep such skepticism in mind as we attempt to unmake and re-
make whiteness. As we scan the globe where whiteness has left its mark, the most


--- PAGE 161 ---
132 THE MICHAEL ERIC DYSON READER
remarkable fact is not the willingness of whites to become disloyal to their white-
ness, but the courageous rebellion of native, colonized, or enslaved folk who
fought and, as best they could, remade the meanings of the whiteness they inher-
ited or confronted. Their stories are worthy of serious study.
Related to that, let's talk about in particular a place you just came from—
Cuba—and how you see that disguising of the "funkiness" of whiteness func-
tioning in U.S. relations with Cuba and the role that whiteness might play
in our relationship with that country.
I'll answer that in a couple of ways. First, the political measures that America has
employed against Cuba are simply obscene. It is indefensible for America to treat
a neighboring nation of beautiful people ninety miles away with such contempt
while it grants China most favored nation status. Our relations with Cuba are
hostile for one overriding reason: America has been unable to kill Castro. Like
that litde Energizer bunny, he just keeps on going. Our foreign policy with the
Soviet Union is far better, a fact that is more than a little ironic. We have thawed
the thick ice that once froze Soviet-U.S. relations, and in our post-Cold War
generosity, we've embraced the big bear we used to fear and hate, but we still
can't embrace her cubs in Cuba.
The Helms-Burton Act extends unjust American policies to their logical, impe-
rialist conclusion. The embargo we have against Cuba not only punishes that na-
tion but punishes other nations that might cooperate with Cuba. Our bullying has
cost the people of Cuba dearly: extreme poverty, severely curtailed luxuries, evap-
oration of resources, shrinking of capital, and the deprivation of essential goods
and services. In the guise of ostensibly just foreign policy, our relation with Cuba,
especially as driven by Helms, is white supremacy in its reckless, destructive mode.
America is not killing Castro; he's living well. We're hurting decent, beautiful
everyday folk who love their country and are proudly trying to extend the most
democratic features of the Revolution: universal literacy, political representation of
the poor, and government rooted in historical memory and national pride.
Finally, I think what's interesting is that most Cubans have a very different un-
derstanding of race dian we have in the United States. Many white Cubans, and
black ones as well, denied that they had a race problem. To our American eyes
and ears, to mix metaphors, that was a hard claim to swallow. The Cubans had
undeniably worked to remove vestiges of discrimination from their official quar-
ters; still, many of the members of our delegation of black Americans understood
diat the rhetorical and representational battles dial bewitch racial equity were still
being fought. It is equally undeniable that white and black Cubans have been able
to forge a Cuban national identity diat overcomes in important ways the schisms
of ethnic tribalism.
Even if it is not what we black Americans, imbued with the rhetoric of our own
racial difficulties, think is altogether just, black and white Cubans at least have the


--- PAGE 162 ---
Giving Whiteness a Black Eye 133
real possibility of negotiating a livable racial situation. It may be what Ernest
Becker termed a "vital lie": a necessary deception that preserves the social fabric
and keeps at bay the forces that destroy identity and community. The embargo
has led to what the Cubans term a "special period," the time of austerity dial has
thrown their culture into sustained crisis. In such a period, it is perfecdy reason-
able that Cubans understand race in the fashion they do to preserve the very sur-
vival of their nation. In many ways, they've done a much better job widi race
than we have under conditions of relative material prosperity.
Any dosing comments on the past, present, or future of the study of whiteness?
I have just one observation. As we look to the next century of whiteness stuthes,
the field will mature and reconstruct its genealogy by pointing b(l)ack—to diose
great figures from W.E.B. Du Bois to Zora Neale Hurston, from Langston
Hughes to Ralph Ellison, and from Nella Larsen to James Baldwin. Such a ge-
nealogy for white stuthes brings to mind something Fannie Lou Hamer said. She
argued that the mistake white folk made with black folk is that they put us behind
them, not in front of them. Had they placed us in front of them, they could have
observed and contained us.
Instead, white folk placed us behind them in what they deemed an inferior po-
sition. As a result, we were able to learn white folk—their beliefs, sentiments, con-
tradictions, cultures, styles, behaviors, virtues, and vices. Black survival depended
on black folk knowing the ways and souls of white folk. It's only fitting now that
we turn to African American, Latino, Asian, and Native American scholars, work-
ers, intellectuals, artists, and everyday folk to understand whiteness.
Interview by Ronald E. Chennault
New York, New York, 1998


--- PAGE 163 ---
This page intentionally left blank


--- PAGE 164 ---
P A R T S I X
GENDER VIEWS
In the same way that many whites have no idea that their whiteness
gives them a racial identity, many men don't realize they have a gender.
I have spent a great deal of my writing life explaring masculinity and its
edifying and harmful meanings. I have also probed the simple yet re-
markably iinassimilated view that our culture holds ancient beliefs about
how men should enjoy privileges and powers that women should not. On
that foundation rests all sorts of vicious behaviors thai have garnered the
support of social convention and legal precedent. Moreover, a great deal
of controversy has surrounded interracial relations, especially between
black men and white women, whose erotic liasions have spawned hostile
debate on all sides. It is vital to the nation's moral health to unravel
Patiarchy's seductive webs while weaving cm understanding of the intri-
cate interactions of men and women.


--- PAGE 165 ---
This page intentionally left blank


--- PAGE 166 ---
Twelve
THE PLIGHT OF BLACK MEN
This was the first article I wrote for a regular "Black America " column (that I inherited
from Cornel West) for the left-wing Z Magazine, beginning in February 1989.1 was
still a graduate student at Princeton, although I was also serving as assistant director of
Hartford Seminary's Action Plan on Poverty, working with local congregations to shepherd
resources to combat the enormous poverty in Hartford, Connecticut. In this chapter, I chart
the sufferings and struggles of black men while refusing to elevate their heartaches above
those of black women. Throughout my writing career, I have written a great deal about the
triumphs and tragethes, and the joys and sorrows, of black males: athletes and hustlers,
preachers and professors, leaders and prisoners, wise men and foolish boys. I have striven to
write about masculinity in a way that reaffirms the humanity of black men while challenging
our patriarchal pitfalls and self-destructive behavior. "This chapter embothes that aim.
ON A RECENT TRIP TO KNOXVILLE, I VISITED Harold's barbershop, where
I had my hair cut during college, and after whenever I had the chance. I had de-
veloped a friendship with Ike, a local barber who took great pride in this work. I
popped my head inside the front door, and after exchanging friendly greetings
with Harold, the owner, and noticing Ike missing, I inquired about his return. It
had been nearly two years since Ike had cut my hair, and I was hoping to receive
the careful expertise that comes from familiarity and repetition.
"Man, I'm sorry to tell you, but Ike got killed almost two years ago," Harold in-
formed me. "He and his brother, who was drunk, got into a fight, and he stabbed
Ike to death."
I was shocked, depressed, and grieved, these emotions competing in rapid-fire
fashion for the meager psychic resources I was able to muster. In a daze of retreat
from the fierce onslaught of unavoidable absurdity, I half-consciously slumped into
Harold's chair, seeking solace through his story of Ike's untimely and brutal leave-
taking. Feeling my pain, Harold filled in the details of Ike's last hours, realizing that
for me Ike's death had happened only yesterday. Harold proceeded to cut my hair
with a methodical precision that was itself a temporary and all-too-thin refuge from
the chaos of arbitrary death, a protest against the nonlinear progression of miseries
that claim the lives of too many black men. After he finished, I thanked Harold,
both of us recognizing that we would not soon forget Ike's life, or his terrible death.


--- PAGE 167 ---
138 THE MICHAEL ERIC DYSON READER
This drama of tragic demise, compressed agony, nearly impotent commisera-
tion, and social absurdity is repeated countless times, too many times, in Ameri-
can culture for black men. Ike's death forced to the surface a painful awareness
that provides the chilling sound track to most black men's lives: it is still haz-
ardous to be a human being of African descent in America.
Not surprisingly, much of the ideological legitimation for the contemporary
misery of African-Americans in general, and black men in particular, derives from
the historical legacy of slavery, which continues to assert its brutal presence in the
untold suffering of millions of everyday black folk. For instance, the pernicious
commodification of the black body during slavery was underwritten by the desire
of white slave owners to completely master black life. The desire for mastery also
fueled the severe regulation of black sexual activity, furthering the telos of south-
ern agrarian capital by reducing black men to studs and black women to ma-
chines of production. Black men and women became sexual and economic prop-
erty. Because of the arrangement of social relations, slavery was also the breeding
ground for much of the mythos of black male sexuality that survives to this day:
that black men are imagined as peripatetic phalluses with unrequited desire for
their denied object—white women.
Also crucial during slavery was the legitimation of violence toward blacks, es-
pecially black men. Rebellion in any form was severely punished, and the social
construction of black male image and identity took place under the disciplining
eye of white male dominance. Thus healthy black self-regard and self-confidence
were oudawed as punitive consequences were attached to their assertion in black
life. Although alternate forms of resistance were generated, particularly those
rooted in religious praxis, problems of self-hatred and self-abnegation persisted.
The success of the American political, economic, and social infrastructure was
predicated in large part upon a squelching of black life by white modes of cultural
domination. The psychic, political, economic, and social costs of slavery, then,
continue to be paid, but mostly by the descendants of the oppressed. The way in
which young black men continue to pay is particularly unsettling.
Black men are presently caught in a web of social relations, economic condi-
tions, and political predicaments that portray their future in rather bleak terms.1
For instance, the structural unemployment of black men has reached virtually epi-
demic proportions, with black youth unemployment double that of white youth.
Almost half of young black men have had no work experience at all. Given the
permanent shift in the U.S. economy from manufacturing and industrial jobs to
high-tech and service employment and the flight of these jobs from the cities to
the suburbs, the prospects for eroding the stubborn unemployment of black men
appear slim.2
The educational front is not much better. Young black males are dropping out
of school at alarming rates, due to a combination of severe economic difficulties,
disciplinary entanglements, and academic frustrations. Thus the low level of edu-
cational achievement by young black men exacerbates their already precarious


--- PAGE 168 ---
The Plight of Black Men 139
employment situation. Needless to say, the pool of high school graduates eligible
for college has severely shrunk, and even those who go on to college have dis-
proportionate rates of attrition.
Suicide, too, is on the rise, ranking as the third leading cause of death among
young black men. Since 1960, the number of black men who have thed from sui-
cide has tripled. The homicide rate of black men is atrocious. For black male
teenagers and young adults, homicide ranks as the leading cause of death. In 1987,
more young black men were killed within the United States in a single year than
had been killed abroad in the entire nine years of the Vietnam War. A young black
man has a one in twenty-one lifetime chance of being killed, most likely at the hands
of another black man, belying the self-destructive character of black homicide.
Even with all this, a contemporary focus on the predicament of black males is
rendered problematical and ironic for two reasons. First, what may be termed
the "Calvin Klein" character of debate about social problems—which amounts to
a "designer" social consciousness—makes it very difficult for the concerns of
black men to be taken seriously. Social concern, like other commodities, is sub-
ject to cycles of production, distribution, and consumption. With the dwindling
of crucial governmental resources to address a range of social problems, social
concern is increasingly relegated to the domain of private philanthropic and
nonprofit organizations. Furthermore, the selection of which problems merit
scarce resources is determined, in part, by such philanthropic organizations
which highlight special issues, secure the services of prominent spokespersons,
procure capital for research, and distribute the benefits of their information.
Unfortunately, Americans have rarely been able to sustain debate about press-
ing social problems over long periods of time. Even less have we been able to con-
ceive underlying structural features that bind complex social issues together. Such
conceptualization of the intricate interrelationship of social problems would facili-
tate the development of broadly formed coalitions that address a range of social
concern. As things stand, problems like poverty, racism, and sexism go in and out
of style. Black men, with the exception of star athletes and famous entertainers,
are out of style.
Second, the irony of the black male predicament is that it has reached its nadir
precisely at the point when much deserved attention has been devoted to the
achievements of black women like Alice Walker, Toni Morrison, and Terry
McMillan.
The identification and development of the womanist tradition in African-
American culture has permitted the articulation of powerful visions of black female
identity and liberation. Michele Wallace, bell hooks, Alice Walker, Audre Lorde,
and Toni Morrison have written in empowering ways about the disenabling forms
of racism and patriarchy that persist in white and black communities. They have
expressed the rich resources for identity that come from maintaining allegiances to
multiple kinship groups denned by race, gender, and sexual orientation, while also
addressing the challenges that arise in such membership.


--- PAGE 169 ---
140 THE MICHAEL ERIC DYSON READER
Thus discussions about black men should not take place in an ahistorical vac-
uum, but should be informed by sensitivity to the plight of black women. To iso-
late and examine the pernicious problems of young black men does not privilege
their perspectives or predicament. Rather, it is to acknowledge the decisively dele-
terious consequences of racism and classism diat plague black folk, particularly
young black males.
The aim of my analysis is to present enabling forms of consciousness that may
contribute to the reconstitution of the social, economic, and political relations that
continually consign the lives of black men to psychic malaise, social destruction,
and physical death. It does not encourage or dismiss the sexism of black men, nor
does it condone the patriarchal behavior that sometimes manifests itself in mi-
nority communities in the form of misdirected machismo. Above all, African-
Americans must avoid a potentially hazardous situation that plays musical chairs
with scarce resources allocated to black folk and direatens to inadvertently exac-
erbate already deteriorated relations between black men and women. The crisis
of black inner-city communities is so intense that it demands our collective re-
sources to stem the tide of violence and catastrophe that has besieged them.
I grew up as a young black male in Detroit in the 1960s and 1970s. I witnessed
firsthand the social horror that is entrenched in inner-city communities, the social
havoc wreaked from economic hardship. In my youth, Detroit had been tagged
the "murder capital of the world," and many of those murders were of black men,
many times by other black men. Night after night, the news media in Detroit
painted the ugly picture of a homicide-ridden city caught in the desperate clutches
of death, depression, and decay. I remember having recurring nightmares of
naked violence, in which Hitchcockian vertigo emerged in Daliesque perspective
to produce gun-wielding perpetrators of doom seeking to do me in.
And apart from those disturbing dreams, I was exercised by the small vignettes
of abortive violence that shattered my circle of friends and acquaintances. My
next-door neighbor, a young black man, was stabbed in the jugular vein by an ac-
quaintance and bled to death in the midst of a card game. (Of course, one of the
ugly statistics involving black-on-black crime is that many black men are killed by
those whom they know.) Another acquaintance murdered a businessman in a rob-
bery; another executed several people in a gangland-style murder.
At fourteen, I was at our corner store at the sales counter, when suddenly a jolt
in the back revealed a young black man wielding a sawed-off, double-barreled
shotgun, requesting, along with armed accomplices stationed throughout the
store, that we hit the floor. We were being robbed. At the age of eighteen I was
stopped one Saturday night at 10:30 by a young black man who ominously ma-
terialized out of nowhere, much like the .357 Magnum revolver that he revealed
to me in a robbery attempt. Terror engulfed my entire being in the fear of immi-
nent death. In desperation I hurled a protest against the asphyxiating economic
hardships that had apparently reduced him to desperation, too, and appealed to
the conscience I hoped was buried beneath the necessity that drove him to rob


--- PAGE 170 ---
The Plight of Black Men 141
me. I proclaimed, "Man, you don't look like the type of brother that would be
doin' somediing like this."
"I wouldn't be doin' this, man," he shot back, "but I got a wife and three kids,
and we ain't got nothin' to eat. And besides, last week somebody did the same
thing to me that I'm doin' to you." After convincing him that I really only had
one dollar and thirty-five cents, the young man permitted me to leave with my
life intact.
The terrain for these and so many other encounters that have shaped the lives
of black males was the ghetto. Much social research and criticism has been gen-
erated in regard to the worse-off inhabitants of the inner city, the so-called under-
class. From the progressive perspective of William Julius Wilson to the archcon-
servative musings of Charles Murray, diose who dwell in ghettos, or enclaves of
civic, psychic, and social terror, have been the object of recrudescent interest
within hallowed academic circles and governmental policy rooms.3 In most cases
they have not fared well and have borne the brunt of multifarious "blame the vic-
tim" social logics and policies.
One of the more devastating developments in inner-city communities is the
presence of drugs and the criminal activity associated with their production, mar-
keting, and consumption. Through the escalation of the use of the rocklike form
of cocaine known as "crack" and intensified related gang activity, young black
men are involved in a vicious subculture of crime. This subculture is sustained by
two potent attractions: the personal acceptance and affirmation gangs offer and
the possibility of enormous economic reward.
U.S. gang life had its genesis in the Northeast of the 1840s, particularly in the
depressed neighborhoods of Boston and New York, where young Irishmen de-
veloped gangs to sustain social solidarity and to forge a collective identity based
on common ethnic roots.4 Since then, youth of every ethnic and racial origin have
formed gangs for similar reasons, and at times have even functioned to protect
their own edinic or racial group from attack by harmful outsiders. Overall, a per-
sistent reason for joining gangs is the sense of absolute belonging and unsur-
passed social love that results from gang membership. Especially for young black
men whose life is at a low premium in America, gangs have fulfilled a primal need
to possess a sense of social cohesion through group identity. Particularly when
traditional avenues for the realization of personal growth, esteem, and self-worth,
usually gained through employment and career opportunities, have been closed,
young black men find gangs a powerful alternative.
Gangs also offer immediate material gratification through a powerful and lu-
crative underground economy. This underground economy is supported by ex-
changing drugs and services for money, or by barter. The lifestyle developed and
made possible by the sale of crack presents often irresistible economic alternatives
to young black men frustrated by their own unemployment. The death that can
result from involvement in such drug- and gang-related activity is ineffective in
prohibiting young black men from participating.


--- PAGE 171 ---
142 THE MICHAEL ERIC DYSON READER
To understand the attraction such activity holds for black men, one must re-
member the desperate economic conditions of urban black life. The problems of
poverty and joblessness have loomed large for African-American men, particu-
larly in the Rust Belt, including New York, Chicago, Philadelphia, Detroit, Cleve-
land, Indianapolis, and Baltimore. From the 1950s to the 1980s, there was severe
decline in manufacturing and in retail and wholesale trade, attended by escalating
unemployment and a decrease in labor force participation by black males, partic-
ularly during the 1970s.
During this three-decade decline of employment, however, there was not an ex-
pansion of social services or significant increase in entry-level service jobs. As
William Julius Wilson rightly argues, the urban ghettos then became more socially
isolated than at any other time. Also, with the mass exodus of black working and
middle-class families from the ghetto, the inner city's severe unemployment and job-
lessness became even more magnified. With black track from the inner city mim-
icking earlier patterns of white flight, severe class changes have negatively affected
black ghettos. Such class changes have depleted communities of service establish-
ments, local businesses, and stores that could remain profitable enough to provide
full-time employment so that persons could support families, or even to offer youths
part-time employment in order to develop crucial habits of responsibility and work.
Furthermore, ghetto residents are removed from job networks that operate in more
affluent neighborhoods. Thus, they are deprived of the informal contact with em-
ployers that results in finding decent jobs. All of these factors create a medium for
the development of criminal behavior by black men in order to survive, ranging
from fencing stolen goods to petty thievery to drug dealing. For many black fami-
lies, the illegal activity of young black men provides their only income.
Predictably, then, it is in these Rust Belt cities, and other large urban and met-
ropolitan areas, where drug and gang activity has escalated in the past decade. De-
troit, Philadelphia, and New York have had significant gang and drug activity, but
Chicago and Los Angeles have dominated of late. Especially in regard to gang-
related criminal activity such as homicides, Chicago and L.A. form a terrible one-
two punch. Chicago had forty-seven gang-related deaths in 1987, seventy-five in
1986, and sixty in 1988. L.A.'s toll stands at four hundred for 1988.
Of course, L.A.'s gang scene has generated mythic interpretation in the Dennis
Hopper film Colors. In the past decade, gang membership in L.A. has risen from
15,000 to almost 60,000 (with some city officials claiming as much as 80,000), as
gang warfare claims one life per day. The ethnic composition of the groups in-
clude Mexicans, Armenians, Samoans, and Fijians. But gang life is dominated by
South Central L.A. black gangs, populated by young black men willing to give
their lives in fearless fidelity to their group's survival. The two largest aggregates
of gangs, composed of several hundred microgangs, are the Bloods and the Crips,
distinguished by the colors of their shoelaces, T-shirts, and bandannas.
The black gangs have become particularly dangerous because of their associa-
tion with crack. The gangs control more than 150 crack houses in L.A., each of


--- PAGE 172 ---
The Plight of Black Men 143
which does over $5,000 of business per day, garnering over half a billion dollars
per year. Crack houses, which transform powdered cocaine into crystalline rock
form in order to be smoked, offer powerful material rewards to gang members.
Even young teens can earn almost $1,000 a week, often outdistancing what their
parents, if they work at all, can earn in two months.
So far, most analyses of drug gangs and the black youth who comprise their
membership have repeated old saws about the pathology of black culture and
weak family structure, without accounting for the pressing economic realities
and the need for acceptance that help explain such activity. As long as the
poverty of young black men is ignored, the disproportionate number of black
unemployed males is overlooked, and the structural features of racism and
classism are avoided, there is room for the proliferation of social explanations
that blame the victim. Such social explanations reinforce the misguided efforts of
public officials to stem the tide of illegal behavior by state repression aimed at
young blacks, such as the sweeps of L.A. neighborhoods resulting in mass arrests
of more than four thousand black men, more than at any time since the Watts re-
bellion of 1965.
Helpful remethes must promote the restoration of job training (such as Neigh-
borhood Youth Corps [NYC] and the Comprehensive Employment and Training
Act [CETA]); the development of policies that support the family, such as child
care and education programs; a full employment policy; and dropout prevention
in public schools. These are only the first steps toward the deeper structural trans-
formation necessary to improve the plight of African-American men, but they
would be vast improvements over present efforts.
Not to be forgotten, either, are forms of cultural resistance that are developed
and sustained within black life and are alternatives to the crack gangs. An exam-
ple that springs immediately to mind is rap music. Rap music provides space for
cultural resistance to the criminal-ridden ethos that pervades segments of many
underclass communities. Rap was initially a form of musical play that directed the
creative urges of its producers into placing often humorous lyrics over the music
of well-known black hits.
As it evolved, however, rap became a more critical and conscientious forum for
visiting social criticism upon various forms of social injustice, especially racial and
class oppression. For instance, Grandmaster Flash and the Furious Five pioneered
the social awakening of rap with two rap records, "The Message" and "New York,
New York." These rap records combined poignant descriptions of social misery
and trenchant criticism of social problems as they remarked upon the condition of
black urban America. They compared the postmodern city of crime, deception,
political corruption, economic hardship, and cultural malaise to a "jungle." These
young savants portrayed a chilling vision of life that placed them beyond the pa-
rameters of traditional African-American cultural resources of support: religious
faith, communal strength, and familial roots. Thus, they were creating their own
aesthetic of survival, generated from the raw material of their immediate reality,


--- PAGE 173 ---
144 THE MICHAEL ERIC DYSON READER
the black ghetto. This began the vocation of the rap artist, in part, as urban griot
dispensing social and cultural critique.
Although rap music has been saddled with a reputation for creating violent out-
bursts by young blacks, especially at rap concerts, most of rap's participants have
repeatedly spurned violence and all forms of criminal behavior as useless alterna-
tives for black youth. Indeed rap has provided an alternative to patterns of iden-
tity formation provided by gang activity and has created musical vehicles for per-
sonal and cultural agency. A strong sense of self-confidence permeates the entire
rap genre, providing healthy outlets for young blacks to assert, boast, and luxuri-
ate in a rich self-conception based on the achievement that their talents afford
them. For those reasons alone, it deserves support. Even more, rap music, al-
though its increasing expansion means being influenced by the music industry's
corporate tastes and decisions, presents an economic alternative to the under-
ground economy of crack gangs and the illegal activity associated with them.
However, part of the enormous difficulty in discouraging illegal activity among
young black men has to do, ironically, with their often correct perception of the
racism and classism still rampant in employment and educational opportunities
open to upwardly mobile blacks. The subtle but lethal limits continually imposed
upon young black professionals, for instance, as a result of the persistence of racist
ideologies operating in multifarious institutional patterns and personal configura-
tions, send powerful signals to young black occupants of the underclass that edu-
cation and skill do not ward off racist, classist forms of oppression.
This point was reiterated to me upon my son's recent visit with me at Prince-
ton near Christmas. Excited about the prospect of spending time together catch-
ing up on new movies, playing video games, reading, and the like, we dropped by
my bank to get a cash advance on my MasterCard. I presented my card to the
young service representative, expecting no trouble since I had just paid my bill a
couple of weeks before. When he returned, he informed me that not only could I
not get any money, but that he would have to keep my card. When I asked for an
explanation, all he could say was that he was following the instructions of my
card's bank, since my MasterCard was issued by a different bank.
After we went back and forth a few times about the matter, I asked to see the
manager. "He'll just tell you the same thing that I've been telling you," he insisted.
But my persistent demand prevailed, as he huffed away to the manager's office,
resentfully carrying my request to his boss. My son, sitting next to me the whole
time, asked what the problem was, and I told him that there must be a mistake,
and that it would all be cleared up shortly. He gave me that confident look that
says, "My dad can handle it." After waiting for about seven or eight minutes, I
caught the manager's figure peripherally, and just as I turned, I saw him heading
with the representative to an empty desk, opening the drawer and pulling out a
pair of scissors. I could feel the blood begin to boil in my veins as I beseeched the
manager, "Sir, if you're about to do what I fear you will, can we please talk first?"
Of course, my request was to no avail, as he sliced my card in two before what


--- PAGE 174 ---
The Plight of Black Men 145
had now become a considerable crowd. I immediately jumped up and followed
him into his office, my son trailing close behind, crying now, tearfully pumping
me with "Daddy, what's going on?"
I rushed into the manager's office and asked for the privacy of a closed door,
to which he responded, "Don't let him close the door," as he beckoned three other
employees into his office. I angrily grabbed the remnants of my card from his
hands and proceeded to tell him that I was a reputable member of the community
and a good customer of the bank and that if I had been wearing a three-piece suit
(instead of the black running suit I was garbed in) and if I had been a white male
(and not a black man) I would have been at least accorded the respect of a con-
versation, prior to a private negotiation of an embarrassing situation, which fur-
thermore was the apparent result of a mistake on the bank's part.
His face flustered, the manager then prominently positioned his index finger
beneath his desk drawer, and pushed a button, while declaring, "I'm calling the
police on you." My anger now piqued, I was tempted to vent my rage on his de-
fiant countenance, arrested only by the vision terrible that flashed before my eyes
as a chilling premonition of destruction: I would assault the manager's neck; his
coworkers would join the fracas, as my son stood by horrified by his helplessness
to aid me; the police would come, and abuse me even further, possibly harming
my son in the process. I retreated under the power of this proleptic vision, grab-
bing my son's hand as I marched out of the bank. Just as we walked through the
doors, the policemen were pulling up.
Although after extensive protests, phone calls, and the like, I eventually received
an apology from the bank's board and a MasterCard from their branch, this inci-
dent seared an indelible impression onto my mind, reminding me that regardless
of how much education, moral authority, or personal integrity a black man pos-
sesses, he is still a "nigger," still powerless in many ways to affect his destiny.
The tragedy in all of this, of course, is that even when articulate, intelligent
black men manage to rise above the temptations and traps of "the ghetto," they
are often subject to continuing forms of social fear, sexual jealousy, and obnoxious
racism. More pointedly, in the 1960s, during a crucial stage in the development of
black pride and self-esteem, highly educated, deeply conscientious black men
were gunned down in cold blood. This phenomenon finds paradigmatic expres-
sion in the deaths of Medgar Evers, Malcolm X, and Martin Luther King, Jr.
These events of public death are structured deep in the psyches of surviving black
men, and the ways in which these horrible spectacles of racial catastrophe repre-
sent and implicitly sanction lesser forms of social evil against black men remains
hurtful to black America.
I will never forget the effect of King's death on me as a nine-year-old boy in De-
troit. For weeks I could not be alone at night before an open door or window
without fearing that someone would kill me, too. I thought that if they killed this
man who taught justice, peace, forgiveness, and love, then they would kill all
black men. For me, Martin's death meant that no black man in America was safe,


--- PAGE 175 ---
146 THE MICHAEL ERIC DYSON READER
that no black man could afford the gift of vision, that no black man could possess
an intelligent fire that would sear the fierce edges of ignorance and wither to ashes
the propositions of hate without being extinguished. Ultimately Martin's death
meant that all black men, in some way, are perennially exposed to the threat of
annihilation.
As we move toward the last decade of this century, the shadow of Du Bois's
prophetic declaration that the twentieth century's problem would be the color line
continues to extend itself in foreboding manner. The plight of black men, indeed,
is a microcosmic reflection of the problems that are at the throat of all black peo-
ple, an idiomatic expression of hurt drawn from the larger discourse of racial
pain. Unless, however, there is vast reconstitution of our social, economic, and po-
litical policies and practices, most of which target black men with vicious speci-
ficity, Du Bois's words will serve as the frontispiece to the racial agony of the
twenty-first century as well.


--- PAGE 176 ---
Thirteen
ANOTHER SATURDAY NIGHT, OR HAVE ALL
THE BROTHERS GONE TO WHITE WOMEN?
This is one of the most controversial pieces I have written. The title joins Sam Cooke's
lament of "Another Saturday night / and I ain 't got nobody "—the plea of many talented
and beautiful black women—with a query many of them raise to me in seeking an
explanatimfor the disinterest of many eligible black men: "Have all the brothers gone to
white women?" In this chapter, from my book Why I Love Black Women, I explore
the reasons given for why black women are alone—reasons of their own making and those
having to do with societal forces. I conclude that black women are often unfairly
stigmatized as overbearing and "too choosy." Moreover, despite claims that their often
superior education makes it difficult for black men to get along with them, black women
often date and marry men with far less training. The most controversial aspect of this
chapter is the contention that some black men, due to the racist cues they inherit from
mainstream society, spurn their own and turn to white women as the ideal representatives
of womanhood. I also argue that, in terms of socioeconomic status, many black men marry
"down" when they marry white women. When I appeared on the ABC television talk
show The View, most of the hosts charged that I was a racist for making this empirically
grounded claim. They interpreted "marry down " to mean that I believed black men who
married white women chose racially inferior women. Despite my vigorous attempts at
clarification, the hosts—with the exception of guest host Kathie Lee Gifford-maintained
their views. My only consolation is that I was able to publicly praise host Star Jones,
about whom Ihadwritten in the book. Another host, Joy Behar, called me the "Barry
White" of black romantic literature because of my appredationfor Star's beauty. In light
of the great singer's death last year, it was the highest compliment I received that day.
"LOOK AT ME," THE SISTER BLURTED IN EXASPERATION. "It's Saturday night,
and I can't buy a date."
I was at a black-tie event for Chicago's 100 Black Men, an organization devoted
to improving the lot of young black males. The event drew many of Chicago's
black elite, including prominent clergy, physicians, entrepreneurs, and politicians.
After the ceremonies were over, my frustrated female had spotted me across the
cavernous room in the Hyatt Hotel. She was a tall, statuesque woman, volup-
tuous in the way that sends black men hankering after something to hold on to


--- PAGE 177 ---
148 THE MICHAEL ERIC DYSON READER
because they've been waylaid by breathtaking beauty. Her skin was brown and
smooth—all sweet chocolate dipped into sensuous ebony hues—and her sparkling
eyes set like flaming candles above her arching cheekbones. Her hair was a styl-
ish black splash, with her limbs elegantly gesturing and her hands delicately
pointing as her painted, manicured nails punctuated her message.
As we talked for half an hour, it was clear that she was not only drop-dead gor-
geous, but also bright as all outdoors, down-to-earth but schooled, witty and urbane
but a true homegirl, used to the corporate game she played as an executive but
wearing her status loosely. Highly intelligent, educated, perceptive, in love with her
people, down for the cause, a lover of black men-and she was alone, by herself,
without a date in sight on a Saturday evening that brimmed with romantic promise.
"What am I supposed to do?" she asked me. "I'm not trying to get married to-
morrow—I'm not pressuring black men that way. I just want somebody to spend
some time with, someone with whom I can have a good discussion and a good
meal, and somebody I can laugh with. I just want a date, for God's sake, not a
husband!"
She had nothing against husbands, should a relationship develop in that direc-
tion. My lovely interlocutor simply sought to underscore her lack of desperation,
a desperation that she had to defend herself against because of the frequent com-
plaint by black men that they feel the noose of matrimony tightening around their
necks on the second date. Besides, an equally stunning Afro-Cuban executive
who was barely five feet accompanied her. She was highly articulate and scrump-
tiously attractive. Her very pretty, cocoa-brown face was lit by a radiant smile.
And her petite but exquisitely crafted figure pressed warmly against the soft fab-
ric of her evening gown as her charismatic glow haloed her curly, flowing locks.
"I'm extremely fortunate," my magnetic Afro-Cuban conversationalist enthused.
"I found a wonderful man who recognized my worth. It's extremely important to
be with someone who appreciates and respects you, someone who's comfortable
with himself, and who'll therefore be comfortable with you, a man who's not
threatened by a strong black woman." As if by cue, he approached, and true to his
wife's word, he was a splendid symbol of black masculinity: tall, dark, and hand-
some, and like his wife, Ivy League trained, and from my hometown, to boot.
"Sister, I just don't understand it," I confessed. "'Cause you finer than the print
at the bottom of a contract whipped up at midnight by a shady lawyer. You
should have brothers beating down your door—or at least standing in line to take
a number so they can catch five minutes of your time. I don't know what I can
do in your case, but I've got to think about this problem because if I've heard it
once, I've heard it thousands of times from incredible black women who simply
want a little love." It was true. I had traveled across much of the nation for the
past decade, and beautiful, bright black women from every walk of life repeated
her story with frightening regularity.
I was frustrated by my failure to adequately explain the painful mystery of why
perfectly wonderful black women are often by themselves. Perhaps they are pun-


--- PAGE 178 ---
Another Saturday Night, or Have All the Brothers Gone to White Women? 149
ished for their success, reviled for their strength and independence, feared for
their security, hated for their heart, loathed for their determination to survive, and
yet still loyal to black men. I didn't have to romanticize black women to appreci-
ate them. After all, I had married three black women with wildly differing results.
But I knew the tough situation they confronted was not mostly of their own mak-
ing, despite what social theorists or barbershop pundits concluded.
The statistics seem to reinforce the gloomy outlook for black women. In
essence, black women are less likely than other women to marry in the first place,
more likely to divorce, and less likely to remarry. Only 50 percent of black
women are expected to be married by the age of twenty-eight, compared to 80
percent of white women. Black women are less likely to remarry after a divorce
than white women. Only 32 percent of black women remarry within five years of
divorce, while 54 percent of white women and 44 percent of Latina women get
married again. As if to underscore how tight and complicated relationships are for
black folk, even when marriages are broken, they don't necessarily lead to di-
vorce. Many sisters experience a marital breakup widiout having their relation-
ships legally terminated. Just 67 percent of black women who were separated
from their husbands were divorced three years later. Although this statistic might
be interpreted as 33 percent of black women try to work out their relationships
during separation, it is just as likely that the high percentage of sisters who don't
terminate their relationships suggests an inclination—perhaps the desperation—to
hold on as long as possible.
When the Centers for Disease Control issued a report in 2002 highlighting
some of these numbers, a journalist friend—I'll call her Dorothy—shared with me
her e-mail exchange with a black male colleague—let's call him Henry—who had
some interesting things to say about why black men over thirty-five find it tough
to be in relationships with black women. Henry said that his college-educated,
high-professional male friends in their late thirties and early forties are quite com-
fortable being single and feel no compulsion to marry. Henry and his friends are
wary of women over thirty-five who've never been married. They figure that any
reasonably attractive woman who is bright and not angry at men is likely to have
lived with someone or been married by thirty-five, even if the relationship failed
and she's in circulation again. When Henry's women friends describe their nega-
tive behavior and attitudes toward men, he lets them know, when pressed, that
"no man is going to stick around for that."
Henry wrote that while we hear a great deal about men being the cause of
women's failure to find a mate, there is little discussion of how women are re-
sponsible for their fates. Henry tried to avoid discussions with his never-married,
over-thirty-five female friends because the truth is painful, and only when they are
pushed will they admit they have issues that keep them single. Moreover, Henry
believed that "too many women view themselves as perpetual victims; the stories
they tell about their previous relationships usually involve them as the victims of
male treachery and the narrative doesn't allow any possibility that maybe they


--- PAGE 179 ---
150 THE MICHAEL ERIC DYSON READER
had some personal qualities that would make a man not want to be in a long-term
relationship with them." Besides the decreased prospect of fertility for women
over thirty-five, Henry said that many women are overweight, and that trying to
force black men to find plus-size women attractive "is like trying to convince a
guy who is indifferent to spectator sports that a baseball strike matters."
In one of her responses, Dorothy, who is forty-something and married for the
second time, told Henry that she could sympathize with many of his observa-
tions, though she was mystified by the double standard. "Perfectly acceptable-
looking sisters sit at home on Saturday nights because they don't look like
Vanessa Williams (either of them!), Ananda Lewis, or Halle Berry—yet these
same men who are insisting that they have to have fit and trim women have pot
bellies, raggedy nails, and shoes that are run down at the heels. Maybe they think
their Jaguars make up for it? Maybe they figure the numbers are so in their favor
they don't have to, in Archie Bunker's words, "run to catch the bus." It's at the
stop, doors open, motor running, waiting for them to hop aboard.'" Dorothy re-
minded Henry of the quote from journalist George Curry, who once told her
"any brother could get over in D.G. long's he can read, write and don't have no
running sores." Dorothy confessed that were she single, she'd have to throw in the
towel. "All I know is I'd be home by myself with a book before I'd allow myself
to wait on some of these brothers to lower their impossibly high standards and
ask me out!"
There are many social scientists, armchair analysts, ghetto critics—and some
black women themselves—who believe that it is black women who set impossibly
high standards for potential partners. To be sure, there are many other reasons
besides high standards that keep black women from marrying, including their ed-
ucational achievements and socioeconomic standing, both of which are higher on
average than black men's; the substantial mortality gap between men and
women; the disproportionate incarceration of black men; the poor labor force par-
ticipation of black men; black men's lower occupational status; the dramatically
decreasing rate of black men seeking higher education; and the increasing rate of
interracial marriage among black men.
The incarceration of black men is a huge problem, especially when it is a zero-
sum game between brothers in prison or in school. In what seems an eon ago in
hip-hop years, rapper turned actor/director Ice Cube proved hip-hop's prescience
when he asked the question, "Why more niggas in the pen than in college?" It's
taken more than a decade for social science to match the science Cube dropped
when he was a bad-boy rebel, long before he became a mainstream media darling
in comethes like Friday and Barbershop.
According to the Justice Policy Institute (JPI) report "Cellblocks or Classrooms?
The Funding of Higher Education and Corrections and Its Impact on African
American Men," hip-hop has been on the money. And cash is precisely what is at
stake in the booming prison industry that lusts to house more blacks in local pen-
itentiaries. The more black bothes are tossed in jail, the more cells are built, and the


--- PAGE 180 ---
Another Saturday Night, or Have All the Brothers Gone to White Women? 151
more money is made, especially in the rural white communities where many pris-
ons thrive. In 1995 alone, 150 new prisons were constructed and filled, while 171
more were expanded.
But money is also at stake when it comes to making a crucial choice: to sup-
port blacks in the state university or the state penitentiary. As the report makes
clear, we have chosen the latter. During the 1980s and 1990s, state spending for
corrections grew at six times the rate of state spending on higher education. By
the end of last century, there were nearly a third more black men in prison and
jail than in colleges and universities. That means that the number of black men
in jail or prison has increased fivefold in the last twenty years. In 1980, at the
dawn of the prison construction boom, black men were three times more likely
to be enrolled in college than incarcerated.
In 2000, there were 791,600 black men in jail or prison, while only 603,032
were enrolled in colleges or universities. In 1980, there were 143,000 black men
in jail or prison and 463,700 matriculating in higher educational institutions. In ef-
fect, the cell block or classroom choice boils down to a policy that, whether in-
tended or not, is genocidal. We would permit no other population of American
citizens to be locked away with such callous disregard for the educational oppor-
tunity that might help stem the tide of incarceration.
It is hardly a coincidence that, as blacks have become cogs in the machinery of
the prison economy, their chances of being college educated have been drastically
reduced. The engine of the prison-industrial complex is fueled by the containment
of black upward mobility and the disenfranchisement of black citizenry. In many
states, felons are ineligible to vote once they leave prison. First we deny these men
a solid education, and then we deprive them of the right to help reshape the poli-
cies that have harmed them.
One of the tragethes of this state of affairs is that it undercuts the advances of
black males in higher education over the last two decades. Between 1980 and
2000, three times as many black men were sent to prison as were enrolled in col-
lege or the university. In 2000, at least thirteen states had more black men in
prison than in college, and from 1980 until 2000, thirty-eight states, along with
the federal system, increased the prison population more than they swelled the
ranks of higher education. If the planners of state budgets continue this destruc-
tive trend, they will compensate for a loss of revenue by cutting spending on ed-
ucation and social services, two critical means by which blacks escape poverty and
the prison trap. If black men are in prison and not in college, they have two
strikes against them in their bid to become viable partners to black women. Black
male imprisonment has a double-whammy effect on black women finding mates
among their male peers: it separates black men from society, and it severely
erodes their prospects for higher education.
Even with these facts supporting the diminished choices faced by women, there
is still the perception that they are just too picky. Ebony magazine has through the
years addressed the issue, in articles such as "How Black Women Can Deal with


--- PAGE 181 ---
152 THE MICHAEL ERIC DYSON READER
the Black Male Shortage," "Black Women/Black Men: Has Something Gone
Wrong Between Them?" and "Do Black Women Set Their Standards for Mar-
riage Too High?" The black male shortage article, from the May 1986 issue, cited
Census Bureau statistics that there were at the rime 6.4 million more females than
males in the United States, and that there were 1.4 million more black females
than black males.
According to the article, Dr. Ann Ashmore Poussaint and other experts sug-
gested that black women stop blaming black men and society for their dilemma.
The experts argued that women should take a closer look at themselves, their at-
titude about men, and their approach to finding a mate. "There are many single
women who complain about loneliness, but when they do meet interesting men,
they project a negative attitude or seem to always get into debates over feminist
issues. Others aren't shy about flaunting their professional and financial successes,
giving men the impression that they either don't need or have time for a mean-
ingful relationship."
These sentiments appear to be informed by the reluctance to embrace feminist
principles as a viable alternative for black women, or by a presumption that fe-
male success is the catalyst for the downfall of black men. But Poussaint also
argued that too many black women eliminated suitors for superficial reasons, in-
cluding profession, skin color, height, weight, income, education, family back-
ground, and social graces or contacts. She said that if a woman felt she was low-
ering her standards by dating or marrying a particular kind of man, she should
reconsider her priorities. Poussaint and others were not suggesting that black
women lower their standards, the article said, but that they should broaden their
outlooks, including, some experts said, dating men outside their culture, although
other experts strongly opposed interracial relationships.
In the higher standards article, printed in January 1981, Ebony explored the black
male complaint that black women are more interested in what black men do than
who they are. It also grapples with the black male perception that black women are
more concerned with professional stature, high income, college degrees, and good
looks. They tested this perception—which was really a hypothesis about black fe-
male behavior put forth by black men-by engaging twenty-five young women at
Spelman College in a group discussion. To the question, "Is a man's status really im-
portant to a Black woman thinking about marriage?" Ebony reports there "was a re-
sounding 'Ifes' from the group."
Some of the students claimed that they were attending college to better them-
selves, and thus, they seek mates who match their efforts and achievement. The
gap between a black male bus driver and a black female attorney would be hard
to surmount. Since the vast majority of black men in 1981 held blue-collar
jobs—a statistic that remains unchanged to this day—and because black women's
route to professional achievement was not as difficult as that of black men, the
magazine contended, the tensions between the genders would only increase.
Many of the young Spelman women recognized that they might have difficulty


--- PAGE 182 ---
Another Saturday Night, or Have All the Brothers Gone to White Women? 153
in finding mates with comparable achievements, and hence believed they could
afford to wait. The article explores the class rift between high-achieving, highly
motivated black females, and black males hampered by persistent racism and
differing socialization.
If the issue of black women having higher standards for relationships was a
concern twenty years ago, it is even more prevalent now. According to some re-
search, black women have been less willing than white women to marry men with
lower status and undesirable traits—those who are younger, previously married,
less educated, or unattractive. In short, black women prefer attractive men who
are near their age and who have a stable career. For those black women who have
never been married, they prefer mates with no previous wives or children. The
younger the black woman, the greater her expectation that her man meet the cri-
teria she deemed important. Further, black women who have higher status are
more invested in building careers and less urgent about finding a mate. The eco-
nomic independence of high-achieving black women, and the deteriorating eco-
nomic conditions of black males, severely depletes the pool of potentially mar-
riageable black men.
In our nation, people tend to marry folk who have similar educational back-
grounds. That poses a huge problem for black men and women, since the ratio
of highly educated black men to women has been said to be as small as sixty
men available for every one hundred women. There are nearly 400,000 more
black women than men enrolled in higher education. Black women are now
earning more than 63 percent of all college degrees awarded to blacks. There are
nearly 4 million black married couples in the United States, and among them,
just under 10 percent have marriages where both spouses have a college degree.
Slightly more than 1 percent of them are marriages where both spouses had
graduate degrees.
Moreover, black women with higher levels of education are disproportionately
affected by the shortage of black men with similar levels of education. In the
1930s, only 11 percent of black women were expected not to marry; today, less
than 40 percent of black women are expected to marry. One might conclude in
analyzing these statistics that there is no shortage of black men for black women
to marry, but that black women choose to remain single rather than marry part-
ners who do not meet their expectations. Further, educated professional black
women seek to marry only those men they find acceptable by high standards;
thus, lack of motivation, not availability, is the critical issue.
But that would be extremely shortsighted. While it is true that such numbers
might translate to black women being "picky," the reality is that black women
seek to meet and marry those men with whom they have the greatest degree of
compatibility. Black male resentment of black female achievement, especially
among black men who have not enjoyed the opportunity to succeed, may trans-
late to unwarranted hostility toward black women. Many brothers feel that black
women are the pawns of a white establishment that seeks to hold them down. As


--- PAGE 183 ---
154 THE MICHAEL ERIC DYSON READER
a result, black female movement through educational and professional ranks is to
some black men a symptom of black women's complicity with a racist system.
Rather than offer an astute analysis of our condition—that in a patriarchal culture,
black men do represent a specific threat to white male power that black women
don't, and hence, in some instances, white men prefer the presence of black
women in professional settings—black men often confuse the consequences of
racism with a desire of black females to undercut them.
Further, for a black man to reach beneath his class station to embrace a black
woman reinforces the status quo: as breadwinner, he can provide for his family,
and thus remain "head of the house." For a black woman to behave similarly up-
sets the status quo: if she makes more money and is better educated than her
partner, the resentment of her man can become burdensome, sometimes abusive.
I know a lot of brothers who felt they could take a woman making more money
than them, but once the reality of her higher status set in, it usually took on so-
cial meanings beyond a paycheck. Issues of control inevitably arose, and the
question of who was in charge followed in its wake. Since black men struggle
with a society that sets up expectations for appropriate masculine behavior-take
care of one's family, be gainfully employed, be a financial success—and then un-
dermines their attainment, black women are often the psychological scapegoat of
our anger. The rise in black male domestic violence is poignant testimony to such
tensions in the black home.
It would be hard to blame black women for wanting to be "equally yoked," but
that does not mean there aren't sisters who are dismissive of black men outside of
their income or educational bracket. In my early twenties, a young lady I had
grown quite fond of and with whom I had become intimate, bluntly told me, "I'm
attracted to you physically, and I think you're very smart, but you're a minister,
and you won't make a lot of money. I need a man who will be financially well-off,
so I don't think we can have a relationship."
I was stunned and hurt, and from that day forward, robbed of any illusions
about how poorly some sisters can behave. Still, the grim reality is that black men
often despise women's success as the unfailing predictor of domestic trouble. I will
never forget a black man who told me that his wife's education had hurt their re-
lationship because she no longer understood her place. "She became a 'phenom-
enal woman,'" he declared with bitter irony, citing in his resentful put-down the fa-
mous Maya Angelou poem of the same name. I have heard similar comments
repeated by brothers time and time again.
Despite all of this, many college-educated black women marry black men with
significantly lower levels of education. In marriages where black women have a col-
lege degree, only 45.9 percent of their husbands also have a college degree. More
than one-quarter of black women who have a college degree are married to men
who have never gone to college. And 4 percent of black women with a college de-
gree are married to black men who didn't graduate from high school. By compar-
ison, nearly 70 percent of white women with a college degree married men who


--- PAGE 184 ---
Another Saturday Night, or Have All the Brothers Gone to White Women? 155
also had a college degree, and only 12 percent of white women with a college de-
gree married men who never went to college. While black women may prefer
mates who are educationally compatible, they have often chosen mates whose
lower achievement makes their marriages vulnerable to divorce and spousal abuse.
Other black men complain bitterly that many black women prefer the hard-
core, thugged-out brother, the bad boy, the player. A brilliant young Vanderbilt
University professor of mathematics, whom this thinking victimized, wrote an
essay about his experience for Essence magazine. Jonathan Farley is a tall, slim, at-
tractive brown-skinned young man, a summa cum laude graduate of Harvard
who took a doctorate in mathematics from Oxford University and is an outspo-
ken advocate for the Black Panthers. In his essay, he recalls a painful episode: a
young lady with whom he fell in love only wanted to be his friend. But the worst
of it is that she took him to dinner to heal his wounds by telling him why he
struck out. "She outlined the difference between men like me and the men Black
women preferred, between mere African Americans and 'niggaz': African-
Americans are safe, respectable, upwardly mobile and professional Black men.
Niggaz are strong, streetwise, hard Black men."
Jonathan pointed out that his erstwhile love had a question posed to her by a
friend: if she was walking down a dark street at night, who would she want by her
side, an African-American or a nigga? She told Jonathan that black women sought
a strong protector. Jonathan writes that he "tried to explain that physical strength
had ceased to be a survival trait back in the Stone Age." Further, he warned her
that women who prefer niggaz to African-Americans were making a costly mis-
take since African-Americans, by virtue of their "higher social and economic sta-
tus"—and wasn't this what black women wanted?—could better protect them and
give them the security they desired. Since many young black women grow up
without fathers in the home, even college-educated black women often settled for
dropouts and drug dealers.
Because of his experience, Jonathan found himself "resisting my own impulses
to open a door, start a conversation or even say hello to many young black
women I meet, for fear of appearing too gentlemanly and hence unworthy of their
attention." Jonathan argued that even black men who were "raised in the suburbs
don the attire and attitude of street thugs so that they, too, will be chosen." He
concluded his essay by admonishing sisters to "leave the players in the play-
ground. . . . Knights in shining armor don't have to have gold teeth."
Many black women have admitted that this is far too frequent a flaw among their
sisters. Many sisters claim to have outgrown such an inclination, chalking it up to
their youth and their failure to know what kind of man would really be a good part-
ner. Once they mature, many black women are attracted to brothers whose stabil-
ity and substance are prized above the flashy danger of destructive black men.
If some black men chafe under the restrictive mythology of the ghetto tough,
many more black women are passed over for an equally nefarious reason. Re-
cently, when I lectured at a northeastern college, a young lady approached me


--- PAGE 185 ---
156 THE MICHAEL ERIC DYSON READER
after my lecture. As we chatted about a number of issues, we began to discuss the
dating situation at her college for black women. That's when she dropped the
bombshell on me.
"Professor Dyson, my boyfriend broke up with me earlier this year," the at-
tractive chocolate sister told me.
"Why'd he do that?" I asked her, noticing that her heart was heavy, her eyes
tearing up as she spoke.
"He said I was too dark," she said lowly.
"That can't be right," I protested on her behalf. "Did he actually tell you that?"
"Right to my face," she replied, as if still in shock.
Although many black men are rarely that blunt, their actions speak just as
harshly. The preference for light-skinned women finds painful precedent in black
culture. It dates back to slavery when the lightest blacks—whose skin color was
often the result of rape by white slave masters—were favored over their darker kin
because they were closer in color and appearance to dominant society. Unfortu-
nately, despite the challenge to the mythology of inherently superior white stan-
dards of beauty, there persists in black life the belief that light is preferable to
dark. Music videos have historically presented light-skinned black women as the
most desirable women. Even as browner women have more recently won space in
the culture of representation within our race—a few of them, like Carla Campbell,
Angela Basset, and Valerie Morris appear in videos, film, and on television news,
respectively—there is an undeniable subordination of darker-skinned black
women to lighter sisters in everyday life.
A bright, beautiful, and brown friend of mine—I'll call her Renee—recendy told
me that she dated for a year a famous football star, a very dark brother, who told
her that he almost didn't ask her out because she was so dark. One of his grid-
iron colleagues, an equally chocolate brother, said within her earshot that Renee
was not the kind of girl he usually dated since his other women had been much
fairer. Renee also reported to me that an all-star NBA player told her that in order
to fit in, he had to have the same car, same house, and same-looking woman as
most of the other basketball players—meaning women who are very light-skinned
or of mixed heritage, since these women are "hot" now.
Renee shared with me a painful e-mail missive from an intern who worked in
her office that testifies to the persistence of virulent beliefs about skin color in
black America. The young lady said that she and her friends felt that "as normal/
average looking young black women, we are no longer desirable." She has "many
friends who are dark-skinned and have natural hair who complain that they can
never get attention from black men." She also commented on what she and her
friends have termed "hybrid chicks," girls who are showcased and admired in
music videos because they "are exotic looking, either half black and Asian or half
Hispanic."
What is remarkable is that such self-defeating prejudice persists despite the
growing prominence in some circles of beautiful dark-skinned black women.


--- PAGE 186 ---
Another Saturday Night, or Have All the Brothers Gone to White Women? 157
There is Ingrid Saunders Jones, the enormously gifted corporate executive who,
from her perch as a senior vice president of Coca-Cola and head of its founda-
tion, has funneled tens of millions of dollars into black America in aid of charita-
ble, civic, and cultural causes. Ingrid is a glamorous woman with flawless, honey-
dipped ebony skin; healthy, sculpted eyebrows; soulful and sexy eyes; cascading,
jet-black hair that is often pulled back into a pony tail; a blinding smile; perfecdy
lined lips; and a '50s-style sensuality. There is Vanessa Bell Calloway, the intelli-
gent and strikingly beautiful actress and co-host of the BET talk show Oh Drama.
Vanessa is a shapely, buff sister with a dewy, espresso-brown complexion; clear,
bright eyes; perfect white teeth; and a glittering sexuality—and a laugh as strong
as her personality. There is Darlene Clark Hine, a brilliant Northwestern Uni-
versity historian—and former president of the Organization of American Histori-
ans—who has written several path-breaking books on black women's life and his-
tory. Darlene is a deep, rich maple-colored beauty with entrancing features: big,
expressive eyes; succulent cheeks; sexy, full lips; and milk-smooth skin, framed by
a flow of layered, shining, silky, silvery hair. And among the younger generation,
there is Aunjanue Ellis, a superbly talented actress with Ivy League credentials-
she attended Brown University—and graduate training at New York University.
Aunjanue is a smoky, sultry chocolate stunner whose megawatt smile, thick black
tresses, chiseled cheeks, sweetly burnished flesh, alluring eyebrows, riveting dark
eyes, luscious and life-affirming lips, svelte and taut physique, and comely legs
make the gorgeous thespian a vision of soulful sensuality.
The continued preference for lighter sisters among blacks bears witness to psy-
chic wounds that are not completely healed. The poisonous self-hatred that pours
freely in the rejection of dark blackness is painful evidence of our unresolved
racial anxieties about our true beauty and self-worth. Dark black women have
often been cast aside and looked down upon because they embody the most vis-
ible connection to a fertile African heritage whose value remains suspect in our
culture and nation.
As long as black men continue to spurn the root of our reality-summed up,
perhaps, in the saying, "the darker the berry, the sweeter the juice"-the longer we
will be separated from the source of our survival. While we are wise not to envi-
sion our blackness in literal terms—it is not simply about skin, but about sensibil-
ity, aesthetics, culture, style, and the like-it would be foolish to deny that the de-
basing of blackness is often about the debasing of blacks in our skin, through our
skin, because of our skin. While race is more cosmic than epidermis and flesh-
encompassing politics, social structure, class, and region-our place in the world,
and our reward and punishment too, are profoundly shaped by color.
As big a barrier to the flow of love between black men and women as the issues
I've discussed are, perhaps none is more controversial, or as hurtful, as the rejec-
tion many black women experience when black men date and marry white
women. As I lecture and preach across the country, black women of every station
comer me, or ask me before an auditorium of hundreds, sometimes thousands, a


--- PAGE 187 ---
158 THE MICHAEL ERIC DYSON READER
version of the question: "Why do so many brothers despise us and chase white
women?"
Of course, I am always reluctant to speak for all black men, especially when it
comes to something as personal and subjective—though obviously not without
serious social overtones-as who one likes or loves. And many of my heroes-
Quincy Jones and Sidney Pokier among them—married white women at a time
when doing so bravely challenged the nation's apartheid. In the '60s and '70s, in-
terracial marriage, whether intended or not, represented a rejection of white su-
premacist values and indicated that love was a matter between individuals, not
races. Few could miss the heroic gesture of loving across racial lines. Those who
did often risked their reputations and social status while enduring cultural
stigma. In short, it was apparent that interracial romance was unavoidably inter-
preted in political terms.
But if we are honest, interracial love has rarely, if ever, been simply about love.
It has always borne political implications. From the very beginning of the black
presence on American soil, stereotypes have distorted relations between the races,
including those involving sex. Black males were brought to this nation in chains
to be studs. Their virility was placed in the service of slavery. Black females were
raped at will; their wombs became the largely unprotected domain of white male
desire. Their sexuality was harnessed to perpetuate slavery through procreation.
Later, of course, many more stereotypes of black men and women flourished,
from the docile Uncle Tom, the fiery "field nigger," the compliant "house nigger,"
and the uppity buck, to the nurturing Mammy, the sarcastic sapphire, the promis-
cuous Jezebel, and now, in our day, the sex-crazed Lothario, the unrepentant
rapist, the welfare queen, and the hoochie mama.
These stereotypes revolve largely around sex—how black people have it, under
what conditions, for what reasons, how frequently, and if it can be read as a
symptom of their debased nature and perverted character. Hence, these stereo-
types often expressed the stunted social perceptions of black identity put forth by
a white culture that refused to own up to its heavy hand in their creation.
Moreover, white society was ambivalent about black sexual identity—they
wanted their blacks highly sexed to support slavery and white male pleasure. Oth-
erwise, they wanted blacks to be constrained, even sexless if possible. Black men
were feared and envied for their mythically large sexual organs. White male sex-
ual desire was linked to strengthening patriarchal culture. As a result, white men
sought to exploit black female eroticism, and to minimize sexual competition by
outlawing black male sexual interactions with white women. The rise of lynching
and castration are tied to the white male attempt to control the exaggerated threat
of black male sexual desire. Long after the demise of such vicious social acts, the
strong taboo on interracial sex prevails.
While black men were being constructed as studs, and black women as inher-
ently lascivious—basically it was guilt by association, since black women must be
hyper-sexed to be able to satisfy the sexual desire of their men—white women


--- PAGE 188 ---
Another Saturday Night, or Have All the Brothers Gone to White Women? 159
were being projected as paragons of sexual virtue and placed on pedestals of pu-
rity. White female sexual desire, as much as possible, was segregated from public
view. It was exclusively directed toward the bedroom of their white husbands,
whose carousing outside the home-whether in the slave quarter or the whore-
house—was for the most part exempt from ethical scrutiny. There was minimal
sexual contact between black men and white women during slavery. However,
during Reconstruction there was a noticeable increase in these relations, although
interracial marriages remained rare.
Antimiscegenation laws prohibiting interracial marriage between whites and
people of color existed in forty states until 1967, when the U.S. Supreme Court
struck down these laws as unconstitutional in the landmark-and aptly named-
Loving v. Virginia. Moreover, after emancipation, vicious sexual stereotypes served
in part as a smoke screen to divert attention from how white men sought to pre-
vent black men from enjoying the privileges of economic stability, middle-class
status, and the freedom to raise their families. Still, the white woman denned the
norm of beauty for the culture. She remained the prized erotic possession to be
fought over by black and white men. Black women were largely excluded from
this economy of desire, except in the crudest fashion.
This history must be kept in mind as we ponder the sexual fault lines in black
America, and the tensions between black men and women around the perception
that black men are aggressively marrying white women. Interracial marriage
among black men and white women has risen dramatically in the last few years.
Nearly 8 percent of all black men between the ages of twenty-five and thirty-four
who were married in 1990 married nonblack women, compared to just 4 percent
for white men in the same age cohort who married outside their race. Region, oc-
cupation, and education play a huge role in determining the interracial marriages
of black men. In the Pacific Northwest, 32 percent of black men marry white
women; in California, it's 20 percent; in the Rocky Mountain states, it's 30 per-
cent; and in the New England states, 19 percent of black men marry white women.
Military service hikes the numbers for black men marrying women outside their
race, as 14 percent of black males in the military are married to nonblacks.
By contrast, only 7 percent of black men who didn't serve in the military mar-
ried nonblacks. More than 10 percent of black men who complete college marry
outside of their race, compared to only 6 percent for black men who didn't com-
plete high school. And for black men who have attended graduate school, the
number jumps to 13 percent who marry nonblack women. In fact, black men
with graduate school experience are 30 percent more likely to marry outside their
race than even black men with a college degree. Overall, more than 200,000 black
men are married outside their race, mostly to white women.
On the surface, despite the soaring rates of intermarriage for black men, that
number might not seem particularly disturbing, but from the perspective of edu-
cated black women, it represents a significant draining of the pool of available
black men from which to choose a potential mate. As more black men go to prison,


--- PAGE 189 ---
160 THE MICHAEL ERIC DYSON READER
the early from crime or from AIDS, are severely unemployed or underemployed,
or choose an alternative sexual lifestyle, the numbers of compatible black men
begin to significandy diminish for educated black women. And given the hostility
that black men without higher education often harbor toward educated black
women, the numbers of black men available for black women dwindle even more.
Young black women face a crisis in available black men unlike diat faced by
their grandmothers, who found marriageable black men in relatively plentiful
numbers. The GI Bill altered the educational and employment landscape for
black men of the post-World War II generation. Black men who had been closed
out of white-collar and professional jobs found new opportunities beyond the
school teaching to which they had been formerly relegated. While black women,
especially in the Soudi, held many of the teaching jobs, blue-collar jobs were at the
time a far better source of income, including waiting on tables in five-star restau-
rants and hotels, jobs diat many college-educated black males took, along with
serving as Pullman porters.
In the Soudi's segregated black schools, black men held most of the principals'
jobs. For diose black men who didn't go to college, especially since it was tough
in the rigidly segregated job market for black men to reap benefit from higher ed-
ucation, they went to work immediately after high school in the jobs that college-
educated men coveted as well. Under Jim Crow, the educated and uneducated
alike met and mixed, and black women enjoyed a much larger pool of available
and socially attractive black men from which to choose a mate.
Today, not only are the economic opportunities severely shrunk for black men
who don't obtain higher education, but the overwhelming majority of black stu-
dents who attend college-80 percent of them-are matriculating in predominantly
white schools, In contrast to black students of earlier generations who attended
historically black colleges and universities, black students now have far greater ac-
cess to white culture, tastes, opportunities, values, and goals. And they mix with
white peers far more frequently than black students at black colleges and those
black youth who end their education at high school.
The situation I have just outlined has in its own right negatively affected the
prospects of black women finding a mate. But when one takes into consideration
the persistence of the belief that white women are the ideal embodiment of beauty
in our culture, and the prize that all men seek, the situation for black women is
even more dismal. They not only fight against trends in the economy, employ-
ment, and education, but they fight a far more elusive opponent: the mythological
eroticization of a standard of beauty that by definition excludes them from com-
petition. Furthermore, black women are subject to stereotypes among black men
about their being "difficult," "demanding," "bossy," "full of attitude," "aggressive,"
and the like, ruling them out of play as possible mates, often by the relatively small
pool of highly educated, or highly achieving, black men.
Thus, when black women express anger at being abandoned by black men in
favor of white women, they are neither being irrational, unfair, nor unduly hostile.


--- PAGE 190 ---
Another Saturday Night, or Have All the Brothers Gone to White Women? 161
Rather, they are taking stock of an abominable cultural condition over which they
have little control. When highly educated or visible black men consistendy make
choices of partners or mates outside of the race, it appears to be far more man co-
incidence or the capricious stirrings of affection. In fact, it hardly seems to be arbi-
trary at all. Rather, there seems to be an undeniable wall of separation between de-
sirable black men and the educated and beautiful black women they are turning
away from in droves. White women are often unconsciously elevated as the erotic
payoff—the sexual reward—for diose black men who seek elevated status in our so-
ciety, or alternatively, who want to cement their position as outstanding men.
Hence, the spurning of black women cannot be considered an exclusively per-
sonal or private choice of black men in an erotic and emotional vacuum. In light
of the factors that drive this trend, it must be seen as part of a deeply rooted, if
often unconscious, process of pursuing the emblem of beauty and status from
which black men have been historically barred. I am not suggesting that all black
men who pursue or marry white women are the victims of an unconscious ado-
ration of white standards of beauty. But it is difficult to ignore the compelling ev-
idence that it is often more than happenstance or coincidence that drives interra-
cial relations between black men and white women.
Of course, it is hardly a one-way street. Many white women find black men de-
sirable too, obviously for purely personal reasons—as is the case many times with
the black male attraction to white women-but also for more complex social rea-
sons as well. A black female student at George Washington University, where I
had gone to lecture, explained to me her theory about why many black men and
white women are magnetized to each other.
"See, Professor Dyson, I think it has to do widi the ideals both black men and
white women represent," the beautiful brown-skinned woman said to me in a cir-
cle of black female students. "White women are allegedly the ideal expression of
beauty: blonde hair, blue eyes, keen nose, thin lips, big breasts, and flat behind.
And black men are the ideal expression of the ultimate physique: muscular, dark
and handsome, sexually aggressive, and of course, having a large sexual organ.
So naturally, when they get together, it's pretty explosive. It's the meeting of two
ideals." That certainly was part of the answer, although neither the student nor I
would reduce the complexity of erotic and interpersonal attraction to sheer phys-
ical chemistry. It also has to do with the way that chemistry is determined by
deeply held social beliefs about features that we are told are attractive and those
we are told we should avoid or that we can live without. Too often, those beliefs
are shaped by racial considerations, driven by troublesome and often unexamined
assumptions about white and black women that pass for common sense, but
which, upon reflection, turn out to be little more than projections, stereotypes, or
scapegoating.
For some black men, having a white woman or wife amounts to enjoying a
level of liberation from erotic or social restrictions diat is downright intoxicating.
For some, it involves the complicated choreography of racial revenge, as they


--- PAGE 191 ---
162 THE MICHAEL ERIC DYSON READER
seek—as I once heard it explained of a black nationalist who justified his relation-
ships with white women—"to punish their fathers." For others, having a white wife
or woman is a way into the club of white patriarchy, as if to say, "I've got what it
takes to snag one of your women, now let me have some of your power."
Of course, such a move might backfire, only increasing the likelihood of white
male resentment, perhaps retaliation. But sometimes, in the strange machinations
of the patriarchal imagination, the pursuit and capture of the white ideal of beauty
signifies to white men a level of erotic and social competence that augurs well for
transracial alliance in the business world. A black woman wrote to me about how
her "sons' biological father (nothing more) married a woman who was thirty
years older than him, just so he could move up in the ranks of his job and have a
'trophy white wife.' Then he proceeded to have children with other women while
he stayed married to his security blanket." Of course, one might argue that this is
merely the sour grapes of a woman who lost her man to a white woman. Still, her
belief that some black men prize white women as stepping-stones is not far-
fetched. Some social scientists have pointed out that members of a stigmatized so-
cial group, or those bereft of prestige, often trade characteristics when choosing a
mate. That might mean that black men have a better chance of winning the af-
fections of a white woman if they offer, for instance, higher socioeconomic status
in return. In fact, white women marry up more often when they marry a black
man than when they marry a white man. A black man has higher socioeconomic
status to offer in exchange for the elevated esteem he might achieve, in his own
eyes, or in the eyes of those he seeks to please, by marrying a white woman. In-
terestingly, black men marry down more often when marrying a white woman
than when marrying a black woman.
This research may support the perception of many black women that many
white women seek only those black men who are well educated, or whose high
visibility and social status are compensation for the status conferred by white
womanhood. Professional athletes and entertainers, among others, are notewor-
thy for a high, or at least visible, degree of interracial partnering and marriage.
Many black women resent the fact that they are precluded access to such men be-
cause they do not offer the status of white skin, blue eyes, or blonde hair. Nor do
they simply cater to the unreasonable demands of the black male star or promi-
nent figure, as some black women contend is true of many of their white female
counterparts.
There is, too, a great deal of hypocrisy involved in the spurning of black
women by well-known black men. For instance, some black men claim that their
preference for white women-besides the fact that they are, according to these
men, devoid of the bitterness, harshness, and drama of black women—has to do
with the relative ease with which they yield to the sexual desires of black men.
The irony, of course, is that if black women give in easily, they are marked as
"ho's," and if they refuse black men's sexual advances, they are often seen as
"bitches." By contrast, many white women are rewarded for the same behavior


--- PAGE 192 ---
Another Saturday Night, or Have All the Brothers Gone to White Women? 163
with permanent partnership or marriage. Further, many of the white women who
aggressively pursue high-profile black men are viewed as appropriately assertive,
endearing, and supportive. On the other hand, black women who are equally ag-
gressive are viewed as "gold diggers" and materialistic hoochies.
Perhaps one of the greatest furors among black women in recent memory was
sparked when an outraged white woman-she signed her missive "Disgusted
White Girl"—who was engaged to a black man penned a letter to Jamie Brown, ed-
itor of the popular gossip magazine Sister 2 Sister. Disgusted wrote to Jamie to "chal-
lenge some of your Black male readers," saying she was engaged to a good-looking,
educated, and loving black male, and that she didn't understand "a lot of the Black
females' attitudes about our relationship." Disgusted wrote that her man "wanted
me because the pickings amongst Black women were slim to none. As he said, they
were either too fat, too loud, too mean, too argumentative, too needy, too materi-
alistic, and carrying too much excess baggage." Disgusted said that before she was
engaged, she was "constantly approached by Black men, willing to wine and dine
me and give me the world. If Black women are so up in arms about us being with
their men, why don't they look at themselves and make some changes."
Disgusted said that she was tired of the dirty looks and snide remarks she got,
that she "would like to hear from some Black men about why we are so appealing
and coveted by them. Bryant Gumbel just left his wife of 26 years for one! Charles
Barkley, Scottie Pippen, the model Tyson Beckford, Montel Williams, Quincy
Jones, James Earl Jones, Harry Belafonte, Sidney Poitier, Kofi Annan, Cuba Good-
ingjr., Don Cornelius, Berry Gordy, Billy Blanks, Larry Fishburne, Wesley Snipes
... I could go and on." Disgusted admonished black women not "to be mad with
us white women because so many of your men want us. Get your acts together
and learn from us and we may lead you to treat your men better."
Then she challenged black men and appealed to an unstated compact that has
been seemingly forged by many black men and white women, when she confi-
dently wrote, "If I'm wrong, Black men, let me know." This hurtful diatribe exposed
the racial logic and, unwittingly, the unconscious white female privilege that work
against black women, and to white women's advantage. By arrogantly lecturing
black women about their shortcomings, Disgusted failed to account for the elevated
status she enjoyed—and the exaggerated value she had conferred on her—because of
her white skin and the social and historical meanings of white female identity.
But it isn't just the famous or visible black man who is the object of white fe-
male desire. In 1995, seven black female students at Brown University started in
their dormitory a "Wall of Shame," which listed the names of the black males who
were dating white women, when they became angry that many of the black males
on campus favored white women while spurning their affections. It would be easy
to make these and other black women look frustrated, irrational, jealous, foolish,
or plain loony when they point to the pathological behavior of their black men
avoiding or stigmatizing them. And yet, the trends suggest that increasingly, black
males in college are doing just that.


--- PAGE 193 ---
164 THE MICHAEL ERIC DYSON READER
As a result, perhaps, college-educated black women are increasingly turning to
white men and others outside the race in seeking companionship. Black women
are often more constrained in the choice of partners or mates by a profound sense
of racial loyalty. Between 1960 and 1980, the number of black women married to
white men was relatively static, inching from 26,000 to 27,000. By 2000, it had
grown to 80,000, and the number is bound to increase with the crisis of available
black men only getting worse for the foreseeable future. To be sure, there is the
possibility of the romanticized white male suitor—the one capable of providing
life's best, unlike the bulk of struggling black men, or the white man who fits the
bill of what is sexy and romantic in ways that black men are rarely permitted—
playing an equally problematic role in the black female imagination as the ideal-
ized white woman plays for black men. And as widi many black men, simple at-
traction to the opposite race might be in effect. For the most part, black women
are perceived as coupling with white men out of necessity more than preference.
A recent spate of articles, in Essence and Ebony magazines, and in newspapers like
the Atlanta Journal-Constitution, has commented on the phenomenon. The Journal-
Constitution article, entitled "Could Mr. Right Be White?" raised the ire of journal-
ist Nathan McCall. The article quotes twenty-nine-year-old Melanie Robinson, a
black woman who has dated three white men, as saying that black men take black
women for granted since the numbers favor men, and that white men are "more
romantic and willing to go on dates like walking in the park or visiting a museum."
Robinson also wishes that black men would do more than offer to take her for a
drink or go to "Red Lobster for all-you-can-eat crab legs on Monday."
In a letter to the newspaper, McCall wrote that he found the article "appallingly
racist and typically shallow." McCall argued that it's "one thing to say that some
black women date white men because there is a shortage of available black men,"
but quite another to "suggest that the very group that created and perpetuated
that shortage-white men-are also the most sensitive and romantic people on
God's great earth." He suggested that it would have been as easy to find women
to "testify that white men are insecure, and that given a dating choice between an
all-you-can-eat crab legs special and an evening at the museum, white men will
opt for Red Lobster every time." McCall concluded that he was thankful for
shows like Jerry Springer and Ricky Lake, because, as "insane as their programs are,
at least they demonstrate that human frailties are as much a reality for whites as
for anyone else."
Perhaps the most recent controversy involving a white man enjoying the plea-
sures of black female companionship erupted around the film Monster's Ball, star-
ring Halle Berry as a waitress who becomes involved with a racist sheriff—played
by Billy Bob Thornton—who executes her convict husband on death row before
falling in love with her. The film includes an extended and explicit sex scene
where Thornton's character makes love from behind to Berry's waitress. Many
blacks were torn when Berry won the Oscar for her powerful portrayal: they
were rooting for her to be acknowledged for her superior skill, but reluctant to


--- PAGE 194 ---
Another Saturday Night, or Have All the Brothers Gone to White Women? 165
praise a part that even indirectly suggested that her character's sexual liaison was
a reward for hating black people and executing her husband, played by Sean "P.
Diddy" Combs.
A few weeks after the Oscars, actress Angela Bassett—whom Berry had gra-
ciously mentioned by name in her acceptance speech as one of "the women that
stand beside me"-criticized the role Berry played even as she was careful to praise
Berry for her performance. Bassett said, "I wasn't going to be a prostitute on
film," and that "I couldn't do that because it's such a stereotype about black
women and sexuality," concluding that "Meryl Streep won Oscars without all
that." Bassett said that she loved Berry's performance, and that she didn't be-
grudge Berry her success, but that it "wasn't the role for me." Bassett said that she
wanted an Oscar, but "for somediing I can sleep with at night." The issue of
stereotypes is extremely important, especially for black women in a powerful
medium like film involved sexually with white men. But so is the freedom to
choose roles that stretch the boundaries of sexual propriety and challenge the lim-
itations imposed on black female sexuality.
In her acceptance speech, Berry challenged the stereotypes of how a black
woman who has been honored by the powers-that-be should behave. Instead of
being safe, Berry was bravely political. She gave the millions who watched
around the globe not only a sorely needed history lesson, but also a lesson in
courageous identification with the masses. Berry tearfully declared that her
award was for "every nameless, faceless woman of color" who now had a chance
since "this door has been opened." Berry's remarkable courage and candor are
depressingly rare among famed blacks with a lot on the line: money, prestige,
reputation, and work. Many covet the limelight's payoffs, but cower in light of its
demands.
Even fewer speak up about the experiences their ordinary brothers and sisters
endure—and if they are honest, that they themselves too often confront—on a
daily basis. To be sure, there is an unspoken tariff on black honesty among the
privileged: if they dare cut against the grain, they may be curtailed or cut off
from reward. Or they may endure stigma. What Berry did was brave and gen-
erous: on the night she was being singled out for greatness, she cast her lot widi
anonymous women of color who hungered for her spot, and who might be de-
nied for no other reason than diat they were yellow, brown, red, or black. Her
achievement, she insisted, was now their hope. Her performance that night was
a stereotype buster.
No matter how you cut it, sex between the races is a complicated affair. Many
black men honestly love white women, and many black women honestly love
white men. But the history of traumatic interaction between the races shapes the
patterns of love and sex across racial lines. As a social taboo that has been shat-
tered, interracial sex is a healthy and edifying occurrence. As the symptom of the
attempt to escape or avoid intimate contact with the women who have loved and
nurtured our race, it can be a sign of utter self-hatred, and hatred of our group's


--- PAGE 195 ---
166 THE MICHAEL ERIC DYSON READER
most powerful and loyal members. One of the most vicious legacies of white su-
premacy is the belief that our women are not beautiful, desirable, intelligent, and
worthy of our love.
The factors that rob black men and women of more love between us—impris-
onment, early death, educational disparities, and self-destructive habits such as
snobbishness, skin-color bias, the preference for "bad boys," and worship of white
standards of beauty—can be combated through conscientious response to our
plight. There are millions of black women from every walk of life who simply
want, like every other group of women alive, to be wanted and loved by the men
who issued from their mothers' wombs. To dishonor that wish is the seed of our
destruction.


--- PAGE 196 ---
Fourteen
IN O.J.'S SHADOW:
KOBE BRYANT'S PREDICAMENT
On July 6, the Eagle County Sheriff's Office in Colorado made an announcement that
shook the world: twenty-four-year-old basketball superstar Kobe Bryant had been arrested
on suspicion of felony sexual assault and false imprisonment of a nineteen-year-old college
student at an elite Edwards, Colorado, spa where she worked, and where Bryant had been
staying in preparation for knee surgery. Bryant wasn'tformaUy charged until July 18, but
by then the media circus and rumor mill had already spun wildly out of control. Later that
day Bryant appeared highly emotional at a news conference in Los Angeles, with his wife
Vanessa by his side, proclaiming his innocence of the charges while admitting he had had an
adulterous—and, according to him, consensual—liaison with his accuser. And although
major news outlets generally observe a policy of not revealing an (alleged) rape victim's
identity, her name and picture—as well as those of a falsely identified woman—had by then
been plastered all over cyberspace. Bryant's accuser, an attractive, white, blonde former
cheerleader, was employed as a concierge at the Cordillera Lodge & Spa, which was where
the fateful encounter took place, on June 30, just before midnight.
It appears unavoidable that Bryant's case would be compared to the Simpson criminal
case, despite spectacular differences: Bryant's is not a murder case; Simpson intimately knew
one of the two victims in his alleged crime, whereas Bryant met his accuser that night; and
Bryant is not a former star, but a widely celebrated athlete not yet at the height of his
projected place as one of basketball's best players of all time. Still, the elements of race and
gender suggest striking parallels: a handsome black athlete pitted in court against a white
woman, and polls that suggest a strong racial divide in the public's belief in Bryant's guilt or
innocence. Whatever the outcome, the case will have permanently altered the lives of Bryant
and his accuser and has already provided a glimpse into persistent stereotypes of white female
identity and black sexuality, and the continuing difficulty of interracial relationships. "This
brief essay from my column in Savoy magazine is my take on these issues.
IF KOBE BRYANT'S ATTORNEYS HAVE THEIR WAY, it will be several months,
perhaps even a year, before the NBA superstar goes to court to defend himself
against sexual assault charges. But within the court of black public opinion, there
has already been a long and brooding deliberation, and a fair amount of dramatic
signifying based on the fact that Bryant's accuser is a nineteen-year-old white


--- PAGE 197 ---
168 THE MICHAEL ERIC DYSON READER
woman. "That's what happens when you mess with a white girl," goes the quiet
chorus. It's a harsh sentiment, but one buttressed by an even harsher history of
sexual mistrust, suspicion, and fear between the races. Even without an assault
charge, the sex between white women and black men has often been volatile.
Sometimes it's been downright fatal. If we're to understand Kobe's case, we've got
to know that history, since it may determine his fate in the national imagination,
and most important, in a Colorado courtroom.
Interracial sex is haunted by entrenched beliefs about how black and white folk
should live and treat one another. Until a few decades ago, we lived in stifling seg-
regation that was supported by custom and law. Whites convinced themselves
and many others that they were superior in every way. We were led to believe
that the only way blacks could be saved was to accept white culture and to adopt
their view of the world. But once we were baptized in the rivers of white life,
sometimes to be drowned, at other times to be washed of our blackness, we saw
the ironies that pollute the mainstream.
No irony was clearer than how white women were at once celebrated and dis-
missed. White women have long been seen as pure and chaste. During slavery
and beyond, white wives were for the most part spared the duty of recreational
sex; that was the job of the whore or the slave. Instead, they were saved for what
can only be thought of as Darwinian sex: if not the origin, then at least the per-
petuation of the species was at stake. White women were in truth "respected" into
sexual confinement and robbed of erotic freedom. For white men, pleasure and
social privilege came wrapped in one neat package: if they ran the world, they
could enjoy it as they liked. For white women, these realms were strictly sepa-
rated, and besides, they had less of both.
That was even truer for slaves. Black women were victims of the erotic whims
of white men who bedded them as they pleased. Black men, too, were sexually
vulnerable. White culture harnessed the black penis to fertilize black wombs and
to fortify white rule. But if black women were a thrill—typecast as the erotic equals
of their insatiable men-black men were a threat. Black men's legendary prowess
made white men jealous and even erotically competitive. White men feared the
free black phallus, and spread that fear to their wives and daughters. The idea of
the potent black male was so scary that it drove D.W. Griffith in 1915 to unleash
Birth of a Nation, a film that throbbed with conspiracy in warning that the social
contract would unravel if black men were permitted to satisfy their lust for white
women. It made litde difference that such paranoia was fueled more by stereotype
than by science. The point was to protect white women, control black men, and
exploit black women.
The history of sexual relations between black men and white women is part ro-
mance novel, part Greek tragedy, and part horror story. In slavery, interracial sex
was plainly forbidden, even though such unions probably took place far more
than ol' Massa knew. Even in emancipation, the erotic ties between black men
and white women were forged in secrecy. The assault on interracial sex in the


--- PAGE 198 ---
In O.J.'S Shadow: Kobe Bryant's Predicament 169
name of white supremacy made such discretion necessary. Black men could be
lynched for just looking at a white woman, or, equally as savage, they could, like
Emmett Till, be beaten and tossed into a river and left for dead. White women
sometimes cried rape to escape the stigma or alienation that dogged those who
slept with black men. And even when black men and white women were brave
enough to defy social convention and expose their love to ridicule, they still faced
ugly comments, hateful stares and certain ostracism in the mainstream. Politics
and history are never far away in the interracial bed.
It is these politics and history that flare up in our consideration of Kobe's
case. On the face of it, the charge of sexual assault against Bryant is a bitter legal
dispute between two young adults. And yet, right away, there are complicating
factors. Bryant is a married man whereas his accuser is single. Bryant is a
wealthy athlete whose skill and charisma have made him hugely popular around
the globe. Although his gender and celebrity may tip the case in Bryant's favor,
race is a perennial wild card. Bryant is a big black man; his accuser, by all ac-
counts, is a much smaller white blonde. The idea of a black man in a tryst with
a white woman still spooks bigots who oppose interracial sex. And there may be
hidden resentments and subtle resistance even among those who don't view
themselves as prejudiced. This may be as true for those blacks tired of our men
tripping up with, and on, white women, as it is for whites with little experience
of blacks, much like those in the Colorado town with a miniscule black popula-
tion where Kobe may have sealed his fate.
It might turn out that Kobe's wealth and fame are trumped by his accuser's
race and gender. That comforts those who think that Bryant's status dupes peo-
ple into believing he couldn't assault anyone. To others, it's proof that the word
of an anonymous white woman is enough to bring a brother down, even a
brother of Kobe's standing, which, in their view, would be tragic, as his flawless
record, and more important, the law, says he deserves the benefit of the doubt. Of
course, this is assuming that there is no clear evidence of Bryant's or his accuser's
guilt forthcoming at trial. If no damning proof is presented, it's her word against
his. In such a case, race shapes our views of what looks like reasonable doubt or
even the evidence of wrongdoing.
Bryant finds himself in the deadly shadow of a racial catastrophe that was
burned into the nation's collective psyche: the OJ. Simpson case. The disap-
pointments and frustrations of that twisted drama have set the stage for Bryant's
prosecution in the court of public opinion, and most likely in the legal arena as
well. Black and white reactions to the Simpson case made it seem as if each group
lived in bitterly opposed worlds of racial perception. Early polls in the Bryant case
mirror this trend: blacks are much more likely than whites to think that the
charge against Bryant is false. And although 40 percent of whites are "very" or
"somewhat" sympathetic to Bryant, nearly two-thirds of blacks feel that way. One
can hardly be blamed for spotting in some whites' insistence on Bryant's guilt a
hunger for revenge of the Simpson verdict.


--- PAGE 199 ---
170 THE MICHAEL ERIC DYSON READER
When the mainstream embraced Bryant, it did so because of his athletic ge-
nius, his good looks, his magnetic smile, his clean image, his easy rapport with the
public-and, as with Simpson, because of the widely shared belief that he has tran-
scended race, or more to the point, that he has escaped the stigma of blackness.
(Let's not forget that Bryant has been hailed for being the Anti-Iverson, peeling
away the thug image glued to the Philadelphia 76ers corn-rowed, tattooed, and
hip-hop loving superstar. In addition, Bryant is considered a "Renaissance man"
because he is fluent in Italian, even as the more impressive multilingual talent of
athletes like Hakeem Olajuwon and Dikembe Mutombo is discounted because
their roots, and the source of their mastery, are African). Like Michael Jordan be-
fore him, and Simpson before them both, Bryant made millions by making it safe
for whites to consume blackness.
It remains to be seen whether Bryant will fall from grace as wildly and sharply
as Simpson did after his acquittal on murder charges. But the two are joined in
grisly solidarity because a white woman screams from the heart of their crises. An
alleged crime against a white woman also led them both to embrace blackness in
a manner they either never knew or had long forgotten. One of the first things
Simpson did after he found his freedom was to descend on a Los Angeles soul
food eatery.
Because his tribulation has just begun, Bryant is not yet desperate to deepen
his ties to loyal blacks. But he is already "blacker" than he was before tragedy
struck, in part because his problems reveal a racial cleavage in public opinion,
and because, to many, he has proved to be no better than the athletes to whom
he was once favorably compared—and indeed, he might now be seen as much
worse. Perhaps most striking, Bryant has publicly identified with the greatest
symbol of black struggle. At an awards show where he was named favorite male
athlete of American teens, Bryant paraphrased Martin Luther King, Jr., while al-
luding to his troubles: "An injustice anywhere is an injustice everywhere." It is
too soon to tell whether, in the spirit of the song that carried the civil rights
movement, Bryant can overcome.


--- PAGE 200 ---
P A R T S E V E N
A F R O - B A P T I S T
R A D I C A L I S M A N D R H E T O R I C
A number of groups have compared their social activism to the valiant
example of the black church to bolster the moral stature of their strug-
gles, from those who protest legalabortion to conservatives who oppose
affirmative action. Much of this comparison has been wretchedly ill-
informed, drivemn more by political expediency than a genuine edmbrace of
the spiril of resistance to injustice that, at its best, characterizes the black
church. From before the nation's foounding until the present day, religious
rhetoric has been heard in sared and secular circles as leaders expressedthe moral and political dimensions of black religious belief. Amoung thegreatest voices for social change have been black Christian Baptists, most
notably Martin Luther King, Fr., who have articulated to the nation
the stirring themes of Afro-Baptist radicalism. Both the rhetoric, and the
radical soial thought, of black Baptists is worthy of greater study.


--- PAGE 201 ---
This page intentionally left blank


--- PAGE 202 ---
Fifteen
"GOD ALMIGHTY HAS SPOKEN FROM
WASHINGTON, D.C.": AMERICAN SOCIETY
AND CHRISTIAN FAITH
A version of this chapter was first presented at a conference entitled the First Amendment
and Religion, held in 1991 at the DePaul University Law School, in response to a
paper by the formidable theological ethicist Stanley Hauerwas. Hauerwas, named in
2001 by Time magazine as "America's best theologian," was also praised by the
magazine as "contemporary theology'sforemost intellectual provocateur." Hauerwas is a
brilliant thinker whose mind ranges across an impressively wide range of subjects from
medical ethics to gossip, in supporting his insistence that the gospel prophetically preach to
liberal society rather than tailor its demands to the political order. In the present chapter,
I argue that the black religious tradition offers a powerful example of the redemptive
relationship between religious belief and social transformation. Although, as this chapter
makes clear, Hauerwas and I have some serious differences of belief about religion and
the public square, I consider him one of the bravest voices in Christendom, and one of the
greatest theological minds of the last half of the twentieth century.
As USUAL STANLEY HAUERWAS (this time with Michael Baxter) has, in "The
Kingship of Christ: Why Freedom of 'Belief Is Not Enough," given us a great
deal to think about in wrestling with the persistent problems growing out of the
church-state debate. Arguing that there are irresolvable tensions between Amer-
ican society and Christian faith, the authors deliver a tough rebuke to those
theologians who "posit some kind of harmony between the two by means of a
so-called church-state theory."1 The authors further maintain that most Chris-
tian theologians conspire to "privatize and subordinate Christianity," especially
when they assume that "Christianity consists of a set of beliefs (mere belief) that
can be abstracted from practices and actions (conduct) ."2 The danger, as the au-
thors see it, is that Christian belief gets removed from its legitimate social con-
text in the church and becomes conceived as a matter of individual freedom.
The remedy that Hauerwas and Baxter propose is for Christians to reclaim their
ecclesiastical and social identity as "the people who acknowledge the Kingship
ofChrist."3


--- PAGE 203 ---
174 THE MICHAEL ERIC DYSON READER
One need not accept (and indeed I don't) the authors' arguments about the
value and function of church-state debates in discussions of religious freedom to
affirm that the Kingship of Christ is crucial for the health of Christian churches.
Still, I remain deeply suspicious of their claims about the social form that best
serves and expresses Christian belief. Their arguments about the church's role in
society suffer from the same flight from social embodiment that they claim char-
acterizes their opponents in the church-state debate. And the intellectual road
Hauerwas and Baxter travel inductively from their conclusion of Christ's King-
ship—leading through arguments about freedom and political practice, the insu-
perable conflicts introduced by church-state debates, and the relation of civil reli-
gion to authentic Christian belief—is marked by signs of confusing detours and
confounding dilemmas.
In my response to Hauerwas and Baxter's position, I will show how their narrow
focus on secondary, less helpful issues in the history of church-state debates ob-
scures more compelling and primary points of concern that have a better chance of
illumining these debates. Then I will show how Hauerwas and Baxter's views of re-
ligious indifferentism rest on faulty analogies between free speech and freedom of
religion, reveal an inadequate theory of politics, and are plagued by insurmountable
dilemmas. In the end, their worries about indifferentism pale in comparison to the
specter of irrelevance posed by Hauerwas and Baxter's beliefs to the lives of every-
day Christians perplexed by the right relation between religion and politics.
Finally, I will argue that their understanding of the Christian tradition implies
a homogeneous idea of faith that excludes from consideration other relevant ex-
amples of the relation between church and society that might challenge or support
their views. Among other helpful models, the example of the prophetic black
church presents a vital vision of the relationship between faith and politics that
preserves Christian identity while expanding the possibilities of democracy, an
unjustifiable task for Christians from Hauerwas's point of view, but a central
claim of black prophetic Christianity.4
Hauerwas and Baxter's misgivings about the First Amendment in their present
essay derive partially from a narrow interpretation of church-state relations by
columnist George Will.5 As Hauerwas and Baxter explain, for Will the "heart of
the constitutional understanding of 'religion,'" is the "distinction between 'con-
duct' and 'mere belief.'"6 According to the authors, Will elaborates this distinction
by saying that the Founding Fathers sought to avoid the religious controversies
that plagued Europe by establishing in religion's stead the commercial republic of
capitalism. Influenced by John Locke, who maintained that the truth of religion
cannot be established by reason, Thomas Jefferson shaped the American doctrine
of the free exercise of religions, which made religions private and subordinate to
the political order. As long as religion is mere belief and private, the logic goes, it
is free and unrestricted. But when it becomes a matter of conduct or behavior, re-
ligion is subject to the rule of law. For Will, this represents the Founders' genius;
for Hauerwas and Baxter, it is sheer anathema, an intolerable rub.


--- PAGE 204 ---
"God Almighty Has Spoken from Washington, D.C." 175
But Will has a severely limited and self-serving view of the First Amendment.
Even if we acknowledge the distinctions many Founders made between belief and
behavior, we are not automatically bound to Will's interpretation of their views.
Indeed Hauerwas and Baxter's worries are legitimate only if Will's argument
about the Founders' beliefs turns out to be the crucial distinction in the constitu-
tional view of religion. But the most important distinction is not between conduct
and mere belief, but between freedom of conscience and the coercion to believe.
This distinction is made clear when we carefully consider in historical context the
easily misinterpreted terms of James Madison and Thomas Jefferson, the prime
architects of the constitutional concept of freedom of religion.
James Madison, who contributed key phrases to the important Virginia Decla-
ration of Rights, an exemplary document defending freedom of religion, pro-
posed the language of the First Amendment that was eventually revised and en-
acted by the First Congress.7 In proposing the First Amendment, Madison was as
greatly influenced by the suffering of religious dissenters at the hands of the
Church of England as by enlightenment ideals of reason's superiority and the
doctrine of natural rights.8 These ideals led Madison to declare that religion "can
be directed only by reason and conviction."9 And the brutal battles fought over re-
ligious freedom led him to conclude that "all men are equally entitled to the free
exercise of religion according to the dictates of conscience."10
Such religious battles also convinced Madison that religious belief must not be
established or imposed by the state. This was especially true for a revealed religion
like Christianity, whose claims to the exclusive possession of truth also opened the
possibility of religiously justified claims to political power.11 To circumvent this pos-
sibility in the embryonic nation, Christianity had to be shorn of its potential polit-
ical authority, a strategy achieved by challenging Christianity's biblical authority
and asserting its status as a reason-governed discourse, a transformation that pro-
foundly shaped Madison's views of religion, and Jefferson's as well.12
Indeed, Jefferson, in the strong embrace of Lockean liberalism, natural rights
philosophy, and enlightenment rationality, also rejected Christianity's status as
revelation.13 With Madison and other similarly enlightened men, Jefferson de-
clared religion to be a matter of opinion.14 This view led him to proclaim that,
should the neighbors of Americans say that there are twenty gods, or no God,
such a statement would neither "break their legs or pick their pockets," precisely
because it is not backed by the force of law.15 For Jefferson and the Founders, such
an opinion is distinguished from officially established and recognized beliefs.
Since the government is derived from the natural rights of human beings and not
divine revelation, such opinions would neither mandate punishment nor require
exceptional protection for their utterance. To act otherwise, as if the religious
opinion that there was no God or that there were twenty gods could cause injury
to be inflicted upon its bearer, is to acknowledge that such an utterance fractured
a legally sanctioned belief about God. But this would be contrary to the constitu-
tional view of religion.


--- PAGE 205 ---
176 THE MICHAEL ERIC DYSON READER
And more important for the fledgling nation, Christianity was no longer to be
protected from challenge or dissent under cover of legal sanction. Thus, the interests
of nonbelievers, unorthodox believers, and dissenting Christians converged around
the disestablishment of religion and the establishment of religious freedom. In view
of this history, the central distinction in the constitutional view of religion is indeed
between freedom of conscience and the coercion to believe. Hauerwas and Baxter's
acceptance of Will's distinction between mere belief and conduct as the primary con-
stitutional religious issue causes them to overlook the bitter cultural and interpretive
wars fought over the freedom of religion by citizens oppressed by the intolerant be-
havior of the established church. By viewing the issue of the freedom of religion in
relation to the historical events I have just sketched, Hauerwas and Baxter might be
led to accentuate the struggles of oppressed Christians and other citizens against the
power of the church when it is officially entrenched by law in a classic Constantin-
ian contract with the state.16 Ironically, the Constantinian compromise of the church
is a favorite theme of Hauerwas's ethical reflections, and invites vigorous exposition
in the present context.17 But Hauerwas and Baxter's pursuit of a less important con-
stitutional distinction has diverted their attention from a suitable occasion to press
one of Hauerwas's more powerful charges.
Even a cursory reading of the events precipitating the development of the First
Amendment suggests that it was a brilliantly preemptive and bloodless resolution
of religious conflict. By disestablishing religion and establishing religious freedom,
the Founders translated an a priori denial of privilege to any one religion in par-
ticular as the principle for extending privilege to them all. The crucial distinction
in the constitutional view of religion is the one between enforced religious views
and the freedom to practice the religion of one's choice or community. Viewing
the freedom of religion debate in this manner allows us to understand what really
was at stake for citizens who endured hardship because of their opposition to the
politically protected claims of official and legal Christianity.
But Hauerwas and Baxter's silence on this aspect of the church-state debate is
rooted perhaps in a presumption of the homogeneity of the Christian experience,
a point I will take up in greater detail later. For now, it is enough to say that the
freedom of religion debate pointed to the vibrant religious diversity, especially
within Christianity itself, that was mocked by the rigid constraints and narrow
practices of the Church of England and by established religion in the colonies. Es-
tablished religion defined the church in the singular, but the existence of New
Light Presbyterians, Strict Congregationalists, Separate Baptists, and even
Methodists demanded that it be reconceived in the plural.18
Conflicts created by the quest for the tolerance of religious pluralism is an in-
escapably key theme that must be addressed in any credible account of the events
surrounding and leading to the First Amendment. Their avoidance is certain to
lead to truncated and self-serving versions of events that shaped, in principle, the
democratic destiny of our nation. Indeed, the religious question played a crucial
role "in the beginning of free government. No question was then more important,


--- PAGE 206 ---
"God Almighty Has Spoken from Washington, D.C." 177
none played so prominent a role in the thought of the pertinent theorists—
Hobbes, Locke, Spinoza, Bayle, and, to a lesser but still significant extent, even
Montesquieu—and even if it could be said that they solved it, or answered it, in
principle, it was left to the American Founders to be the first to solve it, or to try
to solve it, in practice.19
Of course, as Hauerwas and Baxter's discussion of Employment Divison, Dept. of
Human Resources of the State of Oregon v. Smith and Black proves, freedom of religion has
met limitations in the form of state proscription of religious beliefs that intersect the
nebulous area between important aspects of law and faith. We have also seen the
opposite effect in the case of the Jonestown mass suicides, where the failure of state
intervention in the name of freedom of religion perhaps inadvertently aided the
economic and religious exploitation and deaths of over nine hundred persons.20
But uses of freedom of religion have largely safeguarded the religious liberties of
faith communities to pursue the practice of their beliefs in a society where religious
prejudice, bigotry, and intolerance were not given legal underpinning.
The glaring exception, of course, is chattel slaves, who were for most of their
enslavement legally barred from free worship without white supervision. But
even black Christians came to cherish the First Amendment because it protected
their hard-won freedom to worship without governance, while also giving legal
expression to their concern that other groups not suffer similar penalties of social
and religious intolerance. The formulation of the First Amendment by the
Founders presented a tenable solution to the religious suffering created by the le-
galization of Christianity. It may be cogently argued that with the First Amend-
ment, a large and vital Christian purpose was served, that the ideals of Christian
love and tolerance were ironically promoted through the government's refusal to
cede Christianity official status. By keeping believers from maiming one another
over religious dispute, the government instituted in law what Christian belief
aimed for in principle but failed to practice. It would not be the last time the gov-
ernment intervened in the face of the failure of Christians to act on their beliefs,
a topic about which I shall have more to say later.
Overall the First Amendment has been very good for Christianity. It forced
Christian churches to appeal to potential adherents on the basis of persuasive
preaching, sound theology, superior ways of life, and sacrificial action.21 Once
they were cut from the strings of official obligation, independent Christian
churches were free to prophetically address the state and to criticize practices that
were offensive to moral principles to which churches strongly adhered. The ben-
efits of the separation of church and state are nicely summarized by John Bennett,
who says that it fulfills the "need of religious institutions to be free from control
by the state," that it satisfies the "need to protect citizens from interference with
their religious liberty" by either state power or religious groups, and that it "is fa-
vorable to the health and vitality of churches."22
The alarm set off in Hauerwas and Baxter by Will's insistence that the free
exercise of religion rests on religion's privatization and subordination is largely


--- PAGE 207 ---
178 THE MICHAEL ERIC DYSON READER
unnecessary. Perhaps we can reach a clearer understanding if we examine the
two terms of Will's contention separately. To proclaim that religion will not
carry the weight of law by being disestablished is not the same as saying religion
will be made private.23 It is very important not to collapse the two as Will has
done, a move Hauerwas and Baxter fail to challenge. Indeed, many of the
Founders promoted the advantage of the public expression of religion even as
they asserted the necessity for religion's disestablishment.
Because the Founders were not orthodox Christians, the views they held about
the role of religion in the republic had more to do with its preservative function in
national life and its support of political institutions than its strictly redemptive role
as envisioned by partisan believers.24 Benjamin Franklin, for instance, saw the
virtue of what he called "public religion," the forerunner of what we know today
as civil religion.25 Martin Marty says that by public religion Franklin "meant not
the end of sects but of sectarianism, not the end of their freedoms but the increase
of their duty to produce a common morality. Wherever he saw churches agreeing,
he encouraged their support of the commonweal, and he opposed their spats over
their peculiarities. His faith .. . was in ... the need to do good."26 Franklin's views
resonated with other Founders, who sought to fashion a public polity based on the
premise that a common moral community underlay the republic. As Marty says:
"Fortunately for later America, the Founding Fathers, following the example of
Franklin, put their public religion to good use. While church leaders usually for-
ayed only briefly into the public arena and then scurried back to mind their own
shops, men of the Enlightenment worked to form a social fabric that assured free-
dom to the several churches, yet stressed common concerns of society."27
George Washington, too, subscribed to a belief in the public utility of religion,
asserting the link between religion and public morality as the foundation of na-
tional flourishing. In his farewell address, Washington stated:
Of all the dispositions and habits which lead to political prosperity, religion
and morality are indispensable supports. In vain would that man claim the trib-
ute of patriotism who should labor to subvert these great pillars of human hap-
piness, these firmest props of the duties of men and citizens. The mere politician,
equally with the pious man, ought to respect and to cherish them.... Whatever
may be conceded to the influence of refined education on minds of peculiar
structure, reason and experience both forbid us to expect that national morality
can prevail in exclusion of religious principle.28
And even Thomas Jefferson, despite his unorthodox Christian beliefs and his
individualization of religious faith, demonstrated appreciation for religion's public
function in the republic, especially since the proliferation of religious bodies
would serve as a built-in check and balance to American religious life. According
to Jefferson, the function of "several sects perform the office of a Censor morum
over each other."29 He also valued religion for lending moral support to political


--- PAGE 208 ---
"God Almighty Has Spoken from Washington, D.C." 179
liberty when he queried, "And can the liberties of a nation be thought secure
when we have removed their only firm basis, a conviction in the minds of the peo-
ple that these liberties are the gift of God?"30
Of course, it is exactly the public expression of religion along these lines that
disturbs Hauerwas and Baxter, who hold that national or civil religion is "coun-
terfeit" Christianity uprooted from an account of the good. Even if one maintains
this view, however, it doesn't negate the fact that there is nothing in the First
Amendment that prohibits the public expression of religion, including Christian-
ity, in the republic. Thus, as Hauerwas and Baxter present his case, Charles Tay-
lor's arguments about religion and political life are on target: there was neither in-
tent nor need in the separation of church and state to exclude God or religion
from the republic.
Similarly, the subordination of religion to the political order is not as bad as
Hauerwas and Baxter deem it to be, because it doesn't mean what they fear it to
imply. I have already hinted at my response earlier by suggesting that one virtue of
the separation of church and state is Christianity's enhanced potential to address
the state on politically independent terms. But Will's claim is also legitimate, that
religion was to be made subordinate to the political order. The tension that arises
from these apparently contradictory claims can be relieved by examining the two
ways in which we can read religious subordination: either functionally or morally.
First, since American society was deliberately constructed upon secular princi-
ples to avoid the fatal conflicts occasioned by established religion in the England
of the Founders' recent memory, the subordination of religion to the state went
hand in hand with the creation of the nation and the establishment of the freedom
of religion. Saying that religion is subordinate to the political order is the positive
statement of its more generally repeated negative formulation: that religion will
not be established, or politically justified, in American society. What is meant is
that religion will not function officially to adjudicate national disputes, will not oc-
cupy legal status to enforce civil codes, and will not be the means by which social
goods are distributed. These functions are left to the political realm. Hence, in a
legal sense, religion is functionally subordinate to politics.
On the other hand, if by subordinate it is meant that religion will surrender its
independence to the political order to merely justify, or even sanctify, its practices;
that religion will abdicate its role as critic of governmental and state practices; that
religion will no longer provide moral visions and ethical principles by which ad-
vocates of justice may call society to judgment, then religion is without question
morally insubordinate to and politically independent of the political realm. Its
functional subordination by no means entails its moral subordination.
The difference is that functional subordination is the very premise by which
American religions can claim their freedom to express faith and exercise their be-
lief, especially in the social and public sphere. But moral insubordination is the
way religions preserve their integrity and viability and perform their real worth to
the republic by calling it to judgment in relation to their specific moral visions.


--- PAGE 209 ---
180 THE MICHAEL ERIC DYSON READER
Moreover, as I will more fully argue later, if the moral visions of religion are to
have public persuasion, they must be cast in terms that transcend narrow or sec-
tarian religious language and concern, demonstrating their relevance by their
prophetic judgment of, or application to, the nation in compelling public terms.31
Given these distinctions, Hauerwas and Baxter's worries that religion becomes
private and subordinate to the state in the First Amendment are dissolved when
we bring more precision to our understanding of the terms of religion's relation
to the state. If Hauerwas and Baxter's real concern is to resist the privatization
and moral subordination of Christianity, their fight is not with constitutional
views of religion, but with forms of Christian experience and belief that claim that
the church's most perfect social expression is limited to ecclesial expressions, as
Hauerwas and Baxter proclaim.
Ironically, then, it is Hauerwas and Baxter who turn out to be the real oppo-
nents of the full social embodiment of Christianity. By refusing to acknowledge
the legitimate expression of Christian faith outside the perimeters of the church,
Hauerwas and Baxter contribute to a fatal narrowing of religious belief, a position
that has led to Hauerwas being characterized (fairly I think) as a sectarian.32
Their sectarian belief conflicts with Hauerwas and Baxter's intent to resist the pri-
vatization, and indirectly, the subordination of Christianity.
Their views also lead them to deemphasize the crucial features of the church-
state debate that have the best chance to illumine the historical conflicts over reli-
gious tolerance, plurality, difference, and diversity, issues that also clearly affect
our contemporary religious and cultural scene. More important, their position also
reduces the potential impact of the gospel on the lives of Christians struggling to
understand the proper role of faith in contemporary political debates.
Hauerwas and Baxter's deficiencies are further magnified in the way they make
analogies between freedom of speech and freedom of religion in pressing their case.
Drawing on an essay by Stanley Fish, the authors claim that just as freedom of
speech has paved the way for "indifferentism" in speech, so freedom of religion has
led to "religious indifferentism." According to Hauerwas and Baxter, Fish claims
that speech has become a matter of indifference because it has been severed from
an account of the good that assigns value to "free speech," which in reality has built-
in limits against those expressions its exponents deem harmful to its flourishing.
In this view, freedom of speech is really an illusion. Furthermore, all the distinc-
tions that Will made about religion find analogous expression in "a private sphere
not only of speech and ideas, but also of 'mere speech' and 'mere ideas,' of speech
and ideas understood apart from any substantive account of the good which they
serve."33 The same holds for religion. As Hauerwas and Baxter say, "Inherent in
Christian convictions is a substantive account of the good," an account that is in
tension with "all so-called 'political' accounts of the good."34 Moreover, when po-
litical accounts of the good underwrite a vision of God and Christianity that are
rooted in civil religion, there is conflict with genuine Christianity. Hauerwas and
Baxter state that when Christianity gets separated from its embodied social form,


--- PAGE 210 ---
"God Almighty Has Spoken from Washington, D.C." 181
Christian belief becomes "asocial" and degenerates into mere belief, while a "coun-
terfeit" religion, a religion of the nation, rises to take Christianity's place.
On the face of it—judging from the passages they cite—Hauerwas and Baxter's
use of Fish's work appears consonant with their project, an act of untroubled ap-
propriation. But closer reading of Fish's essay suggests that there are irresolvable
tensions between his views and Hauerwas and Baxter's, tensions that have to do
primarily with theological presumptions in Fish's work that are diametrically op-
posed to Hauerwas and Baxter's beliefs. Such tensions place Hauerwas and Bax-
ter in a confounding dilemma. As a result, for Hauerwas and Baxter to success-
fully adopt Fish's arguments, they will either have to substantially alter their
positions or give up their present beliefs about the appropriate social expression
of Christian faith.
The tensions between Fish's analysis and Hauerwas and Baxter's use of it are
glimpsed in Fish's discussion of the possible objections to his view of free speech
as articulated by its defenders. What the defenders of free speech could say, Fish
hypothesizes, is that he has not appropriately anticipated future revisions to his
specific account of the good for which speech stands, thus prematurely closing
possible valid interpretations to future generations: "My mistake, it could be said,
is to equate the something in whose service speech is with some locally espoused
value (e.g., the end of racism, the empowerment of disadvantaged minorities),
whereas in fact we should think of that something as a now inchoate shape ... we
cannot now know . .. and therefore we must not prematurely fix it in ways that
will bind successive generations to error."35 But Fish demurs from this position on
the First Amendment, saying that it "continues in a secular form the Puritan cele-
bration of millenarian hopes, but it imposes a requirement so severe that one
would expect more justification than is usually provided."36 Fish continues: "The
requirement is that we endure whatever pain racist and hate speech inflicts for the
sake of a future whose emergence we can only take on faith. In a specifically reli-
gious vision like Milton's, this makes perfect sense (it is indeed the whole of
Christianity), but in the context of a politics that puts its trust in the world and
not in the Holy Spirit, it raises more questions than it answers."37
For Fish, this alternative to his view makes "perfect sense" only if it is rooted in
a Christian interpretation of events that he implies does not prevail in our culture,
or at least not in the political realms where decisions about the First Amendment
are debated and resolved. Such a Christian interpretation of events, which would
counsel enduring the present penalties imposed by free speech, could only be sup-
ported by belief in a future guaranteed by religious faith. Moreover, such a Chris-
tian perspective is only coherent within a political framework that puts its trust in
the Holy Spirit. Thus, the key features of this opposing view to Fish's position are
dependent upon the premises of a religious worldview to make its claims cogent.
Also, such a religious perspective would influence the political expression of the
alternative to Fish's position, and could therefore in no way be identical to his
views of free speech or, by extension, free religion. As Fish has already indicated,


--- PAGE 211 ---
182 THE MICHAEL ERIC DYSON READER
one such crucial difference between his position and its alternative might be that
free speech in the abstract must be protected, even though it means the present
and concrete suffering by blacks and minorities, because of a future disclosure of
truth that in retrospect will alter how we perceive present suffering. The good to
be revealed in the future guaranteed by faith, we can infer, will compensate for, or
at least justify, the present suffering.
The point is that Fish's view is predicated upon an explicitly secular view that
would seem to severely contradict Hauerwas and Baxter's views. The sorts of ev-
idence that count in the realm of faith will not do for the secular realm-die re-
quirement, as Fish says, is too severe. The opposite is also true, that the sorts of
evidence sufficient in the secular realm will not wash in the realm of faith. The se-
vere requirement that Fish cannot imagine bearing derives from its linkage to a
Christian worldview where evidence is supplied by faith and trust in the Holy
Spirit. This latter alternative—which Fish says requires that we acknowledge "the
(often grievous) consequences, but that we ... suffer them in the name of some-
thing that cannot be named"—is the second of two unacceptable alternatives (and
the one not mentioned by Hauerwas and Baxter) to his position. The first is the
alternative Hauerwas and Baxter do mention, the position that makes speech in-
consequential and a matter of indifference.
This second alternative to Fish's position seems ideally suited for Hauerwas
and Baxter, and given their religious outlook-which emphasizes the social ex-
pression of Christianity in the church and opposition to secular liberal society as
the "politics that know not God"38—the one that they would logically adopt. The
only problem is that by adopting such a view Hauerwas and Baxter immediately
face a dilemma. In accepting the religious basis of society signified by trust in die
Holy Spirit and the Kingship of Christ, they are identified with a position that
Fish claims is opposed to the sort of secular logic that clinches the case that he
makes for speech inconsequentialism and that Hauerwas and Baxter by analogy
extend to religious indifferentism. On the other hand, if Hauerwas and Baxter re-
ject the secular logic of Fish's position, they have destroyed the basis of their ar-
gument for the indifferentism of freedom of religion and would have to forfeit
their claim that it has corrupted the church-state debate, because it is rooted in
the sort of reasoning they find offensive to Christian belief. Either way, Hauerwas
and Baxter are caught in a damning dilemma.
There is yet another point of tension between Hauerwas and Baxter and Fish.
Fish contends that both alternatives to his views—speech as inconsequential, and
present suffering for the sake of a nameless something—are unpersuasive. But he
admits that "many in the society seemed to have bought them."39 Why? Because
such persons avoid facing
what they take to be the alternative. That alternative is politics, the realization
(at which I have already hinted) that decisions about what is and is not protected


--- PAGE 212 ---
"God Almighty Has Spoken from Washington, D.C." 183
in the realms of expression will rest not on principle or firm doctrine but on the
ability of persons and groups to so operate (some would say manipulate) the po-
litical process that the speech they support is labeled "protected" while die speech
inimical to their interests is declared to be fair game.40
To those who respond that politics would render the First Amendment a "dead
letter," or that it deprives us of norms in determining "when and what speech to
protect," or that it effaces die distinction between speech and action, Fish argues
for die primacy of politics.41 Fish responds that
die First Amendment has always been a dead letter if one understood its "live-
ness" to depend on die identification and protection of a realm of "mere" expres-
sion or discussion distinct from die real of regulatable conduct; diat die distinction
between speech and action has always been effaced in principle, although in prac-
tice it can take whatever form the prevailing political conditions mandate; that we
have never had any normative guidance for marking off protected and unpro-
tected speech; rather, diat die guidance we have had has been fashioned (and re-
fashioned) in the very political struggles over which it dien (for a time) presides.42
In sum, for Fish the "name of the game has always been politics, even when
(indeed, especially when) it is played by stigmatizing politics as the area to be
avoided."43
As if Hauerwas and Baxter's arguments were not already on the ropes because
of their earlier dilemma, diis last argument of Fish's deals a fatal blow to their as-
pirations to make Christianity social but not political, especially because so much
of dieir argument hinges on die effective correlation between Fish's views on free
speech and the conclusions Hauerwas and Baxter draw from diem about die per-
ils of free religion. Fish explicitly endorses politics as die means by which claims
of free speech are made intelligible and cogent, precisely because politics has been
die implicit basis of understanding and applying the amendment from the very
beginning. The same, presumably, should hold for the application of politics to
free religion claims. But Hauerwas and Baxter are unwilling to cede die primacy
of politics in making die claims of Christianity cogent or in adjudicating religious
conflict, which is die obvious application of Fish's position to their own. Again,
they are faced widi a dilemma: if diey give up politics, they give up the punch line
to Fish's arguments, severely compromising the force of his contentions and, by
extension, dieir arguments. But if they adopt politics, they abort their arguments
about the primacy of a confessional God and ecclesial religion to politics. Either
way, a principle diey cherish is surrendered.
In some places in their essay, it appears that Hauerwas and Baxter will stick
with Fish all the way through. They say diat with "die indifferentism which in-
evitably ensues when speech is considered apart from the Good, 'freedom of


--- PAGE 213 ---
184 THE MICHAEL ERIC DYSON READER
speech' enjoys a protection in the United States according to arbitrary patterns of
political influence and power as much as according to any consistent application
of constitutional principles."44 It seems as though they are on the verge of ac-
knowledging that value-laden, good-dependent notions of free speech, and by
analogy free religion, need to be negotiated by politics, which in this case amounts
to the struggle to assign value to goods defined in the abstract.
But Hauerwas and Baxter dismiss such hopes by saying that only "within the
ecclesial context, that is, only within a context in which the social landscape is im-
bued with the presence of Christ, can Christianity emerge as an alternative both
to liberal freedom and civic freedom, and more generally, to the political project
we call the United States of America."45 For Hauerwas and Baxter, the task is to
"provide an alternative vision to the political vision of America, one that is shaped
by the acknowledgment that true political authority is to be found not in any re-
publican virtues, new or ancient, nor in any set of governmental procedures, but
in Jesus Christ who is our true King."46 So much for politics!
By refusing to enter the fray, to give political justification and arguments for
their beliefs about the Christian good, Hauerwas and Baxter not only repudiate
their connection with the sort of social activity that Fish describes as necessary for
those who refute nebulous concepts of the freedom of speech, but they also risk a
more serious setback with disturbing consequences for the Christian Church:
they fail to offer to everyday Christians stuck in the gritty interstices of politics ad-
equate resources and substantive recommendations for moving beyond paralysis,
confusion, or wrong practice. Just when Christians caught in the punishing polit-
ical dilemmas of contemporary society need a note of reveille, retreat is sounded.
Thus, the most harmful effect of Hauerwas and Baxter's views of free speech and
free religion may not be the indifferentism they worry over, but the sheer irrele-
vance of their views to the church to which they are committed.
This irrelevance is pegged on the peculiar social but apolitical vision Hauerwas
and Baxter have of Christian faith. By failing to take politics seriously, they can
do little more than lament, for instance, the loss of rights by Smith and Black in
the Supreme Court case they cite. At best, they can make intellectual moves to re-
ject the distinctions that have made religion a matter of indifference. Because they
refuse to engage a public beyond the church, Hauerwas and Baxter have little
chance to affect the manner in which discussion is formed around these issues in
the public sphere. More poignantly, Hauerwas and Baxter's modus operandi can-
not affect future legal and political decisions that similarly impact other citizens'
lives and their freedom of religious beliefs.
Hauerwas and Baxter's problems are also rooted in yet a third dimension of
their discussion of religious indifferentism that they themselves seem not to take
seriously: a substantive account of the good that is the background to their notion
of Christian faith. Not only should speech have an account of the good, as Hauer-
was and Baxter contend, but by extension of their analogy between free speech
and free religion, so should Christian faith. The point here is not to highlight an


--- PAGE 214 ---
"God Almighty Has Spoken from Washington, D.C." 185
account of the good to which Christian faith can be said to generally refer—Chris-
tian love, peace, or justice, for instance—but to elaborate the specific cultural con-
texts and social visions that have decisively shaped and made possible specific
faith communities. I suspect this is not high on Hauerwas and Baxter's agenda be-
cause their procedures and assumptions imply a homogeneity about the Christian
faith that masks the social roots and cultural contexts of the ecclesial embodiment
of religious belief.
Hauerwas and Baxter's approach mutes die radical diversity and complex plu-
ralism within die Christian faith, a situation that long ago made it untenable in
certain sociological and theological senses to speak primarily of The Church.47 Be-
cause of their procedures, Hauerwas and Baxter have failed to take into consider-
ation, or even argue against, an expression of Christian faith that has creatively
confronted many of the problems discussed by the authors: the black church.48 By
turning now to this example, I intend to illumine the relation between religion and
politics in one of the most helpful but neglected models available.
Black Christian churches have had quite a different approach to the First
Amendment than the position argued by Hauerwas or Baxter, largely because
of the prominence of legal issues in determining the status, fate, and humanity of
African-Americans for much of our history. And with the central importance of
religion to African-American culture, the strong and vital connections between
civil and religious concerns has been well established. Not only has religion
helped sustain black survival in times of racial and national crisis, but it has fur-
nished principles and persons to justify black claims to equal humanity and social
justice in government, church, and school.49
Although it is by now common to cite the black Christian experience in debates
about the relationship between religion and politics, the black church is rarely
viewed as a genuine source of information about these matters in ways that count.
As Cornel West has stated:
Ironically, the black church experience is often invoked as an example of the
religion/politics fusion, but rarely as a source to listen to or learn from. Instead,
it is simply viewed as an instance that confirms the particular claims put forward
by the respective sides. The black experience may no longer be invisible, but it
remains unheard—not allowed to speak for itself, to be taken seriously as having
something valuable to say.50
The black church view of the relationship between religion and politics has roots
in the denominational affiliations that shaped it, the ongoing experiences of op-
pression in national life that black religion ceaselessly addresses, and broad ex-
periments in American civil religion.
Black Christians are overwhelmingly Baptist and Methodist, a legacy that ex-
tends back to slave culture.51 Because it was illegal to baptize and preach to slaves
during much of slavery, the process of exposing slaves to Christianity was gradual.


--- PAGE 215 ---
186 THE MICHAEL ERIC DYSON READER
As slaves were eventually incorporated into Christianity on limited terms in the
mid-1700s, they were deeply affected by Methodists and especially by Separate
Baptists. The Separate Baptists were viewed with suspicion by both the established
church and society at large during their initial stages of growth in the early 1700s.52
Deeply disinherited, poor, without formal training, and broadly suspicious of ex-
ternal authority, the Separate Baptists naturally appealed to slaves who were even
more ostracized from American culture than the Baptists because of their legal sta-
tus as personal property.
But as they grew, Separate Baptists continued to exhibit two traits that marked
their early years: their opposition to slavery and their enthusiastic leadership of
the fight against established religion.53 Thus, at the base of the denomination to
which slaves were overwhelmingly drawn, and in which they eventually estab-
lished independent churches in the mid-1800s, was an emphasis on the strong re-
lation between political and civil issues and personal and communal religious be-
lief. The arguments that radical religious dissenters made for freedom from
slavery and freedom of religion prefigured the legal and social arguments ad-
vanced by black intellectuals, organizers, and leaders in the fight against institu-
tional racism in two important ways.54
First, the religious dissenters' arguments expressed religious themes of social
justice linked to belief in God. The arguments of Isaac Backus and John Allen
against slavery and religious intolerance pictured these injustices as offenses not
only to civil society, but to authentic Christian belief.55 Second, although their ar-
guments were unquestionably motivated by religious concern, dissenters cast
their arguments in the language of civic piety and civil responsibility in making
moral claims on the state to act justly. These two narrative strategies were
adopted and ingeniously expanded by black Christians, especially the prophetic
wing of the black church. This vital branch of black Christianity has relentlessly
explained and justified the moral and religious claims of black Christian belief in
the language of civic piety, whose vocabulary includes legal redress, moral sua-
sion, civil rights, and political proclamation.
This last point reveals as well African-Americans' participation in and expan-
sion of traditions of American civil religion. Although for Hauerwas and Baxter
it is "counterfeit" religion, a progressive, largely liberal version of civil religion is
critically celebrated within African-American prophetic Christianity.56 As Charles
Long says, "The distinction between civil religion and church religion is not one
that looms large for us."57 He continues:
In the first place, it is the overwhelming reality of the white presence in any of
its various forms that becomes the crucial issue. Whether this presence was le-
gitimated by power executed illegally, or whether in institution or custom, its re-
ality, as far as blacks were concerned through most of their history, carried the
force of legal sanction enforced by power. The black response to this cultural re-
ality is part of the civil rights struggles in the history of American blacks.58


--- PAGE 216 ---
"God Almighty Has Spoken from Washington, D.C." 187
Long further argues that it is not incidental that black churches have been the
locus of civil rights struggle because it "represented the black confrontation with
an American myth that dehumanized the black person's being."59 Furthermore,
the "location of this struggle in the church enabled the civil rights movement to
take on the resources of black cultural life," such as organization, music, artistic
expression, and proficiency in collecting limited economic resources.60
In appropriating and improvising upon a vocabulary of civic piety, black
Christians have appealed to the sacred symbols of national life and its demo-
cratic principles, which find literate expression in the Constitution and the Dec-
laration of Independence. Perhaps the most famous example of this long-
standing black church tradition is symbolized in the brilliant career of Martin
Luther King Jr. Like his Separate Baptist predecessors and his Black Baptist an-
cestors, King employed the language of civic piety (particularly civil rights) in
articulating at once the goals of African-American religion and a version of lib-
eral democracy.61 Although he remained rooted in his religious base, King tran-
scended the narrow focus of sectarian and myopic religious concerns to em-
brace a universal moral perspective in addressing, first, the specific suffering of
black Americans and, eventually, the economic exploitation and racial oppres-
sion of other "minorities."
But King's genius lay in his ability to show how increased democracy for
African-Americans served the common good by making democracy hew closer to
its ideals than its performance in the distant and recent past suggested. King spoke
a language of civic piety (especially civil rights) diat resonated with crucial aspects
of American moral self-understanding, particularly since such self-understanding
was closely linked to ideals of justice, freedom, and equality. King and his col-
leagues creatively reinterpreted documents of ultimate importance in national
life—particularly the Declaration of Independence and the Constitution—in ex-
tending the goods at which they aimed (including democracy, justice, and equal-
ity) to blacks and others excluded from their original intent.62
Shaped profoundly by the black Christian Church and rooted in black theo-
logical perspectives on love, justice, equality, and freedom articulated in the rich
history of black resistance to racism, King and his cohorts forged empowering
connections between their religious beliefs and the social, civic, and legal goals to
which they believed their faith committed them. Indeed, they translated their re-
ligious efforts into the language with the best chance to express their goals in the
national arena. For the black church, justice is what love sounds like when it
speaks in public, civic piety is love's public language, equality its tone of voice,
and freedom its constant pitch. For Hauerwas and Baxter, such translation may
prove problematic, but for black Christians it has meant survival.
Such acts of translation also rest on the black Christian belief that the entire
world belongs to God, that religious truth is not bound to the sanctuary, and that
God often employs apparently disinterested or even hostile persons, forces, and
institutions to achieve the divine prerogative. This truth can be partially glimpsed


--- PAGE 217 ---
188 THE MICHAEL ERIC DYSON READER
in the popularity of the scripture "You meant evil against me; but God meant it
for good."63 This often quoted passage forms one of the most visible hermeneuric
strategies employed in the black church, one that reflects a strong doctrine of
providence and a serviceable theodicy geared toward black survival and a mo-
mentous confrontation with suffering and evil.
For prophetic black Christians, not only is speaking the language of civil soci-
ety not taboo, but the messages of God are likewise not limited to homiletical
proclamation, theological discourse, or other ecclesial expressions of God talk.
Since the world belongs to God, and the powers that exist, even if evil inten-
tioned, may have good consequences in the eyes of faith, God can use whatever
forum necessary to deliver divine gift or judgment. This whole theological ap-
proach is implicit in the statement by a jubilant black person who, upon hearing
of the 1956 Supreme Court decision declaring segregated transportation in Mont-
gomery, Alabama, unconstitutional, exclaimed, "God Almighty has spoken from
Washington, D.C."64 For black Christians, God is the original and ultimate poly-
glot. The language of civic piety (especially civil rights) serves God's purposes, as
does the language of theological study and religious devotion. Thus, the civil
rights movement helped foster a progressive understanding of the relation be-
tween religion and politics that rested on precedents of such interaction in Amer-
ican civil religion.
I have given this severely abbreviated genealogy and justification of the positive
relation of religion to politics in African-American Christianity to suggest the rich
resources it contains for critical thinking about the relation between church and
society. The progressive and prophetic black church, as I have sketched it here, re-
jects the premises of Hauerwas and Baxter's arguments about the relation of faith
and politics. Faith has a large part to play in the public arena, but only if it will re-
describe its goals in languages that are publicly effective, accompanied by the pol-
itics with the best chance to make those goals concrete and relevant. Black Chris-
tianity avoids attempts to impose Christianity on the world, a strategy as old as
religious establishment and as new as national attempts to manipulate God for po-
litical favor.65 Rather, it retains the strengths and insights of religious belief while
making arguments for the common good and public interest that are subject to
criticism and open to revision because they are neither final nor infallible.
Its history prevents black Christianity from endorsing Hauerwas and Baxter's
pessimistic views about the ability of Christian faith to mix with politics without
losing its soul, without surrendering its capacity to criticize liberal democracy.
Hauerwas and Baxter are right to remind us that Christian faith is in perennial
tension with all political accounts of the good. Indeed, the history of African-
American prophetic Christianity is the story of the relentless criticism of failed
American social practices, the constant drawing attention to conflicts between po-
litical ideals and realities, and the ageless renewal of a commitment to broaden the
bounds of liberty so that democracy is both noun and adjective, both achieve-
ment and process. But some political accounts of the good are better than others,


--- PAGE 218 ---
"God Almighty Has Spoken from Washington, D.C." 189
and only those Christian communities willing to risk the erosion and expansion
of certain aspects of their Christian identity in secular affairs have the opportunity
to affect the public interest for the better.
This, of course, is why Hauerwas and Baxter's views of the various problems
associated with the freedom of religion are viewed suspiciously by the prophetic
black Christian Church. By avoiding the nasty and brutal sphere of politics,
Hauerwas and Baxter cannot adequately account for the black struggle and suf-
fering endured to receive the freedoms the First Amendment guarantees. Black
Christians have always understood that the batteries are not included, that Amer-
ican ideals, principles, and promises are never given, but must be secured through
political struggle in the public realm. With Fish, they recognize that the "game has
always been politics."66 Hauerwas and Baxter's account not only masks the social
and political roots of their own faith, but it effectively discounts the experience of
black Christians who provide precisely the sort of example of the relation be-
tween church and politics that might have a chance of bringing greater clarity to
this complex debate.
Finally, black prophetic Christians are wary of theological discussions that re-
duce the social embodiment of Christianity to the church and that portray the
state as the enemy of Christian freedom. If theological justifications of slavery had
not done so before, white Christian opposition to the civil rights movement chas-
tened black Christian expectation of white Christians' moral and religious sup-
port of the goal of African-American liberation.67 While arguing that the role of
the church was to attend to the spiritual aspects of life in the church while avoid-
ing the acrimonious and schismatic business of politics at all costs, many white
Christian churches ironically furnished ideological and theological support to the
forces that impeded the progress of the civil rights movement.68
The greater and more tragic irony, however, is that often white Christians ac-
tively opposed black progress by participating in White Citizens' Councils, the Ku
Klux Klan, or other hate groups that harassed and even murdered black Chris-
tians. Even if they didn't actively participate in such heinous crimes, many white
Christians "retreated into the womb of an ahistorical piety."69 By adopting positions
similar to those that Hauerwas and Baxter suggest, these white Christians were ren-
dered impotent to affect the lives of their black Christian colleagues because their
theological stance was deeply apolitical and hence unable to make claims on the
public good in ways that were immediately helpful to black Christians.
Moreover, it was not the white church-qua-church that called for the end of
such barbaric and evil practices or that actively intervened to prevent the murder
and maiming of black life. It was the sustained social and political struggle of a
tiny band of black prophetic Christians and their allies who, by sacrificial action,
civil disobedience, and appeals to the American conscience by means of the lan-
guage of civic piety, forced the state to intervene through legal and political mea-
sures. As in the religious situation of colonial America during Revolutionary
times, the state intervened to prevent one group of Christians from killing others.


--- PAGE 219 ---
190 THE MICHAEL ERIC DYSON READER
Once again, civil protest and political power had put into law what Christian
belief had professed but failed to practice. And black Christians interpreted such
intervention as an extension of the providence of God over even secular political
structures, as black Christians heard God Almighty speaking from Washington,
D.C. This does not mean that the state is uncritically praised as the unwavering
instrument of divine deliverance. It is, however, one of the legitimate means avail-
able to black Christians seeking to secure and protect their freedom, so long de-
nied by law and Christian practice.
The poverty of Hauerwas and Baxter's vision of the social embodiment of Chris-
tianity becomes even more evident when they return to one of the bleakest epochs
in modem Catholic Christendom, the papacy of Pope Pius XI, to draw examples of
Christ's Kingship. Pope Pius XI, according to Hauerwas and Baxter, "boldly and
bluntly asserts the importance of publicly recognizing and celebrating the Kingship
of Christ in reconstituting the entire social order."70 The whole point behind the
feast celebrating Christ's Kingship was to emphasize that "the common good is to
be denned by Christ."71 Furthermore, Hauerwas and Baxter claim that, in opposi-
tion to Will's celebration of the secularism that led to the subordination of religion
to politics, "Pope Pius XI sees such a subordination as the undoing of any true pol-
itics."72 Finally, Pope Pius XI, according to Hauerwas and Baxter, "resists the temp-
tation to conceive of politics in anything less than soteriological terms."73
But Pope Pius XI is precisely the sort of figure who is an example of Hauerwas
and Baxter's worst fears: he promoted the moral subordination of Christianity to
the political order. By signing a concordat with Mussolini in 1929, Pope Pius XI
made Mussolini's regime the first government in modern Catholic history to re-
ceive official recognition by the Vatican, thus supplying theological justification to
the dictator's murderous Fascist maneuvers.74 Pius XI "deliberately sabotaged
democracy, the strongest opponent of Communism, for the politically and
morally ruinous experiment of Fascism."75 Pius XI was also a particularly cruel
foe of religious tolerance and diversity.
Pius XI facilitated the "marriage of convenience" between Catholicism and Fas-
cism that helped to destroy the Popolari (the Christian Democratic party), the Peo-
ple's party, which was the second legitimate party in parliament and the only real
alternative to the Fascists.76 More viciously, he requested the resignation of priest
Don Sturzo as general secretary of the Popolari, banishing him from Rome at the
height of the Popolari's fight against Mussolini. After his departure, the Fascists
moved to expand their efforts to "wipe out the 'white' trade-unions, co-operatives,
and youth organizations."77 Pius XI also used his proximity to Mussolini to repress
the freedom of religious minorities, urging Mussolini to restrict Protestant missions
in Italy and to outlaw Freemasons. Pius XI was also pleased when Mussolini pre-
vented the building of a Muslim mosque in Rome and when the dictator perse-
cuted Waldensians, Pentecostalists, the Salvation Army, and eventually Jews.78
After the Concordat of 1929, Mussolini exempted priests from taxation and em-
ployed public funds to prevent the financial collapse of Catholic banks.79


--- PAGE 220 ---
"God Almighty Has Spoken from Washington, D.C." 191
Most appallingly, the official pact between Mussolini and Pius XI led to the
Vatican's declaration that the dictator was a man "sent by providence."80 Pius XI
compromised the politically independent, socially prophetic, and morally insub-
ordinate voice of the church by officially colluding with Mussolini's Fascist Party
to stamp out democracy, restrict the religious freedom of other denominations
and religions, and betray some of the church's own priests and members in an ef-
fort to placate Mussolini. As Denis Mack Smith says, Mussolini claimed that "the
Church, as a result of their treaty, was no longer free but subordinate to the
State."81 During Mussolini's dictatorship, and because of Pope Pius XI's fatal
compromise, this was tragically true.
The concordat with Mussolini is the infamous political legacy of Pius XI's
reign. He is hardly the figure to whom we should turn in thinking about Christ's
Kingship. Even Hauerwas and Baxter's statements about Pius XI's insistence on
the link between soteriology and politics seems more appropriately elaborated,
and less severely compromised, by contemporary exponents of that belief, espe-
cially liberation theologians.82 And although most liberation theologians are com-
pletely committed to the radical transformation of society in light of Christ's
Kingship-and are equipped with penetrating social analysis, progressive political
activity, and broad historical investigation—few are willing to exclusively identify
the Kingdom of Christ with the kingdom of this world. Pius XI failed to remem-
ber Hauerwas and Baxter's lesson: that Christianity is in extreme tension with all
accounts of the political good.
Given Hauerwas's belief in the unity of the virtues, the choice of Pius Xl-a
pope who was antidemocratic, unfaithful in fateful ways to the church and its
Lord, and intolerant of religious and political freedom—as the best exponent of
the Kingship of Christ is not only unfortunate; it is no less than tragic.83 But then,
given the dilemmas I have shown Hauerwas and Baxter to be trapped by, and
their refusal to engage the nitty-gritty world of real politics, their misled—and mis-
leading—choice is sadly predictable.
Hauerwas and Baxter have largely missed the major areas of concern in the
struggles to relate church and state, and religion and politics, because they have
not viewed these matters from the perspective of those who suffered for the free-
dom to worship and practice their beliefs. The political struggle to implement
democratic ideals in our society is the real story behind the First Amendment. It
is about much more than the wall that separates church and state. If the truth be
told, however, the real wall of separation most grievous to American Christianity
and the Church of Christ is not between church and state; it remains the wall be-
tween black and white. About that, Hauerwas and Baxter have nothing to say.


--- PAGE 221 ---
Sixteen
GARDNER TAYLOR: THE POET
LAUREATE OF THE AMERICAN PULPIT
One of my most enjoyable moments as a writer came when I interviewed the Rev. Dr.
Gardner Taylor for this profile, publishedjirst in the Christian Century, which I
serve as a contributing editor. Taylor is one of the nation's foremost preachers and
certainly one of the twentieth century's homiletical giants. He preached in sanctuaries
around the world and served as the president of the Progressive National Baptist
Convention. And for more than forty years, Taylor was pastor of the Concord Baptist
Church of Christ in Brooklyn, making it one of the legendary pulpits in American
Christendom. Besides being a master wordsmith, Taylor is a man of great humility. He is
also a sly wit and a sage bristling with insight and wisdom. In order to fully appreciate
his many gifts., one has to hear Taylor, like all great orators, in person, or at the very
least, on audio recording. I encourage readers to purchase the multivolume The Words
of Gardner Taylor,, edited by Edward L. Taylor, whichfeatures Taylor's written
words accompanied by compact discs of his sermons and lectures (Judson Press).
"GARDNER TAYLOR is THE GREATEST PREACHER living, dead, or unborn,"
Wyatt Tee Walker proclaimed as he introduced Taylor in the fall of 1993 at a ser-
vice marking Walker's twenty-fifth anniversary as pastor of Harlem's Canaan
Baptist Church. (Walker gained fame while serving as one of Martin Luther
King's trusted lieutenants.) Among black Baptists, the pastoral anniversary forms
a distinct genre of religious appreciation. It is an often lavishly orchestrated event
joining praise and pocketbook in feting a congregation's spiritual head.
But on the crisp October morning of his celebration, Walker shared the spot-
light with the man Time magazine in 1980 dubbed "the Dean of the Nation's black
preachers," a phrase that then New York Mayor David Dinkins would later repeat
in his remarks at the service. After acknowledging Taylor's role as an adviser ("he
used to tell me, 'Dave, you've got to bite bullets and butter biscuits'"), Dinkins de-
clared Taylor's preaching could be described in "only two ways: good and better."
These free-flowing compliments might appear to be the natural excesses of a
feel-good service where the spirit is high and such praise, no matter how heart-
felt, is by design the order of the day. But they mirror the sentiments of many
more—black and white, religious and secular, preaching authorities and lay-


--- PAGE 222 ---
Gardner Taylor: Poet Laureate of the American Pulpit 193
people-who have been entranced, even transformed, by Taylor's legendary or-
atorical gifts.
Taylor, however, is more modest about his protean pulpit work. When I men-
tioned Time's declaration, he deflected the tribute with characteristic humor. "You
know what they say a Dean is, at least of eastern schools?" he asks, playing me
with the instincts and timing of a seasoned comic. "Somebody too smart to be
president, but not smart enough to teach." He smiled, shrugged his shoulders in
self-deprecation, and deadpanned, "So much for being Dean."
His humor and refreshing lack of hubris, combined with a preaching genius of
extraordinary duration, have won the energetic seventy-seven-year-old Taylor a le-
gion of admirers during his half century of ministry. Most of his career has been
spent as pastor of Brooklyn's 14,000-member Concord Baptist Church of Christ.
He made that pulpit perhaps the most prestigious in black Christendom before re-
tiring in 1990 after forty-two years of service. The imposing, block-long gray brick
church is a massive monument to black Christianity's continuing vitality in the
midst of the well-documented decline of mainline religion. Under Taylor's leader-
ship, Concord built a home for the aged, organized a fully accredited grade school
(headed for over thirty years by Taylor's late wife, Laura), and developed the Christ
Fund, a million dollar endowment for investing in the Brooklyn community.
For Taylor, his success is an example of how God works in human life. "It is as
if God said Tm going to take this unlikely person from the Deep South and I'm
going to open opportunities for him to show [the world] what I can do,'" he says.
Taylor was born poor in Baton Rouge, Louisiana, in 1918, the only son of the
Rev. Washington and Selina Taylor. "My father was a huge, tall, ebony man who
had no trace of anything but Africa in him," Taylor says. "And he was extraordi-
narily arrogant about it." By contrast, his mother "looked white." After her hus-
band's death, Selina Taylor attended "normal school" to become a teacher, later
earning a degree from Southern University through extension courses. In one of
his four books of sermons, Taylor writes that despite his parents' lack of formal
education, they "had a natural feel for the essential music of the English language
wedded to an intimate and emotional affection for the great transactions of the
Scriptures." The same is true of their son.
Although his father died before Taylor was thirteen, his father's influence, more
than that of any other preacher's—especially his eloquent declamation and his
wide range of reference—marks his son's preaching style. "Dad didn't finish high
school, but he read voraciously. Sixty years ago, he spoke about Darwin's sur-
vival of the fittest and the battle of Thermopylae."
"Wash" Taylor enjoyed a wide reputation among Louisiana blacks for his bril-
liant preaching. Carl Stewart, Gardner Taylor's lifelong friend and a former bas-
ketball coach at Southern University, has for several years hosted a Baton Rouge
radio show devoted exclusively to broadcasting the younger Taylor's sermons.
Stewart illustrates Wash Taylor's preaching appeal by telling the story of a dis-
cussion between two Louisianans about an upcoming funeral. '"Hey, are you


--- PAGE 223 ---
194 THE MICHAEL ERIC DYSON READER
going to the funeral today?' one person asked. And his friend said, 'Who's dead?'
And the other fella retorted, 'It really doesn't matter. Wash Taylor is preaching.'"
Despite his father's influence, Taylor attended Louisiana's Leland College in
hopes of becoming a lawyer. "Clarence Darrow fascinated me," Taylor says in ex-
plaining his career choice. And because an aunt who helped raise him held the
ministry in contempt, Taylor confesses that his view of religion wasn't exalted. "I
didn't have the healthiest attitude about black preachers," Taylor says. "I thought
preaching was a foolish way for people of normal intelligence to waste their lives."
But Taylor's plans changed dramatically when he survived a deadly automobile
accident in which two white men died. Taylor experienced his "call" in that event,
discerning God's claim on his life. "I thought that God must have wanted me to be
his lawyer." Instead of enrolling at the University of Michigan law school where he
had been admitted, Taylor ventured north to the now defunct Oberlin School of
Theology. At Oberlin he read avidly, following writers ranging from Heywood
Broun to Walter Lippmann. Their "literary styles affected me," he says. He also
served as pastor of a church in nearby Elyria, Ohio, and after graduation, he pas-
tored one in Baton Rouge, before being summoned at the tender age of thirty to
Brooklyn's Concord Baptist Church, then with a membership of more than 5,000.
In New York Taylor joined an elite fellowship of ministers. "I don't think ever
in the history of these two millennia have so many pulpit geniuses come together
in one setting as I found in New York in the early '50s. .. . My God, it was un-
believable," he says. Taylor's multiracial aggregate included such preaching lumi-
naries as Adam Clayton Powell Jr., George Buttrick, Paul Scherer, Robert Mc-
Cracken, Sandy Ray, and Fulton J. Sheen. Taylor has fond memories and
wonderful stories about them all.
"Adam . . . with his angry oratory . . . was withering, blazing," he says of Pow-
ell, the controversial and colorful former pastor of Abyssinian Baptist Church and
a longtime congressman. "He was a bon vivant. Adam had hair he could throw
over his brow." Powell's nonkinky, straight mane, along with his pale color, led to
his being called "light, bright and almost white." "While we [black people] talk
about the exaltation of our features, there was still [in the admiration of Powell's
features] a lot left in us that adored white society," Taylor says.
"Buttrick [possessed] the poetry of the English Romantic poets. He was
Wordsworth in the pulpit. He had a probing mind and relentless logic, and a gift
for aphorism. For example, he said that the past ought to be a milestone, not a
millstone." Paul Scherer, a former professor of homiletics at Union Theological
Seminary, had a thespian bent. "Scherer was grand in manner. He had a great
voice and a magnificent head of hair. As Jim Fry, a former student of his used to
say, 'When Scherer said good morning, it was an occasion.'"
When Scherer was invited to deliver the prestigious Lyman Beecher Lectures
at Yale University, "He said to a former classmate who was then a faculty mem-
ber at Yale, 'You know, it's a great honor for them to have me here. I can't tell you
how honored I feel. But why did they wait so long?'" Taylor relates, laughing at


--- PAGE 224 ---
Gardner Taylor: Poet Laureate of the American Pulpit 195
the story. Taylor delivered the 100th installment of the Beecher Lectures, which
were published in 1977 as How Shall They Preach.
Taylor's unique blend of gifts may place him at the forefront of even this great
cadre of preachers. His mastery of the technical aspects of preaching is remark-
able. He brilliantly uses metaphor and has an uncanny sense of rhythmic timing
put to dramatic but not crassly theatrical effect. He condenses profound biblical
truths into elegantly memorable phrases. He makes keen use of parallels to layer
and reinforce the purpose of his sermons. His stunning control of narrative flow
seamlessly weaves his sermons together. His adroit mix and shift of cadences re-
flects the various dimensions of religious emotion. He superbly uses stories to il-
lustrate profound intellectual truths and subtle repetition to unify sermons. And
his control of his resonant voice allows him to pliantly whisper or prophetically
thunder the truths of the gospel. What was once alleged of southern Baptist
Preacher Carlyle Marney may be equally said of Taylor: he has a voice like
God's—only deeper.
Taylor's commanding physical presence, hinged on a solid 6'1" frame, suggests
the regal bearing of pulpit royalty. His broad face reveals seasoned character. His
wide set eyes are alive to the world around him. Taylor's forehead is an artistic
work of chiseled complexity. Furrows furiously cross-hatch his bronze brow, ex-
tending to the receded areas of his exposed, upper cranium where a shock of grey
hair fastidiously obeys its combed direction. Taylor's massive hands are like finely
etched soft leather. They function as dual promontories that stab the air in the
broad sweep of pulpit gesture or clasp each other in the steadied self-containment
of quiet reflection.
Taylor's snappy sartorial habits, though, hint more at Wall Street executive
than Baptist preacher. For a class on homiletics that he occasionally teaches at
Princeton Theological Seminary, Taylor wore a dark-blue, double-breasted wool
suit with a windowpane design, a burgundy-striped shirt, and a paisley tie. And
at Wyatt Walker's pastoral anniversary, he wore a charcoal-gray pin-striped suit,
with a white shirt and burgundy tie.
But it is not his sharp dressing which draws most attention to Taylor. The
preacher's magnetism lies in his intimate and unequalled command of the lan-
guage and literature of the English-speaking pulpit.
James Earl Massey, himself a noted preacher, professor of homiletics, and dean
of Anderson School of Theology in Indiana, ranks Taylor "as one of the top five
unique pulpit geniuses of any generationin American life." Massey contends that
the gifts such figures as Harry Emerson Fosdick, Phillips Brooks, and Henry
Ward Beecher brought to the American pulpit scene, "Taylor has brought in one
person." Taylor possesses Beecher's "prolix ability to spin words," Brooks's
"earnestness of style and breadth of learning," and Fosdick's "ability to appeal to
the masses and yet maintain a dignity in doing so."
Preaching authority Henry H. Mitchell, author of the widely cited Black Preach-
ing, points to Taylor's familiarity with the preaching tradition as a key to his


--- PAGE 225 ---
196 THE MICHAEL ERIC DYSON READER
appeal. "He's not only master of black preaching as such. He knows all the great
white preachers and quotes them [as well]."
Carolyn Knight, a professor of preaching at Union Theological Seminary and
highly regarded pastor of a New York church, recalls a conversation she had with
Taylor that displayed his endless pursuit of preaching excellence. "He told me last
year—and he advised me to do it—that in preparation for his Beecher Lectures, he
went down into the stacks of Union's library and read every set of published
Beecher lectures."
Taylor's reputation as the "poet laureate of American Protestantism" is a consid-
erable achievement. Throughout its history, black preaching has been widely
viewed as a form of public address brimming with passion but lacking intellectual
substance. Like black religion in general, black preaching is often seen as the cathar-
tic expression of pent-up emotion, a verbal outpouring that supposedly compen-
sates for low self-esteem or oppressed racial status. Not only are such stereotypes
developed in ignorance of the variety of black preaching styles, but they don't take
into account the black churches that boast a long history of educated clergy.
James Weldon Johnson's classic poem God's Trombones provides a literary
glimpse of the art and imagination of the black folk preacher. C. L. Franklin's
recorded sermons, spread out over sixty albums for Chess Records, brought the
vigor and ecstasy of the black chanted sermon—dubbed in black church circles as
"the whoop"—to the American public. By and large, however, Americans have re-
mained insulated from the greatest rhetorical artists of the black pulpit.
Of course, broad segments of American society have sampled the richness of
black preaching through the brilliant political oratory of Martin Luther King Jr.
and Jesse Jackson. Both King's and Jackson's styles of public speech—their impas-
sioned phrasing, intellectual acuity, and imaginative metaphors—reflect their roots
in die black church. And their involvement in civil rights and politics extends the
venerable tradition of black preachers serving as social critics and activists.
But their oratory—like that of preacher-politicians from Adam Clayton Powell
to William Gray—has been shaped by the peculiar demands of public life and in-
formed by a mission to translate the aspirations of black Americans to the larger
secular society. The aims of their public speech have led them to emphasize cer-
tain elements of the black preaching and church tradition such as social justice,
the institutional nature of sin, and the redistribution of wealth, while leaving aside
such others as the cultivation of the spiritual life, the nurturing of church growth,
and the development of pastoral theology. Such varying emphases are usually
framed as the differences between "prophetic" and "priestly" religion. If the for-
mer has been most visible to American society in the guise of church-based civil
rights activists, the latter has been closer to the heart of the religious experience
of most black Christians.
Though Taylor has combined both approaches—he was active in the civil rights
movement in New York, and was a close friend and preaching idol of Martin
Luther King, Jr.—he realizes that his life work has ruled out the kind of visibility


--- PAGE 226 ---
Gardner Taylor: Poet Laureate of the American Pulpit 197
that comes from high-profile activism. "I recognized early that the [kind of] work
I do is not attention grabbing. . . . When I came along . . . college presidents were
the lords of black America. Later, it became civil rights [leaders]. Still later, it be-
came [holders of] political office."
Taylor humorously admits that with every attempt he made to "do something
else [other than pastor], I got trapped. . . . They put the whole board of education
off when I was a member," he says. "Governor Rockefeller wiped it out."
As James Massey maintains, "Taylor has stuck with the church. He has been
busy handling the themes of the gospel, busy heralding what it was that Jesus
came to do. He's been busy honoring the name of his Lord, shaping a commu-
nity around that name and seeking to effect society in ways diat are consonant
widi the gospel purpose. This is not newsworthy, like leading a sit-in."
Don Matthews of Washington's First Baptist Church, the church of fellow Bap-
tists Bill Clinton and Al Gore, agrees. "We're in a time when the pulpit and the
church in general are not particularly admired by anybody else that isn't in it.
The only place it is perceived as powerful is in the political world. ... But the peo-
ple who have the spiritual word to speak aren't paid much attention by the New
lork Times or the Washington Post"
William Augustus Jones, noted pastor of Brooklyn's Bethany Baptist Church,
contends that Christians are "resident aliens" who have a radically different per-
spective on the world than secular citizens. "For a preacher to be regarded as pop-
ular means that his faithfulness to the word is not what it ought to be."
Ironically, Taylor's most bitter disappointments and defeats have come within
the church world to which he has been single-mindedly devoted. Over dinner at
Greenwich Village's popular Spanish restaurant El Charro's, Taylor, joined by his
wife Laura-a shock of healthy black hair loosely pinned atop her hauntingly
beautiful ebony face of high cheek bones and deep-set eyes—recalls the 1952 fire
that destroyed Concord Church.
"It was devastating. And were it not for this lady I don't know what I would
have done," Taylor confesses. "She fooled me, innocently. The architect sat in our
home, and ... I asked him how much it was going to cost [to rebuild the church].
He said it would cost a million dollars. My heart went straight down. Black peo-
ple in Bedford-Stuyvesant in 1952 couldn't raise a million dollars. But Laura said,
'Don't pay any attention to him. It won't cost a dime over $750,000.'" Taylor says
that he was so anxious to believe her that for a year and a half he "traveled on
that delusion." He laughs heartily as he reports that it cost nearly $2 million. In
his view, his wife's figure turned out to be a "merciful deception."
Though naysayers said that Concord would never rebuild, the congregation
not only erected an edifice on the very grounds of the fire but also added a gym-
nasium, an educational building, and a full space underneath the sanctuary, dou-
bling the church's seating capacity.
Less satisfying was the outcome of the bitter 1960 confrontation between Tay-
lor and J. H. Jackson, then president of the National Baptist Convention, USA,


--- PAGE 227 ---
198 THE MICHAEL ERIC DYSON READER
Inc., the nation's third largest Protestant denomination and the group to which
most black Bapdsts belong. Jackson's conservative social and political views put
him at odds with Martin Luther King Jr. and those ministers sympathetic to the
cause of civil rights. Because of their disagreements about civil rights, and the
issue of incumbency (Jackson had been president of the convention since 1953
and in the process broke convention limits on presidential tenure), Taylor agreed
to run for the convention presidency at its annual meeting in Kansas in 1960.
A bitter fracas ensued. Hundreds of supporters of each candidate physically
struggled and fought, leading to the accidental death of a loyal Jackson supporter
and certain defeat for Taylor's team. The next year Taylor joined with King and
other ministers who seceded from the convention to form the Progressive Na-
tional Baptist Convention, Inc., which currently has a membership of more than
2 million people.
More than 30 years after this painful period, Taylor harbors no animosity to-
ward Jackson, who died in 1991 at eighty-four. 'Jackson had an ingenious and pe-
culiar appeal to black people, as Reagan had to white people:J. H.Jackson could
weep with the idea . . . that he was being put upon by powerful people . . . who
were attacking [him], and he was weak. He had a gift for that."
Taylor even manages to find humor in illustrating this dimension of Jackson's
appeal, which turned on his great gift of storytelling. H. H. Humes, a childhood
friend of Jackson's, recalls hearing Jackson preach about the hardships that af-
flicted his parents in attempting to send Jackson to college. "When it looked like
he couldn't go back to college, his mother said, 'The boy must go.' And the father
said, 'We don't have anything but a mule.' But she said, 'The boy must go to col-
lege.' And the father said, 'We won't have any way to get the crop.' But the
mother said, 'The boy must go to college,' and they finally sold the mule. Humes
was weeping as he came out of the church. And someone said to him, 'Well you
grew up with him. What did they do for a crop [since] they sold the mule? [Tay-
lor's voice affects a weepy tone] 'Oh,' Humes said, Jack's people never did own a
mule, but I just can't stand to hear him tell that story.'" Taylor breaks into laugh-
ter, trailing it with "Lord, have mer ..." The last syllable of his plea is erased by
more laughter.
Taylor's enormous gift of humor, his ability to acknowledge the humanity of
his opponents, gives him the grace to accept and overcome his own failings.
When I asked him about the thorny problem confronting the black church in its
treatment of women in the ministry, Taylor confessed that he had to grow into his
enlightened position.
"As with the white male, an exclusive preserve [of black male power is] under
threat of invasion ... I had to have a conversion myself. I knew theoretically this
was wrong, but prejudice is not a rational thing."
Taylor's conversion occurred in the late '60s at Colgate Rochester Divinity
School, where he was teaching a class on preaching. There Taylor encountered
white female students whose fresh viewpoints helped change his views on women


--- PAGE 228 ---
Gardner Taylor: Poet Laureate of the American Pulpit 199
in the ministry. "As they presented the gospel, I saw a new angle of vision ... I
had an interesting, and to me a humorous, thing happen. The young women of
Colgate came to me and said, 'You know, you're just like all these other people
here. You use all this sexist language.' Well, I was really stung. Who am I, having
suffered from being excluded so long, to [exclude others]? And so I worked on it."
Taylor reports that after he delivered the Luccock Lectures at Yale Divinity
School, a female faculty member thanked him for his inclusive language. Feeling
good about the acknowledgment, he went back to Colgate to report this fresh tri-
umph to his female students. "I saw some of die young women in die hall, and I
told them what had happened. And I said, 'You know, I want to thank you girls
. .. ' 'Oh,' diey said, 'you don't say girls. Say women,' 'Well,' I said. 'It takes a lit-
de learning.'"
Since that time, Taylor has developed an acute analysis of gender relations, par-
ticularly in black culture. "I was greatly troubled by the Anita Hill-Clarence
Thomas situation, and more troubled than almost anything by the attitude of
[many] black women. I reached the conclusion that black women have been so
put upon diat they have developed a kind of psychological scar tissue, so that
diey've learned to take in stride things that ought to outrage diem. And diat dis-
tresses me. I am tired of the way black men misuse black women, and the way
black women apologize for and accept what black men do."
It is above all Taylor's unsurpassed ability to preach to preachers—his keen
sense of the preaching mission and its encumbrances and opportunities, its joyous
peaks and its seemingly bottomless sorrows—that make him a popular presence
among seminarians and seasoned preachers alike. In his homiletics class at Prince-
ton, Taylor ranges through the history of die English pulpit with formidable ease,
sharing stories of history's great divines. He whips out tattered pieces of news-
paper, whose margins are covered widi notes drawn from a massive and virtually
infallible memory bank of preaching lore and legend.
On one of the days I attend his class, Taylor produces a snatch of paper ripped
from die previous Sunday's New York Times Book Review, which he reads religiously,
along with the New Republic ("I despise almost every word in it, but it gives me
good targets to shoot at"), the New York Review of Books, and the daily New 'York
Times and Newsday. Taylor reads a review describing the ingredients of a great
novel—from its descriptive power to its presentation of a wide view of humanity
without losing its link to individual characters. He reminds them that great
preaching contains the same elements.
His desire to help other preachers has endeared Taylor to audiences across the
nation. It has made his sermons to ministers legendary. Black preachers, espe-
cially, collect sermons widi die zeal of avid fans of baseball cards. At conventions
of black denominations, the tapes of famous ministers sell briskly. These tapes are
especially circulated and reproduced among younger preachers, serving as mod-
els of preaching excellence and training in the high art of sacred speech. Some
even preach the sermons to their own congregations, trying out fresh ideas and


--- PAGE 229 ---
200 THE MICHAEL ERIC DYSON READER
new words they have gleaned from master storytellers. Frederick Sampson's
"Dwelling on the Outskirts of Devastation," Jeremiah Wright's "Prophets or Pup-
pets," Charles Adams's "Sermons in Flesh," William Jones's "The Low Way Up,"
and Caesar Clark's "Elijah Is Us," have all acquired canonical status in a genre of
religious address that treats the plight of the preacher. Several of Taylor's own ser-
mons, including "Seeing Our Hurts with God's Eyes," and "A Wide Vision
Through a Narrow Window," neither of which appear in his books of published
sermons, are classics of the genre. They amply illustrate the astonishing range of
his pulpit gifts.
In "A Wide Vision Through a Narrow Window," Taylor, speaking on a text
from Job, details for his audience of preachers at Bishop College's L. K. Williams
Institute in 1980, the price of authentic preaching. In an arresting metaphor he re-
minds us that for eighteen chapters Job's friends had turned against him, "driving
cold steel into his already bleeding spirit." The nineteenth chapter—the chapter
containing Taylor's text—is Job's "reply to their gloomy countenances, and their
long, bitter indictment of his calamity, as they sit around the pallet of his misery."
Taylor employs and repeats the sermon's theme to sharpen his portrayal of
Job's predicament, a condition where "the window has narrowed out of which he
looks upon the landscape of life. Once there had been the homes of children, and
fruitful fields, and lowing cattle and bleating sheep. But now, the window has nar-
rowed." As if being forsaken by earthly friends were not enough, Job faces, as do
all ministers, the prospect of feeling forsaken by God. Speaking through the voice
of Job, Taylor says that "it seems that God has overthrown me. Now here is where
the window does narrow to a slit. If God be for us, then what difference does it
make, who is against us? . . . But, my father, if G-a-w-w-d be against us, what else
is there left? I don't know why, in the solemn appointments of God, that there are
times when it does indeed seem as if we've got not a friend in earth—or in
heaven!" Taylor thunders. And then he emphatically completes the sentence, with
a staccato verbal surge, "left!"
Taylor eloquently rephrases the theme of his sermon in question form. "And
my brother preachers, you say that you want great power to move among men's
heartstrings?" Taylor incants in almost mournful tones. "You cannot have that,
without great sorrow. G-a-w-w-d can fill only the places that have been emptied of
the joys of this life." He then challenges them with examples drawn from the lives
of other suffering servants. "Dale of Carr's Lane in Birmingham [England] had
particularly toward the end a terribly lonely existence. Charles Spurgeon in the
Metropolitan Tabernacle [London] had rheumatism and gout that made life un-
bearable for him. Frederick W. Robertson of Brighton [England] was so sensitive
that the least thing shattered him like the piercing of an eye. George Truett, who
charmed the American Soudi in the first four decades of this century lived in the
after-memory of a hunting accident in which a friend was killed by his own gun."
Taylor restates his theme later in the sermon. He then implores his congrega-
tion of preachers to look beyond the peripheral signs of preaching greatness to the


--- PAGE 230 ---
Gardner Taylor: Poet Laureate of the American Pulpit 201
real source of pastoral insight—the common bond with one's hearers provided by
suffering. "Now you may tickle people's fancies, but you will never preach to their
hearts, until at some place, some solemn appointment has fallen upon your own
life, and you have wept bitter tears, and gone to your own Gethsemane and
climbed your own Calvary. That's where power is!"
Taylor rhythmically measures his speech, repeating the forces that cannot by
themselves make for great preaching. He builds up tension for the ultimate release
in the announcement of what constitutes the power of proclamation. "It is not in
the tone of the voice. It is not in the eloquence of the preacher. It is not in the
gracefulness of his gestures. It is not in the magnificence of his congregation. It is
in a heart broken, and put together, by the eternal God!"
Taylor wrestles with some of the inevitable sadness that life brings—for in-
stance, the suffering that comes with aging. "I have reached a very unflattering
and unenviable time. I have more money than I have time. And that's not good.
It was much better the other way. But then I'll take it-what can I do?"
As we discussed his fifty-two years of marriage to Laura, he said, "I sometimes
see her lying in repose now, and [he pauses], a great sadness comes over me be-
cause I know one of us must leave the other. I don't know which I fear the most.
[He pauses again]. But, what can we do?"
Tragically Laura was struck and killed by a New York sanitation truck in Feb-
ruary 1995. Despite this great loss, one suspects that Taylor will do what he has
always done, whether life favored him or assaulted him. He will, as long as he is
able, preach the Word of God. That has been his peculiar gift and burden, his
bread and butter for more than fifty years. And out of his own suffering, he has
shaped a ministry that has spoken to the hearts of men and women throughout
the world. And because of his peculiar gift for making mortals see the light of
God, no matter how dimmed by human frailty and failure, who can doubt that it
will continue to shine on him in the hour of his greatest need.


--- PAGE 231 ---
Seventeen
"SOMEWHERE I READ OF THE FREEDOM OF
SPEECH": CONSTRUCTING A UNIQUE VOICE
TTiere is little doubt that the most controversial book I've written is I May Not Get
There with ^bu: The True Martin Luther King Jr. Many black readers were
outraged that I spoke openly about Dr. King's shortcomings in the book, especially
allegations that he was a plagiarist and an adulterer. Ironically, many of my critics never
read the book. Only when I appeared in the media and explained my love and admiration
for King did the attacks subside. I argued that we must confront King's failures honestly
since they are part of the historical record, but that his flaws cannot diminish his legendary
status. I was also keen on beingfrank about King's failures so that the younger generation
might believe that they didn't have to be perfect to be useful. In fact, the failure to address
King's all-too-human behavior only strengthens the hand of his enemies, since they will be
free to distort King's memory with their own jaundiced and bigoted views of his life. Better
to tell the truth and still claim King's greatness, than pretend that King warn't a human
being who had shortcomings like the rest of us. TJiis chapter addresses the rich oral traditions
from which King drew in developing his style of speaking, while confronting King's
plagiarism in academic circles. I make a distinction between King's oral borrowing—part of a
well-established tradition of verbal sharing that, while not exclusive to black culture, does
have unique resonance—and his literary lapses on the page. I also attempt to explain the
psychological elements that may have driven his actions, while offering an account of the
racial pressures that may help explain his behavior. Perhaps the greatest vindication of my
efforts was supplied by Andrew Young, who told me that my book was honest and necessary,
and that I had gotten King and his courageous cohort right. Comingfrom one of King's most
trusted lieutenants, Youngs words have been a blessed source of peace.
AT A RECENT CONFERENCE ON BLACK MALES, I shared keynote responsibil-
ities with two other speakers. One of them was a forty-something civil rights
leader and Baptist preacher. It was February, known in my circles as "National
Rent-a-Negro Month"1 in homage to the flurry of Black History Month activities
that colleges and corporations cram into those twenty-eight days (as if no other
time was appropriate to recognize black achievement). I hustled into the confer-
ence late, arriving just in time to hear the closing comments of the civil rights
leader, who by now was "putting on the rousements"—firing the crowd up with


--- PAGE 232 ---
Constructing a Unique Voice 203
his astute analysis of the crises confronting black men. He was sailing fast now,
punctuating his speech with powerful phrases he knew would elicit the audience's
approval, an old trick that we Baptist preachers use to send our congregations out
to do the Lord's work.
Just as the speaker reached the climax of his oration, I was whisked to the back
entry of the stage to await my turn to speak, since all three keynoters were pre-
senting in rapid succession. As I watched my colleague finish, I got an even bet-
ter sense of the glorious rapport he had established with his audience, a sublime
connection that gives both parties a rush that few other events can match. As he
offered his husky-voiced parting thoughts, the crowd leaped to its feet, and so did
I, gleefully grabbing him as he came off stage in a brotherly bear hug, wrapping
him in the audience's affection as their unofficial emissary.
"Hey, Doc, how ya doin?" my colleague brightly greeted me.
"Man, you tore it up," I enthused. "I got a hard act to follow, boy."
"Aw, man," he graciously responded, "you know you gonna turn it out."
"I don't know, brother," I shot back. "You look like you killed everything in
there. And what ain't dead, you done put in intensive care."
We both cracked up, bathing each other in the occasionally obnoxious mutual
admiration to which Baptist preachers are eagerly given. As I was being intro-
duced, my colleague offered his regrets about having to leave for another en-
gagement. I readily understood, since I would have to leave right after my speech
for the next town in my Black History Month tour.
As the crowd warmly greeted me, I let on that my colleague was difficult to fol-
low but that I'd try to do my best (a Baptist preacher way of begging for sympa-
thy and winning the crowd). My grasp at pity seemed to be working, as the crowd
urged me on with "amens" and "go 'heads." I slid easily enough into my speech,
but at a crucial period—or, more exactly, at a crucial three-minute passage that I
had used in many of my speeches over the past year-I felt the enthusiasm of the
audience flag. Usually my passage drew uproarious guffaws and penetrating
"humhs," but now I was greeted with sprinkled laughter and moderate "huhs,"
the kind that feel more obligatory than genuine. I pressed on, not giving it much
thought, chalking the lukewarm response up to my poor delivery or to having
misjudged my audience. But the rest of my speech went well. I too got a standing
ovation and was grateful for the audience's loving endorsement. But after my
speech, I wondered again why my passage hadn't gone over as hugely as it usu-
ally did. Not until later did I discover what had gone wrong.
Three weeks after my keynote speech, I had a speaking engagement in a
nearby town. The woman who picked me up from the airport for the hour-long
drive to the university remarked that she had attended the conference on black
males and had enjoyed all of our speeches.
"I know you must have wondered why, when you got to a certain point in your
speech, people didn't respond as enthusiastically as you perhaps thought they
would," my host offered, impressing me with her savvy while piquing my interest.


--- PAGE 233 ---
204 THE MICHAEL ERIC DYSON READER
"Yeah, I did wonder what had happened," I confessed.
"Well, the speaker before you had gone through the same routine in his
speech," she revealed. "And since the audience had just heard it, their response
was certainly muted."
"O-h-h-h-h," I said. "Now I get it."
Although I was friendly with the civil rights leader, I took it as a matter of pride
to point out to my host that he had ripped me off, and not vice versa. As soon as
my host's comments hit my ears, I recalled that the civil rights leader's wife had
heard me preach a few months before at a black Baptist church, and since her
husband couldn't attend, she promised that she would give him a tape of my ser-
mon. I had used my dramatic passage in that sermon, and of course, he had ob-
viously listened to the tape and lifted my passage for his speeches. In spite of my
brief fit of ego, I couldn't stay sore at my colleague. After all, Baptist preachers are
always ripping each other off and using the stories, illustrations, phrases, verbal
tics, mannerisms—and in some cases, whole sermons—we glean from other preach-
ers. That's how we learn to preach; by preaching like somebody else until we
learn how to preach like ourselves, when our own voice emerges from the collo-
quy of voices we convene in our homiletical imagination. And in the end, the only
justification for such edifying thievery among preachers is that the Word is being
preached and the ultimate Author of what we say is being glorified.
In fact, the line I had used about the civil rights leader having "killed every thong
in there" was torn straight from the transcript2 of a thousand other conversations
between black Baptist preachers congratulating one another for their rhetorical
might. Then, too, I knew the humorous three-step rhetorical rule of citation by
which many black Baptist preachers operate. The first time they repeat something
they hear, they say, "like Martin Luther King said . . ." The second time they re-
peat it, they say, "like somebody said . . ." The third time they repeat it, they say,
"like I always say . . ." None of this means that there aren't rules of fair play-that
one shouldn't work exceedingly hard in preaching with a Bible in one hand, the
newspaper in the other (an idea ripped off from theologian Karl Earth),3 that one
shouldn't hunt for inspiration in all sorts of unusual places, and that one
shouldn't feed one's flock with the fruits of rigorous intellectual and spiritual en-
gagement. At their best, the practices of black Baptist preachers4 remind us that
knowledge is indeed communal, that rhetoric is shaped in the interplay of a rich
variety of language users, and that what is old becomes new again by being recast
in forceful and imaginative ways.
All of this is crucial if we are to make sense of the recent revelation that Martin
Luther King, Jr., borrowed other people's words in his published and preached
sermons.5 Of course, nothing I have said can account for the even more disturb-
ing charge that King was a plagiarist in his academic work. It is now clear that he
plagiarized huge chunks of his dissertation and graduate school papers and that
he carelessly cited sources in his seminary and undergraduate papers. This news
is especially jarring to those who view King as an American original, a figure


--- PAGE 234 ---
Constructing a Unique Voice 205
whose social vision came wrapped in brilliant metaphors and memorable phrases.
The notion that a figure who commanded the English language with such au-
thority was in truth a borrower of other people's words is too hard for King's ad-
mirers to swallow. For many Americans, King's example is law, his words scrip-
ture. In fact, King's memory has become a racial Esperanto. His life has been
made into a moral language that allows whites to translate their hopes and fears
about black life into meanings that black folk intuitively understand. Much of
King's power hinged on his use of language, indeed, his use as language. His
moral authority was largely rooted in his unique ability to express eloquently the
claims of black freedom.
In that light, understanding what King did with language-that is, getting at his
complex rhetorical habits and the presuppositions he brought to his spoken and
written work-will give us a better sense of how to judge his achievements and fail-
ures. By explaining how King absorbed and recycled rhetorical sources and how he
creatively fused a variety of voices in finding his own voice, one may be charged
with excusing his verbal theft by "converting King's blemish into a grand achieve-
ment."6 Worse yet, one may be charged with appealing to some mythic racial prac-
tice to justify his borrowing, but certainly not borrowed, genius. But that is to con-
fuse explanation with justification. Such a conclusion clings desperately to the naive
belief that we must ignore context and circumstance in making moral judgments.
King's borrowing, and at times, outright theft, of others' words must be viewed
in two arenas: his sermons in the pulpit and in print, and his scholarly writing in
the academy before that. The most sophisticated arguments to date about King's
use of language in the pulpit and in print have been made by scholars Keith D.
Miller and Richard Lischer. Miller, in his insightful Voice of Deliverance, persuasively
argues that King heavily borrowed from white liberal preachers in his published
sermons to further the cause of civil rights.7 He ingeniously seized on the ethical
and political dimensions of white liberal sermons—including their emphasis on the
Christian social gospel, their antimilitarism, their critiques of capitalism and com-
munism, and even their inchoate antiracism-to cast his own arguments for black
emancipation in terms that white liberal listeners would find irresistible.8 By fus-
ing his voice with white liberal voices, King practiced, in Miller's term, the black
oral art of "voice-merging," an ancient practice in black religious circles.9 Miller
argues that in such circles, speech is seen not as private but as communal prop-
erty. In black oral culture black folk learn to refine rhetoric and shape identity by
joining their voices to the voices of their ancestors and their contemporary inspi-
rations. Thus, King didn't view such an art as verbal theft but as a time-honored,
community-blessed tradition with deep roots in black culture.
Richard Lischer agrees in substance with this aspect of Miller's argument. His
brilliantly argued The Preacher King explores the rich rhetorical resources that King
inherited as a prince of the black church.10 While Miller analyzes King's written
sermons and speeches, Lischer pays close attention to King's spoken word, por-
ing over the unedited audiotapes and transcripts of King's sermons and speeches.


--- PAGE 235 ---
206 THE MICHAEL ERIC DYSON READER
Lischer argues that King's real voice was edited out of his published sermons11 as
he and his publisher sought to appeal to as wide an audience as possible. Where
Miller finds virtue in such a strategy, Lischer smells trouble. Not only is King's
spoken voice missing—a voice full of cultural allusion, racial wisdom, and black
rhythms that were muted under the dogma of pen and page—but his theological
and ideological evolution—a full-blown radicalism that was especially apparent in
his highly personal, magnificently improvised, and deeply colloquial black ser-
monizing—is completely whitewashed. Lischer disagrees with the notion that "in
his plagiarism King was simply adhering to the standards of African-American .. .
preaching."12 He claims that it "is one thing to assert" that language is a shared
commodity in black culture,13 which he concedes, but "it is quite another to trans-
late that generalization into a rationale for academic falsification." Finally, Lischer
thinks that Miller overstates the extent to which King borrowed.14 After all, he ar-
gues, white liberal ministers borrowed freely from each other (Miller also makes
this point).
Despite their disagreements, Miller and Lischer offer persuasive arguments about
how King used his intellectual and rhetorical gifts to bring about social change.
Both authors help us understand exactly how King went about the formidable task
of drawing on black cultural and religious traditions while shaping a message of lib-
eration that could sway the conscience of white America. By digging deep into the
history of black oral traditions, they help us understand a much celebrated but lit-
tle understood practice: black preaching. Their brilliant explorations of the me-
chanics, methods, and modes of black sacred rhetoric help us see that black preach-
ers often give their listeners reason to hope and fuel to survive by spinning words
into the Word. Black preachers coin phrases, stack sentences, accumulate wise say-
ings, and borrow speech to convince black folk, as the gospel song says, to "run on
to see what the end is gonna be." King had a genius for knowing what intellectual
and spiritual resources to bring together, and to know when such a fusion would
make the most sense and the greatest impact on his hearers.
As Miller and Lischer make clear, King's borrowing had a noble purpose. For
Miller, it was nothing less than the reflection back to liberal white America of the
ideals it cherished in comforting and familiar language.15 For Lischer, King's bor-
rowing helped to subvert the status quo as King's speech progressively filled with
rage in denouncing racial optimism.16 Miller is right to emphasize King's brilliant
reworking of white liberal religious themes and to suggest that King's success, at
least the success of his early years, was surely linked to the perception by liberal
whites that he and, by extension, most other blacks, was very much like them.
King possessed the unique ability to convince liberal whites, through phrases and
sermon plots they were familiar with, that black freedom was a legitimate goal be-
cause it was linked to social ideals they embraced each Sunday morning. By em-
bracing liberal orthodoxy through the rhetoric of its main exponents, King was
able to send the message that he and the blacks he represented were committed to
the same goal of social reform as white Protestants. Miller also convincingly argues


--- PAGE 236 ---
Constructing a Unique Voice 207
that through the rhetoric at hand, King constructed a public persona-a social self-
that expressed blackness in a fashion that appealed to the white mainstream.17
Lischer complains that Miller's notion of self-making makes King appear du-
plicitous.18 But Miller discerns in King's public persona the tough but inevitable
choice that all minorities in a dominant culture face: how to put one's best face
forward. Given that King was concerned or, early on, even obsessed with what
would work in white America, he was perhaps compelled to mold a public per-
sona that pleased liberal whites while reinforcing black self-respect, a virtually
impossible task. But Lischer usefully reminds us that King faced Du Bois's
famed dilemma of twoness-to be "an American, a Negro."19 Even in this light,
mask wearing or self-making need not be read as mere duplicity. Instead, it may
be viewed as a renewal of the ancient black effort to survive through creating
durable, flexible personalities. Making selves and wearing masks is not merely a
defensive device to deter white intrusion. It is also the positive means by which
blacks shape their worlds and make their identities. Lischer is right to argue that
Miller's reading skews King's later, more radical preaching by not attending to
the sermons and speeches that rarely made it to print. And he renders invaluable
service by excavating a neglected version of King's public persona that remains
buried beneath the rubble of feel-good rhetoric that distorts his memory. Like
Miller, Lischer shows us how King used rhetorical formulas to argue for racial
justice, but with a different bent. He explores how King ingeniously employed
the rhythms, cadences, and colloquialisms of the black vernacular to inspire his
black audiences to disobey unjust laws. Thus, King made speech a handmaiden
of social revolution.
Both authors' arguments illumine King's borrowing habits by placing his
speech making and sermon giving in broad cultural and racial context. Black
preachers—for that matter, all preachers—liberally borrow themes, ideas, phrases,
and approaches from one another, although most would not pass off in print a
sermon heavily borrowed from another preacher as their own. But many of the
same preachers would not hesitate to preach a heavily borrowed sermon in their
pulpits. Many critics are skeptical about the claim that speech is so freely shared
in black communities, and even more skeptical of the notion that cribbing others'
work is such a common practice.20 But in an oral culture where, as Miller argues,
authority is prized above originality, the crucial issue is not saying something new
by saying something first, but in embracing the paradoxical practice of developing
one's voice by trying on someone else's voice, and thus learning by comparison
to identify one's own gift. If imitation and emulation are the first fruits of such an
oral culture, its mature benefits include the projection of a unique style—a new
style—that borrows from cultural precedents but finds its own place within their
amplifications.
King spoke much the way a jazz musician plays, improvising from minimally or
maximally sketched chords or fingering changes that derive from hours of practice
and performance. The same song is never the same song, and for King, the same


--- PAGE 237 ---
208 THE MICHAEL ERIC DYSON READER
speech was certainly never the same speech. He constantly added and subtracted,
attaching a phrase here and paring a paragraph there to suit the situation. He could
bend ideas and slide memorized passages through his trumpet of a voice with re-
markable sensitivity to his audience's makeup. King endlessly reworked themes,
reshaped stories, and repackaged ideas to uplift his audience or drive them even
further into a state of being—whether it was compassion or anger, rage or reconcil-
iation—to reach for justice and liberation. King had a batch of rhetorical ballads,
long, blue, slow-building meditations on the state of race, and an arsenal of sim-
mering mid-tempo reflections on the high cost of failing to fix what fundamentally
ails us—violence, hatred, and narrow worship of tribe and custom. King knew how
to play as part of a rhetorical ensemble that reached back in time to include Lin-
coln and Jefferson and stretched across waters to embrace Gandhi and Du Bois in
Ghana.21 But he played piercing solos as well, imaginatively riffing off themes elo-
quently voiced by black preachers Prathia Hall and Archibald Carey.22 In the end,
King brilliantly managed a repertoire of rhetorical resources that permitted him to
play an unforgettable, haunting melody of radical social change.
Even if one holds that King's creative uses of borrowed words amounted to
verbal theft (a view I heartily reject), one might still conclude that, in King's case,
there was a moral utility to an immoral act. A greater good was served by King's
having used the words of others than might otherwise have been accomplished
had he not done so. This utilitarian calculus takes into account Miller's insistence
that King was weighed down23 with so much to do that it would have been im-
possible for him to achieve the worthy goal of racial revolution without appealing
to such resources. And even if one concludes that King's unattributed use of sen-
tences and paragraphs from others' sermons in his printed sermons was plagia-
rism (a view I do hold), one can still acknowledge the pressures under which King
performed—not simply pressures of time and commitment, but the pressure to re-
sist white supremacy in a manner that maintained black dignity while appealing
to white conscience. As if that were not formidable enough, King also had to bal-
ance the militant demand for social change early on while making certain that the
manner in which black folk demanded their due would not lead to mass black de-
struction. Given such pressures and in the light of King's moral aims, it is cer-
tainly not unforgivable to produce a book of sermons, Strength to Love, that in-
cludes unacknowledged sources.24 In fact, there is some poetic justice in King's
use of orthodox liberal ideas to undermine orthodox racial beliefs and even more
justice in his having breathed new life into these words while expanding their
moral application, fulfilling them in ways their owners might never have con-
ceived but to which they would certainly have no objections. As Lischer argues,
Strength to Love was published to consolidate King's white liberal audience, a goal
he certainly achieved.25 But as Lischer also notes, unedited audiotapes of King's
sermons and speeches26 are not only more representative of King's rhetorical out-
put, but are a more reliable index of his sophisticated oral practices. In the main,
King was more Miles Davis than Milli Vanilli.27


--- PAGE 238 ---
Constructing a Unique Voice 209
King's academic work is another matter altogether. From the scant evidence
that exists, even in his undergraduate days at Morehouse College, King was
sloppy in formally citing the sources of ideas he propounded in his papers.28 King
began college at age fifteen, swept in on an early admissions policy for bright stu-
dents to compensate for the drain of black men during World War II. King grad-
uated from college at nineteen, the same age at which he preached his trial ser-
mon.29 The sermon that King would preach that night became one of his favorite
homilies and was greatly dependent on a sermon by a well-known white minister.
King sailed into seminary with supreme confidence, the son of a solidly middle-
class minister whose future promise had begun to blossom as he embraced grad-
uate school at an age when most male students were gearing up for girls and guz-
zling beer. King's work at Crozer Theological Seminary in Chester, Pennsylvania,
was often distinguished enough to earn him high marks from his professors
(except, ironically enough, in a couple of public speaking courses)30 and die con-
fidence of fellow students, who voted him class president. But King's formal cita-
tion habits continued to be sloppy.31 In most cases, his errors might have easily
been corrected had he taken more time to place quotation marks around material
amply cited in his notes and had he refined his skills of paraphrasing others'
work. King's work at Crozer, especially his use of books and articles from which
he drew many of his ideas, proves that he used these sources to bolster his bur-
geoning dieological beliefs about God, human nature, evil, and sin.
The same holds true for his work at Boston University, where King matricu-
lated after graduating from Crozer. Initially enrolled in the philosophy depart-
ment to work with renowned philosophical theologian Edgar Brightman, King
transferred to the school of theology when Brightman died. There King worked
under the tutelage of L. Harold DeWolf and, to a lesser degree, S. Paul Schilling,
both of whom were influenced by Brightman's conception of personalism, which
holds that God is a living being with the characteristics of human personality.
King put his own stamp on personalist theology32 even as he wrestled with other
great theological and philosophical figures, some of whom he first read in semi-
nary—Kant, Hegel, Marx, Nietzsche, Barth, Niebuhr, Tillich, and Wieman.
Throughout his Boston University career, it is now evident that King plagiarized
large portions of his course papers and his dissertation, "A Comparison of the
Conceptions of God in the Thinking of Paul Tillich and Henry Nelson Wieman,"
completed in 1955.33 King plagiarized the two principal subjects of his disserta-
tion, but the bulk of his theft concentrated on large portions of Jack Boozer's dis-
sertation, "The Place of Reason in Paul Tillich's Conception of God," written just
three years before King's thesis and supervised by L. Harold DeWolf, King's
major adviser.34 Interestingly, King used plagiarized thoughts to reinforce his
theological convictions. He stole words for at least diree reasons: first, to explore
the character of a God who was personal and loving, and not simply, as Tillich
argued, the "ground of being"; second, to investigate the complex nature of
human identity and sinfulness, as King struggled between neo-ordiodox theology,


--- PAGE 239 ---
210 THE MICHAEL ERIC DYSON READER
with its emphasis on original sin, and liberal religious views, which hold that
myths and symbols dot the biblical landscape; and, finally, to probe the origin
and persistence of evil—was it allowed by God, who in yielding to human will, de-
cided to limit herself, or was God not really all-powerful?35 As historian Eugene
Genovese notes, King's plagiarism contained a "curious feature"36 since it was not
characterized by "laziness and indifference" but showed that King "constantly
wrestled with difficult subject matter." And most of his teachers agreed with his
seminary professor's assessment that King possessed "exceptional intellectual abil-
ity."37 Moreover, there is no evidence that King cheated on his examinations,
which he constantly passed with high marks. Then why did he plagiarize?
No one knows, although many scholars and critics across the ideological spec-
trum have ventured reasons. Theodore Pappas's edited volume, Martin Luther King
Plagiarism Story, is a relendess assault on King's reputation, a bitterly moralizing an-
thology that assays to unveil King's moral deficits through his stolen words.38 In-
stead, Pappas's tome, with the exception of contributions by Genovese, Gary
Wills, and Jacob Neusner, is a throb of journalistic overkill with litde relief or bal-
ance. Its ominous blue tones seek to warn us that King's sordid act of intellectual
treachery reveals his inherendy flawed character—information intended, no doubt,
to flatten King's naive boosters. Pappas's attack reveals just how persistent are the
pockets of intellectualized attacks on Martin Luther King's reputation in our na-
tion, although he does document the reluctance of media and academic critics to
publicize King's plagiarism. King's first scholarly biographer, David Levering
Lewis, was "appalled" at the news of his virgin subject's literary misdealings, de-
crying King's "repeated act of self-betrayal and subversion of the rules of scholar-
ship," which, in the light of Lewis's estimate of King's ability, was wholly unneces-
sary.39 Lewis detects in King's psychic makeup the "angst of strivers in the melting
pot," whether they came by immigration or slavery.40 He plausibly posits that an
"alert striver" like King might have sensed a racial double standard in his profes-
sors' treatment of him, and thus, "finding himself highly rewarded rather than pe-
nalized"41 for his apparent mistakes, "he may well have decidefd] to repay their
condescension or contempt in like coin." That may be true, although it may not
help us understand why King cheated in the first place. Then, too, such a reading
depends on denying that King's scholarly habits were influenced by the verbal
promiscuity of black culture, an argument Lewis finds "wholly incredulous."42 An-
other exhaustive King biographer, David Garrow, is more willing than Lewis to
concede the relevance of black cultural factors in understanding King's practices,
at least on the sermonic front. Garrow holds that the discovery of King's plagia-
rism will not only "alter our understanding of the young Martin Luther King,"43
but that the consequences of such a finding will "complement and further
strengthen two interpretive themes" that have found support among civil rights
scholars. The first is that King "was far more deeply and extensively shaped"44 by
the black church tradition that nurtured him than by the thinkers and teachers he
engaged in graduate school. And second, "the black freedom movement was in no


--- PAGE 240 ---
Constructing a Unique Voice 211
way the simple product of individual leaders and national organizations."45 Like
King scholars James Cone, Lewis Baldwin, and Taylor Branch, Garrow under-
scores the powerful influence of the black church on King's theological framework
and his habit of verbal borrowing.46 Although none of these scholars is an apolo-
gist for King's scholarly plagiarism, they bring a vital balance to criticism that fails
to acknowledge the cultural and racial forces that shaped King's rhetorical choices.
Still, it is one thing to argue that King's habits of verbal borrowing drew from
cultural practices (which I think is true) and another to argue that King simply
carried these habits into the academic arena. Such an argument dishonors King's
sophistication and shrewdness and ignores the intellectual gifts and scholarly tal-
ents that got King admitted to graduate school in the first place. But even those
who argue that King's academic habit of taking others' words without attribution
was pure and simple plagiarism (which I believe it was) have unconvincing argu-
ments about what drove him to do it. The suggestion that King's teachers gave
him a break because he was black—that they engaged in "reverse racism" or, even
worse, as Lewis and Genovese argue, that his professors engaged in racial pater-
nalism—seems implausible.47 After all, Boston University produced, during or im-
mediately after King's tenure, distinguished scholars like Major Jones, Samuel
Proctor, Evans Crawford, Cornish Rogers, and C. Eric Lincoln.48 That does not
rule out the possibility that King's case was an exception, but for that logic to
work, King would had to have been a marginal student whose limited skills pre-
vented his success. There is too much evidence that King mastered the mechan-
ics of academic survival and was bright, diligent, and highly disciplined. David
Garrow's surmise that King was in his Boston years "first and foremost a young
dandy whose efforts to play the role of a worldly, sophisticated young philosopher
were in good part a way of coping with an intellectual setting that was radically
different from his own heritage and in which he might well have felt an out-
sider,"49 may go further in capturing King's conflicting emotions about graduate
school and his doubts about whether he belonged. The most highly gifted black
student50 could harbor insecurities about his talents in a white world that insisted
on his inferiority, even in a relatively benign environment like Boston University,
which had a reputation for nurturing bright black students. Garrow suggests that
the King of Boston University may have been "a rather immature and insecure
man,"51 who did not fully become "himself" until he left graduate school, a rea-
sonable speculation not only in the light of King's subsequent career but in the
light of how most of us who have trod a similar path have developed. (Did any-
one really expect Michael Jordan to become the greatest basketball player ever
after viewing him in college, where he never averaged twenty points a game?) We
often forget that King was only twenty-six when he became what Hegel termed a
world-historical figure.52 Boston University certainly was a proving ground for
him, a place where he fought personal and institutional demons and succumbed
to the temptation to represent others' work as his own. I think there are at least
two complex and interrelated reasons behind King's scholarly plagiarism.


--- PAGE 241 ---
212 THE MICHAEL ERIC DYSON READER
First, part of the explanation may reside in what Cornish Rogers, a contempo-
rary of King at Boston University, says was King's primary goal: to become a
first-rate preacher and pastor of a distinguished black southern church. Rogers
says that "King told me the main reason he was getting a doctorate was so he
could get that church—Dexter Avenue, which wanted a minister with a doctor-
ate."53 Rogers says that despite the fact that King's application for Boston Uni-
versity indicated his desire to become a scholar of theology, it was not surprising
that King "changed his perspective as he got older and sensed where his real heart
and best gifts lay."54 This confirms Miller's and Lischer's arguments that King
was first and foremost a preacher of extraordinary skill and resources, and by
comparison, at best a competent theologian. Rogers also argues that theological
education was "alien in the sense that it really did not provide [King] with the
tools for ministry in the black community,"55 even though King would use "some
of the titillating ideas that he got in his studies if he thought they would preach
well." For King, as for many "evangelical divines," preaching was the supreme
skill one must possess and develop to render the greatest service as a Christian
minister. Among black preachers, there is the often repeated mantra dressed up as
a question: "But can he tell the story?" referring to homiletical skills honed in the
black pulpit. And, as Lischer argued about King, every item of experience is
made grist for the preacher's mill, as preachers often remark about a compelling
story or idea "that will preach."
Undoubtedly, there is a profound conflict in such circles about formal theolog-
ical education. Although it is viewed as necessary to critical thinking about reli-
gious matters, theological education is often viewed as a hindrance to the true
worship of God, since liberal scholarship in particular challenges evangelical faith.
This skepticism often translates into a paralyzing anti-intellectualism, a phenome-
non not unknown in black and white preaching circles. But even as such preach-
ers despise the process of theological education—both its demanding intellectual
regimen and its relentless criticism of received theological views—they cherish its
value to their upward mobility and hunger after its symbolic rewards. This is
why, perhaps, there are so many self-anointed, self-appointed, self-administered
"doctors" in the Christian ministry, including the black pulpit (especially, perhaps,
the black pulpit). The doctor deficiency among black clergy—the result of racist
strictures against formal and higher education for most of our history—has led to
its diseased exaggeration in such quarters. King certainly got major cachet from
his degree.56 How many times would black folk derive pride from announcing
that their leader was "Doctor Martin Luther King Jr.," almost as if his title were
part of his given name? And liberal white folk were pleased with themselves in
pronouncing a tide that King had collected from one of their schools. Calling him
"Doctor King" was a way for them to participate vicariously in his achievement
while perhaps unconsciously lauding themselves for having had the good sense to
recognize his gifts. The anti-intellectualism of the clergy, the alienation of a white
academic setting, the appeal of becoming a "doctor," the desire to serve the black


--- PAGE 242 ---
Constructing a Unique Voice 213
church, and a change in vocational aspiration in midstream might certainly have
ganged up on a young black scholar who sought to relieve the intense pressure of
being simultaneously vain, gifted, ambitious, and insecure. Neither can we gain-
say King's pride in being able to pull it all off—not simply the deception that die
work he stole was his, which wasn't difficult (after all, as his dissertation's second
reader, S. Paul Schilling commented, there were odier student-scholars whose pla-
giarism was far worse than King's)57—but the more difficult task of managing the
competing demands of two worlds that, in die words of Bernice Johnson Reagon,
King sought to "straddle."58 In diis sense, King's plagiarism, diough still tragic,
was among the least of his worries. That is a profound commentary on the racist
world King sought to penetrate, the conflicted black world from which he
emerged, and the uncertain world into which he would be thrust as an educated
agent of social change. Not to get the degree would be a greater failure than cheat-
ing to get it. The fault lies not simply with King, although he bears a lion's share
of the blame, but with a world diat demanded that he and odiers perform under
such conditions. The wonder is not that King cheated under these conditions, but
diat C. Eric Lincoln, Samuel Proctor, Evans Crawford, Cornish Rogers, Major
Jones, and thousands of other blacks, did not.
Second, King's plagiarism may have had to do widi his aversion, one shared by
many black students of his generation, to write a dissertation on race.59 Of course,
that aversion is not the driving force in King's cheating but its symptom. The
racial climate that made race a scholarly taboo and encouraged the embrace of al-
ready validated European subject matter might have been the predicate for his
plagiarism. The aversion to write about race was not accidental, but reflected the
dilemma that all black students faced: if they wrote about race, they risked being
pigeonholed or stereotyped; if they avoided it, they risked failing to develop crit-
ical resources to combat arguments about black inferiority. Even today, such a
stigma persists, particularly in the light of the bitter culture wars still being fought.
For instance, Eugene Genovese, in an otherwise tough and eminently fair review
of King's work, let slip that "King passed over the chance to take courses on so-
cial Christianity, Gandhi, race relations, and other trendy subjects, preferring
courses on Plato, Hegel, formal logic, and modern philosophy."60 If such courses
were deemed trendy dien, it is no wonder that rigorously exploring the ideas that
pushed or prevented racial justice would be strongly discouraged in white aca-
demic settings. At Boston University, the stigma of "race scholar" was one that
few students appeared willing to risk. As James Cone notes, King did "not even
mention racism in most of his graduate papers that dealt widi justice, love, sin,
and evil."61 Cone also argues that in "six years at Crozer and Boston, King never
identified racism as a theological or philosophical problem or mentioned whether
he recognized it in the student body and faculty."62
Such issues were broached in the Dialectical Society, an organization of black
graduate students founded by King and Cornish Rogers to offer dieir peers an in-
tellectual forum to debate ideas relevant to black communities.63 The need for


--- PAGE 243 ---
214 THE MICHAEL ERIC DYSON READER
such a group underscores the schizophrenia that many black scholars faced, and
often still do, in seeking to address the painful circumstances of black life while
satisfying the demands of a white academy. Cone's conclusion that King, like
most other integrationists of his time, "appeared to be glad merely to have the
opportunity to prove that Negroes could make it in the white man's world,"64 is
borne out by Rogers's observation that "the only reason many students stuck
around (and did everything that was required of them) was to get the degree
which in the black community makes you equal to the man, to white folks, if
you've got your degree from a white institution, the same degree that whites
get."65 In such an environment, King concluded that he would never set the world
on fire with his scholarly gifts. And as he perhaps battled his own self-doubt in
confronting the rigorous demands of scholarly work-work he couldn't do as well
as the work his genius had suited him for in the pulpit and the public stage, work
of which he was not yet fully aware or capable—it is likely that cheating became a
way to save face back home, satisfy "the man" at school, and sail off into the sun-
set of pastoral duties with no one having been the wiser about his grave sin. After
all, as David Levering Lewis points out, no one, not even King himself, knew
then that he would become Martin Luther King Jr.66 Neither did King or, for that
matter, his admirers and detractors, realize that his failures, like his successes,
would gain such wide attention.
Recent scholarship in the psychology of race may provide a small glimpse onto
King's tortured psychic landscape. This is by no means an attempt to excuse
King's misdeed. Neither is it an attempt to suggest that most of those blacks vic-
timized by the problem I will discuss would ever resort to stealing others' words
as their own. Still, I think it opens a window onto King's mental processes that
might help us understand a bit better why he cheated. Studies by Stanford Uni-
versity psychologist Claude Steele and his colleagues suggest the existence of a
problem that King most likely engaged.67 Steele and his colleagues have at-
tempted to answer a difficult question: Why do able black college students fail to
perform as well as their white colleagues? Throughout the 1990s, Steele says, "the
national college-dropout rate for African-Americans has been 20 to 25 percent
higher than that for whites. Among those who finish college, the grade-point av-
erage of black students is two thirds of a grade below that of whites."68 Steele says
that "the under-performance of black undergraduates is an unsettling problem"
that may "alter or hamper career development, especially among blacks not at-
tending the most selective schools."69
Steele says the answers have resulted in an often "uncomfortably finger point-
ing . . . debate. Does the problem stem from something about black students
themselves, such as poor motivation, a distracting peer culture, lack of family val-
ues, or—the unsettling suggestion of the The Bell Curve— genes?"70 Steele adds to
that list a host of other factors relating to the "conditions of blacks' lives: social
economic deprivation, a society that views blacks through the lens of diminishing
stereotypes and low expectation, too much coddling, or too much neglect?"


--- PAGE 244 ---
Constructing a Unique Voice 215
What stumped researchers even more is that middle-class black students, who
have had the social and economic resources to lift them above the social plight of
their poorer peers, underperform as do disadvantaged blacks, garnering lower
standardized-test scores, lower college grades, and lower graduation rates than
their white peers. What forces could possibly account for such underperfor-
mance, even among middle-class black students? At the risk of oversimplifying
and reducing Steele's argument, it all boils down to what he and his colleagues
termed "stereotype threat": the "threat of being viewed through the lens of nega-
tive stereotype, or the fear of doing something that would inadvertently confirm
that stereotype."71
Steele develops his theory to apply to differential performance among black un-
dergraduate students and their white peers. I apply it to King's own possible
mind-set and suggest that he cheated in part to escape or relieve "stereotype
threat"—the enormous pressure of feeling under relendess white scrutiny and liv-
ing with the fear of confirming stereotypes of black identity. In a telling passage,
nineteen-year-old graduate student King (at an age when most young men are col-
lege sophomores) is described as being
terribly tense, unable to escape the fact that he was a Negro in a mostly white
world. He was painfully aware of how whites stereotyped the Negro as lazy and
messy, always laughing, always loud and late. He hated that image and tried des-
perately to avoid it. "If I were a minute late to class," he said, "I was almost mor-
bidly conscious of it and sure that everyone noticed it. Rather than be thought of
as always laughing, I'm afraid I was grimly serious for a time. I had a tendency
to overdress, to keep my room spotless, my shoes perfectly shined and my
clothes immaculately pressed."72
King was certainly not alone as a black student who confronted an egregiously
unfair academic situation. Neither can we be sure that he wasn't simply the sort
of person who would have cheated no matter his race or age. But since we only
know him as we did—a black man confronting his self-doubt in a majority white
culture-we can only reasonably speculate with the facts at hand. From King's
own description of the psychic and emotional torture he confronted, I think it is
reasonable to suggest that a possible reason for his cheating had to do with the at-
tempt to please the white professors who judged him and to measure up to the
standards of the white society in which he competed academically. I am not sug-
gesting that most black students respond similarly; they obviously do not. I am,
however, arguing that it is plausible that King responded to stereotype threat, per-
haps even "stereotype fatigue," and surrendered the fight on the academic end to
preserve his mental health on the emotional end. The fight was just that cosdy
that plagiarizing course papers and a dissertation—as awful and lethal a flaw as it
is-was deemed less harmful than facing the consequences of failing to meet the
challenges of the white world.


--- PAGE 245 ---
216 THE MICHAEL ERIC DYSON READER
King's plagiarism at school is perhaps a sad symptom of his response to the
racial times in which he matured. His plagiarism is made even sadder by the re-
alization that King's heroic efforts as a civil rights leader relieved for others some
of the pressures that he faced as a graduate student, pressures that no one should
have to face but that thousands of blacks have managed with amazing grace. It is
not unbelievable that such figures were gifted, but that they could perform under
the punishing conditions of rigid racial apartheid. Their success deflects attention
from the horror of the conditions they learned to master. It is bitterly ironic that
of all people, Martin Luther King, Jr., should be found out as a plagiarist since his
huge rhetorical gifts helped to create a world of opportunity for millions. But then
his genius for mastering the white world through mastering its languages, and for
portraying so compellingly the pained psychic boundaries of black life, may de-
rive from the tortured memory of his sore temptation on an isolated battlefield of
conscience where he wrestled with, and failed, himself. As a New York Times edito-
rial eloquently reminded our nation, King may have plagiarized words, but he
could never plagiarize the courage he displayed on countless occasions:
But however just it may be to denounce his scholarship,73 that should not be
confused with his leadership. Whether or not, as a student, he wrote what he
wrote, Dr. King did what he did. . .. Some say he solicited the assistance of oth-
ers . . . but even if so, that's no more to be faulted than John Kennedy turning to
Theodore Sorensen, or George Bush to Peggy Noonan. . . . What the world hon-
ors when it honors Dr. King is his tenacity on behalf of racial justice—tenacity
equally against gradualism and against violence. He and many with him pushed
Americans down the long road to racial justice. That achievement glows unchal-
lenged through the present shadow. Martin Luther King's courage was not
copied; and there was no plagiarism in his power.


--- PAGE 246 ---
PART EIGHT
RELIGION AND SEXUALITY
"The sexuality of black peoples has been a source of mythology, stereotype,
fear, and fascination since our arrival in "the New World." Black folk
have waged fierce campaigns against the exploitation of our sexual iden-
tities even as we have sought to enjoy, with varying degrees of success,
erotic liberty. Although black religions have been instrumental in fostering
social and spiritual freedom, they have been less adept in encouraging
black folk to break the shackles of repression and the sexual conformity
imposed on us by a white supremacist society. And when it comes to al-
ternative lifestyles and sexual practices, st(dwarts of black religion have
been just as homophobic in their outlook as the members of dominant, het-
erosexist culture. Black folk whose lieterosexuality has been demonized
should be the last folk on earth to dump stigma on our gay, lesbian,
bisexual, ami tnmsgender brothers and sisters. The challenge to black be-
lievers is to embrace a just vision of black sexuality that emphasies a love
and acceptance of all human beings, whatever their sexual orientation.


--- PAGE 247 ---
This page intentionally left blank


--- PAGE 248 ---
Eighteen
WHEN YOU DIVIDE BODY AND SOUL, PROBLEMS
MULTIPLY: THE BLACK CHURCH AND SEXUALITY
Some black preachers were angry with me for writing this essay and "telling tales out of
school." It only helped a little that I was honest about my own shortcomings as well. But
the black church must engage black sexuality on every front: the sometimes hypocritical
assaults by the white mainstream that have over the years caused us to deny our sexual
beauty; the sometimes repressive sexual practices of black religious communities that deny
the sacredness of sexual identity; and the homophobia that feeds the AIDS pandemic,
which has torn through black communities with destructive fury. In this chapter, I combat
the legacy of white supremacy that brings shame to black embodiment, even as I exhort
the black church to develop a theology of eroticism that freely embraces our God-given
sexual gifts. Otherwise, the church will be mired in sanctimonious pronouncements that
offer little help to struggling believers, and our children will be further alienatedfrom an
institution that, were it honest and courageous, might literally save their lives.
He healed my body, and told me to run on.
-GOSPEL SONG
"CAN'T NOBODY Do ME LIKE JESUS"
Love . . . gives you a good feeling. Something like sanctified.
-MARVIN GAYE
"LET'S GET IT ON," 1973
Sexual healing is good for me.
-MARVIN GAYE
"SEXUAL HEALING," 1982


--- PAGE 249 ---
220 THE MICHAEL ERIC DYSON READER
THE VISITING PREACHER, A BRAWNY BROWN MAN with smooth skin and
teeth made of pearl, was coming to the close of his sermon, a ritual moment of
climax in the black church. It is the inevitable point to which the entire service
builds. Its existence is the only justification for the less dramatic rites of commu-
nity—greeting visitors, collecting tithes, praying for the sick, reading scripture, and
atoning for sins. These rites are a hallway to the sanctuary of zeal and vision
formed by the black sermon. The furious splendor of the preacher's rhythmic, al-
most sung, speech drove the congregation to near madness. His relentless rhetoric
stood them on their feet. Their bodies lurched in holy oblivion to space or time.
Their hands waved as they shrieked their assent to the gospel lesson he passion-
ately proclaimed. His cadence quickened. Each word swiftly piled on top of the
next. The preacher's sweet moan sought to bring to earth the heavenly light of
which his words, even at their most brilliant, were but a dim reflection.
"We've got to keep o-o-o-o-on keepin' on," he tunefully admonished. The pre-
ceding wisdom of his oration on Christian sexuality, arguing the link between
passion and morality, turned this cliche into a sermonic clincher.
"We can't give up," he continued. "Because we've got God, oh yes, we've got
Go-o-o-o-d, um-humh, on our side."
"Yes," members of the congregation shouted. The call and response between
the pulpit and the pew escalated as each spurred the other on in ever enlarging
rounds of emotion.
"We've got a friend who will never forsake us."
"Yes sir, Reverend."
"We've got a God who can make a way outta no way."
"Yes we do."
"He's a heart fixer, and a mind regulator."
"Oh, yes He is."
"I'm here tonight to tell you whatever moral crisis you're facin', God can fix it
for you."
"Thank you, Jesus."
"If you're facin' trouble on the job, God can make your boss act better."
"Tell the truth, Reverend."
"If your kids won't act right, God can turn them around."
"Hallelujah!"
"If you're fornicating, and I know some of y'all been fornicatin', God can turn
lust to love and give you a healthier relationship with Him."
"Hold your hope! Hold your hope!"
"If you're committin' adultery, and I know some of y'all are doing that, too,
God can stop your rovin' eyes and keep you from messin' up. Won't He do it,
church?"
"Yes! Yes He will!"
"If your marriage is fallin' apart, and there's no joy—I said there's no jo-oy-oy-oy
at your address, God can do for you what He did for David. David asked God:


--- PAGE 250 ---
"The Black Church and Sexuality 221
'Restore unto me the joy of Thy salvation.' I'm a witness tonight, children. God
can do that, church. God can restore your joy. Won't He do it, children?!"
"Yes He will! Thank you, Jesus! Thank you, Jesus!"
"I'm closin' now, but before I go, I just stopped by to let you know that you
can't find salvation in things. You can't find salvation in clothes. You can't find sal-
vation in your car. You can't find salvation in your wife or husband. And you cer-
tainly can't find salvation in sex. Did y'all hear me? You can't find salvation in
sex. You can't find it in sleepin' around, tryin' to fill the empty places of your life
with pleasure and loose livin'."
"Thank you, Jesus!"
"You can only find salvation in our Lord and Savior, Jesus Christ! Do y'all hear
me?Jesus, that's who you need! Jesus, that's who can save you. Jesus, the author
and finisher of our faith. Jesus! Jesus! Jesus!"
"Thank ya! Oh, hallelujah!"
The congregation erupted in waves of shouting and hand clapping as the min-
ister withdrew from the microphone and dramatically spun to his seat. He was
thoroughly spent from a forty-five-minute exercise in edification and enlighten-
ment. As soon as he was done, his fellow ministers on the dais, including me, de-
scended on the preacher's chair to thank him for his thoughtful, thrilling message.
Sex, after all, is a difficult subject to treat in the black church, or, for that matter,
in any church. This is indeed ironic. After all, the Christian faith is grounded in
the Incarnation, the belief that God took on flesh to redeem human beings. That
belief is constantly trumped by Christianity's quarrels with the body. Its needs. Its
desires. Its sheer materiality. But especially its sexual identity.
I got a glimpse that night, or, I should say, a reminder, of how deeply ambiva-
lent Christians are about sex. I learned, too, how dishonest we're sometimes
made by the unresolved disputes between our bodies and our beliefs.
After the service was over, after the worshipers had time to greet and thank the
preacher, we ministers, five in all, retired to the pastor's study.
"Doc, you blessed me tonight," beamed the pastor, a middle-aged preacher of no
mean talent himself. (Among black ministers and their circle of intimates, "Doc" or
"Doctor" is an affectionate term given to preachers. It began, perhaps, as a way of
upgrading the minister to the level of respect his gifts deserved, especially at a time
when black ministers were prevented from completing their formal education.)
"Thank you, man," the preacher gently replied with a kind of "aw shucks"
smile.
"Yeah, Doctor, you were awful, just terrible, boy," a second minister enthused,
heaping on the guest the sort of congratulation black preachers often give to one
another.
"Revrun, it was judgment in here tonight," another minister chimed in with yet
another line of black preacherly praise. "You killed everythang in here. And if it
wasn't dead, you put it in intensive care." At that, we all laughed heartily and
agreed that the preacher had hit his mark.


--- PAGE 251 ---
222 THE MICHAEL ERIC DYSON READER
As a young minister in my early twenties, I was just glad to be in their number,
bonding with ministerial mentors, men standing on the front line of spiritual war-
fare, or, as the black church memorably refers to it, "standing in the gap": carry-
ing and crying the judgment of the Almighty, opening opportunity for salvation,
proclaiming the soul's rescue and the requirements of redemption, and edifying
believers with the inscrutable, wholly uncompromising, tell-it-like-it-is, to-be-
preached-in-season-and-out-of-season gospel of the living God. I was simply en-
joying this magical moment of fraternal friendliness. And it was just that. No
women were there. No one thought it odd that they weren't. We never remarked
once on their absence, and, indeed, we counted on their absence to say things,
manly things, that we couldn't, didn't dare say, in mixed company. Still, I wasn't
prepared for what followed.
"Revrun, I need to ask you something," the visiting preacher begged the pastor.
His eyebrows were raised, a knowing look was on his face, and his voice affected,
if not quite a mock seriousness, then a naughty whisper that clued us that his cu-
riosity was more carnal than cerebral.
"Who is that woman with those big breasts who was sitting on the third aisle
to my left?" he eagerly inquired. "Damn, she kept shouting and jiggling so much
I almost lost my concentration."
"She is a fine woman, now," the pastor let on.
"Well, Doc, do you think you could fix me up with her?" the visiting preacher
asked with shameless lust.
"I'll see what I can do, Revrun," the pastor promised.
The married preacher's naked desire shocked me. To my surprise, it also made
me secretly envious. The fact that he could seek an affair less than an hour after
he had thundered against it offended my naive, literal sense of the Christian faith.
I thought immediately of how angry I'd been in the past when I heard preachers
justify their moral failings, especially their sexual faults. Such ministers chided
their followers with a bit of theological doggerel dressed up as a maxim: "God can
hit a straight lick with a crooked stick."
But in ways I didn't yet completely understand, I envied the preacher's sense of
sexual confidence. He was able to zoom in on his desire and, to borrow a favorite
neo-Pentecostal catchphrase, "to name it and claim it." The preacher—and he was
surely aware of it, since he didn't let principle stand in the way of his pleasure-
had apparently made his peace, however temporary, with the war between Chris-
tian ideals and delights of the flesh. I hadn't.
Still, I'm glad I didn't mount a high horse that night to trample the preacher.
I've developed enough failures in the sometimes bloody management of erotic de-
sire. So have many other black Christians. Especially those seeking, like most peo-
ple of faith, to close the gap between what they believe and how they behave.
That night, I was nearly tortured by questions I couldn't answer. Was the
preacher's theology off? Did he have a flawed understanding of how a Christian
should view the body and its sexual urges? Was his extreme sexual libertarianism


--- PAGE 252 ---
"The Black Church and Sexuality 223
just plain out of order? Was he simply a hypocrite? Or was he acting out, how-
ever crudely, a confused sense of black Christian sexuality that is, by turns, re-
pressed and excessive? Or all of the above?
The answers to these questions are not as simple as we might believe, despite
the rigid certainty of self-anointed arbiters of Christian Truth. And neither are the
answers relevant simply for cases, like the one I've described, where everyone can
agree that something was wrong. It's much more difficult to figure out how we
can have a healthy sense of black Christian sexual identity in a world where being
black has been a sin, where black sexuality has been viewed as a pathology, and
where the inability to own—and to own up to—our black bodies has led us to de-
value our own flesh. We must recover the erotic uses of our bodies from the dis-
tortions of white racism and the traps of black exploitation. We must liberate our-
selves to embrace the Christian bliss of our black bodies.
At the beginning of the African presence in the New World, black bodies were
viewed in largely clinical and capitalist terms. The value of black slave bodies was
determined by their use in furthering the reach of Western colonial rule; expand-
ing the market economies of European and American societies; institutionalizing
leisure for white cultural elites; deepening the roots of democracy for white
property-owning gentry; and providing labor for the material culture that domi-
nates the American landscape. Interestingly, when Christianity poked its nose in,
chattel slavery, already a vile and dehumanizing affair, got even uglier.
Christianity insisted there was a need to save the savages from their own cul-
tural deficits. White Christians sought to rescue slaves from perdition by making
sure what little soul they had was made suitable for the Kingdom of God. Chris-
tianity gave theological legitimacy, and racial justification, to widely held beliefs
about black inferiority. It also sanctified the brutal methods deemed necessary to
tame the beastly urges of black Africans. White society exploited black labor.
White Christianity made it appear that God was behind the whole scheme. Some
argued that God used slavery as a tool to bring backward Africans to America.
They believed God used white slavers to save black souls by subjugating their
bodies. Christian theology shook hands with slavery and sailed off into the sun-
set of white supremacy.
A key to keeping blacks under white control was the psychological poison
pumped into the intellectual diets of slaves. Whites viewed black bodies as ugly,
disgusting, and bestial, and blacks were made aware of this. Black bodies were
spoken of in the same breath as, say, horses and cows. As if being viewed as an
animal wasn't bad enough, blacks were also considered property. Because of
Western beliefs about the connection between moral and aesthetic beauty, the be-
lief in the ugliness of black bodies carried over to attitudes about black souls.
Black sexuality sat at the heart of such judgments. If black bodies were de-
meaned, black sexuality was demonized. Unless, of course, it was linked to
breeding black babies for slavery, or, in the case of black women, satisfying the
lust of white men. Thus, a central paradox of black sexuality began. Even as


--- PAGE 253 ---
224 THE MICHAEL ERIC DYSON READER
whites detested black bodies for their raw animalism, they projected onto those
same black bodies their repressed sexual yearnings. Black bodies provided recre-
ational and therapeutic relief for whites. Although that paradox has certainly
lessened, it has not entirely disappeared.
For the most part, black sexuality was cloaked in white fantasy and fear. Black
women were thought to be hot and ready to be bothered. Black men were be-
lieved to have big sexual desires and even bigger organs to realize their lust.
White men became obsessed with containing the sexual threat posed by black
men. The competition for white women was mostly mythical. It was largely die
projection of white men's guilt for raping black women. Even after slavery, white
men beat, burned, hung, and often castrated black men in response to the per-
ceived threat black men represented. White men also repressed white female sex-
uality by elevating a chaste white womanhood above the lustful reach of black
men. Well before gangsta rap, the crotch was die crux of black masculine sexual
controversy.
During slavery and after emancipation, blacks both resisted and drank in sick
white beliefs about black sexuality. Some blacks sought to fulfill the myth of un-
quenchable black lust. The logic isn't hard to figure out: if white folk think I'm a
sexual outlaw, some blacks perhaps diought, I'll prove it. Other blacks behaved in
exactly the opposite fashion. They rigidly disciplined their sexual urges to erase
stereotypes of excessive black sexuality. During slavery, many black women re-
sisted sexual domination through abortion, abstinence, and infanticide. They in-
terrupted white pleasure and profit one body at a time.
The rise of the black church, first as an invisible institution and then as the vis-
ible womb of black culture, provided a means of both absorbing and rejecting die
sexual values of white society. Black religion freed the black body from its im-
prisonment in crude, racist stereotypes. The black church combated as best it
could the self-hatred and the hatred of other blacks that white supremacy en-
couraged with evil efficiency. It fought racist oppression by becoming the head-
quarters of militant social and political action in black communities. The black
church produced leaders who spoke with eloquence and prophetic vigor about
the persistence of white racism. It was the educational center of black communi-
ties, supporting colleges that trained blacks who became shock troops in the bat-
de for racial equality. Black churches unleashed the repressed forces of cultural
creativity and religious passion. The church also redirected black sexual energies
into the sheer passion and emotional explosiveness of its worship services.
I'm certainly not saying, as do those who argue that black religion compensates
for racial oppression—we can't beat up the white man so we cut up in church—diat
the displacement of black sexual energy by itself shaped black worship. I'm sim-
ply suggesting that die textures, styles, and diemes of black worship owe a debt
to a complicated sexual history. In sharp contrast to the heat of most black wor-
ship experiences, there emerged almost immediately in black churches a conser-
vative theology of sexuality. In part, this theology reflected the traditional teach-


--- PAGE 254 ---
The Black Church and Sexuality 225
ings of white Christianity. Out of moral necessity, however, black Christians ex-
aggerated white Christianity's version of "PC"—Puritan Correctness. Later, many
black Christians adopted white Christianity's Victorian repression to rebut the
myth of black sexuality being out of control.
The contemporary black church still reflects the roots of its unique history. It
continues to spawn social action, though not on the same fronts as it once did.
The increased secularization of black communities, and the rise of political lead-
ership outside of the black church, has blunted the focus of the church's prophetic
ministry. Some things, however, have changed very little. There remains deeply
entrenched in black churches a profoundly conservative theology of sexuality.
Like all religious institutions where doctrine is questioned, rejected, perhaps even
perverted by members, the black church faces a tense theological situation. Un-
like, say, the Catholic or Episcopal Church where an elaborate and more un-
yielding hierarchy prevails, historically black churches have a real opportunity to
bring lasting change more quickly to dieir religious bodies. Such change is sorely
needed in black communities and churches where issues of sexuality have nearly
exploded.
Of course, there are problems that are easily identified but are difficult to solve.
Earlier and earlier, black boys and girls are becoming sexually active. Teen preg-
nancy continues to escalate. Besides these problems, there are all sorts of sexual
challenges that black Christians face. The sexual exploitation of black female
members by male clergy. The guilt and shame that result from unresolved con-
flicts about the virtues of black sexuality. The continued rule of black churches by
a mainly male leadership. The role of eroticism in a healthy black Christian sex-
uality. The revulsion to and exploitation of homosexuals. The rise of AIDS in
black communities. The sexual and physical abuse of black women and children
by black male church members. The resistance to myths of super black sexuality.
And the split between mind and body that leads to confusion about a black Chris-
tian theology of Incarnation. What should be done?
For starters, the black church should build on a celebration of the body in black
culture and worship. Ours, quite simply, is a body-centered culture. Sharp criticism
by black intellectuals, including me, of essentialism—the idea that there is such a
thing as black culture's essence, and that we get at it by viewing blacks as a mono-
lith, ignoring differences made by region, sexuality, gender, class, and the like—has
made many critics reluctant to highlight persistent features of black life. But in
many African and black American communities, colorful, creative uses of the body
prevail. (Unfortunately, as we have learned with resurgent slavery and genital mu-
tilation of females in Africa, destructive and oppressive uses of the body mark our
cultures as well.) Many black folk use vibrant, sometimes flamboyant, styles and
colors to adorn their bodies. Johnnie Cochran's purple suit and Dennis Rodman's
weirdly exotic hairstyles and body tattoos reveal a flare for outrageous, experi-
mental fashion. Plus, the styling of black bodies for creative expression—Michael
Jordan's gravity-rattling acrobatics, singer Anita Baker's endearing tics, Denzel


--- PAGE 255 ---
226 THE MICHAEL ERIC DYSON READER
Washington's smoothly sensuous gait, and Janet Jackson's brilliant integration of
street and jazz dance-underscores the improvisational uses of black bodies.
The black church, too, is full of beautiful, boisterous, burdened, and brilliant
black bodies in various stages of praising, signifying, testifying, shouting, prancing,
screaming, musing, praying, meditating, singing, whooping, hollering, prophesy-
ing, preaching, dancing, witnessing, crying, faking, marching, forgiving, damning,
exorcising, lying, confessing, surrendering, and overcoming. There is a relendess
procession, circulation, and movement of black bodies in the black church: the
choir gliding in and grooving to the rhythmic sweep of a grinding gospel number;
members marching aisle by aisle to plop a portion of their earnings in the collec-
tion plate; women sashaying to the podium to deliver the announcements; kids
huddling around the teacher for the children's morning message; the faithful
standing at service's start to tell how good the Lord's been to them this week; the
convicted leaping to dieir feet to punctuate a preacher's point in spiritual relief or
guilt; the deliberate saunter to the altar of the "whosoever wills" to pray for the
sick and bereaved, and for themselves; the white-haired, worldly wise deacon bow-
ing down at his seat to thank God that he was spared from death, that "the walls
of my room were not the walls of my grave," his bed "sheet was not my winding
sheet," and his bed was not "my cooling board"; the church mother shaking with
controlled chaos as the Holy Ghost rips straight through her vocal cords down to
her abdomen; the soloist's hands gesturing grandly as she bends each note into a
rung on Jacob's ladder to carry the congregation "higher and higher"; the ushers'
martial precision as they gracefully guide guests to a spot where they might get a
glimpse of glory; the choir director calling for pianissimo with a guileless "shhhh"
with one hand as the other directs the appointed soprano to bathe the congrega-
tion in her honey-sweet "ha-lay-loo-yuh"; and the preacher, the magnificent center
of rhetorical and ritualistic gravity, fighting off disinterest with a "you don't hear
me," begging for verbal response by looking to the ceiling and drolly declaring
"amen lights," twisting his body to reach for "higher ground," stomping the floor,
pounding the pulpit, thumping the Bible, spinning around, jumping pews, walking
benches, climbing ladders-yes literally-opening doors, closing windows, discard-
ing robes, throwing bulletins, hoisting chairs, moaning, groaning, sweating, hum-
ming, chiding, pricking, and edifying, all to better "tell the story of Jesus and his
love." In die black church, it's all about the body: the saved and sanctified body,
the fruitful and faithful body, working and waiting for the Lord.
The body, too, is at the center of what Christian theologians have long termed
the "scandal of particularity": the very idea that an unlimited, transcendent God
would become a human being, time-bound and headed for death, was just too
hard for nonbelievers to swallow. That scandal has special relevance for black
Christians, who draw courage from a God who would dare sneak into human
history as a lowly, suffering servant. From the plantation to the postindustrial city,
suffering blacks have readily identified with a God who, they believe, first identi-
fied with them.


--- PAGE 256 ---
T"he Black Church and Sexuality 227
The black church has helped blacks find a way to overcome pain, to live
through it, to get around it, and, finally, to prosper in spite of it. Black religion has
often encouraged black folk to triumph over tragedy by believing that undeserved
suffering could be turned to good use. That idea sparked the public ministry of
Martin Luther King Jr., a towering son of the black church. The radical identifica-
tion with Jesus' life and death, which happened, after all, in his body, has permit-
ted black Christians to endure the absurd violence done to their bodies. Through
church sacraments, black Christians nurtured and relieved their bodies' suffering
memories. On every first Sunday of the month, or whenever they celebrated the
Lord's Supper, black Christians broke bread and drank wine, knowing that Jesus'
crucified body was their crucified body, and that Jesus' resurrected body could be
theirs as well. Every time the words of Holy Communion were repeated, "this do
in remembrance of me," black Christians remembered those lost warriors who
once fought mightily against oppression but who now slept with the ancestors.
Above all, the Incarnation revealed to black folk a God who, when it came to
battling impossible odds, had been there and done that. Because black Christians
inevitably had to pass through the "valley of the shadow of death," they could
take solace from a God who had faced a host of ills they faced. Divine abandon-
ment. Cruel cursing. Ethnic bigotry. Religious marginalization. Unjust punish-
ment. Spiteful epithets. And most important, vicious death. Just knowing that
God had walked this same earth, eaten this same food, tasted this same disap-
pointment, experienced this same rejection, fought this same self-doubt, endured
this same betrayal, felt this same isolation, encountered this same opposition, and
overcome this same pain often made the difference between black folk living and
dying.
It is indeed ironic that, with so much staked on the body, many black Chris-
tians continue to punish themselves with the sort of extreme self-denial that has
little to do with healthy sexuality. To a large extent, the black church has aimed
to rid the black body of lascivious desires and to purge its erotic imagination
with "clean" thoughts. All the while, the black worship experience formed the
erotic body of black religious belief, with all the rites of religious arousal that ac-
company sexual union.
Indeed, the story of the visiting minister that begins this chapter portrays the
erotic intensity of the black worship experience: the electric call and response
between minister and congregation; the fervent temper of the preacher's words
of wisdom and warning; the extraordinary effort by the minister to seduce the
audience onto God's side through verbal solicitation; and the orgasmic eruption
of the congregation at the end of the sermon. It requires no large sophistication
to tell that something like sexual stimulation was going on.
Perhaps that's because there is a profound kinship between spirituality and sexu-
ality. Great mystics figured that out a long time ago. More recently, so have black
singers Marvin Gaye, the artist formerly known as Prince, and R. Kelly. Black Chris-
tians are reluctant to admit the connection because we continue to live in Cartesian


--- PAGE 257 ---
225 THE MICHAEL ERIC DYSON READER
captivity: the mind-body split thought up by philosopher Descartes flourishes in
black theologies of sexuality. Except it is translated as the split between body and
soul. Black Christians have taken sexual refuge in the sort of rigid segregation they
sought to escape in the social realm—the body and soul in worship are kept one
place, the body and soul in heat are kept somewhere else. That's ironic because, as
critic Michael Ventura has argued, black culture, especially black music, has healed,
indeed transcended, the split between mind and body inherited from Descartes and
certain forms of Christian theology. Segments of secular black culture have explored
the intimate bond of sexuality and spirituality. The black church has given a great
deal to black culture, including the style and passion of much of black pop music. It
is time the church accepted a gift in return: the union of body and soul.
The sensuality of our bodies must be embraced in worship. That sensuality
should be viewed as a metaphor for the passion of our sexual relations as well.
And vice versa. The link between sexuality and spirituality was hinted at when
the Bible talked of the church as Christ's bride, and alternately, as the body of
Christ. Because Christian belief is rooted in the Incarnation, Anglican theologian
William Temple held that Christianity is literally the most material of all religions.
The sheer materiality of our faith is not simply a protection against those versions
of Christianity that get high on the soul's salvation and forget about the body's
need to eat. It is also a rebuke to those who believe that God is opposed to our
sexual pleasure. To twist literary critic Roland Barthes, we should celebrate the
pleasure of the text, especially when the text is, literally, our bodies.
Simply put, the black church needs a theology of eroticism. Admittedly, diat is
a hard sell in an Age of Epidemic, where panic and paranoia, more than liberty
and celebration, set our sexual moods. Of course, black sexuality has always
dirived or suffered under a permanent sign of suspicion or revulsion. Still, that's
no reason to be cavalier about sex when its enjoyment can kill us. A theology of
eroticism certainly promotes safe sex. Our definition of safety, however, must in-
clude protection against the harmful sexual and psychic viruses that drain the life
from our desire. Further, a theology of eroticism looks beyond the merely physi-
cal to embrace abstinence as a powerful expression of sexuality.
In the main, a theology of eroticism must be developed to free black Christian
sexuality from guilty repression or gutless promiscuity. Sermon after sermon
counsels black Christians to abstain from loose behavior. To sleep only with our
mates. To save sex for permanent love. And to defer sexual gratification until we
are married. In black churches, as with most religious institutions, hardly anyone
waits for marriage to have sex. People sleep with their neighbor's spouse. Casual
sex is more than casually pursued. And because the needs of their bodies make
them liars with bad consciences, some drown their demons in a sea of serial
monogamies. Little of this is highly pleasurable, but it's pleasurable enough to
make us unhappy. Ugh!
What's even more intriguing is that the sermons pretty much stay the same.
Black Christians pretty much tell their children and each other that that's how


--- PAGE 258 ---
The Black Church and Sexuality 229
things ought to be. And consistency is seen as a substitute for tradition. But it cer-
tainly isn't. Vital, living traditions leave space for people to change bad habits be-
cause they have a better understanding of what the tradition should mean. As one
wise churchman put it: tradition is the living faith of dead people, while the tradi-
tional is the dead faith of living people. Too often, the latter has ruled black
churches. While we may share our forebears' faith, we can certainly leave aspects
of their theologies behind.
A theology of eroticism is rooted in simple honesty about black sexuality.
While we tell our kids not to have sex, more and more of them do. They are mak-
ing babies, having babies, and dying from AIDS. The black church should lay off
the hard line on teen sexuality. Sure, it must preach abstinence first. It should also
preach and teach safe sex, combining condoms and common sense. It should tell
kids from ages twelve through seventeen that when it's all said and done, human
sexuality is still an enlarging mystery, a metaphor of how life seeks more of itself
to sustain itself, of how life, as black theologian Howard Thurman remarked, is
itself alive. (Of course, we adults could use a reminder of this as well.) Our sexu-
ality is one way life reminds itself of that lesson. In the hands of groping teens, sex
is often little more than bewilderment multiplied by immaturity, despite growing,
groaning body parts that seem fit for the job. In an era when music videos, tele-
vision commercials, daytime soaps, and nighttime cable movies exploit our kids'
urges, it's no wonder that they, and indeed, all of us, have sex on the brain. If
only we could use that organ more in our erotic escapades.
The bottom line, however, is that traditional black church methods of curbing
teen sex aren't working. We must make a choice. Either we counsel our kids
about how to have sex as safely as they can, or we prepare to bury them before
their lives begin. The cruelty of contemporary sex is that die consequences of our
kids' mistakes, the same mistakes we made, are often swift and permanent. Most
black preachers and parents who tell kids they shouldn't have sex had sex as
teens. If not, most of them surely tasted carnal pleasure before they were married.
The guilt or embarrassment stirred by their hidden hypocrisy often makes them
harsh and unyielding in their views on teen sexuality. The black church's theol-
ogy of eroticism should place a premium on healthy, mature relations where lust
is not mistaken for affection. It must make allowances for our children, however,
to learn the difference, and to safely experiment with their bodies in pursuit of
genuine erotic health. The black church should pass out condoms on its offering
plates. At the least, it should make them available in restrooms or in the offices of
clergypersons or other counselors. The days of let's-pretend-the-problems-will-go-
away, never-fully-here-anyway, are now most certainly gone.
We must find remedies, too, for angst-ridden black preachers. Many of them
stir anxiety in their congregations because of their own conflicted theology of sex-
uality. The visiting minister I spoke of earlier was bewitched by the erotic double
bind that traps some ministers. He preached a theology of sexuality that satisfied
the demands of black church tradition. But he was also moved by erotic desires


--- PAGE 259 ---
230 THE MICHAEL ERIC DYSON READER
that are rarely openly discussed in black churches, or in the seminaries that pre-
pare men and women to pastor. The sexual exploitation of black women by black
preachers, and the seduction of preachers by female members, rests on just this
sort of confusion. (Of course, it also rests on a gender hierarchy in black churches
where women do much of the labor but are largely prevented from the highest
leadership role: the pastorate. The ecclesiastical apartheid of the black church,
which is more than 70 percent female, continues to reinforce the sexual inequality
of black women.) In many cases, both parties are caught in the thralls of unfo-
cused erotic desire. Such desire doesn't receive reasonable, helpful attention. It is
either moralized against or it lands on the wagging tongues of church gossips.
As a very young pastor—I was all of twenty-three years old—I sometimes par-
ticipated in the sort of sex play that mocks healthy erotic desire. Once, after as-
suming the pastorate of a small church in the South, I received a call from a des-
perate female parishioner.
"Reverend Dyson, I need to see you right away," the soft, teary voice on my
phone insisted. "It's an emergency. I can't discuss it on the telephone."
It was seven o'clock at night. Since I lived nearly a hundred miles from the city
where my church was located, it would take me at least an hour and a half to
reach her home.
"All right, Ms. Bright (not her real name)," I replied. "I'll be there as soon as
I can."
I told my fiancee Brenda, with whom I was living, that a member needed me to
come immediately. I tore up the highway in a frantic race to Ms. Blight's home. I
was a young, relatively inexperienced pastor, new on the job, and eager to please.
When I arrived at Ms. Blight's home, her parents greeted me at the door. Judging
by the surprised look on their faces, her parents had no idea of their daughter's dis-
tress, or her urgent request to see me. When she appeared a few minutes later, I
didn't let on that I'd just zoomed to their house to help relieve their daughter of
whatever problem she had. To them, I guess it looked like I had come courting on
the sly. After all, neither of us were married, and Ms. Bright was only a few years
older than me. Although I was in a committed relationship with Brenda, my mem-
bers didn't know that we were, as the '70s R8cB hit goes, "living together in sin."
(Already living in the Bible Belt, perhaps on its buckle, I was caught in the cross
fire between sex and soul almost before my career as a pastor began.)
Ms. Bright suggested that we go upstairs to her room to talk. We excused our-
selves from pleasant chitchat with her amiable parents. We soon found ourselves
alone in her stylish, sweetly scented bedroom. I felt awkward. I'd never spent
time alone with her before outside of the few occasions we spoke in church. Be-
sides, I didn't know what signal my presence in her boudoir might send. But I
soon found out what was weighing on her heart and mind.
"Reverend Dyson, I think I'm in love with you," she blurted out.
I was genuinely startled. I had never been a Don Juan. And despite the crude
stereotypes of ministers as lotharios out to bed every woman within speaking dis-


--- PAGE 260 ---
"The Black Church and Sexuality 231
tance, I certainly hadn't been promiscuous. I could count the number of girlfriends
I'd had on one hand. And I'd never been led to think of myself as irresistibly hand-
some. I wasn't a guy, like many I'd known, for whom women seemed to pant and
pine. I was just Mike Dyson, the poor kid from Detroit who worked hard, studied
long, and mostly lived out his sexual fantasies with a few beautiful women.
"Well, Ms. Bright, I, um, I, well, I'm very flattered," I barely managed. By now
my yellow face was flushed and my eyes were boring holes in the floor. "I don't
know what to say."
Then it hit me. My pastor, Frederick Sampson, knowing that the advice would
one day come in handy, had given me a stern warning.
"Never let a woman down harshly, Mike," Dr. Sampson said. "Always be gen-
de and considerate." Eureka! Here was my out.
"You know, Ms. Bright, what you've said makes me feel good," I uttered with
more conviction. "I'm truly honored that a woman like you would even be inter-
ested in me. But you know I'm in love with Brenda."
I saw die disappointment in her eyes. Quickly extending Sampson's rule, I was
determined not to make Ms. Bright feel foolish.
"But if I was available, you're the kind of woman I would definitely like to be
with."
And I wasn't just blowing smoke, as they say. Ms. Bright was a very intelligent,
inquisitive woman, as our few conversations revealed. She was also a beautiful
woman; a tall five feet ten inches, she dwarfed my five-foot-nine-inch frame. She
had flawless chocolate skin, an incandescent smile, a sensuous voice, and a volup-
tuous figure.
"Really?" she replied.
In retrospect, I guess that gave her an opening. And despite denying it then, I
probably wanted her to find it. Although each of us had been sitting on chairs in her
room, Ms. Bright stood up and, well, descended on me. Standing directly above me,
she confessed that she'd spent a great deal of time daydreaming about me.
"I just can't get you off my mind," she said. "I really think I'm in love with you,
Reverend Dyson. I don't know what I'm going to do."
As the words rolled off her tongue, which I began to notice more and more, she
began to run her fingers through my hair. I was embarrassed, ashamed, almost
mortified, and extremely turned on.
"Well, I don't know either, Ms. Bright," I muttered. "I guess, well, I don't know,
I guess we'll just have to ..."
Before I could finish, she was kissing me. Before long, we were kissing each
odier. Our tongues dueled with more energy than we'd been able to devote to re-
solving her problem. Except now, it was our problem. I wasn't in love with her,
but my lust was certainly piqued. Talk about not letting a woman down roughly;
I certainly wasn't flunking that test. But I felt bad for cheating on Brenda. I
yanked myself free from Ms. Bight's luscious lip lock and came up for air, reach-
ing as well for a little perspective.


--- PAGE 261 ---
232 THE MICHAEL ERIC DYSON READER
"Look, Ms. Bright, I didn't mean for this to happen," I said through my heavy
breathing. "After all, I'm your pastor, and I should be counseling you, not trying
to get down with you."
She simply smiled. Then, before I could protest, she was out of her blouse.
Next her bra fell to the floor! The queenly, regal pose she struck, part Pam Grier
and part British royalty, made me feel like a lowly subject. And gawking at the
sheer magnificence of her breasts, I was glad to be in her majesty's service. We
groped each other like high school teens stranded in a hormonal storm. After
nearly a half hour of this pantomimed intimacy, guilt suddenly overtook me. Bet-
ter yet, the thought of having sex with her parents able to hear the bed creak and
groan quenched my erotic fire. I recovered what little pastoral authority I had
left—I think it was mixed up with my jacket and tie on the floor—and insisted that
we quit. So we fixed up our clothes. Ms. Bright retouched her makeup, and with-
out saying much—what could we say?—we went back downstairs to make small
talk with her parents. After fifteen minutes or so, I bid them farewell and drove
home far more slowly than I'd driven to my appointment. I was more disap-
pointed at myself than angry at Ms. Bright. Despite what she said—and even she
probably didn't really believe it—I didn't think Ms. Bright was in love with me.
She simply had a crush, though, admittedly, it was a big one. Plus, she had a
healthy dose of sexual desire, a subject we should have been able to talk about,
not only in her house but in our church. We should have been able to refer to sex
education classes, sermon series, Sunday school discussions, Sunday night fo-
rums, and a host of other ways that erotic desire might be addressed in the black
church. Some churches are doing this, but they are far, far too few in number.
I was flattered that Ms. Bright wanted me. At the same time, I was ashamed
that I'd given in to wanting her. I'd come to pray. I'd ended up the prey—the will-
ing prey, as it turned out. Maybe Ms. Bright had seen the desire in my eyes,
which failed to be disguised as pastoral concern. Maybe she was simply the first
to act on what she knew we both wanted. Maybe she was just more honest.
On my way home, I couldn't help thinking of the visiting preacher. I got a lot
more humble. Still, I kept thinking about my erotic encounter with Ms. Bright.
Despite trying to feel bad about it, I found myself getting aroused all over again.
I hadn't yet figured out that it's all right to enjoy erotic desire-to own up to the
fact that you can be horny and holy—as long as you don't live at the mercy of
your hormones. But if we can't talk about sex at home, and we can't talk about it
at church, black Christians end up lying to ourselves and to the people to whom
we're sexually attracted. And too often, we end up being much more destructive
because of our erotic dishonesty.
Because so many black Christians have taken up the task of being sexual sav-
iors—of crucifying the myths of black hypersexuality and sexual deviance—we
abhor out-of-bounds sexuality. This social conservatism expresses itself as a need
to be morally upright. Beyond reproach. (Unsurprisingly, gangsta rappers are
high on the list of sinners. If its detractors actually ever listened to more than snip-


--- PAGE 262 ---
'The Black Church and Sexuality 233
pets of gangsta rap lyrics, they'd probably have a lot more grist for their critical
mills.) Oh, if it was only that simple. If the black church—for God's sake, if any
religious institution—was erotically honest, it would admit that the same sexual
desire that courses through rappers' veins courses through the veins of its mem-
bers. If many of the black ministers who wail against the sexual improprieties of
hip-hop culture would be erotically honest, they'd admit that the same lust they
nail rappers for breaks out in their own ranks. And there aren't too many ser-
mons pointing that out.
The standard religious response has been: "Of course we have the same de-
sires, but we fight them and put them in proper perspective." That's partly true.
The desire is certainly fought. Why, you can see the strain of erotic repression on
unmade-up faces, in long dresses that hide flesh, and in the desexualized carriage
of bodies (notice the burden is largely on the women) in the most theologically
rigid of orthodox black churches. But dial's just the point: mere repression is not
the proper perspective. We've got to find a mean between sexual annihilation and
erotic excess. Odierwise, the erotic practices of church members will continue to
be stuck in silence and confusion.
Neither are there many sermons that assail ministers for exploiting women. To
be sure, there are women who think they were put on earth to please the pastor.
For them, embracing his flesh is like embracing a little bit of heaven. Pastors
should study their books on transference and help spread light on this fallacy. Of
course, there are just as many women who simply get in heat over a man who can
talk, especially if they've dealt with men for whom saying hello in the morning is
an effort. So let's not romanticize the put-upon, helpless female who's charmed by
the wiles of the slick, Elmer Gantry-like, minister-as-oniniconipetent-stud-and-
stand-in-for-God.
Too often, though, there are women who come to the minister seeking a help-
ing hand who get two instead. Plus some lips, legs, arms—well, you get the picture.
The black church is simply running over with brilliant, beautiful black women of
every age, hue, and station. Pecan publicists. Ebony lawyers. Caramel doctors.
Mocha engineers. Beige clerks. Bronze businesswomen. Brown housewives. Red-
bone realtors. Yellow laborers. Coffee teachers. Blueblack administrators. Copper
maids. Ivory tellers. Chocolate judges. Tan students. Often these women are sex-
ually pursued by the church's spiritual head, so to speak.
This fact makes it especially hard to endure the chiding of black preachers,
veiled in prophetic language, launched at the sexual outlaws of black pop culture.
In reality, the great Martin Luther King Jr. is the patron saint of the sexual un-
conscious of many black ministers, but for all the wrong reasons. For most of the
time he lived in the glare of international fame, King, as is well known, carried on
affairs with many women. He wasn't proud of it. He confessed his guilt. He said
he'd try to do better. But he just couldn't give it up. Plus, he was away from home
for 28 days of most months. Lest too many critics aiming to bring King down a
notch or two for his moral failings get any ideas, bear in mind that he spent that


--- PAGE 263 ---
234 THE MICHAEL ERIC DYSON READER
kind of time away from his wife and children, under enormous stress and at great
peril to his life, leading the war against racial inequality.
Many black ministers have absorbed King's erotic habits, and those of many
white and black ministers before and after him. But they have matched neither his
sacrifice nor his achievements. Not that such factors excuse King's behavior. But
they do help us understand the social pressures that shaped King's erotic choices.
One must remember, too, the ecology of erotic expression for civil rights workers.
The wife of a famous civil rights leader once told me civil rights workers often
went to towns where their presence reviled whites and upset many complacent
blacks. She said it was natural that they sexually fed off of each other within their
tight circles of sympathy and like-minded perspective. That squares as well with
King's comment that a lot of his philandering was a release from the extraordi-
nary pressures he faced. That's probably a large part of the story, though it can't
be the complete story. King's behavior apparently predates his fame. His philan-
dering was a complex matter.
In some senses, King's erotic indiscretions were the expression of a Casanova
complex, pure and simple. That complex is especially present in famous men
whose success is a gateway to erotic escapades. Indeed, their fame itself is eroti-
cized. Their success is both the capital and the commodity of sex. It procures sex-
ual intimacy and is the gift procured by (female) sexual surrender. Then, too, for
black men there is a tug-of-war occurring on the psychosexual battlefield. Black
men occupy a symbolic status as studs. That stereotype is one of the few that
black men refuse to resist. They embrace it almost in defiance of its obvious false-
ness, as an inside joke. (How many times did King tell white audiences that blacks
wanted to be their brothers, not their brothers-in-law, even as white women
flaunted themselves before him? King was even set to marry a white woman
when he was in seminary, but she was sent away, and King was warned by a men-
tor that he would never be able to be a black leader with a white wife.)
There is also a specific psychology of the ministerial Casanova. He believes
he merits sexual pleasure because of his sacrificial leadership of the church com-
munity. Ironically, he sees the erotic realm as an arena of fulfillment because it
is forbidden, a forbiddance that he makes a living preaching to others. (Yes, the
cliche is certainly true that "That which is denied becomes popular.") But erotic
forbiddance is a trap. The very energy exerted against erotic adventure be-
comes a measure for ministerial integrity. It becomes the very force the minister
must resist if he is to be erotically honest. Erotic desire both induces guilt in the
minister and is his reward for preaching passionately about the need for the de-
nial of erotic exploitation! Self-delusion and self-centeredness mingle in this
arena of sexual desire.
All of this sets up an erotic gamesmanship between minister and the potential-
often willing—object of his erotic desire. One of the rules of the game is, "Let's see
if I can get him to fall, to act against what he proclaims as truth." This is more
than simply a case of Jezebel out to seduce the minister. It is a case of erotic desire


--- PAGE 264 ---
The Black Church and Sexuality 235
being expressed in a way that reflects the unequal relation between male leaders
and female followers.
Many ministers who travel on the revival circuit-delivering sermons and giv-
ing a lift to the sagging spirits of churches across the nation-too often settle into
comfortable habits of sexual exploitation. Their regimen of erotic enjoyment gets
locked in early in their careers. They travel to churches, preach the gospel, meet
a woman or women, have sex, return home, go back the next year and do the
same. Even ministers who stay in place can roam their congregations, or the con-
gregations of their peers, in search of erotic adventure. What it comes down to is
that the Martin Luther Kingjrs., and the Snoop Doggy Doggs of black culture all
want the same thing. The Snoops are up front about it. Most of us in the black
church aren't.
The same erotic dishonesty applies to another sexual identity: homosexuality.
The notorious homophobia of the black church just doesn't square with the nu-
merous same-sex unions taking place, from the pulpit to the pew. One of the most
painful scenarios of black church life is repeated Sunday after Sunday with little
notice or collective outrage. A black minister will preach a sermon railing against
sexual ills, especially homosexuality. At the close of the sermon, a soloist, who
everybody knows is gay, will rise to perform a moving number, as the preacher
extends an invitation to visitors to join the church. The soloist is, in effect, being
asked to sing, and to sign, his theological death sentence. His presence at the end
of such a sermon symbolizes a silent endorsement of the preacher's message.
Ironically, the presence of his gay Christian body at the highest moment of wor-
ship also negates the preacher's attempt to censure his presence, to erase his body,
to deny his legitimacy as a child of God. Too often, the homosexual dimension of
eroticism remains cloaked in taboo or blanketed in theological attack. As a result,
the black church, an institution that has been at the heart of black emancipation,
refuses to unlock the oppressive closet for gays and lesbians.
One of the most vicious effects of the closet is that some of the loudest protest-
ers against gays and lesbians in the black church are secretly homosexual. In fact,
many, many preachers who rail against homosexuality are themselves gay. Much
like the anti-Semitic Jew, the homophobic gay or lesbian Christian secures his or
her legitimacy in the church by denouncing the group of which he or she is a
member, in this case an almost universally despised sexual identity. On the sur-
face, such an act of self-hatred is easy. But it comes at a high cost. Homophobic
rituals of self-hatred alienate the gay or lesbian believer from his or her body in
an ugly version of erotic Cartesianism: splitting the religious mind from the ho-
mosexual body as a condition of Christian identity. This erotic Cartesianism is
encouraged when Christians mindlessly repeat about gays and lesbians, "we love
the sinner but we hate the sin." A rough translation is "we love you but we hate
what you do." Well, that mantra worked with racists: we could despise what racist
whites did while refusing to despise white folk themselves, or whiteness per se.
(Of course, there were many blacks who blurred that distinction and hated white


--- PAGE 265 ---
236 THE MICHAEL ERIC DYSON READER
folk as well as they pleased.) But with gay and lesbian identity, to hate what they
do is to hate who they are. Gays and lesbians are how they have sex. (I'm cer-
tainly not reducing gay or lesbian identity to sexual acts. I'm simply suggesting
that the sign of homosexual difference, and hence the basis of their social identifi-
cation, is tied to the role of the sex act in their lives.)
The black church must develop a theology of homoeroticism, a theology of
queerness. (Well, if we want to be absolutely campy, we might term it a theology
for Afriqueermericans.) After all, if any group understands what it means to be
thought of as queer, as strange, as unnatural, as evil, it's black folk. A theology of
queerness uses the raw material of black social alienation to build bridges between
gay and lesbian and straight black church members. The deeply entrenched cul-
tural and theological bias against gays and lesbians contradicts the love ethic at
the heart of black Christianity. Virulent homophobia mars the ministry of the
black church by forcing some of our leading lights into secret and often self-
destructive sexual habits. James Cleveland, considered the greatest gospel artist of
the contemporary black church, died several years ago, it is rumored, from AIDS.
Aside from embarrassed whispers and unseemly gossip, the black church still
hasn't openly talked about it. Perhaps if gay and lesbian black church members
could come out of their closets, they could leave behind as well the destructive
erotic habits that threaten their lives.
The black church should affirm the legitimacy of homoerotic desire by sanc-
tioning healthy unions between consenting gay and lesbian adults. After all,
promiscuity, not preference, eats away at the fabric of our erotic integrity. Are
gays and lesbians who remain faithful to their partners committing a greater
sin than married heterosexuals who commit adultery? The ridiculousness of
such a proposition calls for a radical rethinking of our black Christian theology
of sexuality.
Central to the doctrine of Incarnation in the black church is the belief that God
identified with the most despised members of our society by becoming the most
despised member of our society. Sunday after Sunday, black ministers invite us to
imagine God as, say, a hobo, or a homeless person. Well, imagine God as gay.
Imagine God as lesbian. Is the gay or lesbian body of God to be rejected? Better
still, isn't God's love capable of redeeming a gay or lesbian person? The tradi-
tional black theological answer has been yes, if that person is willing to "give up"
his or her sin—in this case, being gay or lesbian—and turn to God. But a more
faithful interpretation of a black theology of love and liberation asserts that God
takes on the very identity that is despised or scorned—being black, say, or being
poor, or being a woman-to prove its worthiness as a vehicle for redemption. We
don't have to stop being black to be saved. We don't have to stop being women
to be saved. We don't have to stop being poor to be saved. And we don't have to
stop being gay or lesbian to be saved. Black Christians, who have been despised
and oppressed for much of our existence, should be wary of extending that op-
pression to our lesbian sisters and gay brothers.


--- PAGE 266 ---
"The Black Church and Sexuality 237
The black church continues to occupy the center of black culture. Although
most black folk have never officially joined its ranks, the influence of the black
church spreads far beyond its numbers. The black church raised up priests to ad-
minister healing to wounded spirits in slavery. It produced prophets to declare the
judgment of God against racial injustice. The black church has been at the fore-
front of every major social, political, and moral movement in black culture. It re-
mains our most precious institution. It has the opportunity to lead again, by fo-
cusing the black erotic body in its loving, liberating lens. A daughter of the black
community, Jocelyn Elders, attempted to bring the sharp insight and collective
wisdom of our tradition to a nation unwilling to ponder its self-destructive sexual
habits. Let's hope that her advice won't be lost on those closer to home. Like
Marvin Gaye, black churches and communities need sexual healing. If we get
healed, we might just be able to help spread that health beyond our borders.


--- PAGE 267 ---
Nineteen
HOMOTEXTUALITIES: THE BIBLE,
SEXUAL ETHICS, AND THE THEOLOGY
OF HOMOEROTICISM
The issue of homosexuality has reaped a whirlwind of controversy and acrimonious
debate in most Christian communities. I believe that one of the explanations for black
homophobia is the realization that if heterosexuality—the supposed "normal" sexuality-
has been demonized in the West for centuries, then surely black homosexuality will
only up the ante of black oppression. Thus, ironically enough, blacks identify with
mainstream sexual values—the very mainstream that has censored and castigated black
heterosexuality—when they practice homophobia. I am not arguing that homophobia
has no homegrown black varieties; I am simply suggesting that such homophobia
allows blacks to forge solidarity with a culture that has excluded them. Thus one form
of bigotry is traded for another. In this interview, conducted by the very sharp cultural
critic and gay activist Kheven LaGrone, I argue that lesbians, bisexuals, gays, trans-
gender, and all other-sexed people have a right to the "tree of life," and that they can
find theological and biblical support for their religious and sexual existence. Although
I have written elsewhere about gay, lesbian, bisexual, transgender, and other-sexuality,
I have never been as extensive, analytical, wide-ranging, or as daring in discussing the
subject as I am in this interview, a tribute to the provocative questions posed to me by
LaGrone.
Please elaborate on your theology of homoeroticism.
What I mean by theology of homoeroticism is a theology that is grounded in the
biblical admonition to acknowledge sexuality as a crucial function of human iden-
tity, and as a symbol of the interpenetration of the divine and the human, signi-
fying a fusion of planes. Since we are grounding our sexual ethics in a theology
that speaks poignandy to human experience, it is natural to turn to the Bible to
justify, legitimate, or sanction our beliefs. I believe that there is theological and
biblical space for the articulation of a homoerotic instinct, homosocial ideas, and
a homosexual identity. People who happen to be same-sex identified can certainly
find support within our churches.


--- PAGE 268 ---
Homotextualities 239
Furthermore, I sought, in my notion of a theology of homoeroticism, to un-
derscore an implicitly homoerotic moment within the ecclesiastical order of black
Christendom. Think, for instance, of men claiming to love Jesus standing on
their feet in fully enthralled ecstasy, emoting about their connection to a God
who became flesh and dwelled among us, as a man. For men to publicly pro-
claim their intense, unsurpassed love for a God who became a man leaves the
door open for homoerotic identification and communion within the liturgy of the
black ecclesial universe. In short, the black church provides space for men and
women to love their own gender in erotic ways with biblical and theological
sanction. My conception of the theology of homoeroticism is an attempt to de-
velop a theologically sound and biblically justified relationship of love that is the
underlying ethic within any sensual order, regardless of one's orientation,
whether it is bisexual, transsexual, transgendered, gay, lesbian, or heterosexual.
The prevailing ethic in any sexuality ought to always highlight the precise func-
tion of love in the adjudication of competing erotic claims. Whenever there is a
contest between destructive incarnations of lust and righteous expressions of
erotic communion, love promotes the latter. That doesn't mean that lust or fan-
tasy cannot embody an ethically justifiable sexual urge. But it does mean that we
have to pay attention to how a relationship of justice is exercised within the con-
text of a sexual ethic. Sexual relations are related to the theological and moral
ideals to which we subscribe.
When I think about homosexuality or any sexual identity, the prevailing idea
is not simply satisfaction of the erotic drive and the sexual urge, but the manner
in which the human being is recognized as the center of one's sexual ethic. Cor-
poreal identity, theologically speaking, should exist in relationship to the divine
order that prescribes human activity. A homoerotic theology is an acknowledg-
ment that there are legitimate means to express same-sexuality, and the fantasies
and erotic desires that grow from it. It also holds that there's a way of theologi-
cally asserting love as the predicate of such unions, since love ought to be the
central principle of any sexual orientation. The question should be, regardless of
orientation: How does this relationship enable the flourishing of an ethic of self-
concern and other-regard? If that basic test is met within a sexual ethic, then the
content of one's sexual identity should not be dictated by traditional theological
proscriptions of homoerotic union. Even in the black church we can affirm the
sexual legitimacy of brothers and sisters who do not meet the heterosexual
norm, and still support them as fellow members of a religious community.
A theology of homoeroticism points to the effort to embody the full expres-
sion of God's sexual gifts to us, and to find legitimate theological support for the
articulation of a broad erotic order within the context of our religious beliefs. If
we can't do it there then we can't do it anywhere. Sex and salvation should be
seen as neither mutually exclusive nor identical. However, they are often mutu-
ally reinforcing, since sexual union within a religious ethic is often a symbol of
God's care and love for the other. Erotic unions at their best engender the salvific


--- PAGE 269 ---
240 THE MICHAEL ERIC DYSON READER
function of intimate contact between God and believer, a relationship often pic-
tured as one between a lover and his beloved. In that light, a believer's sexual
identity should be fully supported within an ecclesial context that embraces the
erotic as a symbol of divine presence and affirmation.
A theology of homoeroticism combats recalcitrant prejudice against alternative
sexualities-prejudices, by the way, that parallel bigotry against the black body in
Western thought and culture. That makes it even more painful to observe the fail-
ure of the black church to embrace the full range of sexual identities that have
been mobilized and manifested within our communities. In so doing, we have
mimicked the sexual bigotry that has bedeviled us. I suppose such behavior is to
be expected, since we have failed to be just and fair with gender relations in the
black church. If the gendered character of heterosexual ethics has presented a pro-
found challenge to the black church, God knows that homosexuality and homo-
eroticism present a formidable challenge. That's even the case for theologies of
liberation that have been promulgated and, in limited form, adapted in the black
church.
Of course, we can account for such resistance to a liberating sexual ethic by
tracing it to the schism between body and soul that many black believers adapted
in the face of feeling that they had to defend themselves against a charge of sex-
ual profligacy, perversion, and impurity. Thus the black church bought into the
division of the body and soul that the white church foisted on us to justify its psy-
chic, moral, and material investments in chattel slavery and racial hegemony. The
white church justified its assault on black humanity and its evil experiment in
slavery by saying, "at least we're taking care of their souls," a goal they sought to
achieve by containing and controlling the black body. In the minds of white
Christians, the black body was a savage body. In a white Christian prism, the eth-
ical end, the moral telos, of slavery was the social, psychic, and theological sub-
ordination of the African savage to European Christianity. This ideological ma-
trix provided the crass ethical utilitarianism for European-American Christianity's
justification of slavocracy: "As long as we're addressing their soul's salvation, we
can do what we will to their bodies." But this theological schizophrenia that rested
on the artificial division of body and soul was more Greek than Hebraic, since the
latter insists on the essential unity of corporeal and spiritual identity. Such theo-
logical schizophrenia introduced into our culture some vicious beliefs that have
negatively impacted our racial self-perceptions, not only as subjects of our own
sexuality but also as objects of the criminalization of our sexuality by white cul-
ture. The black church hasn't done a good job of resisting the worst elements of
theological schizophrenia, leading us to suppress alternative, unconventional, and
transgressive sexualities in the black church and beyond.
So that almost leads directly to my next question: Do you think that black
homosexuals can use the Bible for sexual healing? If yes, how, and what kind
of healing?


--- PAGE 270 ---
Homotextualities 241
Black homosexuals can definitely use the Bible for sexual healing. They can do so
because the biblical texts are a reflection of historical struggles with enlightened
revelation. God has placed on the hearts and minds of human beings beliefs
about how we should live our lives, even though such beliefs are fallible since
they are mediated by the human voice and cognition. The Scriptures reflect the
attempt of human beings to wresde with divine revelation within the context of
our particular histories, given cultures and local traditions. In interpreting biblical
texts, we must always pay attention to what biblical scholars call the Sitz im Leben—
the historical context within which scriptural revelations emerged.
Consequently, we must always be on the lookout for the political hermeneutic
of a biblical text. What I mean by political hermeneutic is that the horizon of in-
terpretation is always shaded by the social order in which readers and hearers dis-
cover themselves. We must remember that the Bible was compiled over the
course of a few centuries. That means that there are an incredibly diverse array
of identities, intentions, ethical limits, and political philosophies articulated within
the discursive and theological perimeters that shape the interpretation of the Bible
and God's revelation. Even though some of us think of the Bible as the inspired
word of God—the transcendental truth of eternity mediated through written reve-
lation—we must not forget the critical role of the amanuensis. Whether it was
Matthew, Mark, Luke, or John, or the scribes of the Pentateuch, or one of the os-
tensible authors in the JEDP documentary hypodiesis, the truth is, they were sec-
retaries—or as Mary J. Blige might say, and I'll pronounce this phonetically, seck-
uh-taries! And secretaries can get stuff wrong, sometimes by mistake! They can
leave the i's undotted, the t's uncrossed, or they may occasionally impose on a
document their own beliefs or shades of their own meaning.
Remember that Paul says at one point in the Scriptures—and I'm paraphrasing—
"Now this is what God says, and this is what I'm telling you." So he at least tried
to gesture toward a hermeneutical ethic that acknowledged the implicit human
character that shapes the record of God's inspiration. He at least tried to distin-
guish between human interpolations and divine revelation—a notion that is
fraught with peril, to be sure, since providence and revelation are concepts often
manipulated by religious elites or those with claims to esoteric knowledge. More-
over, Paul metaphorically suggested the human limitations of comprehending di-
vine revelation and the fallibility of interpreting God's word when he declared,
"We have this treasure in earthen vessels."
I note all of this as a backdrop to saying, yes, as with any of us, I thik gay, les-
bian, transgendered, transsexual, bisexual, and all other-sexed black Christians
can certainly turn to the Bible for sexual healing. After all, this is the great book
of love that points to the appropriate ethical etiquette for our sexual behavior. As
such, it points back to God. The mores, folkways, and moral traditions that shape
us inevitably impinge on our consciousness and color our understanding of what
we should do and how we should behave. Conscience is the product of a histori-
cal encounter with ethical ideals. One's conscience is always shaped by the culture


--- PAGE 271 ---
242 THE MICHAEL ERIC DYSON READER
in which one is reared. Therefore our beliefs about the Bible, about ethical be-
havior, about good and bad, and about how we should adhere to certain princi-
ples are unavoidably shaped by the political and social and moral contexts we in-
herit and create. Depending on how it has been deployed and interpreted, the
Bible has been both the Ur-text and Err-text of black ethical existence. It has been
the great, grand narrative thread that has been weaved throughout the collective
history of African American people and through the individual consciousness of
millions of blacks, even if they didn't officially join the church. "The Book" has
been the dominant interpretive touchstone for the ethical behavior of African
people in America and other parts of the black diaspora.
Black homosexuals can turn to the Bible for sexual healing, just as many of us
heterosexuals have, because it tells us that God loves us, that God created us in
God's image, and that we should learn to accept ourselves as we are. Of course, I
realize that the process of self-acceptance is an index of our evolving spiritual ma-
turity. It takes profound spiritual and moral wisdom to claim with our own lives
on full theological display that what God made is good. We can make such a
claim despite the critical modifications introduced into Christian thought through
Augustinian themes of original sin and the ethical miasma that was its conse-
quence in "the fall." We must accentuate the positive dimensions of human iden-
tity and self-conception as the admittedly distorted reflection of the imago dei. Still,
we can affirm our re-created goodness through discourses of redemption open to
all human beings. There is no asterisk in the biblical promise of redemption that
excludes homosexuals. We have to reclaim the primordial goodness of God that
ultimately took human form in Jesus. As they say in Christian circles, God didn't
make any junk, and that means that whomever God has made, whether homo-
sexual or heterosexual, is a good person.
I realize there are debates about biological determinism versus social con-
struction in sexuality. I know there's a dispute about whether gay and lesbian
sexuality, indeed all sexualities, reflect an inherent predisposition biologically
implanted in the human genetic code that regulates sexual orientation, or if sex-
ual identity is the result of human choice. I happen to believe that gays and les-
bians can no more get up tomorrow morning and be heterosexual than hetero-
sexuals can get up tomorrow morning and be gay or lesbian. I'm not gainsaying
the fluidity of sexual identity, the elasticity of erotic urges, the changeability of
passionate proclivities, or the broad continuum of sensual engagements and stim-
uli. And I'm not suggesting that biological urges are not socially constructed.
After all, even homosexuals who grow up in a culture where their identity and
self-perception is shaped in the crucible of heterosexism, internalize the belief
that it is a sin or an unbearable stigma to be gay or lesbian. Thus they often sup-
press their sexual desires and erotic urges, whether they are conceived to be "nat-
ural" or constructed.
That is why the coming-out process is often especially volatile: it involves the
painful irony of self-identification with the very sexual identity that has been cul-


--- PAGE 272 ---
Homotextualities 243
turally demonized. That's why there's so much self-hatred among gays and les-
bians. The coming-out process must address the fact that the self has been artifi-
cially split off from self-consciousness, at least a self-consciousness that is socially
supported. This accounts for why the homosexual ego is coerced into epistemic
and ethical isolation, or the proverbial "closet." In the closet, one must subordi-
nate one's "natural sexuality" to society's accepted sexual norms, to its en-
trenched mores. So the Bible should help Christians liberate the sexual urge from
artificially imposed restrictions and repressions. In the case of homosexuals, such
restrictions and repressions are fueled by heterosexist values, but these values, I
believe, can be critiqued by an appeal to a progressive sexual ethic, an enlightened
biblical hermeneutic, and a humane theological tradition. How can black homo-
sexuals use the Bible for sexual healing? They can do as all Christians should do:
express their sexuality in the context and pursuit of a right relationship with God,
which is the predicate of all sexual ethics.
But critics who seek to proof-text their opposition to homosexuality often ne-
glect to interpret such biblical passages in their larger theological meaning. For
instance, the story of Sodom and Gomorrah is more about underscoring the ne-
cessity for hospitality to strangers than it is about homosexual perversion. In
essence, the larger pericopes in which biblical texts are contained are either ne-
glected, severed from their interpretive frameworks through theological ax grind-
ing, or subject to hermeneutical myopia. Hence the practice of biblical interpre-
tation reinforces the heterosexist culture from which the theological repression of
sexual difference has emerged. What's fascinating about black Christian appeals
to the Bible to justify suppression of homosexuality is that such appeals are quite
similar to those made by whites to justify slavery. Then again, that was already
a familiar hermeneutical move in black religious circles, since it had been em-
ployed to justify theological strictures against the ecclesial expression of female
authority. Those of us promulgating a theology of homoeroticism must engage
in hermeneutical warfare and interpretive battle, not only with the text but also
with the heterosexist presuppositions that shaped the biblical narratives and their
subsequent mainstream interpretation.
Finally, I think that Jesus states the bottom line when he says that all of the law
and prophets were contained in his summary of the ethical aim of Christian be-
lief. "Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul,
and with all thy mind. This is the first and great commandment. And the second
is like unto it, Thou shalt love thy neighbor as thyself. On these two command-
ments hang all the law and the prophets."
That means that we must embrace and affirm all brothers and sisters regardless
of where we stand on the mysteries of sexual identity. Too often we have focused
on a subsidiary accounting of sexual identity and thrust it into primary consider-
ation to determine legitimate standing within the religious community. Being in
right relationship with God and our neighbor is the crucial factor in our Christian
existence. Once that issue is settled, then sexual orientation becomes subsidiary.


--- PAGE 273 ---
244 THE MICHAEL ERIC DYSON READER
Sacred orientation is more important than sexual orientation. When the Bible is
read through that liberating lens and through the prism of self-acceptance in light
of God's offer of the gift of love and affirmation, it can be read as a source of sex-
ual healing for homosexuals.
One of the most crucial issues a liberating interpretation of the Bible can ad-
dress is the culture of dishonesty that smothers alternative sexualities. Gays and
lesbians, as well as all other-sexed people, often have had to deny to diemselves
they were homosexual. They denied their sexuality to others who might have
perceived it even before they did, a perception that might have caused them great
discomfort. They often have had to stay in an epistemological closet, a theologi-
cal closet, a sociological closet, and to some degree, even a biological closet, be-
cause they didn't want to suffer the consequences of coming out. The culture of
deceit imposed on gays and lesbians has to be relieved by the church's open affir-
mation of their legitimacy, so that they don't have a distorted consciousness and
a bruised conscience about their own sexuality. In the final analysis, we are liber-
ated into self acceptance by a loving and forgiving God.
Okay. You are going to change everybody's mind.
We can hope.
Well, I think so. You've already largely answered my next question, but I'm
going to ask it in case there is something you want to add. How do we
reread the Bible as a guide to promoting complete and healthy homosexual
relationships?
As I've stated, in order to skillfully interpret the Bible, we've got to get at the so-
cial, political, and ideological history of the time during which its constitutive
texts emerged. By so doing, we get a sense of the philosophical reflections on race,
gender, culture, class, and of course, sexuality as well, that penetrated the discur-
sive frames and theological views of the Bible. Some of these reflections were egal-
itarian, but many more were authoritarian. Then, too, we've got to acknowledge
that the culture in which we live shapes our self-understanding, as well as our un-
derstanding of our relationship to the Bible, and what role it should play in regu-
lating our intellectual and moral lives. Our cultural situations even affect how we
think we are capable of transforming our self-understanding through a new inter-
pretation, perhaps even radical reinterpretation, of the Bible in light of the moral
aspirations that we leam to claim as legitimate components of our individual and
collective identities.
But it's equally important to understand there are multiple textualities within
revelation's household. Of course, the Bible is the crucial, significant, and central
text that shines on other texts interpreted in its light, and within the circumference
of its ethical imagination. But a crucial implication of revelation is the belief in the


--- PAGE 274 ---
Homotextualities 245
variegated modalities through which it is articulated, which means that God
speaks and is revealed to us in a number of ways. Even diough the Bible is the
hermeneutical ground of all textualities and modalities of revelation, it is not the
exclusive or exhaustive medium of revelation. I think fundamental Christians in
particular fail to comprehend this point, or at least they strongly disagree with this
theological belief and interpretive principle. As a result, mere is often in such cir-
cles a species of bibliolatry, or worship of the Bible. In my view, we should only
worship the God who inspired the Bible. Bibliolatry is a way to foreclose
wresding with the complex demand of responsible assessment of the contradic-
tory data of human experience in light of religious belief. Bibliolatry resolves all
complexity, nuance, ambiguity, and so on.
Other Christians believe that we can't worship the Bible on the premise that
God continues to speak. When we close the Bible, we have neidier shut God's
mouth nor closed God's mind. The radical openness of the mouth and mind of
God means there is ongoing revelation in our times. It means that God is still
speaking to us. That means that we have scriptural-like, biblical-like revelations
that need to be taken seriously. The backdrop of such critical reflection is the un-
derstanding that the Bible is, besides a book of faith, also a book of history. It is
a text that belongs to time and circumstance. Even though it claims to mediate
eternal truth—a claim I take seriously—its medium is birdied in contingency. God's
word is true, but the means by which we know it are limited, finite, and fallible.
That means we've got to confront the historical conditions of biblical production.
We've got to ask the questions: Why were all the books in the Bible written by
men? Why was the canon largely shaped by masculinist sensibilities? In many
ways, the canon reflects a patriarchal code rearticulated as theological necessity. In
truth, historical contingency has been recapitulated as transcendental inevitability.
Those of us believers who are skeptical, even suspicious of human claims of di-
vine revelation, also believe that God continues to speak to liberated-and liber-
ating—people.
Therefore, in spite of occasional biblical crankiness about (alternative) sexu-
alities, one can conceive of the biblical worldview as an interpretive canvas on
which to sketch a liberating ethical intentionality. We must account for the
manner in which writers smuggled their biases into the biblical text, even as the
biblical landscape accommodated the social perspectives and cultural norms of
societies that shaped its construction. We must also take the risk of reinterpre-
tation and posit the principle of extended canonicity. I think we have to appeal
to the extrabiblical textualities—of experience, suffering, and oppression—that
shape the lives of believers and affect the modalities and anatomy of revelation.
It is extrabiblical revelation because it is not contained in the Bible, but the
Bible is contained in the believer's arc of experience. But blacks, women, gays,
lesbians, and other minorities have to risk reinterpreting the words of the Bible
in light of the Word—to whom the text points and who legitimates the experi-
ence of these minorities.


--- PAGE 275 ---
246 THE MICHAEL ERIC DYSON READER
That covers the Bible, but what about the Qu'ran and other sacred Scriptures?
Sure, the same applies to the Qu'ran, the Bhagavad-Gita, the Torah, and other holy
texts by which religious believers abide. And what I say is significant for all religious
communities, whether they believe God speaks through Moses or Muhammad.
I wrote a story years ago about a black man who was rescued by Jesus, and
they made love. So basically, it was very erotic, with brown skin to brown
skin. What is your reaction to that type of story?
I think that there's space in our fantasy lives for the fusion of autonomous human
eroticisms and divinely ordered sexual identities, especially as we struggle to imagine
the dynamic and complex nature of our relationship to God. We have to remember
that the intimate relation between believers and God is deeply and profoundly erotic
at points, a perception that is reinforced in biblical texts and in theological and reli-
gious literature of all sorts throughout the ages. It makes sense that erotic commu-
nion is the analogical predicate for the intimate relation between the divine and the
human. After all, we start with what we know—intimate human communion—and
analogize to what we imagine—God's identity. Since erotic relations that take place in
the context of a committed relationship is one of the most profound unions on earth,
it is the basis for understanding the intensity of God's presence.
I think that whether it's your story or the story I read once, I think, in the
book, Spirituality for Ministry, by Urban T. Holmes, more than twenty years ago—
where some nuns were either fantasizing about making love to Jesus or dreaming
about him in a sexual fashion—the notion of erotic engagements with God appear
to be honored by sacred precedent. Communion with God takes multiple forms.
I don't think we can, in an a priori fashion, determine any sexual orientation per
se as off-limits when it comes to understanding our relationship to God. It's im-
portant in this context to view our erotic relations in a metaphoric vein, that is, as
attempts to analogize the highest moment of human ecstasy in regard to the ec-
static communion with God. Penetration of the flesh, among other erotic gestures,
becomes a vehicle for a realized spiritual communion. I think all forms of edify-
ing, nondestructive erotic play can ultimately become true grist for die mill of our
sexual imaginations and express true hunger for God.
Let me ask you this then: I shared this story with a friend of mine, and he
was offended. He called it blasphemy and he didn't want to touch the story;
he didn't want to finish it. It was almost as if he were being contaminated or
getting the evil spirit from the story itself, almost like he was afraid of it.
What do you think about that?
Beliefs or fantasies that are radically dissimilar to our normal beliefs, behavior, and
identity are certainly dangerous. They're taboo. They are contaminating, but per-


--- PAGE 276 ---
Homotextualities 247
haps in a good sense. It conjures for me the tide of Mary Douglas's magisterial
work, Purity and Danger. In some religious communities, the sexual relation is never
to be thought of in relationship to God; the purity of God's identity is not to be en-
meshed in the passionate, erotic communion. And yet God creates human beings
with sexual organs and orientations. I think it is very dangerous and disturbing for
many of us to imagine a different sexual order than the one that supports and gov-
erns our everyday existence. Plus, let's face it, we often fear what we don't under-
stand. Or as Stevie Wonder phrased it, "when you believe in things that you don't
understand, then you suffer"—but he added a key phrase that the dominant soci-
ety should take to heart: "Superstition ain't the way." We could replace superstition
with hate, fear, intolerance, bigotry, and the like. America once feared blacks and
oppressed us and, when forced to accept us, discovered either that we weren't so
different or that we presented a valuable difference that the nation eventually
learned to embrace. The inability to embrace sexual difference says more about a
culture or tradition that strangles innovation and creativity in our relationships to
one anodier and to God, than it says about the sinful character of the fantasy or
imagination that might offend us. Beliefs and passions that fall outside of the norm
often bring terror, perhaps even the terror of self-recognition, which may be the ul-
timate terror. The possibility that the very thing I despise may represent a sup-
pressed fantasy is all the more cause to oudaw that fantasy.
How important is fantasy to our sexuality?
I think fantasy is extraordinarily important to sexuality. Fantasy draws from the
collective or individual expressions of one's historically shaped erotic and sexual
desire. Fantasy is the projection of a possible erotic or sexual engagement with
another human being or entity that is driven by our socially constructed and bi-
ologically driven conception of what is desirable. So fantasy, in one sense, is in-
divisible from the political and historical contexts in which our identities are
shaped. We learn to desire the things we're taught to believe are desirable. Some-
times desire cuts across the grain of the socially sanctioned and "appropriate"
fantasy. Certain fantasies are ruled as legitimate and odiers as illegitimate and,
unsurprisingly, the rules follow a broadly patriarchal and heterosexist vein. It's
just fine for young men to want to make love to young women at the appropri-
ate age, but it's reprehensible for men and women to gravitate to their own gen-
der, regardless of age. This notion falls into the realm of permissible fantasy. Per-
missible fantasy is an index of the sexual relations that may not be explicidy or
overtly encouraged, but are nonetheless tolerated because they fall within the
realm of heterosexual erotic identity. I'm dunking here, for example, of illicit sex
between a married man and a woman. Even though there is a taboo to such sex,
it causes nothing like the fear or revulsion of homosexual relations. In fact, the
notion of a same-sex union is so profoundly offensive that its very existence is
thought to be the mark of perversion, while adultery is viewed as a "sin." At that


--- PAGE 277 ---
248 THE MICHAEL ERIC DYSON READER
level, homoerotic fantasy cuts across the socially constructed object of desire and
becomes a subversive political gesture in a heterosexist universe.
Fantasy nurtures the erotic life and permits the idealization of possibly perfect
unions. If fantasies are read as both political projections and individual assertions
of unrealized potential, or even remembered achievement, they become more
dian neo-Freudian expressions of suppressed sexualities. Of course, fantasy is also
a crucial philosophical plank in the argument over offensive, transgressive sexual
behavior. For instance, in the Catholic Church right now, the scandal over pe-
dophilic priests is linked in the minds of some critics with outlaw sexual fantasies
of illicit sex between men and boys. The fact that at least one accused priest was
actively involved in NAMBLA, the North American Man/Boy Love Association,
only served to cement the belief in the minds of millions that priests were little
more than closeted gay pedophiles out to seduce altar boys. The perception
among many straight Catholics is that this is a homoerotic fantasy that needs to
be restricted, that if the fantasy didn't exist then the sexuality couldn't flourish.
And even if the fantasy exists, the behavior should be oudawed.
Sexual fantasies present a template for erotic desire that is reproduced in bodily
behavior. The fantasy is literally the prelude to the kiss. If one can control the fan-
tasy life of a human being, then one might control the behavior that issues from
the fantasy. Still, one might reasonably question if there is strict causality between
fantasy and fulfillment. One is reminded of Jesus' words of warning that to even
imagine an act of adultery is to essentially commit it: "But I say unto you, that
whosoever looketh on a woman to lust after her hath committed adultery with
her already in his heart." Few critics of homosexuality are likely to remonstrate
with equal passion against millions who have lusted after a woman in their hearts,
and who have, by Jesus' standards, already committed adultery. (One thinks un-
avoidably here of Jimmy Carter's confession in the pages of Playboy that he had
lusted in his heart and therefore sinned.) Jesus is aiming here not simply at causal-
ity, but at the necessity to discipline one's imagination according to the ethical
standards of a monogamous, committed relationship.
Hence, it wasn't the sexual identity that was the cause of sin-after all, it was ar-
ticulated within the logic of heterosexuality—but a sexual imagination or fantasy
that subverted faithful relations. One supposes, therefore, that one's sexual orien-
tation would not necessarily alter the ethical prescriptions that regulate one's fan-
tasies when one is in a committed relationship. One's moral practice seems more
important in the fantasy life than one's sexual orientation. But I do think that fan-
tasies play a legitimate, even crucial, function in sexual identity by nurturing a vi-
sion of the ideal relations in one's mind that one may not ever live up to. In this
positive sense, fantasy is the picture of perfection against which practices are mea-
sured. That can be quite punishing because in a heterosexual world, where erotic
ideals of perfection crowd the fantasies of many men, the collective imaginary, po-
litically speaking, is often a pornographic one. Most women cannot live up to that
ideal and perhaps they shouldn't have to even try to reach that unattainable goal.


--- PAGE 278 ---
Homotextualities 249
(The reason for my qualification here is that I don't want to rule out all acts of
pornography as problematic, such as those enjoyed within a healthy erotic rela-
tionship among committed adults.)
My comments and observations are equally applicable to gays and lesbians.
Ironically enough, in the humdrum, mundane, quotidian relations among homo-
sexuals, gays and lesbians end up depressingly similar in their lives to heterosexu-
als. The lion's share of that depression is experienced by close-minded heterosexu-
als who come to realize that in most regards, there's no big difference in gays and
lesbians and straight folk in their day-to-day existence. They just happen to have
sex differently and may have the same sexual fantasies as heterosexuals, just with
different partners. I'm not suggesting that all fantasies are good, healthy, or edify-
ing, but that has nothing to do with sexual orientation. When they occur in a con-
text of erotic and sexual health, as well as ethical strength, fantasies are just fine.
On an individual level, do you think there are such things as illegitimate
fantasies?
For anybody, any group, I think that there are obvious limits. If you are a gay or
lesbian person and you fantasize about murdering somebody in the process of
having sex, I think that's a deeply disturbing, perhaps even potentially destructive
fantasy, just as it is for straight folk. So yes, there are always ethical norms and
limits generated within the logic of a given sexual ethic. You don't have to step
outside of gay or lesbian sexuality to find a restrictive norm that could be imposed
as a legitimate one. Within all orientations, sexual liberty should be shaped by
moral responsibility. However, I don't think responsibility is determined by an
ahistorical and depoliticized appeal to a transcendental norm of respect for the
other, although I'm not knocking Kantian ethics, just disagreeing with aspects of
its description of how morality works. I think that responsibility is a highly nu-
anced ethical concept, shaped by an ethic of respect that finds expression in his-
torically specific and culturally conditioned relations to others. It causes one to
ask the questions: How can one seek one's best while acting in a way not to harm
others? How can the flourishing of one's erotic desire be checked by a sense of
community that respects the integrity of the other? For example, rape is wrong,
period, and the fantasy of rape that one intends to act on is highly destructive, re-
gardless of one's sexual orientation. So yes, I think that. . .
Let me step in. There are some fantasies that are not acted on. Or let's think
about if a fantasy is one that imitates or plays out behavior that some find
offensive, say a woman who might have a fantasy about being raped ...
Oh sure, sure. I thought about that immediately, as soon as I made my comments
on rape. When it comes to fantasy, the sky's the limit, and if you tell no one your
fantasy, or if you share your fantasy with someone of like mind, or act on it with


--- PAGE 279 ---
250 THE MICHAEL ERIC DYSON READER
consenting partners in a noncoercive, nonviolent fashion, it's all good. I certainly
think that it's important to acknowledge the irreverence and the transgressive po-
tential of autonomous sexual desire and fantasy within one's own mind. I think
that the landscape of the psyche should be scouted for fantasies that allow people
to uninhibitedly embrace their healthy erotic identities. I suppose even so-called il-
licit fantasies of rape, or of being raped, within a nonviolent context of reciprocal
affection—or as a solitary fantasy nurtured within one's solipsistic universe of erotic
desire—may be fine as long as one doesn't act on that fantasy in a violent fashion.
For instance, we've got to allow for the pantomime of rape by couples as an erotic
stimulation within the moral boundaries of their relationship. But I'm rather more
libertarian about these matters and believe in a kind of autonomous sexuality
within the limits of fantasy that allows people to sustain a range of irreverent, trans-
gressive beliefs as long as they don't turn violent.
Years ago I was at a party and I saw a black man walking through the party
wearing a leash behind a white man. This was in the Castro, in San Francisco,
which at the time was very white supremacist, was very white. And I remember
I wrote about it, and it got a lot of reaction. One of the questions that came up
was: Does sexual fantasy imitate reality, or does reality imitate fantasy?
It's a dialectical process, isn't it? It's a give-and-take. Can we really divorce
Robert Mapplethorp's Man in a Gray Suit—is that the name of it?
Polyester suit.
Man in a Polyester Suit, right. I'm mixing up Mapplethorp and Gregory Peck, who
starred in the film Man in the Gray Flannel Suit [which I'm actually conflating with
a film he did a decade earlier, A Gentleman's Agreement], which was about another
form of bigotry: anti-Semitism. Anyway, as erotically charged as Man in a Pbly-
ester Suit is, and as full of transgressions against the heterosexual norm as that
photo is, can we really divorce Mapplethorp's imagination from the political
context of a socially constructed black male sexuality, with the large black
organ it features as the site and source of so much fantasy and fear within the
white heterosexual world?
I read in Mapplethorp's biography that he had fantasies about the black
male animal. So that shaped my view of his photography.
Right, right. Technically, that may be true as a precise term of the mammal—the an-
imal—but we both know that "animal" signifies racial primordialism and a savagery
of sorts within the context of an eroticized black masculine subjectivity. But even in-
dividual fantasies reflect the political context in which people are shaped and in
which they mature. The same is true for homoerotic desire, even as it thrives on ar-
ticulations of nonnormative desire. So it's dialectical: fantasies shape behaviors and
behaviors are shaped by fantasies, though I'd still resist the strict one-to-one corre-


--- PAGE 280 ---
Homotextualities 251
lation between the two, since it fails to account for other causative factors. Fantasies
are related to politics, and politics to the articulation of not only the possible—as in
politics is the art of the possible—but also to the ideal one holds in one's mind.
When I think of the black man being led around on the leash by the white
man, I think of the Hegelian dimension of the master-slave dialectic—or the rela-
tionship between the dominant and the dominated—illustrating, in this case, that
there's a reciprocity of means that promotes a mutual reinforcement of fantasy
and its fulfillment. They feed each other and sustain each other, even if in unequal
fashion. On the one hand, die white man has the power because he can pull the
black man. On the other hand, if the black man is stronger, he can resist; so
there's give-and-take. Even in a relation of inequality, there's tension. That's not
only Hegelian, it's downright Foucaultian. Whereas traditional theories of power
located authority in conventional spots of domination in a rigid hierarchical
schemata, Foucault contended that power breaks out everywhere. Its locus classi-
cus is not simply in an institution or in hegemonic power, but in varied and com-
plex relations and negotiations among and between the powerless as well.
That having been said, there's no question diat when white men dominate black
men, even within a homoerotic context, diat can certainly be the corollary of a
white supremacist ethic, or perhaps its direct expression. White supremacist domi-
nation, or fantasies of domination, may fuse with homoerotic desires of union with
black men. I'm not suggesting that white gays and lesbians cannot be white su-
premacists, or diat they cannot derive benefits, pleasures, and perks from white
skin privilege. In fact, their white supremacist fantasies can be projected onto black
bodies. For instance, the big black dick can be sought by gay white men who pos-
sess vicious, stereotypical views of black sexuality, aping—pun intended, I suppose—
the behavior of some white straight communities. The relations of power and dom-
ination, although eroticized within a same-sex framework, can nevertheless express
a white supremacist fantasy that is prior to the sexual fantasy, or at least cotermi-
nous with it. I think this is relatively untheorized in certain white gay and lesbian
communities. Still, I must add, without essentializing diem, that white gays and les-
bians seem more aware in general of the complex racial dynamics of both intimate
and social relations than their heterosexual counterparts. That's not a law or rule,
just an informal ethnographic observation about how one minority is sometimes
sensitive to the plight of another minority-although the exact opposite is also true,
since we know that in straight black communities and among gay and lesbian white
communities, there's plenty of ignorance and bigotry to go around.
One thing I was thinking about was in terms of the black male's perspective,
and his eroticizing of white supremacy ...
Oh sure. If heterosexual blacks can internalize white supremacist views where we
hate our big black lips, our broad noses, or our big behinds—aldiough there ain't
that much black self-hatred around that, diank God!-and seek to modify features


--- PAGE 281 ---
252 THE MICHAEL ERIC DYSON READER
of our God-given beauty through cosmetic surgery, then certainly gay black men
can absorb a white supremacist identity that subordinates black sexuality to domi-
nant white sexualities. There's no homosexual exemption to racial self-hatred. In
fact, for the black other-sexed, there's an exacerbating effect of self-hatreds, an ex-
ponential increase in multiple self-abnegations: with the black self and the gay self
in tandem, there are potentially more selves to despise, resent, even hate. (I'm not
playing into the additive theory of multiple minority statuses here, where folk don't
integrate their various constituent identities into a "person." I'm simply trying to
highlight how, among those prone or vulnerable to self-hatred, there's more to hate
of one's self when it integrates a variety of identities and fights a variety of battles.)
Thus there is a reinscription of a pattern first generated within the context of
patriarchal heterosexism's sexual fantasies, so that gay white communities reartic-
ulate dominant whiteness. Some gays get off on white supremacist fantasies,
which could conceivably fuse with rough-trade homoeroticism that may be a cog-
nate of white supremacist domination of the other. I'm not suggesting that the two
are necessarily the same thing, or that they share a reciprocal relationship. I am
simply saying that the two can merge. Homosexuality has modalities that extend
the white supremacist's desire to subordinate the black sexual identity to himself,
and the acceptance of that by black men is no less problematic because it occurs
in the context of a homoerotic union. Just because the white fist up your ass gives
you pleasure doesn't mean that it's not meant to rip out your guts.
But is the black man's fantasy an illegitimate fantasy?
It's not necessarily illegitimate, it's just troubling. It is legitimately problematic,
even self-destructive. One cannot, by entering a homoerotic union, escape the
ethics of relationality that should govern any healthy relationship.
Now how about educated, successful black men who have prison fantasies?
Again, I don't think anything is off-limits in terms of the autonomy of desire
within the context of fantasy, so I am not interested in restricting such fantasies,
even for those who may subordinate themselves to white men because they have
internalized a white supremacist worldview. To be sure, I would find such fan-
tasies problematic and self-destructive, even if they are literally instrumental to
one's erotic existence. I don't have any desire to impose an ontologically
grounded black ethic of propriety on the homosexual mind. Still, if such fantasies
ultimately prove to be dehumanizing to gay black men, it diminishes the commu-
nity; and if it diminishes the community, it impacts all of us in some measure. Self-
loathing often has social repercussions.
Yeah, but see, I'm thinking that when these black men have prison fantasies,
a lot of times their fantasies remind me of inverted white supremacy, where


--- PAGE 282 ---
Homotextualities 253
they are taking the ideas of black masculinity being animalistic, and so on,
and they are eroticizing that.
That's different. It's like the state of nature meets the myth of the black savage as
Jeanjacques Rousseau shakes hands with Carl Van Vechten, the gay white patron
of black artists during the Harlem Renaissance, hi many ways, Van Vechten was
a great guy, and incredibly supportive of black writers like Langston Hughes. But
at his worst (and remember, as with most of us, the best and the worst live on the
same block, in the same house, and when you get one you get the other), he
seemed to go trolling among the Negroes to get in touch with the primitive state
of man that was signified in blackness. Indeed, the genealogy of the eroticized
primitivism and fetishized animalism of black masculinity stretches back to our
first moments on Western soil as slaves in 1619, down to educated gay black men
seeking the ideal savage type and the archetypically most unreconstructed black
masculinity available—the black prisoner.
What may be erotically attractive to educated gay black men, even in the
straight black male prisoner, is the prospect of situational homosexuality, since at
any moment in prison, heterosexual agency is redirected into homosexual chan-
nels, given the restricted erotic commerce available. By definition, prison sex in
male prisons among prisoners is sex between men, excluding the occasional het-
erosexual alliance in various guises. In prison, the black heterosexual male is
often transformed into a vulnerable or victimizing gay man, at least in provi-
sional, situational terms, his body marked by ad hoc homoeroticism. The ideal-
ization of the prisoner as the black savage is nothing but the postmodern urban
update of the state of nature primitive with a huge sexual organ grinding in the
fantasies of an erotically omnivorous culture.
This is a deep conversation. One last topic. I'm thinking about the word
"queer." In your essay on the black church and sexuality in Race Rules, you
mentioned "Afriqueermericans." Queer is a word that is really debated in
the black gay and lesbian community. I see queers of color, younger gays and
lesbians, and I guess they use that word because it's supposed to be co-opting
it, and it's not white, and it's not male. When I was growing up, the term
queer was used by white people, and it was used in reference to boys—little
boys were "queer." I don't know where I'm going with this ...
Where you are going with it, at least in my mind, is that the change in the use of
queer points to the dynamic character of linguistic transformation, signifying that
words change over space and time. Moreover, they mean one thing to one group,
something different to another group, much like "nigger" or "bitch." Queer is not
as demonizing as nigger, or as bitch for that matter, but it carries an ontological
negativity that is mediated through its enthralling witness against the norm.
Queer: not normal. The riot against normalcy that queer betokens makes it a


--- PAGE 283 ---
254 THE MICHAEL ERIC DYSON READER
highly explosive and useful weapon in the politics of publicity for gay and lesbian
causes. I think here the hierarchy of race makes a huge difference even in gay and
lesbian communities. Black gays and lesbians, as well as other-sexed people, have
been caught in the crosswinds of seeking acceptance in predominantly white gay
and lesbian communities that provide erotic and intellectual succor, but which
may close them out culturally; or hunting for love in a black culture that provides
familiar rituals of home while alienating, stigmatizing, and even demonizing them
because of their sexual preferences. They've been caught betwixt and between; it
has been especially difficult for minority gays, bisexuals, and lesbians to find an
appropriate grammar of erotic identification and communion.
Although "queer" has the resonance of a specific time and cultural identifica-
tion, it has interpretive flexibility and can be used to signify a transgressive, even
playful, resistance to the term's negative connotations. Queer can be a termino-
logical rallying point to galvanize multiple constituencies within gay and lesbian
communities. There can be a postmodern sense of jouissance as well, as in,
"Damned right, I'm queer," or "Damned right, I'm a fag"-the latter expression,
perhaps, a more tolerable or racially resonant signifier among a certain generation
of blacks. Such terms represent the articulation of ethical agency among gays and
lesbians that says, "We refuse to be put off by your negative language; in fact, we
are going to rearticulate it positively in our world in our own way." The same was
done, of course, by some blacks with the word "nigger," and by some women with
the word "bitch." Whether that works or not, I think, is an open question. I think
it's more difficult to talk about among gays and lesbians of color because they
have dramatically participated in multiple kinship groups in their quest for a
home. Only when you find a home can you enjoy the leisure of self-parody or the
luxury of grounding a derisive term in the history of your community's response
to bigotry. There has not been, by and large, a stabilization of black gay and les-
bian communities. Individual examples of success abound, but authentic homo-
sexual community has been much more difficult to attain.
One thing that I think is different between the words "nigger" and "queer" is
that, when I hear rappers use the word nigger, I don't think they are really
changing its meaning. They are reinforcing and personifying what it means.
Years ago, we couldn't point to what a nigger was. If someone called you a
"nigger," you said, "Well I'm not a dumb person, I'm not a nigger." Now you
have these black men acting ignorant, acting loud, cursing, swearing, and so
on, and saying, "By the way, I'm a 'nigger' and I'm black." So they person-
ify what "nigger" is. I think what "queers" are doing-even though I hate the
word, it sounds nasty—is that they are at least projecting intelligence and pro-
jecting respect.
Right, right, right. That is a very interesting point. You've touched on one of the
great contentions in black life, especially with the rise of hip-hop culture. Some


--- PAGE 284 ---
Homotextualities 255
critics, however, would disagree with you; they would say that there were dumb,
ignorant people to whom we could point all along in black history. They would
tell you that there have always been people who could justify the stereotype. But
they will also tell you that "nigger" as an epithet never represented the complex-
ity of black identity, and that to isolate a minor personality type—the so-called nig-
ger—within the behavioral norms of blackness to justify the demonization of all
black people was patendy unjust. As a result, blacks questioned the legitimacy of
the claim that the epithet was deployed by whites to define the behavior of people
who fell outside the norm of good behavior. That's because every black person in
the eyes of most whites was a nigger.
In that light, we might be able to concede the racial daring and subversive at-
tempt among some blacks to appropriate the linguistic negativity of "nigger" and
to recirculate, recontextualize, recode, refigure, refashion, and rearticulate the
term for their purposes. At least now when it came to that word, the "niggas"—the
term as it is baptized in black linguistic subversion—were in control, challenging
whites and bourgeois blacks who could never consider using the term in any in-
carnation. In the eyes of the contemporary "niggas," bourgeois blacks do not ex-
ercise the same level of discretion over their rhetorical and linguistic self-
representation as do the folk, say, in hip-hop.
So the argument could be made that there is indeed a flip, that the people who
were supposed to be dumb are not dumb at all. Instead, they are playing the cul-
ture to the hilt. They are reinforcing certain stereotypes while challenging others.
They're reaping economic remuneration from trying to parody and stigmatize
what "nigger" is or saying, "Yeah, if you call me a nigger, I'm going to live up to
that, I'm going to be a larger-dian-life nigger, and I'll show you what that might
mean." Or they might say, "I dare you to keep calling me 'nigger' in the face of
my embracing this term in such a fashion as to not only reinforce the negative be-
haviors that you think characterize the term, but to deploy it as a rhetorical
weapon against the white supremacy that seeks to deny black people the oppor-
tunity to choose their own destinies." So I think the use of "nigga" is much more
complex than the either/or absolutism that bewitches too many black critics in
their discussion of the term.
I understand your point in terms of queer. But your perception that "queers"
are engaging in their linguistic subversion in an intelligent way has to do with the
fact that gay and lesbian people have not been subject to the same stereotype of
being unintelligent that blacks have been saddled with. For centuries now, black-
ness has signified stupidity and ignorance in the West. But gays and lesbians
have not been perceived as intellectually inferior to heterosexuals. In fact, the op-
posite is true: gays have been tied, at least in the West, to the Greeks, who were
viewed as exceedingly intelligent. So what you face as a queer minority is the im-
probable complexity of black gay identities because you're dealing with both
stereotypes collapsing on your head: dumb nigger and smart queer. Although
I'm sure an exception is made for black queers, whose race may cancel out their


--- PAGE 285 ---
256 THE MICHAEL ERIC DYSON READER
sexual orientation, at least in the intelligence sweepstakes. How much more de-
graded and contradictory can one get in one body? So I think that black gays
and lesbians would certainly be much more sensitive to the nomenclature of self-
disclosure and self-description than even most white gays and lesbians might
ever imagine.
One last topic: class issues. By most people's account, we would be considered
bourgie. I think, like W.E.B. Du Bois's notion of "the talented tenth," we're
leading the masses. Don't you feel that as such we should set an example ...
Set an example for whom?
In general for the masses of African Americans, since we're going to be lead-
ers. Say for instance, earlier you mentioned bourgie blacks, and it was kind
of in a derogatory sense. In fact, I think most "bourgie blacks" are doing pos-
itive things.
Sure, sure. What I mean by "bourgie"—which is a pejorative term shortened from
bourgeois—is not simply middle class. I mean by bourgie the construction of a self-
determined persona that is hostile to, and scornful of, ordinary black people. You
can be rich and not be bourgie. Class in black America has been less about how
much money you make or how many stocks you have than the politics of style.
Still, your overall point is well taken. I think that those of us who are privileged—
and that includes gays and lesbians who have high levels of education—have an ab-
solute obligation to "give back" to the less fortunate. I think we are bound by blood,
history, and destiny to our brothers and sisters, especially to those who will never
know the privilege or positive visibility that many in the middle class enjoy. And we
should cross all lines—sexual, economic, religious, gender, geographical, genera-
tional—in speaking for the oppressed. For instance, that's why I think it's incumbent
on me as a heterosexual black man to speak against the bigotry and injustice faced
by my black brothers and sisters who are gay, lesbian, bisexual, and other-sexed.
And it's equally important for educated, upwardly mobile blacks to not forget those
who have been entombed in permanent poverty and miseducation.
It is part of the hidden courage of black gays and lesbians that despite the stigma
they have endured, they continue to work within the arc of black identity and com-
munity in fulfillment of their sense of personal and political destiny. I think that's
a beautiful thing. Being "queer" or "gay" is a tremendous struggle, but even before
the enemies of black people see a fey snap of the wrist or the "butch" dress of les-
bian women, they see black pigment. So pigment may trump sexual orientation in
a manner that many black gays and lesbians intuitively understand in their bodies,
even though deeply inscribed in their bodies at the same time is the recognition of
their unalterable sexual identities that need to be sustained, affirmed, and prized.
To the degree that black gays and lesbians struggle with the complex convergence


--- PAGE 286 ---
Homotextualities 257
of racial, sexual, gender, and class issues, they already represent courageous role
models of negotiating differences in one body at one site. They represent to us
what blackness will look like well into the twenty-first century.
What a beautiful ending.
Thanks, brother.
Interview by Kheven LaGrone
Chicago, Elinou, 2002


--- PAGE 287 ---
This page intentionally left blank


--- PAGE 288 ---
PA R T N I N E
B I O C R I T I C I S M A N D B L A C K I C O N S
Over the last decade, I have occasionally embraced a genre of writing I
term "biocriticwn," a critical examination of a figure's career and cul-
tural impact through the prism of biographical details and life episodes.
With biocriticwn I hope to open an intellectual window onto the cultural
and intellectual landscape that shapes a figure s life, using biography as
a means to social and cultural criticism. I have used a biocritical ap-
proach to probe the lives and times of black icons like black nationalist
revolutionary Malcolm X, civil rights leader Martin Luther King, Fr.,
and hip-hop immortal "Tupac Sliakur. The virtue of biocritidsm is a
wide-ranging exploration of the forces and figures that define a particu-
lar movement or era. through the lens of a single figure, combining the
best of biography, cultural analysis, historical examination, and social
criticism. I am presently at work on a biocritical analysis of Marvin
Gaye, the legendary artist whose work altered the American musical and
cultural landscape.


--- PAGE 289 ---
This page intentionally left blank


--- PAGE 290 ---
Twenty
X MARKS THE PLOTS: A CRITICAL
READING OF MALCOLM'S READERS
This critical analysis of how Malcolm X has been conceived and interpreted by scholars and
writers was initially written for the late Joe Wood's fine 1992 anthology, Malcolm X:
In Our Own Image. I had written several drafts of the essay and had sharpened my
arguments, honed my analysis, and deepened my engagement with the vast body of
literature on Malcolm that Jit under the four categories of interpretation I developed. Wood
was quite pleased, but suddenly, at the end of this arduous process, he told me that he
wouldn't be using my essay. I was quite disappointed. Wood offered little explanation
except to ask if I hadn't been involved in other projects where my work, having been
assigned, was not ultimately used. It was only later, a few years before Wood's tragic death
in 1999 on a solo hiking expedition in the Longmire area of Mount Rainier—a real loss
for black letters—that I discovered that he had been heavily influenced in his decision by a
mentor from his Yak days whose essay did appear in Wood's collection—Adolf Reed Jr.
Reed's great disdainfor me and my work, and that of other black scholars, would be later
aired in an infamous Village Voice diatribe against black public intellectuals.
Fortunately, what began badly proved to be a boon. A "popular" version of this chapter,
under the mighty advocacy and pen of editor Rosemary Bray, appeared in November
1992, as a 5,000-word lead essay for the New York Times Book Review. Further,
my rejection led me to write my own book on Malcolm, a decision that resulted in two
auspicious events: the publication (/Making Malcolm: The Myth and Meaning of
Malcolm X, which was named a Notable Book of 1994 by the New York Tunes and
Philadelphia Inquirer,, and one of the "outstanding black books of the twentieth century"
by Black Issues Book Review. My partnership with Liz Maguire as my editor and
intellectual compatriot, a professional relationship that blossomed into a friendship, has
lasted over eight books and four publishing houses! This chapter is the first section of
Making Malcolm, and is one of the scholarly efforts of which I am most proud.
I think all of us should be critics of each other. Whenever you can't
stand criticism you can never grow. I don't think that it serves any
purpose for the leaders of our people to waste their time fighting each
other needlessly. I think that we accomplish more when we sit down
in private and iron out whatever differences that may exist and try


--- PAGE 291 ---
262 THE MICHAEL ERIC DYSON READER
and then do something constructive for the benefit of our people. But
on the other hand, I don't think that we should be above criticism.
I don't think that anyone should be above criticism-Malcolm X.
-MALCOLM X: THE LAST SPEECHES
THE LIFE AND THOUGHT OF MALCOLM X have traced a curious path to
black cultural authority and social acceptance since his assassination in 1965. At
the time of his martyrdom-achieved through a murder that rivaled in its fum-
bling but lethal execution the treacherous twists of a Shakespearean tragedy-
Malcolm was experiencing a radical shift in the personal and political under-
standings that governed his life and thought.1 Malcolm's death heightened the
confusion that had already seized his inner circle because of his last religious con-
version. His death also engendered bitter disagreement among fellow travelers
about his evolving political direction, conflicts that often traded on polemic, dia-
tribe, and intolerance. Thus Malcolm's legacy was severely fragmented, his con-
tributions shredded in ideological disputes even as ignorance and fear ensured his
further denigration as the symbol of black hatred and violence.
Although broader cultural investigation of his importance has sometimes
flagged, Malcolm has never disappeared among racial and political subcultures
that proclaim his heroic stature because he embodied ideals of black rebellion and
revolutionary social action.2 The contemporary revival of black nationalism, in
particular, has focused renewed attention on him. Indeed, he has risen to a black
cultural stratosphere that was once exclusively occupied by Martin Luther King Jr.
The icons of success that mark Malcolm's ascent—ranging from posters, clothing,
speeches, and endless sampling of his voice on rap recordings—attest to his achiev-
ing the pinnacle of his popularity more than a quarter century after his death.
Malcolm, however, has received nothing like the intellectual attention devoted
to Martin Luther King Jr., at least nothing equal to his cultural significance. Com-
peting waves of uncritical celebration and vicious criticism—which settle easily
into myth and caricature-have undermined appreciation of Malcolm's greatest
accomplishments. The peculiar needs that idolizing or demonizing Malcolm fulfill
mean that intellectuals who study him are faced with the difficult task of describ-
ing and explaining a controversial black leader and the forces that produced him.3
Such critical studies must achieve the "thickest description" possible of Malcolm's
career while avoiding explanations that either obscure or reduce the complex na-
ture of his achievements and failures.4
Judging by these standards, the literature on Malcolm X has often missed the
mark. Even the classic Autobiography of Malcolm X reflects both Malcolm's need to
shape his personal history for public racial edification while bringing coherence to
a radically conflicting set of life experiences and coauthor Alex Haley's political
biases and ideological purposes.5 Much writing about Malcolm has either lost its


--- PAGE 292 ---
A Critical Reading of Malcolm's Readers 263
way in the murky waters of psychology dissolved from history or simply substi-
tuted—given racial politics in the United States—defensive praise for critical ap-
praisal. At times, insights on Malcolm have been tarnished by insular ideological
arguments that neither illuminate nor surprise. Malcolm X was too formidable a
historic figure—the movements he led too variable and contradictory, the passion
and intelligence he summoned too extraordinary and disconcerting—to be viewed
through a narrow cultural prism.
My intent in this chapter is to provide a critical path through the quagmire of
conflicting views of Malcolm X. I have identified at least four Malcolms who
emerge in the intellectual investigations of his life and career: Malcolm as hero
and saint, Malcolm as public moralist, Malcolm as victim and vehicle of psy-
chohistorical forces, and Malcolm as revolutionary figure judged by his career
trajectory from nationalist to alleged socialist. Of course, many treatments of Mal-
colm's life and thought transgress rigid boundaries of interpretation. The Mal-
colms I have identified, and especially the categories of interpretation to which
they give rise, should be viewed as handles on broader issues of ideological war-
fare over who Malcolm is, and to whom he rightfully belongs. In short, they help
us answer: Whose Malcolm is it?
I am not providing an exhaustive review of the literature, but a critical reading
of the dominant tendencies in the writings on Malcolm X.6 The writings make up
an intellectual universe riddled with philosophical blindnesses and ideological con-
straints, filled with problematic interpretations, and sometimes brimming with bril-
liant insights. They reveal as much about the possibilities of understanding and ex-
plaining the life of a great black man as they do about Malcolm's life and thought.
HERO WORSHIP AND THE CONSTRUCTION
OF A BLACK REVOLUTIONARY
In the tense and confused aftermath of Malcolm's death, several groups claiming
to be his ideological heirs competed in a warfare of interpretation over Malcolm's
torn legacy. The most prominent of these included black nationalist and revolu-
tionary groups such as the Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee (SNCC,
under the leadership of Stokely Carmichael), the Congress of Racial Equality
(CORE, under the leadership of James Farmer and especially Floyd McKissick),
the Black Panther Party, the Republic of New Africa, and the League of Revolu-
tionary Black Workers.7 They appealed to his vision and spirit in developing styles
of moral criticism and social action aimed at the destruction of white supremacy.
These groups also advocated versions of Black Power, racial self-determination,
black pride, cultural autonomy, cooperative socialism, and black capitalism.8
Malcolm's death also caused often bitter debate between custodians of his
legacy and his detractors, either side arguing his genius or evil in a potpourri of
journals, books, magazines, and newspapers. For many of Malcolm's keepers, the


--- PAGE 293 ---
264 THE MICHAEL ERIC DYSON READER
embrace of his legacy by integrationists or Marxists out to re-create Malcolm in
their distorted image was more destructive than his critics characterizing him in
exclusively pejorative terms.
For all his nationalist followers, Malcolm is largely viewed as a saintly figure de-
fending the cause of black unity while fighting racist oppression. Admittedly, the
development of stories that posit black heroes and saints serves a crucial cultural
and political function. Such stories may be used to combat historical amnesia and
to challenge the deification of black heroes—especially those deemed capable of
betraying the best interests of African-Americans—by forces outside black com-
munities. Furthermore, such stories reveal that the creation of (black) heroes is
neither accidental nor value neutral, and often serves political ends that are not
defined or controlled by black communities. Even heroes proclaimed worthy of
broad black support are often subject to cultural manipulation and distortion.
The most striking example of this involves Martin Luther King, Jr. Like Mal-
colm X, King was a complex historic figure whose moral vision and social
diought evolved over time.9 When King was alive, his efforts to affect a beloved
community of racial equality were widely viewed as a threat to a stable social
order. His advocacy of nonviolent civil disobedience was also viewed as a detri-
mental detour from the proper role that religious leaders should play in public. Of
course, the rise of black radicalism during the late 1960s softened King's percep-
tion among many whites and blacks. But King's power to excite the social imagi-
nation of Americans only increased after his assassination.
The conflicting uses to which King's memory can be put—and the obscene
manner in which his radical legacy can be deliberately forgotten—are displayed in
aspects of the public commemoration of his birthday. To a significant degree, per-
ceptions of King's public aims have been shaped by the corporate sector and
(sometimes hostile) governmental forces. These forces may be glimpsed in Coca-
Cola commercials celebrating King's birthday, and in Ronald Reagan's unseemly
hints of King's personal and political defects at the signing of legislation to estab-
lish King's birthday as a national holiday.
King's legacy is viewed as most useful when promoting an unalloyed optimism
about the possibilities of American social transformation, which peaked during his "I
Have a Dream" speech. What is not often discussed—and is perhaps deliberately ig-
nored—is how King dramatically revised his views, glimpsed most eloquently in his
Vietnam era antiwar rhetoric and in his War on Poverty social activism. Corporation-
sponsored commercials that celebrate King's memory—most notably, television spots
by McDonald's and Coca-Cola aimed at connecting their products to King's legacy-
reveal a truncated understanding of King's meaning and value to American democ-
racy. These and other efforts at public explanation of King's meaning portray his
worth as underwriting the interests of the state, which advocates a distorted cultural
history of an era actually shaped more by blood and brutality than by distant dreams.
Many events of public commemoration avoid assigning specific responsibility
for opposition to King's and the civil rights movement's quest for equality. On


--- PAGE 294 ---
A Critical Reading of Malcolm's Readers 265
such occasions, the uneven path to racial justice is often described in a manner
that makes progress appear an inevitable fact of our national life. Little mention
is made of the concerted efforts—not only of bigots and white supremacists, but,
more important, of government officials and average citizens—to stop racial
progress. Such stories deny King's radical challenge to narrow conceptions of
American democracy. Although King and other sacrificial civil rights participants
are lauded for their possession of the virtue of courage, not enough attention is
given to the vicious cultural contexts that called forth such heroic action.
Most insidious of all, consent to these whitewashed stories of King and the
1960s is often secured by the veiled threat that King's memory will be either cele-
brated in this manner or forgotten altogether. The logic behind such a threat is
premised on a belief that blacks should be grateful for the state's allowing King's
celebration to occur at all. These realities make the battle over King's memory-
waged by communities invested in his radical challenge to American society—a
constant obligation. The battle over King's memory also provides an important ex-
ample to communities interested in preserving and employing Malcolm's memory
in contemporary social action. As with King, making Malcolm X a hero reveals the
political utility of memory and reflects a deliberate choice made by black commu-
nities to identify and honor the principles for which Malcolm lived and died.
For many adherents, Malcolm remained until his death a revolutionary black
nationalist whose exclusive interest was to combat white supremacy while foster-
ing black unity. Although near the end of his life Malcolm displayed a broadened
humanity and moral awareness—qualities overlooked by his unprincipled critics
and often denied by his true believers—his revolutionary cohorts contended that
Malcolm's late-life changes were cosmetic and confused, the painful evidence of
ideological vertigo brought on by paranoia and exhaustion.
All these interpretations are vividly elaborated in John Henrik Clarke's anthol-
ogy Malcolm X: The Man and His Times.10 Clarke's book brings together essays, per-
sonal reflections, interviews, and organizational statements that provide a basis
for understanding and explaining different dimensions of Malcolm's life and ca-
reer. Although its various voices certainly undermine a single understanding of
Malcolm's meaning as a father, leader, friend, and husband (after all, it includes
writers as different as Albert Cleage and Gordon Parks), the book's tone suggests
an exercise in hero worship and saint making, as cultural interpreters gather and
preserve fragments of Malcolm's memory.
Thus even the power of an individual essay to critically engage an aspect of
Malcolm's contribution or failure is overcome by the greater urgency of the col-
lective enterprise: to establish Malcolm as a genuine hero of the people, but more
than this, a sainted son of revolutionary struggle who was perfectly fit for the
leadership task he helped define. But moments of criticism come through. For in-
stance, in the course of a mostly favorable discussion of Malcolm's leadership,
Charles Wilson insightfully addresses the structural problems confronting black
protest leaders as he probes Malcolm's "failure of leadership style and a failure to


--- PAGE 295 ---
266 THE MICHAEL ERIC DYSON READER
evolve a sound organizational base for his activities," concluding that Malcolm
was a "victim of his own charisma."11
At least two other writers in the collection also attempt to critically explore Mal-
colm's limitations and the distortions of his legacy by other groups. James Boggs de-
plores both the racism of white Marxist revolutionaries who cannot see beyond color
and the lack of "scientific analysis" displayed by Malcolm's black nationalist heirs
whose activity degenerates into Black Power sloganeering. And Wyatt Tee Walker,
King's former lieutenant, criticizes Malcolm for "useless illogical and intemperate re-
marks that helped neither him nor his cause," while emphasizing the importance of
Malcolm's pro-black rhetoric and his promulgation of the right to self-defense.12 At
the same time, Walker uselessly repeats old saws about the vices of black matriarchy.
But these flutters of criticism are mostly overridden by the celebrative and ro-
mantic impulses that are expressed in several essays. Fortunately, Patricia Robin-
son's paean to Malcolm X as a revolutionary figure stops short of viewing black
male patriarchy as a heroic achievement. Instead, she sees Malcolm as the begin-
ning of a redeemed black masculinity that helps, not oppresses, black children
and women. But in essays by W. Keorapetse Kgositsile, Abdelwahab M. Elmes-
siri, and Albert Gleage, Malcolm's revolutionary black nationalist legacy is almost
breathlessly, even reverentially, evoked.
Cleage especially, in his "Myths About Malcolm X," seeks to defend Malcolm's
black nationalist reputation from assertions that he was becoming an integrationist,
an internationalist, or a Trotskyist Marxist, concluding that "if in Mecca he had de-
cided that blacks and whites can unite, then his life at that moment would have be-
come meaningless in terms of the world struggle of black people."13 Clarke's book
makes sense, especially when viewed against the historical canvas of late '60s racial
politics and in light of the specific cultural needs of urban blacks confronting deep-
ening social crisis after Malcolm's death. But its goal of redeeming Malcolm's
legacy through laudatory means makes its value more curatorial than critical.
Similarly, Oba T'shaka's The Political Legacy of Malcolm X is an interpretation of
Malcolm X as a revolutionary black nationalist, and The End of White World Su-
premacy: Four Speeches by Malcolm X, edited by Benjamin Karim, attempts to freeze
Malcolm's development in the fateful year before his break with Elijah Muham-
mad and the Nation of Islam.14 T'shaka is an often perceptive social critic and po-
litical activist who believes that "the scattering of Africans throughout the world
gave birth to the idea of Pan-Africanism," and that the "oppression of Blacks in
the United States cannot be separated from the oppression of Africans on the
African continent and in the world."15
Such an international perspective establishes links between blacks throughout
the world, forged by revolutionary black nationalist activity expressed in political
insurgency, material and resource sharing, and the exchange of ideas. In this con-
text, T'shaka maintains that Malcolm was a revolutionary black nationalist who
"identified the world-wide system of white supremacy as the number one enemy
of Africans and people of color throughout the world." He argues that Malcolm's


--- PAGE 296 ---
A Critical Reading of Malcolm's Readers 267
internationalist perspective on revolutionary political resistance was specifically
linked to African experiments in socialist politics, contending that Malcolm re-
jected European models of political transformation. Not surprisingly, T'shaka is
sour on the notion that after his trip to Mecca, Malcolm accepted and expressed
support for black-white unity, and he characterizes beliefs that Malcolm began to
advocate a Trotskyite socialism as "farfetched statements."16
Although he gives a close reading of Malcolm's ideas, T'shaka's treatment of
Malcolm is marred by largely uncritical explorations of Malcolm's rhetoric. He
fails to challenge Malcolm's philosophical presuppositions or even critically to
juxtapose contradictory elements of Malcolm's rhetoric. In effect, he bestows a
canonical cloak on Malcolm's words. Nor does T'shaka give a persuasive expla-
nation of the social forces and political action that shaped Malcolm's thinking in
his last years. Understanding these facts might illuminate the motivation behind
Malcolm's Utopian interpretations of black separatist ideology, which maintained
that racial division was based on blacks possessing land either in Africa or in the
United States. Although T'shaka, following Malcolm's own schema, draws dis-
tinctions between his long-range program (that is, return to Africa, which he
claims Malcolm never gave up) and short-term tactics (that is, cultural, psycho-
logical, and philosophical migration), he doesn't prove that Malcolm ever re-
solved the ideological tensions in black nationalism.
Karim's The End of White World Supremacy is an attempt to wrench Malcolm's
speeches from their political context and place them in a narrative framework that
uses Malcolm's own words—even after his break with the Nation of Islam—to jus-
tify Elijah Muhammad's religious theodicy. Such a move ignores Malcolm's radi-
cally transformed self-understanding and asserts, through his own words, a
worldview he eventually rejected. Karim, who as Benjamin Goodman was Mal-
colm's close associate through his Nation of Islam phase until his death, says in
his introduction that Muhammad gave Malcolm "the keys to knowledge and un-
derstanding," that this is "one key point in Malcolm's life that is still generally mis-
understood, or overlooked," and that these speeches "represent a fair cross section
of his teaching during that crucial last year as a leader in the Nation of Islam."17
Karim's introduction to the speeches winks away the ideological warfare that
helped drive Malcolm from the Nation of Islam, and ignores evidence that Mal-
colm grew to characterize his years with Muhammad as "the sickness and mad-
ness of those days."18 Here we have Malcolm the master polemicist telling twice-
told tales of Mr. Yacub and white devils, a doctrine he had long forsaken. Here,
too, is Malcolm the skillful dogmatist deriding Paul Robeson for not knowing his
history, when in reality Malcolm grew to admire Robeson and tried to meet him
a month before his own death.19 The political context Karim gives to the speeches
attempts to transform interesting and essential historical artifacts from Malcolm's
past into a living document of personal faith and belief.
Karim's shortcomings reveal the futility of examining Malcolm's life and
thought without regard for sound historical judgment and intellectual honesty.


--- PAGE 297 ---
268 T H E M I C H A E L E R I C D Y S O N R E A D E R
Serious engagement with Malcolm's life and thought must be critical and bal-
anced. The most useful evaluations of Malcolm X are those anchored in forceful
but fair criticism of his career that hold him to the same standards of scholarly ex-
amination as we would any figure of importance to (African-) American society.
But such judgments must acknowledge the tattered history of vicious, uncompre-
hending, and disabling cultural criticism aimed at black life, a variety of criticism
reflected in many cultural commentaries on Malcolm's life.20
The overwhelming weakness of hero worship, often, is the belief that the com-
munity of hero worshipers possesses the definitive understanding of the subject—in
this instance, Malcolm—and that critical dissenters from the received view of Mal-
colm are traitors to black unity, inauthentic heirs to his political legacy, or mis-
guided interpreters of his ideas.21 This is even more reason for intellectuals to
bring the full weight of their critical powers to bear on Malcolm's life. Otherwise,
his real brilliance will be diminished by efforts to canonize his views without first
considering them, his ultimate importance as a revolutionary figure sacrificed to
celebratory claims about his historic meaning. Toward this end, Malcolm's words
best describe the critical approach that should be adopted in examining his life
and thought:
Now many Negroes don't like to be criticized—they don't like for it to be said
that we're not ready. They say that that's a stereotype. We have assets—we have
liabilities as well as assets. And until our people are able to ... analyze ourselves
and discover our own liabilities as well as our assets, we never will be able to win
any struggle that we become involved in. As long as the black community and
the leaders of the black community are afraid of criticism and want to classify all
criticism, collective criticism, as a stereotype, no one will ever be able to pull our
coat.... [W]e have to ... find out where we are lacking, and what we need to
replace that which we are lacking, [or] we never will be able to be successful.22
THE VOCATION OF A PUBLIC MORALIST
Within African-American life, a strong heritage of black leadership has relent-
lessly and imaginatively addressed the major obstacles to the achievement of a sa-
cred trinity of social goods for African-Americans: freedom, justice, and equality.
Racism has been historically viewed as the most lethal force to deny black Amer-
icans their share in the abundant life that these goods make possible. The central
role that the church has traditionally played in many black communities means
that religion has profoundly shaped the moral vision and social thought of black
leaders' responses to racism.23 Because freedom, justice, and equality have been
viewed by black communities as fundamental in the exercise of citizenship rights
and the expression of social dignity, a diverse group of black leaders has advo-
cated varied models of racial transformation in public life.


--- PAGE 298 ---
A Critical Reading of Malcolm's Readers 269
The centrality of Christianity in African-American culture means that the
moral character of black public protest against racism has oscillated between re-
formist and revolutionary models of racial transformation. From Booker T.
Washington to Joseph H.Jackson, black Christian reformist approaches to racial
transformation have embraced liberal notions of the importance of social stability
and the legitimacy of the state. Black Christian reformist leaders have sought to
shape religious resistance to oppression, inequality, and injustice around styles of
rational dissent that reinforce a stable political order. From Nat Turner to the
latter-day Martin Luther King, Jr., black Christian revolutionary approaches to
racial transformation have often presumed the fundamental moral and social lim-
itations of the state. Black Christian revolutionary leaders have advocated public
protest against racism in a manner that disrupts the forceful alliance of unjust so-
cial privilege and political legitimacy that have undermined African-American life.
In practice, black resistance to American racism has fallen somewhere between
these two poles. At their best, black leaders have opposed American racism while
appealing to religion and politics in prescribing a remedy. Whether influenced by
black Christianity, Black Muslim belief, or other varieties of black religious expe-
rience, proponents of public morality combined spiritual insight with political re-
sistance in the attempt to achieve social reconstruction. Any effort to understand
Malcolm X, and the cultural and religious beliefs he appealed to and argued
against in making his specific claims, must take these traditions of prophetic and
public morality into consideration.
Of the four books that largely view Malcolm's career through his unrelenting
ethical insights and the moral abominations to which his vision forcefully re-
sponded, Louis Lomax's When the Word Is Given: A Report on Elijah Muhammad, Mal-
colm X, and the Black Muslim World and James Cone's Martin and Malcolm and Amer-
ica: A Dream or a Nightmare'? treat the religious roots of Malcolm's moral vision.
Peter Goldman's The Death and Life of Malcolm X and Lomax's To Kill a Black Man
expound the social vision and political implications of Malcolm's moral perspec-
tive. Moreover, both Lomax's and Cone's books are comparative studies of Mal-
colm and Martin Luther King, Jr., Malcolm's widely perceived ideological oppo-
site. The pairing of these figures invites inquiry about the legitimacy and
usefulness of such comparisons, questions I will take up later.24
Lomax's When the Word Is Given is a perceptive and informal ethnography of
the inner structure of belief of the Nation of Islam, a journalist's attempt to un-
veil the mysterious concatenation of religious rituals, puritanical behavior, and
unorthodox beliefs that have at once intimidated and intrigued outsiders. Al-
though other, more scholarly critics have examined Black Muslim belief, Lomax
is a literate amateur whose lucid prose and imaginative reporting evoke the elec-
tricity and immediacy of the events he describes.25
Lomax is also insightful in his description of the cultural forces that helped
bring Black Muslim faith into existence. He artfully probes how the Nation of
Islam proved essential during the 1950s and 1960s for many black citizens who


--- PAGE 299 ---
270 THE MICHAEL ERIC DYSON READER
were vulnerably perched at the crux of the racial dilemma in the United States,
seeking psychic and social refuge from the insanity of the country's fractured
urban center. In Lomax's portrait, it is at the juncture between racist attack and
cultural defense that Malcolm X's moral vocation emerges: he voices the aspira-
tions of the disenfranchised, the racially displaced, the religiously confused, and
the economically devastated black person. As Lomax observes, the "Black Mus-
lims came to power during a moral interregnum"; Malcolm "brings his message
of importance and dignity to a class of Negroes who have had little, if any, reason
to feel proud of themselves as a race or as individuals."26
Despite the virtue of including several of Malcolm's speeches and interviews,
which compose the second half of the book (including an interview during Mal-
colm's suspension from the Nation), the study's popular purposes largely stifle a
sharp analysis of Malcolm's moral thought. Lomax provides helpful historical
background of the origins and evolution of the Black Muslim worldview, linking
useful insights on the emergence of religion in general to Islamic and Christian
belief in Africa and in the United States. But his study does not engage the con-
tradictions of belief and ambiguities of emotion that characterized Malcolm's
moral life. In fairness to Lomax, this study was not his final word on Malcolm.
But his later comparative biography of Malcolm and King is more striking for its
compelling personal insight into two tragic, heroic men than for its comprehen-
sion of the constellation of cultural factors that shaped their lives.
Cone's Martin and Malcolm and America, on the contrary, is useful precisely be-
cause it explores the cultural, racial, and religious roots of Malcolm's public moral
thought.27 Cone, the widely acknowledged founder of black theology, has been
significantly influenced by both King and Malcolm, and his book is a public ac-
knowledgment of intellectual debt and personal inspiration. In chapters devoted
to the impact of Malcolm's northern ghetto origins on his later thought, the con-
tent of his social vision, and the nature of his mature reflections on American so-
ciety and black political activity, Cone discusses Malcolm's understanding of
racial oppression, social justice, black unity, self-love, separatism, and self-defense
that in the main constituted his vision of black nationalism.28
Cone performs a valuable service by shedding light on Malcolm's religious
faith and then linking that faith to his social ideals and public moral vision, rec-
ognizing that his faith "was marginal not only in America as a whole but in the
African-American community itself."29 Cone covers familiar ground in his exposi-
tion of Malcolm's views on white Americans, black Christianity, and the religious
and moral virtues of Elijah Muhammad's Black Muslim faith. But he also man-
ages to show how Malcolm's withering criticisms of race anticipated "the rise of
black liberation theology in the United States and South Africa and other expres-
sions of liberation theology in the Third World."30
The most prominent feature of Cone's book is its comparative framework,
paralleling and opposing two seminal influences on late-twentieth-centuiy Ameri-
can culture. It is just this presumption—that Malcolm and Martin represented two


--- PAGE 300 ---
A Critical Reading of Malcolm's Readers 271
contradictory, if not mutually exclusive, ideological options available to blacks in
combating the absurdity of white racism—that generates interest in Cone's book,
and in Lomax's To Kill a Black Man.31 But is this presumption accurate?
As with all stricdy imagined oppositions, an either-or division does not capture
what Ralph Ellison termed the "beautiful and confounding complexities of Afro-
American culture."32 Nor does a rigid dualism account for the fashion in which
even sharp ideological differences depend on some common intellectual ground
to make disagreement plausible. For instance, the acrimonious ideological schism
between Booker T. Washington and W.E.B. Du Bois drew energy from a com-
mon agreement that something must be done about the black cultural condition,
that intellectual investigation must be wed to cultural and political activity in ad-
dressing the various problems of black culture, and that varying degrees of white
support were crucial to the attainment of concrete freedom for black Americans.33
Aldiough Washington is characterized as an "accommodationist" and Du Bois as
a "Pan-African nationalist," they were complex human beings whose political ac-
tivity and social thought were more than the sum of their parts.
The comparative analysis of King and Malcolm sheds light on the strengths
and weaknesses of the public-moralist approach to Malcolm's life and career. By
comparing the two defining figures of twentieth-century black public morality, we
are allowed to grasp the experienced, lived-out distinctions between King's and
Malcolm's approaches to racial reform and revolution. Because King and Mal-
colm represent as well major tendencies in historic black ideological warfare
against white racism, their lives and thoughts are useful examples of the social
strategies, civil rebellion, religious resources, and psychic maneuvers adopted by
diverse black movements for liberation within American society.
The challenge to the public-moralist approach is to probe the sorts of tensions be-
tween King and Malcolm that remain largely unexplored by other views of either
figure. For instance, it is the presence of class differences within black life that be-
stowed particular meanings on King's and Malcolm's leadership. Such differences
shaped the styles each leader adapted in voicing the grievances of his constituency—
for King, a guilt-laden, upwardly mobile, and ever-expanding black middle class;
for Malcolm, an ever-widening, trouble-prone, and rigidly oppressed black ghetto
poor. These differences reflect deep and abiding schisms within African-American
life that challenge facile or pedestrian interpretations of black leaders, inviting in-
stead complex theoretical analyses of their public moral language and behavior.
The comparison of King and Malcolm may also, ironically, void the self-critical
dimensions of the public-moralist perspective, causing its proponents to leave un-
addressed, for instance, the shortcomings of a sexual hierarchy of social criticism
in black life. Although Cone is critical of Malcolm's and Martin's failures of sight
and sense on gender issues, more is demanded. What we need is an explanation
of how intellectuals and leaders within vibrant traditions of black social criticism
seem, with notable exception, unwilling or unable to include gender difference as
a keyword in their public-moralist vocabulary. A comparative analysis of King


--- PAGE 301 ---
272 THE MICHAEL ERIC DYSON READER
and Malcolm may point out how they did not take gender difference seriously, but
it does not explain how the public-moralist traditions in which they participated
either enabled or prevented them from doing so.
By gaining such knowledge, we could determine if their beliefs were represen-
tative of their traditions, or if other participants (for example, Douglass and Du
Bois, who held more enlightened views on gender) provide alternative perspec-
tives from which to criticize Malcolm and Martin without resorting to the finger-
pointing that derives from the clear advantage of historical hindsight.
As Gone makes clear, Malcolm and Martin were complex political actors
whose thought derived from venerable traditions of response to American racism,
usefully characterized as nationalism and integrationism. But as Cone also points
out, the rhetoric of these two traditions has been employed to express complex
beliefs, and black leaders and intellectuals have often combined them in their
struggles against slavery and other forms of racial oppression.
Lomax, by comparison, more rigidly employs these figures to "examine the is-
sues of 'integration versus separation,' 'violence versus nonviolence,' 'the relevance
of the Christian ethic to modern life,' and the question 'can American institutions
as now constructed activate the self-corrective power that is the basic prerequisite
for racial harmony?'"34 Lomax is most critical of Malcolm, leading one commen-
tator to suggest that Lomax's assessment of Malcolm betrayed their friendship.35
Lomax points out the wrongheadedness of Malcolm's advocacy of violence, the
contradictions of his ideological absolutism, and the limitations of his imprecisely
formulated organizational plans in his last year. His criticisms of King, however,
are mostly framed as the miscalculations of strategy and the failure of white peo-
ple to justify King's belief in them. Lomax's vision of Malcolm loses sight of the
formidable forces that were arrayed against him, and the common moral world-
views occupied by King and his white oppressors, which made King's philosophi-
cal inclinations seem natural and legitimate, and Malcolm's, by that measure, for-
eign and unacceptable. One result of Lomax's lack of appreciation for this
difference is his failure to explore King's challenge to capitalism, a challenge that
distinguished King from Malcolm for most of Malcolm's career.
Another problem is that we fail to gain a more profitable view of Malcolm's real
achievements, overlooking the strengths and weaknesses of the moral tradition in
which he notably participated. Malcolm was, perhaps, the living indictment of a
white American moral worldview. But his career was the first fruit as well of some-
thing more radical: an alternative racial cosmos where existing moral principles are
viewed as the naked justification of power and thought to be useless in illumining or
judging the propositions of an authentically black ethical worldview. Not only did
Malcolm call for the rejection of particular incarnations of moral viewpoints that
have failed to live up to their own best potential meanings (a strategy King employed
to brilliant effect), but, given how American morality is indivisible from the network
of intellectual arguments that support and justify it, he argued for the rejection of
American public morality itself. Malcolm lived against the fundamental premises of


--- PAGE 302 ---
A Critical Reading of Malcolm's Readers 273
American public-moralist judgment: that innocence and corruption are on a contin-
uum, that justice and injustice are on a scale, and that proper moral choices reflect
right decisions made between good and evil within the given moral outlook.
Malcolm's black Islamic moral criticism posed a significant challenge to its black
Christian counterpart, which has enjoyed a central place in African-American cul-
ture. Malcolm challenged an assumption held by the most prominent black Chris-
tian public moralists: that the social structure of American society should be re-
arranged, but not reconstructed. Consequently, Malcolm focused a harshly critical
light on the very possibility of interracial cooperation, common moral vision, and
social coexistence.
A powerful vision of Malcolm as a public moralist can be seen in Goldman's The
Death and Life of Malcolm X. Goldman captures with eloquence and imagination the
Brobdingnagian forces of white racial oppression that made life hell for northern
poor blacks, and the Lilliputian psychic resources apparently at their disposal be-
fore Malcolm's oversized and defiant rhetoric rallied black rage and anger to their
defense. Goldman's Malcolm is one whose "life was itself an accusation—a passage
to the ninth circle of that black man's hell and back-and the real meaning of his
ministry, in and out of the Nation of Islam, was to deliver that accusation to us."
Malcolm was a "witness for the prosecution" of white injustice, a "public moralist."
With each aspect of Malcolm's life that he treats-whether his anticipation of Black
Power or his capitulation to standards of moral evaluation rooted in the white so-
ciety he so vigorously despised—Goldman's narrative skillfully defends the central
proposition of Malcolm's prophetic public-moralist vocation.36
Goldman's book is focused on Malcolm's last years before his break with Muham-
mad, and tracks Malcolm's transformation after Mecca. Goldman contends that this
transformation occurred as process, not revelation, and that it ran over weeks and
months of trial and error, discovery, disappointment. Additionally, Goldman sifts
through the conflicting evidence of Malcolm's assassination.37 Goldman maintains
that only one of Malcolm's three convicted and imprisoned assassins is justly jailed,
and that two other murderers remain free.38 Goldman says about Malcolm's Orga-
nization of Afro-American Unity (OAAU), which he founded in his last year, that its
"greatest single asset was its star: its fatal flaw was that it was constructed specifically
as a star vehicle for a man who didn't have the time to invest in making it go."39
When it was written in 1973, and revised in 1979, Goldman's was the only full-
length biography of Malcolm besides Lomax's To Kill a Black Man. The virtue of
Goldman's book is that it taps into the sense of immediacy that drives Lomax's
book, while also featuring independent investigation of Malcolm's life through
more than a hundred interviews with Malcolm himself. Goldman's treatment of
Malcolm also raises a question that I will more completely address later: Can a
white intellectual understand and explain black experience? Goldman's book helps
expose the cultural roots and religious expression of Elijah Muhammad's social
theodicy, an argument Malcolm took up and defended with exemplary passion
and fidelity. He describes Malcolm's public moral mission to proclaim judgment


--- PAGE 303 ---
274 THE MICHAEL ERIC DYSON READER
on white America with the same kind of insight and clarity that characterized
many of Malcolm's public declarations.
Explaining Malcolm as a public moralist moves admirably beyond heroic recon-
struction to critical appreciation. The significance of such an approach is its insis-
tence on viewing Malcolm as a critical figure in the development of black national-
ist repudiations of white cultural traditions, economic practices, and religious
institutions. And yet, unlike hero worshipers who present treatments of Malcolm's
meaning, the authors who examine the moral dimensions of Malcolm's public min-
istry are unafraid to be critical of his ideological blindnesses, his strategic weakness,
his organizational limitations, and his sometimes bristling moral contradictions.
But if they display an avidity, and aptitude, for portraying Malcolm's moral di-
mensions and the forces that made his vision necessary, Malcolm's public-moralist
interpreters have not as convincingly depicted the forces that make public morality
possible. The public-moralist approach is almost by definition limited to explaining
Malcolm in terms of the broad shifts and realignment of contours created within the
logic of American morality itself, rarely asking whether public-moralist proclamation
and action are the best means of effecting social revolution. This approach largely ig-
nores the hints of rebellion against capitalist domination contained in Malcolm's later
speeches, blurring as well a focus on King's mature beliefs that American society was
"sick" and in need of a "reconstruction of the entire society, a revolution of values."40
This approach also fails to place Malcolm in the intricate nexus of social and po-
litical forces that shaped his career as a religious militant and a revolutionary black
nationalist. It does not adequately convey the mammoth scope of economic and cul-
tural forces that converged during the 1940s, 1950s, and 1960s, not only shaping
the expression of racial domination, but influencing as well patterns of class antag-
onism and gender oppression. As Clayborne Carson argues in his splendid intro-
duction to the FBI files on Malcolm X, most writings have failed to "study him
within the context of American racial politics during the 1950s and 1960s."41 Ac-
cording to Carson, the files track Malcolm's growth from the "narrowly religious
perspective of the Nation of Islam toward a broader Pan-Africanist worldview," shed
light on his religious and political views and the degree to which they "threatened
the American state," and "clarif[y] his role in modern African-American politics."42
Moreover, the story of Malcolm X and the black revolution he sought to effect is
also the story of how such social aspirations were shaped by the advent of nuclear
holocaust in the mid-1940s (altering American ideals of social stability and commu-
nal life expectation), the repression of dissident speech in the 1950s under the banner
of McCarthyism, and the economic boom of the mid-1960s that contrasted starkly to
shrinking resources for the black poor. A refined social history not only accents such
features, but provides as well a complex portrait of Malcolm's philosophical and po-
litical goals, and the myriad factors that drove or denied their achievement.
Malcolm's most radical and original contribution rested in reconceiving the
possibility of being a worthful black human being in what he deemed a wicked
white world. He saw black racial debasement as the core of an alternative moral


--- PAGE 304 ---
A Critical Reading of Malcolm's Readers 275
sphere that was justified for no other reason than its abuse and attack by white
Americans. To understand and explain Malcolm, however, we must wedge be-
neath the influences that determined his career in learning how his public-moralist
vocation was both necessary and possible.
P S Y C H O B I O G R A P H Y A N D T H E F O R C E S O F H I S T O R Y
If the task of biography is to help readers understand human action, the purpose
of psychobiography is to probe the relationship between psychic motivation, per-
sonal behavior, and social activity in explaining human achievement and failure.
The project to connect psychology and biography grows out of a well-established
quest to merge various schools of psychological theory with other intellectual dis-
ciplines, resulting in ethnopsychiatry, psychohistory, social psychology, and psy-
choanalytic approaches to philosophy.43
Behind the turn toward psychology and social theory by biographers is a desire
to take advantage of the insight yielded from attempts to correlate or synthesize the
largely incompatible worlds of psychoanalysis and Marxism carved out by Freud
and Marx and their unwieldy legion of advocates and interpreters. If one argues,
however, as Richard Lichtman does, that "the structure of the two theories makes
them ultimate rivals," then, as he concedes, "priorities must be established."44 In his
analysis of the integration of psychoanalysis into Marxist theory, Lichtman argues
that "working through the limitations of Freud's view makes its very significant in-
sights available for incorporation into an expanded Marxist theory."45
Psychobiographers have acknowledged the intellectual difficulties to which
Lichtman points while using Marxist or Freudian theory (and sometimes both) to
locate and illumine gnarled areas of human experience. For instance, Erik Erik-
son's Gandhi's Truth: On the Origins of Militant Nonviolence, one of psychobiography's
foundational works, weds critical analysis of its subject's cultural and intellectual
roots to imaginative reflections on the sources of Gandhi's motivation, sacrifice,
and spiritual achievement.46
As they bring together social and psychological theory in their research, psy-
chobiographers often rupture the rules that separate academic disciplines. Then
again, if the psychobiographer is ruled by rigid presuppositions and is insensitive
to the subject of study, nothing can prevent the results from being fatally flat. Two
recent psychobiographies of Malcolm X reveal that genre's virtues and vices.
Eugene Victor Wolfenstein's 'The Victims of Democracy: Malcolm X and the Black
Revolution is a work of considerable intellectual imagination and rigorous theo-
retical insight.47 It takes measure of the energies that created Malcolm and the
demons that drove him. Wolfenstein assesses Malcolm's accomplishments
through a theoretical lens as noteworthy for its startling clarity about Malcolm
the individual as for its wide-angled view of the field of forces with which Mal-
colm contended during his childhood and mature career.


--- PAGE 305 ---
276 T H E M I C H A E L E R I C D Y S O N R E A D E R
Wolfenstein uses an elaborate conceptual machinery to examine how racism
falsifies "the consciousness of the racially oppressed," and how racially oppressed
individuals struggle to "free themselves from both the falsification of their con-
sciousness and the racist domination of their practical activity."48 For Wolfen-
stein's purpose, neither a psychoanalytic nor a Marxist theory alone could yield
adequate insight because Freudianism "provides no foundation for the analysis of
interests, be they individual or collective," and Marxism "provides no foundation
for the analysis of desires." Therefore, a "unifying concept of human nature was
required."49
Wolfenstein's psychobiography is especially helpful because it combines several
compelling features: a historical analysis of the black (nationalist) revolutionary
struggle, an insightful biographical analysis of Malcolm X's life, and an imagina-
tive social theory that explains how a figure like Malcolm X could emerge from
the womb of black struggle against American apartheid. Wolfenstein accounts for
how Malcolm's childhood was affected by violent, conflicting domestic forces and
describes how black culture's quest for identity at the margins of American soci-
ety—especially when viewed from the even more marginal perspective of the black
poor-shaped Malcolm's adolescence and young adulthood.
Wolfenstein also explores Malcolm's career as a zealous young prophet and
public mouthpiece for Elijah Muhammad, revealing the psychic and social needs
that Malcolm's commitments served. Wolfenstein's imaginative remapping of
Malcolm's intellectual and emotional landscape marks a significant contribution
as well to the history of African-American ideas, offering new ways of under-
standing one of the most complex figures in our nation's history.
Undoubtedly, Wolfenstein's book would have benefited from a discussion of
how black religious groups provided social and moral cohesion in northern urban
black communities, and from a description of their impact on Earl Little's ministry.
Although Wolfenstein perceptively probes the appeal of Marcus Garvey's Univer-
sal Negro Improvement Association to blacks-and the social, psychological, and
economic ground it partly shared with the Ku Klux Klan and white proletarian
workers—his psychoanalytic Marxist interpretation of Earl Little and Malcolm
would have been substantially enhanced by an engagement with black Protestant
beliefs about the relationship between work, morality, and self-regard.50
Wolfenstein is often keenly insightful about black liberation movements and
the forces that precipitated their eruption, but his dependence on biological def-
initions of race weakens his arguments.51 The value of more complex readings of
race is that they not only show how the varied meanings of racism are created in
society; but prove as well that the idea of race has a cultural history.52 More com-
plex theories of race would permit Wolfenstein to illumine the changing intellec-
tual and social terrain of struggle by groups that oppose the vicious meanings at-
tributed to African-American identity by cultural racists.
In the end, Wolfenstein is too dependent on the revelations and reconstructions
of self-identity that Malcolm (with Haley's assistance) achieved in his autobiogra-


--- PAGE 306 ---
A Critical Reading of Malcolm's Readers 277
phy. In answering his own rhetorical questions about whether Malcolm and Haley
represented Malcolm accurately, Wolfenstein says that from a "purely empirical
standpoint, I believe the answer to both questions is generally affirmative."53 The
problem, of course, is that Malcolm's recollections are not without distortions.
These distortions, when taken together with the book's interpretive framework,
not only reveal his attempts to record his life history, but reflect as well his need to
control how his life was viewed during the ideological frenzy that marked his last
year. By itself, self-description is an unreliable basis for reconstructing the meaning
of Malcolm's life and career. Still, Wolfenstein's work is the most sophisticated
treatment to date of Malcolm's intellectual and psychological roots.
But Bruce Perry's uneven psychobiographical study, Malcolm: "The Life of a Man
Who Changed Black America, which reaches exhaustively beyond Malcolm's self-
representation in his autobiography, possesses little of the psychoanalytic rigor and
insight of Wolfenstein's work.54 Although Perry unearths new information about
Malcolm, he does not skillfully clarify the impact that such information should have
on our understanding of Malcolm. The volume renders Malcolm smaller dian life.
In Perry's estimation, Malcolm's childhood holds the interpretive key to un-
derstanding his mature career as a black leader: Malcolm's "war against the white
power structure evolved from the same inner needs that had spawned earlier re-
bellions against his teachers, the law, established religion, and other symbols of
authority."55 Perry's picture of Malcolm's family is one of unremitting violence,
criminality, and pathology. The mature Malcolm is equally tragic: a man of loom-
ing greatness whose self-destruction "contributed to his premature death."56 It is
precisely here that Perry's psychobiography folds in on itself, its rough edges
puncturing the center of its explanatory purpose. It is not that psychobiography
cannot remark on the unraveling of domestic relations that weave together im-
portant threads of personal identity, threads that are also woven into adolescent
and adult behavior. But Perry has a penchant for explaining complex psychic
forces-and the social conditions that influence their makeup-in simplistic terms
and tabloid-like arguments.
Still, Perry's new information about Malcolm is occasionally revealing, though
some of the claims he extracts from this information are more dubious than oth-
ers. When, for instance, Perry addresses areas of Malcolm's life that can be factu-
ally verified, he is on solid ground. By simply checking Malcolm's school records
Perry proves that, contrary to his autobiography, Malcolm was not expelled from
West Junior High School but actually completed the seventh grade in 1939. And
by interviewing several family members, Perry establishes that neither Malcolm's
half-sister Ella nor his father Earl were, as Malcolm contended, "jet black," a claim
Perry views as Malcolm's way of equating "blackness and the strength his light-
skinned mother had lacked."57 Despite Malcolm X's assertion of close friendships
with Lionel Hampton, Sonny Greer, and Cootie Williams during his hustling days,
Perry's interviews show that the "closeness Malcolm described was as fictitious as
the closeness he said he had shared with the members of his own family."58


--- PAGE 307 ---
278 T H E M I C H A E L E R I C D Y S O N R E A D E R
But when Perry addresses aspects of Malcolm's experience that invite close ar-
gument and analytical interpretation, he is on shakier ground. At this juncture,
Perry displays an insensitivity to African-American life and an ignorance about
black intellectual traditions that weaken his book. For instance, Perry depicts Mal-
colm's travels to Africa-partially in an attempt to expand his organization's polit-
ical and financial base, but also to express his increasingly international social vi-
sion—as intended solely to fund his fledgling organization. Perry also draws
questionable parallels between the cloudy events surrounding a fire at Malcolm's
family farm during his early childhood in 1929 (which Perry concludes points to
arson by Earl Litde) and the fire at Malcolm's New York house after his dispute
with Nation of Islam officials over ownership rights.
A major example of the limitation of Perry's psychobiographical approach is
his treatment of Malcolm's alleged homosexual activity, both as an experimenting
adolescent and as a hustling, income-seeking young adult. Perry's remarks are
more striking for the narrow assumptions that underlie his interpretations than
for their potential to dismantle the quintessential symbol of African-American
manhood. If Malcolm did have homosexual relations, they might serve Perry as
a powerful tool of interpretation to expose the tangled cultural roots of black
machismo, and to help him explain the cruel varieties of homophobia that afflict
black communities. A complex understanding of black sexual politics challenges
a psychology of masculinity that views "male" as a homogeneous, natural, and
universally understood identity. A complex understanding of masculinity main-
tains that male identity is also significantly affected by ethnic, racial, economic,
and sexual differences.
But Perry's framework of interpretation cannot assimilate the information his
research has unearthed. Although the masculinist psychology that chokes much
of black leadership culture needs to be forcefully criticized, Perry's observations
do not suffice. Because he displays neither sensitivity to nor knowledge about
complex black cultural beliefs regarding gender and sexual difference, Perry's
portrait of Malcolm's sex life forms a rhetorical low blow, simply reinforcing a
line of attack against an already sexually demonized black leadership culture.
The power of psychobiography in discussing black leaders is its potential to
shed light on its subjects in a manner that traditional biography fails to achieve.
African-American cultural studies, which has traditionally made little use of psy-
choanalytic theory, has sacrificed the insights such an undertaking might offer
while avoiding the pitfalls of psychological explanations of human motivation.
After all, psychobiography is also prone to overreach its capacity to explain.
In some ways, the psychobiographer's quest for (in this case) the "real Mal-
colm" presumes that human experience is objective and that truth is produced by
explaining the relation between human action and psychic motivation. Such an
approach may seduce psychobiographers into believing that they are gaining ac-
cess to the static, internal psychic reality of a historical figure. Often such access is
wrongly believed to be separate from the methods of investigation psychobiogra-


--- PAGE 308 ---
A Critical Reading of Malcolm's Readers 279
phers employ, and from the aims and presumptions, as well as the biases and in-
tellectual limitations, that influence their work.
Because both Wolfenstein and Perry (like Goldman) are white, their psychobi-
ographies in particular raise suspicion about the ability of white intellectuals to in-
terpret black experience. Although such speculation is rarely systematically exam-
ined, it surfaces as both healthy skepticism and debilitating paranoia in the
informal debates that abound in a variety of black intellectual circles. Such debates
reflect two crucial tensions generated by psychobiographical explanations of black
leaders by white authors: that such explanations reflect insensitivity to black cul-
ture, and that white proponents of psychobiographical analysis are incompetent to
assess black life adequately. Several factors are at the base of such conclusions.
First is the racist history that has affected every tradition of American scholar-
ship and that has obscured, erased, or distorted accounts of the culture and his-
tory of African Americans.59 Given this history (and the strong currents of anti-
intellectualism that flood most segments of American culture), suspicion of certain
forms of critical intellectual activity survive in many segments of black culture.
Also, black intellectuals have experienced enormous difficulty in securing ade-
quate cultural and financial support to develop self-sustaining traditions of schol-
arly investigation and communities of intellectual inquiry.60
For example, from its birth in the womb of political protest during the late
1960s and early 1970s, black studies has been largely stigmatized and usually un-
derfunded. Perhaps the principal reasons for this are the beliefs held by many
whites (and some blacks) that, first, black scholars should master nonblack sub-
jects, and second, that black studies is intellectually worthless. Ironically, once the
more than 200 black studies programs in American colleges and universities be-
came established, many white academics became convinced that blacks are capa-
ble of studying only "black" subjects.
At the same time, black studies experienced a new "invasion" by white intel-
lectuals. This new invasion—mimicking earlier patterns of white scholarship on
black life even as most black scholars were prevented from being published—
provoked resentment from black scholars."61 The resentment hinged on the diffi-
culty black scholars experienced in securing appointments in most academic fields
beyond black studies. Black scholars were also skeptical of the intellectual as-
sumptions and political agendas of white scholars, especially because there was
strong precedence for many white scholars to distort black culture in their work
by either exoticizing or demonizing its expression. Black intellectual skeptics op-
posed to white interpretations of black culture and figures employ a variety of ar-
guments in their defense.
Many black intellectuals contend that black experience is unique and can be un-
derstood, described, and explained only by blacks. Unquestionably, African-
American history produces cultural and personal experiences that are distinct,
even singular. But the historical character of such experiences makes them theoreti-
cally accessible to any interpreter who has a broad knowledge of African-American


--- PAGE 309 ---
280 T H E M I C H A E L E R I C D Y S O N R E A D E R
intellectual traditions, a balanced and sensible approach to black culture, and the
same skills of rational argumentation and scholarly inquiry required in other fields
of study.
There is no special status of being that derives from black cultural or historical
experience that grants black interpreters an automatically superior understanding
of black cultural meanings. This same principle allows black scholars to interpret
Shakespeare, study Heisenberg's uncertainty principle, and master Marxist social
theory. In sum, black cultural and historical experiences do not produce ideas and
practices that are incapable of interpretation when the most critically judicious
and culturally sensitive methods of intellectual inquiry are applied.
Many intellectuals also believe that black culture is unified and relatively ho-
mogeneous. But this contention is as misleading as the first, especially in light of
black culture's wonderful complexity and radical diversity. The complexity and
diversity of black culture means that a bewildering variety of opinions, beliefs,
ideologies, traditions, and practices coexist, even if in a provisional sort of way.
Black conservatives, scuba divers, socialists, and rock musicians come easily to
mind. All these tendencies and traditions constitute and help define black culture.
Given these realities, it is pointless to dismiss studies of black cultural figures sim-
ply because their authors are white. One must judge any work on African-
American culture by standards of rigorous critical investigation while attending to
both the presuppositions that ground scholarly perspectives and the biases that in-
fluence intellectual arguments.
Psychobiographies of Malcolm X's life and career represent an important ad-
vance in Malcolm studies. The crucial issue is not color, but consciousness about
African-American culture, sensitivity to trends and developments in black society,
knowledge of the growing literature about various dimensions of black American
life, and a theoretical sophistication that artfully blends a variety of disciplinary
approaches in yielding insight about a complex historic figure like Malcolm X.
When psychobiography is employed in this manner, it can go a long way toward
breaking new ground in understanding and explaining the fife of important black
figures. When it is incompetently wielded, psychobiographical analysis ends up
simply projecting the psychobiographer's intellectual biases and limitations of per-
spective onto the historical screen of a black figure's career.
VOICES IN THE WILDERNESS:
REVOLUTIONARY SPARKS AND MALCOLM'S LAST YEAR
To comprehend the full sweep of a figure's life and thought, it is necessary to place
that figure's career in its cultural and historical context and view the trends and
twists of thought that mark significant periods of change and development. Such
an approach may be termed a trajectory analysis because it attempts to outline the
evolution of belief and thought of historic figures by matching previously held


--- PAGE 310 ---
A Critical Reading of Malcolm's Readers 281
ideas to newer ones, seeking to grasp whatever continuities and departures can be
discerned from such an enterprise. Trajectory analysis, then, may be a helpful way
of viewing a figure such as Martin Luther King Jr., whose career may be divided
into the early optimism of civil rights ideology to the latter-day aggressive nonvio-
lence he advocated on the eve of his assassination. It may also be enlightening
when grappling with the serpentine mysteries of Malcolm's final days.
Malcolm's turbulent severance from Elijah Muhammad's psychic and world-
making womb initiated yet another stage of his personal and political evolution,
marking a conversion experience. On one level, Malcolm freed himself from Eli-
jah's destructive ideological grip, shattering molds of belief and practice that were
no longer useful or enabling. On another level, Malcolm's maturation and con-
version were the result of his internal ideals of moral expectation, social behavior,
and authentic religious belief. His conversion, though suddenly manifest, was
most likely a gradual process involving both conscious acts of dissociation from
the Nation of Islam and the "subconscious incubation and maturing of motives
deposited by the experiences of life."62
Many commentators have heavily debated the precise nature of Malcolm's
transformation. Indeed, his last fifty weeks on earth form a fertile intellectual field
where the seeds of speculation readily blossom into conflicting interpretations of
Malcolm's meaning at the end of his life. Lomax says that Malcolm became a
"lukewarm integrationist."63 Goldman suggests that Malcolm was "improvising,"
that he embraced and discarded ideological options as he went along.64 Gleage
and T'shaka hold that he remained a revolutionary black nationalist. And Cone
asserts that Malcolm became an internationalist with a humanist bent.
But the most prominent and vigorous interpreters of the meaning of Malcolm's
last year have been a group of intellectuals associated with the Socialist Workers
Party, a Trotskyist-Marxist group that took keen interest in Malcolm's post-Mecca
social criticism and sponsored some of his last speeches. For the most part, their
views have been articulately promoted by George Breitman, author of The Last
Tear of Malcolm X: The Evolution of a Revolutionary and editor of two volumes of Mal-
colm's speeches, organizational statements, and interviews during his last years:
Malcolm X Speaks: Selected Speeches and Statements and By Any Means Necessary: Speeches,
Interviews, and a Letter, by Malcolm X. A third volume of Malcolm's speeches, Mal-
colm X: The Last Speeches, was edited by Bruce Perry, who claimed "ideological dif-
ference with the publisher.65
Breitman's The Last Tear of Malcolm X is a passionately argued book that main-
tains Malcolm's split with Elijah took Malcolm by surprise, making it necessary
for him to gain time and experience to reconstruct his ideological beliefs and re-
define his organizational orientation. Breitman divides Malcolm's independent
phase into two parts: the transition period, lasting the few months between his
split in March 1964 and his return from Africa at the end of May 1964; and the
final period, lasting from June 1964 until his death in February 1965. Breitman
maintains that in the final period, Malcolm "was on the way to a synthesis of


--- PAGE 311 ---
282 THE MICHAEL ERIC DYSON READER
black nationalism and socialism that would be fitting for the American scene and
acceptable to the masses in the black ghetto."66
For Breitman's argument to be persuasive, it had to address Malcolm's con-
tinuing association with a black nationalism that effectively excluded white par-
ticipation, or else show that he had developed a different understanding of black
nationalism. Also, he had to prove that Malcolm's anticapitalist statements and
remarks about socialism represented a coherent and systematic exposition of his
beliefs as a political strategist and social critic. Breitman contends that in the
final period, Malcolm made distinctions between separatism (the belief that
blacks should be socially, culturally, politically, and economically separate from
white society) and nationalism (the belief that blacks should control their own
culture).
Malcolm's views of nationalism changed after his encounters with revolution-
aries in Africa who were "white," however, and in his "Young Socialist" interview
in By Any Means Necessary, Malcolm confessed that he "had to do a lot of thinking
and reappraising" of his definition of black nationalism.67 Breitman argues that
though he "had virtually stopped calling himself and the OAAU black national-
ist," because others persisted in the practice, he accepted "its continued use in dis-
cussion and debate."68 Malcolm said in the same interview, "I haven't been using
the expression for several months."69
But how can Breitman then argue that Malcolm was attempting a synthesis
of black nationalism and socialism if the basis for Malcolm's continued use of
the phrase "black nationalism" was apparently more convenience and habit
than ideological conviction? What is apparent from my reading of Malcolm's
speeches is that his reconsideration of black nationalism occurred amid a radi-
cally shifting worldview that was being shaped by events unfolding on the in-
ternational scene and by his broadened horizon of experience. His social and
intellectual contact with activists and intellectuals from several African nations
forced him to relinquish the narrow focus of his black nationalist practice and
challenged him to consider restructuring his organizational base to reflect his
broadened interests.
If, therefore, even Malcolm's conceptions of black nationalist strategy were un-
dergoing profound restructuring, it is possible to say only that his revised black
nationalist ideology might have accommodated socialist strategy. It is equally
plausible to suggest that his nationalist beliefs might have collapsed altogether
under the weight of apparent ideological contradictions introduced by his grow-
ing appreciation of class and economic factors in forming the lives of the black
masses.70 For the synthesis of black nationalism and socialism that Breitman as-
serts Malcolm was forging to have been plausible, several interrelated processes
needed to be set in motion.
First, for such a synthesis to have occurred, a clear definition of the potential
connection of black nationalism and socialism was needed. The second need was
for a discussion of the ideological similarities and differences between the varieties


--- PAGE 312 ---
A Critical Reading of Malcolm's Readers 283
of black nationalism and socialism to be joined. And the third need was for an ex-
plicit expression of the political, economic, and social interests that an allied black
nationalism and socialism would mutually emphasize and embrace; the explo-
ration of intellectual and political problems both would address; and an identifi-
cation of the common enemies both would oppose. But given the existential and
material matters that claimed his rapidly evaporating energy near the end of his
life, Malcolm hardly had the wherewithal to perform such tasks.
Breitman also maintains that Malcolm's final period marked his maturation
as "a revolutionary—increasingly anti-capitalist and pro-socialist as well as anti-
imperialist," labels that Breitman acknowledges Malcolm himself never
adopted.71 Breitman reads Malcolm's two trips to Africa as a time of expansive
political reeducation, when Malcolm gained insight into the progressive possi-
bilities of socialist revolutionary practice. After his return to the United States
from his second trip, Malcolm felt, Breitman says, the need to express publicly
his "own anti-capitalist and pro-socialist convictions," which had "become quite
strong by this time."72 He cites interviews and speeches Malcolm made during
this period to substantiate his claim, including Malcolm's speaking at the
Audubon Ballroom on December 20, 1964, of how almost "every one of the
countries that has gotten independence has devised some kind of socialist sys-
tem, and this is no accident."73
Such a strategy, one that seeks to predict probable ideological and intellectual
outcomes, may shed less light on Malcolm than is initially apparent. Breitman's
contention that Malcolm was becoming a socialist; Cleage's that he was confused;
T'shaka's that he maintained a vigorous revolutionary black nationalist stance;
and Goldman's that he was improvising can all be proclaimed and documented
with varying degrees of evidence and credibility.
This is not to suggest that one view is as good as the next or that they are
somehow interchangeable, because we are uncertain about Malcolm's final di-
rection. It simply suggests that the nature of Malcolm's thought during his last
year was ambiguous and that making definite judgments about his direction is
impossible. In this light, trajectories say more about the ideological commit-
ments and intellectual viewpoints of interpreters than the objective evidence
evoked to substantiate claims about Malcolm's final views. The truth is that we
have only a bare-bones outline of Malcolm's emerging worldview. In "The
Harlem 'Hate-Gang' Scare," contained in Malcolm X Speaks (and delivered dur-
ing what Breitman says was Malcolm's final period), Malcolm says that during
his travels he
noticed that most of the countries that had recently emerged into independence
have turned away from the so-called capitalistic system in the direction of social-
ism. So out of curiosity, I can't resist the temptation to do a little investigating
wherever that particular philosophy happens to be in existence or an attempt is
being made to bring it into existence.74


--- PAGE 313 ---
284 T H E M I C H A E L E R IC D Y S O N R E A D E R
But at the end of his speech, in reply to a question about the kind of political
and economic system that Malcolm wanted, he said, "I don't know. But I'm flex-
ible. ... As was stated earlier, all of the countries that are emerging today from
under the shackles of colonialism are turning toward socialism."75
This tentativeness is characteristic of Malcolm's speeches throughout the three
collections that contain fragments of his evolving worldview, especially Malcolm X
Speaks and By Any Means Necessary. Even the speeches delivered during his final pe-
riod showcase a common feature: Malcolm displays sympathy for and interest in
socialist philosophy without committing himself to its practice as a means of
achieving liberation for African-Americans.
Malcolm confessed in the "Young Socialist" interview, "I still would be hard
pressed to give a specific definition of the overall philosophy which I think is
necessary for the liberation of the black people in this country."76 Of course, as
Breitman implies, Malcolm's self-description is not the only basis for drawing
conclusions about his philosophy. But even empirical investigation fails to yield
conclusive evidence of his social philosophy because it was in such radical trans-
formation and flux.
Malcolm was indeed improvising from the chords of an expanded black na-
tionalist rhetoric and an embryonic socialist criticism of capitalist civilization. Al-
though Breitman has been maligned as a latecomer seeking to foist his ideological
beliefs onto Malcolm's last days, there is precedence for Trotskyist attempts to ad-
dress the problem of racism and black nationalism in the United States.77 And the
venerable black historian C. L. R.James became a Marxist, in part, by reading
Trotsky's History of the Russian Revolution.™ Although Malcolm consistently de-
nounced capitalism, he did not live long enough to embrace socialism.
The weakness of such an interpretive trajectory, then, is that it tends to demand
a certainty about Malcolm that is clearly unachievable. An ideological trajectory
of Malcolm's later moments is forced to bring coherence to fragments of political
speech more than systematic social thought, to exaggerate moments of highly sug-
gestive ideological gestures rather than substantive political activity, and to focus
on slices of organizational breakthrough instead of the complex integrative activ-
ity envisioned for the OAAU. In the end, it is apparent that Malcolm was rapidly
revising his worldview as he experienced a personal, religious, and ideological
conversion that was still transpiring when he met his brutal death.
But the thrust behind such speculation is often a focus on how Malcolm at-
tempted to shape the cultural forces of his time through the agency of moral
rhetoric, social criticism, and prophetic declaration. Just as important, but often
neglected in such analyses, is an account of how Malcolm was shaped by his
times, of how he was the peculiar and particular creation of black cultural forces
and American social practices. Armed with such an understanding, the focus on
Malcolm's last year would be shifted away from simply determining what he said
and did to determining how we should use his example to respond to our current
cultural and national crises.


--- PAGE 314 ---
A Critical Reading of Malcolm's Readers 285
IN THE PRISON OF PRISMS: THE FUTURE OF MALCOLM'S PAST
The literature on Malcolm X is certain to swell with the renewed cultural interest
in his life. And although the particular incarnations of the approaches I have de-
tailed may fade from intellectual view or cultural vogue, the ideological commit-
ments, methodological procedures, historical perspectives, cultural assumptions,
religious beliefs, and philosophical presuppositions they employ will most as-
suredly be expressed in one form or another in future treatments of his life and
thought.79
The canonization of Malcolm will undoubtedly continue. Romantic and celebra-
tory treatments of his social action and revolutionary rhetoric will issue forth from
black intellectuals, activists, and cultural artists. This is especially true in the inde-
pendent black press, where Malcolm's memory has been heroically kept alive in
books, pamphlets, and magazines, even as his presence receded from wide visibility
and celebration before his recent revival. The independent black press preserves
and circulates cultural beliefs, intellectual arguments, and racial wisdom among
black folk away from the omniscient eye and acceptance of mainstream publishing.
Shahrazad Ali's controversial book, The Blackman s Guide to Understanding the
Blackwoman, for instance, sold hundreds of thousands of copies without receiving
much attention from mainstream newspapers, magazines, or journals. The main-
stream press often overlooked Malcolm's contributions, but black publications like
The Amsterdam News, The Afro-American, Bilalian News, and Black Mews scrupulously
recorded his public career. The black independent press, in alliance with various
black nationalist groups throughout the country that have maintained Malcolm's
heroic stature from the time of his assassination, is a crucial force in Malcolm's on-
going celebration. Such treatments of his legacy will most likely be employed by
these groups to actively resist Malcolm's symbolic manipulation by what they un-
derstand to be the forces of cultural racism, state domination, commodification,
and especially religious brainwashing that Malcolm detested and opposed.
The enormous influence of the culture of hip-hop on black youth, coupled with
the resurgence of black cultural nationalism among powerful subcultures within
the African-American community, suggests that Malcolm's heroic example will
continue to be emulated and proclaimed. The stakes of hero worship are raised
when considering the resurgent racism of American society and the increased per-
sonal and social desperation among the constituency for whom Malcolm elo-
quently argued, the black ghetto poor. Heightened racial antipathy in cultural in-
stitutions such as universities and businesses, and escalated attacks on black
cultural figures, ideas, and movements, precipitate the celebration of figures who
embody the strongest gestures of resistance to white racism.
Moreover, the destructive effects of gentrification, economic crisis, and social dis-
location; the expansion of corporate privilege; and the development of under-
ground political economies—along with the violence and criminality they breed-
means that Malcolm is even more a precious symbol of the self-discipline,


--- PAGE 315 ---
286 T H E M I C H A E L E R I C D Y S O N R E A D E R
self-esteem, and moral leadership necessary to combat the spiritual and economic
corruption of poor black communities. With their efforts to situate him among the
truly great in African-American history, hero worshipers' discussion of Malcolm
will be of important but limited value in critically investigating his revolutionary
speech, thought, and action.
Malcolm's weaknesses and strengths must be rigorously examined if we are
to have a richly hued picture of one of the most intriguing figures of twentieth-
century public life in the United States. Malcolm's past is not yet settled, sav-
aged as it has been in the embrace of unprincipled denigrators while being
equally smothered in the well-meaning grip of romantic and uncritical loyalists.
He deserves what every towering and seminal figure in history should receive:
comprehensive and critical examination of what he said and did so that his life
and thought will be useful to future generations of peoples in struggle around
the globe.


--- PAGE 316 ---
Twenty- One
MIXED BLESSINGS:
MARTIN LUTHER KING, JR., AND THE
LESSONS OF AN AMBIGUOUS HEROISM
Martin Luther King, Jr., is, perhaps, the greatest influence on my life outside of the
mentorship of my beloved pastor, the late, great rhetorical genius, theological giant, and
political mystic, the Rev. Dr. Frederick George Sampson II. I was nine years old when
King was murdered in Memphis, and though I had never heard of him, his death
affected me profoundly. I scrounged around for every personal recollection about him I
could fold, sent off for recordings of his most famous speeches, and read every article and
book about him that the library contained. "This chapter from Reflecting Black is
among my first published attempts to wrestle with the intellectual and moral legacy, as
well as the clear but complex social heroism, of a man I consider the greatest American in
our nation's history.
THE ESTABLISHMENT OF A NATIONAL HOLIDAY to honor the life and achieve-
ments of Martin Luther King, Jr., is a reason for critical celebration. Only the sec-
ond American and the first African-American to be feted with this singular honor,
the celebration of King's birthday is an occasion of national, religious, and racial
significance. It acknowledges that King was the supreme embodiment of American
citizenship and political engagement, the highest manifestation of the American re-
ligious genius, and the richest expression of the multifaceted character of the black
experience in America.
On the other hand, the King birthday celebration also presents the danger of
losing the challenging and uncomfortable dimensions of King's thought and life
by romanticizing his career. The nature and scope of King's accomplishments,
which center in nothing short of a specific revolution in how black people live and
are perceived in American culture, inevitably invite historic embellishment and
social myth. But neither a puerile romanticization of King as Safe Negro nor a car-
icatured mythologization of King as Great American Hero will do. King's life was
too complex, his achievements too profound, and his thinking too provocative to
warrant such naive responses. We must transcend such unrealistic assessments of
King and concentrate on the substantive contributions of his life and thought.


--- PAGE 317 ---
288 THE MICHAEL ERIC DYSON READER
An especially helpful and illuminating way to view King's life and jusdy assess
his accomplishments is through a reflection upon the ethics and politics of hero
celebration. This context permits us to examine the beneficial and harmful uses to
which the King holiday may be put in creating or preserving images of King that
avoid disturbing history or dodge painful truth. This context also provides a
healthy framework in addressing recent revelations about King's character, in-
cluding charges of plagiarism and womanizing. In this chapter, I will examine
some characteristics of heroism, exploring the ways it makes sense to call King a
hero, treat two central tensions that arise in asserting that King's heroism is am-
biguous, and briefly suggest that King's birthday is indeed worth celebrating.
In my brief examination of some characteristics of heroism, I do not intend to
provide a theory of heroism or trace its varied genealogy. Radier, I will discuss
heroism within the limits of existing understandings of the concept and then seek
to apply them to King in analyzing the effects of hero worship on the ideals for
which he gave his life.
In his work on George Washington, cultural critic and historian Gary Wills re-
minds us that hero worship "is a hard assignment for many people today—one
they think they cannot fulfill, or should not. Hero worship is elitist. It reduces
the science of history to mere biography, if not to anecdote. It suggests that indi-
vidual talent is a more important force than large economic processes. . . . The
attitude of many in our time is captured by Bertolt Brecht's Galileo, who says:
'Unhappy the land that needs a hero.'"1 While Wills's larger point about the sus-
picion of many Americans toward hero worship may be valid, explaining the di-
minished field of activity over which heroism is spread, it is equally true that
American hero worship is presently focused in two social spheres: competitive
sports and the military.
Contemporary forms of American heroism are often displayed within the con-
text of sports competition, where individual or team exploits are lauded for em-
bodying particular virtues, skills, and mastery. For example, basketball heroes are
often said to embody the virtues of rigorous habits of practice, expert skills of
physical dexterity, and mastery of the overall complexity of their craft necessary
to perform excellendy and unselfishly in a team sport.
Military heroes, as well, figure prominently in the comparatively constricted
sphere of heroism celebrated today. America's recent war in the Gulf shows how
eager Americans are for clear embodiments of American values of national patri-
otism, personal valor, and sacrifice for the common good. That Generals Norman
Schwarzkopf and Colin Powell are instant heroes testifies to the peculiar hunger
of many Americans for reassurance about the integrity and lightness of this coun-
try's values and ways of life.
Perhaps diis last point clearly demonstrates a telling feature of heroism: it is in-
timately related to ideals felt to be worthy of support because they say something
important about national self-identity. Part of the difficulty in deciding upon a
genuine and truly national hero is connected to the increasing diversity of Amer-


--- PAGE 318 ---
Martin Luther King, Jr., and Ambiguous Heroism 289
ican culture. Because of the bewildering pluralization of perspectives about what
it means to be an American, growing dispute about what goods are worthy of
pursuit, strong disagreement about how to measure various forms of moral and
social excellence, and the unraveling of a unified concept of the public good, the
virtuous as well as the heroic is subject to radical revision and heated debate. Oc-
casionally, however, a person or movement so decisively captures the nation's
imagination that a variety of Americans come to believe that their truest selves
and deepest beliefs are embodied in the vision and life of that figure or movement.
Such was the case for many Americans in relation to Martin Luther King, Jr., and
the civil rights movement.
The civil rights movement provided a social context, cultural framework, and
racial worldview for blacks and other similarly excluded Americans to argue for
inclusion within the larger circle of privilege, rights, and status from which they
had been socially and legally barred. Civil rights leaders and activists built upon
the symbol systems of black religion, the resonant traditions of radical protest
within black culture, and a progressive understanding of liberal democracy in ar-
ticulating demands for equality, justice, and freedom. Because of this potent mix
of elements, the civil rights movement had the advantage of appealing to specific
values nourished within a black cultural cosmos, while linking them to the iconic
structures, symbolic worldviews, and heroic values that undergirded much of
American society. As symbolic representative of the civil rights movement, Mar-
tin Luther King, Jr., embodied the virtues of black religious culture and black tra-
ditions of protest, as well as the best impulses of Western liberal democracy.
On the other hand, King wove into his rhetorical and strategic tapestry threads
of prophetic religious utterance and radical social criticism that sorely tested the
limits of liberal tolerance of forces of fundamental social challenge and transfor-
mation. The fact that some state and national politicians who represent the forces
of stasis and regression that King opposed are now in part responsible for presid-
ing over the public rituals to commemorate his memory only attests to the am-
biguous character of the heroism King embodies.
King figures prominently in a distinct line of social prophets whose ideals can
sometimes only be truly honored by their remaining, in significant measure, out-
side of the totemic processes of official acceptance, which cloak their status as
prophetic characters whose memory judges American moral practice. The ambi-
guity that surrounds King's memory is healthy because it creates suggestive ten-
sions within the developing edifice of King worship and draws attention to those
troubling aspects of King's thought that have the potential to shatter the rigid con-
structions of official truth.
In reflecting on the ambiguity of King's heroism, it will be helpful to discuss
some characteristics of heroism and explore how King can be usefully understood
as an American hero. A heroic figure undeniably possesses the ability to substan-
tially alter and influence the course of events because of her mix of personal traits,
skills, talents, and visions. This definition, of course, rests on the distinction that


--- PAGE 319 ---
250 THE MICHAEL ERIC DYSON READER
Sidney Hook made between two types of persons who qualify as potential heroes.
After defining the hero in history as "the individual to whom we can justifiably at-
tribute preponderant influence in determining an issue or even whose conse-
quences would have been profoundly different if he had not acted as he did,"
Hook describes the difference in "eventful" persons and "event-making" persons.2
The eventful man in history is any man whose actions influenced subsequent
developments along a quite different course than would have been followed if
these actions had not been taken. The event-making man is an eventful man whose
actions are the consequences of outstanding capacities of intelligence, will, and
character rather than of accidents of position. This distinction tries to do justice
to the general belief that a hero is great not merely in virtue of what he does but
in virtue of what he is.3
By Hook's measure, King certainly qualifies as a genuine hero, as someone
whose combination of talents, intelligence, and vision considerably altered the
course of events. This does not mean that King was the only person in the civil
rights movement who possessed high degrees of intelligence, discipline, and skill.
Numerous participants in the civil rights movement exhibited extraordinary lead-
ership ability and qualities, ranging from the ingenious strategic skills of Bayard
Rustin, the penetrating philosophic skills of Bob Moses, the uncanny organiza-
tional skills and folk wisdom of Fannie Lou Hamer, and the creative nonviolent
theory of James Lawson.4 While others possessed sharper skills than King in par-
ticular areas, King possessed a unique ability to inspire masses and maintain the
loyalty of an impressive host of talented men and women. Perhaps this was best
expressed by Benjamin Mays when he wrote:
It may be that only one man in ten million could have led the Montgomery
boycott without that city exploding into one of the worst race riots in history.. . .
If the Montgomery Improvement Association had chosen a person other than
King to communicate the Negroes' grievances to the city fathers, Dr. King might
have gone through life as a successful Baptist preacher and no more. His rare
ability to lead and inspire the classes as well as the masses, in a crusade for social
justice, might never have been called forth.5
Furthermore, it may be argued that the force of King's personality, intelligence,
and gifts helped create the conditions for social change in regard to race relations.
King thus exhibited what Hook meant in a further clarification of the eventful
versus the event-making person.
The event-making man, on the other hand, finds a fork in the historical road,
but he also helps, so to speak, to create it. He increases the odds of success for
the alternative he chooses by virtue of the extraordinary qualities he brings to


--- PAGE 320 ---
Martin Luther King, Jr., and Ambiguous Heroism 291
bear to realize it. At the very least, he must . . . display exceptional qualities of
leadership. It is die hero as event-making man who leaves the positive imprint of
his personality upon history—an imprint that is still observable after he has dis-
appeared from the scene.6
As Lerone Bennett observed, King's ability to create the conditions that led to
social transformation was clearly demonstrated in Birmingham, Alabama, where
it is widely believed that the civil rights movement gained its greatest symbolic
victory because of a highly publicized clash with Sheriff Bull Connors's violent
tactics to repel the civil rights demonstrators.
No leader, of course, can create an event the time is not prepared for. But the
genius of the great leader lies precisely in his apprehension of what the times re-
quire and in carrying through in the teeth of great opposition an act that changes
the times. In Birmingham, King approached that kind of greatness, creating the
occasion of the "Negro Revolution" by an act almost everyone said was ill-timed
and ill-chosen. Birmingham . . . was chosen, not stumbled upon. It was created
by a man who knew exactly what he wanted and how much he would probably
have to pay to get it.7
King was certainly a figure who often precipitated change through conscious, de-
cisive action.
The hero, particularly the one who advances an agenda of trenchant social crit-
icism and sweeping ethical reform, also possesses the ability to create a situation
in which it is untenable to remain unchanged or unchallenged by the hero's vision
of how things should be. The hero, in short compass, forces us to make moral
choices. As James Hanigan says:
One thing that makes the hero's course a precarious one is that the very na-
ture of the hero's role in history requires the more ordinary among us to make
choices. It is not simply a matter for us of liking or disliking, of admiring or ig-
noring the hero. Rather, we are forced to choose for or against the hero, for or
against the vision, or dream, or message, or course of action the hero proposes
to us. One hallmark of the hero's audienticity as a hero is precisely that he or she
forces us to choose; we cannot remain indifferent to this presence among us,
even if we would. For not to be with the hero is automatically to be against him
or her.8
This aspect of heroism was quite evident in King's life. He constandy envisioned
America as a work in progress, a nation constructed by the redemptive or de-
structive choices it would make about its moral and social future. In this regard,
King was quintessentially American, placing the notion of experiment and prag-
matic moral revisionism at the heart of his creed of American social life.


--- PAGE 321 ---
292 THE MICHAEL ERIC DYSON READER
The primary impact of King's life and career may consist in the clarity he
brought to the choices that Americans must make in "living out" the principal
ideals of the American creed, particularly as embodied in the Constitution and
the Declaration of Independence. King's genius and heroic stature derived from
his adroit skill at pointing out the disintegration of the American Dream and dra-
matically portraying the distance between American ideals of justice and equality
and its contradictory antidemocratic practices. But it was his willingness to die for
American ideals that made King so dangerous, because he forced America to ex-
amine itself with the instruments of equality, justice, and social morality America
claimed as its own. Because of this quality in King's leadership, we may concede
that "the possibility for heroism in our time will be tempered by the ideals we pro-
pose to ourselves—a thing proved in the heroic age of civil rights, when Dr. King
and many others suffered and died for the concept of equality we profess but have
not lived up to."9
Moreover, King's martyrdom also linked him to other American heroic figures,
like Abraham Lincoln and John and Robert Kennedy, whose deaths made them
the subjects of national memory through eulogies and memorials, and gained
them even greater status as the vehicles of American moral and social redemp-
tion. As Conrad Cherry perceptively notes in writing about Robert Kennedy's fu-
neral, and by extension other funerals of national significance:
In this funeral Americans joined in a sacred ceremony, the scope of which
crossed denominational religious boundaries. Many citizens had participated in
another such ceremony only a few weeks earlier at the funeral for Dr. Martin
Luther King Jr., and in still another only a few short years earlier at the funeral
for President John F. Kennedy. American history is, in fact, replete with leaders
who have been canonized in the national consciousness as exemplars of Ameri-
can ideals and as particular bearers of Americans' destiny under God. When
those leaders have met their deaths they have become, in the national memory
as well as in the ceremonies and speeches that surround their deaths, martyrs for
the American cause, even in some cases redeemers.10
Equally important, heroism often enables ordinary people to make a critical dif-
ference in their social and personal existence by linking their lives to larger social
goals and movements that embody the virtues to which they aspire. The ideals of
equality, justice, and freedom had for so long been uttered in public discourse and
written in the creeds of American society and had in varying degrees been real-
ized for particular segments of American culture. But freedom, equality, and jus-
tice often remained unrealized for many others, and King both envisioned how
these ideals could be enfleshed and boldly envisioned how enormous obstacles to
their realization could be overcome. In this scenario, the individual hero functions
as an enabler for a group of people to rise above their limiting circumstances and
participate in a drama of redemption, reconstruction, or transformation in which


--- PAGE 322 ---
Martin Luther King, Jr., and Ambiguous Heroism 293
their roles, however small, are perceived as necessary and vital. Thus I will speak
of this further when I discuss King's means of nonviolent transformation.
But the hero also looks to the group for insight and inspiration. Indeed, the
group often serves a heroic function itself, engaging in what Max Weber called so-
cial heroism:
Max Weber claimed that the Reformation and the attendant rise of capitalism
were the last examples of middle class heroism. He is not alluding by this to the
highly individualized gallantry of a John Wayne. Heroism for Weber is a social
act. It occurs when a group of people no longer simply stand up for the system,
but stand out against it. They critique the present and act to reclaim control over
the future. The bourgeoisie of the Reformation era changed the circumstances of
their existence and freed themselves from the dominance of aristocratic, social,
political, and economic structures.11
In this scenario, the hero often functions to recall great past deeds as the basis for
present and future action by masses of people. King understood this, and acted
on it.
But the prospect of King's heroism becomes more problematic as we reflect on
why he is presently being officially canonized, while near the end of his life he
was roundly dismissed as a hopeless romantic and an irrelevant idealist. What
was the real nature of King's achievements? In this section, I want to explore the
nature of King's genius, and then proceed to address two tensions that further
reinforce the ambiguity of King's heroism. Although King possessed many gifts, I
think his genius lay in his moral vision and the choice of nonviolent means in at-
tempting to achieve equality and real democracy for black Americans.
The idea that Martin Luther King was a man of moral vision raises questions
about the nature of moral arguments, the particular content of moral statements,
and the proper adjudication of competing moral claims. In our day, simply put,
morality has fallen on hard times. This difficulty, though, does not absolve us of
the responsibility to engage our every energy and resource in clarifying what we
mean by morality and advancing a moral vision. King was willing, and able, to
perform such a task. In fact, the historical conditions under which he and his
comrades labored elicited from King and the civil rights movement a moral vision
to guide and regulate its tasks and purposes.
Although King's moral vision may be variously conceived, I think, for my
present purposes, it may be helpfully viewed in the following two ways. First,
King's moral vision was not the work of one man; it expressed the hopes and as-
pirations of a long tradition of confrontation with and critical reflection upon the
existential and social circumstances of black people in America. King did not in-
vent or discover, but rather inherited, the imperative to rectify the evils of racism
and impoverishment embedded in the legal, social, political, economic, and reli-
gious structures of American society.


--- PAGE 323 ---
294 THE MICHAEL ERIC DYSON READER
King was the son, grandson, and great-grandson of Baptist preachers, so the
very texture of his life from birth was religious and spiritual. He was reared under
the powerful preaching of his father, the Rev. Martin Luther King Sr., pastor of
the Ebenezer Baptist Church of Atlanta, Georgia. Martin Luther King, Jr., at-
tended Morehouse College and came under the influence of, among others, die
late Dr. Benjamin Elijah Mays, president of Morehouse, and Dr. George Kelsey,
who is now professor emeritus at Drew University. These men, both scholar-
preachers, provided for King the paradigm of ministry as an intellectually re-
spectable, socially engaged, and emotionally satisfying vocation. At nineteen Mar-
tin was ordained to the ministry and became associate pastor of Ebenezer, and
later its co-pastor, after serving six years as the pastor of Dexter Avenue Baptist
Church in Montgomery, Alabama.
Given this background, King was firmly rooted in the institution that lies at the
heart of Afro-American life, the black church. Throughout their history religion
has been and remains the central ordering influence upon the vast majority of
Americans of African descent. Albert Raboteau, in his groundbreaking work on
the religion of Afro-American slaves, titled Slave Religion, writes,
Black religious institutions have been the foundation of Afro-American cul-
ture. An agency of social control, a source of economic cooperation, an arena for
political activity, a sponsor of education, and a refuge in a hostile white world,
the black church has been historically the social center of Afro-American life.12
From its inception the black church identified racism (whether embedded in
vicious slavery or embodied in white Christianity's segregationist ethos) as a
heinous sin, and resolved to make its extirpation a primary goal of the black
church's existence. The black church's message that all people are children of God
and that everyone deserves to be treated with decency and respect found ample ap-
plication in King's moral vision. The notion in the black church that God sides
with the oppressed, as God sided with Israel against Egyptian bondage, inspired
King's actions and was a central part of his moral vision, as reflected in his belief
that Afro-Americans had "cosmic companionship" in the struggle for liberation.
The Afro-American religious notion of loving and praying for one's enemies,
despite their decadence, hate, or brutality, had a strong affinity with the Gand-
hian philosophy of nonviolence as a teaching technique and lifestyle that King ar-
dently preached and assiduously practiced. The black church understanding that
all people, regardless of social standing, educational attainment, political sophisti-
cation, or cultural refinement, are equal heirs to God's promises found expression
in King's concept of the beloved community where black and white, rich and
poor, and powerful and powerless would be united in peace and harmony.
In these and many more significant ways King was organically linked to the liv-
ing tradition of Afro-American religion. One aspect of King's genius was his abil-
ity to project this profoundly Afro-American religious sensibility into the Ameri-


--- PAGE 324 ---
Martin Luther King, Jr., and Ambiguous Heroism 295
can sociopolitical ethos and employ it as a base from which to argue for and, to a
degree, effect social, political, and economic transformation.
This ability reflects the second characteristic of King's moral vision: it coun-
tered the narrow exclusivism of a vulgar patriotism and put forward a creative
reinterpretation of America's central political concepts and documents. King's
moral hermeneutic understood these concepts generally in relation to American
moral improvement and specifically in relation to Afro-American freedom and lib-
eration. In short, King appealed to the very documents that are central to Ameri-
can civil life—the Constitution, the Declaration of Independence—and pointed out
their basis for a moral understanding and interpretation of concepts like equality,
justice, and freedom. Furthermore, he employed these documents as a yardstick
to judge the actual attainment by American society of the goals, norms, and ideals
they articulated.
Not only does King's moral vision have a religious moment, but it extends it-
self into the national and civic realm, constituting its political moment. King's
moral vision was predicated upon, in part, what he understood to be the best in
American religious, civil, legal, social, and political history. He deemed his moral
vision to be commensurate with American historic and national goals set forth in
the Constitution and the Declaration of Independence, which help regulate Amer-
ican ideas about issues like freedom, justice, and equality.
In fact, in his famous "I Have a Dream" speech, King clearly stated that his
dream was "deeply rooted in the American dream."13 When King confronted the
massive and abusive legal, social, and political structures that thwarted the mate-
rialization of Afro-American freedom, justice, and equality in any concrete sense,
he appealed to these documents in calling for the realization of the norms and
ideals they espoused. King said in Washington, "I have a dream that one day this
nation will rise up and live out the true meaning of its creed, 'We hold these truths
to be self-evident that all men are created equal.'"14
King believed, despite the fact that black people were slaves when this creed
was written, that any fair-minded interpreter would be bound to enlarge its vision
of liberty and equality to include all people. The principles articulated in the Con-
stitution and the Declaration of Independence struck an authentic chord of truth
for King that could not be nullified even by the shortsightedness of their original
authors in regard to people of color. These documents provided a substantial
foundation for American society to accord all people the status of persons with
rights. King stated: "When the architects of our Republic wrote the magnificent
words of the Constitution and the Declaration of Independence, they were sign-
ing a promissory note to which every American was to fall heir. This note was the
promise that all men, yes black men as well as white men, would be guaranteed
the unalienable rights of life, liberty and the pursuit of happiness."15
King refused to permit the interpretation of democracy, liberty, justice, and
freedom to be monopolized by those who would truncate and distort the under-
standing of American history and ideals. King refused to allow either the overt


--- PAGE 325 ---
296 THE MICHAEL ERIC DYSON READER
barbarity of bigoted segregationists like the Ku Klux Klan and the White Citi-
zens' Council or the covert but no less pernicious racism of prejudiced politicians
to define democracy. On the rhetorical battleground of American public ideol-
ogy, King wrested from them the prerogative of describing and defining what is
audientically American, and in the process transformed the terms of American
political and civil discourse. Martin Luther King's moral vision, then, which was
rooted in Afro-American religion and which advanced a creative American
moral hermeneutic, was a powerful and often persuasive means for structuring a
protest movement to secure basic rights for black Americans.
Another way of accounting for King's heroic character and genius is his insis-
tence on militant nonviolence as the means of obtaining freedom, justice, and equal-
ity for black people. King's advocacy of militant nonviolence was important for two
interrelated reasons. First, it appealed to the African-American religious heritage of
black culture, while linking that heritage to other powerful models of resistance and
social transformation. Second, it presumed the heroic character of everyday black
folk to resist evil and located transformative agency within their grasp.
King's advocacy of nonviolence was deeply anchored in an African-American
religious ethic of love that promoted the fundamental dignity of all creatures be-
cause of their relationship to a loving, all-powerful God. As I have already indi-
cated, norms and values developed in the black church influenced King's theo-
logical ideals, but they also shaped his strategies of social reform and his beliefs
about human potential for progress and change. What is crucial for the African-
American religious ethic of love in relation to nonviolent means to attain social,
economic, and political freedom is that in King's world view, nonviolence was a
way of life and not simply a strategy of social transformation.
This distinction is key to understanding how King maintained a consistent moral
stance toward various forms of violence, including war and domestic policies that
reinforced poverty and classism. King saw nonviolent resistance to oppressive social
structures, policies, and persons as a means of acquiring basic necessities such as
food, clothing, and shelter, as well as being the only viable and ethically legitimate
way to obtain freedom, justice, and equality. Although the destruction of racism was
a major goal of African-American nonviolent resistance, it was only one goal of the
nonviolent lifestyle. As King matured politically, he began to expand his field of
moral vision to include classism, poverty, and militarism as legitimate objects of so-
cial protest. He believed that conceiving of nonviolence as both a lifestyle and a
means of resisting a variety of social and moral problems was consonant with the
affirmation of life, liberty, and equality in the black religious experience.
But King's advocacy of nonviolence was also the result of disciplined study of
its applications in a variety of national, social, and moral contexts. He examined
the principled resistance to taxpaying advocated by Henry David Thoreau, as
well as his seminal essay on civil disobedience. It is widely known that King also
diligently studied the principles, methods, and lifestyle of Mohandas Gandhi,
whose "experiments with truth" had a powerful impact on King's thinking.


--- PAGE 326 ---
Martin Luther King, Jr., and Ambiguous Heroism 297
Gandhi's leadership of millions of Indians to resist the systemic social oppression
of British colonialism inspired King to adapt Gandhi's methods of nonviolent re-
sistance to American society.
Second, King's advocacy of nonviolence presumed the heroic character of
everyday black people. Although this presumption contained romantic notions of
black self-identity, it also located forms of transformative agency within the grasp
of often powerless ordinary black folk. It is important to remember that at the be-
ginning of the civil rights movement the lot of everyday black people remained
even more circumscribed by the forces of segregation, race hatred, and class in-
equality from which the black middle class had only occasionally, and precari-
ously, escaped. The civil rights movement provided an enormous boost to the
self-identity of black people who had long believed that they were relatively pow-
erless to change their condition.
However, Cornel West points out that King's presumption that black people
could wield nonviolence as a means to social liberation contained a romantic no-
tion of superiority over other racial groups, particularly white Americans. West
also contends that King's doctrine of nonviolence
tends to assume tacitly that Afro-Americans have acquired, as a result of their
historical experience, a peculiar capacity to love their enemies, to endure pa-
tiently suffering, pain, and hardship and thereby "teach the white man how to
love" or "cure the white man of his sickness." King seemed to believe that Afro-
Americans possess a unique proclivity for nonviolence, more so than do other
racial groups, that they have a certain bent toward humility, meekness, and for-
bearance, hence are quite naturally disposed toward nonviolent action. In King's
broad overview, God is utilizing Afro-Americans—this community of caritas
(other-directed love)—to bring about "the blessed community." ... The self-image
fostered ... is defensive in character and romantic in content.16
While I think West's assessment is just, there is another dimension to King's as-
sumption that must not be overlooked: his belief in the moral heroism of black
people also assumed that the power to affect their destiny and to exercise trans-
formative moral agency was achievable by ordinary black folk. Like that of Mar-
cus Garvey before him and Malcolm X during his own day, the genius of King
resided in the ability to appeal to his followers' heroic potentials by placing strict
demands on their shoulders, challenging them to live up to a standard of moral
excellence that neither they nor their opponents realized they possessed. King be-
lieved that black people could muster the resources they already had at their dis-
posal, such as moral authority and a limited but significant economic base, to fos-
ter legitimate claims to social goods like education, housing, and enfranchisement.
Moreover, the standards of moral excellence that King expected through dis-
ciplined participation in nonviolent demonstrations, which included rites of self-
examination and purification, were of inestimable worth not only in fighting for


--- PAGE 327 ---
298 THE MICHAEL ERIC DYSON READER
denied social privileges and rights, but in the healthy enlargement of crucial nar-
ratives of racial self-esteem. King understood the virtues of "everyday forms of
resistance," and appealed to the "weapons of the weak" in opposing unjust social
forces.27
While the above discussion specifies how it makes sense to call King a hero, now
I want to explore two tensions that flow from the assertion of King's ambiguous
heroism, which may be summed up in the following way: while King's contribu-
tions were heroic and significant, many African-Americans, particularly the work-
ing poor and the underclass, still suffer in important ways; and while King de-
serves great honor and praise of a particular sort, he is indebted to traditions of
African-American religious protest, social criticism, and progressive democracy.
It must be conceded that despite the significant basic changes that King helped
bring about, the present status of poor black Americans in particular presents lit-
tle cause for celebration. Their situation does not mean that King's achievements
were not substantial. Rather it reflects the deep structures of persistent racism and
classism that have not yet yielded to sustained levels of protest and resistance.
In order to judge King's career, we must imagine what American society would
be for blacks without his historic achievements. Without basic rights to vote, de-
segregated public transportation and accommodations, equal housing legislation,
and the like, American society would more radically reflect what Gunnar Myrdal
termed the "American Dilemma." King and other participants in the civil rights
movement wrought heroic change, but that change was a partial movement to-
ward real liberation.
If it was once believed that King's vision was only a beginning, a mere foot in
the door of civil rights, political empowerment, and economic equality, the tragic
reality now is that the door has been shut fast in the face of many Afro-
Americans. This is displayed particularly in two areas: the persistence of racism
and the disintegration of postindustrial urban life.
It is fair to say that a climate of hostility has been generated toward those who
assert that this country has not achieved the ideals of freedom, justice, and equal-
ity in any significant structural manner, as envisioned by the mature Martin
Luther King Jr. The early Martin Luther King was preoccupied with securing in-
clusion in American society as it is, without questioning the means by which
wealth is distributed; without probing the mechanisms that determine privilege,
prestige, and status; and without challenging the growing classism that shattered
the notion of a monolithic black community.
The mature Martin Luther Kingjr., however, understood that economic injus-
tice was just as great an impediment to black liberation as racial injustice. As I will
show later, King's mature career was spent in attempting to draw out the implica-
tions of a coalition politics that transcended race to speak of economic injustice
and class oppression. His Poor People's March was the first real attempt to enact
a coalition politics that bound together the interests of various marginalized
groups, including Latinos, poor blacks and whites, and peace activists.


--- PAGE 328 ---
Martin Luther King, Jr., and Ambiguous Heroism 299
Part of King's great frustration resulted from the fact that racism was much
more complex and multifaceted than he realized at the beginning of his career,
and he sought to educate himself and his colleagues about the structural, socially
embedded nature of institutional racism and the structural nature of class oppres-
sion. This accounts in part for how we can claim that King's contributions were
heroic while acknowledging that they were neither perfect nor permanent. Some
of the gains King helped secure were structurally permanent, such as legally de-
segregated public housing and transportation. Other gains must be continually
ratified by law, such as the civil rights bill, which must be renegotiated through
legislation. Moreover, the logic of racial progress is subject to perennial reexami-
nation and justification.
The project to make King a particular sort of hero has often presented a picture
of completion and satisfaction with regard to the structural obstacles to African-
American racial progress. However, a suggestive and subversive side of King's
heroism views him as an iconic figure who inspires continued battle to implement
the goals and dreams for which he gave his life. It is consistent to suggest that al-
though the general perception of blacks has changed, the actual legal barriers to
social mobility have been removed, and particular categories of blacks have made
substantial gains economically, King's life equally symbolizes the continued battle
for the truly disadvantaged, the ghetto poor. It is heroic in a distinctly Kingian
sense to resist official efforts at King canonization that both whitewash actual
racial history and deny the work that remains, and to support the belief that much
more progress must be made before real liberation can be achieved.
To suggest this, however, is to counter the self-image of the reigning political
view of things that is the framework of contemporary conservative and liberal
American sociopolitical ideology. Conservative political thought as construed
here maintains that the struggle for black self-determination is largely over and
that sufficient energy has been devoted to the eradication of racism in American
life. Liberal political thought, even when it acknowledges the continuing expres-
sion of certain forms of racial and economic inequality, rarely effectively examines
the reasons for their malignant persistence.
The predominant political ideology shrinks space for radical dissent and mar-
ginalizes, absorbs, or excludes voices asserting that the American condition is in
terrible disarray. In short, the ideological horizon and sociopolitical landscape
have been dominated by conservative and liberal visions that constitute political
realism, effectively preventing radical alternatives to their often mundane and
pedestrian achievements.
Conservative ideology and politics have the effect of both offering limited and
narrowly conceived options to Afro-American suffering and ensuring the contin-
ued hegemony of white, upper-middle-class politics. Liberal alternatives, while cer-
tainly an improvement, are nevertheless plagued by an inability to move beyond a
provincial vision of what economic and political measures are necessary to better
Afro-American life. Liberalism attends to symptoms rather than to root causes.


--- PAGE 329 ---
300 THE MICHAEL ERIC DYSON READER
The tragic reality of the Afro-American condition is that, while in many re-
spects blacks are certainly better off, in other respects many blacks continue to
suffer. For instance, the disintegration of the moral, economic, and civic fabric of
poor black communities is stunning and entails lethal social consequences. The
arising of a subculture of crime, which thrives on the political economy of crack,
is threatening to destroy the inner city. Also the gentrification of black urban liv-
ing space means that inner-city residents are being squeezed out of marginal
neighborhoods by an escalating tax rate that forces the working poor into even
poorer neighborhoods.
Poverty, for example, affects black people in an especially pernicious manner.
Since the 1970s, there has been an enormous increase in poverty in America. In
1970, 14.9 percent of all children were poor. Today the figure is almost 21 percent.
For minorities, it is even worse. Two out of every five Hispanic children are poor,
and almost one out of every two black children is poor. For black children under
six, the poverty rate is a record high 51.1 percent. There is a continually widen-
ing gap between the wealthy and the poor in America, and this year it is the high-
est ever since the Census Bureau began collecting statistics in 1947. Last year, two-
fifths of the population received 67 percent of all national income, the highest ever
recorded. The poorest two-fifths, on the other hand, received only 15.7 percent of
all income, the lowest ever recorded. Even worse, one-third of all black America
remains below the poverty line.18
Another factor that has contributed to the current condition of black America for
the better part of the eighties is the legacy of the Reagan era. The Reagan adminis-
tration symbolized, and ominously expressed, a new breed of racism, generating
policies pervaded by subtle forms of discrimination and prejudice that have had a
devastating impact on black America. The Reagan administration's laissez-faire at-
titude toward the enforcement of laws and governmental policies that protect mi-
norities and its outright attack on the hard-won rights of America's poor and dis-
possessed helped set the tone for an almost unmitigated viciousness toward these
groups.19 The Reagan years have fueled a subversive shift in the modus operandi of
American racism. Often no longer able to openly express racial hatred through bar-
baric deeds, racists have found subtle and insidious forms of expression.
This racism not only is evident in upper-middle-class America, with its
staunchly conservative values and sensibilities that problematize Afro-American
progress, and in the white working and underclass, with its tightly turfed com-
munities that cling to racial and ethnic identification as a means of exclusion and
survival (e.g., Howard Beach and Bensonhurst) ;20 but it also has, in a cruelly
ironic twist, engendered a new reactionary group of black neoconservative politi-
cal and intellectual figures. This group rejects civil rights as a means to black
progress and naively contends that such measures as affirmative action cripple
rather than aid black freedom by creating negative stereotypes about inferior
black performance in education and employment. All of this suggests the deep di-
mensions of our current crisis.


--- PAGE 330 ---
Martin Luther King, Jr., and Ambiguous Heroism 301
The second tension in regard to King's heroism rests on the fact that, although
his achievements merit praise and honor, those accomplishments are related to a
larger tradition of African-American protest, as well as traditions of liberal de-
mocracy. For instance, the King Holiday reminds us that by celebrating King's
life, and career in particular, America celebrates the profound accomplishments of
black America in general. This recognition offers to American intellectual life the
vital resources of a living Afro-American intellectual tradition that can continue to
inform, challenge, and even transform American discourse about race, class, jus-
tice, freedom, and equality. More specifically, since, as I have stated above, King's
life was developed and shaped in the ethos of a black church worldview and since
the locus classicus of his moral vision was the Afro-American religious experi-
ence, our attention is redirected back to that experience as a crucial resource for
the maintenance and extension of King's moral vision, in alliance with other pro-
gressive sociopolitical, historical, and economic thought.
Indeed, the notion that King himself was the producer, not the product, and the
cause, not the effect, of Afro-American liberation potentials that had been long la-
tent, and at times vitally visible, in the fabric of our national experience is entirely
alien to King's thought. Although he believed historical forces, under the direction
of a demanding but loving providence, had arranged his ascension to a leadership
position, he always believed that he articulated what many black people thought,
knew, and held to be true. King obviously understood that he was the voice for a
protest movement that had been growing for a long while and that had finally
gathered the strength to resist the cumulative evils visited upon black people by the
apartheid-like conditions in the American South. In fact, in speaking about the ex-
perience that initially catapulted him into international fame, King wrote:
When I went to Montgomery, Alabama, as a pastor in 1954, I had not the
slightest idea that I would later become involved in a crisis in which nonviolent
resistance would be applicable. After I had lived in the community about a year,
the bus boycott began. The Negro people of Montgomery, exhausted by the hu-
miliating experiences that they had constantly faced on the buses, expressed in a
massive act of noncooperation their determination to be free. They came to see
that it was ultimately more honorable to walk the streets in dignity than ride the
buses in humiliation. At the beginning of the protest the people called on me to
serve as their spokesman.21
The recognition that King was part of a larger tradition disallows America to
escape its obligation to those King represented by relegating his thought to the
fixed and static past. Instead, it forces America to critically engage and constantly
examine the dynamic contemporary expressions of the thought and practices
emerging from the tradition that birthed and buttressed King.
Furthermore, the need for a reinvigorated moral vision can only be immediately
strengthened by portraying the explicit relationship among King, the civil rights


--- PAGE 331 ---
302 THE MICHAEL ERIC DYSON READER
movement, and the most recent and powerful popular expression of the Afro-
American intellectual and religious tradition: the Jackson campaigns for president.
No honest and complete assessment of the movements and forces made possible
by King's and his comrades' achievements can be performed without mention of
the Jackson candidacy. The Jackson campaigns, which have already in a funda-
mental way transformed the shape and contours of modern American politics,
were made possible by a host of historical ingredients, not the least of which was
the tradition of sociopolitical insurgency stimulated by the Afro-American religious
tradition and the civil rights movement.
The Jackson campaigns in part enact a profound transformation in the ideas we
inherit from the mature Martin Luther King. They underscore the need for a
transition from an initial emphasis on civil rights to an appreciation of issues of
class and economic inequality.22 Thus the relationship between King and Jackson,
as participants in the same tradition and in active pursuit of the goals of economic
empowerment, racial harmony, and universal justice, regulated by a vision devel-
oped in an Afro-American religious perspective, must not be lost as we celebrate
King's birthday.
Indeed, as we celebrate his birthday we must exercise extreme caution in re-
trieving images of King, especially those that avoid the painful truth of recent rev-
elations about King's character. The latter includes charges that King plagiarized
portions of his dissertation, that he was a womanizer, and that he possibly physi-
cally abused a woman the night before his death. In the face of these revelations,
how can we proceed celebrating King's life?
First, it is important to remember that the celebration of King's achievements is
not predicated upon a notion of human perfection. Before these revelations, it was
well known that King was a great but flawed human being. He admitted on sev-
eral occasions his own guilt over sexual indiscretions and pledged to remedy his
infidelity with all the strength to resist temptation that lay in him. King's obvious
recognition of his finitude and limitation serve as a worthy model of emulation for
us as we seek to celebrate his moral legacy of protest for civil and social rights.
But his legacy of self-examination, admission of fault, and the attempt to con-
cretely rectify the wrong, even if it is not always successfully done, is a model we
can usefully incorporate as responsible and mature moral agents.
Second, the charges of King's alleged plagiarism are disturbing and inexcusable.
To use someone else's written work without proper recitation is a form of verbal
thievery. This painful truth, however, forces us to raise even more questions about
why it occurred. Since we cannot question King, we can only surmise, infer, and
speculate. King's dissertation was completed while he was pastoring his first
church in Montgomery and during the beginning of the Montgomery bus boycott.
Undoubtedly, the pressures of the burgeoning movement tempted King to plagia-
rize Jack Boozer's dissertation in order to complete his own doctoral studies.
Moreover, although many black scholars had passed through Boston Univer-
sity's doctoral program in religion, one peculiar and tragic legacy of racism in-


--- PAGE 332 ---
Martin Luther King, Jr., and Ambiguous Heroism 303
volved the pernicious self-doubts that could have plagued any developing black
scholar. Qualities of self-worth, competence, talent, and skill are not developed in
a vacuum, but are in part socially constructed and reproduced. In the mid-fifties it
is certainly conceivable that a young talented black doctoral student who was un-
certain of his real worth, despite the encouragement of professors and colleagues,
and who was faced with an unpredictable and unfolding social crisis, could be
tempted to rely on work that had already been accepted and viewed as competent.
The best approach to these charges, as well as charges about King's possible
physical abuse, can be made by developing a healthy and realistic framework of
assessment of King's life and career that will remain consistent even in the event
of other revelations about his person and character. The power of King's achieve-
ments, the real force of his genius, consisted in his passion for justice to be done
for the most lowly and oppressed inhabitants of American society. His moral au-
thority as a spokesperson for truth, equality, and the embodiment of a particular
slant on the American Dream cannot be compromised by revelations about his
personal and student life.
What these revelations do achieve, however, is a sad reminder of the forces of
wrong and dishonor by which we are all subject to be tempted and corrupted.
King serves as a reminder that no figure establishes an Archimedean point of
moral perfection from which to argue for social change, that all argument for
transformation is immanent criticism rooted in the faults and limitations of being
human, but those limitations do not ultimately destroy the truth for which limited
and faulty humans stand. Although the vehicle for that truth is tarnished, enough
of the truth's power and persuasion can emerge to convince others of its necessity
and worth. We must view King in such a realistic fashion. These revelations show
that King was an enormously complex human being, confirming what we know
of him as we study his ideological evolutions and his political maturation.
As has been much remarked on, toward the end of his life King began to dis-
cern inadequacies in his former analyses of racial antipathy, social injustice, and
economic inequality. He discovered that these problems were much more deeply
rooted and structurally expressed than he had initially surmised.
As a result he focused his considerable critical skills on the larger national and
international economic, political, and social contexts of Afro-Americans', and
other oppressed people's, plight. King began to speak about the redistribution of
resources, guaranteed incomes for the poor, and forming a multiracial coalition
of the unemployed and the poor. This signified his changing perspective. In an
article written just before his assassination and published after it, King wrote:
We call our demonstration a campaign for jobs and income because we feel
that the economic question is the most crucial that black people, and poor peo-
ple generally, are confronting .... We need an economic bill of rights. This
would guarantee a job to all people who want to work and are able to work. It
would also guarantee an income for all who are not able to work .... I hope that


--- PAGE 333 ---
304 THE MICHAEL ERIC DYSON READER
a specific number of jobs is set forth, that a program will emerge to abolish un-
employment, and that there will be another program to supplement the income
of those whose earnings are below the poverty level.23
King had already begun to speak out against the war in Vietnam, decrying the
lamentable manner in which resources for the poor were being pilfered by an ever
increasing war chest. He was criticized within the civil rights movement for
squandering its social influence and political capital with the Johnson administra-
tion. He was attacked outside the movement for delving, even "meddling," into
larger domestic and foreign affairs that were not the legitimate concern of a civil
rights leader.
King's moral vision, however, could not abide the spurious schizophrenia that
compartmentalized moral concern into distinct and separable spheres. Morality
was of a piece to King, and his moral vision was integrated and unified. The
whole of life fell under its searching purview and rigorous scrutiny. King's later ef-
forts to unite poor blacks, whites, and other minorities, as well as labor and other
progressive concerns, marked him as a highly dangerous man who was greatly
feared in many governmental, political, and social quarters.
These facts must be recalled as we engage in the rituals of remembrance and
rites of recovery of the meaning of King's moral vision. We must refuse those
who would commodify King's career into acceptable packages of comfortable,
and not dangerous, memory, to be consumed by the American public in the name
of a mythologization project intent on subverting King's radical and disturbing
memory. In short, we must engage in hermeneutical combat and interpretive war-
fare over the future of King's memory, making certain that the custodians of the
King canon include and remember his provocative words and oppositional ideas,
as well as his comforting thoughts and hopeful beliefs. Martin Luther King, Jr.,
was a man who possessed a profound moral vision that was rooted in the Afro-
American religious experience and that advanced a creative American moral
hermeneutic. Remembering his life and thought challenges us to examine the
present condition of American moral life and discover it wanting in regard to its
treatment of those King represented: the black, the poor, and the oppressed.
Construed in the above manner, King's birthday serves as an outpost in pro-
gressive terrain, creating space in which to collect the energies of protest and
struggle as they are related to the visionary revival and recovery of the moral tra-
dition within which King lived and labored. King Day can facilitate a broadly
conceived coalition of the oppressed and suffering who have a desperate interest
in recovering the symbol and substance of King's moral vision.
Celebrating Martin Luther King's birthday as an official holiday promises a
poignant and profound change in the rhythm of public rituals commemorating
events of ultimate national and historical significance. King Day structures in the
recurring cycle of American holidays a period of time that concentrates attention
upon the meaning of King's life and thought. It also extends beyond King, tran-


--- PAGE 334 ---
Martin Luther King, Jr., and Ambiguous Heroism 305
scending his personal and individual meaning, and celebrates the ingenuity of
black survival in an American political, social, and cultural ethos often inimical to
Afro-American existence.
King Day also points us back to that Afro-American religious tradition that pro-
duced King and that continues to thrive in the midst of American religious, social,
and political life. It also provides a means of reconstituting King's moral vision by
challenging us each year to more closely approximate in our national and indi-
vidual life and thought the goals and purposes for which he gave his life. In this
sense, the name Martin Luther King, Jr., no longer merely represents the time and
place of his life and body on eardi, but symbolizes the hope of oppressed people
everywhere that the dignity and worth of human life will be universally respected
and uplifted.


--- PAGE 335 ---
Twenty- Tw o
"GIVE ME A PAPER AND PEN
TUPAC'S PLACE IN HIP-HOP
The death of Tupac Shakur also hit me hard. I had been a fan of his political thug
gnosticism, even as I had been critical of his occasionally harsh treatment of women in his
songs and his will to self-destruction. I found his brutal honesty refreshing, and his
intellectual engagement with the most pressing social issues of the day through his lyrics a
cause for wonder and broad celebration. After all, Tupac was a high school dropout. But
he read widely and voraciously, and his work stands head and shoulders above that of
most of his peers. I was attracted to Tupac because he is the perfect embodiment of his
generation's virtues—the desire to tell the truth, the love for poor blacks, the quest for
authenticity—and its peculiar troubles, including a romance with social carnage, the
worship of tribal social deities in mystified geographies of "East Coast" and "West
Coast" and the bloody investment in a painfully narrow view of blackness. Above all,
Tupac is at once what we hope for and pray against in every black man. In this chapter,
I evaluate how Tupac became the most influential rapper of our time. He was an artist
consumed with telling his story, and by extension, the story of millions of black youth,
with as muchjire and force as he could summon from the short twenty-Jive years that
were his. Considering that he has released and sold more albums dead than alive, his
genius will not soon be extinguished in the cultural landscape.
WHEN I VISITED WITH EASTSIDAZ RAPPER Big Tray Dee, he surprised me
with his frank discussion of his fallen colleague's art. "I'm real critical and skepti-
cal about lyrics or what people say and how they put it from an artistic stand-
point," Dee says. "It would be maybe like thirty percent of Tupac's songs that I
wouldn't really feel all the time. I would be like, 'That's all right.'" Dee speaks of
Tupac's method of creation, highlighting in the process what made him such a big
force in hip-hop. "But [his songs] wound up in my head because they would grow
on me, and I would see where he was coming from. I had to get that feeling or be
in that mood to really relate to what he was saying at that particular time, on that
particular song. He showed me how he created music through his heart and
through his spirit, showing me that you have to have a certain vibe and continu-
ity. You are not going to appeal to everybody."


--- PAGE 336 ---
Tupac's Place in Hip-Hop 307
Dee's comments underscore a crucial paradox: Tupac's art as a hip-hop emcee
was an acquired taste among the genre's cognoscente, even as the masses em-
braced him through huge record sales and he gained international notoriety as a
symbol of rap's fortunes and follies. Tupac was not hip-hop's most gifted emcee
by any of the criteria that define the form's artistic apotheosis. He did not, for in-
stance, possess the effortless rhythmic patterns of Snoop Dogg, the formidable
timing and breath control of the incomparable KRS ONE, the poetic intensity of
Rakim, the deft political rage of Chuck D, the forceful enunciation of M. C.
Lyte, or the novelistic descriptions and sly cadences of Notorious B.I.G.—the
"mathematician of flow," according to hip-hop luminary Mos Def. Still, Tupac
may be the most influential and compelling rapper of them all. It is not that
Tupac lacked supreme talent in writing lyrics, composing dramatic stories, and
manipulating his voice to haunting effect. But he was more than the sum of his
artistic parts. A considerable measure of Tupac's cultural heft was certainly ex-
tramusical, especially his well-publicized clashes with the law and his shamanis-
tic thespian efforts. Above all, Tupac was a transcendent force of creative fury
who relentlessly articulated a generation's defining moods-its confusion and
pain, its nobility and courage, its loves and hates, its hopelessness and self-
destruction. He was the Zeitgeist in sagging jeans.
"I wasn't a big Pac fan when he was out," Mos Def lets on. "But I'll tell you
why people loved him: because you knew him." Tupac was easy to know be-
cause he was the ghetto's everyman, embodying in his art the horrors and plea-
sures that came to millions of others who were in many ways just like him—
except they lacked his protean genius and a microphone to amplify tragedy and
triumph. Despite being pegged a "gangsta rapper," Tupac ranged freely over the
lyrical landscape of hip-hop, pursuing themes that bled through a number of
rap's subgenres, among them conscious rap, political hip-hop, party music, he-
donism rap, thug rap, and ghettocentric rap. Tupac was equally adept at several
modes of address within hip-hop, from the dis rap ("Hit 'Em Up") to the hip-
hop eulogy ("Life Goes On"), from the maternal missive ("Dear Mama") to the
pastoral letter ("Keep Ya Head Up"). There is something fiercely eloquent and
haunting about Tupac's accomplished baritone: Its regal, distinct register vi-
brated directly to the heart and gave him an intimacy and immediacy of com-
munication that are virtually unrivaled in hip-hop. If one were confined to a
desert island with the choice of taking only one artist to capture rap's range of
expression, Tupac could hardly be surpassed. Tupac's genius can be understood
only by tracing the contours of contemporary rap and placing him within its
rapidly expanding boundaries.
Hip-hop culture has come a long way since its fledgling start in the late 1970s.
Early hip-hoppers were largely anonymous and could barely afford the sound sys-
tems on which the genre is built. By contrast, contemporary artists reap lucrative
contracts, designer clothing lines, glossy magazine spreads, fashionable awards,


--- PAGE 337 ---
308 THE MICHAEL ERIC DYSON READER
global recognition, and often the resentment of their hip-hop elders. If there is a
dominant perception about today's rap superstars among hip-hop's purists, it is
that they have squandered the franchise by being obsessed with shaking derrieres,
platinum jewelry, fine alcohol, premium weed, pimp culture, gangster rituals, and
thug life. Although hip-hop has succeeded far beyond the Bronx of its birth, it has,
in the minds of some of its most ardent guardians, lost its soul. To paraphrase an
ingenious storyteller whose haunting tales elevated and examined the poor-
Charles Dickens-these are for hip-hop the best of times and the worst of times. In
his embattled soul, Tupac embodied both.1
Contemporary rap is filled with stirring reminders of why the marriage of the
spoken word to music has revolutionized black culture. Figures like Lauryn Hill,
Common, Mos Def, Talib Kweli, and Bahamadia generate black noise to spur
the eruption of social conscience. Gifted wordsmiths like Jay-Z, Nas, DMX, and
the assorted rappers of the Wu-Tang Clan use their pavement poetry to probe
urban existence in gripping detail. But there is still strong criticism of rap's mu-
sical vampirism and its dulling repetitiousness. Those who claim the mastery of
instruments through the production of original music is the only mark of gen-
uine artistry offer the first criticism. Such purists ignore the severely depleted
funding of arts in public schools since the late 1970s, a fateful development that
kept many inner-city students from learning to play musical instruments. The
critics also overlook the virtuosity implied in the technical manipulation of exist-
ing sounds to create new music. Although hip-hop was vulnerable to the claim
that it lacked original music at its birth, Tupac was fortunate to have producers
who gave melody to his rage. The sounds that bathed his beautiful baritone were
often striking. "I loved the kind of tracks that were put together for him to rap
over," says contemporary jazz musician George Duke. "They had a lot of the old-
school vibe in there. I thought what he did was interesting in terms of the
chords. It just felt like something I could play over." Moreover, the fact that so
many rappers repeat tired formulas that have been successful for other artists
cannot possibly distinguish rap from, say, contemporary rhythm and blues or
rock music. And neither can the gutless, uninspiring imitation on which too
many raps thrive be said to be unique to hip-hop. After all, contemporary Amer-
ican classical music and smooth jazz—a misnomer worth fighting over, according
to jazz purists-do the same.
To be sure, there are more serious criticisms of hip-hop. It is easy to understand
the elements of rap that provoke consternation: its violence, its sexual saturation,
its recycling of vicious stereotypes, its color-coded preference for light or nonblack
women, its failure to engage politics, its selling out to corporate capitalism, and its
downright ugly hatred of women. Tupac has come to symbolize the blights on
hip-hop's troubled soul. His self-destructive behavior and premature death in-
spired a great deal of hand-wringing over hip-hop's influence on black youth. Un-
fortunately, many critics divide the wheat from the chaff in hip-hop by separating


--- PAGE 338 ---
Tupac's Place in Hip-Hop 309
rap into its positive and negative expressions. That distinction often ignores the
complexity of hip-hop culture and downplays rap's artistic motivations. Instead,
rap is read flatly, transmuted into a sociological phenomenon of limited cultural
value. Rap is viewed as a barometer of what ails black youth. It is apparent that a
great deal of bitterness and anger clutter the disputes between rap's advocates and
its critics. It is equally obvious that black youth are under attack from many quar-
ters of our culture. In hip-hop, as with most youth music, that is nothing new. "All
art created by young people is despised by adults," says Toni Morrison. "Whether
it's Mozart or Louis Armstrong, if it's young, it always has to fight.... And what
shakes out of that, of course, becomes the best." From its origins, rap music was
dismissed or denigrated, even by blacks. The point here is not to berate blacks for
missing the boat on what has turned out to be one of the most popular, creative,
and commercially viable art forms in many decades. I am simply suggesting that
there was a love-hate relation between many black folk and hip-hop culture long
before Tupac and long before rap's controversial headlines, its tragic deaths, and
its worldwide influence.
Early seeds of suspicion have often bloomed into outright rejection of hip-hop
as a vital source of art and imagination for black youth. That is why black wags
of every stripe have stepped up to denounce the music as misguided, poisonous,
and inauthentic, since music that gyrates into the spotlight has little truck with the
revolutionary thrust of, say, Gil Scott-Heron or the Last Poets. In other words,
hip-hop is not really black music. On such a view, hip-hop is but the seductive
corporate packaging of the vicious stereotypes black folk have tried to defeat since
our ancestors were uprooted and brought to America in chains. Except now, crit-
ics of hip-hop claim, the chains that bind us are more mental and psychological
than physical. And the great-great-great-grandchildren of slaves who fought to be
free and who hoped that their seed would escape rather than embrace enslave-
ment create the images that destroy our standing in society. "Thanks to music
videos, the image people all over the world now have of African Americans is of
violence-prone misogynists, preoccupied with promiscuous sex and conspicuous
consumption," says writer Khephra Burns. "Despite years of striving to distance
ourselves from the negative ways in which white folk once portrayed us, we have
come at last to the point of portraying ourselves to the world in this way." Stanley
Crouch sees an even more sinister effect of the relentlessly negative and stereo-
typical portrayal of blacks. "You can talk to people who have traveled around the
world, and they'll tell you the contempt that has developed for black people over
the last twenty years is mightily imposing," he says. "You and I might have a com-
pletely different experience, but if we were in our early twenties, that's another vi-
bration. People would say, 'Uh-oh, here they come,' and people would be suspi-
cious and cross the street. That's going on all over the world."
Burns and Grouch make powerful arguments about the lethal consequences
of flooding the airwaves and video screen with self-defeating visions of black life.


--- PAGE 339 ---
310 THE MICHAEL ERIC DYSON READER
There is little doubt that the effect is exactly as they describe it, with the caveat,
however, that the global portrayal of black life surely cannot rest on the images or
words of barely postadolescent entertainers. This is not to deny that a single
video by a rap artist can more successfully shred international boundaries than a
hundred books by righteous authors. Neither is it to deny the huge responsibility
such artists bear in confirming or combating hateful and ignorant beliefs about
black folk that circulate around the globe. But that is just it: These beliefs are part
of the ancient legacies of colonialism, racism, and regionalism, legacies that per-
sist despite the efforts of intellectuals, ardsts, and leaders to destroy them. Is it fair
to expect DMX to achieve what W E.B. Du Bois could not, or for Tupac to suc-
ceed where Archbishop Tutu failed? The complex relationship between art and
social responsibility is evident, but we must be careful not to place unrealistic, or
even unjust, demands on the backs of artists. Their extraordinary influence can-
not be denied, but the very argument that is often used against them—that they
are not politicians, leaders, or policymakers, just entertainers who string together
lines of poetic meter—is often conveniently forgotten when it might work to hip-
hoppers' advantage.
This recognition does not discount the troubling manifestations of youth cul-
ture that merit consideration. One such instance is Tupac's vigorous embrace of
"thug life." In the interview taped in 1995 when he was in prison, Tupac ex-
plained that "it's not an image; it's just a way of life; it's a mentality." He claims
that thug life is "a stage that we all go through. It's just like that for white kids and
rich kids. They get to go to the military academy or ROTC, or they take all the
risk, energy, and put it into the armed forces. And for a young black male, Puerto
Rican, or Hispanic person, you've got to put this in the streets; that's where our
energies go." Speaking of his thug life mentality, Tupac says, "The way I was liv-
ing and my mentality was a part of my progression to be a man." In outtakes from
an interview he did with Snoop Dogg for MTV, Tupac clarifies what he means by
"thug life." "It's not thugging like I'm robbing people, 'cause that's not what I'm
doing," Tupac said. "I mean like I'm not scared to say how I feel. Part of being
[a thug] is to stand up for your responsibilities and say this is what I do even
though I know people are going to hate me and say, 'It's so politically un-correct,'
and 'How could you make black people look like that? Do you know how buf-
foonish you all look with money and girls and all of that?' That's what I want to
do. I want to be real with myself." Tupac's thug life mentor, West Coast rapper
Big Syke, eloquently and simply defined for me "thug" and "outlaw," another
word Tupac embraced and transformed. "I call thugs the nobodies," Syke says,
"because we really don't have nobody to help us but us. And then outlaw is being
black and minority. Period."
In a conversation with cultural critic Vijay Prashad, I learned a great deal more
about the complex roots of thug. "It's very clear that the word 'thuggee' is a north
Indian word," Prashad tells me. "Probably from Murati, from western India, but


--- PAGE 340 ---
Tupac's Place in Hip-Hop 311
it's not clear." A British man by the name of General Sleeman made it his mission
to eradicate thugs in India. During the early years of the British Empire, there was
an increase in the trade of bullion, and brigands roamed the countryside robbing
merchants and stealing revenue transactions. Sleeman claimed these thugs were
the disciples of the goddess Kali. The thugs used to attach themselves to merchant
caravans, claiming to have some talent, like cooking or preparing drinks. They
would often drug the merchants and then strangle them with a handkerchief
called a rumal, leaving a mark on the necks of the victims. Prashad conjectures
that there are three possible ways the word entered the United States. "The easi-
est way is that Sleeman's work was well-known in the U.S.," Prashad says. Slee-
man authored a popular nonfiction account of India. But this was mainly to the
white mainstream. Prashad thinks the word may have reached black audiences
through excerpts in the Colored American and other newspapers that were tied in
some way to the black church, as the black religious press was deeply interested
in India. The third way is through the Caribbean, since there was a large transit
of people from eastern India coming into the Caribbean after the 1840s. Given
the strong link between black and eastern Indian religions-between Rastafarian-
ism and Shavism, the worship of Shaiva—there were also cultural exchanges, with
"thug" passing into the Caribbean lexicon.2
In light of the heavy Caribbean influence on the development of rap—its found-
ing light, D. J. Kool Herc, emigrated from the Caribbean to the Bronx, where he
transplanted West Indian outdoors parties to the backyards of his American
neighborhood—the word "thug" has a specific resonance in black popular culture.
"It sounds perfect, in musical terms," Prashad says. "It is better than gangster,
which puts you too much in the lineage of the Mafia. This is an alternative kind
of thug; it's 'our' kind of thug. It's a unique word; it is known and not known at
the same time. It has a flavor to it." When I tell Prashad that Tupac had actually
made an acronym of "thug life" ("the hate you gave little infants fucks every-
one"), he is in full agreement with the rapper's forcefully subjective interpretation.
"It is beautiful, because the word, even though it is an indigenous word to these
fellows who were out there to begin with, means the 'hate you gave.' After all, it's
the currency transactions that begin because of the empire's influence that will
bring the brigands. There is truth there." Prashad ends our conversation by telling
me of his experience with some African-Caribbean and African-American youth.
They were sitting on his porch when one of them said, "I'm thugged out." It
caught Prashad's attention. "I remember having a chat with them, saying, 'Do
you know this word? It's familiar to me."' The youth were making fun of
Prashad's eastern Indian accent, and as a result Prashad and the students began
"playing around with words and language." Prashad gave them a brief history of
the word they were using, the word that bound at least three cultures together.
"They found it fascinating, the story I told them, and we had this interchange,
and I said, 'We are inside each other.'"3


--- PAGE 341 ---
312 THE MICHAEL ERIC DYSON READER
Toni Morrison, too, has "respect for the genre, because of what it does with
language." Morrison is not oblivious to the "bad influence" of "people who are
driving [rap] to make it sensational," but she understands the crucial role to
youth of an art form that transmits important information. "It is a conversation
among and between black youth from one part of the country to another: 'What
is it like in Detroit, as opposed to L.A., as opposed to New York?'" Morrison's
view of hip-hop is admirably international, giving her an appreciation of the
genre's inspiring, and subversive, global reach. 'Just seeing what happened to it
in Europe is astonishing," Morrison told me. "When I was in Frankfurt-the cen-
ter of rap music in Germany—I got some unbelievable rap discs from a Turkish
girl who was singing in German." Morrison argues that what unifies hip-hop
throughout the world is its emergence from "the 'others' within the empire"—for
instance, the Turks in Germany and the Algerians and North Africans in
France-who ring profound changes in the nation's discourse. "First of all,
they're changing the language, although nobody admits it," she says. "But that's
where the energy comes from .... It is the necessity for young people to talk to
one another in language that is not the fake language of the press. That sort of
conversation curtails thought altogether. So it is a dialogue." But Morrison does
not neglect the essential musical element that frames the use of language. "The
fact that it also is the music you can't sit down to—you really do get up—is what
has made it so fetching." Morrison is, of course, completely aware of the contro-
versial subject matters broached in hip-hop. "It is always up for grabs about sex-
uality and violence," she says. Morrison argues that the establishment accepts
such discourse only when "it's separate, like when Shakespeare does it, or
Chaucer, or Boccaccio—those are the most outrageously provocative stories and
language in the Decameron. They say they want safe language, but that's just the
way the establishment is: It [rap discourse] wouldn't be outlawed or policed un-
less it had that quality." As a parting thought, Morrison raises an intriguing ques-
tion—humorously, to be sure, as she chuckles all the way through it, but, as is
evident, it seizes me by the pen. "Are there any other groups of gangsters or rob-
bers or whatever you want to call them who made music? The whole notion of
making an art form while you're doing it is . . ." Before she can finish, we're both
cracking up at her brilliant thought, her deliriously righteous question, which
she caps with a nod to the genius of the folk. "I mean only black people could
figure that out. I don't know how far you can go with that! There are sagas
about medieval thugs and Robin Hood, but [it's fascinating] to actually invent
your own art form while you're in the life, so to speak."4
Tupac, Syke, Prashad, and Morrison bring to light the complex fashion—one
full of signification and play-in which the thug, the oudaw, the pimp, and the
like are evoked in hip-hop. It is true that Tupac tried to make the world believe
he really was who he announced on his albums. But at some levels-it is impor-
tant to stress some levels-even that was an act, in the best sense of that word, an


--- PAGE 342 ---
Tupac's Place in Hip-Hop 313
ingenious artistic strategy to create a persona. Persona making, after all, is the
province of art—and of politics, preaching, and every realm where performance
is crucial to self-definition and the transmission of ideas. Too often, however, we
deny the artistic milieu in which rappers operate and descend instead into a
thudding literalism. The historian Robin Kelley makes this point when dis-
cussing Miles Davis and the necessity of a more complex vision of art and per-
sona, even those involving controversial figures like the pimp. "Why is it that we
still love Miles despite the fact that he's such an evil figure?" Kelley asks. "It's be-
cause the stuff that's so romantic, and evil, can be reconciled in the pimp. And
so my thing is, turn the mirror around and look at yourself when you look at the
music. And it's deeply romantic, because that's what the pimps are, the great
ones." Kelley is not offering an apology for pimping. Instead, he is suggesting
that cultural creations have multiple meanings, none of which can be exhausted
or suspended by appeals to the responsible behavior of the artist. (Indeed, many
of art's meanings exist beyond the intent or desire of its creators.) "I guess I'm
tired of this question of what's redeeming or problematic," Kelley says. "We
don't have to go to hip-hop to find it. We can actually invent something." Kelley
contends that an artistic representation "does both of those things simultane-
ously" and that a more important question is "Why are we still drawn to it?" As
Kelley says, "moralizing [and] saying there's nothing redemptive about this, so
therefore we should just critique it, doesn't really tell us anything about how peo-
ple are thinking."5
Taking the time to learn what our youth are thinking and why they create the
art they do demands a capacity for deferred justification that most adults lack.
They seek to ensure the legitimacy of their moral critique by rendering quick
and easy judgments about the art form. Many critics of hip-hop do not have the
ethical patience to empathize with the formidable array of choices, conflicts, and
dilemmas that many poor black youth confront. Tupac is deeply attractive to
millions of young people because he articulates the contradictory poses of ma-
turing black identity with galvanizing exuberance and savage honesty. "Most of
my music [tells the truth]," Tupac says in the interview he did in prison. "I'm just
trying to speak about things that affect me and about things that affect our com-
munity. . .. Sometimes I'm the watcher, and sometimes I'm the participant, and
sometimes it's just allegories or fables that have an underlying theme." Tupac's
allegories and fables largely estranged his elders, underscoring how the genera-
tion gap has grown more menacing.
By almost any measure, the gaps between older and younger blacks are fla-
grant, even frightening. To be sure, there have always been skirmishes between
the generations. Many older blacks have often found the dress, language, and
hair of younger blacks offensive. In turn, many younger blacks have often
soured on the conservative values and accommodating styles of social existence
favored by a majority of their elders. These tiffs have certainly not disappeared.


--- PAGE 343 ---
314 THE MICHAEL ERIC DYSON READER
Indeed, every era seems obligated to draw from local circumstance and color in
painting a fresh picture of generational malaise. Where the Afro hairstyle raised
dander in the '70s, the '90s outbreak of hair twists and braids provoked dread in
corporate and conservative colored circles alike. And as if the boom in '70s cloth-
ing had not already offended by dredging up bell-bottom pants and platform
shoes, the baggy fashions sported by youth—oversized shirts, unlaced shoes, belt-
less pants sagging to the upper gluteus for maximum exposure-have riled their
seniors, especially since such styles are purportedly inspired by prison gear. Al-
though the specific circumstances of black life in the new millennium—unprece-
dented growth of the black middle class, devastating expansion of the ghetto
poor, restructuring of industries that employ large numbers of blacks, sustained
drug and criminal activity, capital flight, increased technologization of the work-
force—shape our understanding of these conflicts, they appear, in one form or an-
other, in each generation.6
What is new and particularly troublesome is the sheer hostility that bruises re-
lations between older and younger blacks. For perhaps the first time in our his-
tory, blacks over thirty have fear and disdain for black youth. Such a perception
turns graver when we consider that half of black America, some 17 million citi-
zens, is below the age of thirty. That means, too, that half of black America has
come to maturity in an age of bewildering black "posts": post-civil rights, post-
modern, postindustrial, and post-baby boom. A great deal of the age chasm in
black communities can be explained by the chaos that blacks over forty con-
fronted in seeking racial equity, personal status, and social justice. Blacks who cut
their teeth on the sinewy fibers of violent racial oppression have little tolerance for
cries of injustice from quarters of relative privilege: young black urban profes-
sionals who can't hail a cab or coddled college students who seethe at the racist
slights encountered on elite campuses. Neither do older blacks, whether strong
integrationists or radical nationalists, cotton easily to "the devil made me do it"
theory of criminal behavior and social disintegration that plagues many black
communities. The purpose of the civil rights and black liberation movements,
after all, was to foster healthy black communities unfettered by white supremacy.
Such struggles were not meant to justify thugs who hurt other blacks. Neither did
those struggles intend to ignore the moral deficiency of persons who use racism
to deflect attention from their own failings.7
For many blacks over the age of forty, Tupac represents the repudiation of an-
cient black values of hope and positive uplift that tied together black folk across
geography and generation. His studied hopelessness—and he affirmed his depres-
sive status by repeatedly declaring "I'm hopeless"—and his downward-looking so-
cial glance only aggravated the generational warfare that looms large in black
America. As "a brother from another generation, I can't help but hear Tupac, if
not totally objectively, at least from a broader perspective—the bird's-eye view of
the forest as opposed to being in the trees, so to speak," says Khephra Burns.


--- PAGE 344 ---
Tupac's Place in Hip-Hop 315
"And what I hear generally are words that rip through our communities, our fam-
ilies, and our lives like automatic weapon fire." Burns says that Tupac is full of
"discord, death, and revenge." Bishop T D.Jakes sees Tupac as an emblem of fin
de siecle black social disintegration, a state of affairs markedly different from what
previous generations bequeathed to their offspring. Jakes says that the twentieth
century "ended with the sound of gunshots reverberating in the streets of the
American black culture." Speaking of Tupac, Jakes laments how the "hearse
wheels rolled away the remains of a young man who our children watched, ad-
mired, and perhaps emulated to some degree." Jakes argues that the "gunshots
should have been a wake-up call to us that somehow our cultural pace and our
agenda was now being set by young men whose rhythm is at best unsteady." Jakes
contrasts such a scenario with an earlier epoch of black achievement and struggle.
He says that our present predicament is "a far cry from the previous decades,
when the role models that we were awed by were world shakers like Martin
Luther King, Rosa Parks, Medgar Evers, and many others": Unfortunately, these
"giants of black faith have in their latter years been replaced by young men whose
talent has lifted them to a height whereby they gained the ear of America prema-
turely, having more talent than statement."
Although youth music has always outraged parents who refused to listen—
because it was morally offensive or sexually suggestive, from jazz to rock—the de-
pressing note of hatred and fear of black youth that is being sounded has dire con-
sequences. Sadly, it suggests there is agreement between the regressive forces that
target black folk in general—conservative critics who decry our moral laxity, our
sexual looseness, our racial obsessions—and black folk who think that hip-hop
channels our pathologies into broad daylight. Many older blacks fail to see that
the same folk who thought it was just fine to keep black life segregated and eco-
nomically inferior are now leading the charge to incarcerate their children. And
often, with a black authority figure standing literally or symbolically in tow, they
point to hip-hop's excesses to justify their actions. Tupac was an irresistible ex-
ample of how self-destructive and utterly irredeemable our youth had become.
Too often the explanations we seek for the disturbing behavior of youth like
Tupac are insufficiently sophisticated. As proof we bog down in the understand-
able but lamentable question: Has hip-hop caused or reflected the violence we
should detest?
Even that question buys into the either-or worldview that undermines a sane
response to our predicament. Of course hip-hop has become intoxicated with
danger, as Tupac's life and career amply testify. Its violent metaphors, profane
lyrics, and real-life embodiment of thug fantasies are at some levels chilling. It
does no good to reprimand black youth for their addiction to violence. Our na-
tion suffers the addiction in spades, as even a cursory read of pop culture sug-
gests. But it is not just pop culture that is implicated. American society was built
on violence, from the wholesale destruction of Native American culture to the


--- PAGE 345 ---
316 THE MICHAEL ERIC DYSON READER
enslavement of Africans. "It's violence in America," Tupac says in his interview
from prison. "What did the USA just do, flying to Bosnia? We ain't got no busi-
ness over there." Comparing America's actions to the destructive effects of gang
violence, Tupac argued, "America is the biggest gang in the world. Look at how
they didn't agree with Cuba, so ... [they] cut them off." That is surely no justi-
fication for hip-hop's artistic elevation of gang-banging or murder, as glimpsed in
Tupac's lyrics. "As a rapper, Tupac represented many of the most despicable ele-
ments of America's youth on account of the Afro-American extension of what I
call anarchic individuality," Stanley Crouch says, "which is: me first." For
Crouch, Tupac's anarchic individualism showed most destructively in the glam-
orization of the gangster in lyrics promoting murder and mayhem, thereby low-
ering the threshold of resistance for impressionable youth. "You can't pile all of
this on Tupac," Crouch says. "But I'm saying that his life and his death and his
behavior and the behavior of the people in his circle represent something deeply
disturbing."
Crouch's argument underscores the urgent need to address not only rhetori-
cal but literal violence, the causes of which cannot be exclusively or primarily
located within hip-hop culture. Although Crouch is tough on Tupac, he avoids
blaming him directly for the scourge of violence in the culture or even in black
communities. "None of this is to say that there shouldn't be some voicing of the
terrible ways in which certain people in this society have to live due to poverty,"
Crouch says. "That's not something that's supposed to be ignored. That's ab-
solutely irresponsible." Blaming black youth for social violence reeks of the
worst kind of scapegoating. Since hip-hop culture is barely a generation old, and
black violence is much older, the charge that hip-hop jump-started violence
lacks merit. But even if hip-hop didn't invent violence, it can be held account-
able for promoting violence. Indulging violence as a reaction to more lethal but
less visible forms of violence (for instance, racism and economic inequality) is
not excusable, but it is surely a reason to tackle the issues to which black youth
are responding.
Neither should we overlook the double standard that prevails in addressing
societal violence or its pop culture parallel. It is by now a cliche to state that
Bruce Willis, Arnold Schwarzenegger, Tom Cruise, and a host of other big white
stars don't come in for nearly the rhetorical drubbing that hip-hop stars regularly
endure. "Like with Quentin Tarrantino, when he puts out his pictures, they're all
gangster pictures and they're all good and they're all critically acclaimed . . . and
they're very creative," Tupac said in the outtakes from his 1996 MTV interview.
"But when we do that same thing without the visuals, all wax, just as compelling
. . . we get treated like the bad messengers and he gets treated like King
Solomon." Tupac also spoke of the video he was directing for the rap song he did
with Snoop Dogg, "2 of America's Most Wanted." Tupac said the video's con-
cept drew from the criticism he and Snoop received for portraying gangsters and


--- PAGE 346 ---
Tupac's Place in Hip-Hop 317
dirtying the airwaves with their gangsta rap. "We wanted to put the mirror up to
show you where we got these gangster ideas," Tupac said. "So we took all these
scenes out of classic movies with gangsters in them . . . not gangsters named Doo
Dirty and Snoop and Tupac . . . but gangsters named Lucky Luciano and Don
Corleone and John Caddy, Al Capone and Smitty."
The ready response, of course, is that these white stars don't seek to imitate
the roles they play in real life. 'James Cagney, Edward G. Robinson, Clint East-
wood, John Wayne, Sylvester Stallone, Arnold Schwarzenegger, Bruce Willis,
not one of them has ever had one bullet fly at them in public," Crouch says.
When I bring up The Sopranos, the hugely successful and much beloved cable
television series, Crouch pounces immediately. "Tony Soprano remains a mon-
ster from the first episode to last night's episode," he says. "See, the brilliance of
it is he shows you, yes, this man is a human being, but he's a sociopath. He's a
predator. He's sadistic. He's a murderer. [Series creator] David Chase doesn't
duck any of that, and he doesn't make it seem to you that you're supposed to
like it. It's just you see the complexity of what's going on." Crouch contends
that Tony Soprano, the lead character in the series, is full of angst about the life
he leads. "He still has all of this guilt, because what he's doing is fundamentally
fucked up. But none of that justifies what he does." Crouch presses me. "I
mean, you're an expert on this material. There's nobody in rap that I'm aware
of in which real questions are asked by the rappers themselves about what the
hell they're doing."
Taken in his full lyrical sweep, I maintain that Tupac is such a figure. One of
the reasons he stands out in rap is precisely because he offered such a powerful,
complex, panoramic view of the young black experience. "If you were going on
the path of a social activist, there is something for you in his lyrics," says Everett
Dyson-Bey, a Moorish Temple minister and prisoner. "If you were on the path
of a straight thug, there is something there for you, too. So to bridge that gap
from one end to the next, to run that polarity, from the positive to the negative,
spoke to so many people of so many different backgrounds." But Tupac con-
stantly questioned his direction by filling his lyrics with characters who were
both the victims and perpetrators of crime, characters who were thugs begging
God for guidance through the minefields of self-destruction, characters leaving
the ghetto while others stayed, characters who asked why they suffered even as
they imposed suffering. In that haze of morbid contradictions, Tupac shone the
light of his dark, brooding, pensive spirit, refusing to close his eyes to the mis-
ery he saw, risking everything to bear witness to the pain he pondered and per-
petuated. In a word, The Sopranos offers, in Ernest Becker's term, an "anthro-
podicy," where we hold each other accountable for the suffering and evil
imposed, whereas Tupac wrestles with a theodicy, the effort to square belief in
God with the evil that prevails, which is at root an attempt to explain the suf-
fering of those he loved.


--- PAGE 347 ---
318 THE MICHAEL ERIC DYSON READER
Crouch may be right about the motley fellowship of gangster actors who never
saw a gun aimed at them off-camera, but it is likely that just as great a percentage
of white actors and singers get into trouble with the law as do black rap artists.
The list includes Robert Downey Jr., James Caan, George Michael, Hugh Grant,
and Axl Rose, among countless others. And in case Tupac and Biggie seem totally
anomalous, one must remember James Dean, Sal Mineo, Kurt Cobain, and Bob
Kane. And earlier black stars that are now revered had their troubles, including
Little Willie John, Frankie Lymon, and Sam Cooke. In their personal foibles and
destructive habits, Ravor Flav, Old Dirty Bastard, Bobby Brown, and their cohort
have got nothing on legends Marvin Gaye, Wilson Pickett, or for that matter
James Brown. None of this explains away the undeniable sadness of the violent
captivity of segments of hip-hop culture. It simply gives a broader context to our
concerns and cautions against seeing hip-hoppers as uniquely plagued. It is true
that the violence that increasingly gets spoken about in hip-hop is self-inflicted
and racially perpetuated. Then, too, the violence is so cartoonish and caricatured
that fewer and fewer vulnerable minds take it seriously, at least not literally. The
biggest knock on hard-core hip-hop may be its tired, cliche-ridden exploration of
a subject that demands subtlety, artistic courage, and the wisdom to refrain from
using a sledgehammer where a scalpel will do. But the big picture must not be ne-
glected: The real-world violence too many hip-hoppers and black youth confront
is so much more troubling than the violence they romanticize, even eroticize, on
records and screen.8
Needless to say, the rhetorical violence that is directed at black women is alto-
gether troubling. To be sure, there is a great deal of parody, signifying, and rau-
cous humor that fills a lot of hip-hop's more vulgar lyrical traditions. Those who
believe that hip-hop invented these practices have only to listen to blues music
from the early twentieth century. Old-school blues bawdiness was every bit as vul-
gar and sexually explicit as what disturbs contemporary defenders of black moral-
ity. Many critics now claim that black youth have lost their way by forsaking ear-
lier visions of ethical caution and racial care. But a review of the concerns of black
leaders in the early 1900s confirms that many of them thought their youth were
just as morally wayward as the youth of our day. And many of those leaders in-
dicted popular culture for its vicious effects on black youth. The remarkably hum-
bling point to remember is that those youth who were seen as heading to hell in
a hand basket became the grandparents and great-grandparents whose behavior
is held up as the example we should aim for.
Still, the crude misogyny and sexism that are rampant in hip-hop are deeply dis-
turbing. The sheer repetition of "bitch" as the proper name of females is not only
distressing but destructive. It sends the message to young girls and women that
their price of admission to hip-hop culture is the acceptance of self-denigration. Un-
like the use of the word "nigga" in hip-hop, "bitch" fails to come across as resistant.
An argument can be made that the circulation of variants of "nigger" serves to de-


--- PAGE 348 ---
Tupac's Place in Hip-Hop 319
prive the term of its negative meanings. "You my nigga" becomes a way of bond-
ing around a term that was historically used by whites to degrade blacks. Thus, it
deprives racist whites of the prerogative of naming blacks in harmful ways, since
blacks have adapted it to their culture in playful or at least signifying fashion. Of
course many black folk disagree and insist that the word can in no sense be re-
deemed. But the logic of those who contend that the word has use is clear, if un-
acceptable. The use of "bitch," by contrast, is less compelling. The majority of
those using it are the men who continue to dominate hip-hop culture. Thus, its
negative meanings are largely held in place. Even when males intend "bitch" to be
positive, such as Notorious B.I.G.'s "Me and My Bitch," the term is still loaded
with hurtful connotations. It is not clear that women in hip-hop who use the term
have sought to use it in ways that question male power or perspectives on women.
Their use of bitch usually does little more than second the female bashing of their
male counterparts.
Likewise, the sexual saturation of hip-hop reflects the sexual obsessions that
haunt the culture. It seems that nearly every rap video has a stock character: a
woman bouncing her bosom, gyrating her gluteus, or otherwise occupied in ful-
filling the sexual fantasies of millions of adolescents and adults. Such a specter
surely degrades women by reducing them to their lowest erotic denominator. It
also suggests to young women that the only viable assets they can exercise are
their behinds and not their brains. Hence, Lil Kim and Foxy Brown spin lustful,
lascivious tales that rival their male counterparts in raunchy abandon. Place that
in the company of hustling, drug-selling, death-dealing, sex-crazed lotharios who
increasingly dominate the imagination of hip-hop and, well, the picture is rather
grim. For many critics, it simply repackages the stereotypes that black folk have
spent centuries resisting: the whorish black woman, the studly black man. The
cruel caveat, however, is that now these stereotypes are brashly amplified in the
mouths of history-starved misfits whose political illiteracy masquerades as defi-
ant art. Of course there is some truth to this rather harsh, dismissive, and unjust
diatribe. Too many black youth have no idea where black folk have been and
only dimly know what we've had to do to get where we are. But it isn't primar-
ily their fault. We have reneged on our responsibility as black adults to keep the
culture vital by making it relevant to contemporary struggles. That means trans-
lating the terms of past struggle into present action. Instead, older blacks often
nostalgically rehash romantic memories of the past, failing to acknowledge just
how remarkably similar our failures and prospects for triumph are to those of
the hip-hop generation.
That shouldn't stop us from admitting that we are much more attracted to the
basest, simplest elements of our artistic makeup than to its brightest, most de-
manding features. This is true for the culture as a whole. That is why Mission Im-
possible outpaces Boys Don't Cry and why Britney Spears outsells Bonnie Raitt. The
fact that Common, Mos Def, Talib Kweli, Bahamadia, Black Eyed Peas, Jurassic


--- PAGE 349 ---
320 THE MICHAEL ERIC DYSON READER
Five, and the Roots don't chart as highly as Jay-Z, Juvenile, Master P, or the lat-
est posthumous effort by Tupac is certainly a problem. But is it hip-hop's problem
or ours? Another way of putting the question is to ask whether that trend doesn't
reflect a general resistance to art that is explicitly political, sharply critical of the
status quo even inside black life, and self-reflective in a way that only mature art
will risk. There is no denying that the ethical aspirations of Mos Def, for instance,
directly counter the corporate capitalism that commits bigger budgets to market
and distribute the latest butt-shaking record. Or another tired, trite, and uninter-
esting "bling-bling" (the sight produced by light reflecting off diamond-laced or
platinum jewelry) video lauding the virtues of material or commercial culture. In
that sense, there is a real war going on in hip-hop. On the one side are purists who
stake the future of the form on lyrical skill, narrative complexity, clever rhymes,
and fresh beats. On the other side are advocates of commercialized hip-hop,
marked by the mass production of records that sell because they are crassly ac-
cessible. They neither challenge their audience nor move them to reflect on social,
racial, or cultural ills. But the issue has never been as simple as politics versus art
or positive versus negative.
Mos Def, praised as one of the leaders of "conscious rap," refuses to think in
such narrow terms. "They've got their little categories, like 'conscious' and
'gangsta,'" says Mos Def. "It used to be a thing where hip-hop was all together.
Fresh Prince [Will Smith's old moniker] would be on tour with N.W.A. [Nig-
gas With Attitude, featuring Dr. Dre and Ice Cube]. It wasn't like, 'You have
got to like me in order for me to like you.' That's just some more white folks
trying to think that all niggas are alike, and now it's expanded. It used to be
one type of nigga; now it's two. There is so much more dimension to who we
are. A monolith is a monolith, even if there's two monoliths to choose from."
Mos Def sees the danger, however, in having only one dimension of the black
experience get airplay, which in present terms is usually of the bling-bling or
thug variety. "I ain't mad at Snoop. I'm not mad at Master P; I ain't mad at the
Hot Boyz. I'm mad when that's all you see. I would be mad if I looked up and
all I saw on TV was me or Common or the Roots, because I know that ain't
the whole deal. The real joy is when you can kick it with everyone. That's
what hip-hop is all about."
Another rapper lauded for his rhetorical brilliance and revolutionary passion,
Common, similarly sees the virtue of the range in hip-hop. "I can't put a line be-
tween us," Common says about the difference between him and hardcore rap.
"Because we are speaking our experiences and we are speaking our voice in hip-
hop. Tupac was talking about smoking weed, guns, and so on, and we can't ig-
nore that. I talk about other subjects [than hard-core rappers], but [conscious rap-
pers] still have flaws, and we are not afraid to show those flaws." Mos Def is
careful to avoid accepting the praise—and the typecasting—of corporate interests
that deny the complexity of black identity and culture. "They keep trying to slip


--- PAGE 350 ---
Tupac's Place in Hip-Hop 321
the 'conscious rapper' thing on me," he says. "I come from Roosevelt Projects,
man. The ghetto. I drank the same sugar water, ate hard candy. And they try to
get me because I'm supposed to be more articulate, I'm supposed to be not like
the other Negroes, to get me to say something against my brothers. I'm not going
out like that, man." In light of his thug persona, it may be hard to consider Tupac
a "brilliant poet as great as any medieval writer," as he is regarded by Arvand
Elihu, a talented young graduate student who taught a course on the felled rap-
per at the University of California-Berkeley.
There is another dimension to the debate as well: Some of the best-inten-
tioned hip-hop, politically speaking, is simply boring or lyrically void of imagi-
nation or inspiration. Or it is just musically dead, a real drawback to what folk
in the midst of heated argument often forget is first and foremost a musical
form. And some of the most apolitical rap is lyrically clever and musically com-
pelling. (Why should it be any different in hip-hop than it is in, for instance,
R&B, where Luther Vandross's ethereal love notes rise higher than a musical
complaint about racism, though few folk assail that branch of black music for
its bourgeois sensibilities that are decidedly apolitical, noninterventionist, and
downright misleading in its portrayal of romantic love?) It may well be that we
should expand our understanding of what politics is, since hip-hop as an art
form has been embroiled in the politics of culture and the culture of politics
since its beginnings. In light of Senate hearings about rap's violent effects, it has
little choice but to be political, even when its politics have to do with its right to
exist at all.
The debate about hip-hop's complexity as well as Tupac's role in rap under-
scores the need for genre justice. We ought to recognize that there are all sorts of
rap music, that not all of rap can do what some of it can do, and that the best
rap is the rap that sticks to what it does best. The power of Tupac's raps is that
they encompass a variety of hip-hop genres. One of the liabilities of blanketing
rap in general terms is that we fail to recognize its diversity. That means that we
also fail to see how many of the debates we try to force on hip-hop culture from
outside are occurring with regularity on the inside. Take, for instance, the
bravado and posturing that clutter hip-hop and the profanity that is often mis-
taken for authenticity, for keeping it real. Lauryn Hill, as a member of the
Fugees, offered a biting commentary in as brilliant and pithy a fashion as might
be imagined when she rhymed: "And even after all my logic and my theory /I
add a 'muthafucka' so you ignorant niggers hear me." There are many moods
and styles in hip-hop. There is griot rap, including figures like Common, Mos
Def, Talib Kweli, Bahamadia, and the Roots. There is radical rap, characterized
by the Coup and most recently by Dead Prez. There is materialistic/hedonistic
rap, presented by Juvenile, Cash Money Millionaires, and a hundred offshoots.
There is ghettocentric hip-hop, including figures as diverse as Jay-Z and the Wu-
Tang Clan. There is gangsta rap, including Snoop Dogg and Dr. Dre. There is


--- PAGE 351 ---
322 THE MICHAEL ERIC DYSON READER
pop rap, symbolized most powerfully by Will Smith. There is Bohemian hard
core, as glimpsed in Outkast and Goodie Mobb. And of course some of these fig-
ures and groups bleed into several genres. And many of these genres can be di-
vided not only by theme and style but also by region. So the Dirty South of At-
lanta's Outkast and Master P of New Orleans can be contrasted to the West
Coast rap of South Central's Ice Cube or Compton's DJ Quick or the Upsouth
rhymes of Nelly of St. Louis.
Our expectations of hip-hop's genres should be rooted in an appreciation of
their intents. We should not expect pop rap to give us a peek into the inner work-
ings of capitalism or white supremacy. Will Smith will never be Dead Prez. At the
same time, Will Smith can beautifully celebrate fatherhood and welcome us to
Miami (and to the dance floor) with his delightful pop confections. And that
doesn't mean that we cannot be rocked by Dead Prez's brilliant critiques of racial
amnesia and cultural genocide in black American life. It's not either-or. And we
must not be afraid to enjoy the many intriguing transgressions of Lil' Kim and
Foxy Brown, even as we lament their lyrical existence almost exclusively in sexu-
alized zones. Not only are there many genres of hip-hop, but one artist can give
us many different looks, feels, sensibilities, styles, and themes. Tupac could both
"get around" by sexually exploiting his star status (a fact that hardly makes him
unique) and admonish poor young women to "keep ya head up." The edifying
and terrifying in this singular artist lived on the same block.
Like Tupac, perhaps its most embattled icon, hip-hop culture lives in conflict
and thrives on contradiction. It is both a highly commercialized, corporate-
sponsored venture as well as an indigenous art form that reflects (on) the brutal
realities of black youth existence. That white corporate types have gotten into the
mix doesn't negate the ghetto sensibilities and themes that drive—and sometimes
drag down—hip-hop. As Toni Morrison says, "The fact that rap is so attractive to
white kids in the suburbs is the risk that all discourses that black people invent
have." Hip-hop is a barometer of black youth taste, style, and desires—as they are
created and disseminated in local communities and by force of corporate distri-
bution. It is also a sure test of our ability to embrace the best of our youth while
engaging in critical conversations about their future. Given its universal popular-
ity and its troubling effects, hip-hop is a vital cultural language that we had all bet-
ter learn. To ignore its genius, to romanticize its deficits, or to bash it with undis-
cerning generalities is to risk the opportunity to engage our children about
perhaps the most important cultural force in their lives.
Tupac may be the most influential rapper to have lived. His voice rings through
our cultural landscape and hovers over our spirits with formidable intensity.
Nearly five years after his death, his posthumously released double compact disc,
Until the End of Time, dwarfed its nearest competition and sold over 400,000 copies
in its first week of circulation. It may be that Tupac's bold voice is more necessary
now than when he lived. He embraced the history of rap and operated within its


--- PAGE 352 ---
Tupac's Place in Hip-Hop 323
limits while always pushing against them, reshaping rap's conventions while blur-
ring the lines between his art and life. His stunning baritone was filled with sur-
prising passion and urgency. He narrated his life as a road map to suffering,
wrenching a brutal victory from the ghetto he so loved, and the fame and fortune
that both blessed and cursed him. As the supreme symbol of his generation, he
embodied its reckless, audacious liberties and its ominous hopelessness. Above
all, he was as truthful as we can expect any human being to be about his evolv-
ing identity and his expanding artistic vision. "My music is spiritual, if you listen
to it," Tupac said in his prison interview. "It's all about emotion; it's all about life.
Not to dis anybody, but where other rappers might paint a perfect picture of
themselves, I would tell my innermost, darkest secrets. I reveal myself in every
one of my records. From 'Dear Mama' to 'Shed So Many Tears,' I tell my own,
personal problems, and people can relate to what I believe."


--- PAGE 353 ---
This page intentionally left blank


--- PAGE 354 ---
PA R T T E N
C I N E M A N O I R
In the mid-eighties, a new em in black cinema dawned. Director, actor,
and writer Spike Lee led the way with his provocative, brilliant, and
idiosyncratic films, including the highly charged racial drama. Do The
Right Thing, and his masterjnece, the bio-picture, Malcolm X. Not
Jar behind Lee were Reginald and Wamngton Hndlin icilh their fresh,
hip urban musical. House Party; John Singleton, with his poignanl
and moving coming-of-age film, Boyz N The Hood: Mario I'an Pee-
bles and his riveting drug drama, New jack City; and Ernest Dicker-
son's powerful urban morality tale, Juice, these figures were joined by
Euzhan Palcy, Julie Dash, Matty Rich, Leslie Harm, and other black
directors eager to explore the (omplex dimensions of black life that have
been historically neglected on film, Fvienty years later, a new stable of
supremely gifted directors, including Kasi Lemmons (Fve's Bayou).
Carl Franklin (Devil in a Blue Dress), Millicent Shelton (Ride),
Gina Prince-Bylluwood (Love &. Basketball). F. Gwy Gray (Set It
Off). Theodore Witehcr (Love Jones), Malcolm Lee (Best Man).
Rick Famuyiwa (Brown Sugar), and Anloine Fitc/ua (Training Day)
have expanded the cinematic ouivass on ichich black life is drawn.


--- PAGE 355 ---
This page intentiotnally left blank


--- PAGE 356 ---
Twenty-Three
SPIKE LEE'S NEONATIONALIST VISION
When I went to see Spike Lee's brilliantly disturbingfilm Do the Right Thing in New
York, the tension in the theater was palpable. After att, warnings had gone out that the
film might provoke racial melees because of its volatile topic and approach. Of course,
nothing of the sort happened. However, the June 19 89 Film proved to be a powerful
conversation piece in the culture, especially in light of racial tragedies connected to white
ethnic New York neighborhoods in the recent past (the infamous Howard Beach incident,
where twenty-three-year-old Michael Griffith was chased to his death by white teens
pursuing him with baseball bats and tree limbs) and in the near future (the murder of
sixteen-year-old Tusuf Hawkins in August 1989 in Bensonhurst, shot twice in the chest by
a white youth who was part of a mob assembled to seek revenge for a neighborhood girl's
interracial dating). This review of Lee's Film, originally published in Tikkun magazine,
charts his attempt to meld two competing ambitions: to narrate the complex humanity of
black folk and to specify the political implications of his neonationalist perspective. Although
I emphasized Lee's tremendous strengths while pointing to thefUm'sflaws, in retrospect, I
think Do the Right Thing, and Lee, deserve even more praise than I gave themjjfteen
years ago. I think it is perhaps his second greatest movie—the greatest is the monumental
Malcolm X, which is still in my mind underrated—and a signal accomplishment in
Americanfilm. As critic Roger Ebert wrote at the time, Do the Right Thing "comes
closer to reflecting the current state of race relations in America than any other movie of our
time." It is a tribute to Lee's huge gifts and aesthetic courage that the film remains a
provocative portrait of its times. It is also a warning against the racial amnesia that clouds
our national racial memory and threatens true racial harmony and equality.
IN 1986, A DISTINCT PHASE IN CONTEMPORARY African-American cinema
commenced. Spike Lee wrote, produced, directed, and acted in She's Gotta Have It,
an independendy made sex comedy that cost $175,000 but grossed over $6 million
after distribution by Island Pictures. Since then Lee, and an expanding cadre of
black filmmakers, including Robert Townsend, Keenan Ivory Wayans, and Eu-
zhan Palcy, have written and directed a number of films that explore various
diemes in black life. Lee in particular creates films that are part of a revival of black
nationalism (neonationalism), a movement that included provocative expressions
in the cultural sphere (elements of rap music, the wearing of African medallions),


--- PAGE 357 ---
328 THE MICHAEL ERIC DYSON READER
interesting interventions in the intellectual sphere (articulation of Afrocentric per-
spectives in academic disciplines), and controversial developments in the social
sphere (symbolized by Louis Farrakhan's Nation of Islam ideology, which enjoys
narrow but significant popularity among blacks). Lee, foremost among his black
director peers, is concerned with depicting the sociopolitical implications of his
Afrocentric film aesthetic and neonationalist worldview.
But he is also determined to display the humanity of his characters, and he in-
sists upon exploring the unacknowledged diversity and the jarring and underap-
preciated contradictions of black life. Lee, however, is confronted with a conflict:
how to present the humanity of black folk without lapsing into an ontology of race
that structures simplistic categories of being for black people and black culture that
are the worst remnants of old-style black nationalism. Such constructions of black
character and culture fail to express the complex diversity of black humanity.
On the one hand, because Lee is apparently committed to a static conception
of racial identity, his characters appear as products of an archetypal mold that pre-
determines their responses to a range of sociohistorical situations. These charac-
ters are highly symbolic and widely representative, reflecting Lee's determination
to repel the folkloric symbols of racism through racial countersymbol. On the
other hand, Lee must revise his understanding of racial identity in order to pre-
sent the humanity of black characters successfully. He must permit his characters
to possess irony, self-reflection, and variability, qualities that, when absent—no
matter the high aims that underlie archetypal representation—necessarily circum-
scribe agency and flatten humanity. It is in the electric intersection of these two
competing and at times contradictory claims, of black cultural neonationalism and
black humanism, that Lee's art takes place.
In Do the Right Thing, Lee's black neonationalism leaps off the screen through
brilliant cinematography and riveting messages. As most Americans know, Do the
Right Thing is about contemporary racism. The film's action is concentrated in a
single block of Brooklyn's "Bedstuy" neighborhood on a scorching summer day.
The heat, both natural and social, is a central metaphor for the film's theme of
tense race relations. The pivotal place of social exchange in this compact, ethni-
cally diverse, and highly self-contained community is Sal's Famous Pizzeria, the
single vestige of white-owned business in Bedstuy. Sal (Danny Aiello) owns and
operates the restaurant along with his two sons, Pino John Turturro) and Vito
(Richard Edwon), proud Italians who make the daily commute from the suburb
of Bensonhurst. Lee plays Mookie, the hardworking but responsibility-shirking
delivery man for Sal's and the primary link between the community and the
pizzeria. Mookie seems able to maneuver easily between two worlds—until late in
the film, when the community erupts in a riot at Sal's, prompted by an egregious
instance of police brutality.
In choosing to explore the racial tension between Italian-Americans and
African-Americans, Lee makes explicit reference to Howard Beach, employing it
as an ideologically charged conceptual foil for his drama about American racism.


--- PAGE 358 ---
Spike Lee's Neonationalist Vision 329
Lee makes allusions to the Howard Beach incident throughout the movie: Sal
brandishes a baseball bat in conflicts with various black patrons; the crowd chants
"Coward Beach" at the riot. Lee wants his movie to provoke discussion about
racism in the midst of a racially repressive era, when-all such discourse is either
banished to academia (although not much discussion goes on there, either) or
considered completed in the distant past. Lee rejects the premises of this Reagan-
era illogic and goes straight to the heart of the mechanism that disseminates and
reinforces racial repression: the image, the symbol, the representation. Do the Right
Thing contains symbols of racism and resistance to racism, representations of
black life, and images of black nationalist sensibilities and thought.
Lee creates symbols that reveal the remorseless persistence of racism in quo-
tidian quantity, exposing the psychopadiology of everyday racism as it accumu-
lates in small doses, over the course of days not unlike the one we witness in Do
the Right 'Thing. Lee shows us the little bruises, the minor frustrations, and the
minute but myriad racial fractures that mount widiout healing. There is the riff of
the prickly relations between the black residents and the Koreans who own the
neighborhood market. There is the challenge of Radio Raheem (Bill Nunn), a
menacing bundle of brawn who wields his boom box as a weapon to usurp com-
munal aural space as he practices his politics of cultural terrorism. But the central
symbol of racial conflict is the ongoing tiff between Buggin' Out and Sal over the
latter's refusal to place photos of black people on Sal's Wall of Fame, reserved for
the likes of DiMaggio, Stallone, and Sinatra. Sal and Buggin' Out's battle over the
photographs, over the issue of representing black people, makes explicit the terms
of the film's representational warfare.
Lee's decision to provoke discussion about racism is heroic. He exposes a cru-
cial American failure of nerve, a stunning loss of conscience about race. But be-
yond this accomplishment, how much light does he shed by raising the question
of racism in the manner that he does? Lee's perspective portrays a view of race
and racism that, while it manages to avoid a facile Manichaeanism, nevertheless
slides dangerously close to a vision of "us" and "them," in which race is seen
solely through the lens of biological determinism.
The problem with such biological determinism is that it construes racial iden-
tity as a unidimensional, monocausal reality that can be reduced to physically
inheritable characteristics. Racial identity is an ever-evolving, continually trans-
forming process that is never fully or finally exhausted by genetics and physiol-
ogy. It is constantly structured and restructured, perennially created and re-
created, in a web of social practices, economic conditions, gendered relations,
material realities, and historical situations that are themselves shaped and re-
shaped. As the feminist critique of Freud asserts, anatomy is not destiny; like-
wise, biology is not identity.
Black cultural neonationalism obscures the role of elements such as gender,
class, and geography in the construction of racial identity, and by so doing limits
its resources for combating racial oppression. Consider the film's end, in which


--- PAGE 359 ---
330 THE MICHAEL ERIC DYSON READER
Lee juxtaposes quotes from Martin Luther King, Jr., and Malcolm X that posit
the harm versus the help of violence in aid of black liberation. Lee has not stum-
bled serendipitously toward an interpretive framework that summarizes the two
options open to black folk in fighting racism: Lee's neonationalist perspective has
regulated his presentation of the problem of racism in the movie all along.
Furthermore, Lee's neonationalism determines which quotes he uses. As Lee
knows, it can be argued that, before their deaths, King and X were converging in
their understanding of race and racism. Both of them were developing under-
standings of racial identity and racism that were much more complex, open-
ended, ecumenical, and international than the views they had previously held.
King was changing because of his more radical comprehension of the relationship
between race and class, and thus began to promote a more aggressive version of
nonviolent resistance. X was changing, too, because of his visit to Mecca and his
expanding conception of the possibilities of interracial solidarity. Each man also
borrowed elements of analysis from the other, appropriating those lessons in ways
that had the potential to chart a much different path for resistance to oppression
in the '70s and on. By using these quotes from King and X, free of context, Lee
gives an anachronistic and historical reading of the two figures. Presenting these
quotes as a basis of present options may provide some conceptual and emotive re-
sources for debate, but does little to enlighten. Lee freezes the meanings of these
two men, instead of utilizing their mature thought as a basis for reconceiving the
problem of racism to address our particular set of historical circumstances.
Lee's neonationalist leanings also affect his characters, who become mere ar-
chetypes. Buggin' Out (Giancarlo Esposito) is the local radical, a caricature of
deep commitment, who is more rabblerouser than thoughtful insurgent. Smiley
(Roger Gueneveur Smith) is the stuttering conscience, first seen in front of the Yes
Jesus Can Baptist Church. He hawks photographs of the famous meeting be-
tween King and X to reluctant passersby. Ossie Davis plays Da Mayor, the neigh-
borhood drunk, who represents older black men who were scathed by economic
desperation and personal failure, and whose modus vivendi is shaped by the bot-
tle. Ruby Dee (Davis's real-life wife) is Modier Sister, a lonely black woman who
represents the neighborhood's omniscient eye. She is a possible victim of deser-
tion by a man like Da Mayor, or a woman who was determined and independent
before her time (or perhaps both). Joie Lee, Spike's real-life sister, plays Mookie's
sister Jade, and represents the responsible and stable black woman. She must sup-
port and suffer Mookie, her affectionately irascible brother, whom she chides for
not taking care of his son. Mookie's son's mother, Tina (Rosie Perez), is the Latin
firebrand who extemporizes in colorful neologism about Mookie's domestic
shortcomings. And a trio of middle-aged black men, Sweet Dick Willie, ML, and
Coconut Sid (Robin Harris, Paul Benjamin, and Frankie Faison), represent the
often humorous folk philosophy of a generation of black males who have wit-
nessed the opening of socioeconomic opportunity for others, but who must cope
with a more limited horizon for themselves.


--- PAGE 360 ---
Spike Lee's Neonationalist Vision 331
In one respect, Lee's use of archetypal black figures is salutary, as it expands the
register of black characters in contemporary cinema. But the larger effect is harm-
ful, and is a measure both of Hollywood's deeply entrenched racism and of the
limitation of Lee's neonationalist worldview. Lee follows a tradition of sorts, as
the attempt to decenter prevalent conceptions of racial behavior began in earnest
in the '20s in Oscar Micheaux's films. A much later attempt to shift from stereo-
type to archetype in black film was crudely rendered in Melvin Van Peebles's
Sweet Sweetback's Baadasssss Song (1971). Although Lee is light-years ahead of Van
Peebles in most respects, he still adopts a crucial element of Van Peebles's work:
the representative archetype.
Lee is unable to meld his two ambitions-to present the breadth of black hu-
manity while proclaiming a black neonationalist aesthetic. His attempt to present
a black universe is admirable, but that universe must be one in which people gen-
uinely act and do not simply respond as mere archetypal constructions. Because
the characters carry such weighty symbolic significance (resonant though it might
be), they must act like symbols, not like humans. As a result, their story seems
predetermined, a byproduct of a complicated configuration of social, personal,
and political situations.
The archetypal model accounts for the manner in which Lee portrays the white
characters, particularly Sal and sons. Pino is the vicious ethnic chauvinist who
clings tightly to his Italian identity and heritage for fear of finding himself awash
in the tide of "nigger" loving that seems to soak his other family members. Vito
is the ethnic pluralist, an easygoing and impressionable young man whose main
distinction is that he has no major beef with the blacks and Puerto Ricans. Only
Sal, who splits the difference between his two sons, manages to rise in some com-
plexity. He is a proud businessman whose long-standing relationship with the
community has endeared him to most of the neighborhood's residents. But when
provoked, he is not above hurling the incendiary racial epithet, which on one fate-
ful occasion seals his destiny by beginning the riot that destroys his store.
This Saturday night Sal keeps the store open late to accommodate a group of
neighborhood kids. That is when Radio Raheem (boom box in tow and pumping
loud) and Buggin' Out shout a final request to place photos of blacks on the wall.
After Radio Raheem refuses to lower the volume of his box, Sal, driven to an un-
derstandable frenzy, crushes the radio with his baseball bat. Radio Raheem also
behaves understandably. He grabs Sal, pulls him over the counter, and the two
men struggle from the store into the street. The police arrive and attempt to re-
strain Radio Raheem using the infamous New York Police "chokehold," a poten-
tially lethal technique, especially when applied to black male necks. The police let
Radio Raheem drop dead to the ground, kick him, and drag him into a police car.
Meanwhile, they have handcuffed Buggin' Out and carted him away. The crowd
is horror-stricken. Mookie, until now the mediator of disputes between Sal and the
community, takes sides with his neighbors and throws a trash can through Sal's
window, catalyzing the riot. The crowd destroys the pizzeria, overturning tables


--- PAGE 361 ---
332 THE MICHAEL ERIC DYSON READER
and equipment and taking money from the cash register. But it is stuttering Smiley
who starts the fire. In African-American religious tradition, the Holy Spirit appears
before believers in the form of fire. Smiley's torch is the articulation of his religious
passion.
Lee's portrayal of police brutality, which has claimed the lives of too many black
people, is disturbingly honest. The encounter between Radio Raheem and Sal is
poignant and instructive. It shows that a black person's death may be provoked by
incidents of racial antagonism gone amok, and that it is easy for precious young
black life to be sacrificed in the gritty interstices between anger and abandonment.
Thus, we can understand the neighborhood's consuming desire to destroy prop-
erty—avenging the murder of a son whose punishment does not fit his crime.
It is also understandable that the crowd destroys Sal's place, the pizzeria being
the nearest representative of destructive white presence, a white presence that has
just denied Radio Raheem his future. But Sal certainly doesn't represent the
"powers" that Public Enemy rapped about so fearlessly on Radio Raheem's box.
As Lee knows, the character of racism has changed profoundly in the last few
decades, and even though there are still too many ugly reassertions of overt
racism, it is often the more subtle variety that needs to be identified and fought.
For instance, after viewing Lee's film many people may leave the theater
smugly self-confident that they are not racists because they are not petit bourgeois
Italian businessmen, because they don't call people "niggers," and because they
are not policemen who chokehold black men to death. But contemporary racism
is often the teacher who cannot take a black student seriously, who subtly dis-
misses her remarks in class because they are "not really central," or because he
has presumed, often unconsciously, a limit to her abstract reasoning. (The double
whammy of race and gender operates here.) Contemporary racism is often
middle-class black managers hitting a career ceiling that is ostensibly due to their
lack of high-level management skills, which, of course, are missing not because of
lack of intelligence but because they have not acquired the right kinds of experi-
ence. Contemporary racism is not about being kept out of a clothes store, but
rather about not being taken seriously because the store clerk presumes you
won't spend your money or that you have none to spend.
To assert that racism is most virulent at Sal's level misses the complex ways in
which everyday racism is structured, produced, and sustained in multifarious so-
cial practices, cultural traditions, and intellectual justifications. Sal is as much a
victim of his racist worldview as he is its perpetrator. By refusing to probe the shift
in the modus operandi of American racism, Lee misses the opportunity to expose
what the British cultural critic Stuart Hall calls inferential racism, the "apparently
naturalized representation of events and situations relating to race, whether fac-
tual or 'fictional,' which have racist premises and propositions inscribed in them
as a set of unquestioned assumptions."
Those who strive to resist the new-style racism must dedicate themselves to
pointing out slippery attitudes and ambiguous actions that signal the presence of


--- PAGE 362 ---
Spike Lee's Neonationalist Vision 333
racism without appearing to do so. This strategy must include drawing attention
to unintended racist statements, actions, and thoughts, which nevertheless do
harm. These strategies must be accompanied by sophisticated, high-powered in-
tellectual dialogue about how the nature of particular forms of Western discourse
provide the expression, reproduction, and maintenance of racist ideology and
practices. People must form interracial, international lines of solidarity and de-
velop analyses of racism in tandem with similar analyses of sexism, classism, anti-
Semitism, anti-Arabism, homophobia, ecological terrorism, and a host of other
progressive concerns.
Perhaps nothing does more to symbolize the shadowed brilliance of Lee's
project, the troubled symbiosis of his black neonationalist vision and his desire
to represent black humanity, than a scene in which Mookie is completing an ar-
gument with Jade. After they depart, the camera fixes on the graffiti on the wall:
"Tawana told the truth!" It is understandable, given Lee's perspective, that he
chooses to retrieve this fresh and tortured signifier from the iconographical reser-
voir of black neonationalists, some of whom believe Tawana transcends her in-
famous circumstances and embodies the reality of racial violence in our times.
Racial violence on every level is vicious now, but Tawana is not its best or most
powerful symbol. Lee's invocation of Tawana captures the way in which many
positive aspects of neonationalist thought are damaged by close association with
ideas and symbols that hurt more than help. Yes, it is important to urge racial
self-esteem, a vision for racial progress, the honoring of historical figures, and the
creation of powerful culture, but not if the result is a new kind of bigotry. For this
reason we must criticize Lee's proximity to Louis Farrakhan's ideological
stances. Real transformation of our condition will come only as we explore the
resources of progressive thought, social action, and cultural expression that were
provided by figures like King, X, Paul Robeson, W.E.B. Du Bois, Lorraine Hans-
berry, Pauli Murray, and Ida B. Wells. But we can't wallow in unimaginative
mimesis. These people's crucial insights, cultural expressions, and transforma-
tive activities must inspire us to think critically and imaginatively about our con-
dition and help us generate profound and sophisticated responses to our own
crises. Only then will we be able to do the right thing.


--- PAGE 363 ---
T w e n t j - F o u r
BETWEEN APOCALYPSE AND REDEMPTION
JOHN SINGLETON'S B O YZ N THE HOOD
When I saw this film in the summer of 1991 with my thirteen-year-old son—and I took
him to see it at least seven times—I cried each time. 'The film spoke to so many issues that
are critical to black male life: father and son bonding, the difficulty of rearing boys in poor
and working-class communities, the vicious self-hatred that threads through gang violence,
the devastating costs of social policies that overlook the economic and social needs of black
males, and the magical power of black love. Like the lead character Furious Styles, played
with incredible sensitivity and maturity by Laurence Fishburne, I got custody of my son
when he ran into trouble while living with his mother. Singleton's film gave me and my
son a common point of reference in discussing important issues between black fathers and
sons. In this chapter, I discuss the predicament of black American men while reflecting on
Singleton's mature-beyond-his-twenty-three-years vision of the social situation of black
masculinity, and the equally intelligent writing of his screenplay. I don't fail to notice the
film's troubling gender politics—that only black men can rear black men, a fact rebutted by
the wise, brave black women who do it every day. Still, I applaud Singleton's cautionary
tale of the disappearing black father, a disappearance often supported by the culture and
underwritten by the state. This film remains the high-water mark of Singleton s career.
BY NOW THE DRAMATIC DECLINE IN BLACK male life has become an un-
mistakable feature of our cultural landscape, although of course the causes be-
hind the desperate condition of black men date much further back than its recent
popular discovery. Every few months, new reports and conferences attempt to
explain the poverty, disease, despair, and death that shove black men toward so-
cial apocalypse.
If these words appear too severe or hyperbolic, the statistics testify to the
trauma. For black men between the ages of eighteen and twenty-nine, suicide is
the leading cause of death. Between 1980 and 1985, the life expectancy for white
males increased from 63 to 74.6 years, but only from 59 to 65 years for black
males. Between 1973 and 1986, the real earnings of black males between the ages
of eighteen and twenty-nine fell 31 percent, as the percentage of young black
males in the workforce plummeted 20 percent. The number of black men who
dropped out of the workforce altogether doubled from 13 percent to 25 percent.


--- PAGE 364 ---
John Singleton's Boyz N the Hood 335
By 1989, almost 32 percent of black men between sixteen and nineteen were
unemployed, compared with 16 percent of white men. And while blacks consti-
tute only 12 percent of the nation's population, they make up 48 percent of the
prison population, with men accounting for 89 percent of the black prison popu-
lation. Only 14 percent of the white males who live in large metropolitan areas
have been arrested, but the percentage for black males is 51 percent. And while 3
percent of white men have served time in prison, 18 percent of black men have
been behind bars.1
Most chilling, black-on-black homicide is the leading cause of death for black
males between the ages of fifteen and thirty-four. Or, to put it another way,
"One out of every twenty-one black American males will be murdered in their
lifetime. Most will die at the hands of another black male." These words appear
in stark white print on the dark screen that opens John Singleton's masterful
new film, Boyz N the Hood. These words are both summary and opening salvo in
Singleton's battle to reinterpret and redeem the black male experience. With
Boyz N the Hood we have the most brilliantly executed and fully realized portrait
of the coming-of-age odyssey that black boys must undertake in the suffocating
conditions of urban decay and civic chaos.
Singleton adds color and depth to Michael Schultz's groundbreaking Cooley
High, extends the narrative scope of the Hudlin Brothers' important and humor-
ous House Party, and creates a stunning complement to Gordon Parks's pioneering
Learning Tree, which traced the painful pilgrimage to maturity of a rural black
male. Singleton's treatment of the various elements of contemporary black urban
experience—gang violence, drug addiction, black male-female relationships, do-
mestic joys and pains, friendships—is subtle and complex. He layers narrative tex-
tures over gritty and compelling visual slices of black culture that show us what it
means to come to maturity, or die trying, as a black male.
Singleton's noteworthy attempt to present a richly hued, skillfully nuanced por-
trait of black male life is rare in the history of American film. Along with the sem-
inal work of Spike Lee, and the recently expanded body of black film created by
Charles Burnett, Robert Townsend, Keenan Wayans, Euzhan Palcy, Matty Rich,
Mario Van Peebles, Ernest Dickerson, Bill Duke, Charles Lane, Reginald and
Warrington Hudlin, Doug McHenry, George Jackson, and Julie Dash, Singleton
symbolizes a new generation of black filmmakers whose artistic visions of
African-American and American life may influence understandings of black
worldviews, shape crucial perceptions of the sheer diversity of black communities,
and address substantive racial, social, and political issues.
A major task, therefore, of African-American film criticism is to understand
black film production in its historical, political, socioeconomic, ideological, and
cultural contexts. Such critical analysis has the benefit of generating plausible ex-
planations of how black film developed; what obstacles it has faced in becoming
established as a viable and legitimate means of representing artistic, cultural, and
racial perspectives on a range of personal and social issues; the ideological and


--- PAGE 365 ---
336 THE MICHAEL ERIC DYSON READER
social conditions which stunted its growth, shaped its emergence, and enabled its
relatively recent success; and the economic and political forces which limited the
material and career options of black filmmakers and constrained the opportuni-
ties for black artists to flourish and develop in a social environment hostile to
black artistic production.
Another task of African-American film criticism is to provide rigorous tools of
analysis, categories of judgment, and modes of evaluation that view the artistic
achievements of black filmmakers in light of literary criticism, moral philosophy,
feminist theory, intellectual history, cultural studies, and poststructuralist theory.
African-American film criticism is not a hermetically sealed intellectual discourse
that generates insight by limiting its range of intellectual reference to film theory,
or to African American culture, in interpreting the themes, ideas, and currents of
African-American film. Rather, African-American film criticism draws from the
seminal insights of a variety of intellectual traditions in understanding and ex-
plaining the genealogy, scope, and evolution of black artistic expression. In short,
black film criticism does not posit or constitute a rigidly defined sphere of aca-
demic analysis or knowledge production, but calls into question regimented con-
ceptions of disciplinary boundaries while promoting the overlapping and inter-
penetration of diverse areas of intellectual inquiry.
Finally, African-American film criticism is related to the larger task of sustain-
ing a just, enabling, but rigorous African-American cultural criticism that revels
in black culture's virtues, takes pleasure in its achievements, laments its failed op-
portunities, and interrogates its weaknesses. African-American cultural criticism
is intellectually situated to disrupt, subvert, and challenge narrow criticisms or
romantic celebrations of black culture. A healthy African-American cultural crit-
icism views black folk not as mere victims in and of history, but as its resource-
ful co-creators and subversive regenerators. It understands black people as
agents of their own jubilation and pain. It sees them, in varying degrees and in
limited manner, as crafters of their own destinies, active participants in the con-
struction of worlds of meaning through art, thought, and sport that fend off
threatening enclosure by the ever enlarging kingdom of absurdity. In this light,
African-American film criticism pays attention to, and carefully evaluates, the
treatment of crucial aspects of black culture in black films. Singleton's film ad-
dresses one of the most urgent and complex problems facing African-American
communities: the plight of black men.
We have just begun to understand the pitfalls that attend the path of the black
male. Social theory has only recently fixed its gaze on the specific predicament of
black men in relation to the crisis of American capital, positing how their lives are
shaped by structural changes in the political economy, for instance, rather than
viewing them as the latest examples of black cultural pathology.2 And social psy-
chology has barely explored the deeply ingrained and culturally reinforced self-
loathing and chronic lack of self-esteem that characterizes black males across age
groups, income brackets, and social locations.


--- PAGE 366 ---
John Singleton's Boyz N the Hood 337
Even less have we understood the crisis of black males as rooted in childhood
and adolescent obstacles to socioeconomic stability and moral, psychological, and
emotional development. We have just begun to pay attention to specific rites of
passage, stages of personality growth, and milestones of psychoemotional evolu-
tion that measure personal response to racial injustice, social disintegration, and
class oppression.
James P. Comer and Alvin F. Poussaint's Black Child Care, Marian Wright Edel-
man's Families in Peril, and Darlene and Derek Hopson's foundational Different and
Wonderful are among the exceptions that address the specific needs of black child-
hood and adolescence. Jewell Taylor-Gibbs's edited work, Young, Black and Male in
America: An Endangered Species, has recently begun to fill a gaping void in social-
scientific research on the crisis of the black male.
In the last decade alternative presses have vigorously probed the crisis of the
black male. Like their black independent filmmaker peers, authors of volumes
published by black independent presses often rely on lower budgets for advertis-
ing, marketing, and distribution. Nevertheless, word-of-mouth discussion of sev-
eral books has sparked intense debate. Nathan and Julia Hare's Bringing the Black
Boy to Manhood: The Passage, Jawanza Kunjufu's trilogy, The Conspiracy to Destroy
Black Boys, Amos N. Wilson's The Developmental Psychology of the Black Child, Baba
Zak A. Kondo's For Homebcys Only: Arming and Streng thening Young Brothers for Black
Manhood, and Haki Madhubuti's Black Men: Obsolete, Single, Dangerous? have had an
important impact on significant subsections of literate black culture, most of
whom share an Afrocentric perspective.
Such works remind us that we have too infrequently understood the black male
crisis through coming-of-age narratives and a set of shared social values that ritu-
alize the process of the black adolescent's passage into adulthood. Such narratives
and rites serve a dual function: they lend meaning to childhood experience, and
they preserve and transmit black cultural values across the generations. Yet such
narratives evoke a state of maturity—rooted in a vital community—that young
black men are finding elusive or, all too often, impossible to reach. The conditions
of extreme social neglect that besiege urban black communities—in every realm
from health care to education to poverty and joblessness—make the black male's
passage into adulthood treacherous at best.
One of the most tragic symptoms of the young black man's troubled path to
maturity is the skewed and strained state of gender relations within the black
community. With alarming frequency, black men turn to black women as scape-
goats for their oppression, lashing out, often with physical violence, at those clos-
est to them. It is the singular achievement of Singleton's film to redeem the power
of the coming-of-age narrative while also adapting it to probe many of the very
tensions that evade the foundations of the coming-of-age experience in the black
community.
While mainstream American culture has only barely begun to register aware-
ness of the true proportions of the crisis, young black males have responded in the


--- PAGE 367 ---
338 THE MICHAEL ERIC DYSON READER
last decade primarily in a rapidly flourishing independent popular culture, domi-
nated by two genres: rap music and black film. The rap music of Run-D.M.C.,
Public Enemy, Boogie Down Productions, Kool Moe Dee, N.W.A., Ice Cube, and
Ice-T, and the films of Spike Lee, Robert Townsend, and now Matty Rich and
Mario Van Peebles have afforded young black males a medium in which to visu-
alize and verbalize their perspectives on a range of social, personal, and cultural
issues, to tell their stories about themselves and each other while the rest of Amer-
ica consumes and eavesdrops.
John Singleton's new film makes a powerful contribution to this enterprise. Sin-
gleton filters his brilliant insights, critical comments, and compelling portraits of
young black male culture through a film that reflects the sensibilities, styles, and
attitudes of rap culture.3 Singleton's shrewd casting of rapper Ice Cube as a cen-
tral character allows him to seize symbolic capital from a real-life rap icon, while
tailoring the violent excesses of Ice Cube's rap persona into a jarring visual re-
minder of the cost paid by black males for survival in American society. Singleton
skillfully integrates the suggestive fragments of critical reflections on the black
male predicament in several media and presents a stunning vision of black male
pain and possibility in a catastrophic environment: South Central Los Angeles.
Of course, South Central Los Angeles is an already storied geography in the
American social imagination. It has been given cursory—though melodramatic-
treatment by news anchor Tom Brokaw's glimpse of gangs in a highly publicized
1988 TV special, and has been mythologized in Dennis Hopper's film about gang
warfare, Colors. Hopper, who perceptively and provocatively helped probe the
rough edges of anomie and rebellion for a whole generation of outsiders in 1969's
Easy Rider, less successfully traces the genealogy of social despair, postmodern
urban absurdity, and yearning for belonging that provides the context for under-
standing gang violence. Singleton's task in part, therefore, is a filmic demytholo-
gization of the reigning tropes, images, and metaphors that have expressed the ex-
perience of life in South Central Los Angeles. While gangs are a central part of
the urban landscape, they are not its exclusive reality. And although gang warfare
occupies a looming periphery in Singleton's film, it is not the defining center.
Unquestionably, the 1991 urban rebellions in Los Angeles following the Rod-
ney King verdict have given new poignancy to Singleton's depiction of the vari-
ous personal, social, and economic forces which shape the lives of the residents of
South Central L. A. His film was an incandescent and prescient portrait of the sim-
mering stew of social angers-aimed at police brutality, steeply declining property
values, poverty, and virile racism—which aggravate an already aggrieved commu-
nity and which force hard social choices on neighborhoods (do we riot in our
own backyards; do we maliciously target Korean businesses, especially since the
case of Latasha Harlins, a black teenager murdered by a Korean grocer, who was
simply given five years probation; and do we destroy community businesses and
bring the charge of senseless destruction of resources in our own community
when in reality, before the riots, we were already desperate, poor, and invisible,


--- PAGE 368 ---
John Singleton's Boyz N the Hood 339
and largely unaided by the legitimate neighborhood business economy?) amount-
ing to little more than communal triage. Singleton's film proves, in retrospect, a
powerful meditation upon the blight of gang violence, hopelessness, familial dete-
rioration, and economic desperation which conspire to undermine and slowly but
surely destroy the morale and structure of many urban communities, particularly
those in South Central L.A.
Boyz N the Hood is a painful and powerful look at the lives of black people,
mosdy male, who live in a lower-middle-class neighborhood in Soudi Central Los
Angeles. It is a story of relationships-of kin, friendship, community, love, rejec-
tion, contempt, and fear. At the story's heart are three important relationships: a
triangular relationship between three boys, whose lives we track to mature ado-
lescence; the relationship between one of the boys and his father; and the rela-
tionship between the other two boys and their mother.
Tre (Cuba Goodingjr.) is a young boy whose mother Reva Devereaux (Angela
Bassett), in an effort to impose discipline upon him, sends him to live with his fa-
ther across town. Tre has run afoul of his elementary school teacher for challeng-
ing both her authority and her Eurocentric curriculum. And Tre's life in his
mother's neighborhood makes it clear why he is not accommodating well to
school discipline. By the age of ten, he has already witnessed the yellow police
tapes that mark the scenes of crimes and has viewed the blood of a murder vic-
tim. Fortunately for Tre, his mother and father love him more than they couldn't
love each other.
Doughboy (former N.W.A. rapper Ice Cube, in a brilliant cinematic debut) and
Ricky (Morris Chestnut) are half-brothers who live with their mother Brenda
(Tyra Ferell) across the street from Tre and his father. Brenda, as a single black
mother, belongs to a much maligned group, whose members, depending on the
amateurish social theory that wins the day, are vilified with charges of promiscuity,
judged to be the source of all that is evil in the lives of black children, or at best
stereotyped as helpless beneficiaries of the state. Singleton artfully avoids these car-
icatures by giving a complex portrait of Brenda, a woman who is plagued by her
own set of demons, but who tries to provide the best living she can for her sons.
Even so, Brenda clearly favors Ricky over Doughboy—and this favoritism will
bear fatal consequences for both boys. Indeed in Singleton's cinematic worldview
both Ricky and Doughboy seem doomed to violent deaths because—unlike Tre—
they have no male role models to guide them. This premise embodies one of the
film's central tensions-and one of its central limitations. For even as he assigns
black men a pivotal role of responsibility for the fate of black boys, Singleton also
gives rather uncritical precedence to the impact of black men, even in their ab-
sence, over the efforts of present and loyal black women who more often prove to
be at the head of strong black families.
While this foreshortened view of gender relations within the black community
arguably distorts Singleton's cinematic vision, he is nonetheless remarkably per-
ceptive in examining the subtle dynamics of the black family and neighborhood,


--- PAGE 369 ---
340 THE MICHAEL ERIC DYSON READER
tracking the differing effects that the boys' siblings, friends, and environment
have on them. There is no bland nature-versus-nurture dichotomy here: Single-
ton is too smart to render life in terms of a Kierkegaardian either/or. His is an
Afrocentric world of both/and.
This complex set of interactions-between mother and sons, between father
and son, between boys who benefit from paternal wisdom or maternal ambitions,
between brothers whose relationship is riven by primordial passions of envy and
contempt, between environment and autonomy, between the larger social struc-
ture and the smaller but more immediate tensions of domestic life—define the cen-
tral shape of Hood. We see a vision of black life that transcends insular preoccu-
pations with "positive" or "negative" images and instead presents at once the
limitations and virtues of black culture.
As a result, Singleton's film offers a plausible perspective on how people make
the choices they do—and on how choice itself is not a property of autonomous
moral agents acting in an existential vacuum, but rather something that is created
and exercised within the interaction of social, psychic, political, and economic
forces of everyday experience. Personal temperament, domestic discipline,
parental guidance (or its absence) all help shape our understanding of our past
and future, help define how we respond to challenge and crisis, and help mold
how we embrace success or seem destined for failure.
Tre's developing relationship with his father, Furious Styles (Larry Fish-
burne), is by turns troubled and disciplined, sympathetic and compassionate-
finely displaying Singleton's open-ended evocation of the meaning of social
choice as well as his strong sensitivity to cultural detail. Furious Styles's
moniker vibrates with double meaning, a semiotic pairing that allows Singleton
to signify in speech what Furious accomplishes in action: a wonderful amalgam
of old-school black consciousness, elegance, style, and wit linked to the hip-hop
fetish of "dropping science" (spreading knowledge) and staying well informed
about social issues.
Only seventeen years Tre's senior, Furious understands Tre's painful boyhood
growth and identifies with his teen aspirations. But more than that, he possesses
a sincere desire to shape Tre's life according to his own best lights. Furious is the
strong presence and wise counselor who will guide Tre through the pitfalls of
reaching personal maturity in the chaos of urban childhood, the very sort of pres-
ence denied to so many in Hood, and in countless black communities throughout
the country.
Furious, in other words, embodies the promise of a different conception of
black manhood. As a father he is disciplining but loving, firm but humorous, de-
manding but sympathetic. In him, the black male voice speaks with an authority
so confidendy possessed and equitably wielded that one might think it is strongly
supported and valued in American culture, but of course that is not so. The
black male voice is rarely heard without the inflections of race and class domi-
nation that distort its power in the home and community, mute its call for basic


--- PAGE 370 ---
John Singleton's Boyz N the Hood 341
respect and common dignity, or amplify its ironic denial of the very principles of
democracy and equality that it has publicly championed in pulpits and political
organizations.
Among the most impressive achievements of Singleton's film is its portrayal of
the neighborhood as a "community." In this vein Singleton implicitly sides with
the communitarian critique of liberal moral autonomy and atomistic individual-
ism.4 In Hood people love and worry over one another, even if they express such
sentiments roughly. For instance, when the older Tre crosses the street and sees a
baby in the path of an oncoming car, he swoops her up and takes her to her crack-
addicted mother. Tre gruffly reproves her for neglecting her child and insists that
she change the baby's diapers before the baby smells as bad as her mother. And
when Tre goes to a barbecue for Doughboy, who is fresh from a jail sentence,
Brenda beseeches him to talk to Doughboy, hoping that Tre's intangible magic
will "rub off on him."
But Singleton understands that communities embody resistance to the ano-
nymity of liberal society as conceived in Aristotle via Maclntyre. His film por-
trays communities as more heterogeneous, complex, and diverse, however, than
the ideal of consensus that grounds Maclntyre's conception of communities,
which is at least partially mediated through a common moral vocabulary. Single-
ton's neighborhood is a community precisely because it turns on the particularity
of racial identity, and the contradictions of class location, that are usually muted
or eradicated in mainstream accounts of moral community. Such accounts tend to
eliminate racial, sexual, gender, and class difference in positing the conditions that
make community possible, and in specifying the norms, values, and mores which
regulate moral discourse and that structure communal behavior. Singleton's film
community is an implicit argument for the increased visibility of a politics of dif-
ference within American culture, a solemn rebuke to the Capraesque representa-
tion of a socially and economically homogeneous community.5
The quest for community represented in Singleton's film is related to the quest
for intellectual community facilitated by certain modes of African-American cul-
tural criticism. By taking black folk seriously, by taking just measure of their in-
tellectual reflections, artistic perceptions, social practices, and cultural creations,
the black cultural critic is seeking both to develop fair but forceful examination of
black life, and to establish a community of interlocutors, ranging from high-brow
intellectuals to everyday folk, whites and people of color alike, who are interested
in preserving black culture's best features, ameliorating its weakest parts, and
eradicating its worst traits.
Of course, specific moments of black cultural criticism also help shed light on
aspects of black artistic production that may be overlooked or underestimated in
much of mainstream criticism. A crucial role for African-American cultural criti-
cism is to reveal historical connections and thematic continuities and departures
between black films and issues debated over time and space in African-American
society. By doing so, the black cultural critic illumines the material interests of


--- PAGE 371 ---
342 THE MICHAEL ERIC DYSON READER
black filmmakers, while drawing attention to the cultural situation of black film
practice. Singleton's depiction of community provides a colorful lens on problems
which have long plagued black neighborhoods.
Singleton understands that communities, besides embodying the virtuous ends
of their morally prudent citizens, also reflect the despotic will of their fringe citi-
zens who threaten the civic pieties by which communities are sustained. Hood's
community is fraught with mortal danger, its cords of love and friendship under
the siege of gang violence, and by what sociologist Mike Davis calls the political
economy of crack.6 Many inner-city communities live under what may be called
a " juvenocracy": the economic rule and illegal tyranny exercised by young black
men over significant territory in the black urban center. In the social geography of
South Central L.A., neighborhoods are reconceived as spheres of expansion
where urban space is carved up according to implicit agreements, explicit arrange-
ments, or lethal conflicts between warring factions.
Thus, in addition to being isolated from the recognition and rewards of the
dominant culture, inner-city communities are cut off from sources of moral au-
thority and legitimate work, as underground political economies reward consent-
ing children and teens with quick cash, faster cars, and sometimes, still more rapid
death.7 Along with the reterritorialization of black communal space through gen-
trification, the hegemony of the suburban mall over the inner-city and downtown
shopping complex, and white flight and black track to the suburbs and exurbs,
the inner city is continually devastated.
Such conditions rob the neighborhood of one of its basic social functions and
defining characteristics: the cultivation of a self-determined privacy in which resi-
dents can establish and preserve their identities. Police helicopters constantly
zoom overhead in Hood's community, a mobile metaphor of the ominous surveil-
lance and scrutiny to which so much of poor black life is increasingly subjected.
The helicopter also signals another tragedy, which Hood alludes to throughout its
narrative: ghetto residents must often flip a coin to distinguish Los Angeles' po-
lice from its criminals. After all, this is Darryl Gates's L.A.P.D., and the recent
Rodney King incident only underscores a long tradition of extreme measures that
police have used to control crime and patrol neighborhoods.8 As Singleton wrote
after the rebellion:
Anyone who has a moderate knowledge of African-American culture knows
this was foretold in a thousand rap songs and more than a few black films. When
Ice Cube was with NWA (Niggas With Attitude), he didn't write the lyrics to
"Fuck tha Police" just to be cute. He was reciting a reflection of reality as well as
fantasizing about what it would be like to be on the other end of the gun when
it came to police relations. Most white people don't know what it is like to be
stopped for a traffic violation and worry more about getting beat up or shot than
paying the ticket. So imagine, if you will, growing up with this reality regardless
of your social or economic status. Fantasize about what it is to be guilty of a


--- PAGE 372 ---
John Singleton's Boyz N the Hood 343
crime at birth. The crime? Being born black .... By issuing that verdict, the jury
violated not only Rodney King's civil rights, not only the rights of all African-
Americans, but also showed a lack of respect for every law-abiding American
who believes in justice. (Singleton, 75)
Furious's efforts to raise his son in these conditions of closely surveilled social an-
archy reveal the galaxy of ambivalence that surrounds a conscientious, community-
minded brother who wants the best for his family, but who also understands the so-
cial realities that shape the lives of black men. Furious's urban cosmology is
three-tiered: at the immediate level, the brute problems of survival are refracted
through the lens of black manhood; at the abstract level, large social forces such as
gentrification and the military's recruitment of black male talent undermine the
black man's role in the community; at the intermediate level, police brutality con-
tends with the ongoing terror of gang violence.
Amid these hostile conditions, Furious is still able to instruct Tre in the rules of
personal conduct and to teach him respect for his community, even as he schools
him in how to survive. Furious says to Tre, "I know you think I'm hard on you.
I'm trying to teach you how to be responsible. Your friends across the street don't
have anybody to show them how to do that. You gon' see how they end up, too."
His comment, despite its implicit self-satisfaction and sexism (Ricky and Dough-
boy, after all, do have their mother, Brenda), is meant to reveal the privilege of a
young boy learning to face life under the shadow of fatherly love and discipline.
While Tre is being instructed by Furious, Ricky and Doughboy receive varying
degrees of support and affirmation from Brenda. Ricky and Doughboy have dif-
ferent fathers, both of whom are conspicuously absent. In Doughboy's case, how-
ever, his father is symbolically present in that peculiar way that damns the off-
spring for their resemblance in spirit or body to the despised, departed father. The
child becomes the vicarious sacrifice for the absent father, although he can never
atone for the father's sins. Doughboy learns to see himself through his mother's
eyes, her words ironically re-creating Doughboy in the image of his invisible fa-
ther. "You ain't shit," she says. "You just like yo' Daddy. You don't do shit, and
you never gonna amount to shit."
Brenda is caught in a paradox of parenthood, made dizzy and stunned by a vi-
cious circle of parental love reinforcing attractive qualities in the "good" and obe-
dient child, while the frustration with the "bad" child reinforces his behavior.
Brenda chooses to save one child by sacrificing the other—lending her action a
Styronian tenor, Sophie's choice in the ghetto. She fusses over Ricky; she fusses at
Doughboy. When a scout for USC's football team visits Ricky, Brenda can barely
conceal her pride. When the scout leaves, she tells Ricky, "I always knew you
would amount to something."
In light of Doughboy's later disposition toward women, we see the developing
deformations of misogyny. Here Singleton is on tough and touchy ground, link-
ing the origins of Doughboy's misogyny to maternal mistreatment and neglect.


--- PAGE 373 ---
344 THE MICHAEL ERIC DYSON READER
Doughboy's misogyny is clearly the elaboration of a brooding and extended
ressentiment, a deeply festering wound to his pride that infects his relationships with
every woman he encounters.
For instance, at the party to celebrate his homecoming from his recent incar-
ceration, Brenda announces that the food is ready. All of the males rush to the
table, but immediately before they begin to eat, Tre, sensing that it will be to his
advantage, reproves the guys for not acting gendemanly and allowing the women
first place in line. Doughboy chimes in, saying, "Let the ladies eat; ho's gotta eat,
too," which draws laughter, both from the audience with which I viewed the film
and from the backyard male crowd. The last line is a sly sample of Robert
Townsend's classic comedic send-up of fast-food establishments in Hollywood Shuf-
fle. When his girlfriend (Regina King) protests, saying she isn't a "ho," Doughboy
responds, "Oops, I'm sorry, bitch," which draws even more laughter.
In another revealing exchange with his girlfriend, Doughboy is challenged to
explain why he refers to women exclusively as "bitch, or ho, or hootchie." In try-
ing to reply, Doughboy is reduced to the inarticulate hostility (feebly mas-
querading as humor) that characterizes misogyny in general: " 'Cause that's what
you are."
"Bitch" and "ho," along with "skeezer" and "slut," have by now become the
standard linguistic currency that young black males often use to demonstrate their
authentic machismo. "Bitch" and equally offensive epithets compress woman-
hood into one indistinguishable whole, so that all women are the negative female,
the seductress, temptress, and femme fatale all rolled into one. Hawthorne's scar-
let A is demoted one letter and darkened; now an imaginary black B is embla-
zoned on the forehead of every female.
Though Singleton's female characters do not have center stage, by no means
do they suffer male effrontery in silent complicity. When Furious and Reva meet
at a trendy restaurant to discuss the possibility of Tre returning to live with his
mother, Furious says, "I know you wanna play the mommy and all that, but it's
time to let go." He reminds her that Tre is old enough to make his own decisions,
that he is no longer a little boy because "that time has passed, sweetheart, you
missed it." Furious then gets up to fetch a pack of cigarettes as if to punctuate his
self-satisfied and triumphant speech, but Tre's mother demands that he sit down.
As the camera draws close to her face, she subtly choreographs a black
woman's grab-you-by-the-collar-and-set-you-straight demeanor with just the right
facial gestures, and completes one of the most honest, mature, and poignant ex-
changes between a black man and a black woman in film history.
It's my turn to talk. Of course you took in your son, my son, our son and you
taught him what he needed to be a man. I'll give you that, because most men
ain't man enough to do what you did. But that gives you no reason, do you hear
me, no reason to tell me that I can't be a mother to my son. What you did is no
different from what mothers have been doing from the beginning of time. It's just


--- PAGE 374 ---
John Singleton's Boyz N the Hood 345
too bad more brothers won't do the same. But don't think you're special. Maybe
cute, but not special. Drink your cafe au lait. It's on me.
Singleton says that his next film will be about black women coming of age, a
subject left virtually unexplored in film. In the meantime, within its self-limited
scope, Hood displays a diverse array of black women, taking care not to render
them as either mawkish or cartoonish: a crack addict who sacrifices home, dig-
nity, and children for her habit; a single mother struggling to raise her sons; black
girlfriends hanging with the homeboys but demanding as much respect as they
can get; Brandi (Nia Long), Tre's girlfriend, a Catholic who wants to hang on to
her virginity until she's sure it's the right time; Tre's mother, who strikes a
Solomonic compromise and gives her son up rather than see him sacrificed to the
brutal conditions of his surroundings.
But while Singleton ably avoids flat stereotypical portraits of his female charac-
ters, he is less successful in challenging the logic that at least implicitly blames sin-
gle black women for the plight of black children.9 In Singleton's film vision, it is
not institutions like the church that save Tre, but a heroic individual-his fadier
Furious. But this leaves out far too much of the picture.
What about the high rates of black female joblessness, the sexist job market
that continues to pay women at a rate that is 70 percent of the male wage for com-
parable work, the further devaluation of the "pink collar" by lower rates of med-
ical insurance and other work-related benefits, all of which severely compromise
the ability of single black mothers to effectively rear their children?10 It is the ab-
sence of much more than a male role model and the strength he symbolizes that
makes the life of a growing boy difficult and treacherous in communities such as
Soudi Central L.A.
The film's focus on Furious's heroic individualism fails, moreover, to fully ac-
count for the social and cultural forces that prevent more black men from being
present in the home in the first place. Singleton's powerful message, that more
black men must be responsible and present in the home to teach their sons how
to become men, must not be reduced to the notion that those families devoid of
black men are necessarily deficient and ineffective. Neither should Singleton's crit-
ical insights into the way that many black men are denied the privilege to rear
their sons be collapsed to the idea that all black men who are present in their fam-
ilies will necessarily produce healthy, well-adjusted black males. So many clarifi-
cations and conditions must be added to the premise that only black men can rear
healthy black males that it dies the death of a thousand qualifications.
In reality, Singleton's film works off the propulsive energies that fuel deep and
often insufficiently understood tensions between black men and black women. A
good deal of pain infuses relations between black men and women, recently dra-
matized with the publication of Shahrazad Ali's infamous and controversial un-
derground bestseller, The Blackmail's Guide to Understanding the Blackwoman. The
book, which counseled black women to be submissive to black men and which


--- PAGE 375 ---
346 THE MICHAEL ERIC DYSON READER
endorsed black male violence toward women under specific circumstances,
touched off a furious debate that drew forth the many unresolved personal, social,
and domestic tensions between black men and women.11
This pain follows a weary pattern of gender relations that has privileged con-
cerns defined by black men over feminist or womanist issues. Thus, during the
civil rights movement, feminist and womanist questions were perennially de-
ferred, so that precious attention would not be diverted from racial oppression
and the achievement of liberation.12 But this deference to issues of racial freedom
is a permanent pattern in black male-female relations; womanist and feminist
movements continue to exist on the fringe of black communities.13 And even in
the Afrocentric worldview that Singleton advocates, the role of black women is
often subordinate to the black patriarch.
Equally as unfortunate, many contemporary approaches to the black male cri-
sis have established a rank hierarchy that suggests that the plight of black men is
infinitely more lethal, and hence more important, than the condition of black
women. The necessary and urgent focus on the plight of black men, however,
must not come at the expense of understanding its relationship to the circum-
stances of black women.
At places, Singleton is able to subtly embody a healthy and redemptive vision
of black male-female relations. For instance, after Tre has been verbally abused
and physically threatened by police brutality, he seeks sanctuary at Brandi's
house, choreographing his rage at life in South Central by angrily swinging at
empty space. As Tre breaks down in tears, he and Brandi finally achieve an au-
thentic moment of spiritual and physical consummation previously denied them
by the complications of peer pressure and religious restraint. After Tre is assured
that Brandi is really ready, they make love, achieving a fugitive moment of true
erotic and spiritual union.
Brandi is able to express an unfettered and spontaneous affection that is not a
simplistic "sex-as-proof-of-love" that reigns in the thinking of many teen world-
views. Brandi's mature intimacy is both the expression of her evolving woman-
hood and a vindication of the wisdom of her previous restraint. Tre is able at once
to act out his male rage and demonstrate his vulnerability to Brandi, thereby ar-
guably achieving a synthesis of male and female responses and humanizing the
crisis of the black male in a way that none of his other relationships—even his re-
lationship with his father—are able to do. It is a pivotal moment in the develop-
ment of a politics of alternative black masculinity that prizes the strength of sur-
render and cherishes the embrace of a healing tenderness.
As the boys mature into young men, their respective strengths are enhanced and
their weaknesses exposed. The deepening tensions between Ricky and Doughboy
break out into violence when a petty argument over who will run an errand for
Ricky's girlfriend provokes a fistfight. After Tre tries unsuccessfully to stop the
fight, Brenda runs out of the house, divides the two boys, slaps Doughboy in the
face, and checks Ricky's condition. "What you slap me for?" Doughboy repeat-


--- PAGE 376 ---
John Singleton's Boyz N the Hood 347
edly asks her after Ricky and Tre go off to the store. She doesn't answer, but her
choice, again, is clear. Its effect on Doughboy is clearer still.
Such everyday variations on the question of choice are, again, central to the
world Singleton depicts in Hood. Singleton obviously understands that people are
lodged between social structure and personal fortune, between luck and ambition.
He brings a nuanced understanding of choice to each character's large and small
acts of valor, courage, and integrity that reveal what contemporary moral philoso-
phers call virtue.14 But they often miss what Singleton understands: character is
not only structured by the choices we make, but by the range of choices we have
to choose from—choices for which individuals alone are not responsible.
Singleton focuses his lens on the devastating results of the choices made by
Hood's characters, for themselves and for others. Hood presents a chain of choices,
a community defined in part by the labyrinthine array of choices made and the
consequences borne, to which others must then choose to respond. But Singleton
does not portray a blind fatalism or a mechanistic determinism; instead he dis-
plays a sturdy realism that shows how communities affect their own lives and how
their lives are shaped by personal and impersonal forces.
Brenda's choice to favor Ricky may not have been completely her own—all the
messages of society say that the good, obedient child, especially in the ghetto, is
the one to nurture and help—but it resulted in Doughboy's envy of Ricky and
contributed to Doughboy's anger, alienation, and gradual drift into gang violence.
Ironically and tragically, this constellation of choices may have contributed to
Ricky's violent death when he is shot by members of a rival gang as he and Tre
return from the neighborhood store.
Ricky's death, in turn, sets in motion a chain of choices and consequences.
Doughboy feels he has no choice but to pursue his brother's killers, becoming a
more vigilant keeper to his brother in Ricky's death than he could be while Ricky
lived. Tre, too, chooses to join Doughboy, thereby repudiating everything his fa-
ther taught and forswearing every virtue he has been trained to observe. When
he grabs his father's gun and is met at the door by Furious, the collision between
training and instinct is dramatized on Tre's face, wrenched in anguish and tears.
Though Furious convinces him to relinquish the gun, Furious's victory is only
temporary. The meaning of Tre's manhood is at stake; it is the most severe test he
has faced, and he chooses to sneak out of the house to join Doughboy. All Furi-
ous can do is tensely exercise his hands with two silver balls, which in this con-
text are an unavoidable metaphor for how black men view their fate through their
testicles, which are constantly up for grabs, attack, or destruction. Then sometime
during the night, Tre's impassioned choice finally rings false, a product of the
logic of vengeance he has desperately avoided all these years; he insists that he be
let out of Doughboy's car before they find Ricky's killers.
Following the code of male honor, Doughboy kills his brother's killers. But the
next morning, in a conversation with Tre, he is not so sure of violence's mastering
logic anymore, and says that he understands Tre's choice to forsake Doughboy's


--- PAGE 377 ---
348 THE MICHAEL ERIC DYSON READER
vigilante mission, even as he silently understands that he is in too deep to be able
to learn any other language of survival.
Across this chasm of violence and anguish, the two surviving friends are able
to extend a final gesture of understanding. As Doughboy laments the loss of his
brother, Tre offers him the bittersweet consolation that "you got one more brother
left." Their final embrace in the film's closing moment is a sign of a deep love that
binds brothers; a love, however, that too often will not save brothers.
The film's epilogue tells us that Doughboy is murdered two weeks later, pre-
sumably to avenge the deaths of Ricky's killers. The epilogue also tells us that Tre
and Brandi manage to escape South Central as Tre pursues an education at More-
house College, with Brandi at neighboring Spelman College. It is testimony to the
power of Singleton's vision that Tre's escape is no callow Hollywood paean to the
triumph of the human spirit (nor is it, as some reviewers have somewhat per-
versely described the film, "life-affirming"). The viewer is not permitted to forget
for a moment the absurd and vicious predictability of the loss of life in South Cen-
tral Los Angeles, a hurt so colossal that even Doughboy must ask, "If there was a
God, why he let mothefuckers get smoked every night?" Theodicy in gangface.
Singleton is not about to provide a slick or easy answer. But he does powerfully
juxtapose such questions alongside the sources of hope, sustained in the heroic
sacrifice of everyday people who want their children's lives to be better. The work
of John Singleton embodies such hope by reminding us that South Central Los
Angeles, by the sheer power of discipline and love, sends children to college, even
as its self-destructive rage sends them to the grave.


--- PAGE 378 ---
Twenty-Five
G H E T T O C E N T R I C I T Y AND THE
NEW BLACK CINEMA
This re/lection on the rise of a ghetto aesthetic in black cinema was first published in
the British magazine Sight and Sound. Later I revised it for publication in other
venues, most notably in Carol Becker's wonderful collection of essays on art and social
responsibility entitled Subversive Imagination. I examine a gaggle of films that
were released in the late '80s to the mid '90s. Most take their cues from hip-hop
culture and its preoccupation with masculinity as much as from earlier film culture.
Addressing the work of Lee, Singleton, Matty Rich, Ernest Dickerson, and Mario
Van Peebles, I argue that the themes, strategies, images, and symbols they employ
represent a coming of age for a generation of directors who seek to portray the
particularities of black life. At the end of this essay, I call for black male film
directors to probe female identities and the relation of black men to women with the
same insight and skill the best of them bring to masculinity, hip-hop, and the class
line. I surmised that only with the emergence of female directors would the complexity
of female identities get a full airing on film. The rise of Julie Dash, Leslie Harris,
and Euzhan Palcy pointed the way to Kasi Lemmons and Gina Prince-Bythewood
and hopefully, in the near future, to a body of criticism worthy of their talents.
THE EXPLOSION OF CONTEMPORARY BLACK CINEMA, along with the emer-
gence of hip-hop culture, expresses the pervasive influence of African American
styles, sensibilities, and ideas in American popular culture. The narrative strategies
that black filmmakers employ, and the images, symbols, and themes black film-
makers present, are important because they embody the coming of age of a new
generation of artists dedicated to portraying the complexities and peculiarities of
black life. Given the wretched history of often distorted, even racist, representa-
tions of black life viewed through the prism of white cultural producers, the rise of
a new black cinema promises the articulation of artistic visions of black life beyond
the troubled zone of white representational authority and mainstream interpreta-
tive dominance.
A sharp analytical understanding of the narrative strategies, themes, symbols,
and images of contemporary black filmmakers is crucial in developing a sophisti-
cated critical vocabulary that may be employed to interrogate the cultural and


--- PAGE 379 ---
350 THE MICHAEL ERIC DYSON READER
artistic practices of the new black cinema. The development of such a critical vo-
cabulary encourages and enables the examination of the artistic perceptions and
representations of black filmmakers; a wide-ranging exploration of the material
conditions and social situations of their cultural production; an astute analysis of
the goals, aims and objectives of black film; and a rigorous engagement with the
cultural contradictions and political determinants of black film production.
A select group of new black films, in particular, investigates the politics of black
masculinity and its relationship to the ghetto culture in which ideals of masculin-
ity are nurtured and shaped. Concepts of masculinity are central to contemporary
cultural debates within African American society, especially given the crisis of
black manhood and the widespread attention it has received in the last few years,
especially within rap music and black film. Malcolm X is the unifying cultural sig-
nifier for the powerful premise of an overhauled black masculinity within a broad
variety of contemporary black cultural expressions, the vibrant hero of a black ju-
venile cultural imagination seeking to contest the revived racism and increasing
social despair of American life.
The relationship between concepts of masculinity and social responsibility is
strongly implied in the life, thought, and career of Malcolm X, whose influence
on contemporary black filmmakers cannot be underestimated. In one reading,
black filmmakers can be seen as cultural interpreters of the socially responsible di-
mensions of black masculinity as they are taken up in the organs of American
popular culture, particularly within African American life. In another reading, the
work of black filmmakers can be read symptomatically, as examples of the failure
or success of artistic explorations of masculinity to probe the healthy and pro-
ductive—or unhealthy and disenabling—consequences of black manhood within
African American life, particularly as it takes shape in the black ghetto and often
in relation to black female identity.
In this essay, I will probe the treatment of the ghetto and black manhood in sev-
eral black films, examining the artistic visions of directors in relation to their re-
sponsibility in forming images of these twin subjects. In the process, I hope to il-
lumine the ethics of representation and characterize the manner in which these
films both enable and resist helpful understandings of black masculinity, espe-
cially in connection with their views of black female subjectivity.
Matty Rich's Straight Out of Brooklyn is a relentlessly desolate rejection of the
logic of liberal democracy: that individuals can act to realize themselves and en-
hance their freedom through the organs of the community or the state. For the in-
habitants of Brooklyn's Red Hook Housing Project, the possibilities of self-
realization and freedom are infinitely reduced by the menacing ubiquity of the
ghetto. The suppressed premise of Rich's film—the steely argument for its exis-
tence at all—is a deferred rebuke to all pretensions that the ghetto is not a totaliz-
ing force, that it is possible to maintain the boundaries between geography and
psychic health implied by the expression: Live in the ghetto, but don't let the
ghetto live in you. It is precisely in showing that the ghetto survives parasitically—


--- PAGE 380 ---
Ghettocentricity and the New Black Cinema 351
that its limits are as small or as large as the bodies it inhabits and destroys—that
Brooklyn achieves for its auteur a distinct voice among black filmmakers while es-
tablishing the film's thematic continuity with black popular culture's avid explo-
ration of black, urban (male) identities.
After disappearing for a while from the intellectual gaze of the American acad-
emy and being obscured from mainstream cultural view by the virulent narcis-
sism of nouveau riche yuppies and the fragile gains of an increased black middle
class, the ghetto has made a comeback at the scene of its defeat. The reinvention
of American popular culture by young African American cultural artists is fueled
by paradox: Now that they have escaped the fiercely imposed artistic ghetto that
once suffocated the greatest achievements of their predecessors, black artists have
reinvented the urban ghetto through a nationalist aesthetic strategy whose inter-
pretative seam joins racial naturalism and romantic imagination. That the most
recent phase of black nationalism is cultural rather than political suggests the ex-
tent to which the absorption of radical dissent into mainstream politics has been
successful and expresses the hunger of black juvenile culture for the intellectual
sources of its hypnotic and feral remix of pride and anger.
Mostly anger, and a little pride, stirs in the fragmented lives of teenager Dennis
Brown (Lawrence Gilliard Jr.), his younger sister Carolyn (Barbara Sanon), and
their parents Frankie (Ann D. Sanders) and Ray (George T. Odom). Each in his
and her own way is the prisoner of an existential and ecological misery so great
that its pervasive presence would suggest the impossibility of charting its affects
and differentiating its impact across the spectra of gender and class within the
community. In Rich's dark ghetto, it appears that all such difference is smothered
by the lethal hopelessness spread thickly over the lives of its inhabitants in equally
devastating portions.
But the exception to this apparently equally shaded misery is the extraordi-
narily acute misery of black men, seen first in the cinematic chiaroscuro of Ray's
descent into a Dantean hell of racial agony so absurd and grotesque that its bleak-
ness is a sadistic comfort, a last stop before absurdity turns to insanity. Ray's grad-
ual decline is suffered stoically by Frankie, a doleful throwback to an earlier and
dispiriting racial era when the black-woman-as-suffering-servant role was forced
on black women by black men forced to pay obeisance to white society who,
when they came home, expected to claim the rewards and privileges of masculin-
ity denied them in the white world. The only other model lifted to black women
consisted of an equally punishing (and mythic) black matriarchy that both
damned and praised black women for an alleged strength of character absent in
their feckless male counterparts. Thus, the logic of black communities ran: As the
black man's fate goes, so goes the fate of the family.
Brooklyn's implicit narrative line ties generously into the fabric of this ideologi-
cal argument, drawing its dramatic punch and denouement from the furious cat-
astrophes that sweep down on its black male characters, the defining center of the
film's raw meditation on the angst of emasculation. Ray's frequent beatings of


--- PAGE 381 ---
352 THE MICHAEL ERIC DYSON READER
Frankie are rituals of self-immolation, her brutally bloodied countenance a tan-
gential sign of his will to redefine the shape of his agony by redefining the shape
of her face. Moreover, Ray's suffering-as-emasculation is further sealed by his de-
nial of desire for white women during a Lear-like verbal jousting with an imagi-
nary white man, a deus ex machina produced by his search for an explanation of
his suffering and a dramatic ploy by Rich that ascribes black suffering to the om-
nipotent white bogeyman. And Dennis's out loud soliloquies in the presence of
his girlfriend Shirley (Reana E. Drummond) about his quest for capital to reverse
his family's collapse belies a deeper need to redeem black masculinity by display-
ing his virility, his goal to be the man that successfully provides for his family al-
lied disastrously with his gratuitous desires to "get paid."
A different tack was pursued in John Singleton's Boyz N the Hood. Singleton's
neorealist representation of the black working-class ghetto neighborhood pro-
vided a fluid background to his literate script, which condensed and recast the de-
bates on black manhood that have filled the black American independent press
for the last decade. Abjuring the heavy-handed approach of negative racial didac-
ticism, Singleton retraced instead the lineaments of the morality play in recogniz-
able black cultural form, richly alluding to black particularity while keeping his
film focused on The Message: Black men must raise black boys if they are to be-
come healthy black men. Thus Tre (Cuba Goodingjr.), Ricky (Morris Chestnut),
and Doughboy (Ice Cube), the three black males whose lives form the fabric of
Singleton's narrative quilt, are the film's interpretative center, while Reva (Angela
Bassett), Brenda Baker (Tyra Ferrell), and Brandi (Nia Long), the mothers of Tre,
Ricky, and Doughboy, respectively, and Tre's girlfriend occupy its distant periph-
ery. Singleton's film—as is the case with most cultural responses to black male cri-
sis—is an attempt to answer Marvin Gaye's plea to save the babies, while focusing
his lens specifically on the male baby that he and many others believe has been
thrown out with the bath water to float up the river, like Doughboy and one out
of four black men, into the waiting hands of the prison warden.
But Singleton's moral premise, like so many claims of black male suffering, rests
dangerously on the shoulders of a ruinous racial triage: black male salvation at the
expense of black female suffering, black male autonomy at the cost of black female
subordination, black male dignity at the cost of black female infirmity. Once and for
all, Singleton's film jarred into visibility the inadvertent yet unseemly alliance be-
tween black cultural nationalists and the cultured despisers of black women. His im-
plicit swipe at black women ceded too much ideological territory and argued too lit-
tle with white and black conservative social scientists who lament the demise of
American culture because it is in the lethal embrace of welfare queens and promis-
cuous black women. The brilliant presence of Furious (the father of Tre, played by
Larry Fishburne) as a redemptive and unswerving North Star, and Brenda's uncer-
tain orbit as a dim satellite, offer the telling contrast in Singleton's cinematic world.
This premise would seem achingly anachronistic, the warmed up leftovers from
black macho posturing painfully evident in '60s black nationalist discourse, were


--- PAGE 382 ---
Ghettocentricity and the New Black Cinema 353
it not for its countless updates in the narrative strains of black juvenile culture, rei-
fied to patriarchal perfection in rap lyrics that denounce the racist dominance of
white men while glorifying without irony black male material dominance and
sexual mastery of black female life. Of course, the quest for black manhood is
everywhere apparent in black culture; note its evocation as well in the upper
climes of bourgeois respectability as the implicit backdrop to Clarence Thomas's
claim of perfidy by Anita Hill, the innuendo of his charge only faintly arrested in
the racial code of his undertone: anodier sister pulling a brother down. But it is
with the reemergence of the ghetto in popular culture and its prominence in a re-
vived black nationalist cultural politics, where, for better and worse, the images of
black masculinity find a discursive home.
This is especially true of black film and rap music. The politics of cultural na-
tionalism has reemerged precisely as the escalation of racist hostility has been
redirected to poor black people. Given the crisis of black bourgeois political lead-
ership, and a greater crisis of black liberal social imagination about the roots of
black suffering, black nationalist politics reemerge as the logical means of remedy
and resistance. Viewed against this backdrop, black film and rap music are the
heightened imaginary of black popular culture, the self-announced apotheosis of
a black populist aesthetic that occludes the seepage of authentic blackness into di-
luted cultural expression.
Rap music grew from its origins in New York's inner city over a decade ago as
a musical outlet to creative cultural energies, and to contest the invisibility of the
ghetto in mainstream American society. Rap remythologized New York's status as
the spiritual center of black America, boldly asserting appropriation and splicing
(not originality) as the artistic strategies by which the styles and sensibilities of
black ghetto youth would gain popular influence. Rap developed as a relatively
independent expression of black male artistic rebellion against the black bour-
geois Weltanschauung, tapping instead into the cultural virtues and vices of the so-
called underclass, romanticizing the ghetto as the fecund root of cultural identity
and authenticity, the Rorschach of legitimate masculinity and racial unity.
The sensibilities afforded by the hip-hop aesthetic have found expression in
many recent black films. New Jack City, for instance, is rife with the feral fusion of
attitude and style as the replacement of substantive politics that prevails among
young black males, especially those profiting from the underground political
economy of crack. Similar to Boyz N the Hood, with Ice Cube (Doughboy) and
Juke, with Tupac Shakur (Bishop), New Jack City appeals directly to the iconic sur-
plus of hip-hop culture by drawing upon rapper Ice-T to convey the film's thinly
supplied and poorly argued moral message: Crime doesn't pay.
Thus, Ice-T's "new jack cop" is an inside joke, a hip-hop reconfiguration of the
tales of terror Ice-T explodes on wax as a lethal pimp, dope dealer, and bitch
hater. The adoption of the interchangeable persona as the prerogative of mood
and message in the culture of hip-hop is taken to its extreme with Ice-T's charac-
ter: Even though he appears as a cop in New Jack City, his appearance on the


--- PAGE 383 ---
354 THE MICHAEL ERIC DYSON READER
sound track as a rapper detailing his exploits as a criminal blurs the moral dis-
tinctions between cops and robbers, criminalizes the redemptive intent of his film
character (even more so retroactively in light of the recent controversy over his hit
"Cop Killer" recorded with his speed metal band).
Director Mario Van Peebles's cinematic choices in New Jack City expose as well
the vocabulary of overlarge and excessive cultural representation that character-
ized many ghetto films of old. Van Peebles's ghetto is a sinister and languid dun-
geon of human filth and greed drawn equally from cartoon and camp. The sheer
artifice of New Jack City's ghetto is meant to convey the inhuman consequences of
living in this enclave of civic horror, but its overdrawn dimensions reveal its cine-
matic pedigree that can be traced more easily to '70s blaxploitation flicks than to
the neorealist portrayal of carnage wreaked by the ghetto's bleak persistence pre-
sented in other recent black ghetto films.
As a black gangster film, New Jack City links its genre's appeal to the Cagneyization
of black ghetto life, the inexorable force of women bashing and partner killing sweep-
ing the hidden icon of the people to a visible position larger than life. Thus Nino
Brown (Wesley Snipes) reigns because he tests the limits of the American Dream, a
Horatio Alger in blackface who pulls himself up by forging consensus among his
peers that his life is a ghetto jeremiad, a strident protest against the unjust limits im-
posed on black male material flourishing. As Nino intones with full awareness of the
irony of his criminal vocation: "You got to rob to get rich in the Reagan era."
But it is the state of black male love that provides the story's unnarrated plot,
its twisted pursuit ironically and tragically trumped by boys seeking to become
men by killing each other. Thus, when a crying Nino embraces his teary-eyed
closest friend and partner in crime, G-Money, on the top of the apartment build-
ing that provides the mise-en-scene for the proverbial ode to an empire gone, de-
stroyed by the fatal winds of undisciplined ambition, Nino hugs G-Money tight,
avowing his love even as he fills his belly with steel as recompense for G-Money's
treacherous disloyalty. It is the tough love of the gang in action, the logic of
vengeance passing as justice in gang love's final fulfillment of its unstated but
agreed-upon obligations.
The mostly black and Latino gangs have also recaptured the focus of American
social theory and journalism in the past decade. Urban sociologists such as New
York's Terry Williams, in his important Cocaine Kids, and Los Angeles's Mike
Davis, in City of Quartz, have written insightfully about the economic and social
conditions that have led to the emergence of contemporary black and Latino gang
culture, citing especially the yearning for love and social acceptance that animates
such aggregation. And former-model-turned-journalist Leon Bing has interviewed
Los Angeles gang members, who speak eloquently about their own lives in words
as moving for their emotional directness as their honesty about the need for af-
fection and comfort that drives them into mutual association. In Straight Out of
Brooklyn and Ernest Dickerson's Juice, the theme of black male love in the ghetto
filtered through the prism of gang or crew association looms large.


--- PAGE 384 ---
Ghettocentricity and the New Black Cinema 355
In Brooklyn, Rich presents a loosely associated group of three black male teens,
including Dennis, Kevin (Mark Malone), and Larry (played by Rich), who are
frustrated by poverty and the closure of personal and vocational horizons that
lack of money has come to signify. Whereas in Juice the crushing consequences of
capital's absence is more skillfully explored through the interactions between the
characters—its damning effects as subdy evoked in the resonances of anger and
gestures of surrender and regret weaved into the moral texture of the film's dia-
logue as they are dramatically revealed in the teens' action in the streets—in Brook-
lyn, money-'s power more crudely signifies in the lifeless representation of large
material and sexual icons that dominate the landscape of dreams expressed by
Dennis and his friends: big cars, more money, and mo' ho's.
The lifelessness of the ghetto is reified in the very textu(r)al construction
through which the movie comes to us: Although it's in color, the film seems eerily
black and white, its crude terms of representation established by its harsh video
quality and its horizontal dialogue. Of course, the film's unavoidable amateur
rawness is its premise of poignancy: After all, this is art imitating life, the searing
vision of a nineteen-year-old Brooklyn youth, with little financial aid and the last-
minute gift of film roll from Jonathan Demme (himself a renegade of sorts before
his Hollywood breakthrough with the troubled Silence of the Lambs), committing his
life to a film drawn partially from real-life events. This is the closest derivation in
film of the guerrilla methods of hip-hop music culture, the sheer projection of will
onto an artistic canvas constituted of the rudimentary elements of one's life in the
guise of vision and message.
In Brooklyn, the triumvirate of teens is not a roving, menacing crew engaging in
the business of selling crack rock and duplicating capitalism's excesses on their
native terrain. Rather, they are forced by desperation to a momentary relief of
their conditions by robbing a dope dealer, an impulse that is routinized and insti-
tutionalized in the crack gang, whose cannibalistic rituals of gunplay and murder
feed on the lives of opponents out to seize their turf in the harrowing geopolitics
of the drug economy.
The anomie and alienation produced by everyday forms of capitulation to de-
spair, and the spiraling violence of Ray, force Dennis from his family to affectionate
camaraderie with Larry and Kevin, and with Shirley. All other hints of family are
absent, save Larry's barber uncle, who unwittingly provides the ill-named getaway
car for their ill-fated heist. But the existential vacuum at home for Dennis is made
more obvious by Ray's attempt to preserve the disappearing remnants of a "tradi-
tional" family, angrily reminding Dennis after he misses dinner that his empty plate
on the table symbolizes his membership in the family. But Rich shatters this icon of
familial preservation into shards of ironic judgment on the nuclear family, as Ray
breaks the dishes and beats Frankie each time he becomes intoxicated.
Dennis's only relief is Shirley and his crew. When Shirley disappoints him by
refusing to buy into his logic about escape from the ghetto by robbery, he turns
to members of his crew, who in the final analysis leave Dennis to his own wits


--- PAGE 385 ---
356 THE MICHAEL ERIC DYSON READER
when they agree that they have stolen too much cash ("killing money," Kevin
says) from the local dope dealer, an act whose consequences roll back on Dennis
in bitter irony when the heist leads to his father's death. The film's dismal and in-
escapable conclusion is that black men cannot depend on each other, nor can they
depend on their own dreams to find a way past their mutual destruction.
In Juice, the crew is more tightly organized than in Brooklyn, although their ac-
tivity, like the teens from Red Hook, is not regularized primarily for economic
profit. Their salient function is as a surrogate family, their substitute kinship
formed around their protection of each other from rival gangs and the camaraderie
and social support their association brings. But trouble penetrates the tightly
webbed group when the gangster ambitions of Bishop threatens their equanimity.
Of all the crew—leader Raheem (Khalil Kain), a teen father; Q(Omar Epps), a DJ
with ambitions to refine his craft; and Steel (Jermaine Hopkins), a likable youth
who is most notably "the follower"-Bishop is the one who wants to take them to
the next level, to make them like the hard-core gangsters he watches on television.
Viewing Cagney's famed ending in White Heat and a news bulletin announc-
ing the death of an acquaintance as he attempted armed robbery, Bishop rises to
proclaim Cagney's and their friend's oneness, lauding their commendable
bravado by taking their fate into their own hands and remaking the world on
their own violent terms. Dickerson's aim here is transparent: to highlight the link
between violence and criminality fostered in the collective American imagination
by television, the consumption of images through a medium that has replaced
the Constitution and the Declaration of Independence as the unifying fiction of
national citizenship and identity. It is also the daily and exclusive occupation of
Bishop's listless father, a reminder that television's genealogy of influence un-
folds from its dulling effects in one generation to its creation of lethal desires in
the next, twin strategies of destruction when applied in the black male ghetto.
Like the teens in Brooklyn, Juice's crew must endure the fatal consequences of
their failed attempt at getting paid and living large, two oft-repeated mantras of
material abundance in the lexicon of hip-hop culture. After Bishop's determina-
tion to seize immortality by the throat leads him to kill without provocation or
compunction the owner of the store they rob, the terms of his Faustian bargain
are more clearly revealed when he kills Raheem, destroying all claims of brother-
hood with a malicious act of willful machismo, succeeding to Raheem's throne by
murderous acclamation.
Dickerson, who has beautifully photographed all of Spike Lee's films, uses
darker hues than characteristic of his work with Lee, but nowhere near those of
the drained colored canvas on which Brooklyn is drawn. Dickerson's moral strat-
egy is to elaborate to its fatal ends the contradictory logic of the gang as a family
unit, a faulty premise as far as he is concerned which overlooks the lack of moral
constraints that ultimately do not work without destructive consequences. His
aesthetic strategy is to move the cameras with the action from the observer's
frame of reference, borrowing a few pages from Lee's book without mimicking


--- PAGE 386 ---
Ghettocentricity and the New Black Cinema 357
Lee's panache for decentering the observer through unusual angles and the fast
pace of editing. Like Rich in Brooklyn, Dickerson wants the impact of his message
to hit home, but he employs a less harsh method, a gender but insistent drawing
into his moral worldview, an invitation to view the spectacle of black male loss of
love by degrees and effects.
In Juice, the ghetto working-class family is much more visible and vital than in
Brooklyn. Mothers and fathers wake their children in the morning for breakfast
and make certain they take their books to school. The extended family is even
given a nice twist when Q fetches a gun from one of his mother's old friends, a
small-time neighborhood supplier. And Dickerson draws attention subtly to the
contrasts between the aesthetic and moral worldviews of the generations, and the
thriving of an earlier era's values among the younger generation, at the dinner at
Raheem's family's house after Raheem's funeral. As snatches of gospel music
float gently through the house, Q and Steel pay their respects to Raheem's family.
When Bishop arrives, the rupture between generational values forces to the
surface the grounds of choice upon which each of the remaining three crew must
stand. Q and Steel are offended at Bishop's effrontery, his mean-spirited and near
demented hypocrisy leading him to violate Raheem's sacred memory with this
latest act born of unbridled machismo and hubris. For them, the choice is clear.
The religious values signified in the quiet gospel music seem no longer foreign,
gently providing a vivid counterpoint to the hip-hop aesthetic of violent
metaphors in the service of greater self-expression.
Instead, the gospel music and the world of black respectability it symbolizes
carry over into their grieving acknowledgment of the bonds between them and
their departed friend, a sure sign of their surviving religious sensibilities bred
from birth and inbred for life, no matter how distant they appear to be from its
central effects. Bishop's traduction of Raheem's memory and family signify the
depth of Bishop's moral failure, the unblinking abandon to which his wanton acts
of violence have given portentous license. Unlike the black teens in Brooklyn's
ghetto, the black males can depend upon one another, but only after being forced
to acknowledge their debts to the moral infrastructure given them by a predeces-
sor racial culture, and only after discovering the limits of their freedom in de-
structive alliance with each other.
Unquestionably, the entire contemporary debate within black culture about
black film and its relation to enabling or destructive representations of black
males, and the consequences of the cinematic choices made about black females
vis-a-vis these representations, started with the meteoric rise of Spike Lee, a key
flashpoint in the resurgence of black nationalism in African American culture.
With Lee's groundbreaking She's Gotta Have It, young black men laid hold of a
cultural and artistic form—the Hollywood film—from which they had with rare ex-
ception been previously barred. By gaining access to film as directors, young
black men began to seize interpretative and representational authority from os-
tensibly ignorant or insensitive cultural elites whose cinematic portrayals of blacks


--- PAGE 387 ---
358 THE MICHAEL ERIC DYSON READER
were contorted or hackneyed, the ridiculously bloated or painfully shriveled dis-
figurements of black life seen from outside of black culture. Lee's arrival promised
a new day beyond stereotype.
What we get with Lee is Jungian archetype, frozen snapshots of moods in the
black (male) psyche photographed to brilliant effect by Ernest Dickerson. Lee's
mission to represent the variegated streams of black life denied cinematic conduits
before his dramatic rise, has led him to resolve the complexity and ambiguity of
black culture into rigid categories of being that hollow his characters' fierce and
contradictory rumblings toward authentic humanity. And after She's Gotta Have It,
black women became context clues to the exploration of black male rituals of so-
cial bonding (School Daze), the negotiation of black male styles of social resistance
(Do the Right Thing), the expansion and pursuit of black male artistic ambitions
(Mo' Better Blues), and the resolution of black male penis politics (Jungle Fever).
It was precisely Lee's cinematic representations of black male life that occa-
sioned the sound and fury of proleptic criticism over his latest and most impor-
tant project: his film biography of Malcolm X. Writer and social critic Amiri
Baraka drew blood in a war of words with Lee, claiming that Lee's poor history
of representing black men suggested that he would savage the memory of Mal-
colm X, a memory, by the way, to which Baraka presumed to have privileged ac-
cess. This battle between the two diminutive firebrands, ironic for its poignant
portrayal of the only logical outcome of the politics of more-black-nationalist-
than-thou, a game Lee himself has played with relish on occasion, was but a fore-
taste of the warfare of interpretation waged in light of Lee's portrait of X.
Malcolm X is the reigning icon of black popular culture, his autobiography the
Ur-text of contemporary black nationalism. His legacy is claimed by fiercely com-
peting groups within black America, a fact certain to make Lee's film a hard sell
to one faction or the other. More importantly, X's complex legacy is just now
being opened to critical review and wider cultural scrutiny, and his hagiographers
and haters will rush forward to have their say once again.
To many, however, Malcolm is black manhood squared, the unadulterated
truth of white racism ever on his tongue, the black unity of black people ever
on his agenda, the black people in ghetto pain ever on his mind. Thus, the films
that represent the visual arm of black nationalism's revival bear somehow the
burden of Malcolm X's implicit presence in every frame, his philosophy touch-
ing on every aspect of the issues the films frame—drugs, morality, religion,
ghetto life, and especially, unrelentingly, the conditions of being a black man.
For many, as for his eulogist Ossie Davis, Malcolm was the primordial, quin-
tessential Real Man.
But, as with the films of Dickerson, Lee, Rich, Singleton, and Van Peebles, this
spells real trouble for black women and for an enabling vision of black masculin-
ity that moves beyond the worst traits of X's lethal sexism. Gestures of X's new
attitude survive in the short hereafter Malcolm enjoyed upon his escape from
Elijah Muhammad's ideological straitjacket. Malcolm's split from the Nation of


--- PAGE 388 ---
Ghettocentricity and the New Black Cinema 359
Islam demanded a powerful act of will and self-reinvention, an unsparing com-
mitment to truth over habit. Lee's film reflects this Malcolm, though not in rela-
tion to his changed views about women. Although there are flashes of a subtly nu-
anced relationship between X and his wife Betty in Lee's film, as usual, Lee is
silent on the complexities of black female identity.
Only when black films begin to be directed by black women, perhaps, will the
wide range of identities that black women command be adequately represented
on the large screen. Powerful gestures toward black feminist and female-centered
film production exist in the work of Julie Dash in Daughters of the Dust and espe-
cially in Leslie Harris's Just Another Girl on the IRT.Less successful is John Single-
ton's flawed fbetic Justice. But until the collapse of the social, cultural, and eco-
nomic barriers that prevent the flourishing of black female film, such works
threaten to become exceptional, even novelty items in the black cultural imagina-
tion. In the meantime, black male directors remain preoccupied, even trapped, by
the quest for an enabling conception of black male identity. But its full potential
will continue to be hampered until they come to grips with the full meaning of
black masculinity's relationship to, and coexistence with, black women.


--- PAGE 389 ---
This page intentionally left blank


--- PAGE 390 ---
P A R T E L E V E N
THE SOUL MUSICS OF BLACK
F O L K
Black music is at the heart—some would argue, it is the heart—of black
existence, providing rhythms of consolation and inspiration to the some-
times harsh, dispiriting experiences of a despised and troubled people.
Gospel music expresses the spiritual genius of black sunnval, while soul
music articulates the desire for freedom and black self-de termination as
the civil rights movement unjolded. Rhythm and blues has captured the
gritty realities of secular black culture, while jazz music embodies the
democratic yeaniings and improvisational urges of black life. Hailing
from Detroit, music of all sorts pulses through my blood, and I have
taken special delight in writing about it as both a scholar and critic—and
best of all, as a fan.


--- PAGE 391 ---
This page intentionally left blank


--- PAGE 392 ---
Twenty- Six
THE PROMISE AND PERILS OF
CONTEMPORARY GOSPEL MUSIC
This chapter was first published in the New York Times (1991) and probes the
controversial rise of contemporary gospel music. I mention the work of the contemporary
gospel groups the Winans brothers, Take Six, Commissioned, and the solo artist Tramaine
Hawkins, before discussing at greater length the pioneering work of Edwin and Walter
Hawkins, and the superb artistry of Be Be and Ce Ce Winans. Such controversies in the
gospel music world in the late 1980s and early 1990s were glosses on earlier tensions
present at the birth of gospel music when Thomas Dorsey introduced blues chords and jazz
syncopations—as well as choir groups featuring women—into traditional black religious
music in the 1920s. The irony is that even traditional gospel music was seen at its
inception as a sacrilegious departure from the edi/ying quartet a capella singing of male
groups. If I were to write this article today, not much would have to change, except the
addition of contemporary gospel luminaries like Kirk Franklin, Donnie McClurkin, and
the brightest star of all, Jblanda Adams.
TRADITIONAL GOSPEL is THE MUSIC OF mass choirs, ecstatic solos, and
pounding, clapping rhythms. "Real gospel music is an intelligible sermon in
song," says Harold Bailey, who led the Harold Bailey singers in the 1960s and
1970s. Throughout its history, this church music has influenced, and been influ-
enced by, the popular music of its time.
Today's acts—like Be Be and Ce Ce Winans, Sounds of Blackness, Take Six,
Commissioned, Tramaine Hawkins, and the Winans brothers—have added high-
priced producers, up-tempo arrangements, and pop instrumentations to tradi-
tional gospel. Thus armed, they are gaining airplay on so-called contemporary
urban radio, home otherwise to acts like Michael Jackson, Luther Vandross,
Anita Baker, and C&C Music Factory. As gospel music gains new acceptance, it is
once again moving away from its roots.
Nash Shaffer, host of a traditional gospel program on Chicago radio station
WNDZ, is one of a number of gospel devotees who object to the recent popular-
ization of the music. "The reason young people like contemporary gospel music
is because of the rhythm and its secular appeal," says Shaffer, who is also the min-
ister of music for the Vernon Park Church of God in Chicago. "The horns and


--- PAGE 393 ---
364 THE MICHAEL ERIC DYSON READER
the synthesizers override the message, and because of the instrumentation the
message is vague and void. It gets lost in the beat and you end up having a
shindig on Sunday morning."
One group Shaffer is concerned about is Be Be and Ce Ce Winans, whose phe-
nomenal success started with a Grammy Award-winning debut album on Word
Records. In 1988 they signed with a mainstream label, and their first album on
the Capitol/Sparrow label, Heaven, was the second gospel record in history to go
gold, after Aretha Franklin's success in 1972 with Amazing Grace. The current
Winans album, Different Lifestyles, reached number one on the Billboard rhythm-
and-blues charts, a first for gospel.
The new album is a curriculum of musical diversity—from rap and up-tempo
rhythm-and-blues to a sample of a gospel shout. But it doesn't contain any purely
traditional gospel. The single "I'll Take You There," which is at number seven on
the rhythm-and-blues chart, is a remake of the Staple Singers, classic that allows
the Winans to pay tribute to a seductive blend of 1970s gospel and pop. The
album's first single, "Addictive Love," which went to number one on Billboard''?,
rhythm-and-blues chart, makes codependency with the divine a palatable propo-
sition. "We were blessed with a record company that put dollars into our budget,"
says Ge Ce Winans, "so that we could come off sounding the way we feel gospel
music should have sounded a long time ago."
The Winans help make visible the implicit sensuality of gospel music, a some-
times embarrassing gift that draws forth the repressed relationship between body
and soul. The suggestive ambiguity of their art is expressed in their songs, many
of which can be read as signs of romantic love and sensuous delight or as ex-
pressions of deep spiritual yearning and fulfillment. In "Depend on You," the
Winans sing, "I never thought that I could ever need someone / The way that I
have come to need you / Never dreamed I'd love someone / The way I've fallen
in love with you."
Such lyrics are exactly the problem, according to the traditionalists. "Whereas
traditional gospel music talks about the love of God," says Shaffer, "contempo-
rary gospel music wants to make love to God." Lisa Collins, who writes about
gospel music for Billboard magazine, says she receives calls from unhappy listen-
ers when she plays a new hit by Be Be and Ce Ce Winans on Inside Gospel, her
syndicated radio show. "We get numerous calls from listeners who think that
there's not enough reference to Jesus," she says, "that their music has strayed too
far from the church, that they water down the lyrics or that their music is play-
ing to a secular crowd. But," she adds, "if you go to their concerts, there is no
doubt that it is a ministry."
Ironically, traditional gospel music initially faced its own barriers within the
church. It was an offspring of blues, jazz, and ragtime music born in the black
Pentecostal churches at the end of the nineteenth century; early religious music
consisted of barbershop quartet harmonies sung a capella by mostly male groups.
A Chicago blues pianist named Thomas A. Dorsey forever changed black reli-


--- PAGE 394 ---
The Promise and Perils of Contemporary Gospel Music 365
gious music in the 1920s by featuring women (and later men) singing in a choir
tradition backed by piano accompaniments dipped in a blues base and sweetened
by jazz riffs. Before the belated embrace of gospel music by mainline black
churches in the 1940s, gospel thrived in mostly lower-class storefront Pentecostal
churches, stigmatized as a sacrilegious mix of secular rhythms and spiritual lyrics.
Traditional gospel greats, including the late Clara Ward, Marion Williams,
Roberta Martin, and Inez Andrews, took the exploration of jazz and blues further.
These artists harnessed the seductive beats of jazz to gospel's vibrant harmonies
and percolating rhythms, and transformed the anguished wails of the blues into
holy shouts brimming with deferred joy. Performers as varied as Ray Charles,
Aretha Franklin, and James Brown started out singing gospel, and the music can
be said to have spawned rhythm-and-blues, soul, and funk. Gospel music gained
wide popular acceptance with Clara Ward's appearance at the Newport Jazz Fes-
tival in 1957 and with the incomparable Mahalia Jackson's numerous concerts at
Carnegie Hall in the late 1950s and early 1960s. (Clara Ward, in fact, was criti-
cized in the 1960s for singing gospel music in Las Vegas.)
But gospel music's real transformation into a popular and contemporary musi-
cal art form was quietly affected by Edwin Hawkins's 1969 rhythm-and-blues-
influenced arrangement of the traditional Baptist hymn, "Oh, Happy Day." The
groundbreaking song was captured on a two-track recorder in the basement of a
California Pentecostal church and was performed by the North California State
Youth Choir, eventually selling more than 2 million copies. Edwin Hawkins's feat
prepared the way for two divergent but occasionally connected developments in
contemporary gospel music.
On the one hand, artists like Andrae Crouch and Hawkins's younger brother
Walter experimented with gospel within the boundaries of the religious world.
Their work was performed in church concerts and secular music halls to a largely
religious audience. Their appeal was primarily defined by young black Christians
seeking to maintain their religious identity. On the other hand, Edwin Hawkins's
success also broke ground for groups like the Staple Singers, who performed pri-
marily in secular musical arenas and whose themes and sound were adapted to
popular culture sensibilities and recast as "message music." Thus, instead of the
traditional gospel themes of God's love, grace, and mercy, the Staple Singers sang
about redemptive community and self-respect.
On their 1971 reggae-influenced number one soul and pop song, "I'll Take You
There," they claimed: "I know a place / Ain't nobody cryin' / Ain't nobody worried
/ Ain't no smilin' faces / Lyin' to the races / I'll take you there." And on their num-
ber two song, "Respect Yourself," from the same album, BeAUitude: Respect Yourself,
they sang: "If you disrespect everybody that you run into / How in the world do
you think anybody 'sposed to respect you? / Respect yourself." Their recordings
from the 1970s showcase three crucial features of contemporary gospel: significant
radio play on nonreligious formats, the broad use of pop music conventions to ex-
plore their musical ideas, and, at best, oblique references to divinity or God.


--- PAGE 395 ---
366 THE MICHAEL ERIC DYSON READER
In the last few years, black gospel music also inspired a group of white religiously
oriented singers like Amy Grant and Michael W. Smith, who are considered con-
temporary Christian musicians. (The dividing line between black gospel and con-
temporary Christian music is primarily racial, although black artists like Be Be and
Ce Ce Winans, Take Six, and Larnelle Harris also show up on the contemporary
Christian charts.) Traditional gospel music has never been completely comfortable
with its parentage of black secular music, In the early parts of this century, frequent-
ing nightclubs, blues bars, and dance halls was considered un-Christian and was for-
bidden. And there are still those who feel that the secular world should be kept out
of the church. Harold Bailey, who is now the director of Probation Challenge, an or-
ganization that works with former prisoners in Chicago, says, "When we speak in
terms of contemporary we are speaking of something temporary, of the moment,
which is contrary to scripture. Those who want to rock will inevitably roll into hell."
The sound of contemporary gospel, many devotees of traditional gospel say, is
indistinguishable from new jack swing or technofunk, and it thrives on postmod-
ern instrumentation, contemporary pop grooves, and religiously ambiguous
lyrics. Some contemporary gospel, in fact, is called new jack gospel: Teddy Riley,
who most recently produced Michael Jackson's Dangerous, also helped produce the
Winans brothers' album, The Return; and among contemporary gospel artists are
rappers like Mike E.
But a gnawing skepticism about the church's ability to address contemporary
cultural issues, coupled with a steep decline in church membership, may modify
the hard line taken by traditional religionists. Contemporary gospel music is help-
ing the uninitiated to discover, and the committed to remember, the church. One
contemporary gospel artist, Tramaine Hawkins, who was heavily criticized when
her single "Fall Down" was played in discos, says that the song "opened up some
real avenues of ministry" and brought listeners to more traditional gospel artists
like Shirley Caesar. "I tried contemporary gospel," confesses Caesar, "but it didn't
work for me." She believes that she is part of a venerable tradition to which all
gospel artists must return. "I'm part of the 'be' crowd," she explains. "I'll be here
when they leave, and I'll be here when they come back."
Ce Ce Winans says that contemporary gospel brings a wider audience to the
gospel message through high production values. "Being able to be played on
mainstream radio without having any less quality than mainstream artists is im-
portant," she says. Without serious record company support, she says, great
gospel singers of the past were deprived of a wide audience. For all its contro-
versy, contemporary gospel music continues to evolve and inspire. Groups like
Take Six, which mixes a capellajazz with gospel themes, and the Sounds of Black-
ness—produced by Jam and Lewis and presently touring with Luther Vandross—
prove that contemporary gospel is an art form as malleable as it is durable and in-
novative. And as contemporary gospel music continues to provide inspiration to
its religious adherents and musical delight to all appreciative listeners, it preserves
and extends the classic functions of traditional gospel music.


--- PAGE 396 ---
Twenty-Seven
When Mariah Carey emerged as a musical superstar in the early 1990s, a great deal of
attention was paid not only to her pipes but to her genes as well. As a biracial woman,
Carey evoked ancient racial tensions in a culture that embraced her music even as it
struggled to reconcile her identity to her artistry. After all, our country is obsessed with
racial pedigree and purity. This essay, which first appeared in the New York Times
in 1994, traces the racial tensions around Carey's racial identity, and takes the occasion
of her Music Box album's ascent to the top of the charts to reflect on how we
characterize "black" and "white" music. Interestingly, once Carey divorced husband and
music mogul Tommy Mottola (who most recently gained notoriety for being called "racist
and very, very, very devilish" by Michael Jackson), she became more radically identified
with the black music she loves, especially the hip-hop culture from which she had been
carejully steered away in her early career.
AT ITS BEST, POP MUSIC PRESSES AN ANXIOUS ear to American society, am-
plifying our deepest desires and fears. At times, too, pop music almost uncon-
sciously invites us to listen to ourselves in ways forbidden by cultural debates
where complexity is sacrificed for certainty. In this vein, the re-ascent to the top of
the charts of Mariah Carey's most recent album, Music Box, signals more than her
musical dominance.
One source of Carey's significance-and undoubtedly the sharpest controversy
around her—has nothing to do with the singer's gargantuan musical gifts. Instead it
derives from the confusion and discomfort that her multiracial identity provokes in
an American culture obsessed with race. Though she has made no secret that she is
biracial (her mother is white, her father a black Venezuelan), Carey's candor evokes
clashing responses from fans and critics. Some see her statement of mixed heritage
as a refusal to bow to public pressure to choose whether she is black or white. But
in light of the "one drop" rule—where a person is considered black by virtue of hav-
ing one drop of black blood, a holdover from America's racist past-many conclude
that the issue of racial identity, for Carey and other interracial people, is settled.
To make matters more complex, Carey's vocal style is firmly rooted in black
culture. It features a soaring soprano and an alternately ethereal and growling
MARIAH CAREY AND "AUTHENTIC"
BLACK MUSIC


--- PAGE 397 ---
368 THE MICHAEL ERIC DYSON READER
melisma that pirouettes around gospel-tight harmonies. So if she's not clearly
black yet sings in a black style, is she singing black music? And what difference
does it make? Without even trying, Carey's music sparks reflections about how
race continues to shape what we see and hear.
Partly what's at stake is the messy, sometimes arbitrary, politics of definition
and categorization. What makes music "black music" and who can be said to le-
gitimately perform it? Consider the fiery fusion of rock, soul, and blues performed
by Lenny Kravitz (like Carey, the child of an interracial marriage) and Terrence
Trent D'Arby, or the socially conscious hard rock of the group Living Color. Is
theirs black music? Though the answer is often negative, the roots of their music
can be traced to black cultural influences, from Howlin' Wolf to Jimi Hendrix.
The difficulty of fixing labels on what D'Arby, Kravitz, and Living Color do high-
lights the racial contradictions at the center of contemporary popular music.
Behind this painful, often protracted struggle to get at the "original article" is
what can only be termed the anxiety of authenticity. Such quests are more than
academic for black folk because of the history of appropriation and abuse of black
musical styles by white performers and producers. While black artists like King
Oliver and Chuck Berry initiated musical innovations from jazz to blues-based
rock and roll, the public recognition and economic benefits due them evaporated,
while derivative white artists like Benny Goodman and Elvis Presley reaped huge
artistic and financial rewards.
Curiously enough, the debate over authenticity lies at the heart of hip-hop,
though irreverence and transgression are staples of rap culture. But authenticity,
even in a genre as closely identified with black culture as rap, does not strictly fol-
low the rules of race. For instance, while the white rapper Vanilla Ice was greeted
within hip-hop with derision because he came off as a white boy trying to sound
black, white rap groups like Third Bass and House of Pain have been enthusias-
tically embraced because of their "legitimate" sounds and themes. Conversely,
black rap artists like Hammer and the Fresh Prince have been widely viewed as
sellouts because of their music's pop propensities.
An even thornier issue is the belief in black communities that some artists ob-
scure their racial roots in a natural but lamentable response to a racist environ-
ment. As a result, they benefit from being black (given the extraordinary popu-
larity of black music) but do not identify with the black people who support them
before they discover a crossover market. In the extreme, this circumstance leads
to the ideal of the pan-ethnic, omni-racial artist; an exotic fantasy whose energy
derives from an implicit denial of the inherent value of simply being black. While
Carey has been scrupulous at award ceremonies to thank her black fans, and to
mention her black father in interviews, artists like Paula Abdul (a self-described
"Syrian-Brazilian-Canadian-American" who first gained public notice as a "black"
cheerleader/choreographer for the Los Angeles Lakers) have increasingly under-
played their black heritage.


--- PAGE 398 ---
Mariah Carey and "Authentic" Black Music 369
Still, as the old saying goes, the finger pointed at artists implies several others
pointed back at ourselves. American culture is painfully redefining itself through
bitter debates about "identity politics," "multiculturalism," and "universalism."
Music cannot be naively expected to triumph over social differences. Because of
the schmaltz that often passes for conscience in pop, the dream of transcendence—
whether of race, or for that matter, of sex and class—is often hindered by sappy
appeals to brotherhood and oneness. What such impulses reflect is a desire to fix
what has gone wrong in a culture intolerant of difference.
The anxiety of authenticity about what and who is really black in pop music is
proportional to just how increasingly difficult it is to know the answer. As mul-
tiracial unions of sex and sound proliferate, the "one drop" rule may lose its
power. And, as cultural theorists are now proud to announce, race is not merely
a matter of biology but an artifice of cultural convention. Such a construction is
often used to establish and reinforce the power of one group over another. This
view does not mean that black music is solely the product of perception. Nor does
it mean that black music's power must be diluted to a generic form. What it does
suggest, however, is that the meaning of race, like the art it molds, is always
changing.
In the end, what Carey's career may teach us is that paranoia about purity is
the real enemy of black cultural expression, which at its best is characterized by
the amalgamation of radically different elements. Creolization, syncretism, and
hybridization are black culture's hallmarks. It is precisely in stitching together var-
ious fabrics of human and artistic experience that black musical artists have ex-
pressed their genius.


--- PAGE 399 ---
Twenty-Eight
ARETHA FRANKLIN, VANESSA BELL
ARMSTRONG, AND ME
7his is my ode to two of the greatest voices of the twentieth century. As it happens, both hail
from my hometown, giving them even greater resonance in my world. While Queen of Soul
Aretha franklin has rightfully been crowned a Hegelian world-historical genius of black
sound, gospel great Vanessa Bell Armstrong, another Detroit sonic marvel, deserves far
wider recognition. I first heard Aretha Franklin's voice as a youth who, besides reading,
listened to the radio to connect me to the broader world. Since the transistor trumped the
tube for me, Aretha's voice was the sound track to my burgeoning adolescence. Her wails,
shrieks, moans, and piercing cries urged me to see the depth and range of female emotion—
and to accept its moral authority. In this essay, I recall in detail how I first came across
Vanessa Bell Armstrongs throbbing, pulsing gift, and how I treasured its regal unleashing
before my very eyes and ears on foreign shores. This chapter from Why I Love Black
Women was a sheer pleasure to write. It embodies my profound appreciatimfor how the
voices of black women have rung clearly in my head to guide my path to manhood.
"LISTEN BROTHER, YOU'VE GOT TO COME OVER HERE RIGHT NOW," my
friend and fellow church member James Pippin excitedly demanded after I an-
swered the phone.
"What's wrong, Pip?" I anxiously replied. "You all right?"
"Man, I've got a copy of an album by a gospel singer who's gonna give Aretha
a run for her money," Pippin goaded me. He knew Aretha Franklin, the Queen of
Soul, was revered in my heart and that her pretty tones and thrilling shrieks often
vibrated the walls of my small apartment. I didn't have to tell him that to me his
egregious comparison was sacrilegious.
"Look, bro, you don't have to get all hyperbolic," I defensively responded. "If
you want me to come over, man, just say so. I'll see you as soon as I can get there."
"Oh, by the way, she's from Detroit." He got in a final tease, chuckling as he
clicked the receiver to its base.
Pippin was double-dipping in disaster. First, he had the nerve to challenge the
Queen's throne. And if that wasn't bad enough, he attempted to exploit my na-
tive passions by pitting one homegirl against the next, and worse yet, a seasoned
veteran—no, the reigning champion—against an untested newcomer. Nevertheless,


--- PAGE 400 ---
Aretha Franklin, Vanessa Bell Armstrong, and Me 371
I hopped into my wife's white mustang and made my way to Pippin's house. On
the long drive over, I couldn't help but think of how big a presence Aretha had
been in my life, how her voice had hovered over me and marked every stage of
my transition from boy to man.
To the world beyond the church, Aretha's freakish precocity seemed to emerge
fully formed from obscure origins in the Detroit neighborhood where her father,
C. L. Franklin, a noted preacher, brought her up. In fact, it was in Rev. Franklin's
legendary rhetorical womb that Aretha gestated before hatching her monumental
talent. As a bronze gospel wunderkind, Aretha's gift poured out in a theological
prescience so striking that her father, a past master himself of the far-flung ec-
stasies and esoteric vibrations of the black voice, must have felt that a double por-
tion of the Spirit, his spirit, had fallen on his woman-child. One can hear fourteen-
year-old Aretha on her first gospel recording declaring with unforced believability
that she was heading to a place where she would "Never Grow Old." Like all
great artists, Aretha was not so much speaking to us as speaking for us, at least
for the fortunate phalanx gathered at her father's New Bethel Baptist Church
where the recording took place. In Aretha's mouth, the gospel standard tem-
porarily dissolved its yearning for a distant heaven and seized her youthful form
to embody its promise right now.
My love for Aretha was inherited from my mother, who frequented New Bethel
when she arrived in Detroit from the South. Rev. C. L. Franklin was a "down-home"
preacher, a lionized pulpiteer whose homilies spread over seventy-six recordings that
found wide circulation in black communities throughout the nation. Ironically, I had
to go all the way to the country—to the Alabama farm of my grandparents on which
my mother was reared and where she picked cotton—to hear for the first time the or-
atorical wizardry of a Detroit icon. I listened rapdy and repeatedly to Franklin's
rhetorical gifts churning through my grandfather's archaic portable record player. He
possessed a powerful voice with a remarkably wide range. Franklin could effordessly
ascend to his upper register to squeal and squall. He was equally capable of de-
scending to a more moderate vocal hum and pitch, and then, at a moment's notice,
he could recompose in dramatic whisper. The velocity of his speech was no less im-
pressive, too. Franklin was the greatest exemplar of "whooping," or the "chanted ser-
mon," where ministers coarsen their articulation, deliberately and skillfully stress
their vocal cords, and transition from spoken word to melodious speech. He was the
shining emblem of folk poetry shaped in the mouth of a minister whose mind was
spry and keen. Franklin's style rarely undercut his substance.
Mama said that often, after Franklin finished his sermons, Aretha would rise
and escalate the spirit to even more frenzied highs. Years later, after searching for a
style to accommodate the magnitude of her art, Aretha would do the same in the
secular realm. She carried into the universe beyond revival tents and sanctuary
walls a religious passion for worldly subjects, among them the flourishing and fail-
ure of love affairs, and the pleasures of the senses. When Aredia switched from
gospel to rhythm and blues, she followed a path carved by such luminaries as Ray


--- PAGE 401 ---
372 THE MICHAEL ERIC DYSON READER
Charles and Sam Cooke. Because of their struggles, she didn't have to confront the
same degree of reproach they had endured. But she encountered her share of re-
sentment and anger among the faithful who believed that she had betrayed her
first love and highest calling. These same folk didn't understand that when Aretha
turned Otis Redding's song "Respect" into a quasi-feminist manifesto, she was, in-
tentionally or not, signifying on the lack of regard she faced as a woman in all her
homes, secular and sacred. While women largely filled its gospel choirs and sanc-
tuary seats, the church remained, in its powers, discretions, and privileges, a man's
world. Of course, so was the world outside the church, but at least women didn't
lose their dignity or self-worth by being asked to believe that God made it so.
Not even Aretha's successful reentries into the gospel world of her youth, one
in 1972, the other fifteen years later, have completely silenced the displeasure with
her defection among those old enough to remember it. Since her departure, there
has been an unspoken search for the next Aretha, for a successor who would stay
the course and sing only for the Lord. Neither would her critics be mollified by
C. L. Franklin's adroitly defensive claim on Aretha's 1972 gospel album, Amazing
Grace, that his daughter "never really left the church."
I kept this debate in mind as I pulled up to Pippin's brick house. Pippin and I
had weathered some hard times under the same umbrella. I had come to Knox-
ville in 1979 to begin my freshman year at Knoxville College, a month shy of my
twenty-first birthday. As a newly minted minister, I sought out a church home
where I could stimulate my faith and exercise my gifts, and I landed at the Mount
Zion Baptist Church. Pippin, an older, wiser big brother, often gave me a lift to
church since he worked nearby as a manager and disc jockey at a tiny radio sta-
tion. He also occasionally played percussions in a local combo.
Still, we were both poor. I preached wherever and whenever I could. Pippin
worked his various gigs to better financial effect, but it didn't take much to top the
$50 I received on a good day for a guest sermon. We often dined at "all-you-can-eat"
buffets, going in early, eating late breakfasts and early lunches, then remaining to
read papers and shoot the bull until we got hungry again for supper. Pippin also
shared with me promotional copies of forthcoming albums and tapes that he re-
ceived at the radio station. That's how he came across this vaunted Aretha successor.
"Come on in, man," Pippin greeted me at the door. "Gerri took the baby to visit
Mother Rosalyn, so we've got the house to ourselves."
Gerri was Pip's wife and a fantastic gospel singer and pianist in her own right.
Before I'd gotten married for the second time, Gerri, Pip, and I hung out regu-
larly, and she agreeably joined in many of our shenanigans.
"Now who's this singer you want me to hear?" I quizzed Pippin as I rested my
coat but not my questions. "Is she Baptist or Pentecostal? What church did she at-
tend? If she's so bad, how come I ain't never heard of her, and I'm from Detroit?"
"Take a chill pill and cool out, bro," Pippin calmly deflected my hazing. "I'm
gonna play her for you right now. I guarantee you that you'll be blown away."


--- PAGE 402 ---
Aretha Franklin, Vanessa Bell Armstrong, and Me 373
I suppose if Pippin's discovery had taken place in our more sophisticated tech-
nological era—a quick download and file sharing over the Internet—the mystery
could have been quickly solved. Back then, in 1984, in a failed Orwellian future,
we had to do it the old-fashioned way: stand before "The Stereo" and place the
stylus over the rotating, compressed wax and allow the analog vibrations to brush
across our soundscape and through our nearly busted woofers and tweeters.
As the familiar crackles and snaps surged through the speakers, and the needle
rapidly unraveled the tightly configured lines on the album's black face—and no
matter how expertly you cleaned your vinyl disc it was bound to emit faint noises
from a sharp object impressing a moving, flat surface—the turntable gyrated the
first few seconds of Pippin's latest find. I was unimpressed. It started with the syn-
diesized sound of rushing wind. It was quickly followed by four strident, gradu-
ated chords hammered by a cheesy synthesizer, underwritten by a scaling piano
smodiered in the faux-symphonic bluster of organ and chimes. A hokey effect
from an amateur outfit, I glibly, caustically concluded. I was slouched in my chair.
Then her voice broke in.
"Master," she began in an understated, clear alto declaration, delaying her next
words so we could fix our minds on the meaning of her lyrics as the piano
pounded out her deliberate pace. "The temp-ehhhhhhhhhest is ray-ging." Now I had
straightened my posture and leaned in as if to grab every syllable as it spilled
through the thinly wired netting of Pippin's stereo speakers. My delighted host was
grinning like a Cheshire cat. The singer slid up the word "tempest" like a plane ef-
fortlessly gliding into air, except she met self-induced sonic turbulence halfway
through. But she navigated her voice experdy amidst the deliberate gruffness she
evoked to stress the storm she was singing about. When she phrased "tempest" as
she did, she was skillfully performing what might be termed vernacular ono-
matopoeia. Her volcanic melisma dissolved peacefully into "raging"-an irony, to
be sure, as she contrasted, even opposed, the stormy condition she described by
drawing her voice back, at least for the present, into a serenely reassuring soprano.
I was intrigued. After singing about the billows tossing high in a steady voice, she
got guttural and let loose a minor vocal eruption as she raced up the scale in quak-
ing glissando, telling us the sky was "oh-oh-h-hh-vershadow-w-w-w-ed with black-
ness," with "black-ness" crisply and succinctly articulated.
On and on it went, as the singer unleashed growling, groaning, lacerating syl-
lables in wild succession, occasionally stopping on a dime to accentuate the in-
herent drama of her subject with an equally theatrical delivery. Okay, I thought,
maybe she has some Aretha-like ways, but I wasn't yet convinced she could hang
with the Queen. That is, until the middle of the song. She gave voice to a series
of otherworldly ejaculations that in their sheer force seemed to bend back the
cast-iron sleeves on Pippin's radiator. She built slowly to a pattern of repeating,
swelling crescendos that only intermittently resolved in sweetly whispered affir-
mations of God's peace in the midst of the storm. She rained down such ferocious


--- PAGE 403 ---
374 THE MICHAEL ERIC DYSON READER
assurances of divine intervention, that the storm from which she promised God's
protection seemed my only refuge.
There was no room in Pippin's house to hide from her voice, no spot untouched
by her vibrations, no plane unaffected by her seismic emissions, no space uninhab-
ited by her shaking, shouting, shivering, shearing sound. She unleashed an eviscer-
ating orchestration of notes to proclaim Jesus as "the Master, I'm talkin' 'bout the
Mas-turhhh"—and mind you, she's wailing at the tip-top of her surging soprano—"of
erher-herrrrrth and sky." She wasn't finished. "you see"—and in the background, the
choir in staccato affirmation picks up her cue and chants "the oh-cean," before she
picks back up and finishes the thought—"ohhhhhhhhohhhhhohhh so sweet-lay,
obey, they gonna obey, thy we-ee-ill." I was all but done. She had led me to the high-
est point of her shattering articulation and suddenly, precipitously dropped me off
a cliff of cascading sound into an ocean of humming tranquility. I could only slump
in my seat and let her soothing, hushing, calming benediction roll over me as she
and her choir called antiphonally for "pee-e-e-eee-e-e-eee-e-e-e-uh-yeece." For the
next thirty or so minutes, I was thrilled and thrashed by the merciless wave of
sounds that alternately tiptoed and tore from Pippin's speakers. In that time, I met
Aretha's sonic daughter, her gospel twin. It wasn't that their voices were necessarily
the same in construction-although they shared similarities of tone, pitch, and style
at points. But they were identical in effect, since both possessed a mesmerizing, tan-
talizing, enthralling gift that demanded notice.
I had no idea as I sat in Pippin's house, transfixed by a voice that I didn't be-
lieve could exist—and perhaps, didn't believe should exist—that six years later I
would meet its owner as we journeyed together to London with Jesse Jackson.
Like me, Jackson had heard that voice and was immediately smitten. He invited
me into his office one day early in 1990—1 was working with him on his autobi-
ography—and he enthusiastically located a track on a gospel compact disc he had
just received.
"Listen to this, Reverend, and tell me she ain't awesome," Jackson elatedly be-
seeched me. As soon as I heard her voice—that voice—I smiled.
"Yeah, she's incredible, amazing, Rev," I replied. "I've played all three of her al-
bums to death."
I didn't tell him the story of how we'd met, that voice and me, years earlier in
Pippin's house. But I told her when we enjoyed downtime in England. We'd gone
there with Jackson—me as his shadow amanuensis, she as his soloist, as he talked
and preached his way around London—to help celebrate Mandela's release from
prison, and to join in his campaign to keep the pressure on South Africa to end
apartheid through sanctions from the world community. Toward that end, Jack-
son would meet with the Mandelas at the London home of deposed African Na-
tional Congress leader Oliver Tambo, attend the Wembley Stadium concert for
the recently released hero, and, well, just be Jesse Jackson. And that meant that
Jackson would give sermons and speeches to galvanize international support for
South African freedom and black self-determination.


--- PAGE 404 ---
Aretha Franklin, Vanessa Bell Armstrong, and Me 375
When Jackson preached, she sang, and amazed the folk. She belted out gospel
ballads and gospel blues, reveling in contemporary and traditional, soulful and
jazzy, and even hipper, up-to-date songs dipped in the aesthetic fashions of black
pop music. She even wowed the rapturously raucous black crowd in Brixton, so
much so that Winnie Mandela grabbed her backstage and lifted her clean off the
ground, no mean feat in light of the singer's compact, substantial frame. And I re-
member thinking that as much as I admired Mrs. Mandela, she wasn't a woman
I'd ever want to tangle with.
Back at our hotel, I regaled the singer with the story of how I'd first heard her,
and how utterly powerful and riveting an occasion it had been. A wide, beautiful
smile broke across her attractive brown-doll face, set off by intense button eyes,
apple-red cheeks, and framed by lush, layered, reddish brown hair. She was cute
as pie and twice as sweet.
I reached into my garment bag and retrieved a copy of her first album, Peace Be
Still, the one that Pippin had snagged me with, which she happily signed for me,
ending with a common valedictory that still touched me deeply, "Love, Vanessa
Bell Armstrong."


--- PAGE 405 ---
Twenty-Nine
THE GREAT NEXT: JAZZ ORIGINS
AND THE ANATOMY OF IMPROVISATION
This interview, conducted by talented directors Maria Agui Carter and Calvin A. Lindsay
Jr., was originally videotaped/or a 1999 PBS hour-long documentary the pair directed,
"The Devil's Music." Their documentary was one installment of a four-part series on
transgressive art entitled Culture Shock. "The Devil's Music" addresses the evolution of
jazz in the '20s as a demonized musical genre to its worldwide celebration today as
America's only genuine art form. Since I am usually ashed to speak about hip-hop and
rhythm and blues, it was a marvelous aesthetic departure for me. This interview permitted
me to speak at length about the origins and expressions of a music I have loved for a long
time. Since most of what I had to say met the cutting-room floor (how else could it be for an
interview that was longer than the documentary itself?), it was a real treat when I got the
chance to publish the entire interview—the equivalent of a jazz jam session between me and
my interlocutors—in Open Mike.
How did the music achieve and get assigned such lofty goals?
When you think about 1920s jazz music, you think about what led up to it. The
formative period of jazz is from around 1895 till about 1905,1910. Ragtime was big
then. The music was so named because of the ragged time, the syncopated rhyth-
mic structures, that African-inspired musicians were playing against more nonsyn-
copated, linear, tonal-based, harmonic European music. Musically speaking, jazz
evolved out of ragtime with the assertion of the sensibilities of African communal
spirits and syncopated rhythmic orders against the more regimented order of West-
em music. Aesthetically speaking, high society music, the music of civil and polite
society performed in the chambers of the elite, was the established canon, the es-
tablished norm against which all other music was judged and compared.
When ragtime came along with its raggedy, nonconventional, syncopated
rhythms against the nonsyncopated, linear conceptions of music in the Western
canon, it created a real rub. But I think part of the controversy erupted in re-
sponse to the function of the music itself. Musicians handed out cards in New
Orleans, especially in the 1920s, which had printed on them "music for all occa-
sions." So the social contexts and geographical spaces to which the music was


--- PAGE 406 ---
Jazz Origins and the Anatomy of Improvisation 377
consigned determined its function. If you're playing in parades and picnics and
funerals and Mardi Gras, the music is much more lively and syncopated and fit
for those situations. But if the music is played in a limited, intimate space, the
music has a different sensibility. Even the popular dances of the 1920s reflected
the influence of space on aesthetics. For instance, in polite society they danced
the quadrille, the mazurka, the waltz, and the polka in association with chamber
music. But when there were open spaces and markedly vibrant dance halls, all
characteristic of the sites of "the folk," the dances were the slow drag, the eagle
rock, and the buzzard lope. All in all, the music and dance outside "official" so-
ciety—and music and dance were intimately connected—reflected the infusion of
African aesthetic values by means of New Orleans Creoles.
A quote: "Beware of a change to a strange form of music, taking it to be a
danger to the whole, but never have the ways of music moved without the
greatest political laws being moved." That's Plato's Republic.
Well, there's no question that the high purpose of music was captured in William
Congreve's phrase: "Music hath charms to sooth a savage breast." It has been
widely, and wrongly, quoted as saying "the savage beast," which appears on the
surface at least to be redundant. In any case, music from either perspective is a
modifying element with a modulating effect: It brings sensibility and order to
chaos. Those musical forms that reflect chaos are seen to be, from a hegemonic,
elite perspective, unworthy of recognition or respect. In fact, they don't count as
music at all. The aesthetic value of these nonmusical, chaotic forms—the frenzy of
ragtime, the frenzy of jazz—reflected in part the chaos of the social circumstances
faced by its artists, including Creole musicians losing their jobs downtown, where
they were playing European-inspired music in New Orleans, to go uptown, where
they had interactions with these more indigenous Negro populations. That meant
that there was some kind of fusion going on, and therefore the musical and aes-
thetic values of the musicians were being "corrupted," so that the "high" and re-
demptive purposes of the music—to regulate the savage—was compromised by the
influence of the very forms of chaos that the music sought to relieve.
The perception of music's purpose is always indivisible, I think, from the polit-
ical and social contexts through which folk, including critics, interpret the music.
Remember in, I think, 1918, the Times-Picayune, the newspaper in the birthplace of
jazz, New Orleans, the Crescent City, argued against the uncivil-like behaviors of
musicians, as well as the uncivil character of the music. "This is not music that is
fit for polite society," they opined, and I'm paraphrasing here. "As a result, we
should suppress it." So musically speaking, the aesthetic representation of the
Western conception of music, with melody and harmony and thematic resolution
and tonal structure and so on, was juxtaposed in the minds of the cultural elite to
musical forms that fell outside of the realm of music's purpose, or, in keeping with
the Greek philosophy of your quote, its telos. The rhythmic intensity of African


--- PAGE 407 ---
378 THE MICHAEL ERIC DYSON READER
music, emerging from racially subordinated communities, subverted the telos, the
goal of music as determined by dominant society, resulting in a huge bifurcation
of musical priorities and aesthetic choices. For the dominant, elite society, music
facilitated the rituals of intimate social interaction in close quarters. For the
masses, music accompanied big social events that facilitated a sense of social co-
hesion and personal agency in chaotic and conflicted social circumstances. Now
that bifurcation, like all dualities, isn't pure, since social phenomena are fluid and
complex, but I think it's a functional definition of the social and aesthetic tensions
that prevailed.
From a social place, what is being said?
Well, in a sense, I think we can look at what was happening in New Orleans at
the time, from the late 1890s to about 1915 or 1920, as a precursor to the culture
wars that are now going on as we debate the differences between Eurocentrism,
Afrocentrism, multicentrism, multiculturalism, and the like. There were racial
forces behind distinctions between European music and so-called non-European,
or African-inspired, music. Those distinctions were really about racial caste, about
keeping Negroes in their place, and about assigning less merit to African cultural
products and forms of music than to European ones. The irony, of course, is that
white musicians later appropriated African forms of music. The first jazz record-
ing, which appeared in 1917 from the Original Dixieland Band, was a whitened
and diluted and domesticated version of African-inspired black music. If it wasn't
quite rhythmically challenged, it was certainly a watered-down version of black
music rendered palatable to a wider, whiter American audience.
The racial distinction between European and African music was sometimes
coded as the differentiation between what's good and bad music, what's produc-
tive and nonproductive music, and what's edifying and what's debased music.
Folk were trying to figure out the place of African people in American culture,
and the arguments over music were key to the process. So the aesthetics were
politicized. The question of what to do with ragtime, and then blues, jazz, and
gospel, was never simply a matter of taste, or should I say, that taste was never
merely a matter of musical preference extracted from the prevailing racial con-
text. Syncopation indexed race as surely as black skin. Plus, the caste question
was never far away, since these ragtime musicians were not often educated musi-
cians who had absorbed the finer points of European music. Their musical trace
had to be washed away from the palette of American music, which was little
more than an imitation of the so-called classical forms flowing in from Europe.
The kick is that across the waters, European classical musicians and composers
are digging this indigenous American music being created by mostly black musi-
cians of an ostensibly degraded and inferior pedigree. Figures like Debussy and
Stravinsky, and even Charles Ives, are being influenced by ragtime, even as the
aesthetic guardians of Western culture are dissing ragtime.


--- PAGE 408 ---
Jazz Origins and the Anatomy of Improvisation 379
Struggles over music were about social regulation because music was the front
line of breaking down racial barriers. Later in the twentieth century, black musi-
cians would play a crucial role in brokering an acceptance of African Americans,
limited though it was, within the regime of American apartheid in the South,
where segregation ruled. It sounds trite to say but black music, to a degree, united
peoples of different races and genders and cultures in this kind of polyphonic ex-
pression of African sensibility. But they had to fight through the social stigma at-
tached to blackness, even though, interestingly enough, in New Orleans, jazz
music is also being created by Creoles. I think James Lincoln Collier, the jazz critic,
has read this entirely wrong. He says because those musicians were Creoles, they
weren't black, and therefore we can't claim that jazz music has black origins. But
as Mike Tyson might say, that's ludicrous. Such an argument as Collier advances
denies the complexity of race, how it is not simply a biological fact but a socially
determined identity. The notion that jazz is not a "black" music because it was cre-
ated by Creoles not only is a reflection of phenotypical literalism but ignores the
politics and history of racial identity in America. A crucial feature of the American
racial contract has involved the thorny question of interracial or mixed race iden-
tity, or what is anthropologically and sociologically termed miscegenation.
That debate has been renewed recently with the rise of Tiger Woods to promi-
nence in golf. Is Tiger black or Thai, or both, and how do we talk about being both
and hence not exclusively either, and how does that nuance our comprehension of
racial identity? Contemporary debates about miscegenation were precipitated by
the sorts of arguments around race and music that occurred in the Creole-
influenced Crescent City of New Orleans back in the late 1800s and early 1900s.
There was an Americanization of New Orleans after the Louisiana Purchase in the
early 1800s. New Orleans, racially and ethnically speaking, was a mixture of
French and Spanish and indigenous American elements. The Creole, or the light-
skinned Negro, the French-inflected mulatto, was the product of a fusion of black
and white. Creoles began to create ragtime and jazz music only after they had in-
teractions with indigenous Negro or African-inflected musicians in New Orleans, a
fact that causes me to be skeptical about Collier's argument that jazz is not identifi-
able as black music. One can hear in such denials reverberations of the stigma of
blackness—of black skin and skill, of black blood, metaphorically speaking, of black
styles-that was rife in American culture at the turn of the twentieth century. It's a
stigma that persists to this day, even if, ironically enough, black popular culture is
the idiom, is the grammar, through which America is globally articulated.
Finally, I think piano-based ragtime accentuated percussive features of black
music that were later expanded in ensembles, which highlighted the shift to the
multi-instrumentality of jazz music, including, say, a saxophone, a trumpet, and a
drum, which facilitated the process of improvisation that was strictly forbidden in
classical music, which had to be read note for note off a sheet. It was eye music
versus ear music, music that had to be read versus music that had to be heard and
learned by ear, the visual versus the aural, so to speak. Since there was initially


--- PAGE 409 ---
380 THE MICHAEL ERIC DYSON READER
little sheet music in jazz, at least not to the degree or in the manner of classical
music, musicians were free to improvise, to remake the song as they played it each
time. There was a structural freshness to the music's improvisational quality, al-
lowing the musicians to enlarge or diminish themes, to rearrange musical ele-
ments, to alter tempos and tones, as the occasion or mood dictated. There's still
a corpus there, a body of ideas and themes and techniques, but they are the raw
material of the riffs that constitute and extend the impulse to improvisation. A
huge feature of the debates over African versus European music was over what
sorts of music contained our cultural and, really, our political values. If democ-
racy is what jazz is about, glimpsed in the equal participation of varying elements
in the construction of a whole, European classical music is about a kind of oli-
garchy of aesthetic taste; that is, there is tight control over what can be played,
what can be said, what can be articulated, and who gets a chance to play it.
Talk about the imagery.
An interesting feature of African music is how it incorporates the communal
basis of racial and cultural survival into its aesthetic vocabulary. That's number
one. Number two, African-inflected music, at least in the case of black music in
America, existed and eventually flourished in a foreign land, in a context where
black folk had to struggle to create a culture of signification among each other as
a survival strategy in an oppressive culture. So the double entendre, from the
spirituals, blues, and so on, allowed blacks to communicate with one another in
liberating fashion. When slaves sang "Green trees are bending/My soul stands
a'trembling/Ain't got long to stay here," white plantation owners were being en-
tertained while black slaves were being emancipated, since they were signaling
each other about when Harriet Tubman was coming through to liberate slaves
and lead them along the Underground Railroad to freedom. So the double en-
tendre fused emancipation and entertainment in many African and African
American musical forms. But black emancipation and white entertainment
weren't the only functions of the double entendre.
In jazz music, the double entendre went secular as it funneled sexual play into
the aesthetic creations of black folk culture. Or should I say, the aesthetic creation
funnels the sexual play of certain subcultures in black life, especially among
working-class black folk. But the sexual did not exhaust the double entendre in
the cultural realm, since black folk through our music signified on what we un-
derstood ourselves to be and played with those images, whether of the barbarian,
the savage, and so on, even as we enlarged on the narratives of complex human-
ity that all great art promotes. We could parody the stereotypes of black identity
even as we extended our creative freedom to engage our libidos, to revel in sex-
ual mischief, to take utter joy in what Richard Wright called the "erotic exulta-
tion" of some forms of music. He was referring primarily to gospel, but I think it
can be applied equally to early ragtime and jazz as well.


--- PAGE 410 ---
Jazz Origins and the Anatomy of Improvisation 381
Another level of double entendre reflected the utter playfulness of linguistical-
ity and orality at the heart of black culture. Long before poststructuralists who
were hooked on European traveling theories of postmodernism talked about the
playfulness of culture and language, black folk comprehended jouissance, the sheer
hedonistic pleasure and delight of experimenting and playing with black cultural
forms, including music. A crucial feature of double entendres was the articulation
of culturally coded messages and styles that signified on white dominant cultural
structures while promoting black self-definition. Even though the dominant cul-
ture may have viewed blacks as barbarians and savages, as dumb animals inca-
pable of abstract reasoning or "high" culture, they nevertheless reveled in the ro-
bustly playful elements of black cultural creativity. At their best, black folk refused
to get stuck in narrow Victorian modes of identity where they repressed con-
sciousness of their sexual selves while exclusively engaging their spiritual nature.
They didn't buy into that bifurcation between mind and body. As critic Michael
Ventura argued, African cultures often overcame the Cartesian dualism of the
West because they contended that there was no such thing as being mental and
spiritual over here and being physically embodied over there.
The double entendre was about black folk having their cake and eating it too,
so to speak; it was about healing the rift between body and soul; it was about
playfulness while contesting white power in signifying fashion; and it was about
enjoying and celebrating their culture even as vicious stereotypes abounded.
That was terribly liberating to black folk who had been indoctrinated with the
belief that they were inferior, that they were, in the words of Margaret Walker
Alexander, "black and poor and small." You must remember that at the turn of
the century, black popular culture was broadly assailed in magazines and jour-
nals. A title from one magazine asked, "Did jazz put the sin in syncopation?"
The Ladies' Home Journal argued that young people listening to jazz music would
produce a holocaust of teen births. Now where have we heard that recently?
There was an enormous groundswell against black and white Americans who
embraced jazz music, especially as cultural guardians were attempting to control
the sexual chaos and erotic frenzy of this rhythmic, syncopated music.
That's because ragtime was associated with the brothel, and jazz music in the
1920s was associated with the speakeasy. Given my earlier analysis about how
the physical and social contexts in which the music was played shaped its use, the
brothel and speakeasy provided a space for blacks to exult in their own bodies.
The speakeasy, the brothel, and other dens of ill repute are where ragtime and
jazz were regularly played. So there was an association in the public mind of
morally suspicious behavior and black music. This was not strictly a contention
between blacks and whites, since during the Harlem Renaissance, upper-class
Negroes were inveighing against the vagaries of ghetto gutter music. When you
went to the cribs of the leading lights of the Harlem Renaissance, they were play-
ing Beethoven, Bach, and Brahms. They were not engaging the debased folk cul-
ture of the masses. Even politically progressive figures such as W.E.B. Du Bois,


--- PAGE 411 ---
382 THE MICHAEL ERIC DYSON READER
the young A. Phillip Randolph, and Chandler Owens spurned jazz music. At
some level, there's an internalized self-abnegation, a disparagement of quotidian
blackness displayed by the Negro upper crust who spurn black folk culture while
uncritically deferring to European canons, codes, and norms. Thus the black cul-
tural double entendre was directed against not only white supremacist culture but
also the Negro bourgeoisie, which lacked serious appreciation for its indigenous
art forms.
Was it starting to creep a little too close to home? In modern times, we see as
many white as black kids buying rap music. Is that maybe an issue?
Absolutely! The degree to which ragtime and later jazz—especially through figures
like Baby Dodds, Buddy Bolden, Jelly Roll Morton, and later Louis Armstrong-
reached out beyond the confines of black culture certainly sparked wide cultural
controversy. There's no question that when jazz penetrated the husk of white cul-
tural circles, there was a great deal of consternation among the white artistic and
political elite. Just as with hip-hop culture today, there was an enormous degree of
anxiety about black art forms like jazz darkening white artistic enclaves and social
settings. As a result, white elites stepped up the policing of boundaries between
black and white cultures, even as jazz inspired interracial cultural exchange. The
music facilitated what Jim Crow with its segregated social practices failed to pre-
vent: different cultures connecting and interacting. Jazz helped promote the syn-
cretic moment, the fused moment, the moment of cultural contact and coopera-
tion between races that existed beyond the restrictions of custom, code, and law.
That's why Jelly Roll Morton, Sidney Bechet, and Louis Armstrong, who was
the young cornet player in King Oliver's group, and others like them were dan-
gerous to the white musical establishment, especially when jazz and its musicians
flowed down the Mississippi, fanning out from the Crescent City to Chicago,
New York, St. Louis, Kansas City, and Los Angeles. The music and its musicians
were now mobile, and many critics deemed them even more harmful because
they could reach a much larger audience, especially white youth. Jazz culture was
seductive to white kids, and they turned from the quadrille, the mazurka, the
waltz, and the polka of their parents to the slow drag and the hoochie-coochie,
while reveling in the blues of the Delta filtering into New Orleans from Missis-
sippi. This explosion of African creativity constituted a veritable Negropolis, a
black cosmopolitanism whose influence sprawled beyond its original indigenous
borders to capture large segments of American society.
Hence the development of the Jazz Age, which in its mainstream cultural em-
bodiment was qualitatively different from the ragtime and jazz juke joints. But it
retained enough aesthetic ferocity, in both music and fiction, to scare some and
shake up many others. F. Scott Fitzgerald reflected some of the ferocious and fer-
tile impulses of the juke joint in the linguistic creativity of his novels, where slang
leapt to the foreground, and his characters were not trying to close out the body.


--- PAGE 412 ---
Jan Origins and the Anatomy of Improvisation 383
In certain European canonical works, the body becomes irrelevant or merely in-
strumental, an appendage to the mind's operations, merely instrumental. For
instance, the body was good for producing wind for the brass instruments or for
the muscle to stroke the string instruments in the classical orchestra. But the body
itself was never as present in European classical music as it was in Negro hot spots,
the indigenous dives of brown divas and majordomos—at least not when it was
primarily interpreted by Europeans. I'm speaking here of musicians, with the
singers who rose to prominence later, including folk like Caruso and Gallas, being
obvious exceptions. Basically, in European music, you saw the segregation of the
body into measured utilities, where the hands were good but not the feet, where
the lips were fine but not the eyes, and so on.
In jazz, the body was aesthetically desegregated, freed from the artificial con-
straints of taste, custom, and tradition. In jazz, the entire body was implicated and
was truly integrated. The values of jazz include a profound vocal tonality, since
the musical instruments were manipulated in varying degrees to sound like the
voice. That's why we love Lester Young's and, later, John Coltrane's, sound, be-
cause the very textures they evoke on the saxophone remind us of the human
voice crying, sighing, laughing, speaking and shrieking, complaining, and ex-
pressing joy. Let's move from the reeds to the brass. In a sense, the blues shouts
and the field hollers get reexpressed, reemphasized, rearticulated in the longing,
yearning, feral tones of the trumpet and the cornet. When you hear Louis Arm-
strong wailing on his trumpet and cornet, when you hear him cutting through the
aesthetics of polite society with its measured, rigid, precise tonalities, lashing, as
only Armstrong could, in a viciously insistent tone that suggested he was indeed
"stomping the blues," you hear the quality I'm talking about. It's anger and joy,
anxiety and peace in shuffling cadences that trade hope for despair as he's trading
twelves in King Oliver's group and later his own.
And beyond jazz, in gospel music, for instance, when you hear the transcen-
dent aesthetic possibilities that transmute suffering into ethical vision and reli-
gious passion, you're hearing the full-bodied character of black music. Black
music, and the contexts of black experience it introduced, were just too much for
an often repressed mainstream society. And you don't have to buy into stereo-
types of the oppositional figures of the white savant and black savage, with the
former a glutton for reason and the intellect, and the latter addicted to primal
urges and nature, to get my point. The aesthetic priorities and intellectual mus-
ings of black artists (and for me, the two go hand in hand, especially when we're
talking about jazz) provided white youth a different and daring prism through
which to view themselves. Remember, Du Bois had written in 1903, at least that's
when the essays in Souls of Black Folk were gathered, that it is a strange thing to see
oneself, that is, the black self, through the lens of another world, a world that was
in many ways a foreign, judging, hostile world. But what happens with jazz music
and culture is that the prism is inverted, metaphorically speaking, so that now, in
the 1920s, black culture provides the lens through which many whites begin to


--- PAGE 413 ---
384 THE MICHAEL ERIC DYSON READER
view and understand themselves. That was a monumental philosophical reversal
achieved largely by aesthetic means.
What was it that was bringing black folks from the rural South to urban
centers in the North?
Economic opportunity was one thing that drew black people from rural agrarian
culture, where they were brutally segregated on post-Emancipation plantations in
sharecropping arrangements. Sharecropping was little more than the evolved
form of slavery. You see, after Emancipation, 90 percent of black Americans lived
in the South until the early 1900s and the great black migration North, to
Chicago and Detroit and other big cities, in search of greater economic opportu-
nity. Even before the great black migration, blacks had been drawn to urban cen-
ters like New Orleans, which was steeped in racial history. Congo Square was
there; it was the place where black slaves had been sold on the auction block.
Congo Square prefigured the urban cultures that coalesced around New Orleans
in the late 1800s and early 1900s because it was where all these Africans from
every part of the world were brought, or literally bought, together. There's nothing
like the oppressive commercialization and commodification of black culture to
forge the solidarity of blackness, even if it was a defensive, protective, reflexive
move, and to create modern blackness in ways it didn't exist in Africa before the
coerced diaspora, the forced migration.
But this new thing, this tertium quid, this not-European, not-African-but-
somehow-American racial reality that formed in Congo Square, was the forging of
the black Atlantic, as Robert Farris Thompson, Peter Linebaugh, and much later
Paul Gilroy, have described it in their work, In Congo Square, music was played
outside the control of the dominant white society. Blacks reappropriated the space
of domination as a source of liberating aesthetic self-expression. The drum was
crucial to this process. It was the dominant symbol, the dominant metaphor, of the
convergence of political meanings and aesthetic articulation, In Congo Square, the
rhythm of black life, with its percussive tonalities, was literally drummed into ex-
istence. That's why the drums were outlawed: they were the language of black
emancipation. The drums allowed blacks to facilitate community, to communicate
valuable political messages in a percussive tongue. It was a testament to the fertil-
ity and generativity of blackness, even for those Creoles who were passer blanc,
passing for white, although it was routinely the case that they were marked in their
bodies with the oudaw(ed) meanings of blackness by the dominant society.
Still, there was something crucial about Congo Square to black identity. New
Orleans provided a gumbo ya-ya of disparate black identities of African origins.
People think when you say black, these identities are self-evident, but they're not.
They think the same for Africa, but when you say African, what are you really
saying? Are you talking about East, West, North, or South African? Are you talk-
ing about Yoruba or Hausa? And in the African diaspora, things are no different.


--- PAGE 414 ---
Jazz Origins and the Anatomy of Improvisation 385
When you speak of African religion, for instance, are you talking about Can-
domble from an Afro-Brazilian experience, or are you speaking of Afro-Cuban
Santeria, or perhaps a Haitian expression of Vodoun? The gumbo ya-ya of black
identity evokes the African appreciation for the integrity of multiplicity, which is
essentially what black urbanity is all about. The black urban experiment of the
early part of the twentieth century, in its edifying moments, was about mass black
exodus to cities that were ports of call for the migrations, mixtures, and mergers
of all kinds of black identities, both within indigenous U.S. populations and from
all over the Americas, from Caribbean cultures, and later from British cultures as
well. The expansion of economic opportunity that drew blacks to big northern
cities from all parts of the country, indeed the world, had a concomitant virtue: it
not only eroded the vicious de jure segregation to which they had been subject in
southern apartheid, but it multiplied the rambunctious collocation of ethnic, re-
gional, religious, sexual, gendered, and class diversities within black identity.
Talk about the atmosphere of Chicago in 1919.
Chicago during that time was home to upwardly mobile blacks, relatively speak-
ing, who had limited success in challenging the norms, the ethos, the very supe-
rior self-understanding that even average whites possessed. As a result, blacks suf-
fered violence as reprisal for their "uppity behavior." So the de jure segregation of
the South was replaced by the de facto segregation of the North. A lot of the vio-
lence blacks suffered was not simply of the top-down sort—violence regulated and
mediated through political structures in an ostensibly democratic society. The vi-
olence had largely to do with the politics of resentment from white working-class
folk who frowned on the even limited success of this burgeoning black working
class. Tensions between the races were exacerbated when black scab workers
were brought in to bust the unions, most of which barred black workers. In effect,
the white power structure was playing musical chairs with nonunionized black
workers and exploited white unionized workers, pitting the latter against the for-
mer. All this means that around 1919, the second great fire razed Chicago. The
first fire happened in 1871, when Mrs. O'Leary's legendary cow kicked the
lantern that started the fire that nearly burned down Chicago.
The second fire was more redemptive, ignited when some blacks joined the
working and middle classes, turning Chicago into one of the great centers of
black culture in the modern West, similar to what would happen later in Los An-
geles when the booming war industry drew blacks in record numbers during
World War II. In Chicago, circa 1919, the stockyards were the huge attraction
that helped spark Chicago's great black migration. The stockyards and the some-
times apocryphal stories that transplanted black Southerners in Chicago sent back
home that exaggerated their standard of living in the big city, as if they were, in
the parlance of hip-hop, "living large." Maybe in comparison to their old southern
haunts they were living large, but they were hardly living in the lap of luxury up


--- PAGE 415 ---
386 THE MICHAEL ERIC DYSON READER
North; and there were virtues to the old southern geographies that formerly dom-
inated black life. In the South, even if they were poor, they had open spaces in
fields, but in the North, their enhanced economic status confined them in tene-
ments that stretched upward several stories and choked the landscapes and sky-
lines of ghettoes and slums.
The North had its own variety of Jim Crow, except that it was Jim Grow,
Esquire, or James Crow III. Northern racism was more subtle but no less vicious.
Twenty years after 1919, during the 1940s, Chicago exploded with black aesthetic
creativity, with jazz, blues, gospel, and later its own variety of soul music, making
it very difficult for white Americans—especially the recently arrived white ethnic
immigrants, including Poles, Italians, Lithuanians, and Irish, who populated
Chicago's burgeoning lumpen proletariat-to accept even marginal black main-
stream success. The battle was classic: recently migrated southern blacks and re-
cently immigrated white European ethnics-in Michael Novak's famous book tide
(at least during his radical phase) The Unmeltable Ethnics, something I'm sure he'd
disavow now as a leading conservative and advocate of the melting pot. In short
order, tensions mounted and eventually led to race rioting in Chicago.
Were the objections concentrated on the influx of people or was it reaction to
what the people brought with them, the culture?
It was both. They were indivisible because the greatest thing the people brought
was themselves and their itinerant, mobile cultural meanings. According to many
conservative social scientists, the urban situation was messed up because black
people reshaped industrial urbanity in the first half of the twentieth century in
Chicago, Detroit, Philadelphia, New York, Los Angeles, and so on. Blacks
brought their culture with them, a culture pervaded by blues and jazz and gospel
music and spiritual sensibilities. They brought a particular understanding of what
their place was, both geographically and racially, but they had to adjust as well,
because transitioning from agrarian, rural life to urbanity's more regimented, geo-
metric living (R. Buckminster Fuller gone ghetto, so to speak, in cloistered,
crabbed cubicles, geodesic domes writ small) was very difficult. The geopolitics of
industrial urban space didn't necessarily bode well for some blacks who brought
cultural habits and lifestyles more suited to the South. Many blacks brought the
cultural norms of creative collectivity and communal sharing with them, which
were healthy and productive; black Southerners helped each other out with the
meager resources they had. They also brought the habit of having a lot of family
members, relatives, and friends live in one room, in the shotgun shacks that were
common in parts of the South, a habit that proved to be counterproductive in
some instances. Thus cultural adaptability worked for and against blacks. You
usually only hear the negative side in books that detail the effect of the black mi-
gration on family structure, cultural thriving, and social cohesion and stability.
But you rarely hear of the vital social and cultural habits (such as adaptable fa-


--- PAGE 416 ---
Jazz Origins and the Anatomy of Improvisation 387
milial structures and flexible gender roles, since black women have always
worked outside the home) that allowed black urbanity to flourish.
At the same time, though, the aesthetic cultures that black Southerners brought-
and the joy, the frivolity, the edifying frenzy, the passionate investment in bodily
expressions and syncopated rhythms and cultural significations that were impor-
tant to sustaining their lives and nurturing their strong sense of self-was crucial to
black survival. It also clashed with certain elements of the white mainstream, not
the least of which was the perception by older whites that this black culture was
ruining their children. When Louis Armstrong left New Orleans and headed to
Chicago, one of his great fans was a high school-aged cat named Bix Beiderbecke.
As a result, the great black migration, with its southern roots, influences the north-
ern white populace, especially youth who are fumbling toward maturity while ex-
periencing alienation from their parents' world. A major way many white youth ar-
ticulated their alienation, and affirmed their sanity, authenticity, and legitimacy,
was by latching hold of the mores mediated through the artistic values of black cul-
ture as expressed in the imaginations and visions of its great artists. What happens
is predictable: Bix becomes better known than his mentor in many artistic circles
and gets the opportunity to make more money than Armstrong. Or think about
Benny Goodman, who reaped huge aesthetic and financial benefit from his associ-
ation with (read: appropriation) and downright ripping off of black musicians. But
at least Goodman had enough sense to bring Fletcher Henderson along as his mu-
sical director, even though Goodman became famous in the first place because he
had purchased twenty-four of Fletcher Henderson's songs to make him the "King
of Swing." Damned, Duke, my sincere apologies!
So urban migration meant much more than black bodies occupying the menial
workforce. It also meant the widening influence of black cultural sensibilities, even
if, as was the case with Bix and Benny, they were appropriated and diluted. Black
cultural influence caused great tension in the industrialized North because it meant
that blackness was just so present. Its proximity was a problem. It was one thing
for whites to minstrel blackness, to appropriate it for pecuniary and performative
gain. Hence you had the Cotton Club in Harlem controlled by white mobsters,
catering to a white clientele in the fabled bosom of blackness with a public face that
was colored by its black entertainers. But it was another thing for Negroes to show
up in the North looking to benefit from their own culture. Thus the aesthetic de-
mands of Negro art caused a quake in racial and economic relations, shifting the
plates along the fault lines of race that underlay the social geography.
But what was really trying for even white liberals was the actual, embodied
presence of the blacks they had spoken for by proxy. When those black folk took
the boat up the Mississippi to speak for themselves, it was mutiny on the white
bounty! When other folk speak for you, no matter how informed or impassioned,
it's just not the same as you speaking for yourself. And part of the problem with
black migration was the aesthetic encounters it forged in the public square, in the
clubs and joints, and the churches and houses of worship that dotted the black


--- PAGE 417 ---
388 THE MICHAEL ERIC DYSON READER
urban landscape. The emotional sweep of black experience, which was largely ab-
stract even for white sympathizers, became flesh and dwelt among the white
world up North. That experience included the pain and pathos of black life; the
utter despair and the defiant hopefulness of black existence; the anguished love
that strode through the rhythms of black music; the sweat and strain and aspira-
tion of black bodies in worship or erotic wooing or work or play; the murmurs,
the shrieks, the barely suppressed guffaws, the edifying laughter, the comic sensi-
bility that confronted the doom or tragedy or evil that blacks fought, elements
that they refused to make their ultimate home, their ultimate reality. All of these
moods and modes of blackness were indivisible from the great black migration.
While the cultural rituals that mediated the normative beliefs of the black cosmos
were appealing to some whites, they were to many more a source of horror, of
pity, of condescending tolerance, or of grave misunderstanding, more often out-
right hostility, but rarely fair engagement. Often black culture alienated whites
who sought to keep blacks at arm's length. White liberals didn't mind fighting for
black freedom, but they didn't want blacks living next door. T.S. Eliot, the great
modernist poet, said, "Between the ideal and the reality falls the shadow." This is
what Chicago was grappling with, the shadow, the dark rim of black urban exis-
tence as black bodies and beliefs challenged American notions of democracy, city-
hood, and industrial civilization.
Speak to the black embrace, or not, of the migration.
Black people were greatly affected by the mainstream culture's perceptions of
their bodies, beliefs, value systems, and social visions: the baggage, metaphori-
cally speaking, of migrating from South to North, as well as the virtues and vices
that characterize black culture. Many black people accepted what white Ameri-
cans believed about black culture: that it was barbaric and savage when it cen-
tered in jazz and blues, which meant that black culture at its best must move to
embrace the transcendental traditions of spirituality that coursed through gospel
music and evangelical, revivalist preaching. A huge problem occurred when
Chicago-based musician Thomas Dorsey, the father of contemporary gospel
music, introduced jazz and blues riffs in his music. Beyond the aesthetic dimen-
sions of racial propriety, there were the social divisions of black society that were
magnified in the great black migration. So the internal contradictions of black cul-
ture proved transportable as well. For instance, up North, blacks updated a habit
they had practiced in places like New Orleans, known as the "paper bag" test-
blacks who were darker than a plain paper bag were prevented by lighter blacks
from participating in social clubs, civic organizations, or, informally, from marry-
ing above their color-driven caste.
A hierarchy of sorts was generated among blacks when relocated Southerners
who had been in place for even a year looked down on and teased their more re-
cently arrived compatriots. It was pretty hilarious for barely seasoned former


--- PAGE 418 ---
Jazz Origins and the Anatomy of Improvisation 389
Southerners to view their kindred as hicks or "Bamas"—the sometimes affection-
ate catchall term for a country bumpkin or hayseed that derives from a shortened
form of Alabama. Like some second-generation Mexican immigrants who were
among the most visible and articulate opponents of further immigration because
it challenged their own space and security, as well as their ability to smoothly as-
similate, many black migrants expressed the most vocal outrage at newly arrived
hicks, when they were barely "unhicked" themselves. Chicago was little more
than a suburb of Mississippi, and you can trace that genealogy all the way from
blues icon Howling Wolf to the stable of stars on Chess Records and the blues
lounges along 43 Street, most famously, perhaps, the Checkerboard Lounge. So
these racial contretemps within black culture were part of the black modernist ex-
perience as blacks negotiated between the margins and the mainstream.
Talk about the musical establishment and their criticism of this new music,
jazz.
As already noted, the first jazz record was made in 1917 by an all-white group, the
Original Dixieland Jazz Band, led by Paul Whiteman. How suggestive can that be,
if you break down and parse Paul and white man, which is both Freudian and
Jungian, since the symbol and the archetype converge? Paul, we remember, was
the first great missionary of Christianity into the gentile world, and so Paul White-
man as a missionary of sorts, acclaimed by whites as the first great king of jazz, is
just too much of a signification to overlook. And "white man" as the acceptable
ambassador of this music to the white world was surely glimpsed in Paul White-
man's Aeolian Hall concert, which marked the aesthetic mediation and economic
commercialization of a black music harshly demonized by dominant society. The
first jazz record and Whiteman's Aeolian Hall concert tell us that part of the music
establishment wanted to commodify and control this music—to package, market,
and distribute jazz to consumers in the marketplace, benefiting its white distribu-
tors, appropriators, and dilutors. Even as the music was being dissed in elite white
circles, the white musical establishment still wanted to make a buck off of jazz. The
artists weren't making the biggest money; it was the producers who were cleaning
up. If you were a songwriter, you might sell your music, but you weren't going to
accumulate enough capital to really make a living from that. So the white record
producers, executives, and owners who were interested in jazz reaped enormous fi-
nancial remuneration from black creativity and genius, a pattern, by the way, that
continues to this day in some artistic circles.
Still, there were huge debates about whether this was real music, in the European
sense. Moreover, conservative elements of the musical establishment railed against
jazz because they couldn't control the music. Jazz just wasn't the conservative music
establishment's ideal of good music. It was similar to what happened later on when
ASCAP got caught with its pants down, so to speak, and was unable to control
rock 'n' roll music because it was exclusively promoting the music of Tin Pan Alley,


--- PAGE 419 ---
390 THE MICHAEL ERIC DYSON READER
with artists like Cole Porter and later Frank Sinatra. As a result, ASCAP missed a
huge cultural moment and overwhelming financial opportunity. Since the conser-
vative elements of the music industry hadn't anticipated the degree to which jazz
would invade white youth subcultures and become influential in significant white
circles, it settled on curtailing the music's circulation. Louis Armstrong made a very
good living because he appealed to blacks and whites. The same was true for Duke
Ellington and Count Basic and the swing movement. In one sense, mainstream
white swing music was the attempt to domesticate the hot beats of ragtime in early
jazz into lightly syncopated orchestral riffing. But again, it wasn't Jimmy Lunceford
or Count Basie or Duke Ellington who got the biggest advantage from the swing
they helped invent. Rather, it was Paul Whiteman, Guy Lombardo, Woody Her-
man, the Dorsey Brothers, and Gene Krupa. Harry James, who was Benny Good-
man's trumpet player, was routinely favored over Louis Armstrong in jazz polls.
What's up with that?
How do you reconcile a lot of the musicians feeling honored with appropri-
ation?
I think it's the contradiction between individual artistic expression and the burden
of representation. You're an individual but as a well-regarded musician, you're in-
evitably a race man; you're representing more than yourself.
On the individual level, I'm sure that black artists were honored that white mu-
sicians who greatly admired their music imitated what they heard and duplicated
it as nearly as possible in circles that black musicians might never be allowed to
darken. Some black artists took great satisfaction in the belief that America was
indebted to them, even without name or attribution, for having created an art
form so powerful that white musicians paid it the compliment of emulation. But
we can't deny that the failure to reap recognition and reward for their achieve-
ments greatly disturbed many a black artist.
As a member of the race, as a representative of a larger agglomerative interest,
there's no doubt that such appropriation was damaging. Not only were these
black musicians being exploited, but there was a feeling that they should actually
be grateful that white musicians were taking their music into arenas they could
not enter. The coercion to black gratitude is a staple of dominant white culture in
most areas of endeavor. Black students, it is felt, should be grateful for getting into
good schools, despite their excellent qualifications. Black voters should be grate-
ful for the attention from politicians that other voters take for granted. And black
citizens should be grateful to live in America and hence should not criticize the
nation's inequalities and injustices, especially when the nation is at war. Black jazz
musicians, like any other artists, were certainly grateful in the strictly generic
sense of that word, to be able to exercise their gifts. But why should they have
been grateful to be exploited? Only the logic of white supremacy, with its pun-
ishing mission to make blacks actually desire their domination, could explain this


--- PAGE 420 ---
Jazz Origins and the Anatomy of Improvisation 391
phenomenon. Many of the musicians were not overtly political, even if they qui-
etly resented the restrictions on their livelihood. Many black artists simply took
things on face value, knowing what they could and could not expect. They knew
they would never make it into prime time, into mainstream venues, where mani-
festly inferior white musicians were Pat Booneing jazz, if you will.
White appropriation of black jazz has to be placed in a social context that ex-
plains the efforts of individual white artists. What was it like to be Bix Beider-
becke, a blessed borrower, and to know that the acclaim you receive for original-
ity of expression in fact derives from the appropriation of the artistic heritage of
unheralded black artists, including a palette of aural shadings, a grammar of tim-
ber, and a tonal structure that supports their artistic endeavors. On the other
hand, as a working white musician, you realize that the fate of any musician, re-
gardless of color, is to experiment with borrowed sounds until you find your own
voice. Although it was never simply a one-to-one correspondence between white
appropriation and black exploitation, the larger social structure within which such
dynamics take place underscores how crucial a factor race is.
Without being essentialist or romantic about these black musicians' humanity,
many black artists recognized they would never get the fame or make the money
they deserved, but they took solace in the fact that the aesthetic values they cher-
ished would in some form make a contribution to the national and global cultural
good. These black musicians were being called every name in the book except
child of God, as they were pelted with epithets like savage and barbarian while
displaying the most ennobling version of individualism, the highest vision of
American idealism, and the most democratic conception of artistic creation imag-
inable. What purer artists can we imagine? So my hat's off to them.
What was the relationship of the mainstream white community to jazz?
From the beginning, jazz was caught in the technological forms that drove the
music industry. As already noted, the first recording of black music involved its
packaging, dilution, and distribution by white cultural forces. The mechanics of
industrialization are coterminous with finding an available market for black
music, a market that was created by the urges and desires of the masses and was
shaped by the desire of white producers and record companies to make money
from an art form that the doyens of American taste found morally reprehensible.
On the other hand, there was the sense that the moral overtones of jazz were quite
hostile to white aesthetic sensibilities and cultural authority, since blackness was
perceived as polluting and contaminating white purity. To paraphrase anthropol-
ogist Mary Douglass in her classic book Purity and Danger, there was a sense of
taboo associated with black bodies, beliefs, and behaviors.
At the same time, many whites were drawn to this allegedly polluted culture
and were, in the view of their critics, fatefully sucked into the vortex of the black
libido. The unlicensed and unchecked expression of sexuality, sensuality, and


--- PAGE 421 ---
392 THE MICHAEL ERIC DYSON READER
eroticism in jazz culture was antithetical to the repressions and virtues of Victorian
culture that were selectively observed by the white elite. Unsurprisingly, the black
aesthetic carried political meanings. Powerful whites sought to control the trans-
gressive expressions of black music by suppressing its public exposure. They kept
it off the radio waves, and they restricted race records for the most part to their
intended black audience. When whites began to buy these records, influential
whites in the recording industry began to market black music to other whites. If
they couldn't whip black music into shape, they figured they'd at least benefit
from the sale of this sonic pathology.
The first positive mention of jazz music in official, public white circles didn't
occur until around 1933; between 1895 and 1933, jazz was evolving and under-
going tremendous transformation even as it was being demonized. In the end, to
pinch the tide of Robert Pattison's wonderful book, jazz proved the "triumph of
vulgarity." That's not only because the music ultimately proved to be compelling
to the masses and superior to its critics' aesthetic objections, but because the
music, through the humanity of its greatest creators, helped America concede the
vulgarity of its racism and antiblack hatred. That's not to suggest that pockets of
black America weren't upset with the music as well. The vicious stereotypes of
black hypersexuality made many blacks uncomfortable with openly embracing a
music shot through with double entendres, sexual innuendo, erotic play, and sen-
sual evocations. Already saddled with notions of savagery and beastlike behavior,
many blacks spurned jazz as the devil's music. Many black people resented ele-
ments of jazz because they believed it compromised the complexity of black art by
capitulating to white people's notion of the savage. These blacks believed that jazz
culture played up the image of blacks as sensate animals and sexual predators to
the exclusion of the image of the morally circumspect black. That's an argument,
of course, that we hear repeated now by the black opponents of the worst ele-
ments of hard-core rap, who claim that it plays up black savagery to the pleasure
and benefit of largely white producers. The only difference now, they say—a dif-
ference, by the way, that sickens the opponents of hard-core rap—is that contrary
to musicians in the Jazz Age, black artists today are being paid for piping black
pathology to the white world.
Then too there was a big dispute about whether black music could be said to
exist at all. One of the most famous debates about this issue took place between
Langston Hughes and George Schuyler. George Schuyler wrote a piece for the
Nation called "The Negro Art Hokum," arguing that there's no such thing as black
art; according to Schuyler, it's American art. Schuyler contended that there was
caste art because lower-class black people produce a certain kind of cultural expres-
sion, but it's not the result of an indigenous or unique black artistic gift. Of course,
other critics argued the opposite. Anthropologist Melville Herskovits in his book
'The Myth of the Negro Past writes about the "deification of Accidence" that is a defin-
ing feature of black identity. For Herskovits, black culture deifies accidental, contin-
gent occurrences by integrating them into the vocabulary of black purposefulness.


--- PAGE 422 ---
Jazz Origins and the Anatomy of Improvisation 393
To borrow a nonblack example (although, arguably, he embodies profound
black properties and identity traits, perhaps a black aesthetic in a postmodern
white face), when Pee Wee Herman falls off of his bike in his important film, Pee
Wee's Big Adventure, he says, "I meant to do that," which captures part of what is
meant in the deification of Accidence. I suppose another way of speaking about
this is to call it an improvisational intentionality, that even when one did not intend a
particular action or behavior, one incorporates it into one's grammar of activity as
a willed event. It's a way, I think, of attempting to exercise control over one's en-
vironment. Herskovits's conception of deification of Accidence is an example of a
historically constructed element of black consciousness and culture. In direct re-
sponse to Schuyler, Langston Hughes argues that there is such a thing as black art
in his influential essay, "The Negro Artist and the Racial Mountain." The racial
mountain refers to the inability of black folk to affirm a splendid folk culture
about which they should have no shame. Hughes argued that one day black folk
would wake up and love and embrace black art and take pride in the achieve-
ments of the so-called lower castes and classes. With the worldwide veneration of
jazz, Hughes has proved prophetic.
Talk about how jazz, once on the outside, is now being celebrated.
It's at once ironic and instructive. I think that jazz has traced the nearly inevitable
path traveled by all sorts of music that has been stigmatized and morally out-
lawed. It finds its way into the vocabulary of American artistic acceptance, even
veneration, and lands at the heart of American identity. What we now mean
when we say American, we mean when we say jazz. It is now recognized as the
singularly original American aesthetic achievement in music, which is why, I
think, we've got white critics arguing that it's not really a black musical expres-
sion. You didn't get those arguments when the music was associated with the
brothels and the brothers in the streets. In light of its history, I happen to believe
that jazz musicians should lead the defense of contemporary black music that is
demonized. I'm not suggesting that they have to like it, or even regularly listen to
it, but that they should, on principle, articulate an informed aesthetic defense of
the right of stigmatized black music to exist. I think that's a reasonable expecta-
tion, but one that neotraditionalists in jazz constantly forget.
I often think they need a refresher course in the history of aesthetic contusion
on jazz's developing body of work in the 1920s. For all intents and purposes,
bebop was hip-hop—if you don't believe me, just check out even Louis Arm-
strong's negative reaction to Dizzy, Bird, and company. What we have turned into
nostalgia was once notorious. Bluesmen, in effect, were B-boys. Let's face it, jazz
was the rap of its time. Now that jazz has been severed from its association with
stigmatized blackness in the public mind, it has been elevated to an aesthetic
perch from which it is favorably compared to the ostensible pathology of some
contemporary black music. Of course, there are differences between jazz and, for


--- PAGE 423 ---
394 THE MICHAEL ERIC DYSON READER
example, elements of hip-hop, which arose under different historical and racial
circumstances, but which nonetheless share a history of assault upon their early
incarnations as the devil's workshop, as examples of barbarism and savagery. Of
course, that's a lesson that hip-hoppers could absorb as well, a lesson, interest-
ingly enough, which might supply rappers help in their defense of their artistic
and cultural endeavors. Theirs is not the first black music to be dissed.
Speak to the irony or appropriateness of dealing with art in a congressional
forum, and more specifically, jazz and hip-hop.
One can imagine a world guided by Plato's Republic, envisioning the philosopher-
king as the arbiter of truth. Still, we don't want to concede such authority to
American politicians, most of whom are neither philosophers nor kings. We don't
want politicians determining and regulating "good" art or becoming arbiters of
aesthetic taste. Do we really want Bob Dole telling us what films to see, or Tipper
Gore, Bill Bennett, and C. Dolores Tucker telling us what music we can listen to?
What these figures miss is that true art opposes such artificial restrictions and em-
braces individual self-expression, or collective articulation, as its raison d'etre.
What's intriguing, and truly sad, is that black activists from the sixties who fought
the racist and fascist restriction of free speech and black cultural expression have
now joined forces with white politicians and moralists, whose views on other sub-
jects put them at tremendous odds with the liberation agenda of these activists.
Plus, some of these politicians opposed the very freedom struggles black folk
waged in earlier decades of the century.
Now I certainly understand, even empathize with, figures who speak against
the misogyny and sexism of hip-hop culture. But it cannot be fought by legislation
against the music; it's got to be fought in the trenches, in the cultural and aesthetic
cul-de-sacs where music makes its mark. We've got to take the message of sexual
equality and gender justice to the streets, clubs—and yes, to the schools and reli-
gious institutions-where sexism, patriarchy, and misogyny thrive and are planted
deep inside the minds of our youth. That's not as sexy as sounding off before a
Senate hearing, which I've certainly done, or trumpeting our views before an
eager audience of journalists, something to which I'm not immune. But it's harder
work, and it demands a long-term commitment to addressing the underlying
causes of social injustice. But I think it's ultimately more rewarding than the sim-
plistic pleasures of assaulting politically unprotected young blacks.
We've got to remember that all black art at one time or another has been sim-
ilarly attacked, and that the effort to legislate against black music's alleged moral
perversities is nothing new. Not only jazz in the early teens and 1920s, but rock-
and-roll music in the 1950s-of course, it's hard to imagine that "Work With Me
Annie," a hit for Hank Ballard and the Midnighters, caused consternation, but
"work" was euphemistic for a sexually suggestive motion of the pelvis—and
rhythm and blues in the 1970s were lambasted. The attempt to censor black


--- PAGE 424 ---
Jazz Origins and the Anatomy of Improvisation 395
music was the attempt to censor black bodies, black voices, and black identities
unleashed in the naked public square. For blacks to join Senate hearings aimed at
suppressing speech, policing art, and reinforcing our second-class citizenship as
producers and even consumers of music, is, I think, tragically mistaken.
We need Senate hearings, instead, into the causes and conditions of economic
and racial desperation that drive some of our youth to express themselves with
profanity and vulgarity. Until we do that, the real vulgarity is not the curse words
that pepper hip-hop lyrics, but the stigmatization and criminalization of our youth
that leads to a precipitous hike in incarceration rates. The raison d'etre of hip-
hop's vocation of angry articulation may lie in the lyrics of one of its greatest
poets, Notorious B.I.G., or Biggie Smalls, when he declares in his song "Things
Done Changed": "Back in the days our parents used to take care of us, Look at
them now, they're even fuckin' scared of us/Calling the city for help because they
can't maintain, Damn, things done changed." That entire song to me is a transla-
tion of Weber's conception of theodicy, which, as ethicist Jon Gunneman argued,
expresses the disjunction between destiny and merit, between what you get and
what you think you deserve.
I think in its clever rhymes is contained a sophisticated social analysis of the
conditions under which young blacks and Latinos mature in postindustrial urban
spaces, especially those enclaves of civic terror called ghettos and slums. Plus, Big-
gie noted the shift in power from older to younger people in what I have else-
where termed a juvenocracy, or the rule, and in some cases, tyranny of younger
people over social and economic resources in domestic and public space. Many
black critics in particular have wrongly concluded that black youth are in such ter-
rible shape because they are somehow morally alienated or ethically estranged
from the legacies that produced them. While there's no denying the huge genera-
tional gulf between older and younger blacks, we must, in searching for an ex-
planation of what's gone wrong, think about the ready availability of guns, the
ever growing economic and social inequality in black communities, and the polit-
ical economies of drugs that prevail when aboveground economies fail. In the
final analysis, we've got to help connect our youth to meaningful cultural tradi-
tions while respecting-and hence, engaging and critiquing-their own newly de-
veloping aesthetic aspirations and cultural articulations.
Comment on the likening of jazz to a boxing match.
The first thing that comes to mind is that, like a boxer, jazz music, as well as most
black music at one time, has been counted down and out. For instance, some peo-
ple say that the blues is down and out, complaining, "Blues culture is mostly lis-
tened to and appreciated by white Americans." Well, B.B. King thanks you, white
America, and so does Bobby Blue Bland, and Denise La Salle and Koko Taylor,
because they're trying to get paid and stay on the road, and they don't care who
supports them, because black music fundamentally embraces whoever will listen.


--- PAGE 425 ---
396 THE MICHAEL ERIC DYSON READER
But that's not to deny that blacks have not appreciated crucial elements of our cul-
ture, including urban blues, or for that matter, some agrarian forms of the blues
that have more in common with what we call country music than some music ex-
ecutives of Nashville might want to acknowledge. So I think black music is always
down and out, always against the rope. But like Muhammad Ali, black music
does the rope-a-dope: It just keeps on taking the punches, and when it looks as if
you're about to destroy it, it takes your worst—appropriation, commodification,
ghettoization in narrow categories on the radio—and wears you out. It turns the
energy of your opposition against you, like some aesthetic jujitsu, and strikes the
fatal blow, like Ali striking George Foreman down in that invigorating, mytholog-
ical contest between black masculinities—the "appropriate" and American-flag-
bearing one (remember Foreman at the 1968 Olympics?), and the outlandish, out-
lawed Muslim-informed one.
Of course, in a sense, Ali was a great jazz performer, because his movements
were like extended riffs on the great themes of grace, power, and precision. But he
was also symbolically precious, and the metaphoric value of his craft was hardly
lost on his legions of followers, as he "floated like a butterfly," like a solo jazz
melody arching effortlessly above the backdrop of supporting instruments keeping
time and pace. Except, of course, Ali was a one-man combo, varying his pitch, and
punch, and the velocity and force of his delivery, "stinging like a bee," to razzle his
opponents and dazzle his fans, much like Miles Davis as he switched from Kind of
Blue to Bitches Brew. And in his flight, in his mobility, Ali also struck symbolic blows
against the demobilization of black culture and the restriction of our unique voices,
as did so many great jazz instrumentalists and vocalists, from Satchmo to Prez,
from the Duke to Bird, from Lady Day to Sassy. And this is where, perhaps, we
can see the relation between jazz and hip-hop, too, at least in Ali's artistry, because
when Ali came out with his doggerel disguised as edifying ring rhetoric-"rumble,
young man, rumble" and "I'm pretty" and "I shook up the world . . . I'm a bad
man"—his braggadocios behavior prefigured rap rhetoric.
But when you think about the metaphor of boxing and fighting as jazz, and jazz
as fighting and boxing, we've also got to focus on the serious sense of contest at
the heart of both. Not only two pugilists testing their ring generalship, but two or
three or four or more instrumentalists in the "cutting sessions" where they lift
their level of play and vision by virtue of engaging their fellow artists in friendly
competition-and maybe here is where, like all analogies, the one between boxing
and jazz breaks down, 'cause there ain't nothing friendly in boxing until the
match is over, and sometimes not even then. But if we compare jazz and boxing,
we might also compare jazz and running, since black music is truly engaged in a
race. But it's a marathon, not a sprint, since jazz and black cultural products are
about the long haul.
One of the advantages of the long view in black culture is that it allows us to
comprehend the durability and resilience of black music. Despite its appropria-
tions, imitations, dilutions, and domestications, black musical creators are peren-


--- PAGE 426 ---
Jan Origins and the Anatomy of Improvisation 397
nially preoccupied with the next thing. You can trace the anatomy of innovation
within given genres, and in looking at how one form gives way to another. For in-
stance, as proof of the former, think of the varieties of what we know today as
jazz. To name a few changes within jazz, termed America's classical music, look at
the progression. First there's blues; after blues, there's ragtime; after ragtime,
there's Dixieland; after Dixieland, there's swing; after swing, there's bebop; after
bebop, there's hardbop; after hardbop, there's postbop; after postbop, there's
avant-garde; after avant-garde, there's fusion; after fusion, there's smooth jazz. Of
course, each of these musical expressions survives, in varying degrees of intensity,
but they symbolize the restless evolution of black musical forms.
And when we examine the historical development of genres of black music, we
observe a constant engagement with innovation, progression, and expansion, from
the spirituals, blues, ragtime, jazz, gospel, rhythm & blues, rock & roll, soul, funk,
disco, hip-hop, house, go-go, new jack swing, techno-soul, acid jazz, bass and
drum, and on and on. And when these forms are occasionally, almost unavoidably,
appropriated, imitated, diluted, and domesticated in mainstream culture, black folk
are on to something else. With black creative cultures, it's always about the great
next. Indeed, the great next is the secular telos that pulls black America forward,
even as we reappropriate what has been appropriated and generate the next form
of creativity. The great next stands as the sign of an inexhaustible black possibility
and fecundity that spawns newer forms of cultural expression.
"Next" is surely one of the key words in the vocabulary of black improvisation,
related to and driven by what the French anthropologist Levi-Strauss calls brico-
lage, making do with what is at hand. For black culture, the great next and brico-
lage is about the possibilities inherent in taking the fragments, the leftovers that
are both literally and symbolically at hand, and doing something imaginative and
substantive with them. In one sense, black cultural creativity, the great next, is
driven by what may be termed the political economy of chitlins: taking the most
unsavory element of an already undesirable entity and making a living from corn-
modifying, marketing, and consuming it. A leftover becomes a lifesaver, in the
case of many blacks who had little to nurture their hunger beyond pork bellies,
which later became an item sold on Wall Street. Black artistic expression often in-
volves taking the sonic fragments and cultural leftovers of dominant culture and
making a black cultural product that is desirable, even irresistible, to the margins
and the mainstream. The beauty of black culture is its ability to re-create and rein-
vent itself as the great next thing in the long evolution of creative possibilities, at
precisely the moment it's being written off.
Interview by Maria Agui Carter and Calvin A. Lindsay fr.
New York, Mew York, 1999


--- PAGE 427 ---
This page intentionally left blank


--- PAGE 428 ---
P A R T T W E L V E
HIP-HOP CULTURE
I have been christened "the hip-hop intellectual" in publications such as
U.S. News & World Report and The Chronicle of Higher Ed-
ucation. Although most of my scholarship has not addressed hip-hop cul-
ture—but black religion, black leadership, black moral and political
thought, and various dimensions of black popular culture—1 have gladly
identified with the younger "hip-hop generation." I have used frequent
references to hip-hop culture in my lectures, sermons, and public addresses,
and I have written a book about the greatest icon in hip-hop—Tupac
Shakur. 1 have done this in hopes of using w'halever intellectual and cul-
tural influence I possess to combat unjust appraisals of hip-hop music, and
to encourage older folk to listen to the cries of hurt and desperation—and
help—that ring across the culture's lyrical landscape. Furthermore, I have
testified twice before Congress in the effort to forge greater awareness of
the genre's brilliant social criticism and aesthetic achievements, while de-
fending the most politically vulnerable and underrepresented group in the
country—poor black and brown urban youth. Hip-hop culture is the most
explosive, engaging, and controversial form of (black) American pop cul-
ture to find global circulation and acclaim in the last quarter century, and
is worthy of serious critique and investigation.


--- PAGE 429 ---
This page intentionally left blank


--- PAGE 430 ---
Thirty
THE CULTURE OF HIP-HOP
In 1987, as a second-year graduate student at Princeton, I published one of the first
essays on rap in the academy. That essay-my first professional piece of writing—was
entitled "Rap, Race, and Reality." It was written for the legendary, but now defunct,
magazine of progressive Christian opinion, Christianity and Crisis, which was
founded in 1941 by the renowned theokgian Reinhold Niebuhr. Two years later, I wrote
"The Culture of Hip-Hop"for my monthly column in Z Magazine. Although the rapid
proliferation of styles, themes, and trends within hip-hop threatens to make obsolete any
analysis of the genre that is older than five years, this essay may be useful for the way it
addresses the emergence, evolution, and redefinition of hip-hop from its humble beginnings
in the Bronx to its golden age in the mid '80s to the early '90s. 'This essay has been
widely used in college and university courses, and has appeared in several anthologies.
FROM THE VERY BEGINNING OF ITS RECENT HISTORY, hip-hop music-or
rap, as it has come to be known—has faced various obstacles. Initially, rap was
deemed a passing fad, a playful and ephemeral black cultural form that steamed off
the musical energies of urban black teens. As it became obvious that rap was here
to stay, a permanent fixture in black ghetto youths' musical landscape, the reactions
changed from dismissal to denigration, and rap music came under attack from both
black and white quarters. Is rap really as dangerous as many critics argue? Or are
there redeeming characteristics to rap music that warrant our critical attention? I
will attempt to answer these and other questions as I explore the culture of hip-hop.
Trying to pinpoint the exact origin of rap is a tricky process that depends on when
one acknowledges a particular cultural expression or product as rap. Rap can be
traced back to the revolutionary verse of Gil Scott-Heron and the Last Poets, to Pig-
meat Markham's "Here Come de Judge," and even to Bessie Smith's rapping to a
beat in some of her blues. We can also cite ancient African oral traditions as the an-
tecedents to various contemporary African American cultural practices. In any case,
the modern history of rap probably begins in 1979 with the rap song "Rapper's De-
light," by the Sugarhill Gang. Although there were other (mostly underground) ex-
amples of rap, this record is regarded as the signal barrier breaker, birthing hip-hop
and consolidating the infant art form's popularity. This first stage in rap record pro-
duction was characterized by rappers placing their rhythmic, repetitive speech over


--- PAGE 431 ---
402 THE MICHAEL ERIC DYSON READER
well-known (mostly R&B) black music hits. "Rapper's Delight" was rapped over the
music to a song made by the popular 70s R&B group Chic, tided "Good Times." Al-
though rap would later enhance its technical virtuosity through instrumentation,
drum machines, and "sampling" existing records—thus making it creatively symbi-
otic—the first stage was benignly parasitic upon existing black music.
As rap grew, it was still limited to mostly inner-city neighborhoods and partic-
ularly its place of origin, New York City. Rap artists like Funky 4 Plus 1, Kool
Moe Dee, Busy Bee, Afrika Bambaata, Cold Crush Brothers, Kurtis Blow, DJ
Kool Here, and Grandmaster Melle Mel were experimenting with this developing
musical genre. As it evolved, rap began to describe and analyze the social, eco-
nomic, and political factors that led to its emergence and development: drug ad-
diction, police brutality, teen pregnancy, and various forms of material depriva-
tion. This new development was both expressed and precipitated by Kurtis
Blow's "Those Are the Breaks" and by the most influential and important rap
song to emerge in rap's early history, "The Message," by Grandmaster Flash and
the Furious Five. The picture this song painted of inner-city life for black Ameri-
cans—the hues of dark social misery and stains of profound urban catastrophe-
screeched against the canvas of most suburban sensibilities:
You'll grow up in the ghetto living second rate / And your eyes will sing a song
of deep hate / The places you play and where you stay, / Looks like one great big
alleyway / You'll admire all the number book takers / Thugs, pimps, and push-
ers, and the big money makers / Drivin' big cars, spendin' twenties and tens,
And you want to grow up to be just like them /.. . It's like a jungle sometimes /
It makes me wonder how I keep from goin' under.
"The Message," along with Flash's "New York, New York," pioneered the social
awakening of rap into a form combining social protest, musical creation, and cul-
tural expression.
As its fortunes slowly grew, rap was still viewed by the music industry as an
epiphenomenal cultural activity that would cease as black youth became bored and
moved on to another diversion, as they did with break dancing and graffiti art. But
the successes of the rap group Run-D.M.C. moved rap into a different sphere of
artistic expression that signaled its increasing control of its own destiny. Run-
D.M.C. is widely recognized as the progenitor of modem rap's creative integration
of social commentary, diverse musical elements, and uncompromising cultural iden-
tification—an integration that pushed the music into the mainstream and secured its
future as an American musical genre with an identifiable tradition. Run-D.M.C.'s
stunning commercial and critical success almost single-handedly landed rap in the
homes of many black and nonblack youths across America by producing the first
rap album to be certified gold (500,000 copies sold), the first rap song to be featured
on the twenty-four-hour music video channel MTV, and the first rap album (1987's
Raising Hell) to go triple platinum (3 million copies sold).


--- PAGE 432 ---
The Culture of Hip-Hop 403
On Raising Hell, Run-D.M.C. showcased the sophisticated technical virtuosity
of its DJ Jam Master Jay—the raw shrieks, scratches, glitches, and language of the
street, plus the innovative and ingenious appropriation of hard-rock guitar riffs. In
doing this, Run-D.M.C. symbolically and substantively wedded two traditions-
the waning subversion of rock music and the rising, incendiary aesthetic of hip-
hop music—to produce a provocative musical hybrid of fiery lyricism and potent
critique. Raising Hell ended with the rap anthem, "Proud to Be Black," intoning its
unabashed racial pride:
Ya know I'm proud to be black ya'll, And that's a fact ya'll .. . Now Harriet
Tubman was born a slave, She was a tiny black woman when she was raised /
She was livin' to be givin', There's a lot that she gave / There's not a slave in this
day and age, I'm proud to be black.
At the same time, rap, propelled by Run-D.M.C.'s epochal success, found an
arena in which to concentrate its subversive cultural didacticism aimed at ad-
dressing racism, classism, social neglect, and urban pain: the rap concert, where
rappers are allowed to engage in ritualistic refusals of censored speech. The rap
concert also creates space for cultural resistance and personal agency, loosing the
strictures of the tyrannizing surveillance and demoralizing condemnation of main-
stream society and encouraging relatively autonomous, often enabling, forms of
self-expression and cultural creativity.
However, Run-D.M.C.'s success, which greatly increased the visibility and
commercial appeal of rap music through record sales and rap concerts, brought
along another charge that has had a negative impact on rap's perception by the
general public: the claim that rap expresses and causes violence. Tipper Gore has
repeatedly said that rap music appeals to "angry, disillusioned, unloved kids" and
that it tells them it is "okay to beat people up." Violent incidents at rap concerts in
Los Angeles, Pittsburgh, Cleveland, Atlanta, Cincinnati, and New York City have
only reinforced the popular perception that rap is intimately linked to violent so-
cial behavior by mostly black and Latino inner-city youth. Countless black par-
ents, too, have had negative reactions to rap, and the black radio and media es-
tablishment, although not as vocal as Gore, have voted on her side with their
allocation of much less airplay and print coverage to rap than is warranted by its
impressive record sales.
Such reactions betray a shallow understanding of rap, which in many cases
results from people's unwillingness to listen to rap lyrics, many of which coun-
sel antiviolent and antidrug behavior among the youths who are their avid au-
dience. Many rappers have spoken directly against violence, such as KRS-One
in his "Stop the Violence." Another rap record produced by KRS-One in 1989,
the top-selling Self-Destruction, insists that violence predates rap and speaks
against escalating black-on-black crime, which erodes the social and communal
fabric of already debased black inner cities across America:


--- PAGE 433 ---
404 THE MICHAEL ERIC DYSON READER
Well, today's topic is self-destruction, It really ain't the rap audience that's bug-
gin' / It's one or two suckers, ignorant brothers, Tryin' to rob and steal from one
anodier / .. . 'Cause the way we live is positive. We don't kill our relatives /
... Back in the sixties our brodiers and sisters were hanged. How could you gang-
bang? /1 never, ever ran from the Ku Klux Klan, and I shouldn't have to run from
a black man, 'Cause that's / Self-destruction, ya headed for self-destruction.
Despite such potent messages, many mainstream blacks and whites persist in
categorically negative appraisals of rap, refusing to distinguish between enabling,
productive rap messages and the social violence that exists in many inner-city
communities and that is often reflected in rap songs. Of course, it is difficult for
a culture that is serious about the maintenance of social arrangements, economic
conditions, and political choices that create and reproduce poverty, racism, sex-
ism, classism, and violence to display a significant appreciation for musical ex-
pressions that contest the existence of such problems in black and Latino com-
munities. Also disappointing is the continued complicity of black radio stations
in denying rap its rightful place of prominence on their playlists. The conspiracy
of silence and invisibility has affected the black print media as well. Although
rapper M. C. Shan believes that most antirap bias arises from outside the black
community, he faults black radio for depriving rap of adequate airplay and
laments die fact that "if a white rock 'n' roll magazine like Rolling Stone or Spin
can put a rapper on the cover and Ebony and Jet won't, that means there's really
something wrong."
In this regard, rap music is emblematic of the glacial shift in aesthetic sensibili-
ties between blacks of different generations, and it draws attention to the severe
economic barriers that increasingly divide ghetto poor blacks from middle- and
upper-middle-class blacks. Rap reflects the intraracial class division that has
plagued African-American communities for the last thirty years. The increasing
social isolation, economic hardship, political demoralization, and cultural ex-
ploitation endured by most ghetto poor communities in the past few decades have
given rise to a form of musical expression that captures the terms of ghetto poor
existence. I am not suggesting that rap has been limited to the ghetto poor, but
only that its major themes and styles continue to be drawn from the conflicts and
contradictions of black urban life. One of the later trends in rap music is the de-
velopment of "pop" rap by groups like JJ Fad, The Fat Boys, DJ Jazzy Jeff and
The Fresh Prince, and Tone Loc. DJ Jazzy Jeff and The Fresh Prince, for exam-
ple, are two suburbanites from Southwest Philadelphia and Winfield. (For that
matter, members of the most radical rap group, Public Enemy, are suburbanites
from Long Island.) DJ Jazzy Jeff and The Fresh Prince's album, He's the DJ, I'm the
Rapper, sold over 3 million copies, boosted by the enormously successful single
"Parents Just Don't Understand." This record, which rapped humorously about
various crises associated with being a teen, struck a chord with teenagers across
the racial and class spectra, signaling the exploration of rap's populist terrain. The


--- PAGE 434 ---
The Culture of Hip-Hop 405
Fresh Prince's present success as the star of his own Quincy Jones-produced tele-
vision series is further testimony to his popular appeal.
Tone Loc's success also expresses rap's division between "hardcore" (social
consciousness and racial pride backed by driving rhythms) and "pop" (explo-
ration of common territory between races and classes, usually devoid of social
message). This division, while expressing the commercial expansion of rap, also
means that companies and willing radio executives have increasingly chosen pop
rap as more acceptable than its more realistic, politically conscious counterpart.
(This bias is also evident in the selection of award recipients in the newly created
rap category at the annual Grammy Awards.) Tone Loc is an L.A. rapper whose
first single, "Wild Thing," sold over 2 million copies, topping Billboard's "Hot Sin-
gles Chart," the first rap song to achieve this height. Tone Loc's success was
sparked by his video's placement in heavy rotation on MTV, which devotes an
hour on Saturdays to Yo! MTV Raps, a show that became so popular that a daily
hour segment was added.
The success of such artists as Tone Loc and DJ Jazzy Jeff and The Fresh Prince
inevitably raises the specter of mainstream dilution, the threat to every emergent
form of cultural production in American society, particularly the fecund musical
tradition that comes from black America. For many, this means the sanitizing of
rap's expression of urban realities, resulting in sterile hip-hop that, devoid of its
original fire, will offend no one. This scenario, of course, is a familiar denouement
to the story of most formerly subversive musical genres. Also, MTV's avid ac-
ceptance of rap and the staging of rap concerts run by white promoters willing to
take a chance on rap artists add further commentary to the sad state of cultural
affairs in many black communities: the continued refusal to acknowledge authen-
tic (not to mention desirable) forms of rap artistry ensures rap's existence on the
margins of many black communities.
Perhaps the example of another neglected and devalued black musical tradi-
tion, the blues, can be helpful for understanding what is occurring among rap
segments of the black community and mainstream American society. The blues
now has a mostly young white audience. Blacks do not largely support the blues
through concert patronage or record buying, thus neglecting a musical genre that
was once closely identified with devalued and despised people: poor southern
agrarian blacks and the northern urban black poor, the first stratum of the devel-
oping underclass. The blues functioned for another generation of blacks much as
rap functions for young blacks today: as a source of racial identity, permitting
forms of boasting and asserting machismo for devalued black men suffering from
social degradation, allowing commentary on social and personal conditions in un-
censored language, and fostering the ability to transform hurt and anguish into
art and commerce. Even in its heyday, however, the blues existed as a secular mu-
sical genre against the religious traditions that saw the blues as "devil's music"
and the conservative black cultural perspectives of the blues as barbaric. These
feelings, along with the direction of southern agrarian musical energies into a


--- PAGE 435 ---
406 THE MICHAEL ERIC DYSON READER
more accessible and populist soul music, ensured the contraction of the economic
and cultural basis for expressing life experience in the blues idiom.
Robert Cray's recent success in mainstreaming the blues perhaps completes the
cycle of survival for devalued forms of black music: it originates in a context of
anguish and pain and joy and happiness, it expresses those emotions and ideas in
a musical language and idiom peculiar to its view of life, it is altered as a result of
cultural sensibilities and economic factors, and it undergoes distribution, packag-
ing, and consumption for leisurely or cathartic pleasure through concert atten-
dance or record buying. Also, in the process, artists are sometimes removed from
the immediate context and original site of their artistic production. Moreover, be-
sides the everyday ways in which the music is used for a variety of entertainment
functions, it may occasionally be employed in contexts that undermine its critique
of the status quo, and it may be used to legitimize a cultural or social setting that,
in negative ways, has partially given rise to its expression. A recent example of
this is the late Lee Atwater's positioning of himself as a privileged patron of the
blues and soul music traditions in the 1989 Bush inauguration festivities, which
was preceded by his racist use of the Willie Horton case. Atwater's use of Willie
Horton viciously played on the very prejudice against black men that has often
led blues musicians to express the psychic, personal, and social pain occasioned
by racism in American (political) culture. Rap's visibility may alter this pattern as
it continues to grow, but its self-defined and continuing challenge is to maintain its
aesthetic, cultural, and political proximity to its site of original expression: the
ghetto poor.
Interestingly, a new wave of rap artists may be accomplishing this goal, but
with foreboding consequences. For example, N.W.A. (Niggas With Attitude) re-
flects the brutal circumstances that define the boundaries within which most
ghetto poor black youth in Los Angeles must live. For the most part they—unlike
their socially conscientious counterparts Public Enemy, Boogie Down Produc-
tions, and Stetsasonic—have no ethical remove from the violence, gang-bangin',
and drugs in L.A.'s inner city. In their song "— Tha Police," N.W.A. gives a sam-
ple of their reality:
Fuck the police, comin' straight from the underground. A young nigger got it
bad 'cause I'm brown / And not the other color, so police think, / They have the
authority to kill a minority / . . . Searchin' my car looking for the product, /
Thinkin' every nigger is sellin' narcotic / . . . But don't let it be a black and a
white one, / 'Cause they'll slam ya down to the street top, Black police showin'
out for the white cop.
Such expressions of violence certainly reflect the actual life circumstances of many
black and Latino youth caught in the desperate cycle of drugs and gangs involved in
L.A. ghetto living. N.W.A. celebrates a lethal mix of civil terrorism and personal cyn-
icism. Their attitude is both one answer to, and the logical outcome of, the violence,


--- PAGE 436 ---
The Culture of Hip-Hop 407
racism, and oppression in American culture. On the other hand, their vision must be
criticized, for the stakes are too high for the luxury of moral neutrality. Having at
least partially lived the life they rap about, N.W.A. understands the viciousness of
police brutality. However, they must also be challenged to develop an ethical per-
spective on the drug gangs that duplicate police violence in black-on-black crime.
While rappers like N. W. A. perform an invaluable service by rapping in poignant and
realistic terms about urban underclass existence, they must be challenged to expand
their moral vocabulary and be more sophisticated in their understanding that de-
scription alone is insufficient to address the crises of black urban life. Groups like
N.W.A. should be critically aware that blacks are victims of the violence of both state
repression and gang violence, that one form of violence is often the response to the
other, and that blacks continue to be held captive to disenabling lifestyles (gang-
bangin', drug dealing) that cripple the life of black communities.
Also problematic is the sexist sentiment that pervades so much of rap music. It is
a rampant sexism that continues to mediate the relations within the younger black
generation with lamentable intensity. While it is true that rap's sexism is indeed a
barometer of the general tenor and mood that mediates black male-female rela-
tions, it is not the role of women alone to challenge it. Reproach must flow from
women and men who are sensitive to the ongoing sexist attitudes and behavior that
dominate black male-female relationships. Because women by and large do not run
record companies, or even head independent labels that have their records distrib-
uted by larger corporations, it is naive to assume that protest by women alone will
arrest the spread of sexism in rap. Female rappers are certainly a potential resource
for challenging existing sexist attitudes, but given the sexist barriers that patrol rap's
borders, male rappers must be challenged by antisexist men, especially male rappers
who contest the portrayal of women in most rap music. The constant reference to
women as "skeezers," "bitches," and "ho's" only reinforces the perverted expression
of male dominance and patriarchy and reasserts the stereotyping of women as sex-
ual objects intended exclusively for male pleasure.
Fortunately, many of the problems related to rap—particularly with black radio,
media, and community acceptance—have only fostered a sense of camaraderie
that transcends in crucial ways the fierce competitive streak in rap (which, at its
best moments, urges rappers on to creative musical heights). While the "dis" rap
(which humorously musicalizes "the dozens") is alive and well, the overall feeling
among rap artists that rap must flourish outside the sanctions of traditional means
of garnering high visibility or securing record sales has directed a communal en-
ergy into the production of their music. The current state of affairs has also pre-
cipitated cooperative entrepreneurial activity among young black persons. The
rap industry has spawned a number of independent labels, providing young
blacks (mostly men) with experience as heads of their own businesses and with
exposure as managers of talent, positions that might otherwise be unavailable to
them. Until recently, rap flourished, for the most part, outside of the tight artistic
and economic constraints imposed by major music corporations. Although many


--- PAGE 437 ---
408 THE MICHAEL ERIC DYSON READER
independent companies have struck distribution deals with major labels—such as
Atlantic, MCA, Columbia, and Warner Brothers-it has usually been the case,
until the late 1980s, that the inexperience of major labels with rap, coupled with
their relatively conservative musical tastes, has enabled the independent labels to
control their destinies by teaching the major music corporations invaluable
lessons about street sales, the necessity of having a fast rate of delivery from the
production of a record to its date of distribution, and remaining close to the sen-
sibilities of the street, while experimenting with their marketing approach in ways
that reflect the diversification of styles in rap.
Rap expresses the ongoing preoccupation with literacy and orality that has
characterized African-American communities since the inception of legally co-
erced illiteracy during slavery. Rap artists explore grammatical creativity, verbal
wizardry, and linguistic innovation in refining the art of oral communication. The
rap artist, as Cornel West has indicated, is a bridge figure who combines the two
potent traditions in black culture: preaching and music. The rap artist appeals to
the rhetorical practices eloquently honed in African-American religious experi-
ences and the cultural potency of black singing/musical traditions to produce an
engaging hybrid. They are truly urban griots dispensing social and cultural cri-
tique, verbal shamans exorcising the demons of cultural amnesia. The culture of
hip-hop has generated a lexicon of life that expresses rap's B-boy/B-girl world-
view, a perspective that takes delight in undermining "correct" English usage
while celebrating the culturally encoded phrases that communicate in rap's idiom.
Rap has also retrieved historic black ideas, movements, and figures in combat-
ing the racial amnesia that threatens to relegate the achievements of the black past
to the ash heap of dismemory. Such actions have brought a renewed sense of his-
torical pride to young black minds that provides a solid base for racial self-esteem.
Rap music has also focused renewed attention on black nationalist and black radi-
cal thought. This revival has been best symbolized by the rap group Public Enemy.
Public Enemy announced its black nationalism in embryonic form on their first
album, To! Bum Rush the Show, but their vision sprang forward full-blown in their
important It Takes a Nation of Millions to Hold Us Back. The album's explicit black na-
tionalist language and cultural sensibilities were joined with a powerful mix of
music, beats, screams, noises, and rhythms from the streets. Its message is provoca-
tive, even jarring, a precis of the contained chaos and channeled rage that informs
the most politically astute rappers. On the cut "Bring the Noise," they intone:
We got to demonstrate, come on now, they're gonna have to wait / Till we get
it right / Radio stations I question their blackness / They call themselves black,
but we'll see if they'll play this / Turn it up! Bring the noise!
Public Enemy also speaks of the criminality of prison conditions and how dope
dealers fail the black community. Their historical revivalism is noteworthy, for in-
stance, as they rap on "Party for Your Right to Fight":


--- PAGE 438 ---
The Culture of Hip-Hop 409
Power Equality / And we're out to get it /1 know some of you ain't wit' it /
This party started right in '66 / With a pro-Black radical mix / Then at the hour
of twelve /. J. Edgar Hoover, and he coulda' proved to 'ya / He had King and X
set up / Also the party with Newton, Cleaver, and Scale /... Word from the hon-
orable Elijah Muhammad / Know who you are to be Black . . . the original Black
Asiatic man.
Public Enemy troubled even more sociocultural waters with their Nation of
Islam views, saying in "Don't Believe the Hype":
The follower of Farrakhan / Don't tell me that you understand / Until you
hear the man.
Such rap displays the power and pitfalls associated with the revival of earlier
forms of black radicalism, nationalism, and cultural expression. The salutary as-
pect of the historical revival is that it raises consciousness about important figures,
movements, and ideas, prompting rappers to express their visions of life in Amer-
ican culture. This renewed historicism permits young blacks to discern links be-
tween the past and their own present circumstances, using the past as a fertile
source of social reflection, cultural creation, and political resistance.
On the other hand, it has also led to perspectives that do not provide critical re-
flection on the past. Rather, many rappers attempt to duplicate the past without
challenging or expanding it. Thus, their historical insight fails to illumine our cur-
rent cultural problems as powerfully as it might, and the present generation of
black youth fails to benefit as fully from the lessons that it so powerfully revives.
This is an unfortunate result of the lack of understanding and communication
among various segments of the black community, particularly along generational
and class lines, problems symbolized in the black community's response to rap.
Historical revival cries out for contexts that render the past understandable and
usable. This cannot occur if large segments of the black community continue to
be segregated from one of the most exciting cultural transformations occurring in
contemporary American life: the artistic expression, cultural exploration, political
activity, and historical revival of hip-hop artists.
An issue in rap that is closely related to the acknowledgment of history and
sources is sampling, or the grafting of music, voices, and beats from another sonic
source onto a rap record. The practice of sampling expresses the impulse to collage
that characterizes the best of black musical traditions, particularly jazz and gospel.
Sampling is also postmodernist activity that merges disparate musical and cultural
forms to communicate an artistic message. Sampling is a transgressive activity be-
cause rappers employ it to interrupt the narrative flow and musical stability of
other musical texts, producing a new and often radically different creation. But rap
may potentially take back in its technical appropriation what it has given in its sub-
stantive, lyrical achievements: a recognition of history. While sampling permits a


--- PAGE 439 ---
410 THE MICHAEL ERIC DYSON READER
rap creator to reconfigure voices and rhythms in creating an alternate code of cul-
tural exchange, the practice may also deprive other artists of recognition or even fi-
nancial remuneration. The classic case in point is James Brown, who, along with
George Clinton, is the most sampled man in rap and the primal progenitor of the
beats and rhythms in hip-hop music. Although his voice, rhythms, and beats are
often easily identifiable and rap's debt to him is obvious, Brown's benefit has been
limited. Recent legal woes connected to the status of rap's practice of creative bor-
rowing may hasten rap's codification of appropriate acknowledgment, particularly
in an economic practice similar to the royalty that distinguishes between small bites
of music and significant borrowing and quotation.
Rap is a form of profound musical, cultural, and social creativity. It expresses
the desire of young black people to reclaim their history, reactivate forms of black
radicalism, and contest the powers of despair and economic depression that
presently besiege the black community. Besides being the most powerful form of
black musical expression today, rap projects a style of self into the world that gen-
erates forms of cultural resistance and transforms the ugly terrain of ghetto exis-
tence into a searing portrait of life as it must be lived by millions of voiceless peo-
ple. For that reason alone, rap deserves attention and should be taken seriously;
and for its productive and healthy moments, it should be promoted as a worthy
form of artistic expression and cultural projection and an enabling source of black
juvenile and communal solidarity.


--- PAGE 440 ---
Thirty- One
G A N G S T A RAP AND AMERICAN CULTURE
In 1994,1 wrote an op-edfor the New York Times entitled "Bum Rap" arguing that
hip-hop culture was often unfairly attacked. In particular, I contended thatgangsta rap was
much more complex than its literal-minded opponents made it out to be. I oho appeared on
the McNeil-Lehrer News Hour to debate gangsta rap, including an exchange with
political activist C. Delores Tucker, the first of our many engagements, debates, and
confrontations over the years. While l am critical of many elements of gangsta rap, it is
important to explore its cultural and racial roots. It is necessary as well to take stock of the
moral complaint, and the venting of suffering and misery, that pour through gangsta rap's
best artists. My book on Tupac Shakur, Holler If You Hear Me, grew in part out of my
effort to understand and explore the complex genealogy of the thug in black youth pop
culture. This essay is my most succinct statement of the ambitions and contradictions of
gangsta rap, and its social and rhetorical uses in hip-hop and the broader culture.
THE RECENT ATTACKS ON THE ENTERTAINMENT INDUSTRY, especially
gangsta rap, by Senator Bob Dole, former Education Secretary William Bennett,
and political activist C. Delores Tucker, reveal the fury that popular culture can
evoke in a wide range of commentators. As a thirty-five-year-old father of a sixteen-
year-old son and as a professor and ordained Baptist minister who grew up in De-
troit's treacherous inner city, I too am disturbed by many elements of gangsta rap.
But I'm equally anguished by the way many critics have used its artists as scape-
goats. How can we avoid the pitfall of unfairly attacking black youth for problems
that bewitched our culture long before they gained prominence? First, we should
understand what forces drove the emergence of rap. Second, we should place the
debate about gangsta rap in the context of a much older debate about "negative"
and "positive" black images. Finally, we should acknowledge that gangsta rap
crudely exposes harmful beliefs and practices that are often maintained with decep-
tive civility in much of mainstream society, including many black communities.
If the fifteen-year evolution of hip-hop teaches us anything, it's that history is
made in unexpected ways by unexpected people with unexpected results. Rap is
now safe from the perils of quick extinction predicted at its humble start. But its
birth in the bitter belly of the '70s proved to be a Rosetta stone of black popular cul-
ture. Afros, "blunts," funk music, and carnal eruptions define a "back-in-the-day"


--- PAGE 441 ---
412 THE MICHAEL ERIC DYSON READER
hip-hop aesthetic. In reality, the severe '70s busted the economic boom of the '60s.
The fallout was felt in restructured automobile industries and collapsed steel mills.
It was extended in exported employment to foreign markets. Closer to home, there
was the depletion of social services to reverse the material ruin of black life. Later,
public spaces for black recreation were gutted by Reaganomics or violently trans-
formed by lethal drug economies.
Hip-hop was born in these bleak conditions. Hip-hoppers joined pleasure and
rage while turning the details of their difficult lives into craft and capital. This is
the world hip-hop would come to "represent": privileged persons speaking for less
visible or vocal peers. At their best, rappers shape the tortuous twists of urban fate
into lyrical elegies. They represent lives swallowed by too little love or opportu-
nity. They represent themselves and their peers with aggrandizing anthems that
boast of their ingenuity and luck in surviving. The art of "representin" that is
much ballyhooed in hip-hop is the witness of those left to tell the afflicted's story.
As rap expands its vision and influence, its unfavorable origins and its relentless
quest to represent black youth are both a consolation and challenge to hip-hoppers.
They remind rappers that history is not merely the stuff of imperial dreams from
above. It isn't just the sanitizing myths of those with political power. Representing
history is within reach of those who seize the opportunity to speak for themselves,
to represent their own interests at all costs. Even rap's largest controversies are
about representation. Hip-hop's attitudes toward women and gays continually jolt
in the unvarnished malevolence they reveal. The sharp responses to rap's misog-
yny and homophobia signify its central role in battles over the cultural representa-
tion of other beleaguered groups. This is particularly true of gangsta rap.
While gangsta rap takes the heat for a range of social maladies from urban vi-
olence to sexual misconduct, the roots of our racial misery remain buried beneath
moralizing discourse that is confused and sometimes dishonest. There's no doubt
that gangsta rap is often sexist and that it reflects a vicious misogyny that has
seized our nation with frightening intensity. It is doubly wounding for black
women who are already beset by attacks from outside their communities to feel
the thrust of musical daggers to their dignity from within. How painful it is for
black women, many of whom have fought valiantly for black pride, to hear the
dissonant chord of disdain carried in the angry epithet "bitch."
The link between the vulgar rhetorical traditions expressed in gangsta rap and
the economic exploitation that dominates the marketplace is real. The circulation
of brutal images of black men as sexual outlaws and black females as "ho's" in
many gangsta rap narratives mirrors ancient stereotypes of black sexual identity.
Male and female bodies are turned into commodities. Black sexual desire is
stripped of redemptive uses in relationships of great affection or love.
Gangsta rappers, however, don't merely respond to the values and visions of
the marketplace; they help shape them as well. The ethic of consumption that per-
vades our culture certainly supports the rapacious materialism shot through the
narratives of gangsta rap. Such an ethic, however, does not exhaust the literal or


--- PAGE 442 ---
Gangsta Rap and American Culture 413
metaphoric purposes of material wealth in gangsta culture. The imagined and real
uses of money to help one's friends, family, and neighborhood occupies a promi-
nent spot in gangsta rap lyrics and lifestyles.
Equally troubling is the glamorization of violence and the romanticization of
the culture of guns that pervades gangsta rap. The recent legal troubles of Tupac
Shakur, Dr. Dre, Snoop Doggy Dogg, and other gangsta rappers chastens any de-
fense of the genre based on simplistic claims that these artists are merely per-
forming roles that are divorced from real life. Too often for gangsta rappers, life
does indeed imitate and inform art.
But gangsta rappers aren't simply caving in to the pressure of racial stereotyping
and its economic rewards in a music industry hungry to exploit their artistic imag-
inations. According to this view, gangsta rappers are easily manipulated pawns in
a chess game of material dominance where their consciences are sold to the high-
est bidder. Or else gangsta rappers are viewed as the black face of white desire to
distort the beauty of black life. Some critics even suggest that white record execu-
tives discourage the production of "positive rap" and reinforce the desire for lewd
expressions packaged as cultural and racial authenticity.
But such views are flawed. The street between black artists and record compa-
nies runs both ways. Even though black artists are often ripe for the picking-and
thus susceptible to exploitation by white and black record labels—many of them
are quite sophisticated about the politics of cultural representation. Many gangsta
rappers helped to create the genre's artistic rules. Further, they have figured out
how to financially exploit sincere and sensational interest in "ghetto life." Gangsta
rap is no less legitimate because many "gangstas" turn out to be middle-class
blacks faking homeboy roots. This fact simply focuses attention on the genre's es-
sential constructedness, its literal artifice. Much of gangsta rap makes voyeuristic
whites and naive blacks think they're getting a slice of authentic ghetto life when
in reality they're being served colorful exaggerations. That doesn't mean, how-
ever, that the best of gangsta rappers don't provide compelling portraits of real so-
cial and economic suffering.
Critics of gangsta rap often ignore how hip-hop has been developed without the
assistance of a majority of black communities. Even "positive" or "nation-conscious"
rap was initially spurned by those now calling for its revival in the face of gangsta
rap's ascendancy. Long before white record executives sought to exploit transgres-
sive sexual behavior among blacks, many of us failed to lend support to politically
motivated rap. For instance, when political rap group Public Enemy was at its artis-
tic and popular height, most of the critics of gangsta rap didn't insist on the group's
prominence in black cultural politics. Instead, Public Enemy, and other conscien-
tious rappers, were often viewed as controversial figures whose inflammatory racial
rhetoric was cause for caution or alarm. In this light, the hue and cry directed
against gangsta rap by the new defenders of "legitimate" hip-hop rings false.
Also, many critics of gangsta rap seek to curtail its artistic freedom to trans-
gress boundaries defined by racial or sexual taboo. That's because the burden


--- PAGE 443 ---
414 THE MICHAEL ERIC DYSON READER
of representation falls heavily on what may be termed the race artist in a far dif-
ferent manner than the one I've described above. The race artist stands in for
black communities. She represents millions of blacks by substituting or sacrific-
ing her desires and visions for the perceived desires and visions of the masses.
Even when the race artist manages to maintain relative independence of vision,
his or her work is overlaid with, and interpreted within, the social and political
aspirations of blacks as a whole. Why? Because of the appalling lack of re-
deeming or nonstereotypical representations of black life that are permitted ex-
pression in our culture.
This situation makes it difficult for blacks to affirm the value of nontraditional
or transgressive artistic expressions. Instead of viewing such cultural products
through critical eyes-seeing the good and the bad, the productive and destructive
aspects of such art—many blacks tend to simply dismiss such work with hyper-
critical disdain. A suffocating standard of "legitimate" art is thus produced by the
limited public availability of complex black art. Either art is seen as redemptive
because it uplifts black culture and shatters stereotypical thinking about blacks, or
it is seen as bad because it reinforces negative perceptions of black culture.
That is too narrow a measure for the brilliance and variety of black art and cul-
tural imagination. Black folk should surely pay attention to how black art is per-
ceived in our culture. We must be mindful of the social conditions that shape per-
ceptions of our cultural expressions and that stimulate the flourishing of one kind
of art versus another. (After all, die-hard hip-hop fans have long criticized how
gangsta rap is eagerly embraced by white record companies while "roots" hip-hop
is grossly underfinanced.)
But black culture is too broad and intricate-its artistic manifestations too un-
predictable and challenging-for us to be obsessed with how white folk view our cul-
ture through the lens of our art. And black life is too differentiated by class, sexual
identity, gender, region, and nationality to fixate on "negative" or "positive" repre-
sentations of black culture. Black culture is good and bad, uplifting and depressing,
edifying and stifling. All of these features should be represented in our art, should
find resonant voicing in the diverse tongues of black cultural expressions.
Gangsta rappers are not the first to face the grueling double standards imposed
on black artists. Throughout African-American history, creative personalities have
sought to escape or enliven the role of race artist with varying degrees of success.
The sharp machismo with which many gangsta rappers reject this office grates on
the nerves of many traditionalists. Many critics argue that since gangsta rap is
often the only means by which many white Americans come into contact with
black life, its pornographic representations and brutal stereotypes of black culture
are especially harmful. The understandable but lamentable response of many crit-
ics is to condemn gangsta rap out of hand. They aim to suppress gangsta rap's
troubling expressions rather than critically engage its artists and the provocative
issues they address. Thus the critics of gangsta rap use it for narrow political ends
that fail to enlighten or better our common moral lives.


--- PAGE 444 ---
Gangsta Rap and American Culture 415
Tossing a moralizing j 'accuse at the entertainment industry may have boosted Bob
Dole's standing in the polls over the short term. It did little, however, to clarify or
correct the problems to which he has drawn dramatic attention. I'm in favor of
changing the moral climate of our nation. I just don't believe that attacking movies,
music, and their makers is very helpful. Besides, right-wing talk radio hosts wreak
more havoc than a slew of violent films. They're the ones terrorist Timothy McVeigh
was inspired by as he planned to bomb the federal building in Oklahoma City.
A far more crucial task lies in getting at what's wrong with our culture and what
it needs to get right. Nailing the obvious is easy. That's why Dole, along with
William Bennett and C. Delores Tucker, goes after popular culture, especially
gangsta rap. And the recent attempts of figures like Tucker and Dionne Warwick, as
well as national and local lawmakers, to censor gangsta rap or to outlaw its sale to
minors are surely misguided. When I testified before the U.S. Senate's Subcommit-
tee on Juvenile Justice, as well as the Pennsylvania House of Representatives, I tried
to make this point while acknowledging the need to responsibly confront gangsta
rap's problems. Censorship of gangsta rap cannot begin to solve the problems of
poor black youth. Nor will it effectively curtail their consumption of music that is al-
ready circulated through dubbed tapes and without the benefit of significant airplay
A crucial distinction needs to be made between censorship of gangsta rap and
edifying expressions of civic responsibility and community conscientiousness.
The former seeks to prevent the sale of vulgar music that offends mainstream
moral sensibilities by suppressing the First Amendment. The latter, however, is a
more difficult but rewarding task. It seeks to oppose the expression of misogynis-
tic and sexist sentiments in hip-hop culture through protest and pamphleteering,
through community activism, and through boycotts and consciousness raising.
What Dole, Bennett, and Tucker shrink from helping us understand-and what
all effective public moralists must address—is why this issue now? Dole's answer
is that the loss of family values is caused by the moral corruption of popular cul-
ture, and therefore we should hold rap artists, Hollywood moguls, and record ex-
ecutives responsible for our moral chaos. It's hard to argue with Dole on the sur-
face, but a gentle scratch reveals that both his analysis and answer are flawed.
Too often, "family values" is a code for a narrow view of how families work,
who gets to count as a legitimate domestic unit, and consequently, what values
are crucial to their livelihood. Research has shown that nostalgia for the family of
the past, when father knew best, ignores the widespread problems of those times,
including child abuse and misogyny. Romantic portrayals of the family on televi-
sion and the big screen, anchored by the myth of the Benevolent Patriarch, hin-
dered our culture from coming to grips with its ugly domestic problems.
To be sure, there have been severe assaults on American families and their val-
ues, but they have not come mainly from Hollywood, but from Washington with
the dismanding of the Great Society. Cruel cuts in social programs for the needi-
est, an upward redistribution of wealth to the rich, and an unprincipled conserva-
tive political campaign to demonize poor black modiers and their children have left


--- PAGE 445 ---
416 THE MICHAEL ERIC DYSON READER
latter-day D. W. Griffiths in the dust. Many of gangsta rap's most vocal black crit-
ics (such as Tucker) fail to see how the alliances they forge with conservative white
politicians such as Bennett and Dole are plagued with problems. Bennett and Dole
have put up roadblocks to many legislative and political measures that would en-
hance the fortunes of the black poor they now claim in part to speak for. Their out-
cry resounds as crocodile tears from the corridors of power paved by bad faith.
Moreover, many of the same conservative politicians who support the attack on
gangsta rap also attack black women (from Lani Guinier to welfare mothers), affir-
mative action, and the redrawing of voting districts to achieve parity for black voters.
The war on gangsta rap diverts attention away from the more substantive threat
posed to women and blacks by many conservative politicians. Gangsta rap's critics
are keenly aware of the harmful effects that genre's misogyny can have on black
teens. Ironically, such critics appear oblivious to how their rhetoric of absolute op-
position to gangsta rap has been used to justify political attacks on poor black teens.
That doesn't mean that gratuitous violence and virulent misogyny should not
be opposed. They must be identified and destroyed. I am wholly sympathetic, for
instance, to sharp criticism of gangsta rap's ruinous sexism and homophobia,
though neither Dole, Bennett, nor Tucker have made much of the latter plague.
"Fags" and "dykes" are prominent in the genre's vocabulary of rage. Critics' fail-
ure to make this an issue only reinforces the inferior, invisible status of gay men
and lesbians in mainstream and black cultural institutions. Homophobia is a vi-
cious emotion and practice that links mainstream middle-class and black institu-
tions to the vulgar expressions of gangsta rap. There seems to be an implicit
agreement between gangsta rappers and political elites that gays, lesbians, and bi-
sexuals basically deserve what they get.
But before we discard the genre, we should understand that gangsta rap often
reaches higher than its ugliest, lowest common denominator. Misogyny, violence,
materialism, and sexual transgression are not its exclusive domain. At its best, this
music draws attention to complex dimensions of ghetto life ignored by many
Americans. Of all the genres of hip-hop-from socially conscious rap to black na-
tionalist expressions, from pop to hardcore—gangsta rap has most aggressively nar-
rated the pains and possibilities, the fantasies and fears, of poor black urban youth.
Gangsta rap is situated in the violent climes of postindustrial Los Angeles and its
bordering cities. It draws its metaphoric capital in part from the mix of myth and
murder that gave the Western frontier a dangerous appeal a century ago.
Gangsta rap is largely an indictment of mainstream and bourgeois black institu-
tions by young people who do not find conventional methods of addressing per-
sonal and social calamity useful. The leaders of those institutions often castigate
the excessive and romanticized violence of this music without trying to understand
what precipitated its rise in the first place. In so doing, they drive a greater wedge
between themselves and the youth they so desperately want to help.
If Americans really want to strike at the heart of sexism and misogyny in our
communities, shouldn't we take a closer look at one crucial source of these blights:


--- PAGE 446 ---
Gangsta Rap and American Culture 417
religious institutions, including the synagogue, the temple, and the church? For in-
stance, the central institution of black culture, the black church, which has given
hope and inspiration to millions of blacks, has also given us an embarrassing
legacy of sexism and misogyny. Despite the great good it has achieved through a
heroic tradition of emancipatory leadership, the black church continues to practice
and justify ecclesiastical apartheid. More than 70 percent of black church members are
female, yet they are generally excluded from the church's central station of power,
the pulpit. And rarely are the few ordained female ministers elected pastors.
Yet black leaders, many of them ministers, excoriate rappers for their verbal
sexual misconduct. It is difficult to listen to civil rights veterans deplore the hos-
tile depiction of women in gangsta rap without mentioning the vicious sexism of
the movements for racial liberation of the 1960s. And of course the problem per-
sists in many civil rights organizations today.
Attacking figures like Snoop Doggy Dogg or Tupac Shakur-or the companies
that record or distribute them-is an easy out. It allows scapegoating without so-
phisticated moral analysis and action. While these young black males become
whipping boys for sexism and misogyny, the places in our culture where these an-
cient traditions are nurtured and rationalized—including religious and educational
institutions and the nuclear family—remain immune to forceful and just criticism.
Corporate capitalism, mindless materialism, and pop culture have surely
helped unravel the moral fabric of our society. But the moral condition of our na-
tion is equally affected by political policies that harm the vulnerable and poor. It
would behoove Senator Dole to examine the glass house of politics he abides in
before he decides to throw stones again. If he really wants to do something about
violence, he should change his mind about the ban on assault weapons he seeks
to repeal. That may not be as sexy or self-serving as attacking pop culture, but it
might help save lives.
Gangsta rap's greatest "sin" may be that it tells the truth about practices and be-
liefs that rappers hold in common with the mainstream and with black elites. This
music has embarrassed mainstream society and black bourgeois culture. It has
forced us to confront the demands of racial representation that plague and pro-
voke black artists. It has also exposed our polite sexism and our disregard for gay
men and lesbians. We should not continue to blame gangsta rap for ills that ex-
isted long before hip-hop uttered its first syllable. Indeed, gangsta rap's in-your-
face style may do more to force our nation to confront crucial social problems
than countless sermons or political speeches.


--- PAGE 447 ---
Thirty-Two
WE NEVER WERE WHAT WE USED TO BE:
BLACK YOUTH, POP CULTURE, AND THE
POLITICS OF NOSTALGIA
'This is my representative statement on hip-hop culture. In this chapter, I range over the
various genres of hip-hop in exploring its roots and ramifications in black culture and
beyond. I also attempt to situate the development of hip-hop culture in reference to
earlier expressions of black pop culture that endured demonization, especially jazz and
blues music. I also argue that an older generation has wrongly concluded that black
youth are ethically estranged from, their elders; too often, older blacks assign to the
unavoidable generation gap a morally perverse intent by youth that is dangerous. I
argue that the moral vision of many older blacks is clouded by a nostalgic sense of the
past that prevents them from identifying with the hip-hop generation—and from
identifying their own lapses and failures as well. Finally, I proffer the existence of a
"juvenocracy " in urban communities—urban spaces occupied and dominated by black
youth under twenty-Jive. 'This demographic shift, which also represents a shift in power
from older to younger blacks, has had a demonstrable, sometimes devastating, impact on
black families. Only by engaging and constructively critiquing hip-hop culture—and not
dismissing or denigrating it—can older blacks possibly hope to understand the most
influential form of black popular culture of the last quarter century.
Our present obsession with the past has the double advantage of making
new work seem raw and rough compared to the cozy patina of tradition,
whilst refusing tradition its vital connection to what is happening now.
By making islands of separation out of the unbreakable chain of human
creativity, we are able to set up false comparisons, false expectations, all
the while lamenting that the music, poetry, painting, prose, performance
art of Now, fails to live up to the art of Then, which is why, we say, it
does not affect us. In fact, we are no more moved by a past we are busy
inventing, than by a present we are busy denying.
-JEANETTE WlNTERSON
"ART OBJECTS," 1995


--- PAGE 448 ---
Black Youth, Pop Culture, and the Politics of Nostalgia 419
I WASN'T EXPECTING THE REBUFF. Its severity underscored the bitterness of
the debate that has formed around urban black youth and the cultures they create.
I had just finished testifying before the United States Senate Judiciary Commit-
tee's Subcommittee on Juvenile Justice. Illinois Senator Carol Moseley-Braun, along
with Maine Senator William Cohen and Wisconsin Senator and Subcommittee
Chair Herbert Kohl, had called the hearing in 1994 to discuss "violent and de-
meaning imagery in popular music." Predictably, the hearings focused on gangsta
rap. While he wasn't within barking distance, rapper Snoop Doggy Dogg was the
shadow figure and rhetorical guest of dishonor at the proceedings. His body of
work—like the rapper himself, slim but menacingly attractive—was relendessly at-
tacked by many of the hearing's witnesses. Snoop was made to appear like hip-hop's
Mephistopheles, seducing black children to trade their souls for the corrupt delights
of "G-funk." The latter is a jeep-rattling, bass-heavy, ripinvention (yes, a mix of rip-
ping off and reinventing) of '70s funk. Except Snoop and G-funk impresario Dr.
Dre's brand of funk is fused to the gangsterish fantasies of 1990s West Coast black
youth culture. After having my say—that the music and its artists are complex, that
they must be understood in both their cultural and racial setting even as we criticize
their hateful sentiments—I was accosted by another witness's husband.
"Don't you have a Ph.D. from Princeton?" the tall, brown-skinned man
brusquely quizzed me.
"Yes, sir, I do," I replied.
"And aren't you a Baptist preacher?" he asked, with even more scorn.
"Yes, sir, I am," I said.
"You know, for somebody who's supposed to be so smart, you sure are a
dumb ass."
At that, he turned and walked off. He had the kind of self-satisfaction that only
proud indignity can conjure. (To be honest, rny Detroit homeboy roots nearly
cracked the surface of my scholarly and preacherly gentility. But since my mama
taught me to respect my elders, I kept my mouth shut.)
There were other times, too, when I caught a glimpse of the hostility between
black youth culture and its older critics. Soon after my Washington witnessing, I
lectured at Harvard on Malcolm X, ending with a recitation of N. W. A.'s (Niggas
With Attitude) rap, "— Tha Police." After my talk, a seasoned graduate student
approached me, I thought, to praise my performance.
"Your lecture was good, man," he duty noted. "But why would you end by sur-
rendering the nobility of black folk to that barbaric nonsense?"
At still another conference, this time at Princeton, I interjected a long snatch
from Snoop's syncopated soliloquy on his and Dr. Dre's rap, "Nothin' but a G
Thang." A colleague later reported that a few of the Ivy League's stuffier types
found my juxtaposing of Ralph Ellison and Snoop jarringly profane. And my per-
formance led New York Daily News columnist Playthell Benjamin to label me a
"sophist" and a "snake oil salesman." (Benjamin would later repeat these, and
much stronger claims, when we went head-to-head at hearings on gangsta rap be-
fore the Pennsylvania State Legislature and on CBS radio's Gil Gross Show.)


--- PAGE 449 ---
420 THE MICHAEL ERIC DYSON READER
Admittedly, much of the resistance I've encountered may have a lot to do with
the fact that I'm a wanna-be rap star. I've even been labeled a "hip-hop intellectual."
Ifou see, even when I'm lecturing on dense theoretical issues, like, say, the relation
of postmodern notions of identity to African-American culture, I've got the grating
habit of dropping a line or two—okay, a few stanzas—from the latest rap release. At
thirty-seven, I came along a little too late to spend my youth spinning tales about
my hood in poetic meters padded by James Brown samples. It's probably pretty sad,
and often maddening, for folk to see a late baby boomer like me—so late that my
generation's been called '"tweeners" because we fit between real baby boomers and
Generation Xers—trying to horn in on a younger age group's territory. It's probably
a pre-midlife crisis, a forward-looking relapse back into a hip-hop youth that was
never really mine. Or maybe in the spirit of hip-hop, I'm simply turning the tables
to sample the youth of artists who sample the music of my youth.
Much of the anger I've seen directed at black youth, especially from older
blacks, is tied to a belief that young blacks are very different from any other black
generation. Among esteemed black intellectuals and persons on the street, there is
a consensus that something has gone terribly wrong with black youth. They are
disrespectful to their elders. They are obsessed with sex. They are materialistic.
They are pathological. They are violent. They are nihilistic. They are ethically
depraved. They are lazy. They are menaces to society.
Right away we must admit that some of these complaints form the rhetorical di-
vide that grows between all generations. Some of these cants and carps are no
more than predecessor blues. They are the laments of those who come Before
judging those who come After. (Such judgments travel a two-way street. Our kids
have their share of disgust about the world they've inherited.)
But many of these complaints reflect a real fear of black youth that's not con-
fined to black communities and not explained by any "generation gap." It's hard
to open a newspaper or watch television without getting an ugly reminder of the
havoc our kids wreak on the streets and the terror they must confront without
much sympathy or support. To be sure, the media has irresponsibly painted many
of the problems of urban America black or brown. In reality, a lot of our social
misery, including drugs, crime, and violence, has a decidedly whiter hue. Still,
black youth are in big trouble.
For many black and white Americans, hip-hop culture crudely symbolizes the
problems of urban black youth. The list of offenses associated with hip-hop cul-
ture is culled from rap lyrics and the lifestyles they promote. The list includes vul-
gar language, sexism, misogyny, homophobia, sexual promiscuity, domestic
abuse, parental disrespect, rejection of authority, and the glorification of violence,
drug use, rape, and murder. And it's true that even a casual listen to a lot of hip-
hop will turn up these and other nefarious attitudes. At least if you listen to the
style of hip-hop known as gangsta rap. The gangsta rap genre of hip-hop emerged
in the late '80s on the West Coast as crack and gangs ruled the urban centers of
Los Angeles, Long Beach, Compton, and Oakland. Since hip-hop has long turned


--- PAGE 450 ---
Black Youth, Pop Culture, and the Politics of Nostalgia 421
to the black ghetto and the Latino barrio for lyrical inspiration, it was inevitable
that a form of music that mimicked the violence on the streets would rise.
It was just as predictable, though not to the degree that it has happened, that a
huge backlash against gangsta rap and black youth would emerge. Among the
factors that made black youth culture ripe for such an attack is a general igno-
rance about the range and depth of hip-hop culture. Ironically, this ignorance
helped make gangsta rap an economically viable music. Anti-rap crusader G. De-
lores Tucker can shout as loud as she wants, and she's certainly earned the right,
but she was nowhere to be found when rap group Public Enemy was at its revo-
lutionary height calling for a united black nation to fight racism and the powers
that be. True, their brand of hip-hop brushed too closely to anti-Semitism and
they certainly could have used a few lessons in feminist thought. But few people
quit listening to Sinatra's "Ey Me to the Moon" (it was really named "In Other
Words," but Sinatra's Billie Holiday-inspired phrasing was so impeccably memo-
rable that he shifted the song's emphasis) because of his occasional racism or his
denigration of women as broads.
The moral of the story is that had more support been given to so-called posi-
tive hip-hoppers and to revolutionary rappers who detested body bags and beer
bottles; who encouraged black men to "be a father to your child"; who advocated
love and respect for black women; who sought to build black communities; and
who encouraged youth to study black history, the gangsta rap tide might have
been stemmed. At the least, gangsta rappers might have been forced to take the
internal criticisms of their hip-hop peers more seriously because such criticisms
would have had moral and economic support. After all, it's easier to get an album
made if you're "pimpin' hos," "cockin' glocks" or generally bitch-baiting your way
through yet another tired tale about how terrible it was to come up in the hood
without your father while blaming your mama for the sorry job she did, than if
you're promoting radical black unity or the overthrow of white racism.
This is not to dis West Coast rap. They got big the old-fashioned way: they
earned it. Left in the shadow of East Coast rap for years, West Coast rap reinvig-
orated the hip-hop game by reinventing the premise of rap: to groove the gluteus
maximus. As Ralph Ellison said, geography is fate. West Coast hip-hop tailored
its fat bass beats and silky melodies for jeeps that cruise the generous spaces of the
West. The music appeals as well to fans in the open spaces of the Midwest and
the South. The tightly drawn grooves and cerebral lyrics of the East Coast have
almost become site-specific. East Coast rappers cling to beliefs in their artistic su-
periority and adhere to the principles of authentic hip-hop. Such beliefs give rise
to poetically intense rappers like Nas or the esoteric basement hip-hoppers Wu
Tang Clan. For the most part, East Coast rap lags far behind the West Coast in
record sales and in popularity. Both brands of hip-hop proved too bruising for the
old heads of the black bourgeoisie. The music also escaped the artistic interests of
a lot of working-class black parents pulling twelve-hour shifts to keep out of the
poorhouse.


--- PAGE 451 ---
422 THE MICHAEL ERIC DYSON READER
But their children surely got the message. And so did the children of white sub-
urbia. The crossover of hip-hop to white teens is certainly a driving force behind
the attack on black youth. Hip-hop's appeal to white youth extends the refash-
ioning of mainstream America by black popular culture. From sports to fashion,
from music to film, innovations in American art owe a debt to the creativity of
black culture. For example, twenty-five years ago, it was unimaginable that black
basketball stars would make television commercials or have sneakers named after
them. Teams like the New York Knickerbockers were derisively dubbed the New
York "Niggerbockers" because of their share of the black talent beginning to flood
the NBA. Today, the NBA is a black man's game. Michael Jordan is the most
revered and perhaps the richest athlete in the world. Kids of every color lace up
his shoes, sport his jersey, and want to, as the ad goes, "Be like Mike."
White kids are also adopting the dress, diction, and demeanor of urban black
youth. From baggy pants to oversize shirts, the "gear" of hip-hop culture has been
mass-produced and worn by youth of every ethnic and racial group. The slang of
hip-hop is now widely used. "Yo" and "Whassup?" are part of our common cul-
tural parlance. The Arsenio Hall Show was an extended hip-hop anthem, a limited
scope of themes pegged to samples of existing material that are endlessly remixed.
Perhaps that's why Hall's show lasted as long as the average rap career, proving
that the genre's virtue is its vice. Even the New 'York Times regularly uses "dis" in
its articles. The swagger of black youth, the sultry way they combine boasting
and self-confidence, has influenced the styles of upper-middle-class white youth.
For many white parents, however, such a trend is cause for concern. While white
youth already face their version of the generation gap—they've been dubbed
"slackers" and "Generation X"—emulating the styles, speech, and behavior of
urban black youth is even more menacing.
Of course, there's nothing new about white kids imitating black kids. Neither
is this the first time that white panic has followed white teens' adoration of black
stars. When Sam Cooke's mellifluous voice and flawless good looks sent white
girls screaming in the '50s, it caused an uproar among white adults. And now that
white girls are driven crazy by Snoop Doggy Dogg's canine comeliness, especially
when there's no doubt about what he wants to do in his dog pound, rap and the
culture that produces it are found wanting. It wasn't until rap made a huge impact
on white kids that the music was so roundly attacked. As long as the "bad" effects
of rap were restricted to black kids, its menace went undetected, unprotested, or
it was flat-out ignored.
Among many black adults, hip-hop culture represents a tragic rejection of the
values that prevailed in black communities years ago, at least during their youth-
ful watch on the wall of black progress. To hear legions of black adults tell it,
there was a time when a black child could be disciplined by any adult in the
neighborhood if he or she did wrong. Such a story is meant to show the strength,
unity, and durability of black communities of the past. It is also meant to under-
score the weakness, fragmentation, and collapse of black communities today.


--- PAGE 452 ---
Black Youth, Pop Culture, and the Politics of Nostalgia 423
(Once, when I visited a university to lecture, I heard this same story repeated by
a black youth, all of eighteen years old, who included her generation among the
duly disciplined children. Most blacks would say that her generation is unfamiliar
with such an experience. That gave me a clue that such stories are, in large part,
rhetorical devices that transmit folk wisdom from one generation to the next.
Such stories help us define the limits of acceptable behavior.)
It's clear that the rise of hip-hop culture has provoked a deep black nostalgia for
a time when black communities were quite different than they are now. When
children respected their elders. When adults, not young thugs, ruled over neigh-
borhoods. When the moral fabric of black communities was knit together by a re-
gard for law and order. When people shared what they had, even if it was their
last crust of bread or drop of soup. When families extended beyond blood or bi-
ology to take in young people in need of rearing. When communication between
blacks on the street was marked by courtesy more than cursing. When black folk
went to church, and even if they didn't, respected the minister as a source of
moral authority. And on and on.
There's little doubt that black communities of the past were sharply different
than they are now. But black communities weren't the idyllic places that nostalgic
black folk make them out to be. Nostalgia is colored memory. It is romantic re-
membering. It re-creates as much as it recalls. The political force of black nostal-
gia-built on a vision of the black past as a Utopian, golden age-is harmful to de-
bates about black youth. Every culture, age, and generation has a high point whose
benefits are unsurpassable. Such Utopias and golden ages, and the benefits they be-
stow, are usually realized after the fact. Indeed, they have to be. It takes decline to
highlight a pinnacle. But when blacks use nostalgia to make moral distinctions be-
tween the sort of people black communities produced Then and produce Now, we
unravel the very fabric of racial memory that we claim our youth desperately need.
A cure for such nostalgia can be found in works like Morals and Manners Among
Negro Americans, edited in 1914 by W.E.B. Du Bois and Augustus Dill. Du Bois
and Dill surveyed hundreds of leading blacks about the "manners and morals" of
black youth. Wouldn't you know it? Many black leaders lamented the negative
impact of popular culture on black youth. One leader blamed moral decline on
movies, which "have an unwholesome effect upon the young people. Roller skat-
ing, ragtime music, cabaret songs, and ugly suggestions of the big city are all per-
nicious. The dancing clubs in the big cities are also vicious." Another leader wor-
ried that black youth "hang around the corners in great numbers, especially the
boys. Many of them are becoming gamblers and idlers." Keep in mind that these
degenerate black youth make up a generation now praised for its high morals.
That should stop us from writing the epitaph of what has been mislabeled a lost
generation of black youth. (Even here, racial distinctions prevail. If white kids are
demonized as "slackers," at least they're seen to be slacking off from a Protestant
work ethic they can recover through hard work. What can you do when you're
lost? Often, you get written off. That happens to too many black youth.)


--- PAGE 453 ---
424 THE MICHAEL ERIC DYSON READER
The relation of nostalgic blacks to hip-hop culture can be viewed in the follow-
ing way: there is a perception of aesthetic alienation and moral strangeness in black
youth. Both of these perceptions, I believe, depend on a denial of crucial aspects
of history and racial memory. Amnesia and anger have teamed up to rob many
blacks of a balanced perspective on our kids. With such balance, we might jusdy
criticize and appreciate hip-hop culture. Without the moderating influence of his-
torical insight, joined to what might be called the humility of memory, we end up
mirroring the outright repudiation our kids face across this country.
Since so much of the politics of nostalgia are about how things used to be,
we've got to understand a bit better how things actually were. Now, I don't har-
bor any illusions about being able, as we used to say in my black ghetto neigh-
borhood in Detroit, to get to "wie es eigentlich gewesen," or, "how it really was."
(Me and my boys repeated that line from nineteenth-century historian Leopold
von Ranke when we were frustrated in our quest for eighteenth-century philoso-
pher Immanuel Kant's "ding an sich," or, "the thing in itself." Yeah, we had it like
that back in the day. No wonder my generation wants our kids to be just like us!)
But we must escape the awkward burden of remembering only what we choose
to believe by getting a more insightful account of things as they happened. The
past should be a fountain of wisdom and warning. It is inevitable that fictions at-
tach to what used to be. But it is immoral to make those fictions the ground of
harsh judgments of our children.
The aesthetic alienation of hip-hop has partly to do with perception. Rap is seen
as wildly differing from the styles, themes, and tones of previous black music.
Well, that's true and not true. Certainly the form of hip-hop is distinct. The skele-
tal rap crew is composed of a DJ (disc jockey), a producer, and an MC (master
of ceremonies, or rapper). (Technology has enhanced, occasionally blurred, and
sometimes redivided the crew's labor over the last fifteen years.) In many cases,
there are at least a couple of rappers. In some cases, there are several. The DJ com-
mands a pair of phonograph turntables. Among other functions, the DJ plays frag-
ments of records through a technique called scratching: manually rotating a record
in sharp, brief bursts of back and forth rhythmic movement over isolated portions
of a song, producing a scratching sound.
The producer has several devices at her command, including a beat box and a
digital sampler. The beat box, or drum machine, is an electronic instrument that
simulates the sound of a drum set. A digital sampler is a synthesizer that stores in
its computerized memory a variety of sounds (a James Brown scream, a TV
theme song, a guitar riff, a bass line) that are reproduced when activated by the
producer. The DJ and the producer work together in laying down backing tracks
for the MC. The tracks consist of rhythms, scratches, beats, shrieks, noises, other
sound effects, and loops, which are fragments of existing songs reworked and re-
peated in new musical contexts.
The MC, or rapper, recites lyrics in a rhythmic, syncopated fashion. The rap-
per's rhetorical quirks, vocal tics, rhyme flow, and verbal flourishes mark his or


--- PAGE 454 ---
Black Youth, Pop Culture, and the Politics of Nostalgia 425
her individual style. In the early days of rap, MCs often simulated sonic frag-
ments with their voices, causing some rappers to be dubbed human beat boxes.
Rappers can use a variety of rhyme schemes, from couplets in tetrameter to
iambic pentameter. Their rhyme schemes can employ masculine and feminine
rhymes, assonantal and consonantal rhymes, or even internal rhymes. Rappers
may use enjambment, prosody, and sophisticated syncopations to tie their collage
of rhymes into a pleasing sonic ensemble.
But hip-hop's form joins features of black oral culture, especially toasts (long
narrative poems) and the dozens, to a variety of black musical styles. As Gil Scott-
Heron once remarked, hip-hop fuses the drum and the word. Blues music is the
style of black artistry most closely associated with hip-hop. The blues spawned
stock characters within its lyrical universe, including the hoochie-coochie man,
the mojo worker, the lover man, and the bad man bluesman. Their relation to hip-
hop's (and '70s blaxploitation flicks') macks, pimps, hustlers, and gangsters is
clear. Plus, the rhetorical marks and devices of blues culture, including vulgar lan-
guage, double entendres, boasting, and liberal doses of homespun machismo, link
it to hip-hop, especially gangsta rap. And in case you're thinking, "Yeah, but the
blues and early jazz weren't nearly as nasty as rap"; think again. There are lyrics
contained in the songs of the great Jelly Roll Morton, for example, that would
make Snoop Doggy Dogg wince in embarrassment. You can read Morton's lyrics
in their most distinguished place of storage, the Library of Congress. (Does this
mean in the next century that that august institution will house the Dogg's Mag-
num Snoopus, "Doggystyle," for future generations to lap up or howl at?) Mod-
ern technology, together with the urban and secular emphases of black culture,
has helped expose localized traditions of vulgar black speech—including agrarian
blues, signifying, toasts, and the dozens-to a worldwide audience. And millions
of blacks are angry and ashamed.
It's clear, too, that '50s rock and roll, '60s soul music, '70s R&B, '80s new jack
swing, and '90s hip-hop soul have touched on themes that rap has addressed,
though often in a dramatically different style. Some of the most important black
music of the '60s and '70s, for instance, attempted to reconcile the political de-
mands of a new black consciousness with the changing rules of domestic life. This
music attempted to join erotic desire to its political ambitions. Thus, Marvin Gaye
followed his 1971 masterpiece "What's Going On" with his brilliant 1973 release
"Let's Get It On," moving from the social to the sexual sphere in exploring the
complex dimensions of black culture. While hip-hop addresses these same con-
cerns, its ideological orientation, and therefore its artistic direction, is almost re-
versed. With the increasing attacks on the black family as an unreliable space to
shape sexuality in socially acceptable forms, a lot of hip-hoppers try to join politics
to erotic desire. Many artists move from the sexual center of rap to the varieties of
political consciousness hip-hop manages to embrace along its cutting edges.
Still, there's no doubt that older styles of black music have provoked their own
controversies. But depending on which black generation you speak with, each


--- PAGE 455 ---
426 THE MICHAEL ERIC DYSON READER
style represents the golden age of black music. In fact, hip-hoppers themselves
have more than a little nostalgia, particularly for '70s culture and music. Their
nostalgia is even more ironic, indeed laughable, because of hip-hop's grand claims
to authenticity, to "keeping it real." Meaning their music won't sell out by pan-
dering to the styles or themes of R&B. Right. Hip-hop still depends on existing
black music even as it reshapes, often brilliandy, the grooves it steals. Without its
creative uses of past black music, rap would be a museum of speech with little to
inspire us to conserve its words, much less heed its warnings and many lessons.
The technical devices of hip-hop accent its ambiguous relation to history.
Through sampling, hip-hop revives and reinvents what has been forgotten. Sam-
pling allows hip-hop to reshape what's been neglected by removing it from the
context—the actual album, the network of cultural nuances, the time period—in
which it originally came to life. What hip-hop gives with one hand, it takes back
with the other. While they make fresh use of a Parliament-Funkadelic beat or a
Leon Haywood loop, hip-hoppers often have little awareness of the musical tradi-
tions those artists fed on. Such awareness might make rappers' creative piracy
much more compelling. How? The rhetoric of rap could rework, satirize, or play
off of the intellectual visions of some of the songs it lifts. What rap does so bril-
liandy with form it might be able to match with content.
Paying more attention to black music's intellectual traditions might keep hip-hop
from completely turning its machinery of mythology on itself. Hip-hoppers get
misty-eyed about the "old-school" and what happened "back in the day." There is
already growing up around rap a wall of myth that excludes crucial features of hip-
hop's own history. For instance, its devotees largely contend that hip-hop origi-
nated in the black (including West Indian) and Latino working-class ghetto of the
South Bronx with block parties in the early '70s. But others have recently argued
that hip-hop was bom in the West Bronx. More significandy, hip-hop cannot be di-
vorced from its roots in Jamaica. In the 1960s, sound system operators hauled mas-
sive speakers in wooden carts in working-class communities during backyard
dances attended by "rude boys," the Caribbean counterpart to hip-hop's "b-boys."
Also, the Jamaican dance hall was the site of a mixture of older and newer forms
of Caribbean music, including calypso, soca, salsa, Afro-Cuban, ska, and reggae.
One of the first great pioneers of hip-hop, DJ Kool Here, was a West Indian im-
migrant to the West Bronx who brought with him a hunger to recreate the memo-
ries and mood of Jamaican dance hall music. Those roots nourish rap.
Hip-hoppers often forget that hip-hop was initially patronized by average
working-class and middle-class kids, not gangsters or other members of the hard-
core scene. Afrika Bambaataa, another old-school pioneer who created hip-hop
standards like "Looking for the Perfect Beat" and "Planet Rock," also founded the
Universal Zulu Nation. True enough, the organization grew out of South Bronx
gang life (Bambaataa was a member of the notorious gang Black Spades). But Uni-
versal Zulu Nation was committed to peace, unity, and self-knowledge. And nei-
ther was hip-hop an exclusively black affair. African-Americans, Afro-Caribbeans,


--- PAGE 456 ---
Black Youth, Pop Culture, and the Politics of Nostalgia 427
Latinos, and progressive whites all shared in the Bronx parties where hip-hop was
spawned in the States. Hip-hop's multiethnic audience helped energize its free-form
expression. Old-school legends like DJ Grandmaster Flash experimented with a
wide range of music, from Frank Sinatra to Thin Lizzy.
It may not be altogether unfitting that hip-hop is partially cut off from the roots
of even its own history. After all, with its impulse to create sonic collages, its sam-
pling of existing music, its disregard for musical conventions, and its irreverent
pairing of the culturally sacred and profane, hip-hop is thought to be a striking
instance of postmodernism. And according to critic Fredric Jameson, the lack of a
sense of history rests squarely at the center, if it can be said to have one, of the
postmodern moment. While it's easy to see why hip-hop is deemed a postmodern
art form—quotation, pastiche, contingency, fragmentation, and the like help define
its presence—it may be that its homegrown nostalgia and hunger for purity and
authenticity betray modernist obsessions.
In other words, the postmodernism of hip-hop may show that we're trying to get
rid of, or, at least, get over modernism too quickly. Postmodernism may turn out
to be modernism in drag. At its heart, modernism looks back to move forward.
Modernism is obsessed with critically reexamining the ground of its origin—which,
in its advocates' minds, turns out to be our culture's origins—so that its foundations
are secured. Modernist discussions are caught up in the rapture of renewal, recov-
ery, return, and renaissance, all in the name of progress, of moving forward. The
new is valuable precisely because it is formed out of reappropriating the original.
The great paradox of modernism, for some critics, is that, in order to outdo it, one
must hold that whatever will succeed modernism, say postmodernism, is rooted in
a ground of thought that is more original than the modernist ground it criticizes.
Ironically, that's a modernist move. As a result, one ends up replacing the content
of modernism, but not the form of modernism itself. That's why critic Theodor
Adorno said that diere was no overcoming modernity.
The question of whether hip-hop is really postmodernist or modernist is, at
some levels, a strictly academic affair. In other ways, the debate may help us un-
derstand the conflicts, and the hidden ties, between hip-hop and forms of black
music that have modernist elements. It may shed light on the uses black folk make
of their past, and the difference those uses make in how we view black youdi.
If black nostalgia has distorted the relation of postmodern black youth culture to
a complex black past, this is nowhere more powerfully glimpsed than in compar-
ing hip-hop with a high point of black modernism: jazz music and culture. Critics
like Stanley Crouch and musicians like Wynton Marsalis have relentlessly attacked
hip-hop culture for its deficits when compared to jazz. In conversations-in truth,
they were Herculean arguments between us that raged for hours at a time—neither
of these gifted gentlemen has had anything good to say about hip-hop culture.
Crouch maintains that hip-hop is, in a memorable phrase comparing rap to the
infamous, racist 1915 D.W Griffith film, "Birth of a Nation with a backbeat."
Marsalis thinks rap reflects a fascism that mars humane art. Plus, rap is rooted in


--- PAGE 457 ---
428 THE MICHAEL ERIC DYSON READER
a banal, mindless repetition of beat, signaling a lack of musical imagination and
invention. Inspired by the likes of Ralph Ellison, but especially by Albert Murray,
Grouch and Marsalis argue that the artistic possibilities of jazz—its heart pumping
with the blood of improvisation, its gut churning with the blues—embody the ed-
ifying quest for romantic self-expression and democratic collaboration that cap-
ture Negro music and American democracy at their best. For Crouch and
Marsalis, hip-hop negates every thing jazz affirms.
Many fans of black music, including stalwarts of soul and R&B, most certainly
agree. They simply add their music of preference, and perhaps their own string of
modifiers, to Crouch and Marsalis's list. (That's because Aretha ain't about de-
mocracy. She's about the imperious demands of gospel genius as it baptizes and
is transformed by secular sentiments. I'm not so sure that Crouch and Marsalis
stand ready, however, to reciprocate. Whether Aretha, Sam Cooke, Otis Redding,
Marvin Gaye, Donny Hathaway, or Al Green count in their reckoning as much
as, say, early Miles or middle Coltrane, Sarah Vaughan or Ella Fitzgerald, or
Ellington or Armstrong, is highly doubtful.) Despite the issues that separate black
musical purists of any sort, their shared disdain for hip-hop culture's claims to art
unite them as citizens of the Republic of Nostalgia.
The only problem is that, like hip-hop, jazz has a history of cultural attack.
That history has been buried under an avalanche of nostalgia that hides jazz's
grittier roots. For instance, during the Jazz Age and the Harlem Renaissance, the
response to jazz by a large segment of the black bourgeoisie, black intellectuals,
and black artists anticipated the attack on rap. Such responses reflected, and were
partly driven by, the negative response to jazz of large segments of white society.
Jazz was viewed as a cultural and artistic form that compromised decency and
morality. It was linked to licentious behavior and lewd artistic gestures. With its
jungle rhythms, its blues base, its double entendre lyrics, and its sexually aggres-
sive dancing, jazz, like hip-hop today, was the most widely reviled music of the
'20s and '30s. Headlines in respectable publications asked questions like: "Did
Jazz Put the Sin in Syncopation?" According to the Ladies' Home Journal, jazz was
responsible for a "holocaust" of illegitimate births. A Cincinnati-based Catholic
newspaper railed against the "sensuous" music of jazz. It said that "the embracing
of partners—the female only half dressed-is absolutely indecent." Blues pioneer
W.C. Handy's daughter, Lucille, was sternly admonished by the Colored Girls'
Circle of an elite school for "making a fool" of herself by singing and dancing her
father's blues and jazz. "It [continuing to sing and dance] will be under the peril
of death and great danger to yourself," the letter concluded.
Many Harlem Renaissance intellectuals detested "gin, jazz, and sex." The publica-
tions of black organizations, from the NAACP's magazine, Crisis, edited by W.E.B.
Du Bois, to the Socialist Party-supported magazine, Messenger, edited by A. Philip
Randolph and Chandler Owens (with assistance from George Schuyler), expressed
opposition to jazz as well. For many Harlem Renaissance intellectuals, jazz was not
viewed as a serious artistic achievement on par with European classical music. The


--- PAGE 458 ---
Black Youth, Pop Culture, and the Politics of Nostalgia 429
great irony of blacks worshiping European music is that European composers such
as Richard Strauss were, at the same time, expressing profound admiration for jazz.
In 1926, one of the most important debates about the relation of black intellec-
tuals to black mass culture took place in the pages of the Nation, between George
Schuyler and Langs ton Hughes. In his essay, "The Negro Art Hokum," Schuyler
argued that there was no such thing as a distinct Negro art apart from American
art. Schuyler said that Negro art occurred in Africa, but to "suggest the possibil-
ity of any such development among the ten million colored people in this repub-
lic is self-evident foolishness." Schuyler argued that "slave songs based on Protes-
tant hymns and biblical texts" and "secular songs of sorrow and tough luck
known as the blues" were "contributions of a caste" in certain sections of Amer-
ica that were "foreign to Northern Negroes, West Indian Negroes, and African
Negroes." For Schuyler, defining art in racial terms was "hokum."
Hughes's response, which ran a week later, became one of his signature essays.
Entitled "The Negro Artist and the Racial Mountain," Hughes's essay lamented
the veiled desire of some black artists to be white. Such artists feared their own
racial identity. Hughes argued that the black middle class was denying a crucial
part of its heritage by denying the "beauty of [its] own people" and that Negroes
should stop imitating "Nordic manners, Nordic faces, Nordic air, Nordic art." In
their stead, he urged Negroes to embrace "the low-down folks, the so-called com-
mon element, and they are the majority-may the Lord be praised." Hughes argued
that the "common people will give to the world its truly great Negro artist, the one
who is not afraid to be himself." For Hughes, the racial mountain was the inability
of the black bourgeoisie to accept Negro art from the masses. Hughes exhorted his
fellow Negroes to let "the blare of Negro jazz bands and the bellowing voice of
Bessie Smith singing blues penetrate the closed ears of the colored near intellectu-
als until they listen and perhaps understand." Hughes's words are still relevant.
By rehearsing this bit of jazz history—one that is conveniently overlooked by
Crouch and Marsalis as they attack rap and proclaim jazz as America's classical
music-I am not arguing that we should romanticize black folk culture. Neither
am I equating black folk art and pop culture. The big business of how black cul-
ture is packaged as a commodity to be bought and sold in the marketplace with
billions of dollars at stake prevents such an easy equation. I'm simply arguing
that all forms of black music have been attacked both within and beyond black
culture. Blues and jazz, rhythm and blues, and soul have all been viewed as in-
decent, immoral, and corrupting of black youth. To be nostalgic for a time when
black music offered a purer aesthetic or a higher moral vision is to hunger for a
time in history that simply doesn't exist. (Of course, another way of stating this
is to say that all black music has an aesthetic appeal, and a moral vision, that will
at first be assailed, but whose loss will one day be mourned and compared fa-
vorably with the next form of hated black music to come along.) Now as
Marsalis, Crouch, and other critics perched aloft the wall of high black culture
throw stones at hip-hop, they forget that such stones were once thrown at their


--- PAGE 459 ---
430 THE MICHAEL ERIC DYSON READER
music of preference. Bebop was once hip-hop. Ragtime was once rap. Bluesmen
were once b-boys. What is now noble was once notorious.
I'm not suggesting that there are no artistic differences between generations and
styles of black music. Queen of Hip-Hop Soul Mary J. Blige is no Queen of Soul
Aretha Franklin. (With Aretha's gifts, very few have measured up. Those who
do-such figures as Vanessa Bell Armstrong, Ann Nesby, and the late Marion
Williams—flourish in the gospel realm.) And neither should she be. She couldn't
be even if she wanted to.. Aretha's art, in large part, draws from her sheer genius.
The outsized technical ambitions encouraged in her by the gospel tradition of the
black church. Her apprenticeship in sanctified emotion under gospel great Clara
Ward and her famous preacher father, C.L. Franklin. And a voice whose only
teachers were unrelenting pathos and undaunted passion. But Aretha's greatest
art has to do with a budding black feminist consciousness in the '60s and '70s.
The demand for respect. The warning to men to think about their emotional
intents with women. The prescription of feel-good therapies for sexual intimacy.
And reckoning with the endless chain of fools produced by the quest for faithful
love. In short, Aretha Franklin's greatness is a product of its times.
Mary J. Blige's art is similarly a product of its times. True enough, hip-hop soul
borrows the grooves, and the rhetorical gravity, of black soul culture. But hip-hop
soul's themes and rhythms occupy a distinct spiritual orbit. Blige says much of what
Aretha said in the '60s and '70s, but she says it in the grittier, more explicit voice of
hip-hop culture. Blige's hip-hop soul feminism seeks real love. But it remakes edify-
ing love confessions into gut-wrenching pleas of faithfuless. It makes self-love the
basis of loving others. And it bitterly, defiantly refuses to accept sexual infidelity
(though Aretha hinted as much when she said if men wanted do-right women
they'd have to be do-right men). Blige is full of self-enclosed hip-hop angst. She also
possesses, or at least she seeks to possess, a strong degree of hip-hop self-reliance.
And she has a dark, stormy, rap-inflected (or is that infected?) artistic temperament.
Blige's art reshapes the blues at the bottom of Aretha's soul feminism into a
brooding female voice of resistance in an Age of Misogyny. Aretha's generation
certainly faced the same forces. But '60s and '70s sexism was cloaked beneath a
chivalry and condescension that even black male versions of patriarchy could ex-
press. (Let's not forget that there were plenty of brutal examples of black men
mistreating black women at Aretha's artistic peak. Lyrically speaking, male rap-
pers talk a good game of ho-smacking and bitch-beating, but the likes of James
Brown, Bill Withers, David Ruffin, Marvin Gaye, and a host of other artists al-
legedly abused wives, girlfriends, or lovers while singing sweet, rapturous praises
to the fairer sex on wax.) Aretha Franklin's and Mary J. Blige's aesthetic values
reflect, in part, the cultural and musical environments that shape their art. What
they respond to—norms, practices, behaviors, expectations, ideas—has as great an
effect on the character of their art as their particular musical gifts. While soul and
hip-hop cultures embody virtues to which each musical style responds, the cul-
tures contain vices to which each style reacts. (Franklin and Blige, of course, em-


--- PAGE 460 ---
Black Youth, Pop Culture, and the Politics of Nostalgia 431
body both the good and the bad of their respective traditions in their art.) The ex-
plicitness of hip-hoppers makes their limitations more obvious. But the subtlety of
soul artists doesn't make their limitations any less lethal.
The problem with nostalgic blacks is that they place more artistic stock in the aes-
thetic form they are familiar with. (They often have what may be termed Hegel's
problem, named after the philosopher who believed that of all periods in history,
the Zeitgeist, the world spirit, was best embodied in his own Prussian state during
his life. For our nostalgic true believers, it translates into the notion that the best in
black music happened to coincide with their own youth.) At the same time, they as-
sociate vice, or limitation, or smallness of artistic vision, with the aesthetic form
most alien to them. While blues, jazz, soul, and R8cB may share crucial assump-
tions, say, about women, the differences in their outward aesthetic forms makes us
believe that one is more harmful or more foreign to black culture than the other.
Thus, hip-hop's misogyny is more jolting than the antipathy toward women that
came through in some R&B. But within both hip-hop and what's called urban con-
temporary music, there are artists who are appalled at the malevolence hurled at
black women. And one need not look beyond these genres to find rich expressions
of the seductive art of subtlety—as opposed to the "do me" explicitness common
among current acts-practiced by artists of previous generations. Ghante Moore and
Tony Terry, Maxwell and Babyface, Prince Markie Dee and Heavy D are just a few.
But nostalgia can't explain every negative assessment of black pop culture.
Even if it did, it wouldn't mean that such judgments are necessarily wrong, even
if they're made for the wrong reasons. It may be that all the explanations about
different artistic ages—and the limitations and possibilities each age presents—sim-
ply can't change the fact that Mary J. Blige isn't Aretha Franklin. Fine. But that's
not an indictment of hip-hop soul per se. It's a value judgment about artists ex-
ploring similar though distinct genres at different times. I'm simply arguing that
we respect the rules of each genre. We should adjust our evaluations of music
based on the sorts of achievement that are possible, even desirable, in a given pe-
riod. That doesn't mean we can't rank them. After all, some music is more com-
plicated than other music. Some art forms take more mastery than others. But we
should rank these different styles of music fairly. As important as it is, complexity
of achievement is not the only value worth recognizing or celebrating in art. Plus,
there are many kinds of artistic complexity that merit our attention.
After all, our age has seen the likes of Whitney Houston, Anita Baker, and
Mariah Carey, gifted artists of a greatly changed black sound, whatever that means,
whose skills of delivery and interpretation far exceed the schlock that riddles so
much contemporary black pop. (Still, each has contributed her fair share of misfires,
as is true, of course, of the inimitable Ms. Franklin.) Contemporary hip-hop soul
has also brought forth artists like D'Angelo. His young career holds promise for
melding the wispy melodies of '70s soul to hip-hop rhythms and occasionally
raunchy sensibilities. And male groups Boys II Men and Jodeci, and female groups
En Vogue and SWV rise above the mediocrity of their chosen idioms.


--- PAGE 461 ---
432 THE MICHAEL ERIC DYSON READER
But that's just the point. Aretha outdid most of her peers whose names we have
long since forgotten. Their failures, or better still, their relative successes, don't in-
validate the genres of black music in which they strived to make sublime art. Soul
music is judged by its brilliance, not its blight. It is measured by its supreme vi-
sions, not its short-sighted trends. Like all great music, it is measured by the size
of its aspirations—which are measured by the aspirations of its greatest artists,
even the unsung ones—not simply by artists who managed to make the charts or
to win the awards. (Donny Hathaway was never justly recognized for his extra-
ordinary genius as a composer, artist, and musician. And Little Willie John was
one of the greatest-some argue, the greatest-R&B singer, but few people know his
name or work, except as it's drained of its pathos by more famous but less gifted
white artists.) Hip-hop is no different. It's not the mindless, numbing pornogra-
phy of the notorious 2 Live Crew that is the measure of hip-hop's vitality, but the
rhetorical, lyrical ingenuity of Rakim or Nas. Snoop Doggy Dogg's seductive and
highly accomplished rhyme flow, and Ice Cube's narrative powers—plus Dr. Dre's
pulsating, harmonically complex G-funk—define gangsta rap's metier. Not the
mediocre rants of the late Eazy-E—although his brilliance as impresario and
record producer, even talent scout, is undeniable. A lot of hip-hop is okay, more
of it is good, and a little of it is great. Just like any other music.
(Crouch, Marsalis, and other critics have argued against hip-hop even being
called serious music. Of course, these critics hold the same grudge against latter-
day Coltrane, Eric Dolphy, Ornette Coleman, Cecil Taylor, Albert Ayler, Archie
Shepp, Don Cherry, and almost any avant-garde jazz artist who championed un-
orthodox harmonies, departure from chord-based improvisations, atonal "noise,"
and dissonant melodies. Neither Ellington nor Armstrong, heroes for Crouch and
Marsalis—and for me, too—would be today what they were when they played. To
be sure, they'd still be geniuses. But the character of their genius would be greatly
altered. Their relentless reach for the edge of experience pushed them to keep
growing, experimenting, and improvising. Conservative advocates of jazz end up
freezing the form, making jazz an endless series of explorations of already charted
territory. It's a process of rediscovering what's already been discovered. Such a
process led Gary Giddins to remark that the problem with so much of contem-
porary neotraditionalist jazz is that Thelonius Monk couldn't even win the annual
contest that's sponsored in his name! The very spirit of jazz-its imperative to im-
provise, which can often lead into dangerous, unmapped territory—is thus sacri-
ficed in the name of preserving the noble, heroic traditions that grow out of a spe-
cific time in jazz's history. What's really being preserved is the product, not the
process, of improvisation. But that's another book.)
At base, the perception of the aesthetic alienation of hip-hop culture is linked to
a perception that black youth are moral strangers. I mean by "moral strangers"
that black youth are believed to be ethically estranged from the moral practices
and spiritual beliefs that have seen previous black generations through harsh and
dangerous times. The violence of black youth culture is pointed to as a major


--- PAGE 462 ---
Black Youth, Pop Culture, and the Politics of Nostalgia 433
symptom of moral strangeness. Heartless black-on-black murder, escalating rates
of rape, rising incidents of drug abuse, and the immense popularity of hip-hop
culture reinforce the perception of an ethical estrangement among black youth. In
arguing the moral strangeness of black youth, many critics recycle bits and pieces
of old-style arguments about the pathology of black urban culture. Widely popu-
larized in Daniel Moynihan's famous 1965 study of the black family-whose
pathology was partially ascribed to a growing matriarchy in black domestic life-
the notion that black culture carries the seeds of its own destruction is an old idea.
The argument for black cultural pathology is really an updated version of beliefs
about black moral deficiency as ancient as the black presence in the New World.
More recently, Cornel West has attempted to explain the problems of black cul-
ture by pointing to its nihilism. Since the nihilism argument has been used by
many critics to prove the moral strangeness of black youth, I'll explore it in some
detail before arguing for an alternate perspective.
For West, nihilism is "the profound sense of psychological depression, personal
worthlessness, and social despair so widespread in black America." West wants to
unblinkingly stare down the problems of black culture, and to call a spade a
spade: black crime is increasing, suicide is rising, hopelessness is spreading, and
ethical surrender is pandemic. Yet liberals, West argues, simply close their eyes or
believe that if they say what they see they'll be thought of as cold conservatives.
West also knows that mere moral corrosion, as argued by conservatives, is not
large enough an explanation for what's going on in black culture. West seeks to
avoid the pitfalls of both conservative behaviorists and liberal structuralists by ar-
guing for a complex vision of black culture that takes into account the "saturation
of market forces and market moralities" in black life, while highlighting the crisis
of black leadership. For West, such a strategy allows us to be frank in our discus-
sions of black moral and spiritual collapse while refusing to scapegoat those
blacks who are victimized by dehumanizing forces.
West is right to grapple with issues of morality and behavior, matters that are
largely taboo for the left. He's also right to zoom in on the market forces and mar-
ket moralities that besiege black culture. Still, as an explanation for what ails us,
nihilism has severe problems. First, nihilism is seen as a cause, not a consequence,
of black suffering. The collapse of hope, the spiritual despair that floods black
America, the clinical depression we suffer, are all the pernicious result of some-
thing more basic than black nihilism: white racism. (The list includes economic
suffering, class inequality, and material hardship as well, but I'll get to those in a
bit.) I don't mean here just the nasty things many white folk believe about black
folk. I'm referring to the systematic destruction of black life, the pervasive attack
on the black sense of well-being, the subversion of black self-determination, and
the erasure of crucial narratives of black self-esteem that are foundational to
American versions of democracy. Nihilism is certainly self-destructive. That's be-
cause black folk were taught—and have had it reinforced across time, geography,
and ideology—that our black selves weren't worth loving or preserving. Nihilism


--- PAGE 463 ---
434 THE MICHAEL ERIC DYSON READER
is the outgrowth, not the origin, of such harsh lessons. Without the destruction of
white supremacy, black nihilism will continue to grow.
Then too, nihilism shifts the burden for getting black America back on track to
suffering black folk. That seems an awful tall order for a people already strapped
with sparse resources and weighted down with nihilism. West argues for a politics
of conversion, where a love ethic is central. As a Baptist preacher and former pas-
tor, I am deeply sympathetic to this. The logic of such a duty, however, might be
questioned. Love without resources will not ultimately solve the problems black
folk face. With enough resources—employment, education, housing, food—black
folk will have the luxury, the leisure, the reasonable chance to love themselves. Of
course, I'm not suggesting that poor black folk without such resources don't or
can't love themselves. But I am suggesting that love alone, even a complex, so-
cially rooted understanding of love, cannot provide the material basis for the per-
manent high self-regard that will need to be in place for black folk to stop snuff-
ing one another out. The presence of such resources cannot by themselves
guarantee a good outcome. But we can be reasonably assured that, without such
resources, a bad outcome is highly likely.
Plus, if black nihilism is really that pervasive, can nihilists resolve nihilism? Can
folk for whom hope has been eclipsed really muster the moral might to throw off
the psychic chains of their suffering? Conversion—which leads me to believe that
this is in part a project of self-help—is a necessary, but insufficient, basis to turn back
the nihilistic tide. While Martin Luther King wanted to convert white racists, he
also wanted to put in place a structure of laws, duties, and obligations that had the
power to change behavior. Given the choice of love and power, King took power,
and let the love come later. (King said, for instance, that the law may not make
whites love blacks, but it could stop them from lynching blacks. Of course, it is a di-
alectical process: love insists on the right laws, and the right sort of laws provide a
framework for—one hopes—the eventual development of love, which could, in turn,
obviate the laws. These poles are united in King's beliefs.) True enough, King's life
and ministry were regulated by a love ethic. But he saw righteous power, that is,
power linked to justice, as the imperfect but indispensable social translation of love.
Finally, West's theory of nihilism is driven by a nostalgic vision of black life.
West says that "the genius of our black foremothers and forefathers was to create
powerful buffers to ward off the nihilistic threat." West also argues that our fore-
parents were equipped with "cultural armor to beat back the demons of hope-
lessness, meaninglessness, and lovelessness." The armor included "values of ser-
vice and sacrifice, love and care, discipline and excellence." Black religious and
civic institutions helped black folk survive.
West is certainly right that black folk kept on keeping on, that they refused to
give up. But for my money, those things haven't gone away. It's too early to tell
if black folk have surrendered the fight. But I guess I just don't see where nihilism
is winning, where the attempts of black folk to make a way out of no way have
ceased. The black church continues to thrive against tremendous odds. Black


--- PAGE 464 ---
Black Youth, Pop Culture, and the Politics of Nostalgia 435
families continue to strive to make a lie out of the vicious rumors of their inher-
ent pathology. Poor black folk-well, it's a wonder that more haven't given up,
surrendered to a life of crime and moral mischief.
The real miracle of contemporary black life is that there are still so many sane,
sensible, struggling, secular, sanctified, spiritual, and spunky black folk who just
said no to destruction way before Nancy Reagan figured out what crack was. In
other words, those black folk of the past are us black folk of the present. Our
black youth are not a different moral species than the black youth of the past.
They are not moral strangers. And as the quote from Du Bois and Dill above
proves, black folk are always worried about their kids. We always romanticize our
past, partly as a way to jump-start our flagging efforts in the present. That's cer-
tainly okay. It's when nostalgia is used to browbeat and thrust a finger in the face
of black youth in an effort to convince them that their moral makeups are griev-
ously defective that nostalgia becomes destructive.
In the end, it may be that the concept of nihilism is symptomatic of the disease
it aims to highlight. It may be that a belief in nihilism is too hopeless about the
black future, too out of touch with the irreverent spirit of resistance that washes
over black culture. A belief in nihilism is too, well, nihilistic. But nostalgia can do
that. By viewing the black past as morally and spiritually distinct from the
present, we lose sight of the resources for ethical engagement that are carried for-
ward from the past into our own thinking, believing, hoping, praying, and doing.
It would be good to remember black preacher and theologian Howard Thur-
man's wise words, from his book of sermons, The Growing Edge'.
At the time when the slaves in America were without any excuse for hope and
they could see nothing before them but the long interminable cotton rows and
the fierce sun and the lash of the overseer, what did they do? They declared that
God was not through. They said, "We cannot be prisoners of this event. We
must not scale down the horizon of our hopes and our dreams and our yearn-
ings to the level of the event of our lives." So they lived through their tragic mo-
ment until at last they came out on the other side, saluting the fulfillment of their
hopes and their faith, which had never been imprisoned by the event itself.
A belief in nihilism may make us prisoners of present events. A belief in the in-
domitable spirit of hope that thrives even when things are at their darkest for
black folk may be the real link to a powerful black past.
Still, there's no doubt that terrible things are happening to black youth. To pre-
tend otherwise is to ignore the obvious. Black youth are killing and being killed.
Crime and violence go hand in hand. High unemployment is entrenched. Teenage
pregnancy is epidemic. How can we explain these facts? I think we've got to move
from a theory of moral strangeness to a theory of how power has shifted away
from adults to young people in many urban homes and communities. Highlighting
such a shift by no means sidesteps issues of morality, values, or responsibility. It


--- PAGE 465 ---
436 THE MICHAEL ERIC DYSON READER
simply gives us a handle on specific changes in black youth culture that have had
a vicious effect on black life.
I think there is •& juvenocracy operating in many urban homes and communities.
For me, a juvenocracy is the domination of black and Latino domestic and urban
life by mostly male figures under the age of twenty-five who wield considerable
economic, social, and moral influence. A juvenocracy may consist of drug gangs,
street crews, loosely organized groups, and individual youths who engage in illicit
activity. They operate outside the bounds of the moral and political economies of
traditional homes and neighborhoods. The rise of a juvenocracy represents a sig-
nificant departure from home and neighborhood relations where adults are in
charge. Three factors are at the heart of such a shift.
The first is the extraordinary violence of American life. As historian Richard
Slotkin has argued, the frontier myth at the base of our country revolves around
"regeneration through violence." America renews itself at the altar of devotion to
violence as a rite of national identification. It is important to remember this rite as
cries go up about the exceptional violence of black youth. Such violence, sadly, is
quite mainstream. The prominence of hip-hop culture has provoked fresh attacks
on black youth. Black youth are viewed as innately inclined to violent behavior.
The lyrics and images of hip-hop are used as proof of such a claim. Well, as strong
and pungent as hip-hop is, as offensive as it can be, it is still art. It isn't life, no
matter what some hip-hoppers claim about its "realness." Indeed, without making
too strong a point of it, hip-hop's existence may be keeping a lot of black youth
away from drugs, crime, and life on the streets because they get to rap about such
things in the sound booth. Thank God for what other hip-hoppers derisively refer
to as "studio gangstas."
It is simply dishonest to paint black youth as the primary source of violence in
America. In fact, more often than not, black youth are the victims, not the perpe-
trators, of violence. Although they are only 5.9 percent of the population, black
males account for 40 percent of homicide victims. Black men over twenty-four are
the victims of homicide at a rate of 65.7 per 100,000. For white males in that age
group, the figure is 7.8 per 100,000. Youth between the ages of twelve and seven-
teen are the most common victims of crime in America: 1 in 3 stands a chance of
being raped, robbed, or mugged. Black youth violence, especially as it is concen-
trated within a juvenocracy, reflects the violence directed at young black bodies.
Juvenocracies are, in part, mechanisms of defense that develop a vicious life
and logic of their own. As most Americans know, it is easy to become addicted to
violence. After all, the major broadcast networks average five acts of violence per
hour in prime time. On Saturday mornings, networks average twenty-five acts of
violence an hour. By the time kids reach elementary school, they've seen 100,000
acts of simulated violence. For poor, black children, who watch more television
than most, the number is even higher. By the time kids turn eighteen, they've seen
almost 18,000 acts of simulated murder on television. Add to that the profusion
of gangsta rap narratives and the picture is indeed disturbing.


--- PAGE 466 ---
Black Youth, Pop Culture, and the Politics of Nostalgia 437
Since black youth are disproportionately targeted for violence, especially in
their own homes, neighborhoods, and schools, the rise of a juvenocracy was pre-
dictable. Black youth hang togedier—in gangs, crews, groups, and so on—for af-
fection and protection. And, yes, for destruction as well. In fact, such behavior
does not show an ethical estrangement from American society, but a feverish em-
brace of its pragmatic principles of survival. Black youth show a frightening moral
intimacy with the traditions of American violence. Appealing to a distinction that
moral philosophers have made for centuries, the behavior of juvenocrats may not
be reasonable—its effect on communities, homes, and schools is unreasonably de-
structive—but in light of the violence and poverty black youth face, the behavior
of juvenocrats is certainly rational.
The second factor explaining the rise of a juvenocracy is the emergence of what
Mike Davis has called the "political economy of crack" in the mid '80s until the
early '90s, which shifted power to young black and Latino males in the homes
and on the streets of cities ranging from Los Angeles to Chicago. The manufac-
turing, packaging, merchandising, and distribution of crack cocaine brought mil-
lions of dollars into the hands of formerly impoverished, grossly undereducated
black and Latino youth. The postindustrial collapse of many urban areas-
brought on by shifts from manufacturing to service industries (over the last
twenty years, the U.S. economy lost 5 million jobs in the manufacturing sector);
the decreased production of goods leading to corporate downsizing; technological
change; capital flight; and the relocation of corporations to low-wage havens in
bordering countries—punched a gaping hole in the legitimate economy for black
youth who were already at its margins. The political economy of crack, and the
goods and services it allowed black and Latino youth to provide for themselves
and their families, helped shift power to young black and Latino males who be-
came de facto heads of households and neighborhood guardians. And menaces.
The number of homicides associated with the crack business soared in cities like
New York, Los Angeles, and Chicago.
Finally, the rise of the culture of the gun in America drove die emergence of a
juvenocracy. The American fetish for loaded weapons of destruction is numbing.
In this case, statistics really do tell the story. In 1990, for instance, there were
11,730 people killed by handguns in the United States. In the UK, the figure was
22. In the US there are 201 million firearms in the hands of private citizens; 67
million of these are handguns. Every day, 65 Americans are killed by handgun
fire. There are 1 million automatic or semiautomatic weapons circulating in our
nation. Thus, it is twenty times more likely that a semiautomatic weapon will be
used in a crime in our country than a conventional firearm. Over $1 billion is
spent annually for treatment of firearm injuries.
There were 33,651 Americans killed in die Korean War. There were 47,364
Americans killed in the Vietnam War. There were 37,155 Americans killed with
firearms in homicides, suicides, and accidents in 1990. In 1991, 45,536 Americans
were killed in motor vehicle accidents. The same year, 38,317 Americans died from


--- PAGE 467 ---
438 THE MICHAEL ERIC DYSON READER
gunshot wounds. Now firearm incidents surpass motor vehicle accidents as the
most likely way Americans will die. Among white Americans, 28.4 per 100,000 die
from motor vehicle injuries; 15.2 per 100,000 die from firearms. For Latinos, 28.7
per 100,000 die from motor vehicle accidents; 29.6 per 100,000 die from firearms.
For blacks, 23.0 per 100,000 die from motor vehicles; 70.7 per 100,000 die from
firearms. In 1990, 12.9 out of 100,000 white males between 20 and 24 were killed
by firearms; 140.7 out of 100,000 black males between 20 and 24 were killed by
firearms in the same year. One in 28 black males born in the United States is likely
to be murdered; 93 percent of black murder victims are killed by other blacks.
Firearms in the hands of young black and Latino men has clearly altered the urban
landscape. Firearms have given juvenocrats the ultimate weapon of death.
The American addiction to violence, the political economy of crack, and this
nation's fetish for firearms account for the rise of a violent juvenocracy. Of course,
there are ethical dimensions to juvenocracies as well. Are juvenocracies corrupt?
Yes. Are the people who participate in juvenocracies often morally vicious? Yes.
Should the destruction that juvenocracies leave in their wake, especially in black
and Latino communities, be opposed? With all our might. But unlike culture of
pathology arguments, or even arguments about black nihilism, my theory of ju-
venocracy doesn't locate the source of ethical erosion and moral corruption at the
heart of black communities. Why? Because the behavior of juvenocrats can be ex-
plained by generic, or better, universal principles of human action. Murder, rob-
bery, assault and battery, and drug dealing are not peculiar to black culture. They
occur everywhere. A theory of black pathology or nihilism confuses the matter by
asking us to believe that these problems are endemic to black communities. They
are not.
A theory of universal human action argues that criminal behavior, and the
moral corruption it implies, occur in Italian communities, too, and Korean ones.
Should we have theories of Italian pathology, of Korean nihilism? Given that
every ethnic and racial group has its unfair share of trouble, it makes no sense to
describe such behavior with ethnic or racial modifiers. Of course, crime, pathol-
ogy, and corruption come in specific shapes. It makes sense to speak openly and
honestly about patterns of immoral and illegal behavior in particular communi-
ties. We can't close our eyes to the obvious. Drive-bys may be more common in
black and Latino ghettos than in Lithuanian or Norwegian communities. And
mob hits might be more common in Providence's Federal Hill than in Harlem's
Sugar Hill. But, it should be apparent that such patterns have more to do with
where criminals live—whether by choice or by circumstance—and, more impor-
tant, where they do "business," than with the ethnic character of their consciences.
Also, the concentration of crime in poor communities, many of these black, has
more to do with economic and material suffering than ethical impoverishment. It
makes no more sense to speak of the pathology of Italian communities because of
the Mafia than it does to speak of the nihilism of Vietnamese communities be-
cause of the rise of gangs in such neighborhoods.


--- PAGE 468 ---
Black Youth, Pop Culture, and the Politics of Nostalgia 439
The moral viciousness of juvenocrats can be explained by their participation in
illicit activities and immoral lifestyles that reinforce destructive behavior. As ethi-
cists who study virtue have argued for centuries, moral health is encouraged by
habits of thought and action that are repeatedly practiced. The same holds for vi-
cious behavior. There's nothing endemic to black culture, versus, say, Jewish or
Irish culture, that promotes vice. But there is something about the nature of a ju-
venocracy that encourages vicious behavior. In fact, a juvenocracy is explicitly or-
ganized around illicit, illegal, and immoral action. Its very purpose is to regularize
such behavior. A juvenocracy shapes its actions so as to maximize the profits of its
participants. Cutthroat, cold-hearted, vicious, and sometimes inhuman behavior—
both toward other members of the juvenocracy and toward those outside its
ranks—is not only common, it is crucial to the maintenance of the juvenocracy.
Something like a Kantian moral imperative operates in the juvenocracy: stay safe,
watch your homeboy's back, and make money at all costs. If one must make oth-
ers unsafe, stab or shoot a neighbor in the back, or steal to "get paid"; so be it.
That's not an example of black nihilism any more than it's an example of white ni-
hilism. And it's not a black ethic any more than it's a white ethic. It's an all too
American ethic (maybe even a universal one), one that unites a broader and deeper
strand of folk than we're willing to admit. (Indeed, I've seen staggering nihilism in
corporate America and in university communities, in certain businessmen for
whom the buck was all, and in novelists whose narcissism and arrogance were a
blight to behold.) The concepts of pathology and nihilism seem too class derived
for my tastes. They stigmatize the very people who have the least resources to re-
sist the sort of behavior for which the well-to-do are rarely held accountable.
Let me be clear. Vicious behaviors are no less vicious because they are rooted
in generic factors of class, political economy, violence, and the like. But by getting
a fix on how and why immoral behavior flourishes, we might have a better
chance of figuring out what to do. On the one hand, if we believe the problem is
cultural, we tell black folk to fix their cultures. We tell them to stop being patho-
logical. Or if we believe they're nihilistic, we tell them to convert to love. On the
other hand, if we think the problem flowers in black culture, but is rooted in com-
plex economic, political, moral, and social factors, our answer is hugely different.
A juvenocracy cannot be overcome by anything less than a radical reexamination
of urban social policies, economic practices, and political measures aimed at black
communities and black youth. A juvenocracy that thrives on violence, the politi-
cal economy of drugs, and the culture of the gun must be viewed, in part, as a
symptom of economic and racial injustice. It must also be seen as a moral sur-
render of black youth to the seductions of excessive material gratification. No
amount of hand-wringing, navel gazing, or pulpit pounding about the good ol'
black days will fix what's wrong. Black nostalgia for days when we were better
simply won't do.
With that, we end up where we began: the rise of a juvenocracy has been com-
plemented by the cultural fascination with, and revulsion to, the pop culture of


--- PAGE 469 ---
440 T H E MICHAEL ERIC DYSON READER
black youth, especially hip-hop. For many critics, the two go hand in hand. But
that's a mistaken perception. That's not to say that gangsta rappers, for instance,
don't identify with real gangsters. That they don't feed off one anodier. That dieir
styles and social aspirations are not easily confused. Still, most real gangsters
don't listen to gangsta rap for inspiration to do what they do. They check out old-
school grooves. Too many of them have said so for us to ignore it. A lot of gang-
sters prefer Al Green to Snoop Doggy Dogg. Too often, then, black youth are all
lumped together-in the media, in discussions by black intellectuals, in the analy-
ses of cultural critics, and in the public imagination.
Unlike Ralph Ellison's character in his famous novel, and the bulk of black folk
for a long stretch of our history, black youth suffer, not from invisibility, but from
hyperuisibility. The surplus sighting, and citing, of young black bodies—in crime sto-
ries on the news, in congressional hearings about demeaning imagery in pop
music, in shopping malls where they hang out, in police profiles where they are
stigmatized, in suburban communities where they are surveilled—has draped para-
noia and panic around their very limbs. In all the wrong ways, black youth are
overexposed. (Is it any wonder, then, that they dress in oversize clothing to hide
their demonized bodies, to diminish the measuring of their alleged menace?)
And unlike James Baldwin and generations of black folk, black youth don't suf-
fer from namelessness. They suffer from namefillness, from too many names. The
sheer nameability of black youth, the ease with which they are mislabeled, pro-
motes among black youth a negative solidarity, a unity produced by the attacks
they have in common. Like Thomas Hobbes, black youth understand that
human beings wield power through calling names and avoiding names. As
Hobbes knew, black youth also know that names venerate and vilify. Names in-
fluence events. Hip-hop culture has provoked the naming, really the misnaming,
of black youth: sadistic, self-destructive, violent, brutal, narcissistic, nihilistic,
pathological, immoral, and, for some, evil. Hip-hop has fought back. It uses
strategies of naming, renaming, unnaming, and overnaming its own culture and
the cultures—racist, rich, elite, bourgeois—against which it strives.
Instead of nostalgia, we need serious, rigorous analysis and critical appreciation
of black youth. Instead of attacks on hip-hop culture, we need sharp, just, well-
informed evaluations of its artistic statements and ethical imagination. Black nos-
talgia must be replaced by an even stronger force: the historic black determination
to remain undefeated by pessimism from within black culture, and paranoia from
beyond its borders. We must not be prisoners of our present circumstances, of
current events. We must be prisoners of faith.


--- PAGE 470 ---
P A R T T H I R T E E N
THE PREDICAMENT OF
POSTMODERNITY
Postmodernism has enjoyed a thrilling if problematic run as a leading in-
tellectual and cultural movement among some (mostly liberal or progressive)
academics. Postmodernism is composed of a complex, even ambiguous, set of
ideas and practices, such as blurring the boundaries between "high" and
"low " culture, rejecting grand namitives—for instance, "truth " with a cap-
ital "T,"—embracing pastiche and fragmentation, and emphasizing playful-
ness and irony in ones intellectual exercises. A major criticism of 'postmod-
ernism is that some of its advocates avoid concrete history and politics while
rhapsodizing about difference, margviality, parody, and provisionaliiy.
'This may account for the many American postmodernists who have over-
looked the homegrown varieties of black postmodernism—and the challenges
they may pose to the European imports that have colored our understand-
ing of the concept. I have written about black postmodernism since I have
been an intellectual, attempting to add nuance and complexity—and black
political and rhetorical weight—to an intriguing intellectual debate.


--- PAGE 471 ---
This page intentionally left blank


--- PAGE 472 ---
Thirty- Three
MICHAEL JACKSON'S POSTMODERN SPIRITUALITY
Michael Jackson is unquestionably one of the greatest entertainers of the twentieth century.
His most recent troubles, including allegations of child molestation, have obscured the
essentialJact of his career: that he has been an incredible singer, dancer, performer, and
interpreter of (African) American song over the past thirty five years. Because we were born
merely two months apart in 1958—Jackson in August, me in October—I have always
marveled at his prodigious output and, perhaps, identified in some small way with his
struggles to artistically and personally redefine himself. From the moment Michael Jackson
burst on the musical horizon in 1968, his relentless perfectionism, Herculean work ethic, and
brittiant showmanship have provided a thesaurus for American musical giftedness. Only one
otherjigure of his generation—Prince—has rivaled Jackson's genius and approached his
impact on the culture. I wrote this scholarly meditation on Jackson's postmodern secular
spirituality after seeing him perform in Mew Jersey in the late '80s. If Jackson never again
reaches the artistic heights he once achieved, he will have still given the world a glimpse of a
God-given talent used to uplift and thrill millions around the globe.
[Michael Jackson] will not swiftly be forgiven for having turned so
many tables, for he damn sure grabbed the brass ring, and the man
who broke the bank at Monte Carlo has nothing on Michael.
-JAMES BALDWIN
Sometimes when you're treated unfairly it makes you stronger and
more determined. Slavery was a terrible thing, but when black peo-
ple in America finally got out from under that crushing system, they
were stronger. 'They knew what it was to have your spirit crippled
by people who are controlling your life. 'They were never going to let
that happen again. I admire that kind of strength. People who have
it take a stand and put their blood and soul into what they believe.
-MICHAEL JACKSON, MOONWALK


--- PAGE 473 ---
444 THE MICHAEL ERIC DYSON READER
MICHAEL JACKSON is, ARGUABLY, THE GREATEST entertainer of the twentieth
century. As an international superstar, Jackson has captured the devotion of a large
segment of the world's population in a manner reserved for a select few historic per-
sonages. Jackson strikes a deep, primal chord in the human psyche, fascinating us,
perhaps, because he so easily and eerily represents us, even mirrors us (all of us) at
the same time. Thus, if he is not a Nietzschean Ubermensch, he is a Promethean allper-
son who traverses traditional boundaries that separate, categorize, and define differ-
ences: innocent/shrewd, young/old, black/white, male/female, and religious/secular.
Perhaps this is also why he frightens us. In his cosmos, Jackson is guided by a
logic of experience that flees the comfortable core of life to its often untested pe-
riphery. In some senses, Jackson celebrates the dissolution of Yeats's center and ex-
ults in the scamper for the edge. If at times his pace to the uncharted is dizzying, his
achievements in the wake of his pursuit are dazzling, and at times monumental. It
is the nature of these achievements that I want to examine in this essay. I under-
stand Michael Jackson to represent a postmodern form of African-American secular
spirituality that is primarily televisual and performance oriented in its medium of
expression, and that wrestles in a poignant fashion with moral themes that reflect
black cultural and religious consciousness.
However, to suggest that Michael Jackson's art harbors religious significance and
spiritual meaning is contentious for many observers of American culture. For some,
Jackson is a self-styled Peter Pan figure who is securely nesded in a fantasy world of
childlike make-believe, buffered by Disney characters and exotic animals.1 To oth-
ers, Jackson is a surpassingly shrewd businessman, capable of amassing a catalogue
of publishing rights to songs by such artists as Sly Stone and the Beades.2 To others
still, Jackson is a victim of the vicious processes of commerce that commodify his
image and capitalize on his persona.3 Certainly these and many other characteriza-
tions of Jackson may ring true, but they do not reflect the central truth of his cultural
significance, nor do they capture the peculiar and unique genius of his art. Above all
else that he may symbolize, central to Jackson's career is an abiding spiritual and re-
ligious consciousness that is expressed in his body of work as a performer.
Admittedly, part of the difficulty in discerning the presence of positive spiritual
values and redemptive religious consciousness in Jackson's art may be its nontra-
ditional expression. In both its style and substance, Jackson's spirituality exhibits
elements that may be understood as postmodern.4 Postmodernism's broad spec-
trum of expression—characterized by pastiche, quotation, fragmentation, stylistic
merging, transgression, and eclecticism-suggests a dismantling of die hardened
distinction between high artistic expression and lowbrow, popular cultural pro-
duction. These and other postmodernist practices call into question settled beliefs
and rigid formulations about art and culture in American life.
For some, postmodernist culture survives, in Roland Bardies's phrase, as the
"civilization of the image."5 Jackson's spirituality exhibits a keen awareness of the
important function of imagery. His spirituality is filtered through the televisual ap-
paratus, symbolizing (and symptomatic of) the Gutenberg shift in cultural con-
sciousness marked by the move in our society from the literate to the cinemate,


--- PAGE 474 ---
Michael Jackson's Postmodern Spirituality 445
and the hegemony of the visual over the verbal. True to form, Jackson's spiritual-
ity is not primarily embodied in a series of written texts, nor is it exclusively artic-
ulated in song lyrics. Jackson's postmodern spirituality surfaces in the brilliant,
haunting, and sometimes disturbing images and visions portrayed in his music
videos and (films of his) live performances.
For Marxist critic Fredric Jameson, postmodernism is linked to and materially
precipitated by the globalization of American capital in the late 1950s, expressing
the "logic of late capitalism."6 His early analysis accentuated the negative aspects
of postmodernism, with its loss of the sense of history and its exemplification of
commodification. Recently, however, Jameson has at least acknowledged some
positive characteristics of postmodernism, such as its stress on the wide accessi-
bility of culture and its recuperation of the art of storytelling in literary texts.7
Other American theorists have uncritically adopted French poststructuralist read-
ings of postmodernism that accentuated marginality, difference, and peripheral-
ization as articulated by figures like Derrida and Lyotard, while ignoring the de-
velopment of more indigenous expressions in the United States.
Ironically, as Cornel West has noted, these theorists have sought illumination of
our American postmodern contexts by borrowing from such figures while neglect-
ing exemplary postmodern African-American cultural producers, particularly artists
and musicians.8 These artists and musicians, from Charlie Parker to Wynton
Marsalis, from Romare Bearden to Betye Saar, have wrestled existentially and ar-
tistically with disenabling forms of otherness and difference. Thus their artistic pro-
duction heralds unexamined but crucial resources for contesting the disempower-
ment that can result from political, economic, social, and cultural marginality.
As a result, these African-American artists offer the possibility of accentuating el-
ements of postmodern cultural experience and artistic expression that are, in Hal
Foster's words, "resistant" and not "reactionary."9 This suggests that these resistant
forms of postmodernist production do not simply replicate older forms of artistic
production in a nostalgic sense of mimetic play, but extend in their recuperative
artistic process the boundaries of cultural expression. This may be viewed in
Michael Jackson, who, while drawing upon the enormously skillful performance
and dancing of James Brown and the electrifying showmanship of Jackie Wilson,
yet manages to insert a unique brand of spiritual consciousness into his perfor-
mances, yielding powerful forms of artistic, cultural, and religious expression.
Jackson's spiritual and religious awareness can be glimpsed in his persistent
preoccupation with images, symbols, and themes that are informed by his own re-
ligious background. Jackson was reared as a Jehovah's Witness by his mother,
whose faith he shared and, until recently, faithfully practiced. Although the par-
ticular character of Jackson's religious reflections and moral musings were shaped
by his experience as a Jehovah's Witness, his art reflects perceptions and con-
sciousness that are easily generalizable to the larger stream of African-American
spirituality. Thus we may without extensive complication, for example, draw sim-
ilarities between Jackson's work and the artistic achievements of his musical com-
rades Stevie Wonder and Marvin Gaye.


--- PAGE 475 ---
446 THE MICHAEL ERIC DYSON READER
Suffice it to say that Jackson's religious sensibilities are expressed in his
wrestling with religiously informed, morally shaped, and culturally conditioned
themes that include an examining of the nature of good and evil; an exploring of
the potentialities for transformation of the self, human nature, and society; a prob-
ing of the true nature of manhood in American culture, as opposed to disenabling
versions of machismo; a confronting of the material lures and sexual seductions
of everyday life in postmodern American culture; a proclaiming of the place of
peace and love in transforming the world; and a surveying of the politics of Amer-
ican racial identity and awareness.
These themes recur in Jackson's song lyrics and music videos, and form the
basis for the articulation of his own vision of African-American secular spiritual-
ity. Jackson is acutely aware of the importance of a morally informed and spiritu-
ally grounded perspective on such themes. For instance, in speaking of his role in
the "We Are the World" song-video-event that helped raise money for starving
Ethiopians, Jackson, in his autobiography Moonwalk,10 illumines the spiritual
theme in the song's message and explains the impetus for his participation:
In early 1985 we cut "We Are the World" at an all-night all-star recording ses-
sion that was held after the ceremony for the American Music Awards. I wrote
the song with Lionel Richie after seeing the appalling news footage of starving
people in Ethiopia and the Sudan. ... I think that "We Are the World" is a very
spiritual song, but spiritual in a special sense. I was proud to be a part of that
song and to be one of the musicians there that night. We were united by our de-
sire to make a difference. It made the world a better place for us and it made a
difference to the starving people we wanted to help. (pp. 261-262)
While Jackson does not specify the "special" nature of the song's spirituality, it
is sufficiently clear that this spirituality bears social ramifications and is at mini-
mum linked to expressing authentic and concrete concern for other human be-
ings. In short, Jackson emphasizes the material consequences of his spiritual
Weltanschauung, redeeming it from the possible infamy of an abstract mysticism
that uncritically valorizes sentimental and emotive modes of expression. Further-
more, it is apparent elsewhere in Jackson's text that this spirituality is a gift from
God and must be expressed in the particular vocational calling for which God has
chosen him, namely, his music and performance:
I've always joked that I didn't ask to sing and dance, but it's true. When I
open my mouth, music comes out. I'm honored that I have this ability. I thank
God for it every day. I try to cultivate what He gave me. I feel I'm compelled to
do what I do. (p. 272)
In discussing the spiritual character of his gift, Jackson speaks about his mother's
faith:


--- PAGE 476 ---
Michael Jackson's Postmodern Spirituality 447
She instilled in me a love of Him that I will always have. She taught me that
my talent for singing and dancing was as much God's work as a beautiful sunset
or a storm that left snow for children to play in. Despite all the time we spent re-
hearsing and traveling, Mom would find time to take me to Kingdom Hall of the
Jehovah's Witnesses, usually with Rebbie and LaToya. (pp. 12-13)
Moreover, Jackson is driven by a desire to enflesh this spirituality, to enable others
to perceive the vision that energizes and empowers him, and in the process to
transform people's lives with his art, with the stories that he sings and "tells":
I've always wanted to be able to tell stories, you know, stories that came from
the soul. I'd like to sit by a fire and tell people stories—make them see pictures,
make them cry and laugh, take them anywhere emotionally with something as
deceptively simple as words. I'd like to tell tales to move their souls and trans-
form them.... In a way, songwriting uses the same skills, creates the emotional
highs and lows.... There are very few books written on the art of storytelling,
how to grip listeners.... No costumes, no makeup, no nothing, just you and
your voice, and your powerful ability to take them anywhere, to transform their
lives, if only for minutes, (pp. 5-6)
Jackson's art, then, is intentional and goal oriented, and self-consciously related to
the spiritual roots that have nourished its beginning and that continue to sustain
its expanding identity.
Jackson's spirituality, though, is a secular spirituality, which may at first appear to
be an oxymoronic formulation. Jackson's spirituality is secular precisely because its
primary site of execution and expression is not the church sanctuary but the con-
cert stage, and because it is not embedded in conventional ecclesiastical structures
or transmitted in traditional religious linguistic or liturgical practices. Furthermore,
his secular spirituality does not assume that a prior grounding in the shared lan-
guage of a religious community is needed in order to grasp its basic premises.
Neither does it make identity formed in intellectual exchange or conceptual dia-
logue needed for comprehension or participation. Jackson articulates powerful
forms of human identity in images, symbols, and language that are shaped by, but
not limited to, his own religious experience. Thus, the many traditions of moral re-
flection and ethical analysis that derive from a common Judeo-Christian heritage in
American society are consonant in many crucial respects with Jackson's own vision
of peace, love, and justice. Similar to the way that devotees of African-American re-
ligion participating in the civil rights movement appealed to a language of rights,
thus allowing them to express their conceptions of peace, justice, and liberation in
secular terms, so does Jackson's spirituality find a "language" that is understood by
members of an American culture not sharing his own religious experience.11
Furthermore, Jackson's spirituality is secular because it is created for, and best
thrives in, the cultural, psychic, and social spaces of the concert world, and not


--- PAGE 477 ---
448 THE MICHAEL ERIC DYSON READER
the ekklesia. It is not situated in, or sustained by, conventional procedures of
church participation, service, or worship. This does not mean, however, that Jack-
son's spirituality is devoid of religious drama involving rituals, pageantry, and
spectacles.12 On the contrary, Jackson's secular spirituality, particularly as per-
formed on the concert stage, is replete with references to certain African-American
religiocultural practices that signify in the musical arena.
For instance, Jackson's concerts thrive on call and response. Jackson's live per-
formances mediate ritual structures of antiphonal oral and verbal exchange between
artist and audience. Such antiphonal exchange permits the artist to articulate his or
her vision and authorizes the audience to acknowledge its reception and even shape
its meaning by responding to the emotion being expressed, refracting the message
being sent, or reaffirming the idea being communicated. In this context, meaning is
an open-ended process that resists premature or permanent closure. This secular
koinonia of communicants (artist and audience) constitutes a text whose under-
standing necessitates mutual participation in order to explore and unpack its multi-
ple meanings. In the best of the African-American religious tradition, meaning is
produced by an ever evolving, perennially transforming, historically conditioned set
of cultural practices, rhetorical strategies, and religious signifiers. Jackson's phe-
nomenal and protean energies in live performance exemplify this point.
Furthermore, Jackson's performances richly fuse Bakhtinian conceptions of car-
nival with African-American forms of spiritual ecstasy, producing a highly ani-
mated hybrid that creates space for cultural resistance and religious agency.13 Both
carnival and African-American religious ecstatic experience have been devalued
as cathartic, excessive, and celebrative of the "low" in human nature. But it is just
this emphasis on the "low" religious expression of ecstasy, empathy, and subjec-
tive experientialism versus the "high" religious expression of control, stolidity,
and objective experientialism that marks, in part, the subversive potentialities and
powers of African-American religion.
Also, it is the "low" cultural expression of laughter, bodily pleasure, and vernacu-
lar language-versus the "high" cultural expression of solemnity, repression, and clas-
sical language—that expresses the powers of culturally degraded masses to revolt and
survive. Carnival prevents rank and social hierarchy from tyrannizing social expres-
sion, much as progressive Christian conceptions of democracy allow the free social
expression of equal beings.14 Bakhtin says, "Carnival celebrated temporary libera-
tion from the prevailing truth and from the established order: it marked the suspen-
sion of all hierarchical rank, privileges, norms and prohibitions."15 Jackson taps into
and ties these traditions together in a highly skillful and empowering fashion.
The primary form of Jackson's secular spirituality is televisual. In fact, the
major moments in Jackson's vocation have been catalyzed by the visual medium,
either on television or in music video. For instance, Jackson's passage from music
superstar to a world historical and cultural figure was ritually enacted on May 16,
1983, with his mythic dance performance of the "moonwalk" on the Motown 25
television special, which was beamed to almost 50 million viewers around the
globe. Jackson's uncanny dexterity, disciplined grace, and explosive imagination


--- PAGE 478 ---
Michael Jackson's Postmodern Spirituality 449
coalesced in a series of immortal movements, which, in their turn, freeze framed
the recrudescent genius of street dance, summarized the important history of Fred
Astaire-like purposeful grace in executing dance steps, and extended the brilliant
tradition of African-American performers like Bojangles, Sammy Davis, and
Katherine Dunham surging against the odds to create vital art.
Jackson's epochal routine skyrocketed his record sales and catapulted him into
the stellar reaches of fame, landing him on the cover of the Guiness Book of World
Records for selling over 40 million copies of his album Thriller, the most in music
history. His autobiography Moonwalk, edited by Jackie Onassis, was aptly named,
for it captures the watershed moment in Jackson's career and symbolizes his
transformation into a personality of almost universal appeal.
The televisual medium, then, is central to Jackson's expression of his musical
vision of life. When he was making the album Thriller, Jackson writes:
I was determined to present this music as visually as possible. At the time I
would look at what people were doing with video, and I couldn't understand
why so much of it seemed so primitive and weak. I saw kids watching and ac-
cepting boring videos because they had no alternatives. My goal is to do the best
I can in every area, so why work hard on an album and then produce a terrible
video? I wanted something that would glue you to the set, something you'd want
to watch over and over. ... So I wanted to be a pioneer in this relatively new
medium and make the best short music movies we could make. I don't even like
to call them videos. On the set I explained that we were doing a film, and that was
how I approached it. (pp. 201-202)
Since the televisual medium is so crucial to Jackson's vision of life, it is here that
I want to concentrate my analysis in examining the confluence of music, medium,
and message in Jackson's art. In the remaining part of the essay, then, I will trace
some of the themes that constitute Jackson's African-American secular spirituality as
they are presented in a major (but not exclusive) mode of expression for him—the
music video. These themes include, as stated above, the nature of good and evil; the
potentialities for transformation of the self, human nature, and society; the nature
of real manhood in American culture; the politics of racial identity in America; and
the place of love in changing the world. In exploring these themes in Jackson's art,
I will examine two representative Jackson videos, "Thriller"16 and "Bad,"17 and a
live performance of "Man in the Mirror"18 at the 1988 Grammy Awards.
Jackson's "Thriller" marked a revolutionary use of the music video. As Jackson
indicated in the quote cited above, he intended to make a singular contribution to
the field. In fact all of his videos are distinct and defy easy categorization.19
"Thriller" (which capped Jackson's first period of music video creation) presents
a fantastical, wild, even scary vision of human transformation that rests upon con-
ventions developed in the horror film genre and utilizes the werewolf figure as a
metaphor of the potential for personal transmogrification. "Thriller" employs a
variety of horror film staples, such as sophisticated makeup, special effects, eerie


--- PAGE 479 ---
450 THE MICHAEL ERIC DYSON READER
music, and even the chillingly familiar voice of thrill master Vincent Price. It is a
mark of Jackson's unique imaginative powers that he is able to explore questions
of human nature and identity in this film genre.
The video begins with a written disclaimer: "Due to my strong personal con-
victions, I wish to stress that this film in no way endorses a belief in the occult."
Jackson was then still connected to the Jehovah's Witnesses, and this statement
was a concession to their concern about the possible misinterpretation of the
video's content. The opening scene of "Thriller" depicts Jackson and his girlfriend,
portrayed by Ola Ray, driving in a white 1950s Buick. Suddenly they are out of
gas, and Jackson faces the embarrassing task of reporting this to Ray, knowing his
companion will suspect a typical male ruse to initiate romantic tomfoolery. Jackson
says that they are honestly out of gas, to Ray's incredulous ears. They get out of
the car and begin to walk. Finally, however, Ray apologizes for her initial disbelief.
Jackson's character then begins to talk with Ray, expressing his affection for her
and hoping that she will return a similar affection to him. As they embrace, Jack-
son asks her to be his "girl." To make it official, Jackson gives her a ring. He then
tells her that he must vouchsafe a piece of important information to her, namely
that he is "not like other guys." This, of course, is a statement with which Jackson
observers, fans and detractors alike, would heartily agree. After Ray says she un-
derstands this, Jackson insists that she is missing his point, that he is different in a
way much different than she appreciates.
Until now, the sterile placidity of the couple's nocturnal surroundings remain
undisturbed, and only reinforce the engaging and affectionate emotions being
mutually expressed between Jacks on and Ray. But Jackson's announcement of
Derridean difference shatters the unity of natural and personal calm. The pain of
his self-awareness is the occasion for subsequent turmoil in Jackson and his com-
panion. It is at the very point of Jackson's announcement that he begins to exhibit
the specific and exaggerated character of his difference. The physiological struc-
ture of Jackson's countenance becomes radically altered, as he commences an on-
tological descent into animalistic debasement: he becomes a werewolf.
The transformation is now complete, and Jackson is the Freak, the one whose
being and appearance cause utter horror and total repulsion (much like Lon-
don's famed "Elephant Man," with whose remains Jackson is fascinated). He be-
gins to chase his companion, who runs shrieking from the immense vulgarity of
his transformed visage. Just as the werewolf corners her, we see a movie audi-
ence and understand that what we have just seen is a film being watched by an
audience on film.
In the audience are Jackson and Ray, she horrified by what she has seen, Jack-
son relishing the gore of every cut, slice, and painful grimace. Ray removes her-
self from the audience, and Jackson, after savoring a final glimpse, follows her.
After assuring Ray that "it was just a movie," the music to "Thriller" begins, with
its menacing bass fine foreshadowing the ominous events about to occur. Jackson
sings the words to "Thriller," speaking about the evil lurking in the dark, the
terror-filled night visions, and the paralysis that results from such visions. As he


--- PAGE 480 ---
Michael Jackson 's Postmodern Spirituality 451
continues to sing, graves begin to open up, and unseemly creatures begin to
emerge from long sleep, recalling some night of the living dead.
Just as the words indicate that "no mere mortal can resist the evil of thriller,"
Jackson is transformed into one of the creatures, growing fangs and developing
dark-circled eyes. In the next scene, Jackson's face is returned to normal, as he
continues to warn of the consequences of the "Thriller night." Once again, Jack-
son is transformed, even transmogrified, into a horrible creature, and along with
other ghoulish "demons" he begins to pursue Ray. They chase her into a house,
where her crying screams are met with more creatures coming out of the floor-
boards and through the windows. As they crowd in for the final assault, Ray of-
fers her ultimate terror-struck shriek, and Jackson, once again changed to his nor-
mal face, greets her and asks her what is wrong. As he helps her to her feet and
they leave, he turns to the camera, with fangish mouth and devilish yellow eyes.
It would be obviously stretching the truth to suggest that "Thriller" offers Jack-
son's self-conscious attempt to theologically thematize his conception of human
nature and human identity. Also, there are troubling aspects to Jackson's adoption
of the horror film genre, which has notoriously sexualized victimization by con-
stituting women as objects of male monster violent desire. However, I believe that
"Thriller" does provide a lens on aspects of Jackson's views about human nature
and on problems of evil that reflect his religious and moral views.
The lyrics to "Thriller" were not written by Jackson, but by Rod Temperton, a
former member of the group Heatwave, itself a product of diverse American and
British cultural and musical elements in the mid-1970s. In his lyrics, Temperton
represents the threat of horror approaching from the outside. The human beings
(Jackson and Ray) are victimized by events external to their nature or control, and
evil intent is expressed through creatures radically unlike themselves:
It's close to midnight and something evil's lurking in the dark / Under the
moonlight you see a sight that almost stops your heart / . . . You hear the door
slam and realize there's nowhere left to run / You feel the cold hand and wonder
if you'll ever see the sun / You close your eyes and hope that this is just imagi-
nation / But all the while you hear the creature creepin' up behind / You're out
of time / . . . There ain't no second chance against this thing with forty eyes.
Jackson provides Ray protection, however, from the marauding monsters:
Now is the time for you and I to cuddle close together / All through the night
I'll save you from the terrors on the screen, I'll make you see.
The further innuendo points to Jackson's ability to romantically thrill Ray:
. . . It's a thriller, thriller night / 'Cause I can thrill you more than any ghost
would dare to try / Girl, this is thriller, thriller night / So let me hold you tight
and share a killer, diller, chiller, / Thriller here tonight.


--- PAGE 481 ---
452 THE MICHAEL ERIC DYSON READER
In his minimovie version of "Thriller" (which was nominated for an Oscar in the
short film category), Jackson extends its range of meaning and expands its spectrum
of signifiers, with the result that he expresses some of his views about human na-
ture. First, Jackson represents the horror of evil as both an external event embodied
in transhuman creatures and as an internal experience embodied in human crea-
tures. Even more pointedly, the terrain of evil embodiment is the self, which has
grave consequences for the human being, especially in altered behavior, attitudes,
and physiological appearance. It is a totalizing process that affects, even infects, the
whole human organism. In the movie, Jackson's turn from magnanimous protector
to malicious pursuer indicates the dialectical tension of good and evil that defines
the human predicament and illumines the difficult context of choice between moral
opposites, particularly when they are embedded in the same human being.
For Jackson's "Thriller," human identity is an imperfect, messy amalgam of
good and evil, of humanitas and animalis, of oppositional tendencies that inhabit the
same psychic, spiritual, and biological space. A full comprehension of the social
practices, personal habits, and cultural behavior manifested in acts of goodness
must be chastened by an awareness of the potential for wrong and harm. Like-
wise, the judgment of the expression of evil social practices, personal habits, and
cultural behavior must be tempered by the recognition of the human possibilities
to do good acts and to generate productive lifestyles. In short, there are dis-
cernible traces of religious conceptions of human nature and identity in Jackson's
video version of "Thriller" that acknowledge the limits of human capacities for
good and also acknowledge an awareness of the human capability to do harm. It
is not altogether unlike the view of human nature that informed Reinhold
Niebuhr's political realism and influenced the thought of Martin Luther King Jr.20
Furthermore, in "Thriller" Jackson has, at least inadvertently, raised the issue
of marginality, difference, and otherness in much the same way that he indirectly
precipitates conversations about such topics in real life (especially because of his
alleged multiple cosmetic surgeries). The werewolf signifies the Embodied Other,
the spectacle of a difference so gross that it evokes responses of fear, terror, or hor-
ror in gasping onlookers. Some may view this as a proleptic revelation of Jack-
son's own existential grappling with his Otherness, to be subsequently revealed in
the "horrifying" spectacle of Jackson's transformation of his own face.
On the matter of his plastic surgery, Jackson complains that as he went from a
"cute," chubby-faced kid to a lean young man, "the press started accusing me of
surgically altering my appearance, beyond the nose job I freely admitted I had"
(p. 229). Jackson denies having his cheeks altered, his lips thinned, or his skin
peeled. In exasperation, he asks rhetorically, "What does my face have to do with
my music or my dancing?" (p. 230). Apparently Jackson fails to understand that,
as a cultural icon, the seeming de-Africanization of his face and the Europeaniza-
tion of his image reflect a wrestling with profound questions of identity and self-
image that influence the way his artistic achievements are perceived. In any regard,
the werewolf character, although a highly stylized signifier rooted in Jackson's fan-


--- PAGE 482 ---
Michael Jackson's Postmodern Spirituality 453
tasy life, communicates the aesthetic dissonance, social terror, and personal repul-
sion that may result from (racial, sexual) forms of otherness and difference.
That the site of otherness would be the body (versus the mind, for example, in
forms of madness) speaks volumes of the African American confrontation with
debilitating forms and uses of embodiment. The socially, morally, and economi-
cally repugnant uses of African-American embodiment, rooted in the commodifi-
cation of the black body, began under slavocracy in American culture. The black
body was articulated as the primal other, the form of difference par excellence.
Such uses of the black body were repudiated in African-American religious prac-
tices, which redeemed the use of the body by employing it in rites of sanctifica-
tion, rituals of purification, and acts of celebration. Jackson's expression of reli-
gious joy through his celebrative dance routines captures at least one pole of the
redemptive use of the black body articulated in black religious practices.
In "Thriller" Jackson has managed, in his own peculiar and idiosyncratic man-
ner, to encapsulate and represent certain of his views about evil and about human
nature and human identity. Jackson as werewolf indicates the possibility of the
radical instability of human nature and reflects the underlining of absolute dis-
tinctions between good and evil. The werewolf indicates the possibility of human
beings embodying radical forms of evil and inflicting evil on other human beings,
whether psychologically or in empirical events of social malevolence. The were-
wolf also indicates the Other, whose very embodiment occasions fear in those he
or she encounters.
In his song and video "Bad," Jackson turns to more familiar cultural and social
territory, as he examines the terms of existence for those who must straddle bar-
riers between two worlds divided by race and class. Jackson searingly probes the
complexities of making judgments about moral issues generated in the urban
inner city. "Bad" is a takeoff on the Edmund Perry story.21 Edmund Perry was a
brilliant Harlem youth who graduated with honors from Phillips Exeter Acad-
emy, a prestigious prep school in New Hampshire, and was awarded a full schol-
arship to Stanford University. Ten days after his graduation, while back home in
Harlem, he was killed on New York City's Upper West Side by a white police-
man, Lee Van Houten, who claimed that Perry and his brother Jonah had vi-
ciously beaten him during a robbery attempt. Perry's story is told in a controver-
sial book, Best Intentions, by Robert Sam Anson.22
"Bad" opens with a full camera view of Duxston prep school, couched in win-
ter snow and obvious opulence, supported by ominous strains of music. As with
"Thriller," the serenity and wholesome environment masks the potential for evil
that lurks within, as Hitchcock's proverbial clean suburban landscape conceals
the absurdity underneath. We then see the empty hallways and neat stairways of
Duxston, followed by a full-face shot of Jackson slowly raising his head from a
bowed position, indicating that the story and world we will see are his. The cam-
era breaks to students running down the stairs and halls of Duxston, exulting in
glee over the apparent winter break. Jackson is seen running down the hall and


--- PAGE 483 ---
454 THE MICHAEL ERIC DYSON READER
being stopped by a white male student who says that he wants to tell Darryl (Jack-
son's character) that he has done a good job this term, that he has worked hard,
and that he is proud of Darryl. Darryl thanks him, after which the white student
says, "High five, man. Take care." Darryl exchanges the high five gesture with the
white student, and other students are shown running out of school.
The next scene switches to Jackson riding on the train, viewing the world out-
side his window. The camera pans back to a full view of the aisle and seats, show-
ing Darryl talking to a white schoolmate while other white schoolmates make a
mess of the train. To die left corner of the camera, and the train, sits a student of
Latino descent with an open book, unsmilingly surveying the scene of recreative
havoc created by the white students and glancing toward Darryl as he continues
his conversation with the white student.
The scene dissolves, and Darryl and the Latino student are now the focus of the
camera, with a mosdy deserted background, indicating the passage of time. The
Latino student begins to look at Darryl, peering at him as Darryl now sits alone.
Over the loudspeaker, the announcer declares that the next station is Grand Cen-
tral Terminal, the final stop of the train. The camera then pans in to a full-faced
shot of the Latino student directing a piercing smirk and cutting glance at Darryl,
who is foregrounded in a visually blurred manner while strains of troubling music
insinuate themselves in the background. Darryl looks at the Latino student and
gives a tentative smile that tests the tension of their nonverbal exchange, then looks
away. The two of them, along with the few other passengers, get off the train.
The next scene shows a crowded subway, as the camera pans down a row of
riding passengers: first a middle-aged black woman with her eyes closed after an
apparently hard day of work; a pensive white woman; an elderly couple who
look to be slightly worried; a young black woman looking down; a stern white
woman blankly staring forward, the perfect exemplar of a person dulled by mind-
numbing, alienated work in a Marxist vision; and finally the Latino student with
Darryl next to him, both of their heads involuntarily shaking to the rhythm of
the subway's movement.
The Latino student turns to Darryl, and as the camera focuses on Darryl's face,
the Latino student asks him, "How many guys proud of you?" Darryl quietly
counts with his lips and, without looking at the Latino student, says, "Three." With
an ironic smile, the Latino student holds up four fingers and says, "Shoot, four guys
proud of me!" Darryl looks at him and they smile, both recognizing that it is a
source of perennial surprise to their fellow white students that they are able to excel
at school. This is a subtle but powerful critique by Jackson of white liberalism,
which has the power to stigmatize and punish with its often unconscious conde-
scension even as it intends to single out and celebrate. This form of critique, of
course, is linked to potent traditions of African-American religious and cultural crit-
icism developed over centuries of protest against injustice and struggle for freedom.
As the Latino student prepares to leave his stop on the subway, he gives Darryl
a soul brother handshake and says, "Be the man." Darryl responds to him, "Be


--- PAGE 484 ---
Michael Jackson 's Postmodern Spirituality 455
the man." The significance here is that the high five of the white student earlier is
juxtaposed against the soul handclasp of the Latino student. The high five, in this
case, is a stylized, fashionable handshake that signifies an ephemeral, external
code of relationship between Darryl and the white student. Although the white
student is expressing attempted camaraderie and friendship, the high five is more
a testament of the cultural distance between them than an acknowledgment of
their bonds of social intimacy.
The Latino student's soul handclasp, however, is a meaningful, internal code of
unspoken solidarity generated out of common circumstances of victimization and
objectification. Furthermore, the Latino student's parting exhortation to Darryl to
"be the man" is a culturally encoded signifier that subverts the usual semantic
meaning of the term and counsels a steadfast resolve to remain strong and rooted
in one's own cultural identity while achieving success at "the man's" (white
man's) institution.
The next scene shows a row of dilapidated, boarded-up brownstones in Harlem
and a row of men standing around twenty-gallon oil drums, warming themselves
over the fires they have started within, not an inappropriate metaphor for the
condition of black men in contemporary American culture. As Darryl walks
down the street a black man hollers at him, "Yo. Yo, blood. Yo." When Darryl
does not answer him (perhaps because he knows that what the man wants he can-
not give, or that what he wants he should not have), the man shrugs him off with
hand gestures that say, "Forget it."
As Darryl continues to amble down the street, three other "brothers" catch sight
of him, and one of them declares, as he hugs Darryl, "The Black is back. Yo. Black
is back, my man," and the other two fellows joyfully greet him. After this, Darryl
goes up into his apartment telling the "fellas" that he'll be down later. After Darryl
goes into his apartment and reads a note of welcome from his mother who has to
work late, until seven, he finds a window and looks out over the material morass
and spiritual squalor that litter his neighborhood, a Harlem gutted by social misery
and urban stench. The next scene shows Darryl and his three friends in the hall-
ways of a building engaging in harmless chitchat and ribbing, as one of his friends
inquires about Darryl's major. When Darryl responds that he is in high school,
which requires no major, the friend asks, "Then what's your minor?" All of them,
including Darryl, have a good laugh. Not so funny later on, and indicative of the
trouble to come, is when Darryl is asked if the "white boys" at his school wear "tur-
tle shells." "That's tortoise shells," Darryl replies. There is icy silence in the room,
thick with resentment over Darryl's benignly intentioned correction.
After the leader of the group indicates that it is time to "go" (i.e., engage in
petty criminal behavior), the scene changes to a street corner, where a man with
a cane is transacting a drug sale with another man. After the man with the cane
completes the sale, Darryl and his friends are seen leaning against a car, regard-
ing him with a cautious silence. The man pulls back his jacket to reveal a revolver
and asks if they are looking for somebody. The fellas, getting the message, depart.


--- PAGE 485 ---
456 THE MICHAEL ERIC DYSON READER
Later, back in a building, the leader declares to Darryl, "Hunts up. Hunts up,
homeboy. There are victims out there waitin' for us." Darryl utters a defiant ques-
tion-" What?"-that rebuts the leader's criminal intentions. The leader declares,
"'What?' Shit! Homeboy ain't home. Naw, see he up at Dunesbury playin' tennis
with his turtle shells." Thus the struggle to maintain one's integrity and to construct
a stable identity as a member of the underclass in the inner-city community surfaces.
Jackson's video focuses sharply on the central problems of defining identity and ex-
amining the moral character of decisions that take account of the social and eco-
nomic forces that form the background against which these choices must be made.
Darryl responds to the leader, "Back off." After a rough verbal encounter, the leader
grabs Darryl and says, "Yo man, what's wrong? Are you bad? Or is that what they
teach you up at that sissy school of yours: how to forget who your friends are? Well
let me tell you somethin', I don't care what they teach you up there. You either down
or you ain't down. So the question is, are you bad or what?" The basis of their past
relationship is shattered, and Darryl must renegotiate the terms of his relationship to
his "in-group" if any form of that relationship is to survive.
Darryl tells the leader to leave him alone, that he's tired of him "messin'" with
him. Finally he takes off his gloves and jacket and says that if the leader really
wants to see what is bad, then he will show him. At this point we (and Darryl) are
still in a morally ambiguous position, because we cannot ascertain the particular
nature of Darryl's challenge, whether it will be a show of neighborhood machismo
that revels in theft and crime, or whether it will be to subvert neighborhood con-
ceptions of what is "bad," similar to what happened between Darryl and the Latino
student's subversion of the code of success in the white world. This is an implicit
appeal to the culturally encoded practice that uses words like "tough" and "bad" to
mean something different, often their opposite. Jackson skillfully displays the dual
tensions that define Darryl's world and that, in much more detail and depth, de-
fined Edmund Perry's world. Moral choice is seen against a background of several
factors that must be considered when one judges the actions of inner-city youth
who resort to a life of crime to "make it." Jackson's moral vision, unquestionably
formed by his own religious views, is able to appreciate these subtleties and pro-
motes a vision that combines compassion and criticism.
The next scene shows Darryl and the fellas at a deserted section of the subway,
awaiting a lone man walking down the corridor. Darryl, under the pressure to
prove his "badness," is poised to pounce and prey upon the man, but at the last
moment decides to tell him to flee. The man speaks no English, reinforcing the
fact that victims of ghetto machismo or criminal activity are often other under-
class and struggling people. The fellas become angry with Darryl, and declare,
"You aren't down with us no more," and Darryl responds, "You ain't bad, you
ain't nothin.'" Here again, Jackson's own moral perspective is informed by an un-
derstanding of human nature that acknowledges that all human beings embody
the potential for wrongdoing. But as is clear in his reading of the story, all human
beings have the ability to contribute to their own future by the choices they make


--- PAGE 486 ---
Michael Jackson's Postmodern Spirituality 457
and the options they exercise. This is no static conception of human nature and
identity, no social determinism that locks human beings into predestined choice.
It is rather a Christian understanding of human nature that appreciates the com-
plexity and ambiguity that surrounds our moral choices, that posits an ambiva-
lent disposition toward the desires that occupy our social landscape, and that ac-
centuates the historical formation of the virtues we attempt to nourish.
At this juncture, the scene, until now black and white, blooms in full color, as
dancers emerge from either side of the columns in the subway, rupturing the re-
alism that has informed the video to this point. From then on, Darryl's message
is communicated in Jackson's powerful singing voice, accompanied by extraordi-
narily skillful dancing that choreographs his message to the fellas. Jackson re-
verses the power arrangement between Darryl and the fellas that has defined their
relationship as he sings:
your butt is mine / Gonna tell you right /Just show your face / In broad daylight
/ I'm telling you / On how I feel / Gonna hurt your mind / Don't shoot to kill /
... I'm giving you / On count of three / To show your stuff / Or let it be ... / I'm
telling you /Just watch your mouth /1 know your game / What you're about / Well
they say the sky's the limit / And to me that's really true / But my friend you have
seen nothin' /Just wait 'til I get through ... / Because I'm bad, I'm bad—come on.
At the climax of his melodied oration, Darryl comes face to face with the leader
of the fellas in a dramatic encounter reminiscent of the machismo-laden stare-
downs between prizefighters. Darryl scorns their wrongdoing in a fusion of
speech and song that is the strongest evocation of the African-American religious
rhetorical practice of "whooping," "chanting," or "tuning" since the advent of rap
music. Darryl's lyrical preachment is accented by the antiphonal response of his
amen chorus of backup dancer/singers, who meet his every word and gesture
with a rising spiral of vocal support that crescendos with a hissing noise meant to
seal their message and admonish their hearers.
At the end, Darryl and the leader lock arms and finally engage in a soul hand-
shake, sealing the leader's respect for Darryl, as he intones, "That's the way it
goes down, huh?" The soul handshake reinstitutes the possibility for personal
and social solidarity between Darryl and the leader, functioning, as it did with the
Latino student, to strengthen the ties of mutuality and community. As the fellas
depart, one of the brothers removes his hat, acknowledging the power of Darryl's
perspective, even as the scene returns to black and white and Darryl's garb re-
turns to his jacket and street clothes.
Jackson's "Bad" video premiered on a CBS television special that aired August
31, 1987, before a national viewing audience. It conveyed a moving message about
struggling with racial identity, forms of machismo, and the problems of underclass
black men in a potent mix of song and dance. It also testified to the national, even
worldwide, influence of Jackson's African-American secular spirituality.


--- PAGE 487 ---
458 THE MICHAEL ERIC DYSON READER
Perhaps the most poignant and powerfully explicit display of Jackson's brand
of secular spirituality was reserved for the 1988 Grammy Awards Show, beamed to
millions of people around the world. As the auditorium faded to dark, a white
screen was shown, silhouetting Jackson's lithe image, his head topped by a dark-
brown fedora, his palm facing outward to the right on the end of his stiffened
right arm, and his left leg extended, capped off by his trademark high-water
pants, with a blue shirt circled at the waist by a white sash, and white socks and
black shoes. As the audience screamed, strains of harmonies rilled the air, and
Jackson enacted ten seconds of solo dance movements, pantomiming some of his
most agile poses. As the screen rose, Jackson began to sing, in an impassioned
voice, a slow gospel-cadenced version of his song, "The Way You Make Me
Feel." As Jackson gyrated on stage, the female dancer-actress Tatiana, famous
from the video version of the song, emerged from the side of the stage. Jackson
was also joined by four dancers who, with him, re-created the moves performed
in the video.
Jackson then did a phenomenal foursquare version of the moonwalk, the dance
that he made famous. The auditorium again faded to dark, with the spotlight on
Jackson. He bowed, took the microphone handed to him, and began singing stan-
zas to "Man in the Mirror:"
I'm gonna make a change, for once in my life / It's gonna feel real good, gonna
make a difference / Gonna make it right... / As I turn up the collar on my favorite
winter coat / This wind is blowin' my mind /1 see the kids in the street, with not
enough to eat / Who am I, to be blind? / Pretending not to see their needs / A sum-
mer's disregard, a broken bottle top / And a one man's soul / They follow each
other on the wind, ya' know / 'Cause they got nowhere to go / That's why I want
you to know / I'm starting with the man in the mirror / I'm asking him to change
his ways / And no message could have been any clearer / If you wanna make the
world a better place / Take a look at yourself, and then make a change
As he sang, the camera panned into his face as people from either side of the stage
emerged from the wings. To his left were two singers, including Siedah Garrett,
coauthor of "Man in The Mirror." To his right were three singers, including con-
temporary gospel great Andrae Grouch.
Jackson was singing, with their support, about the necessity for beginning the
change in the world with one's self. As he stated in Moonwalk:
"Man in the Mirror" is a great message. I love that song. If John Lennon was
alive, he could really relate to that song because it says that if you want to make
the world a better place, you have to work on yourself and change first. It's the
same thing Kennedy was talking about when he said, "Ask not what your coun-
try can do for you; ask what you can do for your country." If you want to make
the world a better place, take a look at yourself and make a change. Start with the


--- PAGE 488 ---
Michael Jackson 's Postmodern Spirituality 459
man in the mirror. Start with yourself. Don't be looking at all the other things.
Start with you. That's the truth. That's what Martin Luther King meant and
Gandhi too. That's what I believe, (pp. 267-268)
As Jackson, Crouch, Garrett, and the others continued to sing, the choir from
New York's New Hope Baptist Church emerged from the back of the stage, aug-
menting the vocal power of Jackson's message. The religious nature of Jackson's
interpretation became visually apparent, and the implicitly religious sensibilities of
his performance became explicitly captured in the religious symbols surrounding
Jackson. Jackson spun and fell on his knees, dramatizing his message of the di-
alectical relationship between personal change and social transformation. Back on
his feet, Jackson pleaded once more for the world to change. Again he fell to his
knees, but this time he succumbed to the spirit and passion of the moment and re-
mained there. Jackson was spontaneously touched by what was occurring, as if he
were a spectator to the event, as if he were only a vehicle, an agent of a transcen-
dent power. Jackson was as shaken by the power of the message as if he were
hearing and delivering it for the first time, a lesson that great gospel singers and
preachers have mastered. Andrae Crouch then moved over from the side of the
stage, as if he were in a church service where someone was "slain in the spirit,"
and after wiping Jackson's brow, he helped him to his feet. Jackson, with new vi-
tality breathed into him, "got happy" again, turning several times, spinning joy-
ously, and spontaneously jumping up and down, shaking his hands, and doing a
complex walk-skip-jump movement.
Jackson's choreography of his religious joy, as he transformed the Grammy
stage into a sanctuary, was infectious, and his audience, his faitiiful congregation,
responded in the ecstatic glee of emotional abandon to his every move, groan,
and gesture. Jackson exhorted them by telling them that everyone has to make a
change, that the black man has to make a change, and that the white man has to
make a change. As he dropped to his knees yet another time, the twenty-person
choir moved ever closer to him, cutting off the stage and reducing it to a diamond,
both in its shape and substance. It was priceless and invaluable because Jackson
was projecting the power of African-American spirituality forward and having it
rearticulated back to him in the reverberating emotion of the audience and the es-
calating ecstasy of his singers. Jackson went down, like a martyr figure delivering
a messianic message, sinking to his knees that his audience might, as he repeat-
edly implored them, "stand up, stand up, stand up." Jackson then resorted to his
best exhortative deep-throated vocal to release a volcanic melisma and syllabic
repetition of the word you, in "you-you-you-ou-ow-ow got to make a change," cat-
alyzing a tumultuous response in the Grammy audience.
At the consummation of his homily in song, Jackson whispered, "Make that
change," and his congregation came to their feet, thundering their applauded
amen at Jackson, yielding their total love and trust to his expressed desire to
change the world by their changing themselves. The camera displayed a felicitous


--- PAGE 489 ---
460 THE MICHAEL ERIC DYSON READER
complicity in the spirit of the moment and scouted the audience for the converted
and the committed, finding them scattered throughout the auditorium's scene of
pandemonium.
Quincy Jones was clapping in recognition of his young charge's genius and in
graceful acknowledgment of their amazingly productive and satisfying partner-
ship over the last decade. Prince, typically unsmiling, was nonetheless on his feet,
giving Jackson his due. Jody Watley was smiling broadly and clapping with joy.
Behind her was Anita Baker, raising her hand in testimony to the spirit's presence
and ejaculating an incendiary "yeah" in verbal testimony to her spiritual enthusi-
asm. There, too, was Little Richard, a cultural icon himself, whose face was
brushed with a deep and clear joy, perhaps vicariously exulting in Jackson's glo-
rious fulfillment, a fulfillment denied Little Richard, a real pillar of rock 'n' roll.
(Jackson would return the joy later, as he was the first to his feet when Little
Richard playfully chided the recording academy for not recognizing his original
genius by awarding him a Grammy.) Finally there were the Houstons, Whitney
and Cissy, exhibiting in their individual persons what Jackson combined: power-
ful forms of traditional, black, gospel-inflected music wed to crossover-rich, hook-
laden music supported by diluted but still driving African-American beats.
Jackson's performance revealed a crucial aspect of his vocation: a theatricaliza-
tion of spirituality, a festive choreography of religious reality that is often present
in his live performances. The manner in which Jackson is able to evoke a virtu-
ally religious response from even secular concert attenders, a response that tran-
scends mere emotional expression or simple cathartic release, is astonishing. He
articulates a vision of the world that, although it includes idiosyncratic and fan-
tastical elements, nonetheless communicates powerful religious truths and moral
themes that are expressed in his riveting music and videos.
Michael Jackson seizes the parameters of the artistically possible and expands
them to dimensions beyond most of our imaginations. He increases the influence
of black religious experience and practices by articulating through televisual media
his brand of African-American secular spirituality and institution-transcending
piety, rife with appropriate religious and cultural imagery. He also transforms the
stage into a world-extending sanctuary on which he enacts rituals of religious ec-
stasy, moral courage, and spiritual passion that mediate substantive concerns about
love, peace, and justice, simultaneously subverting cultural consensus about what
constitutes the really "bad" and the "good." He embodies a postmodern version of
African-American secular spirituality that has the opportunity to spread its influ-
ence into the next century and to ensure the presence in the larger American and
world culture of some of the most poignant and creative art developed from an
enormously rich and resourceful tradition.


--- PAGE 490 ---
Thirty-Four
BE LIKE MIKE? MICHAEL JORDAN AND
THE PEDAGOGY OF DESIRE
This chapter on Jordan was fast published in 1993 for the journal Cultural Studies,
edited by renowned cultural studies scholar, and my dear friend, Lawrence Grossberg. I
have written quite a bit about Jordan over the years, taking the measure of his social and
political impact, as well as his athletic genius. In this chapter, I probe the racial and cultural
dimensions of Jordan s achievements, placing him in the context of black athletic aspiration
during the twentieth century. For much of the past century, black sports had an unavoidably
symbolic and representative character; many athletes were social as well as athletic pioneers,
shattering barriers for the progress of the entire race. I even take a stab at explaining
Jordan's phenomenal ability in physical as well as metaphoric terms. I oho specify the
manner in which Jordan's is a black game—with his playing style revealing postmodern
elements of black cultural creativity. Unlike many fans, I was happy to see Jordan un-retire
for the second time, if for no other reason than he proved that "old" guys could still perform
at unprecedented levels and show the young bucks a thing or two. I took my son to see his
first "last" appearance as an All-Star in New York s Madison Square Garden, and again,
in presumably his final "last" All-Star appearance in Atlanta in 2003. And later that year
I watched Jordan lace up his sneakers for his final game in Philadelphia. Athletically, and
culturally too, his likes will hardly be seen again. This chapter tries to capture his unique
impact on his game and our world.
MICHAEL JORDAN is PERHAPS THE BEST, AND BEST-KNOWN, athlete in the
world today. He has attained unparalleled cultural status because of his extraordinary
physical gifts, his marketing as an icon of race-transcending American athletic and
moral excellence, and his mastery of a sport that has become the metaphoric center
of black cultural imagination. But the Olympian sum of Jordan's cultural meaning is
greater than the fluent parts of his persona as athlete, family man, and marketing cre-
ation. There is hardly cultural precedence for the character of his unique fame, which
has blurred the line between private and public, between personality and celebrity,
and between substance and symbol. Michael Jordan stands at the breach between
perception and intuition, his cultural meaning perennially deferred from closure be-
cause his career symbolizes possibility itself, gathering into its unfolding narrative the
shattered remnants of previous incarnations of fame and yet transcending their reach.


--- PAGE 491 ---
462 THE MICHAEL ERIC DYSON READER
Jordan has been called "the new DiMaggio" (Boers 1990, 30) and "Elvis in
high-tops," indications of the Herculean cultural heroism he has come to embody.
There is even a religious element to the near worship of Jordan as a cultural icon
of invincibility, as he has been called a "savior of sorts," "basketball's high priest"
(Bradley 1991-1992, 60), and "more popular than Jesus," except with "better en-
dorsement deals" (Vancil 1992, 51). But the quickly developing cultural canon-
ization of Michael Jordan provokes reflection about the contradictory uses to
which Jordan's body is put as a seminal cultural text and ambiguous symbol of
fantasy, and the avenues of agency and resistance available especially to black
youth who make symbolic investment in Jordan's body as a means of cultural
and personal possibility, creativity, and desire.
I understand Jordan in the broadest sense of the term to be a public pedagogue,
a figure of estimable public moral authority whose career educates us about pro-
ductive and disenabling forms of knowledge, desire, interest, consumption, and
culture in three spheres: the culture of athletics that thrives on skill and perfor-
mance, the specific expression of elements of African-American culture, and the
market forces and processes of commodification expressed by, and produced in,
advanced capitalism. By probing these dimensions of Jordan's cultural impor-
tance, we may gain a clearer understanding of his function in American society.
Athletic activity has shaped and reflected important sectors of American society.
First, it produced communities of common athletic interest organized around the
development of highly skilled performance. The development of norms of athletic
excellence evidenced in sports activities cemented communities of participants who
valorized rigorous sorts of physical discipline in preparation for athletic competition
and in expressing the highest degree of athletic skill. Second, it produced potent sub-
cultures that inculcated in their participants norms of individual and team accom-
plishment. Such norms tapped into the bipolar structures of competition and coop-
eration that pervade American culture. Third, it provided a means of reinscribing
Western frontier myths of exploration and discovery-as-conquest onto a vital sphere
of American culture. Sports activities can be viewed in part as the attempt to sym-
bolically ritualize and metaphorically extend the ongoing quest for mastery of envi-
ronment and vanquishing of opponents within the limits of physical contest.
Fourth, athletic activity has served to reinforce habits and virtues centered in
collective pursuit of communal goals that are intimately connected to the common
good, usually characterized within athletic circles as "team spirit." The culture of
sport has physically captured and athletically articulated the mores, folkways, and
dominant visions of American society, and at its best it has been conceived as a
means of symbolically embracing and equitably pursuing the just, the good, the
true, and the beautiful. And finally, the culture of athletics has provided an ac-
ceptable and widely accessible means of white male bonding. For much of its his-
tory, American sports activity has reflected white patriarchal privilege, and it has
been rigidly defined and socially shaped by rules that restricted the equitable par-
ticipation of women and people of color.


--- PAGE 492 ---
Michael Jordan and the Pedagogy of Desire 463
Black participation in sports in mainstream society, therefore, is a relatively
recent phenomenon. Of course, there have existed venerable traditions of black
sports, such as the Negro (baseball) Leagues, which countered the exclusion of
black bodies from white sports. The prohibition of athletic activity by black men
in mainstream society severely limited publicly acceptable forms of displaying
black physical prowess, an issue that had been politicized during slavery and
whose legacy extended into the middle of the twentieth century. Hence, the po-
tentially superior physical prowess of black men, validated for many by the long
tradition of slave labor that built American society, helped reinforce racist argu-
ments about the racial regimentation of social space and the denigration of the
black body as an inappropriate presence in traditions of American sport.
Coupled with this fear of superior black physical prowess was the notion that
inferior black intelligence limited the ability of blacks to perform excellently in
those sports activities that required mental concentration and agility. These two
forces-the presumed lack of sophisticated black cognitive skills and the fear of su-
perior black physical prowess—restricted black sports participation to thriving but
financially handicapped subcultures of black athletic activity. Later, of course, the
physical prowess of the black body would be acknowledged and exploited as a
supremely fertile zone of profit as mainstream athletic society literally cashed in
on the symbolic danger of black sports excellence.
Because of its marginalized status within the regime of American sports, black
athletic activity often acquired a social significance that transcended the internal
dimensions of game, sport, and skill. Black sport became an arena not only for
testing the limits of physical endurance and forms of athletic excellence-while re-
producing or repudiating ideals of American justice, goodness, truth, and beauty—
but it also became a way of ritualizing racial achievement against socially imposed
barriers to cultural performance.
In short, black sports activity often acquired a heroic dimension, as viewed in
the careers of figures such as Joe Louis, Jackie Robinson, Althea Gibson, Wilma
Rudolph, Muhammad Ali, and Arthur Ashe. Black sports heroes transcended the
narrow boundaries of specific sports activities and garnered importance as icons
of cultural excellence, symbolic figures who embodied social possibilities of suc-
cess denied to other people of color. But they also captured and catalyzed the
black cultural fetishization of sport as a means of expressing black cultural style,
as a means of valorizing craft as a marker of racial and self-expression, and as a
means of pursuing social and economic mobility.
It is this culture of black athletics, created against the background of social and
historical forces that shaped American athletic activity, that helped produce Jordan
and help explain the craft that he practices. Craft is the honing of skill by the ap-
plication of discipline, time, talent, and energy toward the realization of a particu-
lar cultural or personal goal. American folk cultures are pervaded by craft, from
the production of cultural artifacts that express particular ethnic histories and tra-
ditions to the development of styles of life and work that reflect and symbolize a


--- PAGE 493 ---
464 THE MICHAEL ERIC DYSON READER
community's values, virtues, and goals. Michael Jordan's skills within basketball
are clearly phenomenal, but his game can only be sufficiently explained by under-
standing its link to the fusion of African-American cultural norms and practices,
and the idealization of skill and performance that characterize important aspects of
American sport. I will identify three defining characteristics of Jordan's game that
reflect the influence of African-American culture on his style of play.
First, Jordan's style of basketball reflects the will to spontaneity. I mean here the
way in which historical accidence is transformed into cultural advantage, and the
way acts of apparently random occurrence are spontaneously and imaginatively
employed by Africans and African-Americans in a variety of forms of cultural ex-
pression. When examining Jordan's game, this feature of African-American cul-
ture clearly functions in his unpredictable eruptions of basketball creativity. It was
apparent, for instance, during game two of the National Basketball Association
1991 championship series between Jordan's Chicago Bulls and the Los Angeles
Lakers, in a shot that even Jordan ranked in his all-time top ten (McCallum 1991,
32). Jordan made a drive toward the lane, gesturing with his hands and body that
he was about to complete a patent Jordan dunk shot with his right hand. But
when he spied defender Sam Perkins slipping over to oppose his shot, he switched
the ball in midair to his left hand to make an underhanded scoop shot instead,
which immediately became known as the "levitation" shot. Such improvisation, a
staple of the will to spontaneity, allows Jordan to expand his vocabulary of ath-
letic spectacle, which is the stimulation of a desire to bear witness to the revelation
of truth and beauty compressed into acts of athletic creativity.
Second, Jordan's game reflects the stylization of the performed self. This is the cre-
ation and projection of a sport persona that is an identifying mark of diverse
African-American creative enterprises, from the complexly layered jazz experi-
mentation of John Coltrane, the trickstering and signifying comedic routines of
Richard Pryor, and the rhetorical ripostes and oral significations of rapper Kool
Moe Dee. Jordan's whole game persona is a graphic depiction of the performed
self as flying acrobat, resulting in his famous moniker "Air Jordan." Jordan's per-
formed self is rife with the language of physical expressiveness: head moving,
arms extending, hands waving, tongue wagging, and legs spreading.
He has also developed a resourceful repertoire of dazzling dunk shots that fur-
ther express his performed self and that have garnered him a special niche within
the folklore of the game: the cradle jam, rock-a-baby, kiss the rim, lean in, and the
tomahawk. In Jordan's game, the stylization of a performed self has allowed him
to create a distinct sports persona that has athletic as well as economic conse-
quences, while mastering sophisticated levels of physical expression and redefin-
ing the possibilities of athletic achievement within basketball.
Finally, there is the subversion of perceived limits through the use of edifying de-
ception, which in Jordan's case centers around the space/time continuum. This mo-
ment in African-American cultural practice is the ability to flout widely under-
stood boundaries through mesmerization and alchemy, a subversion of common


--- PAGE 494 ---
Michael Jordan and the Pedagogy of Desire 465
perceptions of the culturally or physically possible through the creative and de-
ceptive manipulation of appearance. Jordan is perhaps most famous for his al-
leged "hang time," the uncanny ability to remain suspended in midair longer than
other basketball players while executing his stunning array of improvised moves.
But Jordan's "hang time" is technically a misnomer and can be more accurately
attributed to Jordan's skillful athletic deception, his acrobatic leaping ability, and
his intellectual toughness in projecting an aura of uniqueness around his craft
than to his defiance of gravity and the laws of physics.
No human being, including Michael Jordan, can successfully defy the law of
gravity and achieve relatively sustained altitude without the benefit of machines. As
Douglas Kirkpatrick points out, the equation for altitude is l/2g x t2 = VO x t
("How Does Michael Fly?"). However, Jordan appears to hang by stylistically rela-
tivizing the fixed coordinates of space and time through the skillful management
and manipulation of his body in midair. For basketball players, hang time is the ve-
locity and speed with which a player takes off combined with the path the player's
center of gravity follows on the way up. At the peak of a player's vertical jump, the
velocity and speed is close to, or at, zero; hanging motionless in the air is the work
of masterful skill and illusion ("How Does Michael Fly?"). Michael Jordan, through
the consummate skill and style of his game, only appears to be hanging in space for
more than the one second that human beings are capable of remaining airborne.
But the African-American aspects of Jordan's game are indissolubly linked to
the culture of consumption and the commodification of black culture.1 Because of
Jordan's supreme mastery of basketball, his squeaky-clean image, and his youthful
vigor in pursuit of the American Dream, he has become, along with Bill Cosby,
the quintessential pitchman in American society. Even his highly publicized trou-
bles with gambling, his refusal to visit the White House after the Bulls' champi-
onship season, and a book that purports to expose the underside of his heroic
myth have barely tarnished his All3-American image.2 Jordan eats Wheaties, drives
Chevrolet, wears Hanes, drinks Coca-Cola, consumes McDonald's, guzzles
Gatorade, and, of course, wears Nikes. He successfully produced, packaged, mar-
keted, and distributed his image and commodified his symbolic worth, transform-
ing cultural capital into cash, influence, prestige, status, and wealth. To that de-
gree, at least, Jordan repudiates the sorry tradition of the black athlete as the naif
who loses his money to piranhalike financial wizards, investors, and hangers-on.
He represents the New Age athletic entrepreneur who understands that American
sport is ensconced in the cultural practices associated with business, and that it de-
mands particular forms of intelligence, perception, and representation to prevent
abuse and maximize profit.
From the very beginning of his professional career, Jordan was consciously mar-
keted by his agency Pro-Serv as a peripatetic vehicle of American fantasies of cap-
ital accumulation and material consumption tied to Jordan's personal modesty and
moral probity. In so doing, they skillfully avoided attaching to Jordan the image of
questionable ethics and lethal excess that plagued inside traders and corporate


--- PAGE 495 ---
466 THE MICHAEL ERIC DYSON READER
raiders on Wall Street during the mid '80s, as Jordan began to emerge as a cultural
icon. But Jordan is also the symbol of the spectacle-laden black athletic body as the
site of commodified black cultural imagination. Ironically, the black male body,
which has been historically viewed as threatening and inappropriate in American
society (and remains so outside of sports and entertainment), is made an object of
white desires to domesticate and dilute its more ominous and subversive uses, even
symbolically reducing Jordan's body to dead meat (McDonald's Mcjordan ham-
burger), which can be consumed and expelled as waste.
Jordan's body is also the screen upon which is projected black desires to emu-
late his athletic excellence and replicate his entry into reaches of unimaginable
wealth and fame. But there is more than vicarious substitution and the projection
of fantasy onto Jordan's body that is occurring in the circulation and reproduction
of black cultural desire. There is also the creative use of desire and fantasy by
young blacks to counter, and capitulate to, the forces of cultural dominance that
attempt to reduce the black body to a commodity and text that is employed for
entertainment, titillation, or financial gain. Simply said, there is no easy correla-
tion between the commodification of black youth culture and the evidences of a
completely dominated consciousness.
Even within the dominant cultural practices that seek to turn the black body
into pure profit, disruptions of capital are embodied, for instance, in messages cir-
culated in black communities by public moralists who criticize the exploitation of
black cultural creativity by casual footwear companies. In short, there are in-
stances of both black complicity and resistance in the commodification of black
cultural imagination, and the ideological criticism of exploitative cultural practices
must always be linked to the language of possibility and agency in rendering a
complex picture of the black cultural situation. As Henry Giroux observes:
The power of complicity and the complicity of power are not exhausted simply
by registering how people are positioned and located through the production of
particular ideologies structured through particular discourses. ... It is important
to see that an overreliance on ideology critique has limited our ability to under-
stand how people actively participate in the dominant culture through processes
of accommodation, negotiation, and even resistance. (Giroux 1992, 194-195)
In making judgments about the various uses of the black body, especially Jordan's
symbolic corporeality, we must specify how both consent and opposition to ex-
ploitation are often signaled in expressions of cultural creativity.
In examining his reactions to the racial ordering of athletic and cultural life, the
ominous specificity of the black body creates anxieties for Jordan. His encounters
with the limits of culturally mediated symbols of race and racial identity have oc-
casionally mocked his desire to live beyond race, to be "neither black nor white"
(Patton 1986, 52), to be "viewed as a person" (Vancil 1992, 57). While Jordan
chafes under indictment by black critics who claim that he is not "black enough,"


--- PAGE 496 ---
Michael Jordan and the Pedagogy of Desire 467
he has perhaps not clearly understood the differences between enabling versions
of human experience that transcend the exclusive gaze of race and disenabling vi-
sions of human community that seek race neutrality.
The former is the attempt to expand the perimeters of human experience be-
yond racial determinism, to nuance and deepen our understanding of the con-
stituent elements of racial identity, and to understand how race, along with class,
gender, geography, and sexual preference, shape and constrain human experi-
ence. The latter is the belief in an intangible, amorphous, nonhistorical, and race-
less category of "person," existing in a zone beyond not simply the negative con-
sequences of race, but beyond the specific patterns of cultural and racial identity
that constitute and help shape human experience. Jordan's unclarity is conse-
quential, weighing heavily on his apolitical bearing and his refusal to acknowledge
the public character of his private beliefs about American society and the respon-
sibility of his role as a public pedagogue.
Indeed it is the potency of black cultural expressions that not only have helped
influence his style of play, but have also made the sneaker industry he lucratively
participates in a multibillion dollar business. Michael Jordan has helped seize
upon the commercial consequences of black cultural preoccupation with style and
the commodification of the black juvenile imagination at the site of the sneaker.
At the juncture of the sneaker, a host of cultural, political, and economic forces
and meanings meet, collide, shatter, and are reassembled to symbolize the situa-
tion of contemporary black culture.
The sneaker reflects at once the projection and stylization of black urban reali-
ties linked in our contemporary historical moment to rap culture and the under-
ground political economy of crack, and reigns as the universal icon for the culture
of consumption. The sneaker symbolizes the ingenious manner in which black
cultural nuances of cool, hip, and chic have influenced the broader American cul-
tural landscape. It was black street culture that influenced sneaker companies' ag-
gressive invasion of the black juvenile market in taking advantage of the increas-
ing amounts of disposable income of young black men as a result of legitimate
and illegitimate forms of work.
Problematically, though, the sneaker also epitomizes the worst features of the
social production of desire and represents the ways in which moral energies of so-
cial conscience about material values are drained by the messages of undisciplined
acquisitiveness promoted by corporate dimensions of the culture of consumption.
These messages, of rapacious consumerism supported by cultural and personal
narcissism, are articulated on Wall Street and are related to the expanding inner-
city juvenocracy, where young black men rule over black urban space in the cul-
ture of crack and illicit criminal activity, fed by desires to "live large" and to re-
produce capitalism's excesses on their own terrain. Also, sneaker companies make
significant sums of money from the illicit gains of drug dealers.
Moreover, while sneaker companies have exploited black cultural expressions of
cool, hip, chic, and style, they rarely benefit the people who both consume the largest


--- PAGE 497 ---
468 THE MICHAEL ERIC DYSON READER
quantity of products and whose culture redefined the sneaker companies' raison
d'etre. This situation is more severely compounded by the presence of spokespeople
like Jordan, Spike Lee, and Bo Jackson, who are either ineffectual or defensive about
or indifferent to the lethal consequences (especially in urban black-on-black violence
over sneaker company products) of black juvenile acquisition of products that these
figures have helped make culturally desirable and economically marketable.
Basketball is the metaphoric center of black juvenile culture, a major means by
which even temporary forms of cultural and personal transcendence of personal
limits are experienced. Michael Jordan is at the center of this black athletic culture,
the supreme symbol of black cultural creativity in a society of diminishing tolerance
for the black youth whose fascination with Jordan has helped sustain him. But Jor-
dan is also the iconic fixture of broader segments of American society, who see in
him the ideal figure: a black man of extraordinary genius on the court and before
the cameras, who by virtue of his magical skills and godlike talents symbolizes the
meaning of human possibility, while refusing to root it in the specific forms of cul-
ture and race in which it must inevitably make sense or fade to ultimate irrelevance.
Jordan also represents the contradictory impulses of the contemporary culture
of consumption, where the black athletic body is deified, reified, and rearticulated
within the narrow meanings of capital and commodity. But there is both resis-
tance and consent to the exploitation of black bodies in Jordan's explicit cultural
symbolism, as he provides brilliant glimpses of black culture's ingenuity of im-
provisation as a means of cultural expression and survival. It is also partially this
element of black culture that has created in American society a desire to dream
Jordan, to "be like Mike."
This pedagogy of desire that Jordan embodies, although at points immobilized
by its depoliticized cultural contexts, is nevertheless a remarkable achievement in
contemporary American culture: a six-foot-six American man of obvious African
descent is the dominant presence and central cause of athletic fantasy in a sport
that twenty years ago was denigrated as a black man's game and hence deemed
unworthy of wide attention or support. Jordan is therefore the bearer of meanings
about black culture larger than his individual life, the symbol of a pedagogy of
style, presence, and desire that is immediately communicated by the sight of his
black body before it can be contravened by reflection.
In the final analysis, his big black body—graceful and powerful, elegant and dark-
symbolizes the possibilities of other black bodies to remain safe long enough to sur-
vive within the limited but significant sphere of sport, since Jordan's achievements
have furthered the cultural acceptance of at least the athletic black body. In that
sense, Jordan's powerful cultural capital has not been exhausted by narrow under-
standings of his symbolic absorption by the demands of capital and consumption.
His body is still the symbolic carrier of racial and cultural desires to fly beyond lim-
its and obstacles, a fluid metaphor of mobility and ascent to heights of excellence se-
cured by genius and industry. It is this power to embody the often conflicting desires
of so many that makes Michael Jordan a supremely instructive figure for our times.


--- PAGE 498 ---
Thirty-Five
IS POSTMODERNISM JUST MODERNISM IN DRAG?
This interview, conducted by the gifted poet, scholar, and church pianist Jonathan
Smith when he was a graduate student, is one of the best I have participated in.
Smith's questions are razor-sharp and knowing, smart without being smug, brilliant
without being ostentatious. I had great fun in probing the complex dimensions of black
culture and in exploring the modern and postmodern implications of black identity. We
discuss music, literature, basketball, religion, literary and cultural theory, sexuality,
slavery, boxing, masculinity, politics, television, civil rights and race, and a great deal
more. It is a tribute to Smith's preparedness that the interview went so well. One can
feel the electricity of the lived, dialogic moment, as his enthusiasm for the subjects we
discuss contagiously passes to me, allowing me to catch fire and blaze through our
exchanges. If I had to point to a single piece of writing that best expresses my ideas
about black culture and identity, this would be the one.
The first thing I'd like to ask is: Who is Michael Eric Dyson? And I want you
to take the liberty of answering this in a manner that is not strictly auto-
biographical. One reason I ask this is because your book jacket begins de-
scribing you as "welfare father, ordained Baptist minister, Princeton Ph.D."
Then in your chapter on the black public intellectual, you give yourself the
shameless self-promotion award.
One of the reasons I take postmodernism so seriously, even as I refuse to make a
fetish of its insights, is a notion that has been championed by its theorists, espe-
cially in cultural and literary studies: an evolving, fluid identity. What I take from
the postmodern conception of identity is captured in the terms beautifully
phrased in black Christian circles, namely, "I don't have to be what I once was."
That Christian conception of the evolution of character highlights the variability
and flexibility of human identity, even if such a view clashes profoundly with
postmodern arguments against a fixed human nature on which many Christian
conceptions of identity rest. But for black Christians-who are arguably situated
deep inside modernism with its impulse to dynamism and disruption, as well as
its unyielding quest for the new—and secular postmodernists alike, identity is a
process, a continual play of existential choices over a field of unfolding possibility.
The self today can be radically different from the self of yesterday.


--- PAGE 499 ---
470 THE MICHAEL ERIC DYSON READER
Taking that seriously, Mike Dyson is an experiment in identity, a testament to
a process of evolving self-awareness; some of the elements of my self are surely in
conflict, while other fragments of my self are made coherent because they've been
sewn together by the threads of history, culture, race, and memory. Who I was,
say, ten years ago, was a scholar in the making, and eight or ten years before that,
I was a welfare father, a hustler on Detroit's streets, a divorcing husband, a young
man who was trying to figure out what to do with his life. I was twenty-one, and
I hadn't gone to college or prepared myself academically to take up my vocation.
So, who I am is constantly implicated in the themes I take up in my work. What
does it mean to be young, black, and male in this country? What are the racial
and economic forces that shape black life? How can we achieve racial justice and
equality? What does it mean to be an intellectual in a world that prizes image
more than substance? How should we treat the vulnerable and the destitute?
How can we bridge the psychic and social gulfs between the generations? How
can we speak about God in a world where religion has been hijacked by funda-
mentalists and fascists? How do we untangle the vicious knots of patriarchy, sex-
ism, and misogyny in our nation? How do we affirm and protect gay, lesbian, bi-
sexual, and trans gendered people in our communities? All these questions, and
many more, play out in my intellectual and political pursuits.
Who I am, then, in many senses, is a bridge builder, a bridge figure. I want to
span the streets and the academy, and the sacred and the secular. I also want to
bridge traditions and the transformations of those traditions, including religious
belief, intellectual engagement, scholarly investigation, racial solidarity, class
struggle, resistance to economic oppression, and feminist insurgence. Of course,
the parts of my identity that might obviously be in tension, say the academic and
the activist, suffer pressure in both directions: the academy is suspicious of the
streets, and vice versa. The tension is one of proximity and distance. To the acad-
emy, there is the threat of proximity to the chaotic, propulsive, unregulated, some-
times uncivil passions of the world beyond the university. To the denizens of the
streets—including its natural constituency of grassroots activists, conspiracy man-
agers, and on-the-ground, indigenous, concrete intellectuals—diere is the fear that
academics will remain aloof, indifferent to their suffering, and intellectually un-
available to supply strategies to resist their oppression. I want to do the best I can
to answer the threat of proximity, not by less but by more interaction between
academics and activists, hoping to prove that the interactions benefit the univer-
sity. And I want to help heal fears of distance by bringing the resources of intelli-
gence and compassion to bear on the hurts of the socially vulnerable. It is that de-
sire to bridge gulfs that unifies my disparate selves, making me much more
sympathetic to the prophetic mystic Howard Thurman, who once prayed to God,
"make me unanimous in myself."
I'll ask you then this question. Baldwin in Giovanni's Room says: "Perhaps
home is not a place but an irrevocable condition." In South to a Very Old


--- PAGE 500 ---
Is Postmodernism Just Modernism in Drag? 471
Place, Albert Murray begins with this thought: "But then, going back home
has probably always had as much if not more to do with people as with
landmarks and place names and locations on maps and mileage charts any-
way. Not that home is not a place, for even in its most abstract implications
it is precisely the very oldest place in the world. But even so, it is somewhere
you are likely to find yourself remembering your way back to far more often
than it is ever possible to go by conventional transportation." Given that, in
that context, where do you feel most at home?
Yes. Yes. Good question, man. Well, as both of these writers make clear, home is
about the geography of imagination. For me, it's also about the architecture of
identity through aspiration and yearning, since home is carved from hope and
memory. It is both forward-looking and backward leaning. And that means that
home is not simply a place forever anchored by concrete foundations. It is not
simply a fixed point with tangible coordinates in space and time. Home is a meta-
physical possibility that seeds the ground of experience and infuses our finite en-
counters in local spaces with meaning. That's why Burt Bacharach's writing part-
ner, Hal David, could pen a lyric that makes the philosophical argument that
"a house is not a home," distinguishing the two by the quality of relations that
turn the former into the latter. Like identity, home, to a large degree, is composed
of an evolving awareness about how you can decrease the discomfort you have in
the world as a result of your roots. That's why our foreparents spoke of "a house
not made with hands," as it says in 1 Corinthians, casting biblical language in
their own religious accents. And they suggested that this world "ain't no friend to
grace," since it was alienated from God's purpose. For a people who were often
homeless-rootless and adrift in a sea of chattel slavery, and later, exploitative
sharecropping-home assumed a high priority. That's why many of our forepar-
ents hoped for a day when they could, in the words of one slave, "read my title
clear." Home had intense metaphoric value for our foreparents in another way: as
the imagined space of unlimited access to God in heaven, a place they hoped to
go after they died, signified in songwriter Charles Tindley's familiar refrain in
black Christian circles, "I'll make it home, someday."
Of course, there are dangers to the notion of home in black life as well, espe-
cially when it comes to elevating one's imagined geography of spirit, one's own
sense of home, as the sole source of authentic blackness. After all, roots are meant
to nourish, not strangle, us. I'm thinking in particular of the vicious debates rag-
ing in many black communities about what is really black, how we define it, and
how the spaces of black identity are linked increasingly to a narrow slice of black
turf-the ghetto. Our kids are literally dying over a profound misunderstanding
about our culture that links authenticity to geography, that makes one believe that
if she is black, she must pledge ultimate allegiance to the ghetto as the sole black
home of the black subject. The exclusive identification of the ghetto as the au-
thentic black home is wholly destructive.


--- PAGE 501 ---
472 THE MICHAEL ERIC DYSON READER
Out of this grows the "keep it real" trope that punishes any departure from a
lethally limited vision of black life, one that trades on stereotype and separation
anxiety, since there is a great fear of being severed from the fertile ground of the
true black self. But to subscribe to these beliefs is to be woefully misled. Sure, the
beauty of the impulse to authenticity is altogether understandable: to protect a black
identity that has been assaulted by white supremacy through the assertion of a
uniquely guarded and qualified black self, rooted in a similarly protected view of
the authentic black home. Plus, too many blacks who "made it" have surely forgot-
ten "where they came from." But the legitimate critique of blacks besieged by what
may be termed Aframnesia—the almost systematic obliteration of the dangerous
memory of black suffering and racial solidarity, a gesture that is usually rewarded
by white elites-is different from imposing rigid views on black life of how and
where blackness erupts or emerges. Thus we end up with vicious mythologies and
punishing pieties: for instance, one cannot be gay and be authentically black in
some circles, which means there's no home, no place of grace in many black com-
munities for black homosexuals. Or the black male assault on black female interests
is justified as the necessary subordination of gender to race in the quest for libera-
tion. Or the only real black is in the ghetto, a ghetto that in the social imagination
of its romantic advocates rarely looks like the complex, complicated, contradictory
place it is. As a former resident of the ghetto, I wholeheartedly concur with the no-
tion that we can neither forget its people nor neglect its social redemption through
strategic action. Further, I think it's beautiful for folk who have survived the ghetto,
who've gotten out, to carry the blessed image of its edifying dimensions in their
hearts and imaginations, and to pledge to never leave the ghetto even as they travel
millions of miles beyond its geographical boundaries. That means that they'll never
betray the wisdom, genius, and hope that floods the ghetto in ways that those out-
side its bounds rarely understand. It is, after all, a portable proposition, a mobile
metaphor. But we must not seize on the most limited view possible of ghetto life and
sanctify it as the be-all and end-all of black existence. That leads to kids killing each
other in the name of an authentic ghetto masculinity that is little more than patho-
logical self-hatred. The black ghetto working class, the working poor, and the per-
manently poor have always been more complex, and more resilient, than they have
ever been given credit for. We've got to avoid the trap of existential puniness and
racial infantilism and see our way to a robustly mature vision that shatters the par-
adigm of the authentic black self and, by extension, the acceptable black home.
Given that analysis, I feel most at home in the intersection of all the energies pro-
voked by my different roles, as preacher, teacher, public intellectual, political activist,
agent provocateur, and paid pest. In one sense, I couldn't rest all of my energy in one
place doing one thing; the ability to do them all gives me the vocational patience to
do any of them. And I feel a sense of transgression, a sense of irreverence (and to my
mind, those are good qualities) in fulfilling all these roles that gives me, oddly
enough, a feeling of being at home, because I feel I'm being truest to myself when I
vigorously, and critically, engage my various communities of interest or, as the an-


--- PAGE 502 ---
Is Postmodernism Just Modernism in Drag? 473
thropologists say, my multiple kinship groups. For instance, I love to preach, and
whenever I get the chance, I'm in a pulpit on Sunday morning "telling the story," as
black ministers elegantly phrase preaching the gospel. For all of its problems and lim-
itations, the black pulpit, at its best, is still the freest, most powerful, most radically
autonomous place on earth for black people to encourage each other in the job of
critical self-reflection and the collective struggle for liberation. I think theologian
Robert McAfee Brown put it best when he said the church is like Noah's ark: if it
wasn't for the storm on the outside, we couldn't stand the stink on the inside.
But the stink in the black church is surely foul. There are still a lot of negative
beliefs about gender and sexual orientation, and even class, that need to be ad-
dressed. There are big pockets of staunchly conservative sentiment that, I think,
have to be opposed. I try not to avoid these subjects as I preach, and sometimes
what I say goes over like a brick cloud! Still, I try to seduce people into seeing
things differently, as I make arguments about why the opposition to gay and les-
bian folk, for instance, reeks of the same biblical literalism that smashed the hopes
of black slaves when white slave masters deployed it. But I try to win the folk over
first, by preaching "in the tradition," so to speak, warming them up first before I
lower the boom. When I was a young preacher and pastor, one of my members
told me you "gain more by honey than vinegar." So I give honey before I give
vinegar. I invite the folk to the progressive theological, ideological, and spiritual
terrain I want them to occupy, but I try to issue that invitation in ways that won't
immediately alienate them. And once they're there, they're a captive audience.
One gains his bona fides by preaching well, evoking "amens" by articulately
referencing the black religious tradition, and this can be done with little fear of
surrendering the politics I favor. The rhetorical forms are themselves neutral, so
to speak, and thus the political uses to which they're put is something that's
strictly TBD: to be determined by the rhetor, the prophet, the priest, the speaker,
or the pastor. Then when I've got them where I want them, rhetorically speaking,
in a velvet verbal vice, I squeeze hard, using the good feeling and theological
credit I've gained from preaching well to assault the beliefs that are problematic,
from homophobia, sexism, patriarchy, ageism, racism, and classism to environ-
mental inequities. And sometimes, they're giving assent against their wills, shout-
ing amen to ideas that they may not have otherwise supported without being
pushed or prodded—or seduced. They might even muse to themselves, "Well,
he's got a point," or "I disagree, but I'll at least think about it." But as much as I
love the black church, and see it as my home, it's too narrow to be my only home.
That's why I claim the classroom, the lectern, and the academy as my home as
well, a place I love immensely, but the inbred snobbishness and well-worn elitism
of elements of this home mean that I can't rest my entire self there either. I'm in-
volved in both mainstream and radical politics, but elements of the latter are hos-
tile to the spiritual traditions I cherish, which means my home in such circles is
not one that accommodates my entire being. So I float among all of these stations
of identification, so to speak. My home, while certainly not carved from a process


--- PAGE 503 ---
474 T H E M I C H A E L E R I C D Y S O N R E A D E R
of elimination—cutting away features I find unattractive, offensive, or burdensome
in each "home"—is certainly the product of a stance of critical appreciation that al-
lows me to derive benefit, pleasure, and sustenance from each space.
So I conceive of home as a moveable feast of identity that I'm constantly feed-
ing on. Because of the many communities in which I'm involved, I'm constantly re-
thinking who I am. In a way, I'm. also constantly trying to get back home to De-
troit, perhaps in a more spiritual than physical manner, since I go back fairly
frequently to preach and visit my mother and brothers. There's an elusive state of
contentment that you nostalgically associate with home even when it was a turbu-
lent and trying place. Detroit was, in many ways, such a place far me, but it also
provided so much joy and fulfillment, and it gave me a sense of the appropriate
things to grasp hold of in life, beyond the material blessings one might seek. It was
a great beginning, and as I heard Toni Morrison once say, beginnings are impor-
tant because they must do so much more than start. While starting is crucial, be-
ginnings also propel us along paths of influence whose real impact we may not be
able to detect for years and years to come. That's certainly the case with me.
Detroit has become for me a metaphor of the complex convergence of fate and
human volition. It's a symbol for me of how destiny is at best partly determined
by living one's life in a meaningful, coherent fashion. That's most acutely obvious
to me in grappling with my brother's imprisonment and my quest for improve-
ment in every sphere of my life, including my professional life, my spiritual infra-
structure, and my moral landscape. Home is a complicated place for me now,
which is why nostalgia is inevitable, pleasurable, even desirable-and quite prob-
lematic, perhaps dangerous at points. Nostalgia, of course, is crucial to the project
of black identity, largely as a defensive move against the brutal memories of suf-
fering we endured at the hands of those outside our communities, and from
within. Nostalgia, at least in that light, is an attempt to exercise sovereignty over
memory, to force it into redemptive channels away from the tributaries of trauma
that flood the collective black psyche. It is the attempt to rescue ethical agency and
hence manage and control the perception of suffering—from the fateful forces of
racial terror. One of the most bruising racial terrors is to have the dominant cul-
ture determine what memories are most important to the dominated minority.
In that case, nostalgia is an attempt to take back the political utility of memory.
After all, if you remember a horrible experience as something from which you can
squeeze some good, then you've refused the hegemonic power the prerogative to
define your fate. By remembering the same event with different accents, with dif-
ferent social purposes, through different eyes, one gives memory a racial and
moral usefulness that can challenge dominant culture. I suspect that's at stake
when black folk wax nostalgic about segregation and the sort of relatively self-
determining culture we were able to carve out of Jim Crow apartheid. You hear it
as black folk say, "When we were forced to live together under segregation, we
had more unity, we lived in the same neighborhoods, we helped each other more,
economically and spiritually, and we did not depend on white patronage but pro-


--- PAGE 504 ---
Is Postmodernism Just Modernism in Drag? 475
moted black self-reliance. Now under desegregation we've lost the power we had.
Our colleges have suffered a brain drain to elite white schools. Our black busi-
nesses that catered to black needs suffered when we were able to buy white. And
our neighborhoods were turned over to the poor and destitute when 'white flight'
was mimicked by 'black track' to the suburbs."
The downside of such nostalgia is that it fails to explicitly engage the radical in-
equality of such segregated arrangements. It also tends to exaggerate the moral dif-
ferences between generations, especially as the rose-colored tint of the black past is
not used to cast an eye on the present or the future, for that matter. The net result is
that one's own generation is made golden, while those following are seen as tar-
nished by the surrender to urges, forces, and seductions that were heroically resisted
in the past. Hence jazz was great and hip-hop is awful. People believe that even
though earlier black generations thought jazz was terrible and preferred religious
music. But there were problems there too, since many blacks felt that religious music
too easily compromised its purity by integrating elements from secular blues. And it
goes on and on. Then too, we've got to be careful not to ultimately justify or legiti-
mate the oppression by nostalgically recalling its good effects. Nostalgic blacks end
up reinforcing what may be termed subversive empathy from the dominant culture,
which, after all, provided the conditions under which our race and culture could
thrive under segregation, even if those conditions were harmful and oppressive.
Subversive empathy is similar, I suppose, to anthropologist Renato Rosaldo's no-
tion of imperialist nostalgia, where hegemonic culture destroys an indigenous mi-
nority tradition and then has the gall to weep with those folk over the destruction
of their culture. In subversive empathy, the dominant culture empathizes with our
need to restore the conditions of our relative prospering under Jim Crow. While not
explicitly invoking a return to the racist past, it nevertheless puts forth arguments
and supports practices that have the same effect. That's why black folk have to be
especially cautious about supporting Bill Bennett's partnership with C. Delores
Tucker in combating hard-core hip-hop. They appeal to a golden age: nostalgic be-
lief about the black family that is turned viciously against us in Bennett's conserva-
tive cosmology. For that matter, we ought to be careful about uncritically celebrat-
ing Bill Clinton's nostalgic appeal to black America to return to a bygone moral era.
In a speech before a black religious audience in Memphis, Tennessee, Clinton in-
voked Martin Luther King Jr.'s memory to chide black America about pockets of
immorality in our communities and pathological family structure, ignoring the
harmful social impact of many of his policies on the black family. He sounds like a
friend, and in many ways he is, but he is also a foe to our best political interests. His
political beliefs, in many ways, are emblematic of subversive empathy.
If the impulse to nostalgia is not disciplined, it can be used to fashion moral
judgments out of fantasies of the past that downplay our failures and project them
more vehemently on someone, or something, else. A huge example is how older
blacks nostalgically recall their idyllic lives in comparison to the ills of modern
youth, assaulting their relative moral failures while extolling their own virtues.


--- PAGE 505 ---
476 THE MICHAEL ERIC DYSON READER
But to sum it all up, I suppose home conjures for me that Frankie Beverly an-
them, 'Joy and Pain." But it remains the quintessential space of possibility, of
hope, of unending yearning and unfulfilled expectation.
I guess I'd like to hear you talk about that notion in relation to this genera-
tion you belong to, "the betweeners"—very late baby boomers and very early
generation x or hip-hop. This also, in the academy, seems to stand right at
that modern-postmodern divide. When I hear you talk about your relation-
ship to home, I hear an important question about history and home, time
and home. I'm the minister of music at my church, so you know that when
I show up with the dread thing going on and I play for the senior choir, there
is this odd sense of dissonance and I feel completely at home there even
though there are some looking at me as if to say "What's wrong with that
brother?" But there's this odd sort of thing that goes on because where you
are is always where you feel most at home. I imagine that that's what hap-
pens to you when you're in the pulpit: that it's the most natural home, but
when you walk out into the classroom there is no rupture. But given our no-
tions of race and culture and some of our stereotypes, it seems as if people
would expect there to be a rupture, but there isn't.
No, no. In that sense it's seamless for me, moving from one rhetorical situation to an-
other, from the pulpit as the axis of convergence of history, spirituality, and morality,
to the classroom, where there are other axes of convergence, including inquiry, skep-
ticism, and excavation. The orbits of these rhetorical universes might be seen to be
in collision with one another. But skillful black rhetoricians, speakers, teachers, intel-
lectuals, and orators can, by virtue of an enchanted imagination, speak worlds of dis-
course into existence that cross disciplinary fault lines, that move among genres, and
that navigate through discursive minefields, such as the question of what constitutes
"real knowledge." At its base, black culture has always been about migration and mo-
bility. Its members, in one way or another, have been about the business of adapting
ourselves to foreign spaces and creating home in the midst of them. We've constantly
raised the question of Psalm 147, "How can we sing Zion's songs in a strange land?"
To borrow more biblical imagery, the book of Acts contains that famous passage
about Paul and his mates being shipwrecked and making it to shore "on broken
pieces." Black people have always been able to take the fragments and shards of our
lives, the pieces of our existence broken by oppression, and rework them into a pat-
tern of purposeful existence. That's not simply about fragmentation as a trope of
black existence in the postmodern moment. It's also about the black modernist quest
for a stable identity in the midst of flux and upheaval, often articulated, ironically
enough, through a premodem religious worldview.
Thus the premodern black biblical universe accommodates black modernist pur-
suits in postmodern conditions. "Making it in on broken pieces" has long been a
rhetorical staple in the grassroots theodicies—in both the Weberian, sociological


--- PAGE 506 ---
Is Postmodernism Just Modernism in Drag? 477
sense and in theological terms—that shape the preaching of figures from C. L.
Franklin, Aretha Franklin's father, to Jesse Jackson. Add to that the fragments of Eu-
ropean cultural influences and African cultural retentions that shape black life, and
the unavoidability of black folk negotiating between disparate vocabularies, indeed,
different worlds, should be dramatically apparent. I think that Levis-Strauss's no-
tion of bricolage, of taking what's at hand, what's left over, so to speak, in the con-
struction of culture to shape one's survival and identity, is a crucial concept as well
in coming to terms with this black gift to move in and through a variety of rhetorics
and discourses. In that sense, then, our identities have always been fabricated out of
the content of our surroundings. Forced migration and permanent exile will make
one into a sophisticated cultural polyglot and sometimes into a cosmopolitan citizen.
Home was often a compromise of contexts: wherever we found ourselves, we made
that home or at least we transported our home there. Home was not something we
could leave and come to again, so home often had to travel with us, across turbu-
lent waters, into hostile countries, and within resistive communities.
That's not to deny the reality of fixed points of domestic reference in time and
space, and in body and memory. But the reality is that black people had to have
multiple notions of home, and often multiple homes, which is why there's a thin line
between coerced migration and homelessness. You've got to remember that home
is a noun, verb, adjective, and adverb, and it is both a means and an end. So the
lack of a sense of rupture grows from the seamless interweaving of multiple mean-
ings articulated through a variety of rhetorical situations, whether it's preaching,
teaching, writing, and so on. In my case, I can't deny that at some points all the
communities I'm involved in may experience tension and conflict because I don't
feel a radical rupture in moving from one vocabulary to another. But as Gerald
Graff argues, we've got to teach the conflicts, and by extension we've got to illus-
trate the tensions. For me, that means we've got to mix rhetorical styles in edifying
fashion. So when I get up in the classroom, for instance, and I really get going, talk-
ing about Foucault and Derrida, perhaps, and about Judith Butler, and about Stuart
Hall and his distinction between preferred meanings versus negotiated meanings
and oppositional meanings, my intellectual excitement translates to my verbal style
and energizes my peculiar semantic trace. And my Baptist roots begin to nourish
my oratorical engagement, and before I know it, I'm preaching postmodernism.
So here you have a professor with a staccato rhythm and a tuneful cadence
who's invested in the articulation of postmodern conceptualizations of identity and
power. I'm baptizing my lecture in the rhetorical waters of my religious tradition.
There is no rupture, no discontinuity, nothing but seamless negotiations between
diverse styles of intellectual and rhetorical engagement. There may be problems
for interlocutors who believe that an etiquette of articulation should prevail, one
that polices style and dictates proprietary usage. But I ain't with that, so there's no
problem for me. The irony is that even in this so-called postmodernist moment,
which ostensibly celebrates pastiche, fragmentation, collage, difference, irreverent
fusions, and the like, black style remains problematic. When black identity marks


--- PAGE 507 ---
478 THE MICHAEL ERIC DYSON READER
postmodernity with its embodied articulation, there's a rupture going on in the
midst of die rupturing context itself. It involves the problem that has confronted us
in premodernity, modernity, and postmodernity: race, and more specifically, the
issue of blackness and its unwieldy complement of transgressing expressions.
Yes. There seems always to be this move to delegitimize, to make it...
Literally illegal.
I remember my first semester as an undergraduate at Princeton. So, to my
mind, this white guy says to me, How are you ever going to go home again?
Aren't you afraid that these people won't understand?
Yes, would have to unbirth you . . .
There's some rupture. I've thought about this black Ivy League tradition that
we seem to silence. Although we celebrate these people, we silence the fact that
they were educated in and present at these institutions at the same time as the
Eliots, Stevenses, Santayanas, and Jameses. Inhabiting the same physical space.
That's exacdy right. And that's why postmodernity is so crucial, at least in dieory:
it helps us uncover and claim the useful legacies of modernism that were submerged
in its racial silences. Of course, it could be that postmodernism is really modernism
in drag. As you said, when you think of modernism, you think of Eliot and Stevens.
And as you noted, you think of Santayana and James too, and we could add Royce,
just to keep the Harvard modernists in line. And we could add Joyce, Pound, Frost,
Crane, and a host of others. Gender got a strong foothold in the modernist canon
in a way that race was never quite able to do, with figures like Marianne Moore,
Virginia Woolf, Rebecca West, and Djuna Barnes. But at the same time, W.E.B. Du
Bois is right in the middle of modernism, along with Countee Cullen, Langston
Hughes, Zora Neale Hurston, Dorothy West, Richard Wright, Chester Himes,
Ralph Ellison, James Baldwin, and many, many more. They were all thinking, writ-
ing, imagining, and populating black universes, even as many of them insisted that
it was impossible to limn the American experience without viewing the nation
through the eyes of blacks who were more American than African, as Ellison con-
tended, or as they emphasized the universal moral impulse that echoes through
black demands for dignity and humanity, as Baldwin argued.
The black modernists were attempting to breathe freely beyond the claustro-
phobic boundaries of race, trying to refigure black identity and, by extension,
American identity. Yet they're always seen in these boxed, fixed, localized cate-
gories, when indeed they're trying to help us reimagine the project of America: "I,
too, sing America," as Hughes sang, ringing a change, varying a theme, signifying
upon and harkening metaphorically back to Walt Whitman's "I sing the body
electric." Hughes and the great black modernists inserted black America into the


--- PAGE 508 ---
Is Postmodernism Just Modernism in Drag? 479
mainstream flow and thereby proved that America must bend itself to our tune,
song, riff, beat, meter, prose, rhythm, and the like in order to be truly, fully,
wholly itself. For instance, Duke Ellington and Louis Armstrong swung in the
mainstream and then swung the mainstream to a black rhythm, and through their
music, helped America grasp the self-enlarging principle of subordinating color to
culture and craft. Hughes was aggressively insinuating himself, and black folk,
into the American stream of consciousness, into the American song—much like
King would later do with the American dream—and thus proving that our meters
hypnotically swayed the nation to our virtuosic, vernacular voices. Hughes lo-
cates the context of the development of his identity in those physical spaces in his
American "home" where he is expelled to feed his growing self-awareness on the
leftovers of racial exclusion.
But he flips the script. He grows strong on the negative diet of marginality that
he turns into a wholesome meal of aesthetic and moral combat against white su-
premacy, especially its failure to recognize black beauty of every sort. So Hughes
in his poem talks about being sent to the kitchen to eat, "When company comes."
But he eats well, grows strong, and pledges that when company comes again, he'll
be at the table and that no one will dare scold him for his presence and send him
to the kitchen, because, "They'll see how beautiful I am / And be ashamed-."
And then he ends by declaring, "I, too, am America." So there's a significant shift
from singing America to being America, from performance to enactment. And the
company, to extend my reading of modernism through Hughes's poem, is Wal-
lace Stevens, T.S. Eliot, Hart Crane, James Joyce, Marianne Moore, and so on,
grand figures whose large egos dominate the psychic rooms and intellectual tables
of American modernism. At the same time, the black subject, the black ego, the
black self, is shunted to the kitchen.
So what Langston Hughes does is articulate the fixed space of his own mod-
ernist identity-the kitchen, metaphorically speaking—as the locus classicus of
American identity, because when you're in the kitchen, the smell of the food wafts
beyond its borders. When you're in the kitchen cooking—and Hughes was cook-
ing, really he was smoking, burning, or whatever term one might conjure from
the culinary arts as a symbol of black vernacular for achieving broad excellence—
the smells will pull people in to ask, "Hmm, where's that smell coming from?
What's cooking in the kitchen?" If you had to be somewhere away from the din-
ing room or living room, it was crucial to be exiled to the kitchen. This is what
black folk knew, especially as they served as domestics, butlers, and cooks. Black
moderns turned their limited, localized spaces into rhetorical, musical, aesthetic,
political, or spiritual kitchens that emitted pleasing smells and seductive scents, so
that people who picked up on them were immediately, irresistibly drawn to them.
That's the language . . .
To pick up on that, even if they don't come to the kitchen, the kitchen has to
come to them. They are sitting at the table waiting for the kitchen to come to
them. The kitchen produces that which they consume for nourishment.


--- PAGE 509 ---
480 T H E M I C H A E L E R I C D Y S O N R E A D E R
There you go, man. Metaphor is power.
I'd like to push a little away from that now and turn to something that
seemed to resonate in an earlier comment you made about black rhetori-
cians and the premodernist Christian tradition as it relates to black resis-
tance. The notion of speaking things that are not as though they were ... this
is not a space of acquiescence, but of resistance.
Oh, exactly right. That's very important and I'll just say something briefly about it.
Too often, we read the history of black resistance, and the speech or action that sup-
ported it, through a distorted lens. Either black folk were for or against oppression,
either they cooperated or resisted, and we can tell all of this in dramatically demon-
strable fashion. Well, it's not quite that simple. Life has put black folk in complex,
often compromising positions, especially during slavery, post-Reconstruction, and
Jim Crow. Many folk were not able to outwardly resist, not simply for fear of reprisal
but because to do so would have undermined their long-term plans of survival and
liberation. Black folk en masse had to survive, even under conditions of harsh op-
pression, so that they could produce black folk who could liberate us. Their survival
tactics had to be hidden, concealed to the larger white world, masked to the oppres-
sor. These networks of hidden meanings and concealed articulations were the predi-
cate of black survival through a signifying, symbolic culture. For instance, many of
the sorrow songs of the slaves contained dual meanings. While the white masses
found the songs entertaining, the slaves simultaneously signaled each other about
plans for emancipation. In effect, they were, as the tide of the book aptly summarizes
it, Puttin' on ol Massa. The patterned quilts that slaves made contained crucial direc-
tions to black slaves seeking to ride the Underground Railroad to freedom. In a
sense, they evoked the principle that later underlay Edgar Allen Poe's famous short
story, "Purloined Letter," since the stolen missive was hidden in plain sight.
The very act of imagination was critical to strategies of resistance and proved
dangerous to the hegemonic white world order. That's why the white world was
so intent on controlling the black imagination, as far as such a thing was possible,
by restricting its enabling mechanisms, particularly those rooted in literacy. Read-
ing and writing were outlawed, and even earlier in slavery, blacks were divided
from other blacks from the same tribe during the "seasoning" process so they
couldn't effectively communicate. If blacks learned to read and write, they might
grow restless with their degraded status, gaining a false and subversive sense of
equality with whites. Of course, Frederick Douglass perhaps confirmed the worst
fears of the white overclass when he reported in his autobiography that knowl-
edge "unfits a child" for slavery. And if slaves spoke to each other without strict
supervision, they might hatch plans to escape, so their speech and social organi-
zation were regularly policed.
But black slaves were able to carve out free spaces of intimate contact and com-
munication that promoted racial solidarity and forms of resistance that eluded the


--- PAGE 510 ---
Is Postmodernism Just Modernism in Drag? 481
master's ear and eye. Still, dominant whites rightly viewed the black imagination
as a wedge between slaves and their oppression. The act of imagining a world of
liberty was threatening. I think in this regard of a humorous statement that
Muhammad Ali made about an opponent when he said, "If Sonny Liston dreams
he can beat me, he better wake up and apologize." That's a brilliant gloss on the
function of imagination and dreaming in black combat, and in the struggle for
self-assertion and mastery of one's opponent. The attempt to regulate the black
imagination is the attempt to restrict acts of black self-reinvention through dream-
ing of a different world where justice and freedom prevailed. That's why black
folk were full of dangerous dreaming, insurrectionist imagining, and resistive re-
visions. The act of conceiving of an alternative world, a racial Utopia, was a ges-
ture of radical resistance that interrupted the totalizing force of white supremacy.
And a question of values, which we'll return to later. I want to push you in
the direction here of talking about black bodies. Black male bodies, black
women's bodies. One of the things that enters my mind here is the notion of
the black masculine journey. To my mind, Morrison's Song of Solomon ranks
right up there with Ellison's Invisible Man as a benchmark text for black
masculinity. It's the condition our condition is in ...
Right, it's rough all over.
To me, this statement has to do with black male bodies in everything from
the Million Man March to Dennis Rodman.
Oh, no question. It's almost a cliche to say by now, but black masculinity is one of
the most insightful and complex texts of American identity. For instance, millions
want to, as the commercial slogan says, "Be like Mike." They're in awe of Michael
Jordan, asking themselves what it is like to inhabit that pigment, that physiology, that
6'6" body whose ligaments, whose alignment of muscles determine the semblance of
flight that folk around the globe vicariously identity with. Michael Jordan's head,
clean shaven with those two ears poking out, at once conjures E.T.-the extraterres-
trial—a sports spectacle, an incredible genius that we can scarcely imagine while also
signifying the globe-round and smooth. And what can be written on its surfaces is
always something that can be erased and rewritten. At the same time, that black mas-
culine head is a signifier of the power of the black phallus. In an interesting, perhaps
even subversive fashion, Michael Jordan's physical and aesthetic genius can be sym-
bolized as a massive phallus whose seminal meanings explode on American culture,
fertilizing a range of barren cultural landscapes with creative expression.
His body is a contradictory text of black masculinity. Jordan is at once em-
braced and fed upon as a Michael Jordan burger at McDonald's. He's being eaten
by the masses, consumed, symbolically speaking. So the closest they may be able
to get to Mike, besides watching him and emulating his moves on the court in


--- PAGE 511 ---
482 T H E M I C H A E L E R I C D Y S O N R E A D E R
their neighborhood playgrounds, sports gyms, or health clubs, is to purchase a
symbolic portion of his body and consume it in market culture. It's a kind of sec-
ular Eucharist, where, at least in Protestant theology, the sacramental elements of
Christ's body and blood are substituted by wafer and wine, or in Catholic theol-
ogy, these elements are transubstantiated into the actual body and blood of
Christ. Jordan's body is symbolically transmuted, through the material conditions
of the political economy of consumption, into an edible commodity.
Or think of the symbolic and contested body of another prominent and com-
plicated black man, the late rapper Tupac Shakur. Tupac's dead but still signify-
ing body has the potential to become one of the first black candidates for cultural
survival. I don't mean survival in the sense that he remains a vital cultural influ-
ence, like Martin Luther King Jr. I mean cultural presence beyond death through
the articulation of a mythological body that defies mortality through urban leg-
end, such as what has happened with James Dean, John F. Kennedy, Marilyn
Monroe, and Elvis Presley. Particularly in the case of Elvis, there's a literal qual-
ity to his mythological persistence, since tabloid magazines claim to spot him, or
JFK, on an island somewhere avoiding their fans, the media, and especially their
"past" lives. I've often wondered why no one ever saw Sam Cooke, for instance,
or Otis Redding, Dinah Washington, or Donny Hathaway. Tupac may be the first
black figure to ascend to such heights-or depending on how one views this cul-
tural phenomenon, to the depths—of pop memorialization.
I must confess I'm an addict, although I hope a critical one, of tabloids like the
National Enquirer and Star Magazine, although since the same company that owns
the Enquirer purchased Star, they often recycle the same information. Without
overinterpreting or rationalizing their appeal, I think, at their best—and I place
best in scare quotes—these tabloids offer counterhegemonic narratives to prevail-
ing cultural truths. Besides that, they allow ordinary people to sound as if they're
speaking the King's English to the Queen's taste. Instead of presenting an "infor-
mant" as saying, "I got afraid when I thought about that stuff later on," they
sound more formal, more literate, and might be quoted as saying, "It startled me
as I pondered it later."
But in the tabloids, Elvis is spotted in California somewhere, Elvis is in some
secluded villa in Italy, Marilyn has joined JFK in what only appears to be a
posthumous romp on the Riviera, while black icons remain sequestered in their
unsexy, earthbound mortality. I think that Tupac may be the first black icon to
join the pantheon of the posthumously alive, people who symbolically defeat their
own death through episodic appearances in the mythological landscape. Folk are
now saying that Tupac is not dead, but alive somewhere in Cuba, perhaps enjoy-
ing a stogie with Fidel. There are Web sites and chat rooms all over the Internet
dedicated to debating whether Tupac is dead or is hanging out on some
Caribbean retreat to escape the cruel demands of fame. His cultural survival says
a great deal about how black masculinity can come to signify contested social and
political meanings that erupt in popular culture.


--- PAGE 512 ---
Is Postmodernism Just Modernism in Drag? 483
When I think about contemporary black masculinity, I can't help reflecting on
another intriguing, contradictory, infuriatingly complex figure: Dennis Rodman.
In fact, he's helping redraw the boundaries of black masculinity in the most ar-
chetypically black masculine sport there is, basketball. Basketball has arguably
replaced baseball as the paradigmatic expression of the highly mythologized
American identity, since sport is a crucial means by which America regenerates
its collective soul and reconceives its democratic ideals, to borrow Emersonian
language. Basketball also has elements of spontaneity; individual genius articu-
lated against the background of group success; and the coalescence of indepen-
dent creative gestures in a collective expression of athletic aspiration. In a sense,
basketball provides a canvas on which American identity can be constantly re-
drawn. The cultural frameworks of American identity, especially American mas-
culinity, are being symbolically renegotiated in black masculine achievement in
basketball.
Dennis Rodman has the sublime audacity to challenge the codes of masculinity
at the heart of black masculine culture in the most visible art form, besides hip-
hop culture, available to black men. He transgresses against heterosexist versions
of machismo that dominate black sport. For instance, he wears fingernail polish
and he occasionally cross-dresses in advertisements and public relations stunts,
wearing a wedding gown in its white purity against that 6'9" brown body that
"the Worm," as he's nicknamed, inhabits. Even his nickname signifies; it suggests
the burrowing of an earth-bound insect into the hidden spaces of the soil, deep be-
neath the surface of things. And it's not as if Rodman were a marginal figure. He's
acknowledged as the most gifted rebounder in the NBA today, and one of the
greatest of all time. His specialty is unavoidably representative. He's constantly
grabbing the ball off the backboard, taking shots that are left over from the failed
attempt to score, enhancing the ability of the team to win. His genius on the court
is, in precis, a symbolic articulation of black masculine identity; it is a major trope
of black masculinity, since black men are constantly "on the rebound," and "re-
bounding" from some devastating ordeal. Black men are continually taking
missed shots off the glass, off the backboard, and feeding them in outlet or
bounce passes to some high-flying teammate who is able to score on the opposi-
tion. Ordinary and iconic black men are constantly helping American society to
rebound from one catastrophe or another and to successfully overcome the op-
position in scoring serious points, serious arguments, serious goals.
This is precisely why you are reviled in some circles. This reading of Dennis
Rodman, with which I agree wholeheartedly. Consider me now as the or-
ganist who plays those chords behind the sermon. Dennis Rodman is terri-
bly fascinating. I laughed uproariously to see him show up with arched eye-
brows and fingernail polish in the championship series on the day after
wearing a boa to his book signing. And here he is performing the dirtiest,
roughest, most "masculine" aspects of the game for his team.


--- PAGE 513 ---
484 T H E M I C H A E L E R I C D Y S O N R E A D E R
He's inscribing those aspects in the text of black masculinity—because 80 percent
of the players in the NBA now are black, so we have to talk about it as a black
man's game. Dennis Rodman's relationship to basketball is similar to disco's re-
lationship to American music, and especially black pop music. The black gay aes-
thetic informed the construction of the post-R&B era before the rise of hip-hop
culture. It was widely reviled, although it is now being reexcavated in popular cul-
ture for archetypal images of American identity. Disco focused on the rhythm as
opposed to the substance of the words; it highlighted the rhythmic capacity of the
voice against the lyrical content of what was being articulated. Disco culture was
about a kind of rapturous and transgressive move against the sexual segregation
of gay and lesbian bodies in social space. It was about the freedom and ecstasy of
dance where clubs became sanctuaries for the secular worship of the deities of
disco: rhythm, carnival, play, movement, and sexualized funk, elements that
helped its adherents choreograph an aural erotopia. Those streaming, swirling
globe lights that fixed on the dance floor assured that artifice was taken as the ul-
timate reality. I guess you could say in a sense that Sylvester got a hold of Bau-
drillard. The way that disco prefigures and precipitates a postmodern American
sensibility often gets erased. Disco was dissed because its black gay aesthetic
vogued against what was in vogue, and therefore its sexual transgression was the
subtext, or what they call in philosophy the suppressed premise, of the logic of an
ostensibly "straight" black pop musical culture.
Dennis Rodman's effect is comparable. He's the suppressed premise of the
logic of black masculinity's prominence in basketball. So he helps to construct the
public face of black masculinity along with Connie Hawkins, George Gervin, Earl
"the Pearl" Monroe, Walt "Clyde" Frazier, Julius "Dr. J" Erving, Earvin "Magic"
Johnson, Charles Barkley, and Michael Jordan. Through Dennis Rodman's body
of work, the homoerotic moment within sport, and especially within black mas-
culine athleticism, surfaces: Patting one another on the behind to say "good
game" or "good play," hugging and kissing one another, falling into each other's
sweating arms to boost camaraderie, and so on. This is a sexualized choreogra-
phy of suppressed black desire and the way it is portrayed from the gridiron to the
hardwood floor, pun intended! Dennis Rodman's figure invites us to see that ho-
moeroticism has a lot to do, ironically enough, with the seminal production of
black masculine athletic identities. The homoerotic and gay sensibility, contrary
to popular perception, doesn't stop—and certainly in his case may even fuel—great
athletic and masculine achievement. My God! The brother is an oudaw in what
was formerly an oudaw and, racially speaking at least, oudawed sport.
There was a time, remember, when blacks weren't allowed to play professional
basketball. When they were relatively early in their tenure in the NBA, in the early
1970s, Ebony magazine did an annual article that featured every black player on
every team, something unimaginable today. And don't forget that the New York
Knickerbockers during this time were called by racist fans the New York "Nigger-
bockers" because of the presence of Frazier, Monroe, Willis Reed, Dick "Fall Back
Baby" Barnett, and Henry Bibby. Rodman's homoeroticized black athletic body is


--- PAGE 514 ---
Is Postmodernism Just Modernism in Drag? 485
"oudaw(ed)" in several simultaneously signifying fashions, so to speak. The out-
law and the rebel, with apologies to Eric Hobsbawm, are countercultural figures
whose lives embody the hidden and contradictory ethical aspirations of the
masses, or at least some of them, even if the masses are not altogether aware of, or
don't consciously identify with, the ideals the oudaw or rebel embodies. So Den-
nis Rodman is performing a kind of above ground "dream work" for the collective
sexual unconscious of black masculinity. What Dennis Rodman's example shows
is that even as black masculine culture overdy represses sexual difference and at-
tempts to conceal or mystify homoerotic elements and behavior, it often depends
on that very homoerotic dimension for athletic entertainment.
This homophobic dimension would seem to explain why most groups dis-
tance themselves from Rodman. Black people explain his absurdities by
pointing to his time in Oklahoma. White people can point to his black
urban ghetto origins. He thus seems to be an unusual signifier who can be
whatever you need him to be. In other words, there are no false statements
you can make about Dennis Rodman.
He's a successor next to Michael Jackson, in that sense. Not only is what you say
about Dennis Rodman true, but what you say about Dennis Rodman is what you
say about yourself. Even as you try to read Dennis Rodman, you're reading your-
self. There's a relationship between ethnography and epiphany, between self-
revelation and the excavation of the other.
To talk for a moment of this modern/postmodern divide about which you
spoke earlier, could you talk for a moment of how your intellectual develop-
ment has been affected by television and cyberspace. When I look back over
Walter Benjamin's "Art in the Age of Mechanical Reproduction," I think to
myself how differently he might have perceived things in the face of television.
I think immediately of what legendary singer and spoken word artist Gil Scott-
Heron famously said, "The Revolution Will Not Be Televised." Well, in many ways,
it has been televised, except the revolution about which he spoke has been replaced
by the revolution of the medium itself. It's like Marshall McLuhan meets Barney
Fife. I'm a child of television, even though my mother tells me diat early on when I
was mad at my family because I wanted to read a lot, I'd say, "Y'all don't read
enough, you watch too much TV." I think it's God's joke on me that part of my life
as a cultural critic is to be an analyst of television. Television has very deeply influ-
enced my understanding of pop culture and my intellectual development in the
sense that I take it as anodier very powerful text that we have to read, diat we have
to interpret, that we have to consume. I think that my self-understanding certainly
has been to a degree both shaped by and articulated against the images, ideas, and
ideologies on television, as they enable an on sight—and that's deliberately ambigu-
ous for me, both s-i-g-h-t and s-i-t-e-negotiation of black identity. The evolution of


--- PAGE 515 ---
486 THE MICHAEL ERIC DYSON READER
television, along with the evolution and influence of film, sport, and music, has co-
incided with the evolution of the popular conception of black people in this country.
Besides its effect on my intellectual development and the professional pleasure it
has provided me in reading its various texts, television has also extended an outlet to
me to advocate social change, analyze culture, and argue about ideas. I know that's
not the sense you meant by your question, but it leads me to reflect on another rea-
son I'm drawn to TV, I think it's a legitimate medium through which to educate the
public and to disrupt, subvert, and transgress against hegemonic forces. First of all, I
talk so fast, which is both a good and bad thing for television. I can get a great deal
in during a five-minute span on a news or talk show, and even more when I've got
more time. On the other hand, I know I should slow down sometimes, but some-
times I'm really suspicious of slowing down. I sometimes prefer the machine-gun ap-
proach, given the often coarse and certainly fast-paced nature of television time and
rhetoric. So, on occasion, the staccato, rapid-fire rhetorical style I have is usefully un-
fettered on television. I want my style to shatter that airtight medium. I want it to put
a dent in television because it's an incredibly pedagogical medium.
As intellectuals, we ought to get used to the fact that television is a medium that
affects people's identities and perceptions of reality, sometimes for the good.
There have been studies carried out that show that people trust their local news-
people more than they trust their clergy people. People still look to conventional
news broadcasts on TV to get their information, even more than from written
journalism or from the alternative press. So I want to bring my alternative, non-
traditional, perhaps even subversive viewpoint to bear on and within this most
hegemonic of mediums.
In some ways, television has proved to have ideological flexibility, especially
when radicals pop up on rare occasions. At least there's the potential to shatter
dominant ideological modes, if even for a brief moment. We should definitely
take advantage of television's episodic fluidity. I don't see television in a snob-
bish way. I've been on Oprah to talk about black oppression, black masculinity,
and female identity. I've gone on CNN to talk about race, white supremacy, and
electoral politics. I want to seize television as a pedagogical tool to help liberate
or transform folk, or at least contest what Stuart Hall calls the preferred mean-
ings of the dominant culture, juxtaposing them to what he terms the negotiated
meanings, as I acknowledge the prevailing ideological framework while arguing
for alternative structures of thought and oppositional practices. I want to use tele-
vision to challenge our culture's common sense, in the way Gramsci meant it,
and to help educate and occasionally uplift those who pay attention.
That does fit within the ways that I wanted to hear you talk about the medium.
This also points me back to your notion of this betweener generation-people in
their late thirties and very early forties. People just a few years older than the
betweeners remember television in its early, formative stages, when televisions
weren't ubiquitous. They remember Uncle Milty, and TV was still a novelty.
But, for me, when I wake up to memory it's there and it's unremarkable. It's


--- PAGE 516 ---
Is Postmodernism Just Modernism in Drag? 487
on and it's unremarkable. One of my earliest TV memories, at three, almost
four years old, is seeing Jack Ruby shoot Lee Harvey Oswald. That's a vivid
scene I remember seeing—sitting on my mother's bed—that scene. That's one of
those moments I've somehow written into my mind as an early moment. That
and also realizing, somewhere around my thirtieth birthday, that from as far
back as I could remember until my thirteenth birthday that the news started
every day with the body count from Vietnam. That's pretty deep—to realize
that there is a generation of us, eight years old in 1968, old enough to be aware
of the assassinations, of the riot in Chicago, of moon landings, of Detroit and
Newark, of all the stuff happening around you, seeing it come at you and no-
body talks to you about it. So, in 1987 and 1988 I carried around a grudge be-
cause People, Time, and Newsweek did "summer of love" and "summer of dis-
content" retrospectives. So, they talked to (all) the people who were adult
participants in '67 and '68. Then they talked to people who were twenty years
old in '87 and '88. And I thought: "you did it again!" In 1968 no one said any-
thing about this to me. Here, again, in 1998 you ask everybody but me.
You're so right. You've brought up here what is not my first memory of television,
but it is my most important one. That is when I saw the newscaster interrupt the
regular program to announce that MARTIN LUTHER KING JR. had been
shot in Memphis, Tennessee. That is the most powerful moment of the television
bonding with me, and of me bonding with the TV. I identified, almost beyond vo-
lition or consciousness, with the television as a medium, as an apparatus, that
brought me an ideologically contested moment in black rhetoric. That is, MAR-
TIN LUTHER KING JR. speaking his last speech. They flashed an image of
him as he said what would immediately become some of his most famous words,
"I may not get there with you, but I want you to know tonight that we as a peo-
ple will get to die Promised Land." That was a very profound and electrifying
episode that shaped my life forever. I asked my mother, "Which one is he? Which
one is he?" I remember distincdy, and I don't know why they showed it, Dr. King
at some point reeling back on his foot. I immediately felt his power; his words
were like containers brirnming with the pathos of black life. Later, the newsman
broke faith again with the printed program by saying, "MARTIN LUTHER
KING JR. has just died at thirty-nine in Memphis, Tennessee."
And now, here I am thirty-eight, and you're thirty-seven, so we're basically the
same age and almost the age at which King died. King's death was stunning to me.
I had never heard of Martin Luther King Jr. before that point, and when he died in
1968—1 was nine years old—it changed my life. Television literally changed my life
because, after his death, I began to watch all the programs about Dr. King. I began
to go to the library to read all the books I could about him that were available. I
then ordered, through a telephone number I got off of the television, speeches that
were available on records. I had my little record player back then, when vinyl was
the medium of choice and analog was the order of the day. Then, through televi-
sion, I ordered the commemorative book on Martin Luther King Jr. So, television


--- PAGE 517 ---
488 THE MICHAEL ERIC DYSON READER
was a very powerful medium that fused with my evolving self-consciousness as a
young black person. The 1967 riots in Detroit also made me pay attention to tele-
vision. It brought me scenes of social ignominy and racial deterioration right before
my eyes, and made me realize that what I could see from my front porch in the
streets—as people scurried up and down the pavement with money stashed in their
big fros, televisions on their backs, and carrying all kinds of ill-gotten gains and
goods-was refracted through the prism of a medium that made it larger than life.
Thinking back on the brothers and sisters in the streets, I'm reminded of the
old joke Dick Gregory told about black people being stopped in the riots. These
people were carrying a couch when the police stopped them. Dick Gregory said
that when these people were stopped, they said, "Goddamn! A black psychiatrist
can't even make house calls anymore!" And what else is it that they say? In a riot
black people destroy everything but libraries and bookstores. Lord have mercy!
Anyway, the reality is that the riots and the death of Martin Luther King Jr. point
to how social catastrophe and transformation is either covered or concealed on
television. These events spring from deeply embedded social processes of resolv-
ing or reinforcing conflict that are not usually explored in great depth on televi-
sion, save in the rare in-depth documentary.
The contested and conflicted meanings of race in the 1960s were frequently pa-
pered over and smoothed out, resulting in the McDonaldization of Martin Luther
Kingjr. in a McLuhan universe where the medium was the message. It's important
to me that the medium through which Dr. King was articulated for me was a tele-
visual apparatus-since I never met him in the flesh. And the message I got from
him was about social change. My early identification with TV grew from the fact
that it had the radical potential to transform, not merely to anesthetize, to open up
and not merely to constrain, to shatter and not merely to constitute, social reality.
I saw it as an imaginative apparatus through which, ideologically, we could resist
and challenge dominant racial and cultural narratives. Now, I didn't know all of
this back then, but I felt a connection to King that transcended time and place and
allowed me to identify with this figure whose life just revolutionized my con-
sciousness. So, there's no question that television changed my life.
The next week in Sunday school I remember that our teacher asked us about
that. That, I'm sure, was one of the very few tunes an adult asked about our
response to current events. If I remember correctly, it was a Wednesday or
Thursday evening when King was assassinated. That was when Batman
came on. That was probably why I was hanging out in front of the tube-
waiting for Batman.
Aww, man! Batman and Robin, brother! My boys Adam West and Burt Ward!
And there was Bruce Lee as Cato on the Green Hornet, and I don't remember the
cat who played the Green Hornet that Cato drove around in the Hornet's Lincoln
Continental.


--- PAGE 518 ---
Is Postmodernism Just Modernism in Drag? 489
I remember that on the Sunday following my Sunday school teacher asking
us how the assassination made us feel—probably the only time anyone asked
us. One girl in the class said she was glad King died because some show she
wanted to watch had been interrupted. There was some TV show she
wanted to see, but the news preempted all that. That seems, again, to be one
of the interesting ways television plays out in our culture. And occasionally
I'm one of those people—I'd rather watch some sitcom than the Republican
convention. I can catch what I need to later on CNN or C-SPAN. I don't
have to sit there and watch it all unfold live.
These news programs are part of the option glut that television now presents.
Our nation, indeed our world, has been deeply affected by the CNNing of Amer-
ican discourse where all information, or at least the information that is deemed
worth knowing, is immediately available. Therefore, there's little psychic space
for reflection, little intellectual or emotional space in which to recover what we
learn or reconstitute the ideas we absorb. We have little time to figure out the
meaning of what we learn. As Derrida taught us, understanding is not simply
about what something means but how it signifies. However, you can't even figure
that out unless you have some space, some remove, from hugely influential
events. I'm not embracing the myth of news objectivity, since I think the best we
can hope for is fairness, which includes placing our biases right out in the open.
I'm thinking here of the need to recover the fragments of events, and to experi-
ence them as fully as possible through interpreting and articulating them.
What the immediacy of communications technology has done is to make us be-
lieve that because we've perceived something, that because we've got the raw data
through our senses, we've thoroughly experienced it. But we don't know what we
know until we begin to think critically about what it means, and until we inter-
vene with a conscious, deliberate intent to classify, to categorize, and to filter our
experiences. It takes much more than empirical access to information to create
understanding. Without interpretation and analysis, experience remains mute and
inarticulate beneath the sheer fact of its existence. The phenomenological weight
of immediacy results in a distorted capacity for interpretation and analysis.
As you mention the idea of space, there is a glut of options and information
such that if you know that you need space to reflect, interpret, and reinterpret,
you don't have time before the next fragment hits you. This is a totally un-
planned but nice little segue. There was a Jay Wright symposium here at which
Harold Bloom was a speaker. Jay Wright said this in a 1983 interview: "These
last two terms, explication and interpretation, should call attention to one of my
basic assumptions: that naked perception (just seeing something), is misprision
in the highest degree. Every perception requires explication and interpretation.
Exploration means just that. A simple report of experience, if you could make
such a thing, isn't good enough." Although he's talking about the art of poetry,


--- PAGE 519 ---
490 T H E M I C H A E L E R I C D Y S O N R E A D E R
this seems to apply to this sort of experience of information. One of the things
that Harold Bloom lamented at this conference was the absence of learnedness,
although he put Jay Wright on this wonderful pedestal as a learned poet in the
tradition of Dante and Milton. Somehow, it occurred to me that there's some-
thing about this peculiar postmodern information glut that makes "learned-
ness" impossible. Bloom mentioned that earlier in his career, although it wasn't
often, he would hear people referred to as a "learned" scholar.
In the light of our postmodern option glut, erudition becomes nearly obsolete and
impossible to attain, at least according to a specific understanding of the concept.
You can't master the discursive tongues that have proliferated via the media in our
own time. In some senses, I lament the loss of such erudition because I'm a non-
traditional traditionalist at that level, reared on The Harvard Classics, TV, and Mo-
town. I saw no disjuncture between Two Tears Before the Mast by Richard Dana, and
William "Smokey" Robinson's "My Girl" sung by the Temptations. Although I un-
derstand and even empathize with elements of Bloom's lament, I've got disagree-
ments with him and other critics over canon formation and related literary issues,
because I think there are multiple canons and multiple forms of literacy that we
ought to respect. The intellectual and rhetorical integrity of these traditions ought
to be acknowledged, and not in a condescending, compensatory fashion designed
to make sure that "the other" is represented, except such inclusion is usually a pro-
cedural and not a substantive engagement with a given work. We've got to take
the revelations about America that "minority" authors offer as seriously as we do
conventional heroes of literature. We have much to learn from black writers' en-
gagement, for instance, with what Baraka termed "vicious modernism."
On the other hand, I think that there's a need to historicize our conceptions of eru-
dition, too. We should constantly be reevaluating what we mean by learnedness and
erudition, since those qualities were never absolutely divorced from the priorities and
prisms of the dominant culture. The learned and erudite were not simply revered for
their knowledge, but they reflected a hierarchy of privilege that provided some the
opportunity to acquire such a status while foreclosing the possibility to others in an
a priori fashion. Ironically enough, even though the possibility of a particular kind of
erudition may be quickly vanishing with the proliferation of information systems, it
may offer a relatively more democratic conception of literacy that invites us to ac-
knowledge a wider range of people as legitimate bearers of "learning."
In the past, the erudite person could only be a white male whose prodigious
learning was acknowledged by his peers and intellectual progeny. Now, at least,
we've widened the view of what counts as erudite and learned, and in many ways
that's a very good thing.
Interview by Jonathan Smith
St. Louis, Missouri, 1996


--- PAGE 520 ---
P A R T F O U R T E E N
CODA: THE LIFE OF THE MIND
I have strived as an intellectual to enhance the public good by thinking
as broadly and deeply as possible about issues of .supreme importance to
the nation. Although I derive immense pleasure from the sheer act of
thinking, reading, and writing, I believe that those of us blessed with the
leisure of such pursuits should also, if we are so inclined, and sufficiently
capable, help our fellow citizens reflect on pressing social jiroblems. In this
role of engaged academic, or public intellectual, I have appeared on
countless television and radio programs: wrillen for numerous news-
papers, journals, and magazines: lectured in universities, public forums.
and political gatherings; and preached in pulpits around the nation.
with the hope of bringing intellectual insight and moral darity to complex
matters. Public intellectuals—black ones in particular—have come in for a
great deal of criticism: we are said to be more interested in fame than
rigor, more moved by money than vocation, and more taken with praise
than pupils. Despite the undeniable shortcomings of public intellectual
life, and despite the legitimate criticism that is launched our way, I think
it is honorable to seree one's society by analyzing our nation's mores, folk-
ways, intellectual habits, social practices, and political behaviors.


--- PAGE 521 ---
This page intentionally left blank


--- PAGE 522 ---
Thirty-Six
IT'S NOT WHAT YOU KNOW, IT'S HOW YOU
SHOW IT: BLACK PUBLIC INTELLECTUALS
This chapter, written for my book Race Rules: Navigating the Color Line, was
excerpted in Emerge magazine and extensively died in The Chronicle of Higher
Education. It caused quite a stir among my fellow black intellectuals, largely because of
the tongue-in-cheek awards I give out at the end. This is one of the most playful pieces I've
written; I poke Jim at myself and my colleagues while trying to write substantively about
the place black intellectuals should occupy in the culture. I found out that many intellectuals
don't have a great sense of humor. Neither can many of us stand the scrutiny we routinely
cast on others. Since I have received great acclaim, as well as bitter denunciation, for my
role as a "public intellectual"—a loaded term that is at times a help and hindrance—I
decided to speak about the blessings and burdens of my vocation. Despite the playfulness of
my essay, I take my vocation—but not myself—with utter seriousness. Black intellectuals are
neither above nor beneath the rest of our culture. Instead, we are agents of the critical
consciousness that can spur the collective self-examination and thoughtful reflection upon
which social action should rest. This is the perfect chapter to end this reader, since it
captures my ambition as an intellectual to shape the culture in which Hive and think. In
light of the anti-intellectual environment the nation is presently living through, it is even
more imperative that we explore the social benefits of the engaged intellectual.
Distracted, instead, by false or secondary issues, yielding appar-
ently little resistance to the sound intrusion of market imperatives
on the entire intellectual object, including that of African American
studies, today's creative black intellectual lends herself/himself—like
candy being taken from a child—to the mighty seductions of public-
ity and the "Pinup " . . . . Might it be useful, then, to suggest that
before the black creative intellectual can "heal" her people, she
must consider to what extent she must "heal" herself.
-HORTENSE SPILLERS
"THE CRISIS OF THE NEGRO INTELLECTUAL: A POST-DATE," 1994


--- PAGE 523 ---
494 THE MICHAEL ERIC DYSON READER
GENTLE READER, I BEGIN THIS CHAPTER WITH a confession and a warning.
First, the warning. This is not an objective examination of the contentious debates
surrounding the rise of so-called black public intellectuals. (You haven't heard of
us? Well, the debates are mostly "inside baseball." To tell the truth, the debates are
more like inside-the-academy bickering. Okay, you've got me: they're tempests in
teapots, even though the teapots are pretty prestigious. But if it's any consolation,
the debates offer the same sort of mudslinging, backbiting, gossiping, and dozens-
playing you're likely to find in a supermarket tabloid.) Mine is a partisan account
of how black intellectuals got into the fix of being lauded and lambasted, admired
and despised, in the same breath. This is simply one black public intellectual's
teeth-baring, tongue-in-cheek mea culpa and apologia rolled into one.
Now the confession: I have been chosen as one of the lucky few. I have been
the recipient of great praise (and sharp criticism, but more on that later) for my
writing and speaking at universities and before the general public. Along with a
relatively few others-including Henry Louis Gates, Cornel West, bell hooks,
Robin Kelley, Patricia Williams, and Stephen Carter-I've been dubbed a public
intellectual. This designation emphasizes how our work contributes to public de-
bate, especially about race and American society. The term public intellectual is
certainly not new. It's been applied to a range of scholars and intellectuals
throughout Europe and America. Other terms, like political intellectual and or-
ganic intellectual, hint at the same public function for the thinker. The term pub-
lic intellectual gained fresh currency in the late '80s with the publication of Rus-
sell Jacoby's book, The Last Intellectuals.
But never before has such a highly educated and vastly literate group of black
thinkers had access to the Public Mind of America—and acclaim or derision for
managing to do so. We have been hailed and harangued by publications ranging
from the New Yorker and the Atlantic Monthly to the Village Voice. And most of us
have appeared on Oprah Winfrey, Charlie Rose, Nightline, and a spate of other televi-
sion shows, to talk about a range of subjects, and a lot about race. So I've got no
complaints about the publicity my work receives. (Well, I've got a few, but they're
the carps of the privileged, so I'll spare you.) I've been very fortunate indeed.
You'd think that academics everywhere, especially black ones, would be proud
that they'd see in our achievements their investments in us, and those like us, pay-
ing all sorts of dividends. Increased visibility for the profession. Heightened respect
for black intellectual work. And a celebration of the unsung giants, especially the
black ones, on whose shoulders we all stand. And many, many scholars and intel-
lectuals do brim with pride and joy. But a lot don't. They simmer in resentment
and prophesy trouble. Much of what makes them troubled is legitimate. Then, too,
much of their resentment stems from pettiness, parochialism, and snobbishness.
In my case, as with many other black public intellectuals, there has been a stri-
dent, severe, but altogether predictable "blacklash." I've been called a "sellout."
Cornel West's work has been viciously dismissed as "completely worthless." bell
hooks has been assailed for being "a hustler." After my appearance on Nightline to


--- PAGE 524 ---
Black Public Intellectuals 495
talk about making the Million Man March more than a walk for testosterone or
bigotry, I was accused of playing "Goebbels," the shrewd and perverted Nazi pro-
pagandist, to Farrakhan's Hitler. (Yeah, that's pretty libelous, but the guy who
wrote it is named Adolf; I guess it was a case of vicarious nostalgia.) As you can
tell, things have gotten nasty. What's the problem?
According to critics, there are several. First, there is the question of how the few
of us who are deemed public intellectuals got anointed. Second, our work suffers
from an intellectual thinness that could be remedied if only we weren't busy pon-
tificating, prophesying, or playing pundit on television or radio. Third, the pres-
tige, fame, and fortune bestowed on us are corrupting, making us sellouts. Fourth,
we public intellectuals play an authenticity game, claiming to speak as politically
rooted prophets for The Race as we peddle distorted meanings of blackness to the
undiscerning white masses. Fifth, we're treated with kid gloves by colleagues and
not really criticized. Finally, we all want to be HNIC (for the uninitiated, Head
Negro In Charge).
Let's face it, there's some truth to some of these charges, and, depending on
whom we're talking about, there's a lot of truth to many of these charges. Still, we
don't have to give up on being public intellectuals. It's an honorable, even critical
vocation. After all, just because counterfeit money exists, we don't have to stop
spending the real thing. (Uh-oh, maybe the criticism about materialism is right;
it's even seeping into my analogies!) We've just got to pay attention to fair criti-
cisms, confess our masked and bald opportunism, admit that we're susceptible to
the seductions of fame and fortune, and acknowledge that there are other equally
gifted intellectuals who could do what we do, maybe even better. We've also got
to face head-on the vicious personal attacks that get palmed off as brave com-
mentary. And we've got to call a spade a spade: there's a lot of jealousy out here.
The irony of all this infighting and name-calling is that just as black intellectuals
begin to receive our due—that is, a few of us, which, as you can't tell by the fury of
the complaints, is more than received it in the past, the rule being the less there is to
go around the more you fight over who gets it—we begin to knock each other off.
Or others do the job for us. Hateful assaults from black and white writers often re-
veal their ignorance, or their distorted views, of how we got where we are. There's
a difference between sharp criticism and the animus of ad hominem and ad fem-
inem roasting. Sure, when you're the object of even the healthy kind of criticism, it
can sting for days. And sometimes a literate intellectual licking leaves you feeling
like you've been mugged by a metaphor. But you gird your loins to write again.
Why are so many critics hot and blathered?
The anointing of a few voices to represent The Race is an old, abiding prob-
lem. For much of our history, blacks have had to rely on spokespersons to express
our views and air our grievances to a white majority that controlled access to
everything from education to employment. For the most part, powerful whites
only wanted to see and hear a few blacks at a time, forcing us to choose a leader—
when we could. Often a leader was selected for us by white elites. Predictably,


--- PAGE 525 ---
496 T H E M I C H A E L E R I C D Y S O N R E A D E R
blacks often disagreed with those selections, but since the white elites had the
power and resources, their opinions counted.
Such an arrangement created tensions in black communities because it reduced
blackness to its lowest common denominator. Only what could be condensed into
speeches, editorials, and other public declarations survived transmission to white
elites. Complexity was often sacrificed for clarity. It also made the content of what
was communicated about black culture conform to the spokesperson's gifts, vi-
sion, or interests. Thus, a spokesperson had a profound impact on what goods or
services the rest of his or her black constituency received. The accountability of
such leaders was often low.
Complicating matters further was the fact that the choice of spokespersons didn't
always turn on issues that were of greatest interest or importance to blacks. Often a
spokesperson was selected because his themes, style, and ideology were acceptable
to the white majority. Many black leaders were viewed skeptically by their con-
stituencies. Booker T. Washington is a prime example of this model of leadership.
Naturally, these conditions introduced considerable tension into the relation-
ship between those who did the speaking and those who were spoken for. Black
spokespersons acquired influence because they were given legitimacy by the
white majority, whose power to establish such legitimacy was far greater than that
of the black minority. As a result, these spokespersons used their power in black
communities to reward loyal blacks and to punish dissidents. This arrangement
meant that patronage more than moral principle determined the allocation of the
limited resources for which the spokesperson was a funnel. As a result, few blacks
benefited from the leadership that was supposed to speak for them all.
This legacy of anointment and appointment hangs like a stone cloud over the
debate about black public intellectuals. Who gets to be a black public intellectual,
who chooses them, and what have they done for you lately? We can answer these
questions by first posing a more basic question: Why are black public intellectu-
als presently enjoying such prominence?
The fact that race is being bitterly debated as the national issue has a lot to do
with the rise of black public intellectuals. Race has always been a deep, charac-
teristic American problem. The refusal to face race, or our courageous confronta-
tion with its complex meanings, defines our national identity And it goes in cy-
cles. At some points in our nation's history—for instance, during the civil rights
movement—we were forced to contend with race. At other times, such as during
the erosion of racial progress in the Reaganite '80s, we believed we could just as
well do without all those remedies like affirmative action, which, in any case, had
been manufactured to give a leg up to undeserving blacks. Well, Edgar Allan Poe
met Yogi Berra: the pendulum of race has swung back, and it's deja vu all over
again. Race is once more an inescapable force on a variety of fronts: the school
yard, the job market, the justice system, politics, everywhere we look. So, living
down to the crude, stereotypical version of American pragmatism, we call in the
race experts to tell us what's going on.


--- PAGE 526 ---
Black Public Intellectuals 497
The enhanced currency of black public intellectuals also rides the wave of pop-
ularity that sections of black life are enjoying. If there's one fact of black life in
white America we can't deny, it's this: black folk go in and out of style. Most of
the time our identities are exploited for white commercial ends, or ripped off to
further the careers of white imitators. Blackness is today a hot commodity, but of
course, it always has been: the selling of black bodies on the slave market, min-
strel shows, Elvis's cloning of black gospel and blues singers all point to the fetish
of black skin and skill in American popular culture. Once the barriers to black
achievement were lowered, black folk ourselves got more of the fat.
Black bodies are "in" now, that is, if you don't happen to be a black man with a
car, tangling with the police in Los Angeles or the white suburbs of Pittsburgh.
Rodney King was the L.A. driver, and, well, you know what happened to him and
to all of us because of what the police did and what the white jury didn't do. Jonny
Gammage was the second driver, and he was stopped and subsequently choked to
death by white police because he was wheeling his football star cousin Ray Seals's
sports car in a neighborhood where everybody knows a black man shouldn't
drive. You're alright if your black body shows up on professional basketball courts,
where nearly 80 percent of the players are black. Or in the entertainment industry,
where, despite the preponderance of decent parts doled out to whites, more blacks
have slightly thicker pickin's and more leftovers to compete for than in the past.
And hip-hop culture, to the chagrin of a whole lot of black folk, has literally dark-
ened the face—some would say given it a black eye—of popular music.
Because black folk are leaving their mark all over American culture, there are
renewed debates about what blackness means. Who better to call on than those
blacks who spend their lives thinking, writing, and living black experience. (I can
see it now: The film features our heroes being summoned to city hall to fight the
slime and sludge of racism, backed by the refrain of the movie's theme song,
"Who you gonna call? RACEBUSTERS! I ain't afraid of no racist.") As terrible
as the fallout from all the fuss about black public intellectuals is-that is, as limited
and limiting as the focus on a few elites is—at least some of us have a small say in
what's done, or more modestly, in what's thought about black folk.
That's a significant improvement over the times when white critics pontificated
about blackness without knowing, or in some cases, caring much about the sub-
ject. Even when white critics were righteous, when they were honest and critically
sympathetic and did their homework, they were the only ones allowed to speak
about black culture to the masses. If black folk weren't allowed in the front of the
bus, at the top of white classes, or in the major leagues—about the only place they
were invited to be first was, when they could enlist, at the war's front line-they
certainly weren't going to be delivering astute analyses of their kith and kin to
millions on television, radio, or in newspapers.
As usual, however, a blessing brings burdens. Some white critics have pointed
out—some lamenting, others fuming—what a terrible thing it is for blacks to talk
only about race, and that for them to make race their sole subject is, in the long


--- PAGE 527 ---
498 THE MICHAEL ERIC DYSON READER
run, harmful to the image of black intellectuals as perpetual one-noters. True
enough. But a little clarification is in order. Black thinkers fought hard for Amer-
icans to take race seriously, that is, as an object of legitimate, critical examination.
Early white thinkers, people like David Hume and Thomas Jefferson, resisted the
process, outside of scandalously biased interpretations of black culture that mas-
queraded as scientific treatises on the inferiority of black culture. It was not until
well into this century that white scholars began to study race for greater intellec-
tual purposes than the proof of white superiority and the redemption, however
crudely managed, of black savages. So black intellectuals paid the cost to be the
boss in a realm of experience in which their thinking on the subject was usually
overlooked, discounted, or berated.
Also, criticisms of the racial monomania of black intellectuals sometimes miss
how black thinkers have been discouraged from making comment in public about
issues other than race. The year he died, Malcolm X noted how even when
whites "credit a Negro with some intelligence," they still feel the black thinker is
only qualified to speak about race. 'Just notice how rarely you will hear whites
asking any Negroes what they think about the problem of world health or the
space race to land men on the moon," Malcolm remarked in 1965.
That's still true today. Black intellectuals are rarely asked about the collapse of
communism, the crisis of capitalism, whether cigarettes should be banned in pub-
lic spaces, the successes and failures of feminism, the Palestinian-Israeli conflict,
the state of modern Islam, the transcendentalist vision of Emerson, Walt Whit-
man's beliefs about erotic friendship, the impact of Heisenberg's uncertainty prin-
ciple on the debate about postmodernism, Foucault's notion of power, Walt Dis-
ney's role in pop culture, fin de siecle apocalyptic thinking, Russian formalism,
Murray Perahia's Beethoven concertos, and a world of things besides. We're
rarely even asked about the unusual things black folk do, like scuba diving, writ-
ing histories of German warplanes, studying ancient Chinese cultures, and so on.
So before critics ascend their high horses too quickly, they should dig their in-
tellectual spurs into the beast of history and hold on for the long, rough ride.
Black intellectuals turned a deficit into a credit. They were limited to writing, or
speaking in public, about race. As a result, the subject is now viewed the way
black intellectuals have long viewed it, as the central problem of American soci-
ety, through the eyes of thinkers who have witnessed the bitter triumphs of racism
while working feverishly for its defeat. Just because the rest of the world caught
on much later—and to be fair, many whites have fought side by side with blacks
from the very beginning—is no reason to punish those, or at least their descen-
dants, who got the point in the first place.
It is important to remember that contemporary black public intellectuals do
have forebears. That would certainly temper whatever pride or self-satisfaction
some black public intellectuals might feel about their present fortunes. They
didn't fall out of the sky, fully formed and prepared to contest the demons of race.
Black intellectuals learned at the knees of, and sometimes, unfortunately, at the


--- PAGE 528 ---
Black Public Intellectuals 499
expense of, black thinkers who blazed the paths we now travel. Too often, these
pioneers were cut off from the public they coveted, their writings deprived of the
close and critical readings they so richly deserved.
E. Franklin Frazier, renowned sociologist and the first black president of the
American Sociological Association, was restricted within the broader, whiter
world of academia in which he was trained and over which he had at least nomi-
nal influence. And W.E.B. Du Bois, the universally recognized Thomas Jefferson
of black letters, the founder of black intellectual invention in the twentieth cen-
tury, and the first black to earn a Ph.D. from Harvard, was prevented from shar-
ing his genius with the institution that shaped him. As the strange career of race
has evolved, the anatomy of opportunity for blacks has changed as well. The
post-civil rights generation of black intellectuals has begun to get some of the
benefits that even towering intellectual giants were routinely denied. For the most
part, the present cadre of celebrated black intellectuals is the first generation to
gain entry as students into elite white colleges and universities, later to return and
find their voices and vocations within those same halls of ivy as professors.
But even that progress contains a drawback. Much of the attention has been
given to those black intellectuals who have managed to find—and hog—the public
spotlight. Less attention has been paid to their cohort in universities for whom the
classroom and careful scholarship are enough. (Or to community college teachers
whose commitment to educating black folk is undervalued.) Such scholars—shall
we call them, for want of a better term, black private intellectuals?—have been, by
virtue of the dramatic emphasis placed on the public intellectuals, done a grave
disservice.
The cruel irony is that just as black scholars have attained legitimate standing
in the academy, getting it the old-fashioned way, by earning tenure, writing schol-
arly monographs, and publishing learned articles, they now have to compete for
attention with so-called black public intellectual superstars. Such figures are the
pampered, high-profile elite who command large speaking fees; get their books re-
viewed in all the right, bright-light, high-gloss magazines and newspapers; appear
on television to chat about their latest work; and occasionally represent the hard-
working, low-wage-earning, undereducated black masses. (Sometimes these intel-
lectuals secretly compete with the masses in their own minds, as they recall their
latest critical rebuff or exaggerate their own suffering, seeing it as the moral equiv-
alent of welfare, class warfare, and income inequality.)
In other words, not only do private black intellectuals have to put up with all
the mess they take from a white academy that is often still insensitive and hostile,
they now have to hear about the goings-on of black public intellectuals, who are
the supposed proof that not only do black scholars have it good, they've got it bet-
ter than most white academics. What a bind. (Of course, given the levels of hos-
tility now being directed at black public intellectuals within the academy, the pri-
vate intellectuals might use their status to their advantage: "Oh, no, not me. I'm
not a public intellectual. I'm just a poor working stiff who grades papers, attends


--- PAGE 529 ---
500 T H E M I C H A E L E R I C D Y S O N R E A D E R
faculty meetings, serves on committees, writes articles and books, and, in what
spare time I have, I volunteer for the neighborhood literacy project.")
As we grouch, sometimes with good reason, about the narrowness and limita-
tions of the university, black public intellectuals should remember that it is the
foothold we found inside the academy—before we "went public"—that became our
launching pad for fame and fortune in the first place. The academy is still home,
and our criticisms shouldn't feed into the hysterical rantings against the academy
by the far right that leave our private intellectual colleagues, especially black ones,
most vulnerable. Many conservatives believe the university is a den of politically
correct educational thieves, robbing our kids of their moral futures with all sorts
of strange theories.
Well, the university isn't all it's cracked down to be: an artificial environment
removed from the lives of real people. Last time I checked at my university, there
were actual bodies in the classroom, real people running the place, and life-and-
death issues being fought over by people who will one day run businesses, defend
clients, make millions, enrich lives, ruin government, and become politicians
(sorry for the repetition) in the Real World. Be glad—okay, some of you should be
sorry—that many of my colleagues get a crack at them first. Some esoteric theory,
off-the-cuff comment, or chance encounter with someone completely opposite in
viewpoint might make the difference, a quarter century after a student leaves a
classroom, in her doing the right or wrong thing.
Sure, the alleged Unabomber went to Harvard and Michigan. But before that
he lived in Chicago's white suburbs, and after he dropped out of the academy he
haunted the mountains of Montana. And no one's going to argue that, based on
their influence on his outlook, either place should be destroyed. (I simply can't re-
sist noting, with all the unfairness and smallness of perspective my comment im-
plies, that the alleged Unabomber's genius was quantitative; maybe if he'd had
more humanities courses, he could have dropped rhetorical, not literal, bombs!)
Not only is the problem of the black private intellectual compelling, but, if
we're honest, the current crop of black public intellectuals is selected in a way
that's elitist and incestuous. Most of us went to Ivy League schools, few of the of-
ficial designees teach outside of elite eastern schools, and none teach at histori-
cally black colleges and universities. I'm not aiming here at some sort of compen-
satory principle for the sake of including all segments of the black intellectual
community. I'm simply pointing out that if the criterion for being a public intel-
lectual is the ability to speak and write clearly and substantively about important
public issues for broad audiences, then many, many more black scholars fit the
bill. Black scholars like William Strickland, Jerry Ward, Gloria Wade-Gayles,
Beverly Guy-Sheftall, Ethelbert Miller, and a host of others certainly qualify. And
God knows that black nationalist and Afrocentric scholars like Maulana Karenga,
Molefi Asante, Asa Hilliard, Ivan Van Sertima, Na'im Akbar, and LaFrances
Rogers Rose were doing public intellectual work, especially among despised, in-
visible black communities, way before the term took hold.


--- PAGE 530 ---
Black Public Intellectuals 501
Certainly that's part of the catch. Contemporary black public intellectuals are
valued because we speak—by no means exclusively, and, in some cases, not even
primarily, but nonetheless in important ways—to a white public. We are involved,
however much we might not like it, with the translation, interpretation, explana-
tion, and demystification of black culture to white masses. The temptations are
readily apparent. That we become the judges of authentic blackness. That we be-
come viewed as the most visible, and hence, the most important and informed in-
terpreters of black culture. That we hoodwink naive white folk with a racial abra-
cadabra whose plausibility depends upon their ignorance. That we misrepresent
the cantankerous ideological and cultural differences within black life. That we
come to think white folk are the only folk that count and, in trying to please them,
we end up selling out black interests.
One black writer harshly reproved black public intellectuals for explaining the
heart of black darkness to white folk, saying that we based our claims on being
Real Blacks as we make big cash telling white folk about the ins and outs of black
culture. According to him, we were conniving, careerist sellouts. He made that
charge, of course, in the well-known black weekly, the Village Voice, gaining a rep-
utation for tough talk, and a column in that publication to boot. Who says trash-
ing black intellectuals for selling out to whites doesn't pay off handsomely, giving
the critic, in this case a black intellectual, more visibility, a larger public voice, and
more legitimacy in the white world?
Let's get real. Black folk read the papers, watch television, and consume books
like everybody else. In fact, much has been made of the strong and still increas-
ing numbers of black book buyers. Black public intellectuals are reaching broader
white and black audiences through their work. Only by underestimating the in-
telligence of those audiences can we conclude that black public intellectuals will
get away with too much rhetorical or intellectual legerdemain. Besides, most of
the black public intellectuals I know make regular appearances among black folk
to hash out important ideas about race, democracy, and this nation's destiny. In
fact, many of the black folk who show up to see and argue with these figures read
their books, saw them on television, read their articles in newspapers, or heard
them on the radio.
Mass media have changed the stakes for the black intelligentsia. Even when Du
Bois, Frazier, Zora Neale Hurston, or Langston Hughes held forth in black com-
munities, they didn't have anything like the range of audience or publicity today's
black scholars enjoy. Television, radio, newspapers, and now the Internet have
changed all that. Now that black intellectuals regularly appear on the Today show
and National Public Radio, and in the pages of the New York Times, the New "Yorker,
the Los Angeles Times, and the like, they have more visibility and name recognition
than many of their predecessors.
It's easy to see why many critics think that's a bad thing. First, such critics play
an authenticity game themselves, that follows this line of reasoning: Real scholars
read, write, study, and reflect at home or in the university. The virtue of their


--- PAGE 531 ---
502 THE MICHAEL ERIC DYSON READER
work often rests in its ability to critically and carefully examine a subject with as
much rigor and intellectual responsibility as they can muster. While their findings
may apply directly to public life, their work will be read-and critics don't often
say this—mainly by other academics and graduate students. Sounds good to me.
I've written stuff like that, with no apologies, because as a black person, then a
black scholar, I've learned that we really have little choice but to master many lan-
guages, arcane theoretical ones and eloquently lucid ones as well.
But that's not the only valid, compelling model of scholarship available. To put it
simply, we need both: serious, critical reflection away from the lights, cameras, and
action of the public realm; and gritty, graceful, engaged intellectual work that takes
on the issues of the day with force and fire. Some of us can do both, while many of
us can only master one. There's no shame either way. The elitist, snobbish attempt
to say only traditional scholarly work counts is self-serving. It's also an intellectually
bigoted view of the life of the mind. On the other hand, the attempt to equate fame
or notoriety with intellectual achievement is vicious and small-minded.
At some point, the claim that the work of black public intellectuals is simply not
rigorous enough, that its intellectual predicates are too thin, can be legitimately
made about all public intellectuals. I know it's true of some of my work. (Please,
don't ask what work I'm referring to; I might have to tell you which paragraph of
an essay I wrote when I was twelve that I have in mind.) We all slip. And our crit-
ics should be there to catch us. But the genre of public intellectual work is not it-
self indictable on that charge, as some critics want us to believe. True enough, we
can't equate an op-ed piece on the unfairness of sending blacks to jail in dispro-
portionate numbers with a dense description of the ways criminality has func-
tioned to stigmatize black folk in America. The latter will, if well done, do much
to reorient thinking among scholars who influence the perception of these matters
in academic circles, and, by extension, beyond the academy. The former could
pull the coat of some policy wonk or congressional flunky who might pass it on
to her boss. Both sorts of work are worthwhile.
What's doubly intriguing about the debate over lack of rigor, especially among
black intellectuals, is that, like the mourners at a funeral, those crying the loudest
are the most guilty. I've seen, heard, and participated in too many discussions with
self-styled rigorous black intellectuals (shall we call them the rigorighteous?) who
took special pride in the complexity, nuance, and density of their thinking—while
despising the lack of same in the work of other black intellectuals—who were then
denied tenure by their white colleagues for lack of substantive work, and laughed at
behind their backs by those they seek to please with their displays of rigorous wiz-
ardry. There's a useful distinction to be made between rigor, which can be ex-
pressed in elegant prose or in complex theory, and wanton inaccessibility, which
masquerades as cutting-edge intellectual craft when it's little more than jargon-
bloated, obfuscated intellectual nonsense. Make no mistake. This is not a mini-
broadside against postmodernism, poststructuralism, or any of the influential pil-
lars, like Derrida and Foucault, of those posts. At its best, theory should help us


--- PAGE 532 ---
Black Public Intellectuals 503
unmask the barbarous practices associated with some traditions of eloquent expres-
sion. But like a good sermon or a well-tailored suit, theory shouldn't show its seams.
Black scholars—though this is true for other scholars as well, just not with the
same implications about presence or lack of intelligence—are often put in a
"damned if you do, damned if you don't" bind. On the one hand, we were told for
years that our work was worthless, that it lacked the rigor and language by which
serious scholarly work is known. We were subtly but insistently implored to em-
ploy the jargon of our disciplines, thereby showing our mastery of that plot of in-
tellectual ground we were taught to plow. Then we were told that if our scholarly
writings were too jargon-filled they were obtuse and meaningless. We were told
that if we couldn't write in ways that made sense to a broad public our work was
of no use. This is good to remember now that critics are taking black public intel-
lectuals to task for our work. Back when scholars like Oliver Cox and W.E.B. Du
Bois were doing just what it is alleged we often don't do—careful, serious, deeply
thoughtful work—they were ignored or dismissed. Du Bois's monumental study,
Black Reconstruction, sold only 376 copies in its first year of publication in 1935. The
book wasn't even reviewed by the American Historical Review, the leading journal in
the historical profession. That's a sober reminder of how black intellectuals
shouldn't be too quick to surrender whatever visibility we've managed to secure in
deference to a notion of scholarly propriety. We see where that got us.
It's also evident that the lure of the lights can corrupt black intellectuals by
making us believe our own press. Or by making us addicted to praise and dis-
dainful of serious criticism, which, by the way, every public intellectual lauds as a
virtue, except when it's directed his or her way. Nobody hates criticism like a
critic. Still, many black public intellectuals have been victims of drive-by, gangster-
style criticism. In this sort of attack, one can virtually hear the machinery of jeal-
ousy working overtime to crush another black intellectual's work, to knock her
reputation down a few notches to build up the critic's own. No one but the critic
benefits from such hateful exercises.
Equally worrisome, too many black public intellectuals hog the ball and refuse
to pass it to others on their team. Many times I've been invited on a television
program, a prestigious panel, or a national radio program because a white critic
or intellectual recommended me. Later I often discover that another prominent
black public intellectual, when consulted, had conveniently forgotten to mention
my name or that of other qualified black intellectuals. Ugly indeed.
I guess this is a way of saying that, yes, a lot of black public intellectuals, despite
what we say—maybe because we say we don't—really do want to be HNIC,
which, in light of the fierce and corrupting competition over the sweepstakes of
visibility, also means Hottest Negro In The Country. If that's the case, it's a dis-
gusting waste of a grand opportunity for a group of black intellectuals to make a
significant impact on our nation's debates about race and blackness. By doing that
well, we might open up space for black thinkers to range freely over the entire
field of American interests. Black public intellectuals have a great responsibility:


--- PAGE 533 ---
504 THE MICHAEL ERIC DYSON READER
to think clearly, to articulate eloquently, to criticize sharply, to behave humanely,
and to raise America's and black folks' vision of what we might achieve if we do
away with the self-destructive habit of racism and the vicious forces of black self-
defeat taking us down from within.
Black public intellectuals are leaders of a particular kind. We stir up trouble in
broad daylight so that the pieties by which we live and the principles for which we
die, both as a people and a nation, are subject to critical conversation. Black public
intellectuals are certainly not leaders in the sense as, say, Jesse Jackson or Louis Far-
rakhan, with an identifiable base in black communities from which we launch criti-
cism or commentary that often, though not always, reflects our constituencies' be-
liefs. Not that black public intellectuals don't have what might be considered
constituencies. There are many publics, and black public intellectuals move in and
out of many of them, including the university. Sure the university is not, nor should
it be, a civil rights organization, although some crotchety conservatives and miffed
liberals would argue that multiculturalism, identity politics, and "PC" have made the
differences between the two rather small. But the university is a public sphere, with
a lot of rich people's and poor people's kids attending. And given the attention we've
got, black public intellectuals have to try to help make the world smarter, safer, and
saner for those, and all of America's, youth. We don't speak for The Race. We speak
as representatives of the ideological strands of blackness, and for those kinships we
possess outside of black communities, that we think are most healthy.
But we ain't messiahs. Nor should we have messiah complexes. We can't afford
to take our world's problems lightly. But we certainly can't afford to take our-
selves too seriously. In that spirit, Gentle Reader, I offer you as a send-off—per-
haps even a send-up—a summary of what I think about black public intellectuals
and our critics. Since we're not, for the most part, eligible for Oscars, Grammys,
or Emmys, consider these the Envys, given to recipients of the First Annual
Awards for Black Public Intellectuals and Their Critics.
"The Cheaper By the Dozen Award. This award is given to Adolf Reed and Eric
Lott, two very smart, if mean-spirited, scholars who revel in ad hominem and ad
feminem arguments. Reed wrote an essay about black public intellectuals in the Vil-
lage Voice, heaping personal attacks on me and bell hooks ("little more than hustlers"),
Cornel West (whom Reed in the past called "a thousand miles wide and about two
inches deep"), Robin Kelley, and Skip Gates. Reed called me and West "running
dogs" for Farrakhan in another Voice article (but we must not be too well heeled—we
still didn't get a chance to speak at the Million Man March!). Reed's bitter commen-
tary seems based more on a writer's level of success with the public than on anyone's
actual ideas, since he is so damn mad at so many different thinkers!
Lott, too, has taken to personal attacks, especially in the left journal Social Text,
where he called West a sellout, and in the journal Transition, where he labeled my
work "middlebrow imbecilism" (just to think, most people have to meet me twice
to draw that conclusion). For both writers, we black public intellectuals just aren't


--- PAGE 534 ---
Black Public Intellectuals 505
radical enough. But isn't that argument worn out by now? At their worst, Reed
and Lott prove that the left continues to do what it seems to do best: self-destruct!
The left holds firing squads in a circle, while our real "enemies "-die radical right-
wingers who detest every bone in our progressive heads (I'm sorry, I mean bod-
ies)—get off scot-free!
"The Elijah Complex Award. This award is named after the biblical figure who
cried, "I, even only I, am left," proclaiming himself the only true prophet in town. It
goes to die undeniably brilliant bell hooks for the numerous times she's told us, in
writing, in public, or in conversation, how she's the only black intellectual to talk
about class, or the only black on a panel to get the deeper dimensions of the topic
of conversation, or one of the few black feminists who's a serious intellectual. Some-
body tell bell that God told Elijah, "Sorry, but there are 7,000 others like you still
around." Well, maybe there aren't that many black feminists and serious intellectu-
als who talk about class, and about race, and gender and sex, too, but there are a
whole lot more than bell seems to be aware of. Please, somebody give her a list!
The Spike Lee/Terry Mcmillan Award for Shameless Self-Promotion. Okay, I'm
the recipient of this award, for calling newspapers, television and radio stations,
magazines, and other venues to tell them why they needed to review my book, or
have me on to talk about my work. I can't believe I'm telling this. After all, I
wanted people to believe my name was so hot that folk just couldn't stand to run
special issues of journals, assemble conferences, or do shows on the matters that
I address without me. And you thought the black public intellectual's job was
easy. Listen, if there are any publishers, magazine editors, or television producers
reading, I'd like to tell you about my latest book . ..
The Golda Meir "Humility Is My Strong Suit" Award. Meir once said, "Stop
being humble, you're not that great." This goes to the very talented Cornel West,
who genuinely is very humble, but who slipped—and don't we all—and reminded
us. (My pastor once said to me, aware of my pride in my humility, "The moment
you announce you're humble, you no longer are.") This award is also in honor of
West's diree-piece suit—a nod to W.E.B. Du Bois's Victorian duds—the armor that
West slips into every day to fight the good fight. Only problem is, he made a lot
of people mad when he said that, generally speaking, black intellectuals these
days dress so shabbily. Since most black intellectuals can't pony up for nineteenth-
century gear—or, for that matter, most twentiedi-century high fashion—the only
hope is for J.C. Penney to recruit West to design affordable clothes for private in-
tellectuals. (Be careful, diough, of all those low-paying sweatshops, diey almost
ruined TV personality Kathie Lee Gifford's clothing empire.)
The Moses "Who Me? I Can't Talk" Award. This goes to Robin D.G. Kelley, a
New York University historian and cultural critic. He is, widiout question, one of the


--- PAGE 535 ---
506 T H E M I C H A E L E R I C D Y S O N R E A D E R
most gifted scholars of any generation, of any discipline, of any school, writing today.
Kelley is ridiculously well rounded: a gourmet cook, an excellent father, a devoted
husband, a committed mentor to graduate students, and an indefatigable researcher
and writer. But he won't own up to his gift to clearly explain complex stuff in pub-
lic. Given all the crap out here (uh, I wasn't referring to my crap), we need Kelley's
passionately intelligent voice. To show you what a sacrificial—oops, I mean, helpful-
public intellectual I can be, I once reluctantly accepted an assignment that was first
offered to Kelley. The second time I appeared on the Oprah Winfrey show happened
because Kelley turned them down and recommended me. Listen, if it had been any-
body but Kelley (not me, mind you, I'm above the fray), the Oprah staff could have
asked us to speak about birds, and we would have put on some Charlie Parker
records, rented a few Tweetie and Sylvester tapes for inspiration, and become an or-
nithologist overnight. I've got the solution: let's introduce Kelley to R&B sensation R.
Kelly. The next time we see him, he'll be known as "R.D.G., That's Kelley you see,"
and he'll be saying, "I don't see nothin' wrong with a little pub in Tune"
"The "I'm Not a Prophet, But I Play One on TV" Award. This goes to Christians
like West, James Cone, and myself, and to those inspired by Buddhist spirituality,
like bell hooks. We all use the term "prophet" in one way or another. Although you
won't catch us saying so, we sometimes mean it to apply to ourselves. Hold on.
Let's be honest here. This probably applies to all public intellectuals, who fancy
themselves prophets of a sort. We mean well, but hey, I guess we've got to realize
that real prophets—of whom there are precious few—lead much more dangerous,
sacrificial lives. Don't get me wrong, we've received our share of threats, nasty let-
ters, vile communication, and hateful responses from unhappy readers, viewers, or
listeners. And we are, well, deeply sacrificial, and, occasionally, prophetic. But when
I think of a prophet like Martin Luther King Jr., we just don't cut it. He spent
his life paying the price for the tide. Plus, King made something like $200,000 a year
in speaking engagements and gave nearly every penny of it to the SCLC, keeping
only $4,000 to supplement his $6,000 a year salary at his church. Black public in-
tellectuals nowadays can make anywhere from $100,000 to over $1 million a year.
We say critical things in public, a lot of people hate us for it, we often act brave. But
we profit while we prophet.
Tlhe Barbara Mandrell "I Was a Public Intellectual When Public Intellectuals
Weren't Cool" Award. Angela Davis wins this, hands down. A long time ago-
when gangsta rappers had the bourgeois blues in their diapers while she was step-
ping to the revolution; when most celebrated intellectuals were eating their
Wheaties, going to Jack and Jill, and courting in the front parlor while she was ap-
plying Marcuse to social misery; when more-radical-than-thou critics were enjoy-
ing the creature comforts that stoke their dizzy nostalgia for marginality while she
was taking three squares in a cramped cell; and when most postfeminists were get-
ting pedicures to put their best foot forward at the debutante while she wore jun-


--- PAGE 536 ---
Black Public Intellectuals 507
gle boots at the front line of class warfare—Angela Davis lived what we mean by
black public intellectual. She continues to embody that. And she still fine!
'the "Excuse the Accents But I'm a Wanna-Beatles" Award. This goes to Paul
Gilroy, a black British critic who, in his book, "The Black Atlantic, has brilliantly
forced Americans to think about black identity in an international context. So
what's the problem with this latest British invasion? Well, Gilroy just plain trashes
most black American intellectuals, often calling us "wrong" for no compelling rea-
son. And for a thinker who spends a lot of time talking about hybridity—meaning
that black identity is complex and varied-he completely ignores black American
intellectuals who talk about these issues with sophistication and skill. Plus, Gilroy
pretty much disses any form of ethnic solidarity, failing to see how that solidarity
has often been a means of black survival. After all, black folk weren't oppressed
as individuals; we were oppressed because of our group identity.
It's painful to see Gilroy rake black folk over the coals in public lectures. He
just doesn't get it. Part of the deference paid to him has to do with his ties to En-
gland, a place America still cowers before intellectually. White folk love to hear
that colonial accent employed to dog black rappers, public intellectuals, and all
the other Negroes who don't measure up. Gilroy may have the black Atlantic
down pat; it's the black specific that he needs to bone up on.
'The "Hey, Don't Compare Black Intellectuals to Jewish Intellectuals, Because
'they'reMot 'that Good"Award. This award goes to critics William Phillips and
Leon Wieseltier. Phillips noted in Partisan Review how the New York intellectuals,
a large number of whom were Jewish, didn't stoop to the crass, pop cultural stuff
that black intellectuals have gained notoriety for. And unlike black intellectuals,
Phillips says, Jewish intellectuals weren't obsessed with (in fact, they didn't even
talk about) their Jewish ethnicity or about race. And he's bragging about that?
Wieseltier is painfully transparent. His vicious attack on Cornel West in the New
Republic is a bitter piece of calumny, a screed motivated in large part by jealousy. But
Wieseltier's sledgehammer approach to West's work seems to package an even
uglier view of the black-Jewish conflict: by setting West up as the premier black in-
tellectual, and then knocking him down, Wieseltier is knocking the black intellec-
tual enterprise in general. He does so, in part, by arguing that West's use of the He-
brew prophets is ill-fated and dim-witted; Wieseltier, in effect, is rescuing sacred
Jewish texts and teachers from what he seems to think is West's inferior intelligence.
But those texts and teachers need to be rescued from Wieseltier's nasty grip.
After all, the best of Jewish sacred traditions counsels wise, balanced criticism, not
the sort of wholesale bludgeoning Wieseltier practices. Although we often forget it,
this critical juncture of head and heart is where blacks and Jews can still embrace.
"the "Do As I Say, Not As I Do "Award. This goes to talented Princeton historian
Sean Wilentz, who wrote a critique of black public intellectuals in Dissent. Really, it


--- PAGE 537 ---
508 THE MICHAEL ERIC DYSON READER
was mostly about Cornel West; when he referred to me and bell hooks, it was as
"another writer." That little glitch, and Wilentz's commentary, show several things.
One, that white folk often choose one black to be the designated hitter, losing sight
of other players, reinforcing what Zora Neale Hurston termed the "Pet Negro" sys-
tem that they despise but help perpetuate. Two, by focusing on one black in what is
at least a generational phenomenon, he slights the diversity of opinion, status, and
style among black public intellectuals, which allows him to make generalizations
that don't hold up under closer investigation.
Three, Wilentz worries that fame, fortune, and celebrity will corrupt black in-
tellectuals. In the attempt to help black public intellectuals avoid such seductions,
why wasn't Wilentz writing about black intellectual work a decade ago, before the
market mandated it, before celebrity occasioned it? He would then look like a
critic motivated by nothing save the best interests of black intellectual life, the
academy, and so on. As it stands, he's the big winner. Since writing in Dissent
(a public intellectual venue) about the pitfalls of too much press and exposure,
he's written for the New Yorker, an even larger public intellectual organ, and
gained more opportunity to express his views in public. I think Wilentz owes
black public intellectuals some royalties!
'the "Hoops At Harvard" Award. This award goes to Henry Louis Gates Jr.
Skip said he feels like the coach of the Dream Team, luring to Harvard such stars
as Cornel West and William Julius Wilson to join team members like K. Anthony
Appiah, Evelyn Higginbotham, and Orlando Patterson. Let's face it, a lot of peo-
ple are just plain jealous of what Gates—a gifted scholar, writer, and administra-
tor—has been able to do at Harvard: gather big names at an elite institution to
think hard and long about the problems black folk face. They have the juice, and
some people just can't stand it: they're smart, sharp, sophisticated scholars. They
deserve to be on The Team.
The problem comes when it's said like the other places have, well, scrubs, folk that
ought to think about retiring or who can only come off the bench, streak scorers who
can't really start at their positions. Boy, look at how the metaphor just goes downhill,
Skip. Hey, Princeton's team ain't so bad, and neither is Yale's. I hear Michigan's
going to the playoffs this year, and that Emory is one of the teams to watch.
Harvard's is a great team, but maybe it's not the Dream Team. Because then
Gates would have to explain why David Levering Lewis—arguably the most vir-
tuosic contemporary black intellectual, what with his books on Africa, the Harlem
Renaissance, Martin Luther King, Jr., and W.E.B. Du Bois—isn't signed. Or why
Nell Painter, a formidable historian of the South, is missing. He'd have to tell us
what happened to the erudite Africanist, V.Y. Mudimbe, or the learned historian
of religion, Charles Long. Or why the astonishingly smart Patricia Williams isn't
suited up in crimson.
Besides, if Harvard's faculty is really the Dream Team, they have an extra bur-
den: they're expected to win the gold every time. More than that, they can't play


--- PAGE 538 ---
Black Public Intellectuals 509
every pick-up game (conference, television show, lecture appearance, and the like)
they're offered. They can't produce sloppy, insubstantial work. They've got to
generate serious, thoughtful, well-wrought books and articles.
And if, as West and Gates have repeatedly claimed, the days of HNIC are over,
then both have to do a difficult thing; spread some of the influence and surrender
some of the power by which they've managed to affect the careers of other black
scholars. Otherwise, saying they don't desire to be HNIC becomes a cover for re-
inforcing their privileged status.
On the PR front, Skip, you've got to get together with Cornel so he can give
you some lessons in Humility 101. (I definitely need to sit in on these as well!)
First thing you learn is that from now on you say, "I'm pleased that we're assem-
bling a marvelous collection of scholars here at Harvard. We're certainly not the
only place where such good intellectual company may be found, but we're proud
to be one of them." Then I'm voting you Coach of the Year. That is, if you can
sign Dennis Rodman!
The problems and possibilities of black public intellectuals are huge. We've got
a chance to make a difference in the world-something a lot of folk can't say, a
chance a lot of scholars don't get. We shouldn't allow pettiness or jealousy to stop
us. If black intellectuals keep bickering, bellyaching, and bitterly attacking one an-
other, we'll blow it. And we shouldn't allow the forces and resources of the mar-
ketplace to set us against one another. We should be using our minds to shine a
light on the real foes of black folk and democracy: poverty, capital flight, right-
wing extremists, religious fundamentalists, and the politics of conservatives and
neoliberals that hurt the working class and the working poor.


--- PAGE 539 ---
This page intentionally left blank


--- PAGE 540 ---
NOTES
CHAPTER 4. THE LIBERAL THEORY OF RACE
1. My argument here is based on the important work of Michael Omi and Howard
Winant in Racial Formation in the United States (New York: Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1986).
2. Cornel West, "A Genealogy of Modern Racism," in Prophesy Deliverance! An Afro-
American Revolutionary Christianity (Philadelphia: Westminster, 1982), pp. 47-68; West,
Prophetic Fragments (Grand Rapids, Mich.: Eerdmans, 1988).
CHAPTER 8. LEONARD JEFFRIES AND THE STRUGGLE FOR THE
BLACK MIND
1. Michael Bradley, "The Iceman Inheritance: Prehistoric Sources of Western Man's Racism, Sex-
ism, and Aggression (New York: Kayode, 1978).
2. Richard King, African Origin of Biological Psychiatry (Germantown, Term.: Seymour-
Smith, 1990).
3. See Frances Cress-Welsing, "The Cress Theory of Color-Confrontation and Racism
(White Supremacy)," in Cress-Welsing, 'The Isis Papers: "The Keys to the Colors (Chicago: Third
World Press, 1991), pp. 1-16.
4. Ibid., p. 4.
5. Ibid., p. 5.
6. Martin Bernal, Black Athena: The Afroasiatic Roots of Classical Civilization (New
Brunswick, NJ.: Rutgers University Press, 1987).
7. Arthur Schlesinger Jr., The Disuniting of America: Reflections on a Multicultural Society
(Knoxville, Term.: Whittle Communications, 1991).
CHAPTER 10. THE LABOR OF WHITENESS, THE WHITENESS OF
LABOR, AND THE PERILS OF WHITEWISHING
1. There is a growing literature on the socially constructed meanings of whiteness. For
some of the best of this literature, see David Roediger, The Wages of Whiteness: Race and the
Making of the American Working Class (New York: Verso, 1991); David Roediger, Towards the
Abolition of Whiteness: Essays on Race, Politics, and Working Class History (New York: Verso, 1994);
Theodore W. Allen, The Invention of the White Race: Volume One: Racial Oppression and Social
Control (New York: Verso, 1994); Fred Pfeil, White Guys: Studies in Postmodern Domination and
Difference (New York: Verso, 1995); Jessie Daniels, White Lies: Race, Class, Gender, and Sexual-
ity in White Supremacist Discourse (New York: Routledge, 1997); Matt Wray and Annalee
Newitz, eds., White Trash: Race and Class in America (New York: Routledge, 1997); Michelle
Fine, Lois Weis, Linda C. Powell, and L. Mun Wong, eds., Off White: Readings on Race,
Power, and Society (New York: Routledge, 1997).
2. Renato Rosaldo, Culture and Truth: The Remaking cf Social Analysis (Boston: Beacon,
1983, 1993), pp. 68-87.
3. For a small sample of such criticism, see Todd Gitlin, The Twilight of Common Dreams:
Why America Is Wracked by Culture Wars (New York: Metropolitan Books, 1995); Michael
Tomasky, Left for Dead: The Life, Death, and Possible Resurrection of Progressive fblitics in America


--- PAGE 541 ---
512 Notes
(New York: Free Press, 1996); Arthur Schlesingerjr., The Disuniting of America (Whittle Di-
rect Books, 1991); and Richard Bernstein, The Dictatorship of Virtue: Multiculturalism and the
Battle for America's Future (New York: Knopf, 1994).
4. See Michael Eric Dyson, Reflecting Black: African-American Cultural Criticism (Min-
neapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 1993); Making Malcolm: The Myth and Meaning of
Malcolm X (New York: Oxford University Press, 1994); Between God and Gangsta Rap: Bear-
ing Witness to Black Culture (New York: Oxford University Press, 1996); and Race Rules: Nav-
igating the Color Line (New York: Addison-Wesley, 1996).
5. Tomasky, Left for Dead, pp. 10, 15-17.
6. Roediger, The Wages of Whiteness and Towards the Abolition of Whiteness.
CHAPTER 12. THE PLIGHT OF BLACK MEN
1. For a look at the contemporary plight of black men, especially black juvenile males,
see Idung, Black, and Male in America: An Endangered Species, ed. Jewelle Taylor Gibbs (Dover,
Mass.: Auburn House, 1988).
2. See William Julius Wilson, The Truly Disadvantaged: The Inner City, the Underclass, and
Public Policy (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1987).
3. See Wilson, The Truly Disadvantaged. For Charles Murray's views on poverty, welfare,
and the ghetto underclass, see his influential book, Losing Ground: American Social Policy,
1950-1980 (New York: Basic, 1984).
4. This section on gangs is informed by the work of Mike Davis in City of Quart. (New
York: Verso, 1991).
CHAPTER 15. "Goo ALMIGHTY HAS SPOKEN FROM WASHINGTON,
D.C.": AMERICAN SOCIETY AND CHRISTIAN FAITH
1. Stanley Hauerwas and Michael Baxter, "The Kingship of Christ: Why Freedom of
Belief Is Not Enough," DePaulLaw Review 42 (1992).
2. Ibid.
3. Ibid.
4. For a sampling of Hauerwas's criticism of Christian ethical defenses of democracy,
see "A Christian Critique of Christian America," in Community in America: The Challenge of
Habits of the Heart, eds. Charles H. Reynolds and Ralph V. Norman (Berkeley: University
of California Press, 1988), pp. 250-265. See also The Peaceable Kingdom: A Primer in Christian
Ethics (Notre Dame, Ind.: University of Notre Dame Press, 1983), pp. 12-13, 111. For
claims about prophetic black Christianity's contention that democracy is a fundamental
norm of prophetic black Christianity, see Cornel West, Prophesy Deliverance! An Afro-American
Revolutionary Christianity (Philadelphia: Westminster Press, 1982), pp. 18-19.
5. George Will, "Scalia Missed Point but Made Right Argument on Separation of Re-
ligion," Durham Morning Herald, Apr. 22, 1990, p. 5. I am not suggesting that Hauerwas's
treatment of the First Amendment is limited to this essay, or that the tension between
church and state, and religion and politics, is a new subject for him, or one exclusively pur-
sued in this essay. Anyone familiar with Hauerwas's work will know of his long-standing
views on such matters. See in particular Hauerwas's books, A Community of Character: Toward
a Constructive Christian Ethic (Notre Dame, Ind.: University of Notre Dame Press, 1981); The
Peaceable Kingdom: A Primer in Christian Ethics (Notre Dame, Ind.: University of Notre Dame
Press, 1983); Against the Nations: War and Survival in a Liberal Society (Minneapolis: W^ston-
Seabury, 1985); and Christian Existence Today: Essays on Church, World and Living In-Between
(Durham, N.C.: Lambrinth, 1987). I am treating, however, the specific context of Hauer-
was's (and Baxter's) remarks as they relate to points they make about Will's interpretation
of the First Amendment.
6. Hauerwas and Baxter, "The Kingship of Christ."


--- PAGE 542 ---
Notes 513
7. See Walter Berns, "Religion and the Founding Principle," in The Moral Foundations of
the American Republic, ed. Robert H. Horwitz (Charlottesville: University Press of Virginia,
1986), p. 208.
8. See Bernard Bailyn, The Ideological Origins of the American Revolution (Cambridge: Bel-
knap Press of Harvard University, 1967), p. 260. Also see Martin Marty, Pilgrims in Their
Own Land: 500 'Years of Religion in America (New York: Penguin, 1984), pp. 162-163.
9. James Madison, quoted in Bailyn, The Ideological Origins of the American Revolution,
p. 260.
10. Ibid.
11. See Berns, "Religion and the Founding Principle," p. 220.
12. Ibid.
13. Berns, "Religion and the Founding Principle," pp. 219-225. For an exposition on
Locke's views of Christianity, see Michael P. Zuckert, "Locke and the Problem of Civil Re-
ligion," in The Moral Foundations of the American Republic (Charlottes ville: University Press of
Virginia, 1986), pp. 181-203.
14. For Madison on religion as opinion, see Marty, Pilgrims in Their Own Land, p. 163.
15. Thomas Jefferson, quoted in Hauerwas and Baxter, "The Kingship of Christ," p. 4.
16. As Robert Bellah defines it in "The Idea of Practices in Habits: A Response," in Com-
munity in America, eds. Reynolds and Norman, Constantinianism is the danger that "Christian-
ity will be used instrumentally for the sake of creating political community but to the detriment
of its own authenticity" (p. 277). As Hauerwas understands the term (building on the work of
John Howard \foder), which is drawn from Constantine's conversion to Christianity, it is the
assumption that "Christians should or do have social and political power so they can deter-
mine die ethos of society.... Constantine is the symbol of the decisive shift in the logic of
moral argument when Christians ceased being a minority and accepted Caesar as a member
of the church." See Hauerwas, "A Christian Critique of Christian America," in Community in
America, eds. Reynolds and Norman, p. 260.
17. See Hauerwas's works cited in notes 15 and 16.
18. For the pressure these groups brought to bear upon the colonies for freedom of reli-
gion, see Bailyn, The Ideological Origins of the American Revolution, pp. 257-258.
19. Berns, "Religion and the Founding Principle," p. 206.
20. Interestingly, Hauerwas raises the possibility of challenging the ideals that underlay
the Jonestown community, but only through intellectual or religious debate or criticism of
the community; even in light of the atrocities committed there, he doesn't entertain the pos-
sibility of state intervention, or active Christian intervention, to protect the exploited vic-
tims of Jim Jones's practices. He says in "On Taking Religion Seriously: The Challenge of
Jonestown," in Against the Nations: War and Survival in a Liberal Society (San Francisco: Harper
& Row, 1985), p. 103: "Our tragedy is that there was no one internal or external to that
community able to challenge the false presuppositions of Jones's false ideals. Our continu-
ing tragedy is that our reactions to and our interpretations of the deaths of Jonestown re-
veal accurately how we lack the convictions to counter the powers that reigned there." On
the other hand, John Bennett sees Jonestown as an indication that freedom of religion is not
absolute and as an example of the difficulty of determining when and if state intervention
into religious practices should occur. Unlike Hauerwas, however, he concedes the possibil-
ity that state intervention is a plausible course of action under admittedly difficult-to-define
circumstances. In "Church and State in the United States," in Reformed Faith and Politics, ed.
Ronald H. Stone (Washington, D.C.: University Press of America, 1983), p. 122, Bennett
says: "That. . . religious freedom from any limitation by the state is not absolute is well il-
lustrated by the terrible events in Jonestown. After those events it is easy to see there
should have been protection of people against such exploitation and even lethal abuse by a
religious leader, but it is not easy to say exactly at what point and by what method the state
should have entered the picture."
21. This view among the Founders is characterized in Martin Marty's summary of Ben-
jamin Franklin's views on established religion in Marty, Pilgrims in Their Own Land, p. 158:
"Yet [Franklin] attacked churchly establishment: when a religion was good, it would support


--- PAGE 543 ---
514 Notes
itself. If a religion could not support itself and God did not care to come to its aid, it was a
bad sign if then the members had to call on government for help."
22. Bennett, "Church and State in the United States," pp. 121-122.
23. It must be admitted that religion under the First Amendment becomes a matter of
private choice versus public coercion, but that meaning of privacy is not in question here.
Rather, it is whether religion under the First Amendment is rendered necessarily and ex-
clusively private without the possibility of its public expression.
24. Of course, Hauerwas and Baxter might argue that the Founders viewed religion pri-
marily as an aid, and not a critic, of the government. That may be the case, but as they
point out in regard to the freedom of religion in their discussion of Will earlier in their
essay, the intent of the Founders is not as important as what has occurred in practice. Sim-
ilarly, what has occurred in practice is that persons and groups have appealed to their reli-
gious beliefs to challenge American government, ranging from the civil rights movement to
antinuclear activists.
25. Marty, Pilgrims in 'Their Own Land, pp. 155-156.
26. Ibid., p. 157.
27. Ibid., p. 158.
28. George Washington, quoted in Berns, "Religion and the Founding Principle," p. 213.
29. Jefferson, quoted in Berns, "Religion and the Founding Principle," pp. 217-218.
30. Ibid., p. 213.
31. Admittedly this distinction between functional and moral subordination doesn't
completely resolve the tensions created by conflicts of conscience over legally established
political practices. In such cases, of course, it is clear that moral insubordination takes
precedence; but the violation of the law in the name of conscience results in the Christian
acknowledging the conflict created by her religious beliefs by accepting the penalty of
breaking the law until the law is changed, either as a result of civil disobedience or through
shifted public consensus, or reconstructed public practice, later reflected in law. The exam-
ples of Christian participation in the civil rights movement, feminist movements, and anti-
nuclear war movements stand out.
32. For instance, Ronald Thiemann has argued that Hauerwas represents one of two un-
acceptable options in developing an effective public Christian response to the crises of North
American civilization. In characterizing the first option, represented in the thinking of theolo-
gian Paul Lehmann, Thiemann, in Constructing a Public TJieokgy: TJie Church in a Pluralistic Culture
(Louisville, Ky: Westminster/John Knox, 1991), summarizes Lehmann's position, expressed
by Lehmann in an essay entitled "Praying and Doing Justice": "Arguing out of the Reformed
tradition's close association of faith with obedience, Lehmann asserts that proper worship al-
ways has as its goal the accomplishment of justice in the world. The righteousness of faith
must result in transformative justice within the public realm. Thus Christian worship is essen-
tially political, and the fatourgia of the church extends naturally and directly into political ac-
tion" (p. 114). The second option is represented by Hauerwas in his book, A Community of Char-
acter. According to Thiemann, Hauerwas contends that "by being faithful to the narratives that
shape Christian character, the church will witness to a way of life that stands apart from and
in criticism of our liberal secular culture. Christian worship, then, must be an end in itself di-
rected solely toward the cultivation of those peculiar theological virtues that mark the church
as a distinctive community" (p. 114). But Thiemann concludes that neither of these options
"provides us with the theological resources we need to face the distinctive challenge presented
to North American Christians" (p. 114). He continues: "Neither the politicization of worship
nor its sectarian separation from public life will suffice in our current situation.... We must
find a middle way between the reduction of the Christian gospel to a program of political ac-
tion and the isolation of that gospel from all political engagement" (p. 114). And in an essay,
'Justice as Participation: Public Moral Discourse and the U. S. Economy," in Community in
America, in which he clarifies the position of the National Conference of Catholic Bishops in
their pastoral letter on the economy, David Hollenbach juxtaposes their belief that "the church
has a responsibility to help shape the life of society as a whole" to Hauerwas's position on such
matters (p. 220). Hollenbach says: "Hauerwas concludes that the church should cease and de-


--- PAGE 544 ---
Notes 515
sist from the attempt to articulate universal moral norms persuasive to all members of a plu-
ralistic society.... [The letter's] disagreement with Hauerwas is with his exclusive concern with
the quality of the witness of the Christian community's own life. In the traditional categories
of Ernest Troeltsch, the bishops refuse to take the 'sectarian' option of exclusive reliance on the
witness of the Christian community that Hauerwas recommends" (p. 220).
33. Hauerwas and Baxter, "The Kingship of Christ," p. 11.
34. Ibid., p. 14.
35. Stanley Fish, "There's No Such Thing as Free Speech, and It's a Good Thing, Too," in
DebatingPC., ed. Paul Berman (New York: DeU, 1992), p. 241.
36. Ibid.
37. Ibid., pp. 241-242.
38. Quoted in Thiemann, Constructing a Public Theology, p. 24.
39. Fish, "There's No Such Thing as Free Speech, and It's a Good Thing, Too," p. 242.
40. Ibid.
41. Ibid.
42. Ibid., p. 243.
43. Ibid.
44. Hauerwas and Baxter, "The Kingship of Christ," p. 10.
45. Ibid., p. 17.
46. Ibid., pp. 17-18.
47. This is not to deny universal dimensions of Christian faith. It is to challenge essen-
tialist notions of Christian identity fostered by references to church without spelling out the
church's social location, who its members are, under what conditions they practice their be-
lief, what historical factors have shaped their faith, and so on.
48.1 understand "black church" as shorthand to symbolize the views of black Christianity.
The black church is certainly not homogeneous, and I shall be focusing on the prophetic di-
mensions of black religious faith. Hauerwas and Baxter's failure to take the black church seri-
ously is part of a larger pattern that has rendered the black church invisible for most of its his-
tory. Even investigations of American religion have usually, until quite recently, excluded black
religion as a central force in American life. As C. Eric Lincoln, in Race, Religion and the Continu-
ing American Dilemma (New York: Hill &. Wang, 1984), says, the "religious situation is structured
in such a way that any investigation of religion in America has usually meant the religion of
white Americans, unless 'Negro,' 'folk,' or 'black' religion was specifically mentioned" (p. 123).
And as Charles Long says in Significations: Signs, Symbok, and Images in the Interpretation of Religion
(Philadelphia: Fortress Press, 1986): "In short, a great many of the writings and discussions on
the topic of American religion have been consciously or unconsciously ideological, serving to
enhance, justify, and render sacred the history of European immigrants in this land. Indeed
this approach to American religion has rendered the religious reality of non-Europeans to a
state of invisibility, and thus the invisibility of the non-European in America arises as a funda-
mental issue of American history at this juncture" (p. 149).
49.1 have in mind here the large number of black ministers among current members of
Congress, continuing a tradition in this century established by leaders such as Adam Clay-
ton Powell; the activity of black church leaders in the civil rights movement and the politi-
cal movements it gave rise to, especially the presidential campaigns of Jesse Jackson; and
the large number of black churchpersons affiliated with historically black institutions of
higher education. In each area, the black church has supplied many of these persons the
principles they have appealed to in making the claims of black equality, justice, and free-
dom to the larger American public. For two examples, see Charles Hamilton's biography
of Adam Clayton Powell, Adam Clayton Powell Jr.: "The Political Biography of an American Dilemma
(New York: Atheneum, 1991), and Roger Hatch, Beyond Opportunity: Jesse Jackson's Vision for
America (Philadelphia: Fortress, 1988).
50. Cornel West, Prophetic Fragments (Grand Rapids, Mich.: Eerdmans, 1988), pp. 22-23.
51. See Medial Sobel, Trabelin' On: The Slave Journey to an Afro-Baptist Faith (Princeton:
Princeton University Press, 1988; original ed., 1979), and James Washington, Frustrated Fel-
lowship: The Black Baptist Quest for Social Power (Macon, Ga.: Mercer University Press, 1986).


--- PAGE 545 ---
516 Notes
52. Sobel, Trabelin' On, p. 85.
53. Ibid., p. 85; and Bailyn, 'The Ideological Origins of the American Revolution, pp. 261-262.
54.1 do not mean by any measure to romanticize the religious dissenters. Although they
fought against slavery, they fought more effectively, desperately, and consistently for their
own religious freedom, largely out of self-interest.
55. For instance, John Allen pointed out the hypocrisy of his fellow countrymen mak-
ing claims to colonial freedom while simultaneously denying liberty to slaves, employing
religious terms like "sacred," "praying," and "fasting" to drive home his point. He said:
"Blush ye pretended votaries for freedom! ye trifling patriots! who are making a vain pa-
rade of being advocates for the liberties of mankind, who are thus making a mockery of
your profession by trampling on the sacred natural rights and privilege of Africans; for
while you are fasting, praying, nonimporting, nonexporting, remonstrating, resolving,
and pleading for a restoration of your charter rights, you at the same time are continuing
this lawless, cruel, inhuman, and abominable practice of enslaving your fellow creatures"
(quoted in Bailyn, "The Ideological Origins of the American Revolution, p. 240). And Isaac Backus
pressed arguments for the religious dissenters to be released from the bondage of the
Church of England, asserting that civil and religious liberty were one. Backus tirelessly
proclaimed that the church of Massachusetts "has declared die Baptists to be irregular,
therefore the secular power still force them to support the worship which they conscien-
tiously dissent from," and that "many who are filling the nation with cry Of LIBERTY
and against oppressors are at the same time themselves violating that dearest of all rights,
LIBERTY OF CONSCIENCE" (quoted in Bailyn, The Ideological Origins of the American
Revolution, p. 263).
56. Robert Wuthnow makes helpful distinctions between conservative and liberal versions
of civil religion in The Restructuring of American Religion (Princeton: Princeton University Press,
1988). About conservative civil religion, Wuthnow says: "On the conservative side, America's
legitimacy seems to depend heavily on a distinct 'myth of origin' that relates the nation's
founding to divine purposes. According to this interpretation of American history, the Ameri-
can form of government enjoys lasting legitimacy because it was created by Founding Fathers
who were deeply influenced byJudeo-Christian values" (pp. 244-245). Wudinow also states
that conservative civil religion "generally grants America a special place in the divine order"
and that the idea of "evangelizing the world is in fact a much-emphasized theme in conserva-
tive civil religion" (p. 247). He contends that despite "formal separation between the kingdom
of God and the kingdom of man, the 'two kingdoms' doctrine in conservative civil religion
also confers a strong degree of divine authority on the existing mode of government" (p. 248).
Conservative civil religion also grants "capitalism a high degree of legitimacy by drawing cer-
tain parallels between capitalist economic principles and biblical teachings" (p. 248).
Liberal civil religion, however, makes little "reference to the religious views of the
Founding Fathers" and doesn't "suggest that America is God's chosen nation" (p. 250).
Liberal civil religion "focuses less on the nation as such, and more on humanity in general"
(p. 250). Wuthnow says that rather than "drawing specific attention to the distinctiveness
of die Judeo-Christian tradition, liberal civil religion is much more likely to include argu-
ments about basic human rights and common human problems" (p. 250). Liberal civil re-
ligionists also "appeal to broader values that transcend American culture and, indeed, chal-
lenge some of the nationalistic assumptions it incorporates" (p. 253). The liberal "version
of American civil religion taps into a relatively deep reservoir of sentiment in the popular
culture about the desirability of peace and justice" (p. 253). As a result, Wudinow men-
tions, "religious leaders who champion diese causes may detract from the legitimacy of the
current U.S. system rather than contribute to it" (p. 254).
It would be good for Hauerwas and Baxter to keep the distinctions between the two ver-
sions of civil religion in mind when making claims about its "counterfeit" religious status.
Although it probably wouldn't persuade them to change their views, it would nonetheless
help them make crucial distinctions about the varying functions of civil religion as it is em-
ployed and exercised by different spheres of the citizenry, and even by different branches
of Christianity.


--- PAGE 546 ---
Notes 517
57. Long, Significations, p. 152.
58. Ibid.
59. Ibid.
60. Ibid., pp. 152-153.
61. Of course, King's later beliefs about the necessity for radical social, economic, and
moral transformation of American democracy presented a serious challenge to extant po-
litical arrangements. See James Cone, Martin and Malcolm and America: A Dream or a Nightmare
(Maryknoll, N.Y.: Orbis, 1991), especially pp. 213-243.
62. Michael Eric Dyson, "Martin Luther King Jr., The Evil of Racism, and the Recov-
ery of Moral Vision," in Union Seminary Quarterly Review 44 (1990): 88-91.
63. Gen. 50:20 (Revised Standard Version).
64. Quoted in Martin Luther Kingjr., Stride toward freedom (New York: Harper & Broth-
ers, 1958), p. 160.
65. See William Safire's comments on the attempts by both Democrats and Republicans
to use God's name "as a symbol for the other side's immorality, much as the American flag
was used in previous campaigns as a symbol for the other side's lack of patriotism," in
"God Bless Us," New York Times, Aug. 27, 1992, p. A23.
66. Fish, "There's No Such Thing as Free Speech, and It's a Good Thing, Too," p. 243.
67. See, for instance, Martin Luther King's discussion of his disappointment with the
white church in A "Testament of Hope: TTie Essential Writings of Martin Luther King Jr., ed. James
M. Washington (San Francisco: Harper & Row, 1986), pp. 345-346.
68. See King's response to white clergymen who deemed his actions in Birmingham, Al-
abama, as "unwise and untimely," in his famous "Letter from Birmingham City Jail," in A
Testament of Hope: "The Essential Writings of Martin Luther King Jr. (San Francisco: Harper &
Row, 1986), pp. 289-302.
69. Ernest T. Campbell, Locked in a Room with Open Doors.
70. Hauerwas and Baxter, "The Kingship of Christ," p. 18.
71. Ibid., p. 19.
72. Ibid., p. 21.
73. Ibid., p. 22.
74. Denis Mack Smith, Mussolini: A Biography (New York: Vintage Books, 1982), p. 161.
75. James Hastings Nichols, Democracy and the Churches (Philadelphia: Westminster Press,
1951), p. 186.
76. Nichols, Democracy and the Churches, p. 182; and Smith, Mussolini, p. 65.
77. Nichols, Democracy and the Churches, p. 183.
78. Smith, Mussolini, pp. 159, 163.
79. Ibid., pp. 159-161.
80. Smith, Mussolini, p. 163; and Nichols, Democracy and the Churches, p. 189.
81. Smith, Democracy and the Churches, p. 162.
82. I have in mind here liberation theologians who link notions of Christian salvation
with sharp forms of social analysis that get at the economic, political, and social forces that
mask liberation in concrete form. For just one recent example, see the important work by
Franz J. Hinkelammert, "The Ideological Weapons of Death: A 'Theological Critique of Capitalism,
trans. Phillip Berryman (Maryknoll, N.Y.: Orbis, 1986).
Also, it seems that Hauerwas's desire to make the church more socially relevant is bet-
ter served by citing the work of black, feminist, and liberation theologians. Especially in re-
gard to liberation theology, Paul Lauritzen argues that Hauerwas has a great deal in com-
mon with Latin American theologian Johannes Metz, particularly regarding each author's
use of narrative in their work. In "Is 'Narrative' Really a Panacea? The Use of 'Narrative'
in the Work of Metz and Hauerwas," in Journal of Religion (1987): 322-339, Lauritzen
writes: "Although these writers represent different religious traditions, both rely in signifi-
cant ways on the category of narrative in their work.. . . Both Metz and Hauerwas are con-
cerned to revitalize Christian faith, both want to make it once again socially relevant, and
both are adamant that it retain its distinctiveness. That both should also place such a heavy
emphasis on the concept of narrative ... is not coincidental" (p. 323).


--- PAGE 547 ---
518 Notes
83.1 am not suggesting that all of Pius XI's views about the social order are captured in the
"Kingship of Christ." His encyclical Quadragesima Anno, issued in 1931, remains one of Catholi-
cism's most impressive statements containing the social teachings of the church, including gov-
ernment's role in society and in the economy, the belief in a just wage, laborers' right to orga-
nize, and strong Christian criticism of both capitalism and socialism. But this document must
be juxtaposed to Rus XI's antidemocratic actions and statements during the reign of Mus-
solini. Neither am I suggesting personal perfection as a criterion to determine the acceptability
of an intellectual position; in that case, my example of King would be immediately nullified. I
am suggesting, however, that these characteristics of Pope Pius XI that I have sketched have
direct bearing on the principles and proposals under discussion; there is an organic link, I
would argue, between Pope Pius XI's views and practices regarding democracy, Fascism, and
the morally subordinate status of the Catholic Church and his recommendations about the
Kingship of Christ. His views are suspect precisely because they have to do with his moral and
theological failures in his office as pope, the official head of the Catholic Church.
CHAPTER 17. "SOMEWHERE I READ OF THE FREEDOM OF
SPEECH": CONSTRUCTING A UNIQUE VOICE
The words "somewhere I read of the freedom of speech " are from King, "I See the Promised Land," in
King, A Testament, p. 282.
1. Dyson, "The Cruellest," p. 33.
2. Dyson, Race Rules, p. 81.
3. Barth, Christ and Adam and The Word of God and the Word of Man.
4. Pipes, Say Amen Brother! Mitchell, Black Preaching; Davis, / Got the Word in Me; Pitts,
The Old Ship of Zion; Boulware, The Oratory of Negro Leaders; Thomas, They Always; Rosen-
berg, Can These Bones Live? Raboteau, Fire in the Bones, pp. 141-151; Hamilton, The Black
Preacher, Spencer, Sacred Symphony.
5. Wall Street Journal, Nov. 9, 1990, pp. Al, 6; New York Times, Nov. 10, 1990, p. A10; At-
lanta Journal-Constitution, Nov. 11, 1990, p. A8; USA Today, Nov. 13, 1990, p. All; Blooming-
ton [Indiana] Herald-Times, Nov. 16, 1990, p. A6; Chicago Tribune, Nov. 18, 1990, p. V2; Wash-
ingtonPost, Nov. 18, 1990, p. C5; San Jose Mercury-News, Nov. 19, 1990, p. Al; Newsweek, Nov.
19, 1990, p. 61; Chronicle of Higher Education, Nov. 21, 1990, p. A8; New York Amsterdam News,
Dec. 1, 1990, p. 24; Time, Dec. 3, 1990, p. 126; Los Angeles Times, Dec. 11, 1990, p. El; New
Republic,Jan. 28, 1991, pp. 9-11; Journal of American Mrforyjune 1991, pp. 11-123.
6. Higham, "Habits of the Cloth," p. 109.
7. Miller, Voice of Deliverance.
8. Ibid., esp. pp. 1-28, 41-141.
9. Ibid., esp. pp. 142-158.
10. Lischer, The Preacher King.
11. Ibid., esp. pp. 8, 93-118.
12. Ibid., p. 63.
13. Ibid.
14. Ibid., pp. 106-111.
15. Miller, Voice of Deliverance, pp. 67-85, 186-197.
16. Lischer, The Preacher King, esp. p. 14.
17. Miller, Voice of Deliverance, pp. 169-197. Also see Miller, "Composing Martin Luther
Kingjr.," pp. 70-82.
18. Lischer, The Preacher King, pp. 112-113.
19. The phrase is in Du Bois, The Souls of Black Folk, p. 45.
20. Lewis, "Failing to Know Martin Luther Kingjr.," p. 82; Genovese, The Southern front,
p. 174.
21. Coretta King claims that her husband, in his "I Have a Dream" speech, "intended to
echo some of the Lincolnian language," speaking of Abraham Lincoln's Emancipation
Proclamation, to which King made early reference in his oration (C. King, My Life, p. 236).


--- PAGE 548 ---
N o t e s 519
The same speech famously extends Jefferson's majestic words by giving them moral imme-
diacy in the nation's racial drama. King implored America to "live out the true meaning of
its creed, "we hold these truths to be self-evident, that all men are created equal" (King, "I
Have a Dream," in King, A Testament, p. 219). King claims to have been profoundly influ-
enced by Gandhi in his beliefs about nonviolence ("Pilgrimage to Nonviolence," in Wash-
ington, ed., A Testament, pp. 38-39). Keith Miller, however, argues that "Gandhi exerted very
little direct influence on King," since King had "learned nonviolence almost entirely from
American sources" (Miller, Voice of Deliverance, p. 88). But however he got hold of Gandhi's
ideas, there is little doubt that they profoundly influenced King's beliefs and behavior. Fi-
nally, King paid homage to Du Bois's greatness, and the influence on him of some of Du
Bois's ideas, in King, "Honoring Dr. Du Bois," Freedom Ways 8, Spring 1968, reprinted in
WE.B. Du Bois Speaks, Vol. 1, Speeches and Addresses, 1890-1919 (Foner, ed.).
22. Prathia Hall was the student whose prayer in Albany at a service King attended included
the phrase "I have a dream" (Lischer, The Preacher King, p. 93). As Lischer notes, her inspired
prayer was charged by a resonant notion in black communities of a dream or vision animating
civil rights activists. King, moved by her prayer, seized its central metaphor and enlarged its
yearning into a prophetic vision of hope for racial justice. Archibald Carey was the Chicago
preacher, jurist, banker, and politician whose speech to the Republican National Convention
gave King a galvanizing image for his "I Have a Dream" speech (Miller, Voice of Deliverance, p.
146). After quoting from "America the Beautiful," Carey rose to oratorical splendor: "That's ex-
actly what we mean—from every mountain side, let freedom ring. Not only from the Green
Mountains and White Mountains of Vermont and New Hampshire; not only from the
Catskills of New York; but from the Ozarks in Arkansas, from the Stone Mountain in Georgia,
from the Blue Ridge Mountains of Virginia—let it ring not only for the minorities of the United
States, but for ... the disinherited of all the earth-may the Republican Party, under God, from
every mountainside, LET FREEDOM RING!" (cited in Miller, Voice of Deliverance, p. 146).
King snatched this passage nearly word for word from Carey to cap his most famous oration.
23. Miller, Voice of Deliverance, pp. 192-193.
24. King, Strength to Love.
25. Lischer, The Preacher King, pp. 4-5.
26. Ibid.
27. In truth, however, the case of Milli Vanilli, the multimillion record selling pop duo who
won 1990's Grammy Award for best new artist, is not as simple as it seems. The duo, com-
posed of black Europeans Rob and Fab, went down in infamy after it was revealed that they
hadn't sung a note on their award-winning album, and they were subsequently forced to re-
turn their Grammy. Rob and Fab were talented and handsome performers. Desperate to land
a record deal, they agreed to be the faces for a studio-produced album of songs engineered
by a manipulative white European producer. Neither the duo nor their producer had any idea
that the album would do so well and that it would garner Milli Vanilli international fame and
fortune. Disagreements between the duo and their "producer"-especially over Rob and Fab's
desire to represent their own work on wax—led to a falling out that forced the duo to confess
their mendacity publicly. Despite their extreme embarrassment and shame, Rob and Fab
eventually were able to make an album featuring their own work, proving that they had gen-
uine talent. By then, however, their downfall had eclipsed widespread interest in their work.
Later, they split up, and in 1998, Rob committed suicide after several unsuccessful attempts.
Their story is not simply one of the massive attempt to defraud the public while capitulating
to the seductions of fame, fortune, and women. It is as well a bitter and tragic update of an
old phenomenon: a white music executive exploiting vulnerable black artists for commercial
gain. The tragedy is that Rob and Fab's authentic artistry was buried beneath the scandal of
their misdeed. See "Behind the Music," VH1, March 28, 1999.
28. Carson et al., eds., The Papers of Martin Luther King Jr., Volume 1: Called to Serve, Jan-
uary 1929-June 1951, and Volume 2: Rediscovering Precious Values, July 1951-November 1955;
Genovese, The Southern Front, p. 162.
29. Branch, Parting the Waters, p. 66. Branch says that King borrowed his first sermon
from Harry Emerson Fosdick's "Life Is What You Make It."


--- PAGE 549 ---
520 Notes
30. Martin Luther King Jr., Papers Project, "The Student Papers of Martin Luther King
Jr.," pp. 28-29; Lewis, King, pp. 37-38; Branch, Parting the Waters, pp. 72, 76; Garrow,
"King's Plagiarism," p. 90.
31. Martin Luther King Jr., Papers Project; Genovese, The Southern Front, p. 162.
32. Genovese, The Southern Front, pp. 164-168, 173.
33. Martin Luther King Jr., Papers Project, pp. 23-31.
34. Ibid., p. 27.
35. Genovese, The Southern Front, pp. 157-191, esp. p. 173; Martin Luther Kingjr., Papers
Project, p. 24. Also see Carson, Holloran, Luker, and Russell, "Martin Luther Kingjr., as
Scholar."
36. Genovese, The Southern Front, p. 173. It is also interesting to note that during his sec-
ond fall in Boston as a graduate student, King received a D+ on a philosophy paper, which
had scribbled over it caustic comments from his professor. King subsequently earned three
straight A's on papers about Descartes, William James, and Mahayana Buddhism (Branch,
Parting the Waters, p. 96). As with many other students, the awful embarrassment and ego
deflation of a poor grade perhaps drove King to redouble his efforts, or perhaps it rein-
forced his habit of borrowing others' work to express his ideas.
37. Martin Luther Kingjr., Papers Project, p. 29; Garrow, Bearing the Cross, p. 41.
38. Pappas, ed., Martin Luther King Plagiarism Story.
39. Lewis, "Failing to Know Martin Luther Kingjr.," p. 81.
40. Ibid., p. 83.
41. Ibid., p. 85.
42. Ibid., p. 82.
43. Garrow, "King's Plagiarism," p. 86.
44. Ibid.
45. Ibid.
46. Cone, "Martin Luther Kingjr., Black Theology-Black Church," pp. 409-420; Cone,
"The Theology of Martin Luther Kingjr.," pp. 21-39; Cone, Martin and America and Risks
of Faith; Baldwin, "Understanding Martin Luther Kingjr., Within the Context of Southern
Black Religious History," pp. 1-26; Baldwin, "Martin Luther Kingjr., the Black Church,
and the Black Messianic Vision," Journal of the Interdenominational Theological Center 12, Fall
1984-Spring 1985, pp. 93-108; Baldwin, There Is a Balm and To Make the Wounded Whole;
Branch, Parting the Waters, esp. pp. 1-26; Miller, Voice of Deliverance, esp. pp. 13-40, 169-185;
Lischer, The Preacher King.
47. Lewis, "Failing to Know Martin Luther Kingjr.," pp. 84-85; Genovese, The Southern
Front, p. 175. The second reader of King's dissertation, S. Paul Schilling, denied that there was
"favoritism toward black students and therefore a lowering of standards for them," and in re-
sponse to a question about whether King "was given a free ride because of reverse racism,"
responded "I would reject that completely" (Thelen, "Conversation Between S. Paul Schilling
and David Thelen," pp. 65, 77). It may be true that King's thesis adviser, L. Harold DeWolf,
was in King's case a "lax mentor who did not demand of King the analytical precision that
might have prepared him for a career of scholarly writing" (Carson, Holloran, Luker, and
Russel, "Martin Luther Kingjr.," p. 101). But that contradicts what other students knew
about DeWolf. "Once he took them under his wing ... he really worked with them," Cor-
nish Rogers says. "He saw to it that all of them lived up to a certain quality that he de-
manded. And he kept after them until they did." Furthermore, Rogers rejects the reverse
racism argument, saying of DeWolf and Schilling, "I knew how tough they were on me. I had
taken courses from both of them." Therefore, it would be both unfair and inaccurate to over-
look the plausible reason for DeWolf's strict inattention to King: DeWolf was overburdened
as one of the few Boston University professors who was willing to work with black students.
Rogers says that DeWolf "took on a lot of dissertations from, especially, black students or
others whom other professors would not take on. If you were willing to be guided by him,
he would take on students whose topics were not in his field. I got the impression dial he
helped a lot of folks who had difficulty getting someone to be their readers" (Thelen, "Con-
versation Between Cornish Rogers and David Thelen," pp. 53-55). Thus, the greater threat


--- PAGE 550 ---
Notes 521
to black students was not racial paternalism, as bad as that might have been, but racist ne-
glect, a far more harmful factor in the intellectual lives of black graduate students.
48. Lischer, The Preacher King, p. 58.
49. Garrow, "King's Plagiarism," p. 90.
50. 'Moreover, although many black scholars had passed through Boston University's
doctoral program in religion, one peculiar and tragic legacy of racism involved the pernicious
self-doubts that could have plagued any developing black scholar. Qualities of self-worth,
competence, talent, and skill are not developed in a vacuum, but are in part socially con-
structed and reproduced. In the mid-fifties it is certainly conceivable that a young talented
black doctoral student who was uncertain of his real worth, despite the encouragement of his
professors and colleagues . . . could be tempted to rely on work that had already been ac-
cepted and viewed as competent" (Dyson, Reflecting Black, p. 242). Also see Jerry Watt's brief
but powerful discussion of the sometimes crippling self-doubt and insecurity that can smother
even the most able budding scholar. Watts, Heroism and the Black Intellectual, p. xii.
51. Garrow, "King's Plagiarism," p. 90.
52. Hegel, The Philosophy of History and Phenomenology of Spirit. Also see King, Stride Toward
Freedom, pp. 95, 100-101.
53. Thelen, "Conversation Between Cornish Rogers and David Thelen," p. 50.
54. Ibid.
55. Ibid., pp. 50-51.
56. John Williams captures the significance of the degree for those times when he writes:
"And if a young man could take graduate studies in the white universities of the North, his sta-
tus was increased manyfold. Morehouse College has sent countless numbers of its graduates
north where an overwhelming majority of them have made good in professional and academic
circles. The A.B. soon enough became almost nothing in terms of status; the M.A. became the
target, and finally, the Ph.D. How grand to roll around on the tongue the word 'doctor'! How
marvelous to be addressed as 'doctor'!" (Williams, The King God Didn't Save, p. 152).
57. Thelen, "Conversation Between S. Paul Schilling and David Thelen," pp. 76-77.
58. Reagon, "Nobody Knows the Trouble I See," pp. 113-117. Reagon says that in black
culture, those who straddle "are born in one place, and we are sent to achieve in the larger
culture, and in order to survive we work out a way to be who we are in both places or all
places we move. . . . King was a straddler; he was who he was wherever he was—in the
African-American church, on the march, in a rally, in jail, at the great and small universi-
ties, in Stockholm. We, his people, could look at him and feel him and know that he was
one of us. He succeeded in embracing the sound of our forefathers, and he never left that sound; no mat-
ter where he was, he was in the pulpit" (Ibid., pp. 114, 116).
59. Lischer, The Preacher King, p. 58. Lischer says that in "the fifteen years from 1942 to
1957 only five Boston students completed doctoral dissertations on race-related topics.
King was not among them."
60. Genovese, The Southern Front, p. 173. It should be noted that King is not now known for
his facility with Plato, Hegel, formal logic, or modem philosophy—all of which proved to be in
his hands little more than rhetorical fodder for Sunday sermons and inspired speeches. As
David Lewis writes, King "was not an original philosopher, although, after Morehouse, it was
perhaps the thing he most desired to be. There are legions of audiences that spent Sunday
mornings, convocation periods, and evenings in auditoriums listening to him rhapsodically
enumerate the principal ideas of Western philosophy from Thales to Miletus to Camus....
Such displays of encyclopedic knowledge sprang partly from a Baptist preacher's love of
showmanship, and Mike [Martin] was a super actor. Partly, too, this was the venial intellectual
arrogance of a young man who held a doctorate from one of the nation's better universities.
But there was, undeniably, also an element of self-deception and self-mystification as to his
philosophical acumen" (Lewis, King, pp. 44-45). King is known, however, for his brilliant abil-
ities to translate the meanings of grand thinkers into the stuff of human action, thus enfleshing
ideas with a genius that few others have possessed. It might have done King some good to
have wrestled intellectually within the province of ideas that would motivate him to take to the
streets out of disgust with merely thinking about the world. Some courses on Gandhi and race


--- PAGE 551 ---
522 Notes
relations might have given him even deeper insight into the nature of the beast he was to con-
front when he left graduate school. As Marx famously said, many philosophers have thought
about the world. The point was to change it. King took that imperative seriously and thus be-
came a derivative philosopher but a world-class activist and a pioneer in social democracy.
61. Cone, Martin and Malcolm, p. 30.
62. Ibid., p. 31.
63. Thelen, "Conversation Between Cornish Rogers and David Thelen," pp. 46-49.
Also see Garrow, Bearing, p. 48; Branch, Parting the Waters, pp. 93-94. Apparently, however,
these issues were not strongly enough debated for students like George Thomas, who was
"one of a tiny minority of Negro students who lost interest in the Dialectical Society pre-
cisely because Jim Crow and other political matters were relegated to the joke period [held
after the formal meeting]" (Branch, Parting the Waters, p. 93).
64. Cone, Martin and Malcolm, p. 31.
65. Thelen, "Conversation Between Cornish Rogers and David Thelen," p. 50.
66. Lewis, "Failing to Know Martin Luther Kingjr." p. 85. More exactly Lewis states
of King and his professors that "neither he nor they knew who Martin Luther King was
then." On that basis, it is easy enough to see that in not knowing who King was then, they
had no knowledge of who he would become.
67. "Thin Ice: 'Stereotype Threat' and Black College Students," Atlantic Monthly, Aug.
1999, pp. 44-54.
68. Ibid., p. 44.
69. Ibid.
70. Ibid., p. 45.
71. Ibid., p. 46.
72. Gates, Let the Trumpet Sound, p. 24.
73. New York Times, Nov. 13, 1990, p. A30.
74. Lerner, ed., Black Women in White America, pp. 149-193; Jones, Labor of Love, Labor of
Sorrow, p. 157; Hine, Hine Sight, pp. 37-47.
CHAPTER 20. X MARKS THE PLOTS: A CRITICAL READING OF
MALCOLM'S READERS
1. These personal and political understandings can be described as paradigms, or the-
ories that explain evidence or account for behavior, that shift over space and time. For a
discussion about paradigm shifts in the history of science, see Thomas Kuhn, The Structure
of Scientific Revolutions, 2d ed. (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1970). According to
Kuhn, revolutions in science occur when a given paradigm fails to account for an increas-
ing degree of disconfirming evidence, called anomalies. Failure of the paradigm creates a
crisis, and can be resolved only with the emergence of a new scientific paradigm. For an
application of Kuhn's work to moral philosophy and religious experience, see Jon Gunne-
mann, The Moral Meaning of Revolution (New Haven: Yale University Press, 1979).
2. The lack of a significant body of scholarly literature about Malcolm reveals more about
the priorities, interests, and limitations of contemporary scholarship than about his importance
as a revolutionary social figure. There is no dearth of interest in Malcolm, however, in the pop-
ular press, and though cultural curiosity about him is now undoubtedly at a peak, he has un-
failingly provoked popular reflection about his life and career among journalists, activists, and
organic intellectuals since his death in 1965. This is made abundantly clear in two book-length
bibliographies on Malcolm: Lenwood G. Davis, with the assistance of Marsha L. Moore,
comps., Malcolm X: A Selected Bibliography (Westport, Conn.: Greenwood, 1984), and Timothy V.
Johnson, comp., Malcolm X: A Comprehensive Annotated Bibliography (New York: Garland, 1986).
3. For an illuminating discussion of the philosophical issues and problems involved in
understanding and explanation in the humanities, see Charles Taylor, "Interpretation and
the Sciences of Man," in Interpretive Social Science: A Reader, ed. Paul Rabinow and William
M. Sullivan (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1979), pp. 25-71.


--- PAGE 552 ---
Notes 523
4. For the notion of thick description, see Clifford Geertz, "Thick Description: Toward
an Interpretive Theory of Culture," in The Interpretation of Cultures (New York: Basic, 1973).
5. Michael Eric Dyson, "Probing a Divided Metaphor," in Refecting Black: African-American
Cultural Criticism (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 1993), pp. 115-128. For dis-
cussion of Malcolm's motivations for his autobiography, and Alex Haley's role in shaping the
narrative of Malcolm's life, see also Arnold Rampersad, "The Color of His Eyes: Bruce
Perry's Malcolm and Malcolm's Malcolm," and Robin D. G. Kelley, "The Riddle of the Zoot:
Malcolm Little and Black Cultural Politics During World War II," both in Malcolm X: In Our
Own Image, ed. Joe Wood (New York: St. Martin's, 1992), pp. 117-134, 155-175, respectively.
6. For more of my comment on other books about Malcolm, see Dyson, "Probing a Di-
vided Metaphor," pp. 115-128.
7. For a good overview and discussion of these groups, see Raymond Hall, Black Sepa-
ratism in the United States (Hanover, N.H.: University Press of New England, 1978).
8. For an excellent discussion of the links between Malcolm X and the Black Power
movement, of which he was a precursor, with discussions of SNCC, CORE, and the Black
Panthers, see Robert Allen, Black Awakening in Capitalist America: An Analytic History (Garden
City, N.Y.: Doubleday, 1969), pp. 21-88. For a discussion of the economic programs and
comparisons of the social visions of each group, see Hall, Black Separatism in the United States,
especially pp. 139-196.
9. See especially John Ansbro, Martin Luther King Jr.: 'The Making of a Mind (Maryknoll,
N.Y.: Orbis, 1982); Stephen B. Oates, Let the Trumpet Sound: The Life of Martin Luther King Jr.
(New York: Harper &. Row, 1982); and David Garrow, Bearing the Cross: Martin Luther King
Jr., and the Southern Christian Leadership Conference, 1955-1968 (New York: Morrow, 1986).
10. John Henrik Clarke, ed., Malcolm X: The Man and His Times (1969; Trenton, NJ.:
Africa World Press, 1990).
11. Charles Wilson, "Leadership Triumph in Leadership Tragedy," in Malcolm X, ed.
Clarke, pp. 36-37.
12. James Boggs, "The Influence of Malcolm X on the Political Consciousness of Black
Americans," and Wyatt Tee Walker, "Nothing but a Man," in Malcolm X, ed. Clarke, pp. 52, 67.
13. Albert Cleage, "Myths About Malcolm X," in Malcolm X, ed. Clarke, p. 15.
14. Oba T'shaka, The Political Legacy of Malcolm X (Richmond, Calif.: Pan Afrikan, 1983);
Malcolm X, The End of White World Supremacy: Four Speeches by Malcolm X, ed. Benjamin
Karim [Goodman] (New York: Arcade, 1971).
15. T'shaka, Palitical Legacy of Malcolm X, pp. 244-245.
16. Ibid., pp. 57, 118.
17. Karim, Introduction to Malcolm X, End of White World Supremacy, pp. 21-22.
18. Gordon Parks, "Malcolm X: The Minutes of Our Last Meeting," in Malcolm X, ed.
Clark, p. 120.
19. On his repudiation of the white devil theory, see Malcolm X, with the assistance of
Alex Haley, Autobiography of Malcolm X (New York: Grove Press, 1965), pp. 362-363. For
Malcolm's desire to meet Robeson a month before his death, see Martin Duberman, Paul
Robeson (New York: Knopf, 1988), p. 528.
20.1 take up this issue in "Beyond Essentialism: Expanding African-American Cultural
Criticism," in Reflecting Black, pp. xiii-xxxiii.
21. The debate about cultural and racial authenticity as it relates to who is able to inter-
pret Malcolm's legacy legitimately has most recently occurred in writer-activist Amiri
Baraka's attacks on Spike Lee about Lee's film portrait of Malcolm X before his film ap-
peared. Implicit in Baraka's charges that Lee would not adequately or accurately represent
Malcolm is the belief that Baraka's representation of Malcolm is superior. Baraka's hagio-
graphical recollections of Malcolm and his refusal to concede that Lee's claims and repre-
sentations of him may be equally valid are a prime example of the often insular intellectual
climate surrounding debates about Malcolm. The irony here, of course, is that of all current
black directors, with the possible exception of John Singleton, Spike Lee appears most suit-
ably disposed to represent a vision of Malcolm that jibes with Baraka's cultural views, given
Lee's Afrocentric film and aesthetic vocabulary and his neonationalist cultural perspective.


--- PAGE 553 ---
524 Notes
22. Malcolm X, "Answers to Questions at the Militant Labor Forum," in By Any Means
Necessary: Speeches, Interviews, and a Letter, by Malcolm X, ed. George Breitman (New York:
Pathfinder, 1970), pp. 22-23.
23. See Henry Young's two-volume study, Major Black Religious Leaders (Nashville: Abing-
don, 1977, 1979).
24. Louis E. Lomax, When the Word Is Given: A Report on Elijah Muhammad, Malcolm X, and
the Black Muslim World (Cleveland: World, 1963), and To Kill a Black Man (Los Angeles: Hol-
loway House, 1968); James H. Cone, Martin and Malcolm and America: A Dream or a Night-
mare? (Maryknoll, N.Y.: Orbis, 1991); Peter Goldman, The Death and Life of Malcolm X, 2d
ed. (1973; Urbana: University of Illinois Press, 1979). For a discussion of moral saints, see
Susan Wolf, "Moral Saints," Journal of Philosophy 8 (1982): 419-439; and Robert Merrihew
Adam's response to her essay in The Virtue of Faith and Other Essays in Philosophical Theology
(New York: Oxford University Press, 1987), pp. 164-173.
25. Of course, the classic treatment of the Black Muslims during the leadership of Eli-
jah Muhammad and Malcolm X is C. Eric Lincoln, The Black Muslims in America (Boston:
Beacon, 1961, 1973). Also very helpful is E. U. Essien-Udom, Black Nationalism: A Search for
an Identity in America (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1962). For a treatment of the
Nation of Islam under Elijah Muhammad and Malcolm X, and it transition to orthodox Is-
lamic practice and belief under Wallace Muhammad as the World Community of al-Islam
in the West, see Clifton E. Marsh, From Black Muslims to Muslims: The Transition from Separatism
to Islam, 1930-1980 (Metuchen, NJ.: Scarecrow, 1984). For a historical and analytic treat-
ment of the Nation of Islam, including its history under Elijah and Wallace Muhammad,
and its separate revitalization as the second incarnation of the Nation of Islam under Louis
Farrakhan, see Martha F. Lee, The Nation of Islam: An American Milknarian Movement (Lewis-
ton, N.Y.: Edwin Mellen, 1988).
26. Lomax, When the Word Is Given, pp. 87, 68.
27. For an extended review of Cone's book, see my essay "Martin and Malcolm," in Re-
fecting Black, pp. 250-263.
28. Of course, Malcolm's life and thought represented and addressed various aspects of
both religious and revolutionary nationalism. In this regard, see John H. Braceyjr., August
Meier, and Elliott Rudwick, eds., Black Nationalism in America (Indianapolis: Bobbs-Merrill,
1970), p. 505. Also see Essien-Udom, Black Nationalism. For a fine historical treatment of the
heyday of black nationalism, see Wilson Jeremiah Moses, The Golden Age of Black National-
ism, 1850-1925 (Hamden, Conn.: Archon, 1978).
29. Cone, Martin and Malcolm and America, p. 151.
30. Ibid, p. 170.
31. Other works explore the relationship between King and Malcolm, along with com-
parative analyses of other intellectual and religious figures, in a religious and social ethical
context. For two fine examples, see Peter Paris, Black Leaders in Conflict, 2d ed. (Louisville:
Westminster Press/John Knox Press, 1991); and Robert M. Franklin, Liberating Visions:
Human Fulfillment and Social Justice in AJrican-American Thought (Minneapolis: Augsburg, 1990).
32. Ralph Ellison, quoted in Robert B. Stepto and Michael S. Harper, "Study and Ex-
perience: An Interview with Ralph Ellison," in Chant of Saints: A Gathering of Afro-American
Literature, Art, and Scholarship, ed. Stepto and Harper (Urbana: University of Illinois Press,
1979), p. 458.
33. For insightful treatments of Du Bois, see Arnold Rampersad, The Art and Imagination
of W.E.B. Du Bois (Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1976); Gerald Home, Black and
Red: W.E.B. Du Bois and the Afro-American Response to the Cold War, 1944-1963 (Albany: State
University of New York Press, 1986); Manning Marable, W.E.B. Du Bois: Black Radical Dem-
ocrat (Boston: Twayne, 1986); and, of course, the definitive treatment of Du Bois to date,
David Levering Lewis, W.E.B. Du Bois: Biography of a Race, 1868-1919 (New York: Holt,
1993). For the definitive treatment of Booker T. Washington, see Louis Harlan's two vol-
umes: Booker T. Washington: The Making of a Black Leader, 1856-1901 (New York: Oxford
University Press, 1972 ); and Booker T. Washington: The Wizard of Tuskegee, 1901-1915 (New
York: Oxford University Press, 1983).


--- PAGE 554 ---
Notes 525
34. Lomax, To Kill a Black Man, p. 10.
35. George Breitman, "More Than One Way 'To Kill a Black Man,'" in 'The Assassination
of Malcolm X, ed. George Breitman, Herman Porter, and Baxter Smith (New York:
Pathfinder, 1976), pp. 131-144.
36. Robert Franklin also makes use of Goldman's notion of public moralist in his excel-
lent book Liberating Vision's, a comparative study of Booker T. Washington, W.E.B. Du
Bois, Malcolm X, and Martin Luther King Jr.
37. There is a swelling literature on the possible plots and theories of how Malcolm was
murdered. While the close study of this literature is beyond my purposes here, it certainly
constitutes an intriguing category of debate around Malcolm. See, for example, Breitman,
Porter, and Smith, eds., Assassination of Makolm X; and Karl Evanzz, The Judas Factor: The Plot
to KillMakolm X (New York: Thunder Mouth Press, 1992).
38. For arguments that Goldman's views about Malcolm's assassination support the of-
ficial government story, and that the CIA and the Bureau of Special Services (BOSS)—the
name of the New York secret police agency at the time of Malcolm's death—were implicated
in his assassination, see George Breitman, "A Liberal Supports the Government Version,"
in Assassination of Malcolm X, ed. Breitman, Porter, and Smith, pp. 145-166.
39. Goldman, Death and Life of Malcolm X, p. 191.
40. Martin Luther King Jr., quoted in David Halberstam, "When 'Civil Rights' and
'Peace'Join Forces," in Martin Luther King Jr.: A Profile, ed. C. Eric Lincoln, rev. ed. (New
York: Hill & Wang, 1984), p. 202.
41. Clayborne Carson, "Malcolm and the American State," in Malcolm X: The FBI File,
ed. David Gallen (New York: Carroll Graf, 1991), p. 18.
42. Ibid.
43. See George Devereux, Basic Problems of Ethnopsychiatry, trans. Basia Miller Gulati and
George Devereux (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1980); Frantz Fanon, The Wretched
of the Earth (New York: Grove, 1966), and Black Skin, White Masks (New York: Grove, 1967);
Erich Fromm, Beyond the Chains of Elusion: My Encounter with Marx and Freud (New York: Simon
& Schuster, 1962); Christopher Lasch, The Culture of Narcissism (New York: Warner Books,
1979); Bruce Brown, Marx, Freud, and the Critique of Everyday Life: Toward a Permanent Cultural
Revolution (New York: Monthly Review Press, 1973); Margaret MacDonald, ed., Philosophy and
Analysis (Oxford: Blackwell, 1954); and relevant work of the Frankfurt school, including
Theodor W. Adorno, Walter Benjamin, Erich Fromm, Max Horkheimer, Herbert Marcuse,
and Jiirgen Habermas. For a collection of essays by these authors, see Andrew Arato and
Eike Gebhardt, eds., The Essential Frankfurt School Reader (New York: Continuum, 1982). For a
treatment of their work in relation to psychoanalytic theory, see C. Fred Alford, Narcissism:
Socrates, the Frankfurt School, and Psychoanalytic Theory (New Haven: Yale University Press, 1988).
44. Richard Lichtman, The Production of Desire: The Integration of Psychoanalysis into Marxist
Theory (New York: Free Press, 1982), p. ix.
45. Ibid., pp. ix-x.
46. Erik H. Erikson, Gandhi's Truth: On the Origins cf Militant Nonviolence (New York: Norton,
1969). For a more controversial psychobiographical treatment of a historical figure, see Erik-
son's study of Protestant reformer Martin Luther, YoungMan Luther (New York: Norton, 1958).
47. Eugene Victor Wolfenstein, The Victims of Democracy: Malcolm X and the Black Revolution
(1981; London: Free Association Books, 1989).
48. Ibid., pp. 1-2.
49. Ibid., p. xiii.
50. For an important historical examination of white working-class racism, see David R.
Roediger, The Wages of Whiteness: Race and the Making of the American Working Class (London:
Verso, 1991).
51. Other Marxist, socialist, and progressive approaches to race theory and racism attempt
to theorize race as a socially, culturally, historically, and politically constructed category that
undergoes change over space and time. See, for example, Cornel West, "Marxist Theory and
the Specificity of Afro-American Oppression," in Marxism and the Interpretation of Culture, ed.
Cary Nelson and Lawrence Grossberg (Urbana: University of Illinois Press, 1988), pp.


--- PAGE 555 ---
526 Notes
17-33; Lucius Outlaw, "Toward a Critical Theory of 'Race,'" in Anatomy of Racism, ed. David
Goldberg (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 1990), pp. 58-82; Michael Eric
Dyson, "The Liberal Theory of Race," and "Racism and Race Theory in the Nineties," in Re-
flecting Black, pp. 132-156; Leonard Harris, "Historical Subjects and Interests: Race, Class,
and Conflict," and Lucius Outlaw, "On Race and Class, or, On the Prospects of 'Rainbow
Socialism,'" both in The Year Left Z: An American Socialist Yearbook, ed. Mike Davis et al. (Lon-
don: Verso, 1987); and Michael Omi and Howard Winant, Racial Formation in the United States:
From the 1960s to the 1980s (London: Roudedge & Regan Paul, 1986).
52. See Thomas Gossett, Race: The History of an Idea in America (Dallas: Southern
Methodist University Press, 1965).
53. Wolfenstein, Victims of Democracy, p. 37.
54. Bruce Perry, Malcolm: The Life of a Man Who Changed Black America (Tarrytown, N.Y.:
Station Hill Press, 1991).
55. Ibid., p. ix.
56. Ibid., p. x.
57. Ibid., pp. 41-42.
58. Ibid., p. 54.
59. For further discussion of this subject, see Dyson, "Beyond Essentialism," pp.
xiii-xxxiii.
60. For insightful discussions of the predicament of black intellectuals, see, of course,
Harold Cruse's pioneering The Crisis of the Negro Intellectual (New York: Morrow, 1967); Cornel
West, "The Dilemma of the Black Intellectual," Cultural Critique, no. 1 (Fall 1985): 109-124;
and Jerry Watts, "Dilemmas of Black Intellectuals," Dissent, (1) Fall 1989: 501-507.
61. Christian ethicist Katie Cannon writes about the "white academic community's
flourishing publishing monopoly on the writing of black history, black thought, and black
worldview. Black scholars did not abdicate their roles in these fields to white academicians.
Blacks have written monographs, theses, conference papers, proposals, and outlines for
books on various aspects of black reality since the 1700s, but white publishers did not give
them serious consideration until the 1970s" ("Racism and Economics: The Perspective of
Oliver C. Cox," in The Public Vocation of Christian Ethics, ed. Beverly W. Harrison, Robert L.
Stivers, and Ronald H. Stone [New York: Pilgrim, 1986], p. 121).
62. William James, The Varieties of Religious Experience (1902; New York: Penguin, 1982).
63. Lomax, To Kill a Black Man, p. 142.
64. Goldman, Death and Life of Malcolm X, p. 189.
65. George Breitman, The Last Tear of Malcolm X: The Evolution of a Revolutionary (New
York: Pathfinder, 1967); Malcolm X, Malcolm X Speaks: Selected Speeches and Statements, ed.
George Breitman (New York: Pathfinder, 1965); By Any Means Necessary; and Malcolm X: The
Last Speeches, ed. Bruce Perry (New York: Pathfinder, 1989).
66. Breitman, Last Tear of Malcolm X, p. 69.
67. Malcolm X, By Any Means Necessary, p. 159.
68. Breitman, Last Tear of Malcolm X, p. 65.
69. Malcolm X, By Any Means Necessary, p. 159.
70. Given the variety and complexity of black nationalist thought, Malcolm could have
accommodated and advocated such changes had he had sufficient time to link his broad-
ened sense of struggle to the subsequent social and political activity he inspired. It is im-
portant, however, not to overlook the tensions between groups like SNCC and Malcolm
while he lived. As Lomax says: "... Malcolm was never able to effect an alliance with the
young black militants who were then plotting the crisis that is now upon the republic. His
trip to Selma was arranged by SNCC people but no alliance resulted. The Black Power
people would later raise Malcolm to sainthood but they would not work with him, nor let
him work with them, in life" (To Kill a Black Man, pp. 157-158).
71. Breitman, Last Tear of Malcolm X, p. 27.
72. Ibid, p. 34.
73. Malcolm X, Malcolm X Speaks, p. 128, quoted in Breitman, Last Tear of Malcolm X, p. 35.
74. Malcolm X, "The Harlem 'Hate-Gang' Scare," in Malcolm X Speaks, p. 65.


--- PAGE 556 ---
Notes 527
75. Ibid., p. 69.
76. Malcolm X, By Any Means Necessary, pp. 159-160.
77. See Leon Trotsky, Leon Trotsky on Black Nationalism and Seff-Determinatim (New York:
Pathfinder, 1978).
78. C. L. R. James, interview in Visions of History, ed. MARHO (New York: Pantheon,
1984), p. 270.
79.1 do not mean to rule out other genres in which Malcolm's life and accomplishments
may be examined. For an example of a science fiction approach to his life and thought, see
Kent Smith, Future X (Los Angeles: Holloway House, 1989), which appears to have been
influenced as much by Schwarzennegger's Terminator films as by ideological currents in
African-American culture.
CHAPTER 21. MIXED BLESSINGS: MARTIN LUTHER KING, JR.,
AND THE LESSONS OF AN AMBIGUOUS HEROISM
1. Gary Wills, Cincinnatus: George Washington and the Enlightenment (Garden City, N.Y.:
Doubleday, 1984), p. 109.
2. Sidney Hook, The Hero in History: A Study in Limitation and Possibility (New York: John
Day, 1943), p. 153.
3. Ibid., p. 154.
4. For a good social characterization of the figures who surrounded King in the civil
rights movement, see Taylor Branch's commanding social history, Parting the Waters: America
in the King Tears, 1955-1963 (New York: Simon & Schuster, 1989).
5. This quote is from Benjamin Mays's introduction to Lerone Bennett, What Manner of
Man: A Biography of Martin Luther King Jr. (Chicago: Johnson, 1976), p. ii.
6. Hook, The Hero in History, p. 157.
7. Bennett, What Manner of Man, p. 131.
S.James P. Hanigan, Martin Luther King Jr., and the Foundations of Nonviolence (New York:
University Press of America, 1984), pp. 31-32.
9. Wills, Cincinnatus, p. 132.
10. Conrad Cherry, God's New Israel: Religious Interpretations of American Destiny (Englewood
Cliffs, NJ.: Prentice-Hall, 1971), p. 6.
11. Paul G. King, Kent Maynard, and David O. Woodyard, Risking Liberation: Middle
Class Powerlessness and Social Heroism (Atlanta, Ga.: John Knox Press, 1988), p. 15.
12. Albert J. Raboteau, Slave Religion (New York: Oxford University Press, 1978), p. iv.
13. Martin Luther Kingjr., "I Have A Dream," in A Testament of Hope: The Essential Writings of
Martin Luther King Jr., ed. James Melvin Washington (New fork: Harper & Row, 1986), p. 219.
14. Ibid., p. 219.
15. Ibid., p. 217.
16. Cornel West, Prophesy Deliverance! An Afro-American Revolutionary Christianity (Philadel-
phia: Westminster, 1982), pp. 74-75.
17. These terms refer to the important works of James Scott. See especially Domination
and the Arts of Resistance (New Haven: Yale University Press, 1990).
18. These Census Bureau figures are usually reported on annually by Robert Greenstein
in Christianity and Crisis. For a good example of such reporting, see John Bickerman and
Robert Greenstein, "High and Dry on the Poverty Plateau," Christianity and Crisis, October
28, 1985, pp. 411-412.
19. For example, the Supreme Court is now, in effect, "Reagan's Court," due to Rea-
gan's appointees, who legally enact his conservative political agenda. For commentary on
how the Supreme Court has turned back the clock on affirmative action, see my "Deaffir-
mation," Nation, July 3, 1989, pp. 4-5.
20. For a brief exploration of racism in both segments of society, see my article "The
Two Racisms," Nation,]uly 3, 1989, pp. 4-5.
21. Washington, ed., Testament of Hope, p. 38.


--- PAGE 557 ---
528 Notes
22. Roger Hatch describes the relation between the perspective of the mature Martin
Luther King Jr., and Jackson's vision for America, and addresses Jackson's evolution into
the second phase of the civil rights movement, which concentrates on equity in every area
of life (particularly economic justice), in Beyond Opportunity: Jesse Jackson's Vision for America
(Philadelphia: Fortress Press, 1988), esp. pp. 11-23.
23. Washington, ed., Testament of Hope, pp. 67, 70.
CHAPTER 22. "GIVE ME A PAPER AND PEN": TUPAC'S PLACE
IN HiP- HOP
1. Rose, Black Noise; Neal, What the Music Said; Boyd, Am I Black Enough for KM? George,
Hip-Hop America.
2. Sleeman, Rambles and Recollection of an Indian Official, and Journey Through the Kingdom of
Oude, 1849-1850; Barren, The Rastqfarians; Dyczkowski, The Doctrine of Vibration.
3. Hobsbawm, Primitive Rebels and Bandits; Seal, The Outlam Legend; Duncan, Romantic
Outlaws, Beloved Prisons.
4. Boccaccio, Decameron.
5. Davis and Troupe, Miles: The Autobiography; Carr, Miles Davis: The Definitive Biography.
6. Patillo-McCoy, Black Picket Fences; Massey and Demon, American Apartheid; Wilson,
The Truly Disadvantaged and When Work Disappears; Kelley, 16'Mama's Disfunktional.
7. Kasher, The Civil Rights Movement; Morris, The Origins of the Civil Rights Movement;
Dittmer, Local People; Fairclough, Race and Democracy; Hine, Hine Sight; Giddings, When and
Where I Enter; Garrow, Bearing the Cross; Carson, In Struggle; White, Too Heavy a Load; Nor-
rell, Reaping the Whirlwind; Branch, Parting the Waters and Pillar of Fire.
8. Guralnick, Sweet Soul Music, Wolff, You Send Me.
CHAPTER 24. BETWEEN APOCALYPSE AND REDEMPTION: JOHN
SINGLETON'S BOYZ N THE HOOD
1. These statistics, as well as an examination of the social, economic, political, medical,
and educational conditions of young black men and public policy recommendations for the
social amelioration of their desperate circumstances, are found in a collection of essays
edited by Jewelle Taylor Gibbs, Young, Black, and Male in America: An Endangered Species.
2. William Julius Wilson has detailed the shift in the American political economy from
manufacturing to service employment and its impact upon the inner city and the ghetto
poor, particularly upon black males who suffer high rates of joblessness (which he sees as
the source of many problems in the black family) in The Truly Disadvantaged. For an analy-
sis of the specific problems of black males in relation to labor force participation, see Ger-
ald David Jaynes and Robin M. Williams Jr., eds., A Common Destiny, pp. 301, 308-312.
3. I have explored the cultural expressions, material conditions, creative limits, and
social problems associated with rap, in "Rap, Race and Reality," "The Culture of Hip-
Hop," "2 Live Crew's Rap: Sex, Race and Class," "As Complex As They Wanna Be: 2
Live Crew," "Tapping into Rap," "Performance, Protest and Prophecy in the Culture of
Hip-Hop," and in Jim Gardner, "Taking Rap Seriously: Theomusicologist Michael Eric
Dyson on the New Urban Griots and Peripatetic Preachers (An Interview)" (see chap. 3,
this volume).
4.1 have in mind here the criticism of liberal society, and the forms of moral agency it
both affords and prevents, that has been gathered under the rubric of communitarianism,
ranging from Maclntyre's Afier Virtue to Bellah et al.'s Habits of the Heart.
5.1 am indebted to Christine Stansell for this characterization of how Singleton departs
from Capra's depictions of community in his films.
6. See Mike Davis and Sue Riddick's brilliant analysis of the drug culture in "Los An-
geles: Civil Liberties between the Hammer and the Rock."


--- PAGE 558 ---
Notes 529
7. For an insightful discussion of the relationship between the underground or illegiti-
mate economy, and people exercising agency in resisting the worse injustices and effects of
the legitimate economy, see Don Nonini, "Everyday Forms of Popular Resistance."
8. For a recent exploration of the dynamics of social interaction between police as agents
and symbols of mainstream communal efforts to regulate the behavior and social place of
black men, and black men in a local community, see Elijah Anderson, Streetwise, pp. 163-206.
9. According to this logic, as expressed in a familiar saying in many black communities,
black women "love their sons and raise their daughters." For a valiant, although flawed, at-
tempt to get beyond a theoretical framework that implicitly blames black women for the
condition of black men, see Clement Cottingham, "Gender Shift in Black Communities."
Cottingham attempts to distance himself from arguments about a black matriarchy that sti-
fles black male social initiative and moral responsibility. Instead he examines the gender
shifts in black communities fueled by black female educational mobility and the marginal-
ization of lower-class black males. But his attempt is weakened, ironically, by a prominently
placed quotation by James Baldwin, which serves as a backdrop to his subsequent discus-
sions of mother-son relationships, black male-female relationships, and black female as-
sertiveness. Cottingham writes: "Drawing on Southern black folk culture, James Baldwin,
in his last published work, alluded to black lower-class social patterns which, when set
against the urban upheaval among the black poor from the 1960s onward, seem to en-
courage this gender shift. He characterizes these lower-class social patterns as 'a disease pe-
culiar to the Black community called sorriness.' 'It is,' Baldwin observes, 'a disease that at-
tacks black males. It is transmitted by Mama, whose instinct is to protect the Black male
from the devastation that threatens him from the moment he declares himself a man.'
Apart from its protectiveness toward male children, Baldwin notes another dimension
of 'sorriness.' 'Mama,' he writes, 'lays this burden on Sister from whom she expects
(or indicates she expects) far more than she expects from Brother; but one of the results
of this all too comprehensible dynamic is that Brother may never grow up—in which
case the community has become an accomplice to the Republic.' Perceptively, Baldwin
concludes that the differences in the socialization of boys and girls eventually erode the
father's commitment to family life."
When such allusive but isolated ethnographic comments are not placed in an analytical
framework that tracks the social, political, economic, religious, and historical forces that
shape black (female) rearing practices and circumscribe black male-female relations, they
are more often than not employed to blame black women for the social failure of black chil-
dren, especially boys. The point here is not to suggest that black women have no responsi-
bility for the plight of black families. But most social theory has failed to grapple with the
complex set offerees that define and delimit black female existence, too easily relying upon
anecdotal tales of black female behavior preventing black males from flourishing, and not
examining the shifts in the political economy, the demise of low-skilled, high-waged work,
the deterioration of the general moral infrastructure of many poor black communities, the
ravaging of black communities by legal forces of gentrification, and illegal forces associated
with crime and drugs, etc. These forces, and not black women, are the real villains.
10. For a perceptive analysis of the economic conditions that shape the lives of black
women, seejulianne Malveaux, "The Political Economy of Black Women."
11. The peculiar pain that plagues the relationships between black men and black
women across age, income, and communal strata was on bold and menacing display in the
confrontation between Clarence Thomas and Anita Hill during Senate hearings to explore
claims by Hill that Thomas sexually harassed her while she worked for him at two gov-
ernmental agencies. Their confrontation was facilitated and constructed by the televisual
medium, a ready metaphor for the technological intervention into contemporary relations
between significant segments of the citizenry. Television also serves as the major mediator
between various bodies of public officials and the increasingly narrow publics at whose be-
hest they perform, thus blurring the distinctions between public good and private interest.
The Hill-Thomas hearings also helped expose the wide degree to which the relations be-
tween black men and black women are shaped by a powerful white male gaze. In this case,


--- PAGE 559 ---
530 Notes
the relevant criteria for assessing the truth of claims about sexual harassment and gender
oppression were determined by white senatorial surveillance.
12. Thus, it was unexceptional during the civil rights movement for strong, articulate
black women to be marginalized, or excluded altogether, from the intellectual work of the
struggle. Furthermore, concerns about feminist liberation were generally overlooked, and
many talented, courageous women were often denied a strong or distinct institutional voice
about women's liberation in the racial liberation movement. For a typical instance of such
sexism within civil rights organizations, see Carson's discussion of black female dissent
within SNCC, in Clayborne Carson, In Struggle, pp. 47-48.
13. For insightful claims and descriptions of the marginal status of black feminist and
womanist concerns in black communities and for helpful explorations of the complex prob-
lems faced by black feminists and womanists, see bell hooks's Ain't la Woman; Michele
Wallace's Invisibility Blues; Audre Lorde's Sister/Outsider; and Alice Walker's In Search of Our
Mother's Garden.
14. Of course, many traditional conceptions of virtue display a theoretical blindness to
structural factors that circumscribe and influence the acquisition of traditional moral skills,
habits, and dispositions and the development of alternative and non-mainstream moral skills.
What I mean here is that the development of virtues, and the attendant skills that must be de-
ployed in order to practice them effectively, is contingent upon several factors: where and
when one is born, the conditions under which one must live, the social and communal forces
that limit and define one's life, and so on. These factors color the character of moral skills that
will be acquired, shape the way in which these skills will be appropriated, and even determine
the list of skills required to live the good life in different communities. Furthermore, these
virtues reflect the radically different norms, obligations, commitments, and socioethical visions
of particular communities. For a compelling critique of Maclntyre's contextualist universalist
claim for the prevalence of the virtues of justice, truthfulness, and courage in all cultures and
the implications of such a critique for moral theory, see Alessandro Ferrara, "Universalisms:
Procedural, Contextual, and Prudential." For an eloquent argument that calls for the authors
of the communitarian social vision articulated in Habits of the Heart to pay attention to the life,
thought, and contributions of people of color, see Vincent Harding, "Toward a Darkly Radi-
ant Vision of America's Truth: A Letter of Concern, An Invitation to Re-Creation."
CHAPTER 33. MICHAEL JACKSON'S POSTMODERN SPIRITUALITY
1. See Larry Black, "The Man in the Mirror," Maclean's, May 2, 1988, p. 67; Michael
Goldberg and David Handelman, "Is Michael Jackson for Real?" Rolling Stone, September
24, 1987, p. 55; Jay Cooks and Denise Worrell, "Bringing Back the Magic," Time,]uly 16,
1984, p. 63; and Jim Miller and Janet Huck, "The Peter Pan of Pop," Newsweek, January 10,
1983, pp. 52-54.
2. See Peter Petre, "The Traumas of Molding Crazes into Cash," Fortunejuly 23, 1984,
p. 48; Alex Ben Block, "Just One More Thriller," Forbes 400, October 1, 1984, pp.
232-234; "MichaelJackson Says 'Beat It' to Bootleggers," BusinessWeek, June 4, 1984, p. 36;
and Goldberg and Handelman, "Is Michael Jackson for Real?" p. 140.
3. See, for example, "The Prisoner of Commerce," New Republic, April 16, 1984, p. 4.
4. For an explication of the European (especially French) contexts of postmodernism, see
Jean-Francois Lyotard, 'The postmodern Condition: A Report on Knowledge, trans. Geoff Bennington
and Brian Massumi (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 1984); for an exploration
of contemporary American postmodernism, see Hal Foster, ed., The Anti-Aesthetic: Essays in
Fbstmodern Culture (Port Townsend, Wash.: Bay Press, 1983); see also Andreas Huyssen, After
the Great Divide: Modernism, Mass Culture, Postmodernism (Bloomington: Indiana University Press,
1986); see also his essay, "Mapping the Postmodern," in New German Critique 33 (Fall 1984),
for a historical situating of German, French, and American arguments on postmodernism.
Also see the excellent collection of essays edited by Andrew Ross, Universal Abandon'? The Pol-
itks of Postmodernism (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 1988).


--- PAGE 560 ---
Notes 531
5. Quoted in Richard Kearney, 'The Wake qflmagination: Toward a Postmodern Culture (Min-
neapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 1988).
6. Fredric Jameson, "Postmodernism or the Cultural Logic of Late Capitalism," New
Left Review, no. 145 (1984): 53-91.
7. Anders Stephanson, "Regarding Postmodernism: A Conversation with Fredric Jame-
son," in Universal Abandon? The Politics of Postmodernism, ed. Andrew Ross (Minneapolis: Uni-
versity of Minnesota Press, 1988), pp. 1-12.
8. Cornel West, Prophetic fragments (Trenton, NJ.: Africa World Press, 1988), pp. 168-170.
9. Hal Foster, Postmodern Culture (Concord, Mass.: Pluto, 1985), pp. xii-xiii.
10. Michael Jackson, Moonwalk (New York: Doubleday, 1988), p. 13. All future references
will be cited in the text.
11. Cornel West makes this salient point about the use of a language of rights by
African-American religionists involved in the civil rights movement, in West, Prophetic Frag-
ments, pp. 22-24.
12. For a useful summary of the meaning of ritual in religious experience, see Leszek
Kolakowski, Religion (New York: Oxford University Press, 1982), pp. 165-170.
13. For Bakhtin on carnival, see Mikhail Bakhtin, Rabelais and His World (Cambridge:
Massachusetts Institute of Technology Press, 1968).
14. See Cornel West's insightful discussion of a Christian understanding of democracy
in his Prophesy Deliverance! An Afro-American Revolutionary Christianity (Philadelphia: Westmin-
ster Press, 1982), especially the introduction and chapter 4.
15. Bakhtin, Rabelais, p. 10.
16. Michael Jackson, "Thriller," Thriller, Epic/CBS Records, 1983.
17. Michael Jackson, "Bad," Bad, Epic/CBS Records, 1987.
18. Michael Jackson, performer, "Man in the Mirror" (co-written by Siedah Garrett and
George Ballard), Bad, Epic/CBS Records, 1987.
19. For a penetrating examination of rock music videos and a plausible way of catego-
rizing MTV videos, see E. Ann Kaplan, Rocking Around the Clock: Music Television, Postmod-
ernism, and Consumer Culture (New York: Methuen, 1987), esp. chap. 4. Many of Jackson's
videos are more closely akin to short films, and thus demand a reading that regards them
as such. Also, the religious, cultural, and racial contexts of Jackson's video films must be
examined, as I attempt in my analysis of two of Jackson's video films and of a live perfor-
mance on the 1988 Grammy's telecast.
20. For the effect of Niebuhr on King's thought, see his essay, "Pilgrimage to Nonvio-
lence," in A Testament of Hope: The Essential Writings of Martin Luther King Jr., ed. James M.
Washington (San Francisco: Harper & Row, 1986), pp. 35-36.
21. Goldberg and Handelman, "Is Michael Jackson for Real?" p. 138.
22. Robert Sam Anson, Best Intentions: The Education and Killing of Edmund Perry (New York:
Random House, 1987). For a hard-hitting, highly critical review essay of Anson's book, see
Michael Dyson, "Edmund Perry: The Help That Hurts," Christianity and Crisis 48 (1988):
17-21, expanded as "The Liberal Theory of Race," chap. 9, this volume.
CHAPTER 34. BE LIKE MIKE? MICHAEL JORDAN AND THE
PEDAGOGY OF DESIRE
1. I do not mean here a theory of commodification that does not accentuate the forms
of agency that can function even within restrictive and hegemonic cultural practices. Rather,
I think that, contrary to elitist and overly pessimistic Frankfurt School readings of the spec-
tacle of commodity within mass cultures, common people can exercise "everyday forms of
resistance" to hegemonic forms of cultural knowledge and practice. For an explication of the
function of everyday forms of resistance, see Scott, Domination and the Arts of Resistance.
2. For a critical look at Jordan behind the myth, see Sam Smith, The Jordan Rules (New
York: Simon & Schuster, 1992).


--- PAGE 561 ---
This page intentionally left blank


--- PAGE 562 ---
CREDITS
Chapter Previous Publication
1. Not from Some Racial Zeus's Head: My Intellectual Development. From Open
Mike: Reflections on Philosophy, Race, Sex, Culture and Religion (New York: BasicCiuitas,
2003), pp. 3-22.
2. Letter to My Brother, Everett, in Prison. From Between God and Gangsta Rap: Bearing
Witness to Black Culture (New York: Oxford University Press, 1996), pp. 3-21.
3. This I Believe. From Quest, Spring, 1971, p. 31.
4. The Liberal Theory of Race. From Reflecting Black: African-American Cultural Criticism
(Minneapolis, MN: University of Minnesota Press), pp. 132-143. Originally pub-
lished in ^Magazine, Vol. 2, No. 3, March 1989, pp. 52-57.
5. When You're a Credit to Your Race, the Bill Will Come Due: O J. Simpson and
Our Trial by Fire. From Race Rules: Navigating the Color Line (Reading, MA: Addison-
Wesley, 1996), pp. 10-46.
6. Debating Affirmative Action. Recorded at Wistar Institute, University of Pennsyl-
vania, February 11, 2003.
7. A Reprieve for Affirmative Action. From Philadelphia Inquirer,June 25, 2003, p. A15.
8. Leonard Jeffries and the Struggle for the Black Mind. From Reflecting Black: African-
American Cultural Criticism (Minneapolis, MN: University of Minnesota Press, 1993), pp.
157-163. Originally published in Emerge, February 1992, pp. 32-37.
9. Shakespeare and Smokey Robinson: Revisiting the Culture Wars. From Between
God and Gangsta Rap: Bearing Witness to Black Culture (New York: Oxford University
Press, 1996), pp. 120-134.
10. The Labor of Whiteness, the Whiteness of Labor, and the Perils of Whitewish-
ing. From Audacious Democracy: Labor, Intellectuals, and the Social Reconstruction of America,
eds. Steve Fraser and Joshua B. Freeman (Boston: Mariner Books, 1997), pp. 164-172.
11. Giving Whiteness a Black Eye. From Open Mike: Reflections on Philosophy, Race, Sex,
Culture and Religion (New York: EasicCivitas, 2003), pp. 99-125. Originally published
in White Reign: Deploying Whiteness in America, ed. Joe Kincheloe et al (New York: Pal-
grave Macmillan Ltd., 1998), pp. 299-328.
12. The Plight of Black Men. From Reflecting Black: African-American Cultural Criticism
(Minneapolis, MN: University of Minnesota Press, 1993), pp. 182-194. Originally
published in ZMagazine, Vol. 2, No. 2, February 1989, pp. 51-56.
13. Another Saturday Night, or Have All the Brothers Gone to White Women? From
Why I Love Black Women (New York: EasicCmtas, 2003), pp. 195-232.
14. In O.J.'s Shadow: Kobe Bryant's Predicament. From Savoy, October 2003, pp. 64,
66, 68.
15. "God Almighty Has Spoken from Washington, D.C.": American Society and
Christian Faith. From Reflecting Black: African-American Cultural Criticism (Minneapolis,
MN: University of Minnesota Press, 1993), pp. 286-319. Originally published in
DePaulLaw Review, Vol. 42, No. 1, Fall 1992, pp. 129-159.
16. Gardner Taylor: The Poet Laureate of the American Pulpit. From Between God
and Gangsta Rap: Bearing Witness to Black Culture (New York: Oxford University Press,
1996), pp. 40-55. Originally published in The Christian Century, Vol. 112, No. 1, Jan-
uary 4-11, 1995, pp. 12-16.
17. "Somewhere I Read of the Freedom of Speech": Constructing a Unique Voice.
From I May Not Get "There With You: The True Martin Luther King, Jr. (New York: Free
Press, 2000), pp. 137-154.


--- PAGE 563 ---
534 Credits
Chapter Previous Publication
18. When You Divide Body and Soul, Problems Multiply: The Black Church and
Sexuality. From Race Rules: Navigating the Color Line (Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley,
1996), pp. 77-108.
19. Homotextualities. From Open Mike: Refactions on Philosophy, Race, Sex, Culture and Reli-
gion (New York: BasicCivitas, 2003), pp. 360-384.
20. X Marks the Plots: A Critical Reading of Malcolm's Readers. From Making Mal-
colm: The Myth and Meaning of Malcolm X (New York: Oxford University Press, 1995),
pp. 21-76. Originally published in Social Text 35, Spring 1993, pp. 25-55.
21. Mixed Blessings: Martin Luther King, Jr., and the Lessons of an Ambiguous
Heroism. From Reflecting Black: African-American Cultural Criticism (Minneapolis, MN:
University of Minnesota Press), pp. 221-246. Originally published in earlier form in
Union Seminary Quarterly Review, Vol. 44, Nos. 1-2, 1990, pp. 85-99.
22. "Give Me a Paper and Pen": Tupac's Place in Hip-Hop. From Holler If You Hear
Me: Searchingfor Tupac Shakur (New York: Basic Civitas, 2001), pp. 105-139.
23. Spike Lee's Neonationalist Vision. From Reflecting Black: African-American Cultural
Criticism (Minneapolis, MN: University of Minnesota Press), pp. 23-31. Originally
published in Tikkun, Vol. 4, No. 5, September/October 1989, pp. 75-78.
24. Between Apocalypse and Redemption: John Singleton's Boyz JV the Hood. From
Reflecting Black: African-American Cultural Criticism (Minneapolis, MN: University of Min-
nesota Press), pp. 90-110. Originally published in Film Theory Goes To The Movies. Ed.
Jim Collins et al (New York: Routledge, 1993), pp. 209-226.
25. Ghettocentricity and the New Black Cinema. From The Subversive Imagination: Artists,
Society and Social Responsibility. Ed. Carol Becker (New York: Routledge, 1994), pp.
154-167.
26. The Promise and Perils of Contemporary Gospel Music. From Reflecting Black:
African-American Cultural Criticism (Minneapolis, MN: University of Minnesota Press), pp.
322-327. Originally published in The New York Times, December 22, 1991, pp. 30-31.
27. Mariah Carey and "Authentic" Black Music. From Between God and Gangsta Rap:
Bearing Witness to Black Culture (New York: Oxford University Press, 1996), pp.
143-146. Originally published in The New York Times, February 13, 1994, Section 2
(Arts & Leisure), p. 30.
28. Aretha Franklin, Vanessa Bell Armstrong, and Me. From Why I Love Black Women
(New York: BasicCivitas, 2003), pp. 46-56.
29. The Great Next: Jazz Origins and the Anatomy of Improvisation. From Open
Mike: Reflections on Philosophy, Race, Sex, Culture and Religion (New York: EasicCivitas,
2003), pp. 179-206.
30. The Culture of Hip-Hop. From Reflecting Black: African-American Cultural Criticism
(Minneapolis, MN: University of Minnesota Press), pp. 3-15. Originally published
in Z Magazine, June 1989.
31. Gangsta Rap and American Culture. From Between God and Gangsta Rap: Bearing Wit-
ness to Black Culture (New York: Oxford University Press, 1996), pp. 176-186.
32. We Never Were What We Used to Be: Black Youth, Pop Culture, and the Poli-
tics of Nostalgia. From Race Rules: Navigating the Color Line (Reading, MA: Addison-
Wesley, 1996), pp. 109-149.
33. Michael Jackson's Postmodern Spirituality. From Reflecting Black: African-American Cul-
tural Criticism (Minneapolis, MN: University of Minnesota Press), pp. 35-60. Originally
published in Black Sacred Music: A Journal ofTheomusicohgy, Vol. 3, No. 2, Fall 1989, pp.
98-124.
34. Be Like Mike? Michael Jordan and the Pedagogy of Desire. From Reflecting Black:
African-American Cultural Criticism (Minneapolis, MN: University of Minnesota Press), pp.
64-75. Originally published in Cultural Studies, Vol. 7, No. 1, January 1993, pp. 64-72.
35. Is Postmodernism Just Modernism in Drag? From Open Mike: Reflections on Philoso-
phy, Race, Sex, Culture and Religion (New York: BasicCivitas, 2003), pp. 151-178.
36. It's Not What You Know, It's How You Show It: Black Public Intellectuals. From Race
Rules: Navigating the Color Line (Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley, 1996), pp. 47-76.


--- PAGE 564 ---
INDEX
Aaron, Hank, 53
Abdul, Paula, 368
Abuse, physical
allegation of King's, 303
child abuse, 25-29
Kobe Bryant's alleged sexual abuse,
167-170
Academic life, 13-15, 470, 494-509
Addiction to tabloids, author's, 482
Adler, Margot, 69-85
Adolescence. See Childhood and adolescence
Adultery, 222
Advertising industry
marketing Michael Jordan, 461-468
sports figures, 49-50
use of Martin Luther King, Jr., 264
Aeolian Hall concert, 389
Aesthetic alienation of hip-hop culture,
424-433
Affirmative action
as reverse racism, 120
college admissions policy, 42, 69-85,
86-88
neoconservative black stance on, 300
Aframnesia, 472
African culture: origins of jazz, 378-380
African Origin of Biological Rychiatry (King), 92
Afrocentricity (Asante), 93
Aging, 201
Air Jordan, 464
Alexander, Margaret Walker, 100, 381
Ali, Muhammad, 396, 481
Ali, Shahrazad, 285, 345-346
Allen, Theodore, 119
American Civil War, 380
American Revolution, 114
Anger
at humiliating behavior of whites, 25-27
white male anger, 111, 120
Anson, Robert Sam, 37-45
Antimiscegenation laws, 159
Arendt, Hannah, xvii
Armstrong, Louis, 383, 387, 390, 393, 432
Armstrong, Vanessa Bell, 370-375, 430
Art, 392-394. See also Music
Asante, Molefi Kete, 93, 95
ASCAP, 389-390
Asian Americans, 79-80
Assassination
Malcolm X, 273
Martin Luther King, Jr., 145-146
Assimilation theory, 40-41
Athletes, 422
Kobe Bryant, 167-170
Michael Jordan, 461-468
OJ. Simpson, 46-66, 167, 169-170
virtue transcending sports, 48-49
See also Sports
Atwater, Lee, 406
Autobiography of Malcolm X, 262
Awards, 494, 504-509
Bacharach, Burt, 471
.Barf (video), 37, 453-457
Bailey, Harold, 363, 366
Baker, Anita, 460
Bakkecase, 70-71, 75, 86, 87
Baldwin, James, 99, 443, 478
Bambaataa, Afrika, 426
Baraka, Amiri, 358
Baseball, 463
Basketball, 422, 461-468, 483-485
Bassett, Angela, 165
Baxter, Michael, 173-191
Bebop, 393, 397
Beharjoy, 147
Beiderbecke, Bix, 387, 391
The Bell Curve (Hermstein and Murray), 61,120
Benjamin, Playthell, 419
Bennett, Lerone, 291
Bennett, William, 411, 415, 416
Bernal, Martin, 93-94
Berry, Halle, 164-165
Best Intentions (Anson), 37-38, 41-43, 453
Betweener generation, 476-478, 486-487
Bing, Leon, 354
Biological determinism, 93, 130-131, 329
Biracialism, 367-369
Black, Cordell, 6
Black art controversy, 392-393
Black Athena: 'the AJroasiatic Roots of Classical
Civilization (Bernal), 93-94
Black Entertainment Television (BET), 46-66
Black History Month, 202-203
"The Blackman's Guide to Understanding the
Blackwoman (Ali), 285, 345-346


--- PAGE 565 ---
536 Index
Black Reconstruction (Du Bois), 503
Blige, Mary J., 430-431
Bloom, Harold, 489-490
Blues music, 364-365, 383, 395-396, 397,
405,431
Body, human
black masculinity, 481-483
body-centered culture, 225-227
commodification of Michael Jordan,
465-468
fashionable nature of blacks, 497
Boggs, James, 266
Bok, Derek, 73
Boozer, Jack, 209
Bourgie blacks, 256-257
Boxing, 395-397
Boyz N the Hood (1991), 334-348,
352-353
Bradley, Michael, 92
Bray, Rosemary, 261
Breitman, George, 281-284
Bricolage, 397, 477
Brightman, Edgar, 209
Brokaw, Tom, 338
Brotherhood, 32-33
Brown, James, 410
Brown, Jamie, 163
Brown, Jim, 49
Brown, Robert McAfee, 473
Brown University, 14
Bruce, Tammy, 55-56
Bryant, Kobe, 167-170
Burdette, Otis, 6, 32
Burns, Khephra, 309, 310
Bush, George W., 70
Buttrick, George, 194
By Any Means Necessary (Malcolm X),
283-284
Caesar, Shirley, 366
Galloway, Vanessa Bell, 157
Capitalism, 445
Carey, Mariah, 367-369
Caribbean music, 426
Carnival, 448
Carson, Clayborne, 274
Carson-Newman College, 11
Carter, Jimmy, 248
Carter, Maria Agui, 376-397
Casanova complex, 234
Catholic Church scandal, 248
Censorship of gangsta rap, 415
Character, evolution of, 469-470
Charles, Ray, 372
Chennault, Ronald E., 113-133
Chicago, Illinois, 385-386, 388-389
Childhood and adolescence, 337
author's upbringing, 4-5
discipline versus abuse, 25-29
of Malcolm X, 277
Christianity. See Religion
Church-state relations, xviii, 174-191
Civilization or Barbarism: An Authentic
Anthropology (Diop), 93
Civil religion, 186-189
Civil Rights Act (1964), 85
Civil rights movement, 41, 289
Clarke, John Henrik, 265
Class. See Socioeconomic status
Cleage, Albert, 266, 281
Clinton, Bill, 121-123, 126, 131, 475
Clinton, George, xxiii
Cochran, Johnnie, 52, 63-64
Cockrel, Kenneth, 4-5
Cohen, Carl, 69-85
Cohen, William, 419
College admissions, 42, 69-85, 86-88
Collier, James Lincoln, 379
Collins, Lisa, 364
Colonialism, 130-132
Colors (1988), 142, 338
Coltrane, John, 383, 464
Coming of age. See Childhood and
adolescence
Common, 321
Community: Bcyz N the Hood, 341-343
Conejames, 213, 269-272, 281, 506
Congo Square, New Orleans, 384
Congreve, William, 377
Constitution, U.S., 74, 85, 115, 174-191
Consumerism: consumption of Michael
Jordan, 481-482
Cooke, Sam, 9, 372, 422
Cooley High (Schultz), 335
Cowlings, A.C., 54
Cox, Oliver, 503
Crack cocaine, 141-143, 342, 437
Cranbrook School, 7-8
Cray, Robert, 406
Creole people, 378-380
Cress-Welsing, Frances, 61, 92, 130
Crime
evolution of drug and gang culture in the
ghetto, 141-143
portrayed in film, 353-354
See also Homicide; Violence
Cross, Ted, 76
Crouch, Andrae, 365, 458
Crouch, Stanley, 316-318, 427-428, 429, 432
Cuba, 132-133
Cultural adaptation, 386-387
Cultural icon, Michael Jordan as, 461-468


--- PAGE 566 ---
Index 537
Cultural pluralism, 40
Cultural Studies journal, 461-468
Culture, black, 469-490
convergence of rhetorical universes,
476-478
film criticism, 335-348
Tupac Shakur as symbol of, 482
white musicians' appropriation of, 386-388
See also Film; Hip-hop
Curry, George, 150
D'Angelo, 431
Daniels, David, 37, 39
Darden, Christopher, 52, 64
Dash, Julie, 359
David, Hal, 471
Davis, Angela, 506-507
Davis, Mike, 437
Davis, Miles, 396
Death
depressingly large numbers of black men,
137-138
firearms' contribution to, 437-438
transcending, 482
See also Homicide
The Death and Life of Malcolm X (Goldman), 273
Declaration of Independence, 115
Dee, Big Tray, 306
Deification of Accidence, 98, 392-393
Demme, Jonathan, 355
Detroit, Michigan, 140
symbols of home, 474
women vocalists, 370-375
Dialectical Society, 213
Dickerson, Ernest, 353, 354, 356
Dill, Augustus, 423
DiMaggio, Joe, 49
Dinkins, David, 192
Diop, Cheikh Anta, 93
Disco culture, 484
Dissent magazine, 507-508
The Disuniting of America: Reflections on a
Multicultural Society (Schlesinger), 94
Divorce: grim statistics for black women, 149
Dixieland music, 397
DJ Jazzy Jeff, 404
DJ Kool Here, 426
Dogg, Snoop Doggy, 419, 422, 432
Dole, Bob, 411, 415, 416
Domestic violence, 430
Domination
many faces of white domination, 108-110
white-black domination, 250-251
whiteness as, 114
Dorsey, Thomas A., 364-365, 388
Do the Right Thing (1989), 327, 328-333
Douglas, Ann, 128
Douglass, Frederick, 480
Douglass, Mary, 391
Dr. Dre, 419, 432
Drug trafficking, 141-142
Drumming, 384, 425
Du Bois, W.E.B.
as face of American identity, 103
criticism of, 505
grim prophecy of, 146
politics of nostalgia, 423
psychic wages of whiteness, 118
racial discourse, 124-125
racism in academia, 499, 503
schism with Washington, 271
spurningjazz, 381-382, 383, 428
Duke, George, 308
Dunbar, Paul Laurence, 99
Dyson, Brenda, 26-27
Dyson, Mike, 26-27
Dyson, Terrie, 8-9, 29
Dyson-Bey, Everett, 15, 19-31, 317
Earning gap, 76-77, 334
Easy Rider (1969), 338
Ebert, Roger, 327
Ebony magazine, 152, 484
Economies of whiteness, 118-120
Ecstasy, religious, 448
Edifying deception, 464-465
Education
affirmative action and university admissions,
42-43, 69-85, 72-73, 75, 86-88
as criterion for black women choosing
black men, 152-155
author's education and intellectual
development, 3-18
author's high standards in literature and
thinking, 99-103
low levels of achievement of black men,
138-139
Martin Luther King, Jr., 209
racism on college campuses, 37-38
the power of knowledge, xxii-xxiii
versus prison for black men, 150-151
Egyptian culture, 94
Einstein, Albert, xxi-xxii
"Elegy" (Gray), 101
Eliot, T.S., 99, 388
Ellington, Duke, 390, 432
Ellis, Aunjanue, 157
Ellison, Ralph
black masculinity, 481
modernism and, 478
multicultural applicability of his work,
98-99


--- PAGE 567 ---
538 Index
Ellison, Ralph (continued)
on O J. Simpson, 47
on whiteness, 129
Emancipation through music, 380
Emerge magazine, 91-95
Emerging culture theory, 40
The End of White World Supremacy: Four Speeches
by Malcolm X (Karmi, ed.), 266-267
Erudition, 489-490
Eventful versus event-making persons,
290-291
Family
Boyz N the Hood, 334-348
cultural adaptation during urban
migration, 386-387
dependence on man's fate, 351-352
Everett Dyson-Bey's imprisonment, 19-31
Moynihan's study, 433
Family values, 415-416
Fantasy, sexual, 247-253
Farley, Jonathan, 155
Farrakhan, Louis, 328, 333, 504
Fascism, 190-191
Fatherhood: Boyz N the Hood, 334-348,352-353
Feminism, 55-56
Film and film criticism
Boyz N the Hood, 334-348
gangster films, 317-318, 353-357
hip-hop culture, 349-359
Malcolm X, 358-359
OJ. Simpson's appearance in, 54
purpose of film criticism, 335-336
Spike Lee's Do the Right Thing, 327-328
Firearms, 437-438
First Amendment, 174-191
Fish, Stanley, 180-184
Fitzgerald, F. Scott, 382
Florio-Bunten, Francine, 65
Foreman, George, 396
Foucault, Michel, xxii, 251
Founding Fathers, 174-178
Franklin, Aretha, 364, 370-375, 428, 430-432
Franklin, Benjamin, 178
Franklin, C.L., 196, 371, 430
Frazier, E. Franklin, 499
Freedom (Patterson), 119
The Fresh Prince, 404-405
Fuhrman, Mark, 52, 61-62, 63, 64
Funk music, 419
Gammage, Jonny, 497
Gandhi, Mohandas (Mahatma), 275, 296-297
Gangs, 141-143, 338, 353-357
Gangsta rap, 411-417, 419, 420-421, 432
Gangster films, 317, 353-357
Garrow, David, 210-211
Gates, Henry Louis Jr., 508-509, 509
Gay and lesbian issues. See Homosexuality
Gaye, Marvin, 227, 425
Gender relations
Bcyz Nthe Hood, 334, 337-338, 339,
343-347, 352-353
Malcolm X, 358-359
sexism in blues, 318-319, 430
sexism in rap, 318-319, 407, 412
See also Women
Generation gaps, 313-315, 318, 419-420
Genovese, Eugene, 210, 213
G-funk, 419
Ghettocentricity, 349-359
Ghetto life
black identity and the black home,
471-472
Boyz N the Hood, 334-348
shaping the lives of black males, 141-143
Straight Out of Brooklyn, 350-352
Giddins, Gary, 432
Gifford, Kathie Lee, 147
Gilroy, Paul, 507
Ginsburg, Ruth Bader, 88
Giovanni's Room (Baldwin), 470
Giroux, Henry, 466
Gitlin, Todd, 107, 125
Goldman, Peter, 273, 281
Goodman, Benny, 387
Gore, Tipper, 403
Gospel music, 363-366, 370-375, 383, 388,
430
Graff, Gerald, 477
Grandmaster Flash and The Furious Five,
143, 402, 427
Grant, Amy, 366
Grant, Madison, 40
Gravity, Jordan's defying, 465
Gray, Thomas, 101
Gregory, Dick, 488
Griffith, Michael, 327
Grossberg, Lawrence, 461
The Growing Edge (Thurman), 435
Gumbo ya-ya of black identity, 384-385
Gun culture, 437-438
Hall, Arsenio, 422
Hall, Stuart, 332
Hamer, Fannie Lou, 133
Hanigan, James, 291
Harlem Renaissance, 253, 381, 428-429
Harris, Leslie, 359
The Harvard Classics, 101-102
Harvard University, 508-509
Hathaway, Donny, 432


--- PAGE 568 ---
Index 539
Hauerwas, Stanley, 173-190
Hawkins, Edwin, 365
Hawkins, Tramaine, 366
Hawkins, Walter, 365
Hawkins, Yusuf, 327
Hazing, 40
Hegel, Georg Wilhelm Friedrich, 431
Heisenberg's uncertainty principle, xxii
Helms-Burton Act, 132
Henderson, Fletcher, 387
Hero celebration
athletes, 48-49
Malcolm X, 263-268, 285-286
Martin Luther King, Jr., 287-305
Herrnstein, Richard, 61
Herskovits, Melville, 392-393
Hill, Anita, 56, 197, 353
Hill, Lauryn, 321-322
Hine, Darlene Clark, 157
Hip-hop
aesthetic alienation of, 424-433
as alternative to crack culture, 143-144
as expression of black male rebellion, 353
as face of American identity, 104
as response to crisis of black masculinity,
338
as setting for film, 349-359
authenticity of, 367-369
audior's support of, 419-420
complexity and diversity of, 320-322
criticisms of, 308-310
gangsta rap, 411-417
jazz and, 392, 394, 427-430
juvenocracy and the culture of violence,
435-440
on black men in prison, 150-151
origins and development of, 311-312,
401-410, 497
racial justice and the imprisonment of
rappers, 66
sexism and sexuality of, 318-319, 394-395
thug life, 310-311
Tupac Shakur's contribution to, 306-323
use of "nigger," 254-256
Hobbes, Thomas, 440
Hollywood Shuffle (1987), 344
Holmes, Urban T, 246
Home, symbolic, 471-476, 476-478
Homicide
homicide rate of black men, 139, 140-141
imprisonment of Everett Dyson-Bey,
21-23
of prominent black men, 145-146
statistics, 335
Homoeroticism, 238-240, 246, 250-253
Homophobia, 238-257, 412, 416, 485
Homosexuality, 238-257
alleged homosexuality of Malcolm X, 278
black identity and disenfranchisement, 472
bourgie blacks and gay self-identity,
256-257
Dennis Rodman as masculine/feminine
symbol, 483-485
eroricization of white supremacy, 250-253
homophobia of the religious community,
235-236
nomenclature of, 253-256
religion and, xvii-xviii
sacred scriptures as guide to homosexual
relationships, 244-246
sexual healing through the Bible, 240-244
theology of homoeroticism, 236, 238-240
Hook, Sidney, 290
hooks, bell, 494, 504, 505, 506
Hopper, Dennis, 338
Horton, Willie, 406
House Party (Hudlin and Hudlin), 335
Houston, Cissy, 460
Houston, Whitney, 460
Howard Beach, 328-329
Hudlin, Reginald and Warrington, 335
Hughes, Langston, 392-393, 429, 478-479
Hume, David, 498
Humility, 505, 509
Hurston, Zora Neale, 46, 508
Hybrid women, 156
Hypervisibility of black youdi, 440
Ice Cube, 150, 338, 339
The Iceman Inheritance: Prehistoric Sources of
Western Man's Racism, Sexism, and
Aggression (Bradley), 92
Ice-T, 353-354
Identity, black, 469-490
black modernists, 478-479
essence of black culture, 225-226
home and the architecture of identity,
471-476
importance of Congo Square to, 384-385
in jazz, 380
Lee's portrayal in film, 328
legislation of black music, 394-395
Michael Jackson, 444, 446-448, 452-453
Michael Jordan, 461-468
portrayed in Michael Jackson's videos,
456-457
privacy and identity in urban settings,
342-343
rap as social commentary on, 401-403,
405-406
renewing the debate over denning,
497-498


--- PAGE 569 ---
540 Index
Identity, black (continued)
self-identification, xix-xxi
sexual identity and, 242-243
with white supremacist overlay, 115-116
Identity, self, 288-289
Identity, white. See Whiteness
Identity politics, 96-104, 107-112, 125
Ignatiev, Noel, 118, 127
I May Not Get There with You (Dyson), 202
Immigrants, European, 385-386
Improvisational intentionality, 393
Improvisational music, 379-380, 432
Income gap, 76-77, 334
Institutional expression of whiteness, 115
Intellectuals, 493-509
author's intellectual development, 3-18,
99-101
hip-hop and jazz, 427-430
reasons for becoming, xvii-xxvi
Reed's antipathy towards, 261
Internet: visions of Tupac Shakur, 482
Interracial sex, 158-166, 167-170
Invisible Man (Ellison), 481
Irigaray, Luce, 125
The Isis Papers: The Keys to the Colors (Cress-
Welsing), 61, 92-93, 130
Islam, 23-25
Italians, as denigrators of blacks, 91-95
Jackson, Jesse
intellectualism and education, xxv-xxvi
preaching style, 196
presidential campaign, 302
Vanessa Bell Armstrong and, 374-375
JacksonJ.H., 197-198
Jackson, Mahalia, 365
Jackson, Michael, 443-460
James, C.L.R., 284
James, Mrs., xix, 4-6, 99-101
Jameson, Fredric, 427, 445
Jazz, 364-365, 376-397, 425, 427-430
Jazz Age, 382
Jefferson, Thomas, 174, 175, 178-179, 498
Jeffries, Leonard, 91-95
Jehovah's Witnesses, 445-447, 450
Jews as denigrators of blacks, 91-95
Johnson, James Weldon, 196
Johnson, Lyndon, 77
Jones, Ingrid Saunders, 157
Jones, Paula, 122
Jones, Quincy, 158, 460
Jones, Star, 147
Jones, William Augustus, 197
Jordan, Michael, 50, 422, 461-468,
481-485
Juke (1992), 353, 354, 355, 356-357
Justice Talking (radio program), 69-85
Juvenocracy, 395, 418, 435-440, 467
Kallen, Horace, 40
Karim, Benjamin, 266-267
Keith, Damon, 7
KeUey, Robin D.G., 107, 313-314, 505-506
Kennedy, Robert, 292
King, Martin Luther, Jr., 287-305
Anson's march with, 45
as public moralist, 270-272
assassination of, 487-489
black nihilism, 434
civic piety and black Christianity, 187
Clinton's invoking of, 475
cultural manipulation of hero celebration,
264-265
ethics and politics of hero celebration,
287-293
inadequacy of the vision, 298-305
irony of current racism, xviii
modifying the voice and persona of,
205-208
moral failings of, 202, 204-205, 209-216,
233-234, 302-303
moral vision of, 293-298
need for addressing present forms of
discrimination, 78
preaching style, 196
sacrifices of, 506
Spike Lee's use of King in films, 330
whites understanding racism, 84
King, Richard, 92
King, Rodney, 53, 62-63, 338, 342, 497
Kirkpatrick, Douglas, 465
Kitchen as metaphor for black exile, 479-480
Knickerbockers, New York, 422
Knight, Carolyn, 196
Knowledge, the power of, xxii-xxiii
Knoxville College, 9, 372
Kohl, Herbert, 419
Kool Moe Dee, 464
Korean Americans, 338
Kristeva, Julia, 125
KRS-One, 403
Ku Klux Klan, 189
Labor, xxiv, 107-112, 385-386
Ladies Home Journal magazine, 428
LaGrone, Kheven, 238-257
Langer, Gary, 81
Language
identity politics and, 96-104
intellectual development, 6
music as language, 319, 381, 408, 425
nomenclature of homosexuality, 253-256


--- PAGE 570 ---
Index 541
of identity, 10-11
use of "nigger," 254-256
The Last Year of Malcolm X (Breitman), 281-284
Latino-Americans, 426-427, 454-455
Learning Tree (Parks), 335
Lee, Spike, 327, 356-358
Lewis, David Levering, 508
Life expectancy, 334
Lindsay, Calvin A., Jr., 376-397
Lischer, Richard, 205-208, 212
Literacy
Gardner Taylor's heritage, 193
slaveowners' control of communication,
480
the power of knowledge, xxii-xxiii
Little Richard, 460
Locke, John, 174
Lomax, Louis, 269-270, 272, 281
Long, Charles, 186-187
Lott, Eric, 504-505
Louis, Joe, 49
Maclntyre, Alisdair, 11
Madison, James, 175
Maguire, Liz, 261
Making Malcolm: The Myth and Meaning of
Malcolm X (Dyson), 261
Malcolm: The Life of a Man Who Changed Black
America (Perry), 277-278
Malcolm X, 261-286, 329-330, 498
a psychobiography, 275-280
as public moralist, 268-275
as revolutionary, 280-284
film depiction of, 358-359
hero worship of, 263-268
influence on black masculinity, 350
"so-called Negro revolution," xix, xxi
Malcolm X (1992), 327
Malcolm X: The Man and His Times (Clarke),
265
Malcolm X Speaks, 283-284
Male bonding, 334-348
Mandela, Nelson, 374
Mandela, Winnie, 375
Man in a Fblyester Suit (Mapplethorpe),
247-250
"Man in the Mirror" (Jackson), 458-459
Mapplethorp, Robert, 250-251
March on Washington, xviii
Marriage: statistics for black women, 149
Marsalis, Wynton, 427-428, 429, 432
Martin and Malcolm and America (Cone),
269-272
Martin Luther King Plagiarism Story (Pappas),
210
Marty, Martin, 178
Masculinity
black masculinity as text of identity,
481-483
Bcyi Xthe Hood, 334-348
exploration in film, 350-359
Massey, James Earl, 195, 197
Material culture, 228, 412-413
Matthews, Don, 197
Mayfield, Curtis, xix
McCall, Nathan, 164
McVeigh, Timothy, 120-121
Meir, Golda, 505
Melanin, role in shaping culture, 61, 91-93,
130
Melting pot theory, 40
Melville, Herman, 98
Memory, politics of, 474-476
Michigan, University of, 69-85, 86-88
Miller, Keith D., 205-208, 212
Ministry, author's, 9-11
MitcheU, Henry H., 195-196
Moby-Dick (Melville), 98
Modernism, 427, 478-479
Monster's Ball (2001), 164
Montgomery bus boycott, 290-291, 301
Momwalk Jackson), 443, 446, 447, 449,
458-459
Moorish Temple Muslims, 23-25
Moral decline, 423, 435-440
Morals and Manners Among Negro Americans
(Du Bois and Dill, eds.), 423
Moral strangers, black youth as, 432-435
Morrison, Toni, 124, 309, 312, 474, 481
Morton, Jelly Roll, 425
Mos Def, 307, 319-320
Moseley-Braun, Carol, 419
Mottola, Tommy, 367
Moynihan, Daniel, 433
MTV, 405
Muhammad, Elijah, 267, 276, 281-282, 409
Multiculturalism, 98-104
Murder. See Homicide
Murray, Albert, 471
Murray, Charles, 61
Music
Aretha Franklin and Vanessa Bell
Armstrong, 370-375
author's roots in, 10-11
bebop, 393, 397
black music as American culture, 479
blues, 364-365, 383, 395-396, 397, 405,
431
Caribbean music, 426
disco, 484
gospel, 363-366, 370-375, 383, 388, 430
jazz, 364-365, 376-397, 425, 427-430


--- PAGE 571 ---
542 Index
Music (continued)
Mariah Carey and, 367-369
nostalgia over changing forms of, 475
ragtime, 376-377, 379-380, 381, 397
sampling, 409-410
sorrow songs, 480
whites' control of black music, 389-391
See also Hip-hop
Mussolini, Benito, 190-191
The Myth of the Negro Past (Herskovits), 392-393
Naked Gun films, 54
Nationalism, 282-284, 327-333
Nation of Islam, 267, 269-270, 328, 409
Neal, Mark Anthony, 46
Neocolonialism, 130-132
Neonationalism, 327-333
New Deal, 40-41
New Jack City (1991), 353-354
New jack gospel, 366
New Orleans, Louisiana, 377-380, 384-385
New Republic magazine, 507
News media
assassination of Martin Luther King, Jr.,
487-489
black public intellectuals, 501-502
racism and black intellectuals, 498
Newton, Patricia, 92
New York Times, 363-366, 367-369
New York Times Book Review, 12
Nihilism, 433-435
Northwestern University, 14
Nostalgia, politics of, 423-440
N.W.A. (Niggas With Attitude), 342,
406-407, 419
O'Connor, Sandra Day, 87
Oklahoma City bombing, 120-121
Omi, Michael, 44
Operation Hope, 7
Oprah (television program), 506
Organization of Afro-American Unity
(OAAU), 273
Original Dixieland Jazz Band, 378, 389
Owens, Chandler, 382, 428
Paper bag test, 388
Pappas, Theodore, 210
Parenthood, xxiii-xxiv
author's experience with, 8-9
Boyz N the Hood, 334-348, 352-353
disciplining children, 25-27
Parker, Bernard, 7
Parks, Gordon, 335
Partisan Review journal, 507
Patriarchy, 266
Patterson, Orlando, 119
Pattison, Robert, 392
Pedophilic priests, 248
Perception, 489-490
Perry, Bruce, 277-278
Perry, Edmund, 37-42, 453
Perry, Jonah, 37, 38
Perry, Veronica, 39, 43-44
Pet Negro system, 46, 508
Phallic symbolism, 481
Phillips, William, 507
Pigmentocracy, 70
Pippin, James, 370, 372-374
Pius XI, 190-191
Plagiarism, 204-216
Plastic surgery, 452
Plato, 377, 394
Pluralism, religious, 174-191
Pokier, Sidney, 158
Police brutality
author's firsthand experience, 25-27
depriving urban dwellers of privacy and
identity, 342-343
in Lee's movies, 331-332
personal experience versus theory, 72
rap depiction of, 406-407
Rodney King, 62-63
whites' reaction to, 53
Political correctness, 124
The Political Legacy of Malcolm X (T'shaka),
266-267
Politics
American-Cuban relations, 132-133
Clinton's failure to address race, 126
identity politics, 107-112, 125
King's moral vision, 295-296
of free speech, 182-184
of gangsta rap, 412-416
of jazz, 392
of nostalgia, 423-440
racism and music, 367-369
subversive empathy, 475
Poor white trash, 121-122
Pop culture, 100-101, 418-440
Pop rap, 404-405
Postmodernism, 469-490
black modernists, 478-479
convergence of rhetorical universes,
476-478
defining masculinity, 481-485
hip-hop as, 427
home and identity, 471-476
information glut, 489-490
Michael Jackson's postmodern spirituality,
443-460
television and pop culture, 485-486


--- PAGE 572 ---
Index 543
Poussaint, Ann Ashmore, 152
Poverty, 23, 141-143, 300
Powell, Adam Clayton, Jr., 194
Powell, Lewis, 70-71, 75
Prashad,Vijay,310-311
The Preacher King (Lischer), 205-208
Preaching
about sexuality, 220-222
academic lecturing as, 477
Aretha and C.L. Franklin's vocal
pyrotechnics, 371-372
as one facet of identity, 472-474
Black History Month, 202-204
body-centered culture, 226-227
role in King's message and voice, 205-208
Taylor, Gardner, 194-201
See also Gospel music; Religion
Presley, Elvis, 482
Price, Vincent, 450
Prince, 460
Princeton University, 11-13
Prison
author's brother's imprisonment, 15, 19-31
limiting the pool of available black men,
150-151
population statistics, 335
sexual fantasies about, 252-253
Probation Challenge (organization), 366
Prophetic fragments (West), 44-45
Prophets, 506
Pryor, Richard, 464
Psychobiography, 275-280
Public Enemy, 404, 408-409, 413, 421
Public intellectuals, 493-509
Purify and Danger (Douglass), 391
Quilts, 480
Qu'ran, 246
Raboteau, Albert, 13
Race
alternatives to liberal theory, 44-45
as factor in college admissions, 42, 69-85,
72-73, 75, 86-88
Cuban perception of, 132-133
determining racial categories, 77
explaining the Simpson trial verdict,
59-66
importance of discourse on, 122-124
liberal theory of, 37-45
rise of black public intellectuals, 496-500
Rate Rules (Dyson), 46-66, 493-509
Racial clarification, 60-64
Racial concealment, 117
Racial Formation in the United States (Omi and
Winant), 44
Racial formation theory, 44
Racial justification, 61-64
Racial memory. See Nostalgia, politics of
Racism
author's education, 7-8
black sexuality and, 223-225
college admissions criteria and, 42, 69-85,
72-73, 75, 86-88
distorting the history of African
Americans, 279-280
impact on development of jazz, 378-380
impact on Martin Luther King, 302-303
Jeffries's emulation of white racism, 95
melanin theory and, 92-93
on college campuses, 37-45
political correctness as, 124
pop music versus hip-hop culture,
367-369
portrayal in Do the Right "Thing, 328-333
powerlessness of black men, 144-145
rap's portrayal of, 406-407
response to the Simpson trial, 57-66
Simpson case reawakening hostilities,
47-66
transcending racism for humanity, 32-33
See also Police brutality; White supremacy
Ragtime music, 376-377, 379-380, 381, 397
Raising Hell, 402-403
Randolph, A. Phillip, 382, 428
Rap. See Hip-hop
Rape, 167-170, 249-250
"Rapper's Delight," 401-402
Ravitch, Diane, 94
Ray, Ola, 450-452
Reagan, Ronald, 264, 300
Red Hook Housing Project, Brooklyn, New
York, 350-352
Reed, Adolf, 261, 504-505
Reed, Willis, 48
Reflecting Black (Dyson), 14
Reggae music, 426
Religion
as factor in Edmund Perry's life, 43-44
author's education and development,
4-5
author's ministry, 9-11
body-centered aspect of, 225-227
church-state relations, 174-191
Elijah Complex award, 505
erotic engagements with God, 246-247
Everett Dyson-Bey's conversion to Islam,
23-25
evolution of character, 469
freeing blacks from white-imposed sexual
values, 223-225
good and evil, 21


--- PAGE 573 ---
544 Index
Religion (continued)
gospel music, 363-366, 370-375, 383,
388, 430
influencing public speaking, 16
institutional expression of whiteness and
white supremacy, 115-116
institutions as source of misogyny and
homophobia, 417
intellectualism and, xvii-xix
King's moral vision, 294-295, 301
King's vocation, 212-213
Malcolm X and the Nation of Islam,
269-270
Malcolm X as public moralist, 268-275
Michael Jackson's roots, 445-448,
459-460
power of black pulpit for effecting change,
473
religious freedom, 174-191
sacred scriptures as guide to homosexual
relationships, 244-246
Sampson's influence, xxiv-xxv
sexual exploitation by clergy, 233-235
sexual healing of homosexuals through
the Bible, 240-244
sexuality and, 219-237
theology of eroticism, 227-233
theology of homoeroticism, 236, 238-240
the quest for black identity during
turmoil, 476-477
versus social transformation, 173-190
See also Preaching; Spirituality
Resistance, 480-481
Revolutionaries, 263-268
Rhythm and blues music, 394-395, 431
Rich, Matty, 350-352
Rigor of intellectual work, 502-503
Riley, Teddy, 366
Riots, 488, 497
Rival epistemologies, 6
Robeson, Paul, 267
Robinson, Jackie, 49
Robinson, Melanie, 164
Robinson, Patricia, 266
Rock 'n' roll music, 389-390
Rodman, Dennis, 483-485
Roediger, David, 112, 118, 119
Rogers, Cornish, 211-212, 213-214
Roosevelt, Theodore, 85
Rosaldo, Renato, 475
Run-D.M.C., 402-403
Russell, Bertrand, 103
Sampling (grafting of music), 409-410, 426
Sampson, Frederick George II, xxiv-xxv,
4-5,102-103, 231, 287
Sandalow, Terrence, 72
Scherer, Paul, 194-195
Schlesinger, Arthur, Jr., 94
Schmeling, Max, 49
Scholars, xvii
Schultz, Michael, 335
Schuyler, George, 392-393, 429
Scott-Heron, Gil, 425
Segregation
alternative affirmative action programs, 78
jazz as weapon against, 379
politics of memory, 474-476
urban migration, 384-386
Self Destruction, 403-404
Self-hatred of blacks
African American film's treatment of, 334,
336
homosexuals, 235-236, 243
importance of skin color in women,
156-157
Senate hearing, 419
Separate Baptists, 186
Sexism. See Gender relations
Sexuality
body-centered culture, 225-227
domestic violence of O J. Simpson, 57
erotic engagements with God, 246-247
gangsta rap, 412-413
importance of fantasy, 247-253
jazz and sexual play, 380-381, 428
Kobe Bryant's alleged sexual abuse,
167-170
poor white trash and, 122
pop, jazz, and rap, 380-381, 425, 428
reasons black men don't want black
women, 149-152, 156-157
reasons black men want white women,
157-164
reasons black women don't want black
men, 151-155
reasons black women want white men, 164
sexual exploitation by clergy, 233-235
sexual obsession of hip-hop, 319-320
the black church and, 219-237
theology of eroticism, 227-233
the paradox of black sexuality, 222-225
white community's response to jazz,
391-392
See also Homosexuality
Shaffer, Nash, 363-364
Shakespeare, William, 98
Shakur, Tupac, 306-323
complexity of the perceived persona,
312-317
embodying the best and worst of rap,
306-308


--- PAGE 574 ---
Index 545
legal troubles, 413
symbolism of Tupac's body, 482
thug life, 310-311, 411
variety and complexity of rap, 321-323
Shan, M.C., 404
Sharecropping, 384
She's Gotta Have It (1986), 327, 357-358
Simpson, Nicole, 54-56
Simpson, OJ., 46-66
blacks' and whites' responses to trial, 57-62
comparison to Kobe Bryant case, 167,
169-170
domestic violence, 54-57
hero celebration of, 48-49
playing the "race card," 63-65
Teflon racelessness of, 50-54
Singleton, John, 334-348, 352-353, 359
Slavery
defining Western freedom through, 119
importance of skin color, 156
Jews as financiers of slave trade, 91-95
legacy of violence and death of black men,
138
long-term effects of, 74
resistance strategies, 480-481
roots of black Christianity, 185-186
sharecropping as, 384
white dominance and white supremacy,
114-115
Slotkin, Richard, 436
Smalls, Biggie, 395
Smith, Jonathan, 469-490
Smith, Michael W., 366
Smith, Susan, 60
Sneakers, 467-468
Social activism, xxiv-xxv, 470
Social commentary, rap as, 401-406, 421
Social heroism, 293
Socialism, 265-267, 281-284
Social Text journal, 504
Social transformation versus religious belief,
173-190
Socioeconomic status
affirmative action and college admissions,
75
dividing middle-class blacks, 404
influencing black men's choice of women,
161-162
influencing black women's choice of men,
151-155
whiteness discourse, 129-130
Song of Solomon (Morrison), 481
The Sopranos (television program), 317
Soul music, 386, 430-431, 431
Souls of Black Folk (Du Bois), 383
Sounds of Blackness, 366
South Central Los Angeles, California,
338-348
Speech, freedom of, 180-181
Spillers, Hortense, 493
Spirituality
good and evil, 21
Michael Jackson's postmodern spirituality,
443-460
Prophet Award, 506
See also Religion
Spirituality for Ministry (Holmes), 246
Sports
baseball, 463
basketball, 422, 461-468, 483-485
See also Athletes
Squirewell, Michael, 6
Steinem, Gloria, 55-56
Stewart, Carl, 193-194
Stout, Jeffrey, 13
Straight Out of Brooklyn (1991), 350-352,
354-357
Strength to Love (King), 208
Stuart, Charles, 60
Subversive empathy, 475
Suicide rate, 139, 334
Supreme Court, U.S., 69-70, 86-88
Sweet Sweetback'sBaadasssss Song (1971), 331
Swing music, 390, 397
Syke, Big, 311
Syncopation, 378, 381, 428
Syphilis study, 63
Tabloids, 482
Take Six, 366
Tatiana, 458
Taylor, Gardner, 192-201
Taylor, Laura, 197, 201
Television
intellectual development and, 485-488
Michael Jackson's spirituality, 448-450
violence portrayed on, 436
Temperton, Rod, 451
Tennyson, Alfred Lord, 101
Tenure, 14-15
Terrible Honesty: Mongrel Manhattan in the 1920s
(Douglas), 128
Terrorism, 120-121
"The Devil's Music" documentary, 376-397
"The Negro Art Hokum" (Schuyler), 392, 429
"The Negro Artist and the Racial Mountain"
(Hughes), 429
Theodicy, 44, 348, 395
Thomas, Clarence, 56, 58, 197, 353
Thornton, Billy Bob, 164
Thriller (video), 449-453
Thug life, 155,310-311


--- PAGE 575 ---
546 Index
Thurman, Howard, 435, 470
Tindley, Charles, 471
Tomasky, Michael, 110-111, 125
Tone Loc, 405
Tbwnsend, Robert, 344
Transition journal, 504
T'shaka, Oba, 266-267, 281
Tucker, C. Delores, 411, 415, 416, 421
Turner, Frederick J., 40
Tuskegee Study, 63
Ulysses (Tennyson), 101
Unabomber, 500
Underground Railroad, 380, 480
Unemployment rate, 334-335
Union labor, xxiv, 385-386
Universal Zulu Nation, 426
Urban life. See Ghetto life
Urban migration, 384-385, 386-389
Urban rebellion, 338
Values espoused by rap, 421
Vanderbilt University, 11-12
Van Houten, Lee, 37, 38, 453
Van Peebles, Mario, 354
Van Peebles, Melvin, 331
Van Vechten, Carl, 253
Ventura, Michael, 381
The Victims of Democracy: Malcolm X and the Black
Revolution (Wolfenstein), 275-276
Videos, 449-457
Vietnamese Americans, 79-80
Vietnam War, 139, 304
Village Voice, 501, 504
Violence
as cause and effect of hip-hop, 315-318
author's experience with, 102
Chicago race riots, 385-386
child abuse, 25-29
controversy over role in black liberation,
329-330
domestic violence of O J. Simpson, 54-57
in Boyi N the Hood, 347-348
in Lee's movies, 331-333
in rap, 403, 406-407, 412-415, 416,
420-421
juvenocracy concept, 395, 418, 435-440,
467
King's commitment to nonviolence,
296-297
white racial violence, 120-121
See also Homicide
Voice of Deliverance (Miller), 205-208
Wage gap, 76-77, 334
Walker, Wyatt Tee, 192, 266
Ward, Clara, 365, 430
Washington, Booker T, 271, 496
Washington, George, 178, 288
Washington, James Melvin, 10
Wadey, Jody, 460
"We Are the World," 446
Weber, Max, 293
Werewolf character, 450-453
West, Cornel
analysis of race, 44-45
as public intellectual, 494
author's dissertation, 13
humility of, 505, 509
influence on the author, 10
on black nihilism, 433-434
on King's commitment to nonviolence, 297
postmodernism, 445
Prophet Award, 506
West Coast rap, 421
When the Word Is Given: A Report on Elijah
Muhammad, Malcolm X, and the Black
Muslim World (Lomax), 269-270
White, E.B., 21
White Citizens' Councils, 189, 296
White culture
fear of black urban migration, 387
hip-hop bridging the gap with black
culture, 422
relationship with jazz, 382-384, 391-393
White liberalism, 454-455
White male anger, 111, 120-121
Whiteman, Paul, 389
Whiteness, 113-133
America's hostile treatment of, 132-133
analysis of white identity, 113-116
Clinton's failure to address race, 126
economies of, 118-120
eradicating white supremacy, 127-129
gender difference and class difference,
129-130
globalization of, 130-132
identity politics, 107-112, 124-126
public discourse on whiteness and race,
122-124
white male anger, 111, 120-121
whiteness studies, 116-120
White supremacy
eroticization of, 251-253
institutional expression of, 115-116
many faces of white domination, 108-109
white ignorance of, 131
whiteness studies, 116-120
white racial violence, 120-121
See also Racism
Whitewishing, 111-112
Whitman, Walt, 478-479


--- PAGE 576 ---
Index 547
Wideman, John Edgar, 15
Wieseltier, Leon, 507
Wilentz, Sean, 507-508
Will, George, 174-175, 177-180
Williams, Lana, 3-18
Williams, Robert, 11
Wills, Gary, 288
Wilson, Charles, 265-266
Wilson, William Julius, 142
Winans, Be Be, 363
Winans, Ce Ce, 363, 366
Winant, Howard, 44
Winterson, Jeanette, 418
Wolfenstein, Eugene Victor, 275-277
Women
Aretha Franklin and Vanessa Bell
Armstrong, 370-375
as subject of fantasy, 248-249
developing consciousness of womanist
tradition, 139-140
feminist response to the Simpson trial,
55-56
interracial sex, 158-166, 167-170
in the ministry, 198-199
Mariah Carey's music, 367-369
marriage and divorce statistics, 149
misogyny of rap, 412, 416, 421
ordination of, 11
portrayed in blues, jazz, soul, and R&B,
430-431
reasons black men don't want black
women, 149-152, 156-157
reasons black men want white women,
157-164
reasons black women don't want black
men, 151-155
reasons black women want white men,
164
sexism in rap, 318-319, 407, 412
sexual exploitation by clergy, 225,
233-234
Wood, Joe, 261
World War II, 385-386
Wright, Jay, 489-490
Wright, Richard, 380
Young, Lester, 383
Zangwill, Israel, 40
Z magazine, 401-410

