=== EXTRACTED TEXT FROM: Tiffany Potter~THE WIRE-Urban Decay and American Television.pdf ===
Extraction Method: PyPDFLoader
Total Pages: 263
Timestamp: 2026-01-04T17:07:10.652772
================================================================================


--- PAGE 1 ---



--- PAGE 2 ---
The Wire


--- PAGE 3 ---
This page intentionally left blank


--- PAGE 4 ---
The Wire
Urban Decay and American Television
edited by
Tiff  any Potter
and
C. W. Marshall


--- PAGE 5 ---
2009
Th e Continuum International Publishing Group Inc
80 Maiden Lane, New Y ork, NY 10038
Th e Continuum International Publishing Group Ltd
Th e Tower Building, 11 Y ork Road, London SE1 7NX
www.continuumbooks.com
Copyright © 2009 by Tiff any Potter and C. W . Marshall
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced, stored in a 
retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any means, electronic, 
mechanical, photocopying, recording, or otherwise, without the written 
permission of the publishers.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
A catalog record for this book is available from the Library of Congress
ISBN:  HB: 978-0-8264-2345-0
 PB: 978-0-8264-3804-1
Typeset by Newgen Imaging Systems Pvt. Ltd. Chennai, India
Printed in the United States of America


--- PAGE 6 ---
v
Contents
Acknowledgements .......................................................................... vii
“I am the American Dream”: Modern Urban Tragedy and 
the Borders of Fiction
C. W . Marshall and Tiff any Potter ................................................1
Baltimore before Th e Wire
Afaa M. Weaver...........................................................................15
I. Baltimore and Its Institutions
 1. Y esterday’s Tomorrow Today: Baltimore and the 
Promise of Reform
David M. Alff ..................................................................................23
 2. “We ain’t got no yard”: Crime, Development, and Urban 
Environment
Peter Clandfi eld ..............................................................................37
 3. Heroism, Institutions, and the Police Procedural 
Alasdair McMillan ......................................................................50
 4. Th e Narrative Production of “Real Police” 
Ryan Brooks .................................................................................64
 5. “I Got the Shotgun, Y ou Got the Briefcase”: Lawyering 
and Ethics 
Lynne Viti ....................................................................................78
 6. Posing Problems and Picking Fights: Critical Pedagogy 
and the Corner Boys 
Ralph Beliveau and Laura Bolf-Beliveau ...................................91


--- PAGE 7 ---
vi CONTENTS
II. On the Corner
 7. Corner-Boy Masculinity: Intersections of 
Inner-City Manhood 
James Braxton Peterson ............................................................107
 8. Stringer Bell’s Lament: Violence and Legitimacy in 
Contemporary Capitalism 
Jason Read .................................................................................122
 9. Networks of Affi  liation: Familialism and Anticorporatism 
in Black and White 
Stephen Lucasi ...........................................................................135
10. Barksdale Women: Crime, Empire, and the Production 
of Gender 
Courtney D. Marshall ...............................................................149
11. Aft er the Towers Fell: Bodie Broadus and the Space 
of Memory 
Elizabeth Bonjean .....................................................................162
III. Twenty-fi rst-Century Television
12. “Th e Dickensian Aspect”: Melodrama, Viewer Engagement, 
and the Socially Conscious Text 
Amanda Ann Klein ...................................................................177
13. It’s All Connected: Televisual Narrative Complexity 
Ted Nannicelli ............................................................................190
14. Dislocating America: Agnieszka Holland Directs “Moral 
Midgetry” 
Kevin McNeilly ..........................................................................203
15. “Gots to Get Got”: Social Justice and Audience Response 
to Omar Little 
Kathleen LeBesco .......................................................................217
Works Cited .....................................................................................233
Episode List .....................................................................................243
Notes on Contributors.....................................................................245
Index ................................................................................................247


--- PAGE 8 ---
vii
Acknowledgements
As with any edited volume, and particularly with a scholarly collection 
such as this, we have incurred many debts along the way. We are grateful 
to all our contributors, and to the people at Continuum for their assis-
tance in bringing this project to fruition. We would like to thank for 
their assistance David Barker, Laura Hamilton, and Sam Tucker. We are 
also grateful to the University of British Columbia Hampton Fund and 
the Social Sciences and Humanities Research Council of Canada for 
funding research time. We are grateful to HBO for permission to use the 
cover images. Above all, we would like to acknowledge our great debt to 
Hallie Marshall and Ken Madden, for constant support, encouragement, 
insights, conversations, and (especially) for their tolerance of our obses-
sion with television. Really, it’s incredible what they put up with. Y ou 
have no idea.


--- PAGE 9 ---
This page intentionally left blank


--- PAGE 10 ---
1
“I am the American Dream”: 
Modern Urban Tragedy and 
the Borders of Fiction
C. W. Marshall and Tiff  any Potter
“It’s kinda fun fi  guring shit out. ”
—Prez (1.07)
Requiem for Snot Boogie
A cop and a drug dealer are sitting on a stoop in front of a boarded-up 
vacant, talking about the murdered man on the street before them. Th e 
opening dialogue of Th e Wire  (1.01) encapsulates so many of the series’ 
tensions that it is worth spending a moment contemplating the fate of 
Snot Boogie. Street names are in some ways a cover, hiding who you are: 
for a while, Little Kevin’s physiologically inapt name keeps him safe from 
police (4.09). But they are also a badge, of honor or of shame. Th e cop, 
Jimmy McNulty, contemplates the body on the ground: “ . . . his nose 
starts runnin’ , and some asshole, instead of giving him a Kleenex, he 
calls him Snot. So he’s Snot forever. It doesn’t seem fair. ” It isn’t fair, and 
the show implicates its viewers in that unfairness by drawing us into a 
position where we oft en think of characters only by their street names.
Bodie, Stringer, Wee-Bey, and Snoop don’t have recognizable fi  rst 
names for most viewers, and even if the names are known (Preston,


--- PAGE 11 ---
2 THE WIRE : URBAN DECAY AND AMERICAN TELEVISION
Russell, Roland, and Felicia), they never become the primary associa-
tions. In editing this book, one of the tensions we felt was the fact that 
white characters tend to default to surnames or to recognizable corrup-
tions that do not eff ace identity (Herc for Hauk, for example, or Prez for 
Pryzbylewski), while black characters, on the other hand, typically 
default to street names. Even among the police, “Bunk and Jimmy” or 
“Bunk and McNulty” seems a more natural collocation than “Moreland 
and McNulty. ” Th ere are exceptions, of course, and enough exceptions 
that we can assure ourselves that we aren’t just falling into a linguistic 
trap that the series has laid for us. D’ Angelo is D; Prop Joe, Chris, and 
Wallace are known by forms of their given names; on the docks, the 
white Th omas Pakusa is more familiar as Horseface; conversely, Avon 
Barksdale remains little more than an unfamiliar name to the police, his 
face known only from a boxing poster from his youth, until Herc real-
izes that he is likely at the East side/West side basketball game (1.09).
1 So 
the loss of Snot Boogie’s birth name proves to be only the fi rst of many 
examples of the rift s in the maintenance of identity that are created by 
the conventions of urban life in the Baltimore of Th e Wire .2
But Snot does more than this for us. He has been killed, we are told, 
because he has robbed a craps game.3 Th is is something he does repeat-
edly, whenever the pot gets big enough. In the past Snot Boogie has been 
beaten for stealing the pot, but McNulty’s source thinks this time things 
have gone too far. Th e whole process has become almost routine: a
regular game, an increase in the stakes, a tempting pot, and Snot tries 
to get away with his prize, never to succeed. Incredulous, McNulty 
asks why, given the predictability of this pattern, Snot Boogie was 
allowed in the game. Th ey had to let him play, McNulty is told: “Th is is 
America, man. ”
4
We are told in passing that Snot’s given name was Omar Isaiah Betts. 
Th e series opens, then, with a guy who habitually, compulsively robs the 
drug dealers of Baltimore, who in the end gets got. And his name is 
Omar, but as with so many of the series’ African American characters, 
his name has been eff  aced. So Snot becomes a prototype for another 
Omar who habitually, compulsively robs the drug dealers of Baltimore. 
Omar, unusually, has kept his real name, and never was labeled despite 
the imposing scar across his face that could prompt any number of 
nicknames. When Omar is killed (5.08), the scene is harrowing because


--- PAGE 12 ---
“I am the American Dream”: Modern Urban Tragedy and the Borders of Fiction 3
of its apparent emptiness for the larger meaning of the series (fan 
response to his death is discussed by Kathleen Lebesco in this volume). 
Th is loss is reinforced when the city paper declines to run the story of 
“a thirty-four-year-old black male, shot dead in West Baltimore grocery. ”
5 
Th e presumed interest of the broader Baltimore community is refl ected 
in this decision, and so the news media further undermine the identities 
of residents of the projects, leaving street names, chosen by oneself or bes-
towed by others, with their power both to eff ace and to create one’s identity.
6
Th e contrast between Omar and Snot Boogie is instructive. While the 
latter is merely pathetic, the former “is loved because he is meaner, fun-
nier, cooler and braver than any other character you’ve ever seen on TV” 
(Delaney 6). Actor Michael K. Williams praises his character’s integrity: 
“He makes no excuses for what he is. He is not duplicitous in any way. 
Th at’s not only rare in the show but in real life, too” (Delaney 6–7). We 
fi nd a heroism in Omar because he only robs from the drug dealers. Th ere 
is a purity in this vision, as when he insists on paying for his cigarettes 
aft er he has robbed a shopkeeper whose store also serves as a drug front 
(4.03). Such variant visions of the institutions of the heroic in Th e Wire are 
discussed by Alasdair McMillan and Ryan Brooks in this volume.
In one episode, Omar wears a shirt that proclaims, “I am the  American 
Dream” (2.10). It’s a charming, ghastly thought. Earlier in the season, 
Omar appears as a witness in court (2.06), where he is described by 
Maurice Levy (one of the attorneys discussed by Lynne Viti in this 
volume) as “a parasite who leeches off  of the culture of drugs. ” But in 
playing such a role, he is, as the scene powerfully declares, no diff erent 
than the lawyer himself. With the irony possible only on a mass-
produced t-shirt, Omar proclaims a profound truth.
Th e phrase “the American dream” was fi  rst used by James Truslow 
Adams in his 1931 work, Th e Epic of America :
Th ere has also been the American Dream, that dream of a land in 
which life should be better and richer and fuller for everyone, with 
opportunity for each according to ability or achievement . . . a 
dream of social order in which each man and each woman shall be 
able to attain the fullest stature of which they are innately capable, 
and be recognized by others for what they are, regardless of the 
fortuitous circumstances of birth or position. (374)


--- PAGE 13 ---
4 THE WIRE : URBAN DECAY AND AMERICAN TELEVISION
It is an idea that has been corrupted into a drive for fi nancial profi t seen in 
the corrupt politicians and developers who take advantage of Stringer Bell, 
as he seeks legitimacy for himself and the Barksdale organization (and 
who is discussed by Stephen Lucasi and Jason Read in this volume). It is 
an idea that is shown to be a fi ction through every episode of the series, 
as we see characters continually fail to improve their lives, or to escape 
the circumstances of their birth. In Season One, Wallace selfl essly tries 
to provide family stability to the kids in the low-rises whose parents are 
dead or addicted. He makes them lunches from store-bought snack 
food (1.06) and he helps them with their homework (1.08), providing 
them with some nurture and continuity, until, that is, he is shot by Bodie 
and Poot (1.12). Th e bullied and socially outcast Dukie sees the promise 
of a life away from the streets, proving competent with the classroom 
computer and even being promoted to ninth grade (4.11); but, despite 
the protection off ered by Michael for a time, Dukie ends up as just 
another drug addict living on the streets (5.10).
Th e Wire  shows us an urban America in which life becomes better 
and fuller for only a precious few (as is addressed by Ralph Beliveau and 
Laura Bolf-Beliveau in this volume). Opportunity and innate ability seem 
not to have a place, since mere survival becomes a legitimate measure of 
success. In the end, Omar lives with integrity, but he cannot achieve that 
American Dream. His Wild West mentality, the lone frontiersman 
taming the wilderness of the drug trade, loses focus when he violates his 
code by acting on his anger. With the murder of his lover, too much has 
been taken from him, and in the end, his erasure from the series lacks 
the resonance we expect from a fi ctional death, particularly of a major 
character. It has no apparent purpose, except to ascribe value to social 
forces that we are challenged to understand. Th e same is true, of course, 
of Snot Boogie. Th e Wire isn’t interested in a dream. Th is is America, man.
“a simple man, who was horrifi  cally punished”
A term that has frequently been applied to the narrative of Th e Wire  is 
“tragedy. ” Simon himself has termed the show “postindustrial American 
tragedy, ” arguing that
whatever institution you as an individual commit to will somehow 
fi nd a way to betray you on Th e Wire . Unless of course you’re


--- PAGE 14 ---
“I am the American Dream”: Modern Urban Tragedy and the Borders of Fiction 5
willing to play the game without regard to the eff ect on others or 
society as a whole, in which case you might be a judge or the state 
police superintendent or governor one day. Or, for your loyalty, 
you still might be cannon fodder—like Bodie. No guarantees. But 
only one choice, as Camus pointed out, off ers any hope of dignity. 
(quoted in Havrilesky)
Tragedy is a concept that Western literature has found diffi   cult to 
represent since the late-nineteenth century, in part because its central 
preoccupation, the cost and consequences of greatness, sits uncom-
fortably with the democratizing tendencies coincident with the 
eff ects of the Industrial Revolution. First Büchner, then Ibsen and 
Chekov, nevertheless found a way to valorize the ordinary individual 
in their plays, discovering a tragic dignity in ordinary situations and 
characters.
In Th e Wire , Senator Clay Davis is located at the top of the show’s 
political and economic hierarchies. He is patently corrupt, but neverthe-
less is able to see himself as a tragic victim. When he is fi nally required 
to explain his fi nancial dealings, he calls an impromptu press conference 
on the courthouse steps. In his hand he holds a translation of Aeschylus’ 
Prometheus Bound; while he mispronounces both the author’s name 
and the play’s title, he presents himself to the assembled crowd as a 
 traditionally tragic fi gure, martyred for being “a simple man, who was 
horrifi cally punished by the powers that be for the terrible crime of try-
ing to bring light to the common people” (5.07). Th e ridiculousness of 
such self-positioning is evident, as Davis presents a summary that might 
describe Christ as well as it does Prometheus, before it is reduced to a 
cliché: “In the words of Uh-silly-us, ‘No good deed goes unpunished. ’ 
I cannot tell you how much consolation I fi nd in these slim pages. ” Th e 
ploy works—the public accepts the story—but in this scene we are also 
pressed by the explicit comparison of classical tragedy and Th e Wire to 
acknowledge the inapplicability of traditional theories of the tragic to 
these narratives.
According to most defi nitions, the arcs for most of the show’s charac-
ters are not tragic, but rather merely sad (and Amanda Ann Klein argues 
in this volume that they are more easily read as melodrama than as 
 tragedy): we regret the murders of D’ Angelo Barksdale and Frank 
Sobotka; we are disheartened at the hardening of Randy Wagstaff  ;


--- PAGE 15 ---
6 THE WIRE : URBAN DECAY AND AMERICAN TELEVISION
we are outraged at the murder of Omar Little. But that doesn’t make 
any of these life stories particularly tragic, any more than that of Clay 
Davis is. Th ere are simply too many stories, too many characters whose 
experience is presented in Th e Wire , for the focus on the individual to 
assert itself, as would be required by conventional representations of 
tragedy. Whenever something bad happens to someone the audience 
has been led to care about, we are equally committed emotionally to 
several other characters as well, and inevitably their stories go on. Events 
have consequences, but they are denied grandeur.
Y et each of them in his own way seems to demand that “attention 
must be paid, ” in the words of Arthur Miller’s Willy Loman. Miller’s 
1949 essay “Tragedy and the Common Man” provides a mid-twentieth-
century iteration of the idea of the tragic that off ers us a starting point 
for a sense of tragedy in Th e Wire. David Simon is in some ways both 
author and agent of this revisionist tragedy for an urban generation that 
has long been excluded from the cultural valuation and social status 
traditionally required for tragedy. Miller is describing character, for 
example, when he articulates his sense of the nature of the tragic fl  aw 
(a term widely, if misleadingly, appropriated in such discussions from 
Aristotle’s hamartia in Poetics 13, 1453a), but he might also be talking 
about the social function of Th e Wire as a series:
Only the passive, only those who accept their lot without active 
retaliation, are “fl awless. ” Most of us are in that category.
But there are among us today, as there always have been, those 
who act against the scheme of things that degrades them, and in 
the process of action everything we have accepted out of fear or 
insensitivity or ignorance is shaken before us and examined, and 
from this total onslaught by an individual against the seemingly 
stable cosmos surrounding us—from this total examination of the 
“unchangeable” environment—comes the terror and the fear that 
is classically associated with tragedy. (4)
Few of Simon’s characters demonstrate the wherewithal to enact this 
demanding requirement, though Stringer’s doomed attempt to reject 
the presumed naturalism of black criminality or Bodie’s refusal to  soldier 
on as a mere pawn might come close (Bodie’s character is discussed at


--- PAGE 16 ---
“I am the American Dream”: Modern Urban Tragedy and the Borders of Fiction 7
length by Elizabeth Bonjean in this volume). Th e show itself, however—
and Simon’s vision—clearly functions as tragedy in these terms, shaking 
out what the generally affl   uent HBO viewer has long accepted, and 
 giving a human face to what is usually written off  as unavoidable urban 
blight, criminality, and addiction. Th e faces are (mostly) fi  ctional, of 
course, but their humanity cannot be identifi  ably false if we are to 
experience the intellectual and emotional eff ects of tragedy.
Th e Wire  gives us the deaths of several salesmen, shift ing the perspec-
tive from the narrative of the single common man to that of disposable 
men, killed off  amid their pursuit of the twisted version of the American 
Dream that is all that is available to many young men of the Baltimore 
projects. Th e men of Th e Wire  share with Wily Loman what Miller argues 
is the tragic element of character (regardless of traditional nobility):
the tragic feeling is evoked in us when we are in the presence of a 
character who is willing to lay down his life, if need be, to secure 
one thing—his sense of personal dignity. From Orestes to Hamlet, 
Medea to Macbeth, the underlying struggle is that of the individual 
attempting to gain his “rightful” position in his society. (4)
When Bodie refuses to submit to Marlo Stanfi eld’s new order and insists 
on controlling his own corner, and then refuses to run from that corner 
even as Chris and Snoop approach, he claims his rightful place: “I ain’t 
never fucked up a count, never stole off  a package, never did some shit 
I wasn’t told to do. I’ve been straight up. But what’s come back?” (4.13). 
Similarly tragic, and less dramatically noble, Dukie’s battle for personal 
dignity is fi nally lost when, in the closing sequence of the series, we 
watch him tie off  and shoot heroin, slipping into exactly the “rightful 
place” that others have always expected of him. Th e eventual protracted 
death implied for Dukie is functionally no diff erent than Willy Loman’s 
suicide. Loman just kills himself faster.
Even outside of the projects, the new common man seeks dignity, at 
times not just for himself, but for those he represents. Frank Sobotka 
fi ghts for a future that is the same as the past, and his loss is the more 
painful because his requests seem so eminently reasonable. As Miller 
points out, if the story is not to be mere pathos, “Th e possibility of 
victory must be there in tragedy” (7). Until the day he is murdered,


--- PAGE 17 ---
8 THE WIRE : URBAN DECAY AND AMERICAN TELEVISION
Sobotka—and the viewers—allow for the possibility that his view of the 
world will win out, and the blue-collar middle class will continue to sus-
tain itself in a Baltimore that values the appearance of wealth and success 
over the economic survival of its individual citizens. His view doesn’t 
win out, of course, and the “fear of being displaced, the disaster inherent 
in being torn away from our chosen image of what or who we are in this 
world” comes a little closer to the HBO viewer, forcing us to recognize 
that “it is the common man who knows this fear best” (Miller 5). In the 
words of Helena Sheehan and Seamus Sweeney, “Th e Wire  is a Marxist’s 
idea of what tv drama should be. Its specifi c plots open into an analysis 
of the socio-political-economic system shaping it all. ”
Th ough they may oft  en seem so, tragedy and bleakness are not 
necessarily the same thing. Th ere are optimistic moments in Th e Wire that 
prevent any automatic sense that there can be no hope for redemption, 
that the social ills depicted are irremediable—a feeling that may accom-
pany viewings of Simon’s earlier miniseries Th e Corner (HBO, 2000). 
Bubbles’s readmission to his family, Namond’s apparently bright future, 
the elevation of the good lawyer Rhonda Pearlman to the judge’s bench, 
and Kima Greggs’s return to motherhood all remind us that change and 
hope are not impossible. More subtly, the willingness of Th e Wire  to pay 
attention to those whom society oft en considers disposable allows a con-
sideration of the tension between the possible and the impossible. In 
modern tragedy, there remains, as Miller argues, “the belief . . . in the per-
fectability of man” (7). Th e Wire  writes starkly of the human costs of a 
capitalism of the disenfranchised, but, like Bodie, it also refuses to allow 
the corners to be taken away from the control of those who inhabit them. 
As television presents the individuals who have dropped below even the 
standard of the common man in twenty-fi rst-century popular and politi-
cal discourse, Th e Wire  goes beyond Miller’s twentieth-century argument 
that tragedy “is the consequence of a man’s total compulsion to evaluate 
himself justly” (5), to argue that all of American culture must act with 
justice in this necessarily brutal self-assessment.
Documentary Fallacy
Perhaps as part of this self-assessment, more than any other series, Th e 
Wire works to confound the line between truth and fi  ction. Its stories


--- PAGE 18 ---
“I am the American Dream”: Modern Urban Tragedy and the Borders of Fiction 9
scream of verisimilitude, and the authentic dialogue draws the viewer 
into a sympathetic consideration of characters who live the sort of lives 
many viewers will not ever have examined with careful, concerned, 
critical awareness. Again, the series forces the HBO audience to con-
front its own prejudices. HBO is a subscriber-based channel, and the 
bulk of its audience is composed of (comparatively) affl   uent, middle 
class, white Americans. Subscribers choose to invest in programming 
that is assumed to have a certain quality that distinguishes it from 
“regular” tv. A second audience is generated through DVD sales, another 
means for direct marketing of quality television to viewers, without the 
economic pressures of advertisers. Th is change in television viewing 
habits, particularly over the past decade, has altered the economic drives 
of American television.
For these viewers (who through investment in a specialty channel, 
or through the purchase of DVDs have committed to HBO and Th e 
Wire), the initial episodes of the series may possess an almost anthro-
pological fascination. Many would not have previously invested 
emotional energies in caring about the drug problem in urban America 
and its ramifi cations. Intellectual energies, sure, maybe. But the veneer 
of fi ction off ered by the series in fact stimulates a desire for identifi  ca-
tion with the characters, immersing the viewer into the heart of an 
American city.
What we see is a war zone: a side of America that appears extreme—at 
times incomprehensible—in a representation that is intellectually and 
morally challenging. Th e series appears to eschew any episode-based 
resolutions (as Ted Nannicelli discusses in this volume), preferring 
instead to off  er larger narratives, juggling a Shakespearian cast of 
dozens of individuals, some of whom have names for us, some of whom 
are recognized or perhaps only partly recognized by their faces. Five 
seasons, each of which coheres as a unit, together form a super-narrative 
that shows the progress of time in a fi ctionalized Baltimore, but not any 
clear moral or narrative advance. Faces change, characters enter our 
awareness or drop from view, but the drug problem (which may be seen 
as the series’ principal concern) persists. Th  ere is change rather than 
advance: whatever closure off  ered is, painfully, only temporary. By 
eschewing strong episodic conclusions, Th e Wire  off ers its viewers a nar-
rative form unlike that off ered typically by television, and with a scale


--- PAGE 19 ---
10 THE WIRE : URBAN DECAY AND AMERICAN TELEVISION
(in terms of pure length, obviously, but also in terms of narrative 
sophistication) unparalleled by most cinema as well.
David Simon and others have drawn analogies between Th e Wire and 
the nineteenth-century novel, a genre whose sweeping narrative pro-
duces a coherent whole, belying its serial origins. Nevertheless, smaller 
narrative gestures can be pulled out, isolated strands from the larger 
skein. Th ese strands might concern individual characters or a single 
episode or group of episodes, which may contain a discernable unity 
because of a strong or individual directorial hand (see Kevin McNeilly 
in this volume).
7 Beyond the novelistic, there is also an epic scope to 
the series, which—over the broad canvas of more than 60 hours of 
television—takes the time to focus on small details. Given the generic 
expectation of substantial length, epic can aff ord to linger over appar-
ently insignifi cant objects and people, to fi  nd virtues in the ordinary, 
and can take the time to establish the place of the everyday in the larger 
world depicted. Th e Wire  explicitly adopts epic ambitions at diff  erent 
points over its fi ve seasons, perhaps most notably when it chooses in 
Season Two to examine the death of the urban middle class. Th e grand 
theme is not localized in one individual, but is shown to have an impact 
on many fi gures, amidst an expansive narrative of dockyard corruption. 
Y et at the same time, Th e Wire  ascribes value to two teenagers sitting on 
an abandoned couch in the courtyard of a low-rise housing project. So 
much gets spoken in their silences, as they contemplate the economic 
implications of the invention of the Chicken McNugget (1.02). Th  e 
series can even turn an apparently extraneous fi sh-out-of-water scene, 
in which Snoop goes to a big-box home improvement store to purchase 
a nail gun (4.01), into a crucial plot point for the whole of Season Four.
Despite the literary sophistication of Th e Wire , there is an authentic-
ity that bleeds through the screen. Part of the reason for this is the 
deliberate blurring of truth and fi ction that the creators have inscribed 
into the casting and the characters of the series. Identity is written, 
rewritten, and overwritten as actors’ biographies and previous roles, 
characters’ names, and real-life citizens of Baltimore dissolve into one 
another, problematizing aggressively any idea of easy constructions or 
associations of identity. Melvin Williams, for example, plays the Deacon 
over 11 episodes (starting 3.02). Th e character is a peaceful community 
builder, but the role reveals nothing of the actor’s past as a Baltimore


--- PAGE 20 ---
“I am the American Dream”: Modern Urban Tragedy and the Borders of Fiction 11
drug lord, who was arrested in 1984 by series co-creator Ed Burns 
when Burns was still a Baltimore police offi   cer. Aft er serving as a 
homicide detective in Baltimore, Burns turned to teaching, a career 
trajectory echoed (somewhat more abruptly) by the character of Roland 
 Pryzbylewski in Season Four. Jay Landsman, a retired Baltimore 
homicide detective who features prominently in David Simon’s book, 
Homicide: A Year on the Killing Streets, plays police offi  cer Dennis Mello 
in 18 episodes; actor Delaney Williams plays a character called Jay 
Landsman throughout the series. Baltimore’s fi rst elected black mayor 
Kurt L. Schmoke appears as the Baltimore Health Commissioner, who 
advises the series’s Mayor on his drug policy (3.11 and 3.12). Grand Jury 
Prosecutor Gary DiPasquale is played by Garry D’ Addario, a former 
Baltimore Homicide Shift  Lieutenant.
8 Recovering heroin addict and 
musician Steve Earle (who sings the series’s title song in Season Five) 
plays Whalon, a recovering heroin addict who is Bubbles’s sponsor. David 
Constable plays managing editor Th omas Klebanow in all but one of the 
episodes of Season Five, a character based on former  Baltimore Sun 
managing editor Bill Marimow; the real-life editor’s name is echoed in 
that of Charles Marimow, the ineff ectual lieutenant of the major crimes 
unit (beginning 4.03). And Ed Norris, Baltimore police commissioner 
from 2000–2002, plays a homicide detective in the show, who is also 
called Ed Norris.
Precisely this overlap—playing a character with your own name, who 
both is and is not a fi  ctionalized representation of who you are—also 
aff ects Felicia “Snoop” Pearson. As she describes in her 2007 memoir, 
Pearson was born in Baltimore to two crack addicts; as a child she 
worked as a drug dealer; and in her teens she was sentenced to eight 
years in prison for killing someone in self-defense. Her real-life recovery 
and rehabilitation must be measured against the bizarre refl ection cre-
ated by the character she plays in Th e Wire . Snoop’s life (and death) in 
Seasons Th ree, Four, and Five, which establish her as a merciless enforcer 
in Marlo Stanfi eld’s drug organization, form a counterpoint to the life 
she has instead chosen for herself. Pearson was introduced to the writers 
and producers aft er a chance meeting with actor Michael K. Williams 
(who plays Omar Little). Th e doubled awareness of actor and character 
serves to reinforce the emotional impact of the character as she moves 
through the violence that surrounds her, and it certainly contributes to


--- PAGE 21 ---
12 THE WIRE : URBAN DECAY AND AMERICAN TELEVISION
horror writer Stephen King’s estimation of Snoop as “perhaps the most 
terrifying female villain to ever appear in a television series” (“ Alarm”).
Less directly, the character of Omar (discussed in detail by James 
Peterson in this volume) is based on a number of real-life individuals 
who made careers robbing drug dealers in Baltimore. One of these, 
Donnie Andrews, provides a particularly powerful resonance with Simon’s 
series. Aft er turning himself in to Detective Ed Burns (co-creator of Th e 
Wire), Andrews was sentenced to life in prison in 1987 for murdering 
one of the dealers he robbed (see Urbina). But from this, there neverthe-
less emerges a story of redemption. Two years aft er his release in 2005, 
he married Fran Boyd. Boyd is the real woman at the center of the drug-
addicted family documented in Th e Corner: A Year in the Life of an Inner 
City Neighborhood, written by Simon and Burns in 1997. Th is book was 
adapted into the six-episode miniseries Th e Corner , that, with Homicide, 
forms a crucial part of the groundwork Simon had established before he 
began work on Th e Wire . Th e unlikely pairing of a (rehabilitated and 
recovered) stick-up man and a (recovered and rehabilitated) drug addict 
proves to be a real-life fulfi llment of the promise the series at times pres-
ents to the viewer.
9 Fiction, fact, documentary—blurring these lines and 
generic distinctions has never been attempted before on television at 
this scale, and its persuasive argumentation seduces viewers into a larger, 
albeit mediated, understanding of the urban life of modern America, 
and provides some sense of hope for the American Dream.
One fi nal example of the elements of truth hiding among the fi ctional 
stories of Th e Wire  seems necessary here. At the wake of Detective Ray 
Cole (3.03), a character who had been played by executive producer 
Robert F . Colesbury (who died unexpectedly aft er Season Two), police 
offi  cers sing a 1986 song by the Pogues, entitled “Th e Body of an  American. ” 
Th e song itself is set at the wake of a boxer, who is described as
Th e man of wire
Who was oft en heard to say,
“I’m a free man born of the U.S.A. ”
Colesbury, of course, was a “man of wire” , instrumental in the series’ 
production. So indeed is the fi ctional character of McNulty, for whom a 
mock wake is held, where the song is again sung (5.10). Again, this “man


--- PAGE 22 ---
“I am the American Dream”: Modern Urban Tragedy and the Borders of Fiction 13
of Wire” is eulogized by Jay Landsman (except it is not Landsman, but 
the actor playing a version of him, a counter-self). Th roughout Th e Wire , 
names and identities blur, producing gripping television that challenges 
notions of how fi ction works, and to what it can aspire. But all of these 
themes, it should be noted, had been shown to the viewer in miniature 
before the fi rst title sequence was run. Th at initial conversation on the 
stoop of the boarded-up vacant repeats at times verbatim a true story 
that Simon tells near the end of Homicide: A Year on the Killing Streets 
(570). From those opening moments of the narrative of Th e Wire , we are 
forced constantly to reconsider what terms like verisimilitude and 
authenticity can mean. Nevertheless, we must always remember that 
as he lies there, dead before the fi  rst episode of the series begins, Snot 
Boogie too off ers us the body of an American.
Notes
1. We discuss Herc’s investigative career elsewhere (see Marshall and Potter, “Fuzzy 
Dunlop”).
2. Th e City of Baltimore is arguably a character of its own in Th e Wire , and the rep-
resentation of the city is discussed in this volume by David Alff  , Peter Clandfi eld, and 
Afaa Weaver.
3. Viewers of Season Four remember that Prez teaches his Middle School math class 
basic probability through the odds of craps, and they all become profi cient in the skills 
that Snot lacks.
4. Margaret Talbot expands on the poignancy of this moment in her profi le of series 
creator David Simon: “It was a perfectly craft ed setup for Simon’s themes: how inner-city 
life could be replete with both casual cruelty and unexpected comedy; how the police 
and the policed could, at moments, share the same jaundiced view of the world; how 
some dollar-store, off -brand version of American capitalism could trickle down, with 
melancholy eff ect, into the most forsaken corners of American society. ”
5. Omar almost loses his name again in the morgue (5.08), where his name tag is left  
on a body bag containing an elderly white man. Th  is is corrected, but it is worth 
noting that the date of birth on the card in the morgue is certainly incorrect, off   by 
roughly 14 years. Th e card indicates 15 August 1960, but other indications suggest Omar 
was born closer to 1974: he claims to be “about 29” in Season Two (2.06), is 34 in Season 
Five (5.08), and is apparently 11 or 12 in 1985 ( Th e Wire: Th e Chronicles  <http://www.
hbo.com/thewire/chronicles/>). Th is obvious error is most likely not a mistake within 
the dramatic world, but rather a meta-televisual nod to the birthdate of someone 
involved with Th e Wire (perhaps David Simon himself, who was born in 1960).


--- PAGE 23 ---
14 THE WIRE : URBAN DECAY AND AMERICAN TELEVISION
6. When Omar helps a court bailiff   with his crossword puzzle, explaining the 
distinction between Mars and Ares, he could be speaking about any one of the nick-
named dealers in Th e Wire : “Same dude, diff erent name, is all” (2.06).
7. For example, the direction of Clark Johnson bookends Th e Wire : he directed the 
fi rst two episodes (1.01 and 1.02; also 1.05) and the fi nal episode (5.10). His vision there-
fore frames the audience’s experience of the overall series, but Johnson also mediates the 
show from within, as he plays city editor Gus Haynes in Season Five. His connection 
with Simon is longstanding: Johnson also played Detective Meldrick Lewis in Homicide: 
Life on the Street (NBC, 1993–1999), which Simon created.
8. “D. ” as he was known, was also the inspiration for “G. ” , Al Giardello, the shift  lieu-
tenant played by Y aphet Kotto in Homicide: Life on the Street , and in which Gary 
D’ Addario also had a role as a SW AT team commander.
9. Relationships among the representations of women, crime, and the domestic 
realm are discussed by Courtney Marshall in this volume.


--- PAGE 24 ---
15
Baltimore before The Wire
A Memoir
Afaa M. Weaver
As Th e Wire closes, Michael takes on the work Omar has done before 
him, robbing the rich gangstas, redistributing the wealth, and upholding 
a truncated sense of honor and decency in a world ground down into 
feeding on its own life. He comes into the rim shop with his partner and 
delivers a gunshot wound to the knee of another gangsta, and makes off  
with their income, leaving him and his cohorts looking very frustrated 
there in the rim shop. Th e rim shop is actually there in East Baltimore 
where I grew up. It’s at the intersection of Gay Street and North Avenue, 
where Gay Street rises up from the Johns Hopkins hospital area on a 
45-degree angle. Th e rim shop is also where the drug dealers recently 
had a strategy of handing out free samples near the end of the month 
when everyone is low on cash. It was a feeding frenzy, a site that seemed 
more unreal than anything you might want to imagine as all kinds of 
people scurried over the area as if they were ants on a sugar cube.
In the late 1950s, my parents were among the young, black, working 
class couples that bought row homes in East Baltimore, many of them 
from the same areas in Virginia and North and South Carolina. Some 
people moved into the area from the public housing projects as time 
progressed. East Baltimore was all white before we moved into the area as 
part of the block-busting strategies used by real-estate companies nation-
wide in the 1950s, strategies that made fortunes for them as they resold 
houses to black folks at exaggerated prices aft  er spreading fear among


--- PAGE 25 ---
16 THE WIRE : URBAN DECAY AND AMERICAN TELEVISION
whites that black folk were coming. We came, and we painted the porches 
that had never been painted before. We added aluminum porches in dif-
ferent colors, the porch business that is the subject of Barry Levinson’s 
1987 fi lm Tin Men, and we planted vegetable gardens in our backyards. 
Th ese were southern families, an agrarian culture. We were their children, 
the bright ones who would do great things in the white man’s world, even 
as they were launching us into it in the days of southern segregation.
Th e Baltimore of my childhood was segregated. It was also the 
childhood of Proposition Joe, the master of double dealing.
Joe and I were attending junior high school at the same time. We 
might have known each other, each of us dressed as we were in those 
days for success, although the mandatory shirt and tie did not come 
until I got to senior high at Baltimore Polytechnic. But when I started 
Herring Run Junior High in 1963, the month of the bombing of the 
Sixteenth Street Baptist Church in Birmingham, I was part of the train 
of children of bright hopes that were sent out on buses into white neigh-
borhoods from the circumscribed black worlds of American apartheid. 
Th e schoolyard used to fi  lm that prequel of Joe in junior high
1 looks 
remarkably the way my junior high school looks now, although it has 
gone through several changes and no longer carries the name of the 
large public park nearby. Joe went wrong, the way a lot of us did in those 
days, but it was a genteel wrong before the wholesale violence of Omar’s 
generation became the prevailing mode of criminal life. Th ose of us who 
went wrong did so in relatively innocent ways that gave way to larger 
enterprises, and some of us are still in that life. Some of my schoolmates 
are senior members of criminal life in Baltimore, and some of my rela-
tives have done time in prison for matters serious or not so serious.
Joe and our crowd got to be 16 or so and started hanging out on the 
corners of East Baltimore where we wore shirts pressed with starch and 
shoes polished all the way to the stitched soles. We stood there and 
drank cheap wine and smoked reefer while we imitated Th  e Tempta-
tions, Th e Four Tops, James Brown, Th e Supremes, Mary Wells, and all 
the bright fantasia of African American Urban Th eater. Violence crept 
in as if on the feet of giant cats.
If you walked southward from the rim shop along Milton Avenue to the 
intersection of Federal Street you were at a locus of East Baltimore street 
life, just four blocks from my parents’ home. Lucky’s Bar and Cut Rate was


--- PAGE 26 ---
Baltimore before The Wire 17
the corner landmark. Th is is where I learned several lessons in the hard and 
oft en insane courage of a black man living for the city. We were a group, 
about four or fi ve of us, and our leader was a member of a respected 
family. His brother was the lord of that section of East Baltimore. He stood 
on the corner of Federal and Milton in a top hat and with a cane, the attire 
that would emerge almost 20 years later in Run-D.M.C., who are now 
elders of Hip Hop. In the old days of Milton and Federal, these elders of 
Hip Hop were 10 years old, the little boys.
One night, just one block away from Lucky’s, some friends and I were 
confronted by a slightly older man who was looking to make a reputa-
tion for himself. He was holding a .25 semi-automatic, and we were all 
unarmed. He caught me in the forefront, just in front of the right fender 
of the car parked next to us. It was a minute or so of menace. Th ere was 
only one thing to do, and I was prepared to do it if necessary. He was 
about 20 feet away, and, as the closest person to him, I could rush 
him and try to bust his heart, scare him down and take the chance of 
eating a bullet along the way. I had to make the decision in the space of 
a few seconds, something one of my uncles taught me.
Uncle Jason was a knife fi ghter who walked everywhere and always 
carried at least two switchblades. His way of training us when we were 
kids was to catch us unaware and slam us up against a wall. Th  e knife 
came up to the sides of our necks instantly, and in the calmest of voices 
he said, “Now chump! What you gonna do? Huh? Chump!” I learned to 
monitor my fear and to pray for intervention.
We were saved that night there up the street from Lucky’s. Th e leader 
of our little gang came up from Lucky’s and ordered our would-be killer 
to put the gun away. Th at was the hierarchy of things in street life in 
those days. Much of it was the respect of younger men for older ones, 
older ones who earned that respect for things that became the myths of 
life. Th ere was some semblance of that hierarchy when Omar was a 
young teenager in the mid-1980s. Omar is part of the age group of the 
elders of Hip Hop. In the prequel that shows him returning the stolen 
cash to the West Indian man on the bus stop,
2 it is a time in Baltimore 
when violence and illegal enterprise were worlds away from that night 
in 1969 under the barrel of the .25 semi-automatic. Heroin was much 
scarcer in the late 1960s than in the mid-1980s when it became as plenti-
ful and familiar as Kool Aid.


--- PAGE 27 ---
18 THE WIRE : URBAN DECAY AND AMERICAN TELEVISION
As black Baltimore was burned away and worn down beginning in 
the 1960s, the jobs that had sustained my parents’ generation left  the city 
and the country. Th ey were replaced fi  rst with a stark and stunning 
absence and then with the paper promise of the service industry. From 
1970 to 1985, I was a blue-collar worker in the city before going off   to 
Brown University’s creative writing program. Proposition Joe was busy 
building his empire in East Baltimore, one that he set up under the 
façade of a TV repair shop. It’s in a neighborhood where the old row 
houses were gradually abandoned, as black folks moved to the suburbs. 
Th eir children would not know our memories, but they would have the 
same racist forces set against them in life. Th ese forces could even take 
the form of the seemingly kind faces that want to assure them that rac-
ism is no longer America’s problem.
One day in the early 1980s, two men escaped from the Maryland 
State Penitentiary, known as Central Booking these days. Th  ey made 
their way to a trendy restaurant on Charles Street, two blocks away from 
Walters Art Gallery. Th ere they made what I can only think was a 
planned hit and killed one of the restaurant workers. Th en in the dead 
aplomb of street courage they got onto a city bus that was headed toward 
North Avenue. Th e SW AT team was assembled, and the two men swore 
they would not go back to prison. Th ey kept their word. At North Avenue, 
they got off  the bus and had a shootout with the police department, who 
fi red from every available angle. Th e men died in the streets, shot to 
death and through death’s door to what lay waiting for them in the great 
beyond.
Omar was just two years away from making that diffi  cult decision of 
doing what must be done, turning his .38 on his compadres to force 
them to give him the small cash that was all the West Indian gentleman 
on the bus stop had at the time.
Milton Avenue went through tremendous changes from the time 
Proposition Joe and I were in junior high school and in the 20 years up 
to Omar’s emergence as a self-styled vigilante. As children Joe and 
I could go to the fi ve-and-dime store there on Milton Avenue and with 
a dollar buy a whole bag of toys. With another dollar we could have gone 
to the movies next door for 35 cents and had a hot dog and soda for 
another 65 cents. Th e only problem might have been Joe’s shenanigans.


--- PAGE 28 ---
Baltimore before The Wire 19
Partly for amusement and partly to polish his entrepreneurial skills, 
young Proposition Joe might have stolen something from the fi ve-and-
dime, something he probably did not even want. Ever alert, the store 
clerk would confront us outside, and Joe would begin apologizing for 
me immediately because, in his sleight of hand, he had put the stolen 
goods in my pocket. I would begin to apologize and sweat, and we would 
both be allowed to go. Around the corner, I would jack Joe up and com-
mence to whoop his ass, whereupon he would make me an off er, an off er 
beyond my imagination. Such is street genius.
Just a few feet away from the place where we were held at gunpoint, 
around the corner, there is a set of old garages that have mostly fallen 
down and rotted away. When they were in operation, they were a center 
for card playing, working on old cars, and drinking. Uncles and cousins 
of mine hung out there. It was just three blocks from my family house. 
One uncle of mine would sit in his car in the aft ernoon sun, listening to 
his radio. For awhile, he had a ’64 Impala Super Sport that he outfi tted 
with little conveniences of his own, such as the one switch in the console 
that turned on his stereo system. At the time he was my age now, in his 
late fi ft ies, and now I know that moment of sitting in the sun and rolling 
back over one’s life.
I do it from inside the white world that was legislated away from us 
when Joe and I were children, and began to deconstruct when Omar 
was born. Snoop is younger still. She was a tiny girl when Omar was 
making his reputation, and she grew up on Patterson Park Avenue, two 
streets over from Milton Avenue and just across from Collington Square 
Elementary School, where my son entered the Head Start program in 
the early 1970s. He and Omar are about the same age, and the two of 
them are rooted in the Baltimore that is rooted inside me, although 
now I am miles away in the Boston area, a place where the constructs 
of race are opposite to what I knew as a youngster coming along in 
Baltimore.
In my moments of greatest discomfort, it is a Boston where the 
city magazine can run a cover story referring to one of our most promi-
nent black scholars as the H.N.I.C. or Head Nigger in Charge. Th  is 
Mississippi Up North is a world where the liberal kindness is too oft en 
steeped in denial of the very thing it propels from this academic vortex.


--- PAGE 29 ---
20 THE WIRE : URBAN DECAY AND AMERICAN TELEVISION
Not only is it a white world that feels alien, it is also a black world that 
feels alien. Th ese are black people I fi  nd it very diffi  cult to know. I long 
for home, a home that is mostly no longer there. Just as Proposition Joe 
said at the meeting of the dealers, “I think we all see the writing on the 
wall in East Baltimore” (5.01): Johns Hopkins is buying East Baltimore 
in huge chunks and has already bulldozed an entire stretch of property 
from Monument Street northwards to Biddle Street. It feels like an 
absence in my heart.
When I am more reconciled to the hopeful world the Christian 
charity of my upbringing taught me to hope and work for, I realize 
America is home, as diffi  cult as that may be.
Notes
1. In November 2007, during the hiatus between Seasons Four and Five, HBO.com 
released three short “prequels, ” called Th e Wire: Th e Chronicles  <http://www.hbo.com/
thewire/chronicles/>. One of these features Proposition Joe in 1962.
2. Another entry in Th e Chronicles  shows a very young (12-year-old?) Omar, already 
with his distinctive scar, in 1985.


--- PAGE 30 ---
I
Baltimore and Its Institutions


--- PAGE 31 ---
This page intentionally left blank


--- PAGE 32 ---
23
1
Yesterday’s Tomorrow Today: 
Baltimore and the Promise of Reform
David M. Alff  
On 27 July 1996, over fi  ft een thousand spectators assembled in West 
Baltimore to watch the dilapidated and crime-ridden Lexington Terrace 
housing projects implode. A parade, balloons, and speeches from gov-
ernment offi  cials celebrated the dynamiting of a low-income residential 
complex long ceded to the governance of warring drug traffi  ckers. “What 
we have done is torn down what essentially have become warehouses of 
poverty, and what we’re creating is town houses of choice, ” explained 
Baltimore Mayor Kurt L. Schmoke, alluding to a 303-unit mixed income 
development that would eventually replace the maligned high-rises. On 
a gorgeous summer aft ernoon before thousands of cheering bystanders 
a sequence of detonations leveled the Kennedy-era towers in seconds 
(Belfoure, “Baltimore Housing”).
Th e third season of Th e Wire  opens with a similar spectacle. Th is time 
fi ctional mayor Clarence Royce presides over the demolition of the 
public housing projects that Avon Barksdale’s drug syndicate controlled 
in Seasons One and Two. “ A few moments from now, the Franklin 
Terrace Towers, behind me, which sadly came to represent some of 
this city’s most entrenched problems will be gone, ” proclaims the mayor, 
to enthusiastic applause (3.01). As Royce speaks, the scene cuts to 
Barksdale crew chiefs Preston “Bodie” Broadus and Malik “Poot” Carr


--- PAGE 33 ---
24 THE WIRE : URBAN DECAY AND AMERICAN TELEVISION
chatting about the towers where both dealt heroin and where Poot lived 
with his mother:
Poot: I dunno man, I mean I’m kinda sad. Th  em towers were 
home to me.
Bodie: Y ou gonna cry over a housing project now. Man they 
shoulda blown those motherfuckers up a long time ago if 
you ask me. Y ou’re talkin’ about steel and concrete man, 
steel and fuckin’ concrete.
Poot: No I’m talkin’ about people, memories and shit.
Bodie: Th ey’re gonna tear this building down and build some new 
shit, but people, they don’t give a fuck about people.
Th e camera cuts back to Royce promising that “low and moderately 
priced housing” will replace the failed towers, and then back to Bodie 
and Poot, and so forth. As the scene proceeds, alternately focusing on 
Royce, Bodie, and Poot, each character registers a diff erent response to 
the impending demolition. Poot, sentimentally refl  ecting that he lost 
his virginity in Franklin Terrace, laments his loss of home and the 
destruction of a site of pleasurable adolescent memory. Royce claims 
that “reform is not just a watchword in my administration. No, it is a 
philosophy, ” and gestures hopefully toward a future where the structural 
renovation of West Baltimore can revitalize the neighborhood’s impov-
erished community. Bodie, more worried about the loss of his turf than 
anything, criticizes Royce’s insincerity and Poot’s nostalgia simultane-
ously when he mocks the latter’s recurrent bouts of gonorrhea: “No 
matter how many times you get burnt, you just keep on doing the same. ” 
Despite the mayor’s grandiloquent proclamations, Bodie believes that, 
however the city goes about manipulating its “steel and concrete, ” the 
residents will continue feeding addictions, committing felonies, or in 
the case of Poot, engaging in dangerous sexual behavior.
Literally and ideologically oblivious to this critique, Royce continues 
his stage performance by asking the onlookers, “Now what do you say? 
Are you ready for a new Baltimore?” Aft er more applause, the mayor calls 
out a countdown and seconds later the towers implode. Unexpectedly, 
smoke and debris from the demolition tumble out onto the surrounding 
streets, triggering car alarms and choking bystanders. Royce coughs into


--- PAGE 34 ---
Yesterday’s Tomorrow Today: Baltimore and the Promise of Reform 25
his sleeve as black dust swallows the podium. Like Bodie’s dismissal 
of the mayor’s reform vision for privileging “steel and concrete” over 
people, the backfi red publicity stunt casts a dark cloud over Royce’s 
vision of a “new Baltimore. ”
Mayor Schmoke welcomed “town houses of choice. ” His fi  ctional 
counterpart Mayor Royce proclaims a “new Baltimore. ” Talk of change 
is anything but new in Baltimore, a city perennially dramatized, 
historicized, and poeticized as the subject of formation and reforma-
tion narratives. From its colonial founding on the shores of a remote 
Chesapeake tributary to its industrial development into a bustling 
Atlantic harbor in the nineteenth century, to its depopulation, drug 
epidemics, and race riots in the twentieth, Baltimore has, in the words 
of geographer Sherry Olson, grown and contracted in a “boom-and-
bust-sequence” of “building up and tearing down, swarming and 
dispersing, getting and spending, birthing and dying, sharing and 
competing” (xii). By attending so closely to the realities of twenty-fi rst-
century Baltimore, Th e Wire  has internalized the metabolism of a city 
historically characterized by boom-and-bust sequences, a pattern trace-
able through the actions and words of characters on the show.
When series co-creator David Simon deliberately restages an event 
from Baltimore’s history, the destruction of a housing project, and repro-
duces its accompanying descriptive language, the mayoral speech, he 
invites his viewers to notice the ways in which reform language and 
infrastructural redevelopment shape one another, or in other words, to 
evaluate the disjunctive relationship between the transformation of 
landscape and transformative rhetoric. By recalling an episode from 
local history through the invocation of that slippery commonplace, 
“new Baltimore, ” Th e Wire both rehearses and challenges a body of 
promotional rhetoric that has enshrouded and gilded the city for 
centuries. By populating its scenes with characters whose disturbing 
narratives resist compartmentalization within political speech, Th e Wire  
embarrasses Baltimore’s project of rhetorical self-fashioning to suggest 
the inadequacy of such language to aptly describe the city. What, aft  er 
all, would a “new Baltimore” mean for Bodie and his crew?
In confronting rhetoric proclaiming everything from Baltimore’s 
reform to its resurrection, Th e Wire  portrays a city conversant with cer-
tain aspects of its history and in denial of others. Th rough an ongoing


--- PAGE 35 ---
26 THE WIRE : URBAN DECAY AND AMERICAN TELEVISION
serial sloganning project, Baltimore presents itself as Charm City, Crab 
City, Monument City, Th e City that Reads, and in the much satirized 
words of former mayor Martin O’Malley “Th e Greatest City in America” 
(O’Mara). For these bloodless clichés, Th e Wire  substitutes its own 
language of the city in the masturbatory tropes of Jay Landsman, the 
shrewd barter of Proposition Joe Stewart, and the fatal swagger of Felicia 
“Snoop” Pearson. Th e conspicuous presence of this kind of language in 
David Simon’s Baltimore illuminates by contrast the corresponding 
poverty of rhetoric used to address and sell the real-life city.
Th is chapter examines how Th e Wire  appropriates Baltimore’s legacy 
of political rhetoric to uncover the city’s strategic foregrounding and 
concealment of diff erent historic moments. As a televisual annotation of 
regional history, Th e Wire  revises, refutes, and ventriloquizes rhetoric 
originating in such documents as Th omas Scharf ’s historical account of 
Baltimore’s founding, Francis Scott Key’s poem “Th e Defense of Fort 
McHenry, ” Mayor Robert McLane’s rallying response to the Great Fire 
of 1904, and the Baltimore Urban Renewal and Housing Agency’s Inner 
Harbor Plan blueprint for the city’s waterfront gentrifi cation program 
in the 1970s and 80s. More than merely satirizing the promotional 
eff orts and selective memory of a rusting port city, Th e Wire  demands a 
re imagination of Baltimore broad enough to encompass the contradic-
tions of logical political rhetoric and a profusely irrational urban 
landscape, and to recover the orphaned accounts, obscured histories, 
and undocumented lives of a city in desperate need of a more truthful 
and complex artistic narrative.
Th e most explicit embodiment of the ways in which Th e Wire  appro-
priates Baltimore’s promotional language comes in the character of 
Tommy Carcetti, a fi ctional politician whose campaign speeches and 
policy proposals ostensibly aim to reform the city’s infrastructural face 
and human heart, but whose actions ultimately perpetuate a historic 
status quo while serving the ends of professional advancement. Th e rise 
of the hotheaded, philandering, and masterful Carcetti from the back-
benches of city council to the offi  ce of the mayor provides the principal 
political plot line of the third and fourth seasons of Th e Wire . Locating 
Carcetti within a nearly 300-year tradition of Baltimore orators, it is pos-
sible to read him as a pastiche of promises, talking points, motivations, 
and gestures. By rehashing the reformist language of tomorrow so oft en


--- PAGE 36 ---
Yesterday’s Tomorrow Today: Baltimore and the Promise of Reform 27
deployed by real-life Baltimore civic leaders, industrialists, journalists, 
and historians, Carcetti personifi es the historic incompatibility between 
municipal rhetoric and material reality, while participating in a mayoral 
tradition of semiotic inheritance that suggests his actions will reiterate 
rather than intervene in the idiosyncratic cycles of Baltimore’s history.
The City
Assessing Carcetti requires some historical sense of the city he comes to 
manage: where and what is the city of Baltimore? With characteristic 
oracular brevity, Reginald “Bubbles” Cousins off  ers a provocative if 
incomplete answer when he asserts that “It’s a thin line ’tween heaven 
and here” (1.04). Substituting “here” for the commonplace “hell” makes 
for striking prosody, but Bubbles’s actual location remains ambiguous. 
Where on the axes of history and geography can we locate a city suppos-
edly bordering on heaven but possibly identical to hell? Historian 
Th omas Scharf set out to answer a similar set of questions when writing 
his 1881 History of Baltimore City and Baltimore County:
Surrounded by rugged hills, hemmed in by boisterous water-
courses, and fl anked by malarious marshes, there seemed little 
prospect that the rough hamlet planted on this apparently unpro-
pitious site would rise to the dignity of metropolitan honors. 
(Scharf 47)
Scharf delivers a colorful and tellingly antiprovidentialist account of 
Baltimore’s foundings. Unlike the Puritan Boston that John Winthrop 
christened a “city upon a hill, ” or the Quakerly Philadelphia that 
William Penn envisioned as a “green countrie towne, ” those who built 
Baltimore had to claim their city from forbidding woods and infectious 
wetlands. In Scharf ’s triumphal formation narrative, it is not God but 
men who leveled hills, drained swamps, fi  lled hollows, and carved a 
gridwork streetscape from the grasses and mud of the Chesapeake basin. 
For Scharf, Baltimore’s eighteenth-century ascension into the ranks of 
America’s most populous and commercially vital cities is a great come-
back story, bearing tribute to great Baltimoreans who transformed a 
“rough hamlet” into an urban center.


--- PAGE 37 ---
28 THE WIRE : URBAN DECAY AND AMERICAN TELEVISION
In its early years, Baltimore defi  ned itself as a site of resistance, 
whether against “unpropitious geography” or the hostile interventions 
of Maryland, whose Annapolis legislature favored rural interests over 
those of the port town. Historian Hamilton Owens comments that 
“ At the very beginning Baltimore Town seemed an alien thing in the 
body politic of the palatinate on the Chesapeake Bay” (2). Sherry 
Olson claims this alienation prompted Baltimoreans “to defi  ne them-
selves as a people struggling against the past, resisting the oppressive 
institutions of the state, surviving in a political environment hostile to 
cities” (1). Olson’s description of Baltimore’s dialectical self-fashioning 
could certainly apply to the fi ctionalized Baltimore of Th e Wire , whose 
mayoral and police administrations over fi ve seasons manage to alienate 
the Maryland Governor (4.13), the state attorney general (3.12), the 
U.S. Attorney General (5.04), and the Department of Homeland 
Security (1.13).
With eighteenth-century Baltimore’s role as an industrial port 
serving piedmont farmers in a state run by southern agrarians, the 
fortunes of the city of Baltimore oft en ran against those of the state of 
Maryland. In its fi  rst hundred years, the city thrived during wars, 
blockades, and other political turmoil. Baltimore capitalized on the 
French and Indian War (1756–1763), the American Revolution 
(1775–1781), and the French Revolution (1789–1802) by supplying 
Atlantic marketplaces with cheap grain, incorporating Arcadian, 
German, and Scottish refugees into its expanding population, and 
exploiting the American need for a naval fl  eet to establish a powerful 
ship-building industry (Olson 11). During the early years of the 
American Republic, Baltimore grew rapidly through its capacity to 
address public health crises, domestic economic rivalries, and foreign 
invasion with large-scale public works eff orts. For instance, outbreaks 
of yellow fever in the early 1800s drove the city to construct a modern 
sewer and drainage system (47).
Infectious epidemics demanded a civic response in the form of stones 
and cement. But the British invasion of Baltimore Harbor during the 
War of 1812 required nothing less than the spiritual unifi cation of a citi-
zenry to support protracted military resistance. Th e instrument of civic 
cooperation came in the “Th e Defense of Fort McHenry, ” a broadside 
poem composed by Francis Scott Key in which the American fl ag serves


--- PAGE 38 ---
Yesterday’s Tomorrow Today: Baltimore and the Promise of Reform 29
as visible proof to an astonished city that U.S. forces had repulsed the 
British fl eet:
What so proudly we hailed at the twilight’s last gleaming,
Whose broad stripes and bright stars through the perilous fi ght,
O’ er the rampart we watch’ d, were so gallantly streaming? 
And the Rockets’ red glare, the Bombs bursting in air,
Gave proof through the night that our Flag was still there.
During the summer of 1812, Baltimore epitomized America’s internally 
divided attitudes toward “Mr. Madison’s War, ” most visibly in the
 violence of a pro-war rabble whose brutality and intimidation garnered 
Baltimore the nickname “Mob City” (O’Mara). However, by 1814, 
following the decisive American victory at the Battle of Baltimore, the 
city that the British had scorned as a “nest of pirates” could boast itself 
the birthplace of the text that would become the American National 
Anthem (Owens 171).
1
Baltimore’s self-descriptive idiom of comeback, transcendence, and 
the forging of civic coherence through adversity carried through the 
nineteenth century as commercial trade expanded and residential 
quality of life declined. Th en on 7 February 1904, fi  re broke out down-
town and incinerated all structures within Baltimore’s original colonial 
boundaries, replacing the city’s commercial core with a scorched and 
ghostly void (Hoff er 162, 186). Th e “Great Fire of 1904” destroyed 1,526 
buildings and caused between $100 and $150 million worth of property 
damage (Hoff er 186; Jensen). On 8th February, the front page of the 
Baltimore Sun r e po rt e d  t h a t  fi re has “devastated practically the entire 
central business district of Baltimore” (“Twenty-Four”). A column adja-
cent to this sober pronouncement catalogued a long list of the addresses, 
owners, and property values of buildings lost to the fl ames.
However, in the days immediately following the devastating fi re, the 
same pages of the Sun that proclaimed the city’s doom published signs 
of its resurgent life. While reporters mulled over the charred remnants 
of Baltimore’s business district, and the implications of massive insur-
ance pay-off s, the Geo. A. Fuller Co. fi rm advertised that, “Th is Company 
is prepared to immediately commence the construction of buildings in 
Baltimore in place of those destroyed by the fi  re” (Geo A. Fuller Co).


--- PAGE 39 ---
30 THE WIRE : URBAN DECAY AND AMERICAN TELEVISION
Other fi rms outside the immediate swath of destruction were quick to 
announce their survival, such as Alex. Brown & Sons, who printed an 
advertisement in the 9th February Sun to “ Announce that their building 
being so slightly damaged by the recent fi re and their vaults not being 
aff ected in any way, they are ready to resume business as soon as the 
streets are cleared” (Alex. Brown & Sons).
Mayor Robert McLane personifi ed in the public sector the spirit of 
resilience already evident among Baltimore businesses. Just three days 
aft er the fi re, the front page of Baltimore Sun declared the need to “raise 
up a new and greater Baltimore from the ruins of the old. ” Th e article 
relayed news that Mayor McLane had declined off  ers of aid from the 
federal government: “I do not mean that we are too proud to ask for 
help, and if we fi nd that we need it [we] shall not hesitate three minutes 
about availing ourselves of the many generous and hearty off  ers of 
assistance, both fi nancial and otherwise, that have poured in upon us 
from all over the country” (“To Build a New”). Following this act of civic 
bravado, McLane proclaimed in an interview with the Baltimore News, 
“We shall make the fi  re of 1904 a landmark not of decline but of 
progress” (McLane 269).
In issuing a series of sweeping predictions, McLane assumes a 
 prophetic stance seamlessly undertaken in Th e Wire by fi ctional mayors 
Royce and Carcetti. As Scharf described Baltimore’s transcendence of 
geographical and political conditions, and Francis Scott Key versifi  ed 
Baltimore as the site of resistance to national invasion, McLane locates 
the city’s greatest triumphs in a future shortly following its most 
traumatic calamities. History, of course, has since proven the former 
mayor’s predictions valid. Peter Charles Hoff er, a historian of the 1904 
fi re, remarks that the widened streets and modern skyscrapers that 
replaced the scorched ruins of Baltimore’s business district “turned the 
Inner Harbor into a distinct and coherent place” (195).
At the dawn of the twentieth century Baltimore needed to rebuild 
itself as a modern city atop the ashes of an antiquated one. Fift  y years 
later, Baltimore again faced the imperative of modernization. Following 
World War II, the city lost over 213,000 residents, many migrating to the 
surrounding suburbs (Gibson). Between 1970 and 1995, Baltimore lost 
over 95,000 manufacturing jobs (Olson 392). It was in these years that 
the city began to see the superblock housing projects and blighted


--- PAGE 40 ---
Yesterday’s Tomorrow Today: Baltimore and the Promise of Reform 31
corners that Th e Wire  transforms into contested turf between the 
Barksdale and Stanfi  eld organizations, the vacant rowhomes where 
Chris Partlow and Snoop stash corpses, and the shuttered commercial 
store fronts instrumental to State Senator Clay Davis’s corrupt urban 
renewal eff orts.
Commercially marginalized by nationwide corporate consolidations 
while plagued with appalling crime rates and failing infrastructure in 
the neighborhoods, the city at mid-century responded with an eff ort to 
redevelop its under-used Inner Harbor into an entertainment district 
that would “reinforce Baltimore’s image as an urban center of distinc-
tion, charm, and vitality” ( Inner Harbor Project). Authored by the city 
Housing and Urban Renewal Agency, the Inner Harbor Plan outlined 
a massive land acquisition and rezoning project that would culminate 
in the construction of a downtown festival marketplace, the National 
Aquarium in Baltimore, Orioles Park at Camden Y ards, and the 
 Baltimore Convention Center. In 1981, Time Magazine  proclaimed 
 Baltimore’s “renaissance, ” asserting that “few cities anywhere can boast 
so dramatic a turnaround” (Demarest).
The Wire
Th e Wire  begins staging its own history of Baltimore at the turn of the 
twenty-fi rst century in neighborhoods beset with seemingly ineradica-
ble poverty but oft en literally in the shadows of downtown skyscrapers 
and within sight of Inner Harbor amenities, in what Peter Szanton 
calls the “the rot beneath the glitter. ” Into this world of tantalizing 
proximity and gross inequity enters Councilman Th  omas Carcetti, a 
scheming agitator driven by his anger at the city’s collapse and navi-
gated by his political savvy. Th ough representing a predominately white, 
middle-class district in the city’s south side, Carcetti sees both human 
catastrophe and professional opportunity in the crime-ridden streets of 
West Baltimore, and so uses his position on the Safety Subcommittee as 
an excuse to court voters citywide.
Carcetti publicly reveals his aspirations for higher offi  ce at the end 
of Season Th ree, following the revelation of Major Howard “Bunny” 
Colvin’s experiments with drug legalization in the Hamsterdam free-
zone. Rather than merely blasting Colvin, Carcetti uses the spectacle


--- PAGE 41 ---
32 THE WIRE : URBAN DECAY AND AMERICAN TELEVISION
of a televised safety subcommittee meeting as a prompt for rhetorical 
bombast:
we turned away from those streets in West Baltimore the poor, the 
sick, the swollen underclass of our city trapped in the wreckage of 
neighborhoods which were once so prized, communities which 
we’ve failed to defend, which we have surrendered to the horrors 
of the drug trade. (3.12)
In Carcetti’s fi guration, Baltimore is not battling itself in a struggle to 
reform, but instead a violent and remorseless external foe. Like Francis 
Scott Key, whose poetry compelled readers to “see through the dawn’s 
early light” as well as the complicated national politics of the War of 
1812 to rally around the common good of defense, Carcetti uses the 
fi gure of invasion to elide the complexities of municipal management 
and to explain the city’s shortcomings as a simple failure of will. Th ere is 
obviously some irony in the fact that Carcetti blames the condition of 
West Baltimore on “surrender, ” considering that the aggressively origi-
nal Hamsterdam project constituted the most radical and successful 
police intervention depicted in Th e Wire . Carcetti builds his reformist 
candidacy by savaging the reform eff  orts of others, much like Mayor 
Royce (and by extension Mayor Schmoke) who applauded the demoli-
tion of high-rise public housing while seeming to forget that such towers 
of the Great Frontier Program were once a welcome antidote to over-
crowded and unsanitary slums.
Where Colvin’s Hamsterdam rezoned the physical geography of West 
Baltimore, Carcetti’s critique of the project is a nebulous rhetorical 
gesture to the limits of toleration. By repeatedly declaring that the city 
has had “enough, ” the councilman off ers only criticism of the present 
regime while proposing no alternative ideas of his own. City government 
is to save West Baltimore, but how it is to do so and with what bench-
marks it can document this rescue remain unstated. Unaware of funding 
shortages, the strained relations between the city and Maryland, and the 
need to broker compromises across multiple constituencies, Carcetti at 
this stage calls only for “the courage and the conviction to fi ght this war 
the way it should be fought” (3.12).


--- PAGE 42 ---
Yesterday’s Tomorrow Today: Baltimore and the Promise of Reform 33
Only aft er formally declaring his mayoral candidacy does Carcetti 
off er his own vision for Baltimore. On the night of the Democratic 
primary, Carcetti and his wife leave the campaign hotel suite to stroll the 
Inner Harbor. Carcetti looks out over the illuminated waterfront, and 
muses to his wife Jen, “It could be a great city again. Pull some jobs in. 
People move back, fi x up the houses” (4.06). Carcetti’s private thoughts 
on the economic renewal, repopulation, and repair of Baltimore hardly 
comprise a unique or actionable plan for reforming the city. Standing in 
the Inner Harbor, once the sight of confl agration and later the acclaimed 
landmark of Baltimore’s renaissance, Carcetti merely echoes Royce’s 
commonplace call for a “new Baltimore. ” Carcetti’s assertion that “It 
could be a great city again” also recalls Mayor McLane’s 1904 boast that 
Baltimoreans would look back on the fi re as a milestone of progress. To 
accomplish this turnaround, all that candidate Carcetti lacks, of course, 
is a fi re, a locatable problem that would infl ict a fi nite amount of damage 
over a short period of time, and which the city could defeat and rebuild 
around. Instead of fi re, Th e Wire shows how Baltimore’s civic institu-
tions have suff  ered from chronic neglect, suburban fl  ight, racism, 
a depressed local economy, drug dependency, and failing schools. In 
short, Carcetti faces systemic problems far more complicated than those 
that McLane attempted to solve in the winter of 1904. When the fi  c-
tional politician slides into the rhetorical grooves of his historical 
predecessors, optimistically reiterating yesterday’s vision of Baltimore’s 
tomorrow, it remains only for the show’s writers to document the ways 
in which Carcetti fails to answer the challenges of twenty-fi  rst century 
urban management.
In this scene, it is Jen rather than Tommy Carcetti who is more attuned 
to the physical city. Smelling the night harbor, she notes that it’s “a little 
ripe” (4.06). Where Th omas Carcetti is absorbed in his hypothetical 
rebuilding of Baltimore, Jen’s words remind viewers that gentrifi cation 
projects conceal but cannot repair the city’s decaying underpinnings, its 
schools, social services, and law enforcement. When Jen notices that the 
harbor stinks, she literally smells Szanton’s “rot beneath the glitter. ” Like 
the ominous smoke cloud that swallows Royce’s stage at the Franklin 
Tower demolition, the sensory residue of an ailing city undermines the 
words that prophesize its recovery.


--- PAGE 43 ---
34 THE WIRE : URBAN DECAY AND AMERICAN TELEVISION
Unlike his wife, Carcetti cannot distinguish between the rot and 
glitter, between material realities, and rhetorical hypotheticals. Th  is 
becomes clearer in Season Four, when the new mayor must contend 
with the same budgetary constraints, constituent contingencies, and 
personal politics that hampered Royce and others. Still animated by an 
optimism in the vein of Robert McLane or Th omas Scharf but sobered 
by the advice of his savvy and cynical advisor Norman Wilson, Carcetti 
sets three goals for his administration: a 10 percent reduction in crime, 
the construction of a “bricks and mortar” public works project, and a 
strategic evasion of issues relating to the public school system (4.08).
In his fi  rst two proposals, Carcetti follows the thinking of the 
twentieth-century Baltimore executive leadership that grasped only 
the external symptoms of the city’s underlying illness, and accordingly 
proposed cosmetic solutions, like arbitrary numerical reductions in cer-
tain types of crime and Inner Harbor gentrifi cation, while sidestepping 
issues like education, whose public perception cannot easily be man-
aged with statistical and linguistic manipulation. Carcetti’s proposal to 
reduce crime by 10 percent is meaningless in a city patrolled by a police 
force willing to massage, miscontextualize, and falsify crime statistics. 
Carcetti’s initiative to build a downtown project simply to put his name 
on something is practically self-satirizing. Unlike Baltimore’s purpose-
ful public works of the nineteenth century (including sewer engineering 
and road improvements) this compulsion toward “bricks and mortar” 
as ends in themselves recalls Bodie’s observations on the city’s pointless 
deployment of “steel and concrete” and its concern for infrastructure 
over people. When the administration considers building a harbor 
promenade walk along the Patapsco River, it does so by prioritizing 
the interests of a potential Washington D.C. commuter population 
over the waterfront’s traditional blue-collar residents. In an episode 
appropriately entitled “Know Y our Place, ” city government’s disregard 
for the ports resurfaces in the words of a Carcetti advisor who laments 
that the promenade could not extend further east because it would run 
into “the Locust Point Marine Terminal, which unfortunately is still a 
working enterprise” (4.09).
While Mayor Carcetti’s fi rst two initiatives crumble in the crucible of 
the Baltimore of Th e Wire , his decision to distance himself from the 
city’s failing public school system to “respect the depths” as Norman


--- PAGE 44 ---
Yesterday’s Tomorrow Today: Baltimore and the Promise of Reform 35
puts it, holds more protracted consequences (4.08). Aft er learning that 
the schools have accumulated a $54 million budget defi  cit, Carcetti is 
compelled to seek state aid. When off  ered a bailout by Maryland’s 
Republican government in return for the installation of state oversight, 
Carcetti elects to retain both autonomy from the state and the $54 million 
debt. Th e mayor defends this decision by blaming the state, engraft  ing 
himself in a tradition of defi  ant Baltimore mayors including Robert 
McLane, who spiritedly declined relief following the Fire of 1904. How-
ever, unlike McLane, who dedicated himself completely to rebuilding 
the city (and committed suicide in May 1904 under the accompanying 
pressures), Carcetti taps into historic animosity as a means of retaining 
his personal reputation: “He was gonna make me beg, then call a press 
conference so the world could see me on my knees” (4.13). Carcetti 
interprets the political as exclusively personal, reading the situation not 
as addressing the future of Baltimore’s children, but the future of his 
own political career. By the end of Season Four, the fi rst-term mayor has 
so thoroughly considered his prospects as candidate for Maryland gov-
ernor that he rejects state educational aid because the embarrassment 
would undermine his 2008 gubernatorial candidacy (4.12). By seeking 
the governorship, Carcetti follows the well-worn path from Baltimore to 
Annapolis traversed by fi ve former mayors, including William Donald 
Schaeff er, an energetic promoter of the Inner Harbor, and Maryland’s 
current governor, Martin O’Malley
2 (Archives of Maryland). While 
none of Carcetti’s policies reforms Baltimore permanently, each contrib-
utes to the mayor’s statewide self-promotion and eventual election as 
governor (5.10).
In predictable irony, the fi rst-district councilman who called upon 
Baltimore’s resolve to fi  ght has in some sense surrendered his own 
 mission of reform. In Th e Wire , Carcetti’s political rhetoric stands in for 
actual intervention in the same way that Baltimore’s many slogans sub-
stitute for the city’s less easily marketable substance, and the tourist 
bustle of the Inner Harbor compensates for the lack of cargo passing 
through the outer one. By understanding Carcetti as the rhetorical sum 
of his predecessors and recognizing the power of his words to misrepre-
sent and side-step real problems, Th e Wire  personifi es the need for 
self-critique within the text of Baltimore’s master narrative, for a street-
wise Bodie to puncture Royce’s infl ated speech (3.01), for an embittered


--- PAGE 45 ---
36 THE WIRE : URBAN DECAY AND AMERICAN TELEVISION
Nick Sobotka to heckle offi  cials at a condo ribbon cutting (5.06), and for 
Jen Carcetti to recognize that underneath a surface of fl  owery words, 
even the most celebrated sections on Baltimore’s map can still reek 
(4.06). Th e appropriation of historical rhetoric in Th e Wire  reveals a city 
that has always shaped itself more compellingly through dialectical 
struggle than seductive marketing, and accordingly calls for a more 
populous discursive realm, in which a cacophony of local speakers 
and authors can draft , debate, and determine the evolving character of 
Baltimore’s composition.
Notes
1. In an interview with Th e Believer , David Simon delivers a confessedly “useless 
history” of the fi nal stages of the Battle of Baltimore that defl  ates Francis Scott Key’s 
patriotic pathos: “In the morning, the star-spangled banner still fl ew over McHenry and 
so we had something to sing at the beginning of sporting events, and the British army, 
having fought the Battle of North Point against Baltimore irregulars to a draw, reem-
barked on His Majesty’s ships and sailed away” (Hornby).
2. When in 2004 the Baltimore public schools faced a staggering budget defi  cit, 
Mayor O’Malley, unlike Th omas Carcetti, accepted a $42 million bailout from  Republican 
Governor Robert Ehrlich in return for ceding some oversight authority to the state of 
Maryland (Craig). O’Malley defeated Ehrlich in the 2006 Maryland governor’s race.


--- PAGE 46 ---
37
2
“We ain’t got no yard”: 
Crime, Development, and 
Urban Environment
Peter Clandfi  eld
Season Th ree of Th e Wire begins by depicting the implosion of the tower 
blocks of Franklin Terrace, the dysfunctional housing project that has been 
central to the fi rst major storyline of the series, the battle of wits between 
police and the drug gang led by Avon Barksdale. Th e disappearance of the 
towers triggers the Barksdale organization’s campaign to retrench and 
defend its territory against its upstart rival Marlo Stanfi eld, a major plotline 
for the third season. Y et, the prominence given to the demolition of the tow-
ers (and to the various reactions of area residents) points to further key 
concerns of the season and of the series: ordinary Baltimoreans’ need for 
decent living places, and the city’s prospects for renovation and material 
revitalization beyond the ostentatious redevelopment of privileged areas. 
Th is resourceful engagement with Baltimore’s urban environment as a sub-
ject in itself, and not just a necessary background for conventional crime 
narrative, is among the distinguishing and sustaining qualities of Th e Wire.
Critics such as Liam Kennedy and Steve Macek argue that movies, 
television news, and other mainstream American media have persis-
tently misrepresented inner-city neighborhoods in “economically 
depressed urban centers” like Baltimore as “landscapes of fear” which—
along with their oft  en non-white residents—are largely and perhaps


--- PAGE 47 ---
38 THE WIRE : URBAN DECAY AND AMERICAN TELEVISION
irredeemably lawless and savage (Macek xii). Macek suggests in passing 
that “fi ctional television dramas like NYPD Blue and Homicide” (viii) 
have also contributed to this misrepresentation of inner cities as breed-
ing-grounds for virulent criminality, but detailed attention to television 
series is conspicuously absent from his generally persuasive analysis. 
Macek’s comment does less than justice to David Simon’s earlier police 
series, Homicide: Life on the Street (1993–1999), and it also disregards 
the possibility that a series with story arcs that extend beyond the 
episodic—a feature Th e Wire inherits and develops from Homicide—
may be particularly well-suited to explore the contexts and nuances of 
complex urban problems. Th e investigation of matters of housing, devel-
opment, and environment is most intensive in Season Th ree of Th e Wire , 
but attention to these matters is built into numerous ongoing storylines 
throughout the series. Th is ongoing investigation identifi  es Baltimore 
itself as a collateral victim of indiff  erence, unenlightened self-interest, 
and corruption among politicians, developers, and other powerfully-
placed people. In linking the concrete local conditions of the city to the 
(apparently) more abstract economic, political, and ideological forces 
shaping its spaces and their uses, the series resonates with the work of 
urban geographer (and adoptive Baltimorean) David Harvey, who 
explores the material problems produced by a globalizing economic 
system under which “machinery, buildings, and even whole urban infra-
structures and life-styles are made prematurely obsolescent” by the 
cycles of investment and profi t-taking (Urban Experience 191). Th e Wire  
harmonizes not only with Harvey’s indictment of fi nance capitalism and 
the spatial waste and disorder it creates, but also with his insistence that 
fi nding alternatives to this unsustainable system requires treating urban 
development and redevelopment as “fundamentally ecological  processes” 
(Justice, Nature 392) and regaining an understanding of inner cities as 
vital parts of the environment, rather than as crimes against it.
As executive producer Nina Kostroff  Noble notes in her DVD com-
mentary on “Time Aft er Time” (3.01), the Franklin Terrace implosion is 
accomplished with computer graphics. Th is piece of virtual redevelop-
ment reminds us that Th e Wire  creates its own version of Baltimore, 
but also illustrates that the series gets its construction materials from 
concrete details of contemporary cities. Th e modernist housing projects 
that Franklin Terrace represents were intended to design crime and other


--- PAGE 48 ---
“We ain’t got no yard”: Crime, Development, and Urban Environment 39
social ills out of existence, in the U.S. and elsewhere (see Vidler 63), but 
their shortcomings have been widely registered, and their demolitions 
have become spectacles both in reality and in fi  ction. Homicide, for 
example, contributes notable takes on the fate of Baltimore’s projects. 
One of its key characters, Detective Meldrick Lewis, has grown up in 
“West Baltimore’s Lafayette Courts . . . probably the most violent of the 
city’s housing projects” (Hoff  man 125), and two episodes from the 
fourth season address his ambivalent views about such places. “Full 
Moon” (4.10) centers on a dingy motel and its semi-transient residents, 
but ends with Lewis reluctantly witnessing the demolition, or as he 
terms it, the “murder, ” of the Courts—shown in footage of the actual 
event on 21 August 1995—and refl  ecting that his family’s apartment 
there was “the last real home [he] ever really had. ” “Scene of the Crime” 
(4.21) explores another highrise project, where Lewis, investigating the 
fatal balcony fall of a drug dealer, must negotiate with the Black Muslim 
fi rm that has been contracted to provide security.
1 Rejecting their racial 
separatism, and provoked by their obstruction of his work, Lewis never-
theless recognizes a case for their presence, particularly since elsewhere 
in the same project (and the same episode), a white police offi   cer has 
failed to intervene in an armed confl  ict that has left  two young black 
residents dead. Together, the two episodes suggest that one measure of 
the failure of such projects is the gap between the potential progress they 
once represented and the intractable problem they have oft en become.
Farther afi eld, David Greig’s 1996 play Th e Architect  examines the 
fi nal stages of a comparable failure in a Scottish council housing estate, 
whose demolition serves as a dramatic conclusion for the work. Th  e 
play’s 2006 fi lm adaptation revolves around the impending implosion of 
a Chicago housing project. Th  e fact that Season Th  ree of Th e Wire 
employs an implosion as its departure point, rather than as part of a 
spectacular narrative climax, is a deft   structural indication that such 
drastic measures do not in themselves represent solutions to ongoing 
housing problems, despite the promises delivered by Mayor Clarence 
Royce, as he presides over the demolition ceremony. Th  e sequence’s 
main commentators on the event are not public fi  gures, but mid-level 
Barksdale gang members Malik “Poot” Carr and Preston “Bodie”  Broadus. 
Both are established by this point in the series as individual personalities 
with their own ordinary concerns, and though the implosion is disrupting


--- PAGE 49 ---
40 THE WIRE : URBAN DECAY AND AMERICAN TELEVISION
their livelihood, they talk of it in relation to everyday, noncriminal expe-
rience. Poot is nostalgic: for him the towers represent “people—memories 
and shit. ” Bodie takes a harsher view: “Th ey gonna tear this building 
down, they gonna build some new shit. But people? Th ey don’t give a 
fuck about people. ” When Poot reveals that he lost his virginity in one of 
the towers, Bodie restates his point with characteristic sarcasm: “Man, 
why didn’t you say something before—they probably wouldn’t be tearing 
this tower down now!” But as Bodie continues to mock him, and dust 
from the implosion rises, Poot reiterates feelings akin to Lewis’s response 
to the “murder” of Lafayette Courts: “Shit, I feel like I ain’t got no home no 
more. ”
2 Th e vigor of the exchange emphasizes that the demolition sequence 
is not only a memorable visual metaphor for Season Th  ree’s theme of 
“reform, ” as creator David Simon describes it in his DVD commentary on 
the episode, but also a metonym for the close attention that Th e Wire  pays 
to the physical spaces that Baltimore’s people inhabit.
In his commentary on 3.01, Simon dwells on the derelict condition of 
many of Baltimore’s distinctive row houses. As the camera, tracking the 
return of parolee and former Barksdale associate Dennis “Cutty” Wise to 
his old neighborhood, reveals an entire block of abandoned houses, Simon 
becomes uncharacteristically (yet eloquently) inarticulate on the subject:
I love this shot. Th is is what was at stake. Th is is the Baltimore that . . . 
I mean, I love row houses, and if you’re from around here you know 
that they’ve . . . destroyed and gutted and bulldozed . . . a lot of the 
vacant ones. And, even though they’re vacant, you, you just wanna 
think that one day they’re all gonna come back, and . . . it’s just so 
sad . . . Th e city’s been emptied of people. (Original ellipses)
Th e scale of the depopulation Simon refers to is assessed in Harvey’s 
Spaces of Hope, whose longest chapter details the movement of indus-
tries, jobs, and people from older parts of the city into suburban and 
exurban areas. Harvey reports that as of 1998, Baltimore’s vacant houses 
numbered “an estimated 40,000 out of a total housing stock of just over 
300,000 units. ” He adds, “Th e idea of reclaiming older neighbourhoods—
particularly those with a high quality housing stock—for impoverished 
populations has been abandoned even though it could make much 
economic and environmental sense” (135). A more recent account puts


--- PAGE 50 ---
“We ain’t got no yard”: Crime, Development, and Urban Environment 41
the number of vacants as high as 50,000 (Lanahan 25). Simon’s hope that 
“one day they’re all gonna come back” could refer to the rehabilitation 
of houses themselves or to the possibility that people will return to 
revitalize inner-city neighborhoods. Th e ambiguity of the remark refl ects 
Th e Wire ’s linkage of houses and people, a connection that is especially 
strong with row houses, which architect Vincent Scully, quoted in a 1999 
New York Times article on Baltimore’s losses of jobs, people, and build-
ings, praises for “their doors and windows showing the scale of human 
use” (Rozhon).
Baltimore is not just setting and backdrop, but subject and fabric for 
Th e Wire , and this is rearticulated in the opening exchange of Season 
Th ree’s second episode, as a Barksdale corner boy tells colleagues about 
an irritating encounter with a tourist. Th e visitor is looking for the “Poe 
house” (the North Amity Street house near downtown Baltimore that 
was once lived in by Edgar Allan Poe and is now a museum). To the local, 
though, the request seems foolish: “I’m like, look around—take your 
pick!” Th e corner boy may interpret “Poe house” to refer to the 
Poe Homes, Baltimore’s fi rst public housing project, built in the 1930s 
adjacent to the Amity Street house, or to mean “po’ [poor] house. ” Either 
way, the incident evokes the mutual incomprehension of the outsider 
seeking the Baltimore marketed to tourists (see Ward 272; Harvey, Spaces 
of Capital 142–143) and the insider to whom the city’s heritage attrac-
tions mean little. As Simon’s commentary on 3.01 suggests, moreover, 
Baltimore’s neglected houses are “poor” in that they stand for communi-
ties once built in and around them but now hauntingly absent.
Th e play on “Poe” here hints at yet further key qualities of the vacant 
houses. Architecture scholar Anthony Vidler’s Th e Architectural Uncanny 
builds on Sigmund Freud’s 1919 essay “Th e Uncanny, ” noting that uncan-
niness arises “from the transformation of something that once seemed 
homely into something decidedly not so” (6). Unhomeliness thus desig-
nates a hostile environment that is all the more menacing because it could 
and should have been a place of safety. Such transformations recur both 
in houses in Poe’s fi ction and in the structures of his works, and Th e Wire  
pays tribute to Poe by developing its own distinctive form of structural or 
architectural uncanniness. Th e vacants are visible from the very begin-
ning of the fi rst episode of the series, which touches on the case of a 
decomposing body found in the Poe Homes (1.01). Th e full and startling


--- PAGE 51 ---
42 THE WIRE : URBAN DECAY AND AMERICAN TELEVISION
implications of these “Poe” houses, however, emerge only in Seasons 
Four and Five, to which I will return.
During Season Th ree, meanwhile, Th e Wire  addresses the linked 
destinies of Baltimore’s urban space and its people in a way that is 
focused through two very diff erent, yet comparably unoffi  cial, redevel-
opment initiatives. Veteran police Major Howard “Bunny” Colvin 
attempts to clean up his Western District by experimentally confi  ning 
the drug trade to a designated area of abandoned houses, while Barks-
dale lieutenant Russell “Stringer” Bell tries to abandon the drug trade by 
refashioning himself and Avon Barksdale as partners in a real estate 
development fi rm called B & B Enterprises.
Th e very neglect of the blocks that Simon laments helps to accom-
modate the location fi lming that grounds construction of authenticity in 
the representation of Baltimore in Th e Wire . Th e vacants are also central 
to Colvin’s scheme: he selects one of the most completely desolated areas 
of his district, and on his own authority declares it a “free zone” where 
the day-to-day drug trade will be tolerated. Aft er initial resistance and 
incomprehension both from Colvin’s subordinates and from drug 
dealers and users, the area soon comes to be called “Hamsterdam, ” aft er 
Amsterdam’s association with drug decriminalization. Ironically, in this 
bid to “keep the devil” of drugs “down in the hole” of a particularly 
dilapidated area, Colvin does on a small scale, and in a principled way, 
what the phenomenon oft en nicknamed “white fl ight” has done to entire 
areas of American inner cities. Ecocritic Michael Bennett describes 
government policies of “the Reagan-Bush years” that favored sprawling 
suburban areas, and their mostly white and middle-class occupants, at 
the expense of inner cities, which bore the economic and environmental 
brunt of deindustrialization (Bennett 176–177). More specifi  cally, 
Harvey’s Spaces of Hope surveys the particularly savage and polarizing 
version of this process that has taken place in Baltimore and the 
surrounding area (138–152), and goes on to suggest that it has resulted 
in the ideological construction of “the inner city as a hell-hole where all 
the damned (with plenty of underclass racial coding thrown in) are 
properly confi ned” (158).
3 Th is ideological coding of inner-city people 
as beyond redemption abets a material process whereby cities such as 
Baltimore—having been impoverished by the migration of capital and 
by government subsidy of this migration—are utilized as dumping


--- PAGE 52 ---
“We ain’t got no yard”: Crime, Development, and Urban Environment 43
grounds for toxic substances generated by rapid and wasteful development 
elsewhere. As an epigraph in Harvey’s Justice, Nature and the Geography 
of Diff erence suggests, “Th e bourgeoisie has only one solution to its 
pollution problems: it moves them around” (366).4 What distinguishes 
Colvin’s Hamsterdam from such practices, and makes it readable as a 
response to the kind of large-scale environmental class-subjugation and 
racism that Bennett and Harvey challenge, is its status as a principled, 
localized, and supervised experiment.
One of Colvin’s community contacts, the Deacon, calls drugs a “force 
of nature” (3.02), but Colvin’s actions amount to a decisive rejection of 
the trope of the inner city as a naturally savage jungle. Th e environmen-
tal implications of Colvin’s scheme are highlighted by the way the camera 
repeatedly frames him against backdrops of green vegetation—a literal 
and benign jungle. Many location-shot street sequences during the 
season, and throughout the series, show city blocks that, though crime-
menaced, are also tree-lined. Such visual hints that the city itself is 
something other than an irredeemable toxic wasteland grow as Colvin’s 
plan begins to take eff ect. In a key sequence, Colvin escorts ambitious, 
reform-minded mayoral candidate Tommy Carcetti, along with the 
viewer, on a tour of reclaimed, formerly drug-infested West Baltimore 
streets, where children play in the sun and ordinary people go about 
routine activities (3.11). Colvin’s main achievement—and possibly the 
most optimistic feature of Th e Wire  as a whole—is this vivid suggestion 
that most of the neglected city itself can be rehabilitated, along with, by 
implication, many of its drug- and poverty-damaged citizens.
5
Colvin’s experiment itself, however, leads to no direct leap forward. 
In insisting that Carcetti see Hamsterdam—the drug zone—as well as 
the reclaimed streets, he acknowledges that the latter are utopian and 
depend, for the moment, on the dystopia of the former. By the time of 
his tour with Carcetti, news of Hamsterdam has reached both Colvin’s 
superiors and the media (hence Carcetti’s interest), and Colvin is 
resigned to being disciplined for his initiative. Still, his eff orts lead indi-
rectly to the end of the Barksdale gang. His unconventional view of the 
drug trade attracts the interest of Stringer Bell, whose latent rivalry with 
Avon Barksdale has become increasingly active over matters such as 
Avon’s lukewarm response to Stringer’s interest in real estate. Stringer, 
alluding to his affi  nity with Colvin as would-be reformers, gives to the


--- PAGE 53 ---
44 THE WIRE : URBAN DECAY AND AMERICAN TELEVISION
maverick police offi  cer information that will lead to Avon’s arrest. Th e 
cemetery setting of the meeting, however, is apt: Stringer’s fate is even 
harsher than the demotion that Colvin endures.
Stringer’s bid to redevelop himself as a businessman presents an intrigu-
ing mixture of ruthlessness and naivety. Detectives Lester Freamon and 
Jimmy McNulty and their colleagues have tracked Stringer’s interest in 
real estate since Season One, but only in Season Th ree do they realize that 
Stringer is not merely accumulating property to fl ip as a means of laun-
dering drug money: “worse than a drug dealer . . . he’s a developer” (3.04). 
Th is mordant suggestion about relative orders of criminality is somewhat 
unfair to Stringer, who has been diligently taking community college 
business courses and reading Adam Smith. Th ough he makes sizeable 
unoffi  cial payments to State Assemblyman Clay Davis (the iconic fi gure of 
political corruption in Th e Wire ), he fails to grasp the extent of Davis’s 
deviousness or the degree to which the development business, as con-
ducted by fi gures such as Davis’s glad-handing crony Andy Krawczyk, is 
founded on infl uence peddling and other forms of double dealing. Harvey 
remarks that it is only through such instances as “corruption within a 
system of planning permissions” that “the nonneutrality of the creation of 
space become[s] evident” (Urban Experience 187). In this light, Stringer’s 
undoing plays partly as the result of a capitalist utopianism that has led 
him to assume that the redevelopment of downtown Baltimore is a more 
honorable and orderly industry than the one he is trying to leave behind. 
It is possible that Th e Wire  is somewhat harsh here in its implicit charac-
terization of the so-called “Baltimore model” of urban renewal. Urban 
development can be more complex even than it seems in Th e Wire . 
Harvey, for example, criticizes the municipally-sponsored redevelopment 
of central Baltimore for its focus on projects that have consumed public 
subsidies but brought more benefi ts to developers, investors, and promot-
ers than to ordinary people ( Spaces of Capital 150–156; see also Ward 
184–185). However, he also judges that these failings exemplify “not 
corruption of the ordinary sort but circumvention of the democratic 
processes of government and of public accountability for the uses 
of public money” (156). Still, if Th e Wire  caricatures developers, this 
treatment might be accounted a legitimate tactical response to the mis-
representation of inner cities, and a constructive use of fi ctional license 
to concretize actual problems of spatial inequity.


--- PAGE 54 ---
“We ain’t got no yard”: Crime, Development, and Urban Environment 45
Near the end of the Season Th ree episode “Middle Ground, ” Stringer 
and Avon drink and reminisce together on the balcony of Avon’s luxuri-
ous condo overlooking the redeveloped inner harbor (3.11). Th ey recall 
that the area’s upscale retail space was the site of some of their juvenile 
criminal escapades, and Avon reminds Stringer of one incident in par-
ticular: “I told your ass not to steal the badminton set! What you gonna 
do . . . with a fuckin’ . . . net and a racquet . . . [when] we ain’t got no 
yard?” Th ough the two men laugh at the memory, its implications are 
ironic and poignant. It is virtually the last thing they share as friends 
(Stringer has already betrayed Avon to Colvin, and Avon is setting 
up Stringer to be ambushed by old enemies), and it hints at the origins 
of Stringer’s ambitions for spatial and class mobility. Criminal careers 
like those of Stringer and Avon do not derive solely from their lack of 
access to healthy urban space or to the constructive competition that 
sports can aff ord. Uneven distribution of recreational space is, neverthe-
less, one of the real iniquities Th e Wire depicts. Episode 1.04, for example, 
pointedly juxtaposes the suburban soccer match of McNulty’s young 
son with scenes of children playing on inner-city sidewalks and using 
improvised basketball hoops on the grounds of Franklin Terrace. 
“Middle Ground” itself emphasizes recreational space by following the 
fi nal meeting of Stringer and Avon with a sequence in the youth boxing 
gym that Cutty, Avon’s former employee, has set up aft er opting out of 
the drug trade and tiring of casual labor in suburban landscaping. Avon, 
himself a former boxer, has provided funds to equip the gym, and Cutty 
endures various diffi  culties to sustain a constructive, if modest, presence 
in his neighborhood. Th e fact that it takes drug profi ts to support facili-
ties to divert youth from the drug trade implies an indictment of offi  cial 
neglect of the importance of recreational opportunity.
Th e day aft er his reminiscences with Avon, Stringer meets his fate in 
a downtown property that B & B Enterprises is redeveloping (3.11). 
Arguing with Krawczyk over the project’s delays and the way Davis has 
been stringing him along, Stringer is confronted by Omar Little and 
Brother Mouzone, freelance gunmen who have joined forces against 
him through Avon’s management. Shooting a bodyguard but sparing 
the cowering Krawczyk, they stalk Stringer through the partly- renovated 
space, dismiss his claims to be done with “gangster bullshit, ” and gun 
him down. Th is end is payback for Stringer’s extensive crimes. However,


--- PAGE 55 ---
46 THE WIRE : URBAN DECAY AND AMERICAN TELEVISION
the fi nal long shot of his body lying in an empty, sunlit room serves also 
to stress the unfulfi lled potential of the city and its people, particularly 
because Stringer was among the most popular characters over the fi rst 
three seasons of Th e Wire , and his death disappointed many viewers. 
Long aft er his death, though, the themes of Stringer’s dealings with 
developers are revisited in the fi nal two seasons, which feature a striking 
profusion of inventive references and allusions to houses and homes, 
especially at strategic moments.
Th e opening sequence of Season Four has Felicia “Snoop” Pearson, 
one of Marlo’s top enforcers, shopping for a nailgun in a big box home 
improvement store, where she and a middle-aged white salesman join in 
admiration of the deluxe model she chooses. Th  e tool proves instru-
mental in the macabre real estate strategy that Marlo uses as he 
consolidates power in the wake of the downfall of Avon and Stringer. At 
the bidding of the remorseless next-generation gangster—who is, inter-
estingly, nearly aff ectless except while tending his homing pigeons—
Snoop and her colleague Chris Partlow systematically repopulate vacant 
houses with the bodies of assorted rivals, unlucky subordinates, and 
bystanders. Th us the uncanniness of Th e Wire  is brought home, and the 
vacants become “Poe houses” in new senses. Th eir use as hiding-places 
for corpses alludes to the various wallings-up and fl  oorboard entomb-
ments in Poe’s fi ction (in “Th e Cask of Amontillado” and “Th e Tell-Tale 
Heart, ” for instance). Even more horrifi cally, their status as graves serves 
to animate the anthropomorphic qualities of the vacants. Anthony Vidler 
reads Poe’s House of Usher as the “paradigmatic haunted house . . . its 
windows ‘eye-like’ but without life—‘vacant’” (Vidler 18). Th e boarded, 
blanked-out windows of the houses represent the blind eyes of the 
victims within; the presence of the victims reinforces the sense that the 
houses, too, are suff ering entities; in turn the houses take on new power 
as metonyms for the ordeals of the living neglected people of the area.
In the fi nal two episodes of the fourth season, Freamon fi  gures out 
Marlo’s perverse repopulation strategy, locating the hidden bodies by 
fi nding doors that have been reboarded with distinctive nails from 
Snoop’s gun. Th is detective work keeps the vacants in view as sites 
uncannily linking the state of Baltimore’s physical structures and the fates 
of its people. Season Five brings complications as the city’s new Mayor, 
Carcetti, refuses strings-attached fi  nancial help from the Republican


--- PAGE 56 ---
“We ain’t got no yard”: Crime, Development, and Urban Environment 47
state government, leaving the police unable to fund investigation of the 
vacants. McNulty responds with a fi ction-making exercise that adds yet 
further ironic dimensions to the connections between unhomely build-
ings and unfortunate human beings: he obtains resources for the vacants 
investigation by fabricating evidence of a serial killer targeting homeless 
people. Th is invention is a version of the truth. Th e season implies that 
the city’s homeless and working poor are being assailed not by an 
individual psychopath but by a social system that treats people, like 
much else, as disposable commodities. Th  e series thus gains further 
resonance with Harvey’s ideas and also those of Vidler, who explores 
how “[t]he resurgent problem of homelessness, as the last traces of 
welfare capitalism are systematically demolished, lends . . . a special 
urgency to any refl ection on the modern unhomely” (12). Unhomeli-
ness is not just a trope, but an all-too-literal condition prevailing in the 
Baltimore constructed by Th e Wire .
As McNulty’s fabrication gains media attention, Carcetti, by this time 
campaigning for the Governor’s job, makes much of the cause of home-
lessness. In pursuit of his political goals, however, Carcetti also gets 
co-opted into supporting Krawczyk’s development schemes, including 
the conversion of 500 public housing units into offi  ce space (5.04) and the 
“New Westport” project (5.06) that is to occupy the site of some of the 
actual port facilities whose decline (and whose role as entry point for 
drugs) has been examined in Season Two. Ominously, this involvement 
associates Carcetti, albeit unwittingly, with Marlo Stanfi  eld: thanks to 
Maurice Levy, the well-connected lawyer whose services he inherits 
from Avon and Stringer, Marlo escapes prosecution for his crimes, and 
in the fi nal episode he is introduced by Levy to Krawczyk at a cocktail 
party overlooking “New Westport. ” Th  e sharp lawyer vehemently 
cautions the remorseless murderer about the portly businessman: “Do 
not get in a room with him alone—you want me there with you, believe 
me, otherwise guys like that will bleed you!” Despite this echo of the 
suggestion that developers are worse villains than drug-dealers, 
Marlo—who has been shown earlier noting a lesser dealer’s suggestion 
about the investment possibilities of gentrifi  cation (5.04)—appears 
positioned to move into the world of real estate and real power and 
to succeed where Bell has failed. Marlo remains enigmatic: following his 
introduction to Krawczyk he leaves the party and provokes a street


--- PAGE 57 ---
48 THE WIRE : URBAN DECAY AND AMERICAN TELEVISION
skirmish that leaves him with a minor knife wound. Y et, precisely 
because he seems to be without Stringer’s desire for legitimacy, his 
prospective involvement with real estate underlines the critique of 
urban redevelopment in Th e Wire as an industry driven by amoral 
pursuit of profi t rather than by principle.
Th e fact that Th e Wire  leaves both antagonistic characters and a fl awed 
system thriving—while well-intentioned mavericks fare less well—
suggests a bleak view of possibilities for long-term solutions to the urban 
problems the series dramatizes. Simon’s “premonition of the American 
empire’s future” reportedly includes “more gated communities and more 
of a police state” (Lanahan 31). Y et Th e Wire  does construct some “spaces 
of hope” (to borrow one of Harvey’s book titles). One of the subtlest of 
the trademark cross-seasonal allusions in the series comes in the fi  nal 
sequence of Season Four. Colvin, following his departure from the 
police, has become involved in programs for the city’s under-resourced 
schools, and he and his wife take in one of the students he works with, 
Namond Brice, the son of an imprisoned Barksdale associate. Th e fi nal 
shots of the season have Namond surveying his new, pleasantly ordinary 
environment from the Colvins’ porch. Th e moment is disrupted as a 
hip-hop-blaring SUV passes and its driver and Namond exchange ges-
tures of recognition, before the vehicle runs a stop sign and speeds off . 
Th e camera then lingers on the image of the leafy, sunlit, and peacefully 
populated neighborhood, as the faint ambient sound of wind-chimes 
blends into the slow introductory percussion of the downbeat closing 
theme. Th is evocation of the street as a living, breathing environment 
delicately remembers Colvin’s hopes for the areas he temporarily 
improved with the Hamsterdam initiative. At the same time, the 
sequence hints that Namond’s future is still in the wind, though we later 
see Namond succeeding at a school debating contest (5.09). At the 
debate, Colvin rebuff s the campaigning Carcetti for his compromises 
as Mayor, but politically astute compromise also allows optimistic 
potential: Carcetti’s success in his bid to unseat the anti-urban Republican 
governor holds out the possibility that he will bridge some of the city’s 
diff erences with its surroundings. Also far from hopeless is the fi  nal 
line of the series, delivered by a chastened McNulty as he retrieves the 
bewildered homeless man he has involved in his fabrication: “let’s go 
home” (5.10).


--- PAGE 58 ---
“We ain’t got no yard”: Crime, Development, and Urban Environment 49
Th e Wire  insists that cities like Baltimore are still worth attempts at 
real renewal. Given that the city’s tourist-oriented redevelopments have 
inspired similar projects in many other places (as Stephen V . Ward 
details), perhaps the success of Th e Wire in adapting television crime 
drama into a virtual space for the exploration of concrete, complex 
urban issues off ers hope that its critique of short-sighted and corrupt 
development practices, and its hints for more sustainable alternatives, 
can also be infl uential.
6
Notes
1. Many episodes in Season Four were broadcast out of order. As their numbers 
indicate, these episodes were originally intended to be separated by half a season; that 
they were broadcast in succession (on 5 and 12 April 1996) reinforces their emphasis on 
living spaces in Baltimore.
2. Th e debate here, like Lewis’s comments in Homicide, refl ects the complexity of 
actual residents’ responses to demolitions of dysfunctional projects (see Cohen).
3. As used in Th e Wire , the title song, Tom Waits’s “Way Down in the Hole” (1987), 
seems to be about the need to subdue the “devil” of drug-addiction, but Harvey’s 
description of the ideology of “white fl ight” suggests alternative, ironic implications to 
the lyrics.
4. In his chapter “Inventing the Savage Urban Other, ” Macek traces the fostering of 
race- and class-based environmental discrimination by right-wing ideologues and 
complicit media (37–69). An illustration of the “urban othering” of Baltimore comes 
from the 15 September 2008 episode of the A&E “reality” series Intervention, which 
concerns Kristen, a young woman who regularly drives 90 minutes from her suburban 
home to buy and use drugs in the city. Th e episode dramatizes her fear of Baltimore, but 
the depiction of her activities suggests as much about the negative eff  ects of suburban 
drug users on the city as vice-versa.
5. Colvin’s experiment links the concerns of Th e Wire  with those of Canadian series 
Da Vinci’s Inquest (1998–2005), where Vancouver coroner Dominic Da Vinci advocates 
needle exchanges and other harm-reduction measures whose real-world implementa-
tion by the character’s model (former coroner and Mayor, and current Senator Larry 
Campbell) continues to provoke debate in Canada.
6. For constructive infl uences on this chapter, I thank the editors, along with Daren 
Johnson, Katja Lee, Antje Rauwerda, Joanne Valin, and Sarah Winters.


--- PAGE 59 ---
50
3
Heroism, Institutions, and the 
Police Procedural
Alasdair McMillan
First of all, it seems, we must control the story tellers . . .
—Plato, The Republic (377 b-c)
Plato argued that for the sake of social order, storytellers needed to 
identify their heroes unequivocally with the highest moral ideals. 
Th ose who failed to do so would be exiled from his ideal Republic. While 
we have grown far more tolerant of anti-heroes and moral ambiguity 
in our narratives, the police procedural is a genre still dominated by 
an essentially Platonic moral framework. More oft en than not, these dra-
mas depict police as heroes and unequivocal servants of the Good, while 
their criminal antagonists tend to be just as unambiguously villainous 
and evil.
Th e situation in Th e Wire is quite the opposite: David Simon hoped 
that “instead of the usual good guys chasing bad guys framework, 
questions would be raised about the very labels of good and bad, and, 
indeed, whether such distinctly moral notions were really the point” 
(Hornby). He goes on to describe the narrative as a “Greek tragedy”—in 
the same vein as those decried by Plato—but one in which the “Olym-
pian forces” set against the protagonists are “postmodern institutions” 
rather than gods or Fate. By emphasizing the power of such institutional 
forces, Simon eff ectively rules out the independence and extraordinary 
virtue of traditional police heroes, along with the ethos of “catharsis


--- PAGE 60 ---
Heroism, Institutions, and the Police Procedural 51
and redemption and triumph of character” which once governed their 
stories.
In this respect, an affi  nity with the social theory of Michel Foucault 
is evident. A philosopher best known for his critique of “disciplinary 
society” and its institutions, Foucault approached the question of power 
in a uniquely infl uential way. Philosophy from Plato onward, he argued, 
was a discourse of legitimation and “right” whose primary goal was 
the identifi cation of political-legal power with goodness and justice. 
Foucault described his critical, “genealogical” approach instead as a 
concern with “the ‘how’ of power” (Society 24); in this general sense, the 
concerns of Foucault and Th e Wire are identical. Like Foucault, Simon 
casts aside cherished beliefs about the legitimacy of legal institutions in 
order to examine the concrete eff ects of their power on individuals.
Foucault interpreted the late-eighteenth-century transition from the 
punitive execution of criminals to the modern penitentiary system as a 
transition to a “new micro-physics of power” (Discipline 139). In this era, 
the feudal model of power—founded on public spectacles of royal gran-
deur and brutal torture—gave way gradually to the exercise of power by 
hierarchical institutions and through discipline: means of “correct training” 
and “gentle punishment” such as ranked progress, regular examinations, 
incarceration, and, above all, surveillance (Discipline 170–194).
Specifi c techniques of discipline and punishment have changed a 
great deal since their origins, but the general modes enumerated by 
Foucault remain pillars of institutional power, directly implicated in the 
contemporary questions raised by Th e Wire. Th is chapter considers the 
police procedural through the lens of Foucault’s theory, with the inten-
tion of understanding specifi cally why heroes in the traditional sense 
must be absent from the narrative. It seems that at least since Plato, 
heroism has been closely associated with morality and the triumph of 
the individual; in Th e Wire , by contrast, we are shown a Baltimore where 
individuals are perpetually at the mercy of dysfunctional, amoral 
institutions.
Procedures of the Procedural
Emerging from the genre of detective fi ction, the police procedural was 
developed fi rst as a literary and then as a radio format. It came into its


--- PAGE 61 ---
52 THE WIRE : URBAN DECAY AND AMERICAN TELEVISION
own on television, following the early success of Jack Webb’s fi  rst
televised adaptation of Dragnet (NBC, 1951–59). His formula was widely 
adopted by networks, giving rise to an enduring tradition of televised 
procedurals, from pioneers like Columbo and Hill Street Blues to the Law 
& Order  and CSI franchises currently dominating prime time. In an 
overview of the genre, Stephen Stark deft  ly summarizes both its basic 
appeal and its moral character:
Legal stories . . . feature clear winners and losers, stock scenarios, 
compelling characters, and recognizable villains and heroes. 
Moreover, the moral imperatives that television usually has inj-
ected into these melodramas—respect the law, good conquers 
evil, the system works—strike a responsive chord with corporate 
advertisers who sponsor network programming. (232–233)
Th e networks have long populated their police dramas with heroes 
modeled aft er the successful example of Joe Friday  in Dragnet. Driven 
by their own virtuous nature, such characters stopped at nothing to root 
out crime and villainy. Th e validity of the laws they pledged to uphold 
was beyond question. Sustained by individual heroism, triumphing over 
evil time aft  er time, the legal system was portrayed as a well-oiled 
machine in the service of justice. And just as the driving force for justice 
was the heroic police offi  cer, crime was depicted as the work of a few 
“deranged or greedy” individuals; broader “social factors” giving rise to 
criminality were only rarely addressed (Stark 266). As David Marc puts 
it, “Dragnet was not merely a hit . . . it was an ideology” (74).
Th is depiction of discipline aims to leave viewers feeling secure and 
confi dent in the effi  cacy of their legal institutions. Th e ideology thereby 
continues to strike the same responsive chord with advertisers, for, as 
Stark quips, “in plain terms, a secure audience buys more Drano, Crest, 
and Miller Beer than an insecure one” (246). Network procedurals have 
consequently done little over the years to question the genre’s proven 
formula: “valorous” police doing their “very best” to catch villainous 
criminals (Stark 275).
Without sponsors to please, the subscriber-based network HBO is 
more willing to experiment with subversive reinterpretations of old 
formats. Simon claims that the series was pitched to the network as


--- PAGE 62 ---
Heroism, Institutions, and the Police Procedural 53
“a rebellion of sorts against all the horseshit police procedurals affl  icting 
American television” (Hornby). Th e genre’s traditional formulas are 
certainly subverted: investigations are drawn-out, anticlimactic aff airs, 
in which the valor of police offi   cers is oft en uncertain and their best 
eff orts are only rarely good enough. Th is is not a matter of emphasizing 
the corruption of a few “bad apples” in the department, or questioning 
the goodness of police offi  cers in general. In the end, such moral notions 
are themselves placed in doubt: the narrative just isn’t about good guys 
chasing bad guys.
As Simon emphasizes, Th e Wire  is about “how institutions have an 
eff ect on individuals, ” and how “whether you’re a cop, a longshoreman, 
a drug dealer, a politician, [or] a judge . . . you are ultimately compro-
mised and must contend with whatever institution you’ve committed to” 
(1.01, DVD commentary). Individual heroism and morality are oft  en 
simply irrelevant, while the “social factors” excluded from most pro-
cedurals are promoted to centrality. Leaving behind the isolated 
investigations and cathartic individualism typical of police procedurals, 
Th e Wire  depicts crime and punishment within a troublingly realistic 
representation of their entire social context.
In Discipline and Punish, Foucault claimed that “the delinquent is an 
institutional product” (301); nowhere else in contemporary culture is 
the truth of this assertion so apparent as in Th e Wire . Criminality  
is depicted as an entrenched, systemic phenomenon, produced and 
shaped by the same institutions tasked with enforcing social discipline 
(or, as they would have it, “fi ghting crime”). Laws themselves are oft en 
portrayed—along with all other institutional dictates—as fundamen-
tally misguided. Th e Baltimore Police Department and the other legal 
institutions of Th e Wire  are machines in the service not of justice, but of 
short-term political interests. Th ese are not bastions of heroism, but its 
most signifi cant contemporary obstacles.
Each season, a new wiretap allows the narrative to “dig up the ways 
that legal and illegal Baltimore talk to each other every day” (Kois). 
What these excavations reveal is that neither side can claim the moral 
high ground. Th e police department and criminal organizations are 
depicted as structurally similar and highly interconnected. Connected 
not just by wires, but by fl  ows of power, patronage, and profi  t, each 
demands similar compromises from the individuals caught up within.


--- PAGE 63 ---
54 THE WIRE : URBAN DECAY AND AMERICAN TELEVISION
Whether you’re a cop, a drug dealer, or a politician, institutional disci-
pline aims to make you into a docile and obedient subject, leaving very 
little room in the process for noble principles or heroic goals.
Th e Wire thereby renounces the idealism of the orthodox procedural, 
bearing a far closer resemblance to modern social theory. Like orthodox 
political philosophy as interpreted by Foucault, orthodox police proce-
durals serve a legitimizing function: with very few exceptions, they 
equate institutional power with right, and Law with Good. In many 
respects, this grossly distorts the reality of discipline. As Foucault notes, 
such a “discourse of right” is in fact “an instrument of domination” 
(Society 27). By contrast, the essence of Th e Wire  is critique: in each sto-
ryline and episode, viewers are confronted with the fact of institutional 
domination in all its arbitrariness, brutality, and secrecy.
Three Character Studies
McNulty. Th e Wire  has no main character, and certainly no singular 
hero. A reasonable place to begin when considering its depiction of 
heroism, however, is with Detective Jimmy McNulty. Th  e narrative 
initially sets him up as a heroic fi gure of sorts, when he pressures Judge 
Daniel Phelan to demand an investigation of Avon Barksdale’s drug-
traffi  cking organization (1.01). McNulty suspects the organization to 
be responsible for the murders of several witnesses, but his bosses oper-
ate under continual pressure from the Mayor’s Offi  ce to reduce crime 
statistics, easier to do with “buy-and-bust” arrests rather than large-scale 
operations. McNulty makes it clear that, unless Phelan applies some 
political pressure of his own, McNulty’s bosses will refuse to pursue any 
serious investigation of Barksdale.
Th is, in a nutshell, is law enforcement as depicted in Th e Wire : career-
minded offi  cers like McNulty’s bosses do the bidding of career-minded 
politicians, working together to climb their respective ladders in an orderly 
fashion. An axiom of Foucault’s theory of discipline is that its principal 
aim is to produce “subjected and practiced, ” “useful, ” and generally “doc-
ile bodies” ( Discipline 138). Like any other disciplinary institution, the 
Baltimore Police Department can be interpreted as a mechanism for the 
production of such docility: the ambitious, career-minded offi  cers are 
those who have internalized its regime of ranked progress, allowing it to


--- PAGE 64 ---
Heroism, Institutions, and the Police Procedural 55
“function automatically” within them (Discipline 227). Deeply invested 
in the status quo and unconcerned with the eff  ects of their actions, 
high-ranking characters like William Rawls and Ervin Burrell are the 
culmination of the useful, docile bodies of the department.
Th e kind of lengthy, expensive, and occasionally embarrassing 
surveillance required to bring down a criminal organization would not 
take place, therefore, without the back-channel maneuvers of short-
sighted and subversive types like McNulty.1 Th e driving force behind the 
investigations of the fi rst three seasons, he is indeed (as his supervisor 
Jay Landsman puts it) “natural police” (5.10). But the larger question 
remains: is he a hero? An offi  cer who defi es bureaucrats for a good cause 
is a common heroic fi gure in police dramas. Y et even when we disregard 
his obvious character fl aws—like a propensity for driving while intoxi-
cated (DWI) and self-destructive sex—he bears little resemblance to the 
police heroes of television past.
Aft er the fi rst investigation of Barksdale’s organization, an incredu-
lous McNulty asks himself a simple yet telling question: “What the fuck 
did I do?” (1.13). We might note, fi rst of all, that he irritated his bosses 
enough to end up on the boat with the Baltimore Police Department 
(BPD) Marine Unit: precisely where he kept telling his colleagues he 
never wanted to be transferred. In situations like these, the disciplinary 
mechanism of ranked progress can serve equally as punishment. 
Insubordination and political machinations like McNulty’s are shown to 
be the only ways to accomplish anything worthwhile in an institution 
as broken as the BPD as presented on Th e Wire , but  even (perhaps 
especially) in service of a good cause they are portrayed as quick ways to 
destroy a career. Th is may also suggest why the bosses are so willing to 
ignore the real problems of the city: their unquestioning docility seems 
to be precisely the quality that earned them promotion.
Another cause of McNulty’s incredulity is that at his investigation’s 
premature end it is he himself, rather than the criminals, who seems to 
bear the brunt of the punishment. Th anks to defense lawyer Maurice 
Levy, Avon Barksdale receives only a few years in prison, and his second-
in-command Stringer Bell avoids prosecution altogether. McNulty’s 
career is left  at an apparent dead end, for the sake of what amounts to 
little more than a speed bump in the continuing operations of a multi-
million-dollar criminal organization. Unlike the simple homicide cases


--- PAGE 65 ---
56 THE WIRE : URBAN DECAY AND AMERICAN TELEVISION
that are the staples of most procedurals, drug cases in Th e Wire off ers no 
easy cathartic resolution.
Drug-traffi  cking organizations are deeply entrenched elements of 
this decaying system. Such delinquency is, as Foucault notes, not only a 
“product” of an institutional context, but “a part and an instrument of it” 
(Discipline 282). Discipline does not relate to delinquency in a purely 
negative or punitive fashion, but uses the delinquent for its own pur-
poses. Th eir economic niche having been produced in the fi rst place by 
the War on Drugs, the gangs’ activities are organized in turn around 
police surveillance and potential prosecution. Th e politicians they bribe 
do their part to discourage investigations; lawyers like Levy create struc-
tured pleas to ensure that the gangs can continue their operations (and 
lawyers’ practices can fl ourish). When a leader is imprisoned, someone 
quickly assumes his role. Even when an entire organization collapses 
(like Barksdale’s does in Season Th ree) another is always ready to pick 
up the pieces (as does Marlo Stanfi  eld’s in Season Four). Th is kind of 
bleak social realism makes the Baltimore of Th e Wire  a frustrating place 
for any would-be hero.
Y et all the while, McNulty seems to be guided by the same ideal of the 
hero called into question by his narrative. Following one of McNulty’s 
rants about his own investigative prowess, he and Lester Freamon have 
this memorable exchange:
Freamon:  Tell me something, Jimmy: how exactly do you think it 
all ends?
McNulty:  What do you mean?
Freamon: A parade? Gold watch? A shining Jimmy McNulty Day 
moment when you bring in a case so sweet, everybody 
gets together and says, “Oh, shit, he was right all along, 
we should have listened to him!”
McNulty: I don’t know. A good case . . .
Freamon: . . . ends. Th ey all end. Th e handcuff s go click and it’s 
over . . .
McNulty:  Until the next case! (3.09)
Th e case “so sweet” that it would affi  rm once and for all his own superi-
ority: Freamon recognizes that this imaginary triumph is what really


--- PAGE 66 ---
Heroism, Institutions, and the Police Procedural 57
drives McNulty throughout Th e Wire . McNulty is perpetually thwarted, 
however, by his own institution and the reality of his position therein. 
Baltimore’s criminal institutions, moreover, are not the kind of villains 
which lend themselves well to such fantasies.
McNulty is no Joe Friday, no principled defender of law and justice. 
His desire is to assert his dominance over Baltimore’s criminal element, 
whatever the means and whatever the cost. As Foucault notes, not just 
the delinquent but the individual as such is an institutional product 
(Discipline 170, 194). What propels McNulty is ultimately revealed as 
little more than raw will-to-power channeled, organized, and individu-
ated by discipline. As Nietzsche’s infamous rebuttal to Platonism would 
have it, McNulty’s motivations are beyond good and evil. He is driven 
not by an internal wellspring of the Good, but simply by a will “to grow, 
spread, seize, become predominant—not from any morality or immo-
rality but because it is living . . . and because life simply is will to power” 
(Nietzsche 259). Th is is perhaps the deepest challenge of all within 
Simon’s general project of challenging the paradigm of the police 
procedural. McNulty’s investigations may initially seem like good causes, 
but over time it becomes apparent that these are merely outlets for this 
fundamental drive.
We may respect his courageous defi ance of the bosses, but eventually 
his motives and principles become altogether suspect. Insofar as 
he never really  puts his ideal scenario of pursuit and triumph to the 
question, his principles are deeply problematic. His motive, on the 
other hand, becomes self-evident in Season Five, when he fabricates a 
serial killer to cover for an illegal and ultimately futile wiretap of Marlo 
Stanfi eld’s organization. Unmistakably, this becomes more of a vendetta 
than a quest for justice. Th  e conclusion of McNulty’s story thereby 
knocks the biggest hole of all in the heroic image suggested by the early 
episodes of Season One, revealing his readiness to discard ethics and 
law in pursuit of a fantasy of domination. Without altogether negating 
his heroism, this constitutes an obvious divergence from the Platonic 
heroic archetype.
Colvin. Major Howard “Bunny” Colvin is another offi  cer who demon-
strates a willingness to think outside the box, also defying both his 
superiors and the law. Where McNulty limits himself to devising


--- PAGE 67 ---
58 THE WIRE : URBAN DECAY AND AMERICAN TELEVISION
creative ways to provoke and prolong investigations of drug traffi  ckers, 
Colvin takes a much broader view. Eventually, he steps outside the “good 
guys chasing bad guys” paradigm altogether, coming to question the law 
and the very premise of the War on Drugs. He decides, in eff  ect, to 
legalize drugs in three of his district’s abandoned neighborhoods. As he 
puts it,
Dozerman gets shot for some bullshit . . . and that’s when the idea 
of the free zone, of Hamsterdam, come to me. ’Cause this drug 
thing, this ain’t police work. Naw, it ain’t . . . I mean you call some-
thing a war and pretty soon, everybody gonna be running around 
acting like warriors . . . Soon the neighborhood that you supposed 
to be policing, that’s just occupied territory. (3.10)
Once the dealers are convinced to use Colvin’s free zones, crime is virtu-
ally eliminated in the district’s residential neighborhoods. Predictably, 
Colvin’s creative policy-making greatly improves ordinary citizens’ 
quality of life. Just as predictably, once press and politicians learn of the 
scheme, the free zones are dismantled, the dealers arrested, and Colvin 
forced to resign.
Colvin doesn’t just pursue some heroic fantasy within the same old 
framework. Instead, he tries to eff ect positive change the only way he 
can in such a broken system, by an outright refusal to obey or enforce its 
dysfunctional brand of discipline. Colvin recognizes that Baltimore’s 
problem with drugs calls for harm reduction: a public health solution, 
not an interminable project of incarceration. Th e Hamsterdam storyline 
thereby makes David Simon’s “unalterable opposition” (Hornby) to the 
War on Drugs quite clear. It leaves us asking, however, whether princi-
ples like Colvin’s can have any lasting eff ect. Th ough most every character 
recognizes the eff ectiveness of his free zones and the futility of the 
punitive War on Drugs approach, the status quo is quickly restored 
in Baltimore. Th e discipline of the BPD ultimately renders Colvin’s 
heroism—like McNulty’s—both wholly ineff ectual and ruinous for his 
career.
Aft er his forced resignation, Colvin decides to participate in a 
University of Maryland pilot program with Dr. David Parenti at Edward 
Tilghman Middle School (4.03). Th  eir class seems to be a positive


--- PAGE 68 ---
Heroism, Institutions, and the Police Procedural 59
 infl uence in the lives of its at-risk students, and is reasonably successful 
in keeping them in school and out of the drug trade. Aft  er a formal 
review, however, the Mayor’s Offi  ce cancels its funding, citing vague 
concerns about segregation and the program’s failure to teach material 
for federally-mandated tests. Such examinations (both in the academic 
and political context) are, as Foucault notes, an essential and “highly 
ritualized procedure” of disciplinary power ( Discipline 184). Not only 
does an examination of the program’s political usefulness lead to its 
cancellation, but the cited concern is that the program itself somehow 
interferes with other regimes of mandatory examination. While Parenti 
remains optimistic about the attention his study will receive from other 
researchers, Colvin is dismissive, off  ering a parting jab at academia: 
“ Academics? What, they gonna study your study? When do this shit 
change?” (4.13).
Th e project may have proven inconsequential from Colvin’s point of 
view, but it leads to one of the more inspiring storylines of the series. 
Colvin bonds in the class with Namond Brice, son of Wee-Bey Brice (an 
incarcerated member of Barksdale’s now-defunct organization). No 
longer receiving funds from the Barksdales, Namond’s mother De’Londa 
pushes him to follow in his father’s footsteps by getting his own corner. 
Here, at the level of families and communities, we can begin to recog-
nize a counter-discipline which sets itself against the law, driving 
individuals from poverty into an institutionalized delinquency. When 
Namond proves ill-suited for the violent life of a corner boy, De’Londa 
throws him out of the house to “harden him up” (4.10). He ends up stay-
ing with Colvin and his wife, and eventually Colvin takes the remarkable 
step of visiting Wee-Bey in prison. Colvin tells him that Namond just 
“isn’t cut out for them corners” (4.13); eventually, Wee-Bey is persuaded 
that Namond would be better off   with Colvin and his wife than with 
De’Londa and on the corner.
Th e eff ects of institutional forces on the paths taken by individuals 
are especially prominent in the stories of Namond and the other 
students at Edward Tilghman Middle. But they also illustrate how indi-
viduals can off er resistance to discipline. Signifi cantly, it is only by having 
the courage to step outside the battle lines drawn by institutions and 
connect on a basic human level—with a convicted murderer no less—
that Colvin is fi nally able to eff ect an enduring, positive change. Although


--- PAGE 69 ---
60 THE WIRE : URBAN DECAY AND AMERICAN TELEVISION
this is change on a small scale, his and Wee-Bey’s actions in this 
storyline stand out as some of the most individually heroic in Th e Wire .
Daniels. While demonstrating such fl  ashes of heroism, McNulty and 
Colvin are continually thwarted by institutions. Cedric Daniels, by 
contrast, seems to be one of the few offi  cers in the department able to 
sustain a commitment both to real police work and to his career. Balanc-
ing principles with pragmatism and political savvy, he ascends quickly 
through the ranks over the course of the series. From the beginning, how-
ever, it is suggested that Daniels’s record is less than spotless. McNulty 
learns early on that Daniels was once investigated by the FBI and found 
to have “a couple hundred thousand dollars more in liquid assets” than 
a police lieutenant really should (1.03). Police Commissioner Ervin
Burrell kept the investigation’s fi ndings quiet, partly to avoid scandal, 
but also to keep the knowledge in reserve. As Daniels puts it, “He’s got 
me if he wants me. Th ing is, I don’t think he wants me. Too much stink, 
too much mess” (1.13). But aft er lingering in the background for years, 
Daniels’s enigmatic misdeeds come back to haunt him, indicating how 
“whatever institution you as an individual commit to will somehow fi nd 
a way to betray you on Th e Wire ” (Simon in Havrilesky). In due course, 
discipline proves itself capable of neutralizing even the most promising 
of potential heroes.
Daniels’ rise through the department is meteoric: in fi ve seasons, he 
goes from Lieutenant to Deputy Commissioner. Burrell uses his knowl-
edge as leverage throughout, occasionally pressuring Daniels to hold off  
or end troublesome investigations. In this disciplinary use of informa-
tion, we may recognize yet another of Foucault’s well-known axioms: 
“power and knowledge directly imply one another” ( Discipline 27). 
When Daniels threatens to replace him in Season Five, however, Burrell 
is no longer in a position to deploy this knowledge as power. Nerese 
Campbell, the city councillor to whom he reveals the secret, quietly 
tucks away the dossier on Daniels. Later, when newly-elected mayor 
Tommy Carcetti is attempting unsuccessfully to persuade Daniels to 
“juke” the statistics, Campbell sees a way to curry favor with her 
knowledge. Unless Daniels agrees to “come to his senses” or step down 
for “personal reasons, ” she threatens to leak the dossier, simultaneously 
preventing his appointment as Commissioner and ruining his wife’s


--- PAGE 70 ---
Heroism, Institutions, and the Police Procedural 61
political career (5.10). Aft er successfully negotiating the delicate balance 
between career and principles for fi  ve seasons, and precisely when he 
would have been in a position to eff ect substantial change in the BPD, 
Daniels is forced into the very same compromising position as his 
predecessors.
Th e critical diff  erence is that given the choice of preserving the 
status quo or stepping down, he makes the heroic decision to step down. 
Even aft er keeping quiet about McNulty’s invented serial killer, the insti-
tutional pressure to present artifi  cial statistics proves too much for 
Daniels. As he puts it, neatly summarizing the fundamental problem 
with the BPD:
I’ll swallow a lie when I have to. I’ve swallowed a few big ones 
lately. But the stat games? Th at lie? It’s what ruined this depart-
ment. Shining up shit and calling it gold, so Majors become 
Colonels and mayors become governors. Pretending to do police 
work, while one generation fuckin’ trains the next how not to do 
the job. (5.10)
Th e “stat game” is a lie that he simply can’t live with. Daniels has come to 
recognize what this lie means and how it reproduces itself, and he can’t 
allow himself to be complicit. Not only would he be upholding a 
dysfunctional system of ranked progress by helping to elect a governor 
who accomplished little in his term as Mayor, as Commissioner he 
would be in Campbell’s pocket. From then on—as Mayor—she would 
expect docility. Like Burrell before him, Daniels would be responsible 
for keeping the BPD captive to political interests. McNulty’s lies were 
intended (at least in his mind) to serve some useful purpose; the lies 
Campbell asks Daniels to tell would have him participating directly in 
the undermining of his department and destruction of his city.
Organizations and Discipline
As J. M. Tyree observes, “Th e Wire is in the business of telling America 
truths about itself that would be unbearable even if it were interested in 
bearing them” (38). Th e series is by no means optimistic about individ-
ual heroism: this is one of the most essential of the unbearable truths


--- PAGE 71 ---
62 THE WIRE : URBAN DECAY AND AMERICAN TELEVISION
it tells. When Daniels decides to resign, for instance, we may respect his 
courage and the importance of the principles at stake. As his wife notes, 
however, the gesture is futile. Burrell “played the game” before him and 
“Rawls or whoever” will do it aft erward (5.10). Guided by a considerably 
more realistic view of society and its institutions than orthodox proce-
durals, Th e Wire  disavows the idea that a few heroic individuals could 
solve the entrenched problems of a city like Baltimore.
Analysis of the narrative in terms of discipline indicates a chief 
reason for this disavowal: the would-be heroes’ chief antagonists are 
their own superiors. Like much of David Simon’s work—notably Th e 
Corner (HBO, 2000) and Generation Kill (HBO, 2008)— Th e Wire  is 
simultaneously very sympathetic in its portrayal of individuals forced 
into compromising positions by institutions, and very critical of the 
ones doing the forcing. But although we ought to fi  nd the bosses’ cal-
lousness reprehensible, we can hardly blame them for having internalized 
the discipline of their institutions by keeping their careers fi  rmly in 
mind. Just as there can be no singular hero in Th e Wire , no individual 
villain can be considered responsible for Baltimore’s decay. What we are 
shown instead is a hierarchy of docile bosses achieving the same eff  ect 
by enforcing discipline’s countless small compromises and training their 
successors to do likewise.
Th us we have arrived at a fundamental distinction between Th e Wire 
and the “horseshit police procedurals” against which Simon set out to 
rebel. Its hero/villain distinction is not mapped on to the opposition 
police/criminal, “good guys”/“bad guys, ” or any such facile dualism. Th e 
dialectic of heroism plays out instead in the complex relationships 
between institutions, bosses, and those subject to their discipline. In 
contrast with the docile, obedient ones “willing to play the game with-
out regard to the eff  ect on others or society as a whole” (Simon in 
Havrilesky), the heroes of Th e Wire  are the rebellious, insubordinate 
characters who resist compromising when it matters most. McNulty and 
the others may not embody an abstract ideal of goodness the way Joe 
Friday once did, but given the questionable status of this ideal in itself 
we may at least regard their heroism as considerably more realistic.
In the narrative of Th e Wire , heroes aren’t necessarily good, and they 
aren’t necessarily police, while the law and its institutions are in no way 
linked with goodness or justice. More importantly, however, the natural


--- PAGE 72 ---
Heroism, Institutions, and the Police Procedural 63
scheme is inverted in Foucauldian fashion. Discarding the idea that 
the character of an institution is somehow derived from the nature of 
the individuals within—good or evil, heroic or villainous— Th e Wire  
dramatizes how the natures and actions of individuals are produced and 
used by impersonal institutions. While the series takes the form of a 
police procedural, it does so only to rebel against their traditional legiti-
mizing function. Ultimately, this provides us with a far more critical 
examination of contemporary legal institutions and their discipline.
Note
1. Of course, police surveillance is itself a disciplinary technique. In this respect, we 
may see McNulty’s storyline—and much of the series—as being about the discipline of 
disciplinary institutions: disciplinary mechanisms within the BPD determine the targets 
of its external discipline.


--- PAGE 73 ---
64
4
The Narrative Production of “Real Police”
Ryan Brooks
In its treatment of the institutions of the American city, Th e Wire 
dramatizes the eff ects of power while simultaneously denying its own 
power, as a literary entity, to regulate the behavior of its viewers. On one 
hand, the show is practically a catalogue of the mechanics by which 
these institutions maintain discipline (the two groups on display in 
Season One are the Barksdale drug organization and the Baltimore Police 
Department, both of which rely on oft en cruel tactics—prescriptive and 
proscriptive, offi  cial and unoffi  cial, covert and overt, violent and norma-
tive—to control their members). On the other hand, the show also 
disavows its own rhetorical strategies by contrasting this rigid discipline 
with its own authentic knowledge or truth. Th e experiences of cops and 
criminals play out in front of the camera, which appears to watch pas-
sively and nonjudgmentally. Even though the “fi rst season of Th e Wire  
was a dry, deliberate argument against the American drug prohibition” 
(Simon, “Introduction” 12), the force of the argument is made possible 
by a position of ostensible detachment: “Th e show’s point of view was 
that of the insider, the proverbial fl y on the wall” (22).
D. A. Miller has suggested that this detached narrative technique is 
one of a collection of practices fi rst used by the nineteenth-century novel 
to carve out a supposedly power-free zone: “Th e knowledge commanded 
in omniscient narration is thus opposed to the power that inheres in the 
circumstances of the novelistic world” (25, italics in the original). 
Extending Michel Foucault’s analysis of social control in Discipline and


--- PAGE 74 ---
The Narrative Production of “Real Police” 65
Punish to a consideration of the novel, Miller suggests that the apparent 
disavowal of power is actually a tactic used by the literary form to 
covertly reclaim disciplinary power. As Miller puts it, the gesture of dis-
owning power in some ways defi nes
the basic move of a familiar power play, in which the name of 
power is given over to one agency in order that the function of 
power may be less visibly retained by another. Impotent to inter-
vene in the “facts, ” the narration nevertheless controls the discursive 
framework in which they are perceived as such. (25)
Th e goal of this discursive framing, Miller suggests, is to normalize 
certain characters and behaviors and to marginalize others. I argue that 
the normalizing function of the narrative in Th e Wire  is to produce what 
its characters call, alternatively, “good” or “real” or “natural police. ”
1 My 
point is not simply that the show tells us what it means to be a good 
police offi  cer, but rather that this defi nition privileges certain tactics of 
crime-prevention and order-maintenance over others.
Even though Th e Wire  opposes knowledge to power, it simultaneously 
creates a world in which knowledge is equated with power. Prosecutorial 
success demands clear recordings, legally obtained evidence, and hours 
of surveillance work. Th e content of this good policing comes into focus 
when we consider that knowledge-power is not restricted to characters 
in positions of institutional authority. Th e rank-and-fi le detectives most 
eff ective at disciplining the drug gang are those who can analyze and 
articulate—in convincing narratives and bulletin boards of photographic 
evidence—the mechanics by which the gang disciplines itself and the 
territory it controls. Th is ability to analyze goes hand in hand with the 
ability to manipulate, reversing the fl ows of power. Th e docile bodies of 
gang members are turned into docile bodies for the police, as scared or 
hostile “citizens” are convinced to go undercover, or lower-level drug 
runners are convinced to “fl  ip” and testify against their higher-ups. 
What makes this mutually reinforcing chain of power and knowledge 
possible is constant surveillance, the ability of the police to monitor 
zones of disorder without being monitored themselves. What makes 
this surveillance possible, in turn, is a fl exible attitude toward crime, the 
patience to wait until the root cause of the crime is exposed before


--- PAGE 75 ---
66 THE WIRE : URBAN DECAY AND AMERICAN TELEVISION
acting to correct it. Th is attitude is squarely at odds with the political 
pressures presented in the show (for improved crime statistics or for 
high-profi le busts that are seen as newsworthy), leading to recurring 
confl icts that demonstrate the authority of the police is itself subject to 
disciplinary control.
Th e fact that “good police” are subject to discipline does not mean, 
however, that the object of the show’s critique is disciplinarity as such. 
(Indeed, what I am suggesting is that “good police” is itself a form of 
disciplinary power.) Y et some critics have interpreted Th e Wire  in 
precisely these terms. In Alasdair McMillan’s account, for instance, the 
point seems to be that disciplinarity leads inevitably to a dysfunctional, 
dehumanizing world of self-policing insiders and penalized outsiders. He 
describes Th e Wire  as “one of the most profound artistic statements since 
Kafk a of the individual condition—the conditions of individuation—in a 
society dominated by dysfunctional institutions” (50). Rather than a 
humanist critique of bureaucracy (or of the techniques of analysis and 
articulation that make bureaucracy possible), I argue that the show is 
instead a critique of two competing modes of policing, what I will call 
the statistical approach and the paramilitary, “War on Drugs” approach. 
Th ese modes depend on a logic of visibility and representation, in which 
order is maintained partially through messages sent to the public: 
messages guaranteeing police accountability, strict enforcement of the 
law, and swift  and severe punishment for infractions. In Th e Wire , these 
competing forms are recast as games of pure power, technologies for 
preserving the institution rather than ensuring public order. As I have 
already suggested, however, these treatments should be understood as 
part of the narrative power game of Th e Wire , which is an attempt to 
train viewers to critically question these hierarchies and which, like 
a police surveillance unit, must remain hidden in order to have its 
coercive eff ect.
“Good Police, Good Police Work”
Season One of Th e Wire is founded, in part, on a failure of institutional 
discipline. Th anks to a bribed witness, a Barksdale gang member is 
acquitted of murder. Following the verdict, Homicide Detective Jimmy 
McNulty violates a department taboo by complaining to an outsider, the


--- PAGE 76 ---
The Narrative Production of “Real Police” 67
judge in the case, about the police failure to stop or even investigate 
Avon Barksdale. Under pressure from the judge, the police hierarchy 
sets up a special detail to investigate the Barksdale organization, but also 
takes various steps to restore and maintain control over McNulty and 
the rest of the detail. In fact, the staffi  ng of the unit represents, in itself, 
a form of control, specifi cally designed to guide its actual investigative 
approach. Th e unit’s commander, Lieutenant Cedric Daniels, reasons 
that by assigning him “dead wood, ” the Deputy Commissioner “sent me 
a message on this . . . Don’t dig in, don’t get fancy. Put a quick charge on 
this Barksdale and then get out. If he sends me good police, I might get 
it into my head to do good police work” (1.02).
As Daniels’s comments indicate, the characterization of diff  erent 
offi  cers is the most immediate way the show privileges certain forms of 
policing—“good police” do “good police work, ” which is linked to “dig-
ging in”; all the rest is “garbage. ” In fact, the narrative framework for 
ranking characters ultimately displaces the rankings—both offi  cial and 
unoffi  cial—established by the organizational mechanisms in the fi  rst 
two episodes. Ellis Carver and Th omas “Herc” Hauk, for instance, are 
handpicked by Daniels, but prove to be violent, bumbling “War on 
Drugs” cowboys, who play “bad cop” even when trying to play “good 
cop. ” Detective Roland “Prez” Pryzbylewski, meanwhile, becomes an 
eff ective investigator only aft er his gun and car, traditional visible mark-
ers of police authority, are taken away from him. Th is chapter will focus 
on the supporting character who undergoes the most drastic change in 
status and who is most indicative of the privileging of disciplinary 
power: Detective Lester Freamon.
At fi rst, Freamon seems to deserve his unoffi   cial bureaucratic 
designation as “dead wood. ” He comes from the Pawnshop Unit, a paper-
shuffl  ing job, where he has been for 13 years—and “four months, ” 
he stresses—and for the fi  rst few episodes, he sits quietly at his desk, 
building miniature furniture, peering archly over the top of his glasses 
like a librarian. When McNulty complains to his partner, Bunk Moreland 
(still on regular assignment in Homicide), about Freamon, Bunk cautions 
him: “Jimmy . . . Don’t let Lester fool you . . . he’s natural police” (1.04). 
McNulty confronts Freamon, later in the episode, touching off  a punchy , 
hard-boiled exchange that confi rms Freamon is no “cuddly housecat, ” 
as Daniels describes him at fi  rst. Aft er adjourning to a bar—where


--- PAGE 77 ---
68 THE WIRE : URBAN DECAY AND AMERICAN TELEVISION
“real police” like McNulty and Bunk hang out—Freamon explains that 
he was reassigned to the Pawnshop Unit from Homicide as punishment 
for doing what he describes as simply “police work”: arresting the son of 
a newspaper editor, a fence for stolen goods, despite his commissioner’s 
orders. Like McNulty, Freamon is made delinquent, by departmental 
standards, aft er disrupting the quid pro quo  that protects the depart-
ment from outsider (media, legal, public) scrutiny. Freamon is disciplined 
precisely for his commitment to public rather than institutional secu-
rity, a tension that will recur through the season. Now, purely by virtue 
of a bureaucratic short-circuit, Freamon has been taken “off  the shelf. ”
Th e show’s implicit claim, of course, is that punishing a “natural 
police” simply for doing “police work” represents a violation of the 
natural order, the elevation of appearance over performance. More 
specifi cally, the writers also use Freamon to naturalize a style of policing 
in which the watchful eyes of professionals must see without being 
seen. One of his early investigative breakthroughs provides an example 
of this narrative tactic. In the aft ermath of a police raid on a drug “stash 
house, ” Freamon spies a phone number, accompanied by the initial “D” 
faintly inscribed on the stash-house wall. Th  is will turn out to be 
the pager number for D’ Angelo Barksdale, Avon’s nephew, a fi nd that 
will allow the detail to start “cloning” the gang’s pagers (so that when-
ever gang members get beeped, the cops do, too) and later to install 
wiretaps in the pay phones of the housing projects controlled by the 
gang (1.04).
In order to check out his hunch, though, Freamon must fi rst return to 
the housing projects, where D’ Angelo and Preston “Bodie” Broadus, a 
low-level dealer, are throwing rocks at a security camera high up on a 
wall. Just as Bodie hits the camera, cracking its lens and causing it to 
pivot downward—which we see, in black-and-white, from the camera’s 
perspective—D’ Angelo’s pager goes off . We watch as Freamon, sitting in 
his car, observes D’ Angelo walk over to a pay phone and make a call; 
when the phone rings in Freamon’s hand, he does not answer but merely 
chuckles in satisfaction. In the background, at the payphone, D’ Angelo 
looks around in confusion. In this scene, the drug crew has successfully 
disrupted one form of control, the security cameras, only to be ensnared 
by a less visible but more eff ective form of control—the detective who 
has secretly tapped into their communication network.


--- PAGE 78 ---
The Narrative Production of “Real Police” 69
Th e image of the smashed camera is also one of the few images to be 
used in the credit sequence for all fi  ve seasons of the show, forming a 
kind of recurring reminder of the need for nimble-minded detectives to 
ensure order. In this sense, the scene points to a tension between the 
show’s discourse of “natural police” and the ideals of panopticism: power 
works to produce docile subjects who have internalized the gaze of the 
police (or of disciplinary institutions more generally), which thereby 
reduces the need for actual enforcement (Foucault, Discipline 201). As 
McMillan writes, the shot from the perspective of the broken camera 
“typifi es the ease with which panopticism is subverted by delinquency 
in Th e Wire . Surveillance alone can never guarantee discipline” (46). Th e 
point of this scene is that surveillance must be supplemented—not only 
by material force and power over bodies, as McMillan suggests, but also 
by detectives with specialized skills, experience, and abilities.
2
In fact, Simon suggests, the proliferation of cameras and other sur-
veillance devices—“watched with a certain indiff erence”—has actually 
created new challenges for these detectives. Instead of dramatizing a 
desperate search for “little nuggets of information, ” Simon says the 
show’s creators were
trying to create a world in which there was almost too much infor-
mation being thrown at the detectives, and it was their job to sift . 
It was almost as if there was so much garbage coming in, and the 
detectives’ challenge was to separate the wheat from chaff . (DVD 
Commentary, 1.01)
Th is shift  from the capturing of precious “little nuggets of information” 
to the sift ing of “too much information” is enacted, temporally, in the 
narrative as well. Aft  er the wiretap is up and running, Freamon’s 
function shift s from digging up bits of evidence to sift  ing through the 
“garbage” coming in over the phones, a job made even more diffi  cult by 
the fact the calls are delivered in code.
Of course, these two skills, panning for “little nuggets” and sift  ing 
through “too much information, ” are, as the metaphors suggest, two 
sides to the same activity—the production of knowledge. And, again, in 
either case, it takes the right detective to do the job. Aft er Freamon and 
Prez listen in to a seemingly innocuous call between Bodie and one


--- PAGE 79 ---
70 THE WIRE : URBAN DECAY AND AMERICAN TELEVISION
of his higher ups, Prez marks the call as “non-pertinent. ” Freamon 
corrects him:
Freamon: Non-pertinent? How do you log that non-pertinent?
Prez: No drug talk.
Freamon: Th ey use codes that hide their pager and phone numbers.
 And when someone does use a phone, they don’t use 
names. And if someone does use a name, he’s reminded 
not to. All of that is valuable evidence.
Prez: Of what?
Freamon: Conspiracy.
Prez: Conspiracy?
Freamon: We’re building something here, detective. We’re build-
ing it from scratch. All the pieces matter. (1.06)
Like his hobby of building tiny furniture, Freamon’s ability to turn the 
“non-pertinent” into the pertinent, to make “all the pieces matter, ” is a 
signifi er of the micro-physics of power, power that extends its control 
over the minutest details. As this chapter argues, the point of Th e Wire  is 
that when other modes of policing prevent these “natural police” from 
“building something” with their knowledge-power, the machinery of 
the disciplinary society grinds to a screeching halt.
“The Man Upstairs Wants a Circus”
Sheer bureaucratic dysfunction is not what ultimately threatens the 
detail’s case, although (as we have seen with Lester Freamon) it will 
be in terms of such dysfunction that the show recasts its real villains, the 
rival law-enforcement tactics I am calling the statistical and the para-
military. Th e fl  ipside of Th e Wire ’s production of good police is its 
production of bad police: it stages a series of confl  icts between the 
rank-and-fi le and the brass as the confl ict between “good police work”—
which connotes pursuing order in reality, the position of the “real” 
rank-and-fi le detectives—and pursuing order in appearance only, a 
narrative designed merely to send messages to specifi c audiences.
What I am calling the statistical approach is represented by Major 
William Rawls, head of the Homicide division, obsessed with improving


--- PAGE 80 ---
The Narrative Production of “Real Police” 71
the clearance rate, “the percentage of crimes that a police department 
feels it has closed, ” which, however, “need not result in a conviction in 
court” (Wilson, Cop Knowledge  146). Rawls demands that McNulty 
arrest and charge D’ Angelo Barksdale with three counts of murder, even 
though this will cripple the ongoing eff ort to build a conspiracy charge 
against Avon Barksdale. Moreover, McNulty complains, the evidence 
against D’ Angelo is not even strong enough to convince a grand jury 
to indict. Outside the courthouse, while the detail ponders its next 
move—and while hands roam over outdoor chess sets in the fore-
ground—Freamon explains Rawls’s game to a narcotics detective: “He 
can charge anything he wants and get credit for the clearance. Grand 
jury doesn’t indict, he drops the case, keeps the stats” (1.06).
Th e plotlines involving the clearance rate allude to a broader context 
in which Baltimore and other cities have attempted to prevent crime by 
promoting police accountability at both the district (geographic) and 
divisional (functional) level. In their case study of Baltimore police 
management in the 1990s, James Clawson and Gerry Y emen attribute 
this approach to the infl  uence of New Y ork City’s widely publicized 
COMSTAT statistics-based accountability process model, credited by 
some as key to the drop in that city’s crime rates during the 1990s. Th is 
model involves computerized mapping of crime and regular perfor-
mance reviews in which commanders are held accountable for the crime 
rates in their districts or their investigative category (Clawson 11).
Th e kind of number fudging and “bureaucratic territoriality” 
(Clawson 16) that can result from such approaches, as well as the more 
explicit treatments of the COMSTAT model, play an even larger role 
in Seasons Two and Th ree. In Season One, though, we see that this 
statistical mode of policing, represented by the clearance rate, is 
privileged over other forms because of its ability to send certain 
messages to higher-ups and to the public at large. As Christopher 
Wilson writes, “Many po lice departments in our time, of course, have 
become fully cognizant that eff ective crime busting can actually lead to 
the appearance of higher crime rates, which can then be used against 
them by a cost-conscious public and publicity-conscious mayors. ” 
Wilson suggests that the “in-house emphasis on clearance rates” emerges 
in response to this “public pressure for greater effi  ciency and produc-
tivity” (146). Th e show’s point, however, is that this emphasis merely


--- PAGE 81 ---
72 THE WIRE : URBAN DECAY AND AMERICAN TELEVISION
substitutes the message of “effi  ciency and productivity” for actual effi  -
ciency and productivity, and thus substitutes career and institutional 
security for public security (all ironically in the name of public security).3 
In the pursuit of a single, mid-level perpetrator who can give him “three 
paper clearances, ” Rawls is willing to jeopardize an investigation into the 
gang leaders who have, according to McNulty, “dropped 10 or 12 bodies 
in as many months” (1.01).
Th e detail’s opposition to the paramilitary or “War on Drugs” approach 
(as the characters describe it) represents the same basic confl  ict—the 
tension between the disciplinary tactics of the “real police” and a set of 
tactics that are, or have devolved into, ineff  ective spectacle. Deputy 
Commissioner Ervin Burrell repeatedly pressures Daniels to set up 
short-term, undercover drug deals (“buy-bust”); follow them up with 
highly visible raids and arrests; and then shut down the investigation. 
His tactics are to “send a message”: “Tomorrow, on the six o’ clock news, 
we put a lot of fucking dope on the table. A lot of it! . . . We need to let 
them know who we are. We can’t let them think for one minute that this 
will stand” (1.11). Th e show’s ironic treatment of this press conference 
suggests that the “message” is primarily designed to promote the depart-
ment itself—by invoking its ongoing “war, ” as the commissioner 
describes it. It is primarily aimed at the public rather than the dealers 
themselves, who quickly regroup. Th roughout the season, this approach 
is counterpoised to the long-term surveillance techniques advocated by 
McNulty, the slow, quiet “digging in” that actually gets to the root of the 
problem.
4 “Not just the shooters, ” as Daniels puts it, “but the ones who 
make the dirt happen” (1.12).
Of course, one implication of these depictions is that public pressure 
is an obstacle, leading to the elevation of means over end. At the same 
time as the show’s producers employ a populist rhetoric, the show consis-
tently depicts methods designed to guarantee visibility and transparency 
as impediments to the “real police. ” Th is disagreement over the eff  ec-
tiveness of high visibility versus other forms of control is, in fact, a debate 
as old as modern policing itself. “Because police cannot be everywhere, 
the calculating criminal is thus off ered an advantage by an all-uniformed 
force; the accountability and protection of liberty thought to be associ-
ated with the uniform in a democratic society comes at a cost” (Marx, 
Undercover 21). An implicit message of Th e Wire ’s critique of the


--- PAGE 82 ---
The Narrative Production of “Real Police” 73
statistical and War on Drugs models is that the cost of visibility and 
democratic “accountability” is simply too high. Arguably, the show asks 
us to concede that, to be eff ective, cops should be able to move in secret 
(less obstructed by the rules of the juridical “game, ” as characters call it) 
in order to eff  ect the penalization of criminals like Avon Barksdale. 
Ironically, we are able to recognize the truth of this claim—within Th e 
Wire’s narrative—precisely because the show itself aspires to fi  ll this 
need for visibility and transparency.
As I have already suggested, one of the show’s chief mechanisms of 
truth-telling is its omniscient narration, which makes these tactical 
disagreements rather one-sided. Th e hierarchy of information is such 
that, while we sometimes know more than the gang members, and 
sometimes less, we almost never know less than the investigative unit 
and usually know more; thus there is almost always more delinquency 
to uncover, an imbalance generating the suspense that drives the 
narrative. Such omniscience clearly works in McNulty’s favor, suggest-
ing all of his hunches are right; as D. A. Miller makes clear, however, an 
omniscient narration is still shot through with power. As when Lester 
Freamon fi ts a Barksdale employee with contact lenses so she can gather 
information for the detail, the narration off  ers the “gift  of corrected 
vision” (1.12). Th e gift   is knowledge (or “corrected vision”), given in 
exchange for the possibility of control. In this case, “corrected vision” is 
also corrective: it will help discipline Avon Barksdale, and will train the 
viewer to understand urban confl ict in a specifi c way.
We get a snapshot of this knowledge-production in the episode 
fi ttingly entitled “Th e Wire” (1.06). Th e episode opens with the same 
image with which it closes—the dead, mutilated body of Brandon 
Wright, a “stick-up boy” who robs drug dealers, spread out on the hood 
of a car in a crucifi x-like pose. Th e fi rst image is from a crane shot, the 
omniscient narrative gaze, looking down on the body as morning breaks 
in the housing project. Th e closing image is a police photograph of the 
body, taken from eye-level; Daniels sets the picture down on his desk, 
sighing, then turns off   his desk lamp, signaling the end of a long, 
frustrating work day. In between these two images, the detail is fi  nally 
able to get a wiretap installed in the projects’ payphones; before that, they 
were merely registering the numbers going in and out, with no sound. 
Because of bureaucratic delays concerning surveillance, the police


--- PAGE 83 ---
74 THE WIRE : URBAN DECAY AND AMERICAN TELEVISION
discover the murder plot only aft  er it is too late. As McNulty puts it, 
slamming the photo down on Daniels’s desk in fury:
He’s on you. We’re up on those pay phones Tuesday night we catch 
that murder. Shit, we get there before the murder. It’s all here on 
the pen register . . . We’re up on those pay phones when we should 
be, and we have him cold. But we’re not up in time, are we? In this 
case, we’re never where we need to be. (1.06, emphasis mine)
Th e repetition of the image of Brandon’s body makes McNulty’s point 
explicit: where the police need to be, in order to function eff ectively, is 
where the narration is. Th is means, in other words, being everywhere, 
even before the crime takes place, as the viewer is when we see the 
genesis of the plot to kill Brandon (1.05). To do this, of course, the police 
also have to see like the narration sees—invisibly, without being seen 
itself. Other tactics amount to foot-dragging, eff ectively allowing such 
murders to happen.
Tolerated Illegality
In Th e Wire , high visibility not only works against the apprehension of 
the calculating criminal, but actually leads to corruption, defeating the 
whole point of the visible demarcations (from the uniform to the drug 
raid) that are supposed to show “a moral separation of police from 
criminals and a visual separation of police from everyone else” (Marx, 
Undercover 21). Burrell’s model not only threatens to let Avon Barksdale 
slip free, but also allows the politicians who accept his drug money to avoid 
prosecution. Th at is the real meaning of the “message” Burrell sends to 
Daniels—“Don’t dig in, don’t get fancy”—through his paramilitary tactics, 
through his assignment of personnel. He demands “dope on the table” 
because he does not want the money passing under the table brought to 
light. Aft er the detail intercepts a state senatorial aide leaving the high-rises 
with $20,000 in a drug money, Burrell rebukes Daniels and makes him give 
the money back. Later, in the privacy of his home, Daniels fumes to his 
wife, invoking the cynical rhetoric of the open secret:
See, this is the thing that everyone knows and no one says. Y ou 
follow the drugs, you get a drug case. Y ou start following the


--- PAGE 84 ---
The Narrative Production of “Real Police” 75
money, you don’t know where you’re going. Th at’s why they don’t 
want wiretaps or wired C.I.s or anything they can’t control. Because 
once that tape starts rolling, who the hell knows what’s going to be 
said? (1.08)
Th us, Burrell’s reprimand—“I told you no surprises, remember?”—
suggests that Daniels’s “surprise” consists not of new information but of 
moving into an area that should be off -limits, one that undermines insti-
tutional control. Daniels has overstepped a boundary of “tolerated 
illegality, the non-application of the rule” which is a “condition of the 
political and social functioning of society” (Foucault, Discipline 82). 
In this case, keeping certain things off  the tape and following the drugs 
rather than the money is the condition of the functioning of the police 
administration, which depends on the cooperation of the political order 
for self-preservation.
Of course, “tolerated illegality” is just as central to the style of 
policing that hides itself. In Freamon and McNulty’s approach, order is 
maintained only when criminals are actually convicted, not just arrested, 
and only when the person who orders the crime is also brought to 
justice. In the pursuit of this more totalizing form of power, the detail 
will decide when and why to arrest, creating long intervals of unpun-
ished violation and eff ectively changing the meaning of certain criminal 
acts, even murders, making them merely the building blocks for the 
larger conspiracy charge. A degree of lawlessness on the part of both the 
uncorrected criminal and the cop who exempts himself from strict 
application of the law is the condition of possibility for the detail’s 
pursuit of justice.
5
My point in making this comparison is to reiterate that “good police” 
and “bad police” can be understood as competing discourses, with, for 
instance, diff erent methods of arranging zones of accepted criminality. 
Th is redescription is helpful, in turn, for reconnecting the show to some 
of the broader claims that have been made about it. As David Simon 
insists, “it isn’t a cop show” (“Introduction” 2)—not only because it 
devotes screen time to other institutions, but because “real police” is 
more than a name for the actions of certain Baltimore police offi  cers. In 
Th e Wire , “real police” is really a form of knowledge-power, a whole way 
of thinking about how social order should be interpreted and enforced.


--- PAGE 85 ---
76 THE WIRE : URBAN DECAY AND AMERICAN TELEVISION
Th is mode thus denotes both a theory of knowledge—that objective 
truth is produced only by observers who follow the action yet remain 
invisible—and a theory of action, in which change can happen 
only through expert intervention at the level of the institutional 
structures shaping people’s lives. In Th e Wire , the content or knowl-
edge revealed “once that tape starts rolling”—even Season One’s “dry, 
deliberate argument against the American drug prohibition” (Simon, 
“Introduction” 12)—should be understood as, above all, a prop for this 
specifi c discourse.
Notes
1. In the Baltimore accent, noticeable in several of the show’s characters, “police” is 
pronounced “POE-leese”—making the compliment “real POE-leese” seem all the more 
authentic and distinctive.
2. Th is professionalized model could be read as an implicit rejoinder to the idea of 
community policing, which, like panopticism, would ostensibly “privatize” policing by 
giving more authority and responsibility to citizens themselves. In Season Four, Com-
missioner Burrell briefl y adopts the “broken windows” approach, in which police crack 
down on minor, quality-of-life off  enses, which Steve Herbert identifi  es as the other 
major contemporary model of police reform (446). Once again, McNulty dismisses this 
tactic as simply “juking stats” (4.10).
3. In July 2003, the BJA (Bureau of Justice Assistance) Bulletin  published an article 
by Ed Burns, a former homicide detective and “policy visionary” (Talbot), who is also 
co-creator of Th e Wire , in which he criticizes the statistical model and implicitly calls 
for a zone of tolerated illegalities: “BPD generated large numbers of arrests to 
maintain statistical indicators of its impact. Unfortunately, this caused street-level 
information to dry up because the frequent interruptions made off  enders wary. Th us, 
the department was without data that had been routinely obtained from off enders and 
informants and that was necessary to assess gang problems and initiate solutions” 
(Burns).
4. Specifi cally, McNulty calls for “Surveillance teams. DNRs. Asset investigation. 
Keep gathering string until we can fi nd a way in. Either a wired C.I. or a Title III. It’s 
what makes this case” (1.01). A “DNR” is a “Dialed-number recorder used to intercept 
the telephone numbers called from a phone and, if the caller ID is installed, to record 
incoming numbers. A preliminary step to any wiretap” (Alvarez 256); “Title III” is “ A 
legal term for a federally sanctioned wiretap” (262); a “wired C.I. ” is a “Confi  dential 
informant who is wearing a concealed recording device” (262).


--- PAGE 86 ---
The Narrative Production of “Real Police” 77
5. In Season Th ree, this eff ective truth is made literal when Major Howard “Bunny” 
Colvin, a true cop’s cop—clearly “real police”—attempts to reduce drug-related violence 
in his district by designating areas where dealers will be allowed to sell drugs without 
being arrested. Th is ad hoc approach has mixed consequences, but, true to form, it is 
ultimately the public spectacle of the drug zone, rather than any internal problems, that 
lead to its demise. Th e best eff orts of a group of professionals are undone by politicians 
who exploit this spectacle to further their careers.


--- PAGE 87 ---
78
5
“I Got the Shotgun, You 
Got the Briefcase”: 
Lawyering and Ethics
Lynne Viti
Among the expansive cast of Th e Wire , two lawyers on opposite sides of 
the adversarial system, Rhonda Pearlman and Maurice Levy, confront, 
navigate, evade, and resolve ethical issues, either by conforming to the 
written code of professional responsibility and disciplinary rules, or by 
skirting these rules and inventing an entirely personal code. Th ough nei-
ther Pearlman nor Levy is a model of ethical perfection, Pearlman sticks 
closer to the accepted mores of the profession, while Levy strays from the 
code and transgresses. Th rough these characters, Th e Wire  challenges the 
existing criminal justice system and the effi  cacy and meaning of the Law 
itself, as well as the many campaigns the law undertakes, most notably 
the American War on Drugs. Although at fi  rst glance Assistant State’s 
Attorney (ASA) Pearlman appears to be a stereotypical prosecutor-hero-
ine and Levy, a standard-issue sleazy criminal defense attorney, over fi ve 
seasons, the stereotypes are at times destabilized, portraying depth and 
change in Pearlman, caricature and stasis in Levy. Y et we question 
whether either lawyer believes that the legal system is truly capable of 
meting out justice, or alternatively, whether the criminal justice system is 
merely a stage on which the attorney enacts certain rituals that are no 
longer really meaningful. Together, the characters of Pearlman and Levy


--- PAGE 88 ---
“I Got the Shotgun, You Got the Briefcase”: Lawyering and Ethics 79
convey a broader cultural anxiety about the “confused and sometimes 
even contradictory” face of the law in Baltimore (Kronman 226).
In Th e Wire, viewers experience the justice system in large part through 
Pearlman and Levy, both of them white and Jewish in this majority 
African American city.
1 Pearlman is young and ambitious, beginning the 
series with a curious mixture of idealism and street-smarts. She is an 
experienced prosecutor, having worked her way up from bail hearings 
and minor crimes to prosecuting major drug crimes. She intends to rise 
in the State’s Attorney hierarchy or become a judge, and, to that end, 
fi ghts what Th e Wire paints as a losing and never-ending war, one that 
cannot even be called a war, because as Detective Ellis Carver says to 
Th omas “Herc” Hauk, “Wars end” (1.01). Pearlman’s foil is Levy, counsel 
and mentor for three generations of Baltimore drug dealers: Proposition 
Joe Stewart, the Barksdale organization, and Marlo Stanfi eld.
Both Pearlman and Levy have, upon their admission to the Maryland 
Bar, sworn to uphold the standards and ethics of the legal profession. 
Each must decide on a daily basis how to balance professional ethics 
with what Richard Zitrin and Carol Langford call the “moral principles 
of our society” (4). As a prosecutor, Pearlman must determine whether 
police evidence has been lawfully obtained, and whether there exists an 
adequate basis for the government to bring charges against alleged 
wrongdoers. For his part, Levy must decide whether to remain loyal to 
“client[s] who insist on acting illegally” (Zitrin and Langford 4). Each 
lawyer approaches—and at times crosses—the line between zealous rep-
resentation of a client within the bounds of the law, and questionable 
and unethical professional behavior.
Individual episodes of Th e Wire  oft en evoke images of the classic 
American Western, with gunfi ghts in the street, quick draw contests, 
holdups, sniping, and shooting from behind buildings. Pearlman and 
Levy are Baltimore’s courtroom and conference room versions of 
gunfi ghters, using as weapons wiretap affi  davits, motions to suppress 
evidence, plea bargaining sessions, and exquisite manipulation of the 
law. Pearlman strives to secure convictions, send shooters and dealers 
away for long prison terms, and advance in the State’s Attorney’s offi  ce. 
Levy, while fulfi lling the defense attorney’s ethical obligation to defend 
his clients zealously, goes far beyond this: he advises them on how to 
launder and hide the fi  ves, tens, and twenties from the corners, and


--- PAGE 89 ---
80 THE WIRE : URBAN DECAY AND AMERICAN TELEVISION
how to expand into legitimate businesses such as downtown real estate 
ventures.
Morals, Ambitions, and Cogs: Rhonda Pearlman
In Pearlman, the audience is off ered a complex and realistic portrayal 
of a prosecutor. Ambition drives her; her work consumes her life. She is 
fueled by a need to immerse herself in paperwork, routine court appear-
ances, plea bargaining, and strategy sessions. It is not only professionally 
fulfi lling, but also seductive to Pearlman, and not surprisingly her 
work obsession spills over to fuel sexual encounters, fi  rst with Jimmy 
McNulty and later with Cedric Daniels, with whom she eventually forges 
a permanent relationship. Pearlman crosses the ethical line at times, 
relentlessly pursuing what she knows is a “career case. ” Whether her goal 
is a Circuit Court of Baltimore judgeship—where we see her land at the 
conclusion of Season Five—or a more prestigious prosecutor’s job, like 
that of Maryland State’s Attorney or fi rst assistant counsel, she labors not 
only for the good of the Baltimore community, but also for the rush of 
the conviction. She is not above fl  irting with the cynical, savvy Judge 
Phelan to get a wiretap order renewed for sixty days (1.07). At times she 
will stretch the truth in an affi   davit to get what she wants. She has 
moments of uncertainty and doubt and repeatedly faces moral and
ethical dilemmas as she lawyers on.
We fi rst meet Pearlman—or rather, Pearlman’s chic and expensive 
black briefcase—in the sterile offi  ce of the Drug Unit (1.01). Her left   
hand, a plain silver ring on the little fi nger, slips a small notebook out of 
the briefcase. Th e camera tilts upward to reveal Pearlman, in gender-
neutral attire, a brown pinstriped suit and tailored white blouse; she 
silently takes notes as she observes the members of Daniels’s detail, who 
are told “Buy-bust, quick and dirty. ” McNulty advocates for DNRs 
(dialed number recorders) and wiretaps, but Daniels orders, “No mikes, 
no wires . . . We do this fast and clean and simple. ” As the two argue, 
Pearlman intervenes, and her fi rst words are explosive and pointed: “Y ou 
all don’t need a prosecutor, you need a fucking referee . . . When you 
know how you’re playing this, give a yell. ” She is more in control than 
anyone else here, including Daniels.
We next see Pearlman in a cluttered and cramped offi  ce when Daniels 
asks her to intercede with her boss for better police for his wire detail


--- PAGE 90 ---
“I Got the Shotgun, You Got the Briefcase”: Lawyering and Ethics 81
(1.02). Pearlman appears at a distance in the frame, walking with  Daniels 
in a narrow hallway. Th  e institutional yellow walls and a cluttered 
bulletin board frame the two. Th ey discuss Daniels’s ragtag team, most 
of them hapless rejects from other departments. In these scenes we are 
given all the signs of a workaholic lawyer on the public payroll: no 
wedding band, stacks of fi les, small cubicle, lunch at her desk. Evidence 
of her personal life is scant—two framed photos on a bookcase, too 
small and far away for the viewer to make out. Pearlman is married to 
the job; she has neither time nor inclination to refl  ect on the work’s 
purpose or meaning.
Still, she is not one to pick a fi  ght unnecessarily with the powerful 
forces in Baltimore’s legal community. Near the end of Season One, 
Pearlman and McNulty visit the Barksdales’ criminal defense lawyer; 
they want Levy to persuade his client Savino to turn himself in for 
shooting Kima Greggs when she went undercover (1.11). McNulty, 
fueled by guilt over Kima’s injury, threatens Levy with an ethical inves-
tigation, and forces Pearlman to back him up. Levy seems surprised to 
see Pearlman violating the unspoken fellowship of offi  cers of the court. 
On the sidewalk outside Levy’s offi  ce, Pearlman refers to Levy’s power in 
Baltimore legal circles. He is “a past offi   cer of the Monumental Bar 
Association, ” one of those “people who matter” and whom she dare not 
cross unless she wants “to spend the rest of . . . [her] life as a fucking 
ASA. ” McNulty casts blame on Pearlman, Levy, and virtually all the 
lawyers of Baltimore. “Everybody stays friends, ” he spits out. “Every-
body gets paid. And everybody has a fucking future. ” Th ough Pearlman 
responds by turning it all back on McNulty’s self-aggrandizing obses-
sion with solving cases, there is a ring of truth to his accusations. Levy 
wants to feather his nest with fat legal fees and feel satisfi ed about secur-
ing his clients’ constitutional rights, but Pearlman is driven by a diff erent 
kind of self-serving professional ambition.
At the end of Season One, we see Pearlman’s prowess at plea bargaining. 
When D’ Angelo is arrested on his way back from a quick drug run to 
Manhattan, we see McNulty, Bunk Moreland, Pearlman, and D’ Angelo’s 
New Jersey public defender at a proff  er meeting (1.13). At fi  rst, the 
African American woman public defender seems to be running this ses-
sion, but McNulty, Bunk, and Pearlman take over. Th ey outline the many 
potential charges against D’ Angelo—22 of them by now. Pearlman does 
not let empathy deter her. “What are you looking for?” she asks. D’ Angelo


--- PAGE 91 ---
82 THE WIRE : URBAN DECAY AND AMERICAN TELEVISION
wants to live “like regular folk. Y ou give me that and I’ll give you them, ” 
he tells her. Th e camera is tight on D’ Angelo’s face, then shoots from just 
behind Pearlman’s head, creating a shadow that gradually eclipses him. 
In the plea bargain that emerges, Pearlman gains convictions (Wee-Bey 
Brice pleads guilty to several open murders, even though it is clear he 
did not commit all of them), and gains some Barksdale assets as well, 
but this falls short of her goals in this deal, and Pearlman’s victory is only 
bittersweet. Still, she keeps her shoulder to the justice system’s wheel, 
not yet able to step back to assess whether her actions are genuinely con-
nected to doing justice, or merely to a series of career moves.
In the Season One fi nale, Pearlman is in her glory, presenting plea 
agreements to the judge. Shown in a wide shot looking down on the 
prosecution and defense tables, a row of Barksdale thugs seated on the 
bench directly behind her, Pearlman is barely able to conceal her 
triumph as she recites the names of Avon Barksdale and his crew. Th e 
scene ends abruptly in medias res , and we move to Wee-Bey’s plea 
bargain session. Immediately we move back to the same courtroom, as 
Pearlman presents the terms of another plea bargain. Th ese scenes imply 
that though Pearlman may think she is accomplishing justice and 
making “Bodymore, Murdaland”
2 a better place, she is in actuality a cog 
in a justice system that grinds everyone down, from cold-hearted thugs 
like Wee-Bey to lost souls like D’ Angelo. Far from creating change in 
West Baltimore, Pearlman is only going through the motions as the 
state’s lawyer, though she does not yet understand this. At this stage, she 
has only inklings that her work is Sisyphean.
Sex, Law, and Ambition
Pearlman’s unhealthy sexual relationship with McNulty early in the 
series is presented as a distraction, a chance to pull away from fi les she 
has brought home. Alone in her townhouse, she accedes to McNulty’s 
needs because with him she can at least complain about her job. On the 
way back from interviewing D’ Angelo in New Jersey, Pearlman tells 
McNulty breathlessly, “Th is is a great case . . . because of how deep it 
goes . . . the murders, the money. Jesus, I feel like I’ve been drunk 
ever since that kid [D’ Angelo] started talking to us. ” She begins talking 
about “going federal with it” , and calls the Barksdale prosecution a


--- PAGE 92 ---
“I Got the Shotgun, You Got the Briefcase”: Lawyering and Ethics 83
“career fucking case” (1.13). In a comic scene, Pearlman climbs all over 
McNulty in the police garage. Th e prospect of a “career fucking case” is 
a heady aphrodisiac, reducing her for the moment to a hormone-fueled 
adolescent.
Less comically, Pearlman is also willing to use her sexuality for the 
pursuit of a case. When Daniels comes to Judge Phelan’s chambers to ask 
for a new wiretap order, Phelan resists initially:
Let me understand. Y ou want to sell drug traffi  ckers a series of cell 
phones that are pre-approved for telephonic intercepts. And you 
want me . . . to sign off  on court-ordered taps on a bunch of phones 
that, at the time I’m signing the order, have not been used for any 
illegal activity whatsoever. (3.10)
He is more than skeptical. Pearlman admits, “If you’re looking for 
precedents, your Honor, there aren’t any. It’s circumstantial PC at best. ” 
She methodically recrosses her legs, encouraging him to accede. He 
laughs, “What the hell, let’s do it. Let the Court of Appeals sort it out, if 
it even gets that far. ” In the corridor, Daniels ribs her, calling her “Quite 
the legal mind. ” Pearlman is unapologetic for using her sexual charms to 
secure the judge’s cooperation. She knows what everyone knows: that 
attractive lawyers are more successful than their less attractive colleagues 
(Biddle and Hamermesh).
Pearlman is also competent, and aware of the practical limits within 
which she operates. When the wire detail fi rst turns up evidence that the 
Barksdale money has found its way into the pockets of elected offi  cials, 
Pearlman is reluctant to build a case against Senator Clay Davis and 
developer Andy Krawczyk. When Lester Freamon follows the money 
from Avon Barksdale and Russell “Stringer” Bell to developers with 
close ties to the State House and City Hall, she is aghast: “Y ou want to do 
this now? . . . Four weeks before the Baltimore city primary, you hand 
me a stack of drug subpoenas that hit a dozen key political fi  gures?” 
(5.02). She plans to sit on the subpoenas until aft er the election, in part 
because her chances for advancement would be destroyed if she rushed 
into the political fray. When Freamon protests that he’s “just following 
the money, ” a wary Pearlman promises him that she will do just that—
“aft er the polls close. ”


--- PAGE 93 ---
84 THE WIRE : URBAN DECAY AND AMERICAN TELEVISION
Pearlman’s “career fucking case” transforms into a prosecution of 
Clay Davis for bribery and fraud. She skillfully presents her case, but 
Davis is acquitted, and as Davis and his lawyer raise their clasped hands 
in victory on the courthouse steps, another lawyer asks Pearlman, “What 
the fuck just happened?” Pearlman responds sagely: “Whatever it was, 
they don’t teach it in law school” (5.07). Pearlman’s case falls to a crooked 
politician’s popularity. In this moment, Pearlman begins to admit to her-
self that justice is seldom achieved in court. Near the end of Season Four, 
Pearlman gets another go at a career case, this one tied to the two dozen 
decomposing bodies in the vacants. Th is leads Pearlman, unawares, into 
the most complex ethical dilemma of her career, and the audience into a 
fuller understanding of the politics of what is supposed to be a neutral 
legal system.
In Season Five, Pearlman must endure McNulty and Freamon’s 
conspiratorial shenanigans, especially the imaginary serial killer they 
create to maintain their wiretap on Stanfi  eld. McNulty’s deceit pushes 
Pearlman into a complex series of ethical dilemmas. When Daniels 
reveals the ruse and informs Pearlman that the wiretap for which she 
has argued is nothing but a tap on a cell phone in the Police evidence 
control room, she is despondent (5.09). She has worked with McNulty 
and Freamon in good faith, and they have kept her in the dark. She fears 
that Daniels will be punished for the sins of McNulty and Freamon, “and 
they’ll fi re me . . . Th is is my career. Th is is everything . . . All those years 
in that courthouse. ” We root for Pearlman, and forgive even her request 
that Daniels accept the mayor’s suggestion to participate in a cover-up. 
Her public legal persona is off ered redemption, though, when Freamon 
provides Pearlman with a way to salvage the tainted case against Stanfi eld, 
identifying Levy’s courthouse mole for her, and documenting the man’s 
“gambling problem and a bank of drug lawyers” (5.10).
In a fi nal showdown with Levy, Pearlman has one more go at that 
career case (5.10). She visits his offi  ce, intending to batter him into a plea 
deal. She plays the tape of his conversation with the courthouse mole, 
then lays out her demands: “Partlow pleads to all the bodies in the 
vacants and takes life, no parole. ” When Levy protests that Pearlman is 
out of line—“blackmailing an offi  cer of the court . . . guilty of obstruc-
tion of justice”—Pearlman doesn’t bat an eye. Th  ough Levy may be 
technically right, she tells him he could be on the hook for ten to twelve 
for bribery of a state’s attorney and violation of grand jury secrecy.


--- PAGE 94 ---
“I Got the Shotgun, You Got the Briefcase”: Lawyering and Ethics 85
Pearlman relaxes, easing back into her chair: “I’ll be out a couple years 
before you, Maury. Y ou come home, fi rst round’s on me. ” She meets 
Levy almost halfway; Stanfi  eld will walk, but his case will be held 
undismissed on the “stet docket. ” Pearlman insists that Stanfi eld leave 
the drug game: “He’s done. We even get the scent of him on the street 
ever again, this comes off  stet and goes to trial. ” She does the best she 
can with a damaged case, weighed down as it is with the fruit of the 
poisonous tree.
3 In the series fi nale, the loose ends of fi  ve seasons are 
tied up in a montage, where Pearlman gets her reward as a Circuit 
Court judge.
Imperfect though the court system is, and imperfect as she has shown 
herself to be, Pearlman is a point of light. She has moved from pure 
idealist to seasoned realist. Her hands are not entirely clean, but she 
does her best to shut down Marlo Stanfi  eld’s operation. Y et we have a 
nagging feeling that nothing has changed in the Maryland criminal 
justice system. Pearlman has inherited Judge Phelan’s slot. A new female 
prosecutor has taken Pearlman’s place. Plus ça change. . . .
Maurice Levy for the Defense
Levy is a perplexing character in his own right, one who also develops 
against stereotype at times, as we move from season to season. At fi rst, 
he is a clever defense attorney. And like Tom Hagen in Francis Ford 
Coppola’s Th e Godfather  (1973) Levy is more than a mouthpiece for his 
drug clients; he is consigliere to the likes of Avon Barksdale, Stringer 
Bell, Proposition Joe Stewart, and Marlo Stanfi eld. He is fi nancial advi-
sor, business strategist, entrée to the legitimate world of business in 
Baltimore, and in a strange twist, even becomes a mentor to Herc Hauk, 
aft er Herc is cashiered from the BPD. Choosing still to see himself as 
a genuine detective, Herc works with Levy as a private investigator, 
providing critical inside information on the illegal wiretap against 
Stanfi eld. In the series fi nale, Levy praises Herc for “taking this law fi rm 
to a whole new level. ” He invites Herc to the Levy preserve for Shabbat 
dinner—his wife Yvette’s brisket: “Y ou’re mishpocha [family] now” (5.10). 
By taking Herc on fi rst as an employee, then as a source of valuable tips, 
then as a protégée, Levy benefi ts from this arrangement, even as he likes 
to believe that he has altruistically helped the dim Herc in fi nding him a 
career aft er police work.


--- PAGE 95 ---
86 THE WIRE : URBAN DECAY AND AMERICAN TELEVISION
Despite these suggestions that he has some good in him, Levy remains a 
Dickensian villain, a mercenary defense lawyer comfortable manipulating 
the law. Levy wants to win cases, or secure the best possible plea bargain 
for his clients, not so much to vindicate their constitutional rights, but 
for the money, to get his business card “in the front pocket of every self-
respectable drug traffi  cker. ” He condescends to his clients: “How many 
times do I have to tell you people?” he admonishes D’ Angelo, with racist 
dismissal. “Kiddo, there’s not another lawyer who could get better for 
you, ” he puff s, aft er he informs Stanfi eld he will go free, but must leave 
the game (5.10). Levy is happy to take drug merchants’ money, and to 
put his name as clerk on incorporation papers for their front businesses. 
He is hard to like, a fact not lost on actor Michael Kostroff , who reports 
being accosted in the supermarket by a fan calling him “you mother-
fucking son of a bitch” (cited in Murphy).
Levy embodies the antithesis of all that the Maryland Lawyer’s Rules 
of Professional Conduct represent. Th e Preamble states, “ As advocate, a 
lawyer zealously asserts the client’s position under the rules of the adver-
sary system” ( Rules [2]). Levy frequently chooses not to exercise the 
required “moral judgment guided by the basic principles underlying the 
Rules . . . the lawyer’s obligation zealously to protect and pursue a client’s 
legitimate interests, within the bounds of the law. ” For example, by sub-
orning perjury in D’ Angelo Barksdale’s fi rst trial, Levy violates Rule 3.3, 
which prohibits a lawyer from “off er[ing] evidence that the lawyer knows 
to be false. ” Levy bends, stretches, and skirts the ethical rules (1.01). 
Aft er the fi rst eyewitness to the shooting, William Gant, nervously iden-
tifi es D’ Angelo, the high-rise security guard, Nakeisha Lyles, takes the 
stand. As the camera pans across three Barksdale lieutenants, Lyles 
recants her earlier statement, though the prosecutor helplessly attempts 
to rehabilitate the witness. Th e hard-core members of Avon Barksdale’s 
crew—Stringer, Wee-Bey, Bird, Orlando—glare at Lyles just before she 
contradicts her earlier identifi cation of D’ Angelo as the shooter. A few 
scenes later, the jury returns with its verdict, not guilty on all counts. 
Levy opens his hands in a gesture that says, “Didn’t I promise I’ d get you 
off ?” Disorder erupts; Judge Phelan bangs his gavel in vain. Levy knows 
the Barksdale crew has intimidated Lyles into recanting. If he has not 
actively suborned perjury (a clear violation of the Maryland Rules), 
the scene suggests that he fully understands what Stringer Bell and his


--- PAGE 96 ---
“I Got the Shotgun, You Got the Briefcase”: Lawyering and Ethics 87
thugs have done to make Lyles change her testimony. Levy has know-
ingly tolerated perversion of the criminal justice system by acceding to 
the witness intimidation that is so widespread in the Baltimore of 
Th e Wire . He is what Preston “Bodie” Broadus disdainfully calls “a paid 
lawyer” (4.03).
Levy’s transgressions of the ethical canons do not stop here. Th  e 
Maryland Rules prescribe against counseling “a client to engage . . . in 
conduct that the lawyer knows is criminal or fraudulent” ( Maryland 
Rules 1.16(b)(2)). Repeatedly, we see Levy meet with his drug clients to 
advise them on how to limit their exposure: Who can hurt you? Have 
you gotten rid of the guns? Who can you rely on to take the years for 
murders and keep his mouth shut? Can we run the money through the 
families to hide it? Levy conforms to the Rules of Professional Conduct 
only when it is convenient or when it protects his clients. And when the 
law bears down upon them, he secures the best deal he can. Indeed, he 
acts with what the Rules term “reasonable diligence and promptness” 
(Maryland Rules 1.3) in representing his criminal clients, but to this 
mix he adds aiding and abetting criminal enterprises, bribery, and 
conspiracy.
Levy, in fact, is not above fabricating a case out of whole cloth. In one 
case, he tells a juvenile court judge that Bodie has simply fallen in with 
a bad crowd (1.06). Bodie has been arrested for selling narcotics and 
assaulting a police offi  cer, earning him a “delinquent petition. ” He has 
also walked away from a juvenile detention facility. Levy spins, “My  client 
acknowledges that he was involved for a time in the sale of a small 
amount of drugs. ” He claims further that Bodie was never paid for his 
work, and was “manipulated by older traffi  ckers in his neighborhood. ” 
When the judge asks how Bodie can aff ord two well-prepared lawyers, 
Levy asserts that they are doing the case pro bono, as part of a program 
to identify troubled youth. Levy speaks so convincingly that even  Bodie’s 
grandmother believes this fairy tale. Levy fi  rst exaggerates (“Preston 
was the victim of a brutal police beating”) then lies to the judge, saying 
Bodie “was heavily medicated” when he walked out of the detention 
center, “simply trying to get back to his grandmother. ” Even Bodie is 
impressed with his lawyer’s rhetorical talents. Here, Levy never goes so 
far as to suborn perjury, but he steps to the outer boundaries of what the 
disciplinary rules permit; his twisting of the facts and his attempt to


--- PAGE 97 ---
88 THE WIRE : URBAN DECAY AND AMERICAN TELEVISION
portray Bodie as merely a misguided youth ready to “be good, ” as Bodie 
puts it, are concurrently legitimate and unethical. As far as Levy is con-
cerned, he is doing nothing wrong, merely fulfi lling his obligation to his 
client. Soon, however, Levy will cross the line from zealous advocacy
to assisting the Barksdales, and later to explicitly instructing Marlo 
Stanfi eld on how to evade and subvert the law. At this point he will off end 
the Maryland Rules’ prescriptive maxim, that lawyers must “use the law’s 
procedures only for legitimate purposes” (Maryland Rules 2.5).
Levy’s self-satisfi ed mien is particularly maddening to Jimmy 
McNulty. Levy promises that if the drug dealer Savino contacts him, 
Levy will advise him to turn himself in. McNulty is impatient: “I’m 
willing to let you little ratfuckers suborn perjury . . . and blow smoke up 
a judge’s ass and jury tamper your balls off  . . . and fuck me if I don’t let 
you structure your cash into briefcase fees, either” (1.11). Th e only signs 
of Levy’s discomfort at McNulty’s badgering are a slight roll of the neck, 
the trace of an impudent smile, and a slight rocking back in his leather 
chair. McNulty threatens Levy with “a target letter from the state’s attor-
ney’s offi  ce followed by subpoenas for every bank account in your name, 
to see whether the cash deposits match the income reported on your 
returns. ” Levy looks to Pearlman to stop McNulty’s fulminations, but 
keeps his cool; he has no desire to open his books or expose himself to 
an investigation by the state’s attorney. “I’ll see what I can do, ” he tells 
them, outfoxed, but only temporarily.
Where Pearlman’s motives are hard to read, Levy is transparent. 
Where Pearlman is all superego, Levy is all id. He is a master of supercil-
ious gesture, the ironic smile, the smart comeback couched in legal 
clichés or terms of art. In a Season Two court scene, Levy accuses Omar 
Little, the stickup man who robs other drug dealers: “Y ou are a parasite 
who leeches off  the culture of drugs. ” Omar agrees, drawling, “Th e way 
I see it, I got the shotgun . . . you got the briefcase” (2.6). Sometimes 
directly, sometimes comedically, Th e Wire  suggests that the law is more 
than an ass, to paraphrase Dickens: it is a sham, and it cheats, and in the 
case of juries, it co-opts the citizens of Baltimore in that deception. What 
makes Levy so worthy of our disdain is his manifest awareness that 
the law has devolved into an empty ritual in which judge, defense 
attorney, prosecutor, and jury enact predetermined, circumscribed roles.


--- PAGE 98 ---
“I Got the Shotgun, You Got the Briefcase”: Lawyering and Ethics 89
His cynical approach to lawyering is a far cry from the ideals embodied 
in the professional code of ethics, whose goal is to “seek improvement 
of the law, access to the legal system, the administration of justice” 
(Maryland Rules, Preamble [6]). Th e Rules set a high standard; lawyers 
should lead American society to be more just, more equitable. Th  ey 
should “further the public’s understanding of and confi dence in the rule 
of law and the justice system . . . in a democratic society” ( Maryland 
Rules, Preamble [6]). Levy’s indiscriminate and overly zealous advocacy 
for Avon, Stringer, Prop Joe and Marlo is, at its heart, a moneymaking 
enterprise, a business—not the furtherance of this ideal judicial system 
in a representative democracy.
Th us, in the end, Th e Wire  gives us a legal universe in which defense 
lawyers are cynical and mercenary; in which prosecutors are engaged in 
a task that eventually will use them up; in which judges know there is 
miscarriage of justice but can only tweak the system. At the end of fi ve 
seasons, we know that the War on Drugs is not about to end, that even 
as Marlo leaves the game, there will be another to take his place. Another 
energetic prosecutor will step into Pearlman’s shoes. As the Deacon says 
to Bunny Colvin, “Drugs . . . that is a force of nature. Th  at’s sweeping 
leaves on a windy day” (3.02). Th e exquisite tension between Pearlman 
and Levy, two representatives of a culture that claims to live by the writ-
ten and spoken word of the law, defi nes the wearing away and degradation 
of justice in our oldest and most precious institutions against the back-
drop of a seemingly perpetual war.
Notes
1. In Season One, Levy rushes in to police headquarters aft  er D’ Angelo Barksdale 
has been brought in for questioning about the death of a witness. Levy complains that he 
has been dragged “from the Levy preserve on a Friday night, ” a reference to the Jewish 
Sabbath. In this scene, McNulty refers to Pearlman as “another member of your twisted 
little tribe, ” with “tribe” explicitly referring to lawyers, but also perhaps to her being 
Jewish. Curt Schleier notes in an interview with David Simon, “Th ere are two regular 
characters with Jewish names: Rhonda Pearlman, a conscientious assistant state’s 
attorney, is one of a handful of generally positive characters in the show. Th  e other, 
Maurice Levy, is a venal, amoral drug lawyer. ” See also Nora Lee Mandel’s “Lilith Watch, ” 
on images of Jewish women in popular culture, which includes an entry on Pearlman.


--- PAGE 99 ---
90 THE WIRE : URBAN DECAY AND AMERICAN TELEVISION
2. Th is phrase, referring to Baltimore’s high murder rate, appears in graffi   ti in the 
Season One title sequence. It is also sometimes found as “Bodymore, Murderland” .
3. Th e Fruit of the Poisonous Tree doctrine is an established extension of the exclu-
sionary rule. Evidence derived from a search and seizure that violates the Fourth 
Amendment is inadmissible in court (Silverthorne Lumber Co. v. United States, 251 U.S. 
385 (1920)).


--- PAGE 100 ---
91
6
Posing Problems and Picking Fights: 
Critical Pedagogy and the Corner Boys
Ralph Beliveau and Laura Bolf-Beliveau
HBO’s Th e Wire  constructs complex relationships between people and 
the institutions in which they live. Th e series tells stories of how cops 
and criminals “game” the judicial system, how unions contend with the 
threats of a changing economy, and how politicians navigate governing. 
In Season Four, Th e Wire  focuses on the stories of adolescents as they 
interact with various institutions of learning. None of these construc-
tions off er simple narratives, however. As David Simon says of the series, 
“to be perfectly honest, we are not only trying to tell a good story or two. 
We are trying in our own way to pick a fi  ght” (4). What makes these 
fi ghts so compelling is how each one opens up a space to critique the 
gaps among individual and group ideologies.
Th e show’s discussion of education is both formal, within the confi nes 
of traditional schools, and informal, within the confi  nes of the corner 
and the game. In both cases, the situations off er a rich understanding of 
how relations of power control characters and their circumstances. Th is 
chapter focuses on two corner boys, Namond Brice and Michael Lee, 
who are reaching the age where they must negotiate between the seem-
ingly oppositional forces of the school and the street. Th is season resists 
reducing each boy’s story to a simple tale of good and evil. Because of 
this complexity, each character’s progress can be illuminated by ideas of 
critical pedagogy.


--- PAGE 101 ---
92 THE WIRE : URBAN DECAY AND AMERICAN TELEVISION
Critical pedagogy off ers a way to examine various contexts of educa-
tion. It interrogates the conditions of power that give knowledge value, as 
well as analyzing the control of traditional institutional structures. A critical 
pedagogy approach encourages the development of self-consciousness in 
both the learner and the teacher, a process which is called “conscientiza-
tion . . . a power we have when we recognize we know what we know” 
(Wink 37). Th is approach argues that self-determination is only possible 
through raising the consciousness of the individual, replacing the accep-
tance of conventional standardized learning with a critical, refl  ective 
perspective. Critical pedagogy struggles against allowing someone’s 
identity and goals to be replaced by the defi nitions and goals of others.
Critical pedagogy is grounded in the ideas of Paulo Freire, initially 
explored in his landmark book Pedagogy of the Oppressed. Freire argues 
that educational systems traditionally impose a “banking model” of 
education, which reinforces traditional power relationships, aff ecting the 
student from outside and above. Students are seen as passive receivers of 
knowledge, and educational power structures reinforce their passivity. 
In this model, students play no role in determining the value of what is 
learned and are discouraged from questioning the validity of the process. 
Th is approach is used by public schools in Season Four of Th e Wire . 
State-wide testing drives the way students are taught—through drill and 
practice. One of the continuing characters in the series, teacher and 
ex-cop Roland “Prez” Pryzbylewski, tries to resist this model, but he is 
quickly admonished into reinforcing standard power relationships (4.09).
Freire works against this process by arguing for a type of education 
grounded in the individual. Rather than maintaining the status quo and 
reinforcing oppressive power relationships, Freire argues for education 
that enhances the power of the learner. In Freire’s revisionist model, the 
banking concept is rejected and replaced by a problem-posing method that 
“consists in acts of cognition, not transferals of information” (79). Such a 
process could lead to “a constant unveiling of reality . . . and the emergence 
of consciousness and critical intervention in reality” (81). Th is can be 
seen, for example, in Pryzbylewski’s class prior to state testing preparation, 
where students are actively engaged in lessons on probability. Understand-
ing that the students needed to explore their own worlds, Pryzbylewski 
uses the “real world” example of gambling with dice (4.07). As a result, the 
boys are briefl y able to see the relationship of math to their world.


--- PAGE 102 ---
Posing Problems and Picking Fights: Critical Pedagogy and the Corner Boys 93
Ultimately, Freire focuses on a concept vital for understanding this 
second type of education:
In problem-posing education, people develop their power to per-
ceive critically the way they exist  in the world with which and in 
which they fi nd themselves; they come to see the world not as a 
static reality, but as a reality in process, in transformation. (83)
A static reality is reinforced through the banking model of education. 
Grasping reality-as-process happens when learners understand that 
they can intervene in the construction of reality, as a result of problem-
posing. Learners are able to resist the oppressive use of power from outside 
and seize the productive possibilities of their own power (Gore 67). Rather 
than accept an imposed idea of themselves, learners become partici-
pants in the construction of their identities, thus turning the focus from 
static being to a dynamic of becoming.
Namond and Michael engage in this “reality in process, ” and both 
characters off er insight into the possibilities of transformation. Caught 
between institutional and ideological demands and the desire to form 
their own identities, they work through these tensions between tradi-
tional social institutions (and other contexts like family life, race, class 
consciousness) and the presence of “the game. ” As such, the trajectory of 
these two characters demonstrates the tensions inherent in teaching and 
learning. Neither boy’s story provides a generic solution for the myriad 
problems inherent in educational institutions; instead, each highlights 
the nuanced ways in which Th e Wire  presents a fi ght to the audience.
The Education of Namond Brice
When Namond is introduced at the start of Season Four, he appears to be 
just another corner boy. Under the tutelage of Preston “Bodie” Broadus, 
a long-time Barksdale soldier, Namond asks to leave the corner early to 
prepare for the upcoming school year. Bodie comments, “If it wasn’t for 
social promotion . . . your ass would be in preschool and shit” (4.01). Y et 
Namond is diff  erent from a typical corner boy. His father, Roland 
“Wee-Bey” Brice, is a loyal soldier in the Barksdale organization. In 
Season One, he confesses to nine diff erent murders—some he commit-
ted and some he did not—to protect his leader, Avon Barksdale (1.13).


--- PAGE 103 ---
94 THE WIRE : URBAN DECAY AND AMERICAN TELEVISION
In return, his family is promised fi  nancial security by the Barksdale
family. Raised in the game, Namond uses his father’s reputation to receive 
special treatment. Th is worries his mother, who demands that Wee-Bey 
discuss the situation with his son. Wee-Bey tells Namond, “Either you 
real out there or you ain’t” (4.02).
Almost immediately, Namond must prove himself real or not when 
Brianna Barksdale cuts off   fi nancial support to the family. Enraged, 
Namond’s mother De’Londa insists he “step up” and earn his way on 
the street. However, Namond is ill-prepared for the real demands of the 
game: his mother is infuriated when he brings drugs into her home, 
rival Stanfi eld corner boys beat him, and no matter how hard he tries, 
he cannot get suspended from school to work the package. Namond’s 
sense of being exists in the tension between the expectations of the 
role he should play and the possibility that he may not fi  t that role. So 
much of the game is based on credibility and reputation, yet Namond 
falters and second-guesses himself. De’Londa and corner culture enact 
a banking model of education; both insist on a passive reenactment of 
the status quo so that the expectations of Namond’s role are reinforced 
without any recognition of his own consciousness.
Th is is perhaps best seen when Namond and Michael confront young 
Kenard about a missing drug package (4.12). Kenard calls Namond a 
“gump, ” but Namond refuses to hit him, so Michael, along as muscle, 
severely beats Kenard and then insists Namond take his package back. 
Namond only replies, “I don’t want it. ” Knowing he has crossed a line, 
Namond fl ees to the boxing gym and talks to Coach Cutty and Sergeant 
Ellis Carver, a local cop who once arrested him.
Namond: What am I gonna do?
Carver: I’ll run you home.
Namond: I can’t go home. She expect me to be my father, but I ain’t 
him. I mean, the way he is and shit. It just ain’t me.
Cutty: What’s between you and Michael?
Namond: Mike ain’t Mike no more. He went hard on this boy last 
night. Fucked his shit up. I can’t go home. I can’t.
In choosing not to enact the codes of the street by beating Kenard, 
Namond knows he cannot meet his father’s expectation that he be “real


--- PAGE 104 ---
Posing Problems and Picking Fights: Critical Pedagogy and the Corner Boys 95
out there. ” His sense of being turns into a new becoming as his “emer-
gence of consciousness” allows him to consider the possibility of “critical 
intervention in reality” (Freire 81).
Namond’s newfound critical consciousness seems at least in part a 
result of the special school-within-a-school program. University of 
Maryland personnel and Howard “Bunny” Colvin, the former com-
mander of Baltimore’s western district, have funding for a special eighth 
grade class. Middle school teacher Grace Sampson says that students like 
Namond could “benefi t from the special curriculum and the smaller class 
size” (4.08). When students balk, she responds, “every one of you has 
proven time and again that you’re not ready for a regular classroom. But 
this is a new program that if you work, it is going to make you ready. ” 
Namond, one of the ten students, responds, “Ready for gen pop. Th is is 
prison, yo. And we in solitary an’ shit. ” As he names this new world, 
Namond takes a fi rst step toward critical consciousness. Freire and Macedo 
describe the naming process by explaining that students must read both 
words and worlds and must eventually write and rewrite them in order to 
transform: “Words should be laden with the meaning of the people’s 
existential experience, and not of the teacher’s experience . . . We then give 
the words back to the people inserted in what I call ‘codifi cations, ’ pictures 
representing real situations” (35–36). In Th e Wire , the students continue 
to name their world as they codify the rules of the street:
Colvin: So you saying you don’t ever give anybody a break?
Namond: Nah . . . ’ cause if you let him slide for a dollar, it’s a sign 
that you’re weak. Today’s dollar is tomorrow’s two.
Th e adults listen as the students insist they must “mess up” those who 
are responsible for spillage or snitching to the police. Colvin asks why 
they must act with such decisiveness. One student responds, “Th  ere 
always people watching. ” Another agrees, “Watching, watching you. ”
Colvin then asks them to write down these rules, and it is then that 
Namond sees connections to the larger world:
Like you all say: don’t lie, don’t bunk, don’t cheat, don’t steal, or 
whatever. But what about y’all, huh? What, the government? What 
it—Enron? . . . We do the same thing as y’all, except when we do it,


--- PAGE 105 ---
96 THE WIRE : URBAN DECAY AND AMERICAN TELEVISION
it’s like, “Oh my God, these kids is animals. ” Like it’s the end of 
the world coming . . . ’Cause it’s like—what is it—hypocrite—
hypocritical. (4.08)
Th ese scenes imply that the students are more engaged when discussing 
what they know, in this case the game. Once they give words to the world 
they know, they can connect it to the larger society. Zenobia, another 
student in this special program, realizes, “We got our thing, but this is 
just part of the big thing. ” Th e school-within-a-school activities off er the 
corner kids a variety of opportunities to change their educational 
experience. In one direction, the students’ lives outside the school are 
presented and discussed inside the school. Students are encouraged to 
affi  x words, descriptions, and understandings of the system of the streets, 
experiences that are usually excluded from institutional context. Th  is 
off ers the students the opportunity to author and own their experience 
within the classroom, and at the same time to establish a legitimate 
connection between the students and the people in the institution—
especially Colvin.
While Colvin’s students are discussing their real-world experiences, 
they are presented with practices in the classroom that have an abstract 
relationship to the pedagogy of the streets. Th  ese are more abstract 
because the lesson to be learned is implied; hence they represent Freire’s 
notion of problem-posing. Th e students use a traditional large group 
trust exercise, where one falls backward blindfolded and trusts the 
 others to catch him or her. Another is a competitive group exercise 
where students in small groups are charged to assemble a building from 
a kit without the printed instructions. Tensions exist between the expe-
rience-based knowledge and the abstract lessons; one is so familiar, and 
the other has the potential of reproducing typical school alienation. 
Such a tension is necessary and compels the students to combine owner-
ship over the terms of their world with more abstract understandings of 
how they as individuals and groups work within it.
But the success of the program is tempered. Th e combination of the 
authorship of real-world experience and the gaining of insights from 
abstraction is not suffi  cient to empower the students to rewrite their 
world. As Freire and Macedo explain, the experience of literacy—the


--- PAGE 106 ---
Posing Problems and Picking Fights: Critical Pedagogy and the Corner Boys 97
writing of the world—is only part of the triggering mechanism for 
empowerment. Rewriting the rigid social hierarchical order for the 
corner kids requires the literacy of writing their world as a necessary 
condition, but it is only a suffi   cient condition when it triggers other 
social responses (Freire and Macedo 107). Th e corner kids are still likely 
to feel out of place in the face of rigid hierarchical structures, whether 
that means the return to the “gen pop” world of the typical classroom, 
or the social protocols of an upscale restaurant. As Colvin argues to 
Baltimore school personnel, “Th ey’re not learning for our world. Th ey’re 
learning for theirs” (4.10).
Namond appears to be the only student actively to question the world of 
the corner. When he is arrested (4.10), he is afraid to go to “baby booking” . 
He calls on Colvin to save him from that fate. And, as mentioned earlier, 
when he must step up and face Kenard, he refuses. In the last episode of 
Season Four, Colvin convinces Wee-Bey that his son will not survive on 
the streets. Later, Wee-Bey tells De’Londa, “Man came down here to say 
my son can be anything he damn please” (4.13). She insists that Namond 
can still be a soldier, but Wee-Bey asks why anyone would want to end 
up like him. Namond is taken in by Colvin and his wife, and he briefl y 
appears in Season Five: participating in the Baltimore Urban Debate 
League, Namond gives an award-winning speech about HIV and AIDS 
in Africa. Colvin says, “I tell ya, if I had that boy’s gift  to talk, I’ da really 
caused a stir” (5.09). It is intimated that Namond will do just that—
cause a stir in this new world.
Namond’s ability to join the new world and his inability to follow the 
script of the street are interrelated. To understand his character’s arc in 
terms of critical pedagogy, we need to study his developing sense of 
power because it tracks with his sense of becoming. But he has already 
demonstrated a deep understanding of the world of “the game. ” His 
inability to be a soldier should not be taken as a lack of understanding of 
the situation. His move away from the street is not an oversimplifi  ed 
moral tale of the evil found there and embodied by those that belong. 
Th e strengths of Th e Wire  trade on complicating the struggles of people 
living in urban centers. Th is means that any judgment about the moral 
position of a character is tied to his or her situation. Th  is becomes 
evident as Michael also transforms in Seasons Four and Five.


--- PAGE 107 ---
98 THE WIRE : URBAN DECAY AND AMERICAN TELEVISION
The Education of Michael Lee
Michael takes a very diff  erent path toward critical consciousness. 
Responsible for his younger brother Bug and weary of his drug-addicted 
mother, Michael is forced to take on adult roles at an early age. As such, 
he has a rigid set of codes. We see him stand up for another boy, Duquan 
“Dukie” Weems and take on the Terrace boys, unafraid of the violence 
that ensues. He also refuses Marlo Stanfi  eld’s handout saying, “Th at 
ownin’ niggas for shit, man. Th at ain’t me” (4.02). It seems as though 
Michael has already read the world of the game. But unlike other televi-
sion shows, Th e Wire  allows the characters continually to evolve, and 
Michael’s sense of self is fi rst challenged by Marlo’s interest in his ability 
to stand up for himself; Marlo sees Michael’s strength of character as 
something useful to his drug organization. Second, Bug’s father returns, 
and it quickly becomes clear that he has molested Michael in the past. 
Although Michael has grown considerably and boxes fairly well, he is 
not “big enough” to take his stepfather. Concerned with his own safety 
and desperate to protect Bug, Michael turns to Marlo for help, telling 
him, “I got a problem I can’t bring to no one else” (4.09). Marlo responds 
by calling for a hit on the stepfather, and Chris Partlow and Felicia 
“Snoop” Pearson brutally kill the man.
From this point forward, Michael becomes schooled in the game. 
Chris and Snoop teach him the rules of the street beginning with a chill-
ing scene where Michael is chased into a deserted building. Michael 
turns the tables and shoots them with paintballs (4.12). Reminiscent of 
the drill and practice preparing for state-wide testing, Chris and Snoop 
grill Michael about what he should do next. He responds, “One to the 
head. I keep it quick. ” Th ey approve, and later in that episode, both 
Michael and Namond approach Kenard. Th is turning point for Namond 
becomes one for Michael, too—as Namond later says, “Mike ain’t Mike 
no more. ” Th e institutions of the street and the game ironically become 
similar to the institution of the school. Michael is educated to become 
a passive follower of Marlo and his crew; he is taught to follow rules 
without question. Michael seems to become another passive loyal 
soldier, killing when Marlo says. Whereas Namond has the school within 
a school and Bunny Colvin to provide a chance at another path, at 
the end of Season Four, Michael seems to adopt a new state of being,


--- PAGE 108 ---
Posing Problems and Picking Fights: Critical Pedagogy and the Corner Boys 99
one ingrained in the rules of the street. We are left  to wonder if he will 
transform somehow.
As Season Five begins, however, we see that Michael is striving to 
understand his world (5.02). As with Namond, Michael will pursue 
the Freirean process of gaining power in his environment through 
renaming that world. As they are about to carry out a hit on June Bug, a 
boy who has badmouthed Marlo, Chris continues teaching Michael the 
code of the streets.
Chris: Why you think we sitting here?
Michael: See who home and who not, who on the block, police 
and whatnot.
Chris: Th  at’s right. Y ou don’t ever want to be the last man to a 
party . . . Th at’s why I show up to a job an hour before, 
sometimes two. I don’t want nobody settin’ up on me 
while I’m settin’ up on them.
Michael: Why we doin’ June Bug anyway?
Snoop: Heard he called Marlo a dicksuck. Talkin’ shit like that.
Michael: Y ou heard? Y ou ain’t sure?
Snoop: People say he said it.
Chris: Don’t matter if he said it or not. People think he said it. 
Can’t let that shit go.
Michael: Why not? . . . What the fuck he care what June Bug say? 
What anybody say? Why this boy got to get dead, just for 
talking shit?
Snoop:  ’Cause he got a big motherfuckin’ mouth, that’s why, and 
you need to stop runnin’ your own mouth, young ’un.
Michael is told to shoot anyone who leaves through the back door. 
However, when a child of fi  ve runs from the violent scene of the hit, 
Michael points the gun at him but cannot pull the trigger.
Th us begins Michael’s new trajectory of learning. Later in Season 
Five, Chris and Marlo are arrested, and Snoop is sent to take out Michael, 
who may have leaked information to the police (5.09). But Michael 
has been schooled well. Sensing a set-up, Michael comes prepared and 
pulls a gun on Snoop. She asks, “How you know?” His reply is, “Y’all 
taught me. Get there early. ” When Michael presses her about why he


--- PAGE 109 ---
100 THE WIRE : URBAN DECAY AND AMERICAN TELEVISION
must be killed, she tells him, “it’s how you carry yourself . . . always apart. 
Always askin’ why you should be doin’ what you told. Y ou was never 
one of us. Y ou never could be. ” Michael shoots her, leaves the car, and 
prepares to go into hiding. Aft  er taking his little brother to safety, 
he prepares to drop off   Dukie, who asks him if he remembers when 
they took on the Terrace boys with “piss balloons. ” Michael pauses 
and then says, “I don’t” (5.09). Although we are not sure if Michael 
speaks the truth, it is clear that he is neither a naïve corner boy nor a 
seasoned soldier.
Michael ultimately transcends both of these institutional contexts; he 
essentially fails at both by succeeding in becoming the agent of his own 
power. Michael is able to determine his own course, and he becomes an 
echo of Omar Little by the end of the series. In Michael’s fi nal scene, he 
holds up a rim shop and takes whatever he wants (5.10). As he steps into 
such a role, viewers come to a deeper understanding of Omar’s circum-
stances, perhaps fi nally realizing why Omar’s character has represented 
something the audience fi nds engaging, moving, and compelling. Viewers 
connect with Omar because of his complete individualism. Like the tradi-
tional anti-hero archetype, he embodies characteristics that would seem 
unheroic but become admirable and even attractive in the world of Th e 
Wire. Th e challenge of understanding Omar lies in the question, “How 
did he become this way?” Michael’s transformation provides an answer.
Michael’s path through the series is both complex and disturbing. 
Early on, he shows Mr. Pryzbylewski that he is quite capable of succeed-
ing at school. He also demonstrates a loyalty to Dukie, Namond, and 
Randy Wagstaff , willing to take a beating for these friends. But these 
corner boys are reaching a level of maturity where they will either suc-
ceed at school or move into the game. Pryzbylewski’s class demonstrates 
the integration of street lives into the classroom. In the terms of critical 
pedagogy, Freire would call this a dialogic relation, where lives outside 
are brought in to the school (Murrell 42). Despite his demonstration of 
an aptitude for schoolwork, Michael is alienated both by the banking 
model of education and by Mr. Pryzbylewski’s model inviting street life 
into the classroom. Michael is forced by his circumstances to reject both 
versions of schooling, while at the same time, through doing homework 
with his brother, demonstrating his understanding of the fundamental 
value of an education.


--- PAGE 110 ---
Posing Problems and Picking Fights: Critical Pedagogy and the Corner Boys 101
Michael’s process of becoming is grounded in the material circum-
stances and responsibilities of his life, as well as his own traumatic 
upbringing. Th e street emphasizes a version of masculinity that pre-
vents Michael from doing anything about his problems through the 
institution, which could off er very little in any event. His little brother’s 
potential exposure to sexual molestation is a danger that requires a 
more radical and antisocial sort of help. By asking Marlo to kill Bug’s 
father, Michael incurs a debt that moves him into the ruthless social 
matrix of the criminal organization. For Michael, school has failed, 
both as a place where social values are taught and as a place that can 
off er a working alternative to the street. Th e result is a dark and disturb-
ing realization of conscience as Michael takes for a time the path of a 
successful soldier.
To understand fi  nally how ideas of critical pedagogy illuminate 
Michael’s path, we need to see the street as another kind of institution. 
Michael is taught to take orders, not to question, and thereby to help the 
organization to demonstrate another kind of banking model. Th is form 
is more eff ective in creating empowerment of a diff erent sort, still capa-
ble of realizing material gains and social status, but working a game on 
the other side of the law. Judging this banking model requires a suspen-
sion from the mainstream middle class world, and a connection to the 
measures of success in the specifi c terms of the street and the game.
Ultimately, however, Michael’s sense of social responsibility, damaged 
though it is by his own trauma and the choices that followed, puts him 
in confrontation with the rules of the street. His path of becoming is not 
as destructive and free from conscience as the street requires. Michael is 
unable to carry out ruthless action without questioning the injustice of 
the situation. Marlo’s gang becomes oppressive, and Michael moves 
closer to a revolutionary state; he identifi  es the myths of Marlo’s gang 
and rewrites his understanding of the game. Michael then rejects that 
path. Our last images of him directly connect to Omar, a character who 
has acted outside of the rules of the game and acted on his code. Michael 
adopts Omar’s modus operandi. He remains recognizable but becomes 
unpredictable. He hides yet acts with such boldness that he will no doubt 
be noticed. Michael even repeats one of the fi  rst actions we see from 
Omar back in the fi rst season of Th e  Wire, when he has to shoot a leader 
of a street crew in the knee to demonstrate his conviction (1.03).


--- PAGE 111 ---
102 THE WIRE : URBAN DECAY AND AMERICAN TELEVISION
The Education of the Audience
Th e Wire  presents a complex and nuanced portrait of American urban 
culture that transcends cynicism with a faith in the complexity of people 
and circumstances. It picks a fi  ght with the oversimplistic suggestion 
that the failure of education happens only because of a lack of resources, 
or worse yet because of incompetent teachers and administration. 
Instead, the show suggests that education can only begin to make sense 
if the formal institutions are seen in the context of the other social forces 
that also educate students. Forces like the economy of the street, the 
ways of manipulating the application of rules or laws, and the competi-
tion to fi nd one’s place provide a matrix of forces that situate the formal 
and informal processes of being educated.
Th e stories of Namond and Michael are thought provoking when seen 
against this complexity. In the same way, a critical pedagogy approach 
off ers a way for the audience to see the fi ght between the top-down style 
of education and the more progressive problem-solving method. Educa-
tors who write about critical pedagogy are usually teachers and teacher 
educators trying to enhance the classroom by focusing attention on the 
way power works in culture. By becoming more conscious of the way 
power and money interact with categories like race and class and gen-
der, critical pedagogy tries to tie the teaching and learning of skills and 
knowledge with the contexts that give them value. Th e stories of Namond 
and Michael show that critical pedagogy can illuminate the ways of 
teaching and learning wherever they take place.
Namond and Michael both succeed in arriving at an alignment 
between what they are and what their education, in all its forms, has 
allowed them to become. But even this realization has more complexity 
in the telling. Namond succeeds through escaping the oppression of the 
game and arrives at a more stable, traditional, middle class life. His intel-
lectual skills, recognized by Bunny Colvin, fi  nd their expression in 
Namond’s eloquent debate performance. Michael also succeeds, but in a 
way that is much more diffi  cult to align with traditional middle class 
values. By the end he has stripped away the trappings of friend and 
brother, but he has also transcended the role of mere soldier. He becomes 
the agent of his own power by gaming the game. He is violent and 
aggressive, but he has learned to use his own power. Exploiting the


--- PAGE 112 ---
Posing Problems and Picking Fights: Critical Pedagogy and the Corner Boys 103
exploiters is a choice that reaches the most critical possibilities of 
learning.
Audiences may fi nd themselves facing an awkward combination of 
reactions to this notion. Th e success of Namond is also the confi rmation 
of middle class values, which in some ways are the very historical and 
material source of the inequalities infl icted on the poor. Will his critical 
consciousness one day lead him to see the fl aws in the unequal distribu-
tion of power and money? Th  e success of Michael is even more 
problematic. He is the thug’s thug, so bad he comes back on the radar on 
the good side. Just as the audience has seen with the example of Omar, 
Michael’s independence is admirable, and his reputation for being his 
own agent will secure his power. He becomes the anti-hero: he may have 
a short life ending violently, but it will follow his own terms rather than 
those set by oppressive systems.
Simple answers are never a part of the experience of Th e Wire , and 
Season Four’s discussion of education certainly furthers this idea. David 
Simon suggests that the series contains “stories that, in the end, have 
a small chance of presenting a social, and even political, argument” (4). 
Simon understates the case. Studying the fi  ght between Namond and 
Michael’s wants and beliefs and the educational institutions that demand 
antithetical ideologies provides the audience with a complexity oft  en 
hard to fi nd in the overprocessed television diet, more recently over-
stuff ed with “reality” stories easy to see through. Seeing into Th e Wire is 
a fi ght worth picking.


--- PAGE 113 ---
This page intentionally left blank


--- PAGE 114 ---
II
On the Corner


--- PAGE 115 ---
This page intentionally left blank


--- PAGE 116 ---
107
7
Corner-Boy Masculinity: 
Intersections of Inner-City Manhood
James Braxton Peterson
In Blues, Ideology, and Afro-American Literature, Houston Baker  analyzes 
the intersecting matrices of lack and desire for the enigmatic blues-
man. Th ese crossroads of lack and desire, according to Baker, became a 
 foundational intersection for the formulation of African American 
identity. Fast forward to the postindustrial economic conditions of the 
twenty-fi rst-century inner city and this foundational intersection fi nds 
an extraordinary consistency with the lack of economic opportunity 
available to generations of inner-city youth who are (through various 
media) exposed to many of the most desirable outposts of capitalist 
society, and the corollary to this desire-producing exposure: an utter 
absence of the structural and civic resources necessary to transcend 
abject poverty. Th e spectacle of this society notwithstanding, various 
verbal and visual discourses generated in popular media seek to con-
struct original models of masculinity for these generational constituents. 
In this chapter I engage emerging theoretical conceptions of black mas-
culinity (à la Mark Anthony Neal and others) and juxtapose these ideas 
with several specifi  c constructions of black masculinity articulated 
and visualized and exemplifi  ed through the characters of Th e Wire . 
Of signifi cance to this discussion is a collaboration between the rapper 
Common and the Last Poets, aptly entitled, “Th e Corner, ” which bril-
liantly articulates the urban corner as a master site for the both the


--- PAGE 117 ---
108 THE WIRE : URBAN DECAY AND AMERICAN TELEVISION
production and representations of black masculinity. “Th e Corner” in 
many ways refl ects the complex intersections of black male identities 
depicted on the corners of the television version of Baltimore, Maryland. 
My focus then is on the proliferation of various complex representations 
of urban black masculinity detailed in Th e Wire .
Th e Wire  reveals a dramatically realistic Baltimore where corner boys 
formulate an inner-city ‘juvenocracy’ based on the unchecked drug 
trade.
1 Y et even within this hyperviolent world of man-children, extraor-
dinary models of black masculinity emerge. “[M]asculinity is a social 
fact produced through a set of both educational and social practices that 
function to regulate and circumscribe the lives of young men, as well as 
reinforce dominant social norms at a time of transition and uncertainty” 
(Davis 292): the models of masculinity in Th e Wire  (most notably here 
in Seasons Four and Five) intersect and/or converge on the proverbial 
corners of the inner-city experience. Preston “Bodie” Broadus is raised, 
comes of age, thrives, and dies on the corner. Omar Little makes his 
name in the street by terrorizing those same corners, even though his 
sexual identity should preclude him from the legendary street status 
he attains. Th e various types of masculinity performed in Th e Wire  pro-
vide incisive depictions of a wide range of black male being. Th e corner 
is merely the nexus through which this cornucopia of black manhood is 
expressed.
I
Th e opening epigraph for the “Corner Boys” episode of Th e Wire  cites 
Zenobia as saying: “We got our thing, but it’s just part of the big thing” 
(4.08). Corner boys are the youngest initiates or entrants into the illicit 
drug “game. ” From Avon Barksdale to Marlo Stanfi eld, drug bosses on 
Th e Wire  exploit their allure with the youngest denizens of inner-city 
neighborhoods in order to compel them to work the corners. Th e drug 
lord thereby accomplishes (at least) two objectives: fi  rst, since the 
majority of the corner boys are younger than the age of legal responsibil-
ity they function as buff ers for the bosses, automatically circumventing 
the criminal justice system; and second, by recruiting the youngest of 
the youth, the drug organization indoctrinates them into the central


--- PAGE 118 ---
Corner-Boy Masculinity: Intersections of Inner-City Manhood 109
“code of the street” . In his ethnographic research conducted in inner-city 
Philadelphia, Elijah Anderson draws the following conclusions:
It must be continually underscored that much of this violence and 
drug activity is a refl  ection of the dislocations brought about by 
economic transformations . . . [W]here the wider economy is 
not receptive to these dislocated people, the underground econ-
omy is. . . . [T]he facts of race relations, unemployment, dislocation, 
and destitution create alienation, and alienation allows for certain 
receptivity to overtures made by people seeking youthful new 
recruits for the drug trade. (Anderson, Code of the Street 120)
Th us Zenobia’s words take on powerful meanings in the context of the 
classroom scenario in which she makes this claim.
Although Zenobia is an African American girl, she is, in the context 
of this episode and from the viewpoint of her alternative educators, a 
corner boy.
2 Th is status is marked by her posture, attitude, and vocal 
outbursts in class. She, like several other junior-high school students, is 
forced into a program where they are studied and in some ways further 
alienated from their classmates and traditional classrooms. As a group 
they face extraordinary challenges that include neglect, abuse, violence, 
and their resultant psycho-social trauma. Over the course of the 
“Corner Boys” episode, the researchers, mostly led by former police 
offi  cer Howard “Bunny” Colvin, make what is termed a “breakthrough. ” 
Th ey have been trying for weeks to establish a genuine connection with 
the students in this recently isolated research project. Th eir work will 
eventually fall under the scrutiny of various political interests, but in 
this episode they are still relatively free to explore the possibilities of an 
educational experiment that removes the most troubled and trouble-
some youth from the traditional classroom—so that students in those 
classrooms can work relatively free from distraction—and uses nontradi-
tional pedagogies to harness the dysfunctional social attitudes common 
among the corner-boy students.
Th e “breakthrough” occurs in this episode when Colvin intercedes 
during one of the other researchers’ exercises. Colvin has become some-
what fl ustered with their eff orts to have a genuine interaction with the


--- PAGE 119 ---
110 THE WIRE : URBAN DECAY AND AMERICAN TELEVISION
corner-boy students and it dawns on him suddenly that even in this 
nontraditional, less school-like setting, the corner-boy students are 
consistently trying to get over on their teachers and the researchers. 
Colvin then confronts the class on this fact. He unveils their in-school 
hustle as a mere training ground for the streets—where they are the cor-
ner boys and the teachers, administrators, and researchers are the police. 
Here Zenobia (through body language, visage, and subtle commentary) 
underscores the fact that this is true in less metaphorical ways since 
Colvin actually has been a police offi  cer. Ultimately Colvin gives them 
various opportunities to refl ect on, discuss, and write about their lives as 
corner boys. He even invites them to develop a code for corner-boy life, 
lists of rules, the do’s and don’ts of corner-boy livelihood.
Th ese scenes are powerful moments for educators who watch Th e 
Wire and know the challenges, possibilities, and failures of inner-city 
classrooms overrun by children of the drug trade. As James E. Davis 
notes,
[t]he interaction of school context and masculine identities and 
socialization is important to consider . . . Th  ese performances 
of masculinity are not necessarily linked to troublemaking but 
to how teachers and other adults interpret these performances. 
(Davis 298)
Davis’s insight sheds light on the interaction that ensues in the 
corner-boy classroom aft er Colvin radically reinterprets the educational 
proceedings. Once the corner-boy students accept the interpretation of 
their classroom as a training ground for their involvement in the illegal 
drug trade—as well as their own limited life experiences and truncated 
opportunities on the mean streets of Baltimore—they become willing 
participants in the educational process. Th  e idea that masculinity is 
directly linked to economic prowess (and possibility) is especially 
relevant and particularly compelling to dispossessed African American 
youth (Davis 296). Th erefore the corner-boy students almost instantly 
become excited and engaged in their classroom. Th  ey participate in 
discussions, work together in groups to construct the code of streets 
from the corner-boy perspective, and even talk about their learning with 
peers outside of the classroom.


--- PAGE 120 ---
Corner-Boy Masculinity: Intersections of Inner-City Manhood 111
Zenobia’s claim, “We got our thing, but it’s just a part of the big thing, ” 
is delivered in the midst of one of these engaging dialogues. Essentially, 
she situates the drug trade within the context of the dislocating power of 
the global economy. From the corner-boy perspective, at the crossroads 
of lack and desire, selling drugs is no diff erent from selling cigarettes or 
alcohol except that some trades are arbitrarily deemed legal and others 
are not. Th is suggestion and these scenes unveil an abiding intersection-
ality with respect to how black masculinity is conceptualized and 
operationalized on Th e Wire . Th at girls can be corner boys is important 
to recognize here, but the youths’ acknowledgment of the relationship 
between aspirational masculinity, global capital, arbitrary illegality, and 
the possibility of public education as a means to overcome socioeco-
nomic and violent challenges are also powerful intersecting messages in 
these scenes.
Alycee J. Lane states that “[i]ntersectionality calls into question the 
construction of monolithic identities and forces one to consider how 
one is positioned by the intersecting and multiple hegemonies that 
structure American culture” (325). If black masculinity was or is in any 
way monolithic, the corner-as-metaphor in Th e Wire  represents 
numerous attempts to deconstruct the monolithic notion of black 
manhood. Since the corner is literally an urban intersection it is a
fi tting metaphor for the deconstructive work necessary to unpack, dis-
mantle, and reformulate notions of black masculinity in the twenty-fi rst 
century. Some of the socioeconomic forces that rigidly construct black 
masculinity are the material lack and ad-induced desire that collude 
to produce the collective willingness to engage in the underground 
economy. Poor public education, crumbling postindustrial residential 
neighborhoods, and the inherently violent communities that result from 
these structural challenges all work to obscure the full range of black 
masculine possibilities. It follows that the literature, fi  lm, and music 
that represent black masculine behavior tend toward these monolithic 
depictions. Th e Wire  departs from this monolithic morass and dwells 
comfortably within the spaces of intersectionality that the real-life geog-
raphy of an urban corner subtly refl ects.
Th e quintessential corner boy of the series is Bodie Broadus. Bodie 
works corners for the Barksdale cartel as well as Marlo Stanfi  eld’s car-
tel. He even attempts a brief stint on his own as the power struggle


--- PAGE 121 ---
112 THE WIRE : URBAN DECAY AND AMERICAN TELEVISION
within the drug trade shift s from Barksdale to Stanfi  eld, but for most 
of Th e Wire  he is the most hard-working, loyal, and dedicated hustler 
on the corner. Technically speaking, he has younger corner boys 
and/or hoppers working for him, but the preponderance of Bodie’s 
scenes in Th e Wire are set on a corner or at some urban intersection 
where he hustles drugs. Bodie’s determination and loyalty allow him 
to thrive within the Barksdale drug organization, but aft  er the cartel 
crumbles, he is quickly absorbed by Marlo’s organization. Bodie’s work 
ethic is indefatigable over several seasons. He is a worker bee and thus 
he debunks stereotypes about black male laziness. Moreover, Bodie 
challenges the Horatio Alger narrative of drug dealing and hustling. 
His hard work, loyalty, and heart do not allow him to achieve the eco-
nomic spoils of his bosses. In fact, Bodie seems to live a fairly meager, 
working class existence. He usually eats in bodegas or cheap corner 
store shops. He never wears expensive clothes or jewelry and he never 
really fl ashes or fl  osses his cash. Bodie lives at the intersection of 
working class and hustler black masculinities and is not permitted to 
live through to the conclusion of Th e Wire . In one of his last extended 
dialogues of the series, he analyzes his years in “the game” with police 
offi  cer Jimmy McNulty and concludes that the “game is rigged” (4.11); 
he is and has been just a pawn. McNulty is ultimately able to convince 
Bodie to consider providing some information to police. Th  rough a 
series of somewhat random events, Marlo is made aware of the possi-
bility that Bodie will become an informant. He is murdered by Marlo’s 
assassins, Chris and Snoop. He may well have had a chance to escape, 
but he refuses to leave “his” corner. Bodie’s murder is a poignant 
moment: although he is murdered like so many other victims in Th e 
Wire, he is in fact an emblematic fi  gure of a murdered generation of 
corner boys.
More than any other character on Th e Wire , Bodie refl  ects the 
cacophony of voices in one of the rapper Common’s most popular 
singles, “Th e Corner. ” (2005/ BE) “Th e Corner” features contributions 
by Kanye West and Th e Last Poets. Lyrically, “Th  e Corner” has three 
vocal and conceptual perspectives—three trajectories representing the 
concept of the urban corner intersect through the vocal performances 
of the artists. Common rhymes verses that suggest the hopelessness of


--- PAGE 122 ---
Corner-Boy Masculinity: Intersections of Inner-City Manhood 113
urban environments centered on the street life that corners have come 
to represent:
Corners leave souls opened and closed, hoping for more
With nowhere to go, rolling in droves
Th ey shoot the wrong way, ’ cause they ain’t knowing they goal
Th e streets ain’t safe cause they ain’t knowing the code
In addition to constructing the mosaic and internal rhyme schemes of 
these lines, Common is also one of the most skillful practitioners of 
enjambment, a technique in which rappers/MCs break poetic lines in 
the midst of a sentence.
3
Got cousins with fl ows hope they open some doors
So we can cop clothes & roll in a Rolls
Now I roll in a “Olds” with windows that don’t roll
Down the roads where cars get broke in & stole
Th ese are the stories told by Stony & Cottage Grove
Th e world is cold the block is hot as a stove
On the corners
Th e total poetic eff ect of Common’s repeated use of enjambment through-
out his verses is to sound as if he is rhyming around corners. Th us the 
form of Common’s delivery refl ects the culturally intersecting space of 
the song’s subject while the content of the lyrics reveals the working 
class aesthetics inherent in Bodie’s characterization as the quintessential 
corner boy on Th e Wire .
Kanye West and Th e Last Poets represent two distinct but likewise 
intersecting examples of “Th e Corner. ” West’s hook can be interpreted as 
a both a subtle critique and tacit glorifi  cation of the violent ways and 
means of the underground economy.
I wish I could give ya this feeling
I wish I could give ya this feeling
On the corners, robbing, killing, dying
Just to make a living (huh)


--- PAGE 123 ---
114 THE WIRE : URBAN DECAY AND AMERICAN TELEVISION
Th e rapper wishes that he could somehow give his listeners the feeling 
of the corner. In fact by wishing it he likely does provide his listeners 
(many of whom do not live in inner-city neighborhoods) with some 
sense of the allure that the drug trade produces at the crossroads of lack 
and desire. West’s voice and conceptual thread are limited to the hook or 
refrain of the song but his lyrics clearly intersect and confront the gen-
eral thematics of Common’s more somber, less glorifi ed verses.
Th e Last Poets proff  er a distinct yet intersecting trajectory into this 
song. Th ey are relegated to the ad-lib portion of the song, but their 
presence is remarkable for at least two reasons: fi  rst, the Last Poets 
are the artistic progenitors of all rappers/MCs, but they are rarely 
recognized as such. Second, their verses produce a completely new 
conceptualization of the corner as a nostalgic historical monument of 
inner-city existence:
Th e corner was our Rock of Gibraltar, our Stonehenge
Our Taj Mahal, our monument,
Our testimonial to freedom, to peace and to love
Down on the corner.
By positioning the corner as a monument, Th e Last Poets have further 
fl eshed out an intersecting discourse on the ultimate point of urban 
existence. Th e ‘corner’ depicted in Common’s lyrics, Kanye West’s 
refrain, and Th e Last Poets’ ad-libs is the foundational component of 
Bodie’s demographic identity. He says as much in his last extended dia-
logue on the series. He represents the underground economy’s working 
class aesthetics depicted by Common’s verses; Bodie lives and dies on 
the corners gently glorifi ed in West’s refrain; and he spends much of his 
life paying homage to a historicized version of those corners that at the 
point of his murder no longer exists.
II
Corner-boy masculinity exists and conceptually thrives at the intersec-
tions represented by several pairings or groupings of characters in 
Th e Wire . Like the ways in which Bodie’s narrative can be compared to 
Common’s lyrics or Zenobia’s complex encapsulation of the cog-like


--- PAGE 124 ---
Corner-Boy Masculinity: Intersections of Inner-City Manhood 115
existence of the corner boy, corner-boy masculinity is enmeshed in the 
public sphere through lived experiences, artistic production, and vari-
ous social theories. In New Black Man, Mark Anthony Neal traces some 
of these intersecting theories and experiences and suggests that a “New-
BlackMan” [sic] exists “for those willing to embrace the fuzzy edges of 
black masculinity that in reality is still under construction” (Neal 29). 
According to Neal, our uncritical allegiance to the “Strong Black Man, ” 
forged in the crucible of racial hatred and historical oppression, obscures 
the multifaceted range of black masculine expression in reality, in the 
media, and in artistic production. My argument here is that Th e Wire 
(almost by default) challenges the rigid conceptualizations of the “Strong 
Black Man” and off ers the broader range refl ected by Neal’s sense of the 
“NewBlackMan”:
NewBlackMan is about resisting being inscribed by a wide range 
of forces and fi nding a comfort with a complex and progressive 
existence as a black man in America. As such NewBlackMan is not 
so much about conceiving of a more positive version of black 
masculinity . . . but rather a concept that acknowledges the many 
complex aspects, oft en contradictory, that make up a progressive 
and meaningful black masculinity. (29)
Corner-boy masculinity is only one of many intersecting and socially 
intertextual models for understanding how black masculinity is fl eshed 
out through the various characters depicted in Th e Wire . Complex 
aspects of black masculinity are studiously rendered throughout the 
series. Both police offi  cers and drug dealers can be cruel and unforgiving. 
Th ey can also be altruistic and compassionate. Characters like Sergeant 
Ellis Carver, Stringer Bell, and Bodie all fl uctuate between these binary 
oppositions. Th eir development as characters through various story 
arcs are an important aspect of the realism of Th e Wire . Corner-boy 
masculinity then fi ts into the series’ fl eshed out paradigm for depictions 
of black male identity that are consistent with Neal’s NewBlackMan 
model.
Over the course of Season Four, Namond Brice becomes a corner boy 
under Bodie. Namond’s parents overdetermine his identity, and through 
his character audiences bear honest witness to the struggles that young


--- PAGE 125 ---
116 THE WIRE : URBAN DECAY AND AMERICAN TELEVISION
men face every day with the brutality of urban inner-city life, with 
nothing less than their manhood hanging in the balance. Namond’s 
father Wee-Bey Brice is an enforcer for the Barksdale drug cartel who 
will spend the rest of his life in jail for his crimes (and for not ratting out 
the Barksdales). Namond is thus confronted with the credible reputa-
tion of his father, but also the awesome weight of his violent legacy. 
Th ese challenges are only exacerbated by his mother, De’Londa, who, 
aft er enjoying the spoils of Wee-Bey’s affi   liation with the Barksdales, 
fully expects her son to carry on in his father’s footsteps. De’Londa is an 
easy-to-demonize maternal fi gure that seems to have stepped right out 
of the 1965 Moynihan Report. As S. Craig Watkins summarizes,
Th e report concluded that the structure of family life in the black 
community constituted a “tangle of pathology . . . capable of per-
petuating itself without assistance from the white world” . . . 
Further, the report argued that the matriarchal structure of black 
culture weakened the ability of black men to function as authority 
fi gures. Th is particular notion of black familial life has become a 
widespread, if not dominant, paradigm for comprehending the 
social and economic disintegration of late twentieth-century black 
urban life. (Watkins 218–219)
De’Londa is certainly a powerful and at times physically imposing 
matriarch. At one point she “bitch-slaps” Namond when he makes yet 
another attempt to express his unwillingness to be the man that she 
wants him to be (4.13). Namond’s mother does all that she can to instill 
him with a materialistic set of values—in fact amongst the four young 
men on whom Season Four centers (Namond, Duquan, Michael, and 
Randy), Namond is always the best dressed. He also lives in the most 
economically sound household, a middle-class by-product of his father’s 
work with the Barksdales. Even though he appears to be the most eco-
nomically comfortable, his mother eventually coerces him to sell drugs 
with Bodie. Th us the Moynihanian notion of pathology in the black 
family is not a default by-product of fatherlessness. For the Brice family, 
Namond’s pathological behavior is the desired result. Explicitly because 
of his absence due to incarceration, Namond’s father is actually a domi-
nant presence in Namond’s life. His mother, De’Londa consistently


--- PAGE 126 ---
Corner-Boy Masculinity: Intersections of Inner-City Manhood 117
compares Namond to Wee-Bey, and Namond always comes up lacking. 
De’Londa’s materialism drives her to push Namond toward the under-
ground economy of the drug trade and, at least initially, Wee-Bey’s 
limited sense of the world beyond his prison cell and the streets of 
Baltimore make him likewise complicit in the parental push to turn 
Namond into a criminal.
De’Londa’s infl uence on Namond utterly shapes his sense of himself 
as a man. Although he is ultimately saved from her by his father’s 
decision to relinquish custody to Bunny Colvin, De’Londa represents 
the signal role that mothers play in the construction of black masculin-
ity (4.13). By focusing so eff  ortlessly on the deleterious eff  ects of her 
materialism and general affi  nity for the trappings of the drug trade, Th e 
Wire puts into bold relief the awesome potential of the single parent 
household to mold and negatively impact the young black male. Th rough 
Namond, the audience of Th e Wire  experiences the emotional trauma of 
becoming a black man in a nihilistic material environment. We are oft en 
invited to critique his emotional responses in certain brutal scenes 
(notably his confrontations with Kenard, Michael, and his mother; 4.12), 
but ultimately viewers pity Namond and appreciate the fact that at least 
he (of the four corner boys in Season Four) will have an opportunity to 
live. Th e series does not simply proff er a middle-class existence over an 
impoverished one as a panacea for all that ails the corner boys. In fact 
Namond’s life with his mother is not much diff erent from his new life 
with Colvin, especially in terms of class. If anything Namond would 
have more access to the material trappings of middle-class status with 
his mother. Instead the series suggests that a stable household with 
attentive, caring, and compassionate parents makes the signal diff erence 
in Namond’s life. Th e potential opportunities of this new life with Colvin 
and his wife are powerfully refl ected in the closing scenes of Season Four 
(4.13). Namond fi nishes his homework on the porch as he is eating his 
breakfast. One of his homies from his corner-boy days drives by in a 
stolen vehicle. Both boys appear visibly older than at the outset of the 
season. As the boy in the stolen car speeds through the intersection he 
nearly causes an accident. Namond stares thoughtfully at the intersec-
tion and the corners. Th  e camera view lingers on the intersection, 
emphasizing the diff erence in this neighborhood. Namond notices this 
diff erence as well: there are no corner boys on these corners.


--- PAGE 127 ---
118 THE WIRE : URBAN DECAY AND AMERICAN TELEVISION
On the opposite end of Namond’s emotional character is Michael 
Lee’s stoic, brooding demeanor and budding violent nature. Unlike 
Namond, Michael does not have any parents to push him into being a 
corner boy. Even though his mother is an addict who regularly sells their 
groceries and otherwise makes life impossible for Michael and his little 
brother Bug, Michael distinguishes himself from his peers by not taking 
ostensibly free money from Marlo at the beginning of the school year 
(4.01). Marlo takes an instant interest in Michael and soon Chris Partlow, 
Marlo’s lieutenant and all around enforcer, begins to court Michael. For 
the most part Michael refuses these advances. He does not have any 
natural, contrived, or coerced affi   nity for the underworld. However, 
Chris makes it clear to him that if ever he needs Marlo’s help, it is avail-
able. Of the four boys in Season Four, Michael most represents the 
traditional “Strong Black Man. ” He is the natural leader of the four: he is 
fathering his younger brother; he protects Dukie, Randy, and Namond 
at diff erent points throughout the season; and he at least attempts to be 
his own man by resisting the off ers from Marlo and his crew.
4
Eventually Michael does need the help of Chris and Snoop, two of the 
most ruthless murderers in television history. When Bug’s father returns 
home from prison, Michael is agitated and upset. He blames his mother 
for the man’s return and aft er only one interaction, it is clear that Michael 
has been sexually abused by him (4.09). Michael walks with Chris and 
Snoop in order to identify Bug’s father for the hit (4.10). Th ey mark him 
coming up to a corner to buy drugs for Michael’s mother. Snoop asks 
him, “What the fuck did he do to you?” to which Michael off ers no reply. 
However Chris gives him a knowing look. When Chris and Snoop 
return to that same corner to escort Bug’s father to his death, Chris asks 
him questions about sexual assault along the way. Th  roughout the 
season Chris and Snoop have murdered multiple people with guns, 
usually a gunshot to the head. But Chris brutally beats Bug’s father to 
death. He punches and kicks him repeatedly and then spits on him to 
punctuate his hate for this man he does not know. Snoop can only look 
on in surprise, but a plausible interpretation of this brutal slaying is that 
Chris identifi es with Michael based on a common past as victims of 
sexual assault and rape. Th at two men bond over being rape survivors is 
a singular achievement in this series—one of many. Y et this bond is for-
mulated over the series’s most brutal murder and it will require Michael’s


--- PAGE 128 ---
Corner-Boy Masculinity: Intersections of Inner-City Manhood 119
wholesale (if temporary) capitulation to the Stanfi  eld organization. 
He is, aft er the brutal beat down of Bug’s father, all in. Michael’s circum-
stantial decision to join the Stanfi eld crew allows him to graduate quickly 
from corner boy to captain of his own corner. Among the four youths 
central to Season Four, Michael distinguishes himself, so it is not sur-
prising that he ascends in the underground economy of the illegal drug 
trade. However, the conclusion of the series suggests that Michael 
becomes a fi gure similar to Omar Little in that he is depicted as robbing 
one of the drug dealing hubs (5.13). Th us Michael’s character intersects 
with Omar’s character albeit aft er Omar is murdered by Kenard (5.11). 
Th is intersection is a poignant and powerful point in the show’s imagin-
ing of corner-boy masculinity. Michael’s brutal beating of Kenard is just 
one step in the nihilistic socialization of Kenard that largely takes place 
off  camera and in the background of the series’ narrative. Kenard con-
tinues to work for Michael as a corner boy throughout Season Five and 
his striking nihilistic persona is all the more present in the series as a 
result of his age. His age is never clearly revealed but he appears to be 
about 9 or 10. Th at he ends up killing Omar Little is one of the more 
striking turns of events on Th e Wire , but the action is particularly 
signifi cant in that it paves the way for Michael to inherit Omar’s legacy. 
Th us the corner-boy masculinity model in this case incorporates an 
intersection of three characters whose violent ways and specifi  c roles 
within the world of Th e Wire  are all the more pronounced through their 
complex interrelated story arcs.
One fi nal example to consider here by way of conclusion is the 
extraordinary character, Omar Little. Technically speaking Omar is not 
a corner boy: that is, he does not sell drugs and he is older than any of 
the corner boys described so far. He is much closer in age to the drug 
bosses, detectives, and politicos that populate the world of Th e Wire . 
However, Omar is one of the most feared fi  gures in this world. Aft  er 
playing a pivotal role in crippling the Barksdale organization by assas-
sinating Stringer Bell (3.12) he spends much of Seasons Four and Five 
robbing the drug “co-op” and hunting members of Marlo’s organization 
whom he holds responsible for the torture and murder of his friend and 
mentor, Butchie (5.03). Omar is an urban Robin Hood whose sartorial 
presentation refl ects the aesthetics of the wild west. Th e duster, vest, and 
shotguns notwithstanding, however, Omar is also gay. Th is fact remains


--- PAGE 129 ---
120 THE WIRE : URBAN DECAY AND AMERICAN TELEVISION
somewhat unremarkable throughout his reign on Th e Wire , but the cre-
ators allow him to express his love for Brandon (Season Th ree) and for 
Reynaldo (Seasons Four and Five). Omar is not the fi rst gay character or 
black gay character to appear on fi lm or television. He is, however, the 
fi rst black gay character to so readily and regularly empower himself 
through the phallic symbolism of the gun.
Omar’s homosexuality only becomes remarkable as it intersects with 
his character’s persona as a violent vigilante. His character is then a reposi-
tory of what Mark Anthony Neal refers to as “black meta-identities, ” 
various and varied identities that exist beneath the surface of the American 
public sphere (Neal 28). Th rough Omar’s various identities—vigilante, 
gay man, feared and respected underworld fi gure—the corner-boy mas-
culinity model also becomes visible. When Omar emerges from his 
hideouts during the day, corner boys spot him from a distance and warn 
all of the dealers and people in the vicinity that “Omar is coming! Omar 
is coming!” (4.04). In a silk pink bathrobe and bearing an enormous 
silver-plated pistol Omar walks and stalks the corners, embodying the 
intersectional nature of corner-boy masculinity, his reputation for 
violence somehow utterly obscuring homophobic perspectives of black 
manhood. Th is kind of confrontation with traditional notions of black 
masculinity centers on the contestation between Omar’s sexuality and 
his fearless wielding of the most pronounced phallic symbol in American 
society—the gun. Th is character is an anomaly amidst the depictions of 
the black manhood in television history. Note well though that Omar’s 
positionality in Th e Wire  is a function of a wide range of black mascu-
linities portrayed through a diverse group of African American actors.
Y et the corner-boy masculinity model distinguishes itself from Neal’s 
studious portrait of the NewBlackMan as well as other scholarship 
dedicated toward fl uid conceptualizations of black masculinity. Corner-
boy masculinity lends itself to the narratological intersections of 
characters complexly situated within the labyrinthine world of inner-
city Baltimore. Here, the setting, with its near claustrophobic enclaves, 
narrow streets, and countless intersections, suggests itself as an environ-
mental model of the ideological expression of one of the most complex 
identities in the world. Th e wide-ranging and intersectional nature of 
black masculinity as it is depicted and portrayed on Th e Wire  directly


--- PAGE 130 ---
Corner-Boy Masculinity: Intersections of Inner-City Manhood 121
engages organic and or authentic notions of identity in our own realities. 
Although Omar Little likely does not walk among us, the pathways of 
black masculinity expressed through his character intersect with our 
own sense of ourselves as African American men.
Notes
1. Michael Eric Dyson coins the term “juvenocracy” in Race Rules. It refers to urban 
communities that are dominated by youth who are emboldened and empowered by 
their status in various nefarious underground economies.
2. At various points in the season the corner-boy students are referred to as “corner 
kids, ” especially notable when Bunny Colvin theorizes that corner kids distinguish 
themselves from stoop kids based upon their domestic situation and how that situation 
(drug-addicted parents, neglect and the like) translates for them in the school system. 
More oft en than not, though, this group of students is referred to as corner boys.
3. Technically speaking, enjambment is the continuation of a syntactic unit from 
one line or couplet of a poem to the next without pause. Th is is an intriguing and per-
haps perplexing technique to discern within rap music since we rarely see or know how 
an artist actually writes and organizes his/her lines.
4. He protects Dukie from Namond throughout the season; he fi  ghts on behalf of 
Randy when their schoolmates believe that Randy is a snitch (4.11); and he beats Kenard 
when Kenard tries to hustle Namond out of some drugs (4.12).


--- PAGE 131 ---
122
8
Stringer Bell’s Lament: 
Violence and Legitimacy in 
Contemporary Capitalism
Jason Read
In Th e Wire , the illegal drug trade acts as a sustained allegory for 
capitalism. It is at once the outside of the world of legitimate business, 
governed by diff erent rules and principles of loyalty, and the dark mirror 
of business, revealing the eff ects of a relentless pursuit of profi t on the 
community and lives of those caught in its grip. Nowhere is this 
tension between “the game” (the drug trade) and the larger world of 
capitalism illustrated with greater clarity than in the life and death of 
Russell “Stringer” Bell. Stringer is oft en presented as the character most 
enamored of the legitimate world of business, taking economics classes 
at community college and applying the lessons to the world of the drug 
trade. Stringer is also presented as the character who desires not only 
wealth, but the legitimacy of the world of legal business. His story off ers 
a brutal retelling of the classic “rags to riches” story in which murder, 
addiction, and betrayal are as fundamental as hard work and business 
acumen. His story ends tragically as well: while Stringer is able to accu-
mulate money, he is unable to acquire security and legitimacy, and he 
remains caught between the semi-feudal loyalties of the drug trade and 
the ruthless world of capital, until the contradictions between the two 
eventually kill him.


--- PAGE 132 ---
Stringer Bell’s Lament: Violence and Legitimacy in Contemporary Capitalism 123
What Stringer’s story reveals is not only the unstable nature of the 
border that separates the drug trade from the world of legitimate busi-
ness, but the way in which the relationship between the two is sustained 
as much by narratives and fi ctions as by their actual material relations. 
Th e connection between material relations and the narratives and  fi ctions 
that sustain them is at the center of Karl Marx’s critique of capitalism, 
most famously in his concept of ideology, which reveals the way in which 
particular social relations of production are sustained by particular ideas, 
narratives and fi ctions. More specifi cally, and more relevant to the matter 
of the drug trade, is Marx’s critique of primitive accumulation.
So-called primitive accumulation is the narrative that classical political 
economy off ers to account for the historical origins of capitalism. In 
order for capitalism to exist, there must be an original diff erence between 
capitalists and workers, between those who have money to invest and 
those who have only their labor power to sell. Within capitalism this 
situation is always presupposed. Political economy solves this problem 
by transforming this diff erence of class into a moral diff erence, and the 
economic distinction of workers and capitalists is transposed into a dif-
ference between the wasteful and frugal. As Marx writes,
Th is primitive accumulation plays approximately the same role 
in political economy as original sin does in theology. Adam bit 
the apple, and thereupon sin fell on the human race. Its origin is 
supposed to be explained when it is told as an anecdote about the 
past. Long, long ago there were two sorts of people; one the diligent, 
intelligent, and above all frugal elite; the other lazy rascals, spend-
ing their substance, and more, in riotous living. (Capital 873)
Marx’s irony indicates that such a moral diff  erence is insuffi  cient to 
account for the historical emergence of capitalism. It is not enough to 
save money, because the saving of money will not produce the other 
necessary condition, the existence of workers. Th  e morality of thrift   
does not produce the dispossessed that can be put to work. In order for 
this to happen, there must be a corresponding dispossession of peasants 
from the land, a destruction of the old feudal system. Th is destruction 
takes place through a complex list of factors that includes the laws that 
convert the commons to private property, the accumulation of wealth


--- PAGE 133 ---
124 THE WIRE : URBAN DECAY AND AMERICAN TELEVISION
made possible by colonialism and slavery, and practices of debt and 
usury, previously outlawed due to religious restrictions.
Marx’s point here is twofold. First, he replaces a moralizing fairy tale 
with a historical genealogy that stresses a multiplicity of conditions: capi-
talism is the product of a series of historical transformations, reshaping 
Europe and the world, and not the simple eff ect of a moral diff erence. 
Capital is not the cause of this process, but the eff  ect: “Th e knights of 
industry, however, only succeeded in supplanting the knights of the 
sword by making use of events in which they had played no part in what-
soever” (Capital 875). Second, whereas the fi  rst narrative stressed the 
importance of morality, painting the worker as lazy and the capitalist as 
thrift y, Marx’s counter-history underscores the importance of violence 
and force. In order for capitalism to exist, peasants had to be violently 
expropriated from the land. Workers are not born, they are made: “Force 
is the midwife of every old society which is pregnant with a new one” 
(Capital 915). On fi rst glance it would appear that Marx is simply invert-
ing the terms of the narrative of so-called primitive accumulation: where 
the fi rst saw the clear victory of moral intention, Marx sees the hazy 
eff ects of unintended consequences tainted with violence. However, 
Marx does not simply oppose one narrative to the other, juxtaposing the 
image of the capitalist with blood on his hands with that of the moral 
hero of thrift , because the story of primitive accumulation, the idea that 
we could all become rich with a little more thrift  or the right investment 
advice, is a functioning element of contemporary capitalism. It is not 
enough simply to displace the false, ideological account of the formation 
of capitalism with the true account, because the false account continues 
to linger on in the fantasy life of most people in capitalist society. Unlike 
previous modes of production (such as feudalism, in which people were 
born into specifi c paths for life), capitalism undoes previous conditions 
of social hierarchy, replacing the motley ties of birth and title, with money, 
which is available to everyone. Capitalism does not spread the wealth, 
just the idea that we could all become wealthy.
Marx’s critical engagement with primitive accumulation provides the 
schema from which much of the central allegorical dynamic of Th e Wire  
can be unpacked. It outlines the constitutive elements of myth, violence, and 
unintended consequences that make up day-to-day life in capitalism.


--- PAGE 134 ---
Stringer Bell’s Lament: Violence and Legitimacy in Contemporary Capitalism 125
Right and Money
Th e connection between the drug trade and a certain ideal of capitalism 
is fi rmly established early in the series. In interrogating D’ Angelo 
Barksdale, Detective Jimmy McNulty, in an attempt to play off   of 
Barksdale’s guilt over the murder of a “citizen” (i.e. someone not in the 
drug trade), clearly states the line of demarcation that separates the drug 
trade from legitimate business. As McNulty argues, “Everything else in 
this country gets sold without people shooting each other behind it” 
(1.02). Later D’ Angelo repeats McNulty’s description to his underlings 
in “the Pit, ” modifying it slightly: “Shit, everything else in this world gets 
sold without people taking advantage. Scamming, lying, doing each 
other dirty. Why does it got to be that way with this?” (1.03). Th e world of 
legitimate business stands apart from the drug world precisely because 
of its moral basis. For D’ Angelo, guilt-ridden and torn over the human 
cost of the drug business, this moral diff  erence constitutes an ideal. 
D’ Angelo initially seems to believe in the ideals and narratives of the 
world of business, taking its maxims and slogans, “the customer is always 
right, ” as moral maxims rather than just advertising type (1.03). D’ Angelo 
believes that the world of business is a moral world, in that one can sur-
vive while doing right, and that moral behavior is rewarded. As with the 
narrative of so-called primitive accumulation, the distinction between 
the rich and the poor is a moral distinction, between good and bad.
Th e break between the world of business and the world of drugs is 
never clean; however, they are both constituted by the same fundamental 
economy and the same drive for profi  t. Th ey are unifi  ed by the fact 
that in each economy it is money, and not morals or any other measure, 
that stands as the highest value. Despite his idealization of the business 
world, D’ Angelo recognizes this with darkly humorous clarity. Th is is 
refl ected when D’ Angelo corrects Poot Carr and Wallace about the 
workings of the world of business in a discussion about the inventor of 
the Chicken McNugget. Against Wallace’s and Poot’s naïve claim that 
the “genius” inventor of the McNugget “got paid” for the idea of serving 
chicken in nugget form, D’ Angelo argues that the corporate hierarchy 
dictates that the man who invented the McNugget would still be working 
in the basement of McDonald’s, “fi guring out a way to make the shakes


--- PAGE 135 ---
126 THE WIRE : URBAN DECAY AND AMERICAN TELEVISION
taste better” (1.02). Against the ideal of equal and just compensation, 
D’ Angelo asserts the harsh reality of the rule of money: “Fuck right. 
It ain’t about right, it’s about money. ” As much as D’ Angelo eventually 
wants to escape the game, he recognizes that the same hierarchy and 
harsh pursuit of profi t exists in the legitimate world as well. Th e world of 
business and the drug trade are thus two diff erent manifestations of the 
same chessboard, of the same structure, in which the pawns remain 
pawns, slaving away, and the king stays the king. Th ey may be separated 
by means, legal and illegal, but are ultimately unifi  ed by ends, by the 
pursuit of profi t.
In Th e Wire , money is presented as what Marx terms the “abstract 
equivalent, ” not only because it can be exchanged for any commodity, 
but because it eff aces its condition of origin. Once money is made, once 
the drugs have been sold, the money is as good as the money from any 
other enterprise, legal or illegal. By defi  nition money overspills its 
specifi c condition of origin. As Lester Freamon sums up the show’s nar-
rative itinerary, which extends from the streets to the corridors of power, 
“Y ou follow drugs, you get drug addicts and drug dealers. But you start 
to follow the money, and you don’t know where the fuck it’s gonna take 
you” (1.09). As money ties together the various businesses and human 
endeavors (traveling in garbage bags of stacked and counted bills from the 
hands of junkies to politicians such as Clay Davis), it carries with it the 
ability to transgress borders as well. Th ough money crosses borders, it 
does not always take its earners or holders with it: when D’ Angelo takes 
his girlfriend Donette out to dinner at one of Baltimore’s upscale restau-
rants in the inner harbor, he wonders if its high-class clientele knows 
“what he is about”; Donette is quick to remind him that the distinctions 
between legal and illegal fall apart in the face of money’s indiff erence to 
its conditions, saying, “Y ou got money, you get to be whoever you say 
you are” (1.05). Donette’s remark echoes one of Marx’s fundamental 
points regarding money: money is not just a means of payment, it is a 
means of transformation. Money transforms the desire to have some-
thing into the possession of that thing; money actualizes desire, including 
the desire to be someone.
In the tension between D’ Angelo’s desire to escape the world of drugs, 
gaining legitimacy through an enterprise governed by moral rules, and 
the recognition that, in our society money is legitimacy, we see the


--- PAGE 136 ---
Stringer Bell’s Lament: Violence and Legitimacy in Contemporary Capitalism 127
 contours of Marx’s critique of the fundamental division of capitalist 
society: a division between its values, which are opposed to drugs and 
murder, and its measure of value, which is primarily if not exclusively 
economic, recognizing only money. For Marx, capitalist society is 
schizophrenic, divided between two standards:
Th e ethics of political economy is acquisition, work, thrift , sobriety—
but political economy promises to satisfy my needs.—Th e political 
economy of ethics is the opulence of a good conscience, of virtue, 
etc.; but how can I live virtuously if I do not live? . . . It stems from 
the very nature of estrangement that each sphere applies to me 
a diff erent and opposite yardstick—ethics one and political econ-
omy another; for each is a specifi  c estrangement of man and 
focuses attention on a particular fi eld of estranged essential activ-
ity, and each stands in an estranged relation to the other. ( 1844 
Manuscript 151)
Th is is the split that plagues D’ Angelo. He has all that society values—a 
closet full of fi ne clothes, an SUV , and meals at fi ne restaurants—but it 
comes at the cost of a good conscience. D’ Angelo recognizes that he 
can only make money by devaluing human life, by selling his own con-
science. Against this split existence, which poses a division between the 
value of money and the values of morals, D’ Angelo dreams of a unifi ed 
existence. For D’ Angelo the world of drug traffi  cking is not some sort 
of refusal of the norms and ideals of society, crime as some kind of 
rebellion, but it is an attempt to possess the very dream that has been 
denied to him. Th is is why when D’ Angelo is arrested, and off  ered an 
opportunity to be a witness against his uncle and the Barksdale organi-
zation, he sees this as a chance to escape not only jail time, but his life. 
His fantasy is that the police will make it possible for him to live like 
“regular folks” (1.13).
The Soldier and the CEO
Th e ambiguous relationship between the drug trade and the world of cap-
italism reaches its point of maximum tension and outright contradiction


--- PAGE 137 ---
128 THE WIRE : URBAN DECAY AND AMERICAN TELEVISION
in the relationship between Avon Barksdale and Stringer. In the 
beginning Stringer is simply Avon’s second in command, the queen to 
his king, to use the chess metaphor from the opening of Season One. 
As such he is more directly tied to the day-to-day and brutal aspects of 
the drug trade. Stringer orders the initial hit on Omar’s crew (1.05), 
and the murder of Wallace. Th  ese killings are presented as purely 
rational, governed by a strict logic of cost and benefi  t. By Stringer’s 
estimation, letting Omar’s crew get away with the robbery of the 
Barksdale stash would expose them to future robberies; similarly, 
Wallace has proven himself too weak, a likely candidate to become an 
informant. At the same time that Stringer orders these murders, reveal-
ing his ability to utilize violence, he also dissuades Avon from engaging 
in an out-and-out war with Omar. In Stringer’s mind, a war is too 
expensive, risking not only loss of life but the increased police scrutiny 
that comes with bodies. Th e logic underlying Stringer’s initial acts of 
brutality is governed by a rational assessment of risks versus benefi  ts. 
It is this ability to calculate costs against potential profi  ts that eventu-
ally pits Stringer against Avon.
From the beginning, Avon is presented as a “soldier, ” as someone 
whose control of the drug trade is less about turning a profi  t than it is 
about controlling territory and respect. For Avon, confl ict and violence 
are not subject to calculations that measure cost against benefi ts, but to 
a tradition that establishes the rules and conditions of respect. Confl ict 
takes place within particular rules and traditions. Th  ese traditions 
include the truce that limits confl ict and violence on Sundays, and the 
annual Eastside/Westside basketball game, in which rival gangs put 
aside violence in order to compete for bragging rights on the court. 
Th ese rules provide no instrumental purpose; they do not serve the ends 
of profi t or even dominance. Th e rules reveal that violence is not just a 
strategy, but it is constitutive of reputation, inseparable from the ends 
it serves.
In Season One, Stringer is Avon’s loyal second in command, whose 
shrewd calculations maintain Avon’s power at whatever cost. As Avon’s 
organization faces the dual threats of Omar and an aggressive police 
investigation, Stringer is willing to employ deception, murder, and a 
fundamental restructuring of the organization, in order to protect


--- PAGE 138 ---
Stringer Bell’s Lament: Violence and Legitimacy in Contemporary Capitalism 129
Avon and maintain territory. When Avon is incarcerated at the end of 
Season One and the drug connection dries up, Stringer continues 
his pursuit of power. Th is is at fi  rst a question of pure survival. Th  e 
incarceration of D’ Angelo and Avon has left  the Barksdale crew severely 
crippled and without access to a product. Stringer, however, recog-
nizes this problem to be as much a problem of economics as a problem 
of street-level warfare, asking his economics professor at the commu-
nity college how to deal with “an inferior product in an aggressive 
market place” (2.05). Aft  er attempting to simply rename and thus 
rebrand his product, Stringer turns to his rival, Proposition Joe, in 
order to cut a deal, exchanging territory in the Towers (the housing 
projects) for access to Joe’s supply at wholesale prices. In the conversa-
tion in which Proposition Joe and Stringer make their deal, the ideal 
of running drugs like a business is opposed to the work of being a 
soldier: they are two fundamentally diff erent strategies, and ultimately 
two diff erent perspectives on the game. From this conversation, the 
business strategy emerges. Rather than deal with confl  ict through 
violence and the struggle over territory, the agreement makes it 
possible to convert every possible confl  ict into a shared enterprise. 
Th is is the ideal behind the “co-op” in which formerly rival drug gangs 
are unifi ed through shared access to a wholesale supply of drugs. Th  e 
co-op ultimately becomes its own end, the idea of the drug trade as 
pure business, separate from street-level confl  icts. As Stringer relates 
this ideal to Avon, the co-op makes possible a new business plan, based 
on product rather than territory: “Nothing but cash. No corners, no 
territory, nothing” (3.06).
When Avon is released from prison in Season Th  ree, Stringer’s 
reorganization of the drug trade into a business comes into direct con-
fl ict with Avon’s ideal. Avon responds to Stringer’s drug trade without 
violence, saying, “Y eah, I ain’t no suit-wearing businessman like you. 
Y ou know I am just a gangster, I suppose. And I want my corners” (3.06). 
Despite Avon’s increasing militarization over the course of the sustained 
wars with Marlo and Omar (evident in his army-fatigue hat and increas-
ingly lethal arsenal), his disdain for the ideal of running the drug trade 
as a pure business is not just based on some crude street-level mentality, or 
a simple identifi cation of masculinity and violence. Being a soldier, or a


--- PAGE 139 ---
130 THE WIRE : URBAN DECAY AND AMERICAN TELEVISION
gangster, is not just about using violence to solve problems: it requires 
restricting that violence with specifi c rules in order to gain respect. Avon is 
enraged when Stringer orders a hit on Omar on a Sunday: “Sunday truce 
been there as long as the game itself ” (3.09). In order to gain respect, 
to earn a name, it is necessary to maintain territory within certain 
respected traditions and rules. When Stringer and Avon come to a direct 
confl ict over their respective strategies, Avon angrily states that the 
diff erence between the two of them is in their blood, touching the core 
of their humanity: “I bleed red and you bleed green” (3.08). For Avon 
the rules of the game are the very conditions for recognition, for the 
constitution of a reputation. In the world of a businessman, there is only 
one rule—to accumulate money. Th e confl ict between Avon and Stringer 
is not just between diff erent means, violence or negotiations, but between 
the ends those means serve, reputation or accumulation.
For Marx primitive accumulation is not just an argument about the 
violent foundation of capitalism; it is an argument about the transfor-
mation of violence. Both of these apply to the situation of Stringer. Just 
as Marx argues that capitalism was made possible by the wealth gener-
ated through slavery and colonial plunder, economic relations that 
would become illegitimate under capitalism itself, Stringer utilizes the 
money gained from the drug trade to start a legitimate business, to 
invest in real estate, and even to have his own business cards printed. 
Th e drug trade does not just make Stringer wealthy; it carries the pos-
sibility of making him a capitalist, someone who not only has wealth, 
but legitimacy as well. Whereas it fi rst appears that Stringer is not con-
cerned with reputation, discarding the rules that govern the game, this 
is only because he has switched games, moved to the point where it is 
accumulating wealth, rather than maintaining territory and upholding 
the codes of the street, that dictate reputation. Th  e businesses that 
Stringer runs, copy shops and condo developments, initially function as 
a front; but eventually they make it possible for him not only to print 
business cards, but to hand one to McNulty.
Stringer’s struggle for legitimacy can be contrasted with Bubbles’s 
story. Bubbles, the informant who works closely with Detectives McNulty 
and Greggs, begins a legitimate enterprise in Season Th ree, selling t-shirts 
and other consumer goods from a shopping cart he dubs “Bubble’s 
Depo [sic]” (3.07). While such an endeavor is in many respects more


--- PAGE 140 ---
Stringer Bell’s Lament: Violence and Legitimacy in Contemporary Capitalism 131
legitimate than Bubbles’s other activities such as scavenging or stealing 
scrap metal and selling information to the police, he does not pursue it 
as an attempt to become a legitimate member of society. For Bubbles, 
money is money; any endeavor that makes enough money to provide 
the next high is equally legitimate. Th is puts him into confl  ict with his 
“boy” Johnny for whom there is a certain point of pride in making 
money from “capers. ” It also puts him into confl ict with Stringer’s world-
view in which there is a fundamental dignity to the ideal of becoming a 
legitimate businessman. Bubbles does not subscribe to the code of the 
streets or to the moral ideal of capitalism. He neither romanticizes 
“capers” nor idealizes business, grasping instead what Marx referred to 
as the “ethics of political economy” ( 1844 Manuscript 151): the funda-
mental idea that what is good is what makes money. It takes an addict, 
the ultimate consumer, to see the truth of money’s indiff  erence to its 
causes or conditions.
At fi rst glance the narrative of primitive accumulation, whether on 
the individual or social scale, would seem to bring an end to violence, as 
legitimate means of exploitation take the place of plunder. For Marx, 
however, primitive accumulation is not so much an end to violence, but 
a transformation of it; the overt violence of slavery is replaced with the 
day-to-day violence of the factory fl oor: “Th e silent compulsion of eco-
nomic relations sets the seal on the domination of the capitalist over the 
worker. Direct extra-economic force is still of course used, but only in 
exceptional cases” ( Capital 899). Capitalism is not an end to violence 
but a codifi cation of it, a normalization of it to the point where it becomes 
invisible. A similar transformation of violence takes place in Th e Wire . 
For Avon, all violence is caught up in the drama of recognition; it is 
visible and overt, functioning as a sign as much as the simple elimina-
tion of an adversary. In contrast to this, Stringer utilizes a diff erent mode 
of violence when he arranges the murder of D’ Angelo. Th e motivation is 
based on a simple calculation: the 20-year sentence that D’ Angelo 
received for transporting drugs is, in Stringer’s view, more than he 
can be reasonably expected to carry. When he becomes a risk to the 
organization he is eliminated. Since he is family, his murder is made to 
look like a suicide, rendered invisible. Violence is transformed from an 
activity to what is at once a strategy and a symbol, to a way of dealing 
with the risks of doing business.


--- PAGE 141 ---
132 THE WIRE : URBAN DECAY AND AMERICAN TELEVISION
Man without a Country
As Avon and Stringer come into confl  ict, they each fi  nd others who 
embody their particular side of the contradiction between soldier and 
CEO: Avon turns to the fi  ercely principled Brother Mouzone, while 
Stinger fi nds an unlikely ally in Police Major Howard “Bunny” Colvin. 
Stringer admires Colvin’s “Hamsterdam” experiment not for its eff ect on 
the quality of life in West Baltimore or for its eff ects on the crime statis-
tics, but because it emulates the ideal of drugs as business, removing 
crime from the picture. Stringer reveals the location of Avon’s hideout to 
Colvin, in a betrayal that he defi nes as “strictly business” (3.11). At the 
same time Avon turns to Brother Mouzone (and, less directly, to Omar) 
in order to eliminate Stringer. Mouzone and Omar personify the ideal of 
a life governed by the rules of respect, by a code.
When Avon and Stringer turn on each other, betraying each other 
to the forces that will see the other arrested or murdered, it is not out 
of personal animosity; they still regard each other as brothers (3.11). 
Th ey have come to represent two sides of an uneasy duality—the sol-
dier and the CEO—that has been torn asunder. While this particular 
duality refl ects the drug trade, it is not without its resonances within 
the culture at large. When McNulty searches the apartment of the 
recently deceased Stringer, it is no accident that he stumbles upon 
a copy of Adam Smith’s Th e Wealth of Nations  alongside a pair of 
samurai swords (3.12): this represents the ideal of the CEO as “knight 
of industry, ” as one who conducts business while consulting Sun Tzu 
for strategy. Stringer’s identifi cation with the idea of the CEO is made 
clear in Season Two, when he struggles with the collapsing market and 
increased violence of the Barksdale organization in decline. As an 
exasperated Stringer states, “Th at’s why they be payin’ these CEOs so 
much damn money, ’ cause when the shit fall bad it fall on them” (2.09). 
Stringer believes in the American ideal, right down to the justifi  cation 
of the extreme inequality of current pay scales, and this turns out to be 
his undoing. Th e deadly confl  ict between Avon and Stringer is a con-
fl ict between two ways of establishing a reputation, violence and 
money, which come into such bloody confl  ict because they are so 
intertwined.


--- PAGE 142 ---
Stringer Bell’s Lament: Violence and Legitimacy in Contemporary Capitalism 133
Although the confl ict ends poorly for both the incarcerated Avon and 
the murdered Stringer, there is a fundamental asymmetry in this tragedy. 
It is not just that Stringer is dead, paying the ultimate price for his 
ambition, but that he is, as Avon says, “a man without a country” (3.06). 
Stringer’s attempts to become a legitimate businessman are in part 
thwarted by Clay Davis. Davis, a State Senator, is hired by Stringer to 
negotiate the complex world of city and state permits. However, this is 
actually a scam, playing on Stringer’s credulity, inexperience, and desire 
for legitimacy; Davis is simply milking Stringer for money, scamming 
him for hundreds of thousands of dollars, a point that he eventually 
brags about (5.09). Stringer’s search for legitimacy is doomed from the 
start; he fails to see the way in which drugs and business overlap. Stringer 
views the world of the drug trade to be a world of brutal survival, a 
world to be escaped as quickly as possible. In contrast to this, he sees the 
world of business to be governed by diff erent rules, to be less bloody and 
thus more moral. He proves to be wrong on both counts: the drug world 
is more moral than he thinks (Avon, Brother Mouzone, and Omar are 
all governed by a code) and the business world is more ruthless than 
he imagines.
Stringer’s demise illustrates the diff  erence between the story that 
capital tells about its origins, stressing the moral basis of the distinction 
between the rich and the poor, and Marx’s understanding of primitive 
accumulation, which stresses the role of violence and the primacy of 
conditions over intentions. Th  e fi  rst is the narrative that Stringer 
believes in; it is why he thinks that his intelligence and hard work will 
translate into not only wealth but also legitimacy. In subscribing to 
such a narrative, Stringer fails to perceive the divided nature of capital-
ist society, in which, as Marx argues, the “ethics of political economy” 
are separate from the “political economy of ethics” (1844 Manuscript 151); 
each comprises a separate measure. Stringer’s story is thus not just 
a retelling of the fundamental narrative of capitalism, in which the 
game stands in for the violent and honor-bound world of feudalism, 
but it becomes an allegory for life under capitalism. Stringer has proven 
to be too good a student, taking seriously capital’s lessons about the 
virtues of the market and the idealization of the CEO—all of which 
proves to be his undoing. Stringer’s lesson, learned too late, is the


--- PAGE 143 ---
134 THE WIRE : URBAN DECAY AND AMERICAN TELEVISION
lesson learned by every employee who has been downsized, or anyone 
who has fallen for the latest get-rich-quick scheme: the only value capi-
tal respects is money. What Th e Wire  reveals is not the inner workings 
of the dangerous underworld of drugs, but the nature of our world and 
the narratives that sustain it.
1
Note
1. Th is chapter benefi  ts immeasurably from countless conversations with Jackson 
Nichols.


--- PAGE 144 ---
135
9
Networks of Affi  liation: 
Familialism and Anticorporatism 
in Black and White
Stephen Lucasi
Mark Bowden’s profi le of David Simon, creator of Th e Wire , begins not 
with Simon’s successes, but by enumerating his disappointments and 
professional grudges. Chief among these are experiences reporting for 
Th e Baltimore Sun , experiences rendered lamentable by “the editors and 
corporate owners who have . . . spent the last two decades eviscerating a 
great American newspaper” (Bowden 51). Th e  Sun certainly receives its 
fair share of critique throughout the series, especially in its fi nal season. 
Among the most nefarious characters introduced in Season Five is Sun 
Executive Editor James C. Whiting, who refers and defers to “Chicago” 
(the paper’s corporate headquarters), who engineers the departures of 
veteran reporters in favor of younger, cheaper talent, and who parrots 
the corporate mantra “Do more with less” as a solution to the paper’s 
escalating economic crises.
While Season Five of Th e Wire  contains the most acerbic commentary 
on the corporatization of local economies and cultures, this same stri-
dent anticorporatism weaves its way throughout the series, intersecting 
oft en with another of its central themes: the deformation of traditional 
familial networks under conditions of socio-economic privation. Th  e 
series of divorces, detentions, and deaths that shape the many familial


--- PAGE 145 ---
136 THE WIRE : URBAN DECAY AND AMERICAN TELEVISION
narratives mirror an equally robust catalog of mergers, acquisitions, and 
hostile takeovers in the commercial narratives. If Mark Bowden is 
correct that Simon rails against the corporate-capitalist evisceration of 
“a great American newspaper, ” then it seems appropriate to argue, as 
I do here, that Th e Wire  rails against the eviscerating eff ects of globaliza-
tion and corporatization on a (formerly) great American city. By tracing 
the juxtapositions of familial and commercial strands in the narratives 
of Avon Barksdale, Russell “Stringer” Bell, and the Sobotka family, 
I argue that Th e Wire  critiques the neoliberal economic practices of 
globalization that dissolve communities into little more than markets 
and families into little more than competitive consumers therein.
Before exploring how Th e Wire  illustrates the shift  toward a global-
ized economy, it is necessary to map a few competing perspectives on 
the ways global capitalism aff  ects localities and families. In capitalist 
fantasies disseminated by corporate media outlets, communal tensions 
are alleviated by transnational fl  ows of capital, which in turn make 
diverse geographic and cultural sites seemingly equal participants in 
global economies. As Fernando Coronil notes, corporate images of 
globalization off er “the promise of a unifi ed humanity” divided neither 
by “the rich and the poor” nor by racial, national, or regional diff  er-
ences; such optimistic projections suggest “that the separate histories, 
geographies, and cultures that have divided humanity are now being 
brought together by the warm embrace of globalization” (351–352). Of 
course, scholarly accounts of globalization present vastly diff  erent 
perspectives on the possibilities enunciated in this rhetoric, illustrating 
how the fl ow of capital across national borders merely intensifi  es pre-
existent inequalities. Spurred by U.S.-based transnational corporations’ 
interests in eliminating blue- and white-collar occupations, corporate 
globalization has aff ected all sectors of the U.S. economy, but African 
Americans oft en are more adversely aff ected than others (Johnson et al.; 
Okazawa-Rey; Persuad and Lusane).
Th at it intensifi  es America’s pre-existent (racial) inequalities on 
national and transnational scales does not mean, however, that global-
ization’s more local eff  ects on specifi  c urban centers have not been 
equally intensifi ed during the last half-century. Arjun Appadurai argues, 
for instance, that “not all deterritorialization [the severance of cultural 
tradition from its original geographical moorings] is global in scope”; it 
aff ects “even small geographical and cultural spaces, ” including cities,


--- PAGE 146 ---
Networks of Affi   liation: Familialism and Anticorporatism in Black and White 137
towns and villages (61). David Wilson concurs that “globalization does 
not uniformly aff ect all cities and all economic sectors within them” 
(“City Transformation” 31); rather, it creates “global cities” of exorbitant 
capital investment while instituting policies “that explicitly [fragment] 
cities into mosaics of ‘deserving’ and ‘undeserving’ terrains” (36). Th e 
depictions of Baltimore in Th e Wire  reveal precisely these polarizations 
between, for instance, the Inner Harbor (a “deserving” terrain) and pre-
dominantly black neighborhoods (“undeserving” terrains), where an 
estimated one-third to one-half of black men are jobless (Chaddha et al.).
Such economic trends clearly weighed on the minds behind Th e Wire . 
In a 2006 interview, David Simon comments on the thinking behind 
Season Two’s focus on the ports, describing this shift  as an eff ort to illus-
trate “the death of work and the death of the union-era middle class” 
(O’Rourke). Aft er considering Baltimore’s ailing General Motors and 
Bethlehem Steel plants, the producers settled on the ports since they so 
clearly depicted what Simon sees as a fundamental truth of life at the 
turn of the twenty-fi rst century: the “triumph of capitalism over human 
value. ” Asked to sum up Th e Wire ’s themes, Simon off ers “the very sim-
ple idea that, in this Postmodern world of ours, human beings—all of 
us—are worth less. We’re worth less every day, despite the fact that some 
of us are achieving more and more” (O’Rourke).
Th e family and its evolution under globalizing economies off  er a 
trenchant example of this worth-less-ness. Cultural critics continually 
disagree about the eff ects of globalization on families. While some fi nd 
that “globalisation cannot . . . be seen as responsible for any major depar-
ture from conventional family living” (Ziehl 334), others conclude that 
“the spread of global capitalism is undermining the strength of the 
underlying societal and familial values, ” including both marital and 
child-rearing patterns and arrangements (Harbison and Robinson 52). 
Anthony Giddens even claims, “Th e traditional family is under threat, is 
changing, and will change further” with the infl  uence of current eco-
nomic shift s (4). If Th e Wire  is any indication, though, such evolution in 
familial structures is well under way. To envision this trend, one need 
only recall, for instance, the symbolic destruction of the domestic 
arrangement of Poot Carr and Wallace in Season One. Th ough only a 
“young’un” himself, Wallace provides a rudimentary home for a small 
group of what Simon calls Baltimore’s “unparented” youth (“Th e Wire : 
It’s All Connected”). In a series of sentimentalized scenes, Wallace feeds


--- PAGE 147 ---
138 THE WIRE : URBAN DECAY AND AMERICAN TELEVISION
the children, readies them for school, and helps them with their home-
work. Th is vision of potential domestic stability proves fl eeting, though, 
when Wallace runs afoul of Stringer’s operation. Aft er Wallace’s depar-
ture following his involvement in the slaying of a stick-up boy, Stringer 
orders Poot and Bodie Broadus to execute Wallace, a telling example of 
the ways that capital corrupts the most fraternal connections visible in 
Season One. Th us, when they lure Wallace back to his makeshift  home, 
the series’s familial and commercial narratives intersect with brutal 
clarity. Framed by the bleak rowhouse, another ubiquitous symbol of 
the city’s failing economy, Wallace playfully warns the absent children, 
“When I fi nd y’all, I’m beatin’ y’all asses. Don’t let me fi nd y’all. ” As Bodie 
pulls out his gun, though, Wallace’s tone quickly shift  s; he frantically 
struggles to dissuade Bodie and Poot: “Y’all my niggas, yo. . . . We boys! 
Why it gotta be like this?” (1.12). Set in the abandoned domestic space, 
the scene portrays the dual betrayals of the drug game; neither the 
fraternal connections between the young men nor the aff ective paternal 
connections with the young children can survive the game. Only trans-
actional arrangements devoid of aff  ect, such as Stringer’s relation to 
Bodie and Poot, remain viable.
Similar examples of familial realignment abound throughout the 
series, but Th e Wire  also employs familial narratives for contrasting 
purposes. Th e family continually operates as a guardedly optimistic site 
for the (re)valuation of human life against capitalism’s global march, 
especially through the immediately established juxtaposition of Stringer’s 
corporate ethos with Avon’s more thoroughly local-familial ethos. 
Stringer enters the series as an observer at D’ Angelo’s trial, sporting a 
business suit and intimidating witnesses. In his next scene, Stringer 
informs D’ Angelo of the consequences of his trial. When D’ Angelo 
arrives for work, Stringer tells him, “Y ou goin’ out on point, pickin’ up 
business in the Pit. . . . Y ou the man in the low-rises. ” An incredulous 
D’ Angelo asks, “Why you gonna put me in the low-rises when I had a 
tower since summer?” Stringer ends the conversation by explaining, “Y ou 
show us you can run the Pit, and you’ll be back uptown soon enough” 
(1.01). Th e symbolic spatial language Stringer employs here is equally as 
important as his organizational restructuring. Th e contrast between the 
uptown tower, which symbolizes fi nancial success, and the low-rises or 
the Pit, a less profi table compensatory site, corresponds quite readily to


--- PAGE 148 ---
Networks of Affi   liation: Familialism and Anticorporatism in Black and White 139
the language and visual symbolism of modern capitalism’s vertical 
fi nancial structure. Th  is economistic thinking infl  ects Stringer’s 
handling of Barksdale crews and his aspirations eventually to transcend 
the drug trade. For Avon, however, a genuine interest in family and 
community mitigates fi nancial discourse. Aft er the trial (1.01), Avon 
tells D’ Angelo, “ . . . you family, okay? But that shit cost money. It cost 
time and money. ” Before D’ Angelo leaves, Avon kisses him on the head, 
repeating, “Y ou family, all right? Y ou know it’s always love. ” Th ough he 
dwells on the fi nancial costs of the trial, Avon’s introduction emphasizes 
his moral complexities. More than a heartless thug, he simultaneously 
runs a violent business and maintains aff  ective familial connections. 
Avon’s subsequent emergence, where he dons an apron and cooks at a 
community gathering, again emphasizes almost comically the commit-
ment he upholds to his family and community (1.02).
Th is contrast structures much of the Barksdale-Bell narrative, includ-
ing the fi nal confl icts that dissolve their control of the Baltimore drug 
trade (3.06; 3.08; 3.09; 3.11). Importantly, their contrasting commit-
ments materialize in discourse and deeds, especially through their 
interactions with D’ Angelo. When together, D’ Angelo and Avon oft en 
speak of and participate in familial activities, and fi  nancial matters 
materialize only tangentially. Among the most signifi cant portrayals of 
Avon’s commitment to family is a scene when he brings D’ Angelo to visit 
an uncle in physical decline. Th ere, Avon refl ects on the human costs of 
his family business, expressing simultaneously the importance of main-
taining familial ties and fear of becoming the uncle he evidently cares 
for: “ . . . you about to see your uncle, you understand me? Th is family. . . . 
Family is what counts, family is what it’s about. Family gonna always be 
there ’ cause it’s blood. ” Avon then shift s his focus to what his uncle has 
come to represent: “He scares me. See, if he dead, you know, I could 
carry it better. Comin’ up the way we did, you know, you kinda expect 
that. . . . Y ou can’t plan for no shit like this, man. It’s life” (1.05). Th  e 
blocking of the scene emphasizes further Avon’s aff  ective connection 
to his family. While D’ Angelo shares Avon’s fears and stands away from 
the hospital bed, nervously shrugging his shoulders, Avon sits com-
fortably beside his uncle, continually patting the man’s hand and 
aff ectionately touching his face. Th  e ironic doubling of the scene—
Avon models for his nephew the proper connection between uncle


--- PAGE 149 ---
140 THE WIRE : URBAN DECAY AND AMERICAN TELEVISION
and nephew—affi  rms the signifi  cance for Avon of traditional, non-
commercial familial relationships.
Despite Avon’s seemingly good-faith eff orts, the gulf separating Avon 
and D’ Angelo widens throughout Season One and, by the fi nal episode, 
threatens to destroy both the family and their business. Following 
D’ Angelo’s arrest, his mother, Brianna, visits him in a New Jersey jail, 
attempting to dissuade him from testifying against Avon and Stringer. 
Not surprisingly, a distraught D’ Angelo questions the very commitment 
to family that Avon has touted throughout the season. He tells his 
mother, “Y ou know, he always talking family. ‘Family is the heart, ’ he say. 
Well, I’m family . . . ain’t I?” (1.12). Brianna, though, eff ectively reverses 
D’ Angelo’s opinion by reinforcing precisely the sentiments that Avon 
expresses:
Y ou like for him to step up, take all the weight, and let you walk? 
Because he will. . . . But if he gotta go away, that mean you gotta 
step up and fi ll his shoes. . . . Now if you wanna get even with him, 
you can. But if you hurt him, you hurt this whole family. . . . Th is 
right here is part of the game, D. And without the game, this whole 
family would be down in the fuckin’ Terrace living off  scraps. Shit, 
we prob’ly wouldn’t even be a family. (1.12)
For Brianna, as for Avon, family and business are intricately interwoven, 
but neither will sacrifi ce family purely for fi nancial gain. While D’ Angelo 
and Avon subsequently share time in prison, Avon continues to look 
aft er D’ Angelo, and D’ Angelo’s repeated rejections and rebuff s cause 
Avon visible distress, culminating in his lament, following D’ Angelo’s 
apparent suicide, that D’ Angelo “did that shit to hurt [him]” (2.07). 
Despite D’ Angelo’s protests to the contrary—he tells his girlfriend 
Donette, “When they got no more use for you, that family shit disap-
pears. It’s just about business” (2.05)—Avon remains sincerely committed 
to family and community. In Season Five, he agrees to help Marlo 
Stanfi eld (another West-sider) circumvent (East-sider) “Prop Joe” Stewart’s 
control of heroin importation, only on the condition that Marlo fi  rst 
gives Brianna $100,000 (5.02).
Stringer, however, is seldom depicted except as businessman. Indeed, 
the only depictions of his domestic life occur when he has usurped


--- PAGE 150 ---
Networks of Affi   liation: Familialism and Anticorporatism in Black and White 141
D’ Angelo’s position with Donette, and when, aft er his death, Detectives 
Jimmy McNulty and Bunk Moreland search his lavish condominium, an 
inversion of the bleak and empty rowhouse in which Wallace dies. 
Unlike Avon, Stringer’s characterization relies, fi rst, upon the settings in 
which he conducts his business: the towers and terrace, Orlando’s club, 
the copy shop, the funeral home, meetings with lieutenants and the 
New-Day Co-Op, meetings with lawyers and politicians (in Baltimore 
and beyond), meetings with contractors at B&B Enterprises’ properties, 
and even his visits to Avon in prison. Within these spaces, Stringer’s 
discourse is thoroughly economic, oft  en disinterestedly corporate. In 
what amounts to a concentrated parable of the ways fi nance capital and 
information technologies—two driving forces behind globalization—
have reshaped economies, Stringer plays “Wall Street” from his car, 
selling off  stock in Nokia and Motorola via his mobile phone and 
explaining to his drivers theories of “market saturation” that apply as 
easily to the drug trade as they do to Wall Street (2.02). Th  roughout 
Seasons Two and Th ree, Stringer attempts to distance himself and his 
organization from the “territory” and “real estate” over which Avon 
obsesses: he wants his lieutenants to avoid confl icts over “corners” and 
to “handle this shit like businessmen. Sell the shit, make the profi t, and 
later for that gangster bullshit” (3.01).
Stringer’s eff orts eventually fracture his relationship with Avon. While 
Avon continues to think of himself as “gangster” and strives to maintain 
control of his corners, he mocks Stringer’s eff  orts to become a “suit-
wearing businessman” and player in the “money game” (3.06). Avon 
correctly sees Stringer’s eff orts to distance himself from the street as 
threats to their local control of drug traffi   c. Unlike Avon, Stringer 
willingly cedes control of real estate to Prop Joe in exchange for access 
to Joe’s heroin “connect” and membership in the New-Day Co-Op. He 
demonstrates this corporatist mentality further when trying to con-
vince Avon not to war with Marlo: “Th  e fact is we got every mob in 
town, East Side, West Side, ready to pull together, share territory on 
that good shit that Prop Joe puttin’ out there. . . . I mean, we past that 
run-and-gun shit, man. Like, we fi nd us a package and we ain’t got to see 
nothing but bank. Nothing but cash. No corners, no territory. Nothing” 
(3.06). Stringer’s “nothing but cash” mantra emerges logically from the 
culture of monetarism—of cash without territory or industry—that has


--- PAGE 151 ---
142 THE WIRE : URBAN DECAY AND AMERICAN TELEVISION
eviscerated West Baltimore neighborhoods formerly reliant on employ-
ment in the manufacturing sector. His focus on the “package” and 
“bank” without regard for the community itself replicates the very 
sources of economic and political violence against undeserving urban 
terrains, even if it does temporarily reduce physical violence between 
rival territorial organizations.
Th is utter disregard for family and community also leads to Stringer’s 
demise. For Stringer, capital comes before all else and must be pro-
tected at all costs. As he explains to Avon regarding D’ Angelo’s 
apparent inability to do his time, “He fl  ip, man, they got you and me 
and fuckin’ Brianna! . . . Now, I know you’re family. Y ou loved that 
nigga. But you wanna talk that ‘blood is thicker than water’ bullshit, 
take that shit somewhere else, nigga. Th  at motherfucker would’ve 
taken down the whole fuckin’ show!” (3.08). More even than this stark 
explanation, Stringer’s plot to kill D’ Angelo refl  ects his corporatist 
ethos. To orchestrate the hit, Stringer must reach not only outside of 
the West Side but outside of Baltimore entirely to an associate from 
Washington, DC, whose cousin performs the hit. Together with his 
interactions with the Co-Op, Stringer’s eff  orts to move beyond the 
circumscribed borders of Baltimore’s West Side enrage and disillusion 
Avon enough that he sacrifi  ces Stringer to vengeful hit-men Omar 
Little and Brother Mouzone. In another brutal irony, Stringer’s many 
attempts to deterritorialize the Barksdale family’s operation end in a 
scene of execution mirroring Wallace’s death (3.11). Like Wallace, 
Stringer is executed in an empty, depopulated domestic space, the 
building that B&B Construction is converting to loft  condos. And like 
the empty row house where Wallace dies, the empty loft  s represent 
another outgrowth of the shift ing economy, away from a production-
based and toward a consumer-based economy. In the background of 
the window before which Stringer is shot lurks a sign reading, “Com-
ing Soon, Residential/Retail Opportunities from B&B Enterprises” 
(3.11), an overt symbol of the very reasons Avon willingly gave Stringer 
up. Despite Stringer’s valiant eff  orts to transcend the territorial vio-
lence of drug traffi  cking, the writers and producers never let us forget 
the calamitous socio-economic eff  ects of Stringer’s paradoxical route 
of escape. Framing the scene of Stringer’s death with the B&B Enter-
prises sign in the background signals their condemnation of the


--- PAGE 152 ---
Networks of Affi   liation: Familialism and Anticorporatism in Black and White 143
economic principles that defi  ned his eff orts to reform and transcend 
the game.
Because of his eff orts to reform the violence of the game, Stringer 
does remain a redemptive character and his death a tragedy of sorts. Th e 
same cannot be said, though, for the arch-capitalist known as “Th  e 
Greek” whose operation the Major Crimes Unit investigates in Season 
Two. Indeed, Simon refers to Th e Greek as representative of “capitalism 
in its purest form, ” which, for Simon, means an utter lack of aff  ective 
“allegiance” to anyone or anything but profi t (O’Rourke). Th e entirety of 
Season Two explores, more overtly than the Barksdale-Bell narrative, the 
stakes in allowing for expansion of the economic principles Th e Greek 
comes to represent. Th e season is framed by two very diff erent refl ections 
on the ramifi cations of corporate globalization for Baltimoreans. When 
the season opens, Jimmy McNulty is aboard a police boat in Baltimore 
Harbor, surveying the now-closed factories that line the once-active 
industrial center. McNulty and his partner, Claude Diggins, discuss 
what the retraction of industry has meant to their families:
McNulty: My father used to work there.
Diggins: Beth Steel?
McNulty: In the shipyards there, yeah.
Diggins: I had an uncle who was a supervisor there. Got laid off   
in ’78, though.
McNulty: ’73 for my dad. (2.01)
For those who have remained in Baltimore, including the many dock-
workers depicted in Season Two, the globalizing economy has meant a 
series of layoff s and plant-closings, and the families dependent on this 
industrial work continually endure hardship and poverty. In contrast to 
this, Th e Greek and his associate Spiros “Vondas” Vondopolous, who 
claim no allegiance to the city, use Baltimore only as a market for their 
traffi  c in heroin and in women. And when they depart in Season Two’s 
fi nale, Th e Greek tells the airline attendant their reason for travel is 
“Business. Always business” (2.12).
Between these moments, much of Season Two’s narrative focuses on 
the economic and familial tragedy of the Sobotka family, a family deci-
mated by the failing Baltimore economy and the hard choices they must


--- PAGE 153 ---
144 THE WIRE : URBAN DECAY AND AMERICAN TELEVISION
make to survive. Th e hardest of these is Frank Sobotka’s decision to 
continue working with Th  e Greek’s network aft  er the discovery of 
fourteen murdered women, part of the global sex traffi  cking industry, in 
an unloaded shipping container. Th is choice is a complicated one for a 
number of reasons, not least of which is Sobotka’s evident devotion both 
to family and to community. Like Avon and Stringer, Sobotka’s charac-
terization relies heavily on the spaces in which he operates. Sobotka’s 
fi rst scene occurs in the union hall, where he discusses with his union 
brothers their desperate need to get more ships and more work (2.01). 
Th ough defi ned, like Stringer, by the space of his labor, Sobotka’s char-
acterization also runs counter to Stringer’s corporatism. In his next scene, 
Sobotka makes a large cash donation to his Polish Catholic parish. 
Sobotka rapidly emerges as a character who maintains strong allegiance 
to the local community, even if such allegiance comes at the cost of affi  l-
iation with Th e Greek’s global crime syndicate.
Th rough his combined local-familial concern and his willingness to 
participate (blindly) in Th e Greek’s crime network, Sobotka actually 
comes to resemble Avon. Like Avon, Sobotka is oft en depicted as part of 
a broader familial network working the Baltimore docks, as well as an 
integral part of a traditional, fraternal organization that structures not 
only his working life but his social life as well. Sobotka also fears the 
dramatic shift s that are redefi ning his place in the Baltimore economy, 
oft en blending familial and economic discourse much in the way that 
Avon has. During a conversation with lobbyist Bruce DiBiago, Sobotka 
brilliantly encapsulates the reshaping of the U.S. economy since the 
1970s: “Y ou know what the trouble is, Brucie? We used to make shit in 
this country. Build shit. Now we just put our hand in the next guy’s 
pocket” (2.11). Th is sentiment reprises a series of similar statements. 
Aft er he attends a presentation on the use of “modern robotics” in 
 Rotterdam to fuel “an exploding global economy”—a haunting depic-
tion of globalization’s eff ects on the shipping industry, and on stevedores 
specifi cally—Sobotka tells DiBiago, “aft  er the horror movie I seen 
today . . . Robots! Piers full of robots! My kid’ll be lucky if he’s even 
punchin’ numbers fi ve years from now” (2.07). For Sobotka, antiglobal-
ism goes hand in hand with both a localist pro-union and pro-family 
stance. When his nephew, Nick, complains of not getting enough days 
and of needing more money, Sobotka asks why Nick didn’t come to him.


--- PAGE 154 ---
Networks of Affi   liation: Familialism and Anticorporatism in Black and White 145
Referring to the cash Sobotka has dispensed recently, Nick mocks what 
he assumes is his uncle’s feigned altruism: “ Ah, yeah. Frankie Sobotka is 
Father fuckin’ Christmas on the docks lately. No doubt, his pockets are 
full. ” An irate Sobotka responds, “Y ou think it’s for me? . . . It ain’t about 
me, Nick!” (2.04). And, as Nick well knows, Sobotka’s actions through-
out Season Two bear this out: he continually sinks money into failed 
political schemes to bring in more ships by rebuilding the granary pier 
and dredging the harbor; when “New Charles” loses his leg working the 
pier, Sobotka provides the family cash assistance; when another union 
member considers changing unions, Frank sends him to the local bar 
where a stack of bills awaits him.
None of this is to suggest, though, that Sobotka’s behavior is beyond 
reproach. Indeed, the extended Sobotka family and the International 
Brotherhood of Stevedores union of which they are a part dissolve as a 
result of both Sobotka’s desperate affi  liation with Th e Greek and the 
younger Sobotkas’ misapprehension of their elder’s example. Th e utter 
diff erences between Th e Greek’s and Sobotka’s networks and commit-
ments make Sobotka’s decisions particularly troubling. Because of 
economic shift s that devastated his union and community, Sobotka 
must affi  liate himself with the very type of organization responsible for 
that devastation. If Sobotka’s focus rests on industrial prospects and a 
production-based economy where people “build shit, ” Th e Greek’s focus 
is, fi rst, on inspiring consumption. As he tells Sobotka in one of their 
meetings, “It’s a new world, Frank. Y ou should go out and spend some of 
the money on something you can touch” (2.08). Extending this notion of 
a “new world” represented through globalized capital, Nick tries to 
explain to Sobotka the extent of Th e Greek’s network and its political 
reach. Framed pointedly by the closed factories lining the harbor in the 
background, Nick explains, “Th ese guys, they got a big operation to pro-
tect. Th ey’re global-like” (2.11). From the importation of heroin and of 
Eastern European women to the transatlantic exportation of stolen cars, 
Th e Greek’s operation spans far beyond the local economy and culture it 
helps destroy, and it maintains a stance largely inimical to the mainte-
nance of familial ties. As Vondas explains to Nick, presaging a similar 
comment from Th e Greek, “It’s just business with us. Everything is just 
business with us” (2.05). When Vondas and Th e Greek discuss their trou-
bles with the Sobotka family and Vondas intimates a paternal aff ection


--- PAGE 155 ---
146 THE WIRE : URBAN DECAY AND AMERICAN TELEVISION
for Nick, Th e Greek mockingly retorts, “Y ou are fond of him, Spiros. Y ou 
should’ve had a son. ” Vondas knowingly replies, “But then I would’ve 
had a wife” (2.11). Th ough they laugh at this, the joke reveals a dark 
underside of global capitalism. As was the case with Stringer, both men 
are defi ned entirely through their relation to capital, and neither exhib-
its anything but a purely transactional relationship with others. Vondas 
and Th e Greek are presented as actually incapable of familial aff  ection 
and their motivations lie solely in desire for and security of capital. Th us, 
when they return in Season Five, they readily accept Marlo’s “insurance” 
plan against the possible demise of Prop Joe, eff  ectively green-lighting 
Joe’s execution despite the amiability and established business relation-
ship developed between Joe and Vondas.
Mirroring much of the dominant American discourse of globaliza-
tion, Season Two seems to present the progress of globalization as an 
inevitable force against which localities and families have little or no 
hope of surviving. Before his death, for instance, Sobotka laments the 
cost of enmeshing his family and union with Th e Greek’s global syndi-
cate: “I fl ushed my fuckin’ family, for what?” (2.11). Despite Sobotka 
and Nick’s eventual cooperation with Major Crimes in dismantling the 
organization, the season ends with ominous scenes of continued global 
exchange: a new group of (Eastern European) women offl  oad from the 
back of a truck, and new shipments of heroin roll in. Business as usual 
seems to have resumed, despite a slight hiccup on the docks. In con-
trast to the fi  nal montage and the laments of Offi   cer Beadie Russell 
that “the port is still screwed” (2.12), there is a guardedly optimistic 
image of resistance to the entrenchment of global capitalism. Major 
Stan Valchek, the “company man” who spitefully initiated the inves-
tigation of Sobotka’s union, opens a piece of mail containing 
a photo of a stolen surveillance van, loaded aboard an outbound ship 
by union members. Th roughout Season Two, Valchek has received a 
series of similar photos from ports increasingly distant from Baltimore, 
and the fi nal photo depicts smiling Australian longshoreman mocking 
Valchek from half a world away. Th  ough admittedly a very minor 
element of the season’s intricate plotting, this strand of the narrative 
counterbalances the tragic narrative of Sobotka’s entrance into the 
global corporate economy. Th  e photos of I.B.S. laborers reclaim a
sense of the “international” from global capitalism and do so through


--- PAGE 156 ---
Networks of Affi   liation: Familialism and Anticorporatism in Black and White 147
a traditional expression simultaneously of fraternal aff  ection and 
sincere economic resistance.
Th e docks, of course, are not the only site in Th e Wire where commit-
ments to community and family prevail over corporatism. Th  is same 
dynamic returns in the series fi  nale, the closing montage of which 
mirrors the combined cynicism and guarded optimism that marks the 
juxtaposition of commercial and familial narratives. Within that mon-
tage, Vondas reemerges in the diner, meeting now with new dealers Fat 
Face Rick and Slim Charles. Initially, the inclusion of Rick, a long-time 
Co-Op member who uses the bureaucratic city-development machine 
like Stringer to siphon millions for worthless property, suggests the 
maintenance of Stringer’s corporatist ideal in the Baltimore drug trade, 
echoing the ominous continuation of the global trade at the close of 
Season Two. Th e inclusion of Slim, however, suggests a continued resis-
tance to this corporatism. Th ough originally a mercenary enforcer, Slim 
has evolved into a traditionalist like Avon, Prop Joe, and even Omar in 
his adherence to the rules of Baltimore’s game. It was Slim who disci-
plined two unruly soldiers at Avon’s homecoming bash; who chastised 
those same soldiers for violating the Sunday morning truce by attacking 
Omar and endangering his grandmother, a “bona-fi  de colored lady” 
(3.09); who, with Avon’s assistance, resisted Stringer’s desire to assassi-
nate the corrupt State Senator, Clayton Davis; who looked out for Bodie 
aft er the fall of the Barksdale-Bell network; and who correctly advised 
Prop Joe to tread carefully with Marlo. Most signifi  cantly, it was Slim 
who was derisively accused of being a “sentimental motherfucker” when 
he cost the Co-Op $900,000 by prec ipitously killing Melvin “Cheese” 
Wagstaff  (5.10), the opportunistic dealer who killed his own uncle, Prop 
Joe, to curry favor with Marlo.
Slim’s sentimental opposition to Marlo and Cheese replicates 
precisely the oppositions structuring confl  icts between Avon and 
Stringer, and between Sobotka and Th e Greek: obligations to local and 
communal tradition counter the push toward purely transactional 
relations to others. Like Avon and Sobotka before him, Slim has tried 
throughout to balance the demands of a shift  ing Baltimore economy 
and its heightened production of human worth-less-ness against the 
opposing demands of upholding local and familial traditions. Impor-
tantly, Slim is required to negotiate these competing demands with the


--- PAGE 157 ---
148 THE WIRE : URBAN DECAY AND AMERICAN TELEVISION
two networks—represented by Stringer’s Co-Op and Vondas’s global 
syndicate—most responsible for the corporatization of Baltimore’s 
drug trade. Th rough this fi  nal repetition of the inherent confl  icts 
between corporate economies and the maintenance of traditional 
modes of social organization, which structure much of the fi ve-season 
arc of Th e Wire , the show’s creators emphasize the signifi  cance of the 
familial and communal traditions that Avon, Sobotka, and now Slim 
represent as sources of potential resistance to the divisive practices of 
contemporary capitalism.


--- PAGE 158 ---
149
10
Barksdale Women: 
Crime, Empire, and the 
Production of Gender
Courtney D. Marshall
In Ain’t I A Woman?, bell hooks writes, “One has only to look at American 
television twenty-four hours a day for an entire week to learn the way 
in which black women are perceived in American society—the pre-
dominant image is that of the ‘fallen’ woman, the whore, the slut, the 
prostitute” (52). She argues that the sexual logic which buttressed chattel 
slavery lives on in popular culture images and public policy. HBO’s Th e 
Wire challenges hooks’s cataloging of black female stereotypes on 
two grounds; it allows for women’s participation in crimes other than 
prostitution, and it invites us to see “fallen” women as complicated 
characters. On Th e Wire , black women are murderers, thieves, and drug 
dealers; they are also mothers, sisters, and girlfriends. By setting up 
black women vis-à-vis black men, the show examines gender variability 
within criminal networks. However, where hooks would see these depic-
tions as detrimental to black women, I contend that these characters 
have a lot to teach us about black women’s economic and organizational 
lives. Th e Wire  demonstrates the central importance of the practices and 
discourses of crime, law, order, and policing to the formation of black 
female power and identity.


--- PAGE 159 ---
150 THE WIRE : URBAN DECAY AND AMERICAN TELEVISION
Th is chapter argues that rather than depicting mothers as failures 
because they are unable to keep their male relatives from committing 
crimes, Th e Wire  challenges the very language on which we deem 
mothers successful. By looking at three women in the Barksdale empire, 
Donette, Brianna Barksdale, and De’Londa Brice, I will argue that the 
show invests mothers with the job of teaching civic values, even if those 
values are criminalized.
1 As a result, crime produces gender within the 
Barksdale empire.2 Capitalism imposes a sexual division of labor, and 
women are obliged to fulfi ll the mother role in order to ensure the sys-
tem a steady supply of labor. Th e show sets up a striking distinction 
between the close-knit Barksdale organization with the new generation 
of drug sellers in Marlo’s crew.
3
Insights into the gendered workings of Th e Wire  are encouraged by 
new insights in black feminist criminology. Th ese innovations lead to a 
more nuanced way of engaging representations of black female crimi-
nals. Jody Miller, for example, looks at the ways poverty, crime, and 
sexual violence are mutually constitutive in the lives of young black 
girls living in St. Louis. She conducts extensive interviews with young 
black boys and girls in order to “investigate how the structural inequal-
ities that create extreme—and racialized—urban poverty facilitate . . . 
social contexts that heighten and shape the tremendous gender-based 
violence faced by urban African-American girls” (3). She situates her 
project within a tradition of feminist criminology which has signifi  -
cantly shaped the ways we theorize women’s participation in the 
criminal justice system, both as victims and off  enders. She examines 
victimization as a precursor to off ending, and emphasizes the “contem-
poraneous nature of victimization and off  ending by examining the 
impact of gender inequality on street and off ender networks” (3). Miller 
implores us to expand our scope when it comes to female off  ending, 
looking at the ways that a society stripped of social services for women 
then criminalizes these very women when they participate in under-
ground economies and criminal activity in order to care for themselves 
and their families. At the same time, we must work toward a more tex-
tured analysis of how patriarchy structures the economies in which 
they seek alternatives.
Th is new vision of female crime must come along with a more criti-
cal consumption of popular culture images of black female criminals.


--- PAGE 160 ---
Barksdale Women: Crime, Empire, and the Production of Gender 151
In depicting black female criminals, Th e Wire  walks a fi ne line between 
making them stereotypical and making them victims, and as viewers 
we also walk a line between glorifying and rejecting representations of 
criminal behavior. Patricia Hill Collins identifi  es four overarching 
stereotypes of black women: the mammy, the matriarch, the welfare 
mother, and the whore. She writes that “each image transmits clear 
messages about the proper links among female sexuality, fertility, and 
black women’s roles in the political economy” (78). While the mammy 
is asexual and devoted to upholding white societal values, the other 
three stereotypes are built upon hypersexuality, and to varying degrees, 
disordered gender roles. Collins writes that “the matriarch represents 
the sexually aggressive woman, one who emasculates black men because 
she will not permit them to assume roles as black patriarchs. She refuses 
to be passive and thus is stigmatized” (78). Th is particular stereotype of 
black womanhood serves a racist social order by implying that black 
communities, in their unwillingness to promote ostensibly proper 
gender and family relations, are thereby unfi t for inclusion in the larger 
body politic. Margaret M. Russell argues that “Hollywood movies and 
television have served as the primary medium for the replication and 
reinforcement of stereotypes” drawing a critical genealogy which 
stretches from Sapphire of Amos ’n’ Andy (adapted for television 1951–53) 
to contemporary television shows. As a result, black motherhood is 
a highly contested term in black cultural studies. Russell goes on 
to suggest that the black female viewer is caught in an ethical bond 
with a number of responses open to her: “stoic detachment, awkward 
ambivalence, derisive laughter, deep embarrassment, stunning rage” all 
buttressed by a need to distance oneself from the “detestable image on 
the screen” (137). Th is range of responses is interesting for what it shows 
about the limited ways we are asked to evaluate these images. Like Collins 
and hooks, Russell can fi nd no oppositional space within depictions of 
female criminals and no virtue in the depiction of female vice. I’m not 
interested in vilifying or recuperating these characters, but critical reluc-
tance to engage them is a problem, particularly given our voracious 
consumption of these images. While we can condemn these images of 
complicit mothers, a more useful approach would be to take their choices 
seriously and analyze why these fi ctional women seek refuge in crime 
for their families and what the criminal network off ers them.


--- PAGE 161 ---
152 THE WIRE : URBAN DECAY AND AMERICAN TELEVISION
Donette, Brianna, and the Barksdale Code
While the fi rst seasons center on the relationship between Avon Barksdale 
and Russell “Stringer” Bell, the two male heads of the Barksdale enter-
prise, the women of the Barksdale family play signifi  cant roles in its 
complicated sex-gender system. Donette is the girlfriend of D’ Angelo 
Barksdale, a drug dealer and Avon’s nephew. We fi  rst see her when 
D’ Angelo brings her and their son to a neighborhood party organized by 
Avon. Stringer asks her to “C’mon, give us a twirl, let’s take a look, ” and 
it is clear she fi nds this inappropriate (1.02). Avon asks Stringer to get 
some food for her and remarks on her skinniness. D’ Angelo replies that 
she has a big appetite. Th e scene’s awkwardness is based on her body’s 
appetites being fodder for the men’s conversation. Th  ough neither 
Stringer nor Avon know her very well (when she and D’ Angelo fi rst walk 
in, Avon asks if this is their baby), they do not ask her any questions that 
would demonstrate that she has a life beyond D’ Angelo. To them she is a 
body whose function at that moment is to be scrutinized and discussed, 
the result of her reproductive capacities evaluated and admired. When 
Avon and D’ Angelo begin to talk, Avon hands the baby to a woman and 
tells her to be careful with his “little soldier, his little man” (1.02). While 
it can be argued that “soldier” is a term of endearment, in this context it 
also suggests that her son will be brought up to work for and defend 
the family business just like his father. While he will be loved and cared 
for, like all soldiers in Barksdale’s army, eventually he will be a dispos-
able pawn.
4
D’ Angelo is imprisoned for 20 years at the end of Season One, and 
Donette’s role within the organization shift s. When she fails to visit him 
on a regular basis, Avon and Stringer decide to school her on jailhouse 
protocol. Th ey fi  rst appeal to her loneliness and present themselves as 
viable social and economic alternatives to D’ Angelo. When Stringer 
comes to visit her, she off ers him one of D’ Angelo’s shirts, and when she 
bends over to place the shirt across his chest, she says, “Y ou know it’s a 
shame to let things go to waste” (2.03). While we can interpret the line 
to refer to her body, the line also connotes a sense that while she loves 
D’ Angelo, anyone can wear his clothes. Stringer can replace D’ Angelo 
both in his clothing and in his relationship. Th e show doesn’t go so far as 
to imply that Donette is sexually indiscriminate. Rather, the exchange


--- PAGE 162 ---
Barksdale Women: Crime, Empire, and the Production of Gender 153
suggests that her version of domesticity is constituted by the public side 
of Barksdale criminal dealings.
Stringer quickly lets Donette know that as D’ Angelo’s girlfriend she 
has a part to play in the Barksdale organization, namely giving comfort 
to her imprisoned boyfriend. He tells her that prison is very stressful on 
men and it is imperative that the women in their lives keep them teth-
ered to the outside world. “Only one thing he needs to be secure about, 
and if not then he might start thinking he can’t do that time and then we 
all got problems” (2.03). D’ Angelo’s personal relationship problems risk 
becoming a catastrophe for the entire organization. Donette is respon-
sible for fulfi lling a very diff erent familial need than the men who work 
for Avon. In the scene, her feminine role within the organization is 
emphasized by her pink clothes and the ring on her wedding-band 
fi nger. Th ough she is not legally D’ Angelo’s wife, she is expected to fulfi ll 
the duties as if she were; she must be his sweet thing.
5 Th is becomes even 
more interesting in light of the message Th e Wire  sends about the aff ec-
tive bonds of law. Th e state structures family ties through the institutions 
of marriage; the modern family is constituted by the law. Stringer, 
Donette, and the other members of the Barksdale organization do not 
allow their economic gain to be bound by the law, just as they don’t let 
the law determine who their family is. Th ey sell illegal substances, use 
illegal weapons, and do not allow the law to dictate their aff  ective ties. 
Th ough she and D’ Angelo are not together anymore, Donette continues 
to fi ll a necessary function in the Barksdale organization through her 
domesticity.
In case Donette isn’t moved by emotion, Stringer makes an economic 
appeal and shift s from treating her like a family member to treating her 
like the spouse of an injured employee. D’ Angelo’s hard work as a drug 
lieutenant has allowed her to have an apartment, car and money, and 
even though D’ Angelo is in prison, Avon continues to support her as 
D’ Angelo would. Stringer tells her, “We all got a job to do, and your job is 
to let D’ Angelo know we still family” (2.03). Gender is central to the ways 
in which social relations are negotiated, built, and secured. Donette chal-
lenges these relations when she refuses to go to the prison, and Stringer 
must put her back in her place. Th e show highlights the interdependence 
of male and female gender roles as D’ Angelo’s continued cooperation 
relies upon Donette’s feminized dependence on the masculine strength


--- PAGE 163 ---
154 THE WIRE : URBAN DECAY AND AMERICAN TELEVISION
of the crew. D’ Angelo is constantly reminded of the good job that his 
family has done for his girlfriend and son. Donette is being paid for her 
important domestic functions.
Th is arrangement is not egalitarian, however. Certainly, if Donette 
wanted to leave D’ Angelo and make a new life with another man, she 
would become a target for the organization. Th e danger of girlfriends on 
the show is that there is no telling how much their men have told them 
about the inner workings of the organizations. To remedy that problem, 
Stringer has sex with her. Th  is is important because throughout the 
scene she fl irts with him, but rather than call her actions inappropriate 
and admonish her for wanting to have sex, he gives in to her advances 
and acts as a sexual substitute. Stringer recognizes that if Donette is 
not satisfi ed sexually, there will be a greater likelihood that she will go 
outside of the organization to fi  nd another man, potentially passing 
on sensitive information. As the shot ends, the camera pans across the 
couch to the end table where we see a number of pictures of Donette and 
D’ Angelo. If the show implies that she wants to move on from that rela-
tionship, her sexuality is made safe by having her be with Stringer. 
Stringer does not allow her to explore what split affi  nities could arise if 
she were to have a relationship with anyone outside of the Barksdale 
crew. Recognizing the danger of her sexuality, they want her to use her 
femininity on their terms, and they want to keep it contained within the 
organization.
Th ough Stringer sends her on a mission to keep D’ Angelo feeling like 
he is a part of the organization, D’ Angelo clearly wants out of the crew 
and disputes her claim that Avon and Stringer support their relationship 
and their desire to raise their son. By the end of her tenure on the show, 
Donette has mourned the deaths of both D’ Angelo and Stringer, and in 
her last scene she cries alone on the couch while her son plays nearby 
(3.12). In a short time, she has had to bury two men that she loved, and 
with the fall of the Barksdale empire, it is unclear what her future holds. 
She is never depicted with other family members. She is not even given 
a last name; she is literally not a Barksdale. In her situation, black female 
sexual desire was used to crystallize the hierarchy of black masculinity 
and to maintain ties between them. Like a chess piece, she is moved 
from one man to another, and in the end she is abandoned.


--- PAGE 164 ---
Barksdale Women: Crime, Empire, and the Production of Gender 155
While Donette represents the ways romantic ties are used to manipulate 
people within the organization, Brianna Barksdale represents a more 
successful negotiation of maternal ties. Brianna is Avon’s sister, D’ Angelo’s 
mother, and a key player in the organization. We fi rst see her when she 
brings a special lunch to D’ Angelo while he is working in the Terrace. 
She gets the food from Sterling’s, a local restaurant, and while D’ Angelo 
is familiar with the restaurant, Wallace, one of the young men he super-
vises, is not. Th e show juxtaposes Wallace’s limited exposure to the world 
outside of the Terrace with Brianna’s easy movement in and out of the 
Terrace. Th ough the car she drives is a direct result of the work that 
boys like Wallace do, their labor allows her to not be bound to poverty 
like they are. Bringing food to D’ Angelo places her squarely within 
traditional representations of motherhood.
When D’ Angelo is arrested in the rental car with drugs, Brianna’s 
maternal instincts cause her to challenge her brother. Like Donette, she 
is reminded that all of the material comforts she enjoys are dependent 
upon D’ Angelo’s cooperating with Avon and not sharing information 
with the police. Th eir reliance on D’ Angelo puts them all in precarious 
relationships, but again, the men of the organization pretend that it is 
only the women who benefi  t and do not work. However, because 
Brianna is also Avon’s sister and has been around the work all her life, 
she calls him on his lax supervision and is very angry that he would 
jeopardize her son’s freedom so carelessly. Avon tells her that she needs 
to use her position as D’ Angelo’s mother to remind him of his commit-
ment. Avon is able to manipulate D’ Angelo’s close ties to his mother in 
order to keep his empire strong. Brianna tells him, “Y ou ain’t gotta worry 
about my child. I raised that boy, and I raised him right” (1.12). While 
she knows that D’ Angelo is being used as a pawn, she still demands that 
he be treated with respect. Her dual role provides an important context 
for understanding her cooperation and complicity with crime. Unlike 
Donette, whose infl uence remains limited to the domestic, Brianna can 
articulate motherhood and deploy it to sanction her own participation 
in the business. She successfully mobilizes the construction of mother-
hood to stake her claim in Barksdale politics.
Brianna is also regarded as a trusted leader within the organization, a role 
that is unusual in televisual depictions of female criminals. When Avon is


--- PAGE 165 ---
156 THE WIRE : URBAN DECAY AND AMERICAN TELEVISION
released from jail, she tells him that she and Stringer will rebuild their 
earnings while he sits back. Until the police stop watching him so closely, 
she will handle the money and Stringer will handle the drugs. Th ough 
Brianna is conventionally feminine in many ways (marked most obvi-
ously in her makeup and clothing), in this scene she is also marked as 
being much like the men. While Avon and Stringer wear plain beige 
shirts, she stands out in a low-cut red outfi t. She smokes a cigarette in a 
nonchalant way, making it clear that she is not nervous when talking 
about the drug game. She stands with her arms folded, in an exact physi-
cal echo of Stringer’s body language. Th e scene makes the three of them 
look like a united front. Th ey respect her opinion and follow her advice; 
she is given the same number of lines in the scene as they are. When 
they get to the subject of D’ Angelo, she is both mother and employer, 
telling Avon that she will visit aft er she situates the new drug buy. She 
speaks to Avon as both a sister and a partner, telling him that he will 
defi nitely pay for D’ Angelo’s service. Th e action of the scene literally 
revolves around the effi  ciency and maternity of her body, and during 
this time of crisis, she is burdened with a wide range of Barksdale poli-
cies and practices.
When D’ Angelo wants to leave his family behind and “breathe like 
regular folk, ” his mother’s visit becomes even more important (2.06). 
She tells him he has two choices: do the time or step into Avon’s place 
and let him do it. Either way, he must fulfi  ll his place in the family. 
Brianna warns him that if he talks to the police he will bring down the 
entire family: “ All of us. Me and Trina and the cousins” (2.06). Th e job of 
women here is to remind men of their masculine duties. Th ough she is 
a trusted advisor in the organization and certainly not incarcerated, 
Brianna manipulatively constructs herself, Donette, Trina, and the 
children as all being dependent upon D’ Angelo, Avon, and the rest of the 
men. It then becomes D’ Angelo’s job to keep his mouth shut and save 
them all from living “down in the fucking Terrace . . . on scraps” (2.06) 
She even goes so far as to say that without the game they might not be a 
family. Th eir familial ties are strengthened by their participation in
illegal activities, and this is the logic on which gender roles are con-
structed. When the organization needs the women to look pretty and be 
helpless, they do it. When it needs them to be fi erce leaders, they do that 
too. Donette and Brianna are required to perform a fl  exibility that is


--- PAGE 166 ---
Barksdale Women: Crime, Empire, and the Production of Gender 157
integral to the workings of the group. Th  ey represent the complex 
negotiations that occur between and among diff erent constituencies in 
the imperial context.
Like Father, Like Son
If Donette represents the mother in limbo whose son might carry on the 
legacy of his dead father, and Brianna sacrifi ces her son for the sake of 
family, De’Londa Brice’s entire life is built upon the ambitious dream 
of running the empire even aft er her ties to it are severed. Th e drama of 
De’Londa and her son Namond plays out like a younger version of 
Brianna and D’ Angelo, and, like Donette, she was also romantically 
involved with one of Avon’s employees. However, unlike Brianna, she 
has no qualms about exposing her son to the harshness of street life. 
Brianna uses her closeness to Avon to negotiate for more safety and 
better working conditions for D’ Angelo while De’Londa uses her 
tenuous ties to the Barksdale organization for her own self-interest. 
When we meet De’Londa, Wee-Bey has already been imprisoned for 
life, and she is being supported by a pension from the Barksdale organi-
zation. Like the other women, she is accustomed to certain material 
comforts, but unlike the other women, she depends upon her boyfriend’s 
good name and on her son in order to maintain them.
De’Londa is introduced in the show’s fourth season, a season which 
revolves around the home and life of four boys, Namond Brice, Randy 
Wagstaff , Michael Lee, and Duquan Weems. Out of all these boys, 
Namond is the only one who has a biological mother who cares for him. 
Duquan’s family consists of drug addicts who steal his clothes and aban-
don him; Michael’s mother sells groceries for drugs; and Randy lives with 
a foster mother. If we follow the conventional cultural logic, De’Londa is 
the most successful mother of the bunch. Unlike the other boys, Namond 
wears nice clothes and has all the latest video games and stereo equip-
ment because his mother wants the best for him. With this comes the 
expectation that he should continue to live the life of a soldier’s son. Th is 
is in stark contrast to Michael’s mother who, when detectives come by to 
look for him, only knows the he and his brother have found their own 
place to live. She tells them, “I popped him and Bug out my ass, and they 
forgot where they came from” (5.06). We can never forget where Namond


--- PAGE 167 ---
158 THE WIRE : URBAN DECAY AND AMERICAN TELEVISION
comes from because De’Londa never has a scene without him or his 
father, and we rarely see her outside of a domestic setting.
Being the son of De’Londa Brice is not without its hardships. In a 
move that mirrors the fi rst two seasons, Namond decides that he does 
not want to be in the family business. Th  is is when the show deploys 
another conventional female role: keeper of traditions. It is De’Londa’s 
job to remind Namond of all the sacrifi ces she and his father have made 
for him; she does not appear fragile or dependent. Th ough Wee-Bey is in 
jail for life without parole, she uncritically holds him up as an example to 
follow. Th eir confrontation reaches new heights when she yells at him 
for not beating up Kenard, a younger boy who stole drugs Namond was 
to sell. Namond wants to use diplomacy to solve the problem, while his 
mother wants Kenard to “feel some pain for what he did”:
De’Londa: Th is how you pay me back for all the love I showed? Shit, 
I been kept you in Nikes since you were in diapers.
Namond: What he done got him locked up.
De’Londa: Th at’s right. Wee-Bey walked in Jessup a man, and he 
gonna walk out one. But you out here, wearing his 
name, acting a bitch! Aw, look at you, crying now. 
(4.12)
De’Londa transforms familial love into contractual obligation; Namond 
owes her loyalty and fi nancial comfort because she has provided nice 
material things for him. However, Namond points out the inherent con-
tradiction of the contract. Familial love is acted out by participating in 
illegal activities, but the punishment for those activities, in this case 
prison, breaks families apart. Wee-Bey was a good provider, but now he 
is in jail and is unable to do anything for them. Th e only way for Namond 
to show that he loves his mother is to take care of her in a way that will 
lead to his own imprisonment or death; he must sacrifi ce himself for her 
happiness. In pointing out that his tears are inappropriate, De’Londa 
polices the boundaries between the feminine and the masculine.
6 She 
has an obsessive fi xation on teaching Namond how to be a man by forc-
ing him to be like a man he rarely sees. It is only in her stories about him 
that Wee-Bey attains model status. Later, when the police call her aft er 
Namond runs away, she says, “Put that bitch in baby booking where he


--- PAGE 168 ---
Barksdale Women: Crime, Empire, and the Production of Gender 159
belongs. Let him learn something” (4.10). In a season that revolves 
around education and the Baltimore public school system, we see a 
mother who believes that the penitentiary would serve as the best 
academy for her son. She does not talk to her son aft er this pronounce-
ment, suggesting that prison will be the fi nal shaper of his male identity. 
Eventually the show off  ers alternative caregivers for Namond as it 
attempts to separate familial ties from economic ones. Howard “Bunny” 
Colvin off ers to take Namond into his home and show him a diff  erent 
way to live under a diff  erent type of masculine authority. Colvin’s 
home represents a chance for Namond to have a present father fi  gure, 
but more importantly for the show’s argument, for him to have an 
appropriate mother fi gure.
De’Londa uses her son in order to stay connected to the Barksdale 
crew aft er it crumbles. She feels that she is teaching Namond to be an 
upstanding citizen in a criminal community. While they are not law-
abiding citizens, she teaches him that to participate in the underground 
economy of drug selling, certain characteristics are desirable. Th ere is 
intense sadness in her voice when she realizes that the change in her son’s 
prospects also necessitates a separation from her. When Colvin visits 
Wee-Bey, he says, “Y our boy is smart and funny and open-hearted . . . 
He could go a lot of places and do a lot of things with his life. Be out 
there in the world in a way that, you know, didn’t happen for you and 
me” (4.13). Colvin portrays the life he can give Namond as being vastly 
more expansive than the one De’Londa can off er. Namond is being given 
the chance for a legal life, a life where social class and material posses-
sions are not jeopardized by police and incarceration. Colvin appeals to 
Wee-Bey using shared memories of the West Side and tells him that 
the game he ran is not the same one in which his son will participate. 
He diff erentiates the two of them from a new generation by saying that 
the new crews have “no code, no family. ” Th  is generational shift   is 
emphasized in the lack of female characters in Marlo Stanfi  eld’s crew. 
His crew is not bound by blood, and Felicia “Snoop” Pearson, its only 
woman, is consistently masculinized. Th  e show no longer portrays 
female counterparts to the male criminals fulfi lling feminine roles. Th e 
new women are killing machines.
Th ough the show portrays strong women who break the law, we are 
always reminded that their strength is a result of how well they perform


--- PAGE 169 ---
160 THE WIRE : URBAN DECAY AND AMERICAN TELEVISION
their assigned roles. Black mothers do not hold all the cards. Colvin 
tells Wee-Bey that Namond’s future is up to him, and does so without 
involving De’Londa. Th e later exchange between Namond’s parents is 
fascinating for the way it maps gender and parental roles. Wee-Bey is 
depicted as wanting Namond to have a life full of opportunities, while 
De’Londa’s only concern seems to be how Namond ties her to Wee-Bey, 
and by extension, to the now fallen Barksdale organization:
Wee-Bey: Y ou put him out, huh?
De’Londa: He need to get hard.
Wee-Bey: If he out, then he out.
De’Londa: Oh no you not. Y ou ain’t gonna take my son away from 
me, not for this—
Wee-Bey: Remember who the fuck you talking to right here. 
Remember who I am. My word is still my word. In 
here, in Baltimore, and in any place you can think of 
calling home, it’ll be my word. Th ey’ll fi nd you.
De’Londa: So, did you cutting me off  too?
Wee-Bey:  Y ou still got me. We’ll get by. But you gonna let go of 
that boy. Bet that. (4.13)
Lest we believe that De’Londa is in control, Wee-Bey makes it known 
that even from jail he has the ability to send people out to hurt her if she 
does not do as he wishes. Like the other Barksdale women, De’Londa’s 
freedom is tempered by the tremendous burden she carries and by an 
implicit threat of violence. Having a boyfriend and a son whose lives are 
shaped by their participation in crime shapes her understanding of 
womanhood. She is desperate aft er having been cut off  by the Barksdale 
organization, and she has to rely on her son to fi  ll the economic need 
that Wee-Bey cannot and the Barksdales will not.
Representations of crime in black popular culture have focused 
primarily on men and masculinity. When women are discussed, they 
oft en exist solely as wives or mothers who support the men in their lives. 
Th e Wire  disrupts this narrative and suggests that womanhood, like all 
roles within capitalism, is not without a desire for self-preservation. Th e 
organization of crime depends upon the inherent gendered nature of 
domesticity, and women are just as invested in their own survival as


--- PAGE 170 ---
Barksdale Women: Crime, Empire, and the Production of Gender 161
men are. As a result, the show’s black mothers symbolize both assets and 
liabilities in their attempts to assert themselves within the organization. 
Th ese women are neither Madonna-like “angels of the hearth” nor the 
neglectful fallen women Collins and hooks describe. By using crime as 
a lens through which to understand more fully the nexus of women’s 
work in depictions of familial networks, Th e Wire  accepts and even 
embraces some stereotypical roles ascribed to black mothers and uses 
them to transform the horizons of the audience’s expectations.
Notes
1. Th ere is, of course, much to say about other forms of motherhood in the show, 
notably in Kima Greggs and Cheryl’s lesbian motherhood and Anna Jeff  ries’s foster 
mothering of Randy. I do not want to imply that these other forms of motherhood are 
unimportant to my discussion. In fact, in opening up forms of male parenting, Th e Wire  
makes signifi cant interventions in discussions of black parenting on television. See, for 
example, Michael and Duquan’s caring for Bug, Howard Colvin’s fostering of Namond, 
and Bubbles’s caring for Sherrod. Th e Wire  declines to make caretaking strictly the role 
of women.
2. I use the word empire deliberately both to suggest the control that Avon Barksdale 
has over broad areas of Baltimore and the ways that he uses family ties to sustain his 
operations.
3. Without overromanticizing the brutality of the Barksdale organization, they 
are depicted as family-oriented. By the end of Season Five, though, family structures 
break down. Michael Lee asks Chris Partlow to kill his stepfather, and Calvin “Cheese” 
Wagstaff  conspires with Chris Partlow and Felicia “Snoop” Pearson to have his uncle, 
Proposition Joe Stewart, killed.
4. In Season One, D’ Angelo teaches chess to two other drug dealers, Wallace and 
Preston “Bodie” Broadus. Th ey speak in metaphors which relate the chess game to drug 
game. In both settings, pawns “get capped quick” while “the king stay[s] the king” 
(1.03).
5. Mary J. Blige’s “Sweet Th ing” (1993) plays in the background during this scene.
6. Wee-Bey also tells Namond to cut off  his long hair, but because it makes him an 
easier target for the police.


--- PAGE 171 ---
162
11
After the Towers Fell: 
Bodie Broadus and the 
Space of Memory
Elizabeth Bonjean
Our interest in lieux de mémoire  where memory crystallizes and secretes itself has 
occurred at a particular historical moment, a turning point where consciousness of 
a break with the past is bound up with the sense that memory has been torn—but 
torn in such a way as to pose the problem of the embodiment of memory in certain 
sites where a sense of historical continuity persists. There are lieux de mémoire , sites 
of memory, because there are no longer milieux de mémoire , real environments 
of memory.
—Pierre Nora, “Between Memory and History: Les Lieux de Mémoire”
Th e day is bright in West Baltimore as three young African American 
men walk through the center of an alley framed by debris that lines the 
perimeter—castaway garbage cans, a tire, an old chair, a broken refrig-
erator. Th ese soldiers from Avon Barksdale’s crew trace familiar pathways 
to their destination—the Franklin Terrace Towers—their purposeful 
steps punctuated by the insistent orations of Mayor Clarence Royce and 
the cheering approval of a crowd. Navigating the public streets, Preston 
“Bodie” Broadus, Malik “Poot” Carr, and Herbert De’Rodd “Puddin” 
Hearns banter about their personal and collective histories lived on this 
spot, a long-held Barksdale drug traffi  cking territory (3.01). Th e soldiers’


--- PAGE 172 ---
After the Towers Fell: Bodie Broadus and the Space of Memory 163
journey to the Towers is interspersed with Mayor Royce’s pronouncements 
of the promising future that will thrive on this ground. Distracted by the 
pageantry of the occasion and their desire for a safer environment, the 
community overlooks the economic realities of what redevelopment 
might mean for them in terms of aff ordable housing and the remaking 
of what Liam Kennedy has termed the “space as a social product” for the 
City of Baltimore (8). Instead they are blinded by the ingratiating smile 
of the mayor standing on a platform with a patriotic red, white, and blue 
banner as his backdrop. Attempting to intertwine Royce’s identity with 
the site of transformation, the signage reads: “Building for the Future. 
New Beginnings for West Baltimore, ” with credit given to “Mayor 
Clarence V . Royce” in disproportionately larger letters than the “citizens 
of Baltimore. ” Royce lays further claim to the space by calling for a 
forgetting of all the ills that came to be associated with the Towers in 
order to make way for a new community.
As Bodie, Poot, and Puddin arrive at the Towers, they are ironically 
separated from their history and memories by a police street barricade; 
the soldiers stand watch as the assembly of onlookers takes part in a 
collective countdown to the demolition. Despite Bodie’s bravado that 
the Towers are a housing project that should have been “blown up a long 
time ago, ” he is transfi xed by the violent spectacle as explosives are 
detonated and the fi rst of the two Towers crumbles. An intense surge of 
smoke blankets the blue sky, billowing out onto the street where a green 
traffi  c light seems to signify its unexpected arrival. We continue to con-
nect with Bodie’s experience of the event as the sound of his voice is 
heard exclaiming, “Oh shit” as clouds of dust overwhelm the crowd. 
Bodie’s words lead us to an image of the second tower collapsing and an 
environment suddenly overcome by elements it had sought to eradicate: 
even in its death, the essence of the Towers cannot be easily contained. 
As at-home viewers, we are voyeurs of this fi ctional event, yet instantly 
are transported back in time to 11 September 2001 when Americans—
and the world—witnessed the collapsing World Trade Center Towers in 
New Y ork City replayed over and over on television. Th is reimagining 
of 9/11 excludes the terrorist element that perpetuated the attack, but 
remains fi xated on the locus of capitalistic enterprise and the aft ershocks 
that ripple through a community when it is destroyed by a powerful, 
outside force (DVD commentary 3.01). When this episode fi rst aired on


--- PAGE 173 ---
164 THE WIRE : URBAN DECAY AND AMERICAN TELEVISION
19 September 2004, the governors of New Y ork and New Jersey, along-
side New Y ork Mayor Michael Bloomberg, had only days before 
ceremoniously laid the cornerstone for the new Freedom Tower to be 
built at Ground Zero, with an accompanying memorial to “honor and 
remember those who lost their lives” (RenewNYC.org). Conversely, 
Mayor Royce avows that the footprints of West Baltimore’s towers are 
meant to be built over and forgotten; the people who subsisted there are 
deemed unworthy of remembering.
Th is chapter explores the powerful presence of the Towers as focal 
point in the surrounding community of family, home, school, and mar-
ketplace. Focusing on Bodie, I look at the Towers as representative of the 
Barksdale organization and their role in defi ning cultural space and in 
shaping the identity of the young black men who grow up within their 
social sphere. Amidst this environment and the eventual downfall of the 
Barksdale gang, Bodie’s growing need to locate himself in relationship to 
the iconic Towers moves him through stages of grief for people, codes, 
loyalty, respect, and territory. Th e illegal, violent terrain Bodie navigates 
complicates our comprehension of his losses. Th erefore it can be reveal-
ing to engage with a question philosopher Judith Butler asks in her 
post-9/11 work Precarious Life: “What counts as a livable life and a 
grievable death?” (xv). Questions such as this may lead to connections 
about what loss and grief in the world of Th e Wire  can teach us about 
our own humanity before and aft er the Towers fell. We might wonder, as 
Butler does, about the transformative possibilities for individuals and 
for society as a whole, when given freedom to openly grieve a painful 
loss (21–23). We might reconsider a question of what constitutes valu-
able life by searching for the possibilities of hopefulness in a warring 
humanity.
Before the Towers Fell
Th e Franklin Towers are established as cultural markers in the initial 
episode of Th e Wire  as D’ Angelo Barksdale arrives at his place of busi-
ness only to be demoted from this prime territory until he can prove 
himself (1.01). Th e Towers’ looming signifi  cance is later shown in 
relationship to the neighboring low-rises, another Barksdale territory 
referred to as “the Pit. ” In this space, crew members are educated


--- PAGE 174 ---
After the Towers Fell: Bodie Broadus and the Space of Memory 165
in the rules of the drug game as they dream of someday working 
their way up to a position in the Towers. Th e fi rst glimpse of Bodie is 
in the center courtyard of the Pit, seated alone atop an orange couch. 
Bodie is 16 years old, but his eyes look older than his years as he 
watches over the area. His time in the game has made him smart 
about people and procedures, while his strong dedication to the 
Barksdale gang as family sets him apart from his friends and 
co-workers, Poot and Wallace.
Th ough a Barksdale by blood, D’ Angelo does not have the edge 
that his relatives and other members of the Barksdale crew possess; 
his uncle Avon reprimands him for his “emotional” responses to situ-
ations, while Avon’s business partner, Russell “Stringer” Bell lectures 
D’ Angelo about the importance of never “show[ing] weakness” to 
others. Ever watchful, Bodie observes D’ Angelo’s soft  ness with his 
employees and customers, and he is at times frustrated by D’ Angelo’s 
nonviolent choices in dealing with the shortcomings of others. Bodie’s 
own response to such situations is to react quickly and sharply, as 
when Bubbles’s friend Johnny attempts a con with fake money. Caught 
and detained by the Pit crew, Johnny is beaten by a furious Bodie, who 
declares that Johnny should be “thrown onto the expressway” as just 
punishment (1.01). Witnessing Johnny’s fear, D’ Angelo’s approach is to 
talk quietly to him and take the real money Johnny possesses. An 
incredulous Bodie waits for a directive to right the wrong committed 
against them, but D’ Angelo simply walks away. Y et Bodie will not let 
the issue go without sending a message about respect, leading an attack 
that lands Johnny in hospital. What Stringer has classifi ed as weakness 
in D’ Angelo, is depicted here for the viewer as strength of character, a 
desire on D’ Angelo’s part to retain a “sense of human vulnerability” in 
his encounters with others as he endeavors to connect to a “collective 
responsibility” (Butler 44–45).
Th e steps that Bodie is prepared to take in order to assert the 
hierarchical power of the Barksdale gang in the West Baltimore 
drug-traffi  cking community, and his identity within it, are extreme 
and persistent, refl  ecting the rigid systems gang cultures employ in 
order to create and maintain their place in the social order. Elijah 
Anderson details the rules at work in African American street sub-
culture and how understanding and operating within the established


--- PAGE 175 ---
166 THE WIRE : URBAN DECAY AND AMERICAN TELEVISION
code system is necessary not only for survival on the streets, but to 
affi  rm and reaffi  rm one’s identity through actions that show a demand 
for respect:
Street culture has evolved what may be called a code of the streets, 
which amounts to a set of informal rules governing interpersonal 
public behavior, including violence. Th e rules prescribe both a 
proper comportment and a proper way to respond if challenged. 
Th ey regulate the use of violence and so allow those who are 
inclined to aggression to precipitate violent encounters in an 
approved way . . . At the heart of the code is the issue of respect—
loosely defi ned as being treated “right, ” or granted the deference 
one deserves. (82)
Anderson’s study of violence, poverty, and gang culture emphasizes how 
codes of behavior are instilled in children at a young age—through 
modeling adult interactions or hands-on mentoring from an older 
 family member who teaches them how to negotiate their way through 
the complexities of their social environment. Early indoctrination into 
the code leads to a lifetime of learning to read the nuances of people and 
conditions, and an active wrestling with one’s self-identity in relation-
ship to issues of respect. Such learned behaviors reinforce the code we 
see at work in the fi ctional streets of Th e Wire .
As Anderson documents, “Th e code revolves around the presenta-
tion of self. Its basic requirement is the display of a certain predisposition 
to violence” (86, 88), making Bodie’s keen sensitivity to interpreting the 
code all the more essential to the development of his character. A small 
but signifi cant negotiation of identity and respect surfaces when 
D’ Angelo interrupts Wallace and Bodie’s game of checkers, laughingly 
telling them they are playing the wrong game on a chess board (1.03). 
Adhering to the principle that one must never look weak, Bodie resists 
the interference and guards himself against D’ Angelo’s laughter, perceiv-
ing it as a move to embarrass Wallace and himself because they do not 
know how to do something the right way. Bodie eases into D’ Angelo’s 
tutelage when he grasps that D’ Angelo is not ridiculing their intellect, 
but simply wants to teach them the rules of the game. As Bodie and


--- PAGE 176 ---
After the Towers Fell: Bodie Broadus and the Space of Memory 167
Wallace engage with the rules of chess, they relearn the constructed 
nature of their parallel universe on the street. Here, Bodie enters into a 
moment of rare reciprocity with D’ Angelo when he pushes for tactics 
necessary to win the game. Th e pawns are “like the soldiers. Th ey move 
like this, one space forward only, ” D’ Angelo cautions.
Bodie: All right so . . . If I make it to the other end, I win?
D’ Angelo: If you catch the other dude’s king and trap it, then you 
win.
Bodie: But if I make it to the other end . . . I’m top dog.
D’ Angelo: No. It ain’t like that, look. Th e pawns in the game, they 
get capped quick. Th ey be out of the game early.
Bodie: Unless they some smart-ass pawns. (1.03)
Th is momentary negotiation of power and identity demonstrates Pierre 
Nora’s concept of a milieu de mémoire —the social space of memory-
making within a community. Nora describes an environment of memory 
as a social memory that is active, always engaged in a process that 
requires an endless give-and-take between creating, instilling, forget-
ting, remembering, and re-creating as part of a living, breathing collective 
identity:
Memory is blind to all but the group it binds—which is to say, as 
Maurice Halbwachs has said, that there are as many memories 
as there are groups, that memory is by nature multiple and yet 
specifi c; collective, plural, and yet individual . . . Memory takes 
root in the concrete, in spaces, gestures, images, and objects. (9)
Th e everyday gestures within the Barksdale community are representa-
tive of social memory at work shaping a group identity. Like pieces on a 
chessboard that can be moved in a series of patterns, the Barksdale lead-
ership defi nes and redefi nes its social space for its members. A whistle, 
a hand gesture, a rotating stash house, a pager, a cell phone—these are 
all external, concrete locations of memory in operation, inscribing a 
system of order, hierarchy, and respect. Th e milieu de mémoire of the


--- PAGE 177 ---
168 THE WIRE : URBAN DECAY AND AMERICAN TELEVISION
Pit functions within the larger context of the Barksdale environment as 
a whole. Y et this subgroup is charged with the infl uence of D’ Angelo in 
the remembering, forgetting, and rethinking of their social practices. 
From handling the altercation with Johnny, to teaching the rules of the 
game to Bodie and Wallace, D’ Angelo negotiates the social space with 
compassion, humor, and the free sharing of knowledge. Such altera-
tions to the defi ning of the social space of the Pit make room for the 
reimagining of self-identity in the social world of the Barksdale gang 
and in the social life of West Baltimore. For Bodie, the discovery that 
there is a remote chance that he can move beyond the role of a soldier 
means he can aspire to a longer, more successful life. In time, the 
infl uential experiences of working under the Barksdale organization 
and under D’ Angelo as an individual will cause Bodie to integrate 
memories of the Pit into the Barksdale group code, ultimately infusing 
the rules of the game with not only nuances of professional possibility 
for himself, but a fuller appreciation of individual and collective 
responsibilities.
If, as Nora reminds us, “memory is by nature multiple and yet spe-
cifi c; collective, plural, and yet individual” (9), then Bodie’s memories 
are not only shaped by the Barksdale culture, but by his personal memo-
ries living life in the socially-devalued territory of West Baltimore. In 
this environment, a common family element is the vital role of grand-
mothers in child-rearing due to absent or economically challenged 
parents (Rosenblatt and Wallace xvi–xviii; Shelden, Tracy, Brown 
83–87). Y et as widespread as these conditions are, the lived experience 
of their realities is uniquely individual. In fi rst encountering Bodie we 
can readily identify him with the customary associations of youth in 
gang subculture: he is angry and violent, he adheres to the street code, 
and he is involved in illegal activity. Th e introduction of Bodie’s grand-
mother is a point of departure for understanding the personal 
environment of memory that has helped mold Bodie’s self-identity. In 
search of Bodie aft er he has assaulted a police offi  cer and subsequently 
escaped from a juvenile detention center, police offi  cers Th omas “Herc” 
Hauk and Ellis Carver aggressively enter Bodie’s grandmother’s house, 
hunting unsuccessfully for her grandson. As he is about to leave, Herc 
takes a moment to look at the home he has just stormed through and 
sees the human dignity in the face of the woman who quietly folds


--- PAGE 178 ---
After the Towers Fell: Bodie Broadus and the Space of Memory 169
laundry in her front room. Herc speaks to her and apologizes for his 
brash behavior and silently receives her unexpected reply:
Is it the drugs again?
Herc nods.
Would you like to sit down?
He sits.
Preston came to me when my daughter died. He was four years 
old. But even then, I knew he was angry. His mother lived out 
there, caught up in it. Aft  er a while, you couldn’t make her see 
nothin’ else. So how you think you gonna carry it? (1.04)
Bodie’s grandmother disrupts the dehumanizing strategies that oft  en 
brand marginalized members of society. In her minimalistic narrative, 
Bodie’s grandmother contextualizes the harsh entity of West Baltimore 
as a place of lived histories and memories that have meaning to indi-
viduals and families. In restating how her daughter lived and died, the 
grandmother simultaneously reinscribes her daughter’s memory into 
the landscape of her home environment as a mother and daughter, and 
into the space of the community as a participant in a culture that culti-
vates drug addiction and drug traffi  cking, marking the community as 
complicit in her daughter’s death. Bodie’s place as an innocent child in 
this story elicits compassion from Herc and provides a new lens with 
which to view Bodie: no longer another essentialized young black gang 
member from the streets, he is an individual with a face and borne of 
circumstances.
In the private social space of his grandmother’s home, the memory of 
Bodie’s mother lives, for “memory is life . . . [i]t remains in permanent 
evolution, open to the dialectic of remembering and forgetting, uncon-
scious of its successive deformations, vulnerable to manipulation and 
appropriation, susceptible to being long dormant and periodically 
revived” (Nora 8). Bodie’s memory-making of his mother did not stop at 
the age of four with her physical death, but moves in multiple directions 
from that point, recapturing recollections from the fi rst few years of his 
life and the memories formed in her absence. Bodie’s personal memo-
ries are in dialogue with those sheltered by his grandmother—photographs 
of family adorn the walls of her home and look out from shelves and


--- PAGE 179 ---
170 THE WIRE : URBAN DECAY AND AMERICAN TELEVISION
tables as if arrested in time. Together, they constitute resistance to the 
hierarchies of “grievable life” that Butler exposes, which allow some 
people to remain undeserving of any gesture of mourning because of 
race, creed, class, nationality, or politics. Hierarchies of grief are possi-
ble, Butler explains, when hierarchies of life exist. A system like this 
orders individuals in terms of societal worth, and categorizes people 
into group entities—things—devoid of all personal background and all 
qualities that make us uniquely human (32). Th e particularized memo-
ries Bodie and his grandmother retain, combined with the physical 
objects of their shared family history and memories which remain alive 
in their home, rupture the narrative myth of the dominant culture which 
excludes African American gang subculture from human conditions of 
family, love, and felt loss.
Such hierarchies overlook the pressures of individual survival in 
African American subcultures where life in racialized and violent com-
munities oft en means that very young children lose their parents, 
making “the support of a close family member . . . extraordinarily impor-
tant”: the need to have someone in that role feeds feelings of abandon-
ment by the parent who has died (Rosenblatt and Wallace 64). In this 
way, the death of Bodie’s mother can be interpreted as an abandonment 
that stimulates an unresolved grief Bodie carries with him. As he 
searches for a solidity to her presence in the past and in his present, 
Bodie must continually reposition himself, reminded when he bumps 
up against absence that memory is fl uid.
Like memory, grief is a process—it fl  ows, changes directions, gets 
buried, resurfaces, adapts. As part of the warring Barksdale organiza-
tion, Bodie’s personal losses mount, as do the strains of memory. Th  e 
fi rst of Bodie’s fresh losses will haunt him for the remainder of his life 
due to the unique circumstances: it is Bodie himself who brings about 
the death, and the victim is not a member of a rival gang, but his child-
hood friend, Wallace (1.12). Trapped in a downward spiral aft  er the 
brutal murder of Omar’s lover, Brandon, an overwrought Wallace feels 
complicit and assuages his guilt with drugs. As the Barksdales grow 
suspicious of Wallace’s loyalty to the organization and his strength of 
character, Stringer charges Bodie to carry out Wallace’s murder. Bodie 
and Poot accept this turning point in the game, realizing that as sol-
diers they must maintain the front line. Y et Poot is reluctant to eliminate


--- PAGE 180 ---
After the Towers Fell: Bodie Broadus and the Space of Memory 171
his friend, while Bodie steels himself to the personal side of their 
assignment.
Th e coldness Bodie harnesses in order to rationalize and carry out 
the impending murder is increasingly intensifi ed at the murder scene 
as Bodie is confronted with the living, breathing human being of his 
friend. Bodie fi ghts his vulnerability, verbally denouncing Wallace as a 
“weak-ass nigger, ” a “boy” who needs to “stand up straight” and “be a 
man. ” Listening to the barrage of insults, an emotionally distressed Poot 
can no longer bear Wallace’s trauma and implores Bodie to shoot him. 
In a defi ning moment of what Elisabeth Kübler-Ross and David Kessler 
describe as “anticipatory grief ” (1), Bodie hesitates. Standing fi  xed in 
place, the only movement seen is the shaking of his hands in apprehen-
sion of pulling the trigger and completing the act; Bodie enters into a 
momentary “state of limbo” with his grief where “fear of the unknown” 
and the reality of the coming loss of Wallace co-mingle (1, 4). In On 
Grief and Grieving, Kübler-Ross and Kessler emphasize that to be stuck 
for any length of time in an emotional abyss, terrifi ed of the unknowable 
and of the future pain we will experience in respect to loss, is a founda-
tional element of anticipatory grief. Th eir outline of the grieving process 
and its fi ve stages of grief—denial, anger, bargaining, depression, and 
acceptance—is modeled on Kübler-Ross’s renowned examination of 
how human beings come to terms with the fi nal stages of life in On Death 
and Dying, and is useful here in exploring Bodie’s personal journey in 
relationship to loss.
Because gang subculture operates in relation to power and violence, it is 
rife with the tenuous nature of life and death. Such conditions can breed 
a perpetual, if unacknowledged, fear of loss and pain among gang 
members. When an anticipatory or realized grief presents itself, the 
bargaining stage may take eff ect. Characterized by a sense of being “lost 
in a maze” of self-deception, bargainers enter into the language of 
“what if ” and “if only” statements as they try to alter the inevitable or 
actualized outcome of their loss (17). Th ough grief studies counsels that 
one must eventually endure sorrowful feelings in order to make prog-
ress in the grieving process, bargainers like Bodie are not yet ready and 
“will do anything not to feel the pain of this loss, ” including infl icting or 
wallowing in guilt (17). With this in mind, the scene of Wallace’s murder 
can be further explored.


--- PAGE 181 ---
172 THE WIRE : URBAN DECAY AND AMERICAN TELEVISION
Bodie’s bargaining begins as soon as he has the courage to point his 
gun at Wallace. Branding his friend with the accusation that he is “weak, ” 
Bodie belittles Wallace to manage his own guilt for the treacherous act 
he is about to commit (1.12). If another tactic of bargaining is to reverse 
the guilt, placing the blame on the other, then Bodie’s admonishment of 
Wallace as weak puts the responsibility for this deadly course of events 
on Wallace for not being stronger. Bodie’s further allegations aim to 
infantilize Wallace, targeting him as behaving like a “boy, ” and demand-
ing that he must “stand up straight” and be a man. In the bargaining 
language of “what ifs” and “if onlys, ” Bodie seems to indicate, “If only 
you could have grown up and behaved like a man, things would be dif-
ferent. ” With Anderson’s code of the streets enmeshed in Bodie’s grief 
process, Bodie wears a tough mask. He will, as Kübler-Ross and Kessler 
describe, “do anything not to feel this pain” (17), and so tries to force 
onto Wallace’s shoulders the weight of his own death through guilt and 
blame. Y et grief and memory-making are messy processes. In the space 
between the verbal prologue and pulling the trigger, Bodie’s hesitation 
betrays his harsh exterior. In the intimacy of this moment, Bodie wants 
and needs to erase his memories of Wallace, to render him faceless in 
front of the barrel of the gun. But Bodie cannot eff ectively dehumanize 
his friend. Th us when he does fi nally shoot the gun, Bodie leaves Wallace 
critically wounded, and Poot must fi nish the job. Th is violent act now 
complete, the intimate social environment of these three friends has for-
ever altered: it has “taken root in the concrete space” (Nora 9) of Wallace’s 
room in the low-rises, and now binds their individual and collective 
memories to it.
After the Fall
In the aft ermath of D’ Angelo’s murder (2.06), the demolition of the 
Franklin Towers (3.01), and the disintegration of the Barksdale gang 
(3.12), Bodie fi nds himself to be one of the last former Barksdale crew 
members on the street. Th e game has changed, as has his place in it. 
Pushed away from a prime corner by new king Marlo Stanfi  eld, Bodie 
runs a corner in territory that has no locus to replace the absent Towers 
and their symbolic resonance of productivity and a shared code for the 
community. Bodie is at sea. Slim Charles, another Barksdale survivor,


--- PAGE 182 ---
After the Towers Fell: Bodie Broadus and the Space of Memory 173
reminds Bodie, “ Ain’t like the old days, dog. Mayor Barksdale left . Y ou 
out here on your own, dog” (4.01). What persists is a small nucleus of 
associates Bodie surrounds himself with as family—including Poot and 
Little Kevin—reminiscent of the close-knit inner workings of the Pit 
under D’ Angelo’s management. When Little Kevin suddenly disappears 
from this world, it is a loss that destabilizes Bodie’s social environment 
even on this new corner, hindering the cohesiveness of a group identity 
shaped by their reciprocal network of memory-making. Th ough Bodie 
suspects Kevin’s absence means something is amiss, he remains in a state 
of denial, his grief suspended until he receives word from Slim Charles 
that Kevin’s vanishing is permanent: he has been killed by Marlo’s crew. 
Reeling from the news, Bodie stands alone on his corner—stunned by 
the reality of the loss and the eff ective erasure of Kevin from the social 
system (4.10).
Does the post-Towers world of Marlo Stanfi eld give way to a codeless 
community? Is it a space, as Judith Butler suggests of our post-9/11 
world, in which “certain lives are not considered lives at all” (34)? If so, 
Butler contends, human beings can be rendered faceless, nameless, 
deemed as unworthy of a “narrative, so that there never was a life, and 
there never was a death” (146). Marlo’s blatant disregard for humanity 
illustrates this point as his denial of human dignity is extended not just 
to the living, but the dead whom his crew entombs in vacant houses 
where he believes the faceless will be forgotten. One of the faceless, Little 
Kevin, begs Marlo’s crew before his death to be left  where his family and 
friends can fi nd him, so that they can give him a proper “home go, ” but 
even that small amount of dignity in death is not allowed to him (4.10).
If dehumanization is at work in the world of Th e Wire , then the 
reawakening of old wounds in Bodie following the loss of Kevin has 
purpose. Th e loss sets in motion a spiral of grief that demands Bodie’s 
full attention in order that he might reach personal acceptance of his 
pain, and along the way he might fully bear witness to who and what has 
been lost. One of the steps on Bodie’s journey is his opportunity to bear 
witness to D’ Angelo publically with the Barksdale family. Bodie’s choice 
of a material tribute reiterates the signifi cance of the Towers in the real-
world shaping of identity—the bonds between space and identity fused 
in a fl oral arrangement shaped like the Towers with the numbers “221” 
representing the Tower D’ Angelo took great pride in having once


--- PAGE 183 ---
174 THE WIRE : URBAN DECAY AND AMERICAN TELEVISION
managed (2.07). Th e other memorial he makes to D’ Angelo is in the
living form of a group system on the new corner modeled on D’ Angelo’s 
training and tactics. Bodie’s interactions with D’ Angelo in the Pit showed 
him the possibility of people being treated with decency and seen in all 
their humanity.
Bearing witness to loss within the social environment means the 
privacy of pain must be made public. In making meaning out of one’s 
inner life, what “one has learned and the person’s values, beliefs, and 
psychology” (Rosenblatt and Wallace 71–72) are oft en shared in narra-
tives, as Bodie’s grandmother demonstrates in her account to Herc. 
Sitting alone in a park with Offi   cer Jimmy McNulty, Bodie struggles 
with another stage of grief—the burden of depression—as he evaluates 
the conditions of his life and the frustrations that inform his narrative:
I feel old. I’ve been at this since I was thirteen. I ain’t never fucked 
up a count, never stole off  a package, never did some shit I wasn’t 
told to do. I’ve been straight up. But what’s come back? . . . Th ey 
want us to stand up with them, right? But where the fuck they at, 
when they supposed to be standing by us? . . . Th is game is rigged, 
man. We like them little bitches on a chessboard. (4.13)
It is a dark December night in West Baltimore as Bodie, Poot, and 
Spider work Bodie’s corner. Pawns or soldiers, these three men know the 
game and that they are under attack. Th e Towers are gone, yet Bodie 
stands tall on his corner in memory of those he has lost and grieved; the 
others fl ee. In full acceptance of his fate, Bodie shouts, “I’m right here!” 
calling attention to his territory and to his humanity—resisting in vain 
what Butler calls the “violence of derealization” (33), the exclusion from 
a hierarchal society that leaves him dead with no one from his commu-
nity by his side. Social environments of memory are collapsing. In their 
place, remembrances are being encased in sites of memory until we are 
ready to look at the footprint of our humanity and face our pain.


--- PAGE 184 ---
III
Twenty-fi  rst-Century 
Television


--- PAGE 185 ---
This page intentionally left blank


--- PAGE 186 ---
177
12
“The Dickensian Aspect”: 
Melodrama, Viewer Engagement, 
and the Socially Conscious Text
Amanda Ann Klein
One of the most frequently noted features of Th e Wire  is its realism or 
authenticity. Th e show is compelling television, many critics claim, 
because it is so “real” (Bowden), because of its “obsessive verisimili-
tude” (Weisburg) and because it is rooted in “primary sources” 
(Stanley). Th is focus on the so-called realism of Th e Wire , however, 
marginalizes the series’ reliance on the codes of melodrama—a mode 
that is frequently read in opposition to realism—in order to enlist 
viewer identifi cation. Linda Williams points out that “the word melo-
drama seems to name an archaic form—what vulgar, naïve audiences of 
yesteryear thrilled to, not what we sophisticated realists and moderns 
(and postmoderns) enjoy today” ( Playing 11–12). Indeed, melodrama, 
“a broad aesthetic mode existing across many media, ” is frequently 
characterized as excessive, old-fashioned, indulgent and in bad taste 
(Williams, Playing 12). In spite of these claims, melodrama has histori-
cally been deployed as a means for grappling with moral questions 
during times of moral uncertainty (Brooks 15). Most great melodramas, 
like Charles Dickens’ Oliver Twist  (1838), Harriet Beecher Stowe’s 
Uncle Tom’s Cabin (1852),  or Douglas Sirk’s Imitation of Life  (1959), 
have been produced during periods of social crisis when the balance


--- PAGE 187 ---
178 THE WIRE : URBAN DECAY AND AMERICAN TELEVISION
of power was fi rmly on the side of those who were determined to abuse 
it, when the powerless were routinely exploited or manipulated by the 
powerful, and when arcane laws of social decorum were driving 
individuals to despair. Th e sprawling story of Th e Wire  was also con-
ceived in a time of interlinked social crises: when the nation’s War on 
Drugs has failed (Season One); its unions are fraudulent, ineff  ective 
and dying (Season Two); its political system is irredeemably corrupt 
(Season Th ree); its schools are glorifi  ed daycare centers (Season Four); 
and the media is more concerned with selling stories than reporting 
the news (Season Five). And, like Dickens, Stowe, and Sirk, the cre-
ators of Th e Wire  rely on melodramatic codes as a method for generating 
viewer empathy and engagement. Standard conventions of melodrama 
include a focus on powerless victims, an emphasis on corruption 
and injustice as the primary source of confl  ict, and the characters’ 
frustrating inability to eff  ect change around them. Th  ese qualities 
encourage the viewer to experience outrage or indignation over the 
plight of the victim. Th ese tactics also function to place the weak on a 
higher moral plane than the powerful (Gaines 169).
Despite their reputation for being emotionally manipulative, 
escapist and/or improbable, most melodramas seek to uncover some 
ostensible truth about a social ill and to explain its existence and con-
sequences to the audience. Th e revelation of that truth is oft en marked 
through a visual tableau: a moment in which it is either “in the nick of 
time” or “too late” for a character with whom the audience has been 
encouraged to identify (Williams, “Melodrama” 69). For example, 
throughout Season One, Wallace, a young hopper in the Barksdale 
organization, has been characterized both as an innocent in need of 
protection and as a selfl ess custodian of numerous young orphans, two 
character traits that encourage the audience to identify with him. 
When he can no longer tolerate the profi table sadism of the drug trade, 
Wallace provides testimony to the Baltimore Police Department and 
then abandons the dangers of city for the relatively safe space of his 
grandmother’s house in “the country. ” Wallace eventually tires of this 
quiet life and returns to Baltimore in the season’s penultimate episode, 
a choice that will result in a conventionally melodramatic death scene 
(1.12). Wallace is killed by his old friends, Preston “Bodie” Broadus 
and Malik “Poot” Carr, and the two men must look their powerless


--- PAGE 188 ---
“The Dickensian Aspect”: Melodrama, Viewer Engagement, and the Socially Conscious Text 179
victim in the eyes before pulling the trigger. Furthermore, Wallace is 
murdered in the same room where his young charges sleep at night, 
thus converting this space of innocence and safety into a terrifying 
and bloody crime scene. Th  is violent tableau serves as a reminder 
of Wallace’s suff  ering and off  ers a wordless condemnation of the 
Baltimore system in which the innocent are passively slaughtered.
Th e Wire  relies on such melodramatic conventions (the powerless 
victim, the vivid scene of suff ering) in order to generate sympathy for 
characters that may not otherwise deserve it (drug dealers, murderers, 
corrupt politicians), but it diverges from other socially engaged, melo-
dramatic texts by constantly undercutting its ability to generate viewer 
aff ect. Aff ect—that deeply felt, visceral emotional response on the part 
of the viewer—is a key feature of the melodrama. It has been argued that 
this “excessive” viewer engagement with the melodramatic text (usually 
manifested in the form of tears) acts as a displacement or diversion away 
from the very real problems addressed by the text. Tears are “always a 
kind of false consciousness” since they take place when it is no longer 
possible for the viewer to intervene (Williams, Playing 31). In fact, 
crying may even take the place of action, since it provides the viewer with 
the satisfaction of having done something on the behalf of the victim. For 
this reason “melodrama” is frequently deployed as a pejorative term—as 
a dishonest or “politically constrained” method for engaging audience 
empathy (Gaines 178).
1
However, the audience’s relationship with the melodramatic text 
functions somewhat diff erently in Th e Wire. In this chapter I examine key 
melodramatic moments in all fi ve season fi nales—those moments in the 
narrative when many of the show’s key storylines are expected to yield 
satisfying, emotionally-charged conclusions—as a way to understand 
how the series engages and then denies or subverts several key melodra-
matic pleasures. Th ese pleasures include the catharsis of tears, narrative 
closure, moral legibility, individualistic solutions to social problems, 
and nostalgia. In this way the series  does not engage in the sleight of 
hand whereby generalized injustices are resolved through the salvation 
of the individual, or in which moral certainty is off ered as a viable solu-
tion to the otherwise complex realities of contemporary social problems. 
Furthermore, because the series constantly challenges its own aff  ect, 
the audience is left  feeling dissatisfi ed and agitated; anger, sadness and


--- PAGE 189 ---
180 THE WIRE : URBAN DECAY AND AMERICAN TELEVISION
outrage are not purged in a moment of intense emotional release. Th is 
uneasy viewing position is a central part of the specifi c audience engage-
ment that is created by the series.
The Denial of Narrative Closure
In the melodramatic mode, a last-minute rescue or an untimely death 
(or both) is always a possibility until the fi  nal or penultimate scene. 
Audiences remain riveted to the narrative, waiting to be carried, emo-
tionally and bodily, from moment to moment. Th is visceral aspect of the 
melodramatic mode, what James C. Whiting, editor of Th e Baltimore Sun 
in Season Five, once called “the Dickensian aspect, ” is particularly useful 
for engaging audiences in real life issues (5.06). Historically, this reliance 
on empathy has been central to the melodrama’s moral and social project 
of creating awareness of injustices (Williams, “Melodrama” 42). If empathy 
is not generated—if the audience is not made to feel—then the melo-
drama has failed. Th e Season One fi nale of Th e Wire  generates a powerful 
inducement to cry throughout the episode, and then undercuts this 
impulse in its fi nal moments. Although D’ Angelo Barksdale was a crew 
leader for his uncle Avon Barksdale (and thus a murderer), the series’ 
creators made him a possible point of identifi  cation by characterizing 
him as more confl icted than his peers and by revealing more of his life 
outside of the drug trade. For example, D’ Angelo is tortured by the murder 
of Wallace and bemoans his death in a typically melodramatic fashion, 
through self-blame and the futile desire to turn back time. “I needed to do 
more . . . I shoulda done more . . . Th at’s on me, ” he laments as he sits in 
an interrogation room, contemplating the loss of time that is so crucial 
to melodrama (1.13). D’ Angelo’s guilt over Wallace, combined with his 
desire to escape his untenable position by becoming “regular folk” has 
convinced him to turn state’s evidence in exchange for his freedom. 
D’ Angelo’s decision could potentially shut down the Barksdale crew for 
good, but by the end of the fi nale he changes his mind. Signifi cantly, the 
moment in which he makes this climactic decision is revealed to the 
viewer through secondary sources and employs several distancing strat-
egies to weaken the scene’s potential aff ect.
Th e scene begins when Assistant State’s Attorney Rhonda Pearlman 
gets a call from the New Jersey prison where D’ Angelo is being held.


--- PAGE 190 ---
“The Dickensian Aspect”: Melodrama, Viewer Engagement, and the Socially Conscious Text 181
Until this point the viewer, like Pearlman, is unaware that her “career 
fucking case” is in jeopardy. Th e camera then cuts to the New Jersey jail, 
and Maurice Levy, the corrupt Barksdale family lawyer, grabs the phone. 
Rather than remaining to listen as Levy gives Pearlman the bad news 
that D’ Angelo will not be their key witness (thereby destroying their 
case), the camera continues to pan to the left  , past Levy, to reveal 
D’ Angelo seated in a holding room in the background of the frame. Our 
view of D’ Angelo is partially obscured by jail bars and a smudged 
window and he appears small within the frame. His head hangs low and 
his mother, Brianna Barksdale, massages his shoulders. When she looks 
up, as if to meet the camera’s gaze, the image immediately cuts to a new 
scene. Th is scene adheres to the conventions of the melodrama in that 
this wordless display off ers a “bodily expression of what words could not 
fully say” (Williams, Playing 30) and yet the distance of these bodies 
from the camera, the iron bars and grimy window that obscure the 
characters, and their brief time on the screen fails to indulge the viewer’s 
desire for emotional catharsis. Th  roughout Season One, the viewer 
watches as a large corkboard charting the inner workings of the 
Barksdale clan is meticulously fi lled with photographs of key players. At 
the end of the season fi nale the board is empty again, not because the 
case has been solved, but because it has been closed. Th e empty board 
is a visual rendering of loss, for the police department, the District 
Attorney’s offi  ce, and presumably for justice. Furthermore, while the 
episode has led us to believe that Wallace’s death was not in vain—that 
it has encouraged D’ Angelo to do the right thing—in the fi nal moments 
of the episode our desire for justice is thwarted. We want to rail at 
D’ Angelo, to weep in frustration and anger, but the image and tone shift  
abruptly before these emotions can be properly vented. Th e end result is 
that viewer remains dissatisfi ed.
Moral Ambiguity and the Denial of Nostalgia
In Season Th ree, impending elections force the police department to 
doctor its crime statistics in order to salvage funding and to avoid further 
meddling from the Mayor’s offi  ce. In response to this pressure and to the 
near loss of one of his offi  cers in a routine drug bust, Major Howard 
“Bunny” Colvin hatches his plan for a “Free Zone” (which becomes


--- PAGE 191 ---
182 THE WIRE : URBAN DECAY AND AMERICAN TELEVISION
known as “Hamsterdam”), a defi ned area where junkies and drug dealers 
can conduct their business without intervention. Th  e offi  cers under 
Colvin’s command, as well as the drug dealers and junkies, are initially 
confused and even angry about this radical plan that essentially rewrites 
the rules of the American War on Drugs. One dealer even asks, “Why 
you got to go and fuck with the program?” (3.04). Th e arrangement is 
illegal and, more problematically, its success depends on the police being 
able to cultivate the trust of drug dealers and junkies. Indeed, the odds 
are stacked against Colvin and his project, but Hamsterdam continues 
to triumph over setback aft  er setback, from the elderly resident who 
refuses to abandon her home in the Free Zone to the BPD’s premature 
discovery of the arrangement. Hamsterdam succeeds in generating a 
precipitate drop in crime statistics, off ers an opportunity for aid workers 
to administer clean syringes and other medical care to drug addicts and 
sex workers, and leaves Baltimore’s residential corners free of shootings, 
drugs, and fear.
Viewers follow the highs and lows of Hamsterdam all season long, 
becoming increasingly invested in the experiment’s success. We have 
become frustrated with the failures of the police department and, like 
Colvin, see Hamsterdam as a potential, though radical, solution. But by 
the season fi nale, Hamsterdam is crawling with indignant reporters and 
politicians looking to capitalize on the self-destructive choices of others. 
We see Deputy Commissioner William Rawls joyfully give the order 
“Over the top gentlemen!” as he blares “Flight of the Valkyries” from his 
squad car—a nod to the famous scene in Francis Ford Coppola’s Apoca-
lypse Now (1979) in which American soldiers appear to enjoy fi rebomb-
ing a village of Vietnamese women and children. In the version of this 
scene in Th e Wire , hoppers and junkies are tackled mid-run, squad cars 
corner their prey, and one addict is even pulled out of a vacant building 
with his pants down. Th e viewer witnesses an orgy of supposed justice 
both at the street level and from above, since local news stations have 
deployed helicopters to capture the story. Had the season ended with 
this chaotic scene, the viewer could unambiguously mourn the end of 
Hamsterdam and its pathetic, seemingly unjust destruction.
Instead, the fi nale concludes with a plain-clothes Colvin surveying the 
ruins of his idea. Reginald “Bubbles” Cousins, who is there collecting 
scrap metal, approaches and gestures toward the wreckage surrounding


--- PAGE 192 ---
“The Dickensian Aspect”: Melodrama, Viewer Engagement, and the Socially Conscious Text 183
them: “Th at’s somethin’ , huh . . . Before a dope fi end come down here, cop 
a little somethin’ . Ain’t nary a soul hassle ’ em. Hoppers and police. Th ey 
just let ’ em be. ” Colvin smiles and nods, “It was a good thing, huh?” Here 
is the standard place where melodrama would generate its strongest 
emotional response from its engaged viewers. All season long we have 
empathized with Colvin’s radical idea, and therefore this shot of an empty, 
quiet block dotted with piles of bulldozed refuse—a sign announcing 
“HIV Testing” here, a bed post there—would typically encourage the 
viewer to mourn the end of Hamsterdam. However, Bubbles does not 
indulge Colvin’s (and by extension, the viewer’s) nostalgia. He shrugs 
and lowers his eyes, remarking, “I’m just saying, ” as he walks away. Th e 
melodramatic mode conventionally allows the viewer to weep with relief 
over the triumph of justice or anguish over the destruction of it by clearly 
identifying innocence and villainy. Indeed, Williams argues that the 
“quest for a democratic, plain-speaking recognition of innocence and 
guilt, a guilt or innocence that can be spoken out loud and seen by all,
is inherently melodramatic” (“Melodrama” 81). Th e Wire  subverts the 
conventional, black-and-white melodramatic morality by refusing to 
tell the audience whether the loss of Hamsterdam is something to be 
mourned or celebrated. Even Bubbles, who presumably had the most to 
gain from the Free Zone that granted him safe access to drugs as well 
as medical care, is ambivalent. Th e scene concludes with a long shot 
that cranes backwards, revealing ever more of the ravaged urban land-
scape. It is silent except for the rattling of Bubbles’s grocery cart over the 
broken road. Th en the shot fades to black without a clear demarcation of 
right and wrong. Th is fi nale lacks an explicit articulation of moral com-
pass, leaving the viewer lost in a thicket of values that they must parse on 
their own.
The Failure of the Good Benefactor
Th e introduction of a benefactor (an individual who intervenes in the 
aff airs of a destitute youth) places the burden of the victim’s survival on 
the shoulders of a kind-hearted stranger willing to do good. Th  is plot 
device is melodramatic since it relieves society of the burden of wide-
spread reform.2 Society does not need to change as long as a few wealthy 
individuals intervene in the nick of time. Th erefore, it is not surprising


--- PAGE 193 ---
184 THE WIRE : URBAN DECAY AND AMERICAN TELEVISION
that Season Four of Th e Wire , which focuses on how the city of Baltimore 
continues to fail its children, introduces the melodramatic device of 
the benefactor or advocate. In this season, the viewer is off  ered four 
Dickensian characters for viewer identifi  cation: Randy Wagstaff  is an 
orphan; Duquan “Dukie” Weems and Michael Lee are parented by drug 
addicts; and Namond Brice suff ers a lazy mother obsessed with money. 
Th e season encompasses many storylines (Professor David Parenti’s 
alternative education experiment, the rise of Marlo Stanfi  eld’s empire, 
the Mayoral elections) but these stories continually return focus to the 
boys and their fates. It is particularly useful to contrast the storylines of 
Randy and Namond since their fates are directly tied to the successful or 
unsuccessful interventions of their adult advocates.
Aft er his foster home is torched as retribution for “snitching, ” Randy 
fi nds himself homeless and once again ensnarled in the system, a victim 
of fate. Sergeant Ellis Carver, who feels responsible for Randy since the 
boy only agreed to testify at his urging, spends most of the episode try-
ing to keep Randy out of a group home, but ultimately fails to overcome 
the bureaucratic child services system. As they approach the group 
home, Randy tells the dejected Carver, “It’s okay. Y ou tried. Y ou don’t 
need to feel bad. Th  anks” (4.13). Carver is clearly startled by this 
exchange, by a 13-year-old attempting to calm the fears of an adult, but 
Randy’s words are not soothing. Instead this conversation highlights 
Randy’s grim acceptance of the status quo; he knows that things do not 
work out for boys like him. Indeed, soon aft er his arrival in the home, 
Randy’s bed is vandalized with the words “Snitch Bitch, ” and his money 
is stolen. Th e last shot we are off ered is of a group of boys administering 
him a brutal beating. Carver, however, does not stick around long 
enough to see Randy’s fate as the audience does. Instead he quickly exits 
the boys’ home, climbs into his car and slams the door. Th e camera cap-
tures his movements in a long take and then remains outside the door, 
observing Carver through the window as he repeatedly pounds the 
steering wheel with his fi sts. Th is scene is a reversal of the melodramatic 
convention of the benefactor because despite all of Carver’s hard work 
and his genuine concern for Randy, his individualistic solution to the 
fl awed child welfare system fails. It is too late for Randy, and this leaves 
the audience wondering if it is too late for all the other children Carver 
has encountered in his job.


--- PAGE 194 ---
“The Dickensian Aspect”: Melodrama, Viewer Engagement, and the Socially Conscious Text 185
Season Four does not conclude with the failure of the benefactor, 
however, but on the bright, sunny sidewalks of Bunny Colvin’s neigh-
borhood. Th e camera slowly pans from the quiet streets, where the 
sounds of chirping birds can be heard, to Namond, who eats his break-
fast and completes his homework before heading inside his new 
middle-class home. When he briefl y returns to the porch to retrieve his 
breakfast plate, the sound of rap music can be heard off screen. Namond 
looks up to see a black SUV slowly driving past the house. Immediately 
the viewer is anxious: will Namond be killed, just like Wallace, D’ Angelo, 
Bodie, and all the other young hoppers who expressed a desire to get out 
of the life? We are relieved when the next shot reveals that the driver is 
Donut, a 13-year-old car thief and one of Namond’s old friends. He 
waves at Namond, and speeds through a stop sign, nearly hitting another 
car, before disappearing over the horizon. Donut’s presence in this fi nal 
scene serves as a reminder of Namond’s old life as a hustler, of what he 
has given up, and what he has gained by moving in with the Colvins. 
Namond smiles and turns to go inside. Th  e closing shot of the fi  nale 
reveals the same street: in the distance a man and a child cross the street, 
friends greet each other, and leaves rustle. Namond has been rescued “in 
the nick of time” and the feeling this intervention provides the viewer is 
undeniably pleasurable. And yet, this ending is as unsettling as any other 
season fi nale: being happy for Namond does not erase the images of 
Michael losing his soul, Dukie selling heroin on the corner, and Randy 
being beaten by a group of bullies. Melodrama ideally off ers “the hope 
that it may not be too late . . . that virtue and truth can be achieved in . . . 
individual heroic acts rather than . . . in revolution and change” (Williams, 
“Melodrama” 74). Here, we cannot pin our hopes on the success of the 
individual when so many others are failing.
The Denial of Catharsis
Th e dialectic between “in the nick of time” and “too late, ” which causes 
the viewer to recognize and feel empathy for the plight of the virtuous, 
is frequently established through the time-honored technique of parallel 
editing. Audiences are shown two or more events, such as a victim in 
peril and the victim’s would-be savior racing to the scene, which are tak-
ing place simultaneously in separate spaces. Parallel editing heightens


--- PAGE 195 ---
186 THE WIRE : URBAN DECAY AND AMERICAN TELEVISION
suspense by expanding screen time and delaying the ultimate resolution 
of the narrative. Linda Williams adds that the use of parallel editing in 
the melodrama off ers audiences hope that “that there may be still be 
an original locus of virtue, and this virtue and truth can be achieved in 
private individuals and individual heroic acts” (Playing 35). Th e closing 
montages that serve as capstones for each season fi  nale of Th e Wire 
appear to function in a similar fashion. By stringing together a series of 
images of major characters, the viewer is given the impression that 
although it might be “too late” for one character (thus provoking viewer 
indignation over class- and race-based inequalities), problems are solved 
“in the nick of time” for others (providing a measure of relief).
Th e closing montage of the Season Two fi  nale opens with Nick 
Sobotka walking beside a chain link fence that overlooks Baltimore 
Harbor (2.12), which had been the source of his family’s livelihood and 
is now the fi nal resting place of his uncle Frank, who was murdered in 
the previous episode by the Greek’s henchmen (2.11). Nick should be 
hiding out in a witness protection program, and so when the camera 
pans left  to reveal a car driving slowly along the harbor, his death feels 
imminent. Rather than glimpse Nick’s demise, the audience is off ered a 
montage of “too lates”: the waterfront is now patrolled by U.S. Marshals 
and Frank’s offi  ce sits empty; Ziggy Sobotka, framed in a long shot, looks 
small and frightened in his orange prison jumpsuit; and Lester Freamon 
symbolically places a lid on a box of surveillance photographs entitled 
“Port Investigation 2003, ” the case that Cedric Daniels and his team had 
attempted to solve all season long. Th e most disturbing image of this 
montage, however, is the last: several pretty young women clumsily 
exit the back of a cargo container in their high heels and tight jeans, 
along with boxes of other illegally imported goods. Th e camera moves 
in for a close up of their faces, but the women squint and shield their 
eyes from the glare of car headlights. Th  ey are anonymous victims, 
walking off screen to a life of indentured prostitution in a Baltimore 
brothel. Th e montage then returns to a medium shot of Nick, who wipes 
away his tears and turns his back to the camera. As he lumbers along
the harbor we wait for the gunshot that will end his life, but it never 
sounds. Th e camera pans left   again to reveal that, for now at least, 
the road is empty and Nick is safe. But aft er so many “too lates, ” Nick’s


--- PAGE 196 ---
“The Dickensian Aspect”: Melodrama, Viewer Engagement, and the Socially Conscious Text 187
“nick of time” salvation does little to restore the viewer’s hope for 
the future.
Th e series fi nale in Season Five also establishes dialectic between “in 
the nick of time” and “too late. ” Dukie’s fi nal scene is set at night, in the 
dirty alley by the Arabber’s horse stables. Th e boy and his new mentor 
are framed in a long shot with both characters in the background of the 
image, making it diffi  cult to read their facial expressions. Th e placement 
of a chair and a horse cart in the mid-ground of the frame further add to 
this distancing eff ect. But as the camera slowly tracks to the left , as if it 
is trying to slink away undetected from this disturbing sight, Dukie 
tightens a tourniquet and raises a syringe to his arm. We can contrast 
Dukie’s fate with that of another drug addict, Bubbles. His fi  nal scene 
opens with an extreme low angle shot of the basement door that had 
always been closed to him and has now been opened by his distrustful 
sister. Aft er enduring the loss of two young protégés, frequent beatings 
at the hands of street thieves, and a fi ve-season-long battle with heroin, 
he has suff ered enough to purge himself of his sins and to be worthy of 
this “nick of time” salvation (5.10). Th e last image of Bubbles shows him 
seated at the dinner table with his sister and nephew, the light of the 
setting aft ernoon sun suff using the room with a warm glow. Th is con-
clusion induces viewers to cry because despite overwhelming odds, 
Bubbles has achieved sobriety and become a functioning member of 
society (a fact confi  rmed by a news story in the Baltimore Sun). Th e 
improbable has become probable and hope has become reality.
Steve Neale argues that “the longer there is delay [between the intro-
duction of the problem and its resolution], the more we are likely to cry, 
because the powerlessness of our position will be intensifi ed, whatever 
the outcome of events, ‘happy’ or ‘sad’ , too late or just in time” (12). 
However, as with the Season Two fi nale, this closing montage does not 
privilege success over failure, or failure over success. We cannot locate 
victory in Bubbles’s sobriety, Rhonda Pearlman’s appointment to a 
judgeship, or Lester Freamon’s blissful retirement because these instances 
of individuals overcoming the system are placed on the same plane as all 
of the failures we have just witnessed. Th is concept is underscored by the 
use of the opening credit song, “Down in the Hole, ” as a nondiegetic, 
acoustic counterpoint to these images. Th e song is neither celebratory


--- PAGE 197 ---
188 THE WIRE : URBAN DECAY AND AMERICAN TELEVISION
nor mournful, and the viewer’s familiarity with it aft  er fi ve seasons 
emphasizes that there is nothing exceptional about what we are seeing. 
Th ese snippets of life, the good and the bad, are all equally important 
and all equally constitutive of the state of Baltimore.
Conclusions: A Diff erent Kind of Viewer Engagement
Th e Wire employs these various melodramatic tactics in order to enlist 
viewer empathy and to engage us in its otherwise daunting, sprawling 
narrative, and yet, as Cheese Wagstaff  announces, moments before he is 
shot in the head in the series fi  nale, “Th ere ain’t no back in the day, 
nigger. Ain’t no nostalgia to this shit here” (5.10). And so, aft  er fi ve 
seasons, we are left  to wonder—why enlist our empathy only to push it 
away? Some television critics have argued that the ultimate message of 
Th e Wire is that injustice, corruption and suff  ering are inevitable in 
urban America and that change is not possible (Sternbergh). Others 
argue that “individuals are capable of change, but institutions are not” 
(Ryan, “Full Circle”). But why devote fi ve seasons of television to a show 
with a message that boils down to “nothing can be done”? Certainly, 
HBO has built its reputation on television series that subvert classical 
genre expectations, with the controversial black screen fi  nale of Th e 
Sopranos (2007) being only one particularly famous example. However, 
Th e Wire  plays with convention neither in order to demonstrate its 
sophistication or diff erence from common network fare, nor as a refl ec-
tion of postmodern storytelling practices. Rather, play with melodramatic 
conventions is employed in Th e Wire to subvert the passive, satisfi ed 
viewing position typically established by the primetime social melo-
drama. In its place the series constructs an active, socially engaged 
viewer. As David Simon admits, “My stuff  is a hard sell even if a network 
is doing all it can, particularly since so many Americans regard their 
television sets as a means of relaxation rather than a means of provoca-
tion” (“1
st Exclusive”).
Writing on Italian Neorealism and its function, theorist and screen-
writer Cesare Zavattini has said, “It is not the concern of an artist 
to propound solutions. It is enough, and quite a lot, I should say, to 
make an audience feel the need, the urgency, for them” (56). Simon has


--- PAGE 198 ---
“The Dickensian Aspect”: Melodrama, Viewer Engagement, and the Socially Conscious Text 189
Mike Fletcher, the sympathetic young Sun reporter, echo these very 
sentiments in the series fi nale of Th e Wire . When Fletcher explains to 
Bubbles what will appear in the article he is writing about him, Bubbles 
asks, “What good is a story like that?” Fletcher explains, “People will 
read about it, think about it, maybe see things diff  erently. ” Fletcher’s 
words are simple and idealistic but they usefully describe the primary 
achievement of Th e Wire  as a series. By watching these stories and char-
acters, and thinking about them, engaged fans, like Fletcher’s ideal 
reader, will begin to see things “diff  erently” (Klein). In Th e Wire the 
melodrama’s passive viewing position is replaced with a more pragmatic 
one that demands engagement with the social confl icts described in the 
series, not merely the fi  ctional characters that are animated by them. 
Viewers may feel sad at the end of a season, and possibly cry, but they 
will also likely remember their outrage long aft er the credits have rolled 
and their tears have dried. It is the urgency that lingers.
Notes
1. Williams disagrees with the idea that emotional climaxes discourage social 
action: “if tears are an acknowledgement of a hope that desire will be fulfi lled then they 
are also a source of future power; indeed, they are almost an investment in that power” 
(Playing 32).
2. Th is is also a convention of the social problem fi lm: “Th e characters and the social 
confl icts were polarized, the treatment of the social issues subordinated to the emotional 
confl icts experienced by the protagonists, and the confl  icts oft en resolved through a 
populist benefactor or through the eff orts of an exceptional individual who overcame 
economic and social constraints in the interests of the community” (Landy 433).


--- PAGE 199 ---
190
13
It’s All Connected:
Televisual Narrative Complexity
Ted Nannicelli
“Th e Wire  deserves a Nobel Prize for Literature, ” remarks Time magazine 
writer Joe Klein in Th e Wire Odyssey , a documentary bonus feature 
included as part of the program’s Season Five DVD set. Much of 
the critical praise for Th e Wire  has not only  been equally eff usive, but 
has also invoked literature as a means of praising the show, as well as 
describing what it does and what sort of an artwork it is. 1 Klein’s 
assertion is particularly interesting because it seems that the highest 
commendation he can give Th e Wire  is to suggest that the show some-
how transcends its art form—that it should be considered a work of 
literature rather than a television program.
2 As rhetoric, Klein’s impli-
cation is benign puff  ery. But it belies a demeaning attitude toward 
television that is insidious when couched in panegyrics upon television 
for its putatively un-televisual properties.
When critics like Tim Goodman write about the supposed “novelistic 
approach to storytelling” in Th e Wire, they usually have in mind the show’s 
narrative complexity, its depth of character development, and its astute 
sociological insight. But these things do not belong solely to the province 
of literature. According to Wendell Pierce, who plays William “Bunk” 
Moreland, David Simon “told [the cast] from day one, ‘It’s a novel. ’” But 
Pierce put it more accurately when he told a journalist that Th e Wire  
“showed the possibility of television used as an art” (quoted in Wiltz).


--- PAGE 200 ---
It’s All Connected: Televisual Narrative Complexity 191
Indeed, while the shallow analogies between Th e Wire  and literature may 
garner the show some well-deserved attention, they will not do very much 
analytic work; they will not help us to understand with any depth or 
nuance how the show does what so many critics and fans fi nd utterly com-
pelling and innovative. In this chapter, I off er some preliminary analysis of 
Th e Wire ’s innovation as a television program in three important areas—
narrative complexity, character development, and social commentary.
A number of television scholars have identifi  ed a relatively recent 
development in television programming—a hybridization of the older, 
established forms of the series and the serial. Sarah Kozloff  summarizes 
the distinctions between series and serial: “ Series refers to those shows 
whose characters and setting are recycled, but the story concludes in 
each individual episode. By contrast, in a serial the story and the 
discourse do not come to a conclusion during an episode, and the 
threads are picked up again aft er a given hiatus” (91). However, most 
contemporary television scholars recognize that the series and the serial 
are not binary opposites, but rather opposite ends of a continuum (Allrath 
et al.; Ndalianis). Furthermore, many agree with Robin Nelson’s claim 
that “the dominant form of TV drama today is a hybrid of the series and 
the serial” (quoted in Allrath et al. 6). Th e language and theories with 
which these scholars describe the hybridization phenomenon some-
times diff er, but for the most part they are talking about the same thing. 
Following Jason Mittell, I see contemporary television’s increasing 
hybridization and tendency towards serialization as one element of a 
broader move towards what he calls “narrative complexity. ”
For Mittell, narrative complexity is “a distinct narrational mode” and 
“is predicated on specifi c facets of storytelling that seem uniquely suited 
to the series structure that sets television apart from fi lm [and, of course, 
literature] and distinguish it from conventional modes of episode and 
serial forms” (29). More specifi cally,
at its most basic level, narrative complexity is a redefi  nition of 
episodic forms under the infl uence of serial narration—not neces-
sarily a complete merger of episodic and serial forms but a shift ing 
balance. Rejecting the need for plot closure within every episode 
that typifi es conventional episodic form, narrative complexity 
foregrounds ongoing stories across a range of genres. (32)


--- PAGE 201 ---
192 THE WIRE : URBAN DECAY AND AMERICAN TELEVISION
To this description, Mittell adds some other common characteristics of 
narratively complex shows. Most relevant to a discussion of Th e Wire  is 
a lack of explicit storytelling “signposts” or elements of narrative redun-
dancy. Collectively, these features require more active engagement on 
the part of the viewer (34–38). Mittell suggests that shows like Dallas 
(CBS, 1978–91) and Hill St. Blues (NBC, 1981–87) were early incarna-
tions of this narrational mode, which has since evolved and moved 
towards greater seriality in shows such as Buff y the Vampire Slayer (WB, 
1997–2001; UPN, 2001–03), and Th e Sopranos  (HBO, 1999–2007).
Mittell’s conception of narratively complex television off ers a good 
starting point from which to analyze Th e Wire —a show that is, accord-
ing to skeptical Emmy voters, “so multilayered, so dense” that it is 
“practically impenetrable to new viewers” (quoted in Levine). Indeed, it 
is crucial to emphasize the extent to which Th e Wire  represents the more 
radical end of what Mittell has in mind. In the fi rst place, Th e Wire  sits far 
to the serial side of the series-serial continuum. Th e fi rst episode of the 
third season, “Time Aft er Time” (3.01), demonstrates this. Th e episode 
ends with the following scenes: to Major Howard “Bunny” Colvin’s 
dismay, Offi  cer Th omas “Herc” Hauk and Sergeant Ellis Carver bring in 
yet another possession and loitering case; Detective Jimmy McNulty 
reopens the previous year’s fi les, whereupon we see photos of D’ Angelo 
Barksdale and Wallace; Fruit tells Dennis “Cutty” Wise that he is not 
going to get his drug money back; Colvin rides through his district and 
is shocked by the depth of its problems when a young teenager tries to 
sell him drugs.
Th ese fi nal minutes of the episode demonstrate quite a bit about Th e 
Wire’s overall narrative strategies—particularly with regard to seriality. 
Clearly the end of this episode raises questions that will not be answered 
until a future episode; this is typical of narratively complex shows. But 
in contrast to most other narratively complex shows, this episode off ers 
no narrative resolution whatsoever. Th is lack of closure should not be 
overstated, for as television scholar Michael Newman notes about series-
serial hybrids (or, as he calls them, “contemporary scripted prime-time 
serials”), “most typically, certain questions go unanswered episode aft er 
episode, but they are not the kind of questions that obstruct narrative 
clarity” (20). Y et as we see in this example that Th e Wire  regularly refuses


--- PAGE 202 ---
It’s All Connected: Televisual Narrative Complexity 193
to off er viewers any sort of episodic narrative closure or even the 
promise that dangling questions will be answered in the next episode.
In place of narrative closure within an episode, Th e Wire  frequently 
off ers another sort of closure identifi ed by Newman: “the unifi cation of 
themes and motifs into an orderly, integrated whole” (20). Th e closing 
scenes of “Time Aft er Time” (3.01) constitute a thematic coda. Herc and 
Carver’s inability to improve upon their inveterate and ineff  ective 
methods of policing the corners, McNulty’s comment, Cutty’s return to 
the street, and Colvin’s patrol tie together and recall the episode’s other 
allusions to the possibility (or impossibility) of reform. Y et rather than 
contributing to narrative closure, this thematic coda opens up more 
questions—questions about the possibilities for Councilman Tommy 
Carcetti to achieve his ambition of reforming the city, for Cutty to adjust 
to life outside of prison, for Herc and Carver to change the way they do 
police work, for Colvin to salvage his neighborhoods, and for McNulty 
not to “do the same shit all over again. ” More importantly, it opens up a 
question for which there will be no simple answer: Are our society’s 
largest institutions even capable of reform?
3
One fi nal observation about the end of “Time Aft  er Time” that 
underscores the seriality and narrative complexity of Th e Wire  is that 
despite the fact that this is the fi rst episode of a new season, the audience 
is challenged to recall details from the previous season (including the 
death of D’ Angelo) in order to make sense of current developments. 
In this expectation that viewers follow narrative threads not only 
across multiple episodes but across multiple seasons, Th e Wire  reveals a 
particularly strong affi  nity with the narrative strategies of the serial. 
Furthermore, the number of diff  erent narrative threads—from past 
seasons as well as Season Th ree—explored in these fi nal minutes of the 
episode is another indication of narrative complexity. “Multi-threading, ” 
a term I borrow from Steven Johnson to describe the multiple layering 
of narrative threads within and across episodes and series, is another 
important development in contemporary series-serial hybrids.
4 As 
Newman notes, series-serial hybrids “are typically ensemble dramas, 
and each episode has multiple, intertwined plots” (18). He summarizes 
the standard structure of the series-serial hybrid as follows: “Major plots 
(‘ A plots’ in teleplay jargon) involving a main character have at least six


--- PAGE 203 ---
194 THE WIRE : URBAN DECAY AND AMERICAN TELEVISION
beats [i.e. scenes],  oft en more. An episode usually has two or more 
A plots and several B or C plots with a number of small beats each” (18). 
So, the series-serial hybrid threads together these multiple story lines, and 
more narratively complex shows will typically contain more threads.
Here again, Th e Wire  exhibits more narrative complexity than most 
other series-serial hybrids. Because the program embraces seriality to 
such a great degree, it demands that its audience not simply track 
more narrative threads, but—as the reference to D’ Angelo Barksdale in 
“Time Aft er Time” (3.01) makes clear—that its audience track more nar-
rative threads that reemerge sporadically and circuitously over greater 
periods of time. Th is is to say that the measure of narrative complexity 
cannot simply be how many storylines are threaded through a single 
episode. Consider “Middle Ground” (3.11). By my count, there are 13 dif-
ferent narrative threads in this episode—some of which overlap within 
the episode. Although 13 diff  erent (sometimes overlapping) narrative 
threads may seem like a lot for a single episode, this number does not 
really indicate the depth of narrative complexity the episode contains. 
Brother Mouzone’s attempt to fi nd Omar Little, and Omar’s quest for 
vengeance against the Barksdale organization are two narrative threads 
that intersect in this episode. But only the viewer of Season Two under-
stands the complexity of their relationship and the ways in which their 
narrative threads not only intersect with those of Avon Barksdale and 
Russell “Stringer” Bell, but relate directly to Avon and Stringer’s eff orts 
to double-cross one another. In Season Two, Avon hires Brother 
Mouzone to help retain territory from Proposition Joe Stewart’s drug 
dealers, unaware that Stringer has an undisclosed agreement with Prop 
Joe. In order to rid himself of Mouzone, Stringer convinces Omar that 
his boyfriend, Brandon, was tortured and murdered by Mouzone when 
in fact Stringer and Avon are themselves responsible. Aft  er shooting 
(but not killing) Mouzone, Omar realizes that Stringer has lied to him, 
whereupon he embarks on his quest for vengeance against the 
Barksdale organization. Understanding that Omar was set up, Brother 
Mouzone tells Stringer that his deal with the Barksdale organization is 
nullifi ed. At this meeting, Stringer accidentally tips his hand and 
Mouzone realizes that it was in fact Stringer who crossed him. In short, 
only viewers who have tracked all of Th e Wire ’s narrative threads since 
the beginning of the show will be attuned to the depth of narrative


--- PAGE 204 ---
It’s All Connected: Televisual Narrative Complexity 195
complexity that underlies many scenes like opening of “Middle 
Ground” (3.11), in which Brother Mouzone solicits Omar’s help to kill 
Stringer Bell.
David Bordwell has written about such “network narratives” in the 
cinema and suggested that an increase in the narrative complexity of a 
fi lm oft entimes requires increased reliance upon the conventions of 
classical Hollywood storytelling. He concludes that “whatever new 
shapes degrees-of-separation plots [or muti-threaded narratives] take, 
most remain coherent and comprehensible, thanks to the principles of 
causality, temporal sequence and duration, character wants and needs, 
and motivic harmony that have characterized mainstream storytelling 
(not just in cinema) for at least a century” ( Hollywood 100). Kristen 
Th ompson has made similar arguments. She contends that “the increase 
in the number of plotlines that interrupt each other has made such 
dramas concomitantly even more dependant on redundancy, dialogue 
hooks, appointments, deadlines, and, especially emphatically marked 
dangling causes that can carry over several scenes involving other 
plotlines” (58).
Although the breadth of empirical data and the depth of their 
analyses put Bordwell and Th ompson on fi  rm ground, Th e Wire indi-
cates that it is possible for increasingly narratively complex television to 
depend less upon the sort of devices that engender narrative redundancy 
they hypothesize. Here again, the innovations of Th e Wire  need to be 
framed as developments in the context of television rather than 
somehow outside of it. To begin with, the amount of recapping the show 
does is insuffi  cient to bring the casual viewer up to speed. Typically, 
shows recap—or reiterate pertinent narrative information—in two ways: 
through lead-in “previously on” segments or in expository dialogue. 
According to Newman, “in serialized narratives recapping is especially 
important because of the large quantity of data about the story world 
that forms the background of any new developments” (18). However, 
Th e Wire  diff ers drastically from more conventional serialized shows in 
its use of these two common recapping devices.
Some of the “Previously on Th e Wire ” segments seem to attempt to 
distort past events rather than clarify them. Many of these segments 
rearrange the temporal order of narrative events from multiple epi-
sodes prior to the one that was “previously on. ” Th e segments are also


--- PAGE 205 ---
196 THE WIRE : URBAN DECAY AND AMERICAN TELEVISION
striking in what narrative threads they choose to foreground. Consider, 
for example, the “Previously on Th e Wire ” lead-in to “Mission Accom-
plished” (3.12). Th  e segment starts by recapping Roland “Prez” 
Pryzbylewski’s accidental shooting of a fellow offi  cer. Th e segment then 
cuts to Mayor Clarence Royce, Commissioner Ervin Burrell, Deputy 
Commissioner for Operations William Rawls, and Councilman 
Carcetti cryptically discussing the idea of “keeping this thing going 
without calling it what it really is. ” Here, the viewer unfamiliar with 
earlier episodes in the season will have no way to know that the “thing” 
in question is Bunny Colvin’s legalization of drugs in Hamsterdam. 
Instead, the editing of the segment suggests that the “thing” is some 
sort of conspiracy around the shooting.
Th e second way shows usually recap narrative information is through 
expository dialogue. Th ompson uses the term “dispersed exposition” 
to denote “a type of redundancy that seems specifi c to television” (65). 
She goes on to analyze the way that recaps of narrative details are 
embedded in the dialogue of episodes of Murphy Brown (CBS, 1988–98), 
Bad Girls  (ITV , 1999–2006), and Fawlty Towers (BBC2, 1975–79) in 
order to bring viewers up to speed or ensure their understanding. 
Dialogue in Th e Wire  rarely recaps narrative details for viewers in this 
way. On the contrary, David Simon and other creators are forthright 
in their DVD commentary sessions about the pleasure they take in 
making episodes so dense that viewers may not absorb all of the perti-
nent information in a single viewing. Th  roughout Season Th ree, for 
example, Baltimore City Councilwoman Euneta Perkins’s name is men-
tioned by a variety of characters—Mayor Royce, State Delegate Odell 
Watkins, Carcetti, and prospective City Councilwoman Marla Daniels—
in discussions of how her increased detachment from the political scene 
may be a help or a hindrance to their own political agendas. But even the 
most dedicated viewer will be unable to recall what Perkins looks like or 
how exactly she fi ts into the narrative. Th is is because Perkins does not 
appear in the fl esh until the fi nal episode of the season!
Characters on Th e Wire  may refer fl eetingly to events that viewers 
have seen in previous episodes, but this is rarely cause for detailed 
recapping. Imagine a viewer who begins watching Th e Wire  with the 
fi rst episode of Season Four, “Boys of Summer” (4.01). One of the


--- PAGE 206 ---
It’s All Connected: Televisual Narrative Complexity 197
major narrative threads of this season involves Prez beginning to teach 
at a West Baltimore middle school. Th  rough exposition, the viewer 
learns that Prez used to be a Baltimore Police offi  cer, but does not fi nd 
out that he has left   the force because of his fatal shooting of another 
offi  cer (although this information is revealed in “Previously on Th e 
Wire” segments). Even more signifi  cantly for dedicated viewers, the 
memory of Prez pistol-whipping and blinding a young teenager in 
Season One hangs over the whole of Season Four. Th is crucial narrative 
detail—which colors the viewer’s understanding of Prez’s entire teach-
ing experience—is never once recapped either dialogically or in a Season 
Four “Previously on Th e Wire ” segment.
Dialogue in Th e Wire  is more likely to hold subtext than it is to overtly 
recap narrative details or provide what Johnson calls “fl ashing arrows” 
pointing towards the show’s themes. Consider for example, the dialogue 
in the fi nal part of the balcony scene with Stringer and Avon aft er each 
has crossed the other in “Middle Ground”:
Stringer: Y ou know I don’t take my work too seriously.
Avon: Th  at’s right. It’s just business.
 Stringer gives Avon an extended look.
Avon:  Us, motherfucker.
 Th  ey embrace.
Stringer:  To us, man. (3.12)
Only the viewer who recalls that Stringer’s justifi  cation of selling out 
Avon to Colvin in a prior scene was “it’s just business” will understand 
Stringer’s look at this moment. Th e tight framing of Stringer’s face and 
the extended duration of the shot may cue viewers to think that Avon 
has said something important or that for some other reason this is a 
weighty moment. But the viewer also needs to recognize the parallelism 
of the lines of dialogue to understand Stringer’s emotional arc fully. 
Moreover, only the viewer who recalls that in previous episodes in which 
Avon was imprisoned, the two men put their hands up against either 
side of the prison glass and said “us, ” will have a sense of how hollow 
these words are now.


--- PAGE 207 ---
198 THE WIRE : URBAN DECAY AND AMERICAN TELEVISION
Some readers may justifi ably wonder what room all of this narrative 
complexity leaves for character development. I would argue that the nar-
rative complexity of Th e Wire actually promotes development of character. 
Layering multiple, intersecting narrative threads as a narrative strategy 
gives the creators leeway to branch off  from an “ A plot” and follow a less 
prominent character or narrative thread without giving viewers the 
sense that the major storyline has been interrupted. In the context of a 
single-protagonist, three-act structure narrative, most viewers would 
not accept these interruptions of major plotlines for the sake of charac-
ter development. But, ironically, what may strike some viewers as the 
more plot heavy complex narrative structure of Th e Wire  gives the 
show the freedom to explore character in more depth because it forces 
viewers to change their narrative expectations as they realize that the 
show creates a vast and complex social network.
Th e show’s serial format allows it to track these less prominent narra-
tive threads for extended periods of time across multiple episodes and 
even seasons. In Season Th ree, for example, we follow Detective Kima 
Greggs outside of the Major Crimes Unit and see tensions rise between 
her and her partner, Cheryl, over Kima’s anxieties about parenthood 
and commitment. We track this narrative thread in very brief and 
occasional scenes, and it has little bearing on more prominent storylines, 
but it allows for an exceptional amount of character development. 
It helps us to understand Kima’s increased hostility towards authority, as 
well as the various parallels that are made between her and McNulty 
over the course of Season Th ree. Perhaps most signifi  cantly, the serial 
form of Th e Wire  permits Kima’s character arc to unfold slowly across 
the duration of the series until, in Season Five, she comes to embrace 
motherhood and she takes a stand against the wayward police tactics of 
McNulty and Detective Lester Freamon.
Earlier I suggested that, in Th e Wire , dialogue is rarely used as a tool 
for narrative exposition. In many cases, this is because the creators 
refuse to sacrifi ce character development for the sake of narrative redun-
dancy (or, for that matter, clarity). Recall the pre-credits opening scene 
(in industry jargon, the “cold-open”) of “Boys of Summer” (4.01). 
Because this is the fi rst episode of a new season, one might expect this 
scene to feature a prominent character—say McNulty—off  ering some 
sense of what has happened leading up to where Season Four begins or,


--- PAGE 208 ---
It’s All Connected: Televisual Narrative Complexity 199
perhaps, where it might be going. Instead, we have a scene in which 
Felicia “Snoop” Pearson buys a nail gun in a hardware store. 
Clerk: I see you got the DeWalt cordless . . .
 He pauses to assess her.
 Y our nail gun—DeWalt 410.
Snoop: Y eah . . . Trouble is if you leave it in a truck for a while, 
need to step up and use the bitch, the battery don’t hold 
up, you know?
Th e clerk describes the fi  ner points of a few of the powder-activated 
models he sells, and then: 
Clerk: Th e DX 460 is fully automatic with a .27 caliber charge. 
Wood, concrete, steel to steel—she’ll throw a fastner into 
anything. And for my money, she handles recoil better 
than the Simpson or the P3500. Now, do you understand 
what I mean by recoil?
Snoop: Y eah, the kickback. I’m with you.
Clerk:  Th at’s right.
Snoop: .27 caliber, huh?
Clerk: Y eah. Not large ballistically, but for driving nails it’s 
enough. Any more than that, you’ d add to the recoil.
Snoop: Man, shit. I seen a tiny-ass .22 round-nose drop a nigga 
plenty of days, man. Motherfuckers get up in you like a 
pinball, rip your ass up. Big joints, though? Big joints, 
man, just break your bones, you say, “Fuck it. ” I’m gonna 
go with this right here, man. How much I owe you?
Rather than elucidating anything about the prominent storylines of the 
show, the dialogue in this scene obfuscates. Th e creators have suddenly 
dropped the viewer into the middle of a hardware store in Baltimore 
to listen to an authentic conversation about nail guns without any
narrative signposts whatsoever. Remember, too, that on an initial view-
ing, much of what Snoop says may go unrecognized or misunderstood 
by viewers unfamiliar with her cadence and diction. Now, the nail gun 
is not immaterial to one of Season Four’s “ A plots, ” for it turns out that


--- PAGE 209 ---
200 THE WIRE : URBAN DECAY AND AMERICAN TELEVISION
Snoop and her partner, Chris Partlow, use it to board up vacant houses 
where they dump the bodies of their murder victims. But the scene in 
which Snoop actually buys the tool is hardly essential to this narrative 
thread. Rather, the scene functions to reveal Snoop as a character within 
a social context. We get a glimpse of Snoop’s world in this scene, but, 
more importantly, we also get a sense of the extreme disconnect between 
her world and the world of the white, middle-class store clerk, who is 
baffl  ed by the end of their conversation.
In this example, we have what is perhaps the most deservedly 
acclaimed result of the narrative complexity of Th e Wire —examinations 
from a variety of perspectives of the way societal contexts shape charac-
ters and their arcs. As Martha Nochimson puts it in her discussion of the 
importance of seriality to Th e Sopranos :
seriality in television incorporates into mass culture the experi-
mental modern narrative techniques that bring relativity to bear 
on a subject . . . American mass culture has been profoundly 
hostile to ambiguity and nuanced ethical perspectives, but these 
are the essence of televisuality by virtue of what serial television 
does to narrative structure. Television, when permitted to operate 
along the grain of its narrative tendencies, builds the nuances and 
ambiguity of relativity into the narrative.
While Th e Wire  off ers the hope of redemption for some of its characters 
(notably Bubbles and Cutty), it simultaneously shows us that societal 
and institutional forces make the classical Hollywood arc of the goal-
oriented protagonist something that is not possible for everyone. In 
Season Five, we see that only a year or so aft  er his fi rst appearance in 
“Boys of Summer” (4.01), Randy Wagstaff  has been—in Prez’s words—
“chewed up by the system” and transformed from a bright, motivated, 
and warm child into a hardened thug (5.06). Character arcs in Th e Wire  
are also abruptly halted by so-called “random violence. ” But when 
Kenard murders Omar (5.08), the fastidious viewer recognizes that the 
violence is not random but cyclical. In Season Th  ree, we have seen 
Kenard and his friends “playing Omar” aft  er witnessing a shoot-out 
between Omar’s crew and Barksdale soldiers (3.03).


--- PAGE 210 ---
It’s All Connected: Televisual Narrative Complexity 201
Th e immobility of society’s largest institutions, Th e Wire  posits, not 
only ensures that some characters will not be able to progress within 
society, but affi  rms that they are part of much larger cycles, whereby the 
individual personalities or characters may change but the roles available 
remain the same. By the end of Season Five, Bubbles is able to fi  nd his 
way off  the street, but the social conditions that let him fall so far in the 
fi rst place still exist for people in his socio-economic group. Th us, when 
another formerly bright and motivated student, Duquan “Dukie” 
Weems, hustles Prez for drug money (5.10), the viewer understands that 
Dukie will be the next iteration of Bubbles. But whereas there is now 
some glimmer of hope for Bubbles, the fi nal shot we get of Dukie—in 
which he is shooting up in an alley—conveys only despair. Having 
followed Dukie’s narrative thread across two years, we recognize that 
this is not the result of a classical Hollywood protagonist making poor 
decisions, but rather of social forces that will create a Bubbles or a Dukie 
over and over again.
In Th e Wire , narrative structure, character development, and social 
commentary are not disparate elements, but rather deeply intertwined—
indeed, the show’s ability to create rich characters and off er astute social 
commentary stems from its narrative complexity. Furthermore, I have 
argued that Th e Wire ’s narrative complexity is not “borrowed” from 
other arts, but arises from the show’s innovative use of serial narrative 
techniques in a televisual format. Th e Wire  has not, of course, invented 
serial narratives and it bears similarities to serials in other types of 
narrative art (literature, in particular). But serial narratives, are not 
inherently linked to a particular medium, so it makes little sense to talk 
about Th e Wire as being novelistic when in fact the show creatively 
appropriates and adapts a well-worn narrative device for a new use in a 
diff erent art form.
Notes
1. For example, Tim Goodman of Th e San Francisco Chronicle  writes, “Over the 
course of its fi rst three seasons, Th e Wire  on HBO has been one of the great achieve-
ments in television artistry, a novelistic approach to storytelling in a medium that 
rewards quick, decisive, and clear storytelling. ”


--- PAGE 211 ---
202 THE WIRE : URBAN DECAY AND AMERICAN TELEVISION
2. Th e irony—of which Klein and the critics such as Jason Weisberg, who are fond 
of comparing Th e Wire  to a nineteenth-century (more specifi cally, Dickensian) novel, 
seem unaware—is that, as David Bordwell points out, it was common through the 
nineteenth century for critics and artists to describe the novel in terms of older (and 
more esteemed) art forms—notably painting and theatre. Even for Charles Dickens 
himself, “every writer of fi ction . . . writes, in eff ect, for the stage” (quoted in Bordwell, 
Narration 7).
3. Th e show does off  er an unequivocal answer to this question by the end of the 
season, which is apparent as Colvin surveys the wreckage of his bulldozed social experi-
ment in “Mission Accomplished” (3.12).
4. For discussions of muti-threading in Hollywood, see Evan Smith, as well as 
Bordwell’ s Poetics of Cinema.


--- PAGE 212 ---
203
14
Dislocating America:
Agnieszka Holland Directs 
“Moral Midgetry”
Kevin McNeilly
Renowned Polish expatriate fi lmmaker Agnieszka Holland has directed 
three episodes of Th e Wire : “Moral Midgetry” (3.08), “Corner Boys” 
(4.09) and “React Quotes” (5.05). As a non-American helming a televi-
sion program that is, as its creator David Simon puts it, “rooted in the 
logic and ethos of a second-tier city, of a forgotten rust-belt America” 
(Alvarez 10), Holland is admittedly out of place, a foreigner. But this 
sense of unresolved displacement closely informs her directorial 
approach to the fraught American content of Th e Wire . Th e Baltimore 
depicted in the series consists of characters and places shaped by a 
fundamental estrangement. Holland’s visual tactics, particularly in “Moral 
Midgetry, ” intensify the challenges of representing those forgotten per-
sons. I want to present a close reading, a close watching, of that episode 
in order to draw out the ethical imperative: the demand that we regard 
and treat each other humanely, that underlies Holland’s unfl  inching, 
fricative television.
A distinctive sense of dislocation, with its attendant textures of 
alienation and discomfort, imprints itself on her work both for fi  lm 
and for television. Th  e lost, stifl  ed, and misidentifi  ed children of 
Olivier Olivier (1992), Th e Secret Garden (1993), A Girl Like Me (2007),


--- PAGE 213 ---
204 THE WIRE : URBAN DECAY AND AMERICAN TELEVISION
or even Washington Square (1997, based on the Henry James novel) fi nd 
counterparts in the corner boys and drug runners of Th e Wire ; D’ Angelo 
Barksdale’s doomed struggle for self-worth, within and against his 
family and friends, is not far removed from Jewish teenager Solly Perel’s 
compromised humanity in Europa Europa (1990), as Solly conceals 
himself among the Nazi Y outh he ardently admires and reviles. Com-
plicity, for Holland, is not a moral exception. Solly, like Brianna Barksdale 
or Stringer Bell, isn’t ever subject to Holland’s unqualifi  ed judgment. 
Instead, her cinema traces a character’s compromises and inconsistencies, 
focusing on diffi  cult moments of their tenacious humanity, when the 
necessity to live outweighs programmatic absolutism, fi xed ideology, or 
authoritarian dictate. As Holland’s viewers, we are implicated in tangles 
of disavowal, allegiance, and betrayal; we are invited to see mirrored in 
their self-scrutiny something of our own troubled connections to our 
world, as both onlookers and living participants.
Holland says that she prefers a “disorienting” cinema—not packed 
with dizzying or shocking visuals but “demanding, ” Maria Stalnaker 
argues, “a re-examination of traditional representations” of the ways 
Holland’s audiences and her characters take their world for granted 
(316). If Th e Wire  is “rooted” in “the forgotten, ” as Simon suggests, then 
it can be understood as an intervention in the self-contradictory claims 
to place and citizenship (or even personhood) made by the lost and 
forgotten people whom the civil order cannot begin to recognize or 
serve. All Americans in Th e Wire , no matter how entrenched in the civil 
order, appear as essentially displaced persons. Barksdale or McNulty, 
whatever side of the Baltimore drug war you are on, Th e Wire  sees you 
and hears you partially and brokenly as a stranger to yourself. (We could 
recall the many misfi red forms of surveillance and mistaken interpreta-
tions throughout the show’s fi ve seasons, our broken and incomplete 
view epitomized by the image in the title credits of the cracked lens 
of a video camera.) Th is estrangement is exactly Holland’s turf. She is 
the quintessential nonresident cinéaste; she lives, fi  lms, and writes, as 
Stalnaker puts it, “in translation” (314), consistently troubling cultural 
and national boundaries that defi ne the ways human beings craft  their 
sense of place. Holland’s work unsettles.
Before directing Th e Wire, Holland worked a bit in American television, 
helming several episodes of Cold Case (CBS, 2003–present), but more


--- PAGE 214 ---
Dislocating America: Agnieszka Holland Directs “Moral Midgetry” 205
notably directing the made-for-TV movie Shot in the Heart: I Was Gary 
Gilmore’s Brother (2001) for HBO. Th e producer of Shot in the Heart , 
Nina Kostroff  Noble, drew Holland to the attention of David Simon. 
Holland was keen to be a part of Th e Wire , which she has described as 
“far more stylistically and thematically courageous than most Hollywood 
movies” and has compared to a “great American novel” (quoted in Baker, 
“New Frontier”). Aft er shooting Th e Secret Garden , Holland describes 
herself as having “an allergic reaction to the working methods of the 
American studio, ” unable and unwilling to accommodate the commer-
cial pressures of that “system” (Jenkins). If her work studies situations of 
moral or existential compromise, Holland rarely compromises her own 
hard-eyed vision, and never turns her lens away from those troubling 
moments of selling oneself short; it is toward such moments, in fact, that 
Holland’s interest as a fi  lmmaker is most forcefully directed. Her 
approach, she says, is to “try to capture an original, sensual, visual truth 
that works for each story. ” Because her subject matter oft en intensifi es 
the loss of various cultural, social, or moral bases upon which any claims 
to truth can be made by her characters, the nature of that “visual truth” 
needs to be carefully understood as predominantly a kind of critical 
scrutiny: an objectifi cation of the crumbling of various objective grounds 
of knowing.
Th e best way to understand this approach is to think of Holland not 
so much as a writer, but as an engaged reader. She made Th e Secret 
Garden, a sweet-tempered children’s fi lm that initially appeared out of 
keeping with her typical post-Holocaust subject matter, because Frances 
Hodgson Burnett’s novel “was my favorite book as a child, so when I was 
a s k e d  t o  m a k e  m y  fi rst fi lm for an American studio I decided to go 
back to this story I loved, and it gave me strength to impose my vision 
while working in this whole new way, in America” (Jenkins). Films, for 
Holland, emerge from text, and in particular from the act of reading. 
Discussing her Henry James adaptation in a Polish interview, Holland 
claims, “I am a reader and certainly know him better and have a deeper 
connection to him than many other American directors” (quoted in 
Stalnaker 327). What she means by claiming this connection, however, 
isn’t some pretense to authority, but an identifi  cation with the sort 
of reading of America in which James himself engages. As a critical, 
visual reader, she scrutinizes aspects of a broken America, and fi  nds


--- PAGE 215 ---
206 THE WIRE : URBAN DECAY AND AMERICAN TELEVISION
the means both to destabilize and to rework her viewer’s presumptive 
perspectives.
Th e opening scene of “Corner Boys” (4.09), the second episode 
Holland directed, gestures toward alternative ways of seeing, a reorien-
tation of perspective based on the debunking of institutionally 
sanctioned structures of representation. In the fi rst three seasons, these 
structures were depicted principally as the buildings and other com-
promised urban spaces that came to represent, for the smugly moral
mayor’s offi  ce, the dissolution of a viable life, but in Season Four 
this intersection of social authority with cultural reality happens in a 
pedagogical context. Roland “Prez” Pryzbylewski has made a career 
shift  from police work to teaching in a public school. When Prez 
presents the narrative for a math problem on the chalkboard to his stu-
dents, he has his idiom corrected—his highfalutin’ term “distributed” 
gets changed to the more direct “gives out” that his students can 
understand.
Holland’s adoption of a busy, mobile, embedded point-of-view in this 
scene emphasizes the distractedness and unruliness of the classroom, as 
Prez fails to hold his students’ attention. When he asks for a solution to 
the problem, one of the students, Calvin, gives him the right answer, not 
because he has worked out the math, but because he has in fact paid 
closer attention to the material realities of the room and his teacher’s 
physical habits. Calvin knows the right answer because he sees the 
“dinks” around it on the board—the places where, in the previous class, 
Prez has touched the board with his chalk or his fi nger, next to the right 
answer. Th is is still a form of reading: not of texts or images (representa-
tional schemas like math word-problems), but of people, of the ways in 
which human beings interact bodily with their surroundings. Impor-
tantly, Holland cuts to a close-up of a student’s notebook in which the 
“dinks” are reproduced in pen around the right answer; what we see, 
eff ectively, is a new way of writing, closer to graffi  ti than to note-taking, 
in which the inarticulate jots and scribbles, the waste scrawls around the 
proper language of the “correct” answer, begin to assume meaning. We 
see, in miniature, a brief return of the hand-made, unkempt, abject mess 
of “people” to the pristine representational surface of the blank page. If 
Holland understands her vision primarily as that of a proactive reader,


--- PAGE 216 ---
Dislocating America: Agnieszka Holland Directs “Moral Midgetry” 207
then here we see her start to unfold the visual tactics of her reading style, 
of how to see diff erently.
Holland’s way of seeing is primarily micrological, focused on small, 
momentary details that unfold into her larger project, to alter how we 
watch each other. Th is practice of close looking seems appropriate to 
television as a medium, given for example that Th e Wire  is made for the 
small screen, even to the extent of retaining standard television’s 4:3 
aspect ratio, rather than opting for 16:9 “widescreen” which at the very 
least would imply an attempt to imitate the big screen spectacle of the-
atrical fi lms. Th e Wire  operates in the small, and Holland’s direction of 
“Moral Midgetry” (3.08) exploits this micrological mode of visual atten-
tion fully. Opening in “Hamsterdam, ” the drug-dealing enclave created 
by Major “Bunny” Colvin’s experiment in harm-reduction policing, the 
fi rst scene depicts two uniformed police offi  cers in long shot sitting on 
the hood of their car, one reading a newspaper, the other being talked at 
by a young girl and clearly not listening; the focus pulls in close, and we 
see a packet of drugs change hands across the foreground. Th  is brief 
hand-off  concentrates Holland’s own focus on miniatures: she focuses in 
close, drawing a line of sight toward the camera. It is important to 
acknowledge the signifi cance in this episode of the work of the director 
of photography, Eagle Egilsson; Holland plays aggressively with how we 
look and what we see, and her camera needs to be mobile, shift  ing, 
attentive—an unfl inching directness Egilsson’s careful cinematography 
delivers.
Th is opening scene also lays out a local human geography, a tangle 
of fl eeting, fl uid interactions among a plurality of people and perspec-
tives, moving like molecules within a contained chaos. Dealers, junkies, 
and others go through doorways, like inset versions of the television 
screen’s rectangular frame, like actors entering and exiting a dramatic 
stage. As embedded observers, courtesy of the fl uid ground-level camera, 
we remain on the street exterior for a minute or so, looking on as black-
market commerce swirls around us. In one passing moment we witness 
two youths carry a third outdoors as a landlord, or a dealer, complains 
“I saw his nuts!” Th ere are some things, apparently, that shouldn’t be 
seen, codes of conduct organic to the new, tolerated form of community 
emerging from the Western District precinct’s permissiveness.


--- PAGE 217 ---
208 THE WIRE : URBAN DECAY AND AMERICAN TELEVISION
Th ose codes are at once articulated and suppressed in Colvin’s 
subsequent reports to the deputy commissioner—texts that provide a 
narrative arc in facts and fi  gures, to overlay on the city’s politically 
motivated demand that the murder-rate be radically reduced in the 
district. His reports are not “cooked” or fi ctionalized, he says, but repre-
sent an accurate account of an implausibly steep decline in violent crime 
in the West, a decline that seems to be a direct and immediate result 
of the surreptitious creation of Hamsterdam following the major’s 
unsanctioned initiative.
Th e scene of his latest report, about half way through the episode, 
begins with the camera panning up across a pair of computer screens 
with a “Baltimore COMSTAT” screensaver that immediately shift s to a 
multicolored city map. Th e same image appears behind Colvin (who is 
presenting statistics to the deputy commissioner), linking foreground 
and background, reversing the focal movement that we followed in the 
episode’s opening sequence back along a centrifugal sightline, now shift -
ing from working hands (in this case, indicated metonymically by the 
sound of fi nger-taps on the keyboard just out of frame) to uniformed 
cop. Colvin isn’t looking down reading his paper but looking up from 
his lectern, explaining the written notes to us. We are still in the same 
eye-level embedded position, this time looking over his audience’s 
shoulders, but our relationship to police surveillance and intervention 
has changed. Now, instead of presenting itself as an unregulated pocket 
of disregarded humanity, created to keep the rest of Baltimore (statisti-
cally) safer, Hamsterdam becomes an unmentionable site of ethical 
intervention. Th is is what Colvin, with a veneer of astute political 
correctness, describes as “an intensive reach-out to the community, ” an 
unmapped and unnamable urban space that essentially makes policing 
work better.
When the deputy commissioner wants to have his people audit the 
Major’s fi gures, Colvin tells him to “pull everything, ” and affi  rms that his 
numbers “will stand” any scrutiny. Colvin has, of course, pulled some-
thing of a fast one, since his tactics are hardly regulation, but the numbers 
themselves, what the commissioner’s offi  ce understands as “facts, ” are 
irrefutable. Th is scene off ers us a moment of collision between absolute 
clear-sightedness, in the guise of clean-lined computerized representations 
of tendencies and percentages, and absolute blindness, in the complete


--- PAGE 218 ---
Dislocating America: Agnieszka Holland Directs “Moral Midgetry” 209
erasure and silencing of the human hubbub in which we were fi  rst 
immersed.
Th ose perspectives collide, however, only for us; within the narrative 
framework of the episode, they miss each other entirely. And missed 
connections are exactly what Holland’s direction aims to emphasize. In 
both scenes, reading produces disengagement: the offi  cer reads his paper 
so he doesn’t have to look around him or do his job, while Colvin reads 
out his fi  gures to keep the administration from fi  nding out about 
Hamsterdam. How exactly does Holland’s visual style here invite us to 
watch as readers, to interpret what we see in front of us? Th  is incom-
mensurability of perspectives is established not only with the offi   cers 
willfully ignoring the need for them to intervene in the human mess 
before them, but also in the various relationships we glimpse, fl eetingly, 
among the dealers and junkies roaming the street before our eyes. 
A dealer leans into a customer’s car-window, crossing a visual threshold, 
to ask “How y’all doin’ today?” while his runner fetches the drugs. When 
the female buyer counters, “No off ence, but can we just get the 8-ball?” 
the dealer nods and draws back out, apologizing “ A ’ight, a’ight, just being 
social. ” Passing cars and pedestrians cross the image foreground, 
interrupting our visual access to the exchange. We are repeatedly 
reminded of the impediments between people. Th e “social” character 
of the Hamsterdam experiment (which appears to be working as a 
harm-reduction strategy) also remains fraught with alienated human 
relationships.
When this same dealer is tricked by the fake prospect of making easy 
money, he passes out of the visual ken of the apathetic police through a 
dark doorway, where he has his money stolen and his mouth, hands, 
and feet duct-taped. We subsequently see an image of the closed door, 
cut into a scene of the two offi   cers who describe the ODs and other 
business-as-usual of the drug trade, but who have not noticed anything. 
When the dealer crawls like a worm back out onto the step, an image 
that suggests abject dehumanization, Sergeant Ellis Carver rushes up 
and pulls the tape from his mouth, only to be cursed: “God damn, can’t 
you get a fucking police when you need one?” Th  e irony is thick and 
obvious, but it bears remembering that this isn’t merely a case of “moral 
midgetry” as the episode title states, but it also enacts a deeply embed-
ded contradiction in the project of serving and protecting itself, in the


--- PAGE 219 ---
210 THE WIRE : URBAN DECAY AND AMERICAN TELEVISION
work of surveillance as social rehabilitation that is the city police mandate. 
What we are and are not capable of seeing invites us to reconsider, via the 
television screen, the visual tactics of police-work, of the gaze of the law 
as both the imperative and the impediment to positive change.
Th is reconsideration is carried forward in the subsequent scene, in 
which Hamsterdam’s robbery victims—all dealers—come into a police 
station to make complaints and to identify the perpetrators who stole 
their drug money. Th is action switches them ironically from their nor-
mal roles as criminals. Th e dealers play around with the computer’s 
facial drawing soft ware, the Make-a-Face. Apparently, they are better at 
using it than the police: “How do you know how to do this?” Offi   cer 
“Herc” Hauk asks them. “How do you don’t know how to do this?” they 
reply, tossing his incredulity back at him by inverting his smug question. 
Th e unreliability of witnessing quickly comes into play, as they stop 
attempting to be accurate and, at Herc’s bemused insistence, begin 
cartooning, trying to “Chinese up them eyes like Beyoncé” and to turn 
the procedural aid of the Make-a-Face into a fantasy.
Th is duplicity plays against a later scene, where Prez uses FBI 
computer soft ware to blow up a video image brought in by McNulty 
and Detective Kima Greggs. Like the dealers playing at being upright 
citizens, Prez toys with his buddies, pretending not to know what he 
is doing with the upscale technology, then quickly turns his obvious 
facility with the equipment into a comedy by parodying the voiceover 
from an imaginary superhero action fi lm. He punctuates each sentence 
with a keystroke, blowing up the image of a car license plate further as 
his voice builds in mock intensity:
Uh oh, nothing there. It’s so tiny. No mere mortal can . . . Ohhh. 
Y ou see what he just did? What? He did it again! . . .Who is this 
man? Where does he come from? Can anybody stop him? Please 
don’t hurt us. My eyes, my eyes, it’s so big and clear and bright!
Like the dealers with the Make-a-Face, Prez draws on the language of 
celebrity and movie glamour, exaggerating playfully while apparently 
distilling pertinent, incriminating fact from the surveillance tape—a 
version of a wire that, for once, does not appear to have failed or been 
misconstrued. But the fi ctionalizing in which this technological clarity


--- PAGE 220 ---
Dislocating America: Agnieszka Holland Directs “Moral Midgetry” 211
is couched suggests that it is more about showing off , about what feats 
of visual acuity Prez can perform, than about the ethical demands of 
police work. Prez becomes a surrogate for the director here, given that 
Holland’s approach depends on tactics of refocusing and reframing, of 
looking closely in order to disorient. However, Prez’s attention is drawn 
not to people but to signs and markers: identifi cations rather than iden-
tities; numbers, names and representations that are legible to the system 
and that can be used to close out an investigation.
In the background of the scene with the mock-visionary Prez, we 
glimpse McNulty on the phone to “Mama Barksdale, ” Brianna, as he 
pursues the offi  cially closed case of the apparent suicide of her son 
D’ Angelo. Th is leads directly to an intimate scene at the center of the 
episode that concentrates its visual and thematic elements, suggesting—
partially, uncertainly, as is the way with Th e Wire —a contingent answer 
to the question of what we watch for. McNulty’s interview with Brianna 
off ers a decisive moment of catharsis and disclosure. Holland’s stagings 
oft en work through instances of quiet intensity, points that say much 
more, with more subtlety, than they might seem. Her visual practice 
concentrates on small points of revelation, when we have our way of 
seeing incrementally reoriented. In this scene, Holland focuses not 
only on visual forms, or on reframing other images within her camera’s 
fi eld of view (here, photographs from D’ Angelo’s autopsy), but also 
redirects our attention to the reactive face of the dead teen’s mother, 
asking us to read her looks, to watch her expression for signs of feeling 
as she realizes her complicity in her son’s death. More importantly she 
realizes that McNulty sees her for who she is, a mother who has betrayed 
her own child, a role she never wants to admit she has played.
Th e scene opens outside the door of the interview room, as we watch 
McNulty cross the threshold into the enclosed space, entering a win-
dowed cubicle that mimics the box casing of an analogue television set. 
Instead of following McNulty in, the camera tracks left  along the parti-
tion, outside the room, trailing McNulty’s obscured shape in the 
corrugated glass. Our vision is impaired and slashed rather than enabled 
by these windows, a directorial tactic that, by interfering with our line of 
sight, draws attention to the visual processes of how we are engaged as 
viewers. Th e blockage is instantaneously cleared, however, as the scene 
abruptly cuts to inside the room. Brianna and McNulty talk about


--- PAGE 221 ---
212 THE WIRE : URBAN DECAY AND AMERICAN TELEVISION
D’ Angelo, but Holland reworks the over-the-shoulder, shot/reverse-shot 
juxtaposition of points-of-view we might expect from fi lmed dialogue. 
We start over Brianna’s left  side, laying the basis for this visual set-piece. 
When McNulty fi rst enters the room, we watch him from just behind 
Brianna’s shoulder, looking slightly up; the focus immediately moves 
from her raised arm and hand—which will now remain blurred, in shots 
from this perspective, for the rest of the scene—to McNulty’s face. 
Behind McNulty, the horizontal striations on the window mimic 
bars and graphs; there is a paper map of Baltimore pinned up behind 
Brianna, overlaying a grid pattern on urban geography, while the metal 
blinds on the outer window across the room also echo this rational, 
rectilinear form. Th ose neat geometries are disrupted by the presence of 
human bodies, as the actors move through the frame. When McNulty 
and Brianna begin to talk, for example, we don’t change to McNulty’s 
point-of-view to look back at Brianna. Instead, the camera is positioned 
as if viewing the exchange from another chair at the table; our eye-line 
is in fact slightly lower than the seated Brianna’s. Th e viewer is located as 
a secondary, diminished onlooker, but is also indicated as a participant, 
present at the table.
Th is bodily closeness becomes increasingly relevant to what Holland 
wants to suggest by reorienting our attention. When the camera cuts 
away from Brianna’s face to regard McNulty again as he begins to 
disclose the details of D’ Angelo’s fi le, the perspective shift s back to the 
fi rst over-the-shoulder shot; instead of off ering us a clean, well-craft ed 
image, Holland has Brianna’s out-of-focus and slightly moving left  hand 
continue to block the lower part of the frame and obscure McNulty’s 
torso, as a distraction. Th is visual interference could easily be taken as 
sloppy fi lm-making, or perhaps to suggest the deliberately rough-hewn 
textures of documentary realism, appropriate to the gritty visual style of 
Th e Wire . But this tactic does much more here than merely support a 
general theme of dissolution or urban decay. Th is moment of blurring 
and disruption off ers a careful visual echo of the opening scene, in which 
the image of a police offi  cer leaning back with reading-matter near to 
hand—McNulty holds a mug of tea, with the case-fi le folder on the desk 
beside him—is interrupted by a blurred, African American hand. In the 
opening scene, the focus pulls back to the dealers on the street, and we 
lose the image of the police in a haze; in the interview scene, a reversal


--- PAGE 222 ---
Dislocating America: Agnieszka Holland Directs “Moral Midgetry” 213
of that refocusing happens only when McNulty enters, but we never 
refocus on that hand. Blurred images of Brianna’s body repeatedly thwart 
any attempt to picture McNulty neatly in the frame: when he walks in 
front of Brianna to drop a teabag in the wastebasket, the camera passes 
behind her head as it follows his movement, briefl  y blocking him out 
entirely. D’ Angelo, McNulty recounts, purportedly hanged himself with 
a belt on a doorknob; images of doors as both impediments and thresh-
olds, as barriers and frames, have permeated this episode. McNulty 
explains that this scenario isn’t possible: D’ Angelo was in fact strangled—by 
human hands—and has been badly framed for his own killing. Th e brutal 
physicality of his death, and the realization that his narrative isn’t as 
neatly closed as the police department wants, is corroborated visually in 
this scene by the refusal of human bodies, particularly Brianna’s, ever to 
leave the frame cleanly.
Th e need to arrive at an explanation of D’ Angelo’s death pushes 
Brianna to question meaning and plausibility, cause and eff  ect in 
D’ Angelo’s story: “What are you saying?” she asks, and McNulty, like the 
dealers in the Make-a-Face scene, merely throws the question back at 
her: “What am I saying?” D’ Angelo’s murder was sanctioned by the 
Barksdale leadership, but this admission, the only possible explanation, 
is both unspeakable and untenable in the illusory scheme of family 
bonds to which Brianna clings. (Brianna: “ Avon and D was family. ” 
McNulty: “Family. Right. ”) Her love for her son, McNulty implies, as 
well as her brother’s benefi cent leadership, can only be a fi ction.
“Th is is just you talking, right?” Brianna asks, reducing the apparent 
factuality of McNulty’s account to mere words. As she stands up to leave, 
McNulty opens the fi le on the table, and our point-of-view is momentarily 
doubled. At fi rst, we look around the blurred left   half of her body, at 
approximately waist-height, mimicking the seated perspective of the ear-
lier shot, but then the perspective quickly identifi es with hers, as we look 
down at the photos of D’ Angelo’s bruised neck and body. Th e camera cuts 
briefl y back to our initial position, and we see her eyes move down, 
directed to the photos. We see the contents of the fi le itself only briefl y, 
with the autopsy Polaroids laid out in a quadrilateral grid, but the grid 
itself tilted and skewed obliquely across the right angles of the screen.
We look for a trace of something in Brianna’s face, something McNulty 
discloses more fully, when Brianna asks him why he didn’t come to her


--- PAGE 223 ---
214 THE WIRE : URBAN DECAY AND AMERICAN TELEVISION
with this information before. McNulty’s response is cold: “Honestly? 
I was looking for somebody who cared about the kid. I mean, like I said, 
you were the one who made him take the years, right?” Richard Price’s 
dialogue, in the guise of the colloquial, provides the cue for Holland’s 
direction here. Holland is also honestly looking for somebody who 
cares, and wants to enact a particular way of looking as a form of care, of 
ethical engagement. Th e angled and disruptive visuals of the scene, 
while certainly subtle and brief, invite a form of seeing as reading, as a 
mode of disclosure that doesn’t lay claim to truth in appearances or ide-
ologies but rather in the tactical debunking of those false fronts, those 
put-ons. McNulty, compromised though he may be, asserts—by having 
Brianna reread herself and what she has told her son to do—the possi-
bility that care may not be merely a rhetorical ploy, a ruse to bring down 
the Barksdales.
Th e presence of those unruly, living bodies in those grids and boxes, 
bodies that won’t be contained except violently by institutional struc-
tures and unjust moral codes, suggests that care remains as a kind of 
abject residue, an embodied connection that can’t ever be overwhelmed 
or enclosed. As the camera moves in closer on Brianna’s face, we see her 
nostrils fl are, her mouth tremble, a tear run from her left  eye. While it 
would be easy to overplay this reaction, Holland and actress Michael 
Hyatt focus, literally, on the cracks in appearances, the momentary 
upwellings of feeling that play across the tightly guarded surface of 
the face. What the close perspective wants us to do, really, is to read 
Brianna’s visage, to look for some sign that she is not the horrifyingly 
unfeeling mother that McNulty suggests she had to be. We read, in 
Holland’s view, not necessarily for sense, but for its opposite, for what 
exceeds the symbolic strategies of containment. What Holland’s micro-
logical reading tactics emphasize isn’t arriving at an understanding of 
what can be said. Rather, it is opening up language and sight to the 
unsaid and the unsayable.
Th e fi  nal scene of this episode, a duet between Stringer and Avon, 
extends and adapts this closely attentive visual process. “We gotta talk, ” 
Stringer tells Avon, who has been holding court in an old armchair and 
telling his cohorts about the need to get back to old times to fi ght Marlo 
Stanfi eld. Stringer is still in his suit, while Avon, who has just had 
a wound stitched up with rawhide, is in a white undershirt and jeans.


--- PAGE 224 ---
Dislocating America: Agnieszka Holland Directs “Moral Midgetry” 215
Th e camera moves around the two, taking up a variety of perspectives, 
observing them from the positions that the members of Avon’s inner 
circle have just vacated. At one point early in the exchange, there is a 
shot of Stringer, at a medium distance, over Avon’s left  shoulder. In the 
background, behind Stringer’s right shoulder, we see Avon’s image, 
slightly out of focus, refl ected in a small rectangular mirror over a sink, 
creating a sort of embedded screen, in which we see the conventional 
reverse shot for the dialogue, miniaturized. Th  ey argue over what 
Stringer claims is Avon’s proclivity for indiscriminate murder, at the end 
of an episode that has emphasized the decline of the murder rate in the 
Western District. Avon derides Stringer’s masculinity, suggesting that he 
hasn’t got the hardness to “snatch a life, ” which leads Stringer to confess 
his complicity in D’ Angelo’s murder. “Y ou want to talk that blood-is-
thicker-than-water bullshit. . . . Th at motherfucker would have taken 
down the whole fucking show, starting with you, killer. ” For Stringer 
Bell, lives are governed by theatre, by the “show” in which family plays 
its staged part. Dressed up in a suit like a city hall man, his striped tie 
echoing visually the bars on the windows, he holds Avon down, and our 
point of view remains tight in between them, compressing the shot/
reverse-shot technique into as close and proximate a range as possible as 
they speak, losing sight of any of the mechanics of framing and repre-
sentation we may have noticed around them and instead coming as near 
to their bodies as the camera can.
Our perspective is, as McNulty puts it earlier, “squeezed between the 
sides” . It is a deadly position for D’ Angelo, that implicates us directly 
as close watchers, as close as the television screen or camera lens can 
come to sweating, spitting, bleeding bodies, in the visceral, ethical 
negotiation—family versus business—unfolding before us. Th ey part, 
and the perspective pulls back, circling behind Avon as he stalks the 
room and then sits on a bed in the back corner. Th  ere is no dialogue 
now, only the sound of their exhausted breathing. We have reached 
the limits of what is sayable. D’ Angelo’s murder, once admitted, disrupts 
the bond that hold the Barksdales together, a “social” bond that essentially 
enabled their attempts to legitimate or even to humanize themselves.
Th rough Holland’s dislocated visuals, we witness the complicity of 
Avon and Stringer in their own undoing, and the dismantling of any 
vestiges of care. Th e camera pulls back slightly from Avon, now in the


--- PAGE 225 ---
216 THE WIRE : URBAN DECAY AND AMERICAN TELEVISION
middle distance, and pans left , so that we now see Stringer’s form in the 
left  foreground, blurry and slightly shadowed. Th e aperture pulls and 
shift s, and his face comes into focus; once again, Holland uses a visual 
tactic of reorientation by refocusing, which we watched Prez enact 
within the episode as he enlarged the image of the license plate, but it is 
coupled here with a mobile, fl uid perspective (rather than a fi xed line-
of-sight); this merger of fl  uid curvature with decisive linearity recalls 
the juxtaposition of living bodies in various scenes with rectilinear 
doors, frames, and boundaries. Th at counterpoint manifests itself in the 
fi nal shot of the episode, which positions us on the outside of a dirty 
window, looking through the squared grid of the six-paned frame at 
Avon and Stringer, who are separated and segmented not only by space, 
but also by the vertical and horizontal grille-strips. Th e rectilinear graph 
into which the social order wants to organize the city is overlaid onto 
their alienated bodies. Th e episode fi  nishes not with resolution, but in 
wounded separation. We leave the men apart, and the camera tracks 
right, off  the window and onto the dark wall beside it, leaving watchers 
fi nally excluded and barred, even from light. Still, Holland doesn’t close 
“Moral Midgetry” by rendering judgment on the untenable and com-
promised situation of Avon and Stringer. Instead, that undefi  ned 
darkness helps to keep open and unsettled her visual interrogation of 
the fi ctions and of the necessities that dislocate her America.


--- PAGE 226 ---
217
15
“Gots to Get Got”: 
Social Justice and Audience 
Response to Omar Little
Kathleen LeBesco
If you’re pissed about Omar, be pissed about the game and how dead inside the people 
that kill each other without a thought truly are. Be pissed about the world that put them 
in that position. […] Let the show teach you something. Make it a wakeup call.
Phuck that pole smokin queer…
—fan postings, HBO.com
Mere samples of viewer response to the character of Omar Devon 
Little—an honorable queer gangsta involved in storylines related to 
crime and justice—the epigraphs to this essay demonstrate Omar’s func-
tion as a kind of agent provocateur. Th ey also suggest the value of 
studying how fans make sense of Th e Wire  rather than merely presum-
ing that they internalize the intentions of its creators. Utilizing a 
theoretical framework and methodology based in cultural studies, this 
chapter explores audience dialogue about issues of social justice on the 
show. Th e study focuses on the show’s fan forum on the HBO.com web-
site, which was very active during the run of the series and continues to 
be accessible, though lightly traffi  cked. In particular, I am interested in 
how viewers negotiate attitudes toward crime and how these attitudes 
are integrated with other perspectives on a socially just vision of living


--- PAGE 227 ---
218 THE WIRE : URBAN DECAY AND AMERICAN TELEVISION
with respect across diff erence. Omar serves as a lightning rod for the 
articulation of both ambivalent attitudes toward homosexuality and 
progressive beliefs about the need for social change in the overinstitu-
tionalized U.S. today.
Beyond Media Eff ects
Historically, scholars interested in the relationship between mediated 
representations of crime and audience response have posited an overly 
simplistic model of media eff  ects wherein media representations of 
crime are reductively imagined to have clear, direct, and measurable 
eff ects on the behavior or attitudes of viewers (e.g. Lefk  owitz et al ., 
“Television Violence” and Growing Up ). In contrast, Aaron Doyle 
exhorts researchers to attempt to determine the meaning of crime 
stories for audience members, as a supplement to research focused 
on the political and institutional eff ects of crime and the media (“How 
Not” 867). Th is chapter takes up Doyle’s project by exploring how 
watchers of Th e Wire  make sense of crime stories, particularly those 
centered on Omar.
By acknowledging and mining a complicated connection between 
Th e Wire  and its fans, we stand to learn more about the capacity of media 
to spawn social and political change. By examining the meanings that 
fans hold for crime and violence in the show, we can avoid a quantitative 
preoccupation on the amount of crime and violence depicted, making it 
harder for simple media-blaming to mask the real social, political, and 
economic causes of crime and violence (Gauntlett 54).
Th is project is essential for gauging the extent to which Th e Wire  
serves as a corrective—not only to formulaic cops-and-robbers shows 
but also to ideologically regressive attitudes about justice and crime—in 
the minds of its viewers. Series creators David Simon and Ed Burns see 
the problems with “the system” (Rose 84–85), and their desires for social 
justice and social reconstruction are palpable in the series (and in media 
interviews; see Ryan). Th ey seem to concede, with Stuart Hall et al., that 
crime is merely a form of unproductive labor, illegal but thoroughly 
capitalistic and “adapted to the system on which it is parasitic” (364). 
Joel Best argues that our tendency to view crime “as a melodrama in 
which evil villains prey on innocent victims” frightens and confuses the


--- PAGE 228 ---
“Gots to Get Got”: Social Justice and Audience Response to Omar Little 219
public, and obfuscates attempts at designing and carrying out eff ective 
social policies (xii; see also Surette 209). Following this logic, one might 
presume that the complexity of Th e Wire —its general lack of melo-
drama, its subtlety and its avoidance of what Steven Johnson has termed 
“fl ashing arrows” (i.e. easily readable clues to a text’s meaning, leaving 
the audience little cognitive work to do)—might push audiences in the 
opposite direction, emboldening them to put their hard-won compre-
hension of social justice issues to work in the streets and in the realm of 
policy change.
Audience Analysis
Rather than issuing from on high a proclamation about the cultural work 
that Th e Wire  accomplishes or fails to accomplish (as does Suderman), 
we need to ask how audiences understand the show (Schiappa 5). How 
do audiences read the series in terms of a call for social reform? My 
answer is based on a careful study of thousands of posts by fans of the 
series on the HBO.com website in the fan forum for Th e Wire . Th e forum 
contains hundreds of thousands of posts by fans in response to threads—
discussion prompts—generated both by the HBO staff   and by other 
fans. Perhaps no thread was more active in the fi nal weeks of the series 
than that devoted to the death of Omar Little, whose fi  ctional death 
warranted an obituary on the pages of Newsweek where he was tagged 
“Robbin’ Hood” (Alston 15).
Omar is a fascinating character for a number of reasons, not the least 
of which is his unexpected collision of identities. A man with a code 
who also robs and kills, sensitive and openly gay in a hypermasculine 
black urban subculture, and somehow off  the radar while embedded in a 
surveillance-saturated culture that disproportionally and systematically 
targets young black men (Doyle, Arresting Images 72), Omar is a bundle 
of seeming contradictions. It is the very complexity of his character that 
makes Omar an excellent site for interpreting audience understandings 
of a number of issues related to social justice.
In “Clarifi cations” (5.08), Omar is shot and killed by Kenard, a boy 
from the neighborhood, while buying a pack of cigarettes at the corner 
store. Aware of his enormous popularity, the proprietors of HBO.com 
immediately created an offi  cial discussion entitled “Omar Little R.I.P . ” ,


--- PAGE 229 ---
220 THE WIRE : URBAN DECAY AND AMERICAN TELEVISION
which garnered over 1300 responses, most of them posted in the few 
days aft er the episode depicting his death aired.1 A great number of the 
posts are inadequately detailed to provide any clues about their author, 
but many posts include biographical information that leads me to believe 
that the Wire boards at HBO.com are a magnet for a diversity of stances 
and opinions, from economically liberal would-be sociologists to, socially 
conservative survivors of the streets, and everyone in between.
According to Arthur Raney, a viewer’s moral judgments about the 
behavior of characters onscreen shape his or her aff  ective disposition 
toward the characters, and also infl uence the viewer’s level of pleasure 
from the viewing experience (145). Raney’s work compels me to con-
sider the moral judgments, both positive and negative, associated with 
Omar’s behavior as a key not only to the pleasure of the fans but also as 
a lens on moral perspectives on justice. Taking the wide range of fan 
backgrounds into consideration, a number of themes emerge from my 
analysis of their posts. Th e most prominent are that Omar is respectable 
and beloved by fans “despite” his homosexuality and because of his 
code; and that the characterization of Omar motivates refl  ections on 
and action in the realm of social justice.
Omar’s Sexuality and His Code
Fan conversation on Omar’s death centers around either the viewers’ 
shock and frustration with the writers for ending Omar as they did, or 
on praise for writing a complex character. Azz24446, who elsewhere 
identifi es as an older, politically conservative white male, writes,
Omar Little is one that most all of us will remember for years to 
come because he combined such mutually-exculsive concepts as a 
sociopathic killer with someone who operated by internal moral 
code (“I never put no gun on a citizen. ”). He was NOT a cookie 
cutter personality.
2
Th e vast majority of posters echo this sentiment, citing their admiration 
of Omar’s code (no cursing, no thuggery on Sundays, no targeting law-
abiding citizens, etc.) and his quirks (a love of Honey-Nut Cheerios, a 
wordsmith’s talent for aphorisms, and a propensity for whistling while


--- PAGE 230 ---
“Gots to Get Got”: Social Justice and Audience Response to Omar Little 221
he works), as well as their shock at the manner in which his character 
“got got. ”3
As might be expected in a culture stained by homophobia, though, 
not all fans embrace Omar, despite his many charms. Blocchead writes,
Damn shame when society comes to a point where someone like, 
Omar, can be considered a ‘real nigga’ . I mean, FUCK- he’s a fuckin 
FAG! Does that make him any less of a man!? -HELL YES IT DOES! 
[…] Don’t get it twisted- I’m not homophobic to the point of being 
an out-n-out bigot against gay folks, but, to be idolizing a character 
such as ‘Omar’ is just down right disgusting to me. He may have 
been portrayed as an ethics-bound killer (how oxymoronic), but 
the only thing ‘G’ about him was his sexuality. Fuck that.
Th is fan’s anti-queer hostility is apparent, but his post is still noteworthy 
for its recognition of the ironies of being an “ethics-bound killer. ” Most 
fans on the boards write lovingly of Omar and his much vaunted code 
(which I discuss below), unable or unwilling to square his murderous 
activities with their aff ection for him.
In a similar vein, Jaemil writes, “Phuck that pole smokin queer......yea 
kenard my boy keep it real taking out faggot ass mother fuckers all 
day!!!!!” Th is provokes many other fans to respond by reinforcing Omar’s 
credibility as “true G” despite his homosexuality. Th ere are few defenses 
of queerness here—or even distancing “tolerance” moves;
4 instead, most 
fans seem to see queerness and hardness/gangsta status as not mutually 
exclusive, and they don’t mind saying so. In a seething rebuke, Demonic1 
replies, “what the man do behind closed doors with whom ever or what 
ever is the mans business.. all this anger Jaemil is showing down there 
with his post aint nothing but built up anger that he secrectly enjoys 
watching men. ” Not a single fan in the “Omar Little R.I.P . ” thread admits 
enjoying Omar’s sexuality or discusses his/her desire to see Omar be 
aff ectionate with his lovers, but, at the very least, most fans here are not 
traffi  cking in the worst, most reductive stereotypes about gay people.
Whatever progressive views of justice may reign on the boards, there 
is also ambivalence about Omar’s homosexuality. Most posters who 
mention it maintain a distance, saying things like “despite Omar being a 
fag, I liked him . . . ” But even the issue of justice is vexed. For some fans,


--- PAGE 231 ---
222 THE WIRE : URBAN DECAY AND AMERICAN TELEVISION
the preoccupation is with dramatic justice: they wanted Omar to go out 
gloriously, shotgun blazing, and whistling “Th  e Farmer in the Dell, ” 
rather than see him taken out by a “li’l hopper” . Th ese fans do not, for 
the most part, talk about other conceptions of justice. In the parlance of 
dramatic justice, the vast majority of fans called for the head of Kenard, 
a young boy—not exactly a progressive perspective on juvenile crime. 
Th is sense of vigilanteism seems particularly odd for fans schooled by 
Season Four’s sharp, poignant assessment of the complex relationship 
between young inner-city boys and the variety of institutions that con-
tinue to fail them—families, foster care, juvenile detention centers, 
police, and schools.
Apart from the posts eulogizing Omar, there were a few interesting 
conversations about his sexuality while the character was still alive. In 
January 2008, a poster to the HBO.com boards started a new thread. 
Aft er showing a fondness for Omar and acknowledging his homosexu-
ality, annfl ood asked, “How do you suppose Omar reconciles his 
homosexuality with his strict religious upbringing and aversion to 
profanity—I would think that a man such as Omar with such a strict 
moral code would, at the very least, fi nd two men together a sin against 
God. ” Sixty responses, in aggregate, painted an interesting picture of fan 
attitudes toward Omar’s queerness, and queerness in general.
Several posters use the term “homo” to refer to Omar, and not (appar-
ently) as part of an insider’s ironic project of linguistic reclamation. One 
poster, NoShameinGame, self-identifi es as gay and uses the thread as an 
opportunity to declare his admiration for Omar: “Call him homosexual, 
a homo, thug homo, label it as you please, but Omar is still a man of cer-
tain ‘principles’ , and that’s why I like him. ” DoninCincy agrees, arguing 
“Omar’s sexual preferences are not a big issue to the writers. […] Omar is 
too complex to be so tightly defi ned. […] Th e majority of people who see 
Omar as one sided in the series are the gangster fi gures who feel that they 
have to posture as rough and tough to feel secure in their manhood. ”
Lest we get too far ahead of ourselves in lauding the progressive poli-
tics of fans of Th e Wire , note NoShameinGame’s agreeable response to 
DoninCincy:
I’m sure all these so called rappers, gangster rappers, whatever, are 
in the closet, and have experienced homosexual relations before.


--- PAGE 232 ---
“Gots to Get Got”: Social Justice and Audience Response to Omar Little 223
All these feuding rappers are just a bunch of closet queens catfi ght-
ing like women would do. No disrespect to women, but we all 
know women have their catfi ghts against each other.
Appreciation of sexual diversity as a progressive value seems under-
mined here, and elsewhere on the boards, by old-fashioned misogyny. 
Echoing the perspective of many other fans, Prophetessroxy writes, 
“I loved Omar because even though he was a homosexual, he wasn’t a 
‘stereotypical ‘fl amer’ ....he liked his boys, but he was gangsta to the bone... . ” 
Here, Omar’s performance of gangsta masculinity mitigates against his 
sexuality to produce a performance deemed acceptable by this fan, wary 
of stereotypes. Omar’s “hard” masculinity salvages his citizenship, dem-
onstrating in this context, being female/feminine is a larger obstacle to 
positive regard than being queer.
Areas of social life including religious association, family life, and local 
politics are crucial sites for the enactment of good citizenship—and they 
are also sites at which the homosexual has historically failed in US culture 
(Herrell 273). Richard Herrell examines the remaking of queer social 
identities at these sites, remarking that “If the ‘citizen’ is defi ned as ‘not 
alien’ by membership in the nation, ‘bad citizens’ are contrasted with the 
‘good’ by their alienation from the collective moral purpose” (Herrell 276). 
As a man with a code, Omar is no stranger to the collective moral 
purpose. Omar as churchgoer has a code that extends protection crown-
wearing grannies everywhere (see 3.09, “Slapstick”), thus marking him as 
a good citizen both in the realm of religious association and in family life. 
Furthermore, his Robin Hood behavior on the street, while a stretch from 
the electoral kind of politics practiced by Councilman (later Mayor) 
Tommy Carcetti, fi nds him in good stead in the politics of the hood. Inas-
much as Omar remakes himself in all three arenas of concern for Herrell, 
his sexuality recedes into the background of fan imagination, it seems.
Th e widespread adoration of Omar might indicate that his audience—
particularly the liberal would-be sociologists—are well trained to see 
“authenticity” in intersecting identities. But this reading makes little 
sense for the socially conservative fans who declare their love for Omar 
“despite” his queerness. In this case, an interpretation derived from 
Herrell’s theoretical argument—that Omar’s recuperated citizenship 
allows his sexuality to recede—prevails.


--- PAGE 233 ---
224 THE WIRE : URBAN DECAY AND AMERICAN TELEVISION
A Call to Action
In decrying the unjust demise of Omar, fans of the show reveal varied 
perspectives on the possibility of real justice. Howsiah, for instance, 
writes,
Omar was true Justice and now Justice is dead. We mourne. Not 
only was his death a tragedy. But the fact that this young boy did 
him in so precise and cold-bloodedly. Speaks volumes about the 
world they live in.
Th is poster couldn’t be clearer about his vision of social justice—an 
impossibility. Darknastycash concurs: 
Th e Wire is not a hollywood, weepy, happy ending type of show. 
People like Omar don’t die in their sleep at the age of 85. […] Omar 
was the closest thing to a hero the show had. Aft  er Omar died 
though, there were a bunch of clues as to how insignifi cant he was to 
the city. Th e newspaper passed on the story about the “mid 30’s Male 
who was killed in a convenience store” and ran a diff erent story. To 
us as fans, that was a slap in the face but this show has never been 
about pleasing the fans, that was just a pleasant side eff ect. Even the 
Coroner (who undoubtedly dealt with more than one of Omar’s vic-
tims over the years) placed the wrong name tag on his body. Th at 
just goes to show how little of an impact he had on the civilian lives 
in Baltimore. […] It sucks, but that’s the cold, harsh reality.
Th is poster evidences frustration with the death of an anti-hero, but also 
embraces the Simonian impulse to critique the way that society pre-
cludes justice from being done. But does “that’s the cold, harsh reality” 
imply that this can be changed, or is this merely the semantic equivalent 
of a shrug? Other posters point out that Omar’s death seems fi tting for a 
show trying to communicate that justice is rarely served. What I’m inter-
ested in is what happens aft er this realization; do fans want social change? 
Or are they content with the lesson that life is not fair?
An analysis of how fans respond to discourse about the “ American 
Dream”—with its attendant myths of striving, social mobility, and


--- PAGE 234 ---
“Gots to Get Got”: Social Justice and Audience Response to Omar Little 225
meritocracy—relative to Omar helps to answer these questions. At one 
point, Omar wears a t-shirt that reads, “I am the American Dream” 
(2.10). In many ways, his character did function as a dream—a dream 
that justice could be served in the midst of a corrupt system, a dream to 
be the watcher rather than the watched in surveillance-saturated society. 
Ironman9695 writes,
Th is unforgettable force of a character came to defi  ne the essence 
of this incomparably exceptional program’s most resonant and 
resounding message: He who allows himself to be beholden to the 
institution is its reformer at his peril. He who parts company with 
the institution is his own man.
Omar appears inspirational in his ability to part company with institu-
tions, but it is not just his life that inspires. Fan Jenny15 argues,
Th e creators of this show are brilliant; through Omar’s ridiculous 
death, they have channeled to the viewers the very anger, frustra-
tion, and disillusionment of the characters and the people they 
portray. and the best part is, that we cannot even feel self-righteous 
in our grief and anger, since its a murderous bandit were mourning, 
aft er all.
Jenny15 thus imagines Omar’s death as a narrative clarion call—a 
consciousness raiser for audiences far and wide.
Many, many fans on the HBO boards express frustration and disap-
pointment with the way Omar was killed off   on the show. Th e most 
popular sentiment is that it was unjust to the viewer to craft   such an 
aesthetically and narratively unsatisfying ending for one of the most 
engrossing characters and storylines in the series. Most viewers articu-
late profound sadness that Omar’s arc ended in the manner that it did, 
claiming it was not only inconsistent with what we knew of this careful, 
watchful, intelligent character, but also that it was just plain unjust and 
wrong to do that to loyal viewers. Critics might use Omar’s demise as a 
jumping off  point to speculate on the intentions of the show’s creators—
perhaps to say that senseless things happen sometimes, or perhaps to 
create exactly the sense of anger and frustration that might motivate


--- PAGE 235 ---
226 THE WIRE : URBAN DECAY AND AMERICAN TELEVISION
action for social change. But it seems like a long way from being annoyed 
with the death of a fi ctional character to real-world agitation.
Fan Neutralitybias off  ers a plan regarding social justice for the 
engaged viewer of Th e Wire :
So that’s my challenge for you fans. If you’re pissed about Omar, be 
pissed about the game and how dead inside the people that kill 
each other without a thought truly are. Be pissed about the world 
that put them in that position. […] let your love for the character 
teach you something. Let the show teach you something. Make it a 
wakeup call.
“Be pissed” is not exactly a sophisticated and concrete course of action, 
but it is more than is advocated by most television series in terms of real 
world change. Nor is it the only call to action to be found on the boards. 
Beenthardunthat (whose handle bespeaks the wisdom of experience) 
writes, “Th e writers this year have done a fantastic job of trying to show 
us more than blood and beatings. Th ey have tried to make us realize that 
we do have choices, both in the streets, our homes and at the ballots. ” 
Eschewing the bullets of Malcolm X, this audience member directs other 
fans to a time-tested course of action, the ballot box, as a path for the 
change advocated by Th e Wire .
Still other fans make intriguing connections between Omar’s demise 
and the disappearance of the kind of institution that does not suff ocate 
or oppress the individual. Rather self-eff acingly, Noahblake writes,
Omar is like a lot of institutions that are dying out -organizations 
and systems that if not perfect, were at least consistent....and are 
being toppled by people and forces with no sense of morality or 
honor whatsoever. […] as weird as it may seem that I should emu-
late a murdering ganster -me, a dorky white suburban guy.....I hope 
I can stand up for the justice and “right” that exist in my world the 
way Omar did in his.
While this fan seems to defend institutions more than Simon would, 
what is interesting is his aim of standing up for justice. Here, Omar is 
undoubtedly a catalyst for change.


--- PAGE 236 ---
“Gots to Get Got”: Social Justice and Audience Response to Omar Little 227
One fi nal fan exchange about the extent to which Th e Wire  off ers a 
call to action illustrates the diffi  culty of declaring the show an ideologi-
cally transparent text. Celeak71 writes, “Th is show should give us all the 
gumption to think of ways of playing active roles in being a beacon of light 
in our communities, so Omars don’t have to be maufactured in our hoods. 
(see the second chance for Namond Brice thanks to Colvin). ”
5 Th is ignites 
a fi restorm of responses by fans who fi nd Celeak71 too critical of Omar 
and of the streets from which he hails. DRLHB writes,
Omar W AS the embodiment of the ‘code’ that ‘a man must have a 
code’ which he sticks to no matter what the personal cost. Th  at’s 
the defi nition of ‘integrity’ and ‘courage’ and is one of the reasons 
why he W AS Th e Wire to many of us. Who else is gonna keep the 
devil down in the hole, except men and women of integrity and 
courage, no matter what their socioeconomic status, race, sexual 
preference, or which brand of smokes they prefer.
6
Here DRLHB articulates a vision of social justice that can be pursued 
regardless of one’s context, whereas Celeak71 sees the show as a caution-
ary tale about certain kinds of (depraved) contexts. Celeak71 responds,
Th e tragedy is that the characters make irrational decisions because 
they are constrained by their experiences and cannot make sound 
holistic judgement. It is a mirror of society and a challenge to us to 
fi nd ways to become again, a beacon of light to those who don’t 
have the guidance - whether they are in the streets, in politics, on 
the police force, or in the media.
DRLHB retorts,
At this point, I’ d much rather have some ‘fake ass hollywood 
bullshit’ than the current ‘fuck a coherent compelling story, 
we’re going to teach these bitches some community college level 
sociology’ bullshit. Don’t rest in peace yet, Omar.
Th e poster continues, referring to the show’s creators:
While I admire them […], their decision to write Omar out of the 
show in the way they did was wrong on just about every level.


--- PAGE 237 ---
228 THE WIRE : URBAN DECAY AND AMERICAN TELEVISION
It was succumbing to hopelessness, pointlessness, despair and the 
idea that just because something ‘is, ’ it is somehow right. Which 
are the very things they condemn […] Now THAT’S ironic.
Th is fan articulates the power of the vision promulgated by Simon et al. 
and critiques the descent into apathy that the demise of Omar signals. 
What I glean from the full exchange is that Th e Wire  does not read 
transparently as a manifesto for social justice. Just as one fan can see the 
show as a cautionary tale about the “manufacture of Omars”—that is, 
the creation of thugs, however honorable they may be—another fan 
reads the series’s championing of anti-heroic values as the only sensible 
path of resistance to institutionalized life. Some see the show’s provoca-
tive ideologies as its highest calling, while others demand the political 
lesson and an aesthetic masterpiece.
It is the rare fan who is ready to take to the streets in pursuit of social 
justice aft er watching Th e Wire . However, discussion among audience 
members on the HBO.com boards indicates that the series functions 
eff ectively as a consciousness-raiser about the social, political and eco-
nomic plight of individuals constrained by corrupt, failing institutions. 
Whether or not the fans see this as something that can be railed against 
varies. Some fans, already wise to issues of social justice, resent the civics 
lesson and demand masterly storytelling that fi  ghts against “hopeless-
ness, pointlessness, despair. ”
Conclusion
In an interview, David Simon explains the title of the series: “Th e title 
refers to an almost imaginary but inviolate boundary between the two 
Americas . . . Th e Wire  really does refer to almost a boundary or fence or 
the idea of people walking on a high wire and falling to either side” (quoted 
in Ethridge 154). Simon sees the American Dream as a charade and wants 
to use the series to unmask this reality. In her study of HBO.com discus-
sion boards for Six Feet Under , Rhiannon Bury notes that fans take 
great pains to distinguish their admired series from typical network 
fare: “Because the process of signifi cation is intrinsically linked to the 
process of subject formation, such fans not only construct themselves as 
‘quality readers’ but also police the boundary of such a readership” (191).


--- PAGE 238 ---
“Gots to Get Got”: Social Justice and Audience Response to Omar Little 229
We have seen this is also the case in online discussions of Th e Wire . In 
articulating what constitutes quality viewership, fans are reinscribing, 
rather than subverting, that very sense of two Americas that Simon is 
working so hard to expose and change. When fans have a hard time 
escaping even discursive elitism—working toward classlessness solely 
through conversation—it is indeed diffi  cult to applaud the true impact 
of the show’s ideological underpinnings. Th e series as text is rich and 
politically knowing; as consciousness-raiser, it is successful and evoca-
tive; yet as itself an agent of sociopolitical transformation, Th e Wire  
provokes ambivalent responses, which press each viewer to engage with 
the themes of the series critically.
Broadcast on a channel with an elitist tagline (“It’s not TV . It’s HBO. ”), 
Th e Wire  seems from the start to congratulate its viewers for their excel-
lent taste. Critics like Maureen Reddy voice concern about texts that 
position their readers as “liberal and humane, even progressive and 
nonracist” (167), all the while congratulating them on upholding socially 
dominant values. Is Th e Wire  guilty of ideologically progressive fl attery 
of those fans already assumed to have great taste? Not exactly: for Simon 
and Burns, fans are liberal and humane when they critique socially 
dominant values, not when they embrace them. Critics have applauded 
David Simon for his determination to go beyond providing mere enter-
tainment and reinforcing audience beliefs in a moral and just society. At 
the same time, they have noted that his actual challenge to institutional 
life “lacks a clear articulation of an affi  rmative social and political project” 
(Ethridge 152). Blake Ethridge believes that fi  guring out how to solve 
these complicated problems is beyond Simon’s purview; instead, “What 
is important for Simon is the representation of the problem and the 
provocation of the audience” (155).
My study of fan response indicates that not all of the audience neces-
sarily reads the series as a polemic on the American Dream, and they 
content themselves with commentary on the high quality of the acting, 
writing, and direction in the show, or its realism. Th  ose fans who do 
read the show as a polemic respond neither by stigmatizing Simon or 
the show, nor by doing nothing, or by, kowtowing to the utilitarian logic 
of institutional structure. Where the battle emerges is between doing 
nothing (as seems to be the case in the “it’s all in the game” refrain that 
frequently resurfaces) and actively rejecting institutions (in theory or in


--- PAGE 239 ---
230 THE WIRE : URBAN DECAY AND AMERICAN TELEVISION
practice). Although fan response illustrates that the series has goaded 
some to work for social, political and economic change, it has also inoc-
ulated others who seem so immersed in its realism that they cannot 
imagine any other way, shrugging off   their shared responsibility for 
social change.
Whether this bifurcation in audience response strikes one as suffi   -
cient depends on one’s expectations of subscription television as a 
change agent. Ethridge contends that Simon need not both agitate for 
change and direct that agitation (163). Few, if any, members of the tele-
visual cohort of Th e Wire ever prompt heightened sociopolitical and 
economic awareness among fans; thus, it seems like a rush to judgment 
to indict Th e Wire  for failing to deliver a clear alternative path to the 
institutional frameworks it so stunningly critiques. Aaron Doyle notes 
that “TV does not have greater ability than other media to let viewers 
see the ‘truth’ of institutional life; TV instead has greater power to 
validate the ideological stories it tells about what happens in other 
institutions” (Arresting Images 137–138). If we assess Th e Wire  for the 
quality with which it has validated an unusually critical set of ideolo-
gical stories about institutional life, it is an unqualifi  ed success. Th e 
fan responses I have analyzed here represent dynamic and complex 
res ponses to this critical set of ideological stories, especially those con-
cerning homosexuality, racializations of sexuality, street justice, and the 
myth of the American Dream, bearing witness to the series’s true and 
profound impact on those who tuned in.
7
Notes
1. Discussions of Omar in this chapter are primarily drawn from this offi  cial “Omar 
Little R.I.P” thread, although there were many posts about Omar from user-generated 
threads as well. Th ere was no overt diff erence in the tone or content of posts in network-
generated vs. user-generated threads.
2. Th is and all posts that follow were made to Th e Wire ’s discussion board at 
HBO.com. See the list of “Posts Cited” at the end of this chapter for full citation informa-
tion. Th e poster is here referring to Omar’s statement to Detective William “Bunk” 
Moreland in 1.07: “I do some dirt, too, but I never put my gun on nobody who wasn’t in 
the game. ” Posts are cited verbatim, errors and non-standard English included. Th  e 
posts quoted in this chapter are not meant to be statistically representative of views 
expressed on the boards or among fans generally. In fact, posts that are discursively


--- PAGE 240 ---
“Gots to Get Got”: Social Justice and Audience Response to Omar Little 231
“extreme” in some respect are the most suggestive about social justice and are thus well 
represented here.
3. Omar fi rst articulates the main element of his code in 1.07: visiting his wrath only 
on those “in the game. ” Fans witness Omar’s fury that the ghetto’s traditional Sunday 
morning truce has been violated in 3.09, when he and his grandmother are shot at on 
their way to church. In later episodes, like 4.03 we learn of Omar’s fondness for Honey 
Nut Cheerios when he blames his lover Renaldo for letting the box “go light. ”
4. An excellent example of such a “tolerance” move would be “Not that there’s 
anything wrong with that, ” which became a tag line for Jerry and his friend George on 
Seinfeld when they wanted to correct the misunderstanding that they were gay and 
simultaneously to exhibit their open-mindedness. See Seinfeld, “Th e Outing” (4.17), 
original air date 11 February 1993.
5. Th is poster’s last comment refers to the Namond Brice storyline in Season Four 
that resolves with his move to the home and care of Howard “Bunny” Colvin. See 4.13.
6. Th is poster’s rhetorical query about “who else is gonna keep the devil down in the 
hole” is a clear reference to the lyrical refrain of Th e Wire ’s Tom Waits-penned theme 
song, “Way Down in the Hole. ” Th e post itself functions as a nod to the ways in which 
the series defi nes the language fans use to discuss it.
7. Th e author wishes to thank the editors of this volume, as well as John Shields and 
Laura Tropp, for feedback on this chapter.
Posts Cited
Except where noted, all posts were accessed successfully on 18 December 2008.
Annfl ood: <http://boards.hbo.com/topic/Wire-Member-Created/Omars-Homosex
uality/1900001954&start=60>, posted 25 January 2008, accessed 26 July 2008. Posts in 
user-generated threads have been taken down, but can be accessed at <http://web.
archive.org/web/20080131184241/boards.hbo.com/topic/Wire-Member-Created/
Omars-Homosexuality/1900001954&start=60>.
Azz24446: <http://boards.hbo.com/topic/Wire-Hbo-Official/Omar-Little-Rip/
1900003292&start=1275>, 25 February 2008.
Beenthardunthat: <http://boards.hbo.com/topic/Wire-Archives/Omar-Little-Rip/
1900003292&start=990>, posted 25 February 2008.
Blocchead: <http://boards.hbo.com/topic/Wire-Archives/Omar-Little-Rip/1900003292&
start=270>, posted 4 March 2008.
Celeak71: <http://boards.hbo.com/topic/Wire-Archives/Omar-Little-Rip/1900003292&
start=780>, posted 27 February 2008.
Darknastycash: <http://boards.hbo.com/topic/Wire-Hbo-Offi  cial/Omar-Little-Rip/
1900003292&start=1155>, posted 25 February 2008.


--- PAGE 241 ---
232 THE WIRE : URBAN DECAY AND AMERICAN TELEVISION
Demonic1: <http://boards.hbo.com/topic/Wire-Archives/Omar-Little-Rip/1900003292&
start=315>, posted 3 March 3008.
DoninCincy: <http://boards.hbo.com/topic/Wire-Member-Created/Omars-Homos
exuality/1900001954&start=45>, posted 26 January 2008, accessed 26 July 2008. Posts 
in user-generated threads have been taken down, but can be accessed at <http://web.
archive.org/web/20080131184939/boards.hbo.com/topic/Wire-Member-Created/
Omars-Homosexuality/1900001954&start=45>.
DRLHB: <http://boards.hbo.com/topic/Wire-Archives/Omar-Little-Rip/1900003292&
start=780>, posted 27 February 2008;
<http://boards.hbo.com/topic/Wire-Archives/Omar-Little-Rip/1900003292&
start=285>, posted 3 March 2008;
<http://boards.hbo.com/topic/Wire-Archives/Omar-Little-Rip/1900003292&
start=195>, posted 6 March 2008.
Howsiah: <http://boards.hbo.com/topic/Wire-Archives/Omar-Little-Rip/1900003292&
start=1110>, posted 25 February 2008.
Ironman9695: <http://boards.hbo.com/topic/Wire-Archives/Omar-Little-Rip/
1900003292&start=150>, posted 10 March 2008.
Jaemil: <http://boards.hbo.com/topic/Wire-Archives/Omar-Little-Rip/1900003292&
start=330>, posted 3 March 2008.
Jenny15: <http://boards.hbo.com/topic/Wire-Archives/Omar-Little-Rip/1900003292&
start=945>, posted 26 February 2008.
Neutralitybias: <http://boards.hbo.com/topic/Wire-Archives/Omar-Little-Rip/
1900003292&start=1035>, posted 25 February 2008.
Noahblake: <http://boards.hbo.com/topic/Wire-Archives/Omar-Little-Rip/1900003292&
start=900>, posted 26 February 2008.
NoShameinGame: <http://boards.hbo.com/topic/Wire-Member-Created/Omars-H
omosexuality/1900001954&start=45>, posted 26 January 2008, accessed 26 July 2008. 
Posts in user-generated threads have been taken down, but this post can be accessed at 
<http://web.archive.org/web/20080131184939/boards.hbo.com/topic/Wire-Member-
Created/Omars-Homosexuality/1900001954&start=45>.
Prophetessroxy: <http://boards.hbo.com/topic/Wire-Hbo-Offi  cial/Omar-Little-Rip/
1900003292&start=975>, posted 26 February 2008.


--- PAGE 242 ---
233
Works Cited
Adams, James Truslow. Th e Epic of America . Boston: Little, Brown and Company, 1931.
Alex. Brown & Sons. Advertisement. Baltimore Sun 9 February 1904: 2.
Allrath, Gaby, Marion Gymnich, and Carola Surkamp. “Introduction: Towards a 
Narratology of TV Series. ” Narrative Strategies in Television Series. Ed. Gaby Allrath 
and Marion Gymnich. New Y ork: Palgrave Macmillan, 2005. 1–43.
Alston, Joshua. “HBO’s Killer With a Code. ” Newsweek 151.9 (3 March 2008): 15.
Alvarez, Rafael. Th e Wire: Truth Be Told. New Y ork: Pocket Books, 2004.
American Bonding Company. Advertisement. Baltimore Sun 9 February 1904: 1.
Anderson, Elijah. “Th e Code of the Streets. ” Atlantic Monthly 273.5 (May 1994): 80–94.
— — —. Code of the Street: Decency, Violence, and the Moral Life of the Inner City . 
New Y ork: W .W . Norton Co., 2000.
Appadurai, Arjun. Modernity At Large: Cultural Dimensions of Globalization . 
Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 1996.
Th e Architect . Dir. Matt Tauber. Magnolia Pictures, 2006.
Aristotle. “Poetics. ” Ed. and trans. Stephen Halliwell. Aristotle, Poetics. Longinus, On the 
Sublime, Demetrius, On Style. Ed. Stephen Halliwell et al. Cambridge, MA: Harvard 
University Press, 1995; corr., 1999. 1–141.
Baker, Houston. Blues Ideology and Afro-American Literature: A Vernacular Th  eory . 
Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1987.
Baker, Peter C. “ A New Frontier. ” Th e National Newspaper  (United Arab Emirates) 
14 May 2008. <http://www.thenational.ae/article/20080514/ART/260765471/1007>.
“Baltimore Housing Complex Demolished. ” Washington Post  28 July 1996. Final 
edn.: B4.
Belfoure, Charles. “In Baltimore, Public Housing Comes Full Circle. ” New York Times 19 
March 2000. <http://www.nytimes.com/2000/03/19/realestate/in-baltimore-public-
housing-comes-full-circle.html>.
Bennett, Michael. “Manufacturing the Ghetto: Anti-Urbanism and the Spatialization 
of Race. ” Th e Nature of Cities: Ecocriticism and Urban Environments . Ed. Michael 
Bennett and David W . Teague. Tucson: University of Arizona Press, 1999. 
169–188.
Best, Joel. Random Violence: How We Talk about New Crimes and New Victims. Berkeley: 
University of California Press, 1999.


--- PAGE 243 ---
234 THE WIRE : URBAN DECAY AND AMERICAN TELEVISION
Biddle, Jeff  E. and Daniel Hamermesh. “Beauty, Productivity and Discrimination: 
Lawyers’ Looks and Lucre. ” Journal of Labor Economics 16 (1998): 172–201.
Bordwell, David. Narration in the Fiction Film. Madison: University of Wisconsin Press, 
1985.
——— . Poetics of Cinema. New Y ork: Routledge, 2008.
— — —. Th e Way Hollywood Tells It: Story and Style in Modern Movies . Berkeley: 
University of California Press, 2006.
Bowden, Mark. “Th e Angriest Man in Television. ” Th e Atlantic  (January/February 
2008): 50–57.
Brooks, Peter. Th e Melodramatic Imagination. New Haven, Connecticut: Y ale University 
Press, 1976.
Burns, Edward. “Gang- and Drug-Related Homicide: Baltimore’s Successful Enforce-
ment Strategy. ” BJA (Bureau of Justice Assistance) Bulletin July 2003. <http://www.
ncjrs.gov/html/bja/gang/pfv.html>.
Bury, Rhiannon. “Praise Y ou Like I Should: Cyberfans and Six Feet Under.”  It’s Not TV: 
Watching HBO in the Post-Television Era. Ed. Marc Leverette, Brian L. Ott and Cara 
Louise Buckley. New Y ork: Routledge, 2008. 190–208.
Butler, Judith. Precarious Life: Th e Powers of Mourning and Violence . London and New 
Y ork: Verso, 2004.
Chaddha, Anmol, William Julius Wilson, and Sudhir A. Venkatesh. “In Defense of Th e 
Wire.”  Dissent (Summer 2008). 26 August 2008. <http://www.dissentmagazine.org/
article/?article=1237>.
Clawson, James and Gerry Y emen. “Edward Norris and the Baltimore Police Depart-
ment. (A and B). ” 2003. Social Science Research Network. <http://papers.ssrn.com/
sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=508762>.
Cohen, Charles. “Destroying a Housing Project, to Save It. ” New York Times 21 August 
1995. <http://www.nytimes.com/1995/08/21/us/destroying-a-housing-project-to-
save-it.html>.
Collins, Patricia Hill. Black Feminist Th ought: Knowledge, Consciousness, and the Politics 
of Empowerment. London: Routledge, 1990.
Common. BE. “Th e Corner. ” Geff en Records. 24 May 2005.
Coronil, Fernando. “Towards a Critique of Globalcentrism: Speculations on Capitalism’s 
Nature. ” Public Culture 12.2 (2000): 351–374.
Craig, Tim. “Baltimore’s Troubles May Slow O’Malley—Rivals for Governor Would 
Focus on City. ” Washington Post 22 February 2004, Final edn.: C1.
Davis, James E. “Research at the Margins: Dropping out of High School and Mobility 
among African American Males. ” International Journal of Qualitative Studies in 
Education 19 (2006): 289–304.
Delaney, Sam. “Omar Little is the Gay Stick-up Man Who Robs Drug Dealers for a 
Living in Th e Wire. ” Th e Guardian  19 July 2008. <http://www.guardian.co.uk/
culture/2008/jul/19/television.wire>.
Demarest, Michael. “He Digs Downtowns. ” Time Magazine 24 August 1981. <http://
www.time.com/time/magazine/article/0,9171,949385-1,00.html>.


--- PAGE 244 ---
Works Cited 235
Doyle, Aaron. Arresting Images: Crime and Policing in Front of the Television Camera . 
Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 2003.
— — —. “How Not to Th  ink About Crime in the Media. ” Canadian Journal of 
Criminology & Criminal Justice 48.6 (2006): 867–885.
Dyson, Michael Eric. Race Rules: Navigating the Color Line. New Y ork: Vintage, 1997.
Ethridge, Blake D. “Baltimore on Th e Wire : Th e Tragic Moralism of David Simon. ” It’s 
Not TV: Watching HBO in the Post-Television Era. Ed. Marc Leverette, Brian L. Ott 
and Cara Louise Buckley. New Y ork: Routledge, 2008. 152–164.
“1st Exclusive David Simon Q & A. ” Th e Wire on HBO: Play or Get Played in David 
Simon’s Baltimore . 16 August 2006. <http://www.borderline-productions.com/
Th eWireHBO/ exclusive-1.html>.
First National Bank. Advertisement. Baltimore Sun 9 February 1904: 1.
Foucault, Michel. Discipline and Punish: Th e Birth of the Prison . Trans. Alan Sheridan. 
1977. 2nd edn. New Y ork: Vintage, 1995.
— — —. Society Must be Defended: Lectures at the Collège de France, 1975–76 . Trans. 
David Macey. New Y ork: Picador, 2003.
Freire, Paulo. Pedagogy of the Oppressed . Trans. Myra Bergman Ramos. New Y ork: 
Continuum, 2002.
Freire, Paulo and Donaldo Macedo. Literacy: Reading the Word and the World. New 
Y ork: Bergin & Garvey, 1987.
“Full Moon. ” Homicide: Life on the Street. Dir. Leslie Libman and Larry Williams. NBC. 
5 April 1996.
Gaines, Jane M. Fire & Desire: Mixed-Race Movies in the Silent Era. Chicago: University 
of Chicago Press, 2001.
Gauntlett, David. “Th e Worrying Infl  uence of Media Eff  ects Studies. ” Ill Eff ects: Th e 
Media/Violence Debate. 2nd edn. Ed. Martin Barker and Julian Petley. London: 
Routledge, 2001. 47–62.
Geo. A. Fuller Company. Advertisement. Baltimore Sun 9 February 1904: 1.
Gibson, Campbell. “Populations of the 100 Largest Cities and Other Urban Places 
in the United States: 1790 to 1990. ” U.S. Census Bureau. June 1998. <http://www.
census.gov/population/www/documentation/twps0027/twps0027.html>.
Giddens, Anthony. Runaway World: How Globalization is Reshaping Our Lives . 1999. 
London: Routledge, 2003.
Goodman, Tim. “Y es, HBO’s ‘Wire’ is challenging. It’s also a masterpiece. ” San Franciso 
Chronicle. 6 September 2006. <http://www.sfgate.com/cgibin/articlecgi?f=/c/a/2006/
09/06/DDG7BKV7HK26.DTL>.
Gore, Jennifer. “What We Can Do For Y ou! What Can ‘We’ Do For ‘Y ou’?: Struggling 
over Empowerment in Critical and Feminist Pedagogy. ” Feminisms and 
Critical Pedagogy. Ed. Carmen Luke and Jennifer Gore. New Y ork: Routledge, 1992. 
54–73.
Greig, David. Th e Architect . 1996. Plays: 1. London: Methuen, 2002. 91–201.
Hall, Stuart, Chas Critcher, Tony Jeff erson, John Clarke, and Brian Roberts. Policing the 
Crisis: Mugging, the State, and Law and Order. London: Macmillan, 1978.


--- PAGE 245 ---
236 THE WIRE : URBAN DECAY AND AMERICAN TELEVISION
Harbison, Sarah F ., and Warren C. Robinson. “Globalization, Family Structure, and 
Declining Fertility in the Developing World. ” Review of Radical Political Economics 
35.1 (2003): 44–55.
Harvey, David. Justice, Nature and the Geography of Diff erence. Malden, MA: Blackwell, 
1996.
— — —. Spaces of Capital. New Y ork: Routledge, 2001.
— — —. Spaces of Hope. Berkeley: University of California Press, 2000.
— — —. Th e Urban Experience . Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1989.
Havrilesky, Heather. “David Simon on Cutting ‘Th e Wire. ’” Salon.com 10 March 2007. 
<http://www.salon.com/ent/tv/feature/2008/03/10/simon/>.
Herbert, Steve. “Policing the Contemporary City: Fixing Up Broken Windows or 
Shoring Up Neo-Liberalism?” Th eoretical Criminology 5.4 (2001): 445–466.
Herrell, Richard K. “Sin, Sickness, Crime: Queer Desire and the American State. ” 
Identities: Global Studies in Culture and Power 2.3 (1996): 273–300.
“Historical List of Governors of Maryland 1634–” Archives of Maryland. 26 July 2008. 
<http://www.msa.md.gov/msa/speccol/sc2600/sc2685/html/govintro.html>.
Hoff er, Peter Charles. Seven Fires: Th e Urban Infernos that Reshaped America. New Y ork: 
Public Aff airs, 2006.
Hoff man, Tod. Homicide: Life on the Screen. Toronto: ECW Press, 1998.
hooks, bell. Ain’t I A Woman?: Black Women and Feminism. Boston: South End Press, 
1981.
Hornby, Nick. Interview with David Simon. Th e Believer  August 2007. 12 April 2008. 
<www.believermag.com/issues/200708/?read=interview_simon>.
Inner Harbor Project I Renewal Plan . Urban renewal and Housing Agency. Baltimore, 
1967.
Jenkins, Steven. “Copying No One: Agniezska Holland Challenges the Maestro. ”
GreenCine 10 November 2006. <http://www.greencine.com/article?action=view&
articleID=360>.
Jensen, Brennen. “Lives Lost: One. ” Baltimore City Paper 3 September 2003. <http://
www.citypaper.com/news/story.asp?id=2321>.
Johnson, James H., Grover C. Burthey III, and Kevin Ghorm. “Economic Globalization 
and the Future of Black America. ” Journal of Black Studies 38.6 (2008): 883–899.
Johnson, Steven. “Watching TV Makes Y ou Smarter. ” Th e New York Times 24 April 2005. 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2005/04/24/magazine/24TV .html>.
Kennedy, Liam. Race and Urban Space in Contemporary Culture. Edinburgh: Edinburgh 
University Press, 2000.
King, Stephen. “Setting off  a ‘Wire’ Alarm. ” EW .com 25 August 2006. <http://www.ew.
com/ew/article/0,,1333799,00.html>.
Klein, Amanda Ann. “Th e Truth Y ou Say? Th e End of Th e Wire .”  PopMatters 14 March 
2008. <http://www.popmatters.com/pm/features/article/56051/the-truth-you-say/>.
Kois, Dan. “Everything you Were Afraid to Ask about ‘Th e Wire .’”  Salon.com 1 October 
2004. 12 April 2008. <dir.salon.com/story/ent/feature/2004/10/01/the_wire/index.
html?pn=4>.


--- PAGE 246 ---
Works Cited 237
Kozloff , Sarah. “Narrative Th eory and Television. ” Channels of Discourse, Reassembled: 
Television and Contemporary Criticism . Ed. Robert C. Allen. London: Routledge, 
1992. 67–100.
Kronman, Anthony T. Th e Lost Lawyer: Failing Ideals of the Legal Profession. Cambridge: 
Belknap Harvard, 1993.
Kübler-Ross, Elisabeth, and David Kessler. On Grief and Grieving. New Y ork: Scribner, 
2005.
Lanahan, Lawrence. “Secrets of the City: What Th e Wire  Reveals about Urban Journal-
ism. ” Columbia Journalism Review (January/February 2008): 23–31.
Landy, Marcia. Genres: Cinema and Society, 1930–1960. Princeton: Princeton University 
Press, 1991.
Lane, Alycee J. “Black Bodies/Gay Bodies: Th  e Politics of Race in the Gay/Military 
Battle. ” Black Studies Reader . Ed. Jacqueline Bobo, Cynthia Hudley and Claudine 
Michel. New Y ork: Routledge, 2004. 315–328.
Lefk owitz, Monroe M., Leonard D. Eron, Leopold O. Walder and L. Rowell Huesmann. 
Growing Up To Be Violent: A Longitudinal Study of the Development of Aggression . 
New Y ork: Pergamon, 1977.
— — —. “Television Violence and Child Aggression: A Follow-up Study. ” Television and 
Social Behavior: Reports and Papers, Volume III: Television and Adolescent Aggres-
siveness. Ed. George A. Comstock and Eli A. Rubinstein. Baltimore: National 
Institute of Mental Health, 1972. 35–135.
Levine, Stuart. “Voters Explain Why Th ey’re Not High on ‘Th e Wire. ’” Variety.com 21 
August 2005. <http://www.variety.com/article/VR1117927818.html>.
Macek, Steve. Urban Nightmares: Th e Media, the Right, and the Moral Panic over the City. 
Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 2006.
Marc, David. Demographic Vistas: Television in American Culture. 
Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press, 1984.
Marshall, C.W . and Tiff any Potter. “Th e Life and Times of Fuzzy Dunlop: Herc Hauk 
and the Modern Urban Crime Environment. ” Darkmatter 4 (2009). <http://www.
darkmatter101.org/site/2009/05/29/the-life-and-times-of-fuzzy-dunlop-herc-and-
the-modern-urban-crime-environment/>.
Marx, Gary T. Undercover: Police Surveillance in America . Berkeley: University of 
California Press, 1988.
Marx, Karl. Capital: A Critique of Political Economy, Volume I . Trans. Ben Fowkes. 
New Y ork: Penguin, 1977.
— — —. Th e Economic and Philosophic Manuscripts of 1844 . Trans. Dirk Struik. 
New Y ork: International, 1964.
Maryland Lawyer’s Rules of Professional Conduct. American Legal Ethics Library. <http://
www.law.cornell.edu/ethics/md/code/>.
McLane, Robert. “Th e Fire. ” People and Problems. Ed. Fabian Franklin. New Y ork: Henry 
Holt and Company, 1908.
McMillan, Ali [Alasdair]. “Dramatizing Individuation: Institutions, Assemblages, and 
Th e Wire .”  Cinephile 4.1 (Summer 2008): 42–50.


--- PAGE 247 ---
238 THE WIRE : URBAN DECAY AND AMERICAN TELEVISION
Miller, Arthur. “Tragedy and the Common Man. ” Th e Th eatre Essays of Arthur Miller . 
2nd edn. Ed. Robert A. Martin and Steven R. Centola. New Y ork: Da Capo Press, 
1996. 3–7.
Miller, D. A. Th e Novel and the Police . Berkeley: University of California Press, 1988.
Miller, Jody. Getting Played: African American Girls, Urban Inequality, and Gendered 
Violence. New Y ork: NYU Press, 2008.
Mittell, Jason. “Narrative Complexity in Contemporary American Television. ” Th e 
Velvet Light Trap 58 (Fall 2006): 29–40.
Model Code of Judicial Conduct , 2007. Ed. Center for Professional Responsibility. 
Chicago: American Bar Association, 2007.
Murphy, Joel . One on One with Michael Ostroff  . 14 February 2008. <http://www.
hobotrashcan.com/2008/02/14/one-on-one-with-michael-kostroff />.
Murrell, Jr., Peter C. “Digging Again the Family Wells: A Freirian Literacy Framework as 
Emancipatory Pedagogy for African American Children. ” Mentoring the Mentor: A 
Critical Dialogue with Paulo Freire . Ed. Paulo Freire. New Y ork: Peter Lang, 1997. 
19–58.
Ndalianis, Angela. “Television and the Neo-Baroque. ” Th e Contemporary Television 
Series. Ed. Michael Hammond and Lucy Mazdon. Edinburgh: Edinburgh University 
Press, 2005. 83–101.
Neal, Mark Anthony. New Black Man. New Y ork: Routledge, 2006.
Neale, Steve. “Melodrama and Tears. ” Screen 27 (1986): 6–22.
Newman, Michael Z. “From Beats to Arcs: Toward a Poetics of Television Narrative. ” 
Th e Velvet Light Trap 58 (Fall 2006): 16–28.
Nietzsche, Friedrich. Beyond Good and Evil: Prelude to a Philosophy of the Future. Trans. 
Helen Zimmern. New Y ork: Russell and Russell, 1964.
Noble, Nina Kostroff . Commentary. Th e Wire , 3.01. “Time Aft er Time. ” DVD. HBO 
Home Video, 2007.
Nochimson, Martha. “Tony’s Options: Th e Sopranos  and the Televisuality of the 
Gangster Genre. ” Senses of Cinema 29 (November–December 2003). <http://www.
sensesofcinema.com/contents/03/29/sopranos_televisuality.html>.
Nora, Pierre. “Between History and Memory: Les Lieux de Mémoire .”  Memory and 
Counter-Memory. Special issue of Representations 26 (Spring 1989): 7–24.
Okazawa-Rey, Margo. “Economic, Social, and Racial Justice: Th  e Survival of the 
African-American Family. ” Journal of Health & Social Policy 9.1 (1997): 15–21.
Olson, Sherry H. Baltimore: Th e Building of an American City . Baltimore: Th e Johns 
Hopkins University Press, 1997.
O’Mara, Richard. “Backstory: Baltimore—‘Home of 1,000 Slogans. ’” Christian Science 
Monitor 5 January 2006. <http://www.csmonitor.com/2006/0105/p20s01-lihc.html>.
O’Rourke, Meghan. “Behind Th e Wire : David Simon on Where the Show Goes Next. ” 
Slate 1 December 2006. <http://www.slate.com/id/2154694/>.
Owens, Hamilton. Baltimore on the Chesapeake. Garden City, NY: Doubleday, Doran & 
Company, Inc., 1941.
Pearson, Felicia and David Ritz. Grace aft er Midnight: A Memoir . New Y ork: Warner 
Books, 2007.


--- PAGE 248 ---
Works Cited 239
Persuad, Randolph B., and Clarence Lusane. “Th e New Economy, Globalisation, and the 
Impact on African Americans. ” Race & Class 42.1 (2000): 21–34.
Plato. Th e Republic . Trans. G. M. A. Grube. Indianapolis: Hackett, 1974.
Raney, Arthur A. “Punishing Media Criminals and Moral Judgment: Th e Impact on 
Enjoyment. ” Media Psychology 7.2 (2005): 145–163.
Reddy, Maureen T. Traces, Codes, and Clues: Reading Race in Crime Fiction . New 
Brunswick, NJ: Rutgers University Press, 2003.
Rose, Brian G. “Th e Wire .”  Th e Essential HBO Reader . Ed. Gary R. Edgerton and Jeff rey 
P . Jones. Lexington: University Press of Kentucky, 2008. 82–91.
Rosenblatt, Paul C., and Beverly R. Wallace. African American Grief . New Y ork and 
Hove: Routledge, 2005.
Rozhon, Tracie. “Old Baltimore Row Houses Fall Before Wrecking Ball. ” New York Times 
13 June 1999. <http://www.nytimes.com/1999/06/13/us/old-baltimore-row-houses-
fall-before-wrecking-ball.html>.
Russell, Margaret. “Law and Racial Reelism: Black Women as Celluloid ‘Legal’ 
Heroines. ” Feminism, Media, and the Law.  Ed. Martha Fineman and Martha 
T. McCluskey. New Y ork: Oxford University Press, 1997. 136–145.
Ryan, Maureen. “‘Th e Wire’ Comes Full Circle in its Gripping Finale. ” Th e Chicago 
Tribune.com 9 March 2008. <http://featuresblogs.chicagotribune.com/entertain-
ment_tv/2008/03/the-wire-comes.html>.
——— .  “‘Wire’ Man Wants Y ou To Care. ” Chicago Tribune 13 January 2008. <http://archives.
chicagotribune.com/2008/jan/13/entertainment/chi-0113_wirejan13>.
“Scene of the Crime. ” Homicide: Life on the Street . Dir. Kathy Bates. NBC. 12 April 
1996.
Scharf, Th omas J. Th e Chronicles of Baltimore . Port Washington, NY: Kennikat Press, 
1972.
— — —. History of Baltimore City and Baltimore County. Baltimore: Regional Publishing 
Company, 1971.
Schiappa, Edward. Beyond Representational Correctness: Rethinking Criticism of Popular 
Media. Albany: State University of New Y ork Press, 2008.
Sheehan, Helena and Seamus Sweeney. “ Th e Wire  and the World: Narrative and 
Metanarrative. ” Jump Cut 51 (forthcoming 2009).
Shelden, Randall G., Shannon K. Tracy, and William B. Brown, eds. Youth 
Gangs in American Society . 2nd edn. Belmont, CA: Wadsworth/Th  omson 
Learning, 2001.
“Silo Point Luxury Condominiums. ” 2007. <http://www.silopoint.com>.
Simon, David. Homicide: A Year on the Killing Streets. New Y ork: Ivy Books, 1991.
— — —. “Introduction. ” Th e Wire: Truth Be Told. Rafael Alvarez. New Y ork: Pocket Books, 
2004. 2–34.
— — —. Commentary. Th e Wire , 1.01. “Th e Target. ” DVD. HBO Home Video, 2004.
— — —. Commentary. Th e Wire , 3.01. “Time Aft  er Time. ” DVD. HBO Home Video, 
2007.
Simon, David and Edward Burns. Th e Corner: A Year in the Life of an Inner-City 
Neighborhood. New Y ork: Broadway, 1997.


--- PAGE 249 ---
240 THE WIRE : URBAN DECAY AND AMERICAN TELEVISION
Smith, Evan. “Th read Structure: Rewriting the Hollywood Formula. ” Journal of Film and 
Video 51, 3–4 (1999): 88–96.
Smith, Van. “Redemption Song and Dance. ” Baltimore City Paper 19 March 2008.
Stalnaker, Maria. “ Agnieszka Holland Reads Hollywood. ” Living in Translation: Polish 
Writers in America. Ed. Halina Stephan. New Y ork: Rodopi, 2003. 313–330.
Stanley, Alessandra. “So Many Characters, Y et So Little Resolution. ” New York Times.
com 10 March 2008. <http://www.nytimes.com/2008/03/10/arts/television/10stan.
html?hp=&pagewanted=all>.
Stark, Steven D. “Perry Mason Meets Sonny Crockett: Th e History of Lawyers and Police 
as Television Heroes. ” University of Miami Law Review 42 (1987–88): 229–284.
Sternbergh, Adam. “Sternbergh on ‘Th e Wire’ Finale: Th e Anti-‘Sopranos. ’” New York 
Magazine.com 10 March 2008. <http://nymag.com/daily/entertainment/ 2008/03/
sternbergh_on_the_wire_fi nale.html>.
Suderman, Peter. “Tension City. ” National Review 60.7 (21 April 2008): 59–60.
Surette, Ray. Media, Crime and Criminal Justice: Images, Realities and Policies. 3rd edn. 
Belmont, CA: Wadsworth, 2007.
Szanton, Peter. Baltimore 2000: A Choice of Futures: A Report to the Morris Goldseker 
Foundation. Baltimore: Th e Foundation, 1986.
Talbot, Margaret. “Stealing Life: Th e Crusader Behind ‘Th e Wire. ’” Th e New Yorker 22 October 
2007. <http://www.newyorker.com/reporting/2007/10/22/071022fa_fact_talbot>.
Th ompson, Kristin. Storytelling in Film and Television . Cambridge, MA: Harvard 
University Press, 2003.
“To Build a New and Greater Baltimore. ” Baltimore Sun 10 February 1904: 1.
“Twenty-Four Blocks Burned in Heart of Baltimore. ” Baltimore Sun 8 February 1904: 1.
Tyree, J. M. Rev. of Th e Wire : Th e Complete Fourth Season [DVD]. Film Quarterly 61.3 
(Spring 2008): 32–38.
Urbina, Ian. “From Two Broken Lives to One Beginning. ” New York Times 9 August 
2007. <http://www.nytimes.com/2007/08/09/us/09baltimore.html>.
Vidler, Anthony. Th e Architectural Uncanny: Essays in the Modern Unhomely . 
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1992.
Ward, Stephen V . “‘Cities are Fun!’: Inventing and Spreading the Baltimore Model of 
Cultural Urbanism. ” Culture, Urbanism and Planning . Ed. Javier Monclús and 
Manuel Guàrdia. Aldershot: Ashgate, 2006. 271–285.
Watkins, S. Craig. Representing: Hip Hop Culture and the Production of Black Cinema . 
Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1999.
Weisberg, Jacob. “Th e Wire  on Fire: Analyzing the Best Show on Television. Slate.com. 
13 September 2006. <http://www.slate.com/id/2149566/>.
Williams, Linda. “Melodrama Revised. ” Refi guring American Film Genres: Th eory and 
History. Ed. Nick Browne. Berkeley: University of California Press, 1998. 42–88.
— — —. Playing the Race Card: Melodramas of Black and White from Uncle Tom to 
O. J. Simpson. Princeton: Princeton University Press, 2001.
Wilson, Christopher P . Cop Knowledge: Police Power and Cultural Narrative in 
Twentieth-Century America. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2000.


--- PAGE 250 ---
Works Cited 241
Wilson, David. Cities and Race: America’s New Black Ghetto . London and New Y ork: 
Routledge, 2007.
— — —. “City Transformation and the Global Trope: Indianapolis and Cleveland. ” 
Globalizations 4.1 (2007): 29–44.
Wiltz, Teresa. “Down to ‘Th e Wire’: It’s a Wrap for Gritty TV Series. ” Th e Washington 
Post 3 September 2007. <http://www.washingtonpost.com/wp-dyn/content/
article/2007/09/02/AR2007090201454.html>.
Wink, Joan. Critical Pedagogy: Notes from the Real World. 2nd edn. New Y ork: Longman, 
2000.
Zavattini, Cesare. “Some Ideas on the Cinema. ” Vittorio De Sica: Contemporary 
Perspectives. Eds. Howard Curle and Stephen Snyder. Toronto: University of Toronto 
Press, 2000. 50–61.
Ziehl, Susan C. “Forging the Links: Globalisation and Family Patterns. ” Society in 
Transition 34.2 (2003): 320–337.
Zitrin, Richard and Carol M. Langford. Th e Moral Compass of the American Lawyer. 
New Y ork: Ballantine, 1999.


--- PAGE 251 ---
This page intentionally left blank


--- PAGE 252 ---
243
Episode List
Episode Sequential 
Numbering
Title First Aired
Season One
1.01
1.02
1.03
1.04
1.05
1.06
1.07
1.08
1.09
1.10
1.11
1.12
1.13
01
02
03
04
05
06
07
08
09
10
11
12
13
Th e Target
Th e Detail
Th e Buys
Old Cases
Th e Pager
Th e Wire
One Arrest
Lessons
Game Day
Th e Cost
Th e Hunt
Cleaning Up
Sentencing
 2 Jun 2002
 9 Jun 2002
16 Jun 2002
23 Jun 2002
30 Jun 2002
 7 Jul 2002
21 Jul 2002
28 Jul 2002
 4 Aug 2002
11 Aug 2002
18 Aug 2002
 1 Sep 2002
 8 Sep 2002
Season Two
2.01
2.02
2.03
2.04
2.05
2.06
2.07
2.08
2.09
2.10
2.11
2.12
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
Ebb Tide
Collateral Damage
Hot Shots
Hard Cases
Undertow
All Prologue
Backwash
Duck and Cover
Stray Rounds
Storm Warnings
Bad Dreams
Port in a Storm
 1 Jun 2003
 8 Jun 2003
15 Jun 2003
22 Jun 2003
29 Jun 2003
 6 Jul 2003
13 Jul 2003
27 Jul 2003
 3 Aug 2003
10 Aug 2003
17 Aug 2003
23 Aug 2003


--- PAGE 253 ---
244 THE WIRE : URBAN DECAY AND AMERICAN TELEVISION
Episode Sequential 
Numbering
Title First Aired
Season Th ree
3.01
3.02
3.03
3.04
3.05
3.06
3.07
3.08
3.09
3.10
3.11
3.12
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
Time Aft er Time
All Due Respect
Dead Soldiers
Hamsterdam
Straight and True
Homecoming
Back Burners
Moral Midgetry
Slapstick
Reformation
Middle Ground
Mission Accomplished
19 Sep 2004
26 Sep 2004
 3 Oct 2004
10 Oct 2004
17 Oct 2004
31 Oct 2004
 7 Nov 2004
14 Nov 2004
21 Nov 2004
28 Nov 2004
12 Dec 2004
19 Dec 2004
Season Four
4.01 
4.02
4.03
4.04
4.05
4.06
4.07
4.08
4.09
4.10
4.11
4.12
4.13
38
39 
40 
41 
42 
43 
44 
45 
46 
47
48 
49 
50 
Boys of Summer
Soft  Eyes
Home Rooms
Refugees
Alliances
Margin of Error
Unto Others
Corner Boys
Know Y our Place
Misgivings
A New Day
Th at’s Got His Own
Final Grades
10 Sep 2006
17 Sep 2006
24 Sep 2006
 1 Oct 2006
 8 Oct 2006
15 Oct 2006
29 Oct 2006
 5 Nov 2006
12 Nov 2006
19 Nov 2006
26 Nov 2006
 3 Dec 2006
10 Dec 2006
Season Five
5.01
5.02
5.03
5.04
5.05
5.06
5.07
5.08
5.09
5.10
51
52
53
54
55
56
57
58
59
60
More With Less
Unconfi rmed Reports
Not for Attribution
Transitions
React Quotes
Th e Dickensian Aspect
Took
Clarifi cations
Late Editions
—30—
 6 Jan 2008
13 Jan 2008
20 Jan 2008
27 Jan 2008
 3 Feb 2008
10 Feb 2008
17 Feb 2008
24 Feb 2008
 2 Mar 2008
 9 Mar 2008


--- PAGE 254 ---
245
Notes on Contributors
David M. Alff is a doctoral student in the English Department at the University of 
Pennsylvania. He is immensely thankful to those who helped in formulating and 
revising this essay, including Katrin Rowan, Elizabeth Blum, Phillip Maciak, and 
Katie Price.
Ralph Beliveau  is on the faculty in the Gaylord College of Journalism and Mass 
Communication at the University of Oklahoma. He studies critical media pedagogy, 
rhetorical theory, and media criticism.
Laura Bolf-Beliveau  is an assistant professor in the English Department at the 
University of Central Oklahoma. As English Education Program Coordinator, she 
prepares future teachers. Her research studies how new teachers engage in social justice 
pedagogy.
Elizabeth Bonjean  is currently a Visiting Assistant Professor of Theatre at the 
University of Texas at Austin. She teaches courses in dramatic literature, theatre history, 
critical theory, and play analysis. Elizabeth received her Ph.D. from the University of 
Washington, Seattle.
Ryan Brooks is a senior Ph.D. student in English Studies at the University of Illinois, 
Chicago. He has presented conference papers on Charles W . Chesnutt, Ralph Ellison, 
Hardt and Negri, and William S. Burroughs. His fields of interest include Transatlantic 
Modernism, Postmodern and Contemporary Fiction, and Political Theory.
Peter Clandfield  teaches in the Department of English Studies at Nipissing 
University in North Bay, Ontario. He is author or co-author of several articles and 
book chapters about fictional representations of urban development, and he plans a 
book-length project on the same subject.
Amanda Ann Klein  is an Assistant Professor of Film Studies at East Carolina 
University. She has published on topics ranging from the films of Jean-Luc Godard to 
fan magazines and reality television. She is currently completing a manuscript about 
film cycles and popular culture.
Kathleen LeBesco  is Professor of Communication Arts at Marymount Manhattan 
College, where she teaches about communication theory, cultural studies, and popular 
culture. She is author of Revolting Bodies? The Struggle to Redefine Fat Identity (University 
of Massachusetts) and has published extensively about the politics of representation.


--- PAGE 255 ---
246 THE WIRE : URBAN DECAY AND AMERICAN TELEVISION
Stephen Lucasi is a Ph.D. Candidate in English at the University of Connecticut. 
His dissertation, ‘False to the Past: Slavery and the Historical Fictions of National Iden-
tity, ’ explores theories of post-national identification through contemporary American 
historical literature of slavery.
C. W . Marshall  is Associate Professor of Classics at the University of British 
Columbia. He is the author of The Stagecraft and Performance of Roman Comedy  
(Cambridge, 2006). With Tiffany Potter, he edited Cylons in America: Critical Studies in 
Battlestar Galactica (Continuum, 2008).
Courtney D. Marshall  is completing her Ph.D. in English at the University of 
California, Los Angeles. She works in critical race theory and black feminist criticism. 
Her current project is on the black female body in narratives of lynching and capital 
punishment.
Alasdair McMillan  is an M.A. candidate at the University of Western Ontario’s 
Centre for the Study of Theory and Criticism. Alongside ongoing research in 
continental philosophy and media theory, he has previously written on The Wire , 
Foucault, and Deleuze.
Kevin McNeilly is Associate Professor in the Department of English at the University 
of British Columbia. He teaches Cultural Studies and Contemporary Literatures.
Ted Nannicelli is a Ph.D. candidate in the Film Studies Department at the University 
of Kent, Canterbury, where he is researching the ontology of the screenplay.
James Braxton Peterson  is Assistant Professor of English at Bucknell University, 
and was the founding Media Coordinator for the Harvard University Hip Hop Archive. 
His forthcoming book explores in detail the lyrics and life of Tupac Shakur (Praeger/ 
Greenwood Press).
Tiffany Potter teaches English at the University of British Columbia, specializing 
in eighteenth-century theatre and fiction, and ideas of gender, sexuality, and North 
American indigeneity. With C. W . Marshall she edited Cylons in America: Critical 
Studies in Battlestar Galactica (Continuum, 2008).
Jason Read is Assistant Professor of Philosophy at the University of Southern Maine. 
He is the author of The Micro-Politics of Capital: Marx and the Prehistory of the Present 
(SUNY , 2003). His current research is on the ontology of social relations and a critique 
of neoliberalism.
Lynne Viti, a native of Baltimore, is a senior lecturer in the Writing Program at 
Wellesley College, where her courses focus on legal studies. A member of the Massachusetts 
Bar and a practicing attorney, she previously served as a law clerk and later Chief Law 
Clerk to justices of the Massachusetts Superior Court.
Afaa M. Weaver  holds the endowed chair as Alumnae Professor of English at 
Simmons College. His latest collection of poetry is The Plum Flower Dance: Poems 1985 
to 2005 (University of Pittsburgh, 2007). His official website is www.afaamweaver.com.


--- PAGE 256 ---
247
9/11 163–4, 173
adolescence 91, 119, 137, 166, 168–70, 172, 
184, 200
African-Americanism see race, 
African-American identity
AIDS 97, 183
alienation 20, 28, 96, 109, 203, 223
America
American culture 2, 14, 111, 120, 144, 
203, 223
American dream 3–4, 7, 12, 132, 224, 
228–30
military of 28–9
Annapolis 28, 35
audience 7–9
composition of 9, 52
education of 102–3
response of 4, 9, 93, 177–80, 183, 185, 
188–9, 192–3, 204
and social reform 218–19, 224–6, 228–30
Baltimore passim
accent 76n
budget of 34–5
conflict with Maryland 28, 32 35
East Baltimore 15–16, 18, 20, 140–1
economy of 33, 37, 38, 137, 143–4, 147
fire of 1904 26, 29–30, 33
history and narrative of 25–31
Inner Harbor 26, 31, 33–5, 45, 126, 137, 186
Lucky’s Bar 16–17
Milton Avenue 16–19
names of 25–6, 29
reform and renewal of 24–6, 31–3, 35, 39, 
42, 44, 47, 49, 163–4, 193
representation of 13n, 26, 28–9, 35–6
as subject of The Wire 41, 137
suburbs of 30, 33, 40, 42, 49n
West Baltimore 3, 23–4, 31–2, 43, 82, 132, 
140–2, 159, 162–5, 168–9, 174, 197, 
207–8, 215
Baltimore Sun 11, 29–30, 135, 180, 187, 189
Barksdale, Avon 2, 39, 41–8, 56, 59, 64, 66, 
73–4, 82–3, 85, 108, 147
and economics 131–3, 136, 139, 144
relationship with Brianna 155–6
relationship with D’Angelo 139–40, 152, 
165, 213
relationship with Stringer 128–30, 132, 
138–9, 141–2, 194, 197, 214–16
see also Barksdale drug organization
Barksdale, Brianna 94, 140, 142, 150
interview with McNulty 211–14
relationship with Avon 157
relationship with D’Angelo 155–7, 181
Barksdale, D’Angelo 2, 5, 68, 71, 81–2, 86, 
89n, 129, 161n, 168, 181, 192, 
194, 204
death of 172, 185, 211, 213, 215
and economics 125–7, 139, 142
murder of Wallace 180
relationship with Bodie 164–7, 173–4
relationship with Donette 152–4
relationship with family 139–40
trial of 138–9
Barksdale drug organization 4, 23, 31, 37, 43, 
56, 59, 64, 79, 82, 86, 88–9, 103,
111–12, 116, 119, 129, 132, 150, 
153–4, 160, 161n, 162, 164, 
167–8, 172
control of housing projects 23, 31, 37
Eastside/Westside basketball game 2, 128
police investigation of 54–5, 67, 71, 73–4
Index


--- PAGE 257 ---
248 THE WIRE : URBAN DECAY AND AMERICAN TELEVISION
Bell, Russell (Stringer) 1, 4, 6, 42–8, 55, 83, 
85–6, 89, 115, 119, 122, 131, 156
deal with Proposition Joe 129, 194
death of 142, 194–5
and economics 130–3, 136, 139–42, 
144, 153
murder of Wallace 138, 170
relationship with Avon 128–30, 132, 
138–9, 141–2, 194, 197, 214–16
relationship with D’Angelo  131, 138–42, 
152, 165, 215
relationship with Donette 152–4
Bird see Hilton, Marquis
Blocker, Wendell (Orlando) 86
Bodie see Broadus, Preston
Boston 19, 27
Bratton, Savino 81, 88
Brice, De’Londa 59, 94, 97, 116–17, 150
relationship with Namond 157–60
Brice, Namond 8, 48, 59, 98, 100, 118, 121n, 
161n, 184
education of 91, 93–7, 102–3, 185,
227, 231n
as model of masculinity 115–17
relationship with De’Londa 157–60
Brice, Roland (Wee-Bey) 1, 59–60, 82, 86, 
93–4, 97, 116–17, 157–60, 161n
Broadus, Preston (Bodie) 1, 6–8, 25, 34–5, 
69–70, 87–8, 147, 161n, 174
death of 185
life in housing projects 23–4, 39–40, 68, 
162–4, 168
as model of masculinity 108, 111–15
mother and grandmother 168–70, 174
murder of Wallace 4, 138, 170–2, 178
relationship with D’Angelo 165–7, 173–4
relationship with Namond Brice 93–4, 
115–16
Brother Mouzone see Mouzone
Bubbles see Cousins, Reginald
Bug see Manigault, Aaron
Bunk see Moreland, William
Bunny see Colvin, Howard
Burns, Ed 11–12, 76n, 218, 229
Burrell, Ervin 55, 60, 62, 72, 74–5, 196
business see capitalism
Butchie 119
Butler, Judith 164–5, 170, 173–4
Campbell, Nerese 60–1
capitalism 13n, 38, 44, 48, 107, 111, 122–5, 
141, 163
and the family 130–4, 136–40, 144, 146
and globalization 135–8, 143–8
Carcetti, Jen 33, 36
Carcetti, Tommy 26–7, 30–3, 43, 46–8, 60, 
193, 196, 223
Carr, Malik (Poot) 4, 125, 137–8
gonorrhea of 24
life in housing projects 23–4, 39–40, 
162–3
murder of Wallace 138, 170–2, 178
relationship with Bodie 173–4
Carver, Ellis 79, 94, 115, 168, 184, 192–3, 209
Cheese see Wagstaff, Melvin
Cheryl 161n, 198
chess 71, 126, 128, 154, 161n, 166–7, 174
Chicago 39, 135
Chicken McNugget 9, 125
childhood see adolescence
Chris see Partlow, Chris
class 170, 186
and economics 123, 136
elitism 229
middle class 9, 102–3, 116–17, 137, 200
upper class 126
working class 7, 18, 34, 112, 136
Colvin, Howard (Bunny) 31, 42–5, 48, 
57–9, 77n, 89, 109–10, 121n,
132, 181–3, 192–3, 196–7, 202n, 
207–9
heroism of 58, 60
and Namond Brice 95–8, 102, 117, 159–60, 
161n, 185, 227, 231n
see also Hamsterdam
Common (rapper) 107, 112–14
The Corner  8, 10, 62
corner see drugs, trafficking and trade
corruption 5, 31, 38, 44, 53, 74, 87, 177
Cousins, Reginald (Bubbles) 8, 11, 27, 130, 
161n, 165, 182, 187, 200–1
craps 2, 13n
credits see title sequence and song
crime
audience response to 217–18 
see also audience, and social reform
causes of 52–3, 65


--- PAGE 258 ---
Index 249
entrenchment of 53, 62
and gender 149–51, 155–6, 159–60
global scale of 143–4, 148
magnitude of 44, 47
manipulation of police statistics 34, 60–1, 
66, 70–1, 132, 181–2, 208
punishment of 51, 55, 66
reduction of 34, 54, 58
sexual crimes 98, 101, 118, 150
theft 2–3, 17, 19, 45, 113, 119, 145–6, 149, 
185, 210
“tolerated illegality” 75
see also Hamsterdam
Cutty see Wise, Dennis
D’Addario, Gary 11, 14n
Da Vinci’s Inquest  49n
Daniels, Cedric 60–1, 67, 72–5, 80, 
83–4, 185
Daniels, Marla 196
Davis, Clayton (State Senator) 5, 31, 44–5, 
83–4, 126, 133, 147
Deacon 9, 43, 89
“The Defense of Fort McHenry” see Key, 
Francis Scott
developers and development 4, 38, 44–8, 80, 
130, 142, 163–4
dialogue 1, 9, 111–12, 169, 195–8, 212, 
214–15, 217
Dickens, Charles 86, 88, 177–8, 180, 184, 
202n
docks, the 2, 9, 34, 47, 137, 143–5, 186
Donette 126, 140–1, 150, 152–7
Donut 54, 117, 185
drugs
addiction 4, 11, 24, 33, 49n, 118, 131, 
184, 187
decriminalization 42, 58, 132 
see also Hamsterdam
economics of 122–3, 125–9, 132–3, 141
fronts 3, 86, 130
marijuana 16
persistence of 9, 43
profits from 45, 125–6, 128
trafficking and trade 23, 56, 58, 86, 
108–12, 114, 116–19, 127, 
138, 162, 165
Dukie see Weems, Duquan
Earle, Steve 11
education see school
family 135–40, 144, 146–8, 153, 157–9, 161n, 
168–9, 213
fans 217–30
Fat Face Rick see Henrix, Ricardo
fatherhood 116, 118
FBI 60, 210
fear 6, 8, 15, 17, 37, 49n, 84, 119–20, 139, 144, 
165, 171, 182, 184
fiction 8, 12–13, 202n see also narrative
Foucault, Michel 43, 51–60, 62, 63n, 64–6, 
69–70, 72, 75
Franklin Terrace Towers 23–4, 45, 129, 140, 
155–6, 164–5
demolition of 23, 33, 37–8, 162–4, 
172–4
Freamon, Lester 44, 46, 56, 67–71, 73, 83–4, 
126, 185, 187, 198
Freire, Paolo 92–3, 95–7, 99–101
Fruit 192
gangs and gang culture 15, 45–6, 129–30, 
141, 165, 170–1, 222–3, 226
genre
blurring and subversion of 9, 12, 188, 191
epic 9
melodrama 5, 177–81, 183–6, 188, 218
novel 9, 64, 190, 205
reality television 103
television police drama 50–4, 57, 
62–3, 75
tragedy 4–8, 50, 122, 143, 227
western 79, 119
gentrification 26, 33–4, 47
Greek, The 143–7
Greggs, Kima 8, 81, 130, 161n, 198, 210
grief 164, 172–6, 225
guns 17, 119, 138
nail gun 10, 46, 199
as phallic symbols 120
Hamsterdam 31–2, 42–3, 48, 58, 77n, 132, 
182–3, 196, 202n, 207–9
Harvey, David 38–49
Hauk, Thomas (Herc) 2, 13n, 79, 85, 168, 174, 
192–3, 210


--- PAGE 259 ---
250 THE WIRE : URBAN DECAY AND AMERICAN TELEVISION
Haynes, Gus 14n
HBO and HBO.com 7–9, 52, 188, 205, 217, 
219, 228–9, 230n
Hearns, Herbert De’Rodd (Puddin) 
162–3
Henrix, Ricardo (Fat Face Rick) 147
heroes and heroism 3, 50–7, 60–2, 78, 100, 
185, 224
heroin 7, 10, 17, 24, 140–1, 143, 145–6, 
185, 187
Herc see Hauk, Thomas
Hill Street Blues  52, 192
Hilton, Marquis (Bird) 86
hip-hop 17, 48, 107, 112–14, 121n, 222–3
HIV see AIDS
Holland, Agnieszka 203–16
Homicide (book) 11–13
Homicide (TV series) 14n, 38–9, 49n
honor 1, 3–4, 15, 27, 44, 133, 217, 226–8
hooks, bell 149, 151, 161
Horseface see Pakusa, Thomas
housing projects 3, 7, 30, 34, 39, 41, 47, 129, 
141, 162–3
Franklin Terrace see Franklin Terrace 
Towers
Lafayette Courts 39–40
Lexington Terrace 23
spatial structure of 138 
see also urban space
vacancy of 40–2, 46–7, 84, 138, 142, 
173, 182
identity 2, 9, 11–12, 93 see also race, African 
American identity
irony 3, 35, 45, 49n, 72–3, 88, 142, 202n, 210, 
221–2, 228
Jeffries, Anna 157, 161n
Jews and Judaism 79, 85, 89n
Johnny 131, 165
Johnson, Clark 14n
June Bug 99
Kenard 94, 97–8, 117, 119, 121n, 158, 200, 
219, 222
Key, Francis Scott 26, 28–30, 32, 36n
Krawczyk, Andy 44–5, 47, 83
Landsman, Jay 11, 13, 26, 55
Last Poets 107, 113–14
law 52–3, 58, 62, 66, 75, 78–80, 86–8, 90n, 
108, 111, 159, 210
and economics 126, 130
and gender 153
Lee, Michael 4, 15, 91, 93–4, 97–102, 157, 
161n, 184–5
as model of masculinity 116–19, 121n
Levy, Maurice 3, 47, 55–6, 78–9, 81, 84–9, 
89n, 181
Lewis, Meldrick 14n, 38, 40
Little Kevin 1, 173
Little, Omar 6, 11–12, 14n, 45, 88, 14
death of 200, 219
fan reaction to 217–28
homosexuality of  119–20, 218–23, 230
inspired by Donnie Andrews 12
as model of masculinity 108, 119–21, 133
murder of Stringer 142, 194–5
relationship with Avon Barksdale 
128–9, 132
relationship with Brandon 170, 194
similarity to Michael Lee 100–1, 
103, 119
see also honor
Lyles, Nakeisha 86–7
Macek 38–9, 49n
Manigault, Aaron (Bug) 98, 101, 118, 157, 
161n
Marimow, Bill 11
Marimow, Charles 11
Marx, Karl 8, 72, 123–4, 126–7, 
130–1, 133
masculinity 101, 107–12, 115–21, 129, 156, 
158, 160, 215, 219, 223
McLane, Robert 26, 30, 33–5
McNulty, Jimmy 1–2, 12, 44–5, 47–8, 63n, 
66–8, 70, 72–3, 80, 84, 88, 143, 
192–3, 210
and Bubbles 130
fabrication of serial killer 47, 57, 61, 84
heroism of 54–7, 62
interrogation of D’Angelo 125
interview with Brianna 211–14
parallels with Kima Greggs 198


--- PAGE 260 ---
Index 251
relationship with Bodie 112, 174
relationship with Rhonda Pearlman 80, 82
and Stringer 130, 141
on surveillance 74, 76n
melodrama see genre, melodrama
memory 167–70, 174, 193, 197, 202–3
Miller, Arthur 7–8
Mittell, Jason 191–2
money laundering 44, 87
morality 9, 48, 50–1, 57, 74, 203, 209
and the audience 220
and complicity 204–5
and economics 123–7, 131, 133
and gender 151
and legal ethics 79–80, 84, 86–8
and melodrama 177–80, 183
and the police see police,
moral ambiguity of
Moreland, William (Bunk) 2, 67, 81, 141, 190
motherhood 8, 116–17, 149–51, 155–7, 161, 
161n, 169, 198, 214
role of the grandmother 168–9, 
178, 223
Mouzone (Brother) 39, 45, 132–3, 142, 
194–5
Names 1–3, 13, 14n, 154
naming one’s world 95, 99
renaming and rebranding 129
narrative 9, 35, 39, 50, 53, 56, 62, 65–7, 69, 73, 
91, 120, 173–4
arcs 38, 191, 194, 197–8, 208, 225
background narrative 119, 195
and character development 198–201
closure 179, 181, 192–3
complexity 190–5, 198–9, 219
and culture 170
cyclicality 200–1
and economics 123–4, 126, 134, 146
of family 135, 138, 147
and the police 74
Neal, Mark Anthony 107, 115, 120
New Charles 145
New Jersey 81–2, 140, 164, 180–1
New York City 71, 81, 163–4
Noble, Nina Kostroff 38, 205
Norris, Ed 11
O’Malley, Martin 35, 36n
Omar see Little, Omar
optimism 48, 61, 85, 138, 146–7
Orlando see Blocker, Wendell
Pakusa, Thomas (Horseface) 2
Parenti, David 58–9, 184 
see also school-within-a-school
Partlow, Chris 2, 46, 84, 161n
murder of Bodie 7, 112
relationship with Michael Lee 98–9, 118
stashing corpses 31, 46, 200
Pearlman, Rhonda 8, 78–5, 88–9, 89n, 
180–1, 187
sexual relationships of 80, 82–3
Pearson, Felicia (Snoop) 1, 9–12, 19, 26, 161n, 199
and gender 159
murder of Bodie 7, 112
relationship with Michael Lee 98–100, 118
stashing corpses 31, 46, 200
see also guns, nail gun
Perkins, Euneta 196
Phelan, Daniel 54, 80, 85–6
Philadelphia 27, 109
Pierce, Wendell 190
The Pit 125, 138, 164–5, 168, 173–4
Plato 50, 57
Poe, Edgar Allan 41, 46
police 11–12, 13n, 28, 32, 34, 95, 128
accountability 66, 68, 71
authority of 66
career-mindedness of 54–5
moral ambiguity of 50, 65, 70
presence and visibility 72
reform 76n, 193
similarity to criminal organizations 53, 
64, 115
police procedural see genre, television 
police drama
Polish communities 144, 203, 205 
Poot see Carr, Malik
ports see docks
poverty 23, 31, 103, 107, 125, 136
and gender 150
power 51, 53, 57, 60, 64–5, 69–70, 75, 
100–3, 167
and the drug trade 111, 123


--- PAGE 261 ---
252 THE WIRE : URBAN DECAY AND AMERICAN TELEVISION
power (Cont’d )
and gang subculture 171
relationships in education 92–3, 97
projects see housing projects
Proposition Joe see Stewart, Joe
Pryzbylewski, Roland (Prez) 2, 13n, 67, 69–70, 
92, 100, 196–7, 201, 206, 210–11, 216 
Puddin see Hearns, Herbert De’Rodd
race 102, 170
African American identity 2, 107–8, 
110–12, 115–17, 120–1, 136, 147, 
149, 170
racism 18, 33, 39, 49n, 86, 151
and segregation and inequality 16, 37, 49, 
59, 136, 186
white people 2, 15, 79, 200, 220, 226
rap music see hip-hop
Rawls, William 55, 62, 70, 72, 182, 196
real estate see developers and development
realism 3, 15–16, 19, 42, 56, 115, 177, 188, 
212, 224, 229–30
redemption 8, 42–3, 51, 84, 143, 179, 
186–7, 200
Republicans 35, 36n, 46, 48
Reynaldo 120
rim shop 15–16, 100
rhetoric
and history 36
and politics 25–6, 32–3, 35
as a ruse 214
of The Wire 64, 72, 190
Royce, Clarence (Mayor) 11, 23, 25, 30, 32, 
34–5, 39, 196
destruction of the housing projects 162–4
Russell, Beadie 146
Savino see Bratton, Savino
Schmoke, Kurt 11, 23, 25, 32
school 4, 11, 33–4, 48, 58–9, 99, 109, 164, 177, 
197, 206
and critical pedagogy 91–7, 100–3
school-within-a-school 95–6, 98, 184
similarity to the street 98, 121n, 159
sex trafficking industry 144–6, 186
sexuality
homosexuality 119–20, 161n, 218–23, 230, 
231n see also Little, Omar
sexual crimes see crime
sexually transmitted diseases 24 
see also AIDS and Carr, Malik (Poot), 
gonorrhea of
virginity 24, 39
Sherrod 161n
Simon, David 4, 8, 10–12, 13n, 14n, 25, 
39, 48, 50, 52–3, 57–8, 60, 62, 64, 
69, 76, 89n, 91, 103, 135–7, 143, 188, 
190, 196, 203, 205, 218, 223, 226, 
228–9
Slim Charles 147–8, 172–3
Snoop see Pearson, Felicia
Snot Boogie 1–4, 13, 13n
Sobotka, Frank
death of 5, 8, 186
and economics 136, 144–7
Sobotka, Nick 36, 144–5, 185–7
Sobotka, Ziggy 185
Sopranos, The  188, 192
Spider 174
sports 2, 45, 128
Stanfield, Marlo 7, 46–7, 79, 84–5, 
89, 99, 108
conflicts with other drug lords 129, 140–1, 
146–7, 214
control of housing projects 31, 37, 172
drug operation 11, 56–7, 85, 111–12, 118, 
150, 159, 184
and Michael Lee 98, 101, 118
murder of Bodie 112
murder of Little Kevin 173
stevedores see docks
Stewart, Joe (Proposition Joe) 16, 18, 26, 79, 
85, 89, 140, 146–7, 161n
relationship to Stringer 129, 141, 194
Stringer see Bell, Russell
suicide 35, 131, 140, 211, 213
Sunday truce 128, 130, 147, 220, 231n
surveillance 51, 53, 55, 57, 63n, 65, 68–9, 
73–5, 76n, 80, 204, 208, 219, 225
and the law 79–80, 83, 85, 210
long-term versus short-term 72
teaching see school
television 13n, 103, 207
episode recaps 195–7
as literature  190–1


--- PAGE 262 ---
Index 253
and moral discourse 51–2, 205
parallel editing 185–6
series–serial continuum 191–3, 198, 201
subversion of expectations 188, 190, 200
Terrace boys 98, 100
theft see crime, theft
tourism and tourists 41, 49
Towers, the see housing projects
tragedy see genre, tragedy
unions 91, 137, 144–6, 177
University of Maryland 58, 95
urban life 2, 4, 12, 42, 46, 48, 97, 121n
depopulation and dispossession 40, 203–4
and globalization 136, 143. 145
persistence of inequality 188
see also race, African American identity
urban space 37–8, 41, 44–5, 48, 163, 172–3, 
208, 212
vacants see housing projects, vacancy of
Valchek, Stan 146
Vancouver 49n
violence 16–17, 124, 128–32, 139, 142–3, 166, 
170–1, 200
virginity see sexuality, virginity
Vondopolous, Spiros (Vondas) 143, 145–8
Wagstaff, Melvin (Cheese) 147, 161n, 188
Wagstaff, Randy 5, 100, 116, 118, 121n, 157, 
184–5, 200
Wallace 2, 4, 125, 128, 137–8, 142, 155, 
161n, 192
death of 178–9, 185
relationship with Bodie 166–7, 170–2
war 28, 62, 164
between drug lords 141
on drugs 56, 58, 64, 66–7, 72–3, 78–9, 89, 
177, 182
and education 93
Watkins, Odell 196
wealth 15, 123–4, 130, 136, 183
Wee-Bey see Brice, Roland
Weems, Duquan (Dukie) 4, 7, 98, 100, 116, 
118, 121n, 157, 161n, 184–5, 
187, 201
West, Kanye 112–14
Whalon 11
white flight 42, 49n s ee also urban life, 
depopulation and dispossession, and 
Baltimore, suburbs
Whiting, James 135, 180
Williams, Delaney 11
Williams, Linda 177–81, 183, 185–6, 189
Williams, Melvin 10
Williams, Michael 3, 11
Wilson, Norman 34
Wire, The
title sequence and song 11, 49n, 69, 90n, 
187, 204, 231n
The Wire: The Chronicles  20n
Season One
1.01 1, 14n, 43, 53–4, 69, 72, 76n, 79–80, 
86, 138–9, 164–5
1.02 10, 14n, 67, 80–1, 125–6, 139, 152
1.03 60, 101, 125, 161n, 166–7
1.04 27, 45, 67–8, 169,
1.05 14n, 74, 126, 128, 139
1.06 4, 70–1, 73–4, 87
1.07 1, 80, 230n, 231n
1.08 4, 75
1.09 2, 126
1.10 (not mentioned)
1.11 72, 81, 88
1.12 4, 72–3, 138, 140, 155, 170, 172, 178
1.13 28, 55, 60, 81, 83, 93, 127, 180
Season Two
2.01 143–4
2.02 141
2.03 152–3
2.04 145
2.05 129, 140, 145
2.06 3, 14n, 156, 172
2.07 140, 144, 174
2.08 145
2.09 132
2.10 3, 225
2.11 144–6, 186
2.12 143, 146, 186
Season Three
3.01 23, 35, 38, 40–1, 141, 162–3, 172, 
192–4
3.02 10, 43, 89
3.03 12, 200
3.04 44, 182
3.05 (not mentioned)


--- PAGE 263 ---
254 THE WIRE : URBAN DECAY AND AMERICAN TELEVISION
The Wire: The Chronicles  (Cont’d )
3.06 129, 133, 139, 141
3.07 130
3.08 130, 139, 142, 203, 207
3.09 56, 130, 139, 147, 223, 231n
3.10 58, 83
3.11 11, 43, 45, 132, 139, 142, 192–3
3.12 11, 28, 32, 119, 132, 154, 172, 
196–7, 202n
Season Four
4.01 10, 93, 118, 173, 196, 198, 200
4.02 94, 98
4.03 3, 11, 58, 97, 231n
4.04 120
4.05 (not mentioned)
4.06 33, 36
4.07 92
4.08 34–5, 95–6, 108
4.09 1, 34, 92, 98, 118, 203, 206
4.10 39, 59, 76n, 97, 118, 159, 173
4.11 4, 112, 121n
4.12 35, 94, 98, 117, 121n, 158
4.13 7, 28, 35, 59, 97, 116–17, 159–60, 
174, 184–5, 231n
Season Five
5.01 20
5.02 83, 99, 140
5.03 119
5.04 28, 47
5.05 203
5.06 36, 47, 157, 180, 200
5.07 5, 84
5.08 2, 13–14n, 200, 219
5.09 48, 84, 97, 99–100, 133
5.10 4, 12, 14n, 35, 48, 55, 61–3, 84–6, 
100, 147, 187–8, 201
wiretap see surveillance
Wise, Dennis (Cutty) 40, 45, 94, 192–3, 200
Wright, Brandon 73, 120, 170, 194
Zenobia 96, 108–11, 114

