=== EXTRACTED TEXT FROM: Toward-a-black-radical-critique-of-political-economy-Turner-Lou-2010-March-22.pdf ===
Extraction Method: PyPDFLoader
Total Pages: 19
Timestamp: 2026-01-04T17:07:16.474107
================================================================================


--- PAGE 1 ---
Page 1 of 19 
 
 Toward a black radical critique of political economy                                       Turner, Lou. (2010, March 22)  
Toward a black radical critique of political 
economy 
Turner, Lou. (2010, March 22). Toward a black radical critique of political economy The Free Library . 
(2010). Retrieved July 29, 2011 from http://www.thefreelibrary.com/Toward a black radical critique of 
political economy.-a0224711355 
THE YEAR 1967 marked a sea change in black consciousness, beginning with black labor. The 
long hot summer of '67 saw unprecedented black mass revolt, first in Newark, New Jersey, 
followed by Detroit, Michigan where the white working class joined in. Not only tension -filled 
black inner cities, but rural Black Belts were in a state of mass uprising and organization. Tent 
cities in Lowndes County, Alabama, Greenville, Mississippi, and other battle fronts of the Civil 
Rights Movement across the South spontaneously sprang up. They provided the original impetus 
behind Martin Luther King, Jr.'s Poor People's Campaign.  
King had come to a June  1966 rally at Detroit's Cobo Hall to help organize 
mass working -class support for displaced Alabama farmers and their 
families, raising funds for food, clothing, shelter, and importantly, land. He 
returned again to Cobo Hall in 1967, this time from his an d SCLC's 
(Southern Christian Leadership Conference) Chicago campaign. Chicago 
was King's initial foray into the urban North. Unlike Chicago, which was 
riven with conflicting political agendas of the city's black leadership and 
run by an intransigent and wi ly mayoral boss, Richard J. Daley, the power 
and political savvy of black organized labor in Detroit gave King a new 
appreciation of the importance of unionization for black working people. It 
would influence his decision to participate in his last freedom  struggle with 
striking sanitation workers in Memphis, Tennessee in the spring of 1968.  
Together, the rural tent cities that served as make -shift dwellings for displaced agricultural and 
domestic workers, the urban battles over segregated schools and hous ing, the struggles of the 
black working poor to organize for better wages and working conditions, and the power of black 
organized labor to form a new kind of solidarity and leadership for all of these struggles, began 
to emerge as a comprehensive whole in  King's social vision toward the end of his life. Charles 
Denby, a native of Lowndes County and the worker principally responsible for bringing King to 
Cobo Hall in 1966 and 1967, wrote at the end of 1967's summer of revolt, after returning from a 
trip to Lowndes County:  
   One would be amazed to see how those Negroes [in Lowndes County] 
   have raised their consciousness along political lines in the past 
   two years through their own self-activities and holding mass 
   meetings every Sunday night for the past two years. (1) 
THE MILITANCY of '67 and the national insurrection sparked by the assassination of King in 
1968 would by the end of '68 confront a new ruling -class challenge with the election of Richard 
M. Nixon to the White House, as well as the raci st climate the election campaign that year 
Related Reading: 
42 p. 
 
The League of Revolutionary 
Black Workers, 1965-1976


--- PAGE 2 ---
Page 2 of 19 
 
 Toward a black radical critique of political economy                                       Turner, Lou. (2010, March 22)  
brought in its wake with the presidential candidacy of Alabama governor George Wallace. 
Because of the UAW (United Auto Workers) leadership's long history of do -nothingness when it 
came to fighting racism and upgr ading black workers both in the plant and on the union staff, 
Wallace gained a foothold among some sectors of the white working class. This greatly alarmed 
Denby, especially after witnessing Wallace's impact on white workers at a Cobo Hall rally for 
him in 1968, only a year after King had spoken there:  
   As soon as I entered the building, I could feel and sense the 
   tension. You felt like you were sitting among a jungle of wild 
   beasts and that if you did not quickly transform yourself into a 
   ferocious beast or escape from this meeting, that you would be 
   caught and destroyed as soon as this man got in the position to do 
   it. You could see these beasts putting fear or trying to put fear 
   into anyone who opposed Wallace.... Then I felt, "This is fascism." 
   (2) 
As the vitality of the 1960s Civil Rights Movement waned, its watershed reached with King's 
assassination and the ensuing uprisings that swept the U.S. in 1968, a new stage of black  labor 
militancy arose at the point of capitalist production relations. Altogether new forms of 
organization appeared in 1969 with the spontaneous creation of black caucuses in the industrial 
trade unions, especially in the UAW. (3) Among the significant l abor actions these new workers' 
organizations initiated was a 1969 walkout to commemorate King's birthday, one year after his 
assassination. Not only was this the first celebration of King's birthday as a working -class 
holiday, but the absence of black wor kers actually shut down production. At Denby's Chrysler 
Mack Avenue plant, black workers staged a walkout on the fourth anniversary of the 1965 
assassination of Malcolm X. Eight months earlier, black and white workers had walked out at 
Denby's plant over the assassination of Sen. Robert F. Kennedy, which came two months after a 
similar walkout in response to the assassination of King.  
IN MAY 1968, a month after the King assassination, the first black caucus, DRUM (Dodge 
Revolutionary Union Movement) was fo rmed in response to the summary firing of seven 
workers (five black and two white) at Chrysler's Dodge Main plant in the Detroit enclave of 
Hamtramck. The formation of DRUM a month after King's assassination demonstrated a notion 
that Denby had long held a bout the integrality of the labor and civil rights movements in the 
consciousness of black workers. Militancy among black workers fighting discrimination in 
production and in the union intensified after King's assassination. DRUM led a five -day wildcat 
strike in July 1968 to get the seven workers reinstated. According to black labor historian 
William F. Harris:  
   After DRUM's success, several other groups of revolutionary black 
   workers sprung up in automobile plants, among them FRUM at Ford and 
   GRUM at General Motors. Later in 1968 these groups, whose leaders 
   shared a pseudo Marxist-Leninist [i.e., Maoist] view of the world, 
   came together to form the League of Revolutionary Black Workers. 
   (4)


--- PAGE 3 ---
Page 3 of 19 
 
 Toward a black radical critique of political economy                                       Turner, Lou. (2010, March 22)  
Another scholar of black labor history, Philip Fo ner, described the socioeconomic basis of this 
militancy of the young urban poor who entered Detroit's auto shops at the end of the 1960s:  
   The UAW itself estimated in 1969 that nearly 30 percent of its 
   members at Chrysler were under 30, at General Motors 33 percent, 
   and at Ford nearly 30 percent; the percentages of workers with less 
   than five years' seniority were 51 at Chrysler, 41 at Ford, and 40 
   at General Motors. Late in 1967 and in 1968, a new element was 
   added to these young workers--the hard-core unemployed, dropouts 
   from the ghetto schools. The New York Times of August 13, 1967, 
   reported that the heads of the big three auto companies and Walter 
   Reuther were working with militant black nationalists and that the 
   "purpose of the alliance is cooperation in the prevention of 
   another riot." One result of the Detroit power structure's sudden 
   interest in the ghetto was the announcement by the auto companies 
   that they would drop all "educational" qualifications for 
   employment, train ghetto people with government financing, and 
   bring them into the plants. Several thousand young blacks actually 
   were hired. They moved into the hardest jobs, the foundries, 
   assembly-line work, and press work. None went into the skilled 
   trades. (5) 
The 1969-70 downturn in auto sales that triggered a series of layoffs of this very same cohort of 
young black workers was evidence of more powerful effects to come. This downturn was one of 
several objective factors that conditioned the demise of the black caucuses movement.  
The Ideological Turn & Industrial Purge of Black Labor, 1975-1983  
THE SUBJECTIVE inner contradiction that spelled the end of the most revolutionary in -plant 
movement since the formation of the CIO (Congress of Industrial Organizations) in the 1930s, 
importantly, found expression in the pages of The Black Scholar. In 1975, Denby reported on the 
responses of production workers to the debate then underway in The Black Scholar on 
nationalism, separatism and Marxism. (6) He reported that the black workers he spoke to about 
the debate dismissed it as remote from their struggles against the new onslaught that corporate 
capitalism was then commencing to unleash upon labor through a thoro ughgoing restructuring of 
industrial production relations. Denby tied this to the demise of the black caucuses, whose 
leaders' conflation of a Maoist brand of Marxism with nationalism the Reutherite union 
leadership thoroughly exploited (red -baited) to dis credit them in the eyes of black workers and 
sympathetic white workers.  
DENBY UNDERSTOOD, painfully, from witnessing the UAW's method of destroying earlier 
radical caucuses, the consequences of the ideological pitfalls that led to the demise of the black 
caucus movement on the threshold of the most far -reaching restructuring of capitalist production 
relations in the twentieth century. In Marxian dialectics, the economic and the ideological are 
inseparable. Hence, the radical challenge by labor to capital, spearheaded by young black 
workers calling themselves revolutionaries and the potential that it had to elicit support of rank -
and-file white labor, had so threatened significant sectors of industrial capitalism that capital 
could not possibly have regained  its equilibrium without the aid of the union bureaucracy. Once 
the ideological battle waged by the union leadership against this new worker militancy


--- PAGE 4 ---
Page 4 of 19 
 
 Toward a black radical critique of political economy                                       Turner, Lou. (2010, March 22)  
succeeded in discrediting and defeating the black caucuses, capitalist restructuring commenced 
its great industrial purge of black labor in the decade from the mid-1970s to the mid-1980s.  
By the 1975 recession, the fifth and longest post -World War II recession, industrial capitalism 
understood that its gravest threat lay in the revolutionary character of the  black working class. 
Mass unemployment of the black workforce and the alienation of succeeding generations of 
young workers from the labor market grew from the mid -1970s onward. As abstract as the 
ideological debates about nationalism and Marxism were, th ey were in actuality a reflection of 
the material realities of the period, if only as a mirror opposite of the preoccupation of black and 
white workers seeking to forge a new solidarity to fight the industrial purge of labor and the 
union concessions that paved the way for capitalist restructuring.  
The problem of growing black unemployment had also not been comprehended adequately by 
black intellectuals, even as it was fomenting a new disaffected spirit among younger and deeper 
strata of the black working class. It was a deeply alienated spirit. Neither this new black 
militancy nor its intense alienation had developed to the point where either the youth themselves 
or radical intellectuals recognized the need to work out new philosophic ground for the 
organizational growth and direction of the post -civil rights black liberation movement. What 
grew instead was the desire for more militant activism and the idea that it alone would foment 
revolutionary change.  
THE IDEOLOGICAL IN -FIGHTING among various tendencie s of the black liberation 
movement was merely another manifestation of this new condition of black life and labor. Denby 
recollected that when such conditions existed back in the Depression and War years of the 1930s 
and '40s, and workers, black and white,  talked of revolution, it was the non -revolutionary 
character of the Communist Party that prevented one from actually occurring. The turbulence of 
the 1970s was quite different because when the revolutionary aspirations of the unemployed got 
blocked, they became deeply disillusioned. Inside the factory, solidarity among black and white 
workers became indispensable to fighting capitalist restructuring and the union bureaucracy's 
concessions that paved its way. What made the intellectual discussion about nati onalist 
separatism the most alienating of abstractions was that it came at precisely the moment that 
solidarity among black and white workers was needed to fight the onslaught of restructuring.  
By 1975, the need for a new philosophic/organizational direct ion for the movement had become 
dire. The disintegration of the black caucus movement in the plants, which was certainly not due 
to any lack of militancy, was proof enough of that. As Denby concluded of the period, 'You can't 
have a movement in the street that you can have in the plant and [it's] nowhere in the plant now." 
(7) Something new appeared with the capitalist restructuring that began in 1974 -75, throwing 
masses of black workers into the unemployment lines, many of them permanently. The 
alienation of the working class had a new face --permanent unemployment. By the end of the 
decade it also had a new name--the "underclass."


--- PAGE 5 ---
Page 5 of 19 
 
 Toward a black radical critique of political economy                                       Turner, Lou. (2010, March 22)  
Capital & Race I: Poverty of the Theories of Poverty  
THE THEORY of the black "underclass" gained currency at the end of the 19 70s when at one 
and the same time the U.S. economy hit the depth of its longest post -war recession and when the 
economic dislocations of black inner cities disclosed a new social phenomenon, namely, 
recurrent black mass revolt in a single locale, the black  communities of Miami, Dade County, 
Florida. Two black social scientists attempted to formulate theoretical responses to explain the 
black inner-city phenomena of permanent unemployment and social revolt. William J. Wilson's 
1978 work The Declining Signifi cance of Race was one of the first attempts to rationalize the 
phenomenon of permanent joblessness among African Americans in terms of a so -called new 
class formation he dubbed the "underclass." Marvin Dunn, a Miami -based community 
psychologist, was sought after, at the time of the 1980 Miami rebellion, by the news media and 
policy-makers for his sociopsychological knowledge of black Miami and the urban conditions 
that bred the revolt. He later summarized his findings, in collaboration with former Newsweek 
urban affairs editor, Bruce Porter, in a book rifled, The Miami Riot of the 1980s: Crossing the 
Bounds (1984).  
Despite the analytical differences between Wilson's and Dunn's work, each shared the same 
"underclass" premise. The chief methodological premise  of the "underclass" conception is the 
split labor market theory formulated by sociologist Edna Bonacich. Split labor market theory, in 
which an employer seeks to pay one class (or race) of workers less than another for the same 
work, also provided one of the logical presuppositions of a variant of "human capital" theory 
employed by black neoconservative Thomas Sowell. The convergence of the "underclass" thesis, 
split labor market theory, and the human capital concept formed the analytical basis of Wilson's  
"declining significance of race" hypothesis.  
Bonacich's split labor market theory originates in what she perceives as a need to develop a 
theory "for variations in ethnic antagonism." (8) Ethnic antagonisms, in her view, originate in the 
capitalist labor  market. The theory of a split labor market also arises from another need, 
according to Bonacich, the need for a "materialist" framework for sociological theories of racial 
and ethnic conflict --"one based on the assumption that material interests frequentl y take 
precedence over ideas and ideals." (9) Bonacich's theory has "two additional features." The first 
was developed by Wilson, the second provided ideological ground for Sowell in his deployment 
of the concept of human capital. The first feature "propos es that class conflict within ethnic 
groups may be critical to relations between them.... Second, the theory predicts that the class 
most overtly antagonistic to blacks is white labor, not white capital." (10) With capitalist 
production relations abstracted away, we are left with supply-side concepts like "underclass" and 
human capital to explain "What causes the disappearance of work" and "the complex and 
changing realities that have led to economic distress for many Americans." (11)  
SO PERVASIVE is this supply-side bias that even a social democrat like Wilson insists that 
there is nothing productive to be gained by seeking "to assign blame" to a system of rapacious 
capitalist accumulation that has produced the greatest economic disparity between wealth an d 
poverty in U.S. history. On the other hand, so rooted in the assumptions of split labor market 
theory are theorists of the political economy of race that even when one critiques Wilson's 
"underclass" thesis, the critique results in a more facile adherenc e to his methodological


--- PAGE 6 ---
Page 6 of 19 
 
 Toward a black radical critique of political economy                                       Turner, Lou. (2010, March 22)  
assumptions. For instance, while Norman Fainstein takes Wilson to task for exaggerating "the 
economic differences among blacks and [minimizing] those between the races," he nonetheless 
assumes the same standpoint as Wilson. He cites  a 1976 American Sociological Review article 
by Bonacich (12) in defense of his critique of Wilson, apparently unaware that Bonacich's split 
labor market theory was the basis of Wilson's Declining Significance of Race, and that in both 
that article and her earlier 1975 article for the American Journal of Sociology she thanks Wilson 
for his "useful suggestions."  
Bonacich's "central hypothesis ... that ethnic antagonism first germinates in a labor market split 
along ethnic lines" fundamentally distances her from capitalist production relations and their 
inherent crises of accumulation. Her methodological location made it improbable that she would 
grasp that instability and crises in production relations determine the variation in the character of 
labor markets, whether or not ethnic antagonisms are inherent in them.  
Capital & Race II: Theory of the Wage Minimum  
THE IDEOLOGICAL RETROGRESSION of the Reagan era was one in which neo -Marxism 
and neo -conservatism became, in some instances, barely distinguishable w hen it came to 
theoretical attitudes toward race and class. In the case of Sowell, the retrogression was from neo -
Marxist to neo-conservative, reflecting the dual phenomenon of a developing black middle class 
and a deepening black "underclass." What Sowell , then a young left economist, referred to in a 
1960 article for the American Economic Review as "Marx's 'increasing misery' doctrine" (13) 
corresponds to the absolute general law of capitalist accumulation that Marx reaches at the 
climax of volume one of Capital. The pauperization of the working class is not only the result but 
the prevailing determinant of capitalist accumulation --its law of motion. In tracing the steps of 
Sowell's neo-Marxist argument, the source of his divergence from Marx is discernible at the very 
point of Sowell's theoretical affinity with him.  
Sowell begins with the difference between classical political economists Adam Smith and David 
Ricardo on the question of what constitutes wages. What Smith called "real" and "nominal" 
wages is the difference between the money workers receive in wages and what they will actually 
buy in goods and services. For Ricardo, real wages meant the amount of what Marx later called 
labor-power contained in the commodities workers received. Sowell distingui shes Marx's 
concept from his contemporary, the socialist politician, Ferdinand Lassalle's notion of the "iron 
law of wages," and follows by drawing a further distinction between Marx and his close 
collaborator Frederick Engels with respect to Marx's treatment of the "wage minimum" in Marx's 
1847 critique of French utopian socialist Pierre Proudhon, Poverty of Philosophy. Where Marx 
observed that "the natural price of labor is no other than the wage minimum," in a footnote to the 
posthumously published 1885 edition of Poverty of Philosophy, Engels added the "corrective" 
that "the fact that labor is regularly and on the average paid below its value cannot alter its 
value." (14)  
IN DISTINGUISHING Marx's view from those of Smith, Ricardo, Lassalle and Engels, S owell 
nonetheless attributes a price determination to wages that Marx had not, in order to rationalize 
the tendency of the wage rate to gravitate toward the wage minimum. He argues that one of 
Marx's assumptions "is a falling price level with increased pro ductivity, so that it is meaningful


--- PAGE 7 ---
Page 7 of 19 
 
 Toward a black radical critique of political economy                                       Turner, Lou. (2010, March 22)  
for [Marx] to speak of a fall in wages in money terms, as well as in value terms, and to speak of a 
'cheapening' of commodities." (15) According to Marx's general law of capitalist accumulation, 
greater productivity, through an increase in the production of relative surplus value, means lower 
wages when generalized over the working class as a whole. It is the operation of this law of 
motion of capitalist society that is responsible for the creation of an unemployed surplu s 
population at the same time that it pauperizes those who remain employed. The center toward 
which real wages gravitate is not only the wage minimum wherein black working -class income 
inequality subsists, it is the direction toward which the wages of all American workers tends.  
Engels' revision of Marx's concept of the wage minimum gave the impression --one which 
apparently attracted Sowell --that the relative factors that Marx adduces could contravene this 
direction, if not abrogate the general law itself.  As previously noted, on Sowell's reading, the 
absolute general law of capitalist accumulation was conceived by Marx as a "misery index" to 
measure the rise and fall of wages. The tendency of wages to gravitate toward the minimum was 
however conceived by M arx as the result, not as the cause behind the formation of the reserve 
army of the unemployed and the expansion of the surplus population via the concentration and 
centralization of capital. According to the absolute general law of capitalist accumulation , an 
increase in the surplus population is independent of the natural growth of the population. Marx 
found that "modern industry's whole form of motion ... depends on the constant transformation of 
a part of the working population into unemployed or semi -employed hands." (16) Each stage of 
capitalist production has its own law of population, making the superficiality of theorists of the 
"underclass" apparent when they fail to analyze critically capitalist production, and simply 
measure unemployment against census data. In contrast to the insufficiency of demographic 
accounts to explain the growing pauperization of the working class, Marx argued that "Capitalist 
production can by no means content itself with the quantity of disposable labor -power which the 
natural increase of population yields. It requires for its unrestricted activity an industrial reserve 
army which is independent of these natural limits." (17)  
Capital & Race III: The State and the Rise of Neoliberalism  
EVEN A CURSORY EXAMINATION of the st ructural crisis in black economic reality in the 
1970s and '80s reveals evidence of a long downturn and the extent to which the contradictions in 
capitalist production relations possess a purely racist determination as the touchstone of their 
"unrestricted activity." Over the long downturn, race has operated as a fundamental 
determination of the political economy of private and state capitalist restructuring. Writing for 
the A. Philip Randolph Institute, Bernard Anderson provided the following index of the impact 
of the restructured U.S. economy on the black working class:  
* The accumulated residue of past unemployment: "The black unemployment rate was 1.89 
times higher than that of others at the depth of the 1981 -82 recession, but was 2.14 times higher 
in early 1986--four years after continuous economic growth!" (18)  
* Displacement: "Fully 5.1 million adult workers were displaced by plant closings or 
employment cutbacks during 1979 through 1984. Black workers accounted for 600,000 of the 
displaced workers, and Hispanics accounted for 300,000." (19)


--- PAGE 8 ---
Page 8 of 19 
 
 Toward a black radical critique of political economy                                       Turner, Lou. (2010, March 22)  
* Educational imperative: "Between 1970 and 1984, New York lost 492,000 jobs previously 
filled by workers with less than a high school education, and gained 239,000 jobs requiring some 
college. Philadelphia lost  172,000 jobs for the less educated and gained 39,000 college jobs; 
similarly, Baltimore lost 73,000 jobs for the less educated, and gained 15,000 requiring one or 
more years of college." (20)  
* Growth of contingent work: "Nearly 3 of every 4 part -time jo bs created between 1979 and 
1985 were filled by people wanting full-time work." (21)  
* Aggregate result: "In summary, the dimensions and pace of structural change in the American 
economy have produced a loss of good jobs, falling incomes, and rising inequality." (22)  
The A. Philip Randolph Insitute's report data provide further evidence that the overwhelmingly 
racial character of the economic dislocations from 1975 to 1985 is undeniable. That the 
disproportion of black dislocations was accompanied by equa lly historic economic dislocations 
of the white working class provided the ideological basis for neo -Marxist and neo-conservative, 
as well as social democratic, portrayals of capitalism's structural crisis in non -racial class terms. 
"Neoliberalism" was, by  the early 1990s, its policy designation, even as it assumed the broad 
ideological form of a "colorblind racism." Disaggregating the particularities of the structural 
dislocations suffered by the black working class from the broad general dislocations expe rienced 
by white working and middle classes allows us to draw more the explicit conclusions that:  
1. Because African Americans have high rates of unemployment at all levels of education, 
education has not proven to be a panacea for black income inequality.  
2. Because the greatest class disparity exists within the black community, the gap widened 
between the black poor and black middle class to the point where the income of the vast majority 
of African Americans (85 percent) continued to decline while that of the top 15 percent increased 
significantly in the Reagan-Bush-Clinton years.  
3. Because blacks, especially black women, were concentrated in the low-wage service sector, 
where wage levels are close to the minimum, black wage rates were coupled to the declining 
constant dollar value of the minimum wage.  
4. Black youth unemployment has assumed the proportions of urban unemployment 
characteristic of the Third World.  
WITH THIS LEGACY of structural crisis in lack econo mic reality inherited from the Reagan 
era, and its corresponding ideological retrogression, political economic debates among the two 
ruling-class parties--the Democrats and the Republicans --has really been a discourse about how 
best to manage Reaganomics. The politicization of welfare reform that got underway in the 
Reagan era and that found its most draconian realization a decade later in the Clinton 
administration conceals an insidious state -capitalist logic, one tightly tied to the logic of the 
structural crises of capital and race.


--- PAGE 9 ---
Page 9 of 19 
 
 Toward a black radical critique of political economy                                       Turner, Lou. (2010, March 22)  
The state was no less complicit than private sector capitalism in its policy interventions to meet 
the low-wage labor demands of capitalist restructuring. Since 1973, the number of people who 
were on AFDC (Aid to Families with Dependent Children) stayed constant at 10.7 million due to 
the tightening of eligibility requirements in the 1970s and again under Reagan in the 1980s. 
Although the need had intensified sharply under the impact of the structural dislocations from the 
mid-1970s through the 1980s, the caseload levels remained constant. So, whereas those families 
living below the poverty line increased by 41 percent, i.e., from 18.3 to 25.7 million, between 
1973 and 1985, the tightening of eligibility requirements made it so  that only half of the poor 
could qualify. Moreover, benefits failed to keep pace with the price increases of goods and 
services. So, although the Reagan administration boasted of low inflation, the reality was that it 
was sky -rocketing among the out -of-work and working poor. The real purchasing power of 
welfare benefits fell by one -third, and in some states like New Jersey and Illinois by over 50 
percent.  
Tightened eligibility requirements coupled with the Depression -level purchasing power of 
benefits wer e the administrative vise that compelled poor women to seek outside work to 
survive. (23) Arguably, the many policy twists administered to the welfare system is evidence of 
the system operating punitively as a regulator of what Marx called the reserve army  of the 
unemployed, supplying capitalism with workers for low-wage employment:  
   When there is a shortage of workers willing to take low-paying 
   work, government historically tightens eligibility requirements to 
   force more recipients into the work force. The Work Incentive 
   Program (WIN), which created workfare and training programs that 
   compelled welfare recipients to find jobs, was established in the 
   full employment years of the late 1960s. (24) 
One reason that the Clinton administration an d the Republican -controlled Congress would later 
find common cause in abolishing welfare "as we know it" is due to the fact that the constant 
dollar value of welfare benefits, in the 1980s, had risen relative to the minimum wage, which had 
remained stagnant for two generations. No doubt "welfare reform" was the political mechanism 
by which liberals intended to demonstrate the extent to which they were capable of managing 
Reaganomics.  
Capital & Race IV: Crisis of Accumulation  
   The more a ruling class is able to assimilate the most prominent 
   men of a ruled class, the more solid and dangerous is its rule. 
--Karl Marx, Capital, Vol. III  
CAPITALISTS measure the impact of technological innovation on wages in terms of 
productivity and profitability. Fundame ntal for Marxist, on the other hand, was the impact of 
technological change on the lot of the working class, whether in terms of displacement and 
unemployment, or the impact of these on the earnings and standard of living of the working 
class. Capitalists and Marxists each try to explain the causes of unemployment brought on by 
technological changes and economic crises in two ways. The first, or cyclical explanation, 
describes the sum -total of unemployment shocks as a consequence of the temporary or cyclica l


--- PAGE 10 ---
Page 10 of 19 
 
 Toward a black radical critique of political economy                                       Turner, Lou. (2010, March 22)  
decrease in the demand for labor which induces capitalists to lay off workers temporarily. The 
second, or structural explanation, describes these shocks as related to shifts in entire industries, 
regions, or urban areas which have changed the pattern or structure of their demand for labor, for 
example, deindustrialization in the Midwest, or the national expansion of the service industry. 
Although displaced workers may be retrained, or may migrate from one sector of the economy to 
another, working class unemployment rises.  
While distinct, these explanations actually complement each other, insofar as each takes account 
of the structural causes of unemployment, only in different periods, durations, and to various but 
shared degrees. For example, while cyclic al unemployment accounts for only a moderate share 
of the fluctuation in unemployment, structural unemployment:  
   [A]ccounted for a particularly high share of the increases in 
   unemployment during particular episodes, such as the mid-1970s and 
   late 1960s. [I]t accounted for very little of the increases in 
   unemployment in the late 1950s and the early 1980s. (25) 
So volatile is capitalist restructuring that it simultaneously creates unemployment in some sectors 
while increasing employment in others.  Thus the pattern and structure of unemployment across 
various sectors changes. As part of this volatility, technological changes that marginally raise 
productivity also unequally disperse the returns to capital between different sectors. Labor 
constantly faces a "no-win" situation under the impact of these structural shocks. Unemployment 
not only increases in vulnerable industries and sectors, but in so -called strong sectors. Capital 
investment grows in those sectors and industries, even as unemployment in creases in them. Over 
time the system returns to its equilibrium, the inequality of returns on investment and 
productivity between sectors having narrowed, and capital and labor having migrated to more 
"productive" sectors.  
THE LOGIC of U.S. capital accum ulation in the 1980s and 90s, indeed, the motivation and plan 
behind capitalist restructuring, has been the equalization of profit rates whose tendency to fall 
got its historic impetus from the unprecedented "technological revolution" of the last two 
decades. According to the late radical political economist, Rhonda M. Williams:  
   Marx's argument (and extension thereof) is straightforward: capital 
   flows from sectors with low profit rates (capital-intensive 
   sectors) toward sectors with high rates (labor-intensive sectors). 
   Market prices rise in the former and decline in the latter, 
   generating a tendency for profit equalization. (26) 
The current restructuring of capital accumulation structures the mix of capital - and labor -
intensive sectors, setting small but privileged high -tech sectors and elite strata within broad -
based labor -intensive service sectors. The problem is that profit rates tend to equalize over 
extended durations of time, so newly acquired capital mobility allows for the rapid entry and exit 
of capital in and out of high profit labor-intensive sectors of the world economy, making the low-
wage workforce the most vulnerable sector of the working class.


--- PAGE 11 ---
Page 11 of 19 
 
 Toward a black radical critique of political economy                                       Turner, Lou. (2010, March 22)  
The ghetto, for that reason, must be viewed as more than the excrescence of capitalist 
accumulation. It is also the historical material condition of capitalist accumulation, and therefore 
a powerful link between the southern plantation economy and northern industrialization, and 
more recen tly, deindustrialization. This historical, no less than material, linkage between the 
plantation and the ghetto arises from their mutual underdevelopment. Owing to the ghetto's 
historical link to capitalist industrialization, by virtue of it being the loca tion of the latter's black 
proletarian workforce, the cycle of black underdevelopment rooted in southern agriculture began 
to breakdown. The mass migration of black labor out of the repressive regime of the southern 
plantation economy was the subjective mo tive force that telescoped northern capitalism's 
dominance over the southern economy.  
Capital & Race: "Black Capitalism" and the Circulation Crisis  
THE BLACK COMMUNITY, however, is not merely a vast, underdeveloped labor market it is a 
multi-billion dollar consumer market. By way of this market, the wages and incomes of the black 
working class flow out of the ghetto at an even greater rate than its labor -power. The economic 
underdevelopment of the ghetto is a result of capital drains and disinvestment, th at is, capital 
siphoned off by financial institutions, housing markets, social service reductions, and 
infrastructure decline. (27) The flow of black income into the ghetto is only temporary before 
flowing out again, thus never strengthening or providing an adequate foundation for other sectors 
of the ghetto economy. The greatest drain on the resources of the ghetto is the brain and talent 
drain that departs via the educational system and the careerism of high -wage professionals --
ironically, the very pursui ts often extolled as the salvation of the black community. As analyst 
Timothy Bates tells it, "Programs that enable some to escape the ghetto serve to preserve and 
reinforce ghettoization for many more. The best and the brightest are drawn out of the ghett o to 
serve themselves and contribute to the further advancement of the dominant society." (28)  
For their part, the so-called black capitalist enterprises that remain tied to the ghetto are of one of 
two varieties: either they cater exclusively to resident s and clientele inside the ghetto, or they 
serve larger markets, e.g., manufacturing, wholesale and retail sales, transportation, construction, 
etc., outside of the black community. The difference is pivotal to any understanding of the 
unsustainability of black economic development through "black capitalism." With capitalist 
development, the internal market of the black community is thought either to be too weak to 
sustain black-owned businesses that cater to black consumers, or that it represents too robus t an 
outflow of consumer dollars to other metropolitan markets. In fact, this duality merely reflects 
the interaction between the weakening of the internal market of the black community and the 
drain of black consumer revenues to powerful metropolitan markets.  
THE DESTRUCTION of the internal market of the ghetto is a result of that form of capital 
accumulation that has over the last thirty -five years telescoped the phenomenal growth of the 
service sector and the burgeoning metropolitan consumer markets. In  the ensuing crisis, other 
forces appear to be at work, hastening the demise of the ghetto market, such as high rates of 
crime and unemployment, and gentrification and increasing black homeownership. Not only 
have consumer markets become extremely competit ive over the last three decades, redirecting 
the flow of black consumer dollars, but capitalist expansion has made the suburbs and 
metropolitan-area consumer outlets (e.g., malls and big box outlets) powerful magnets for black


--- PAGE 12 ---
Page 12 of 19 
 
 Toward a black radical critique of political economy                                       Turner, Lou. (2010, March 22)  
dollars. In the meantime, eme rgency services like hospitals abandon the ghetto. These 
developments promote the formation of black -owned enterprises devoted to serving greater 
metropolitan-areas, and in some cases, regional markets, to the exclusion of the internal market 
of the black community.  
It is no mystery that the ruin of the less developed sectors of the capitalist economy forms the 
basis for expanding the capitalist home market. This phenomenon is almost always unintelligible 
to petty -bourgeois nationalists, simply because for  them this ruin signifies the decay of the 
indigenous economy, "and not ... the transformation of patriarchal into capitalist economy." (29) 
Their romanticization of a decaying indigenous economy illuminates a fundamental 
contradiction of black economic li fe, namely, that the social and economic dislocations of the 
black community, particularly the ruin of its internal market, signify its final integration into the 
national economy. The ruin of the underdeveloped commercial structures of the black 
community signals the expansion of black consumerism and the further integration of the black 
workforce into sectors of the labor market formerly closed to it. It has signaled as well the 
appearance of a black "underclass" subsisting on the lowest rungs of capitali st society. In sum, 
the destruction of the underdeveloped social and economic structures of the black community 
represents its final transformation into an expanded home market for a new stage of capitalist 
accumulation.  
As a consequence of this ruin, "Th e problems of markets and capital, in combination with ... 
other ghetto attributes, are sufficient to minimize the economic development potential of a black 
business community that is oriented toward servicing a ghetto clientele." (30) To this the 
bourgeoisie proposes the abstraction of a so -called "competitive edge" of the ghetto based on 
"(1) developing lines of business that can utilize the ghetto's supply of abundant labor and (2) 
relying heavily upon non -ghetto sources for both capital and markets." (3 1) Abstract or not, it 
expresses the prevailing relations of the African -American community to capitalism. The 
attempts to humanize these exploitative relations is only somewhat less opportunistic than the 
naked self-interest of black entrepreneurial elite s concerned with generating rising incomes for 
ghetto residents (including from the underground economy) whose limited consumer options are 
the exclusive source of their enrichment.  
EACH of these entrepreneurial sectors --the traditional one that services the black community 
exclusively, and the new cross -over sector that relies on capital and markets outside the black 
community--are linked to different, and at times, opposing economic trends. Traditional sectors 
have historically been linked to those areas  of U.S. capitalism that have employed significant 
proportions of the black labor force, mostly in industrial manufacture, service industries, and the 
public sector. The linkage that the new cross -over sector has established to the economy may be 
to the do minant capital and market sources which may or may not be part of those branches of 
the economy to which old-line ghetto businesses are historically linked. (32)  
This only defines the linkage of black capitalism to the broader U.S. capitalist economy. The  
other, more crucial, linkage involves that of black labor. The difference between the two 
represents an important shift in black economic and political development, one whose material 
basis has been instrumental in changing the black community's ideologic al understanding of 
itself. Heretofore, black entrepreneurial sectors were restricted to the parasitic role of serving a


--- PAGE 13 ---
Page 13 of 19 
 
 Toward a black radical critique of political economy                                       Turner, Lou. (2010, March 22)  
ghetto clientele whose income from the dominant capitalist economy constituted the life-blood of 
the black business community. Reliance on, and loyalty to, this traditional business sector on the 
part of the black working class has become marginal over time.  
This petty -capitalist sector only indirectly shares in the exploitation of the black labor force. 
Moreover, the nationalist politic s of this business sector are determined by the narrow 
commercial interests of competing with other ethnic commercial interests that also serve 
consumers inside the ghetto. Black Nationalist politics display little ambition of going beyond 
the narrow horizon set by the petty, competing, commercial interests of the ghetto economy. The 
larger capitalist system whose markets extract the lion's share of black consumer dollars and 
whose productive forces exploit the labor -power of the black community is left uns cathed by 
nationalist criticism. Indeed, there is little criticism heard, only undisguised idolatry of what "the 
white man" has achieved, accumulated and controls. On the other hand, the new black 
entrepreneurial sectors have as a condition of their existence the direct exploitation of black labor 
power. The ideological shift accompanying the new production imperative of so -called black 
capitalism to exploit black labor -power directly has assumed the most fantastic forms of 
expression among various nationalist tendencies, in contrast to traditional black politics that have 
since the Depression been tied to the Democratic Party. One finds among the former everything 
from the resurrection of the self -help economics of Booker T. Washington to an Afrocentric 
return to pharaonic Egyptian society, updated, no less, with information age technology.  
AS IN THE CASE of black residential segregation, black businesses experience redlining and 
capital disinvestment. Lack of capital and a shrunken ghetto market are the do minant features 
that condition the weak commercial dynamics of black businesses. Retail, personal service, and 
small contracting enterprises constitute three traditional lines of black business. Disinvestment 
restricts the size and availability of business  loans, limiting the size of black businesses. Despite 
the supply -side economics of the Reagan era, access to capital was more difficult for black 
businesses than for that stratum of small white businesses that fueled the service sector explosion 
that bolstered the political fortunes of Republican fiscal conservatism. Indeed, the small business 
set-aside aspects of affirmative action were met by legal efforts to overturn or curtail such 
policies by small white business interests, spearheaded by the Chamber of Commerce, reflecting 
the cut-throat competitiveness of the service sector economy.  
Black entrepreneurial interests fought this white business backlash, and looked to the State to 
remove the last vestiges of racial inequality, in order to save themselve s from extinction as a 
fraction of the middle class. This fight took on the ideological form of Democratic Party and 
Black Nationalist politics. The former is associated with traditional black business elites (that is, 
where they don't enjoy token status w ithin the Republican Party), whereas the politics of the 
latter often assumed the ideological expression of "Black -upwardly-mobile-professional" 
(buppie), though often failed, entrepreneurs. As Marx noted in his critique of French utopian 
socialist Pierre Proudhon for privileging the small producer and shopkeeper over the worker in 
his politics, "retarded industrial development made idealization of the small producer natural." 
(33) It is precisely the petty entrepreneurial interests of this sector of the bl ack bourgeoisie that 
gets expressed in Democratic and Republican party politics and in the self -help politics of petty-
bourgeois Black Nationalism.


--- PAGE 14 ---
Page 14 of 19 
 
 Toward a black radical critique of political economy                                       Turner, Lou. (2010, March 22)  
GONE are the class antagonisms between capital and labor, between the State and the 
communities of resistan ce of the black working class. Instead, the black bourgeoisie seeks the 
amelioration of class antagonisms at the expense of the black working class. No other purpose is 
served save that of weakening, and thus muting, the growing class contradictions of the  black 
community. This is motivated by no other class interest than the one Marx noted:  
   However different the means proposed for the attainment of this end 
   may be, however much it may be embellished with more or less 
   revolutionary notions, the content remains the same. This content 
   is the reformation of society in a democratic way, but a 
   reformation within the bounds of the petty bourgeoisie. Only one 
   must not form the narrow-minded notion that the petty bourgeoisie, 
   on principle, wishes to enforce an egoistic class interest. Rather, 
   it believes that the special conditions of its emancipation are the 
   general conditions within which alone modern society can be saved 
   and class struggle avoided. (34) 
THE BLACK PETTY -BOURGEOISIE accomplishes this by compromising the very means by 
which the struggle against the enemies of the black working class is prosecuted. This is because 
it is "a transition class, in which the interests of two classes are simultaneously mutually 
blunted"; which is why its democratic representatives also "imagine [themselves] elevated above 
class antagonism generally." (35) While these democratic representatives:  
   ... concede that a privileged class confronts them ... they, along 
   with all the rest of the nation, form the people. What they 
   represent is the people's rights,, what interests them is the 
   people's interests. Accordingly, when a struggle is impending, they 
   do not need to examine the interests and positions of the different 
   classes. (36) 
Instead, by identifying their interests and rights with those of the people, the petty -bourgeois 
democratic representatives and their nationalist counterparts subsume the class antagonisms and 
interests of the black community under the abstraction of "progress" and serf-reliance.  
Works Cited  
Bernard Anderson, The Changing Workplace and Unions: Implications for Black Workers (A. 
Philip Randolph Institute, n.d.).  
Timothy Bates, "Circular Causation in Social Processes: The Relationship of the Ghetto and 
Black-Owned Businesses." in Richard R. Cornwall and Phanindra V. Wunnava, eds. New 
Approaches to Economic and Social Analyses of Discrimination. (New York: Praeger, 1991).  
Ted Benton and Ian Craib, Philosophy of Social Science: The Philosophical Foundations of 
Social Thought (New York: Palgrave, 2001).  
Edna Bonacich, "A Theory of Ethnic Antagonism: The Split Labor Market," American 
Sociological Review, (October 1972).


--- PAGE 15 ---
Page 15 of 19 
 
 Toward a black radical critique of political economy                                       Turner, Lou. (2010, March 22)  
--. "Abolition, the Extension of Slavery, and the Position of Free Blacks: A Study of Spli t Labor 
Markets in the United States, 1830-1863," American Journal of Sociology (November 1975).  
--. "Advanced Capitalism and Black/White Race Relations in the United States: A Split Labor 
Market Interpretation," American Sociological Review (February 1976).  
Robert Brenner, The Economics of Global Turbulence: A Special Report on the World 
Economy, 1950-98. London: New Left Review 229 (May/June 1998).  
S. Lael Brainard and David M. Cutter, "Sectoral Shifts and Cyclical Unemployment 
Reconsidered," Quarterly Journal of Economic 108 (Feb. 1993).  
Sundiata Cha-Jua, Ted Koditshek and Helen Neville, eds., Race Struggles (Urbana: University of 
Illinois Press, 2009).  
Sundiata Cha-Jua and Clarence Lang, "The 'Long Movement' as Vampire: Temporal and Spatial 
Fallacies in Recent Black Freedom Studies." Journal of African American History 92 (2007).  
Oliver Cromwell Cox, Caste, Class and Race: A Study of Social Dynamics (New York: Modern 
Reader, 1970).  
Charles Denby, Indignant Heart: A Black Worker's Journal (Detroit: Wayne State University 
Press, 1989).  
--. "Lowndes County Shows Revolt Gains," News & Letters (August-September 1967).  
--. "Black intellectuals probe role of Marxism and American workers," News & Letters (August -
September 1975).  
Raya Dunayevskaya, Marxism and Freedom (Amherst, NY: Humanity Press, 2000).  
The Raya Dunayevskaya Collection: Marxist -Humanism, Its Origin and Development in the 
U.S., 1941 to Today. Detroit: Wayne State University Labor History Archives, 1981.  
Frantz Fanon, "Racism and Culture, " in Toward the African Revolution (Political Essays), trans. 
Haakon Chevalier (New York: Grove Press, 1969).  
Philip Foner, Organized Labor and the Black Worker, 1619 -1981 (New York: International 
Publishers, 1982).  
Antonio Gramsci, Selections from the P rison Notebooks, trans, and eds. Quinton Hoare and 
Geoffrey Nowell Smith (New York: International Publishers, 1976).  
William H. Harris, The Harder We Run: Black Workers since the Civil War (New York: Oxford 
University Press, 1982).


--- PAGE 16 ---
Page 16 of 19 
 
 Toward a black radical critique of political economy                                       Turner, Lou. (2010, March 22)  
V.I. Lenin, The Develo pment of Capitalism in Russia: The Process of the Formation of a Home 
Market for Large-Scale Industry, in Collected Works, Volume 3. (Moscow: Progress Publishers, 
1972).  
Herbert Marcuse, Reason and Revolution: Hegel and the Rise of Social Theory (Boston: Beacon 
Press, 1960).  
Karl Marx, The Poverty of Philosophy (New York: International Publishers, n.d.)  
--. The 18th Brumaire of Louis Bonaparte in Collected Works, Volume 11. (New York: 
International Publishers, 1979).  
--. Capital, Volume 1, trans. Ben Fowkes (New York: Vintage Books, 1977).  
--. Capital, Volume 3, trans. David Fernbach (New York: Vintage Books, 1981).  
News and Letters Committees, Resident Editorial Board Minutes of News &Letters (June 15, 
1975).  
Alice O'Connor, Poverty Knowledge: Social Science, Social Policy, and the Poor in Twentieth -
Century U.S. History (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 2001).  
Thomas Sowell, "Marx's 'increasing misery' Doctrine," American Economic Review (March 
1960).  
Survival News 2:1 (Winter 1988).  
Rhonda M. Williams, "Competition, Discrimination, and Differential Wage Rates: On the 
Continued Relevance of Marxian Theory to the Analysis of Earnings and Employment 
Inequality," in Richard R. Cornwall and Phanindra V. Wun nava, eds. New Approaches to 
Economic and Social Analyses of Discrimination. (New York: Praeger, 1991).  
William J. Wilson, When Work Disappears: The World of the New Urban Poor (New York: 
Alfred A. Knopf, 1996).  
Eric Olin Wright, "Foundations of a Net -Marxist Class Analysis," in Eric Olin Wright, ed., 
Approaches to Class Analysis. (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2005).  
Endnotes  
(1.) Charles Denby, "Lowndes County Shows Revolt Gains," News & Letters, August -
September 1967. Denby had been the work er-editor of New & Letters from 1955 to his death in 
1983.  
(2.) Charles Denby, Indignant Heart: A Black Worker's Journal (Detroit: Wayne State University 
Press, 1989), p. 222.


--- PAGE 17 ---
Page 17 of 19 
 
 Toward a black radical critique of political economy                                       Turner, Lou. (2010, March 22)  
(3.) Denby participated in these new revolutionary black workers' organization s and edited one 
of the many shop newsletters generated by the Black Caucus movement, the Mack Avenue 
Chrysler Stinger.  
(4.) William H. Harris, The Harder We Run: Black Workers since the Civil War (New York: 
Oxford University Press, 1982), p. 171.  
(5.) Philip Foner, Organized Labor and the Black Worker, 1619 -1981 (New York: International 
Publishers, 1982), p. 411.  
(6.) Charles Denby, "Black intellectuals probe role of Marxism and American workers," News & 
Letters, August-September 1975.  
(7.) Resident Editorial Board Minutes of News & Letters, June 15, 1975.  
(8.) Edna Bonacich, "A Theory of Ethnic Antagonism: The Split Labor Market," American 
Sociological Review, October 1972, p. 547.  
(9.) Edna Bonacich, "Abolition, the Extension of Slavery, and the Pos ition of Free Blacks: A 
Study of Split Labor Markets in the United States, 1830 -1863," American Journal of Sociology, 
November 1975, p. 601.  
(10.) Ibid. As Oliver C. Cox critically observed of the South, the original focus of Bonacich's 
delineation of the split labor market theory, "This kind of the reasoning is common, and it has the 
significant--though frequently unintended --function of exculpating the Southern ruling class." 
See Oliver Cromwell Cox, Caste, Class and Race: A Study of Social Dynamics (New  York: 
Modern Reader, 1970), p. 575.  
(11.) William J. Wilson, When Work Disappears: The World of the New Urban Poor (New 
York: Alfred A. Knopf, 1996), p. xiii.  
(12.) Edna Bonacich, "Advanced Capitalism and Black/White Race Relations in the United 
States: A Split Labor Market Interpretation," American Sociological Review, February 1976.  
(13.) Thomas Sowell, "Marx's 'Increasing Misery' Doctrine," American Economic Review, 
March 1960.  
(14.) See the note by Engels in the 1885 German edition of Karl Marx, Th e Poverty of 
Philosophy (New York: International Publishers, n.d.), p. 45n.  
(15.) Thomas Sowell, "Marx's 'increasing misery' Doctrine," p. 116.  
(16.) Karl Marx, CapitalI, p. 786.  
(17.) Ibid., p. 788.


--- PAGE 18 ---
Page 18 of 19 
 
 Toward a black radical critique of political economy                                       Turner, Lou. (2010, March 22)  
(18.) Bernard Anderson, The Changing Workplace and U nions: Implications for Black Workers. 
A. Philip Randolph Institute, p. 16.  
(19.) Ibid.  
(20.) Ibid., p. 20.  
(21.) Ibid.  
(22.) Ibid., p. 21.  
(23.) This was the pattern and trend of the administrative disadvantaging of the poor that shaped 
the policy environment for the abolition of welfare in the 1990s, euphemistically called "welfare 
reform."  
(24.) See Survival News, vol. 2 (1), Winter 1988.  
(25.) S. Lael Brainard and David M. Cutter, "Sectoral Shif ts and Cyclical Unemployment 
Reconsidered," Quarterly Journal of Economics 108 (1), Feb. 1993, p. 220.  
(26.) Rhonda M. Williams, "Competition, Discrimination, and Differential Wage Rates: On the 
Continued Relevance of Marxian Theory to the Analysis of Ear nings and Employment 
Inequality." In New Approaches to Economic and Social Analyses of Discrimination. Eds. 
Richard R. Cornwall and Phanindra V. Wunnava (New York: Praeger, 1991), p. 81.  
(27.) Eric Olin Wright's concept of "nonexploitative economic oppres sion" would seem to be an 
adequate conceptualization of these relations, i.e., the notion that not only is "the welfare of the 
advantaged group ... at the expense of the disadvantaged ... based on the ownership and control 
over economic resources," but the  notion that "in nonexploitative oppression there is no 
appropriation of labor effort, no transfer of the fruits of labor from one group to another." See 
Eric Olin Wright, "Foundations of a neo -Marxist class analysis," in Eric Olin Wright, ed., 
Approaches to Class Analysis (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2005), p. 24. However, 
the logic of this argument follows the variations treated earlier in the critique of Thomas Sowell. 
Whatever the appearance of equality in the market, including the labor mark et, and the so-called 
externalities that result in market forces producing inequalities, Marx argued that such were just 
that--appearances--that belie the despotic relations of capitalist production. So as far as 
"approaches to class analysis" of the black  working class, a more dialectical approach is needed 
to grasp that between the permanently unemployed and the black working class employed in 
industry, many of whom move back and forth between steady employment and persistent 
layoffs, are those employed i n the vast service sectors. Most are non -union, and most, unable to 
escape from the inner city, must live with the so-called "underclass." These intermediate strata of 
the black working class are as tied to what Wilson calls the "jobless ghetto" as the per manently 
unemployed. Although these vast strata of the black working class are concentrated in the low -
wage service sectors, their presence in the inner city fosters a community of interests (social 
capital). In the so -called jobless ghetto there are worki ng-class elements, then, that know no 
social dependency and whose social consciousness has been shaped by their experiences in


--- PAGE 19 ---
Page 19 of 19 
 
 Toward a black radical critique of political economy                                       Turner, Lou. (2010, March 22)  
confronting and breaking down the caste and sexist relations that predominate in the 
manufacturing, industrial and service sectors.  
(28.) Timothy Bates, "Circular Causation in Social Processes: The Relationship of the Ghetto 
and Black -owned Businesses." In New Approaches to Economic and Social Analyses of 
Discrimination, p. 249.  
(29.) Vladimir Ilyich Lenin, The Development of Capi talism in Russia: The Process of the 
Formation of a Home Market for Large -Scale Industry. Collected Works, Volume 3 (Moscow: 
Progress Publishers, 1972), p. 166.  
(30.) Timothy Bates, "Circular Causation in Social Process," p. 251.  
(31.) Ibid., p. 250.  
(32.) Bates maintains that "The ghetto business that competes in the broader marketplace ... 
actually shapes the flow of income into the ghetto economy. Furthermore, its prospects are not 
held hostage by intraghetto income levels; its prospects are linked to  its ability to compete in the 
broader economy." Ibid., p. 250.  
(33.) Quoted in Raya Dunayevskaya, Marxism and Freedom (Amherst, NY: Humanity Press, 
2000), p. 52.  
(34.) Karl Marx, The 18th Brumaire of Louis Bonaparte. Collected Works. Volume 11. (New 
York: International Publishers, 1979), p. 130.  
(35.) Ibid., p. 133.  
(36.) Ibid., p. 133.  
2010 The Black Scholar

