=== EXTRACTED TEXT FROM: Traditional-Offa-Yoruba-Religion-in-Nigeria.pdf ===
Extraction Method: PyPDFLoader
Total Pages: 137
Timestamp: 2026-01-04T17:06:58.382505
================================================================================


--- PAGE 1 ---
Traditional Offa 
Yoruba Religion in 
Nigeria as written
By
Sunday Peter Tinuoye
(MBA ATBU, B.Sc. ABU 
Zaria, ANIMN, Cert. 
Computer).


--- PAGE 2 ---
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Tinuoye  Peter  Sunday  is  a  native  of  Omu-Aran  in  Irepodun  Local 
Government Area of Kwara State of Nigeria. He was born into a Christian 
family on the 7th of April 1974 and started his early education in First 
Baptist  ZEB  primary  school  Offa  Kwara  State  from  1979  to  1985  and 
proceeded  on  his  secondary  education  from  1986  to  1992.  He  gained 
admission to study Bachelor of Science degree in Business Administration 
and gained admission after completion of his first degree to study Masters of 
Business Administration. He had one year experience as Marketing Officer 
and three years experience as a Customer Care Officer with Power Holding 
Company of Nigeria Plc, Bauchi. He is presently the Prepayment Officer of 
the same company.  He his happily married with a kid.


--- PAGE 3 ---
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Chapter 1 : Traditional Offa-Yoruba Religion
Chapter 2 : Mystical Powers As Mechanics Of Social Control, 
Social Order In Old And New Offa
Chapter 3 : Death and Its Exegesis
Chapter 4 : Other Specifics On Death
Chapter 5 : Offa-Yoruba  Traditional  Economy  And  Community  
Development Economic Activities In Offa


--- PAGE 4 ---
CHAPTER 1
TRADITIONAL OFFA-YORUBA RELIGION
RELIGION AS OFFA-YORUBA MAN UNDERSTANDS IT
On religion generally, its discussion shall consist of various beliefs in myriad 
realities of life’s existence. For this reason we may pre-empt our discussion 
on this topical issue with an explanation on the “Big Bang Theory”. “Big 
Bang Theory maintains that the universe originated in a cosmic explosion of 
hydrogen which became condensed into galaxies”. This explanation of the 
theory may directly or indirectly translate to mean that cosmic explosion 
described above is not unrelated top the origin of the whole universe that 
existed in orderly and harmonious manner and so undisturbed prior to such 
an explosion1. Indeed”,…… heavens and earth were one piece, then we 
parted them”, the two pieces being fused and bound together to make a 
homogeneous mass2 before an action – the cosmic explosion – to break, 
diffuse or separate it took place. This is an equivalent of the saying that “The 
world was created by one god (the original and earliest creator) who at the 
same time was both male (residing in his celestial realm “orun”) and female 
(living on the planet called the earth – “Ile”)……...
to whom eventually dominion over the realm thus created was ceded”. This 
“original god” suggests the only one God as the source of all souls and 
beings. It is also suggested that he is “an earlier god” than all other gods3. To 
be candid, Yoruba name for the supreme God is Olorun or Olodunmare – 
being the more earlier used than Olorun. However, Olorun appears to be the 
more common name at the present time; but there is reason to think that this 
popularity is of relatively recent origin. The name clearly means “owner of


--- PAGE 5 ---
the  sky”;  “its  very  clarity  may  suggest  that  it  is  not  very  ancient”.  Its 
monotheistic implementations make it acceptable to Islam and Christianity, 
religions which, as we may have realized, have been growing rapidly among 
the Yoruba for the last 175 yeras4 while it may be noted that while “Olorun is 
not identified with the sky in a literal way but is understood as associated 
with the world beyond” to which the sky is the gate”,5  in general, it appears 
that Olodumare represents an older, less rationalized concept of God than 
does Olorun. He is a kind of cosmic power, manifesting himself in various 
ways in different contexts. For instance, as Olorun, He is identified with the 
sky (Orun) which is his mat and thid is the one who is been spreads over the 
whole extent of the earth, the owner of a mat that is never folded up6.
Offa-Yoruba belief, the principal characteristic religio-cultural rights offer 
man unlimited and unrestricted possibilities for research in all disciplines 
and  techniques  such  that  he  may  approach  any  possible  question  of 
reliugion, not only in terms of material reality but also more in terms of 
those of the spiritual world which brings him (man) closer to his Creator (i.e. 
God), thereby nourishing his mind and soul with higher truths.
The  Offa-Yoruba  world  view  encompassing  the  belief  system  on  focus 
encourages man to contemplate (study carefully) the universe and the events 
taking place in it so as to discover the secrets behind God; invites man to 
ponder on the god who is the Absolute other than His creation. The creator 
cannot by any means be the same kind of being as that which He created 
explains the importance of God and His infinite scope; expects man to use 
his knowledge for the general good of humanity; and always stresses belief 
in the unseen or the invisible who is self-subsistent and the only one who is 
without like or equal. Thus, if any created being can be said to ‘cause’ 
anything, that capacity to ‘cause’ anything, that capacity to ‘cause’ was itself


--- PAGE 6 ---
created within that being. Thus, no being in the universe can be said to be 
self-existent. Rather, it owes its existence to the Creator who alone is self-
existent as well as self subsistent. Hence it flows from the fact that the 
Creator (God) alone truly creates, that for each being He has determined all 
possible ‘causes’ and ‘effects’7.
THE  NATURE  OF  OFFA-YORUBA  MAN  AND  HIS  BELIEF  IN 
VOODOOISM
In the general perspective of man’s belief, let it be drawn out that on the one 
hand, on arrival of man on earth, he is by nature given to hatred, depravity 
(viciousness), wickedness, brutish, solitary, transgression (going beyond the 
good with attributes of sin); whereas on the other hand man can be kind, 
compassionate, loving, accessible and humane. Indeed, there is the complete 
environment in which he dwells which is what we call or refer to as universe 
and man is at the centre of it and therefore its focus8. Pursuant to this, having 
examined a couple of stories about man’s creation duly, from Yoruba and 
Hindu mythology, we have come to the conclusion that the only authentic 
story of creation is the one contained in scripture books, most especially the 
one vividly expressed in the Bible which explains the origin myths of the 
beginning of manly important realities of the universe, people, etc. believing 
that though man is a religious animal, a political, as well as social animal 
and as acquisitive being, it is, therefore, conclusive that man (African man 
inclusive) in his sober mind, in his serious thought and calm situation – not 
in fancied mood and/or imagined fashion – is convinced that religion is the 
vehicle by which he believes he can ride to heaven through, e.g. God’s own 
chosen  intermediary  called,  namely,  Jesus  Christ  by  Christians,  Anobi 
Mohammed (SAW) by Muslims, etc9.


--- PAGE 7 ---
TRADITIONAL RELIGION
Generally, therefore, religion is the essence of good morals. This is the main 
belief of the Africans in religion. True religion; not minding its types, is 
always the same in the essence everywhere on the globe, if it is able to 
maintain its part or parts, particularly the part that is especially a spiritual or 
immaterial entity we cal, spirit10. This true religion we are talking about is 
not un-associated with the inward nature of the true substance of anything 
having important feature or features of sincere kindness that instils fears of 
God  into  mankind  and  inculcates  good  virtues  in  the  individual  man. 
Therefore, any religious free thinking of beauty and esprit de corps uttering a 
sense of union and of common interests and responsibilities in his sermons 
and preaching emanating from some religious group of any religion must 
obviously be the religious order necessarily needed to imprint on the man’s – 
African or European – archetypal (original) ideas about or of God and his 
belief in one True God; the fact of the belief that had already been adduced 
that all creation is the result of an emanation or a series of emanations from 
the Divine Being.
Candidly all religions, indeed true religion – traditional African or 
modern – preaches that humanity’s business is to reconcile God and man 
consciously or unconsciously and to give to each only its just rights in 
relation to the other. Even if the coming of Christian religion duly illustrates 
the setting of a particular example. The example of its intrusion must not 
necessitate or be confined to the throwing-down of all things of African 
origin such as the pangs of European incendiary acts of colonialism have 
now afflicted (distressed) us almost to the very fabric of our socio-cultural 
heritage. The outcome of vanity and possessiveness of colonial mentality


--- PAGE 8 ---
that has always been ending us in humiliation and defeat according to the 
period of history, its needs, customs, difficulties and circumstances to the 
chagrin (feeling of disappointment, etc) that there are many disadvantages of 
being colonial stooges. We are now engaged in the search for the best way to 
de  condition  Africans  by  removing  them  from  the  scene  of  European 
conditioning.
THE SIGNIFICANCE OF RELIGION: If the original stories of the theory 
of “Sociology of Religion” by Emile Durkheim say that “Durkheim, despite 
his agnostic and scientific mentality”,  held that “society  could not exist 
independently  of  religious  forms  of  sentiment  and  action”,  then  the 
significance of religion in man’s social life is established thereby exactly re-
emphasizing, in this theory, the religiosity of African, and, therefore, Offa 
man; as he goes further to posit that:
‘into any social event there will intrude religious forms of expression; 
Even  science,  that  most  secular  and  sceptical  form  of  human 
enterprise is not immune to religious modes of thought and conduct,. 
Indeed, to the extent that science grows and acquires the character of a 
“community”, we might expect to find it (science) incorporating more 
of the characteristics of a religious institution11.
And that by Bolaji Idowu (1973:56) re-echoed in his discussion of the 
revelation  of  God  (Olodumare)  in  religion  in  general,  that  which  is  an 
equivalent of what Durkheim had said, when he emphasizes that:
‘We find in every age and generation that there is a direct contact of 
God with human soul (manifesting) personal awareness of God on the 
part of man through God’s own initiative. What man knows of God, 
what he discovers about God, comes as a result of this self-disclosure. 
Man,  may  of  course,  by  his  own  rational  mind  interpret  what  is


--- PAGE 9 ---
revealed to him and he may rationalize it. But first of all, the truth is 
revealed to him in ways which he may be able to describe it or not1, 2.
In addition to the above, in Durkheim’s thought, and rightly too, the 
most essential of the characteristics of any religion, including African and 
Offa-Yoruba indigenous religion, is the quality of sacredness. For example, 
all known religious beliefs, whether simple or complex present one common 
characteristic classification of all things, real and ideal, of which men think, 
into two classes or opposed groups, generally designated by two distinct 
terms  which  are  translated  well  enough  by  the  words  “profane”  and 
“sacred”13.  Thus,  by  interpretation,  this  division  of  the  world  into  two 
domains – the one containing all that is sacred, the other, all that is profane – 
is the distinctive  trait  of religious thought to the effect that the beliefs, 
myths,  dogmas  and  legends  are  either  representations,  or  systems  of 
representations, which express the nature of the sacred things, the virtues 
and powers of which are attributed to them or their relations with each other 
and with the profane things4.
Of course, by sacred things one must not understand them to mean 
simply those personal beings which are called gods or spirits, since a rock, a 
tree, a spring, a pebble, a piece of wood, a house, or in a word, anything can 
be sacred15 namely, a rite can have the character of the sacred. “In fact rite 
does not exist which does not have the character of sacredness to a certain 
degree”. Despite the fact that “An amulet has a sacred character” yet the 
respect which it inspires is nothing exceptional” if it is said of a man that he 
makes  a  religion  of  those  beings  or  things,  whose  eminent  value  and 
superiority to himself, he only recognizes”; such that it is clear that there is 
nothing in such relations which is really religious16. Here, let it be stated that 
acceptance  of  this  view  is  not  to  denigrate  religion;  God,  or  the  life


--- PAGE 10 ---
hereafter; but to bring them, or at least some aspects of them, within the 
range of understanding.
YORUBA BELIEF IN DIETIES, DIVINITIES 
AND THE GODS
To the people of the world had been committed the care of the earth, 
“to dress it and keep it”. Though rich in all that the owner of the universe 
could supply, the earliest people were not to be idle. Useful occupation was 
appointed them as a blessing, “to strengthen the body, to expand the mind, 
and to develop the character”17. Here we have cause to recur to the very past 
beginning that in the Garden of Eden was the tree of knowledge of good and 
evil where the Lord God commanded man, saying “of every tree of the 
garden thou mayest freely eat” but of the tree of knowledge of good and evil, 
thou shall not eat”13. Created to be “the image and glory of Gos”19 people of 
the  earth  had  received  endowments  not  unworthy  of their  high  destiny. 
Graceful and symmetrical in form, regular and beautiful in feature, their 
countenances glowing with the tint of health and the light of joy and hope, 
they (the people), without mincing words, bear, in outward resemblance, the 
likeness of their Maker. Not only was this likeness manifest in the physical 
nature, every faculty of the mind and soul reflected the Creator’s glory. 
Thenceforth, endowed with high mental and spiritual gifts, the people were 
made out a little lower than the angels20 that they might not only discern the 
wonders of the visible universe, but comprehend moral responsibilities and 
obligations.
Thus far, the Lord God created the earth and there “He put the man 
whom He has formed”21. Here on earth, in the very beginning, there was the 
book  of  nature  which  spread  its  living  lessons  before  them  and  which


--- PAGE 11 ---
afforded  an  exhaustless  source  of  instruction  and  delight.  These  living 
lessons of the creation were the handiwork of the Creator Himself such that 
on every leaf of the forest and stone of the mountains, in every shining star, 
in earth and sea and sky, God’s name had been written and His mysterious 
powers  in  them  not  incapacitated  for  particular  actions.  With  both  the 
animate and inanimate creation – with leaf and flower and tree, and with 
every living creature, from leviathan (= great source) of the waters to the 
mote in the sunbeam – the dwellers on earth held converse (communion), 
gathering from each the secret of its life. God’s glory in the heavens, the 
innumerable  worlds  in  their  orderly  revolutions,  “the  balancing  of  the 
clouds22, the mysteries of light and sound, of day and night – all are the 
objects of study for use by the peoples of the earth’s surface, e.g. the laws 
and operations of nature and the great principles of truth that govern the 
spiritual universe in which reside the deities were opened to their minds by 
the infinite Author of all. In the light of knowledge of the glory of God”23, 
their mental and spiritual powers developed and they realized the highest 
pleasures of their peaceful and harmonious existence, hence, a fit study for 
those who were made in His image. As all that are happening today have 
been structured in the Garden of Eden model and, therefore, a representation 
of what God Himself desired the whole earth to become29 as well as His 
purpose that as human family increased in numbers, they should establish 
places of worshipping Him – the shrines, the temples, the tabernacles, the 
churches, the mosques and the like. In African religious thin king shrines in 
Africa of the old were occupied with deities (gods or goddesses i.e. divine 
beings  called small  gods) where the wonderous works and acts of God 
should be studied in a way that should be fitted more and more fully to 
reflect throughout endless ages the light of the knowledge of His glory25. In


--- PAGE 12 ---
the process of Africans objectifying their religious thoughts and intention 
images were created to stand between them and their God as intermediaries 
and conveyor-belts that would reach their God with their supplications. They 
never pray to the idols but to their God in steadfast honesty. This observation 
is confirmed in the discussion of “God and the Gods in West Africa by 
saying that at one time, Olodumare/Olorun and the sky which is His abode 
were nearer to the earth than they are now, “so near that one could reach up 
and touch the sky”. But as time went on “man did something that annoyed 
the Divine Being such as using the sky for food or whipping his hands on it” 
as a result God and the sky separated themselves from the earth. Since that 
time Olodumare has controlled the world from a distance”27.
Having been affirmed and understood as such, the ultimate power is in 
His  hands  but,  like  a  great  king,  He  does  not  attend  to  the  details  of 
administration. There are entrusted to his agents, the lesser divinities who 
represent him on earth”28. Practically, however, Olodumare or Olorun (the 
Yoruba name for the supreme God) has no regular cult of his own but he 
may be thought of as the ultimate recipient of worship offered to other 
divinities. Although, as thus stated that in some ways, as rather distant being, 
the name ‘Olodumare’ has
“always carried with it the idea of one with whom man may enter into 
covenant or communion in any pace and at any time (He is); one who 
is supreme, superlatively great, incomparable and unsurpassable in 
majesty, excellent in attributes, stable, unchanging, constant, stable”29 
(Ibid) that
he could be approached through an intermediary of one’s own understanding 
. he is not worshipped directly and, truly, has no images, shrines or priests,


--- PAGE 13 ---
yet prayer (s) may be directed to Him and it is assumed that in some sense 
the sacrifices made to the lesser deities ultimately reach him30.
THE OFFA-YORUBA ORISHA
(“THE LESSER GOD”)
The Offa-Yoruba belief in and understanding of Orisha (the lesser 
Gods) in general perspective may be discussed along the points that:
The Yoruba deity is almost certainly related to Offa-Yoruba Orisha, name 
commonly  used for the multitude  of “lesser gods”. The chief or ‘great’ 
orisha of the Offa-Yoruba is Orishanla who is said to have been the first 
creation of Olodumare (i.e. Olorun (God) or even his “image or symbol on 
earth”. Other names for him are Orishanla, “the whaite divinity” or Obatala, 
“king of the white cloth”, He is always clothed in white, the inside of his 
temple is white-washed and his preists wear white. As he is sacrifice is the 
bloodless snail. Orishanla/Orishala is the chief of the “white divinities” of 
whom they are said to be ovber fifty31. That in the belief of the people at 
times he takes on the role of the supreme God – “Orishanla may be an 
excpression  of  Olodumare  in  respect  of  the  role  as  an  artificer”  (=  a 
craftsman, maker, or contriver) 32. It is even speculated among the people 
that because he “is sometimes referred to as creator – craftsman, maker or 
contriver – it is possible that his cult i.e. his particular system of religious 
worship,  especially  with  reference  to its  rites  and ceremonmies33 –  was 
independent of or earlier than belief in Olorun who usurped his position”.34 
That according to one account Orishanla was entrusted by Olodumare with 
the task of creating the world and given some earth and a five-toed chicken. 
He threw the earth on the “watery waste” and set the chicken to work this 
process started is the lcation of the present city of Ile – Ife – the place where


--- PAGE 14 ---
the earth expands athwarth. That there are a number of variations on this 
story. According to one of them, Orishanla, on his way to carry out the job of 
creation was distracted by a party, became drunk on palm-wine, and went to 
slep.  His  younger  brother,  Oduduwa,  took  the  earth  and  the  chicken 
proceeded to do the job successfully and then established himself as king at 
Ile-Ife.  When  Orishanla  awoke  he  felt  that  his  brother  had  improperly 
usurped his place and a battle ensued. Consequently upon this, Olodumare 
intervened and allowed Oduduwa to continue as king but gave Orishanla the 
responsibility of creating men to pupulate the earth. That thus, it may be said 
that while Oduduwa is the creator of the world, Orishanla is the creator of 
mankind. That the later manifests his power, especially through those who 
are in some way deformed: cripples, dwarfs, albinos. That these are not 
“mistakes” but evidences of the activities of Orishanla and thus sacred to 
him35. That the story of the conflict between Orishanla and Oduduwa may 
represent an encounter between early inhabitants of the land, represented by 
Orishanla, and the invading group, represented by Oduduwa who established 
the divine kinship at Ile-Ife. That at any rate, descendants of oduduwa then 
spread out, establishing their rule in the whole of Yorubaland. Some or most 
Yoruba still refer to themselves as sons of Oduduwa36.
That according to Yoruba belief, Oduduwa may also be identified with 
the earth. According to one of the Yoruba views, there is close relationship 
between Orishanla, Oduduwa and the supreme deity such that Oduduwa is 
also reported as being identified with the Creator, Olorun. In a liturgy (or a 
form of public worship/communion) used in Ile-Ife, Oduduwa is referred to 
as  Iye  ‘male  (i.e.  Iye  Irunmola)  “mother  of  the  divinities”  or  “mother-
divinity”. By this understanding Oduduwa may also be identified with the 
earth.  Thus  it  may  be  said  that  Obatala  and  Oduduwa  represent  one


--- PAGE 15 ---
“androgynous deaity” i.e. at once male and female deity comparable to the 
cosmos having the two halves of a hollow, closed calabash, the lower part 
being the earth and the primeval waters on which rests the habitable world; 
such that Obatala is identified with the sky, and oduduwa with the earth 
thereby  respectively  representged  as  the  upper  and  lower  halves  of  a 
calabash which can never be separated.
That as there is relationship between Yemowo (mother Mowo) another 
name for Oduduwa, worshipped at Ile-Ife as the wife of Obatala/Orishanla 
and the Ogboni cult, another name for Oduduwa in this respect is “Earth-
Mother”37 that is onile (Earth owner) or simply Ile (earth). That this “Earth-
Mother” has close associations with the ancestors and the dead generally 
who are thought of, for some purposes, as living in the earth. That aiye (the 
world) rests on her (i.e. Ile or the Earth-Mother); she supports people during 
their time in the world and receives them when they die38, she, the Earth-
Mother,  sometimes  also  called  Oduduwa,  has  a  cult,  Ogboni;  which 
traditionally was “the major  governmental organ for preserving law and 
order, checking excesses  in kings  and keeping the citizens law abiding. 
Members of the Ogboni cult consider themselves to be in a special sense, the 
“sons  of Oduduwa”,  suggesting again that Oduduwa  has  been,  to  some 
extent, merged with the Earth-goddess. That thus far we have been speaking 
of the concept of “ultimate” or creative power; it is clear that in Offa-Yoruba 
there  are  alternative  ways  of  conceiving  this  power.  Namely,  Olorun, 
Olodumare Orishanla/Obatala and Oduduwa, all represent the original power 
of the universe. They are not simply “different names for the same god”, 
they  overlap,  interpenetrate,  and  are  for  some  purposes  interchangeable. 
Indeed, basically, Offa-Yoruba have belief in one ultimate power. Yet, that 
power is a complex one, associated with the phenomena of aky, earth and


--- PAGE 16 ---
sea; with the establishment of kinship on earth, and with the relationships 
between male and female. For reasons of illustration and clarity, the English 
words “divinity” and “deity” may be helpful here as they can refer to “that 
which has the quality of being divine”. In comprehensive sense and also to a 
particular divine being, Olodumare or Olorun can be thought of as “divinity” 
or “deity”. In practical sense and in reality, Olorun or Olodumare is not 
normally thought of, especially in modern sense, as an Orisha, although it is 
reported that He is sometimes termed “The Orisha” as Yoruba are went to 
say “alase, ekeji Orisha”, i.e. The Orisha containing all the Orisha within 
Himself. Indeed, it has been suggested that the Offa-Yoruba and other West 
African groups think of God both as Creatgor and ancestor; He transcends 
the world and humanity, acting upon them from without; but He is imminent 
(i.e. having the pervading presence of God in His creation), acting within 
and through nature and man; just as they are imbued with an idea of a 
universal unity of Being, manifested in the variety of human and natural 
worlds. This immanent (all pervading) aspect of the Divine is personalized 
in the lesser “divinities”. According to Newell S. Booth (1977) an Orisha or 
voodoo in among Yoruba peoples of West Africa is thought to “live” in the 
spiritual  realm  but  is  also  associated  with  particular  places.  When  the 
physical image of divinity is at times referred to by the Offa-Yoruba in 
particular, this may be taken a meaning that the image is inhabitated by the 
Orisha on certain occasion for certain purposes, although ultimately “the 
home of the divinity is in heaven”39. It has also been affirmed that the image 
is not finally to be identified with the divinity is indicated by the fact that the 
former (the image) can be replaced when it has worn out; that in other 
words, the people, the Offa-Yoruba, are not idolators. By way of objectifying 
the existence of the divinity, it goes without saying that the existence of the


--- PAGE 17 ---
divinity thus depends on its being recognized and worshipped by man; it is 
also said that it is by prayer and sacrifice that men “give power” to the 
divinity. There is also a Yoruba saying that “where there is no man there is 
no divinity”40. In the Orisha divinity is brought down to the human level; 
thus in a sense, they are man-made. Each divinity has his own particular 
worshippers “valled” by the god and initiated into his cult particular worship 
ceremonies  which  usually  involve  a  symbolic  “death  and  ressurection” 
Those so possessed are the wives of the Orisha, regardless of sex; has his/her 
own appropriate music, dance, offerings, taboo(s) and specific functions to 
perform  in  relationship  to  human  needs  and  problems.  Cult  groups 
associated with the worship of particular divinities not probably developed 
originally from kinship groupings and it is still true that many deities are 
identified with a particular clan which all members, male and female are 
worshippers by virtue of birth into it 41.
RELIGION AND OFFA-YORUBA BELIEF IN VOODOOISM
With regard to the above, we are referring to belief in super natural 
power possessed by the super humans, the gods of the land, and there are the 
gods of the lands etc. In Offa-Yoruba country, as in the Nile Valley or in 
Mesopotamia,  the  early  Offaman  recognized  a  personality  behind  every 
phenomenon. It is indeed believed that every external object or happening 
just because it was external and, therefore, not under his control, was a 
manifestation of some power independent of himself (i.e. the Offaman) and 
to be understood only in terms of his (Offaman’s) own personality and in 
accordance with his way of thinking, regarding the happening (s) peculiar to 
himself only. Thus, in so far as the conditions of his life were bound to take 
a local colour to emphasize certain aspects of the apparent universe in a


--- PAGE 18 ---
manner which would differentiate him and his beliefs from those of other 
men’s in other lands. These beliefs though all starting with a common stock, 
develop  an  Offaman’s  religion  distinct  from  that  of  the  Arabs  or  the 
Europeans’.
Not necessarily because Offa people were worshipping sun-god called 
Amon-Ile by the Egyptians, the early Offa men and women recognized that 
the dominating feature of the existence of life in Offa is derived from the sun 
when it appears. They recognized in it the source of life, the source of a 
certain power as it crosses the heaven unclouded, from sunrise to sunset 
“’and nothing is hid from the heat thereof’”42 as well as not only in accord 
with the Egyptians’ make believe story that emphasized the personification 
of the sun’s power which later on metamorphosed into the true creation story 
of One God, the Supreme God, the Creator of all things not only for the 
Egyptians but for men all over the earth to believe, Offa men and women not 
exempt; but because such belief in sun-god, regarded as the only one god 
amidst the very many gods, had over-turned its supremacy, at least in part, to 
assume the posture of a synergetic process whereby varying local beliefs 
were brought into a specious (seemingly true) harmony among beliefs in 
vario process whereby varying local beliefs were brought into a specious 
(seemingly true) harmony among beliefs in various gods to the extent that 
persistently a small hill appearing was believed to be the nucleus of the 
earth, it self believed to be made by the creator god whilst itself could even 
be the creator god so much that it is believed that in any case it was the spot 
chosen by him (the creator god) for his earthly temple. Consequent upon 
this, in the course of time, every shrine43 in Offa claimed to occupy its own 
primordial hillock of its own god. Hence, such shrines were in different 
places and were homes of different gods, excepting Onmaka/Moremi house


--- PAGE 19 ---
which has no devotes per se. the gods were Shango (god of thunder), Ogun 
(god  of  iron)  Oya  (river  goddess),Osun  (river  goddess),  Egungun 
(masquerade), Shaponna (god of small-pox). Of course in Offa of old, there 
were  as  many  shrines  as  there  were  devotees  of  different  gods 
acknowledging allegiance to different chief gods. In fact, the act of setting 
up shrines was attributed to the emergence of varying deities.
In the old kingdom of Offa-Yoruba, religion was, at that time, in a 
very  fluid  state  such  that  there  were  no  order  of priesthood:  The  local 
nobleman (i.e. the head-man of a clan) acted as priest on the necessary 
occasions and was simply assisted by a body of laymen who took it in turn 
to serve in the shrine for a stated period. In their belief in the gods of the 
land, in the more striking reversal of values, the significance of death as the 
act  or  handiwork  of  the  gods  is  expressed  such  as  this:  that  if  life  be 
miserable, perhaps made so by a god or gods, death may be the beginning of 
something better – “death is before me today like the convalescence of a sick 
man going forth after an illness”44. In positive sense, this translates to mean 
that the Yorubas, including Offa-Yoruba, had always cheerfully assumed that 
the gods were on the whole kindly being; or, in the negative sense, if now 
the whole fabric of society which summed up Offa-man’s ideal of happiness 
had broken down, that was, of course, the acts of the gods or at times they 
asked; were the gods to blame, or had there been something wrong with 
society?  At  this  time,  the  sense  of  moral  unworthiness  as  the  cause  of 
misfortune  begins  to  show  itself.  This  of  course,  cannot  be  called  a 
revolutionary  change  in  Yoruba  religious  thinking.  Rather,  it  was  a 
revelation of old Offa ideas, but new in the emphasis which it laid on ethics. 
This is because, on ethical lines, in theory at least, that which was evil in


--- PAGE 20 ---
man’s life is being weighed in the balance of ‘a god’ against that which was 
good. Indeed, therefore, morality and religion are here made independent.
BELIEF IN THE MAGIC, SORCERY, ETC.
In man’s life, virtue (moral excellence) is not always consistent with 
the  acquisition  of  material  prosperity.  In  consequence  there  arises  the 
dilemma: the latter (material prosperity) could not be forgone, and yet the 
last  judgement  could  not  be  disregarded.  Nevertheless,  the  practically-
minded Offa-Yoruba solved the dilemma by the use of magic, against which 
the gods themselves are powerless. In its formulation; the people believe that 
a set form of words, accompanied by a set ritual of action can, if properly 
used,  exercise  compelling  force.  Thus,  already,  in  the  old  Offa,  early 
medicine  men  (Babalawo)  had  been  instructed  in  the  use  of  certain 
utterances whereby each of them could propitiate the malevolent beings of 
the other world. Now, the modern Offa general public have had a share of 
the privileges of the ancient Babalawos such that however much evil a man 
had done in his life time he could face the judgement of the gods with 
equanimity (i.e. calmness of mind) provided that he knew the right thing to 
say and the right way of saying it so much that in case he should forget, the 
formular was incanted (or enchanted) inside of his coffin at death so that 
such reciting of an incantation, was a sure passport to the realms of the 
blessed dead. As if a routine matter, in a stereotyped manner, the incantation 
(or enchantment) of the formular in the coffin ensured that every awkward 
question  by  the  gods  on  the  last  judgement  day  would  be  countered 
automatically and the trial of the soul shall thereby be reduced to a force.


--- PAGE 21 ---
Indeed the motive of magic was not ethical but the safeguarding of man’s 
own future enjoyment. Some of these magic turned cults to which the public 
was admitted and even participated  in them, the myths  of indivisibility, 
having been accredited to the magic powers, gave to the cult something in 
the nature of a popular religion.
BELIEF IN THE MYSTICAL POWER CALLED EVIL MAGIC OR AJE 
(WITCHCRAFT)
Evil magic in Offa – Yoruba belief involves the belief in and practice 
of trapping and using this kind of power to do harm to human being or their 
property. It is here that we find sorcery at work in addition to order related 
practice like witchcraft, conjuration, e.t.c.. however, we must point out that a 
great  deal  of  belief  here  is  based  on,  or  derives  from,  fear,  suspicion, 
jealousies,  ignorance  or  false  accusations  which  go  on  in  Offa  and  her 
surrounding villages. Namely, people fear to leave around their hair, finger 
toe nails, clothes or other articles with which they are normally in direct 
contract like saliva chewing stick, e.t.c. in case  their ‘enemies’ will use them 
and work evil magic against them. This is because the hair or foot print and 
finger nails, when secretly acquired, may be  burnt or pricked or otherwise 
used in a harmful way and thus cause inflictions of pains, diseases or death 
upon the person from whom they come. It is even feared that an enemy 
might prick it thorns or collect a person’s foot-print and incise it with evil 
medicine and thus cause harm to the victim.
This is what James Frazer distinguishes as contagious magic5 James Frazer 
gives  one  useful  category  of  this  kind  of  evil  magic.  He  has  called  it 
‘homeopathic magic’ which in African-and Offa-Yoruba-societies could be 
illustrated with endless examples. ‘Homeopathic magic’ involves the belief


--- PAGE 22 ---
that what happens to an object which looks like another will affect the latter. 
It involves the method by Babalawo, of  treating diseases by use of very 
small  doses  of  this  medicine  which,  in  large  doses,  produce  in  healthy 
person symptoms similarly to those of the diseases he (the Babalawo) want 
inflicted on his enemy.6 For example an enemy might, through the help of 
Babalawo or any other medicine-man, makes a doll which looks like and 
represent aparticular person in Babalawo’s mind such that by burning or 
pricking that doll the very real person will be harmed accordingly. Really, it 
is  when  used  maliciously  that  mystical  power  is  condemned  as  ‘black 
magic’, ‘evil magic’ or ‘sorcery’.
Nevertheless, the person’s belief in magic power is not devoid of 
superstition. For example, it was forbidden and feared in formal Offa society 
to praise somebody else’s children or property too often. For to do so might 
cause someone else’s mystical power e.g. ‘Aje’ – ‘witch craft’, to harm or 
destroy the particular child or children or property. For this reason one need 
“the Third-eye” to see, to read and to understand the meaning of signs, 
object and odd articles that may be found in Offa-Yoruba homes, fields, 
possessions and even on their bodies. Presently, however, the tension of this 
situation in the society has reduced considerably to the  barest minimum. 
Today, many of our men and women of small, very small, age ride in flashy 
cars of varying types in town and in their respective station of life and 
outside Offa without bothering about the danger of large series of generic 
troubles of evil magic from which they now see themselves as having being 
set free from modern way of thinking and understanding. Also there are 
many who have built and have been living in mansion and other magnificent 
buildings of varying grades of architectural beauty in town.


--- PAGE 23 ---
Furthermore, while there is no doubt that there are those who still 
believe  that  protection  or  prosperity  comes  from  the  object  of  mystical 
powers which they wear or otherwise used, others believe and acknowledge 
that the object in themselves have no inherent power as such. Instead the 
object represent and symbolise power which comes from God, especially 
when used to procure protection or prosperity, but when used otherwise, 
their  power will  amount to evil magic.  Thus, this  magic power we are 
talking about may be directly supplied by God; or it may be trough the spirit 
the living-dead or as part of the invisible forces of nature in the universe. 
Conversely,  despite  this  fact,  mystical  objects  can  also  use  their 
effectiveness and when this happen their owner or owners must get new 
ones or if possible get old ones recharged like a car battery.
At some particular point, religious controversy gets complicated when 
religion  and  magic  are  formed  to  merge  and  there  is  no  clear  way  of 
separating them any more than magic has been separated from Christianity 
or Islam at certain point. This is because some traditional medicine specialist 
who use “good magic” claim that the mystical power which they have and 
use comes ultimately from God, and as many have been seen, part of their 
profession truly involves praying to God directly or through the intermediary 
of  the  living-dead  and/or  spirits  of  solicit  His  help  as  such  it  may  be 
contended  that  “this  is  ‘spiritual  power’  functioning  through  physical 
means” such that as we have seen, for Offa-Yoruba people, the two worlds-
celestial and terrestrial globes-are but one universe with such a difference 
that the spirits, living on the celestial globe, have more access to that human 
beings sort of power than do on the planet of ours. It is this, believingly, 
which stature of the Yoruba belief in invisibility of the departed, even if 
these died as children, for upon death, the living-dead (i.e., the departed)


--- PAGE 24 ---
enter into a higher dynamic hierarchy than that of the living  47. Although 
truly speaking some Babalawos are experts in their business; yet there are 
others who supply their clients with cheap, false articles for the sake of gain; 
e.g. false mediums.
As for the false mediums in most African societies, these explain why 
modern  men  and  women,  do  not  stand  on  the  primitive  ideas  of  their 
ancestors nor continue to believe in things similar to what their forefathers 
believed in; in that false men and women mediums abound. Malams and 
Prophets  who have  joined  the band  in West  African  societies  have  had 
among them false practises of medium, claiming, for the sake of gain they 
want to make, what they cannot do, because they are what they are not. 
Under evil magic we have the following:
SOCIETIES, MAGIC AND WITCHCRAFT
These are types of evil magic. We would discuss sorcery as it relates 
to evil magic per se and, perhaps vis-à-vis witchcraft. So that at times we 
may use each of these interchangeably because they are each other’s useful 
auxiliary for expatiating on the thrills of African voodooist; because in many 
respects they mean the same. Technically speaking, sorcery, just like evil 
magic, involves the use of poisonous ingredients put into the food or drink 
of someone. No matter the academic finesse (delicacy) involved, one might 
say  that  for  Yoruba  people  in  general  sorcery  stands  for  anti-social 
employment of mystical power, and sorcerers are the most feared and hated 
by members of their communities. It is being feared that they employ all 
sorts of ways to harm other people or their belongings. For example, other 
animals to attack their enemies of their communities. It is being feared that 
they employ all sorts of ways to harm other people or their belongings. For


--- PAGE 25 ---
example,  they send flies, snakes, lions or other animals to attack their 
enemies or carry diseases to them; they spit and direct the spittle with secret 
incantations to go and harm someone; they dig up graves to remove from 
them human flesh or bones which they use in their practices; they invoke 
spirits to attack or possess someone.
These age-old uses of sorcerers spells to harm, not devoid of magic 
account for why Offa-Yoruba people feel and believe that all the various ills, 
misfortunes, sicknesses, accidents, tragedies, sorrows, dangers and unhappy 
mysteries  they  encountered  or  had  had  and  experienced,  but  which  no 
orthodox medical doctor could unravel, are caused by the use of this type of 
mystical power called evil magic, in the hands of a sorcerer, a witch or a 
wizard. They equally account for why we may understand, for example, that 
a bereaved mother whose child died from malaria will not be satisfied with 
the scientific explanation that a mosquito carrying malaria parasites stung 
the child and caused him or her to suffer and die from malaria. She will wish 
to know why the mosquito stung her child at the time mosquito did and not 
somebody else’s child but her own. The only satisfactory answer acceptable 
to her is that someone sent the mosquito against her child. While, agreeably, 
this is not a scientific answer, it is a reality for the majority of Yoruba 
people, including Offa-Yoruba.
That is to say that we may easily get rid of mosquitoes and prevent 
many  diseases,  there  will  always  be  accidents,  cases  of  barrenness, 
misfortunes  and  other  unpleasant  experiences  which  are  considered  as 
mysterious happen stances. For Offa-Yoruba, these are not purely physical 
experiences;  rather  they  are  mystical  experiences  of  a  deeply  religious 
nature.  In  Offa  town  and  people  talk  freely  about  them  –  African 
voodooisms,  for  they  (voodooisms)  willy-nilly  belong  to  their  (African


--- PAGE 26 ---
peoples’) world of reality, whatever else scientists and theologians might 
say. To them (Offa-Yoruba, indeed Africans) nothing happens by chance: 
everything is caused by someone, directly or through the use of mystical 
power, ‘good’ or ‘evil magic’. If one has one’s ears open, one will hear the 
names of people being blamed for misfortunes, sicknesses, accidents and 
other forms of suffering of someone or the other in every village. With 
regard to this, it is mainly women who get blamed for the experiences of evil 
machinations; and many a woman has suffered lynching in the hands of her 
accusers  and  continues  to  suffer  humiliation  and  disgrace  under  such 
accusations, sooner or later in her life, i.e. if she survives lynching and lives 
on.
According to the Yoruba version of its historical antecedents, sorcery 
among Yorubas developed out of the superstitious concept of immortality of 
the soul. For instance, it someone suddenly lost his speech or fell seriously 
ill, going into convulsions, maybe beside offering sacrifices to the supposed 
ghost worrying him, his family would also beseech the gods. This is because 
in their belief guiding their approach in this way, many living things and 
objects (that include non-living things e.g., stone, rock, tree, etc) in their 
natural world had spirit which in Yoruba is ‘emi’ imbued with spiritual (i.e. 
in body and soul) power which could harm people at any time or place, if so 
manipulated.  They  (the  Yoruba  people),  therefore,  feared  and  venerated 
these spirits and a greater many in Offa of today still do as in earlier times. 
Though  superstitious  practice  reveals  the  savagery  and  backwardness  of 
primitive religion in ancient Offa culture, as in any part of African culture, 
there is still a certain proportion of the population which believes in their 
primitive witchcraft and ghosts. For instance, “if a person fell ill, he would, 
more often than not, think that his ‘soul’ had been spirited away or carried


--- PAGE 27 ---
off secretly by a particular ghost and would have to ask someone to practise 
divination; to determine which ghost did it”, before trying to exercise. Again 
“If a person felt pain or suffered stomach trouble or felt dizzy or had some 
other disorder, there was a host of items which could be offered as sacrifices 
to different ghosts and gods”. A survey shows that at the advent of Islam and 
Christianity in Offa, Offa people had many ghosts (of the living-dead) and 
spirits which were being revered, but not worshipped, as being erroneously 
believed.
At that time, the missionary workers of the two religions realized that 
the  people  had  adopted  for  quite  long  an  attitude  of  intimacy  and 
dependence towards the ‘gods’ and ‘good ghosts’ to the point of almost 
irreversibility, to the effect that during weddings, funerals and festivities, 
they would offer oblation (sacrifices) to them (the gods) and seek approval 
before taking any action, that is, in terms of ‘good ghosts’. As for the ‘evil 
ghosts’ and monsters, people quite often tried to curry (solicit) their favour 
so that they would not become angry and, in a show of force and power, 
harm them. The natural  consequence or result of the foregoing  may  be 
understood  as  fore-showing  the  conclusion  that  this  type  of  “analogous 
judgement (by mystical powers) forms the basis (of the people’s) illusory 
explanations of natural life”.48 This is the reason that in Offa-Yorubaland, 
once somebody died, it is believed that something caused the death, as if to 
say  that  nobody  dies  a natural  death in the community. Such suspicion 
ranges from poison, oracle (i.e. what the oracle says), enemy witches to 
natural death. This is the reason why some sociologists say that sorcery does 
not  form  part  of  the  system  of  beliefs  which  Africans,  and,  therefore, 
Yoruba, regard as religion. Both witchcraft and sorcery in Offa-Yorubaland 
are regarded as reprehensible (i.e. deserving reproof, rebuke or blame) and


--- PAGE 28 ---
anti-social  and  rites  which  magicians  (mostly  sorcerers)  perform  are 
mundane and improvised. E.g., Awon Onidon is a condemnation in Yoruba, 
used to refer to some of them.
OFFA-YORUBA BELIEF IN ORACLE
The  plethora  of  meanings  of  oracle  includes  the  place  where  the 
hidden knowledge is believed to be revealed, e.g. the shrine of Apollo at 
Adelphi in ancient Greece49, the shrine of a god in Africa or Babalawo’s 
place in Offa. Here the prospective clients who go to a place where the god 
gives such an answer believe that many a Babalawo or any other priest or 
priestess through whom the god’s answer is given will be able to form 
his/her own judgements of the methods which she/he adopted to work the 
oracle to their favour. Even in ancient Greece and Rome oracle is taken to be 
the answer of a god to some question50. Such an answer always has a hidden 
meaning that is hard to understand by the clients. Oracle is regarded as a 
realiable or sure guide, divine revelation or utterances making up a message 
from God for the guidance of man or the one who does such revealing. 
Oracles abound in the Bible51.
In Africa, Offa-Yoruba practisioners or practical Babalawos of ‘Ifa’ 
are  said  to  form  the  best  organized  and  most  knowledgeable  magical-
religious institution of their country or community, such that Offa-Yoruba 
religion and medicine have achieved liaison with man. Indeed, the basic 
purpose  of  ‘Ifa’ (oracle)  is  to  determine  the  correct  sacrificial  offering 
necessary to secure a favourable solution to the problem con fronting the 
client. A person’s life destiny may also be determined by Ifa. In accordance 
with this beliefd, there is also the belief that Orisha (deity/divinity) are 
functional deities having to do with super human powers that are in some


--- PAGE 29 ---
sense available to man. The concept of divine is also closely associated with 
the natural environment as well as with human relationships. Divination of 
what the Orisha wants can be thought of as ways of conceiving and coming 
to terms with such practical concerns as weather, disease, fertility, kinship 
and government. Also the concept of the divine is closely associated with the 
natural environment and with human relationships57.
Therefore, the divine, and the natural environment together with the 
human relationships kindred with them are a continuum for consideration in 
this wise. This was the situation at the advent of foreign religions, Islam and 
Chriustianity. Truly, it has been recognized by several observers that African 
thought is basically man-centred such that to understand African concept of 
divinity/deity, we have to look at such concept from the human point of 
view, that is, in terms of human needs.53
As already mentioned, the basic purpose of Ifa (oracle) is to determine 
the correct sacrifice necessary to secure favourable resolution of the problem 
confront ting the client. Whenever a deity wants a particular sacrifice to be 
performed, the message is sent through Ifa. A person’s life destiny may also 
be determined by means of Ifa.
METHOD: One method employed, in brief, is for the Babalawo to transfer 
quickly sixteen palm nuts from one hand to the other. If one nut is left 
behind a double mark is made in the powdery substance placed on the 
divining tray. If two are left a single mark is made. If none is left or more 
than two, the throw does not count, and, as a result, the process is repeated 
eight times, with the result of two series of four marks each, such as:
I II
II II
I I


--- PAGE 30 ---
I II
There are sixteen primary figures called odu and there are 256 of them 
making for a variety of possibilities from which the one most exact and 
related to the client’s problem is chosen. The upshot of it all is that the 
system  of divination is called Ifa; and sometimes this name is also used for 
the deity. The priests of Orunmila are the practitioners of divination. They 
have the title of “Babalawo” – “father of mysteries”
“The B abalawo constitutes a focal point
in the traditional Yoruba religion;
channeling sacrifices and worshipers
into different cults (various worships
of different gods)…………………….
He heps his clients deal with the wide
Range of personalized and impersonal
Forces in which the Yorubas believe, 
And to achieve the individual destinies
Assigned to them at birth”54.
In the process, it needs be affirmed that there are sixteen primary figures 
called Odu, representing the combination’s possible with four marks. Each 
figure may be combined with the same figure or any of the others to make a 
total of 256 possibilities. For each of those there are number of verses, 
which  also  may  be  known  as  Odu.  They  usually  describe  a  problem 
involving  some  mythological  figure,  a  sacrifices  that  was  made,  the 
outcome, and the application. A competent Babalawo should know several 
verses for each  of the 256 Odu. Thus, when  a particular  Odu (primary 
figure) has resulted from the process of divination, the diviner will recite the 
verses until the client selects one that appears to suit the problem. The verses


--- PAGE 31 ---
associated  with  the  256  Odu  have  been  called  the  Yoruba  “unwritten 
scripture”. Certainly they provide considerable information regarding the 
deities and their activities, much of it ancient, ‘medium’ is another form of 
divination; an equivalent of ifa oracle. It refers to one who communicates 
divine revelation55. He is a person who said to be capable of communicating 
with the spirits of the death56. or a person through whom supposed messages 
from the world of spirits are received and sent57.*
FOOT NOTES
1. The World Book Dictionary (1974), vol I, pp200;478
2. Ko  r’an  21:3  describes  this  formation  of  the  universe  fourteen 
centuries ago.
3. Newell S. Booth, Jr (1977), African Religions: A symposium Lagos: 
NOK Pub Ltd p 162
4. Ibid, p160   5 Ibid.   6. Ibid, 161
7. Mohammed Amin (1976), West Africa, 28 October 1996 p1679; 1680 
on Islam and the Creation.
8. Tell, No 44, Nov. 1, 1999,  p10.
9. Ibid.
10. Ralph Waldo Emerson, World Book Dictionary (1974) vol 1, p713
11. R.P. Cuzzort (1969), Humanity and Modern Sociological Thought, 
p29
12. Bolaji Idowu (1973), African Traditional Religion, p56
13. Roland Robertson (1969), Sociology of Relgion; p42.
14. Ibid. 15,  Ibid.   16. Ibid


--- PAGE 32 ---
17. Allen G. White (1952), Education; The Allen G. White Publications, 
p20
18. Genesis 2: 9 - 17
19. 1 Corinthians 11:7
20      Hebrews 2:7
21. Ibid (1952), p20
22.Job 37:16
23.2 Corinthians 4:6
24.Ibid, (1952), p22
25.Ibid
26.Newell S. Booth Jnr, Ibid, p159
27.Ibid,  p161  28  Ibid
29.Ibid,  30,  Ibid.  31  Ibid, p163
32.     Ibid
33.The World Book Dictionary (1974) vol I, Ibid, p513.
34. Ibid.   35 Ibid   36  Ibid.
37. Ibid, p164.  38 Ibid  36  Ibid.
40      Ibid  411 Ibid, pp 168 – 167.
42. Wooley,  Sir  Leonard  (1963),  History  of  Mankind,  Cultural  and 
Scientific Develoment, London: George Allen & Unwin Ltd, p714.
43. The place where traditional believers worship.
44. Ibid, p721
45. In John S. Mbiti, Ibid, p200
46. The world Book Dct (1974) vol I, 1003
47. Ibid, p199.


--- PAGE 33 ---
48. Plekhanor  G.  (1982),  On  the  so-called  Religious  Exporation  in 
Russian, in Social Aciences in China vol I, No 2, 1982, p176.]
49. Lexicon Webster Dictiobnary vo I, 1976, p665.
50. The World Book Dictionary vol II, p446.
51. John L. Mc Kenzie, S.J. (1975) Dictionary of the Bilbe, Geoffrey 
Chapman Pub, p628
52. Op ut, p175. 53 Ibid
54. Ibid, p168 55 op ut, p694
56. Lexicon Webster Dictionary, Ibid p593
57. World Book Dictionary vol II, Ibid, p1281.


--- PAGE 34 ---
CHAPTER 2
MYSTICAL  POWERS  AS  MECHANICS  OF  SOCIAL  CONTROL, 
SOCIAL ORDER IN OLD AND NEW OFFA
Mechanics, in the sense of social control and social order, refers to the 
technique  or  means  by  which  peace  and  stable  government,  in  old  as 
opposed  to  modern  Offa,  are  achieved.  Our  attempt  here  is  at  systems 
approach to understanding the solution of the problem of peace, order and 
security  in  society.  Facts  can  be  established  that  powers  of  African 
voodooisms; working together as parts of socio-political arrangement1 do 
function  to  produce  social  control  and  social  order  towards  peace  and 
stability for the working system of the society, in regular and predictable 
manner. Belief generally is that “Everything in the universe is produced and 
can be explained by mechanical or material forces”2. Henceforth, certain 
mystical  forces  propping  old  Offa  social  structure  by  which  certain 
particular  effects  were  produced  for  the  society’s  goal-attainment, 
adaptation; integration and pattern-maintenance are to be accomplished in a 
conscious or an unconscious mental process which motivates emotional and 
behavioural  responses.  They  are  being  used  to  advantage.  They  are 
necessary in most societies and due for consideration here. 
Many authorities have affirmed that African societies are authoritarian 
societies; Among the agents of social control that can bring about social 
order, not the least are those which instill fear, order and discipline in the 
people and thereby inculcate customs, good manners and good behaviours in 
the  youth  and  all  other  members  of  the  society,  by  employing  the


--- PAGE 35 ---
gerontocratic wisdom of fear, emphasizing the Biblical saying of “spare the 
rod and spoil the child”. Such agents of social control, social order constitute 
an endless illumination, intellectual, enlightenment) in which all forms of 
misdemeanor in the society dissolve, sometimes as if they had occurred by 
sheer ignorance but many a time voodooists invoke them deliberately or one 
way or the other get them extirpated outright for peace, order and stability to 
reign  supreme  in  the  society,  by  the  fears  of  their  power  and  force, 
expressive  in  every  way  of  man’s  existence.  For  discussion  in  their 
descending  order  of  precedence,  we  may  mention  ‘aje’  (witchcraft), 
‘Shango’, (good of thunder), ‘Ogun’ (good of iron), ‘Epe’ (curse), ‘Egungun’ 
(masquerade), ‘ogboni’ (secret cult) and ‘Oro’ (secret cult) to enable us to 
see  how  much  wisdom of authoritarianism is  enshrined in each  for  the 
maintenance of social control, and socialorder, for peace and stability  in the 
people’s social set to gain footh ok especially before the whitemen came 
with  their  philosophy  of  peace  maietenance  by  legal  system  of  theirs. 
Though when they came many new arts and secerices  had been added to the 
people’s  stock  of  knowledge  of  socio-political  organization  and 
governmental system ,the quest for the timeless and unversal use of the 
above  mentored  mechanics  of  social  control  is  still  urgrig  the  thirsty 
enquirers on to use some of these to decide case of theft, false accusation, 
disbates between adversaries, hollow pretencios by evil machinations, and 
expose the real evil doer(s) instantly with instants justice. As a corollary at 
the instance of the newly introduced politico-legal system, the traditional 
world of the people was, and has since been, engulfed in a mighty catalyst of 
the whitemen’s civilization which well-night wiped out the channels of the 
people’s autochthonous culture and civilization, with the result that there are 
today  speculative  booms,  political  bandwagons,  fashion’  cycles  and


--- PAGE 36 ---
irreligious revivals which today adversely affect the existing mechanics of 
social control, and social other. This is the situation that impels, through the 
understanding of particular social pheneomenon, as well as the manifold of 
sense of perception; the rules of “productive imagination” in the process of 
realizing the knowledge or experience of these agents of social control for 
use:
THE REASON OF THE EFFECT OF SOCIAL CHANGE ON AFRICAN 
CUSTOMS AND TRADITIONS
As a rule in the society, younger people will rarely attempt to use 
mystical power against older members of their community, unless it is in 
taking counter measures. The older a person is, the higher his social status 
and the more he is thought or expected to have a personal mystical power for 
use,  either  in himself  or through  possession of the  necessary  objects  in 
which it may have been stored. With respect to witchcraft machinations, 
Barbara  Ward  (1986)  3 has  rightly  observed that economic  factors  have 
exacerbated family and lineage tension’s and witchcraft accusation’s have 
been on the increase with the necessary setting up of new cults to combat 
witchcraft machination’s in African societies. This is because certain effects 
follow  whenever  and  wherever  a  money  economy  is  substituted  for  a 
subsistence  economy.  Thus,  owing  to  impersonal  influence  of  modern 
economic conditions, the close interdependence of the members of a family 
breaks up e.g. when any one member has had the opportunity of meeting his 
own needs by producing  something for the home or world market,  e.g. 
cocoa, cotton, groundnuts, palm produce, etc. Therefore, as it is usually the 
younger generation who are alive to the new opportunities they become 
independent  of  their  elders,  such  opportunities  together  with


--- PAGE 37 ---
Christian/Islamic  teachings  and  school  education  eventually  condemn 
beliefs in ancestral spirits and in magic as well as practices which express 
these beliefs. They jointly aim at the eradication of supernatural beliefs. 
They also condemn such practices as polygamy (and cling onto monogamy) 
and the initiation school as well as all forms of marriage payment.
Today, in Offa, all forms of scatrices on cheeks are being phased out 
gradually by discontinuing such cicatrisation. For instance in the 1960’s high 
marriage  payments  were  brought  down  considerably.  Consequently,  the 
Offaman of modern development in family life is confronted with two main 
social configuarations – that of his traditional community where the older 
generation  still  form  the  community  based  on  the  ties  of  kinship  and 
marriage, but from which most of the young men are actually absent for 
much of their time, in search of golden fleece in the urban towns and cities, 
or overseas, where all have had the experience of the new and different 
urban world whose values they bring back home. At any point in time, in the 
town, where majority of the population consists of men detached from their 
own homes and kindred, there is such continuous coming in and going out of 
it that it is difficult to form a community of any particular kind, European or 
African.14
THE  WORKING  SYSTEM  OF  TRADITIONAL  MECHANICS  OF 
SOCIAL CONTROL, SOCIAL ORDER, WITCHCRAFT.
Witchcraft, by definition; is the possession of a quality which enables 
or drives its possessor to injure his fellows by merely wanting to5. Primitive 
Govt,  London:  The  scholar  Press,  p134).  Witchcraft,  the  world  over,  is 
associated with fear, horror, carnage and the specter of witches sucking


--- PAGE 38 ---
blood and killing people. Associated with this is Dr. Freedman’s belief that 
the whole universe must be interpreted as tied in its detailed working to the 
lives of human persons so that for the ordinary man in the street, not so 
endowed  himself,  the  practical  problem  is  to  study  his  fellowmen  and 
discover whom among them he ought to avoid or follow.6 So that such 
universe  is   man-centered  in  the  sense  that  it  must  be  interpreted  by 
reference to humans. In discussing idea about Yoruba concept of witchcraft 
belief, we may insist on the concentration of curiosity on the singularity of 
an event. For example, if an old and rotten ‘granary’ or ‘barn’ (‘a ba’ or 
‘ahere’) falls down and kills someone sitting in it or under its shadow, the 
event  is ascribed to witchcraft. Indeed, Offa-Yoruba witchcraft belief  in 
vogue is not like what obtains in some societies in Nigeria where the power 
of  witchcraft  still  reigns  supreme  like  Amaigbo7 called  “The  forest  of 
thousand witches”, because the dense forested area has not been visited by 
modern  civilization;  where  every  native-born  child  is  genetically 
programmed into the powers of witchcraft, in the sense that the people in the 
area  have  a  natural  blend  into  witchcraft,  having  been  born  into  it. 
Paradoxically in Offa-Yoruba town where so appearing to them in outlook as 
such modern Offaman in this scientific age – and for other various reasons 
too has not given credence to the existence of witches an d the science of 
witchraft,  because  the  practice  of  witchery  is  dismissed  as  a  gross 
misrepresentation among the natives who have no hope of finding a way out 
of the woods of their primitive chains of bondage; yet, of course, there are 
Offaman and women whose belief in witchery persists with them in that 
witchraft belief dominates the understanding of the society at large’ that 
every human being is born with special powers to do certain  things or 
perform anything of feat at all that their imagination can convey to them,


--- PAGE 39 ---
either during special occasions or in times of emergency. In the main; they 
believe that there are some individuals who are more successful in dealing 
with natural forces that others; that it is only marked individuals, and not all 
humans, who are significant in this respect; that such marked individuals 
gradually draw to themselves lesser men and women in their wake, whether 
their endowment is for good or evil fortune, until when he comes into the 
limelight and pulls crowd.
So that even though Offa people freely admit that it is in the nature of 
old and rotten granaries to collapse as well as believe that if a person sits for 
several hours under its shadow day after day, he may one day be crushed 
when it falls; yet the general rule of believing in witchcraft havoc is obvious 
but  not  an  interesting  field  for  them  for  speculation.  Nevertheless,  in 
circumstances such as this, the question that interests them is the emergence 
of a unique event that cues out of t that interests them is the emergence of a 
unique event that comes out of happen stances. For instance, they would 
want to know or find out why there were many hours when no one was 
sitting under that granary when it might have collapsed harmlessly, killing 
no one but did not fall them; why there were many hours when n other 
people were sedated by it who might have been victims when it fell but who 
happened not to be there inquisitive questions, the fascinating problem (or 
question) is: why did it fall when it did, just when the particular Mr. so – and 
– so was sitting in it and no one else was sitting there; thereby raising the 
question’s as to why did it have to happen to him at that particular time of 
his sitting in it? What can he do to prevent such misfortune in future? Is it 
anyone’s fault – as a cause? Especially when technical fault’s information 
has  been  exhausted”.  And  curiosity  instead  tends  to  focus  on  the


--- PAGE 40 ---
involvement of a particular person within the universe, leading to further 
questions as follows, why me? Why today and not any other day? What can 
be done about it?.
Indeed  in  Offa,  as  in  elsewhere  in  Nigeria;  there  are  many 
developments in societies which have their origin buried in the traditional 
history and systems of beliefs which many tend to see today as purely rigid 
and sacrosanct which must be strictly observed and kept intact. One of such 
is the respect, reverence and fear of elders and what come out of their mouth 
and theiur actions. Hence, “the words of our elders are words of wisdom”. 
Naturally the lkive issue in Offa today is how to organize other people 
especially oneself in relation to them; how to control the turbulent youth, 
how to soothe disgruntled neighbours, how to gain one’s rights, how to 
prevent or side – step usurpation of authority or how to justify the act of 
someone. In consequence of how to organize other people and one’s relation 
to them and the related social problems, as mentioned above, to serve these 
practical  social  ends,  all  kinds  of  beliefs  in  the  omniscience  and 
omnipotence of the environment are called into play. This is because when 
social life  in a  particular  community  has  settled  down  into any  sort of 
constant form, social problems tend to crop up in the same areas of tension 
or strife. So, as part of the machinery for resolving them, these beliefs about 
automatic  punishments,  destiny,  ghostly  vengeance  and  witchcraft 
crystallized  into  the  established  institutions  of  coercion.  Indeed,  in  the 
course  of  social  evolution,  institutions  proliferate  in  the  society  and 
specilize8 in various aspects of way of people’s life.


--- PAGE 41 ---
WITCHCRAFT  AS  MECHANICS  OF  SOCIAL  CONTROL,  SOCIAL 
ORDER
Back to witchcraft belief, there are some who believe that witches 
(aje)  are  not limited  to  women,  though  formerly  only  old  women  were 
witches, often referred to as malignant old women, professing, or noted to 
have, magical power or the power of the agency by which social – personal 
events  are  determined.  Their  rather  weird  pattern  of  answer  during 
altercation or their type of person is distinguished by their odd, fantastic, 
queer looking and wrinkled face. They always do something mysteriously or 
frighteningly strange, something that seems not to be of this world or due to 
something  above  or  beyond  nature,  and  something  that  suggests  the 
frightening effect that is unnatural. Usually, their all night weird cries come 
from the jungle with tales of uncanny feeling that their eyes are always 
peering (=peeping) from darkness. Nowadays, however, all are agreed that 
today the witches include younger as well as older persons of opposite 
sexes; that though men do not actually have the power of witchcraft, the 
husbands of witches (called Osho in Yoruba) are said to be members of the 
witchcraft “society” while some of these (men) play their role in such a 
“society”  as  butchers  (olobe  in  Yoruba).  In  a  BBC  Network  Africa 
programme9,  a  man,  Malikanga,  of  West  African  Republic,  accused  of 
witchcraft activities and arraigned in court where he confessed his nefarious 
scheme stated how he did his action by placing smoked meat – flesh and 
bones – of the killed victims of his on market together with the meat of other 
animals  like  monkeys,  etc.  similar  occurrences  are  obtainable  in  some 
Nigerian markets. Some of these  Osho act as intermediaries between the


--- PAGE 42 ---
person who is in the grip of the witches and between the witches themselves, 
as  some  of  these  either  act  as  intermediaries  or  advisers  or  healers 
(medicinemen or Babalawos). They help the  aje (witchcraft victim (s) by 
seeking to find out what the witches would want or demand for the release 
of the victims.
Ordinarily one avoids speaking about the witch because it is thought 
that witches overhear even private discussion’s about them and thus may be 
angered.
As we have noted ‘the witches’ cannot be recognized either by their 
physical characteristics, as described above, or by their overt behaviour, as 
mentioned  in  the  previous  pages.  As  a  corollary  most  people  cannot 
assuredly tell who the witches are, but some believe that a close observer 
can detect them by the way they speak and by their attitudes towards others. 
We may cite the following examples to support: First, a young woman who 
defies her elders; and, secondly, a woman who had had about eight children 
but at long last had only three or none left. In the latter case, the woman is 
often suspected of using her children fore contribution to the feasts where 
witches jointly eat one another’s children. Another identification sign is that 
concerning a woman’s after return trip from the nocturnal meeting of the 
witches and some or anyone becomes ill. Most common today is the Church 
system of detecting witches, after traditional atigari system had given way to 
it. Officers in Christian churches maintain that they can recognize witches 
through the power given to them by God.
Thus, judging by the level of peace, social stability and social security 
that characterized the country in pre-colonial days, before the British came


--- PAGE 43 ---
to Nigeria; one may elucidate the justification of the usefulness of witchcraft 
as mechanics of social control, social order with the following observations: 
that witchcraft is not evil all of the time. Unlike in Amaigbo in Igboland, 
Offa people do not know witchcraft as the mother and cradle of creation 
neither can one be categorically sure that they do not believe that witches’ 
power stems from evil. What is sure is that ordinary people believe that 
witches have a common bond  that binds them together such that it instills in 
them the confidence  that if we all know  the  same thing, you can’t  tell 
anybody what he already knows. We will respect each other such that while 
we live happily together, we individually prepare our defenses well. Indeed 
there lies the secret of harmony. When you all know the same thing and are 
not afraid of each other, then peace and harmony will reign, so says Dr. 
Okdo (1995) 10. The lack of authenticity of the witchcraft believers’ no-evil 
claim aside, the fear the witch-caused trouble has instilled into the public at 
large and individuals in particular that it is not unrelated to one of the most 
important areas of the witches’ power. Their power is well vested in the 
psycho-herbal  healing which is a combination of psychic  (spiritual) and 
traditional (i.e. herbal) healing.
Another is that witches have the ability to see intestines, liver and 
other internal organs of human beings as well as foetus in the uteruses of 
their mothers. They can make women temporarily infertile or permanently 
barren, cause over-due pregnancy as well as its miscarriage, make child 
delivery  difficult,  induce  frightening  dreams  and  sleeplessness,  cause  a 
person to dry up (i.e. lose weight) or to have headaches, stomach aches or 
other  illness,  cause  blindness,  make  one  lose  job  or  reduce  him  to 
kobolessness, bring madness to their victims, suck human blood or kill the


--- PAGE 44 ---
victim(s) by other means and frustrate any type of human effort. As a matter 
of fact it is not untrue that some seek witches’ assistance in committing 
crimes such as theft, etc. It is equally true that for fear of antagonizing the 
witches by their acts of misdemeanour; there is the fear of the trouble it 
takes to seek the power to fight back’ their enemies, even if the enemies are 
their kith and kin; including sons, daughters, brothers, sisters, co-wives and 
other relatives, except their fathers and mothers, and the awareness of the 
witches having the ability of impersonating a friend or a relative when doing 
harm as well as the belief that their power can also be used to make one 
prosperous or popular as well as to cure illness or to insure a long life, the 
entire community believes that as far as the quality of the witches’ power of 
life and death is concerned, the period of gerontocracy – when elders of the 
community ruled the state – i.e. during the period we might refer to as the 
period  of  minimal  government  of  the  traditional  African  societies  – 
aggressive purposes as well as outrageous acts of the individuals inimical to 
the social control and social order in the state were kept at bay or reduced to 
the barest minimum.
Of course the checks and balances operating in this system involve the 
agreed fact that witches get their power from God rather than from the 
Orisha (the gods). A story says that in the past, evil people tried to spoil the 
world when certain women called upon God to give them power to fight the 
villains (the wicked) with the power given them, they fought and won the 
battle but they did not return the power to God again; since that time this 
power is being passed from one generation to the next, such that while it is 
believed by some that witches are as powerful as the Orisha; tahre are those 
who hold opposite view. There are many others who emphatically say that


--- PAGE 45 ---
“Orisha must be more powerful than the witches otherwise Shango (god of 
thunder) would not be able to kill them”11. Thereby one can assuredly say 
that  Orisha hate  the  witches  and  kill  them  and,  therefore,  conclude  by 
insisting that witches themselves are under the control of the  Orisha (the 
gods) as they want. Practically therefore they are responsible to the Orisha 
(the gods).
Also there are some who have countervailing power against witchcraft 
machination’s and those supernatural, spiritual or magic power can compel 
the witches to submission and to surrender. It is also true that as far as the 
information of my present assertion goes, there is certainly a real witchcraft 
composed mostly of elderly women with male leaders. It is very widespread, 
highly secret and much feared by the people and the witches alike. Here we 
may cite the coming of the Atinga witch hunters from Ghana to various 
towns of Nigeria, including Igbajo which was visited early 1951.
The  member  of  Atinga  cult  in  Southwestern  Nigeria  (i.e.  in 
Yorubaland) never visited a settlement unless invited to do so by the chief 
and people or, by the sons the soil as happened at Igbajo, early 1951. at the 
end of secret preparation of anti-witchcraft medicine a kind of lotion), the 
Atinga possessed devotees claimed to have the power of recognizing witches 
and  opf  discovering  where  sorcerers  and  sorceresses  kept  their  harmful 
objects. Wiches were quite often pointed out when detected and were asked 
to  confess  their  sins.  Right  away,  confession  cleansed  a  woman  of  her 
witchcraft while the adamant ones who refused to confess were tested for 
witchcraft.


--- PAGE 46 ---
According to my eye-witness account I may say that of interest was 
the  attitude  of  the  wealthy  and  influential  men  who  willingly  or  were 
desirous of inviting the Atinga devotees to their towns and not minding to 
pay their expenses while they were in residence, e.g. happened at Igbajo a 
town of about 20km from Ikirun or 40km from Oshogbo. The sponsors did 
not prevent Atinga attacks on their relatives who are witches, even if they be 
their mothers12.
SHANGO – THE GOD OF THUNDER AND LIGHTNING
As gleaned from it, we have drawn extensively upon the story of 
Shango told by Newell S. Booth Jr. (1977), subsumed in the “God and the 
Gods in West Africa” in “African Religions: A symposium” (1977) 13. The 
story goes on to say that a “semi-independent deity, with his own associates, 
is the one who manifests himself in thunder and lightning”. Indeed, among 
the Yoruba he is generally known as Shango who is said to have been an 
ancient  king  of  Oyo  and  the  grandson  of  Oduduwa.  According  to  one 
account14  he was a violent and cruel king who was so hated bvy his subjects 
that he finally went out into the forest and hang himself. In contradistinction 
from  this  statement,  however,  when  someone  said  that  he  had  hanged 
himself,  Shango  became  very  angry  and  sent  lightning  from  heaven  to 
destroy the one who had insulted him. Another account, the official one, told 
by his priests, Shango really ascended into heaven. That he was falsely 
accused of hanging himself. Nevertheless, in either case, it is important to 
refer to ‘Shango as “The king who did not hang himself”’ in order to avoid 
his wrath Oba Koso15. Observingly, in another sense, it appears that Shango 
has taken over, to some extent, the characteristics and functions of a more 
ancient “thunder god”, “Jakuta” “the one who hurls stone”. With regard to


--- PAGE 47 ---
this, some have suggested that “Jakuta was an early “Supreme God”; but 
that, unlike Shango, he does not seem to have ever been a human being. “He 
is an expression of the wrath of God against various forms of immorality, 
such  as  lying  and  adultery.  This  same  concern  has  indeed  come  to  be 
associated with the fugure of Shango in Yorubaland and the ewe land.
Thus,  it  is  not  surprising  that  thunder  is  seen  by  the  Yoruba  as 
manifestation of the divine wrath as this aspect of Shango’s life is noted for 
its violent storms, especially in Yorubaland in fact considered to be “the 
second  region  in  the  world  for  lightning  frequency,  consisting  of  “The 
resounding booms, the deafening sound of the thunder claps; the blinding, 
dazzling, criss-crossing; end to end flashes of the lightining” all of which 
contribute to and affirm the sense of divine presence in the storm; such that 
the following song is reported as addressed to Shango:
O Shango, thou art the master!
Thou takest in thy hand the fiery stones, 
To punish the guilty!
To satisfy thy anger!
Everything they (the stones) strike is destroyed,
The fire eats up the forest,
The trees are broken down,
And all things living are slain:


--- PAGE 48 ---
(Af. Religions, Ibid, p172). Shango has followers and priests. The priests of 
Shango have responsibility for the burial of anyone killed by lightning. They 
may  also  inspect  proprerty  struck  by  lightining  in  order  to  fuind  the 
thunderbolt  (Edun  Aara  in  Yoruba).  Shango’s  symbol  is  the  double  axe 
which are his representations rising above his head, a common phenomenon 
among the Yoruba practitioners of Shango. As regards political sense, it may 
be true to say tat Shango is the great national divinity of the Yoruba in 
general,  although  not  in  the  ultimate  religious  sense.  For  he  is  rather 
nationalistic, almost imperialistic, god who is given a great deal of attention. 
The Aalafin (king) of Oyo who claims to be a descendant of Shango is 
traditionally crowned in his (Shango’s) shrine. In married life, Shango is 
associated with a spouse. Her name is Oya, the Niger River goddess as well 
as the strong, damaging wind that brings no rain. She is fierce, wears a beard 
and is supposed to be terrible to look at, although she can also be attractive 
and kind.
Having said thus about Shango, it follows that throughout Yorubaland, 
men’s  fascination  found its  greatest  satisfaction in  the prevailing  peace, 
order and stability in the society in which they lived before the Europeans 
arrived Africa. Truly speaking, since the beginning of time man has always 
demonstrated hatred towards his fellow man and his natural tendencies for 
greed through unnecessary intra-mural feuds (i.e. infighting) which need be 
put  in  check  by  interventionists.  Surprisingly  enough,  as  African  man 
continues in battling with the untoward circumstances surrounding him, one 
is bound to agree with one area of thinking, on the part of the advocates of 
inward looking theory, that of the two stories ever told of Shango, the one 
which is of less legendarily miraculous but is of historical importance is to


--- PAGE 49 ---
the effect that Shango was the first king of Oyo after Oranmiyan and Ajaka 
(Shango’s elderly brother) who were his immediate predecessors when the 
latters (i.e. Ajaka’s) seat of government was at Oko – this is because after 
establishing the settlement on the ‘slippery place’, i.e, the ground where 
Oranmiyan’s horse stumbled only to be called simply as Oyo in Yoruba 
Oranmiyan later on relinquished his domain to his elder son (being older 
than Shango) to rule as his regent and successor, after he had returned to Ile-
Ife, his original homeland where he died and was buried there at Ile-Ife. 
Ajaka ruled Oyo-Oko as Alaafin until he (Ajaka) eventually ceded the throne 
to his more vigorous junior brother, Shango. That was before he died and 
became defied as god of thunder.
Thus, as narrated above, Shango was an historical figure; a legendary 
king of Oyo at first, wsho later on became a god. This divinity (or, god) of 
thunder and lightining is thought of as powerful, crafty and ruthless, and is 
so persistently feared as such by many people. An Ifa diviner said that 
Shango is so powerful that he is chained by  God to prevent  him from 
coming down to use his full power. Shango, he continued, had been initiated 
into the Ifa cult by Orunmila so he respects Babalawo’s16 houses. In the 
opinion of an Ogun priest Shango does not act unless he is provoked; but 
once moved to anger there is no hope for the one who annoyed or criticized 
him. With the help of Oya, his wife, Shango uses thunder-stones to destroy 
animals, houses, and people. Through the use of traditional medicine and 
incantations,  Shango  whorshippers  call  on  him  to  avenge  wrongs.  One 
procedure for using Shango to attack enemies involves rubbing on  Ibeji 
figure (doll carved in the image of twins) with hot peper and other things 
which Shango and Ibeji (twins) must not eat. When Shango strikes down a


--- PAGE 50 ---
wrong-doer, the man’s relatives will ask Shango followers to come to the 
house that has been damaged – perhaps the victim himself has been killed –
m for a feast and offering of purificatory sacrifices. After this, the Shangoists 
will pull the thunder-stone that caused the damage out of the ground where it 
had struck and gt embedded therein. For is believed that if the thunder-stone 
is not found and dug out, everyone in the house will die rubbishing the 
house to grass-growths i.e., grass will grow where the house once stood. All, 
or nearly all, of the property found in a house thereby struck by lightining 
may be confiscated by Shango worshippers. Conversely, Shango devotees 
may also appeal to the god of thunder and lightining (Shango) for protection 
against evil spirits for children and for health and wealth 7. 
Among oriki (praise-names5) giving salute to Shango, one hears the 
frightening epithets of him (Shango) as “Enia ti a bu lehin t’o si mo” – “A 
man who gets to know who has spoken ill of him behind his back” “Enia ti a 
bu lehin t’o si gbo” – “A man who hears all that is said of him behind his 
back” “A bi eti lu ka ‘ra bi ajere” – “He who has ears all over his body like 
holes in a colander”. “Ma bu u, ma sa a, ma s’oro re lehin” – “Don’t abuse 
him, don’t hack him, don’t backbite him” (Babalola, S.A., Ijala songs, p222 
– 223) “Atunwon-ka nibi won-gbe-ndana  iro”  – One who scatters them 
where they are conspiring”. Ololo afi-enu ika- lole” “One who punishes the 
wicked by causing them to rub their mouths on the ground”. “Ati lojo ati 
lerun ko si eni ti Shango o le pa” – “Both in the rainy season and in the dry 
season,  there  is  no  one  who  cannoit  be  killed  by  Shango”18.  (Simson, 
George, Ibid, p22).


--- PAGE 51 ---
OGUN – THE GOD OF IRON
One deaity who is not a “diuvine mediator” as “are Orunmila and 
Eshu, but shows something of their universal quality, is Ogun”. He is the 
god of iron and of those whose occupations are related to the use of iron: 
hunters, farmers, warriors, smiths and, in modern situation; chaufferurs and 
mechanis19. (op ut, p170). It is said that “Ogun himself is not iron but that 
property of iron which giuves it the power to cut”. Also he is said to be the 
pioneer  god  who  goes  before  others  to  clear  the  way  –  “Ogun  is  the 
possessor of two machetes with one he prepares the farm and with the other 
he clears the road 20”. Offerings must be made to him in connection with any 
sacrifice because he is responsible for the knife that is used. Namely, for 
similar reasons, apparently, he is associated with circumcision and other 
operations and because of his relationship to machinery; Ogun is one god 
who seems to be more than holding his own in modern society. In practice, 
Ogun is also associated with justice; oaths are taken in his name over pieces 
of iron; anyone breaking such an oath must expect to be hurt or killed by 
iron in some form. In general, Ogun is a rather fierce and unbending deity, 
viz:
“Where does one meet him?
One meets him in the place of battle
One meets him in the place where torrents of blood
Fills with longing as a cup of water does the thirst”.


--- PAGE 52 ---
Ogun is sometimes said to be the eldest son of Oduduwa. In concretizing 
this saying, it goes without mincing words that Ogun was originally a human 
being. It was after his death that he was deified and became the god of iron. 
When it was said that Ogun is sometimes the eldest son of Oduduwa, to 
with, he was the first-born son of Oduduwa, the progenitor of the Yoruba or 
one of Oduduwa’s children. “When Ogun arrived on earth from heaven, one 
of the first places he visited was Ara where he found the peole engaged in 
the act of offering a dig in sacrifice to ‘Olodumare’, ‘the Almighty; Ogun 
joined in the ceremony; (he) waited till it was concluded and then went his 
way”22. In a very definite conviction; Ogun has been described as a very 
great hunter and warrior, brave and victorious in war, much spoil. He was 
notorious for his hot temper, which made him often quarrelsome with other 
people23. Having been so described as a strong man of great prowess and 
invicibility, he was later on described as a native of Apa near Shaki from 
where one day he went to Ile-Ife in his capacity as Chief Alapa, in order to 
defend his kith and kin against an oppressive uncle called Obatala. Prior to 
one of his feats, at Ile-Ife, he was shut out at the town – gate by Obatala. But 
meanwhile,  Oranmiyan  was  engaged  in  single  combat  with  the  wicked 
Obatala. Inside the town and fortunately Oranmiyan succeeded in killing 
Obatala and threw the town-gate open to Ogun who thus came into Ile-Ife. 
During his few months’ stay at Ile-Ife, Ogun decided to go and live in 
solitude on a hilltop near the town of Ire, alternatively called ‘Ilu Ina’ ‘The 
town of fire’, because the inhabitants worship fire as a god.
One day, as he was strolling through the town, Ogun felt thirsty and 
desired to drink palm-wine. But  to his surprise none of the people to whom 
he spoke uttered a word in anwer. He did not know that the traditional taboo


--- PAGE 53 ---
associated  with  a  festival  had  enjoined  (placed)  absolute  silence  on  all 
inhabitants of the town on that day. In annoyance, Ogun slaughtered as many 
of the people as they refused to speak to him in answer to his request for 
information about how he might obtain some palm-wine to drink. On the 
following  day  several  people  informed  Ogun  that  a  man  called  Aparo 
Degbeaha had been responsible for the failure of the inhabitants of Ilu Ina 
(i.e.  the  town  of  fire)  to  have  ready  some  palm-wine  for  Ogun  at  the 
previous day’s festival. The man, Aparo Degbeaha, the informants alleged, 
had misled the people by assuring them that Ogun would not come to the 
festival ceremony. On hearing this, Ogun became furious and at once went 
out to search of the alleged culprit, Aparo degbeaha, intending to kill him as 
soon as he could get hold of him. When Aparo Degbeaha saw Ogun coming 
took flight and turned himself into bird which flew to the top of a palm-tree 
nearby. Ogun in turn ordered his followers to uproot the palm tree after he 
had applied a magical spell to prevent the bird, Aparo, from being able to fly 
away. When the palm-tree had fallen down Ogun ordered his men to strip off 
all its branches and capture Aparo. The punishment thereupon meted out to 
Aparo was that hot embers were placed on the bird’s head as a result of 
which his head (Aparo’s head) became bald. Throughout the ordeal however, 
Aparo kept absolutely still and mute as he suffered the torture. But just 
before Aparo died,, he said,” ‘It is not uncommon for a person to pass a 
whole day by a fire side’”24…………. Before returning to his residence that 
day Ogun threatened that he would come to the town again the following 
day; and that if the people of Ilu Ina (i.e. Ire) could not provide him with 
palm-wine to drink, he (Ogun) would massacre them all.


--- PAGE 54 ---
Hence, human beings – hunters, warriors and blacksmiths – who had 
received the secret of iron from Ogun did not forget him as “Ogun Onire” – 
meaning “Ogun the owner of the town of Ire”25. Whether it be true or not 
that he haiuled from Ire or Shaki; 26 Ogun is the Orisha (god) of iron and of 
the things made of iron and hence of war27. In other words Ogun is the 
Orisha of war, of hunt, and of all pursuits in which iron or steel is used. He is 
held to be mischievous, powerful and crfuel. Idowu says that in pranks 
(tricks)  and  mischief-making,  “Ogun  is  next  to  Eshu”  but  that  justice, 
fairplay, and rectitude rather than evil are associated with him. Some men till 
today make covenants and take oaths in the name of Ogun by washing a 
knife or any piece of iron in water containing palm leaves and drinking the 
water from itoo (a type of calabash); putting a gun and cutlass on Ogun’s 
shrine, pouring water into the barrel of the gun and asking those taking oath 
to eat kolanuts and drink the water; kissing something made of iron and 
asking Ogun to witness the oath; or when  a person is suspected of a crime 
against  somebody,  e.g.,  a  relative,  taking  white  and  brown  kolanuts  to 
Ogun’s shrine and eating the kolanuts and calling on Ogun to punish the 
offender by making him ill or killing him, perhaps by snake bite or as a 
result of contact with something made of iron, e.g. by getting a wound from 
stepping on a nail; by injuring himself with a knife or cutlass; or by being 
accidentally shot by hunter. An aggrieved person may take one accused of 
theft to Ogun’s shrine to clear himself by calling on Ogun to punish him if 
he has lied. Instabces of occurrences of this abound. To mention but one, a 
muslim diviner who still worship Ogun because he is a hunter told of the 
following incident:


--- PAGE 55 ---
A pressing iron was stgolen by one of the washermen. The washermen 
called a meeting, washed one of the irons in wsater and each drank some of 
the water, calling on Ogun to kill the thief. Three days later, one of the men 
was  bitten  by  a  cobra.  Ordinarily  dpeaking;  all  those  who  work  with 
materials made of iron, including carpenters, mechanics, fitters, truck and 
taxi drivers, appeal to Ogun to protect them from injuring themselves and 
others.  So  also  do  other  people  who  use  iron  tools,  instgruments  or 
mechnics. Namely those who use knives in circumcising  and making tribal 
marks and in surgical operations wash their instruments in water issued from 
snails and then present them to Ogun, asking that the wounds heal quickly. 
In addition to the special powers and concerns of Ogun, he, like many of the 
Orisha, may be appealed to for children. All in formants on Ogun agree that 
failure to provide an annual festival for him may have dire consequences 
that include famine, civil strife and accidents of all kinds. All of the above – 
mentioned categories of Ogun followers go to make or show distinction 
between those who are Ogun worshippers because he is their lineage god 
(Orisha) and those who become worshippers because of their occupation. 
Women are included in the first group but not in the second. (Simpson, 
George E., op ut p29 – 32) conceptions of Ogun and people’s attitudes 
towards him are revealed in his praisenames (Oriki) as follows:
              HIS PRAISE-NAMES
1. Ogun  okunrin 
ogun,  ato 
polowo iku.
1.   Ogun  the 
powerful  one, 
sufficiently  to 
advertise death


--- PAGE 56 ---
2. Eni  ti 
somo’nia 
dolola
2.    One  who 
makes  human 
beings  pros- 
perous.
3. Emi  Ogun  ‘o 
gbe bi ni eniti 
ko robi sebo
3.    One  who  is 
not  enriched  by 
ogun  will  find  it 
difficult  to  get 
sacrificial 
kolanuts.
4. Gbigbe  ni  o 
gbe mi bi o ti 
gbe Akinoro ti 
o fi kole ola.
4.   Ogun  enrich 
me  as  you 
enriched  Akinoro 
enough  to  build 
amagnificient 
house  and  make 
him  eminents.
5.
.
Ogun  awoo, 
alaka aiye osin 
‘mole.
Ogun  the 
powerfuful  one, 
the strong one of 
the  earth,  the 
great  one  of  the 
other world.
6. Agbe lehin eni 
a nda loro
6.   The protector 
of  those  who  are 
being injured
7. Ogun gbe mio. 7.   Ogun, support 
me.
THE SONG FOR OGUN
1. Meji meji, kondo ye e ! 1.  Slaughter them, cut 
them into two halves.
2. Animoro, kondo ye e! 2.   Amiroro        (a 
warrior)  cut them into 
two halves.
3. Gbogungboro oloke Amoye. 3.   Gbogungboro  (  a


--- PAGE 57 ---
warrior) of the Amoye 
hill.
4. Odidi, omo afodi di. 4.   The one who heals 
the cuts.
5. Ajamode, baba sogbe ! 5.   Deep, broad cuts.
6. Odidi, omo afodi di. 6.   The one who heals 
the cuts.
SHAPONNA – THE GOD OF SMALL POX.
To be mentioned alongside the above-mentioned African/Yoruba gods, 
we find somewhat more ‘independent’ deities who in turn have their own 
associates  or  pantheons  (i.e.  temples  or  shrines  dedicated  to  them 
respectively). Whether or not we consider them as the deities of Offa-Yoruba 
collectively,  one  of  these  pantheons  (deities)  commonly  believed  in  is 
Shaponna as one of the independent deities because actually he is not simply 
one god but the “generic name for a group of deities” (= pantheon) 28. This is 
why Shanponna is sometimes said to be the “earth god” but his concern is 
not so much with earth as a source of fertility as with earth as licus of 
disease and death. In Offa he is often referred to as the “small pox deity” 
(Orisha Olode). This is the result of identifying hinm with the most obvious 
sign of his wrath. He is associated not only with small pox (olode) but also 
with all fevers, boils and rashes. He is a “hot” deity, especially because he is 
quite often present in hot, dry weather. Hence, he is called “Ile gbona” in 
Yoruba. Here when a person dies of small pox the usual term for death is not 
used. It is said that “The king has taken him29. In such cases there must not 
be any mourning but instead an expression of gratitude for what the king has 
done; otherwise his anger will increase. By extension; special funeral rites


--- PAGE 58 ---
are carried out by the priests of Shanponna. In the process, presumably the 
body is disposed of in a way that will minimize the chance of spreading the 
disease. Meanwhile, Shganponna priests have sometimes been suspected of 
intentionally causing the disease and because of this, the cult (worship) of 
Shanponna was outlawed in Nigeria in 1917. it is also a common knowledge 
that Shanponna’s shrine is often located outside the town, either because of 
his fierceness or because as “king of the earth”, he cannot be too close to a 
human king. It has also been suggested that whether this – the reason givewn 
for locating Shanponna’s shrine outside the town – is due to his jealousy of 
human rule or the human king’s jealousy of him is not entirelty clear30. 
Soonest, perhaps in the immediate succeeding pages, we shall embark on the 
discussion of Offa-Yoruba mode of burial rites and ceremonies.
CURSE AS SOCIAL CONTROL MECHANICS
As part of social control mechanism, curse spells or causes man’s 
doom in life. Veritably, it is unAfrican and inhuman to make a mockery of 
old age, because Africans and all human beings pray to God to prolong their 
life span. Somehow  any Yorubaman found to be sunk in gloom, looking 
miserable is quite often suspected by the people in the community, including 
spiritualists, parapsychologists, politicians and even some senior citizens, to 
have a total crash of one or the other plan of his and link such a crash, 
maybe from grace to grass, to the curse placed on him by somebody31. The 
cursing word of elders in this respect emanates from the African social 
dictum that Africans and all human beings pray to God to prolong their life


--- PAGE 59 ---
span. Hence, those who indulge in the abomination of making mockery of 
old age shall not live to be old. They shall die before their aloowed life span, 
and they shall suffer for vilifying the root of the tree from wshich they 
sprouted.
Indeed, curses, if placed on people genuinely and in righteous anger, 
are potent in their effects. It is from this prism that elders believe in cursing 
any embattled enemy, in dispute. This kind of cursed will forever affect the 
accursed, especially if the man who placed the curse could not be revoked as 
a result. The Yorubas yhave an adage that “Ti omode ba soko lu alagemo, a 
pon’laso  bi  aparo  ni’”  Translated,  it  menas  that  “if  a  child  stones  a 
chameleon, his clothes will forever be stained and be cursed with the evil 
having the verisimilitude to the feathers of bush-fowl’s quills; that he will 
forever be dirty”. In those days of old Offa, old age was a sacred thing; 
regarding old man as next to God. You cannot talk to them anyhow, let alone 
abuse them. If you do, you will pay the price. And many have paid dearly for 
their impudence against their elders.
However, curse in the web of traditional and modern beliefs may be 
discussed in terms of character training towards attaining social control, 
social order. Although supernatural sanctions for the use of elders are losing 
their force in modern societies of Africa, in the days of “ancestor – worship’ 
which we have already interpreted in this book to mean ancestor-veneration; 
the head of the family and the spirits of the living-dead to whom sacrificves 
had to be made to secure the member’s welfare. For example, if one of the 
family members seriously offended the head of the family the latter could 
refuse to sacrifice on his behalf until a formal reconciliation had been made, 
more especially when the offending family member, by his acts, was held to


--- PAGE 60 ---
commit sin against or offend the spiritual beings who are quite often thought 
of as the ultimate guardians of the family or community at large and who, by 
such acts, caused danger to or endanger, the community by bringing the 
living-dead’s anger dopwn upon the community or family at large. In cases 
of what Radcliff – Brown calls ‘the crfime of being a bad lot’, the wrath of 
curse may be incurred by the culprits. Such people may be habitual thieves 
bringing disgrace to the family, etc. Indeed, the father’s curse quite often 
relates to the definite invocation of some disaster upon an offender or a 
sinner or an immoral actor. This case was believed to actually bring upon the 
disgruntled  iconoclast  the  intended  punishment  or  woe.  Any  resultant 
sickness, therefore, might be explained by a diviner as due to the anger of 
some senior relative. 
FOOT NOTES
1. As do parts of machine.
2. The world Book Dictionary (1974), vol III 
Ibid p 1278.
3. Some Observation’s on Religious cult in 
Ashanti, Africa vol XXVI, January 1986 No 1. p 47.
4. Lucy Mair (1969), Agrican marriage and 
social change pp19 & 20


--- PAGE 61 ---
5. Mair, Lucy (1977), Primitive Government, 
London: The Solar Press, p134.
6. Robertson, Roland (1969), (ed) Sociology of 
Religion, p89
7. In Igboland.
8. Ibid, p96
9. Of 29/4/95.
10. Dr. Okolo (1995), Prime people, p5
11. Simpson, George E (1980), Yoruba Religion 
to Medicine in Ibadan, Ibadan: Ibadan University Press, p 
77
12.For differing points of view on whether or not witchcraft contributes to 
the stability of the social stgructure, see S.F. Nadel (1952), Wiotchcraft in 
four  African  Societies:  Anm  Essay  in  compariuson,  American 
Anthropologist, NO. 54, pp 18 –m 29, Bohannan, Paul (1964), Africa and 
Africans, Natural History Press, pp 232 – 233; John Middleton and E.H. 
Winter, eds (1963), Witchcraft and Sorcery in East Africa, Fredrick A. 
Paeger.
13. pp 1781 & 172
14. In 1971.


--- PAGE 62 ---
15. Newell S. Booth (1777) African Religions 
Ibid, p171.
16. The old man who knows the secret
17. Simpson, Geirge E. (1980), Ibid p21
18. Ibid, p22.
19. Ibid (1977), p170
20. Ibid. 21. Ibid.
22  Babalola, S.A. op ut, p6.
23. Ibid, p4.
24. Ibid, pp 4 – 6.
25. Harold Courlander, op ut, pp 36 & 37.
26. Ibid, pp 63 & 64.
27. Fadipe, N.A., Ibid, p261.
28. Accoduing to Herskovits in African 
Religions (2977), Ibid, p171.
29. Ibid
30. Ibid.
31. Weekend Concord, Saturday August 12


--- PAGE 63 ---
2000, p3: curse that caused Okadigbo’s fall.
CHAPTER 3
DEATH AND ITS EXEGESIS
In general understanding, death may be realized as occurring within 
the will of God but paradoxically it could be said to be outside the will of 
God. Prior to advent of modern religion’s – Islam and Christianity – it has 
been said that ‘at first there was no death in the sense of the seperation of 
soul  and body  and the reusultant  corruption  of the body’. However, by 
concept of death and its exegesis we mean Yoruba view of death; while its 
exegesis  is  concerned  with  scholarly  explanation  and  interpretation  the 
Yoruba and generally the African meanings attached to death of man. While 
ordinarily death means the act or fact of the ending of any form of life in a 
person, animal or plant, the Yoruba view of death spectacularly refers to loss 
or absence  of spiritual  life, the  stopping  of inhaling  and  exhaling  – i.e 
breathing in and out. The Yoruba believe tjat at death, the spirit or, one might 
eay, when the ‘death’ occurs the ‘breath’ leaves the body, believing then that 
it has left its bodily habitation and gone to live in the spirit world, even 
though it is not actually clear to hem just where this spirit world is. In 
essence, they associate their view of death with that of the soul. To them 
‘The soul comes fgrom without into the human body and passes into other 
habitations. In other words, death is regarded as the passage into a new stage


--- PAGE 64 ---
of life and it is in the process of becoming an ancestor. That is to say that it 
is in the process of not simply a dangling dead-end of life but a link in the 
continuity of existence which unites the past and the future through the 
present.So that particularly, at this juncture we may discuss Offa-yoruba 
belief about death in a little detail.
OFFA-YORUBA BELIEF ABOUT DEATH.
Offa-Yoruba  belief  in  life  after  death  begins  with  belief  in  the 
occurrence of death at the end of one’s span of life and provides the basis for 
the rise of ‘the belief in life after death’, because we are assured by modern 
religious teachings that ‘God gives life after and death’, that ‘all that survive 
after physical death goes back to God, the original Source of all things’. It is 
We (God) who will inherit the earth, _____________. All beings thereupon: 
to us (God) will they all be returned’. In furtherance of this, Offa-yoruba 
believe that life here on earth is not interminable. They hold that sooner or 
later the inevitable phenomenon called death will come upon man who is 
only a sojourner on god’s earth. No matter how long a person lives on earth 
death must come as a necessary end. As we may have said already that death 
is a spear-head connection between the world of the living and that of the 
spirits, the Offa people believe that death is only a transition, only a means 
of passing from the world of the living to the world of the spirits. Tha 
Yoruba  word  for  death  is  ‘Iku’.  This  same  name  is  the  name  for  the 
personified power which had been commissioned by the supreme Being to 
kill (or end life) and remove people from this world.
THE HISTORY OF DEATH OCCURENCE.


--- PAGE 65 ---
By inference, from the above, when an Offa-man dies, he becomes an 
‘Oku’ – death person or ghost. As concerning  the  origin  myth  of ‘Iku’ 
(death) it is said that mythical  statement of how ‘Iku’ began his killing 
function has been narrated by E. Bolaji Idowu in his ‘Olodumare; God in 
Yoruba Belief’. The well-known myth states that death began to kill when he 
was greatly offended through the killing of his mother. The mother of ‘Iku’ 
(death)  was  killed  at  Ejigbo-Mekun  market.  Consequently  ‘Iku’ (death) 
became offended and started to revenge by killing other people. Another 
version of this story is that in which we may demonstrate that in Yorubaland 
‘Egungun’, that is, ‘masks and masquerades’ are means by which Offa-
Yoruba try to concretize and materialize the spirits of the dead. Nevertheless, 
it  is  well-known  that  mythical  statement  about  Iku  may  not  be  wholly 
accurate; yet this does not mean that its theoretical model can be totally 
invalidated or that its empirical formula based entirely practical experience 
without regard to science or thory that all knowledge including religious 
knowledge,  is  based  on  experience,  can  be  proved  to  be  unequalto  the 
exigency of the situation demanding attention on the possibility of realizing 
its truth for examination for validation.
Meanwhile, Offa people use euphemistic expressions to describe death of 
someone. When an ordinary man in town dies, the euphemistic descriptive 
word of his end of journey in life is ‘O ku’, meaning he dies. Their is 
difference between ‘O ku’ and ‘Oku’. While ‘O ku’ means he dies, ‘Oku’ 
means a ‘dead person’ or a ‘ghost’. When Offa-Yoruba man says Mr so and 
so ‘ku’, he means to say that Mr so and so dies; whereas the Yoruba saying 
‘mo ri oku; in English means I saw a dead person or a ghost. According to 
tradition; when an Oba (king) or chief (oloye) dies, he is said to have gone


--- PAGE 66 ---
into the ceiling, that is, ‘o waja’ in Yoruba. On the other hand, if a noble or 
rich man dies, the most commonly used term to describe his death is ‘Igi 
araba nla wo’, meaning ‘a mighty oak tree has been uprooted and fallen’ or 
‘erin wo’ meaning ‘an elephant has fallen’. Truly, no Offa-man would use a 
common phrase to describe the death of his Oba or Chief. It is unethical to 
say the Chief is dead or describe it in such plain terms the death of an elder 
or a man of any importance. Uptill today, anybody who mentions the death 
of a Chief or an elder without using the appropriate euphemism to do so is 
never looked upon with good eyes. It is regarded as denigratory to do sop 
and, in the past, suh a person, caught up doing so incur death penalty to 
himself. Even in announcing the death of a person – any person – the Yoruba 
culture demands that the voice should drop to a whisper level when using 
each of the expressions to describe the death of such a person.
Furthermore,  these  terms  are  used  to  indicate  the  dead  person’s 
departure from this physical world; more so Offa men and women believe 
that death of someone is not a total departure or total annihilation of the 
spiritual part of the departed. They think about death as not the end of man 
but rather as passage from this wordly existence into another, the spiritual 
world, part of which, it is believed, belongs to the ancestral spirits; they 
believe that through the death of an individual, the living are reminded of 
their relationship with the dead who they know are in invisible existence. 
Despite  the  general  belief  that  death  is  universal,  unpredictable  and 
inescapable for all mankind and ultimately eyond human control and with a 
strong belief that death is a kind of metaphorical ladder which everyone has 
to climb, it follows that while the Horubas in particular use the expression 
“Ojise Orun de” – “Heaven’s Baliff has come” to dedscribe the descent of


--- PAGE 67 ---
death in one fell swoop, they also believe that death (Iku) is regarded as a 
debt which everyone must pay; in such a way that Offa-man’s belief is in 
“man is for both life and death”, in the flying death that swoops and stuns 
(i.e. deadens consciouysness)” is established8. As do other West Africans, 
death is regarded by Offa people as one of the crises of life, and, therefore, 
there are some religious rites associated with it.
As a corollary, man, as we have seen, is made up of physical, tangible 
body, and the personality – social, which is the real human essence. Such 
that Offa-Yoruba believe that when death occurs, the personality-soul which 
is the spiritual substance and, therefore, the essential part of a person, is 
separated from the physical body; such that invariabl;y the left-over, that is, 
the remains of the fallen physical body decays while the personality – soul 
returns to the original source (God), the Supreme Being, from whom it 
comes. This Offa-Yoruba belief is demonstrated in the importance which the 
people attach to funeral rites. Alongside this belief, the people again believe 
in life after death and are, therefore, convinced that unless the funeral rites 
are carefully, elaborately  and  properly  performed, the  spirit  of the  dead 
would not be able to join others in the Land of the Dead. It would be 
compelled  to  roam about  the  earth  without  rest.  This  explains  why  the 
funeral rites and ceremonies are quite often elaborate while great care is 
taken to go through all rites. All have said may look superstitious. They are 
true beliefs in olden day, including the fact that in passing we may observe 
that if everything had ended with the passing away of the physical body, the 
Offa-Yoruba, indeed, Africans, would not have been bothering to engage 
themselves in such elaborate funeral ceremonies till today. It would have 
dawned  upon them enough to enjoy  as  much  of life as  possible,  doing


--- PAGE 68 ---
whatever they think will suit their selfish purpose without adequate regard to 
the discomfort of other people. But since they know that death only brings 
change of life and that at death man passes from this physical world into a 
new type of life where the conduct of man in the physical world will be 
adjudged, the people then prepare themselves for the final end while alive 
and the survivors of the dead engage themselves performing funeral rites, 
right from the time when the breath of life departs from the body, after 
drfawing his or her last breath.
AT SICK BED-SIDE
Preceding kicking the bucket, the cerfemonies observed at death by 
Yoruba tribes, according to E.B. Ellis (1979:155), chiefly differ from those 
of the Ewes. In the midst of various indications of death appearing imminent 
and religious observances, especially prior to the time when the breath of life 
is wishing to depart from the physical body, there is the usual outburst of 
exaggerated grief, more so when the last breath has been drfawn. When the 
breath of life has departed from man’s body the usual lamentations with 
frenzied gestures take place. Prior to this, however, that is, when it has 
become manifest that the sick person cannot survive his or her sickness, the 
eldest son of the sick man/deceased or his brother, if there be no son, at once 
sends for a Babalawo (the medicine-man diviner) to ascertain if the sickman 
died or is going to die from natural causes or through the machinations of 
witches. Sometimes  before the occurrence  of death, that is, as Offa old 
traditions in retrospect assert, when an Offa-man falls seriously sick his 
eldest son or brother, being very close to him ought always to be by the sick-
bed. Indeed tradition demands that he should very often be at his bed side. 
At point of death or comma those at the bed side call in a diviner – a


--- PAGE 69 ---
Babalawo – in order to ascertain the cause of the person’s illness that is 
leading to his death, especially if the sickman lingers on in pain, to enable 
his relatives to know as “the beast of the ancestors” in accordance with 
Babalawo’s ifa oracular prescription (s) and direction to avoid the scourge of 
such a death in large-scale devastating the family in ones and twos.
This is because Offa-Yoruba distinguish between natural death and 
accidental death. Their belief is strong that only the aged die. That is why the 
death of a young man is regarded as premature, the cause of which generally 
speaking, might be due to some supernatural forces, such as witchcraft, 
magic, sorcery or powerful curse, which he was unable to take preventive 
measures against. Hence Offa-man’s ejaculation: “Olorun mase e ni akuta” 
meaning “may God nip occurrence of such death in the bud”. The death of a 
young man, therefore, does not evoke the same degree of cheerful feeling as 
death of an aged person. The death of a young man, in Yoruba parlance, is 
tragic and it is an occasion of sorrowful mourning; whereas the death of an 
aged person is welcomed as good news involving moments of emotion of 
encouragement and approval of praise and joy, because at ripe age such a 
person has been recalled to join his ancestors in the land beyond from where 
he would be reincarnated. 
HOW OFFA PEOPLE BURY THEIR DEAD
How funeral obsequies (rites) are carried out in Offa is the concern of 
this part of the book. In old Offa, funeral obsequies of the dead were quite 
often carried out and celebrated with utmost grandeur and solemnity. As 
John  S.  Mbiti  (1969)  has  said:  “birth  being  the  first  rhythm  of  a  new 
generation; the rites of birth are performed in order to make the child a


--- PAGE 70 ---
corporate and social being: Initiation rites continue the process and make 
him mature, responsible and active member of his society; marriage makes 
him a creative and productive being linking  him with both the departed and 
the generation to come; finally comes death, that inevitable and, in many 
societies, most disturbing phenomenon of all,” Thus, all along death stands 
between the world of the human beings and the world of the spirits, between 
the visible and the invisible.
There are many, and often complicated, ceremonies connected with 
death,  burials,  funerals,  inheritance,  the  living-dead,  the  world  of  the 
departed, the visit of the likving-dead to their human families, reincarnation 
and survival of the soul. Thus, it follows that, when we have lived to full 
age, it is obvious that decath is something that concerns everybody, partly 
because sooner or later everyone personally faces it and partly because it 
brings loss and sorrow to every family and community. It is no wonder, 
therefore, that rituals connected with death are usually elaborate since it 
would be futile to imagine that we could deal adequately with the subject of 
death within the scope of this book. We shall take a few specific cases for 
consideration below. We shall take quite a few specific cases with which to 
illustrate the processes of how Offa people bury their dead.
Dead, we have said earlier on, is regarded as a passage from this 
earthly  existence to another world. Thus, as a process of transition,  the 
funeral rites of an aged Offa-man are characterized by feasting, happiness 
and merriment. As Bolaji Idowu (19 ) says of the Yoruba aged in general – 
and the same is true of Offa – the aged Offa-men are prepared to die in order 
to enter the next world and join their ancestors therein. It is a belief among 
Offa people that such people in their state of coma, before they become


--- PAGE 71 ---
deceased, can communicate with their ancestors in the life beyond when 
they get there. Meanwhile, during periods of ascertainment of the kind of 
death a man had died and purificatory sacrifice at death, the babalawo, after 
sacrificing a fowl, inquiries at the oracle of Ifa by means of an Ifa board 
(called Opon Ifa) and sixteen palm-nuts for ascertainment of whither the 
deceased is bound, and if it affirms that the death was caused by witchcraft, 
further inquiry is made to know if any other member of the family is, or is 
being, threatened with a similar fate and also if the soul of the deceased is in 
danger of further molestation from the evil spirits who have been influenced 
to act as such by the evil machinations of the sorcerers. Should the oracle 
declare in the affirmative that the soul of the departed is in danger, a sheep 
or goat is sacrificed and the carcass on which is smeared some quantity of 
palm-oil before it is carried outside the town, is deposited at a cross-road or 
road-junction of two or more paths which has the effect of causing the evil 
spirits to disperse in as many directions as there are paths. After this the 
babalawo then prepares the usual water of purification with shear-butter and 
edible snails. Dipping in to the vessel containing the water, palm-fond sacred 
to Ifa, he (the babalawo) sprinkles the corpse, the room and the spectators 
(or the by-standers) around with fluid, as a ritual act of cleansing from the 
pollution (uncleanness) caused by the death of the departed. At the same 
time he invokes the soul of the departed to leave the house as soon as the 
funeral rites have been performed and proceed peacefully to its destination; 
to “Ipo oku orun” – the place of the dead, wishing it safe journey, as he says 
some short prayers, including “May the road be open to you. May nothing 
evil meet you on the way. May you find the road good when you go in 
peace.”


--- PAGE 72 ---
After these preliminaries the corpse is washed with new sponge, soap 
and clean but moderately warm water and/or sometimes with a decoction of 
aromatic herbs on a mortar (turned upside down and used as seat) on which 
the deceased is held up by supporters. Following this, the deceased is attired 
in his/her best clothes (the one he loves to wear most); the thumbs and the 
great toes are then tied together with strands of cotton thread; while the 
nostrils are stuffed with white cotton wool; as his/her hands are placed on 
his/her chest. If the deceased be a man, the head is shaved with a razor or 
loal knife after which then hairs is carefully wrapped up in a piece of  white 
cotton with which the deceased is buried in the earth, behind the house or in 
one of the rooms in the house. But if the deceased be a woman the hair is 
plaited to match her status in life whereas the exposed parts of hers are 
smeared (or rubbed) with a decoction of the bark of a tree which gives a 
reddish  hue  =colour)  to  the  skin.  This  reddish  hue  (or  colour)  of  the 
camwood  or  a  red  dyewood,  commonly  obtainable  in  Western  parts  of 
Africa, is called Osun in Yoruba. Finally the corpse is wrapped up in may 
dignifying native clothes or attires, supplied by the relatives and placed on a 
mat at the door of a room. Nowadays, a well-decorated bed is used, placed in 
a well-tidied, neat sitting room.
Sometimes the body is treated with resinuous herbs so that it becomes 
desiccated (thoroughly dry) such that while it remains in the house, the soul 
is believed to abide in its old home till such time as proper ceremonies can 
be held. Reason for all these is that the corpse has to be prepared in such 
manner in order to give the dead person a worthy appearance in the ancestral 
community and to make it comfortable for people to sit around it when lying 
in state invariably for three days. For it is believed that if the corpse is not


--- PAGE 73 ---
properly  washed,  the  deceased  would  not  be  permitted  to  enter  orun 
(heaven)  and  also  if  the  spirit  were  to  be  reincarnated  the  dirts  of  the 
formerly deceased would cling to the body of the reincarnate. Essentially, it 
needs be reinstated that great importance is attached to the washing of the 
corpse because it is believed that one has to be clean in order to be admitted 
into the abode and comity of ancestors.
For funeral obsequies (ceremonies) to begin; immediately after the 
corpse  has  been  washed  and  dressed  and  the  death  (of  an  old  man)  is 
announced there is the booming of guns that invites concerned people from 
different parts of the town or village as well as those from other towns and 
villages to start trooping in for mourning expression of sympathy and all 
forms of condolence visits; while others move around the town or village 
weeping and crfying aloud, as a search party combing the town for their 
missing member singing a mourning song: “A nwa; a o ri, a o sun, a o wo, a 
o mo bi to wa; a o wo bi to ba lo o”, meaning “We are looking for him; we 
cannot find him; even during all night vigil; and we are worn out by the 
labours of restlessness; he is not among the lots; it’s over, he is gone; we do 
not know which way he has passed.”
These rites which are a must to be performed presuppose life after 
death. They are performed to enable the deceased to make his/her journey to 
the other world easy and hitch-free. These would also make the spirit of the 
departed contented in the world beyond. In another sense, they are also 
performed to honour and to pay the last respect to the deceased by the living. 
During the time of funeral ceremony much time and expenses are lavished 
on the departed to ensure a proper funeral. That is why as soon as a person 
breathes his or her last, the living survivors get a fowl ready. Its descriptive


--- PAGE 74 ---
name is adie irano in Yoruba or “a fare-fowl” in English. It is killed by way 
of immolation and offered for the ancestors to open the gate for the deceased 
as well as make it easier for him to get to the Land of the Dead; since the 
purpopse of this is to clear the path for a safe journey back home.
Dujring  the  adie  irano funeral  rite,  it  needs  be  recalled  that 
processionally, as the deceased person makes his last journey and the corpse 
is carried from the home denuded of him to its grave-yard, a man goes with 
the live adie irano (fare-fowl) feathers till they reach their destination where 
the ritual fowl is immolatged and ceremonially eaten by the partakers. The 
sacrifice of fare-fowl admits of two or more meanings. After inviting him 
(the deceased) in a leery (careful and unburdened) manner by the living 
calling him by name three times and adjured (i.e. entreated) him to depart his 
dwelling place as he is no longer wanted to haunt the dwellings of the living 
but to be gone forthwith, the sacrifice of “adie irano” (or “the fare-fowl”) as 
it (i) buys the road (ii) secures a right wayh” for the dead; and (iii) besides 
securing a right of way for the soul of the deceased it is supposed to guide it. 
Furthermore, as the feathers of the fowl are plucked, they are scattered 
around the house and the bird itself is carried to a bush-road where it is 
cooked and eatgen. The road on which adie irano is eaten must be outside 
the town and leadaway from it, for trough the people believe that the Land of 
the Dead is beneath the earth, they think that it is necessary to eat the fowl 
(adie irano) on such a road leading into the bush, in order to place it in a 
proper position for commencing its office of guide to the soul. It also has the 
connotation of te reason why the Yoruba often say: “adie irano ki ise ‘un 
ajegbe”, meaning “The  fare-fowl is not eaten without  reciprocation”.  In 
other words, “he who partakes of  adie irano will in turn (in the future)


--- PAGE 75 ---
provide a fare-fowl when he dies”, (Awoladu, J. Omosade, et al, (1979), 
West African Traditional Religion; p 259). All said and done in this way 
presuppose that Offa-Yoruba beliefs in as eternal verities, i.e. truths, true 
statements, facts, opinions, doctrines, etc.
MOURNING AND WIDOWHOOD PERIOD
In  the  mean  time,  during  period  of  mourning,  it  follows  that  as 
monourners and other sympathizers flock into the deceased’s home, food 
and drinks are provided freely by the survivors for the guests and members 
of the cult to which the deceased beloged in his life. In this part of Africa, as 
in other parts, there obtains the custom to abstain from eating for a day or 
two following some person’s death. One must also stop work for a few days 
as a sign of respect for the deceased person. Indeed some normal activities 
are  expected  to  be  suspended  until  all  funeral  rites  are  completely 
performed, showing thereat one of the family members has been separated 
from their midst. As corollary of this custom and practice a king or chief’s 
death, as well as its funeral rites, is a national affair. The major funeral rites 
requiring a lot of elaborate preparation, as much of it involves a great deal of 
pomp and pageantry demanding a lot of wealth to be spent, people, in order 
to pay their last respect to the departed king or chief, national mourning is 
declared for all and sundry to observe and adhere to. By this time, a death-
feast  ought to have been  prepared  and  commenced  to  be  served  to the 
people. It is a yam meal and part of it which is meant for the deceased is 
placed near the bier while outside the house a continual beating of drums is 
kept up together with frequent discharges of crackles of musketry fired in 
honour of the departed. At its advanced stage, the feast at which intoxicants 
are  lavished,  soon  becomes  a  veritable  (true)  orgy  in  which  the  chief


--- PAGE 76 ---
mourners, that is, the widows, close relatives and children of the deceased, 
take no part, more especially the widows.
Indeed,  in  pre-colonalization  era  in  Offa  it  happened  that  during 
funeral  ceremony  burial  rites  are  followed  by  feast,  drinking,  wailing, 
drumming and firing of musketry (e.g. Dane-guns) in honour of the deceased 
on a large-scale, depending on the status of the deceased one. If in life he or 
she belonged to some secret societies such as  Ogboni,  Egungun,  Oro, etc, 
the secret societies are connected with and are involved in the observances 
of the funeral rites. After the death of a secret cult member, relatives of the 
deceased have to pay a huge sum of money and make a number of presents 
to the society; failing which burial may be delayed. That is, if relatives 
encounter difficulties in paying the amount and in making the presents as the 
laid down rules of the secret society direct the body of the deceased may not 
be allowed to be buried in time. The fact that if a member of Hunters’ Guild 
dies, several other rites performed by the Guild indicates people’s belief that 
the ‘soul’, at times called the in-dwelling spirit, lives on after death. It is a 
custom that as soon as the close relatives of the deceased have performed the 
last offices for the dead and have placed the corpse at a conspicuous place, 
on the bed either by the door of the house or in a large apartment the chief 
mourners, especially the widows, are shut up in an adjacent apartment where 
they are confined and compelled by custom to remain until after the burial 
ceremony, the confinement lasting about seven days during which the first to 
third day the corpse invariably lies in state.
While the close relatives are thus immured, they are forbidden to wash 
clothes or wear neat and tidy clothes or take bath. Also traditional oractice 
requires them to refuse all types of food, at least for the first tgwenty-four


--- PAGE 77 ---
hours, after which they usually allow themselves to be persuaded to eat, as it 
is in vogue today, for they are in period of “Ofo”, i.e. the period of the 
“unwashed”.
THE WOMEN MOURNERS AND WIDOWHOOD
Of truth the conventional mourning is the business of women of the 
household in addition to the widows who are already engaged in wailing, 
uttering loud cries of lamentation. While their men are feasting, eating and 
drinking, these women mourners keep on lamenting the departure of the 
dead person recalling in their wailing and weeping the good things he did 
and said as well as reminding them that he lives on in the next world. These 
the women do in the apartment in which they are being confined for a week 
or so; and in consequence the descriptive word of this ritual in Yoruba is 
“Isokun  oku”,  meaning  “the  ritual  sobbing  and  crying  in  mourning  the 
dead”. It marks a period of mourning set aside by women for the deceased. 
Hence, according to custom, a mourner is often applied to a female child of 
the deceased; while a male child, on the other hand, is sometimes called 
iwale, a digger  (of a  grave).  In  other  words  it is  the  females  (women) 
counterparts  dig  the  grave.  Following  this  custom,  a  father  of  e.g.  two 
daughters and a son might thus say that he has begotten two mourners and a 
digger (grave-digger). As female friends usually come from their various 
homes to join and participate in the lamentations and disperse (at their own 
respective times), there is the conventional character of the mourners which 
is referred to as ‘ “A mourner mourns and goes on their way (without afore-
thought),  but  one  who  ponders  over  sad  memories  mourns  without


--- PAGE 78 ---
ceasing”’10. The literary meaning of this in Yoruba is that “Bi abani sofo ba 
sokun tan yio ko ri si ile re; eni ti oku ku fun ko ni dabo ekun sun u”. 
(Translation nine).
According to Ellis’s “The Yoruba speaking peoples of the slave Coast 
of West Africa” (1974:157) and the same goes for Offa-Yoruba, there are 
professional mourners who are well-versed in sob-stories of the departed 
ones,  in  remote and  immediate  times,  chosen  for  their  poetical  tune  of 
expression whose services are engaged, in well-to-do households who often 
contrive  (i.e. invent a plan) to work up real mourners to condition’s of 
frenzied grief. For instance, a professional mourner sings in a modulated 
wail, viz: “He is gone, the lion of a man. He was not a sapling11 or a bush to 
be  turned  out  of  the  earth,  but  a  tree,  a  tree  to  brave  the  hurricane;  a 
spreading tree under which the hearts of his family could rest in peace”, etc, 
etc; while the widows and daughter(s) of the deceased lament their lonely 
and unprotected state, somewhat as follows:
“Odi gbere”,  a farewell greeting  which occurs  in lamentation and 
dirges at funerals among most Yorubas when mourners bid the departed 
good bye, namely: “Odi gbere” in Yoruba means upon next meeting is until 
“gbere” – time unknown.
“Od’arinnako – “It is now a matter of chance to meet on the way” during 
wayfaring or “Odi oju ala” – our meetings will now be in dreams”. They 
epecially the widows, pray to him (the dead) not too forget his children, to 
look after them as well as ask him for personal benefits like children, good 
husband or wife, good work and victory over all evils, enemies, etc, etc.
BEFORE INTERMENT


--- PAGE 79 ---
On the afternoon there follows the funeral procession. The body is 
placed on the stretcher-like board on a door taken off its hinges, covered 
with a rich native cloth and borne at trots through the principal streets of the 
town by men followed first by male sympathizers, with the women group 
coming behind. The entire members of this procession consist of male and 
female friends and relations who accompany the brier, singing praises of the 
deceased and throwing handfuls of money-coins (owo eyo) in olden days – 
to spectators and bystanders lining their routes. The procession returns home 
towards evening, and the corpse is interred and laid to rest in the grave that 
has been dug in the earthen floor of one of the apartments in the house or 
dug immediately after death in an uncultivated ground in the near-by vicinity 
of the house, sometimes near to the main compound or town, quite often dug 
by clansmen and others, while the grave is so contrived that the head of the 
deceased, if he is to be buried in the house, may project beyond the line of 
the outer wall of the house; or at times it is dug at the back of the deceased’s 
house. This probably symbolizes the belief that the deceased person has not 
gone away from or left homestead completely. He is in effect still present in 
the midst of his family and clansmen. Nowadays, however, the corpse is 
often carried to the cemetery for burial and the grave is jointly dug by male 
sympathizers, relatives, sons-in-law and at times of the deceased who may 
later be joined by others arriving late.
Also before interment takes place, most of the cover cloths in which 
the corpse is wrapped are taken off and the body, usually remaining in white 
shirting  or  calico,  is  carefully  lowered  into  the  grave12 though  there  is 
another version of this statement which affirms that at the grave side gifts 
are presented to the deceased in the form of food, money, clothes, fowls or


--- PAGE 80 ---
animals, rums, cowries, etc. these things which are offered by the children 
and relatives of the deceased to acquire something on his journey to “Ipo – 
oku” – “the Land of the Dead”. The gifts offered are placed in the grave. 
Adding to all these are personal belongings which are together buried with 
the corpse, to accompany the deceased man so that he does not find himself 
poor in the hereafter, believing that these things are part of him and he must 
not be robbed of them by the surviving relatives or else he would visit them 
and  demand  what  is  his  own.  It  is  also  opined  that  the  animal  killed 
afterwards serves, as it is to accompany the deceased, to provide him with 
food on the way and livestock in the next world13.  Furthermore, inside the 
grave the body of the deceased is spilt or sprinkled with the blood of the 
animal, offered as sacrifice. It is usually a he-goat, sacrificed to propitiate 
the Elegba a otherwise called Esu in Yoruba but satan in English. In another 
sense the he-goat  is called the “beast of the ancestors”14. This selfsame 
“beast of the ancestors”, when so sacrificed, is also a sign linking both the 
departed and the living members of the family as well as an assurance that 
the  dying  person  will  not  go  into  a  friendly  (even  festal  or  festive) 
community set with joyful mood ready for reception of the returnee. There is 
yet another opinion that the ‘living-dead’ are present at the death of their 
human relative who may asked, through the slaughter of their animal (‘the 
beast of the ancestors’), to hasten the death of the sick man in order to 
terminate his pain or suffering quickly15.
However, the official or professional ritualist afterwards goes into the 
grave to offer the slaughtered sheep or goat to the spirit of the deceased, he 
splits kola-nuts and places them and other gifts beside the body of him that 
is dead now, already laid in the grave. The composite demand of this custom


--- PAGE 81 ---
is  known  in  Yorubva  as  “Biba  oku  yi  ‘hun”  which  in  English  means 
“Entering into a covenant with the deceased16. Before the grave is filled up 
with earth amidst the wishes for a safe and pleasant journey home, in the 
Land  of  the  Dead,  the  sons  and  daughters  of  the  deceased  weep  and 
customarily their tears are to be seen to fall on the corpse in the grave. The 
significant importance of the presence of the children assures the departed 
that  there  are  someone  to  remember  him,  to  keep  him  in  ‘personal 
immortality’ when he has disappeared finally, physically. Messages and gifts 
are sent through the deceased to the relatives and friends who died earlier 
on. To cover up the grave, torn branches, pot shreds or broken but suitable 
planks of appropriate sizes – length and breadth wise – are fitted together 
and stuck into or piled over and around the open spaces round the corpse to 
keep off animals from tampering with the grave, particularly the pigs.
When the earth has been shoveled over back to the grave pit and the 
grave has been filled full with the earth, the earth is smoothed down and 
sometimes  when  many  articles  of  value  have  been  entombed  with  the 
deceased, the grave surface is moistened with water and beaten flat to pulp, 
to make the earth settle down, although A.B. Ellis (1974) says that in certain 
of Yorubaland, when many articles of value have been entombed and the 
surface of the tomb has been moistened with water to make the earth battle 
down, slaves and other dependants are made to sleep on it night after night 
for the double purpose of protecting it and of obliterating traces of its exact 
position,  methinks  this  is  an  unusual  practice  in  Offa,  at  least  no  oral 
tradition mentions it. After interment, that is, with the completion of burial 
ceremony,  a  gun  is  fired  to  indicate  that  the  suppose  has  been  finally 
buried17, then the dispersive flock of mourners from a desolate cemetery


--- PAGE 82 ---
moved to the former house of the deceased where the feast which had been 
suspended  since  the  afternoon  recommences  together  with  drinking  and 
shouting amidst the firing of muskets while jungle (harsh, dull and heavy 
sounds) of native gongs and the dull sounding thud (beating) of the native 
drums continues all night. Offa-Yoruba do not practice burial of the dead by 
cremation. The deceased having been sent to the spirit world in this manner 
and thus  leaving off the living  relatives as  a result, the survivors, after 
burying the corpse, return home from the cemetery joyfully amidst singing, 
drumming and dancing with the talking drum saying, while relations of the 
deceased, sympathizers and all chant same in chorus: Ile O! Ile! O!! Ile! O!! 
Ile! O!! lo lo ta rara! Meaning: O our home! O our home!! O our home!!! 
Baba (father) rele re (goes to his own home); to his celestial home he goes 
without wobbling and trudged”. In this way, the strategic places in town are 
set to this sort of music for passing through till they return to the house of 
the deceased in the dusk of the evening twilight.
DECEASED  OBAS  SENT  TO  THE  SPIRIT  WORLD  AMIDST 
ABOBAKU ENTOURAGE
Though the form of burial among the ancient Offa-Yoiruba indicated 
that they conceived of burial as seeing off someone who is going on a 
journey and, therefore, needed to be provided, in the grave, those things 
which the would-be living-dead might need on such a journey. However, 
particularly as concerns kings in Yorubaland, it is unheard of in Offa history 
that some of the Olofas were provided with an entourage of “abobaku”, 
“those who die with the king”. Rather, the practice is very common with the 
Alaafin of Oyo and some paramount chiefs in Ghana, where, like in Egypt, 
servants and wives of kings or other rich people were buried with the body


--- PAGE 83 ---
of the deceased king due to the belief that the departed needs wives and 
servants to keep him company when he reaches there and other property he 
needs for use so that he would not arrive there empty-handed and/or remain 
poor in the spirit  world.  “The  court  case in Ghana  on  Akyia  Mensah’s 
demise (1944) is a proven case of those kings who died with the king”. Cult 
practice in various parts of West Africa substantiates this. Akyia Mensah was 
a chief of a small town of Apedwa in the Gold Coast (now Ghana) whose 
decapitated head was buried with the corpse of Sir, Nna Ofori Atta I, a 
paramount  chief  of  Akim  Abuakwa  at  Kibi;  otherwise  referred  to  as 
Omanhene of Akim Abuakwa. Again, we may mention that “The greatest 
treasures ever discovered in a burial place were those of king tutankhamen 
of Egypt who died in BC 1352, discovered in his tomb 3300 years ago in 
1992 18.
OTHER CATEGORIES OF DEATH
Most African peoples have mythological explanations of how death 
first came into the world. We have discussed earlier on that of the Yoruba. 
Thus,  Offa-Yoruba  man  has  since  accepted  death  as  part  of the  natural 
rhythm  (functioning)  of  life;  yet,  he  believes  that  paradoxically,  every 
human  death  is  thought  to  have  external  causes  making  it  (death)  both 
natural and unnatural.
Indeed, there are categories of death in Yorubaland – bad or good 
death, death of the young and of the aged. Bad deaths do not normally 
receive full funeral rites. When a child dies the parents and relations lament 
the death and dispose of the corpse as quickly as possible, since it is a bad 
death. Deaths caused by anti-wickedness divinities like the gods of thunder


--- PAGE 84 ---
(Shango) small pox (Shaponna), and Ogun (Iron) are regarded as bad. Such 
deaths are regarded as capital punishment from the divine god(s) and as such 
they are not to be mourned. The same thing happens when death is caused 
by  curse.  Curse  is  something  greatly  feared  in  Yoruba  societies,  and  a 
powerful curse is believed to bring about death to the accursed person, 
praying that hail (i.e. the curse) and lightning might descend from heaven on 
the  accursed  person  or  thing.  Curse  in  Yoruba  belief  is  any  malignant 
influence  of  obscure  or  mysterious  origin  which  withers  hope,  blasts 
prospects and /or checks prosperity of a person. To injure as such a blight 
does, in Offa-Yoruba, a common imprecation (or prayer of a curse) is “oku 
igbe” that is, “Bush death”, meaning “may you die in the bush alone uncared 
for and so receive no funeral rites”.
None  the  less  there  are  yet  other  deaths  which  may  not  receive 
befitting burial, even if they be deaths of the aged. Namely, in contrasting a 
man’s duties to his relations with those towards the members of any secret 
society to which he (the deceased man), whereby the deceased man or the 
chief mourner insists upon the importance of the former because of the 
obligation his relations to bury him, it runs thus, that a man must honestly 
perform all the duties incumbent on his relationship with his relatives, even 
though he may belong to a secret society. Thus, in his life, when he has 
attended to the society he must attend to his relations “because it is they who 
must bury him when he dies”, an equivalent Yoruba saying that “Ore timo 
timo iye kan kata kata; ojo ti ore timo timo ba ku iyekan kata kata ni yio gbe 
sin”. Deaths of the deceased caused by gods of thunder, small pox, iron or 
curse (s) require that their victims are buried with purificatory and expiatory 
(atoning) rites to appease the divinities concerned.


--- PAGE 85 ---
Other types of bad death include death of children, unmarried people, 
those who die through suicide or as a result of some diseases like leprosy, 
small-pox or epilepsy, and people who die as a result of accidents like falling 
from a palm tree, women dying in child-birth, women dying in pregnancy, 
lunatics, suicide and those who have been murdered or burned. Such deaths 
are  perhaps  regarded  as  abominable.  Full  funeral  ceremonies  are  not 
performed for all the persons who died one of those deaths. 8in other words 
they  may  not,  or  are  not  given,  complete,  full  and  formal  burials. 
Furthermore, the burial of a person who dies a bad death is not attended by 
common people but by specialists which are versed in the essential rituals 
involved. For example among Offa-Yoruba, a person killed by Shango (god 
of Thunder) is buried by Baba Magba, the devotee priest of the god, shango, 
at the spot where the deceased person had been struck dead or in the “evil 
forest” while the deceased’s belongings are not to be touched or used by 
anybody unless the oracle directs otherwise. The same thing happens to the 
belongings of the victims of  Shaponno (the god of small-pox). It is also 
believed that people who died bad death cannot join the ancestors in the 
Land of the Dead. In actual sense, people do not even give such death any 
much thought; else, they are not discussed beyond the point of the necessity 
to dispose of them, as hurriedly as possible. That is why such deceased 
persons do not enjoy the attention given to the ancestors or are not regarded 
as such and as such they are not remembered nor are they provided with 
ancestral shrines. However, modern change tends to make burial procedures 
more even or similar for everybody, excepting that it may be noted that 
while, generally, clansmen dig the grave when death occurs, a father does 
not dig grave of his son or daughter, or husband for his wife.


--- PAGE 86 ---
As for good death, it is that which comes when one lives to a ripe old 
age. Indeed, so far as it is beyond what is normal or expected to have some 
special power as well as unpleasantly severe and painful, death is regarded a 
uncanny (strange in an uncomfortable way) and disturbing when it occurs, 
yet the death of an aged person is an occasion of much rejoicing in as much 
as  the  elaborate  ritual  is  heaviest  when  a  funeral  ceremony  is  being 
organized, since people see nothing so strange about it. Of course, there are 
occasions when the death of a young man or woman is not considered totally 
bad: For example, such a person must have lived an exemplary and good 
life; and must have left behind some children of high social standing and 
reputed for their achievements; such that in consequence, people believe that 
the departed will have a good place to occupy among the ancestors in the 
abode of the ancestors in the abode of the spirits. Although they lament and 
mourn such death, they still give the deceased a befitting burial.
There is also what people refer to as premature or untimely death. 
Offa-Yoruba believe that the death of a person – young and old – must have 
a cause or must have been brought about in one or the other way by some 
evil forces, namely: sorcedry ‘Ogun’ (magic power) and ‘aje’ (witchcraft). 
These are often regarded as the cause of the untimely death of young people. 
That is why when a young person dies his clansmen often try to find out and 
believe the pronouncements through the oracles of divinity or divinities, as 
enunciated by the latter’s priest(s) or priestess (es), the cause of the death.
Respecting what people call natural death, this may come as a result 
of old age. The person may ass away after a brief illness. But when an old 
person dies as a consequence of an inexplicable disease or a prolonged 
sickness, people still ascertain whether or not the death is due to some


--- PAGE 87 ---
human evil machination. However, there are times when old people really 
know that death is imminent. As such, such people usually send for their 
sons, daughters and some dear and close clansmen who are not at home to 
come back home in good and quick time, before he, the dying man, draws 
his last. At death-point such dying man gives advice to his children and other 
people  concerned  as  to  what  they  are  to  bury  him (in  the  house  or  in 
cemetery) and the type of funeral arrangements he wants. He could tell them 
the people he owes and what he owes them; what other people owe him; 
where he keeps his money and the people in partnership business with him; 
including his capital outlay in the business and what they should do with the 
inheritance he is leaving behind.
Further to the above, he blesses his children, talks about those who 
have passed away before him; as if he is already together with them in the 
ancestral abode, an indication that he is getting prepared to give up the 
ghost, as people by his death-bed begin to sob and make all sorts of effort to 
save him from dying. Although people already know that the man is old 
enough to die, his words at death usually bring tears and people shed them. 
Even as the man’s hairbreadth escape turns out hopeless, the deceased’s 
children and clansmen are happy that their father/head of the family is dying 
a good death and that he is going “home” to join his own ancestors. For in a 
sense,  it  those  who  die  a  good  death  that  are  given  impressive  burial 
ceremonies. That is why people everywhere strive to die a good death which 
alone will entitle him to a formal burial, and to as much as possible, avoid a 
bad death which will not only deprive them of burial rites but also deny 
them admittance to a good place in the world of the spirits. Hence, this 
sounding note of warning to Offa-Yoruba man, like any other good man,


--- PAGE 88 ---
thus: “E ma sika laiye tori ao ro run; E ma sika laiye o tori ao rorun; t’ a ba 
de bode ao rojo”. Meaning: “Thou shall not do wickedness on earth, because 
thou shall go to heaven; Again, thou shall not do wickedness on earth, 
because thou shall go to heaven. At the gate of its thoroughfare ye shall 
recount  the  deeds  ye  did  while  alive19.  Emphatically,  befitting  burial 
ceremonies are the ones meant for people who die good death.
WHERE DO DEAD GO AFTER DEATH?
The duo-question that where do the dead people go? And what really 
happens to the deceased persons go after death? May be answered on these 
points: that at death, as we have already intimated, the soul does not die; but 
that before it separates from the body at the death of a person, it gets a taste 
of it (death). That in any case, after death – physical death – all those who 
die return to God,  in heaven, and equivalent Yoruba saying that “Ti a ba ku 
orun  li  anlo”.  That  the  Yoruba-man  has  reassuring  confidence  in  his 
abncestopr in the spirit world when he says “O di owo baba mi l’orun” 
meaning “To thy care O my bosom father in heaven, I commend myself”. 
That in the ‘forward’ page of “Education” by Ellen G. White (1952:7), the 
author’s definitionof education that “True Edducation” is well defined as the 
harmonious development of all faculties – a full and adequate preparation 
for this life and the future eternal life” has established the fact that death is a 
transition or change of place of death especially passage from this life to the 
next, such that it means that our life’s period of existence on this planet 
called earth is an apparent life of probation.
Realistically,  as  our  stay  on  earth  epitomizes,  each  person  is  a 
sojourner  in  transit  upon  it  with  a  destination  to  reach  in  sight.  The


--- PAGE 89 ---
destination in sight in this case is what Offa-Yoruba call “orun” – “heaven” 
such that the time between the two distinct period of living and passing 
away from the world incorporates the features of life that now is and the life 
in the hereafter with a change or passing from one condition of living in self-
sufficiency or man-made imperative of live-and-let-live indulgency at the 
former place of activities, etc, to another, that of living-dead, consisting of a 
state of misery, not deserving the name of life. The Yoruba have an idea of 
“atorun  bowa  saiye”,  “a  coming back  from heaven  to  enjoy  life”.  This 
imputes that somehow they hope that there are those have departed that will 
come back to life here on earth, or at least they expect to meet again; maybe 
at  “home”,  “ile”,  as  heaven  is  called  in  Yoruba.  Thus,  from  Yoruba 
philosophy of life: “Aiye l’oja” – “The world that now is what we should 
call market place”; “orun ni’le” – “Heaven is the home”, one can say that is 
why  when  an old  person  dies  at Offa,  the obituary  is published  in  the 
newspaper(s) or announced throughout the town by women singing, after the 
dead has been laid to rest, “Ile o, ile o ilke, Baba re ile re, lle lo lo tara ra” a 
song  expressing  the  deceased  man’s  feeling  home  sick  of  his  home  in 
heaven, as if he has been longing to go to his celestial or heavenly home, 
since “ile” means home and “Baba re ‘le re; ile lo lo tara ra” means “father 
has  gone  to  his  (ceslestial)  home;  to  that  heavenly  home  he  has  gone 
straight”20.
Nevertheless, from the muddled idea about the “soul” that dates back 
to  the  very  early  times  when  men,  under  the  stimulus  of  a  dream  of 
apparitions,  came  to  believe  that  their  thinking  and  sensation  were  not 
activities of their bodies; but believe them to be those of the distinct soul in-
dwelling in them. That is to say that is the soul which inhabits the body and


--- PAGE 90 ---
leaves it at death. Hence, one is inclined to conclude that the living soul and 
the “soul” of the deceased were similar to, as well as different from, each 
other. That is to say from the time men have been driven to reflect about the 
relation between this so-called in-dwelling “soul” and the outside world such 
that it follows that if upon death the soul took leave of the body and lived on 
and there was no occasion to invent another distinct death for it, the Offa-
Yoruba religious philosophy asserts that in comas and dreams, as in death 
and eternal sleep, one’s “soul” temporarily drifts and leaves the body at 
death  and  after  a  while  returns  when  he  (the  dying  man)  has  regained 
consciousness. Thus there arose the idea of its (man’s soul’s) immortality 
and becomes the living-dead; in that at death a person’s soul leaves his body 
permanently for another world called variously as the world of spirits, the 
Land of Dead, the ancestral world, etc.
Hence, this “soul” was/does called “the soul of the dead”or“ghosts 
exist independently in the naturally really physical world but invisible to the 
human eye and against it people are defenseless. In a nut-shell, all of the 
above show that among Offa-Yoruba, the concept of soul; and ghost-viewing 
is extremely common among the Yoruba of Nigeria21. It is the spirit of a dead 
person come from the world of spirits. The separation of this soul from the 
physical body at death has been confirmed by St Mark (8:36): “for what 
shall it profit a man if he shall gain the whole world and lose his own soul”? 
While it’s (the soul’s) existence in the Land of the Dead, lasting there for a 
long time, is at the same time affirmed by the saying that “John Brown’s 
body lies a-moldering in the grave. His soul (i.e. his ghost) goes marching 
on”.


--- PAGE 91 ---
Alongside “Life after death”, belief in the hereafter is confirmed many 
times  and  in  various  places  in  the  scripture  books  of  both  Islam  and 
Christianity. The Yoruba-Muslim’s believe that as the living people pray for 
their departed so are the latter (the dead) for the former (the living). Yoruba 
quite often say : As we invoke God’s mercy and blessings upon the living till 
the latter (the living) shall come to join and be like them in “Ipo oku” or 
Iwale Aja” – i.e. “in the sepulchers” where they are more than sepulchral 
effigies as they exist in their own right, as an embodiment of wordily power, 
even when the long withheld from his remains, that is, succeeding or prior to 
sepulchral  ceremonies,  the  dying  man  hears/heard  his  own name  in the 
hollow sepulchral tones of death22.
There is a section in the Qur’an which affirms that for a whole month, 
after death, the deceased Moslem hover over his former place of abode 
looking over the living, his or her survivors, and watching at what they are 
doing with his property, in cash and kind and the treatment of his family – 
wife/wives and children – left behind – whether they are treating them good 
or bad – before his final departure from the house23. In accordance with this 
observation; Yusufu Ali’s statement (1975) that “why should man disbelieve 
in the Hereafter” presupposes life in the afterlife. (Qur’an  p781). It is this 
belief in life that has resurfaced in the belief in the Hereafter as well as in the 
belief in “the Day of Judgement”, as it is frequently being called and hinged 
on God’a warning that “every evil deed must have its punishment” “which”, 
it  is  said,  “often  begins  in the  very  life’s  time  of the  living”.  Thus, in 
fulfillment of the Covenant-based bilateral agreement between man and his 
God, A. Yusuf Ali (1975) says in his “The Holy Qur’an24” that “The first 
need is to mend our lives and worship and serve God--------”. The next is to


--- PAGE 92 ---
realize the meaning of the Hereafter, when every soul (i.e. the in-dwelling 
soul which quits the physical body of the deceased at death) will get the 
need (i.e. reward of praise that hath gotten thee fame) of its conduct in this 
life”, as God says:
“Verily the Hour is coming my design is to keep it hidden (or make it 
manifest) for every soul.
They receive its reward by measure of its (soul’s) Endeavour25.
THE OFFA-YORUBA THEORY OF “ORUN RERE, 
ORUN APADI”.
Although to know where the deceased persons go after death is a 
desire of ages, the “orun rere,  orun apadi” theory of the Yoruba ought to 
have begun our discussion of the Yoruba belief in life in the Afterlife and 
further explanation of what really happens after death. The “orun rere, orun 
apadi” (“The good heaven, bad heaven”) theory seems to answer the aged-
old question of the life and death, especially the one which asks about the 
whereabouts of the dead after death and confirms the “Ultimate Reality” of 
happenstances of the existential and transcendental life of every man after 
death,  Dr.  Tm  Laftaye  in  his  “Life  in  the  Afterlife”  (1980)  says  that 
“Everyone has a vested interest in the life beyond death”.
Unlike what Christian doctrine says and teaches about this that in-
between the good heaven (paradise) and the bad heaven (hell or heaven of 
torment) there is the great gulf fixed (1980:31), the Yoruba good heaven, bad


--- PAGE 93 ---
heaven theory seems to compare the whole kingdom of heaven with that of a 
great king that consists of two different states with one full of people doing 
great mischief on earth and the other filled with obedient, peaceable people 
but constantly subject to incursions from wild tribes from whom the good 
people were willing immunity to be procured for them by their conqueror, 
by paying their conqueror tributes in return for their protection against the 
incursionists.
The conqueror obliged and built-in between the two a strong barrier, 
constructed of iron and with iron gates. The jambs (upright posts) of the 
Gates were constructed with blocks or bricks of iron while the interstices 
(narrow  openings)  were  filled  up  with  mutton  lead  so  as  to  form  an 
impregnable mass of metal. The blocked entrance so constructed provided 
the permanent protection the good wanted from the bad; while the closing of 
a mountain gap between them and through which incursions were made on 
the  good  people  provided  the  much-needed  permanent  precaution  that 
separates the good from the bad such that neither was unable to see the other.
On the other hand, in order to gain a complete picture of the Old 
Testament teachings on the subject of where the dead reside at long last, Dr. 
Tim Lattaye (1980:28) gives a description of Sheol and Hades both of which 
are the abode of the dead. Though Sheol is the temporary place of the dead, 
Proverbs 9:18 describes it as “A place where the dead exist”; Psalm 86:13, 
“A place for the soul”; Psalm 9:17, “A place for the wicked and those who 
forget God”; Genesis 44:29, “Even a godly Jacob expected to be there”; 
Psalm 88:3, “David expected to go there”; Psalm 89:48 “All men will go to 
sheol”; Eccelesiastes 9:10 describes the Land of the Dead as a place where 
there is no work” or “knowledge” or “wisdom”. It has been said that thirty-


--- PAGE 94 ---
nine books of the Old Testament refer to sheol as the world of the dead 
sixty-five times. As for its translation; the word sheol may translate to mean 
“grave”, “hell” or “death”. Of course sheol must not be confused with “the 
pit” or the “lake” of fire. For, it is the place of all those who have departed 
this life, e.g. both believers and unbelievers (Tim Lattaye 1980:27).
The New Testament has its own word (or name) for the World of the 
Dead. It is ‘“hades”, appearing therein forty-two times’. Again; as Jesus 
Christ Himself used it eleven times, “Gehenna” is also the New Testament 
word for the permanent place of the dead in contrast with Hebrew word 
“sheol”. However, both refer top the afore mentioned temporary place of the 
Dead; whereas “Hell” is a permanent place of Torment for those who died as 
wicked’.
According  to  Tim  lattaye,  the  Land  of  the  Dead  has  been 
compartmentalized into three: Paradise and Hell with portion in-between 
them called “the Great Gulf Fixed”, an impassable gulf which separates the 
righteous from the unrighteous, but over which the latter may took and 
converse but not cross, as had happened in the story of lazarus and the 
certain  rich  man,  narrated  in  Luke  16:19  –  31.  “The  most  complete 
description of Sheol and Hades in the Bible came from Jesus Christ Himself. 
(Luke 16:19 – 31; Tim Lattaye), 1980:29). The upshot of it all is hereby 
epitomized by the Yoruba saying that “oloto o ni sun n’ipo ‘ka” meaning that 
“the truth-sayer will never have his eternal sleep in the sepulcher of the 
wicked”.
However, going by the description of the three compartments of the 
Place of the Dead, by Lattaye who did so with impressive substantiations


--- PAGE 95 ---
from the Old and New Testament sayings, though he himself said that very 
few details are given about the “Greta Gulf Fixed”, we have been intimated 
with the fact that it is an impassable gulf over which men, at death, may look 
and converse but not cross over. Its attribute of the kind of contraplex. (e.g. 
system  of  sending  messages  in  opposite  directions)  by  God’s  own 
contraption has led Christian teachings to postulate that God designed it so 
that those who want to pass from ‘here to there’ cannot; nor can those who 
want to come from ‘there to here’ pass across, making it, therefore, evidently 
a chasm that separates the believers from the unbelievers, the wicked from 
the righteous in the next life. Once a person dies, he is confined to one side 
or the other – comfort or torment side.
In the midst of this selfsame vein of the thought, there are sanbe 
sayings about escape from Sheol-Hades. One of them concerns one of the 
many  outstanding  changes  wrought  by  death,  burial  and  resurrection  of 
Jesus Christ which consolidates the belief in Christians that when a present 
day believer in Christ (or any Christian during the church age) dies, he no 
longer goes to Sheol-Hades; his soul proceeds immediately to Heaven, to be 
with his Saviour, Jesus Christ26.
OUT-OF-THE-BODY EXPERIENCE.
Although to know where the deceased person go after death and what 
become of them in post-life afterlife is a desire of ages, we need to be 
careful not to be confused a bit by the vague similarities between out—of-
the-body experience research findings per turning to the “soulish state” of 
the deceased and the claims of many ancient or modern groups of writings


--- PAGE 96 ---
which, by the way, are only a tip of iceberg, for many books recount such 
events. The availability of such books shouldn’t discourage us; for “life after 
death” is pretty a heavy stuff. By its characteristic feature, on the demise of a 
person, the “soulish state” describes the on-going condition of the dead. We 
may  have  already  noted  that  the  “soulish  state”  of  the  dead  has  been 
described in Luke 16:19 – 33 as a condition of life that is quite different 
from  that  of  our  physical  life;  it  is  conscious  and  recognizable;  it  can 
converse and be comforted or tormented; in that state earthly events are 
remembered and those who go to torment may not pass over into comfort. 
While the part of this statement suggests the unforceable forgiveness of sins, 
it is unthinkable that the Old Testament believers could be said to “have 
been taken by Christ up into paradise (the place of comfort in the Land of 
the Dead) where they have been joined by the souls of Christians at death 
ever  since  the  first  century.  The  soulish  state  is  both  conscious  and 
immediate upon              death” 2  .
We have had some comprehensive look at life in the Afterlife. In Offa 
there has been increasing fascination with life beyond the grave, a concern 
over what happens to the soul, that is, the in-dwelling soul that gives driving 
force  to  the  physical  body,  after  death.  There,  at  Offa,  many  amazing 
experiences have been reported by people who were considered clinically 
dead but then “miraculously revived” to tell the story of their out-of-the-
body experience. Available are also stories of sick bed/death bed visions 
while at the present and future activities of the dead are being revealed to the 
people through the pages of God’s written revelations to man in the scripture 
books of Islam and Christianity respectively. It is these important accounts 
of life that we have turned, to discuss in greater detail and to shed light on


--- PAGE 97 ---
the age-old questions of life and death. When a man faints or an Offa person 
da’aku, he is regarded as being clinically dead for a while, and out of the 
body  such  that  after  revival  to  life,  he  narrates  his  out-of-the-body 
experience activities he performed.
FOOT NOTES
1. Newell S. Booth, Ibid, p148
2. Ralph Waldo Emerson (1985), Coming 
back: The Science of Reincarnation; London: The 
Bhaktive danta Book Trust, p1.
3. Ibid, p140
4. Yusuf Ali (1975), Qur’an p775n. 2492.
5. Ibid.
6. Kwamena Amponsah (1975), Topics on 
West  African  Traditional  Religions:  Religious 
Studies, vol II p63.
7. p 186
8. Ibid, p53


--- PAGE 98 ---
9. Johns Mbiti (1969), African Religions and 
Philosophy, p149.
10. E.B. Ellis (1974), Ibid, p157.
11. That is, a young tree, especially a young 
forest tree, i.e., a young or inexperienced person.
12. Gone are the days when otherwise is the 
case, as enunciated in A.B. Ellis (1974), p158.
13. K. Amponsah, Ibid, p66; J.S. Mbiti, Ibid, 
pp150 – 156.
14. Ibid 15. Ibid.
16. E. Bolaji Idowu (        ), Olodumare, God in
Yoruba Belief, p190 in K. Amponsah, Ibid, p66.
17.    Ibid, p159.
1. J.S.  Mbiti  (1975),  Introduction  to  African  religion’s  London: 
Heinman, p114.
2. Interpretation mine.
3. Interpretation mine.
4. Social sciences in China vol III (1982) No 2


--- PAGE 99 ---
June, 1982, p174
5. The World Book Dictionary vol II, p1883
6. “Oro o nile” (1974), Radio Nigeria
programme, Ibadan.
7. Page 792n. 2545.
8. A. Yusuf Aliu (1975), The Holy Qur’an 
p792 – 3.
9. Tim Lattaye 1980: 32 – 33
10. Ibid, pp 34 &35.


--- PAGE 100 ---
CHAPTER 4
OTHER SPECIFICS ON DEATH
Other specifics  on death are definite statements concerning  death, 
including what happens after death. They shall run on the following:
OTHER RITES PERFORMED BEFORE THE LIVING AND THE DEAD 
FINALLY PART COMPANY
After interment, the deceased is believed to be around for a number of 
days and until certain ceremonies are performed he will not get a place in the 
abode of the ancestors. In consequence, on the third day of the burial another 
ceremony takes place in the house of the deceased. This ritual ceremony is 
called in yoruba ‘lki ta’ or third day of burial ritual’ in English. On this day, 
the children of the deceased will another animal known as ‘’the beast to 
accompany the deceased ‘’ as well as prepare loaves of beans – Akara. On 
this occasion people again eat, drink and make them—relives merry. Again 
on the seventh day there is yet another ceremony which is a little more 
elaborate than that of the third day. It is called ‘lki je’ in yoruba, meaning 
‘’the seventh day burial ceremony. This is the day spirit of the death will 
finally set out on his journey to the spirit world. At dawn of this seventh day, 
the windows (if there be any) who have been living in confinement till that 
day are brought out. They are washed ritually to get them out of the first 
phase of their widowhood, One write says that widow may be continued in a 
room for about forty days. During the period her clothes should not be 
washed  in  consonance  with  “Ofo”-   “unwashed”  -ritual  regarded  as


--- PAGE 101 ---
imperative for observance1  other authorities, Omosade Awolalu and Ade 
lumo Dopamu (1979)1 say  that  after  widows  have been washed ritually 
during the “Ije” – “seventh day burial ceremony”, they can now go out to 
farm, market and stream . but they cannot yet attend ceremonies during 
which they could be hailed with fanfares in showy parade of any kind or go 
to visit anyone with pomp until the second phase, taking place on the fortieth 
day, is over. The widowhood period spanning forty days is the period styled 
“ofo” – the unwashed period otherwise referred to as the period of mourning 
which varies with the rank and influence of the deceased. For some obvious 
reasons some cults (or traditions) demand that other ceremonies should be 
performed on the thirteenth, seventeenth and fortieth day of the burial of the 
deceased.
Usually the second phase of the widowhood ends on the fortieth day 
when another ceremony similar to that performed on the third day preceding 
is performed, killing or not killing an animal, since either of these depends 
on the financial strength and capability of the survivors. However, without 
doubt bean-cakes (akara) are provided and given to the people present. The 
widowhood rite performed in the manner described above is to ward off the 
spirit of the dead. For on the last day of the forty day ceremony, they (the 
widows) have to shave off their heads which may be taken to be a symbol of 
separation between the dead and the living, showing in particular that their 
husband has been separated from them and at the same time regarded as an 
indication of Yoruba belief that death does not destroy life since the growth 
of new hairs on the shaved heads indicates that life continues as they spring 
and reappear2. Sequel to this, the widows can make thanks-giving visits to 
those who assisted at the funeral ceremony and/or sympathized with them


--- PAGE 102 ---
during their period of grief. They are now free to go to anywhere they 
please. For after all funeral obsequies have been performed and celebrated 
with  the  utmost  grandeur,  fanfare  and  solemnity  in  a  way  and  fashion 
befitting to bid farewell to and prepare the spirit of the deceased for “Ehin 
iwale  Aja”  i.e.  “Life  beyond”.  Contrary  to  this,  the  rel;=atives  of  the 
deceased are disgraced if they are unable to hold proper funeral ceremonies 
for their dead; because his spirit would not be able to get to the Land of the 
Dead,  unless  the  rites  are  fully  and  completely  performed. As  a  result, 
relatives and children of the deceased, therefore, go abbnorowing. In the 
process huge sums of money are borrowed to finance the observances of the 
rites and, not inconsequential, the relatives are by so doing become heavily 
indebted. As huge debts are thereby incurred and most relatives sell their 
properties to pay off their debts, such plight quite often reduce them to 
almost a state of beggary, after carrying out the funeral rites. They, or some, 
even pawn their children to raise the money necessary which sometimes the 
borrowers are unable to defray for several years running.
For those who want not to believe in this sort of thing and kick against 
the  traditi9onal  practice  of  this  kind,  their  case  has  a  number  of 
substantiations. For instance there is the belief that the deceased is present 
spiritually during burial of his corpse and the performances of the funeral 
rites. There is also the belief that it is when the important aspect of the 
funeral ceremony is performed and so neatly concluded that the deceased 
will actually be given a permanent place of rest in the spirit world. Because 
if not so done he (the soul of the deceased) will prowl about, haunt human 
habitations  and  become ever restless. Although  some consider  5that the 
second phase of burial ceremony is of first importance and magnitude, they


--- PAGE 103 ---
also hold that if the seventh day ceremony is elaborate and the fortieth day 
ceremony is performed, they are enough to gain the deceased admittance 
into the spirit world to the effect that the observance of the second burial 
ceremony wh8ich, in this case, is to feed the people, can be postponed 
indefinitely; considered long enough more so that a commemoration – feat is 
often held a year after the death of a person, especially a noble man3. The 
commemoration – feast taking place a year after the death of a person is a 
ceremony which, if performed, is known as the ceremony of calling back the 
soul of the departed to his people”, principally the nuclear family and it 
amounts to a sort of renewal of covenant between the living and the dead 
relatives4.
On the fourth day, that is the day following the burial of the deceased 
person, mourners carry on the feast till the evening of the next day when the 
bones of the victims that have been sacrificed and those of the fowls, sheep 
and goat that have been eaten by the guests are collected and placed on the 
grave of the deceased; while all the articles used daily by the deceased, such 
as his tobacco pipe, his mat on which he slept, the plate or plates or vessels 
from which he ate, his calabashes from which he drank and other things like 
pillows, cups, etc, are carried into the bush and burned. Meanwhile, up to 
this point it is believed that the soul of the deceased is supposed to have 
been lingering near his old home and destruction of his property now is 
intended to signify to the soul of the dead that he must depart from his old 
home, since there is no longer anything belonging to him in the destruction 
of the deceased’s property was carried much further. Speaking of the Yoruba 
ceremonies at birth, marriage and death generally, A.B. Ellis (1974:159) says 
that “usually the apartment in which the deceased is buried is closed and


--- PAGE 104 ---
never used again sometimes the roof is removed’’. According to him rich 
families even abandon the house altogether; and it said to have been usual in 
the days by-gone to burn it. In the final process of all these parting funeral 
rites  the  deceased  is  called  by  his  name  three  times  and  adjured 
(commended) him to depart, for he is no longer to haunt the dwellings of the 
living. After this invitation to be gone, the soul of the departed quits the 
house and other environs.
ANNIVERSARY CELEBRATION OF THE DEAD
However, in modern times, at the one-year anniversary celebration of 
the deceased man’s demise, if the be Christian, depending upon the agreed 
resolution at a meeting of the family – heads for the occasion, or at the 
fortieth day funeral  ceremony, if he be a Moslem, where and when all the 
relatives and friends well wishers are gathered for a big funeral occasion for 
the dead and all and sundry are in festive mood till the occasion lasts. This 
ceremony, as elaborate as it might be, puts an end to all the interruptions of 
normal rhythm of life caused by the death of the departed. It also puts an end 
to all the restrictions hitherto imposed on the normal life of the homestead of 
the  deceased,  may  be  following  the  death  of  the  family,  viz:  as  such 
restrictions are lifted, normal life resumes, for there after the widows are free 
to remarry, if they want to; the property of the deceased can now be shared, 
arrangement as concerning the taking care of the children and other care of 
the late man’s household are also made.
Finally, observingly, the yearly ceremony marking the remembrance 
anniversary of the death of a deceased one is, partly, a symbolic way of 
‘revising’, ‘inviting back’ the departed and thus renewing contact with him


--- PAGE 105 ---
in the next world; and, partly, declaring a formal resumption of life. In terms 
of African-Yoruba religious philosophy, it is a ritual celebration of a man’s 
conquest over death: for according to such religious philosophy, death has 
only disrupted, it has not destroyed, the rhythm (functioning) of life. It also 
indicates that the departed is not really dead. Rather, he is a living-dead and 
can be contacted, invited back and drawn into the human circles. During the 
ceremonies it is patently  clear  that son, in Offa-Yoruba society, plays  a 
leading and continuing role in the ceremonies of his father’s funeral, e.g. in 
keeping up his (father’s) memory and in caring for the household in place of 
his father, the ceremonies which mystically (or mysteriously, hidden from or 
beyond human knowledge or comprehension) link the human world with 
that of the departed.
COMPLEX  SOCIETY DUE  TO  CULTURE  COMPLEX  IN  MODERN 
OFFA
It may be said, in the fineness of feelings, thoughts, tastes, manners, 
etc, that the study of culture complex of Offa modern society, consisting of 
traits of the traditional culture, Islamic culture and Christian culture, shows a 
process by which the prevailing trait or pattern of culture spreads outward 
from the point of origin of Yoruba traditions  and practices, the original 
whirl-pool of the ripples of culture complex. Of truth, Emory S. Bogardus 
says  that  when  missionaries  are  sent  from  one  country  to  a  “heathen” 
country, culture diffusion may take place……..’5. notwithstanding, there is 
the truth that despite the social and economic pressure of our time as well as 
the  impact  of  the  influence  of  the  Islamic  and  Christian  teachings  and 
preaching  against  extravagant  spending  and  expenses  being  lavished  on 
traditional  funeral  ceremonies,  that  is,  with  reference  to  this  kind  of


--- PAGE 106 ---
particular system of hero worship among the Yorubas in general, especially 
the cult (or custom) of funeral rites and ceremonies, as described above, 
great admiration for the cultic sayings and ritualistic practices by which 
Yhoruba belief in the cult (tradition) of their culture hero which had grown 
after the latter’s death – though continually being frowned upon by people of 
Islamic and Christian faiths in theory – seems to be flourishing in practice, 
and not perhaps, aggravated by the elites of our societies. Namely, today, in 
Offa,  the chief Yoruba  town  of the Ibolos  in Kwara  State,  corpse  of a 
deceased Christian could remain embalmed and kept in mortuary for several 
months before interment, if the siblings and other close relatives  of the 
deceased are well to do. Though Moslems bury their dead the instant one of 
their members dies, the expenses lavished on the eight and fortieth day 
funeral ceremonies always looked alarming whenever they took place and 
got one stunned and spelt bound. In both Christian and Moslem funeral 
ceremonies, huge debts are often incurred and cannot be said to be so a 
meager  incurrence  of  liabilities  enough  to  doom  the  cost  of  traditional 
obsequies to condemnation. As of now, neither Christian nor Moslem funeral 
ceremonies incorporating personal responsibility for the costs of  asho ebi 
and the number of cows to be felled by individuals could condemn the costs 
of funeral ceremonies of old to drudge (mere hard work). On the strength of 
this observation, it is trite saying that nowadays’ cost of funeral ceremonies 
in Yorubaland drowse away the cost of those of the olden days.
For instance, there is a popular Oshogbo story of a rich man, Pa 
Oparinde, who died in the early 1950’s and his corpse laid in a glass cofin, 
over-laden  with  five  hundred  pounds  of  those  days  (now  one  thousand 
naira): one hundred pounds each was put under each of his feet; his left and


--- PAGE 107 ---
right foot respectively and another one hundred pounds each under his left 
and right hands in like manner while the remaining one hundred pounds was 
put under his head. Other valuables like gold, clothes (made up of costly 
materials), etc, were included. All inserted in the coffin were put on display 
in the glass coffin placed on the hearse rolled round the town in majestic 
motion and with pump and pageantry of a well-balanced music of aro (tgwo 
pieces of music-making iron by striking), shekere (another music-making 
implement – a gourd covered with cowry shells shaken to produce music 
sounds) and talking drums. Amidst the joyous people in the procession were 
men of the underworld who, when the hearse was ear-marked to head for the 
Baptist Church cemetery, dispersed to go and get ready for their usual deal 
of night marauding activities intended to exhume the corpse this time around 
and make away with all the valuables contained in the entombed cofin.
Unaware that all valuables were removed, that the corpse alone had 
been left intact in the grave, the exhumers betook themselves to their self-
imposed  task  of  removing  the  earth  from  the  six-foot  sepulcher  with 
seriousness and ardency till they reached the coffin which they removed 
with  very  great  care.  They  broke  in  upon  the  corpse  of  the  deceased 
rampageous and searched for what they could get to carry away, but to no 
avail. Indeed, none was found to their disappointment, dismay and disgust. 
Annoyingly, therefore, they left the exhumed corpse uncared for, even when 
they left it nakedly. In that bare state, the deceased lay till the following day 
when the death of a child was reported to the Reverend in-charge and the 
latter and the parents of the dead child went into the cemetery to choose a 
site for the child’s grave. When they came to the deceased man’s corpse, 
lying down naked, it was eye-sore. As a result, the Rev. turned about and


--- PAGE 108 ---
rushed home to get a cover cloth which he used to cover the naked body of 
the deceased, noble and elderly in his life time. There after, the Rev. ordered 
that death knell be tolled which caused Church elders to want to know for 
again the bell was being tolled. They rushed in to vicarage to inquire who 
died again from the Rev. They were told the story of the ugly situation of 
what transpired. The Church members were surprised and arrangement was 
quickly made to re-bury the exhumed corpse. Today, burying gifts, in 
cash and kind, with the deceased is no longer  in practice  among Offa-
Yoruba.
In  the  abiding  sense  impressed  upon  our  mind  by  Islamic  and 
Christian teachings that trend towards causing men and women of nowadays 
to depart from the evil of extravagant spending on funeral ceremonies and 
practice of ‘ancestor-worship’ as well as seeking at the same time to reform 
people’s social life, we are quite often told that material things entombed 
with the corpse of a dead person are of no benefit or advantage to the 
deceased. Essentially, this sermon which requires some deep consideration 
calls to mind a similar but popular story about the Englishman who went to 
place a wreath on the tomb of a deceased relative at the same time that a 
Chinese was putting rice on the tomb of his own deceased relative.
The  Englishman  characteristically  asked  the  Chinese  “’my  friend, 
when is your relative going to eat the rice that you are offering?’ to which 
the Chinese promptly replied ‘when yours is smelling your flowers’”6.
In Offa-Yoruba town of today, while it is true that social change effect 
came into the people in the wake of spread of Islam and Christianity, it is 
also substantially true that continuity of culture of the past and social change


--- PAGE 109 ---
effect are abiding pari-passu with the people, with the survivals of the past 
always manifest in the said social change effect. For instance, all funeral, 
including all ritual, ceremonies put together are a ritual celebration of the 
deceased’s conquest over death has only disrupted and not destroyed the 
rhythm (the functioning) of life, as being preached by the saying that “Jesus 
Christ died, rose from his death on the third day and ascended to heaven 
thereafter”7.
Though the grave is, paradoxically, the symbol of separation between 
the dead and the living, turning it to the shrine for the living-dead converts it 
(the grave) to the point of meeting between the two worlds, an equivalent 
belief of the cruciferous (cross-bearer, as in ecclesiastical processions); yet 
social change effect has had considerable impact on Offa-Yoruba, indeed 
African, culture.
We may mention also that whatever be the case in Offa, burial is the 
commonest method of dealing and dispensing with the physical body of the 
dead.  In  doing  this,  different  customs  are  followed. 
Sometimes the people bury the body inside the house, in the room where the 
person  was  living  at  the  time  of  death.  Sometimes  it  is  buried  in  the 
compound where the homestead is situated. Sometimes they bury the body 
behind the compound and sometimes the corpse is carried to the cemetery 
for burial. The shape of then grave commonly found is rectangular and lying 
horizontal on the ground, not circular or round as those of the Gwaris of 
Niger State of Nigeria. Method of disposal of corpse and funeral rites and 
ceremonies, described above, apply mainly to those who are adults and are 
at old age or die normal death.


--- PAGE 110 ---
As coined and explained by John S. Mbit (1975) 8. explanation of the 
living-dead is as follows: While surviving relatives remember the departed, 
the spirit of him (the departed) more or less leads a personal continuation of 
the life which later on has become what we have called the living-dead. This 
is because people regard the spirit, otherwise referred to as in-dwelling soul 
and, therefore, the driving force of the human person while alive, as being 
much like a human being, although it is dead. We have already intimated 
that at death, the in-dwelling soul does not die but here we are affirming that 
when it separates from the body at the death of the body, it (the in-dwelling 
soul) gets a taste of death. On several occasions when it (the former in-
dwelling soul) appears to members of the family, they will say that they saw 
‘so and so’. Up to that point it has not lost its personal name and identity. 
During this period of appearances of the spirit and its visits which may last 
up to four and even five generations, it is possible for something of the 
features, characteristics and personbality of sucyh a spirit (called formerly 
the in-dwelling solul in man, but now the living-dead) to be noticed, even in 
a newly born child. When this occurs then the people would sa ‘so and so’ 
has come back, has returned or has been reborn.
DEATH AND BELIEF IN LIFE AFTER LIFE
By its real scholarly explanation and interpretation of the principle of 
dedath, reincarnation is not a “belikef system” or a psychological device for 
escaping the “grim finality” of dedath; rather it is a precise science or an 
assayhed statement that explains and interprets “our past and future lives”. 
We have heard quite often and many books have been written on the subject, 
usually based on hypnotic regression; near-death experiences, accounts of 
out-of-the-body  experiences,  etc.  by  hypnotic  regression;  we  mean


--- PAGE 111 ---
dreamlike reversion of a dead person to an earlier stagte of condition of the 
living when he was alive.
Indeed, it is generally believed by all men that death is not an end to 
life but a means to a new life in eternity. Of truth, from the earliest times in 
Africa, men had been accustomed to place in the graves of their dead the 
things that they (the dead) had used and enjoyed in this world and would 
equally require in the next of course about the existence of that world, there 
was no doubt whatsoever, but the inconsistencies and contradictions with 
which  the  Offa-Yoruba  man  has  accepted  this  belief  nowadays  make  it 
difficult to discover quite (completely) what was/is his conception of the 
future life after life, i.e, life after death. However, that the Offa man of the 
old  kingdom  believed  firmly  in  a  future  life  is  certain.  Because  he 
recognized the fact of physical death; only he was unable to conceive of any 
form of existence other than that of the physical life. Therefore to him; the 
difference between the living and the dead was one of degree rather than of 
kind. The belief prevailing at Offa was that the dead lived on but in less real 
manner. Thus, they (the dead) required food and drink, just as they had done 
in this world before they died. Hence a prudent living man would do all he 
could  to  ensure  that  that  provision  was  regularly  made  for  his  (the 
deceased’s) soul’s sustenance.
However, since it was patently clear to him as true that the dead could 
not and did not eat nor drink, it was the spirit to which the offering was 
made that mattered rather than its (the soul’s) sustenance, such that, in the 
Egyptian experience of the Pharaoah’s days, a loaf of painted wood was as 
satisfactory as a wheatened loaf (or loaf of wheat bread), the wine-jars and 
tray full of meat – meat carved in relief (or in engraved relief) on the walls


--- PAGE 112 ---
of the tomb chamber – were as sustaining as actual meat and wine, and had 
the advantage of being incorruptible. The same goes for Offa-man of old. 
Indeed  according  to  him  the  dead  man  was  actually  alive  in  his  tomb 
(grave). Altruistically, in the olden days, that was the reason for the care 
taken to preserve the body of the deceased from decay or destruction, and, in 
his  belief,  because  decay  was  only  too  probable,  a  portrait-statute  was 
immured (enclosed within walls or entombed) which would, in case of need 
act as the body’s substitute 9.
Generally it is a Yoruba belief that the dead was not dead. He was 
always alive. A curious illustration of his belief, in the literal truth of the 
dogma, is afforded by the gifts with which the dead were entombed. The 
pictures of such oujtpouring are not in any sense a memorial of the wealth 
and luxury that the man had enjoyed in his lifetime. It has been supposed 
that they represent scenes of what obtain in the next world, characteristically 
conceived as being a replica of this world – this explains the Yoruba saying: 
Bi a ti nse laiye ni an se lo run” – and that their presence in the tomb would, 
by sympathetic magic, ensure for the dead man just the enjoyment of such 
things as he had most enjoyed while alive; that there too, in the world, he 
would be the lord of broad acres, owing the cattle so realistically figured on 
the tomb walls, feasting and hunting, just as the relief (i.e figures or designs) 
on the tomb walls showed him doing: such a belief, one may assert, does 
seem to have been developed in the later phases of Yoruba history when men 
were obsessed to a far greater extent with the thought of another world and 
the germs of such belief may well have been present in the muddled minds 
of the later Offa-Yoruba.


--- PAGE 113 ---
Though deriving from ordinary life of the people, objective, light-
hearted and full of bustling activities, they believed that the owner of the 
tomb is not dead and living in the tomb he looks on at life as he has known 
it, though he no longer can play a direct part.
Generally too, paradoxically, early Yoruba man was not very deeply 
interested in another world to which man may go after death, except in line 
with the fact that the whole of his elaborate funerary ritual aimed at securing 
the  continuation  of  life  in  this  world,  of  course  subject  only  to  those 
conditions which the fact of death imposed. Such a belief is the belief of a 
prosperous and happy people who enjoyed life so whole-heartedly that they 
could not endure the thought of losing it (life); 10 as opposed to some, the 
poor, for whom costly burial was impossible; but presumable they got as 
much happiness as they could out of life when they were alive and vaguely 
hoped for the better, or even the best, thereafter. Since aforetime, the belief 
has it that “A man survives after death. His deeds are laid beside him for 
treasure”.
REINCARNATION
From birth to death, experience of man is not unconnected with Offa 
belief system. This belief for discussion is about the belief of life after death 
together with the principle of reincarnation. Such belief in reincarnation 
reaches the conclusion that the existence of strong personal attachments and 
the  facts  of  death  is  the  most  upsetting  and  disorganizing  to  man’s 
calculation’s ending up abruptly. These personal attachments and facts of 
death are perhaps the main sources of Offa religious beliefs. In his life 
experience, the man undergoes various transformations in his present nature


--- PAGE 114 ---
at different stages. As at birth, and as a child, man’s powers of mind and 
body remain yet undeveloped. But as he grows they too grow and certain 
moral  qualities such as courage, daring with the will to conquer unfold 
themselves. In the extreme old age, however, these are again obscure and a 
second childhood supervenes (i.e. come directly as consequence of old age) 
such that the back of the man who formerly walked proudly straight and 
erect is now bent whilst his vivacious dispositions gradually extenuates till 
he dies. Hence, this Offa belief system sees death as the most disruptive of 
all the events of catastrophes, since it removes a family member away into 
the spirit world. Therefore, Offa religion, be it traditional or otherwise, deals 
with the problem of death in the following manner of reincarnation thoughts.
In  our  academic  approach  to  understanding  the  principle  of 
reincarnation, we dare to state that a funeral ceremony expresses the belief in 
immortality which denies the fact of death, which merely necessitates soul 
transmigration into the world beyond as well as reappears in the present 
world later on as “Babatunde” or “Yetunde” (i.e. “Papa or Mamma has come 
back to life again”) as the case may be. Other mourners support the bereaved 
by their presence at the funeral ceremony of the departed, which in the long-
run comforts the bereaved, even as at the time when the departed is being 
given  appreciation  to  the  full  life  he  spent  just  as  other  encomiums 
overwhelm him. The comfort and support checks the emotions which death 
produces. It also controls the stress and anxiety, which might disrupt society. 
Further to this, during the goings-on at the funeral ceremony, the community 
group  unites  to  support  the  bereaved  while  at  home  or  abroad.  This 
expression of social solidarity reintegrates Offa society.


--- PAGE 115 ---
That  by  its  real  scholarly  explanation  and  interpretation  of  the 
principle of death, reincarnation is not a belief system, or a psychological 
device for escaping the “grim finality” of deadth; but a precise science that 
explains ‘our past and future lives’. We have heard quite often, and many 
books have also been written on the subject, usually based on the hypnotic 
regression; near-death experiences, accounts of out-of-the-body experiences, 
etc. By hypnotic regression, we mean dreamlike reversion of a dead person 
to an earlier state of condition of living when he was alive on this planet. 
That the belief of Offa-man in reincarnation is like that of the British poet 
laureate, John Masfield (1985)  11 who in his well known poem about past 
and future lives, writes:
“I hold that when a person                                                    (an  
Offaman) dies                                                                            His soul  
returns again to earth,                                              Arrayed in some 
new  flesh  disguise, 
Another mother gives him birth                                               with 
sturder limbs and brighter brains,                                     The old soul  
takes road again”.
Indeed,  Offaman  believes  that  at  death,  man,  the  living  being, 
transmigrates  from  one  body  to  another.  In  other  words,  transmigration 
relating to the doctrine of reincarnation of the soul in a human body after 
death, represented by death, refers to the passing of a ‘soul’ (‘emi in Yoruba) 
at  death  into  another  body  for  the  purpose  of  metempsychosis. 
Metempsychosis is the passing of the soul at death from one body into 
another. In other words simply put, it is the transmigration of the soul. Offa-
Yoruba belief in this respect apart, some oriental philosophies teach that by


--- PAGE 116 ---
metempsychosis a person’s soul” lives in an animal’s body” 17. The belief in 
metempsychosis  is,  therefore,  a  characterizing  feature  of  most  animistic 
religions and has reached a high degree of sophistication in Buddhism and 
Hinduism. Animistic religions are religions founded on animism whereas 
animism itself is an attribution of spirit or soul to inanimate things 13.
ON THE WHITEMAN’S CONCEPT OF ANCESTORWORSHIP
AFRICAN  NATIVE  VERSUS  WESTERN  IDEOLOGYOF 
LEGITIMATION
Standing  apart  from  the  Whiteman’s  ideology  of  legitimating;  by 
Christian clerks who came to Africa to propagate Christianity, emphasizing 
the  necessity  of  their  religion  as  better  than  or  superior  to  the  African 
traditional religion which the Africans have to abandon in preference to 
theirs, it is important to assert that in Offa of old, spirits and idols were – and 
still are – not being worshiped as it is erroneously believed by the white men 
and  their  apologists.  The  error  of  such  belief  derives  from  the  wrong 
interpretation of the Yoruba verb world ‘bo.  In this author’s belief and 
understanding, the Yoruba verb word ‘bo’ is an abbreviation of these Yoruba 
words ‘bu owo’ or ‘bowo’ which in English mean or means ‘give respect’. 
Of course this kind of respect is given with a bow, as we bow our heads in 
prayers to the Almighty God. So that by extension, if we say in Yoruba to 
someone: bo ori baba we are saying, in English, to that person to have an 
occasion to venerate his living-dead father in order to propitiate the latter 
and assuage his dangerous anger without necessarily involving Christian or 
Muslim mode of worship.


--- PAGE 117 ---
Though relations, well-wishers, other people of goodwill, etc, gather 
together to grace the occasion with a kind of festivity that involve eating, 
drinking  and  dancing,  the  occasion  therefore  was  for  merry-making  as 
people  eat,  dance  and  wine  to  their  fill,  as  on  a  Valentine’s  Day.  The 
occasion is without religious setting, in the modern religious sense. It is 
totally  wrong for anyone  to interpret  ‘bo ori baba’ to mean  worship  of 
ancestor or ancestor worship; just as the Yoruba epithet ‘Aborisa’ must not 
beseen as “The who worships ‘orisa’ (god) but rather as one who passes his 
supplications to the ultimate God for accomplishment through a divinity, 
which now serves as conveyor-belt in the transcendental duties between man 
and God. Such interpretation of the festival occasion of veneration of one’s 
living-dead is erroneous and particularly derogatory because our contention 
in this respect smacks of the scripture books of the modern religions whose 
Yoruba  and  English  editions  have  one  of  their  verse  which  decrees  as 
follows: “Bowo fun bba ati iya re ki ojo re ki o le ba pe lori ile ti oluwa 
olorun re fi fun o”. Its English translation reads: “Honour thy father and thy 
mother that the Land on which you are may be prolonged”. Since the Yoruba 
word  “Bowo”  was  not  interpreted  to  mean  worship  but  “Honour”  –an 
equivalent,  venerate,  etc  –  there  is  no  gainsaying  the  fact  that  ancestor 
honouring or ancestor venerating (or veneration) is not the same as ancestor 
worship,  more  so  that  many  dictionary  meanings  of  worship  include 
ceremonies or services, often formally prescribed, in honour of God.
ANCESTOR WORSHIP
Ancestor worship in Yoruba is “ori baba bibo”. It is a kind of hero 
worship or veneration that involves special anniversary celebration of some 
cultural carnival that derives from a postulation that we need to do honour to


--- PAGE 118 ---
our dead. In Yoruba culture there is usually death, burial and mourning. The 
Offa-Yoruba are always aware of the dead such that even when they don’t 
know where somebody is buried, there is a symbolic burial, as hunters’ 
guilds are wont to do burying the deceased man’s effigy (or image) called 
“ipa”.
As the lives of the dead and the living are seemly inseparable, in Offa-
Yoruba culture if a man has not laid his dead to rest their ghosts (the ghosts 
of  the  dead)  are  believed  to  be  floating  and  believes  that  a  lot  of  the 
problems he is encountering evolve primarily from the fact that his dead 
have not been shown the gratitude by him; the living folk, and have not been 
accorded a befitting repose, invoking blessings upon blessings on the living 
children, grand children and great grand children for long life and prosperity 
while prayers perfect repose of their ancestors are said to round up the 
occasion of the pouring of libation that puts paid to the ceremony. In spite of 
the Whiteman’s derogatory name assigned to this occasion of honouring the 
ancestors, carnivals of sumptuous meals comprise the ceremony which is not 
different from what many nations do, including the Federal Government of 
Nigeria and the Nigerian Army, under the Armed Forces Remembrance Day 
on January 15 of every year to commemorate the repose of martyrs and 
gallant heroes in war.
FOOT NOTES
1. West African Traditional Rfelikgion (1979) p26.
2. John S. Mbiti (1975), Introdujction to African Religion;


--- PAGE 119 ---
London: Hieneman, pp 114 & 115.
3. A.B. Ellis (1974), PP 159 & 160; Omosade Awolalu, et 
al  (1979),  pp  261  &262;  Kwabena  Amponsah 
(1975), pp 66 & 67.
4. J.S. Mbiti (1969), African Religions & Philosphy, p151
5. The World Book Dictionary vol I (1974), p513.
6. E. Bolaji Idowu (1973), African Traditional rfeligion; 
London: SCM Press Ltd, p179.
7. New Tgstament Text: Mathew, Luke.
8. Mbit, John S. (1969), Introduction to African 
Religion; Ibid, p119.
9. Leonard, Wooley Sir (1963), The B egining of 
Civilization; London: George Allen & Unwin Ltd, 
pp 718 – 719.
10. Ibid, p720
11. Coming Back: The science of Reincarnation, p11.
12. The World Book Dictionary (1974), vol II, p1295
13. Ibid.


--- PAGE 120 ---
CHAPTER 5
OFFA-YORUBA  TRADITIONAL  ECONOMY  AND  COMMUNITY 
DEVELOPMENT ECONOMIC ACTIVITIES IN OFFA
Economic institution is an important Offa institution in the life of a 
people. In Offa economic activities consist mainly in subsistence farming. It 
is the income earner for about 80% of the adult men. It is the income for 
about 80% of the adult men. Agricultural crops include yam, cassava and 
potato. No export crops are cultivated in any commercial quantity. There is 
no cocoa and no palm produce. There are abundant farmlands. It consists of 
shifting cultivation, use of hoes and cutlasses and bush burning. There are 
long distance farmers. There are farmers who travel several miles before 
they  reach  their  farms  on  which  they  dwell  for  several  months  before 
returnbing home. Some of these come home during festival celebrations, like 
“Odun awe” (Idil Fitril: Moslem Ramadan festival); “Ile-ya” (Idil Kabir or 
Greater  Biaram  –another  Moslem  fesytival  during  which  rams  are 
slaughtered). They may come home during Christmas or during traditional 
festival of “non maka” (or “Laare”: First fruit ceremony of yam festival). 
About 10% each accounts for crafts and traders respectively. As for trading, 
a complex marketing pattern moves agricultural Products from producer to 
consumer and imported good come into the town from various parts of the 
federation. The businessmen are merchants, distributors, wholesalers and 
retailers  who  by  so  doing  help  to  make  essential  commodities  reach 
purchasers/ consumers at grassroots level.


--- PAGE 121 ---
TRADITIONAL NATIONAL ECONOMIC LIFE IN OFFA –YORUBA.
Objective  of  this  topic  are  to  discuss  and  to  list  sources  of  economic 
development  of  our  environment,  to  appreciate  the  contribution  of  the 
economic  development  to  societal  development.  The  two  make  good 
bedfellows;  and  to  explain  the  role  of  human  resources  in  economic 
development.
The economy of any nation has many aspects which can be divided into 
three main sectors namely the primary sector made up of agriculture which 
include farming, forestry, fishing, poultry and livestock; the secondary sector 
which includes manufacturing, processing and construction; and finally the 
tertiary sector which consists of Banking service; trading and teaching etc. ln 
this part of this book, we are solely concerned with the Agriculture primary 
sector which is agriculture farming is an integral part of agriculture animals: 
it involves management of domestically  animals so farming is the most 
prominent  aspect  of  agriculture.  Farming  includes  livestock,  crop 
production;  and  fishing.  Farming  is  crop  production  has  been  for 
subsistence. Subsistence farming is when a farmer produces for the feeding 
of his family only. Nigeria is yet to produce for export. We are yet to reach 
the  stage  in  agricultural  development  when  export  of  food  crop  will 
contribute a large chunk of our foreign earning. However, the main crops 
produced in Northern part of Nigeria are Beans, Guinea corn, Rice, Onions, 
Millet, Pepper, Tomato, Sugarcane, Cotton, Groundnut etc. Most of these are 
also produced in offa. Among offa- Yoruba the usual economic unit is the 
family, nuclear or extended and sometimes, elders or family head who holds


--- PAGE 122 ---
the entire family land in trust are responsible for the allocation of land for 
use by the various families according to their needs. Often the land is not 
given fully to individual owners but is regarded as being held in trust. That a 
family may use the land but not own, as ownership might harm the future 
well- being of the family, i.e., the larger family as a whole. The altitude 
towards land holding is an old one and still persists in many parts of the 
town. From the point of view of usufructuary right; Land planted with cash 
crop, and crop planted for cash sale, may eventually become the property of 
the family  member planting  the trees,  due to long years of use e.g for 
subsistence farming. This is the practice not only in offa but in Yoruba land 
in general, recovery of such pieces of land from the allottees is often two 
difficult, if not impracticable, to accomplish. The area of ground devoted to 
subsistence crops varies with the size of the family, the land of soil and the 
amount of labour required clearing the bush. In offa –yoruba crops produced 
are yam, cassava, maize, kola nut, oil, cocoyam, etc. Although some crops 
such as tobacco, groundnut, cotton, palm produce, kola nut, rubber etc. are 
industrial raw material, none of these could be reagarded as being produced 
on commercial quantitly in offa for export trade.
Types of Soil in offa.
Sand Soil
Clay Soil
Loamy soil 
Silt.


--- PAGE 123 ---
The best soil for farming is loamy soil. Loamy soil is a mixture of sandy and 
clay soils. It is always dark in colour, showing the prosence of decomposed 
plants and animals. It also contains almost all the macro nutrients. It has 
moderate pore spaces.
FARM WORK
This done by all members of the family, especially those who are able to 
wield a hoe, more so those who are known to do so with dexterity. Here sex 
roles are involved. Generally the men concentrate on clearing and burning 
the bush to make farm and planting operations; the women look after the 
weeding and harvesting. The chief farming tools are the hoe and the cutlass. 
Hoes vary in size. Often a large and fairly heavy hoe is used for digging 
while light one is for weeding. Although it has been criticized as a primitive 
and inefficient tool, the hoe has certain advantages: it is light and handy to 
use; it is easily made by local blacksmiths or cheap and easily available to 
buy at village stores; it suits the Africans soil which is often too thin for any 
heavy farm implement to dig deeply; it allows the farmer to cultivate large 
areas too broken up by tree trunks and laterite rocks for easy ploughing.
PRACTICED SHIFTING CULTIVATION
By this system of farming, a patch of bush is cleared. Or in the forest, 
trees and bushes are felled in the middle of dry season. They are left to dry 
out before being burnt. In the drier savannas of Offa people the withered 
shrubs and grasses are burned off at the end of dry season. So that after 
farming for two or three years, it is allowed to go back to bush while another 
patch is made ready for cultivation. This period of rest or fallow given to 
farm before it is re cultivated enables the already used up farmland to regain


--- PAGE 124 ---
the richness of its soil in the long run. However, the longer the period of 
fallow the more complete the recovery of soil fertility. This explains the 
reason for long distance farms on which live farmers who travel several 
miles before they reach their farms, dwelling there for several months, or 
make them more or less permanent places of abode.
PLANTING
After the land is cleared and the first rains have fallen, seed and tubers 
are planted. Several crops are usually planted and grown together in the 
same plot, but varieties change from year to year. Details of cultivation vary 
with the nature of the crop and the custom of the people. Customarily in 
Offa, yams are usually grown in mounds, sweet potatoes in ridges, cereals in 
furrows and cassava by placing cuttings in holes made in the soft ground. 
Unlike in the forest where little weeding is done, grain crops in the savanna, 
Offa, must be kept from being choked up by new grass springing up from 
the roots or the under growths which were not destroyed by fire when the 
bush was being burnt.
CHIEF FOOD CROPS
YAMS: These are widely cultivated during the sufficient six to ten months, 
raining season required for growth. The yam is grown from tuber cuttings 
planted in mounds of earth, and, as it is provide to support the foliage. It is a 
good food crop (at least equal in nutritional value to potato of temperate 
lands5) and it keeps well. It is eaten boiled like potatoes, mashed with palm 
oil or pounded into fufu. There is much internal trade in yams at Offa. Some 
are carried to places like Lagos.


--- PAGE 125 ---
MAIZE: This is grown without need of irrigation everywhere as wet season 
lasts for five months  5. It needs a richer and deeper soil than millets but 
yields much more grain per acre of land. It is eaten as fermented paste or 
ground up paste (tuwo) and boiled or roasted on the cob. It is also made into 
porridge.
GUINEA CORN: Typically, it is one of the staple foods. Together  with 
millets where they exist, they do well when they are grown as a wet season 
crop. They do well even on poor soils as they are used to resisting drought. 
Guinea corn can be made into ‘ogi’ and finally porridge.
CASSAVA:: This food crop is popularly  grown throughout West Africa. 
Farmers love growing it because of its advantages, it does reasonably well 
on poor soils and it can withstand both drought and a lot of moisture. If it is 
grown in a weeded plot, it will yield a crop more quickly than yam, though it 
may be left in the ground until it is wanted. Whilst growing it requires little 
attention from the farmer. Although, seemly, it is the chief food now for Offa 
people, like many areas in West Africa, it is not very nutritious, consisting 
mainly of starch without fat or protein. It has many uses. It is eaten pounded 
as fufu, or scraped, partly fermented and dried as gari, etc. Commercially, it 
yields starch and tapioca.
SWEET POTATOES:  These  are  food  crop  with  which  Offa  people  are 
familiarly  and  popularly  refer  to  them  (Offa  people)  as  “Offa  omo  a’ 
janomo” – “Offaman son of him who loves eating potato quite often”. To 
grow very well, potatoes require good aoil and a moist growing seasonb. It 
is “more nutritious than cassava” 6 but they are not an important food crop in 
many areas in which they would flourish.


--- PAGE 126 ---
LIVESTOCK FARMING
Livestock is the rearing of animals. Animals reared in Nigeria are 
goat,  sheep,  camel,  and  cattle.  Cattle  are  mainly  reared  by  the  pastoral 
Fulani. Cattle provide us with milk; goat provides meat and cow is used for 
production of beef and hides and skins used for making bags and shoes.
POULTRY FARMING
Poultry farming is the rearing of birds and fowls. Poultry farming has 
become a large industry in Nigeria today. Poultry farming is yet to reach the 
level of production for export. Birds and fowls are reared for meat. Eggs are 
sources of protein.
FISHERY AND FISHING
Fishery involves the rearing in fish ponds. Fingers hatched from fish 
eggs are grown into large fishes. Fishery is not as popular as poultry farming 
in Nigeria, most especially in Offa, pastor present.
Fishing involves catching fishes in the sea, rivers, lakes and oceans. 
Fishing is one of the important occupations of the Offa people. Fishes are 
sources of protein.
PRACTICED AGRICULTURE IN OFFA-YORUBA LANDS
By practiced agriculture we mean system of agriculture acquired and 
perfected  and  made  proficient  through  practice  that  has  continued  to 
accomplish the people’s needs in terms of food stuffs, exchange earning


--- PAGE 127 ---
locally and internationally, etc. We have referred to practiced agriculture 
because we don’t want to confuse agriculture with farming. Farming is an 
integral part of agriculture. In our study of natural resources of man, we 
learnt  about  their  influence  on  man  with  reference  to  local  and  wider 
context.  We  at  the  same  time  read  about  how  man  utilizes  the  natural 
resources in his environment. We will, in this topic discuss agriculture as 
sources of basic economic commodities. Principally, agriculture plays a vital 
role  in the Offa-Yoruba economy.  Over 80 per cent  of Offa people  are 
farmers. Agriculture, therefore, provides employment for most people in 
Offa.  In  addition  to  this,  it  provides  most  of the  raw  materials  for  the 
manufacturing industries today: palm fronds are used for basket weaving, 
fence-making and brooms; it produces food that feeds the community as 
well as earns foreign exchange for the country in modern times. As we get 
along, we shall discuss types of crops that can be found in Offa and their 
importance, as well as explain the importance of livestock, poultry farming 
and  the  importance  of  fishing  in  national  economic  life  of  the  people. 
Simply put, livestock refers to the rearing of animals.
CASH CROPS IN NIGERIA
Cash crops are agricultural products grown for the main purpose of 
selling either locally or abroad, therefore, when a cash crop is specifically 
grown for export purposes, it is referred to as an export crop. This si s 
paradox of what obtains in Offa.
Nigerian cash crops include cocoa, rubber, palm oil,, palm kernel, 
kola nuts, groundnuts, cotton benniseed, cashew nuts and tobacco. Among


--- PAGE 128 ---
the cash crops listed above cocoa, rubber, palm-oil, palm kernel, groundnuts 
and cotton are export crops. Offa has none.
The cash crops available in the forest belts of southern Nigeria include 
cocoa, rubber, palm oil, palm kernel, kola nuts, cashew nuts and tobacco. 
The cash crops available in northern Nigeria include groundnuts, cotton and 
benniseed. Even where these are to be available in Offa, they are always in 
very small quantities, too small for exportation purposes.
PALM PRODUCTS
Nigeria has been a very good source of palm products to the European 
countries ever before colonization. Two important products from the palm 
tree are palm-oil and palm-kernel. Palm trees grow well in the forest zones 
of southern Nigeria. Palm trees provide the main cash crops in the Cross 
River, Imo and Anambra states of Nigeria. A large quantity of palm trees are 
also found in Bendel, Ogun, Oyo and Ondo states. Nigeria is still the largest 
exporter of palm products in the world. In 1969 alone, Nigeria exported 
36,700 tones of palm oil and 176,100 tones of kernels to foreign countries 7.
Palm products are used in different ways both locally and abroad. 
Many of our industries use palm-oil for the manufacturing of margarine, 
different types of soap as well as candle. Palm-kernels are also crushed for 
producing oil. Palm-kernel oil is processed in some industries into perfumes 
and manufactured products. Importantly edible oil, palm-oil, is pressed out 
and obtained not by machinery but by hand methods, production is not on 
commercial quantity. People traveled far away, in the past to “Odo Ehin” or 
“Iyin”, a town in Ekiti, but nowadays to Onitsha, in Anambra State, to buy 
affordable quantities for local consumption. Hence some history books call


--- PAGE 129 ---
Offa-Yoruba ‘Ibolo’ meaning “palm-oil gatherers” 7. (R.S. Smith (1969), The 
kingdoms of the Yoruba p169).
Palm products are very important in the lives of every Nigeria for they 
provide  oil  for  cooking  as  well  as  our  local  soap.  The  Nigerian  Palm 
Produce Board markets the palm products of Nigeria and Offa-Yoruba are 
not exempt.
GROUNDNUTS
Groundnut which was introduced into Nigeria by the early Portuguese 
traders also has its origin traceable to America. Groundnuts grow well in the 
savanna areas of northern Nigeria. Groundnuts require very minimal rainfall, 
even though it can still tolerate heavier rainfall. Some major groundnut-
producing areas of Nigeria include Kano, Ktsina, Sokoto and Borno. The 
Nigerian Groundnut Board markets the groundnuts.
Nigerian groundnuts are not only for domestic consumption but also 
for export. Groundnut oil is used in the manufacturing of soap as well as 
margarine and ‘kuli-kuli’ (groundnut cake) a commodity carried about by 
Nupe hawkers, to their customers.
COTTON
Cotton is grown for local consumption as well as for importation in 
some parts of northern Nigeria. Large  hectares of cotton plantation are 
found  in  Katsina,  Sokoto,  Kano  and  Zaria.  The  Nigerian  Cotton  Board 
markets our cotton. Nigeria cotton is used by local cloth weavers as well as 
textile factories. Textile factories are sited at Ikeja, Kano, Kaduna and Aba. 
From this yarns (spun threads for weaving) are, in the past made in Offa.


--- PAGE 130 ---
KOLANUTS
Kola nuts are harvested from the kola trees. Kola trees are available in 
the forfest zones of Nigeria. The trees are planted by peasant farmers. The 
nuts are usually eaten raw. Kolanuts are produced in Ogun and Oyo states 
for internal trade. Kano is the chief kola nut market in Nigeria. Some Offa 
farmers talk about production of these in small quantity, very few of them.
OFFA-YORUBA FOOD CROPS
Food crops are sometimes referred to as subsistence crops. They are 
crops which are grown only for home consumption. Farmers grow food 
crops mainly for consumption of the family but surpluses are usually sold in 
the local market.
Important food crops of the forest belts of the south are root crops 
such as yam, cassava and cocoyam. Others include pepper, okro, melon as 
well  as  different  types  of  fruits  such  as  oranges,  bananas,  pawpaw, 
pineapples, pears and sweets potatoes. Other food crops grown are mostly 
grains, such as maize, millet, guinea corn, and rice.
FISHING OCCUPATION
Although it is mostly coastal peoples that engage in fishing, in Offa 
fishing is carried on in small streams with hook, line sink and hook attached 
to a reasonably long stick by both children and adults. Apart from Afelele 
lagoon no body of water nearing that of China’s Yellow River floods that is 
being constantly controlled with dikes exists in Offa. But, apparently there is 
a man-made ditch. Water from it could be conveyed for irrigation purposes 
while fishing in it is affordable. In lagoon such as this, various kinds of traps


--- PAGE 131 ---
are used to catch fish, e.g., the movement of fish being directed by long 
bamboo  making  under-water  fences  into  the  conical  or  spherical  cane 
baskets. In many territories of West Africa, “fishermen employ harpoons and 
spears with either fixed or movable heads” 8. This is not practiced in Offa. In 
addition  to  the  above-mentioned  as  approved  obtainable  in  Offa  other 
methods used in rivers and streams in Offa include the harmful method of 
poisoning fish in isolated pools during raining season. After the fish have 
been landed, they are taken over by the women who may either be the 
families of the actual fishermen or by traders who are ready to buy the 
catches.  Pertinently,  some  of  the  fish  caught  is  sold  fresh  for  local 
consumption. A little “is preserved on ice” and sold as iced fish in town. The 
greater part is, however, preserved by various other methods, namely: small 
fish are dried in the sun, larger ones are dried either by smoking in ovens or 
by salting. And depending upon the method used and the thoroughness of 
curing, “dried (or smoked) fish” could remain edible for periods of between 
one and six months 9, as may be easily found on sale in Offa markets and 
elsewhere by Nupe (Tapa) fish mongers. Fishermen of various types know 
the type of tackle to be used as well as know when to go fishing. From 
experience,  it has been stated by local fishermen that fish are fewer in 
numbers and harder to catch these days than they once were. This may or 
may not be true, but if it is, among the several reasons which can explain it 
are those ones: (1) good fishing areas have been fished too much and too 
many fish have been taken out of their waters; (2) small fish have been 
caught in fine-meshed nets (= networks) before they have had time to breed; 
(3) streams have been poisoned. These reasons must, in time, have reduced 
the stocks of fish in particular areas. Remedies appear to lie in governmental 
control of the methods of fishing in the Offa Local Government Area as well


--- PAGE 132 ---
as in the development of fish farms in order to re-stock freshwater fisheries 
of the area.
ANIMAL REARING AND ANIMAL PRODUCTS
SHEEP AND GOAT
Most families in Offa keep sheep, goats and poultry. Sheep and goats 
are kept by old men and ladies. These sheep and goats bear a Biblical 
resemblance to each other and usually have hairy coats and tough, strong 
flesh. From home to home, their numbers vary. They haunt the compounds 
and houses looking for what to pick and eat. Offa-Yoruba men and women 
traders often travel to the north-east Nigeria to buy sun-dried sheep and 
goat’s flesh for sale at home, Offa.
HORSES
Here at Offa, a few horses were reared in Offa and chiefs’ compounds 
and noble men’s. But since they are no longer required for military purposes, 
their ownership in town is now a luxury; yet they remain the joy and pride of 
the chiefs who sparingly ride them.
PIGS
These  were  introduced  into  coastlands  of  West  Africa  by  the 
Portuguese. The small, ugly, long-headed West African pig commonly found 
in Offa and the surrounding villages resembles that found today in southern 
Spain. They are regarded as unclean by the Muslims; but they are sometimes 
found in dirty areas of the villages around Offa and around refuse dumps in


--- PAGE 133 ---
Offa township, living on what they can forage and scavenge for themselves, 
occasionally eked out by a ration of chaff from corn or millet.
CATTLE REARING
It is said that apart from goats and dwarf cattle found in some parts of 
Nigeria, domesticated animals are not easy to rear owing to which transmits 
in its bite a disease called trypanosomiassis, the presence of the tsetse-fly-
free area. This makes animal rearing possible. Unlike in the north where 
laden donkeys and horses, used for transport, are a familiar sight along the 
roads, most flocks of cow and herds of other animals – sheep and goats – are 
owned by nomadic tribes called ‘Cow’ Fulani who move from place to place 
in search of seasonal grazing grounds called transhumance and water for 
their  animals.  Economically  speaking,  majority  of  the  cattle  commonly 
found along the roads are of the Zebu type and the sheep have hairy coats, 
which, when tanned, provide good leather. Especially valuable in this respect 
are the fine skins of the Red Sokoto goats, which for centuries have been 
imported from north-west Nigeria during Ileya (Idil Kabir). The well-known 
tanhouse is located in Sulu’s compound, Popo area, Offa and headed by the 
late Alhaji Raji Alawo. Cows raised in Offa area are often sent by rail or on 
foot, to be slaughtered in markets oif Offa, but those exported to Offa from 
the north are for Offa abattoirs and markets of Lagos, Onitsha, Ibadan and 
other cities in the south. To the Fulani cattle are a source of wealth and 
money rather than food. They sell live beasts for cash and buy meat from 
village/town  butchers  and  grain  from  the  farmers.  In  farmlands  around 
Fulani cattle ranchers, cattle dung left on fallow fields are paid for with grain 
by farmers. Both men and women butchers are seen engaged in meat selling 
all over the town. (Ibid, pp70 – 74).


--- PAGE 134 ---
PROBLEMS OF AGRICULTURE IN NIGERIA, 
OFFA-YORUBALAND
There are many problems which badly affect agriculture in Nigeria. 
The same apply to Offa. Finance: This simply means money. There is hardly 
enough money to put into agriculture in Nigeria. Not all farmers benefits 
from  agricultural  loan  scheme.  Land  tenure  system:  In  Nigeria,  land  is 
fragmented  according  to  kindred.  So  there  is  hardly  enough  land  for 
commercial agriculture.
Conservatism: Taboos and belief in superstitions and the failure of our 
people to agree to change or adopt the new method of farming is yet another 
problem adversely affecting agriculture in Nigeria. In some parts of Nigeria, 
some lands are associated with evil spirits and therefore not farmed at all. 
Also, some lands are not farmed at certain periods of the year, for fear of the 
wrath of the spirits. Furthermore, our people have always failed to adopt the 
scientific method of agriculture. Some believe that the application of 
fertilizers and the use of hybrid variety crops will “kill” their soil. 
Lack of extension workers: The absence of agriculture extension workers 
who educate the farmer on the best method of farming is another factor 
which badly affects agriculture in Nigeria. Because of this, Farmers are not 
educated on the use of different types of fertilizers in farming and the 
application of pesticides. 
Use of crude implements of farming: Our people still use some crude 
implements of farming such as hoes and knives. The use of these 
implements causes low agricultural productivity. Hot damp climates are 
quite enervating and prohibitive to long hours of work in farmlands.


--- PAGE 135 ---
Solutions
Money should be made available to the farmers through liberalization 
of the agricultural loan scheme. The present land tenure system should be 
abolished. Farmers should be educated on the modern method of farming. 
They should have knowledge of the use of fertilizers and pesticides. Farmers 
should  also  be  educated  on  the  dangers  of  their  conservative  idea  and 
superstitions attached to lands. Modern tools of farming should be provided 
to farmers in form of incentive:
Importance of Agriculture
Production of food for man. Agriculture makes the foods we eat. All 
the essential food nutrients, vitamins and minerals which help man’s growth 
are  available  in  the  food  we  eat.  Agriculture  helps  us  to  produce  raw 
materials for our industries. For example, sugar cane is used in the sugar 
factories. Timber is used to manufacture plywood. Cotton wools is used in 
the textile industries. Hides and Skins are used for making shoes and leather 
bags. Groundnut is used in the production of groundnut oil and animal feeds. 
Agricultural  products  are  sources  of  foreign  exchange  for  the  country 
Nigeria exports goods such as palm produce, cocoa, groundnut, etc to other 
countries. It is also a source of national income. Agriculture is a source of 
employment to many Nigerians. More than 70 per cent of Nigeria is engaged 
in agriculture.
PEOPLE’S AUTHOCHTHONOUS INDUSTGRIES
From  society  to  society  in  Africa,  autochthonous  methods  of 
development of local industries differ, in terms of economic systems. At the


--- PAGE 136 ---
twi-light of colonial era in Africa when social engineering on the continent 
began, societies were simpler, not complex as industrial societies are today. 
Their respective economies were traditional in forms and contents. Trade 
wars involving keen competition were absent. During the colonial era trade 
by barter – trade by exchanging one kind of goods or services for other 
goods or services without using money – gave way to money economy when 
the method of production and distribution of products took a new dimension. 
However, each of the African societies has its own traditional economies 
which has certain features in common with others’, universally manifesting 
characteristics in the method of organizing system of producing goods and 
servicing its needs for its own perpetuation and in arranging the distribution 
of  the  fruits  of  its  production  among  its  own  members;  so  that  more 
production can take place.
In  Africa  today  there  are  three  ideal  types  of  economic  systems: 
economy run by tradition; economy run by command, and economy run by 
market.  We  shall  focus  our  attention  on  economy  run  by  tradition; 
production and distribution are based on procedures originated in the distant 
past. In this type of economic system of production; the individual quite 
often takes on the job which his father and grand father had undertaken and 
continues to be undertaken by the offspring from time immemorial, with a 
kind of hereditary chain which assures that certain  skills  and  crafts are 
passed  on  from  one  generation  perpetually,  perhaps  repeating  and/or 
following production method in exactly the same way(s). the same goes for 
distribution method, e.g. by porterage. This is the type of economy that is 
predominant  in  virtually  in  Yorubalands  till  modern  time,  not  perhaps 
alongside other types of economies. In Offa, there abound Ile Alogbede, Ile


--- PAGE 137 ---
Onigba, Ile Gbena, Ile Atagi Soro, Ile Ologa Ile Aponbi. Edach of these 
houses is a compound of specialists who had once specialized in one trade or 
the other. For example, in Ile Alagbe, there live people who are practicing 
backsmithing,  Ile  Ologa  had  once  been  the  home  of  slave  buyers,  Ile 
Balogun is now the compound of the people who were war fighters, etc.
FOOT NOTES
1. J.S.  Mbiti  (1975),  Inroduction  to  African  Religion,  p10  in  R.  A. 
Owolabi (1984), Yoruba Religion & medicine in Offa, p 47.
2. Population Census, 1963.
3. F.G.  Higson  (1964),  A  certificate  Geography  of  West  Africa, 
Longmas, p74.
4. Ibid, p 80
5. Ibid, p 78
6. Ibid.
7. Leo Chukwuma Ogueri, et al (1989), Social Studies, p 65.
8. Ibid, p69
9. Ibid.
10. M.A. Orebanjo, et al (1990) Social Studies Macmillian, pp 63 – 69.
11. Robert S. Smith (1969), The kingdom of Yoruba, p169.

