=== EXTRACTED TEXT FROM: Transnational_Blackness__Navigating_the_Global_Color_Line__Critical_Black_Studies_.pdf ===
Extraction Method: PyPDFLoader
Total Pages: 375
Timestamp: 2026-01-04T17:06:35.552321
================================================================================


--- PAGE 1 ---



--- PAGE 2 ---
Transnational Blackness
pal-mara-00fm.indd   ipal-mara-00fm.indd   i 7/29/08   10:45:30 AM7/29/08   10:45:30 AM


--- PAGE 3 ---
The Critical Black Studies Series
Center for Contemporary Black History 
Columbia University
Edited by Manning Marable
The Critical Black Studies Series features readers and anthologies examining challenging topics 
within the contemporary black experience—in the United States, the Caribbean, Africa, and 
across the African Diaspora. All readers include scholarly articles originally published in the 
acclaimed quarterly interdisciplinary journal Souls, published by the Center for Contemporary 
Black History, the research and publications center of the Institute for Research in African-
American Studies at Columbia University. Under the general editorial supervision of Manning 
Marable, the readers in the series are designed both for college and university course adoption, 
as well as for general readers and researchers. The Critical Black Studies Series seeks to provoke 
intellectual debate and exchange over the most critical issues confronting the political, socio-
economic, and cultural reality of black life in the United States and beyond.
Titles in this series published by Palgrave Macmillan:
Racializing Justice, Disenfranchising Lives: The Racism, Criminal Justice, and Law Reader (2007)
 Edited by Manning Marable, Keesha Middlemass, and Ian Steinberg
Seeking Higher Ground: The Hurricane Katrina Crisis, Race, and Public Policy Reader (2008)
 Edited by Manning Marable and Kristen Clarke
Transnational Blackness: Navigating the Global Color Line (2008)
 Edited by Manning Marable and Vanessa Agard-Jones
The Islam and Black America Reader (2009)
 Edited by Manning Marable and Hishaam Aidi
Beyond Race: New Social Movements in the African Diaspora (2010)
 Edited by Manning Marable
The New Black History: The African-American Experience since 1945 Reader (2010)
 Edited by Manning Marable and Peniel E. Joseph
pal-mara-00fm.indd   iipal-mara-00fm.indd   ii 7/29/08   10:45:30 AM7/29/08   10:45:30 AM


--- PAGE 4 ---
Transnational Blackness
Navigating the Global Color Line
Edited by Manning Marable and Vanessa Agard-Jones
pal-mara-00fm.indd   iiipal-mara-00fm.indd   iii 7/29/08   10:45:30 AM7/29/08   10:45:30 AM


--- PAGE 5 ---
transnational blackness
Copyright © Manning Marable and Vanessa Agard-Jones, 2008.
All rights reserved.
First published in 2008 by PALGRAVE MACMILLAN® in the US—a division of 
St. Martin’s Press LLC, 175 Fifth Avenue, New York, NY 10010.
Where this book is distributed in the UK, Europe and the rest of the world, this is by 
Palgrave Macmillan, a division of Macmillan Publishers Limited, registered in England, 
company number 785998, of Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire RG21 6XS.
Palgrave Macmillan is the global academic imprint of the above companies and has 
companies and representatives throughout the world.
Palgrave® and Macmillan® are registered trademarks in the United States, the United 
Kingdom, Europe and other countries.
ISBN-10: 0-230-60267-3 (hardcover)
ISBN-13: 978-0-230-60267-0 (hardcover)
ISBN-10: 0-230-60268-1 (paperback)
ISBN-13: 978-0-230-60268-7 (paperback)
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
T ransnational blackness : navigating the global color line / edited by Manning Marable and 
Vanessa Agard-Jones.
 p. cm.—(Critical black studies series)
Includes bibliographical references and index.
1. Blacks—Race identity. 2. Race relations—History. 3. Race awareness. I. Marable, 
Manning, 1950- II. Agard-Jones, Vanessa. 
HT1581.T73 2008
305.896–dc22     2008012343
A catalogue record of the book is available from the British Library.
Design by Scribe Inc.
First edition: October 2008
10  9  8  7  6  5  4  3  2 1
Printed in the United States of America.
pal-mara-00fm.indd   ivpal-mara-00fm.indd   iv 7/29/08   10:45:31 AM7/29/08   10:45:31 AM


--- PAGE 6 ---
Contents
  Introduction: Blackness beyond Boundaries: Navigating the 
Political Economies of Global Inequality 1
 Manning Marable
  Theorizing Race in a Global Context 9
 1 Race and Globalization: Racialization from Below 11
 Leith Mullings
 2 Global Apartheid, Foreign Policy, and Human Rights 19
 Faye V. Harrison
 3 The Modern World Racial System 41
 Howard Winant
 4 The Ongoing Contestation over Nationhood 55
 Anthony W. Marx
  Interrogating Race and Racism in the Americas 63
 5 A Tale of T wo Barrios: Puerto Rican Youth and the Politics 
of Belonging 65
 Gina M. Pérez
 6 Reinventing the Jamaican Political System 73
 Brian Meeks
 7 Afro-Colombia: A Case for Pan-African Analysis 87
 Joseph Jordan
  Mutual Inspiration: Radicals in T ransnational Space 99
 8 The Havana Afrocubano Movement and the Harlem 
Renaissance: The Role of the Intellectual in the Formation of 
Racial and National Identity 101
 Ricardo Rene Laremont and Lisa Yun
 9 Eslanda Goode Robeson’s African Journey: The Politics of Identification 
and Representation in the African Diaspora 115
 Maureen Mahon
pal-mara-00fm.indd   vpal-mara-00fm.indd   v 7/29/08   10:45:31 AM7/29/08   10:45:31 AM


--- PAGE 7 ---
Contentsvi
 10 Du Bois’s Double Consciousness versus Latin American 
Exceptionalism: Joe Arroyo, Salsa, and Négritude 135
 Mark Q. Sawyer
 11 “Long Live Third World Unity! Long Live Internationalism”: 
Huey P . Newton’s Revolutionary Intercommunalism 149
 Besenia Rodriguez
 12 “A Free Black Mind Is a Concealed Weapon”: Institutions and Social 
Movements in the African Diaspora 175
 Robin J. Hayes
  Europe and Asia on the Color Line 189
 13 T okyo Bound: African Americans and Japan Confront 
White Supremacy 191
 Gerald Horne
 14 Femme Negritude: Jane Nardal, La Dépêche Africaine, and the 
Francophone New Negro 205
 T. Denean Sharpley-Whiting
 15 Regionalism against Racism: The T ransEurope Struggle for 
Racial Equality 215
 Clarence Lusane
  Crafting Resistance: Identity, Narrative, and Agency 227
 16 Salvaging Lives in the African Diaspora: Anthropology, Ethnography, 
and Women’s Narratives 229
 Irma McClaurin
 17 Going Back to Our Own: Interpreting Malcolm X’s T ransition from  
“Black Asiatic” to “Afro-American” 245
 Elizabeth Mazucci
 18 Linking African and Asian in Passing and Passage 265
 Lisa Yun
 19 Out of Chaos: Afro-Colombian Peace Communities and the 
Realities of War 281
 Asale Angel-Ajani
  Race, Power, and Politics in Africa 291
 20 African American Expatriates in Ghana and the Black 
Radical T radition 293
 Kevin K. Gaines
 21 “Crimes of History”: Senegalese Soccer and the Forensics of Slavery 301
 Michael Ralph
pal-mara-00fm.indd   vipal-mara-00fm.indd   vi 7/29/08   10:45:31 AM7/29/08   10:45:31 AM


--- PAGE 8 ---
Contents vii
 22 Nuclear Imperialism and the Pan-African Struggle for Peace and 
Freedom: Ghana, 1959–1962 333
 Jean Allman
About the Editors 355
About the Contributors 357
Index   363
pal-mara-00fm.indd   viipal-mara-00fm.indd   vii 7/29/08   10:45:31 AM7/29/08   10:45:31 AM


--- PAGE 9 ---
This page intentionally left blank


--- PAGE 10 ---
I NTRODUCTION
Blackness beyond 
Boundaries
Navigating the Political 
Economies of 
Global Inequality
Manning Marable
The advance guard of the Negro people . . . must soon come to realize that if they are 
to take their just place in the van of Pan-Negroism, then their destiny is not absorption 
by the white Americans. That if in America it is to be proven for the first time in 
the modern world that not only Negroes are capable of evolving individual men like 
T oussaint, the Saviour, but are a nation stored with wonderful possibilities of culture, 
then their destiny is not a servile imitation of Anglo-Saxon culture, but a stalwart 
originality which shall unswervingly follow Negro ideals.
—W . E. B. Du Bois, 1897
1
On March 5, 1897, the newly formed American Negro Academy met for 
its inaugural sessions in Washington, D.C., W . E. B. Du Bois, then a twenty-
nine-year-old social scientist and recent PhD graduate of Harvard University, 
delivered the second paper to this gathering of black American intellectuals, “The 
Conservation of Races,” that would foreshadow much of his future life’s work. 
The paper centered in part on the question of what constituted “blackness,” or 
the construction of black identity within the challenging contexts of white-domi-
nated societies. Inside the United States, Du Bois argued, each African American 
must struggle to determine “what, after all, am I? Am I an American or am I a 
Negro? Can I be both?” Du Bois then sought to delineate the boundaries between 
Africanity, race, and citizenship that constantly confronted black Americans:
pal-mara-00intro.indd   1pal-mara-00intro.indd   1 7/25/08   1:52:41 PM7/25/08   1:52:41 PM


--- PAGE 11 ---
Transnational Blackness2
We are Americans, not only by birth and by citizenship, but by our political ideals, 
our language, our religion. Farther than that, our Americanism does not go. At that 
point, we are Negroes, members of a vast historic race that from the very dawn of 
creation has slept, but half awakening the dark forests of its African fatherland. . . .
We are that people whose subtle sense of song has given America its only American 
music, its only American fairy tales, its only touch of pathos and humor amid its 
mad money-getting plutocracy. As such, it is our duty to conserve our physical 
powers, our intellectual endowments, our spiritual ideals; as a race we must strive 
by race organization, by race solidarity.
2
For Du Bois at this time, the boundaries of blackness were defined largely 
by aesthetics, culture, and the highly charged construction of “race.” But as the 
twentieth century unfolded, Du Bois expanded his understanding about the com-
mon grounds that people of African descent shared throughout the colonial and 
segregated world. This led him to embrace the politics of Pan-Africanism, and 
efforts by black activists in the Caribbean, the United States, and Africa itself to 
overthrow white minority regimes. Intellectually, it gave Du Bois a truly global 
concept of what today would be termed “Black Studies.” Part of the mission of 
Black Studies as an intellectual project has been the remapping of collective iden-
tity and memory, in part by using Du Bois’s criteria. But it should also combine 
theory with collective action, in the effort not simply to interpret but to transform 
the world, empowering black people in the process.
During the 1960s, when Black Studies departments were first being launched 
within predominantly white academic institutions, an ideological debate subse-
quently developed over the appropriate geopolitical and cultural boundaries for 
what the study of “blackness” should comprise. Many prominent African Ameri-
can cultural nationalists, such as Kwanzaa-founder Maulana Karenga, vigorously 
argued that Black Studies must trace its intellectual lineage back to classical Egyp-
tian civilization. The black experience in the United States, in this Afrocentric 
interpretation, was a small subsidiary of a much grander African civilizational 
saga. Other black studies scholars noted the destructive effects of the transat-
lantic slave trade, and focused on the cultural and political resistance of African 
Diasporic populations scattered across North and South America, the Caribbean, 
Europe, and Asia as the decisive elements in the making of the modern world. 
Scholars largely trained in the United States often had a more parochial vision 
of Black Studies, emphasizing the local struggles waged by African Americans to 
achieve political rights and equality against the American nation-state. As a mea-
surement of the lack of theoretical and conceptual consensus among these schol-
ars, departments and programs dedicated to Black Studies still call themselves by 
various names: “Afro-American Studies,” “African American Studies,” “Africana 
Studies,” “African and African American Studies,” “African Diasporal Studies,” 
and “Comparative Race and Ethnicity Studies.”
At Columbia University, when I founded the “Institute for Research in Afri-
can-American Studies” (IRAAS) in July 1993, the precise name of the program 
was the result not of a theoretically grounded academic discussion but rather 
pal-mara-00intro.indd   2pal-mara-00intro.indd   2 7/25/08   1:52:41 PM7/25/08   1:52:41 PM


--- PAGE 12 ---
Blackness beyond Boundaries 3
a pragmatic political compromise. The “Institute of African Studies” had been 
established in Columbia University’s School of International and Public Affairs 
approximately one-quarter century earlier, and its director and small faculty were 
deeply concerned that IRAAS would colonize and incorporate their curricula into 
our own program. The decision was made to keep African American and Carib-
bean Studies distinctly separate from African Studies. Over subsequent years, as 
the fortunes of Columbia’s African Studies Program rose and fell, I came to regret 
that decision administratively, as well as intellectually.
It is impossible to relate the full narrative of the experiences of people of African 
descent in the United States, and throughout the Caribbean and the Americas, 
without close integration and reference to the remarkable history of the African 
continent, its many peoples, languages, and diverse cultures. The South Atlantic 
and especially the Caribbean were “highways” for constant cultural, intellectual, 
and political exchange between people of African descent, especially during the 
past three centuries. Pan-Africanist-inspired social protest movements like Marcus 
Garvey’s Universal Negro Improvement Association and African Communities 
League (UNIA) started in Jamaica but accelerated into hundreds of chapters across 
the United States as a mass movement, and then grew hundreds of new chapters 
throughout Central America and Africa. Documenting the UNIA’s complex story 
by focusing solely on the events of one nation, such as the United States, distorts 
the narrative and cripples our understanding of fundamental events. Similarly, 
South Africa’s “Black Consciousness Movement” of the 1970s and the brilliant 
protest writings of Steven Biko cannot be interpreted properly without detailed 
references to the “Black Power Movement” in the United States during the 1960s, 
and to the influential speeches and political writings of Malcolm X of the United 
States and Frantz Fanon of Martinique.
“Blackness” acquires its full revolutionary potential as a social site for resis-
tance only within transnational and Pan-African contexts. This insight motivated 
W . E. B. Du Bois to initiate the Pan-African Congress Movement at the end of 
World War I. George Padmore, Kwame Nkrumah, Du Bois, and others spon-
sored the Fifth Pan-African Congress, in Manchester, England, in October 1945, 
out of the recognition that the destruction of European colonial rule in Africa and 
the Caribbean, and the demise of the Jim Crow regime of racial segregation in the 
United States, were politically linked. Any advance toward democracy and civil 
rights in any part of the black world objectively assisted the goals and political 
aspirations of people of African descent elsewhere. An internationalist perspec-
tive, from a historian’s point of view, also helped to explain the dynamics of the 
brutal transnational processes of capitalist political economy—the forced move-
ment of involuntary labor across vast boundaries; the physical and human exploi-
tation of slaves; the subsequent imposition of debt peonage, convict leasing, and 
sharecropping in postemancipation societies; and the construction of hypersegre-
gated, racialized urban ghettoes, from Soweto to Rio de Janeiro’s slums to Harlem. 
As this edited volume illustrates, the twentieth century was full of examples of 
“blackness beyond boundaries as praxis”—intellectual-activists of African descent 
pal-mara-00intro.indd   3pal-mara-00intro.indd   3 7/25/08   1:52:41 PM7/25/08   1:52:41 PM


--- PAGE 13 ---
Transnational Blackness4
who sparked movements of innovative scholarship, as well as social protest move-
ments, throughout Africa and the African Diaspora.
In 1900, Du Bois had predicted that the central “problem of the twentieth cen-
tury” would be the “problem of the color line,” the unequal relationship between 
the lighter versus darker races of humankind.
3 Du Bois’s color line included not 
just the racially segregated Jim Crow South and the racial oppression of South 
Africa but also the British, French, Belgian, and Portuguese colonial domination 
in Asia, the Middle East, Latin America, and the Caribbean among indigenous 
populations.
4 Building on Du Bois’s insights, we can therefore say that the prob-
lem of the twenty-first century is the problem of global apartheid: the racialized 
division and stratification of resources, wealth, and power that separates Europe, 
North America, and Japan from the billions of mostly black, brown, indigenous, 
undocumented immigrant, and poor people across the planet. The term “apart-
heid” comes from the former white minority regime of South Africa; an Afrikaans 
word, it means “apartness” or “separation.” Apartheid was based on the concept of 
herrenvolk, a “master race” that was predestined to rule all non-Europeans. Under 
global apartheid today, the racist logic of herrenvolk is embedded ideologically in 
the patterns of unequal economic and global accumulation that penalizes Afri-
can, South Asian, Caribbean, Latin American, and other impoverished nations 
by predatory policies.
Since 1979–80, with the elections of Ronald Reagan as U.S. president and 
Margaret Thatcher as prime minister of the United Kingdom, America and Great 
Britain embarked on domestic economic development strategies that are now 
widely known by the term “neoliberalism.” Neoliberal politics called for the dis-
mantling of the welfare state; the end of redistributive social programs designed 
to address the effects of poverty; the elimination of governmental regulations and 
regulatory agencies over capitalist markets; and “privatization,” the transfer of 
public institutions and governmental agencies to corporations. Journalist Thomas 
B. Edsall has astutely characterized this reactionary process of neoliberal politics 
within the United States in these terms: “For a quarter-century, the Republican 
temper—its reckless drive to jettison the social safety net; its support of violence 
in law enforcement and national defense; its advocacy of regressive taxation, envi-
ronmental hazard and probusiness deregulation; its ‘remoralizing’ of the pursuit 
of wealth—has been judged by many voters as essential to America’s position in 
the world, producing more benefit than cost.”
5
One of the consequences of this reactionary political and economic agenda, 
according to Edsall, was “the Reagan administration’s arms race” during the 
1980s, which “arguably drove the Soviet Union into bankruptcy.” A second con-
sequence, Edsall argues, was America’s disastrous military invasion of Iraq. “While 
inflicting destruction on the Iraqis,” Edsall observes, “[George H. W .] Bush mul-
tiplied America’s enemies and endangered this nation’s military, economic health 
and international stature. Courting risk without managing it, Bush repeatedly 
and remorselessly failed to accurately evaluate the consequences of his actions.”
6
pal-mara-00intro.indd   4pal-mara-00intro.indd   4 7/25/08   1:52:41 PM7/25/08   1:52:41 PM


--- PAGE 14 ---
Blackness beyond Boundaries 5
Edsall’s insightful analysis significantly did not attempt to explain away the 
2003 U.S. invasion of Iraq under President George W . Bush and subsequent 
military occupation as a political “mistake” or an “error of judgment.” Rather, he 
located the rationale for the so-called “war on terrorism” within the context of U. 
S. domestic, neoliberal politics. “The embroilment in Iraq is not an aberration,” 
Edsall observes. “It stems from core [Republican] party principles, equally evident 
on the domestic front.” The larger question of political economy, left unexplored 
by Edsall and most U.S. mainstream analysts, is the connection between U.S. 
militarism abroad, neoliberalism, and macro-trends in the global economy. As 
economists, such as Paul Sweezy and Harry Magdoff, noted decades ago, the 
general economic tendency of mature, global capitalism is toward stagnation. For 
decades, in the United States and western Europe, there has been a steady decline 
in investment in the productive economy, leading to a decline in industrial capac-
ity and lower future growth rates. Profit margins inside the U. S. have fallen 
over time, and corporations have been forced to invest capital abroad to generate 
higher rates of profitability. There is a direct economic link between the deindus-
trialized urban landscapes of Detroit, Youngstown, and Chicago with the expan-
sion of industries in China, Vietnam, Brazil, and other developing nations.
Since capitalist economies are “based on the profit motive and accumula-
tion of capital without end,” observed Marxist author Fred Magdoff, “problems 
arise whenever they do not expand at reasonably high growth rates.”
7 Since the 
1970s, U.S. corporations and financial institutions have relied primarily on debt 
to expand domestic economic growth. By 1985, total U.S. debt—which is com-
prised of the debt owed by all households, governments (federal, state, and local), 
and all financial and nonfinancial businesses—reached twice the size of the annual 
U.S. gross domestic product (GDP). By 2005, the total U.S. debt amounted to 
nearly “three and a half times the nation’s GDP , and not far from the $44 trillion 
GDP for the entire world,” according to Fred Magdoff.
8
As a result, mature U.S. corporations are forced to export products and invest-
ment abroad, to take advantage of lower wages, weak or nonexistent environmen-
tal and safety standards, and so forth to obtain higher profit margins. T oday about 
18 percent of total U.S. corporate profits come from direct overseas investments. 
Partially to protect these growing investments, the United States has pursued an 
aggressive, interventionist foreign policy across the globe. As of 2006, the United 
States maintained military bases in fifty-nine nations. The potential for deploying 
military forces in any part of the world is essential for both political and eco-
nomic hegemony.
9 Thus the current Iraq War was not essentially a military blun-
der caused by a search for “weapons of mass destruction” but rather an imperialist 
effort to secure control of the world’s second largest proven oil reserves; it was also 
the first military step of the Bush administration’s neoconservatives to “remake 
the Middle East” by destroying the governments of Iraq, Iran, and Syria.
Although the majority of nations in the international community either 
openly opposed, or at least seriously questioned, the U.S. military occupation of 
Iraq, the neoliberal economic model of the United States has been now widely 
pal-mara-00intro.indd   5pal-mara-00intro.indd   5 7/25/08   1:52:41 PM7/25/08   1:52:41 PM


--- PAGE 15 ---
Transnational Blackness6
adopted by both developed and developing countries. Governments across the 
ideological spectrum—with the important exception of some Latin American 
countries in recent years—have eliminated social welfare, health, and education 
programs; reduced governmental regulations on business activity; and encouraged 
the growth income inequality and entrepreneurship. Even noncapitalist countries 
like Cuba have revived the sex-trade-oriented tourism business, which has con-
tributed to new forms of gender and racial prejudice in that country. As a result, 
economic inequality in wealth has rapidly accelerated, reinforcing traditional pat-
terns of racial and ethnic domination.
A 2006 study by the World Institute for Development Economic Research of 
the United Nations University established that, as of 2000, the upper 1 percent 
of the globe’s adult population, approximately 37 million people, averaged about 
$515,000 in net worth per person, and collectively controlled roughly 40 percent 
of the world’s entire wealth. By contrast, the bottom one-half of the planet’s adult 
population, 1.85 billion people, most of whom are black and brown, owned only 
1.1 percent of the world’s total wealth. There is tremendous inequality of wealth 
between nations, the UN report noted. The United States, for example, com-
prised only 4.7 percent of the world’s people, but it had nearly one-third, or 32.6 
percent, of global wealth. By stark contrast, China, which had one-fifth of the 
world’s population, owned only 2.6 percent of the globe’s wealth. India, which 
has 16.8 percent of the global population, controlled only 0.9 percent of the 
world’s total wealth. Within most of the world’s countries, wealth was dispropor-
tionately concentrated in the top 10 percent of each nation’s population. It comes 
as no surprise that in the United States, for example, that as of 2000 the upper 10 
percent of the adult population owned 69.8 percent of the nation’s total wealth. 
However, Canada, a nation with much more liberal social welfare traditions than 
the United States, nevertheless still exhibited significant inequality. More than 
one-half (53 percent) of Canadian assets, were owned by only 10 percent of the 
population. European countries such as Norway, at 50.5 percent, and Spain, at 
41.9 percent, had similar or slightly lower levels of wealth inequality.
10
The most revealing finding of the World Institute for Development Economics 
Research was that similar patterns of wealth inequality have come to be prevalent 
throughout the developing world. In Indonesia, for example, 65.4 percent of the 
nation’s total wealth belonged to the wealthiest 10 percent in 2000. In India, the 
upper 10 percent owned 52 percent of all Indian wealth. Even in China, where 
the ruling Communist Party still maintains vestiges of what might be described 
as “authoritarian state socialism,” the wealthiest 10 percent owned 41.4 percent 
of the national wealth.
11
But even these macroeconomic statistics, as useful as they are, obscure a cru-
cial dimension of wealth concentration under global apartheid’s neoliberal eco-
nomics. In the past quarter century in the United States, where deregulation and 
privatization have been carried to obscene extremes, we are presently witnessing 
a phenomenon that the media has described as “the very rich” who are leaving 
pal-mara-00intro.indd   6pal-mara-00intro.indd   6 7/25/08   1:52:41 PM7/25/08   1:52:41 PM


--- PAGE 16 ---
Blackness beyond Boundaries 7
“the merely rich behind.” One study by New York University economist Edward 
N. Wolff found that 1 out of every 825 households in the United States in 2004 
earned at least $2 million annually, representing nearly a 100 percent increase 
in the wealth percentage recorded in 1989, adjusted for inflation. As of 2004, 1 
out of every 325 U.S. households possessed a net wealth of $10 million or more. 
When adjusted by inflation, this is more than four times as many wealthy house-
holds as in 1989. The exponential growth of America’s “super-rich” is a direct 
product of the near elimination of capital gains taxes and the sharp decline in 
federal government income tax rates.
12
Inside the United States, the processes of global apartheid are best represented 
by the “New Racial Domain” (NRD). The NRD is different from other earlier 
systemic forms of racial domination inside the United States—such as slavery, 
Jim Crow segregation, and ghettoization or strict residential segregation—in sev-
eral critical aspects. These earlier racial formations, or exploitative racial domains, 
were grounded or based primarily, if not exclusively, in the political economy of 
U.S. capitalism. Antiracist or oppositional movements that blacks, other ethnic 
minorities, and white antiracists built were largely predicated upon the confines 
or realities of domestic markets and the policies of the U.S. nation-state. Mean-
ingful social reforms such as the Civil Rights Act of 1964 and the Voting Rights 
Act of 1965 were debated almost entirely within the context of America’s expand-
ing, domestic economy, and influenced by Keynesian, welfare-state public poli-
cies. The political economy of America’s NRD, by contrast, is driven and largely 
determined by the forces of transnational capitalism, and the public policies of 
state neoliberalism. From the vantage point of the most oppressed U.S. popula-
tions, the NRD rests on an unholy trinity, or deadly triad, of structural barriers 
to a decent life. These oppressive structures are mass unemployment, mass incar-
ceration, and mass disfranchisement. Each factor directly feeds and accelerates the 
others, creating an ever-widening circle of social disadvantage, poverty, and civil 
death, touching the lives of tens of millions of people in the United States.
13
Transnational Blackness presents examples of individuals and organizations of 
African descent, primarily originating in the United States, that challenged the 
legitimacy and power of the global color line and its oppressive political econo-
mies of inequality. Such examples varied widely in the tactics and strategies for 
social change they employed. What they held in common was a long memory 
of resistance to human exploitation, and the knowledge of African-descendant 
cultural heritages and rituals that connected the diverse peoples of the African 
Diaspora. For Du Bois over a century ago, there were certain “Negro ideals” worth 
fighting to preserve, which challenged the hegemonic materialism of Europe and 
America. Similarly, as the twenty-first century unfolds, and as the global color 
line’s struggles for social justice intensify, the role of black activist-intellectuals and 
social protest movements will assume even greater significance transnationally.
pal-mara-00intro.indd   7pal-mara-00intro.indd   7 7/25/08   1:52:41 PM7/25/08   1:52:41 PM


--- PAGE 17 ---
Transnational Blackness8
Notes
 1. W . E. B. Du Bois, “The Conservation of Races,” Occasional Paper No. 2 (Washington, 
DC: American Negro Academy, 1898).
 2. Ibid.
 3. W . E. B. Du Bois, The Souls of Black Folk (New York: Oxford University Press, 2007), 8.
 4. See W . E. B. Du Bois, “The Color Line Belts the World,” Collier’s Magazine 20 (October 
1906): 20.
 5. Thomas B. Edsall, “Risk and Reward,” New  York Times, December 5, 2006.
 6. Ibid.
 7. Fred Magdoff, “The Explosion of Debt and Speculation,” Monthly Review 58, no. 6 
(November 2006): 24–26.
 8. Ibid.
 9. The Editors, “U.S. Military Bases and Empire,” Monthly Review 53, no. 10 (March 2002): 
1–14.
 10. Eduardo Porter, “Study Finds Wealth Inequality Is Widening Worldwide,” New York 
Times, December 6, 2006.
 11. Ibid.
 12. Louis Uchitelle, “Very Rich Are Leaving the Merely Rich Behind,” New  York Times, 
November 27, 2006.
 13. I have outlined in greater detail the political economy of the New Racial Domain in 
Manning Marable, Living Black History: How Reimagining the African-American Past Can 
Remake America’s Racial Future (New York: Basic Civitas, 2006), 214–300.
pal-mara-00intro.indd   8pal-mara-00intro.indd   8 7/25/08   1:52:41 PM7/25/08   1:52:41 PM


--- PAGE 18 ---
P ART  I
Theorizing Race in a 
Global Context
pal-mara-01.indd   9pal-mara-01.indd   9 7/25/08   1:30:42 PM7/25/08   1:30:42 PM


--- PAGE 19 ---
This page intentionally left blank


--- PAGE 20 ---
C HAPTER  1
Race and Globalization
Racialization from Below
Leith Mullings
In 1903 the great African American scholar and Pan-Africanist W . E. B. 
Du Bois noted, “The problem of the twentieth century is the problem of the color 
line . . . the relation of the darker to the lighter races of men in Asia and Africa, in 
America and the islands of the sea.”
1
In the twenty-first century we are still confronted with an international color 
line, the racialized consequences of massive impoverishment, and displacement 
integral to globalized capitalism. The challenges of structural racism create simul-
taneous spaces for oppression and resistance. The modern color line is not only 
imposed from above but also becomes a site for contestation from below. This 
book testifies to the complexities of the paradox of race in the contemporary 
world. As these papers demonstrate, globalization has resulted in new forms of 
racialization but has also created new, transnational forms of resistance to racism. 
Race making—the construction of race as a way to rationalize global inequali-
ties—also creates a basis for global collective action. These innovative new move-
ments take race as a space for organizing global social movements against the 
inequities of globalization and have the potential to transcend both the scope and 
the reach of earlier Pan-Africanist movements. Four centuries of the transatlantic 
slave trade and racialized subordination of people of African descent produced a 
construction of race throughout much of the world. As a result, many regions of 
the world were dominated by what one could call a racial mode of production—
involving not only exploitation of labor but also the skills of Africans and their 
descendants—to build the modern world system. In many areas of the world, race 
became a worldview that rationalized domination and privilege, on one hand, and 
dispossession of land, labor, wealth, and rights, on the other. “Scientific racism,” 
which emerged in the eighteenth century, provided a pseudoscientific patina for 
a set of beliefs that categorized people into different races, each endowed with 
pal-mara-01.indd   11pal-mara-01.indd   11 7/25/08   1:30:42 PM7/25/08   1:30:42 PM


--- PAGE 21 ---
Transnational Blackness12
unequal capacities, and alleged not merely that biological and social differences 
were fixed, inheritable, and unchangeable, but also that races could be ranked 
hierarchically, with the white race as the pinnacle of civilization.
Yet the imposition of race also created the structural context for producing 
sites of resistance and creative spaces for the articulation of subaltern opposi-
tion. The twentieth century saw magnificent mass struggles whose objective was 
to overturn powerful structures of racial hierarchies: the diverse and sometimes 
contradictory anticolonial struggles throughout Africa and the Third World, the 
civil rights movement in the United States, and the anti-apartheid movement in 
South Africa. These struggles brought about powerful worldwide transformations 
in politics and culture. The people of Africa, Latin America, and the Caribbean, 
who lived under European colonization, have now acquired nominal sovereignty 
in nation-states, defeated the apartheid state in South Africa, and dismantled legal 
segregation in the United States. T oday, most anthropologists reject the notion of 
biological race.
2
Powerful new forces now configure how race is lived. With the fall of socialism, 
globalized capitalism became the dominant world system. Old and new forms 
of “accumulation by dispossession”
3 have increasingly impoverished much of the 
world’s population, creating new forms of racialized and gendered stratification 
and new sites of racialization, such as the prison-industrial complex. U.S. phe-
nomena including rising unemployment, the dismantling of the welfare state, the 
privatization of previously public services (such as education), and the growth of 
incarceration as a way of controlling dissent
4 all have their counterparts in Africa, 
Latin America, and the Caribbean. In the areas of the greatest oppression, the 
legacies of colonialism, international debt, structural adjustment policies, and the 
enormous circulation of arms have resulted in major setbacks for the progressive 
thrusts of the post–World War II liberation movements. Black women frequently 
become the first victims of violence during structural adjustment, warfare, ethnic 
strife, and domestic conflict.
In these new conditions, the meaning of race is constantly reconfigured as 
new forms of exclusion built upon the continuing consequences of enslavement, 
colonialism, and imperialism. As capitalism incorporates elements of racialized 
populations into its neoliberal global project, the familiar rigid stereotypes and 
polarizing discourses built during earlier epochs become less useful to capital’s 
needs, and new ways of managing race and inequality are manufactured and fos-
tered. In the United States and South Africa, for example, the implementation of 
policies of “color blindness” may serve to repackage white supremacy by deny-
ing the continuing significance of racism.
5 Racial stratification now works not 
only through frameworks alleging biological differences between populations but 
also through an emphasis on individual meritocracy or group culture. In Europe, 
right-wing anti-immigration ideologues no longer openly claim incontrovertible 
biological differences between races in opposing immigration from Asia, Africa, 
the Caribbean, and the Middle East but rather assert that there are unbridgeable 
cultural differences between immigrant groups and Europeans—a neoracism, a 
pal-mara-01.indd   12pal-mara-01.indd   12 7/25/08   1:30:42 PM7/25/08   1:30:42 PM


--- PAGE 22 ---
Race and Globalization 13
“racism without race.”6 In the United States, “culture of poverty” or “underclass” 
frameworks function pseudobiologically as mutually enforcing paradigms that 
provide explanations for—and ultimately deflect attention from—the structural 
forces that have produced savage inequalities of race, class, and gender.
7
It is also true that the forces of globalization previously described also cre-
ate spaces for new mobilizations and counterhegemonic movements that can be 
transnational in theory and practice; Brecher, Costello, and Smith describe this as 
“globalization from below.”
8 Similarly, we can see the emergence and acceleration 
of counterhegemonic social movements framed in the language of race and racism 
in order to signal dispossession, make claims on resources, form transnational alli-
ances, and challenge racialization from above—a process we might call “racializa-
tion from below.” This development is particularly striking in areas such as Latin 
America where ideologies glorifying race mixture and the lack of legal segregation 
have inhibited the growth of such organizations. The expansion of these move-
ments is assisted by the use of new information technology,
9 hemispheric and 
global conferences, such as the UN World Conference against Racism, Racial 
Discrimination, Xenophobia and Other Forms of Intolerance (WCAR) and their 
associated documents.
For example, in Latin American countries with sizeable populations of African 
descent, racially based social movements have emerged and gained strength in 
the 1980s and 1990s. This is particularly significant because in many of these 
countries, though the dominant ideology projects a national ideal of racial mix-
ture, pervasive discrimination coexists with an official denial of the existence of 
racism.
10 In the last two decades, many Latin Americans of African descent have 
increasingly rejected the options of mixed race categories and the “mulatto escape 
hatch” in order to assert, on their own terms, an oppositional racial—or more pre-
cisely, racialized—identity. In some cases, these movements have won land titles, 
a commitment to implement antidiscriminatory policies (such as affirmative 
action), and official government recognition of their historical distinctiveness.
Brazil, the country with the largest black population in the hemisphere, is an 
interesting case in point. Observers frequently note the paradoxical coexistence 
in Brazil of persistent racial inequality with the failure to generate mass antira-
cist movements. The generally accepted national ideology that Brazil is a “racial 
democracy”—a concept that vigorously denies racial inequality yet aggressively 
subordinates the status and identity of blackness—has historically limited orga-
nizing on the basis of racial discrimination despite the existence of a longstand-
ing, if fragmentary, black consciousness movement.
11 Recently, the articulation 
and mobilization of a militant black identity has emerged as a potentially power-
ful political concept unifying those who self-identify as being of African descent 
and has begun to comprise a major component in the national debate about 
the future of the Brazilian state.
12 As Sheila Walker observes, although “African-
ity” has always been a significant feature of Brazilian culture, Afro-Brazilians are 
only now unambiguously claiming their blackness.
13 As a result of the growing 
capacities of that movement in the late 1990s, the Brazilian centrist government 
pal-mara-01.indd   13pal-mara-01.indd   13 7/25/08   1:30:42 PM7/25/08   1:30:42 PM


--- PAGE 23 ---
Transnational Blackness14
under former President Fernando Henrique Cardosa officially acknowledged the 
pervasive existence of racial discrimination in Brazil and appointed a national 
commission to explore it. Militant Afro-Brazilians were prominent in the offi-
cial delegation to the WCAR and were able to negotiate a major shift in Brazil’s 
dialogue on race.
14 In May 2001, then President Cardosa signed a decree initiat-
ing the National Program for Affirmative Action. Currently, there is a growing 
(and strongly contested) movement led by Afro-Brazilian members of the ruling 
Workers’ Party to push for a much more comprehensive racial equality statute 
that would aggressively enforce affirmative action and similar policy reforms in 
order to redress Brazil’s racial disparities. President Luiz Inacio Lula da Silva of the 
Workers’ Party has responded positively to these demands by proposing measures 
addressing discrimination in government. Recently, he appointed the first black 
Supreme Court justice and four Afro-Brazilian ministers to his cabinet, including 
a newly created cabinet-level Special Secretariat for Promotion of Racial Equali-
ty.
15 In the face of implacable resistance to the enforcement of affirmative action 
measures in the form of legal actions, the current government has not only sup-
ported affirmative action but also instituted innovative school attendance grants 
that allow poor families to keep their children in school rather than pulling them 
out to work.
16 In theory, the policy is designed to address class inequality, but in 
practice, within the racialized social hierarchy of the country, such reforms also 
address the profoundly racialized effects of marginalization.
Colombia is another important state in which “racialization from below” is 
developing as a strategy of resistance. Colombia contains the third highest Afri-
can-descended population in the Americas, after Brazil and the United States. 
Afro-Colombians have historically inhabited lands on the Pacific Coast that are 
rich in timber, gold, farming potential, and biodiversity. Beginning in the 1980s, 
national and multinational corporations have been attracted to this potential mar-
ket and have invested heavily in this region.
17 As anticorporate protests grew all 
over the country, a nascent Afro-Colombian social movement crystallized in the 
course of organizing to promote legislative reforms.
18 Afro-Colombians were able 
to win some recognition of territorial rights and cultural distinctiveness in the 
new 1991 National Constitution and, through subsequent legislation in 1993, 
gained the right to apply for land titles. However, after winning these rights, 
Afro-Colombians have been subject to massive displacement from their ances-
tral lands.
19 Afro-Colombians have increasingly been victims of assassinations of 
activists and massacres of villagers, primarily by right-wing paramilitary forces, 20 
and several observers suggest that levels of violence directed against them have 
been significantly escalated by the billions of U.S. dollars pouring into the area 
through the “War on Drugs.”
21 In this context, Asale Angel-Ajani describes the 
Afro-Colombian strategy of organizing into “peace communities,” which adopt a 
general policy of neutrality regarding the armed conflict, as an attempt to separate 
themselves from the escalating violence and the inevitable ravages of constant 
warfare. T o assert their approach of neutral disengagement from violence, Afro-
Colombians have increased their organizing efforts in the national and interna-
tional arenas. The first Afro-Colombian national conference was held in 2002, 
pal-mara-01.indd   14pal-mara-01.indd   14 7/25/08   1:30:42 PM7/25/08   1:30:42 PM


--- PAGE 24 ---
Race and Globalization 15
and Afro-Colombians have also mounted efforts to mobilize international soli-
darity by traveling to Europe and the United States to raise awareness about their 
situation and create alliances.
In this process, culture plays a strategic role in creating and sustaining an Afro-
Colombian identity, on the one hand, and constructing a larger transnational 
movement, on the other. Joseph Jordan describes this reimagining blackness, 
African consciousness, and Afro-Colombian ethnicity as a process “that provides 
a means for extra-national citizenship connecting Afro-Colombians to other 
communities of African descent throughout the Americas.” The adoption and 
indigenization of popular cultural forms, such as hip-hop, provide transnational 
cultural matrices for the articulation of new forms of identity. These function as 
a strategy of resistance, with the potential to reimagine an African descendant 
identity, thereby connecting Afro-Colombians to other communities of African 
descent, as well as making group demands on the nation-state.
22 In Europe, there 
are more than ten million people of African, Asian, and Middle Eastern descent. 
Clarence Lusane describes how, drawing heavily on UN declarations and resolu-
tions, “black” communities have been centrally involved in Europe-wide cam-
paigns that call for the implementation of antidiscrimination policies. According 
to Lusane, Europe is now poised to make “the most sweeping changes in anti-dis-
crimination legislation since the modern effort to come together as a region.”
23
From August to September of 2001, the WCAR convened in Durban, South 
Africa. The WCAR and its preparatory conferences were an important point at 
which these nascent and often contradictory movements began to converge. The 
WCAR and its accompanying Non-Governmental Organizations (NGO) Forum 
was attended by thousands of representatives of governments, international agen-
cies, NGOs, academia, policy makers, media, and communities from over 160 
countries. In addition to indigenous and African-descendant populations from 
all over the world, other groups such as the Burakumin of Japan, the Roma from 
Europe, and the Dalits from the Indian subcontinent were all in attendance and 
pressed their claims for addressing comparable forms of discrimination. The 
more than eight thousand attendees participated in formal and informal meet-
ings, exchanged information and forged alliances. Both meetings produced policy 
documents, declarations, and programs, and the WCAR adopted a Declaration 
and Program of Action that commits member states to undertake a wide range 
of measures to combat racism and racial discrimination at the international, 
regional, and national levels. These have been used by movements all over the 
world as organizing tools, for popular education and, as models for legislation.
The various movements represented at Durban emerged from extremely 
diverse conditions and find themselves at various levels of development, but all 
are intensified by the transnational consequences of globalized capitalism and the 
imposition of market-based structural adjustment “reforms” on exploited popula-
tions. The recognition of common issues transcending boundaries and the inter-
rogation of the role of profits from slave trade, colonialism, and more recent 
forms of domination play a part in current conditions of poverty; are important 
steps in building a transnational movement to challenge these conditions; and 
pal-mara-01.indd   15pal-mara-01.indd   15 7/25/08   1:30:42 PM7/25/08   1:30:42 PM


--- PAGE 25 ---
Transnational Blackness16
at the same time accelerate the ability of these movements to see themselves as 
positioned both within and beyond the nation-state.
Samir Amin observed that one of the most significant features of the confer-
ence was the development of an analysis that situated racism and discrimination 
as “generated, produced and reproduced by the logic and expansion of capital-
ism,” which in its contemporary globalized form “can only result in ‘apartheid 
on a global scale.’”
24 The concept of global apartheid was an important theme of 
the conference. In a 2001 article in the Nation, Salih Booker and William Minter 
described global apartheid as “an international system of minority rule whose 
attributes include: differential access to basic human rights; wealth and power 
structured by race and place; structural racism, embedded in global economic 
processes political institutions and cultural assumptions; and the international 
practice of double standards that assume inferior rights to be appropriate for cer-
tain ‘others,’ defined by location, origin, race or gender.”
25
Amin hailed WCAR as “a people’s victory” in which “the spirit of Bandung 
has breathed again.” He compared it to the historic Bandung Conference held in 
Indonesia in 1955, attended by leaders from Africa and Asia.
26 However, WCAR 
is potentially a more advanced development than the meeting in Bandung, which 
was comprised essentially of representatives of states or states-in-waiting—that is, 
government officials and representatives from national liberations organizations 
who possessed official credentials. The NGO forum of WCAR, on the other hand, 
encompassed a range of sometimes disorganized and often contradictory popular 
currents. At the same time, WCAR transcended the more traditional category of 
Pan-Africanism by incorporating subaltern groups who are not of African descent 
but find themselves similarly affected by the weight of global apartheid.
These counterhegemonic movements nevertheless face considerable chal-
lenges, and their success in confronting global apartheid will depend on the 
extent to which they are able to build on the dominant approach that emerged 
from WCAR—one that attempts to transcend an essentialized notion of race 
and move toward a perspective linking subaltern populations, not by race but by 
racialization. There are strong pressures, often from neoliberal organizations such 
as the World Bank, to emphasize issues of cultural difference at the expense of 
more radical efforts toward fundamental social change.
27 If history is any guide 
to the extent that this nascent movement succumbs to such pressures and retreats 
toward a more parochial vision of their political tasks, they risk developing fissures 
along lines of class, gender, and other differences and even eventually imploding. 
As these divergent movements progress to the next step, it will be essential for 
them to continue to build solidarities across identities and boundaries, devel-
oping coalitions among the working class, antiracists, and feminist constituen-
cies and alliances with progressive national liberation movements. In so doing, 
place-based efforts will have to transform themselves from movements of integra-
tion, autonomy, or reform into more ambitious movements confronting all forms 
of inequality. T o achieve these goals, it will be necessary to construct a new lan-
guage of human emancipation that has the capacity to project a new vision of an 
pal-mara-01.indd   16pal-mara-01.indd   16 7/25/08   1:30:42 PM7/25/08   1:30:42 PM


--- PAGE 26 ---
Race and Globalization 17
alternative global social order in which “difference” does not inevitably convey the 
reality of structural inequality.
Notes
 1. W . E. B. Du Bois, The Souls of Black Folk (1903, repr., Boulder, CO: Paradigm, 2004).
 2. Leonard Lieberman, “How ‘Caucasoids’ Got Such Big Crania and Why They Shrank,” 
Current Anthropology 42, no. 1 (2001): 69–95.
 3. David Harvey, The New Imperialism (New York: Oxford University Press, 2003).
 4. Leith Mullings, “Losing Ground: Harlem, the War on Drugs, and the Prison Industrial 
Complex,” Souls: A Critical Journal of Black Politics, Culture, and Society 5, no. 2 (2003): 
1–21.
 5. Howard Winant, The World Is A Ghetto: Race And Democracy Since World War II  (New 
York: Basic Books, 2001); Lee Baker, From Savage to Negro: Anthropology and the Construc-
tion of Race 1896–1954 (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1998); George Fredrick-
son, Racism: A Short History (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 2002).
 6. Etienne Balibar, “Is There a “Neo-Racism?” in Race, Nation, Class: Ambiguous Identities, 
ed. Etienne Balibar and Immanuel Wallerstein (New York: Verso, 1991), 15–28.
 7. Leith Mullings, On Our Own Te r m s (New York: Routledge, 1997).
 8. Jeremy Brecher, Tim Costello, and Brendan Smith, Globalization From Below: The Power 
of Solidarity (Cambridge, MA: South End, 2000).
 9. Francis Njubi, “New Media, Old Struggles: Pan Africanism, Anti-Racism and Informa-
tion T echnology,” Critical Arts 15, no. 1–2 (2001): 117–34.
 10. Marisol De la Cadena, “Reconstructing, Race, Racism, Culture and Mestizaje in Latin 
America,” NACLA Report on the Americas 34, no. 6 (2001): 16–28.
 11. Michael Hanchard, Orpheus and Power: The Movimiento Negro of Rio de Janeiro and Sao 
Paulo, Brazil, 1945–1988 (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1994); Kimberly 
Jones-de Oliveira, “The Politics of Culture or the Culture of Politics: Afro-Brazilian Mobi-
lization, 1920–1968,” Journal of Third World S
tudies 20, no.1 (2003): 103–20; Frances 
Windance T wine, Racism in a Racial Democracy: The Maintenance of White Supremacy in 
Brazil (New Brunswick, NJ: Rutgers University Press, 1998).
 12. Michael Hanchard, ed., Racial Politics in Contemporary Brazil (Durham, NC: Duke Uni-
versity Press, 1999); A. S. Guimaraes, “Behind Brazil’s ‘Racial Democracy,’” NACLA 
Report on the Americas 34, no. 6 (2001): 38–39.
 13. Sheila Walker, “Africanity vs Blackness: Race, Class and Culture in Brazil,” NACLA Report 
on the Americas 35, no. 6 (2002): 16–20.
 14. J. Michael T urner, “The Road to Durban—and Back,” NACLA Report on the Americas 35, 
no. 6 (2002): 31–35.
 15. Marion Lloyd, “In Brazil, a New Debate Over Color,” Chronicle of Higher Education 50, 
no. 23 (2004): 38–40.
 16. Thomas Boston and Usha Nair-Reichert, “Affirmative Action: Perspectives from the 
United States, India and Brazil,” Western Journal of Black Studies 27, no. 1 (2003): 3–14.
 17. Arturo Escobar, “Displacement, Development, and Modernity in the Colombian Pacific,” 
International Social Science Journal 55, no. 175 (March 2003): 157–67.
 18. Peter Wade, Blackness and Race  Mixture: The Dynamics of Racial Identity in Colombia (Bal-
timore, MD: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1993); Arturo Escobar, “Displacement.”
 19. Arturo Escobar, “Displacement.”
 20. Ulrich Oslender, “Communities in the Crossfire,” in Hemisphere: A Magazine of the Amer-
icas 11, no. 3 (2002): 24–27.
pal-mara-01.indd   17pal-mara-01.indd   17 7/25/08   1:30:42 PM7/25/08   1:30:42 PM


--- PAGE 27 ---
Transnational Blackness18
 21. Forrest Hylton, “An Evil Hour: Uribe’s Colombia in Historical Perspective,” New Left 
Review 23 (2003): 51–93.
 22. Peter Wade, “Working Culture: Making Cultural Identities in Cali, Colombia,” Current 
Anthropology 40, no. 4 (1999): 449–71.
 23. Clarence Lusane, Chapter 15 of this volume.
 24. Samir Amin, “World Conference Against Racism: A People’s Victory,” Monthly Review 
(December 2001): 21.
 25. Salih Booker and William Minter, “Global Apartheid,” Nation 273, no. 2 (2001): 
11–16.
 26. Samir Amin, “World Conference against Racism: A People’s Victory,” Monthly Review 
(December 2001): 21.
 27. Charles Hale, “Does Multiculturalism Menace? Governance, Cultural Rights and the Pol-
itics of Identity in Guatemala,” Journal of Latin American Studies 34 (2002): 485–524.
pal-mara-01.indd   18pal-mara-01.indd   18 7/25/08   1:30:43 PM7/25/08   1:30:43 PM


--- PAGE 28 ---
C HAPTER  2
Global Apartheid, 
Foreign Policy, and 
Human Rights
Faye V. Harrison
Human rights—“the reasonable demands for personal security and basic 
well-being that all individuals can make on the rest of humanity by virtue of their 
being members of the species Homo sapiens”
1—are in increased jeopardy in this 
era of globalization. Small, poor countries increasingly are dominated by imposed 
economic controls that make a mockery of their rights to self-determination. 
For about two decades, this neoliberal regime—in which developed nations aid 
poorer nations on the condition that they restructure their economies and politi-
cal systems to accommodate maximum wealth accumulation by multinational 
corporations—has arrived packaged as so-called free trade. This phenomenon is 
more than an idea or ideology. It is a cultural system, “a paradigm for understand-
ing and organizing the world and for informing our practices within it.”
2 It is “an 
approach to the world which includes in its purview not only economics but also 
politics, not only the public but also the private, not only what kinds of institu-
tions we should have but also what kinds of subjects we should be.”
3
The reasons for this assault on human rights—political and socioeconomic—
are complex. In many parts of the world, however, it can be attributed, at least in 
part, to the relative immunity with which transnational corporations and agen-
cies dictate social, political and economic issues within nation-states, especially 
smaller nations. These nations’ ability to protect rights to education, health care, 
and humane work standards is drastically compromised by internationally man-
dated policies and programs that give higher priority to corporate rights and the 
rights of transnational capital than to the basic needs and dignity of ordinary 
human beings. Although the social contract that more democratic states once 
had with their citizens is disappearing, the repressive role of state power clearly is 
pal-mara-02.indd   19pal-mara-02.indd   19 7/25/08   1:36:08 PM7/25/08   1:36:08 PM


--- PAGE 29 ---
Transnational Blackness20
not. In many cases, Western, particularly the United States, foreign aid packages 
include generous provisions for police and military upgrading. Thanks to this free 
market in arms, intergroup tensions within smaller nations now are more apt to 
escalate into militarized conflicts.
For example, the militarized condition of life in Jamaica provides a prime 
example of how U.S. foreign aid for fighting drugs and crime impacts develop-
ing nations. During the 1980s, after the politically orchestrated demise of the 
democratic socialist administration, the policing and military capacity of the 
conservative Jamaica Labor Party government was substantially upgraded with 
a sizable security aid package, the largest ever given by the United States to any 
country in the Commonwealth Caribbean. The aid enabled the government of 
Edward Seaga, former prime minister, to act more punitively against the “danger-
ous elements”—crime, labor discontent, and political unrest—that threatened 
law and order on the island and threatened the United States’ strategic interests 
in the region. The well-funded war against crime was led by the Special Opera-
tions Squad, popularly dubbed “Seaga’s eradication squad.” In the mid-1980s, 
Americas Watch issued a human rights report that decried the growing pattern of 
extrajudicial executions responsible for half of the nation’s total homicides. The 
militarization of the state and the often indiscriminate deployment of repres-
sive police tactics remain a problem today. Last year, these problems prompted 
Amnesty International to censure the government in a special report.
4
These problems are not confined to the southern hemisphere; comparable 
trends are also in evidence in the north. In the United States alone, Reaganomics, 
Contract with America, welfare reform, the dismantling of affirmative action, 
Proposition 187, policing by racial profiling, and the prison-industrial complex 
are variations on the same theme. Note that they closely resemble the structural 
adjustment programs that the International Monetary Fund (IMF) stipulates and 
the war on drugs and crime underwritten by the United States in debt-ravaged 
“developing” countries. Common themes emerge upon examination of these tac-
tics to regulate the global economy and police the crises that regulation engenders. 
This neoliberal method results in processes that might be called capitalism’s sec-
ond primitive accumulation and a “recolonization” of markets in a world fraught 
with dilemmas of postcolonialism and the postmodern condition.
5
David L. Wilson, an activist with the Nicaragua Solidarity Network, provides 
another example of this dynamic in his analysis of maquiladoras (assembly plants 
operating as subsidiaries or subcontracted firms of transnational corporations) 
as a site for the workings of neoliberalism. Neoliberalism, he writes, is a regime 
of development and a phenomenon of primitive accumulation, which in many 
ways is comparable to the classic case that Marx described for the transition into 
capitalism. Primitive accumulation then and now creates “a vast labor pool of 
people desperate for jobs, even at wages below subsistence levels.” Wilson argues: 
“[W]hat is new about neoliberalism is a sort of primitive accumulation against 
capitalist and post-capitalist economic forms—against industrial production 
for the domestic market, against small-scale capitalist or cooperative agriculture 
pal-mara-02.indd   20pal-mara-02.indd   20 7/25/08   1:36:08 PM7/25/08   1:36:08 PM


--- PAGE 30 ---
Global Apartheid, Foreign Policy, and Human Rights 21
(often the result of agrarian reform), and against the tenuous but crucial safety net 
that has developed in many third world countries.”6 These conditions of change, 
mediated by the IMF , World Bank, and World T rade Organization (WTO)—all 
multinational but strongly U.S.-influenced—have been intensified by the geopo-
litical and politico-economic realignments engendered in today’s post–cold war 
milieu in which alternatives to capitalism are widely discredited.
Subsequently, capitalism’s conflicts with communism and socialism have—
except for the brutal U.S. embargo against Cuba—given way to wars between 
competing ethnic groups and to a U.S.-funded “war against drugs” that is driven 
by the contradictory foreign policy of the remaining superpower.
7
In this context, one of the gravest human rights problems is the intensifica-
tion of discrimination and violence that target people on the basis of race. 8 Race 
is a socially constructed distinction, material relation, and dimension of social 
stratification that intersects with and is mutually constituted by class, gender, 
ethnicity, nation, and increasingly transnational location and identity. Although 
culturally variable, it encodes social differences often presumed to be hereditary—
differences that, if not carefully managed and policed, are considered threats to a 
nation’s social structure.
Although historically, racial differences were considered to be rooted in biologi-
cal variations, today these differences are increasingly expressed not in racial terms 
but in cultural terms. These trends in reconfiguring race are evident across a wide 
array of international settings, from European zones of ethnic cleansing (where, 
through mass rapes, women became permanently partitioned racial subjects) to 
African contexts (in which ethnonational conflicts are racial and, in extreme cases, 
intensify to the point of genocide).
9 The conflict between the Hutus and T utsis 
in Rwanda and Burundi is a tragic instance of this. Anthropologist Lisa Malkki 
has pointed out that members of Burundi’s Hutu community has crafted mytho-
historical narratives that define their differences from T utsis in terms of “moral 
essences,” which operate as powerfully as the biological distinctions that operated 
during an earlier era.
10
In many places around the world, race is being reconfigured in more acceptable 
ideological codes and rhetoric, which some scholars view as a new form of racism 
without races. Social critics in France, Germany, and Austria point out that even 
right-wing xenophobes in their countries formally acknowledge that blatant rac-
ism is widely discredited and that “races” do not “really exist.” Although this may 
sound progressive, this cursory, one-dimensional awareness does not mean that 
racism has withered away or is not being reproduced in modern and postmod-
ern guises. Despite the nominal no-race stance taken by some western European 
neofascists, their punitive assaults against Third World immigrants and eastern 
European refugees (e.g., the Roma in Bosnia) effectively demonize ethnona-
tional outsiders and subject them to conditions so oppressive that a new form 
of apartheid may be emerging. Encoded in the notions of immigrant and refugee 
are meanings of ethnic absolutism that invent or renew racial identities on recon-
figured landscapes of national inclusion and exclusion. Paradoxically, although 
pal-mara-02.indd   21pal-mara-02.indd   21 7/25/08   1:36:08 PM7/25/08   1:36:08 PM


--- PAGE 31 ---
Transnational Blackness22
certain categories of immigrants are viewed as troublesome parasites whose cul-
tures threaten the purity of European nations, their economic participation in 
ethnically and sexually segmented labor keeps their host economies thriving and 
enriches their employers.
This ambivalence is also present in the United States, where nativist campaigns 
target immigrants. Californians supported Proposition 187, which barred chil-
dren of illegal immigrants (mainly Mexican) from educational and health services, 
even as California’s agribusiness and service sectors became increasingly depen-
dent on the exploitable labor of the children’s parents. Propositions such as 187 
are not intended to create an inhospitable atmosphere for immigrants, thereby 
urging them to return to their native countries; it is really about keeping them in 
their (exploited and vulnerable) place within the United States by restricting their 
legal rights. In other words, these measures perpetuate a deskilled and stigmatized 
labor force that cannot make credible human rights demands like those increas-
ingly made by Americans and legal residents of color—demands that are eroding 
white privilege and engendering a crisis of white identity.
Alongside, and in some instances interacting with, these culturalist essen-
tialisms, though, is the relentless resurgence of biology-based accounts about 
the nature and roots of social difference. This is clearly the case in North 
America where Richard Herrnstein’s and Charles Murray’s 1994 book, The Bell 
Curve: Intelligence and Class Structure in American Life, and research funded 
by neoconservative foundations such as the Pioneer Fund have revitalized dis-
cussions on measurements of intelligence, athleticism, fertility patterns, and 
criminal violence.
These disturbing patterns are reemerging despite the decades-old perspective 
of such scholars as Ralph Bunche, who noted in his A World View of Race that 
racial distinctions lack any real biological basis. In his bold analysis of imperi-
alism, global intergroup conflicts, and the threat racism posed to world peace, 
Bunche—who was awarded the Nobel Prize in 1950 for his role as UN mediator 
in Palestine and Israel’s conflicts with neighboring Arab states—underscored the 
economic basis of the global racial hierarchy and its fundamental intersection 
with class exploitation.
11
Bunche was influenced by Du Bois, who in 1915 published a seminal essay, 
“African Roots of the War,” in which he theorized about imperialism and global 
conflict before Lenin published his Imperialism, The Highest Stage of Capitalism 
in 1917. Historian and biographer David Levering Lewis writes that the essay, 
which articulated Du Bois’s “mature ideas about capitalism, class, and race” in the 
workings of colonialism and the causes of World War I, was “one of the analyti-
cal triumphs of the early twentieth century.”
12 Nearly ninety years after Du Bois’s 
analysis and seventy-six years after Bunche’s, political scientists and others who 
study international relations still need to be urged to include race and racism in 
their analyses of global politics and political economy.
Anyone who reads the newspaper—and knows how to read between the 
lines—is aware that racism and the interlocking injustices of xenophobia, class 
pal-mara-02.indd   22pal-mara-02.indd   22 7/25/08   1:36:08 PM7/25/08   1:36:08 PM


--- PAGE 32 ---
Global Apartheid, Foreign Policy, and Human Rights 23
exploitation, and gender oppression are escalating global phenomena. If they 
read the alternative media, they know that some people think the globalization 
of free-market ideas and policies, especially those imposed on vulnerable nations 
(i.e., neoliberalism) have something do with this trend. If they read or heard 
broadcast news reports in late August and early September 2001, they are well 
aware that these problems were foci around which the fraternal twin meetings, 
the World Conference against Racism (WCAR) and its parallel Non-Govern-
mental Organizations (NGO) Forum, convened in Durban, South Africa. The 
meetings marked the year 2001 as the International Year of Mobilization against 
Racism, Racial Discrimination, Xenophobia, and Related Intolerance, one of the 
highlights of the Third Decade to Combat Racism and Racial Discrimination 
(1993–2003).
13 South Africa’s symbolic power as a postapartheid society and, 
previously, as the setting for a protracted struggle for African liberation and mul-
tiracial democracy, resonates deeply with the political sensibilities and yearnings 
of antiracists the world over. As a sort of secular “Mecca,” the Durban meetings 
attracted “pilgrims” from all over the world. Not surprisingly, quite visible among 
them were NGO representatives and country delegates from the African conti-
nent and Diaspora. In the spirit of optimism, we might say that the pilgrims who 
gathered in Durban participated in symbolically charged and substantively mean-
ingful rituals of rebellion and solidarity. On this hopeful note, let us also assume 
that some of them—by virtue of their experience and by virtue of their critique 
of those experiences—underwent a significant rite of passage that led them to a 
new phase of critical knowledge, consciousness, and struggle. Their expanded 
social action and political mobilization toolkits may have enabled them to bet-
ter respond to today’s volatile atmosphere of restructuring, which is an atmo-
sphere that seems particularly resilient in the face of many of the resistance tactics 
employed in the past.
As they police the crises that neoliberalism unleashes, the managers of today’s 
global economy insist that there are no alternatives to the market liberalization, 
privatization, and cuts in government spending—domestic and foreign—being 
mandated by the IMF , World Bank, WTO, and U.S. policy. These neocolonial 
ideologies are informed by transnational interests that force vulnerable nations to 
redefine their national priorities. Neoliberal ideology and policy directives, which 
cross national boundaries with impunity, have promoted free market rights at 
the expense of human rights. It is crucial to note that globalized politics and 
policies, particularly those of such post–World War II institutions as the IMF 
and World Bank, are now largely controlled by a single superpower: the United 
States. Although, as Sherle R. Schwenninger writes, “the perception of U.S. power 
and influence has in many cases exceeded its reality,” the United States domi-
nates, especially in the area of finance. Owing to the “unusual circumstances of 
the post-cold war period—Europe’s preoccupation with the European monetary 
union, Japanese deflation, Russian weakness, low oil prices, geopolitical inertia 
in East Asia,” the United States controls “world monetary policy in a way not 
seen since the 1950s.” As a consequence, it has been able to “[push] financial 
pal-mara-02.indd   23pal-mara-02.indd   23 7/25/08   1:36:08 PM7/25/08   1:36:08 PM


--- PAGE 33 ---
Transnational Blackness24
liberalization (without adequate safeguards) on such unprepared countries as South 
Korea, Thailand and Russia.”14 In other spheres as well, the United States sets and 
limits the policy in accordance with its interests—interests that often disregard the 
threatened life chances, health, and subsistence security of most human beings.
Will post-Durban thinking and organizing lead a critical mass of antiracists 
beyond the formal trappings of democratization and its mystifying public rela-
tions rituals and selective enforcement of human rights? Will new mobilization 
strategies move activists beyond the state-centeredness of most UN programs 
toward more effective ways of combating the rights violations for which trans-
national interests are responsible? In light of the forces that circumscribe and 
often dictate what states (particularly peripheral states) can do, will the pilgrims 
push for principled implementation of substantive, concrete change, and true 
human rights?
Although South Africa was certainly an ideal site for the UN-sponsored human 
rights conference and antiracist pilgrimage, in all honesty, the country can only be 
characterized as postapartheid in the narrowest terms. De facto justice has yet to be 
achieved. Thus the concerted struggle against apartheid must continue in South 
Africa as well as in the world at large. The biggest threat to human rights and to 
human life and life chances, particularly those of racially subjugated people, is the 
structural violence that emanates from global apartheid.
15 Structural violence is 
the symbolic, psychological, and physical assaults against human psyches, physi-
cal bodies, and sociocultural integrity that emanate from situations and dominant 
institutions. This broader range of symbolic, psychological, economic, and envi-
ronmental assaults is neglected, because the conventional human rights system has 
mainly focused on liberal notions of individuals’ political and civil rights within 
nation-states. Yet ultimately and ironically, these structurally induced forms of 
violence set the stage for the very political abuses that have traditionally been the 
focus of human rights monitoring. A central issue that has not received its due is 
the question of social and economic rights, which are controversial in their poten-
tially profound implications for income and wealth redistribution. These rights 
are highly contested and effectively sabotaged by structures of power and privilege 
dictated primarily by transnational forces, such as the IMF , the World Bank, the 
WTO, and U.S. foreign policy—entities whose politico-economic purview, as 
mentioned earlier, transcends that of individual nation-states.
Apartheid is a policy of enforced separation and disparities between races. 
Other than through the deployment of state repression in explicitly racially coded 
laws, oppressively segmented labor markets, and brutal policing, apartheid’s 
enforcement can also be accomplished through subtler covert means that evade 
and disguise race while reproducing it nonetheless. Consequently, apartheid per-
sists although de jure forms of racism officially ended with the historic 1994 elec-
tion of Nelson Mandela as South Africa’s president. Beyond the specifics of South 
Africa, the term apartheid can be applied to the global order, that is, the so-called 
New World Order, and not simply as an effective metaphor. As Salih Booker and 
William Minter point out, the “concept captures fundamental characteristics of 
pal-mara-02.indd   24pal-mara-02.indd   24 7/25/08   1:36:08 PM7/25/08   1:36:08 PM


--- PAGE 34 ---
Global Apartheid, Foreign Policy, and Human Rights 25
the current world order missed by such labels as ‘neoliberalism,’ ‘globalization’ 
or even ‘corporate globalization.’” Global apartheid is a reality marked by the 
operation of “undemocratic institutions [that] systematically generate economic 
inequality.” Booker and Minter define it as “an institutional system of minority 
rule whose attributes include: differential access to basic human rights; wealth 
and power structured by race and place; structural racism, embedded in global 
economic processes, political institutions and cultural assumptions; and the inter-
national practice of double standards that assume inferior rights to be appropriate 
for certain ‘others’, defined by location, origin, race or gender.”
16
Peace studies researcher Gernot Köhler reinforces this view by pointing out 
that, in the current world situation, a minority race of whites and “honorary 
whites” dominates the majority of humanity, which is composed disproportion-
ately of peoples who were once defined by former colonial authorities as racial 
outsiders and are now—at least implicitly—treated as racial subjects by neocolo-
nial powers and their political economy.
17 Related to this view is anthropologist 
Ann Kingsolver’s concept of “strategic alterity,” which refers to “the practice of 
shifting between strategic assertions of inclusion and exclusion (or the marking 
and unmarking of ‘selves’ and ‘others’) to both devalue a set of people and to 
mask that very process of strategic devalorization”—the present-day transnational 
world is organized around such strategic differences.
18 As Köhler writes, apartheid 
in its global form is even more severe than what existed in predemocratic South 
Africa in that the disparities in wealth, power, military control, health, and life 
expectancy are even more extreme and are still growing.
Sociologist Howard Winant correctly underscores that “the contemporary 
international hierarchy (i.e., capitalism, a system that necessarily creates and per-
petuates racial hierarchies) works through varied experiences, identities, and con-
flicts rather than through any overarching uniformity. . . . [E]ach nation-state, 
each political system, each cultural complex necessarily constructs a unique racial-
ized social structure, a particular complex of racial meanings and identities.” Thus 
“the . . . increasing internationalization of race can only be understood in terms of 
prevalent patterns, general tendencies, [but] in no sense can such generalizations 
substitute for detailed analyses of local racial formations.”
19
Scholarly research on issues of race and racism is producing a rich canon on 
the diversity of racism and the culturally specific ways that race—whether marked 
or unmarked—is socially and politically constructed (and reconstructed) as an 
institutional or structural basis for identity. Many of these studies elucidate how 
the social processes that give rise to new race-centered identities are reconfigur-
ing the sociocultural terrains of ethnicities, nationalisms, religious allegiances and 
conflicts, and gender politics. Throughout the global order, new identities and 
movements have emerged organized around intensified and often primordial-
ized distinctions—that is, differences assumed to stem from a people’s beginning. 
Increasingly, territorially anchored struggles over the meaning and control of 
place are emerging, alongside struggles over newly reconfigured criteria for group 
membership within deterritorialized, diasporic, and transnational space.
20 These 
pal-mara-02.indd   25pal-mara-02.indd   25 7/25/08   1:36:08 PM7/25/08   1:36:08 PM


--- PAGE 35 ---
Transnational Blackness26
apparently contradictory yet complementary tendencies are occurring within, and 
as divergent responses to, a world that has “become much more tightly integrated 
into a nexus of . . . global fields . . . [across which] sophisticated telecommunica-
tions, an accelerated mobility of capital and labor, and rapid flows of commodi-
ties and culture compress both time and space [over] fractured technoeconomic, 
geopolitical, and sociocultural landscapes.”
21
Although it is clear that various forms of racism exacerbate global apartheid, 
critical race analysts must also examine how disparate, culturally specific social 
constructions of race interact with the ideological and structural forces of race-
making that emanate from international and transnational forces. The ensuing 
portion of this chapter will investigate the racial politics of one of those culturally 
specific forces: U.S. foreign policy. Upon that foundation, I will then compare 
the various interplays between specific domestic configurations and transnational 
spheres of race and power.
T o a considerable extent, neoliberalism reflects the cultural logics of the domi-
nant nation-states of the north, particularly the United Sates. In other words, 
certain cultural logics have more sway than others do in the market of cultural 
exchange and in the international hierarchy of cultures, peoples, and nations. The 
ideological underpinnings of U.S. policy—domestic and foreign, geopolitical and 
economic, overt and covert—rest upon racist presuppositions. These presupposi-
tions, which have shifted over time, include social Darwinist, eugenicist notions 
of difference and more liberal ideas that distance themselves from discredited, 
biodeterminist discourses. A multinational network of policies rooted in white 
supremacy fuels global apartheid. These policies, however, are being refashioned 
as formerly colonized people scatter across the globe and force multicultural 
awareness in white folks’ backyards. These changes are especially evident in the 
tensions that arise when dominant western nations interact and build alliances 
with—as well as compete with—East Asian, primarily Japanese, entities.
Anthropologist Aihwa Ong elucidates the role that the transnational mobility 
of Japanese capital plays in racializing the international division of labor. Oth-
ers have examined the liminal location the Japanese occupy in the global racial 
hierarchy, sandwiched between the “civilized white” and the “barbarous black.” 
John Russell argues that, by denigrating blackness in their mass culture, the 
Japanese align themselves with whiteness and all that it symbolizes in terms of 
wealth, power, cultural capital, and racial supremacy.
22 As evidenced by the stag-
gering increase in Caucasian-Asian interracial marriages in the United States, this 
alignment is increasingly acknowledged by Caucasian and Asians who imagine 
a somatic norm based on a mixture of Asian and European features. One could 
argue, however, that the Japanese do not simply consent to white hegemony in 
their appropriations of symbols of whiteness but also contest and undermine its 
normativity by co-positioning themselves at the apex of the global hierarchy.
23
International relations scholar Robert Vitalis notes that foreign policy and the 
study of international relations are driven by a longstanding unspoken “norm 
against noticing” race.
24 A dramatic example of this occurred when the United 
pal-mara-02.indd   26pal-mara-02.indd   26 7/25/08   1:36:08 PM7/25/08   1:36:08 PM


--- PAGE 36 ---
Global Apartheid, Foreign Policy, and Human Rights 27
States refused to participate in the WCAR, because it objected to two key issues 
on the conference’s agenda: reparations for slavery and colonialism (an issue of 
considerable international scope with implications for African and Caribbean 
debt relief and for post–affirmative action policy struggles in the United States); 
and the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, particularly discussions of Zionism as racism. 
The U.S. State Department was especially adamant in its insistence that an inter-
national conference focused on racism was not an appropriate venue for discuss-
ing Israel and for implicating U.S. foreign policy in the Middle East. From the 
U.S. perspective, the WCAR violated an important international norm by simply 
acknowledging the potential racial implications of its policies.
At the Durban forum and conference, however, Palestinian NGOs and soli-
darity groups from other parts of the world, including South Africa and Brazil, 
resisted the United States’ attempt at political censorship and asserted that dis-
crimination and oppression comparable in many ways to that of predemocratic 
South Africa exist in Palestine. This characterization appears in documents dis-
tributed at the WCAR NGO Forum in Durban.
25 Additionally, although neither 
the words “apartheid” nor “race” appear in this document, a report by the Pales-
tinian Coalition for Women’s Health titled “Israeli Violations of Women’s Health 
Rights in Palestine During the Al Aqsa Intifada” details violations to the rights 
to life, medical care; safe education, residence, and work, and well as mental and 
social welfare that are consistent with examples of global apartheid in other parts 
of the world.
It is important to note that criticism of Israel’s human rights violations against 
Palestinians is not limited to Muslims or Gentiles. As evidenced by the small but 
growing cadre of Israeli army officers who are going to jail rather than enforcing 
repressive Israeli policies in the West Bank, there is Jewish dissent as well, both 
inside and outside of Israel. In a call for financial support for the progressive 
Jewish journal, Tikkun, Cornel West wrote in the October 1, 2001, issue of The 
Nation that the magazine is on the verge of bankruptcy because pro-Israel Jews are 
retaliating against their liberal and progressive counterparts for criticizing Israeli 
policies toward Palestinians.
26 Lest the views of the Palestinian NGOs be consid-
ered unfairly biased, evidence from social scientific research on Israel—apparently 
unmotivated by anti-Semitism or a deliberately propagandized pro-Palestinian 
position—is emerging to counter such assertions. For example, political scientist 
Stanley Greenberg conducted a comparative analysis situating Israel alongside the 
United States, specifically comparing Alabama, South Africa, and Ireland.
27 In 
this work, Greenberg points to Israel as a settler colonial regime organized around 
race. This organization is manifested clearly in patterns of land alienation, labor 
control, and state policy.
Although Greenberg does not equate Israel’s situation to South Africa’s, he 
does, however, underscore similarities between the two societies that place them 
within the same critical framework. Such a comparison illuminates varying forms 
and instances of racialization, including the more implicit varieties in which 
pal-mara-02.indd   27pal-mara-02.indd   27 7/25/08   1:36:08 PM7/25/08   1:36:08 PM


--- PAGE 37 ---
Transnational Blackness28
salient social distinctions are publicly marked in culturalist or political categories 
of religion, ethnicity, and ethnonationalism.
The apartheid metaphor, therefore, may be useful and appropriate for inter-
rogating the current Palestinian predicament. In a recent article on the peace 
process’s effect on Palestinian geography, John Simon, who directs the Monthly 
Review Foundation, draws on data, including maps documenting the “Swiss 
cheesization” of the West Bank, to illustrate recent attempts by the Israeli state to 
maintain control over 57 percent of the land mass of the West Bank for security 
reasons. This demand, he writes, “makes a mockery not only of the ‘peace process’ 
but of the very notion of an independent Palestine,” and it condemns Palestine to 
“a kind of Bantustan-like arrangement yielding a pseudo-state both politically and 
economically dependent on Israel.”
28 Although there was a great deal of polarized 
debate over the Palestinian question and whether the WCAR was an appropriate 
venue for it, according to the broad definition of “racial discrimination” found 
in the International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Dis-
crimination (ICERD)—namely that it covers discrimination on the basis of race, 
color, descent, national, or ethnic origin—the Palestinian delegation had every 
right to bring their case to Durban and to argue their claim that there is a racial-
ized dimension to their oppression. The legitimacy of their claim was recognized 
and supported by many African and African-descended delegates who contested 
the U.S.-defined and U.S.-enforced norms for labeling racial discrimination.
A clear instance of a foreign policy with racial outcomes and subtexts, similar 
in many ways to domestic drug policies that criminalize many African Americans 
and Latinos, is the multibillion-dollar U.S.-led “war on drugs” in Colombia and 
elsewhere in Latin America. This “war” is propelled by U.S. economic and mili-
tary aid that has escalated the violence of Colombia’s army, paramilitary forces, 
guerrillas, and narco-traffickers. Colombians of African descent are most often 
dislocated and devastated by the civil unrest: Although they make up only 25 
percent of the population, Afro-Colombians are 70 percent of those forcibly dis-
placed by violence.
Louis Gilberto Murillo, a political leader from the predominantly Black 
Chocó Province was forced into exile because of his efforts to mobilize a peace 
plan. He links the struggles of African Americans to Afro-Colombians. He said 
on a radio broadcast in 2001, “I would like African Americans to note that their 
tax money is used to support a U.S. policy, including Plan Colombia, which is 
detrimental to African Colombians. And not just detrimental to their standard 
of living, but to their lives. It is a policy that kills them.”
29 (Plan Colombia is the 
Colombian government’s term for its massive, widespread drug-control program 
funded largely by foreign governments, including more than $1 billion from the 
United States.)
Another activist, Marino Cordoba, president of the Association of Displaced 
Afro-Colombians (AFRODES), echoes Murillo with his report of assassinations 
and forced removals from rural farming communities. These graphic reports 
have been corroborated by NACLA Report on the Americas, which issued a recent 
pal-mara-02.indd   28pal-mara-02.indd   28 7/25/08   1:36:08 PM7/25/08   1:36:08 PM


--- PAGE 38 ---
Global Apartheid, Foreign Policy, and Human Rights 29
commentary saying that U.S. aid is designed “to give the [Colombian] military 
‘rapid mobility capability’ against guerrillas as well as to accelerate drug plant 
fumigation. Powerful herbicides . . . rain down on the . . . countryside” causing 
serious health problems and environmental damage as well as other human rights 
violations by indiscriminate security forces.
30
Paradoxically, the war on drugs has destabilized the Colombian state and civil 
society, undermining the business investments, free markets, and democracy that 
U.S. officials claim is their goal—a goal used, in part, to justify their military 
presence in the region. Consequently, what is euphemistically called a low-in-
tensity conflict (because of the restricted deployment of U.S. ground troops), 
with high-intensity impact, cannot be justified in economic terms or, for that 
matter, any rational terms. Though the realpolitik of drug control appears to con-
flict with the economic goals of U.S. foreign policy, it “reestablishes [the United 
States’] primacy of place by defining the hemispheric security agenda as a struggle 
against the corrosive influence of drug production, trafficking, and to a lesser 
extent consumption.”
31 Moreover, it manufactures a domestic climate of hysteria 
over the dangers of illegal drugs. This climate, as Daniel Lazare writes, is built on 
the manipulation of fear and enables the state, in its domestic and transnational 
guises, “to operate in such a way that [is] ‘free of any normal restraints from the 
‘bureaucracy,’ from congressional subcommittees, and from the press.” The “war 
on drugs” is ultimately a war on reason and a war against political democracy, 
both at home and abroad that “[enlists] Congress, the media, and ultimately the 
public itself in an all-consuming jihad. . . . [A] people unable to distinguish truth 
from falsehood when it [comes] to drugs [is likely to be] unable to distinguish 
truth from falsehood when it [comes] to global warming, energy policy, separa-
tion of church and state, or tax cuts for the rich and famous. Because it [is] unable 
to assess where its true interests [lie], it [is] all the more subject to domination 
and control.”
32
According to sociologist James Petras, Plan Colombia’s first agendum, above 
all else, is to protect the U.S.’s geopolitical interests and imperial power in Latin 
America and beyond. In the late 1990s, the principal locus of both leftist and 
nationalist “resistance to the U.S. empire . . . shifted to northern South Ameri-
ca—namely Colombia, the Eastern highlands of Ecuador, and Venezuela,” which 
are called “the radical triangle.” The Colombian insurgency, its systemic threat, 
and its appeal in other Latin American countries, although they are key factors, 
are only part of the larger geopolitical matrix that is contesting U.S. hegemony. 
Adding another element to the matrix resisting U.S. domination, the president of 
Venezuela, Hugo Chávez Frías (who publicly acknowledges his African ancestry) 
has instituted nonaligned policies regarding oil production, supply and prices, 
and is trading freely with Cuba—which has undermined the U.S. strategy of 
relegating Cuba to the status of a pariah state. Petras further points out that Presi-
dent Chávez’s subsidized oil deals “have strengthened the resolve of the Carib-
bean and Central American regimes to resist Washington [DC]’s efforts” to turn 
the Caribbean into an exclusive U.S. lake: “While the guerrillas and popular 
pal-mara-02.indd   29pal-mara-02.indd   29 7/25/08   1:36:08 PM7/25/08   1:36:08 PM


--- PAGE 39 ---
Transnational Blackness30
movements represent a serious social and political challenge to U.S. supremacy in 
the region, Venezuela represents a diplomatic and [political-economic] challenge 
in the Caribbean basin and beyond. In more general terms, the radical triangle 
can contribute to undermining the mystique surrounding the invincibility of U.S. 
hegemony and the notion of the inevitability of free market ideology.”
In other words, Plan Colombia’s strategic geopolitical aim is to “reconsolidate 
[imperial] power in northern South America, secure unrestricted access to oil, [the 
primary source of energy in the United States,] and enforce the ‘no alternatives 
to globalization’ ideology for the rest of Latin America.” T o these strategic ends, 
the U.S. covertly supports right-wing terrorists through its military aid to the 
Colombian armed forces, which, in turn, are in alliance with paramilitary forces. 
Paramilitary terror is an “any means necessary” tactic “to empty the countryside 
and deny the guerrillas logistical support, food, and new recruits.”
33
As indicated earlier, the impoverished peasants and workers of Colombia, 
who are most vulnerable to this brutal practice of sociopolitical cleansing, are 
disproportionately of African descent. This problematic pattern of racial violence 
is the most recent expression of an already established practice of rampant social 
cleansing—that is, a “genocide of the poor”—which has long targeted categories 
of persons presumed to be intrinsic sources of danger and disorder: “prostitutes, 
homosexuals, drug users and street children. . . . [M]ost of the adolescent vic-
tims are black.”
34 In light of this bias, it is not surprising that Afro-Colombians, 
especially young men, are perceived as the usual suspects in the war against drugs 
and guerrillas. Particularly in the Pacific and Caribbean coastal regions, which are 
home to the country’s highest concentrations of Afro-Colombians, paramilitary 
and guerrilla activity has intensified and capitalist “development” interests are 
encroaching. It is not happenstance that this is occurring with increased intensity 
as African descendants, more than ever, claim their collective rights to the lands 
they cultivated since emancipation and assert their distinct cultural and political 
voice as las comunidades negras (the black communities).
35
The repressive consequences of Plan Colombia have seriously constricted 
civil society, limiting, for example, citizens’ rights to make trade union and civic 
demands or exercise political rights. It has increased the size, centralization, and 
military capacity of the state, which sees any measure of public debate and civil 
opposition as “subversive to the war effort” and as a “fifth [column] acting on 
behalf of the guerrillas.”
36 Consequently, alarming—and increasing—numbers of 
journalists, intellectuals, labor activists, and community leaders have been assas-
sinated. In the short term, U.S. policy in Colombia undermines the climate for 
foreign investment and free trade. Nonetheless, the hemispheric and global super-
power is well aware that its long-range business interests depend on the outcome 
of political struggles in Latin America and beyond. The American empire is trying 
to stack the geopolitical cards in its favor, assuming that a pro-imperial resolution 
of the war will recolonize the region and create the most conducive conditions for 
the transnational accumulation of U.S. capital.
pal-mara-02.indd   30pal-mara-02.indd   30 7/25/08   1:36:08 PM7/25/08   1:36:08 PM


--- PAGE 40 ---
Global Apartheid, Foreign Policy, and Human Rights 31
In hegemonic discourse, the United States is touted as the leading paragon of 
democracy and freedom. In George W . Bush’s current rhetoric, with its appro-
priation of religious themes, the nation-state represents goodness in the struggle 
against evil. Yet the United States’ human rights record at home and abroad is 
marginal, and it has long played an obstructionist role in the UN human rights 
system. U.S. refusal to participate in the WCAR was consistent with the U.S. 
government’s three decades of noncompliance with ICERD even though it signed 
it. In the wake of the horrendous events of September 11, 2001, Bush publicly 
stated that evil terrorists hate Americans because we love freedom. The record 
shows, however, that U.S. policy has disregarded many people’s human rights by 
countering struggles for freedom, self-determination, and economic and environ-
mental justice all over the world. Indigenous and ethnonational people; marginal-
ized nations and nation-states struggling to make their way down nonaligned and 
(in some cases) noncapitalist paths; racial minorities, immigrants, and refugees 
abused as strangers, scapegoats, and criminalized dangerous classes in countless 
nation-states; and women, whose rights the United States refuses to recognize as 
human rights (as defined in CEDAW , the UN Convention for the Elimination of 
All Forms of Discrimination against Women, which it has refused to sign), have 
to confront obstacles created or reinforced by U.S. policy’s greater interest in free 
markets than in free human beings.
In many respects, U.S. policy promotes the recolonization of markets and labor 
and, hence, helps to create a vast pool of men and women desperate for jobs and 
forced to work at below-subsistence wages. Women, disproportionately women 
of color concentrated in the southern hemisphere, have been designated as a 
“new colonial frontier” for flexible capital accumulation.
37 The neoliberal regime 
of development depends on gender-dependent dichotomies, such as “women’s 
work” and “men’s work,” that are supported by patriarchal assumptions that sew-
ing, assembling electronic components, and pursuing home- and community-
based informal activities are extensions of women’s natural activities requiring no 
special skills, training, or compensation.
Aihwa Ong, drawing on postcolonial theorist Gayatri Spivak, refers to these 
women, who are compelled to work for slave wages under unhealthy conditions, 
as “paradigmatic subjects” of the international division of labor.
38 In Haiti in 
1996, women workers in the Disney factory earned only twenty-eight cents an 
hour, which is less than a living wage even by Haitian standards.
39 It is no coinci-
dence that those super-exploited Haitian workers are black women, second-class 
citizens in the poorest nation in the western hemisphere. The gross violation of 
their right to just terms of employment and fair working conditions must be 
viewed as a consequence of their bottom-level location within intersecting hierar-
chies of gender, race, class, and nation.
Labor exploitation that intersects with gender and racial oppression are inevi-
table consequences of “the logic and operation of capital in the contemporary 
global arena.”
40 In a world of growing disparities of wealth, power, and privilege, 
women comprise 70 percent of the poor, and they are particularly vulnerable to 
pal-mara-02.indd   31pal-mara-02.indd   31 7/25/08   1:36:09 PM7/25/08   1:36:09 PM


--- PAGE 41 ---
Transnational Blackness32
the ideological and physical assaults of nationalist militarization, economically 
induced environmental degradation, and the economic restructuring and politi-
cal realignments mediated by policies, such as structural adjustment. Structural 
adjustment depends on the cultural production of discourses and images about 
masculine dignity and feminine sacrifice, especially that of women of color. Fur-
thermore, the policy is able to operate in the first place because of widespread 
expectations and role hierarchies ensuring that women will have to take up the 
slack when jobs and social safety nets are slashed or eliminated. Underscoring pre-
cisely this point, a UNICEF report on Latin America and the Caribbean stated, 
“If it were not for poor women working harder and longer hours, the poorest 
third of the population in that region would not be alive today.”
41
Increasingly, the subsistence security and human rights of these women and 
their families are being eroded, while they subsidize the production and accumu-
lation of the world’s wealth, which, more than ever before, is being concentrated 
at the top of the transnational ladder. Structural adjustment and other neoliberal 
policies, often fused with the cultural politics of local settings, contribute to the 
superexploitation of women’s labor. Racially subordinate women, of course, bear 
the heaviest burdens and are the most vulnerable targets.
42
These superexploited women, however, are not merely victims but also agents 
who actively negotiate the conditions of their everyday life and work. Through 
mostly covert acts of resistance and rebellion, they expose and contest the post-
colonial industrial logic that institutionalizes inequalities of age, gender, class, 
and race. Although some of their negotiations may appear to be universal or 
transcultural (e.g., strikes), these actions are informed, at least in part, by cultur-
ally specific meanings, values, and experiences. Whether through social criticism 
encoded in songs and oral poetry in North Africa, through the covert language of 
protest expressed by spirit possessions on factory floors in Malaysia, or through 
conventional strikes that women in South Korea and Jamaica have organized 
against the repressive regimes of free trade or export-processing zones, women 
struggle to reclaim their human dignity. They do this in the face of domination 
that makes gender, race, class, and national—or transnational—identity socially 
and economically salient in a globalizing world.
43
Although structural adjustment is a specific policy of the IMF working in 
conjunction with the World Bank, USAID, and other institutions, the term also 
refers to a general development orientation and policy climate driven by neolib-
eral assumptions about economic growth and change. In other words, structural 
adjustment can also serve as metonym for the restructuring and realignments that 
define present-day globalization.
44 Hence, in the case of Cuba, although the IMF , 
World Bank, WTO, and USAID do not directly intervene in the Cuban econ-
omy, neoliberal policies—the most coercive and punitive being the U.S. embar-
go—have indeed reshaped the nation during its so-called Special Period since the 
end of USSR and Eastern Bloc economic support, and they have undermined its 
revolutionary achievements in ensuring rights to employment, education, and 
pal-mara-02.indd   32pal-mara-02.indd   32 7/25/08   1:36:09 PM7/25/08   1:36:09 PM


--- PAGE 42 ---
Global Apartheid, Foreign Policy, and Human Rights 33
health services. This has occurred even though, when the embargo began in the 
early 1960s, the politico-economic climate in the world was Keynesian rather 
than neoliberal. Nonetheless, for the past two decades, this punitive policy has 
been enforced within a politico-economic matrix of neoliberal globalization.
In the wake of the disintegration of the USSR and the demise of the Eastern 
Bloc, the Cuban government undertook an “internal readjustment” and “rational-
ization” to sustain its economy and meet basic subsistence needs. These changes 
allowed for greater economic diversification, a partial process of privatization, 
foreign investment, and “dollarization.”
45 The effects of these drastic changes—
Cuba’s own structural adjustment—on everyday life have been considerable.
Cuba’s status as a socialist sanctuary is being destabilized under dollarization 
and the conditions of economic austerity that led to it. Social inequalities are 
reemerging and becoming conspicuous and crime is becoming a problem. A red 
flag signaling the changing times can perhaps be found in a troubling December 
2001 incident in which five members of a family, including an eight-year-old 
child and a couple visiting from Florida, were murdered in a robbery in Matanzas 
Province. This heinous incident was unusual in that murders are extremely rare 
in Cuba and mass murders “are unheard of.”
46 The economic crisis that brought 
about this unprecedented crime wave has caused escalating unemployment and 
has reduced safety net provisions—trends that have impacted African-descended 
Cubans, and Afro-Cuban women in particular, more than any other segment of 
the population. With less access to kin-mediated remittances from the dispro-
portionately white émigré communities overseas, there is more pressure on Afro-
Cuban women, who are more likely than white Cubans to live in female-headed 
households, stand in long lines for rations, stretch the devalued peso, and make 
ends meet by any means necessary.
47 Any means necessary has come to include 
doing work on the side—trabajo por cuenta propia—in the underground economy 
aligned with the growing tourist sector. For younger women, particularly those 
who fit the culturally constructed stereotype of la mulata (mulatto woman), this 
is increasingly being translated into working as jineteras (sexual jockeys). This line 
of work reflects Cuba’s historical race, gender, and class boundaries.
48 Desperate to 
lure foreigners to the country’s beaches and hotel resorts, the Cuban government 
itself has resorted to manipulating prerevolutionary racial clichés by “showcasing 
‘traditional’ Afro-Cuban religious rituals and art, ‘traditional’ Afro-Cuban music, 
and Afro-Cuban women,” who are foregrounded as performers in these com-
modified contexts.”
49
The sexual exoticization of African-descended women has a long history in 
Cuba as well as throughout the African Diaspora and the West, where variations 
on the theme of black hypersexuality are rampant as either a positively valued 
essentialism or a fertility or health-related social problem. Nadine Fernandez 
questions the assumption that black and mulatto women predominate in Cuba’s 
sex tourism by highlighting the role of a racially biased gaze in attributing Afro-
Cuban women’s interactions with male tourists to prostitution while perceiving 
pal-mara-02.indd   33pal-mara-02.indd   33 7/25/08   1:36:09 PM7/25/08   1:36:09 PM


--- PAGE 43 ---
Transnational Blackness34
white women’s interactions in terms of alternative interpretations, including that 
of “romance.” Because of their greater access to dollars and to jobs in the tourist 
sector, white women are more likely to have privileged access to tourists in 
restricted venues (shops, restaurants, and nightclubs) where Afro-Cubans are not 
generally permitted to enter. Consequently, Afro-Cubans interact with tourists 
“outside tourist installations, making their meetings much more visible and scru-
tinized by the public eye.”
50 In the context of Cuba’s current crisis, traditional 
racial narratives of gender, race, and sexuality are being reasserted and rewritten 
to fit with recent restructuring.
51
The U.S. embargo is a flagrant form of foreign intervention. Like official 
structural adjustment policies, it has been premised on an ideology of power, 
recolonization, and ranked capitals that assumes that Cubans are expendable 
troublemakers—perhaps even harborers of terrorism—who deserve to be starved 
out of their defiant opposition to U.S. dominance. The same ideology that ratio-
nalizes the unregulated spread of commodification into all spheres of social life 
implies that Cuban women’s bodies, especially Afro-Cubanas’ hypersexualized 
bodies, can be bought and sold on the auction block of imposed economic aus-
terity without any accountability on the part of the papiriquis, or sugardaddies, 
of global capital. The implication of these policies is that Afro-Cuban families 
and communities can be sacrificed so that northerners can enjoy privileges—
including that of living in a “good” and “free” society—that southern workers and 
peasants subsidize. Cuba’s current crisis is being negotiated over the bodies of its 
women, with African-descended women, las negras y mulatas, las chicas calientes 
(black and mulatto women, hot sexy chicks), expected to bear the worst assaults 
against what remains in many ways a defiant socialist sanctuary.
52
Analyses of the heightening of racial conflict and the attendant increase in 
human rights abuses around the world point to the confluence of several fac-
tors. The world has become more integrated in ways that lead to more decen-
tralized and flexible capital accumulation, dramatic disparities in social and life 
expectancy, a reconcentration of wealth in the hands of a minority, and a decline 
in subsistence security and environmental sustainability for the broad masses of 
humanity. Diminished socioeconomic security and increased social stress, often 
precipitated by free but clearly not fair market mandates, best explain the escalat-
ing tensions that provoke volatile politics of racial marginalization. Destabilizing 
economic forces are helping to deepen fragmentations of identity. As a conse-
quence, once-established national identities are weakened and often give way to 
new identities in which culturally concrete forms of community, language, and 
ethnic loyalties become more salient and respond defensively to an increasingly 
globalized world.
Domestic racism and global apartheid also are intensified by:
 the economic and political destabilization engendered by post–cold war 
realignments and restructuring;
pal-mara-02.indd   34pal-mara-02.indd   34 7/25/08   1:36:09 PM7/25/08   1:36:09 PM


--- PAGE 44 ---
Global Apartheid, Foreign Policy, and Human Rights 35
  the circumscription of state (especially peripheral state) sovereignty under 
the influence of transnational forces;
 the crisis of social welfare resulting from the diminished ability of the state 
to provide a safety net and to protect rights to education, health care, and 
humane work conditions;
 the destabilizing effects of structural adjustment and stabilization programs 
on civil society;
 the instability and decline of international markets in export commodi-
ties (e.g., coffee in Rwanda), especially those around which less diversified, 
extroverted economies are organized;
 major demographic shifts leading to the increasing internationalization of 
work forces and societies;
 the elaboration of competing mythicohistorical and mythicosocial accounts 
that construct differences and identities in essentializing terms drawn from 
fundamentalist racial ideologies that are centered on biology, morality, and 
cultural alterity;
 and the globalization of the arms trade, which adds fuel to the fire ignited 
by intergroup tensions.
The structural violence of the IMF , the WTO, and the superpower politics 
of the United States are threads visibly woven through several of these factors. 
Whether expressed through foreign policy or international communications 
media, the United States’ culture of race and its relations of racism have a pro-
foundly global impact in light of the superpower’s position in the global hierarchy. 
For example, the internationalization of American media carries with it power-
ful representations of black Americans (including images of popular culture and 
identity politics) that have influenced perceptions of blackness all over the world. 
The United States’ construction of race has had a profound impact on a minority 
of Afro-Latin Americans, particularly those involved in racially cognizant black 
movements. Latinos of African descent traditionally are politically fragmented 
by national ideologies of mestizaje (mixedness with the goal and implication of 
whitening) and by complex racial classification systems that delineate elaborate 
socioracial continuums. Resisting the hegemonic notion of a “mulatto escape 
hatch,”
53 advocates of black consciousness increasingly are appropriating the U.S. 
principle of hypodescent—the “one drop rule”—to build united fronts against 
racism among African descendants.
The globalization of U.S.-led multilateral interests, however, does not nul-
lify the culpability of domestic forces within nations that contribute to racism. 
Although they may be situated in contexts shaped by the interests of transnational 
capital, it is crucial to remember that real people on uneven playing fields make 
the choices that eventually lead to human rights violations.
Antiracist activists must be attentive to the workings of complicit forms 
of individual and collective agency—with their political, economic, and psy-
chological dimensions. A holistic understanding of the dynamics of culture, 
pal-mara-02.indd   35pal-mara-02.indd   35 7/25/08   1:36:09 PM7/25/08   1:36:09 PM


--- PAGE 45 ---
Transnational Blackness36
power, and political economy at multiple levels—local, national, and transna-
tional—within a global matrix of domination is needed to craft better means of 
coalition-building.
The events of September 11, 2001, underscored the urgency of exposing and 
strategizing about U.S. domestic and foreign policy and of repositioning the 
United States on the terrain of international relations. The well-being of ordinary 
Americans is at stake: our very lives depend on it. Will the current war against ter-
rorism degenerate into yet another war against reason and democracy? This would 
sacrifice civil liberties and human rights on the altar of “superpowerdom” built by 
the architects of global apartheid.
There were many pilgrims at the WCAR who were well aware that their 
expanded antiracist repertoires and arsenals must include weapons suitable for 
combating the negative and dehumanizing aspects of globalization. They also 
know, now more than ever, that they must help forge a more humane globaliza-
tion informed by more just ways of imagining and mobilizing global communi-
ties united against racism, xenophobia, and all related intolerance. The rite of 
passage that the WCAR represented for human rights educators, researchers, and 
activists may lead them in the direction of new tools, strategies, and opportunities 
for organizing in ways that are at once local, national, regional, and transnational. 
It will take an enormous amount of conviction and critical imagination, but it 
is up to diverse agents of many civil societies and receptive sectors of govern-
ments to make the WCAR more than an empty public relations symbol for the 
UN. All antiracists who regard the Durban Plan of Action as an inspiring tool in 
the struggle for transformation should translate the plan into real victories—and 
shape a twenty-first century truly reconfigured by change.
54
Notes
 1. Ellen Messer, “Anthropology and Human Rights,” Annual Review of Anthropology 22 
(1993): 222.
 2. David L. Wilson, “Do Maquiladoras Matter?” Monthly Review 49 (October 1997): 30.
 3. Catherine Kingfisher and Michael Goldsmith, “Reforming Women in the United States 
and Aotearoa/New Zealand: A Comparative Ethnography of Welfare Reform in Global 
Context,” American Anthropologist 103 (September 2001): 716, 727.
 4. See Faye V . Harrison, “Crime, Class, and Politics in Jamaica,” TransAfrica Forum 5 (Fall 
1987): 30–32. Also see “Human Rights in Jamaica” (Americas Watch/Human Rights 
Watch, 1986); “Jamaica,” in Amnesty International Annual Report (Amnesty International, 
2001); “Jamaica: Police Killings—A Human Rights Emergency” (Amnesty International 
Press Release, October 4, 2001); “Killings and Violence by Police: How Many More Vic-
tims?” (Amnesty International, October 4, 2001): 1–72.
 5. David Harvey, The Condition of Postmodernity: An Inquiry into the Origins of Cultural 
Change (Cambridge, MA: Basil Blackwell, 1989); Fredric Jameson, Postmodernism or the 
Cultural Logic of Late Capitalism (Durban, South Africa: Duke University Press, 1990); 
Jean-François Lyotard, The Postmodern Condition (Minneapolis.: University of Minnesota 
Press, 1984).
 6. Wilson, “Maquiladoras,” 30.
pal-mara-02.indd   36pal-mara-02.indd   36 7/25/08   1:36:09 PM7/25/08   1:36:09 PM


--- PAGE 46 ---
Global Apartheid, Foreign Policy, and Human Rights 37
 7. In a historic turn of events, the U.S. Congress agreed to a limited relaxation of the embargo 
following Hurricane Michelle, which inflicted mass destruction on Cuba in November 
2001, resulting in widespread food shortages and medical emergencies. As a result, the 
U.S. State Department authorized the sale of grain and medicines to Cuba. It was the first 
trade deal between the two countries since 1962, when President Kennedy established the 
embargo. In spring 2002, however, the Bush administration violated its agreement with 
Cuba when the State Department denied travel visas to Cuban food import officials who 
were scheduled to visit the U.S. to buy grain. “Cuba Reaches Historic T rade Deal with 
U.S.,” Latin American Monitor: Caribbean 19 (January 2002): 8; “U.S.–Cuban Food Sales 
in Jeopardy,” Caribbean Update 18 (May 2002): 8–9.
 8. Faye V . Harrison, “The Persistent Power of ‘Race’ in the Cultural and Political Economy 
of Racism,” Annual Review of Anthropology 24 (1995): 47–74; Faye V . Harrison, “Facing 
Racism and the Moral Responsibility of Human Rights Knowledge,” Annals of the New 
York Academy of Sciences 925 (December 2000): 1, 45–69.
 9. For analyses of ethnic cleansings and other violently marked racial conflicts in Eastern 
Europe, Rwanda, and Oromo (a region in Ethiopia that is a site for a nationalist move-
ment for self-determination), see Vesnas Kexic, “Never Again a War: Women’s Bodies 
Are Battlefields,” in Look at the World through Women’s Eyes: Plenary Speeches from the 
NGO Forum on Women, Beijing ‘95, ed. Eva Friedlander (New York: Women, Ink, 1995), 
51–53; Mahmood Mamdani, When Victims Become Killers: Colonialism, Nativism, and the 
Genocide in Rwanda (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 2001); and Asafa Jalata, 
“The Impact of a Racist U.S. Foreign Policy on the Oromo National Struggle,” Journal of 
Oromo Studies 6 (1999): 49–90.
 10. Lisa Malkki, Purity and Exile: Violence Memory, and National Cosmology among Hutu Refu-
gees in T anzania (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1995), 227–28.
 11. Ralph Bunche, A World View of Race (1936; repr. Port Washington, NY: Kennikat, 
1968).
 12. David Levering Lewis, W . E. B. Du Bois: Biography of a Race, 1868–1919 (New York: 
Henry Holt and Company, 1993), 504; Robert Vitalis, “The Graceful and Generous Lib-
eral Gesture: Making Racism Invisible in American International Relations,” Millennium: 
J
ournal of International Studies 29 (2000): 354. For a discussion of Du Bois’s UN petition, 
participation in early UN conferences, and lobbying to have the UN Charter acknowledge 
“dependent peoples’” rights to self governing, see Lewis, W . E. B. Du Bois: The Fight for 
Equality and the American Century, 1919–1963  (New York: Henry Holt and Company, 
2000): 507; also see Amiri Baraka, “Paul Robeson and the Theater,” Black Renaissance 2 
(1): 39, for a discussion on African American and UN activism to protect Black people’s 
human rights.
 13. For reflections on the conference, see Samir Amin, “World Conference against Racism; 
A People’s Victory,” Monthly Review 53 (December 2001): 20–23; and Faye V . Harrison, 
“Imagining a Global Community United against Racism,” Anthropology News (December 
2001): 22–23.
 14. Sherle R. Schwenninger, “America and the World: The End of Easy Dominance,” The 
Nation 20 (November 2000): 20.
 15. For a detailed analysis of the structural violence in urban Jamaica, see Faye V . Harrison, 
“The Gendered Politics and Violence of Structural Adjustment: A View from Jamaica,” in 
Situated Lives: Gender and Culture in Everyday Life, ed. Louise Lamphere, Helena Ragoné, 
and Patricia Zavella (New York: Routledge, 1997), 451–68.
 16. Salih Booker and William Minter, “Global Apartheid,” The Nation 9 (July 2001): 11.
pal-mara-02.indd   37pal-mara-02.indd   37 7/25/08   1:36:09 PM7/25/08   1:36:09 PM


--- PAGE 47 ---
Transnational Blackness38
 17. Gernot Köhler, “Global Apartheid,” in T alking about People: Readings in Contemporary 
Cultural Anthropology, ed. William A. Haviland and Robert J. Gordon (Mountain View, 
CA: Mayfield, 1978), 262–68.
 18. Ann Kingsolver, NAFTA Stories: Fears and Hopes in Mexico and the United States (Boulder, 
CO: Lynne Rienner, 2001), 110.
 19. Howard Winant, Racial Conditions: Politics, Theory, Comparisons (Minneapolis: University 
of Minnesota Press, 1994), 123.
 20. Linda Basch, Nina Glick Schiller, and Cristina Blanc Szanton, Nations Unbound: Transna-
tional Projects, Postcolonial Predicaments, and Deterritorialized Nation-States (Langhorne, 
PA.: Gordon and Breach, 1994).
 21. Faye V . Harrison, “Introduction: Expanding the Discourse on Race,” Contemporary 
Issues Forum: Race and Racism, American Anthropologist 103 (September 1998): 609.
 22. Aihwa Ong, The Spirits of Resistance and Capitalist Discipline: Factory Women in Malaysia 
(Albany: State University of New York Press, 1987); and Ong, “The Gender and Labor 
Politics of Postmodernity,” Annual Review of Anthropology 20 (1991): 279–309. Russell, 
“Race and Reflexivity: The Black Other in Contemporary Japanese Mass Culture,” Cul-
tural Anthropology 6 (1991): 3–25.
 23. A further discussion on this topic is found in Faye V . Harrison’s “Unraveling ‘Race’ for the 
21st Century,” in Exotic No More: Anthropology on the Front Lines, ed. Jeremy McClancy 
(Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2002), 145–66. Also see “Everyday Neoliberalism 
in Cuba: A Glimpse from Jamaica,” in Outsider Within: Reworking Anthropology in the 
Global Age (Urbana: University of Illinois Press, 2007).
 24. Vitalis, “The Graceful and Generous Liberal Gesture,” 333. This norm against noticing 
race is consistent with the tendency to ignore gender and, in particular, the problematic 
international politics of masculinity, of which feminist political scientist Cynthia Enloe’s 
work has made us more aware: Bananas, Beaches, and Bases: Making Feminist Sense of Inter-
national
 Politics (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1989); and The Morning After: 
Sexual Politics at the End of the Cold War (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1993).
 25. Israel’s Brand of Apartheid: The Nakba [Catastrophe] Continues, booklet summarizing the 
Palestinian NGO Position Paper for the WCAR; Occupied Jerusalem, a New Soweto?, study 
by the Jerusalem Center for Social and Economic Rights; Amandla Intifada, newsletter of 
the Palestine Solidarity Committee, South Africa; and Down  with the Nazi-Israeli Apart-
heid, statement by the Afro-Brazilian National Congress.
 26. Other dissenters among U.S. Jews include Jewish Mobilization for a Just Peace (Junity), 
which is a Philadelphia-based international network working to support Gush Shalom 
(a leading Israeli- Palestinian peace organization); Jews for Peace in Palestine and Israel, 
based in Washington, DC; Not In My Name, a Chicago-based organization; the Coalition 
of Jews for Justice, of the San Francisco Bay Area; Jews Against the Occupation, New York 
City; Boston’s Women in Black; and Jewish Women for Justice in Israel and Palestine. 
This information is found in a October 29, 2001, Jonathan Fremont, e-mail message 
from the office of Congresswoman Cynthia McKinney (D-GA) regarding the October 25, 
2001, congressional news conference on the Middle East Peace Process.
 27. Stanley B. Greenberg, Race and State in Capitalist Development: Comparative Perspectives 
(New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 1980), 41.
 28. John Simon, “Palestinian Geography and the Peace Process,” Monthly Review (October 
2001): 30–34 (emphasis added).
 29. Louis Gilberto Murillo, “I Survived a Paramilitary Death Squad,” Pacific News Service, 
June 4 2001, http://www.pacificnews.org/content/pns/2001/june/ 0604survived.html 
(accessed July 2001).
pal-mara-02.indd   38pal-mara-02.indd   38 7/25/08   1:36:09 PM7/25/08   1:36:09 PM


--- PAGE 48 ---
Global Apartheid, Foreign Policy, and Human Rights 39
 30. TIRN [T ennessee Industrial Renewal Network] Fair T rade Committee, “Afro-Colombian 
Speaker in T ennessee”; “Whither the War in Colombia?” NACLA Report on the Americas 
35 (September–October 2001): 7.
 31. William Walker III, “A Reprise for ‘Nation Building’: Low Intensity Conflict Spreads in 
the Andes,” NACLA Report (July–August 2001): 25.
 32. Daniel Lazare, “A Battle against Reason, Democracy, and Drugs,” NACLA Report on the 
Americas 35 (July–August 2001): 14–17.
 33. James Petras, “The Geopolitics of Plan Colombia,” Monthly Review 53 (May 2001): 
33–41.
 34. Nina S. de Friedemann and Jaime Arocha, “Colombia,” in Invisible No More: Afro-Latin 
Americans T oday, ed. Minority Rights Group (London: Minority Rights Publications, 
1995): 67.
 35. Peter Wade, “Colombia,” Africana: The Encyclopedia of the African and African American 
Experience, ed. Kwame Anthony Appiah and Henry Louis Gates, Jr. (New York: Basic 
Civitas Books, 1999): 477–78; also see the discussion on legal reform and collective land 
rights in Peter Wade, Race and Ethnicity in Latin America (London: Pluto, 1997): 99.
 36. Petras, “The Geopolitics of Plan Colombia,” 42.
 37. Maria Mies, Veronika Bennholdt-Thomsen, and Claudia von Werlhof, The Last Colony 
(London: Zed Books, 1988).
 38. Jacqui M. Alexander and Chandra Talpade Mohanty, “Introduction: Genealogies, Lega-
cies, Movements,” in Feminist Genealogies, Colonial Legacies, Democratic Futures, ed. Jac-
qui M. Alexander and Chandra Talpade Mohanty (New York: Routledge, 1997), 5.
 39. Ong, “The Gender and Labor Politics of Postmodernity,” 289; Gayatri Spivak, “Subaltern 
Studies: Deconstructing Historiography,” in Selected Subaltern Studies, ed. R. Guha and 
Gayatri Spivak (New York: Oxford University Press, 1988): 3–44.
 40. National Labor Committee, Mickey Mouse Goes to Haiti, video recording (1996).
 
41. Chandra Talpade Mohanty, “Women Workers and Capitalist Scripts: Ideologies of Domi-
nation, Common Interests, and the Politics of Solidarity,” in Feminist Genealogies, ed. 
Jacqui M. Alexander and Chandra Talpade Mohanty, 28.
 42. Vivienne Wee and Noeleen Heyzer, Gender, Poverty and Sustainable Development: T owards 
a Holistic Framework of Understanding and Action  (Singapore: ENGENDER, Centre for 
Environment, Gender and Development, 1995), xv; Pamela Sparr, ed., Mortgaging Wom-
en’s Lives: Feminist Critiques of Structural Adjustment (London: Zed Books, 1994); Enloe, 
Bananas, Beaches and Bases, 1–18. For an analysis of how gender ideologies informed 
structural adjustment programs in the Caribbean, see Peggy Antrobus, “Crisis, Challenge 
and the Experience of Caribbean Women,” Caribbean Quarterly 35 (1989): 17–28; UNI-
CEF report quoted in Sparr, “How We Got into This Mess and Ways to Get Out,” Ms. 
(March–April 1992): 33–34.
 43. June Nash, “Global Integration and Subsistence Insecurity,” American Anthropologist 
96 (January 1994): 7–30; Harrison, “The Gendered Politics and Violence of Structural 
Adjustment.”
 44. Ong, Spirits of Resistance and Capitalist Discipline; Ong, “Gender and Labor Politics of 
Postmodernity,” 289.
 45. See Faye V . Harrison, “Negotiating Everyday Neoliberalism in Jamaica and Cuba,” in 
Outsider Within: Reworking Anthropology in the Global Age, ed. Harrison (Urbana: Univer-
sity of Illinois Press, 2008).
 46. Carollee Bengelsdorf, “[Re]Considering Cuban Women in a Time of T roubles,” in Daugh-
ters of Caliban: Caribbean Women in the Twentieth Century, ed. Consuelo Lopez Spring-
field (Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1997).
pal-mara-02.indd   39pal-mara-02.indd   39 7/25/08   1:36:09 PM7/25/08   1:36:09 PM


--- PAGE 49 ---
Transnational Blackness40
 47. “Five Family Members Killed,” The Weekly Gleaner (December 27, 2001–January 2, 
2002): 12.
 48. Ibid. See also Helen I. Safa, The Myth of the Male Breadwinner (Boulder, CO: Westview 
Press, 1995), 139. The issue of these racially differential effects and the unequal distribu-
tion of remittances from abroad is discussed in Pedro Pérez Sarduy and Jean Stubbs, eds., 
Afro-Cuban Voices: On Race and Identity in Contemporary Cuba (Gainesville: University 
Press of Florida, 2000), xv, 5, 34.
 49. Julia O’Connell Davidson, “Sex T ourism in Cuba,” Race and Class 38 (1996): 39–48; 
Coco Fusco, “Hustling for Dollars,” Ms. (September–October 1996): 62–70.; Gayle 
McGarrity and Osvaldo Cárdenas, “Cuba,” in No Longer Invisible: Afro-Latin Americans 
T oday (London: Minority Rights Publications, 1995), 100; Georgina Herrera, “Poetry, 
Prostitution, and Gender Esteem,” in Afro-Cuban Voices, ed. Perez Sarduy and Stubbs, 
123–24; Nadine Fernandez, “Back to the Future: Women, Race, and T ourism in Cuba,” 
in Sun, Sex, and Gold: T ourism and Sex Work in the Caribbean, ed. Kamala Kempadoo 
(Lanham, MD.: Rowman and Littlefield, 1999), 81–89.
 50. Fusco, “Hustling for Dollars,” 67.
 51. Fernandez, “Back to the Future,” 88.
 52. Bengelsdorf, “[Re]Considering Cuban Women,” 245.
 53. The colonization and market configuration of Cuban bodies through sex work does not 
target women alone. There are also pingueros (male sex workers). Derived from pinga 
(“dick”), pinguero was coined in the wake of the legalization of the U.S. dollar. Derrick G. 
Hodge, “Colonization of the Cuban Body: The Growth of Male Sex Work in Havana,” 
NACLA Report on the Americas 34 (March–April 2001): 20–28.
 54. The idea of an escape hatch comes from historian Carl N. Degler’s classic study, Neither 
Black nor White: Slavery and Race Relations in Brazil and the United States (New York: 
M
acmillan, 1971).
pal-mara-02.indd   40pal-mara-02.indd   40 7/25/08   1:36:09 PM7/25/08   1:36:09 PM


--- PAGE 50 ---
C HAPTER  3
The Modern World 
Racial System
Howard Winant
As the world lurches forward into the twenty-first century, there is 
widespread confusion and anxiety about the political significance, and even the 
meaning, of race. In this chapter I argue that, far from becoming less politically 
central, race defines and organizes the world and its future, as it has done for 
centuries. I challenge the idea that the world, as reflected by the national societies 
I compare, is moving “beyond race.” I suggest that the future of democracy itself 
depends on the outcomes of racial politics and policies as they develop in various 
national societies and in the world at large. This means that the future of democ-
racy also depends on the concept of race, that is, the meaning that is attached 
to it. Contemporary threats to human rights and social well-being—including 
the resurgent dangers of fascism, increasing impoverishment, and massive social 
polarization—cannot be managed or even understood without paying new and 
better attention to issues of race. This chapter attempts to provide a set of concep-
tual tools that can facilitate this task.
The present moment is unique in the history of race. Starting after World War 
II and culminating in the 1960s, there was a global shift, a “break,” in the world-
wide racial system that had endured for centuries. The shift occurred because, 
after the war, many challenges to the old forms of racial hierarchy converged: 
anticolonialism, antiapartheid, worldwide rejection of fascism, and perhaps most 
important, the U.S. civil rights movement and U.S.-U.S.S.R competition in the 
world’s southern hemispheric nations all called into question white supremacy to 
an extent unparalleled in modern history. These events and onflicts linked antira-
cism to democratic political development more strongly than ever before.
All around the world a centuries-old pattern of white supremacy is more 
fiercely contested, more thoroughly challenged, in our lifetimes than ever before. 
As a result, for the first time in modern history, there is widespread, indeed 
pal-mara-03.indd   41pal-mara-03.indd   41 7/25/08   1:39:57 PM7/25/08   1:39:57 PM


--- PAGE 51 ---
Transnational Blackness42
worldwide, support for what until recently was a “dream”—Dr. Martin Luther 
King Jr.’s dream, let us say, of racial equality.
The rise of a worldwide trend toward antiracism and democratization start-
ing in the late 1940s was only the first phase, that is, the initiation of the shift 
or break in the old world racial system. A second phase, the containment of the 
antiracist challenge, came after several decades of fierce struggles. Thus by about 
1970, despite all the political reforms and cultural transformations wrought by 
social movements and democratic politics around the world and despite the real 
amelioration of the most oppressive features of the old world racial system, the 
centuries-old and deeply entrenched system of racial inequality and injustice was 
hardly eliminated. Rather, in a postwar social order faced with an unprecedented 
set of democratic and egalitarian demands, racism had to be adapted. A new 
racial politics developed, which was a reformed variety that was able to concede 
much to racially based democratic and egalitarian movements, yet it maintained 
a certain continuity with the legacies of imperial rule, conquest, enslavement, and 
so forth.
Thus, white supremacy has proven itself capable of absorbing and adapting 
much of Dr. King’s dream, repackaging itself as “color-blind,” nonracial, and mer-
itocratic. Paradoxically, in this reformed version racial inequality can thrive, still 
battening on stereotypes and fears; still resorting to exclusionism and scapegoat-
ing when politically necessary; still invoking the supposed superiority of so-called 
mainstream (i.e., white) values, and still cheerfully maintaining that equality has 
been largely achieved. It is ironic that this new, “color-blind” racial system may 
be more effective in containing antiracist challenges than any intransigent, overtly 
racist backlash could possibly have been.
Although the officially nonracial version of white supremacy has succeeded in 
curtailing progress toward the dream in many battles—immigration and citizen-
ship, income redistribution and poverty, and above all compensatory programs 
commonly called “affirmative action”—nonracialism has hardly won the day. 
It has certainly not eliminated the movement for racial justice that spawned it. 
Rather, the racial politics that result from this synthesis of challenge and incorpo-
ration, racial conflict and racial reform, has proven neither stable nor certain. It is 
a strange brew, often appearing more inclusive and pluralistic than ever yet filled 
with threats—of “ethnic cleansing,” resurgent neofascism, and perhaps equally 
insidious, a renewed racial complacency.
The global racial situation, then, is fluid, contradictory, and contentious. No 
longer unabashedly white supremacist, much of the world is, so to speak, abash-
edly white supremacist. The conflicts generated by the powerful movements for 
racial justice that succeeded World War II have been contained but not resolved. 
Thus, no new world racial system has yet been created; instead, the problems 
of the old system have come to a head, and the outlines of what will succeed 
it can at least be glimpsed, if not clearly foreseen. What does such a glimpse, 
however preliminary, reveal? The new world racial system will struggle to adapt 
the rhetoric of egalitarian social movements to the exigencies of a postimperial, 
pal-mara-03.indd   42pal-mara-03.indd   42 7/25/08   1:39:57 PM7/25/08   1:39:57 PM


--- PAGE 52 ---
The Modern World Racial System 43
post–cold war, and postapartheid reality. T o some extent, this system succeeded 
in reinventing itself along nonracist lines; in fact, its capacity to redefine itself as 
“beyond race” is in many ways a crucial index of its intransigence. Yet there is also 
a widespread recognition that the reforms undertaken in the 1950s and ’60s have 
ossified and been derailed far short of their goals. Indeed, they may be providing 
a kind of cover for a reassertion of white privilege, white rule, and “northern” 
cultural norms—all under the banner of “postracial” societies, which are now 
officially considered color-blind and pluralist.
T oday’s global racial system is obviously not the world’s first. The racial dimen-
sions of modernity itself have been widely acknowledged. The Enlightenment’s 
recognition of a unified, intelligible world, the construction of an international 
economy, the rise of democracy and popular sovereignty, and the emergence 
of a global culture all were deeply racialized processes. T o understand how race 
was fundamental to the construction of modernity is of more than historical 
interest; it also explains much about the present. Notably it undermines the 
commonly held belief that racism is largely a thing of the past and the idea that, 
after the bad old days of white supremacy and colonial rule, the “race problem” 
today is resolved.
Before addressing the present, let us recall that past. What are the origins of 
the world racial system? How have the enigmatic specters of racial difference and 
racial inequality been loosed on the world?
Examining early modern history, racial patterns present ample precedents for 
the horrors of our own age. The tension between slavery, on the one hand, and 
nascent democracy, on the other, structured the lengthy transition to the modern 
world. Resistance against slavery was pivotal to crafting the broader redefinition 
of political rights for which early advocates of democracy yearned and fought. 
Indeed the violence and genocide of earlier racial phenomena prefigured contem-
porary atrocities, such as the Holocaust, “ethnic cleansing,” and totalitarianism.
How racial was nascent capitalism? Were the politics and cultural groundwork 
of modernity premised on racial distinctions? Did the generally limited democ-
racy of the developed world consist, in part, of an application of the principles of 
colonial rule to the “mother countries”? In what ways did early forms of resistance 
to racialized forms of rule—as seen in abolitionism and slave revolts for exam-
ple—dynamize the worldwide impetus toward democratization? In what ways did 
antiracism itself become an archetypal democratic movement? Did the resistance 
to slavery, which grew into antiracism, ultimately accomplish more than fight-
ing for the human, social, cultural, and political rights of racially subordinated 
groups? Was it not also crucial in permitting the acquisition of those same rights 
by whites? In other words, is the modern, inclusive form of democracy to which 
we have become accustomed itself the product of global struggles against racism?
The abolition of African slavery was the great rehearsal for the “break” with 
white supremacy that took place in our own time. Abolition was made possible 
by three momentous social changes: the triumph of industrial capitalism, the 
upsurge of democratic movements, and the mobilization of slaves themselves in 
pal-mara-03.indd   43pal-mara-03.indd   43 7/25/08   1:39:57 PM7/25/08   1:39:57 PM


--- PAGE 53 ---
Transnational Blackness44
search of freedom. Abolition was not completed with the triumph of the Union 
army in the American Civil War or the passage of the Reconstruction amend-
ments to the Constitution. Only in 1888, when Brazil became the last country to 
free its slaves, did the first crucial battle in the world’s centuries-long war against 
white supremacy draw to a close. And slavery persists in many forms even today.
But abolition left many emancipatory tasks unfinished as new forms of racial 
inequality were implemented: Democracy was still partial. Racialization contin-
ued to fine the mechanisms of authoritarian rule and the distribution of global 
resources. Racial thought and practices defined distinct types of human bodies 
as subordinate. This ranking of human society by race continued to enable and 
justify world-systemic rule. Generalized processes of racial stratification contin-
ued to support enormous and oppressive systems of commercial agriculture and 
mining. Thus until the mid-twentieth century, the unfulfilled dreams of human 
rights and equality were still tied up with the logic of race.
Although there was always resistance to racist rule, it was only in the period 
after World War II that opposition to racial stratification and racial exclusion once 
again provoked widespread political conflicts. Civil rights and antiracist move-
ments, as well as nationalist and indigenous ones, fiercely contested the racial 
limitations on democracy. These movements challenged the conditions under 
which black and brown people’s labor was exploited in the former colonies and 
the metropoles. They drew upon the antifascist push of the war and the geopoliti-
cal conflicts of the cold war. They rendered old forms of political exclusion prob-
lematic and revealed a panoply of mainstream cultural icons—artistic, linguistic, 
scientific, and even philosophical—to be deeply conflicted. They drew on the 
experience of millions who returned from military service to face a segregated or 
colonized homeland. Such movements recognized anew their international char-
acter, as massive postwar labor demand sparked international migration from the 
world’s southern to its northern hemisphere, from areas of peasant agriculture to 
industrial areas. These enormous transformations manifested themselves in a vast 
demand to complete the work that began a century before with slavery’s abolition. 
They sparked the worldwide break with the tradition of white supremacy.
As the tumultuous 1960s drew to a close, the descendants of slaves and ex-
colonials forced at least the partial dismantling of most official forms of discrim-
ination. But with these developments—the enactment of a new series of civil 
rights laws, decolonization, and the adoption of cultural policies of a universal-
istic character—the global racial system entered a new period of instability and 
tension. The immediate result of this break with past practices was an uneven 
series of racial reforms that had the general effect of ameliorating racial injustice 
and inequality. But they also worked to contain social protest. Thus, the wide-
spread demands of the racially subordinated and their supporters were at best 
answered in a limited fashion. A new period of racial instability and uncertainty 
was inaugurated.
This shift in racial attitudes and practices was a worldwide phenomenon, 
but it obviously took very different forms in particular national settings. Racial 
pal-mara-03.indd   44pal-mara-03.indd   44 7/25/08   1:39:57 PM7/25/08   1:39:57 PM


--- PAGE 54 ---
The Modern World Racial System 45
conditions are generally understood to vary dramatically in distinct political, 
economic, and cultural contexts. In this chapter I comment, necessarily briefly, 
on four national case studies: the United States, South Africa, Brazil, and the 
European Union (considered as a whole). In these comparisons, I argue that 
the post–World War II break is a global backdrop, that is, an economic, political, 
and cultural context in which national racial conflicts are being worked out.
The United States
How permanent is the United States’ color line? The activities of the civil rights 
movement and related antiracist initiatives achieved substantial, if partial, demo-
cratic reforms in postwar decades. T oday, however, these innovations coexist with 
a weighty legacy of white supremacy that originates in the colonial and slavery 
era. How do these two currents combine and conflict today?
Massive internal and international migration has reshaped the U.S. population 
numerically and geographically. A multipolar racial pattern has largely supplanted 
the old racial system, which is often (and somewhat erroneously) viewed as a 
bipolar white-black hierarchy. In the contemporary United States, new varieties 
of interminority competition and new awareness of the international dimensions 
of racial identity have greater prominence. Although racial stratification varies 
substantially by class, region, and indeed among groups, comprehensive racial 
inequality certainly endures. Racial reform policies are under attack in many 
spheres of social policy and law as opponents of the policies forcefully claim that 
the demands of the civil rights movement have largely been met and that the 
United States has entered a “postracial” stage of its history.
The racial break in the United States was a partial democratization, produced 
by the moderate coalition that dominated the political landscape in the post–
World War II years. The partial victories of the civil rights movement were won 
through mass mobilization and a tactical alliance with U.S. national interests. 
This alliance was brokered by so-called racial moderates: political centrists largely 
affiliated with the Democratic Party who perceived the need to ameliorate racial 
conflict and end outright racial dictatorship but who also feared the radical poten-
tial of the black freedom movement.
There was a price to be paid for civil rights reform. It could take place only in 
a suitably deradicalized fashion, only if its key provisions were articulated (leg-
islatively and juridically) in terms compatible with the core values of U.S. poli-
tics and culture: individualism, equality, competition, opportunity, and the fair 
accessibility of the American dream. The movement’s radicals—revolutionaries, 
socialists, and political nationalists (black, brown, red, yellow, and white)—paid 
this price, foregoing their vision of major social transformation under threat of 
marginalization, repression, or death.
The radical vision was, as Dr. King’s dream allowed us to call it, an alterna-
tive “dream” in which racial justice was central. T o be “free at last” meant some-
thing deeper than symbolic reforms and palliation of the worst excesses of white 
pal-mara-03.indd   45pal-mara-03.indd   45 7/25/08   1:39:57 PM7/25/08   1:39:57 PM


--- PAGE 55 ---
Transnational Blackness46
supremacy. It meant substantive social reorganization that would be manifested in 
egalitarian economic and democratizing political consequences. It meant some-
thing like social democracy, human rights, and full social citizenship for blacks 
and other so-called minorities.
But it was precisely here that the moderate custodians of racial reform drew 
their boundaries, both practically and theoretically.
1 T o strike down officially 
sanctioned racial inequality was permissible, but to create racial equality through 
positive state action was not. The danger of redistribution—of compensating 
for the unjustified expropriation and restriction of black economic and political 
resources, both historically and in the present—was to be avoided at all costs.
Civil rights reform thus became the agenda of the political center, which moved 
“from domination to hegemony.”
2 The key component of modern political rule, 
of hegemony as theorized most profoundly by Marxist writer Antonio Gramsci, 
is the capacity to incorporate opposition. By adopting many of the movement’s 
demands, by developing a comprehensive and coherent program of racial democ-
racy that hewed to a centrist political logic and reinforced key dimensions of U.S. 
nationalist ideology, racial moderates were able to define a new racial common 
sense. Thus, they divided the movement, reasserted some stability, and defused 
a great deal of political opposition. This was accomplished gradually from about 
the mid-1960s to the mid-1980s.
This partial reconfiguration of the U.S. racial order was based on real conces-
sions but left major issues unresolved, notably the endurance of significant pat-
terns of inequality and discrimination. The reform that did occur, however, was 
sufficient to reduce the political challenge posed by antiracist movements in the 
United States. Certainly it was more successful than the intransigent strategy of 
diehard segregationists—whose tactic was encapsulated in the slogan “massive 
resistance” to even minimal integration—would have been. Yet the fundamental 
problems of racial injustice, inequality, and white supremacy, of course remained; 
they were moderated, perhaps, but hardly resolved.
So in the Unites States race not only retains its significance as a phenomenon 
for structuring society but also continues to define North American identities 
and life chances decades after the supposed triumph of the so-called civil rights 
revolution. Indeed “the American dilemma” may be more problematic than ever 
as the twenty-first century commences because achieving this moderated agenda 
requires that the civil rights project be raised. This process, which began in the 
late 1960s, achieved greater success in the following two decades.
This tugging and hauling, this escalating contestation over the meaning of 
race, resulted in ever more disrupted and contradictory notions of racial identity. 
The significance of race (“declining,” as one author has suggested, or increas-
ing?), the interpretation of racial equality (color-blind or color-conscious?), the 
institutionalization of racial justice (reverse discrimination or affirmative action?), 
and the categories of race—black, white, Latino/Hispanic, Asian American, and 
Native American—all these were called into question as they emerged from the 
moderate civil rights gains of the mid-1960s.
pal-mara-03.indd   46pal-mara-03.indd   46 7/25/08   1:39:57 PM7/25/08   1:39:57 PM


--- PAGE 56 ---
The Modern World Racial System 47
The argument is now made that the demands of the civil rights movement have 
largely been met and that the United States has entered a postracial stage of its 
history. Some claim that this means racial injustice is largely eradicated. In some 
circles, such views have become the new national “common sense” in respect to 
race, gaining not only elite and academic adherents but also widespread support, 
especially among whites. As a result, the already limited racial reform policies 
such as affirmative action and the relatively powerless state agencies charged with 
enforcing civil rights laws (i.e., the U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Com-
mission) developed in the 1960s are undergoing a new and severe attack. The 
postracialist advocates of such trends—usually classified as neoconservative but 
sometimes also found on the left—ceaselessly instruct racially defined minorities 
to rely on their own resources rather than government support to succeed. In a 
callous distortion of Martin Luther King Jr.’s message, neoconservatives exhort 
minorities to rely on the “content of their character” rather than “the color of their 
skin” to propel them to success—a social value of self-reliance that discards claims 
that racial prejudice still impedes opportunity for some Americans.
3
In an egregious example, the Supreme Court in April 2001 decided on the 
Alexander v. Sandoval case—in which a Spanish-speaking resident of Alabama 
challenged the state’s policy to administer driving tests in English only—to repeal 
even the inadequate civil rights reforms of the 1960s. The Court decided that 
states may offer licensing examinations in English and no other languages—and 
it said this provision does not violate civil rights laws. Here as elsewhere, by add-
ing a purpose or “intent to discriminate” requirement to anti-discrimination law, 
the Court makes it almost impossible to get legal relief from discrimination. As 
critical legal theorist David Kairys has argued, this amounts to creating different 
equality rules for whites and nonwhites because, in situations in which whites 
suffer harm, the Court does not require proof of intent or purpose.
As the dust settled from the titanic confrontation between the movement’s 
radical propensities and the establishment’s tremendous capacity to incorporate 
moderate reform, a great deal remained unresolved. The ambiguous and con-
tradictory racial conditions in the United States today result from decades-long 
attempts simultaneously to ameliorate racial opposition and to placate the ancien 
regime raciale. The unending reiteration of these conflicting and contradictory 
practices testifies to the limitations of American democracy and the continuing 
significance of race in the United States.
South Africa
In the mid-1990s, South Africa—the most explicitly race-structured society in the 
late twentieth century—entered a difficult but promising transition. The apart-
heid state was committed to a race-based framework of citizenship, civic inclu-
sion, and law in general; the postapartheid constitution incorporates the principle 
of nonracialism originally articulated in the African National Congress (ANC)-
based Freedom Charter of 1955. Yet the country still bears the terrible burden 
pal-mara-03.indd   47pal-mara-03.indd   47 7/25/08   1:39:57 PM7/25/08   1:39:57 PM


--- PAGE 57 ---
Transnational Blackness48
of apartheid’s secondary consequence: persistent racial inequality persists across 
every level of society. The legacy of segregated residential areas, combined with a 
highly racialized distribution of resources of every sort, force political leadership 
to take a moderated middle road toward reform. Because whites continue to con-
trol positions throughout the economy, white fears must be placated in order to 
sustain the country’s economic base and minimize capital flight. The handful of 
blacks who have penetrated the corporate and state elites understand very well the 
price the country would pay for a radical turn in policy.
Yet South Africa is officially committed to racial equality and to promoting 
both individual and collective black advancement. Can the postapartheid state 
stabilize the process of political, social, and economic integration of the black 
majority? Can it maintain an official nonracialism in the face of such compre-
hensive racial inequality? How can the vast majority of citizens—excluded until 
recently from access to land, education, clean water, and decent shelter, debarred 
from Africa’s wealthiest economy, and denied the most elementary civic and polit-
ical rights—garner the economic access they so desperately need without reinforc-
ing white paranoia and fear?
How can the postapartheid state facilitate the reform of racial attitudes and 
practices, challenging inequality, white supremacy, and the legacy of racial sepa-
ratism without engendering white flight and subversion?
Both the antiapartheid movement and the new government’s policies were 
shaped in part by global concerns. Internal political debates reflect changing 
global discussions around race and politics. Just as the South African Black 
Consciousness Movement drew on the speeches of Malcolm X and Aimé Cés-
aire to understand racial oppression, just as the antiapartheid movement used 
international antiracist sentiment to build momentum for sanctions on the old 
regime so, too, is the current government both guided and constrained by inter-
national pressures.
Moreover, internal politics also bring international resources to bear: Through 
the postwar era, the antiapartheid movement drew a great deal of support from an 
international antiracist movement, which was largely linked to an international 
trend to support decolonization. Since the 1994 election, however, international 
constraints have limited the sphere of action of the new democratic government. 
Critics of affirmative action policies, for example, emphasize the danger of under-
mining efficiency in the name of redistribution in the same way critics of redis-
tributive policies deploy neoliberal economic arguments to reject nationalization; 
in each case, they invoke international discourses that are nonracial in form yet 
have racial implications in practice. The South African state continues to face 
considerable challenges from the political left and right: Will it be possible to 
reconstruct the nation by building not only a democracy but also a greater degree 
of consensus, citizenship, and belonging? T o what degree can a policy of “class 
compromise” (the politically negotiated pace of reform) forestall the dangers of 
social upheaval and capital flight.
4
pal-mara-03.indd   48pal-mara-03.indd   48 7/25/08   1:39:57 PM7/25/08   1:39:57 PM


--- PAGE 58 ---
The Modern World Racial System 49
Understanding these processes requires viewing South African racial debates in 
global perspective and exploring options for local actors who seek to change the 
terms of engagement as they restructure national politics. Although many white 
civil servants remain in place, the 1994 elections changed the racial character of 
the state; affirmative action policies, to which the ANC-led government is com-
mitted, could reorganize racial distribution of incomes, if not wealth. Yet in the 
context of a global debate over affirmative action, and in the face of the threat of 
the flight of white capital and skills, the process of reform is far slower than many 
South Africans, black and white, expected. This dilemma remains unresolved: 
how can democratic, nonracial institutions be constructed in a society where most 
attributes of socioeconomic position and identity remain highly racialized?
Brazil
Brazil presents significant parallels, both historical and contemporary, to other 
American nations, including the United States. These similarities include Brazil’s 
history of slavery and black inequality, its displacement and neglect of a large 
indigenous population, its intermittent and ambiguous commitment to immigra-
tion, its inconsistent democracy, and its vast and increasingly urban underclass 
(disproportionately black). Brazilian racial dynamics have traditionally received 
little attention from scholars or policy makers despite the fact that the country has 
the second largest black population in the world (after Nigeria). Its postemancipa-
tion adoption of a policy of national “whitening,” which was to be achieved by 
concerte0d recruitment of European immigrants, owed much to the U.S. exam-
ple and also drew on nineteenth-century French racial theorizing.
5
Amazingly, what has often been called the “myth of racial democracy” still 
flourishes in Brazil, even though it has been amply demonstrated to be little more 
than a fig leaf covering widespread racial inequality, injustice, and prejudice.
6 The 
Brazilian racial system, with its “color continuum” (as opposed to the more famil-
iar “color line” of North America), tends to dilute democratic demands. Indeed, 
Brazilian racial dynamics make it difficult to promote policies that might address 
racial inequality. Public discourse resolutely discourages any attempt to define 
inequality along racial lines; only under the presidency of Fernando Henrique 
Cardoso (1995–2003) was the subject of racial inequality first officially raised. 
Although Brazil has now instituted certain racial reforms—such as affirmative 
action in education and regularization of land titles based in quilombos (maroon 
communities established by runaway slaves under slavery)—serious obstacles still 
confront efforts to challenge racial injustice. For example, politicians who do 
point out racial inequalities, and thereby challenge the myth of racial democracy, 
are subject to charges that they are themselves provoking racial discrimination by 
stressing difference.
Reliable research on racial stratification and racial attitudes in Brazil has only 
become available over the past few years.
7 A range of political questions thus 
remains mysterious. Consider the example of voting rights: Although illiterates 
pal-mara-03.indd   49pal-mara-03.indd   49 7/25/08   1:39:57 PM7/25/08   1:39:57 PM


--- PAGE 59 ---
Transnational Blackness50
were barred by law from voting until 1985, there is no reliable data on the pro-
portion of illiterates who were black—and thus the extent to which black Brazil-
ians have been disenfranchised through this century, though undoubtedly large, 
remains uncertain.
The emergence of the Movimento Negro Unificado (MNU) as a force to be 
reckoned with—though by no means as strong as the 1960s U.S. civil rights 
movement—represents a new development. The MNU used the 1988 centen-
nial of the abolition of Brazilian slavery, as well as the 1990–91 census, to dra-
matize persistent racial inequalities. As in South Africa, this phase of the black 
movement takes its reference points partly from international antiracist strug-
gles, often drawing on examples, symbols, and images from the civil rights and 
antiapartheid movements.
In the 1990s, a range of racial reforms were proposed in Brazil—largely in 
response to the increasingly visible movimento negro (black movement). T o strike 
down officially sanctioned racial equality was permissible; to create racial equality 
through positive state action was not permissible with these reforms; to prompt 
the state to adopt antiracist policies, however, will require far greater support for 
change than presently exists. The political dilemma is familiar: Blacks need orga-
nized allies in the party system, among other impoverished and disenfranchised 
groups, and on the international scene. Yet in order to mobilize, they must also 
begin to assert a racialized political identity, or there will be little collective sup-
port for racial reforms. How can blacks address this dualistic, if not contradictory, 
situation? How can Afro-Brazilians assert claims on the basis of group solidar-
ity without simultaneously undermining the fragile democratic consensus that is 
emerging across many constituencies? How can democratic institutions be built 
alongside policies designed to address racial inequalities without undermining a 
vision of common citizenship and equality?
The European Union
The last few decades have established that indeed, “the empire strikes back.” 
Racially plural societies are in place throughout Europe, especially in former impe-
rial powers, such as the United Kingdom, the Netherlands, France, and Spain but 
also in Germany, Italy, the Scandinavian countries and to some extent in the East. 
The influx into these countries of substantial numbers of nonwhites during the 
postcolonial period has deeply altered a dynamic in which the racial system and 
the imperial order had been one—in which outsiders were mostly kept outside 
the walls of the “mother country.” As a stroll around London, Frankfurt, Paris, 
or Madrid quickly reveals that those days are now gone forever. Yet the response 
to the new situation often takes repressive and antidemocratic forms, focusing 
attention on the so-called immigrant problem (or the “Islamic problem”), seeking 
not only to shut the gates to Maghrebines or sub-Saharan Africans, T urks, or Slavs 
(including Balkan refugees), but often also to define the “others” who are already 
present as enemies of the national culture and threats to the “ordinary German” 
pal-mara-03.indd   50pal-mara-03.indd   50 7/25/08   1:39:57 PM7/25/08   1:39:57 PM


--- PAGE 60 ---
The Modern World Racial System 51
(or English, or French, etc.) way of life. This rationale for racial exclusion and 
restriction in Europe is termed “differentialist.” It is distinct from the meritocratic 
logic of discrimination in the United States, a reflection that Europeans value the 
integrity of national cultures more highly than they value individual equality.
8 
Thus, the particular racial issue that must be confronted in Europe is the newly 
heterogeneous situation, that is, the multiplication of group identities. Currently, 
antidemocratic tendencies such as new right and neofascist groups are widely vis-
ible, widespread, and growing. At the state and regional levels, restrictive policies 
that jeopardize mobility of employment or residence, and sometimes stigmatize 
religious or other cultural practices, are gaining popularity. Conflicts over immi-
gration and citizenship have taken on new intensity, with crucial implications for 
the character of democracy.
The dynamics of integration raise a wide range of questions about future 
European racial logics. Conflicting principles of citizenship—jus sanguinis (where 
citizenship is determined by ancestry—“blood”) versus jus soli (where citizenship 
is determined by birthplace—“soil”)—are deeply imbedded in the distinct Euro-
pean national makeups, and their resolution in a common cultural or political 
framework has not come easily.
9 Nations’ relations with their former colonies 
vary, posing serious questions of immigrant access and of economic ties between 
the old empires and the new Europe, but also raising anxieties about security and 
terrorism. Particularly in the early 1980s, popular antiracist sentiments stimulated 
the formation of many multiculturalist and pluralist organizations. Over the past 
decade, however, many have ceased to function as mass mobilization initiatives in 
support of democracy. So, although the slogan “T ouche pas mon pôte” (“Hands 
off my buddy”) no longer summons tens of thousands of French citizens into the 
street in defense of the democratic rights of racially defined minorities, the transi-
tion to racial pluralism is still very much underway.
The Tenacity Of Race
T o understand the changing significance of race in the aftermath of the twentieth 
century, the century whose central malady was diagnosed by W . E. B. Du Bois 
as “the problem of the color-line,” requires us to reconsider where the racialized 
world came from and where it is going. In the settings studied, the break that 
began with movement activity after World War II and that was contained from 
the late 1960s onward by political reform has not been consolidated. Just as ear-
lier stages of modern racial history failed to resolve many issues, so too does the 
present epoch. In the first years of the twenty-first century the world as a whole, as 
evidenced by the above national cases, is far from overcoming the tenacious lega-
cies of colonial rule, apartheid, and segregation. All still experience continuing 
confusion, anxiety, and contention about race. Yet the legacies of epochal struggles 
for freedom, democracy, and human rights also persist. T o evaluate the transition 
to a new world racial system in comparative and historical perspective requires 
keeping in view the continuing tension that characterizes the present. Despite 
pal-mara-03.indd   51pal-mara-03.indd   51 7/25/08   1:39:58 PM7/25/08   1:39:58 PM


--- PAGE 61 ---
Transnational Blackness52
the enormous vicissitudes that demarcate and distinguish national conditions, 
historical developments, roles in the international market, political tendencies, 
and cultural norms, racial dynamics often operate as they did in centuries past: as 
a way of restricting the political influence of racially, socially, and economically 
subordinated groups. In the contemporary era, racial beliefs and practices have 
become far more contradictory and complex. The “old world racial system” has 
not disappeared, but it has been seriously challenged and changed. The legacy of 
democratic, racially oriented movements such as the U.S. civil rights movement, 
anti-apartheid struggles, SOS-Racisme in France, the Movimento Negro Unificado 
in Brazil, and anticolonialist initiatives throughout the world’s southern nations, 
is thus a force to reckon with. It is impossible to address worldwide dilemmas of 
race and racism by ignoring or transcending these themes, for example, by adopt-
ing so-called colorblind policies. In the past, the centrality of race determined the 
economic, political, and cultural configuration of the modern world. Although 
in recent decades movements for racial equality and justice have blossomed, the 
legacies of centuries of racial oppression remain—nor has a vision of racial jus-
tice been fully worked out. Certainly the idea that such justice has already been 
largely achieved—as seen in the colorblind paradigm in the United States, the 
nonracialist rhetoric of the South African Freedom Charter, the Brazilian rheto-
ric of racial democracy, and the emerging racial differentialism of the European 
Union—remains problematic.
What would a more credible vision entail? The pressing task today is not to 
jettison the concept of race but instead to come to terms with it as a form of flex-
ible human variety. What does this mean in respect to racism? Racism has been 
a crucial component of modernity, a key pillar of the global capitalist system, 
for five hundred years. So it remains today. Yet it has been changed, damaged, 
and forced to reorganize by the massive global social movements that have taken 
place in recent decades. In the past, these movements were international in scope 
and influence. They were deeply linked to democratizing and egalitarian trends, 
such as labor politics and feminism. They were able both to mobilize around the 
injustices and exclusion experienced by racially subordinated groups and sustain 
alliances across racial lines. This is background; such experiences cannot simply 
recur. Yet surely the massive mobilizations that created the global break following 
World War II were not fated to be the last popular upsurges, the last egalitarian 
challenges to white supremacy, to racial hierarchy. In the countries I have dis-
cussed and in transnational antiracist networks, these earlier precedents still wield 
their influence. They still spark new attempts to challenge racism.
At the same time, new political and intellectual leaders have come onto vari-
ous national stages in recent years, arguing that the worst racial injustices (of 
the United States, Brazil, South Africa, and so on) are now firmly relegated to 
the past and that the problem of racism can now be viewed as essentially solved. 
Why, then, should we maintain affirmative action policies? Why direct resources 
toward immigrants, victims of segregation and apartheid, or the (disproportion-
ately dark-skinned) poor? Don’t we already have equality now?
pal-mara-03.indd   52pal-mara-03.indd   52 7/25/08   1:39:58 PM7/25/08   1:39:58 PM


--- PAGE 62 ---
The Modern World Racial System 53
Will race ever be transcended? Will the world ever get beyond race? Probably 
not. But the entire world still has a chance of overcoming the stratification, the 
hierarchy, the taken-for-granted injustice and inhumanity that so often accompa-
nies the race concept.
Like religion or language, race can be accepted as part of the spectrum of the 
human condition, while it is simultaneously and categorically resisted as a means 
of stratifying national or global societies. As we enter a new millennium, nothing 
is more essential in the effort to reinforce democratic commitments, not to men-
tion global survival and prosperity.
Notes
 1. Nikhil Pal Singh, “Culture/Wars: Recoding Empire in an Age of Democracy,” American 
Quarterly 50, no. 3 (September, 1998); Stephen Steinberg, Turning Back: The Retreat from 
Racial Justice in American Thought and Policy (Boston: Beacon Press, 1995).
 2. Howard Winant, Racial Conditions: Politics, Theory, Comparisons (Minneapolis: University 
of Minnesota Press, 1994).
 3. Shelby Steele, The Content of Our Character: A New Vision of Race in America (New York: 
St. Martin’s, 1990); Stephan Thernstrom and Abigail Thernstrom, America in Black and 
White: One Nation, Indivisible (New York: Simon & Schuster, 1997).
 4. Edward Webster and Glenn Adler, “T oward a Class Compromise in South Africa’s ‘Dou-
ble T ransition’: Bargained Liberalization and the Consolidation of Democracy,” Politics 
and Society 27, no. 3 (September 1999): 347–85.
 5. Thomas E. Skidmore, Black into White: Race and Nationality in Brazilian Thought (1974; 
repr. Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 1993).
 6. Carlos A. Hasenbalg and Nelson do Valle Silva, “Raça e Oportunididades Educacionais 
no Brasil,” in Relações Raciais no Brasi l Contemporâneo, ed. Hasenbalg and Silva (Rio de 
Janeiro: Rio Fundo/IUPERJ, 1992); Michael George Hanchard, Orpheus and Power: The 
Movimento Negro of Rio de Janeiro and Sao Paulo, Brazi l, 1945–1988 (Princeton, NJ: 
Princeton University Press, 1994); George Reid Andrews, Blacks and Whites in São Paulo, 
Brazil, 1888–1988 (Madison: University of Wisconsin Press, 1991).
 7. Edward T elles, “Segregation by Skin Color in Brazil,” American Sociological Review  57 
(1992): 186–97; T elles, “Industrialization and Racial Inequality in Employment: The 
Brazilian Example,” American Sociological Review 59, no. 1 (1994): 46–63; France Wind-
dance T wine, Racism in a Racial Democracy: The Maintenance of White Supremacy in Brazil 
(New Brunswick, NJ: Rutgers University Press, 1997); Datafolha, 300 Anos de Zumbi: Os 
Brasileiros e o Preconceito de Côr [300 Years After Zumbi: Brazilians and Color Prejudice] 
(São Paulo: Datafolha, 1995).
 8. Pierre-André Taguieff, “The New Cultural Racism in France,” T elos 83 (Spring 1990) and 
excerpted in Racism, ed. Martin Bulmer and John Solomos (London: Oxford University 
Press, 1999); Michel Wieviorka, The Arena of Racism, trans. Chris T urner (Thousand 
Oaks, CA: Sage, 1995).
 9. Rogers Brubaker, Citizenship and Nationhood in France and Germany (Cambridge, MA: 
Harvard University Press, 1992).
pal-mara-03.indd   53pal-mara-03.indd   53 7/25/08   1:39:58 PM7/25/08   1:39:58 PM


--- PAGE 63 ---
This page intentionally left blank


--- PAGE 64 ---
C HAPTER  4
The Ongoing 
Contestation over 
Nationhood
Anthony W. Marx
The nation is never a fixed subject, but always in flux and a major focus of 
contestation. Elements of the state and factions of civil society project and dispute 
varying images of who is to be included as a member of the polity, so specifying 
obligations, allocation of benefits, and rights. The result at any one time is a set of 
images of solidarity and rules of citizenship that remains fluid. Precisely because 
this process is central to the defining, demarcating, and implementing of the 
community and social identities, it remains a primary subject of politics.
1
As a country torn by political conflict during much of the twentieth century 
and having recently enjoyed a transition to majority rule, South Africa has expe-
rienced a particularly vibrant contestation over nationhood. That contestation 
remains today in the aftermath of the second popular national election in June 
1999. What remains at stake is the definition of who is included as the central 
constituency of the polity, serving and served by the state. Thinking about the 
possible future paths of nationhood in South Africa, we might begin with an 
overview of the past contestation.
The South African state was formed in the aftermath of a major violent struggle 
between Dutch-descendant Afrikaners claiming national self-determination and a 
British imperial power pursuing colonial rule. This struggle reached its crescendo 
with the Anglo-Boer War of the turn of the twentieth century. Outmanned and 
outgunned by the world’s leading imperial power, the Afrikaners valiantly held off 
a British victory for three years. The British resorted to the first use of machine 
guns and concentration camps, in which many Boer women and children per-
ished. One in six Afrikaners died in the conflict.
2
pal-mara-04.indd   55pal-mara-04.indd   55 7/25/08   1:54:33 PM7/25/08   1:54:33 PM


--- PAGE 65 ---
Transnational Blackness56
T o make peace and impose unitary rule over the newly created South Afri-
can state, the British sought to appease their former Afrikaner adversaries. As I 
have argued elsewhere, that peace was built on British concessions to Afrikaner 
demands to continue the political exclusion and subordination of the majority 
African population. White racism, common to the Afrikaners and the English 
(despite the latter’s denials) became the basis for an emergent accommodation 
among whites assuaging their ethnic antagonism.
3 White loyalty to the state was 
thus built on the basis of exclusion of blacks.
With the creation of the South African state after 1910, two distinct images 
of nationalism emerged among whites. British rulers joined with more prag-
matic Afrikaners to encourage the idea of a white South African nationalism 
defined, demarcated, and reinforced by continued black exclusion. This ideology 
remained the dominant image of the first half of the twentieth century and was 
forged and refined under the governments of Louis Botha and Jan Smuts. This 
racist nationalism unifying whites as such was challenged by an ethnic national-
ism of more recalcitrant Afrikaners, unified in the prior violent conflict with 
the British and resentful of imperial rule. Rather than embrace a unified white 
nationalism, the Afrikaner nationalists pressed for the self-determination of their 
ethnic constituency as the slim majority among whites. Their National Party 
came to power under General Hertzog in 1924 and held power until 1936, when 
a coalition emerged.
The contestation between unified white and Afrikaner nationalism was effec-
tively ended with the 1948 victory of the National Party. Under D. F . Malan 
and his successors, National Party members (“Nats”) solidified their constituency 
with encouragement of Afrikaner culture and language while using public policy 
to advance the economic interests of Afrikaner workers against richer English-
descendant business owners.
4 The Nats also greatly reinforced and systematized 
the exclusion and domination of blacks under the tremendously costly, pervasive, 
and draconian policies of apartheid. Many Afrikaners were employed by the state 
to enforce these rules, thereby both containing the black majority and employing 
Afrikaners. By the 1960s and 1970s, Afrikaner nationalism was clearly dominant, 
by force, in South Africa.
As an important example of the unexpected consequences of a particular form 
of nationalism, the Nats’ policies were so effective that they gradually under-
mined their own imperative. As Afrikaners were empowered, culturally solidified, 
and economically advanced by state policy, their antagonism against the richer 
English diminished. And again the combined white interest in racial domina-
tion reinforced an English-Afrikaner alliance, despite the self-proclaimed liberal 
denials of the English. By the 1980s, many English were supporting the National 
Party, thereby diluting its ethnic separatism.
5 Meanwhile, the consolidation of 
white power and wealth provided assurance to whites of their continued privilege 
and allowed for some exploration of reforming apartheid. Of course such reforms 
were overwhelmed in the 1980s by rising black protests pressing for more perva-
sive change.
pal-mara-04.indd   56pal-mara-04.indd   56 7/25/08   1:54:33 PM7/25/08   1:54:33 PM


--- PAGE 66 ---
The Ongoing Contestation over Nationhood 57
The role of resistance forces the narrative back to a related but distinct form of 
black nationalist contestation, challenging white nationalism from its very start. 
Although black opposition predates even the formation of the South African 
state, majority opposition was consolidated by the formation of that state and its 
imposition of rules excluding (and thereby unifying) all blacks. Not surprising, 
the coming enactments of those rules of exclusion prompted the organization 
of the first black national political coalition, what would become the African 
National Congress (ANC), formed in 1909.
The ANC’s image of nationalism was, of course, directly contrary to the 
dominant white view. Instead of a nation of whites, solidified by exclusion of 
blacks, the ANC sought black rights, at first through peaceful petition by elites 
and, when that failed, with mass organization and protest. Eventually, the ANC 
adopted a particularly inclusive form of nationalism, defined as uniting all those 
who opposed the system of apartheid, including white liberals. The inclusive-
ness of the ANC’s nonracial nationalism was its hallmark, purposefully designed 
to attract the largest number of followers to oppose the government. As long as 
apartheid remained, it provided the demarcation of the alternative image of a 
nation, defined as all those who opposed apartheid.
But this definition of inclusive nationhood was also contested among blacks, 
although the history of this dispute has been largely eclipsed of late by the pre-
dominance of the ANC. For instance, after the 1948 victory of the National 
Party, a section of the youth within the ANC became critical of the ANC’s liberal 
inclusiveness. Arguing that the ANC’s stance failed to prevent the consolidation 
of white domination, this section broke away from the ANC in 1959 to form the 
Pan-Africanist Congress (PAC). This group advocated a different form of nation-
hood, which was open only to those who claimed primary allegiance to Africa and 
thereby effectively excluded whites as well as “mixed-race coloureds” and Indian 
descendants. The PAC advocated mass insurrection, and when protests increased 
in 1960, the PAC was banned and forced into exile, as was the ANC.
6
Constrained by state oppression and exile, the PAC and ANC continued their 
efforts at opposition, but within the vacuum of internal organization a new group 
and ideology emerged. Founded in 1969 by Steve Biko, the Black Conscious-
ness (BC) movement sought to rebuild domestic assertiveness and resistance with 
yet another form of distinctive nationalism based on black separatism. Positive 
black identity was asserted by organizing political and service organizations that 
excluded whites, which was in direct ideological opposition to white nationalism. 
Unlike with the PAC, officially designated coloureds and Asians were included in 
BC as fellow victims of apartheid, thereby avoiding an essentialist demarcation 
of blacks as African descendants only. The power of this image built black asser-
tiveness and exploded with the Soweto Uprising of 1976, which was sparked by 
violent state oppression against a peaceful student march.
7
As a further complication, the late 1970s saw the blossoming of at least two 
other distinct forms of protonationalism. Concentrated in Natal, rural Zulus 
in particular were organized by Chief Mangosuthu Buthelezi into the Inkatha 
pal-mara-04.indd   57pal-mara-04.indd   57 7/25/08   1:54:33 PM7/25/08   1:54:33 PM


--- PAGE 67 ---
Transnational Blackness58
Freedom Party. This group enjoyed the status of state client, benefiting from the 
funding and arms provided to the KwaZulu homeland authority (also headed by 
Buthelezi). But Inkatha resisted some aspects of apartheid, notably rejecting Kwa-
Zulu independence, although it distanced itself from the ANC. Despite claims 
of being nonethnic, Inkatha was generally understood as asserting an ethnically 
distinctive Zulu nationalism. And at the same time, the trade union movement 
among blacks was becoming a major social force, with more than a million mem-
bers by the mid-1980s.
8 Although less clearly nationalist in its framework and 
organization, the trade union movement (influenced in ways by the exiled Com-
munist Party) projected an image of national rights leading to advancement of 
working-class interests. This astonishing mix of actors all converged in pressing 
for the end of apartheid.
The BC movement helped rebuild domestic protest, which was then inspired 
by continued ANC exile activism to resurface after the 1976–77 crackdown. The 
result was the United Democratic Front (UDF), which adopted an ANC-inspired 
image of inclusive nationalism opposed to apartheid. This mass protest effort of 
the mid-to-late 1980s was reinforced by the activism of the trade unions, although 
coming into increased conflict with Inkatha and remnants of BC.
By the late 1980s, opposition was largely consolidated under the UDF and 
its allied unions, bringing South Africa to a state of near-civil war and economic 
collapse. By then the National Party, encouraged by the consolidation of white 
power and privilege and discouraged about the prospects of retaining minority 
rule, social peace, and economic progress, was more open to pursuing reforms. 
The way was open to a compromise, further encouraged by the end of the cold 
war. White fears of a Communist-aligned black takeover diminished, even as 
international sanctions increased whites’ interests in finding an accommodation 
that would end the economic pressures.
The negotiations of the early 1990s largely pitted the ANC image of an inclu-
sive nationalism against the prior rulers of the National Party. Black separatists, 
Afrikaner nationalists, and Zulu nationalists were marginalized by ANC efforts 
to appease Inkatha with an alliance. The largest trade union federation, the Con-
gress of South African T rade Unions (COSATU), effectively subordinated itself 
politically to the ANC, consistent with the long-held Communist Party view of 
the need for achieving majority rule before the more divisive issues of class power 
could be addressed. This accommodation by the organized black working class 
proved crucial to the negotiated transition, for it allowed the ANC to reach out 
to whites with promises of property protection for accumulated wealth and pres-
ervation of white civil service jobs. Whites thereby felt sufficiently confident of 
their prospects to support a negotiated settlement, which brought majority rule 
elections in 1994.
During the subsequent five years, at least for the most part, the contestation 
over South African nationhood finally came to rest upon the images propounded 
and reinforced by the ANC-led government. The world has been greatly inspired 
by South Africa’s relatively peaceful emergence from being the quintessentially 
pal-mara-04.indd   58pal-mara-04.indd   58 7/25/08   1:54:33 PM7/25/08   1:54:33 PM


--- PAGE 68 ---
The Ongoing Contestation over Nationhood 59
racist state to a state committed to nonracial inclusion. All South Africans are 
promised equal citizenship rights by the new constitution, with minority rights 
of culture and language also asserted. Under the inspiring leadership of Nelson 
Mandela, blacks advanced through state-provided services, some redistribution 
of land, and limited forms of affirmative action in private employment. Whites 
retained most of their previously acquired wealth and largely kept their civil ser-
vice jobs. Business was reassured by neoliberal economic policies and limits on 
state intrusion. South Africa would appear to have emerged as a successful com-
promise of minority interests and majority demands for redress within an inclu-
sive nation.
For all that is to be celebrated about South Africa’s success at forging an inclu-
sive nation thus far, tensions remaining under the surface continue to bubble up. 
In the political realm there remain small groupings advocating Afrikaner, Zulu, 
or black separatism, although these have relatively little electoral support at the 
moment. The real tensions are more evident in related economic issues. Many 
blacks enjoy the new provisions of water, housing, electricity, and improved schools 
and health care, although such redress has come slower than many expected. A 
relatively small black middle and upper class has profited greatly since the end of 
apartheid, but urban black unemployment remains at approximately 40 percent, 
there has been little advancement particularly in the rural areas, and crime is ram-
pant.
9 Meanwhile, despite their continued enjoyment of relative privilege, many 
whites feel uncertain. Some have migrated, and white-dominated business has 
made little new domestic investment and has shifted major holdings overseas.
The current economic situation impinges upon the new ANC-led government 
headed by Thabo Mbeki. Economic policy remains firmly neoliberal, seeking 
to appease domestic and international capital by limiting efforts at redress or 
redistribution in order to encourage growth. But amid record low prices for gold 
exports, world capital flows against the Third World, and lower labor cost com-
petitors elsewhere, South Africa’s growth has been disappointing. The govern-
ment postponed more redistribution to achieve growth but has largely ended up 
with less of either.
Pressure is brought against this stasis from competing quarters. Particularly the 
left camp within the ANC, aligned with the unions and Communist Party, would 
like to see more redistribution. Whites and business, to put it simply, press for 
less. The ANC’s inclusive nationalism and nonracialism inspire continued efforts 
to finesse these pressures and retain all camps within the “great tent” of a political 
party, the inclusiveness of which was forged in the anti-apartheid struggle.
Efforts to maintain a compromise and retain coherence within such an inclu-
sive ANC will come under increased pressure if economic dislocation continues. 
The inclusiveness that worked to bolster the ranks of the ANC in opposition to 
apartheid is less easily maintained in government, where actual and divisive policy 
choices must be made. Of course, the ANC would prefer to hold on to its exten-
sive constituency and retain majority power. This challenge presents the ANC 
and President Mbeki in particular, with at least two temptations:
pal-mara-04.indd   59pal-mara-04.indd   59 7/25/08   1:54:33 PM7/25/08   1:54:33 PM


--- PAGE 69 ---
Transnational Blackness60
Given the salience of resentment against continued white privilege, the ANC 
might be tempted to solidify its support with an antiwhite rhetoric. This approach 
might be seen as a way to maintain more or less unified black support, thereby 
avoiding a split of that constituency along the lines of a growing economic divide 
among blacks since the end of apartheid. There have already been at least three 
indications of this temptation. In late 1997, even the great statesman Mandela 
lashed out in a major speech against white selfishness,
10 perhaps not coincidentally 
during the lead-up to the 1999 election when blacks again overwhelmingly sup-
ported the ANC. Mandela and his successor, Mbeki, also sought to consolidate 
an alliance with Buthelezi’s Inkatha by ignoring Buthelezi’s past use of violence 
and rewarding him with a post in the cabinet. The prospect emerged of a Nguni 
peoples coalition, unifying the largest black ethnic groups, the Xhosa and Zulu, 
and excluding whites. More vaguely, Mbeki’s trademark advocacy of himself and 
his country as part of an “African renaissance” hints at a cultural exclusion of 
whites, despite claims that whites can be included as fellow Africans.
In whatever form, such appeasement to hard or soft images of black separat-
ism may be described as South Africa’s “Zimbabwe option,” consolidating black 
majority rule and white marginalization. Zimbabwe’s experience suggests that this 
approach may require increased authoritarian efforts with antagonism of whites’ 
interests bringing economic costs and provoking popular unrest being forcefully 
contained. Although South Africa’s history, larger white population, and higher 
level of development set it apart from Zimbabwe, white South African political 
parties stoked fears of the prospect of similarity.
The other temptation is the “Brazil option,” that is, a coalition of middle- and 
upper-class blacks and whites that serve their interests while leaving unaddressed 
the needs of a marginalized poor population, particularly the rural blacks. This 
temptation is also already evident in nascent form with macro statistics demon-
strating that limited redress thus far has indeed created a greater class disparity in 
South Africa since apartheid.
11
Even the trade unions may be described as supporting this outcome, for their 
organized membership tends to benefit from a rising middle class status, even 
as the unemployed and informal sector remain outside the union ranks. Neo-
liberal policies and international economic pressures reinforce this outcome, 
which at least in Brazil has brought economic advance for the top half of the 
population with little advance and only limited protest and mobilization by the 
bottom half.
It is worth noting that South African elites may be tempted to pursue both of 
these seemingly contradictory temptations. They can use either explicitly anti-
white rhetoric or softer forms of “Africanness” to unify black support. And at the 
same time, they can pursue economic policies that reassure whites and better-off 
blacks but do not reach out to poorer blacks. Ironically, this combined approach 
would be consistent with the ANC tradition of trying to be strategically inclusive 
for pragmatic electoral benefit.
pal-mara-04.indd   60pal-mara-04.indd   60 7/25/08   1:54:33 PM7/25/08   1:54:33 PM


--- PAGE 70 ---
The Ongoing Contestation over Nationhood 61
Still, the ANC ideology of inclusion runs against these less liberal strategic 
temptations. The ANC leadership rightfully prides itself on its nonracial and 
inclusive nationalism, which provides an inspiring alternative to the long history 
of more exclusive forms of nationalism in South Africa and elsewhere. This inclu-
sion is the founding image of the new South Africa, which many would strongly 
resist abandoning. The actual experiences of continued deprivation and specified 
social exclusion in Zimbabwe or Brazil do not make the temptations of their 
approaches all that attractive, at least in the long run. Of course, the pressures 
pushing South Africa in either or both of these directions remain real, for it is dif-
ficult in this “new world order” to meet the needs of a poor Third World majority 
and the interests of a First World minority and its foreign allies. South Africa’s 
situation is emblematic of many countries that include both of these competing 
constituencies, although every country faces its own unique pressures.
In the absence of sustained growth and foreign support for such growth, South 
Africa will be further subjected to the pressures that forced Zimbabwe and Brazil 
down their unfortunate paths of racial populism, authoritarianism, and inequal-
ity. When a balance of all social interests cannot be met, choices must be made 
that forge new coalitions and nationalisms of selective inclusion and exclusion. 
Thus far the world shows little inclination to support South Africa’s efforts to 
avoid the alternatives of ethnic, racial, or class exclusion. Indeed, the world is 
now dominated by global economic market forces that do not have the collec-
tive agency to even make such a choice of support. Instead, private capital flows 
heighten domestic tension while overwhelming more limited global public poli-
cies. South Africa thus remains poised at a crossroads of alternative images of 
its nationhood. The ideological highroad of inclusion is challenged by the prag-
matic low road of social and economic choices that exclude some from the real 
benefits of citizenship. The contestation over these alternatives continues. South 
Africa’s future remains open and uncertain. And with it the world will be making 
a choice, even if not consciously so. For South Africa has emerged as symbolic of 
the new world in which we live, inspiring many around the globe with its peaceful 
transition and efforts to redress past injustice while surviving in the global market. 
If South Africa fails to maintain this trajectory, it will be a signal that the great 
transformation of the post–cold war era brings not an “end to history” but rather 
a new phase of contestation and possible conflict.
Notes
 1. See Rogers Brubaker, Nationalism Reframed (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 
1996).
 2. See Leonard Thompson, A History of South Africa (New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 
1990).
 3. See Anthony W . Marx, Making Race and Nation (New York: Cambridge University Press, 
1998).
 4. See Anthony W . Marx, “Class Discord and Racial Order,” Politikon 26, no. 1 (May 1999): 
81–102.
pal-mara-04.indd   61pal-mara-04.indd   61 7/25/08   1:54:33 PM7/25/08   1:54:33 PM


--- PAGE 71 ---
Transnational Blackness62
 5. Tim Sisk, Democratization in South Africa (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 
1995).
 6. See T om Lodge, Black Politics in South Africa Since 1945 (Johannesburg, South Africa: 
Ravan, 1983); Gail Gerhart, Black Power in South Africa (Berkeley: University of Califor-
nia Press, 1978).
 7. See Anthony W . Marx, Lessons of Struggle (New York: Oxford University Press, 1992).
 8. See Steven Friedman, Building T omorrow T oday (Johannesburg, South Africa: Ravan, 
1987).
 9. Michael Bratton, “After Mandela’s Miracle in South Africa,” Current History (May 1998): 
214–19.
 10. Report of the president of the ANC, Mafeking, December 16, 1997.
 11. World Development Indicators (Washington, DC: World Bank, 1988).
pal-mara-04.indd   62pal-mara-04.indd   62 7/25/08   1:54:33 PM7/25/08   1:54:33 PM


--- PAGE 72 ---
P ART  II
Interrogating Race and 
Racism in the Americas
pal-mara-05.indd   63pal-mara-05.indd   63 7/25/08   1:27:03 PM7/25/08   1:27:03 PM


--- PAGE 73 ---
This page intentionally left blank


--- PAGE 74 ---
C HAPTER  5
A Tale of Two Barrios
Puerto Rican Youth and the 
Politics of Belonging
Gina M. Pérez
According to David Harvey, “the perpetual reshaping of the geographic land-
scape of capitalism is a process of violence and pain.” This process intersects 
with race and gender, forcing new definitions and criteria of belonging in dif-
ferent communities. Since beginning my fieldwork among poor and working-
class Puerto Ricans in Chicago and San Sebastián, Puerto Rico in 1995, I have 
returned to Harvey’s description of capitalism’s impact on place and space to help 
me make sense of the shifting realities of thousands of puertorriqueños (Puerto 
Ricans) living on the island and the mainland. When I began my research project, 
I initially thought I would construct an ethnographic study of circular migration 
between Chicago and San Sebastián—a small town in the northwestern region 
of the island—focusing on particular households and family members as they 
moved between both communities over time. After a few months I began to 
panic because I had identified only one family that fit this profile. But as I contin-
ued to work at one of Chicago’s Puerto Rican cultural centers and continued to 
hear stories of displacement, gentrification, migration, and confusion over vary-
ing meanings of community, I redirected my research focus. I began to consider 
the changing meanings of migration among first- and second-generation Puerto 
Rican migrants in Chicago to examine what impact this movement had on both 
communities. Both places have been connected by transnational flows of people, 
goods, money, and ideologies for more than fifty years.
When migrants seek economic mobility and security for themselves and their 
children, migration is to be expected. Unexpectedly, however, migration between 
Chicago and Puerto Rico was an important strategy used by older migrants to 
protect their offspring from the influences of American culture. As young girls 
pal-mara-05.indd   65pal-mara-05.indd   65 7/25/08   1:27:03 PM7/25/08   1:27:03 PM


--- PAGE 75 ---
Transnational Blackness66
became teenagers, families worried they might develop relationships with “the 
wrong kind of guy” and eventually get pregnant. For many young boys, adoles-
cence meant gangs, drugs, and violence. Families would often send children to 
Puerto Rico as teenagers once they felt their children were getting into trouble. 
But for most part, the mere possibility of sending children to Puerto Rico to live 
with family members always existed as both a resource and a disciplinary threat. 
Thus, the links Chicago-based families maintained with relatives in Puerto Rico 
become critical as their U.S.-reared children grow older. This is one way in which 
adult migrants can activate and deactivate transnational connections at different 
points in the life cycle of households.
In addition to parents’ justified fears of gang involvement, they also worry 
about the real problems of police harassment and brutality against Latino youth. 
This dynamic highlights the racial politics of place and belonging. On one hand, 
the neighborhoods of Humboldt Park, Logan Square, and West T own—which 
are on Chicago’s Near Northwest Side and house the largest concentration of 
Puerto Rican families—are popularly regarded as dangerous places. English- and 
Spanish-language print and television media have labeled these places as gang- 
and drug-infested: Several years ago, one Chicago Tribune writer called Humboldt 
Park “hell’s living room,” reflecting attitudes that help justify a zero-tolerance law 
enforcement policy with regard to so-called suspicious youth. This policy, which 
was at the heart of the city’s controversial anti-loitering ordinance, allowed law 
enforcement officials to detain people for unlawfully congregating on the street 
with “no apparent purpose.”
1 These neighborhoods are also on the western bor-
der of some of the city’s most rapidly gentrifying neighborhoods, such as Wicker 
Park and Buck T own, and are even experiencing the beginnings of gentrification 
themselves. Although many Puerto Rican youth are lifelong residents of these 
gentrifying areas, they were suddenly considered outsiders. They were constantly 
watched, harassed, verbally abused, and humiliated by powerful interests, such as 
new businesses in the area and law enforcement. They are often reminded that 
they no longer belong. Just as gentrification brings the destruction, gutting, and 
rebuilding of old buildings, so too does gentrification reconfigure a neighbor-
hood’s racial and social landscape by redefining membership in a community and 
clearly labeling as outsiders those who transgress imposed norms of class, dress, 
race, and ethnicity.
These questions of membership, community, race, globalization, and trans-
nationalism also emerged in my research in San Sebastián. Since the late 1960s, 
Puerto Rico has been engaged in an ongoing debate about who properly belongs 
to the “Puerto Rican nation.” This struggle has been fueled in part by a mass 
return migration from the United States beginning in the 1960s and by height-
ened immigration from the Dominican Republic. The return migrants’ social 
remittances and globalization introduce new ways of being at the local level.
2 
T ogether, these processes prompted an ongoing national debate on “Puerto Rican-
ness” and the detrimental effects that los que vienen de afuera—that is, outsiders 
or, literally, those who come from the outside—have on Puerto Rican culture, 
values, and local communities. In what follows, I will discuss how this los de 
pal-mara-05.indd   66pal-mara-05.indd   66 7/25/08   1:27:03 PM7/25/08   1:27:03 PM


--- PAGE 76 ---
A Tale of Two Barrios 67
afuera discourse is used in San Sebastián to define membership in the Puerto 
Rican nation and the local community and how it is also deployed by local politi-
cians to resist the unexpected consequences of globalization in the town.
During my field research in San Sebastián in 1998, discussions about Puerto 
Rico’s political status as a nation and as an American territory were, understand-
ably, near-constant topics of conversation. Almost as often, residents lamented 
and hotly debated issues concerning la juventud de hoy (today’s youth) and los 
de afuera. People argued passionately about contemporary social problems and 
attempted to explain the cultural changes happening around them. They consid-
ered drugs, crime, sexual promiscuity, and a disdain for work, family, and com-
munity to be the unwelcome consequences of the transnationalism enabling los 
de afuera to dwell among them.
One writer from San Sebastián calls it “the thing we don’t want to talk about”: 
the Diaspora at home, los de afuera. Narrowly defined, the term refers to Puerto 
Ricans who currently reside on the island after many years living in the United 
States. More broadly, the label popularly applies to Dominicans—who are almost 
always racialized as black—pillos (criminals), asesinos (murderers), or anyone else 
who does not properly belong in the imagined “circle of the we” of the Puerto 
Rican nation.
3 Like the term Nuyorican, “los de afuera” is usually used pejora-
tively, connoting a culturally and racially distinct group whose values, behaviors, 
language, and dress directly challenge so-called authentic Puerto Rican culture 
and racial identity. The label “los de afuera” is used not only to define member-
ship in the immediate and national community but also to resist the transnational 
flow of ideas, people, and capital that many believe destabilize traditional under-
standings of customs, community, and identity in local community politics.
Like many municipalities in Puerto Rico, San Sebastián witnessed unprec-
edented growth beginning in the 1970s. Between 1970 and 1990, its population 
increased by more than 20 percent to 38,799, which is remarkable considering 
the town’s population as a whole shrunk by nearly 10 percent in the 1950s and 
1960s.
4 These demographic changes, however, are not surprising and, in fact, 
reflect population increases throughout the island: Although return migration 
to the island began in earnest in the 1960s, it reached its peak in the 1970s and 
continued at a steady, although diminished, rate through the 1980s.
5 The life 
histories and stories of the residents of barrio Saltos—an outlying sector of San 
Sebastián—reveal myriad economic and noneconomic factors informing migra-
tion decisions. They also paint a complicated portrait of life in the town and of 
the ways in which migration, identity, and the politics of place remain emotion-
ally charged issues in local residents’ lives. In what follows, I identify two distinct 
but related ways in which people make sense of los de afuera and the changes 
brought about by return migration.
First, young Puerto Rican men and women who do not fit expected norms 
of behavior, dress, and linguistic performance are often immediately labeled as 
de afuera regardless of whether or not they have actually lived outside of Puerto 
Rico. Multiple piercings, hip-hop styles of dress for men, and provocative dress 
for women are commonly regarded as markers of one’s outside status and usually 
pal-mara-05.indd   67pal-mara-05.indd   67 7/25/08   1:27:03 PM7/25/08   1:27:03 PM


--- PAGE 77 ---
Transnational Blackness68
provoke pointed remarks by older barrio residents. During my field research and 
tenure working in a bodega (small grocery store) in barrio Saltos, for example, I 
witnessed the heated intergenerational conflicts between young and old men who 
consistently demonstrated their disdain for one another. Because the bodega was 
located directly across the street from local basketball courts, the old men drink-
ing and playing dominoes would often interact with the young male ball players 
and others around the courts. The old men, who frequented the store consis-
tently, complained about the trendy clothing of the young men, their multiple 
piercings, and their music, which included rap and heavy metal. They attributed 
these behaviors to the negative influences of life in the United States. One evening 
as I worked in the store, I teasingly told one young man with pierced ears, eye-
brows, and a lip ring that he should not smoke because he will die young. One of 
the older regulars looked up from his beer and sneered, “Qué se muera, no mas! 
Mira como es! Déjalo que se muera!” (“Then let him die! Just look at him! Just 
let him die!”) The young man looked surprised at the outburst, said something 
under his breath, and left the store. Other older men playing dominoes witnessed 
the exchange and laughed. One commented, “La juventud de hoy está perdida. 
Vienen de afuera, vienen para aca, y no hacen na’.” (T oday’s youth is lost. They 
come from the outside, they come here, and they don’t do anything.)
The idea of “la juventud perdida” was a common lament. Older community 
residents would pray for them—“para los jovenes, tan metidos en el vicio, en la 
droga, en la prostitución” (for the youth, so involved in bad habits, drugs, and 
prostitution)—and stress how vastly different the young are today compared to 
how they were when they were younger—“Son perdidos, y no saben vivir la vida.” 
(They’re lost, and they don’t know how to live life.) They would accuse the young 
people of being lazy, unmotivated, and corrupted by life afuera. One day over a 
game of dominoes, two old men tried to convince me and another woman, Beba, 
that today’s youth were worthless. Severino commented,
’Chacho! Estos jovenes—yo diría que solo un 25 percentage de la juventud hoy en 
día son buenos. Jovenes que valen la pena y que no están metidos en problemas—en 
las gangas, en la droga.
[Those young people—I’m saying that only 25 percent of today’s youth are good. 
Young people who are worthwhile and not in trouble—in gangs, drugs.]
“Sí,” Carlos added, “la juventud está perdida” (Yes, the young people are lost). 
When Beba protested that more than 25 percent of the youth were worthwhile, 
she was corrected by Severino who continued,
No, no. Mira, los jovenes de hoy no trabajan! No saben trabajar. Cogen el welfare, 
los cupones. No saben trabajar como nosotros . . . por eso los jovenes son bancar-
rota. Es el modernismo—el mundo moderno. Y es lo mismo que allá [en los Esta-
dos Unidos].
pal-mara-05.indd   68pal-mara-05.indd   68 7/25/08   1:27:03 PM7/25/08   1:27:03 PM


--- PAGE 78 ---
A Tale of Two Barrios 69
[Look, the youth of today don’t work! They don’t know how to work. They get wel-
fare and food stamps. They don’t know how to work like us . . . and so the young 
people are bankrupt. It’s modernism—the modern world. And it’s the same over 
there in the United States.]
Young men, according to these narratives, don’t know the value of work or the 
value of making money and living an honest life. Moreover, unlike these older 
critics who also lived afuera for varying lengths of time, these young men have 
internalized the cultural values attributed to urban ghetto living and bring them 
to the island: gangs, drugs, and increased violence in Puerto Rico are blamed, in 
large part, on los que vienen de afuera.
Notions of “la juventud perdida” also vary widely depending on gender. 
Although young men are derided for their failure to be productive members of 
the community, women de afuera are blamed for their domestic failings: They 
are called immodest, locas (crazy girls), fiesteras (party girls), and enamoradas (boy 
crazy) and are said to be responsible for failed marriages and the moral deteriora-
tion of the town. When I first arrived in San Sebastián, for example, one of my 
great-aunts took great pride in introducing me to her friends and neighbors. When 
she introduced me to the men at the panadería (bakery) across the street from her 
home, she pointed out that although I was born and raised afuera, I was not “una 
de esas locas de afuera. Miren como se viste (one of those crazy girls from over 
there. See how she dresses), she insisted, as she passed her hand along the front of 
me, highlighting my appropriately short skirt and conservative blouse. “Es como 
si fuera criada aquí, como en los tiempos de antes” (It’s as if she was born here, like 
in the old days), she concluded. In contrast, I heard one grandmother complain 
to her friends that her granddaughter who was born and raised in Puerto Rico, 
“se viste como si fuera de Nueva York” (looks like she’s from New York). Other 
young women were criticized for socializing away from their homes—away from 
the supervision of their elders—too much, relying too heavily on relatives to care 
for their children, and not attending to their husbands properly. Invariably, these 
problems were attributed to the influence of American gender ideologies that 
threaten traditional Puerto Rican family values. Thus, the label “los de afuera” 
not only reproduces a particular understanding of community that is static and 
smoothes over its true heterogeneity—including class, race, and sexuality—but it 
also stigmatizes those people whose economic marginalization necessitates migra-
tion as a strategy of survival. As other scholars have noted, young people often 
make convenient scapegoats for larger political and economic problems.
6
On the level of political discourse, the label “de afuera” is used to resist what 
some pepinianos (residents of San Sebastián) regard as the negative conse-
quences of progress on daily life in the town. Although globalization is routinely 
viewed as a sweeping, large-scale phenomenon, these statements offer an on-
the-ground example of the way globalization—as it informs the concepts of 
progress and culture—can spark tension and resistance between individuals and 
within communities.
pal-mara-05.indd   69pal-mara-05.indd   69 7/25/08   1:27:03 PM7/25/08   1:27:03 PM


--- PAGE 79 ---
Transnational Blackness70
As one prominent lawyer and independentista (one favoring the independence 
of Puerto Rico) explained:
The return of those who come and go between here and the United States is a prob-
lem. The mayor is a product of the migration. And you can see the impact return 
migration has had even on the highways. The mayors who migrated, who have been 
through that, don’t make small streets or roads. When people return, they have a 
larger vision of the world: big projects with big thinking that is metropolitan and 
even North American. Big cars, big streets. . . . It’s a process that affects the vision 
of life here, how we should do things here. It’s a vision that is not from here. It’s 
from over there.
7
This lawyer interprets “big visions,” as a threat to the traditional cultural values 
and practices that most pepinianos believe characterize San Sebastián and make 
it unique. Since the 1950s, San Sebastián, the neighboring municipality of Lares, 
and other towns of the central highland region have been popularly regarded as 
authentic sites of Puerto Rican culture.
8 And since the early 1970s, local com-
munity activists and cultural workers have dedicated themselves to preserving and 
enhancing these cultural traditions.
For this reason—and many others that are beyond the scope of this chapter—
many residents of San Sebastián are extremely critical of their new mayor, Justo 
Medina, who was elected in 1992. Born in San Sebastián but raised in Perth 
Amboy, New Jersey (the city pepinianos fondly refer to as a mini-San Sebastián on 
the mainland), don Justo is young, energetic, and committed to bringing “pro-
greso” to the small, largely rural town.
He is also the first New Progressive Party (PNP) mayor in a town deeply loyal 
to los populares, the Popular Democratic Party. An example of his distinct vision 
was his backing of a new tabloid-size local newspaper, El  Progreso, which resem-
bled the New York Daily News more than the town’s tradition of modest news-
papers like El  Pepino, El Palique, and El Maguey. Many pepinianos complained 
bitterly about these changes, accusing the mayor of using the paper as an unof-
ficial vehicle of his administration and of squeezing out the town’s other print 
media, which frequently criticized him and his new policies. Such tactics, one 
man assured me, were typical of los de afuera and they underscored rumors of don 
Justo’s corrupt ways, including his alleged financial gains through illegal activities 
in Perth Amboy (he was repeatedly accused of making his money through la bolita 
(the numbers) in Perth Amboy, although no one could prove this).
One forty-year-old New York-born man told me,
Mira, este alcalde que tenemos aquí, el vino de afuera. Igual que el alcalde de Agua-
dilla. Pero él no trabaja nada para su pueblo. Este alcalde vino, trabajo sus cuatro 
añitos y se tiró para el alcalde. Y ganó. Vino y hizo su residencia y ahora es alcalde.
[Look, this mayor we have here, he came from the outside. The same with the 
mayor of Aguadilla. But he doesn’t work at all for his town. This mayor came, he pal-mara-05.indd   70pal-mara-05.indd   70 7/25/08   1:27:03 PM7/25/08   1:27:03 PM


--- PAGE 80 ---
A Tale of Two Barrios 71
worked his four years here and then ran for mayor. And he won. He came and 
established residency, and now he is mayor.]
Not only was the mayor accused of buying the elections—a strategy, according 
to local populares and independentistas, employed by los penenpes (the PNP sup-
porters) on both a local and national level—he is also believed to embody every-
thing that is wrong with los que vienen afuera: arrogance, vendepatria (being a 
sellout), and disloyalty to the Puerto Rican nation.
What is striking about these political struggles is the way in which real fears 
about the consequences of global capital in a small town are articulated through 
the discourse of los de afuera, and at the same time residents praise the men and 
women who migrated in the 1950s and 1960s because they understood el honor 
del trabajo (the honor of work). In fact, the town’s migrants occupy an ambigu-
ous ideological and material space. They are celebrated and honored each year 
during San Sebastián’s two festivals, Festival de la Novilla in January and El 
Festival de la Hamaca in July. And residents continually point out that the town 
was built not only on the labor of those working in sugar cane but also through 
migrants’ years of struggle and sacrifice working in industrial jobs in North 
America. But that was, as a young, unemployed return migrant explained to 
me, in “los tiempos de la migración, en los años ’40, ’50, y ’60” (the time of the 
migration, in the ’40s, ’50s, and ’60s). T oday, the circulation of people between 
the island and the United States is reviled, pathologized, and blamed for what 
were and continue to be—that is, the consequences of inequality, domination, 
and unequal development as a result of Puerto Rico’s ongoing colonial relation-
ship with the United States.
Globalization, then, is often about violence, pain, and new understandings of 
belonging that are viewed through racial prisms. But globalization can be positive 
and progressive, presenting new opportunities for people to fashion new collec-
tive identities. As we look forward to the way migrants push cultural boundaries, 
we must pay particular attention to the way youth are implicated in these pro-
cesses. On one hand, they might redirect our attention to liberating possibilities 
in global cultures and identities. On the other hand, they are often a society’s 
most vulnerable and voiceless citizens and frequent scapegoats for political and 
economic changes and problems that are not of their own making.
Notes
 1. Although the law was ruled unconstitutional by the U.S. Supreme Court in 1999, many 
barrio residents believe it still guides police practices in their neighborhoods.
 2. Peggy Levitt, The Transnational Villagers (Berkeley: University of California Press, 2001).
 3. The phrase “circle of the we” comes from David Hollinger, “How Wide the Circle of 
‘We’?: American Intellectuals and the Problem of the Ethnos since World War II,” Ameri-
can Historical Review 98 (April 1993): 317–37.
 4. According to the census, the population in 1970 was 30,175, the lowest population rate 
since 1940, when it was around 30,200. By 1980, the population had increased more than 
pal-mara-05.indd   71pal-mara-05.indd   71 7/25/08   1:27:03 PM7/25/08   1:27:03 PM


--- PAGE 81 ---
Transnational Blackness72
15 percent to 35,690 and grew again during that decade. Although these figures are based 
on official census data, there is much controversy among local observers who suspect the 
census seriously undercounted San Sebastián’s population.
 5. Francisco L. Rivera-Batiz and Carlos E. Santiago, Island Paradox: Puerto Rico in the 1990s 
(New York: Russell Sage Foundation, 1996).
 6. Ana Celia Zentella, “Returned Migration, Language and Identity: Puerto Rican Bilin-
guals in Dos Worlds/T wo Mundos,” International Journal of Social Language 84 (1990): 
81–100.
 7. “El retorno de los que vienen y van entre aquí y los Estados Unidos es un problema. El 
alcalde es producto de la migración. Y se ve el impacto que tiene la migración de retorno 
hasta en las carreteras. Los alcaldes que migraron, que han pasado por eso, no hacen calles 
pequeñas o callejones. Cuando la gente regresa, tiene una vision más amplia del mundo: 
proyectos grandes, con mentalidad grande, metropolitana, y hasta norteamericana. Carros 
grandes, calles grandes. . . . Es un proceso que afecta la vision de la vida por acá, de como 
se debe de hacer las cosas aquí. . . . Esa vision grande, no es de aquí. Es de allá.”
 8. In the early 1950s, during the crucial early years of Puerto Rico’s industrialization pro-
gram, El Mundo ran a series of articles spotlighting San Sebastián and its long, distin-
guished cultural history. The most recent example of San Sebastián’s importance in the 
island’s cultural imaginary is a recent article in El Nuevo Día describing the town’s rich 
cultural traditions evident in this year’s Festival de la Novilla. El  Nuevo Día, January 
17, 2000.
pal-mara-05.indd   72pal-mara-05.indd   72 7/25/08   1:27:04 PM7/25/08   1:27:04 PM


--- PAGE 82 ---
C HAPTER  6
Reinventing the 
Jamaican Political 
System*
Brian Meeks
The New Year began with a bang. One Sunday in late January, these were 
among the leading stories in the Gleaner : The first, under the nonchalant head-
line “Higglers selling prescription drugs on the streets: Open-air pharmacy on the 
sidewalks,” went on to note: “The illegal trade has left the health sector baffled 
about how so many different kinds of prescription drugs could have found their 
way on the street side, and concerned about the health risk involved in the abuse 
of these drugs.”
The second headline that appeared under the photograph of a single telephone 
pole with a spider’s web of hundreds of wires leading away from it was entitled 
“Wired up”: “This is one of many illegal wire connections in Majestic Gardens in 
the Kingston 11 area. The Jamaica Public Service Company estimates that there 
are 50,000 illegal wire con nections island wide. Majestic Gardens is an inner-city 
community, but illegal connections are found in various forms in suburban and 
rural communities.”
1
The third headline had the decidedly more pedestrian headline, “Thousands of 
drivers using expired licenses.” The new computerized system for issuing drivers’ 
licenses had encountered a number of glitches; these, a Mrs. Ferguson of Inland 
Revenue indicated, would soon be ironed out, but then she raised the more burn-
ing problem of the proliferation of illegally issued licenses: “If there is collusion at 
the depot, there is nothing we can do about that,” she explained. “We are talking 
about illiterate drivers,” Mrs. Ferguson admitted. She said drivers who “bought” 
* This essay was first published in 2001. There have been numerous changes in Jamaican politics since it 
was first written, but the general framework of Jamaican society remains the same.
pal-mara-06.indd   73pal-mara-06.indd   73 7/25/08   1:54:06 PM7/25/08   1:54:06 PM


--- PAGE 83 ---
Transnational Blackness74
their licenses and avoided the standard examinations can hardly be singled out as 
long as their original documents were signed by legal authorities and they passed 
the reading test. “If the person can read, the department cannot tell whether the 
license is bogus.”
2
The fourth headline, on the front page, was the increasingly familiar story: 
“Gun Battle follows boy’s abduction: Seven-year-old Jovayn Miller abducted. 
Abductors demand $10 million ransom.” In this instance, however, the good 
news was that the boy was later found and returned to his family unharmed.
Finally, and also on the front page, this now traditional, though increasingly 
antiquarian, report of the political clash. In this case intraparty appeared under 
the head “Charles, Broderick in heated brawl”: “The police confirm that they 
had to break up a stone and bottle-throwing incident in Summerfield Clarendon 
Friday night, involving Pearnel Charles, JLP caretaker for the Clarendon north 
central constituency and Dr Percy Broderick former JLP Member of Parliament 
for that constituency.”
3
My last visit to the Institute for Research in African-American Studies at 
Columbia was in 1994, at which time I presented a paper titled: “The Political 
Moment in Jamaica: The Dimensions of Hegemonic Dissolution.”
4 The paper 
proposed that following the retirement of Michael Manley from public life in 
1993 and the reelection of his People’s National Party (PNP) under the new lead-
ership of P . J. Patterson, the island was approaching a social and political crisis 
point. The main suggestion was that Jamaica was in a state of hegemonic dissolu-
tion: “The old hegemonic alliance is unable to rule in the accustomed way, but 
equally, alternative and competitive modes of hegemony from below are unable 
to decisively place their stamp on the new and fluid situation.”
5
In the absence of a populist organization to take the lead and carry events in 
a more radical direction and in the context of an international conjuncture that 
did not seem to provide a permissive opening for radical action, three potential 
options were mooted: The first was the option of an increasingly authoritarian 
government “within or outside the constitution”; the second was the possibility 
of a democratic renewal across the breadth of the Jamaican social and political ter-
rain; and finally, following Marx, was an option described as the “common ruin of 
the contending classes,” or widespread deterioration in the fabric of civil society 
and the state. In the seven years that have passed since then, this “strange, event-
ful history”
6 is unveiling an alternative that is altogether none of these, though it 
appears to include elements of them all.
The Zeeks riots of late 1998, in which thousands of nominally PNP support-
ers brought Kingston to a standstill in protesting against the detention of their 
“don,” or area leader, and the April 1999 Gas Price riots, during which the entire 
island was under a state of siege from protests following budgetary increases in 
the price of gasoline,
7 signaled a new phase in the old situation. The decision by 
the besieged police officers to ask the detained Donald “Zeeks” Phipps, don of 
Matthews Lane, to quiet his own crowd indicated their recognition of the relative 
autonomy of the dons and of the downtown “massive.”
pal-mara-06.indd   74pal-mara-06.indd   74 7/25/08   1:54:06 PM7/25/08   1:54:06 PM


--- PAGE 84 ---
Reinventing the Jamaican Political System 75
Globalization and neoliberalism, in drastically reducing the size and reach of 
the state, have undermined its critical power, deriving in part from the ability 
to distribute scarce resources. Simultaneously, new opportunities in the inter-
national drugs market provided the formerly loyal political enforcers with inde-
pendent sources of wealth. Long before the 1998 crisis, then, the dons began to 
assume quasi-state functions as allocators of social benefits and, in the absence 
of a reliable and trusted police force, as law enforcers.
8 Yet even now the process 
is incomplete.
Though following the Zeeks events there was talk of an alliance of dons across 
traditionally antagonistic party lines and though it is true that a truce of sorts 
has held in the inner city for three years, the party divisions have not altogether 
been erased. Thus in the Gas Price riots of the following April, Zeeks’s decision 
not to block the roads in downtown Kingston provided critical relief in its politi-
cally most vulnerable zone for Patterson’s government. Tactically this was a bril-
liant move, for it both asserted Zeeks’s autonomy and strategic importance and 
simultaneously sent the message that he was still “PNP” though now more as an 
important ally than an operative of the governing party. If this were at all in ques-
tion, then Patterson’s visit to Zeeks’s stronghold in Matthew’s Lane immediately 
after the riots to thank him for his support should leave no one in doubt as to the 
unsubtle shift in power relationships. The Jamaican state is still in charge but the 
cracks are opening up. Governments still rule, but increasingly they require the 
tactical support of these area leaders.
The complexity of the present moment is evident in all this, for the devolution 
of power to warlords who gain wealth from illegal drugs and the substitution of 
the rule of law with the rough retributive justice of the streets are an evident indi-
cator of the collapse of the political system and the approach of the Hobbesian 
“war of all against all.” Yet is there not a democratic kernel in the popular mobi-
lization of people outside of the restrictive confines of middle-class-led political 
parties? Is there not a certain laudable autonomy that derives from the shrinkage 
of the pervasive and bloodily divisive patronage networks of the seventies and 
eighties? None of this potential can fully bloom as long as authoritarian dons run 
these communities along the lines of feudal fiefdoms, but it would be remiss not 
to see the implicit potential for a democratic renewal in the collapse of clientele-
oriented politics.
The more evident feature, however, is the growth of the authoritarian trend. 
This is manifest in the police force and in the formation of a new crime fighting 
group, the Crime Management Unit (CMU) under Senior Superintendent Reneto 
Adams. Following a new round of particularly heinous crimes, the CMU was set 
up in the middle of 2000 as the latest special squad to combat violent criminals 
and Adams’s unit has already gained special notoriety for its viciousness and scant 
regard for procedure. In the most recent incident, seven young men were killed 
in a shoot-out in a house in Braeton, a lower middle-class suburb southwest of 
Kingston. The police claimed that the victims were wanted in connection with, 
among other crimes, the brutal killing of a headmaster of a local primary school. 
The police assertion that they approached the house and were fired on was hotly 
pal-mara-06.indd   75pal-mara-06.indd   75 7/25/08   1:54:06 PM7/25/08   1:54:06 PM


--- PAGE 85 ---
Transnational Blackness76
denied by citizens from the community. Firsthand reports of grieving neighbors 
and family members who heard the shoot-out suggest the degree to which notions 
of the rule of law have been abandoned and hint at a growing groundswell against 
the formal representatives of the system:
Residents find cold comfort in relating the blood-curdling reports of screaming 
youth, mercy pleas and explosions which dominate their conversations in the day, 
and their dreams at night . . . 
I heard “Gallus” [Andre Virgo] saying the Our Father prayer. He was crying and 
begging for his life. Then I heard a barrage of shots and he went silent,” a neighbor 
said.
Mi hear an officer sey “Weh yu a do bwoy? T ry run?” and him seh “No, officer, 
how mi fi run and yu a beat mi,” and then mi hear pure explosion and nothing 
else,” another neighbor said.
9
Any assumption, however, that these acts are carried out by rogue elements in the 
police force without the support of a significant body of the citizenry would be 
mistaken. In 1991, Carl Stone’s polls showed a 56 percent support for vigilantism 
in the adult population, and Anthony Harriott in 1994 found that among Jamai-
can police officers there was a similar support of some 54 percent. If there was 
any lingering doubt that support for summary justice exists in the very highest 
echelons of government, it would have been dashed when Justice Minister K. D. 
Knight, in an intemperate reference to violent gunmen and no doubt spurred on 
by repeated, highly publicized acts of wanton violence, blurted out in early Janu-
ary that they belong in the morgue. Indeed it is fair to assume that even as there is 
a growing and vocal constituency for justice and fair play, in the face of repeated 
incidences of brutal and wanton violence, the constituency demanding law and 
order by any means necessary is also consolidating.
The weakest tendency in all of this is that of democratic renewal. There is 
a significant increase in community organization. T revor Munroe records, for 
instance, the increase in the number of registered youth clubs from about 596 
in 1989–90 to 727 in 1996–97.
10 And there is a laudable return of elements of 
the middle class to political activism, which is evident in the formation of human 
rights groups, such as Jamaicans for Justice and the University of the West Indies 
(UWI) Faculty of Social Science’s initiative to educate citizens in the inner-city 
community of Craig T own. But so far there is no indication that these disparate 
tendencies might coalesce into some kind of new social movement. Indeed, with 
the gutted trade union movement struggling for its survival and a new round of 
emigration undermining nascent community organization, the likelihood of the 
emergence of new political formations in the short run is limited.
Certainly from the perspective of the initiative of the PNP regime, there 
has been very little that can be considered supportive of a new democracy. If 
one thinks about the early years of the Patterson regime, there was an explicit 
trend to make government more open and to make politics more accessible to 
ordinary people. Thus, the important Values and Attitudes conference of 1994 
pal-mara-06.indd   76pal-mara-06.indd   76 7/25/08   1:54:06 PM7/25/08   1:54:06 PM


--- PAGE 86 ---
Reinventing the Jamaican Political System 77
brought hundreds of delegates together and sought to tap broad national opinion 
on the ways to address and overcome the evident deterioration in manners and 
civic responsibility at the social and individual levels. The prime minister’s own 
“Live and Direct” meetings, in which he established face-to-face contact with 
people at the community level, were also a part of this period, as was the local 
government reform initiative of Arnold Bertram’s ministry. But these, particu-
larly since the cataclysmic financial sector collapse of 1997,
11 have receded across 
the policy horizon.12
In their place has emerged the silhouette of a largely unimaginative regime, 
one that is presiding over a decade without any real growth and that, in deciding 
to underwrite the profligacy of the banking sector, has placed an enormous yoke 
of debt around its own neck and around the necks of this and future generations 
of the country’s citizens. The structural adjustment policy of high-interest rates, 
further enhanced to deal with the fallout of the financial sector, has served as a 
“blunt instrument” to reduce inflation but, more damagingly, it has facilitated, 
in the context of an already-skewed pattern of distribution, the transfer of wealth 
from the poor to the rich. Thus, the United Nations Development Program’s 
(UNDP) 2000 Human Development Report sought to count Jamaica, along with 
Brazil and Guatemala, among the countries with the greatest income inequality, 
where the top fifth’s share in national income is more than twenty-five times that 
of the bottom fifth’s.
13 The outcome of these policies, alongside the decline of 
any positive democratic initiatives in an already sharply divided community, has 
resulted in greater alienation and the feeling that the government does not care, 
that individual ministers are corrupt, and that the ship is rudderless.
Thus, even positive administrative moves, such as Minister Peter Phillips’s road 
repair and rebuilding efforts and the attempt to resuscitate a public urban transport 
system, have so far had little discernible impact. 
14 The peculiarity of the PNP’s 
third term is this: not everything that was done was misguided nor has everything 
collapsed. The 1999 Survey of Living Conditions asserts that mean consump-
tion has increased, there have been statistical improvements in education, and the 
health status of the population has remained stable; on the negative side, there has 
been a noted stagnation in housing development and when the sample was asked 
whether their personal economic situation had improved from that of five years 
ago, 55.4 percent of all respondents said it had improved or remained the same, 
whereas only 44.6 percent said it had worsened.
15 As to purely statistical perfor-
mance, aside from the daunting failure to grow and the hard inequality indices, it 
can be credibly argued that the government’s performance, in a generally difficult 
situation, could have been much worse. The regime has certainly not presided 
over a total demise of the island’s infrastructure, which is evident in the previously 
mentioned road-building program, the upgrading work on the two international 
airports, and the proposed new trans-island highway.
What, then, accounts for the anomie and drift in which solutions to the 
endemic violence appear as elusive as ever and the sense of lawlessness and disor-
der pervades every sphere of life? What accounts for the dissatisfaction when, in 
pal-mara-06.indd   77pal-mara-06.indd   77 7/25/08   1:54:06 PM7/25/08   1:54:06 PM


--- PAGE 87 ---
Transnational Blackness78
December 2000, the Jamaica Labour Party (JLP) for the first time in seventeen 
years nosed past the PNP in the national public opinion polls and then defeated 
the governing party’s candidate in a by-election, in one of its safest seats in North 
East St. Ann?
16
Many reasons can be put on the table for disenchantment and political dis-
satisfaction. Ever more blatant income inequality is obviously one reason. The 
feeling that the government does not care, that it has looked only after itself and 
has become too fat and operates at a bureaucratic level without reference to the 
popular base, is another. There is also the simple factor of having been in power 
for twelve years, an unprecedented length in modem Jamaican politics. An entire 
cohort of new voters was six years old when the JLP was last in power. For them, 
there is no memory of the authoritarian “one-man ism” of the Seaga regime of the 
1980s. All their frustrations about unemployment, their real experiences of police 
brutality, and their sense of alienation from an apparently uncaring society are 
focused on one known reality: the “third-term” PNP government. But to further 
understand the present moment, we need to return to the notion of hegemonic 
dissolution, or the disconnection by significant sections of the population from a 
formal order that they no longer feel any loyalty toward, that they perceive to have 
disrespected them repeatedly, and that is no longer able to provide many with the 
modicum of a decent livelihood.
At the economic level, the world built around remittances—the barrel and 
moneygram—has grown exponentially. Swathes of the island are now completely 
dependent on this avenue for survival. At the community level, the dependence on 
the don for social welfare has also grown exponentially. At the level of justice, the 
disconnection from the formal justice system takes two forms: For those living in 
the downtown ghettoes, the justice of the dons is increasingly more available and 
reliable. For those living in the fortress like middle-class townhouse complexes, a 
similar reliability is to be found in the justice and efficiency of the fast-response 
guard services. So, as is characteristic of many prerevolutionary situations (though 
Jamaica is not quite yet at this point), even when there is some apparent statistical 
social and economic reprieve, the disconnection from the law and from official 
society, bred on the intensity of the previous downward spiral, intensifies.
The “election” of George Bush in a deeply flawed electoral process in which he 
received fewer votes than his opponent, Al Gore—and in which he would have 
lost, by all indications, on a careful recount of the decisive Florida vote
17—signals 
a new and dangerous moment in the neoliberal globalization project.18
Like every stock market bubble before it, the particularly long ten-year boom, 
fueled by the fanciful optimism in technology stocks, has recently burst. 19 In the 
harsh glare of the morning light following the collapse of NASDAQ and then 
the Dow Jones, the weak fundamentals of the U.S. economy are once again on 
display for all to see. In an insightful article in Newsweek, Fareed Zakaria points 
out the growing U.S. current account deficit in which the United States spent 
$435 billion more dollars than it earned in 2000, which is roughly equivalent 
pal-mara-06.indd   78pal-mara-06.indd   78 7/25/08   1:54:06 PM7/25/08   1:54:06 PM


--- PAGE 88 ---
Reinventing the Jamaican Political System 79
to 5 percent of its GDP . 20 The United States, he argues, sustains its profligate 
consumption habit because countries with “spare cash” find it appropriate to 
invest in U.S. stocks and bonds. If, however, due to falling confidence even a 
fraction of this infusion of resources were to stop, then, “It could produce a spiral 
of problems: a falling dollar, which produces rising interest rates, which weakens 
stock prices and further slows the economy. Practically every time an advanced 
country has run a large current account deficit this vicious cycle has emerged.”
In favor of the possibility of such a vicious cycle is the fact that this “correction” 
is occurring at a time when the Japanese economy is doing badly, the Asian econo-
mies have not yet recovered from the crisis of 1987, and the German economy 
is slowing. Against the odds, the United States has emerged as the sole surviving 
world power and the dollar as a world currency. Thus the United States is the only 
nation that pays its foreign debts in its own currency, significantly enhancing its 
ability to pay its way out of crisis.
21
There is, therefore, no certainty that the vicious cycle will be the only option. 
Zakaria, however (in what, to be fair, is only an op-ed piece), fails to sketch the 
outlines of a broader and more dangerous secular crisis facing the Organization 
for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) economies. Whereas in 
the period from 1950 to 1973 the OECD economies as a whole grew at an aver-
age annual rate of 4.3 percent, in the period from 1973 to 1995 this average 
shrank dramatically to 2.4 percent. This was accompanied by a parallel contrac-
tion in the rate of growth of private consumption, from 4.3 percent in the earlier 
period to 2.6 percent. The relative contraction in the rate of increase of final 
demand has led to a decrease in the propensity to invest in fixed assets. Thus, 
fixed capital, which grew at an annual rate of 5.7 percent in the 1950–73 period, 
grew by only 2.1 percent from 1973 to 1995. This secular decline in growth, 
consumer demand, and the demand for fixed capital has contributed to the expo-
nential growth of investible funds without a clear productive “home.” Thus, as 
Harry Shutt suggests: “Inevitably this coincidence of a continuing steady growth 
in investible funds with slowing demand for both fixed investment and working 
capital meant that a significant proportion of such funds were channeled into 
speculation—that is, into assets that held out greater prospect of gain from capital 
appreciation than from earnings yield.”
22
If this fundamental reality is used as a point of focus, then much in recent 
global economic policy can be discerned. The World T rade Organization (WTO) 
project, for instance, can through this lens be understood as an attempt to find a 
means of kick-starting the Western world by opening up new markets and some-
how stimulating the stalled consumer demand. And yet by shifting wealth from 
the wage sector to capital, neoliberal economic policies have, if anything, exac-
erbated the problem. For although more markets have been liberalized and the 
marginal productivity of capital has improved, failure to stimulate growth and 
the shift in the distribution of wealth means that there are fewer consumers able 
to exercise effective demand for the increased production of goods and services. 
pal-mara-06.indd   79pal-mara-06.indd   79 7/25/08   1:54:06 PM7/25/08   1:54:06 PM


--- PAGE 89 ---
Transnational Blackness80
Therefore, with mountains of idle cash and insufficient productive enterprises 
to invest in, there is the even greater possibility of speculation to put this cash 
to work. The result has been the proliferation of a variety of strategies, from the 
privatization of governmental assets to junk bonds to futures markets to deriva-
tives and the promotion of so-called emerging markets. The outcome of what is 
essentially a massive speculative bubble based not on production and growth but 
on the artificial inflation of stock prices without foundation must ultimately, as 
Shutt bleakly suggests, lead to a correction of epic proportions:
All the [new financial] devices . . . are ways of artificially boosting the rates of return 
on investment in response to unrelenting pressures to push them ever higher. Theo-
retically, of course, this problem might be resolved if these forces were somehow 
to abate, so that the market rate of return could fall to a more readily attainable 
level. However, history suggests unambiguously that the only way this can happen 
under a competitive market system is by means of a destructive “crash” rather than 
an orderly retreat to lower returns. . . . Hence a sober assessment of these various 
financial stratagems must surely conclude that, for all the undoubted ingenuity of 
the financial manipulators, it can only be a matter of time before the forces of grav-
ity reassert themselves and the reality of systemic financial failure must be faced.
The implications for the developing world in such a context are both well-
known and well-documented. Countries caught in the quagmire of indebtedness 
find themselves in a permanent cycle of structural adjustment. Primary goods 
exporters, traditionally “price takers,” have now become “policy takers” as well.
23 
The policies of “opening up,” export orientation, and privatization that they have 
been forced to adopt have not, for the most part, led them on to autonomous 
paths of growth, but rather, these countries must forever “export themselves 
out of debt,” no matter that they are competing with a dozen other countries 
exporting the same coffee or cocoa—or shoes and shirts. No matter that domes-
tic food production is declining, as export agriculture is favored over food crops 
and natural resources are pillaged for instant returns, with long-term damage to 
the environment. The export of commodities, both primary and manufactured, 
because labor intensive manufactures are the new “commodities,” is a way of 
exporting cheap labor. The increasing volume of these developing country exports 
have assisted the United States to maintain the long boom of non-inflationary 
growth in the 1990s. This is the one sense in which “globalization” has increased 
wealth-in a unidirectional way.
For countries like Jamaica, then, caught in the stare of neoliberalism, the pri-
mary policy questions are how to follow the rules of the game more thoroughly, 
how to make the state “lean and mean,” how to find that elusive niche, and how 
to take full advantage of the purported comparative advantage with the economic 
wealth and well-being that should naturally follow. The dismal result has been a 
collapse of the productive economy; the exacerbation of the gap between the rich 
and the poor; the impoverishment of the countryside; a massive export of talent; 
pal-mara-06.indd   80pal-mara-06.indd   80 7/25/08   1:54:06 PM7/25/08   1:54:06 PM


--- PAGE 90 ---
Reinventing the Jamaican Political System 81
the undermining of the state; and, in some instances, an all-class crisis, or process 
of hegemonic dissolution.
Above all, there has been a patent failure at the governmental level, by the 
“loyal opposition” and by most leading intellectuals and representatives of civil 
society to heed lessons perceived by Michael Manley two decades ago: that capital 
follows its own logic of accumulation; that powerful nations set the rules and look 
after themselves; that economically powerful states are always the advocates of 
open markets even when, like the infant United States, they were premier defend-
ers of protectionism in earlier phases; and that it is therefore absolutely necessary 
to begin the debate on alternative futures against and beyond the false horizons 
of neoliberalism.
24
There is, of course, the present bear market aside, no certainty that a cataclys-
mic crash will occur. Unprecedented growth (barely understood as a phenom-
enon), along the lines of that in the 1950s and 1960s, could come again and 
effectively utilize the capital overhang to undermine a devastating correction. But 
if there is any substance in the foregoing analysis, and the general unease with 
which leading Western commentators view the present bear market would tend to 
support it,
25 then the need for an entire rethinking of the Jamaican agenda is not 
only necessary but any delay in doing so would verge on the criminal.
The postwar system, based on competitive parties dispensing scarce benefits 
and led by heroic leaders, is moribund. The populist party, whether in its nation-
alist, PNP garb or its private sector-oriented JLP form, is dying. The results of 
the North East St. Ann by-election suggests the degree to which Patterson’s PNP , 
which was elected to power eight years ago with genuine popular support, has 
lost credibility. In the absence of a genuine alternative, then, popular support will 
flow in the direction of the default alternative, the JLP , in the Jamaican tradition, 
though it would not be surprising if the overall turnout at the next general elec-
tion were the lowest in Jamaican history.
If the present situation can, at least in part, be accounted for by the alienation 
of people from politics, then what is urgently required to correct the dangerous 
drift to the rocks of nihilism and authoritarianism is a popular renewal. The ideal 
alternative would be a new, democratic federation of local and grassroots orga-
nizations that would unite a critical mass of Jamaicans around a politics based 
on participation, inclusion, and transparency. Such pure forms, however, seldom 
present themselves. An alternative, in keeping with the country’s two-party tra-
dition, might well be a critical alliance of well-thinking men and women across 
party lines that would allow them to maintain their vestigial party loyalties while 
beginning the conversation that will lead to a new formation.
Such a national alliance might evolve into a government of national unity, but 
the danger in that possibility is the reassertion of politics from above without the 
limited safeguard of an opposition in waiting. Such an outcome would not only 
prolong the politics of the last half century but also possibly entrench an even 
more dangerous monopoly, when what is desperately required is a new popular 
politics from below.
pal-mara-06.indd   81pal-mara-06.indd   81 7/25/08   1:54:06 PM7/25/08   1:54:06 PM


--- PAGE 91 ---
Transnational Blackness82
The first task on the agenda of such a formation would have to be a constituent 
assembly of the Jamaican people at home and abroad. The year 2002 marks the 
fortieth anniversary of Jamaican independence. What more important milestone 
to begin the debate around a new social contract, this time discussed and ratified 
by the people, than this important date? The notion of “abroad” is particularly 
stressed in this formulation, as roughly half of all Jamaicans live overseas. They are 
“taxed,” as it were, by their remittances to their families on the “rock,” but they 
have no representation. The slogan of Jamaicans overseas must be the classical one 
of “no taxation without representation.” Any new contractual arrangements must 
include the input of the Diaspora and must make constitutional arrangements for 
its inclusion beyond the conclusion of the initial debates.
The constituent assembly would not be a one-off meeting but would involve a 
series, perhaps hundreds, of meetings in Browns T own and Above Rocks, Brook-
lyn and Brixton, to discuss alternative agendas and to ultimately mandate del-
egates to a national convention to debate and ratify a new constitution. Issues on 
a possible agenda should not be preempted, but if the experience of the past forty 
years suggests that there needs to be a thorough democratic reform of the political 
system, they might include:
1.  The appropriate constitutional arrangements to undermine the constituen-
cy-based spoils system and the ruthlessness endemic in a winner-takes-all 
election. This might include discussions around proportional representa-
tion to partially or completely replace the first-past-the-post system, the 
question of term limits, the matter of the recall of nonperforming repre-
sentatives, and the entire question of the transparency of elections, with 
particular emphasis on electoral funding arrangements.
2.  The devolution of power from the center to the communities. This process, 
in a de facto sense, began as the patronage system receded. T o the extent 
that people have real local control, then the process of reconstructing com-
munity can genuinely take hold.
3.  The political inclusion of overseas Jamaicans in any future electoral arrange-
ment, whether by transparent overseas voting procedures or otherwise. 
The obverse of this is the development and fostering of powerful lobbying 
groups in the main immigrant centers. The strength of the overseas Jamai-
can and Caribbean community can only be manifest to the extent that there 
is active organization at the community level with close ties to natural allies 
in the African-American community and among environmentalist groups, 
organized labor, and elsewhere.
4.  The unprecedented extension of democratic procedures into all spheres of 
government, including a publicly elected commission to oversee the opera-
tions of the police and the military; the opening up of the budget debate to 
the nation by a discussion at the grassroots level months in advance of the 
preliminary budget and the election of mandated delegates to a national 
budget debate; and the further extension of the principle of democracy and 
pal-mara-06.indd   82pal-mara-06.indd   82 7/25/08   1:54:07 PM7/25/08   1:54:07 PM


--- PAGE 92 ---
Reinventing the Jamaican Political System 83
accountability to key national institutions, such as the election of direct del-
egates to the Public Accounts Committee to sit alongside members of the 
house and similar directly elected representatives to sit on the committee of 
the Ombudsman and that of the Contractor General.
5.  The initiation of a debate around national social and economic imperatives. 
These must no longer be subject to secret negotiation by international agen-
cies with no responsibility for the survival of the Jamaican people. Thus a 
national food policy that would ensure a strategic agricultural sector and 
educational and health policies that would have twenty-year plans, subject 
to variation only on the basis of democratic decision-making, would all be 
high on the agenda.
6.  The beginning of a conversation on the role of international capital and 
its character. Such a debate cannot begin after a crash, when it is too late, 
but must raise some of the critical issues mentioned in this chapter with a 
full recognition that capital and the market is not only far from benign but 
also, as we speak, in deep crisis, with profound implications for the future 
of the world.
7.  The proposal for a federation of the Caribbean peoples. The island-by-is-
land sovereignty of the 1960s is as moribund as its accompanying political 
system. The Caribbean is our natural region, geographically and culturally. 
It is here that we need to look for the forms of solidarity and cooperation 
that will give us more meaningful space, allow us to develop while taking 
better advantage of economies of scale, and allow us to play a more coher-
ent role in world affairs. There is no danger to be found in a federation 
based on democratic principles, in which power is devolved to the grass-
roots and cooperation is based on principles of respect and the search for 
mutual benefit.
T o many, these proposals may seem farfetched and tendentious. They are 
meant to be. For too long we have played it safe by restricting ourselves to think-
ing only within the box. That box, the stultifying paradigm of neoliberalism, is 
now in tatters. We need to begin thinking outside of it. It is therefore appropriate 
to end on a quote from Kari Levitt, who has recently sought, in a similar vein and 
spirit, to address the elements of a program for the Caribbean and all developing 
countries beyond the failed neoliberal paradigm:
You may dismiss this wish list as idealistic. Perhaps so, but it is certainly more real-
istic than the assumption that the world can continue on its present path without 
courting disasters more terrible than any we have yet visited upon ourselves. With-
out dreams, nothing is possible. Without hope, there is no future.
26
The collapse of Jamaica in its present form, whether by slow burn or more 
rapid denouement, may be closer than we think. Jamaica, I submit, shall be dem-
ocratic or not at all.
pal-mara-06.indd   83pal-mara-06.indd   83 7/25/08   1:54:07 PM7/25/08   1:54:07 PM


--- PAGE 93 ---
Transnational Blackness84
Notes
 1. Sunday Gleaner, January 21, 2001.
 2. Ibid., 3. A crude calculation suggests that if there are 50 thousand connections and each 
leads to a household of 5 people, then there are roughly 250 thousand people, or 10 per-
cent of the entire population, illegally connected to the electricity network
 3. Sunday Gleaner, January 21, 2001.
 4. Ibid.
 5. Brian Meeks, Radical Caribbean: From Black Power to Abu Bakr (Kingston: University of 
the West Indies Press, 1996), 134.
 6. Sunday Gleaner, January 21, 2001.
 7. The paper, under the title “The Political Movement in Jamaica”was first published in 
Race and Reason 3 (1996–97), 39–47. It was later republished as a chapter in my collec-
tion Radical Caribbean and more recently in Manning Marable, ed., Dispatches from the 
Ebony T ower: Intellectuals Confront the African American Experience (New York: Columbia 
University Press, 2000), 52–74. References are to the version in the UWI collection.
 8. Meeks, “The Political Movement in Jamaica,” 134.
 9. Ibid., 137.
 10. William Shakespeare, “Coriolanus,” in The Concise Oxford Dictionary of Quotations 
(Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1981), 205.
 11. For a critical reading of these events, see the introduction to my Narratives  of Resistance: 
Jamaica. Trinidad, the Caribbean, 1–24 (Kingston: University of the West Indies Press, 
2000).
 12. For an insightful analysis of the social situation in the inner city and the root causes of 
violence, see Horace Levy, et al., “They Cry Respect: Urban Violence and Poverty in 
Jamaica,” Centre for Population, Community and Social Change (Mona, Jamaica: University 
of the West Indies, 1996).
 13. Although police killings per year have declined from the average of about 200 in the 1980s 
to 130 in the 1990s, the numbers are still unacceptably high as are the numerous reported 
cases of summary justice, though, as Harriott suggests, very few of these cases were ruled 
as unjustifiable and the offenders charged with murder. See Anthony Harriott, Police and 
Crime Control in Jamaica: Problems of Reforming Ex-Colonial Constabularies (Kingston: 
University of the West Indies Press, 2000), 82.
 14. Gleaner, March 20, 2001.
 15. See Carl Stone, “Survey of Public Opinion on the Jamaican Justice System,” Unpub-
lished report to U.S. Agency for International Development, Kingston, 1991, p. 30; and 
Anthony Harriott, “Race, Class and the Political Behaviour of the Jamaican Security 
forces,” Ph.D. dissertation, University of the West Indies, Mona, Jamaica, 324.
 16. See T revor Munroe, Renewing Democracy into the Millennium: 
 The Jamaican Experience in 
Perspective (Kingston: University of the West Indies Press, 1999), 127.
 17. In 1997, after a half decade of a freewheeling financial bubble, the banking sector experi-
enced a severe crash. Many smaller banks folded, leaving depositors high and dry. When 
the momentum threatened to engulf the entire economy, the minister of finance inter-
vened purportedly to rescue the small investors with a sector-wide bailout. The cost of 
this and the subsequent “restructuring” exercise has even more severely encumbered the 
government and, by implication, the taxpayers in debt. See, for instance, “Davies Explains 
Restructuring,” Sunday Gleaner, April 26, 1998.
 18. It should be noted, however, that in the face of the loss of the North East St. Ann seat 
there seems to be an early attempt to regroup the PNP around the slogan “deepening 
democracy.” The governor general’s “throne speech” opening the 2001–2 financial year 
pal-mara-06.indd   84pal-mara-06.indd   84 7/25/08   1:54:07 PM7/25/08   1:54:07 PM


--- PAGE 94 ---
Reinventing the Jamaican Political System 85
in parliament emphasized, for instance, the need to deepen democracy at the local and 
community levels. See “A Vision for Prosperity,” Gleaner, April 3, 2001.
 19. Jamaica’s GDP grew at a rate of 0.1 percent for the period 1990–98. This put it behind 
all Caribbean territories except Haiti, which experienced negative growth, and its own 
performance in the previous decade that, although relatively anemic, was at an average of 
2.0 percent. See World Bank, World Development Report 1999–2000, Entering the 21st 
Century (New York: Oxford University Press, 2000), 250.
 20. United Nations Development Program, Human Development Report 2000 (New York: 
Oxford University Press, 2000), 34.
 21. For a discussion of the convoluted and sorry history of urban transport in Jamaica in 
which I laud the minister’s efforts but argue for an as-yet-untried popular approach to the 
management of public transport, see my Narratives of Resistance.
 22. Planning Institute of Jamaica, 1999 Survey of Living Conditions. Table 7.22, p. 40.
 23. In a three-way race on March 8, 2001, the JLP’s candidate, Shahine Robinson, defeated 
the PNP’s Carrol Jackson by a margin of 509 votes on first count. The significance of this 
is profound, as the North East St. Ann seat was one of the ruling party’s safest rural seats. 
In the last general election in 1997, the PNP romped home in this seat by a margin of 
about 2,000 votes. If such a remarkable swing were to be repeated island wide, the ruling 
party would be lucky to retain a handful of seats in the next election. See Jamaica Gleaner, 
March 9, 2001, http://www.jamaica-gleaner.com.
 24. This is the name of a popular electronic service for the quick remittance of foreign 
exchange to family and dependents.
 25. See OECD National Accounts Statistics and IMF International Financial Statistics, in 
Harry Shutt, The Trouble with Capitalism: An Enquiry into the Causes of Global Economic 
Failure (London: Zed Books, 1998), 38.
 26. A Jamaican Case Scud (Washington, DC: Howard University Press, 1987); and Michael 
Manley, The Poverty of Nations (London: Pluto, 1991). The front-page headline of News-
week in the first few days of the stock market decline is as indicative as any. It stated: “Are 
You Scared Yet? The Sinking U.S. Economy. Will It Take the Rest of the World Down 
with It?” Newsweek, March 26, 2001.
pal-mara-06.indd   85pal-mara-06.indd   85 7/25/08   1:54:07 PM7/25/08   1:54:07 PM


--- PAGE 95 ---
This page intentionally left blank


--- PAGE 96 ---
C HAPTER  7
Afro-Colombia
A Case for Pan-African 
Analysis
Joseph Jordan
Afro-Colombians, one of the most resourceful and resilient communities 
in the Americas, are under siege. They have struggled largely outside of the gaze of 
most of the world despite suffering massive social upheavals. According to some 
sources, Afro-Colombians constitute up to 25 percent of the country’s total pop-
ulation of about forty million and as a group have a population in excess of ten 
million. These figures may vary according to the criteria used.
1 Despite such a 
large population size, Afro-Colombians face constant threats of displacement 
from both the Colombian state and transnational corporations. In the wake of 
such attacks, Afro-Colombians have adopted new strategies of resistance to com-
bat repression from the state and its multinational allies. By looking inward or 
engaging in self-valorization as an initial strategy, Afro-Colombians have deter-
mined the character of the struggle. However, self-valorization, a form of iden-
tity politics, is not sufficient as a basis for struggle. When connected to a larger 
movement for political institution-building, self-valorization has the potential 
to bring Afro-Colombian communities together with other groups of African-
descent in Latin America that are currently engaged in mass movements for 
social change. At this present moment, Latin America is in transition, and popu-
lar movements are challenging regional hegemonies. This article examines the 
changing political landscape in Colombia and offers some preliminary thoughts 
on analyzing the course of Afro-Colombians’ struggle for self-determination 
from a Pan-Africanist perspective.
The early history of Africans in Colombia begins with the Spanish conquest 
and settlement of various areas in the early 1500s. The importation of Africans 
as slaves provided labor for Spanish conquest and slavery remained a key feature 
pal-mara-07.indd   87pal-mara-07.indd   87 7/29/08   9:42:48 AM7/29/08   9:42:48 AM


--- PAGE 97 ---
Transnational Blackness88
of Colombia’s history until it was abolished in 1851. The formation of an Afro-
Colombian identity built upon a tradition of resistance can be attributed to a 
continuous history of slave rebellions and to the existence of independent maroon 
communities called palenques, which were formed by escaped African slaves. The 
term palenque is translated, literally, as stockade. T oday, Palenque San Basilio, on 
the Pacific coast of Colombia, maintains an autonomous culture of resistance 
that recalls the independent spirit of those early maroons. Sustaining a culturally 
based consciousness of defiance and resistance is a key component for a Pan-
African project that endeavors to reclaim Afro-Colombian autonomy, cultural 
heritage, security, and ancestral land, particularly in regions such as Choco, on 
the northern end of the Colombian Pacific littoral. In September of 2002 organic 
intellectuals from all sectors of the Afro-Colombian community as well as other 
states in the region assembled for the first Afro-Colombian national conference to 
advocate for a maroon-based perspective on the Afro-Colombian struggle for self-
determination. In particular, conference speakers drew up the political actions 
undertaken by black intellectuals in the English-speaking Caribbean as a model 
for Afro-Colombians’ movement building:
During times of crisis, the Maroon experience was used to construct an explanation 
for the situation in the 1920s and 1930s. The methodology and style of thinking 
that emerged from these efforts was characterized by its capacity to analyze, verify 
and apply what had been learned within a perspective that had been based on that 
accumulated experience. Such praxis/research collectives developed a direction and 
a set of questions independent of the research methods that reproduced the existing 
order. . . . 
Although individuals represented in themselves several different ways of per-
ceiving experience—through race, class, gender, nationality, religion and political 
party—it was the emergence of a shared vocabulary, created through the exchange 
of experience, that made it possible for groups across the region to make sense of 
their situation.
2
The maroon experience thus consisted of a process that begins with a specific 
form of consciousness that produces a specific critical analysis based on accumu-
lated experiences. When considered collectively, the separate aspects of the process 
produce a maroon complex or group of factors that characterize Afro-Colombian 
resistance to oppression.
In addition to those models of resistance examined at the 2002 national con-
ference, there are other approaches that have examined the primacy of black pop-
ular culture as a means of both recovery and as a catalyst for social change and 
movement building. Scholarship by Arocha, Escobar, Wade, Asher, and others,
3 
has addressed the genesis of African and Afro-Colombian identity in Colombia 
using various analytical frames that include the roles of popular cultural forms, 
modernity, and transnational cultural flows.
A common critique of these scholars’ work suggests that certain practices that 
signify “blackness” or “African” identity and culture in Colombia, according to 
the contemporary sociopolitical sense of both designations, should be read as 
pal-mara-07.indd   88pal-mara-07.indd   88 7/29/08   9:42:48 AM7/29/08   9:42:48 AM


--- PAGE 98 ---
Afro-Colombia 89
new rather than historically grounded cultural practices. According to these cri-
tiques, the signification of blackness or African identity in Colombia replicates 
the cultural production of other external black populations and, therefore, bears 
all of the limitations of an imitative culture.
4 Using this logic, youth in Cali, 
Colombia such as those studied by scholar Peter Wade who use hip-hop to make 
statements about their sociopolitical conditions could not be said to have cre-
ated a cultural product, but instead are reproducing the cultural frameworks of 
black youth experiences in the United States. One, however, could contend that 
hip-hop itself is a recreation in that its producers have borrowed from several 
cultural traditions within and outside of the U.S. context. Therefore the adapta-
tion of hip-hop by Colombian youth follows the recombinant strategies that have 
produced the range of black popular cultures throughout the Americas. Wade, 
who studied this phenomenon, argues that dismissing these strategies, “also raises 
issues about the analysis of cultural politics and the deconstruction of cultural 
‘inventions’ without thereby invalidating them as a locus of ethnic solidarity.”
5
Francis Njubi sees efforts, such as those of the youth of Cali, Colombia as the 
counter-penetration of information technology by people of African descent in 
the struggle against human rights violations produced by slavery, colonialism, 
apartheid and globalization. Historical antiracist movements like abolitionism, 
Pan-Africanism, and the antiapartheid and civil rights movements all used com-
munications technology to expose the extent and brutality of white supremacy 
and to create international networks of resistance movements.
6
Richard Powell, in “What is This ‘Black’ in Black Popular Culture?” references 
Stuart Hall’s validation of the reality, veracity, and even strategic necessity of such 
a concept. Hall says:
It is this mark of difference inside forms of popular culture—which are by defini-
tion contradictory and which therefore appear as impure, threatened by incorpora-
tion or exclusion—that is carried by the signifier “black” in the term “black popular 
culture.” It has come to signify the black community, where these traditions were 
kept, and whose struggles survive the persistence of the black experience (the his-
torical experience of black people in the diaspora), of the black aesthetic (the dis-
tinctive cultural repertoires out of which popular representations were made) and 
of the black counternarratives we have struggled to voice.
7
Powell identifies five components, implied in Hall’s definition of black popular 
culture, that define black diaspora cultures:
 They constantly struggle against claims, from within and without, of racial 
quintessence and against dominant (and often hegemonic) cultural and 
political forces.
 Black diaspora cultures are defined by having the sufficient demographic 
numbers and critical mass to proclaim common beliefs, value systems, and 
goals toward building community-based institutions and products.
 Black diaspora cultures have a structural dependence upon an acknowl-
edged collection of life experiences, social encounters, and personal ordeals 
pal-mara-07.indd   89pal-mara-07.indd   89 7/29/08   9:42:48 AM7/29/08   9:42:48 AM


--- PAGE 99 ---
Transnational Blackness90
the sum of which promotes a solidarity and camaraderie that creates 
community.
 The demonstration of a distinctive cultural repertoire expressed through a 
“black aesthetic,” or a collection of philosophical theories about the arts of 
the African Diaspora.
 Black diaspora cultures are characterized by forms that are alternative to 
their mainstream counterparts but proactive and aggressive in their desire 
to articulate, testify, and bear witness to that cultural difference.
8
While acknowledging the general framework these Africanist interpretations 
provide, this chapter also offers a preliminary examination of the Afro-Co-
lombian struggle to organize for their own advancement as a national com-
munity and the means through which they continue to rationalize a group 
identity in relation to the Colombian nation-state. The dynamics observed 
in the Afro-Colombian struggle also appear in other Latin American nations 
where African-descended populations, having suffered exploitation and the 
threat of psychic annihilation, form political struggles or movements to artic-
ulate (or rearticulate) their histories.
A primary contention of this chapter is that Afro-Colombians have articulated 
a new black cultural identity as a strategy for mobilization within the current his-
torical process of Colombia’s nation-definition. Reimagining “blackness,” African 
consciousness, Afro-Colombian ethnicity, and maroon identity provides a means 
for an extra-national citizenship, and it connects Afro-Colombians to struggles 
waged by other communities of African-descent throughout the Americas. This 
cultural connectedness lays the foundation for African-descended populations in 
general and Afro-Colombians in particular to construct political alliances that 
acknowledge and build upon cultural and historical commonalities.
Contemporary cross-cultural alliances between black and indigenous com-
munities in Colombia and other Latin American nations recognize both groups’ 
colonial histories of oppression under European settlers and militaries and the 
formation of resistance struggles by earlier coalitions of blacks and indigenous 
people to fight against these forces.
9 In forming the current cross-cultural alli-
ances, Afro-Colombian activists worked to stave off the development of fractions 
between racial and ethnic groups leading up to Colombia’s new constitution in 
1991. Current work by cultural, political, and intellectual cadres to sustain coali-
tions between indigenous and African-descended communities throughout the 
region has a more progressive orientation. In doing so they avoided what Frantz 
Fanon saw as a failure of national consciousness, at the height of anti-colonial 
struggles, to articulate a consciousness oriented toward notions of justice beyond 
parochial interests. Hence, the lack of inclusive representation and participation 
from all groups during the formation of a self-governed nation-state would repro-
duce the exploitation that the oppressed had suffered. Fanon also addressed the 
issue of culture and how it was recovered and expressed:
pal-mara-07.indd   90pal-mara-07.indd   90 7/29/08   9:42:48 AM7/29/08   9:42:48 AM


--- PAGE 100 ---
Afro-Colombia 91
Culture is not a folklore nor an abstract populism that believes it can discover the 
people’s true nature. It is not made up of the inert dregs of gratuitous actions, that 
is to say actions which are less and less attached to the ever present reality of the 
people.
A national culture is the whole body of efforts made by a people in the sphere 
of thought to describe, justify, and praise the action through which that people has 
created itself and keeps itself in existence.
10
For African-descended communities, this process of engaging an extra-national 
citizenship built around a shared cultural and racial identity and similar diasporic 
experiences can be placed under the general rubric of Pan-Africanism. Pan-Af-
ricanism is a concept used to describe a movement and is sometimes divided 
into cultural and political manifestations. For the purposes of this argument, the 
separation of culture and politics seems to be a false dichotomy given that history 
shows the opposite is true. Pan-Africanism, a concept with a 200-year-old history, 
theorizes a politico-cultural link between Africa and black people in the African 
Diaspora contending with similar experiences of colonial oppression based on the 
racialized notions attached to blackness, and therefore establishes a foundation for 
a common struggle against colonialism to regain self-governance.
Although mentioned at various moments in the major studies of Afro-Co-
lombians, most analysts examine the deeper implications of Afro-Colombians’ 
self-identification in a diasporic or Pan-African context or engage the theoreti-
cal literature on Pan-African identity in their works. Nonetheless, these largely 
historical and ethnographic studies add to a growing literature on the Afro-Co-
lombian community’s development as a distinctive presence in the nation. Even 
when Pan-African connections are made in the literature, few seem to imagine 
the possibility of a region-wide or broader international alignment with other 
black struggles against racialism, imperialism, state and criminal terrorism, and 
capitalist exploitation.
As Horner notes, historians of Latin America “seem to lose all interest in the 
Negro as soon as abolition is accomplished. In any case, he disappears almost 
completely from the historical literature.” Clearly, Africana histories must neither 
begin nor end with the history of slavery in the Americas. Yet, Watson notes:
National states have been built through purposeful racial, ethnic, religious, class, 
or other internal exclusions such that the nationalization of society has tended to 
move in tandem with the racialization of society. Many states practice forms of self-
racialization, by constructing national identity and defining national belonging via 
criteria like birth, ancestry, or naturalization, with the effect of using citizenship to 
transform commensurable diversities into markers of relative difference. . . . Para-
doxically, to become civil and national under sovereign states people have had to 
enter the nation-state as alienated national persons.
11
What then, provides the means for a recovery and resituating of the Afro-Colom-
bian as a subject rather than as an object in the nation’s historical consciousness? 
pal-mara-07.indd   91pal-mara-07.indd   91 7/29/08   9:42:48 AM7/29/08   9:42:48 AM


--- PAGE 101 ---
Transnational Blackness92
Luis Gilberto Murillo, former governor of Chocó State in Colombia, addressed 
this issue in his presentation of El  Choco: The African Heart of Colombia in New 
York in February 2001. In this monumental presentation, Murillo outlined the 
plight of Afro-Colombians and points to the growth of an explicit self-defined 
Afro-Colombian identity, which represents an evolution or break from an implied 
(or imposed) Afro-Colombian identity:
We now use the term Afro-Colombians as a way to keep our cultural identity, 
whether we are rural or urban Afro Colombians. We say Pacifico or Bio-geographi-
cal Choco, instead of only Chocó. We say pluriethnic and multicultural, instead of 
Black, indigenous or mestizo. We have rights (at least on paper) to Pacific coastal 
collective lands, as well as decision-making power. We defend our right to self-
determination and cultural, economic and political development. We have our own 
Afro Colombian agenda at regional, national and international levels.
12
Murillo’s presentation also confirms the evolution of a distinct and modern Afro-
Colombian identity that breaks from (and evolves from) previous notions of Afri-
canness. And he hints at the prospects for an enlightened politics based upon this 
new outlook both for Afro-Colombians and other Afro-Latin communities facing 
similar struggles.
Afro-Latin collectives and communities are consolidating new ideological 
positions and collaborative alliances as a way to resist state hegemony. In the case 
of Colombia, these alliances also hold the promise of providing a political vehicle 
for the expression and pursuit of Afro-Colombian and indigenous agendas for 
participation in the political system. Murillo notes that, in previous generations, 
government and societal attempts to theorize and valorize mestizaje meant black 
and indigenous lives were devalued.
Mestizaje, and promotion of the notion of a “Cosmic Race,” is understood as 
the state’s attempt to fix the hierarchy of racialized identities around the notion of 
a Spanish-Indian-black hybrid. Where “Blackness” as a distinct presence would be 
gradually eliminated. As Arocha notes, “Carved into the stone walls of the Span-
ish Language Academy building in downtown Bogotá is a golden motto: ONE 
GOD, ONE RACE, ONE TONGUE.”
13
But, in reality, achieving the true equality necessary to realize this motto is 
impossible in a context where European aesthetics and cultural and social values 
inform a rigid hierarchy of race and identity. The Colombian state continues to 
reject the idea of Afro-Colombians as legitimate cultural and political subjects. 
Furthermore, state forces dismiss the sociocultural structures of Afro-Colombi-
ans and indigenous peoples as primitive, anachronistic, and incapable of form-
ing a foundation for life in the modern world. Mestizaje assumes, in the most 
Darwinist and Manichean manner imaginable, that Afro-Colombians desire and 
need to shed their identities and whiten themselves in order to participate in 
Colombian society.
In this atmosphere, blacks are forced to struggle against the social pressure 
toward blanqueamento, or the whitening imperative, as both an act of political 
pal-mara-07.indd   92pal-mara-07.indd   92 7/29/08   9:42:48 AM7/29/08   9:42:48 AM


--- PAGE 102 ---
Afro-Colombia 93
resistance and as an affirmation of their own humanity and identities. Afro-Co-
lombians’ pursuit of political recognition and ancestral rights to land based upon 
heritage strikes at the heart of the “one race” proposition of the Colombian state, 
and supports, instead Murillos’s idea of a pluriethnic society and the collective 
rights for blacks and indigenous peoples. The multiethnic proposition provides 
for the mestizaje myth and would presume that political and economic rights 
and benefits are distributed equally among all individuals deemed eligible for 
those rights and benefits. In this system, group rights are minimized in favor of 
the capitalist model of individual ownership and exploitation of resources based 
upon the individual(s) yielding to modernism and state imperatives. In contrast, 
the pluriethnic model critiques these claims based upon the reality of existing 
structural inequalities in class status and other hierarchized sectors as a result 
of centuries of racism, ethnocentrism, and economic exploitation. Recognizing 
these historical realities, the pluriethnic model identifies the existence of mar-
ginalized ethnic groups and their rights to collectively own land and proposes 
redistribution of national resources based on ancestry, tenure, and other historical 
grounds. Though not a perfect alternative, it is one that accounts for the inherent 
discrimination that exists within state articulations of the Colombian individual 
and the impact on Colombia’s communities of color as a collective.
Afro-Colombians engaged in an extraordinary process of political organizing 
during the constitutional reform period during the 1980s and were preparing 
to take advantage of new openings promised by the new constitution of 1991 
and the passage of Law 70 in 1993. The new constitution acknowledged ethnic 
diversity in the nation and had provisions for collective land ownership rights 
for Afro-Colombians and autonomous indigenous territorial units for Indians. 
Despite their activism, Afro-Colombians’ lack of strong organizational structures, 
lack of access to technical assistance, and the general lack of sympathy for their 
plight on the part of state officials made it difficult for them to take full advantage 
of the new political openings. Added to these complications were the state’s com-
mitment to mega-development projects that required control of lands historically 
occupied by Afro-Colombians and indigenous peoples.
In contrast, Arocha documents the effectiveness of the indigenous commu-
nity’s links to external and national Non-Governmental Organizations (NGOs), 
as well as their own collective organizations during the period of petitioning and 
filing claims for land in 1993. The comparative weakness of Afro-Colombian 
political organizations and the relative lack of extra-national support meant they 
were not able to take advantage of new laws to claim land in the same manner 
as members of Colombia’s indigenous community.
14 Since then Afro-Colombian 
activists realized that obtaining collective land rights has important implications 
for Afro-Colombians’ reconciliation with the state as well as for their concomitant 
reconstruction within society. These activists have been reconfiguring their efforts 
to build coalitions with other African-descended communities throughout Latin 
America to build a broader political movement to redress their specific problems. 
pal-mara-07.indd   93pal-mara-07.indd   93 7/29/08   9:42:48 AM7/29/08   9:42:48 AM


--- PAGE 103 ---
Transnational Blackness94
Such initiatives follow a long tradition of Pan-African cooperation and problem 
solving in the Americas and promises to provide new directions for the Pan-Afri-
can movement as a whole.
15
The development of Afro-Colombian’s pluriethnic alliances was and is a 
tedious process, hence this essay draws these connections in broad strokes. This 
study aims to explore the development of racialized cultural and political practices 
within the Afro-Colombian community that actively draws upon Pan-African 
internationalism as a natural vehicle for constructing indigenous struggles. For-
mer Governor Murillo feels:
Faced with formidable attacks on our cultural, economic and physical well-being, 
the most important challenge to Afro-Colombians today is to build a strong alter-
native movement. We support all efforts towards national reconciliation based on 
the inclusion of all Colombians in a pluriethnic country where all cultures have the 
same opportunity for self-development, without violence, without discrimination 
of any sort, and with territorial autonomy. Black and Indigenous people need to think 
and plan our future independently from the rest of the nation. Now, and in the 
future, despite the deep troubles we are suffering today, we are the African heart of 
Colombia. Colombia, as well as the rest of Latin America, cannot deny its African 
roots. T o the contrary, we should take pride in these roots!
16
At the same time that Afro-Colombia gazes outward to make those extended 
Latin American connections, regional developments also echo these sentiments. 
At the Preparatory Conference of the Americas against Racism, Racial Discrimi-
nation, Xenophobia and Related Intolerance held in Santiago, Chile in December 
of 2000, those gathered issued a statement entitled, the Chile Declaration of Afri-
can Descendents that opens with these words: “Affirming that the main victims 
of racism in the Americas are African descendants and indigenous peoples.”
17 
In the body of the document attendees further “affirm that African descendants 
have the right to our cultural identities, to recognition of those identities and to 
the adoption of measures that protect and develop them, as well as educational 
systems and institutions that respect our history, cultures, and identities.”
18 This 
statement marks both a transgressive and affirming action to articulate an African 
selfhood by persons from nations where blackness has historically been a mark of 
backwardness and exclusion. Further pronouncements from the Conference were 
equally impressive. Those gathered agreed to: “condemn the situation of exclu-
sion and marginalization that leaves our peoples submerged in poverty in all the 
Americas, a situation aggravated by the implementation of economic policies and 
development models that do not respect diversity, promote homogeneity, and 
perpetuate the systematic violation of our economic, political, social and cultural 
rights. As a consequence, we demand that states, multilateral organizations and 
private enterprise adopt compensatory measures, including reparations.”
19
Similar dynamics are evident in efforts in Ecuador, Guatemala, Peru, and Bra-
zil. Nascent Africanist and Pan-Africanist projects that build on sporadic but per-
sistent efforts over the last two hundred years are developing in these countries as 
pal-mara-07.indd   94pal-mara-07.indd   94 7/29/08   9:42:48 AM7/29/08   9:42:48 AM


--- PAGE 104 ---
Afro-Colombia 95
well as in Uruguay, Costa Rica, Mexico, Honduras, and Bolivia. In other coun-
tries such as Panama, Puerto Rico, and Cuba a strong Africanist and Pan-African-
ist formation has existed for many years but retains a legacy of racialized thinking 
reified in the rigid color hierarchies still evident in the political, economic, and 
aesthetic sectors of these societies.
While traveling in Suriname in 1972, S. Allen Counter and David Evans made 
contact with a maroon community. The Suriname chief of the maroon commu-
nity asked both men the following question: “are you still the white man’s slaves?” 
T o that Counter and Evans replied: “We are not slaves in our land. Well not 
really in the true sense of the word.” His people having fought for their freedom 
and won, the chief asked another profound question: “Well, have you won your 
fight?” T o that they responded: “The battle is still being fought.” The conversa-
tion continued and produced this telling inquiry from the Bush chiefs: “Well, 
have you found the road home?”
20
In this chapter I examined the situation of Afro-Colombians as an oppressed 
community within Colombia in relation to the exploitation of African descen-
dants in the Americas. The intent was to propose a validation of the Pan-African 
perspective both as an analytical frame for understanding the evolution of Afro-
Colombian identities and as a strategy for internationalizing their struggle for 
rights and recognition. This holds important implications for the Pan-African 
movement as a whole, which has experienced a theoretical and practical stasis 
since the fall of the apartheid regime in South Africa and the emergence of mod-
ern reactionary regimes on the African continent. The emerging Afro-Colombian 
rights movement is an important historical development for Pan-African solidar-
ity, because it has critically articulated and theorized Africana identities, histories, 
and futures. In addition, Afro-Colombians acknowledge the need for commit-
ment to theory and practice and for critical reflection upon both as a way to 
nurture the developing Afro-Latin movement that aims to further institutionalize 
its gains.
Returning to the history of maroon traditions will enable theorists and activists 
of the Afro-Colombian struggle to gain further insight on ways to shape cam-
paigns of resistance in the Americas. These traditions of resistance serve as crucial 
reservoirs for consciousness and appear as significant touchstones when attempt-
ing to forge a national and international sense of unity.
The maroon complex and the independent settlements it spawned have impor-
tant symbolic meanings since these runaway groups provided a structure for black 
and Indian cooperation in opposition to state repression. Antonio Benitez-Rojo 
has reminded us that, “Some day, when the holistic investigations on this matter 
are undertaken, the Caribbean itself will be surprised to learn how close it came 
to being a confederation of Maroon states. . . . It would certainly be necessary to 
examine the participation of the Maroons in the social struggles and indepen-
dence movements of the region.”
21
All of these imperatives pose new questions. How should theorists and activists 
execute further projects to sustain solidarity and support in a pluriethnic context? 
pal-mara-07.indd   95pal-mara-07.indd   95 7/29/08   9:42:48 AM7/29/08   9:42:48 AM


--- PAGE 105 ---
Transnational Blackness96
How can the lessons of the past twenty years be incorporated into these projects 
to create a comprehensive model of action based upon the unique aspects of the 
Afro-Colombian and Afro-Latin conditions and the special remedies demanded 
by these conditions? Lastly, how do solidarity projects of this nature provide for 
the further restructuring of the Pan-African internationalist movement in the 
United States? Will it help to resolve lingering ideological or philosophical ques-
tions about the nature of the movement? Will NGOs, community-based support 
groups, and government officials find imaginative ways to integrate their work 
and thus produce a more viable movement?
With the official recognition of African-identified communities in Latin 
America the Pan-African movement has entered a period wherein the theoreti-
cal stagnation of the past twenty years can be addressed. As Afro-Latin com-
munities begin to insist upon a regional integration of their individual political 
struggles based upon the commonality of their conditions, a more complete cri-
tique of globalization and neo-liberal capitalism and imperialism becomes pos-
sible. Moreover, when Afro-Latin national and regional groups extend their views 
and endeavor to situate their analysis within a Pan-African context, the movement 
for self-determination is profoundly transformed. However, even though a new 
and empowered identity accompanies the growth in Afro-Colombian political 
activism, in order to be successful this process must consider the perspectives 
from other African-descended communities dispersed across many nations who 
have experienced similar transformations. Lastly, Afro-Colombian activists must 
continue to struggle with the histories of denial and the often self-imposed iden-
tity isolation that has separated their communities from the African Diaspora in 
general and from the rest of African America, which reaches from the northern to 
the southernmost regions of the Americas.
Notes
 1. Arturo Escobar, “Displacement, Development and Modernity in the Colombian Pacific,” 
International Social Science Journal 175 (March 2003): 157–67.
 2. W . F . Santiago-Valles, “The Caribbean Intellectual T radition that Produced James and 
Rodney,” Race and Class 42, no. 2 (October–December 2000): 61–79.
 3. For Jaime Arocha, see “Inclusion of Afro-Colombians: Unreachable National Goal?” Latin 
American Perspectives 25, no. 3 (May 1998): 70–90; “Los Negros y la Nueva Constitu-
cion Colombiana de 1991,” America Negra 3 (1992): 39–54; and “Afrogenesis, Euro-
genesis y Convivencia Interetnica,” Pacifico: Desarrollo o Biodiversidad? Estado, Capital 
y Movimientos Sociales en el Pacifico Colombiano, ed. Arturo Escobar and Alvaro Pedrosa 
(Bogota: CEREC: 1996). For Arturo Escobar, see “Displacement, Development and 
Modernity in the Colombian Pacific,” Moving T argets: International Social Science Jour-
nal 175 (March 2003): 157–67; and “Culture, Economics, and Politics in Latin Amer-
ican Social Movements Theory and Research,” in The Making of Social Movements in 
Latin America: Identity, Strategy, and Democracy, ed. Arturo Escobar and Sonia Alvarez, 
(Boulder, CO: Westview, 1992), 62–85. For Peter Wade, see Blackness and Race Mix-
ture: The Dynamics of Racial Identity in Colombia (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins Univer-
sity Press, 1993); “The Cultural Politics of Blackness in Colombia,” American Ethnologist 
22, no. 3 (1995): 341–58; “Blackness, Music, and National Identity: Three Moments in 
pal-mara-07.indd   96pal-mara-07.indd   96 7/29/08   9:42:48 AM7/29/08   9:42:48 AM


--- PAGE 106 ---
Afro-Colombia 97
Colombian History,” Popular Music 17, no. 1 (1998): 1–19; “Representations of Black-
ness in Colombian Popular Music,” Representations of Blackness and the Performance of 
Identities, ed. Jean M. Rahier (Westport: Bergin and Garvey, 1999); “Current Anthropol-
ogy, Making Cultural Identities in Cali, Colombia,” August 40, no. 4 (October 1999): 
449–68; and “Racial Identity and Nationalism: A Theoretical View from Latin America,” 
Ethnic and Racial Studies 24, no. 5 (September 2001): 845–67. For Kiran Asher, see Con-
structing Afro-Colombia: Ethnicity and T erritory in the Pacific Lowlands, PhD dissertation 
(University of Florida: 1998).
 4. See, for example, Eduardo Restrepo, “Afrocolombianos, antropologia y proyecto de mod-
ernidad en Colombia,” in Antropologia en la Modernidad: Identidades, Etnicidades y Movi-
mientos Sociales en Colombia, ed. Maria Victoria Uriba and Eduardo Restrepo (Instituto 
Colombiano de Antropologia, Bogota: 1997).
 5. Wade, “The Cultural Politics of Blackness in Colombia,” 341–58.
 6. Francis Njubi, “New Media, Old Struggles: Pan Africanism, Anti-Racism and Informa-
tion T echnology,” Critical Arts (January 2001): 117–35.
 7. Richard J. Powell, Black Art: A Cultural History (London: Thames and Hudson, 2003), 
13–15.
 8. Ibid.
 9. Adam Halpern and France Winddance T wine, “Antiracist Activism in Ecuador: Black-
Indian Community Alliances,” Race and Class 42, no. 2 (October–December 2000): 
19–32.
 10. Frantz Fanon, Wretched of the Earth (New York: Grove, 1963), 233.
 11. Hilbourne Watson, “Theorizing the Racialization of Global Politics and the Caribbean,” 
Experience Alternatives: Global, Local, Political 26, no. 4 (October–December 2001): 
449–84.
 12. Luis Gilberto Murillo, El  Choco: The African Heart of Colombia, speech given at The 
American Museum of Natural History, Sponsored by The Colombia Media Project and 
The Caribbean Cultural Center, New York, February 23, 2001.
 13. Arocha, “Inclusion of Afro-Colombians: Unreachable National Goal?,” 72.
 14. Ibid, 82
 15. See Karen Juanita Carillo, Afro-Latinos Prepare for Third AFROAMERICA XXI Con-
ference, Mundo Afro Latino, February 25, 2004, http://www.mundoafrolatino.com/
english/020504.htm (accessed June 2004). See also Chile Declaration of African Descen-
dents, Preparatory Conference of the Americas Against Racism Racial Discrimination, 
Xenophobia and Related Intolerance, December 5–7, 2000, Santiago, Chile.
 16. Murillo, El Choco; emphasis added.
 17. Chile Declar
ation of African Descendents, Preparatory Conference of the Americas Against 
Racism Racial Discrimination, Xenophobia and Related Intolerance, December 5–7, 
2000, Santiago, Chile, http://academic.udayton.edu/race/06hrights/VictimGroups/
AfricanDescendants/AfricanDescendants.htm.
 18. Ibid.
 19. Ibid.
 20. S. Allen Counter and David L. Evans, I Sought My Brother: An Afro-American Reunion 
(Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1981).
 21. Antonio Benitez-Rojo, The Island Is Repeated: The Caribbean and the Post-Modern Perspec-
tive (Hanover, NH: Ediciones del Norte, 1989), quoted in W . F . Santiago-Valles, “The 
Caribbean Intellectual T radition,” 47.
pal-mara-07.indd   97pal-mara-07.indd   97 7/29/08   9:42:49 AM7/29/08   9:42:49 AM


--- PAGE 107 ---
This page intentionally left blank


--- PAGE 108 ---
P ART  III
Mutual Inspiration
Radicals in Transnational Space
pal-mara-08.indd   99pal-mara-08.indd   99 7/25/08   1:23:45 PM7/25/08   1:23:45 PM


--- PAGE 109 ---
This page intentionally left blank


--- PAGE 110 ---
C HAPTER  8
The Havana Afrocubano 
Movement and the 
Harlem Renaissance
The Role of the Intellectual 
in the Formation of Racial and 
National Identity
Ricardo Rene Laremont and Lisa Yun
From the writings of Frederick Douglass and T oni Morrison in North 
America to those of José Martí and Carlos Moore in Cuba, intellectuals and writ-
ers in the Americas have played a role in creating political and social identities 
for the descendants of Africans in this hemisphere. From the 1920s through the 
1940s, parallel intellectual movements took place in New York and Havana that 
attempted to find voice and identity for the descendants of Africans in the United 
States and Cuba. The Afrocubano movement in Havana not only found a voice 
for Africans in Cuba but also redefined the definition of what it meant to be 
Cuban, making it difficult for Cubans to assert Cuban national identity without 
embracing both European and African cultures. In contrast, New York’s Harlem 
Renaissance embarked on a different intellectual project. Rather than redefin-
ing American national identity, the movement constructed an African American 
identity within American and European culture so that African American culture 
would become admirable and comparable to Anglo American culture. In the pro-
cess Harlem Renaissance writers created a culture that was ennobled but also one 
that would parallel Anglo-American culture rather than fundamentally change 
the dominant discourse in the decades to come. Writers of the Negritude move-
ment (Aimé Césaire and Leopold Senghor, principally) did the same for Africans 
pal-mara-08.indd   101pal-mara-08.indd   101 7/25/08   1:23:46 PM7/25/08   1:23:46 PM


--- PAGE 111 ---
Transnational Blackness102
in Europe. Highlighting the glorious and romantic aspects of African culture, the 
Negritude movement emphasized that, in measuring Africanity against whiteness, 
African culture was worthy of admiration by Europeans and Americans.
The intellectuals in the Havana Afrocubano movement, by attempting to 
merge African and European cultures not only distinguished themselves from the 
Harlem Renaissance and the Negritude movement but also did something novel: 
they redefined the definition of national identity. This is not to say that racism 
was erased in Cuba. Castro’s regime has significantly improved the social and eco-
nomic conditions of working-class Cubans, most of whom are of African descent. 
Carlos Moore has pointed out, however, that Afro-Cubans are still excluded from 
the upper echelons of political power and social prestige. The color-line, what W . 
E. B. Du Bois called the problem of the twentieth century, still operates in Cuba 
and is similar in some respects to that which operates in Brazil. Cubans embrace 
African culture—there is not that aversion to African culture that exists in the 
United States—yet Cubans themselves often relegate descendants of Africans 
(especially darker descendants) to poverty and social exclusion. A contradictory 
paradigm of race and colorism operates. African culture is included in the defini-
tion of what it means to be Cuban or Brazilian, yet socioeconomically, the darker 
African is excluded.
Although racism is operative in Latin America, this chapter will not attempt 
to address the categories of relative racism in Cuba and the United States. The 
aim here is instead to clarify that in Cuba from the period from 1920 to 1940 
intellectuals gathered to create a new definition of the Cuban nation that would 
integrate African culture and Spanish culture. During the same period, African 
American intellectuals embarked on a related but different project, creating a dis-
course still circumscribed by separate-but-equal paradigms of dominant Anglo-
Saxon culture. In the following generations, white Americans could appreciate 
Harlem Renaissance writers and artists without fundamentally challenging their 
own images of whiteness as the center of American national identity and without 
recognizing blackness as part of their own heritage.
The first essential political and social reality to grasp is that a counterrevolu-
tion occurred in Cuba after the war for liberation against Spain in 1898. In the 
war against Spain, Africans and descendants of African slaves, Chinese coolies, 
and poor European whites, or criollos, formed the bulk of the military forces that 
fought against Spain and the white landowning elite. Their principal military 
strategist and general was a black man (or more accurately, a mulatto) named 
Antonio Maceo. The other leader of the revolution, a criollo named José Martí, 
died in the first year of the war. After the success of the revolution in 1898; two 
events took place that would frustrate the hoped-for political and social empower-
ment of Africans in Cuba: the arrival of large numbers of Spanish immigrants and 
the arrival of Americans with their capital. From 1898 until the Great Depres-
sion of 1929, large numbers of Spaniards immigrated from Spain to Cuba. The 
Cuban government subsidized this immigration as part of an unwritten policy of 
“whitening” the Cuban nation.
1 By 1929, nine hundred thousand Spaniards had 
pal-mara-08.indd   102pal-mara-08.indd   102 7/25/08   1:23:46 PM7/25/08   1:23:46 PM


--- PAGE 112 ---
The Havana Afrocubano Movement and the Harlem Renaissance 103
immigrated to Cuba, which is more than had immigrated in the entire period 
from 1511 to 1899. This immigration significantly changed the demographics 
and racial politics of the new Cuban nation. The Spanish who arrived in Cuba 
entered the labor market or set up businesses that directly competed with those 
run by criollos or phenotypically Mediterranean-looking Cubans. These criollos 
and Spaniards shared not only points of cultural commonality (both had origins 
in Spain) but also points of friction (the criollos had just fought a war of indepen-
dence that was to have liberated them from Spain and Spaniards). Criollos, with 
Africans and Chinese, had only recently expelled the Spanish from the island in 
what was a class war shouldered by a multiracial underclass. The arrival of large 
numbers of white Spaniards in Cuba beginning in 1901 seemed like a reinvasion 
to many Cubans.
Many of the Spanish who arrived came with views of race informed by the 
European intellectual tradition rather than by the Cuban racial experience. Those 
Spaniards who arrived in Cuba in the first two decades of the twentieth century 
had their views of Africans informed by European schools of racial eugenics that 
were influential in both Europe and the United States. Such views included those 
of Arthur Gobineau and Oswald Spengler (nineteenth-century intellectuals later 
associated with the Nazi Party in Germany), and Enrico Ferri, Cesare Lombroso, 
and Alfonso Asturaro (Italian intellectuals who would contribute to Francoism 
and Fascism).
2
Besides mass immigration by the Spanish, Cuba was effectively invaded by 
American capital during the period from 1896 to 1911. American financiers 
began investing heavily on the island, focusing initially upon the purchase of 
sugar plantations and refineries. Land purchases and other sales to Americans 
quintupled from $50 to $250 million. The portion of the sugar crop produced 
by U.S. owned mills increased from 15 percent in 1906 to 48 percent in 1920 
to 75 percent by 1928.
3 With its substantial interests on the island, the United 
States interfered in Cuban politics to obtain results that were compatible with 
American investment.
T o protect American capital, the United States also sent marines in 1899 to 
assure that Cuba would remain pacific. Many officers injected a new racist per-
spective that was different from the racism that had been practiced in Cuba in the 
past. Americans brought views on race informed by the North American experi-
ence. Miguel Barnet’s Biography of a Runaway Slave records a slave’s recollection of 
the new brand of “nigger” racism brought to the island by the Americans. Instill-
ing fear in Cuban whites, the Americans helped in effectively disenfranchising 
blacks who had gained stature in the revolution.
4
Because of the arrivals of the Spanish and the Americans, politics in Cuba 
during 1899 to 1920 underwent a white nationalist period. White racism toward 
blacks attained a new level of virulence. Borrowing from the sociology of eugenics, 
some white Cuban essayists called for the absolute elimination of the black race.
5 
Criollos within Cuba also objected to blacks taking low-paying jobs. They asserted 
that blacks accepted substandard wages for agricultural and other industrial jobs 
pal-mara-08.indd   103pal-mara-08.indd   103 7/25/08   1:23:46 PM7/25/08   1:23:46 PM


--- PAGE 113 ---
Transnational Blackness104
(cigar rolling, stevedore work) that pushed them out of these labor markets. This 
racial pattern was similar to labor rhetoric leveled against blacks, Chinese, and 
Mexicans in the United States during the same period. Poor criollos became even 
more disgruntled when, in 1913, President Jose Miguel Gomez relaxed the gen-
eral ban on black immigration to Cuba that the Cuban government had imposed 
in 1898. Agricultural laborers flooded into Cuba from Haiti and Jamaica. In the 
period from 1913 to 1925, 150,000 black workers immigrated to Cuba from 
Haiti and Jamaica, taking low-paying agricultural jobs that some white criollos 
felt should have been assigned to them.
6 Because of these developments, Cuban 
criollos in the labor market were being pushed from three directions: by the new 
arrivals from Spain, by the newly liberated Africans of Cuba, and by immigrants 
from Haiti and Jamaica.
The expansion of Haitian and Jamaican migration took place one year after 
the most bloody incident involving race on the island of Cuba. In 1907, Eva-
risto Estenoz and Pedro Ivonet organized the Partido Independiente de Color 
(Independent Party of Color), a party formed as a result of growing frustration 
among blacks and mulattoes in post–independence Cuba. Blacks and mulattoes 
found themselves still marginalized socially, economically, and politically. Even 
after their valiant participation in the war, they were still subjected to extensive 
economic and political discrimination like blacks in the post–Civil War American 
South. They were limited in the educational opportunities afforded to them and 
were relegated to second-class lower-paying agricultural, industrial, and service 
jobs. The new Cuban legislature was composed overwhelmingly of white del-
egates who refused governmental positions even to prominent blacks who had 
participated in the war. Blacks and mulattoes were pushed aside (often with a 
nudge from white American officials who emerged from paradigms of Jim Crow, 
anti-miscegenation, and segregation and who were overseeing the island politi-
cally, militarily, and economically). Because of their exclusion from government 
and from skilled-labor jobs, Africans in Cuba began organizing politically, princi-
pally within the Partido Independiente de Color.
Although the party had been founded in 1907, by 1910 it had twenty thou-
sand members and posed a significant threat to the conservative and liberal par-
ties in elections. Fearing this threat and claiming that the Partido Independiente 
de Color was intent on fomenting a race war, the Cuban Congress enacted a 
law prohibiting the formation of political groups based on race, thereby mak-
ing the Partido Independiente de Color an illegal party. Unwilling to accept the 
demise of their party, Estenoz and Ivonet allegedly staged a revolt against the 
state in Oriente Province in May 1912. Taking advantage of this situation, Presi-
dent Gomez sent troops to crush this rebellion. In the resulting pogrom, the 
Cuban army killed more than four thousand blacks and mulattoes.
7 This Guer-
rita de Doce (Little War of 1912) renewed Cuban awareness of the role of race in 
politics and had lasting consequences for race-based politics on the island. The 
political and ideological developments of 1900–1920, the demographic changes 
pal-mara-08.indd   104pal-mara-08.indd   104 7/25/08   1:23:46 PM7/25/08   1:23:46 PM


--- PAGE 114 ---
The Havana Afrocubano Movement and the Harlem Renaissance 105
accompanying them (the arrival of Spaniards, Haitians, Jamaicans), and the eco-
nomic boom from expanded sugar production all affected the discussion in Cuba 
about race. Cuba was about to embark in two directions regarding race.
One approach emulated American Jim Crow and European Fascist and Nazi 
views that aggressively promoted the separation of the races and the elimination of 
the black race as legitimate political objectives. During this period, racist groups 
including La Liga Blanca de Cuba (The White League of Cuba) and El Orden de 
los Caballeros (Order of the Knights)—a Cuban chapter of the Ku Klux Klan—
were formed with the express purpose of “whitening” Cuba demographically and 
culturally. Intellectuals including Rafael Conte, Jose M. Campany, Mario Guiral 
Moreno, and Carlos de Velasco argued in favor of eliminating or diluting the 
vote for black men (notably, the constitution provided for universal male suffrage 
regardless of race) or replacing Cuba’s social system of race with the system of 
racial apartheid (Jim Crow) existent in the United States.
8
Because of the shocking pogrom of the Little War of 1912 and the intro-
duction of American- and European-influenced styles of racism in Cuba, some 
intellectuals within Cuba began questioning whether these approaches to race 
relations were relevant to the Cuban racial experience. By the beginning of the 
twentieth century, most Cubans were genetically mulattoes. Few Cubans could 
claim to be either pure Spanish or pure African. Marriage and concubinage 
between white men and black women were common. (Nevertheless, there was 
still social resistance to marriage between black men and white women.
9) Cuba, 
after four hundred years of tolerated miscegenation, was not socially and attitudi-
nally prepared to adopt the brand of legislated racism being practiced or discussed 
in the United States or Europe. Cuba was, at least genetically if not yet culturally, 
a mulatto nation.
Despite this tolerance of miscegenation and acceptance of interracial offspring, 
many Cubans still practiced racial discrimination against the darkest blacks—
mulattoes were still more acceptable socially than darker blacks. This structure 
of social reward based upon color encouraged lighter-complexioned Cuban elites 
to practice marriage with white women while sustaining concubinage with black 
women as a means of maintaining their social status. That said, the tolerance of 
miscegenation in Cuba also led to social practices that allowed blacks and whites 
to congregate, mingle, socially engage, and marry. This particularly occurred 
among blacks and whites from the non-elite classes. Elite bars, schools, and res-
taurants often denied entry to blacks. (Even today, dark blacks are barely visible 
in the best Cuban restaurants and hotels, such as the Hotel Nacional.) Neverthe-
less, in most locales, social segregation never approximated the Jim Crow prac-
tices of the United States. Although criollos may have attempted to deny blacks 
access to public spaces and whereas they traditionally excluded blacks from access 
to better paying jobs, the American taboo and the shame associated with interra-
cial relations were not replicated in this context. Most prominent Cuban “fami-
lies had mulatto cousins: the better the family, the more probable this was.”
10 
pal-mara-08.indd   105pal-mara-08.indd   105 7/25/08   1:23:46 PM7/25/08   1:23:46 PM


--- PAGE 115 ---
Transnational Blackness106
Spanish males and criollos in Cuba from the sixteenth through the twentieth 
century seemed to have preferred sexual relations with black and mulatto women. 
The extent of interracial sexual contact in Cuba reached levels unprecedented in 
the United States. Their offspring provide genetic proof of such contacts. Fur-
thermore, in Cuba, paternity across the races was socially acceptable and legally 
recognized. Social acceptance of interracial progeny reached levels unthinkable 
in the United States, which legislated interracial marriage as a crime punishable 
under the law. Because of this socially accepted practice of miscegenation, racial 
tolerance was much greater in Cuba than in the United States. Cuban criollo atti-
tudes toward African Cubans during these periods were mostly schizophrenic. 
Although tolerance of interracial relations was acceptable, the appearance of the 
black man in well-paying jobs was not.
In the final analysis, some intellectuals in Cuba concluded that the political 
programs and the racial ideologies being offered by both Europe and the United 
States were connected to imperialist policies that may have played a role in sub-
jugating Cuba to neocolonial status. Because of Cuba’s neocolonial dependency, 
they concluded that Cuba needed to embark on a new set of cultural politics that 
would liberate it politically and culturally from the United States and Europe. 
The political developments of the first quarter of the twentieth century and the 
contradictions at work within Cuban society itself forced some Cubans to create 
countercultural alternatives regarding the definitions of racial and national iden-
tity that would stand out in contrast to those being offered to Cuba by the United 
States and Europe. Cuba’s failure to deal adequately with the question of race in 
the first quarter of the twentieth century provoked some Cuban intellectuals to 
examine the question of race and the definition of Cuban identity. This move-
ment eventually redefined Cuban national identity so that it included African 
religions and Africanity.
This objective within the Havana Afrocubano movement led to a centering of 
Africanity that was different from the employment of Africanity in the Harlem 
Renaissance. The Havana Afrocubano movement, led principally by mulattoes 
and whites, inverted social and psychological preference among some Spanish 
elites and criollos that preferred and revered hispanidad (Spanishness) and purexa 
de sangre (blood purity).
The unusual aspect of the Cuban project was that it was led primarily by 
mulatto and white intellectuals who consciously tried to create a new national 
identity linked to racial inclusion. The principal leaders of this movement were 
Gustavo Urrutia, Nicolas Guillen Fernando Ortiz, Ramon Guerra, and Lydia 
Cabrera. From approximately 1928 to 1940, Cubans engaged in a significant 
debate within Cuba to define the racial composition of the new Cuban nation. 
Cuban intellectuals examined European and American paradigms of race rela-
tions and rejected them in favor of a paradigm that specifically sought to merge 
the Spanish and the African cultural traditions. In effect, they created a very dif-
ferent paradigm of race relations.
pal-mara-08.indd   106pal-mara-08.indd   106 7/25/08   1:23:46 PM7/25/08   1:23:46 PM


--- PAGE 116 ---
The Havana Afrocubano Movement and the Harlem Renaissance 107
Gustavo Urrutia began this movement when he initiated an editorial column 
entitled “Ideales de una raza” in Cuba’s largest-selling newspaper, El Diario de 
la Marina. The editorial series began in 1928 and continued until 1933. In this 
series, Urrutia and other sympathetic writers wrote articles about the need for 
cultural proximity between Africans and Europeans, and about the need for 
improving the economic conditions for recently liberated African slaves. Most 
important, they wrote about the need to redefine the meaning of what it meant 
to be Cuban. They concluded that “descendants of Martí” (criollos) and the 
“descendants of Maceo” (mulattoes or blacks) were to be included in the defini-
tion of what it meant to be Cuban.
11 This meant explicitly and implicitly that 
criollos and Africans were entitled to Cuban nationality. The founding fathers 
of the Cuban nation (Martí and Maceo) were a white man and a black man. 
Therefore, their heirs—the whites and blacks born on the island—were more 
entitled to be Cubans than the Spanish and Americans born abroad. Similarly, the 
racial views of the Europeans and Spanish, which only served to divide the Cuban 
nation, were to be rejected because they impeded national unity and contributed 
to the continued dependency of Cuba, particularly upon the United States. They 
argued that those recent arrivals—those from Spain and the United States—did 
not really belong to the definition of the Cuban nation.
The Americans’ views regarding the derogation of the black race may have 
been acceptable in many parts of North America, but from the Cuban writers’ 
viewpoints, they were inconsistent with the Cuban social experience. In 1929, 
Nicolas Guillen wrote in “EI Camino de Harlem” that the North American para-
digm of race relations was to be avoided in Cuba:
We are terrified when we reflect upon the essence of the problem, which is grave 
and sensitive, we are separating ourselves one from the other when we should be 
uniting. And as time passes this division will become so profound that there will 
not be room for a final embrace. This will be the day when every Cuban city and 
town—all of them—will have a “black ghetto” as exist with our neighbors in North 
America. And this will be the road that all of us-those of us who have the color of 
Martí and those of us who have the color of Maceo-must work to avoid. That is the 
road to Harlem.
12
Fernando Ortiz was a central figure within the Afrocubano movement. Ironi-
cally, this white lawyer and ethnographer initially began studying the African 
religion in Cuba because, as a criminologist, he believed that there was a link 
between African religious practices and criminality. His first book, Los negros 
brujos, amounted to a condemnation of Cuban–African religious traditions. The 
more he studied African religions, however, the more Ortiz underwent the con-
version from critic to disciple of the religion. His immersion in African religion 
and music led him to adulation of the African tradition both in his personal and 
his academic life. His studies moved him to create the Society for Afro-Cuban 
Studies, which served as the locus for intellectuals who began reimagining a new 
Cuban national identity.
pal-mara-08.indd   107pal-mara-08.indd   107 7/25/08   1:23:46 PM7/25/08   1:23:46 PM


--- PAGE 117 ---
Transnational Blackness108
The intellectual objective of the Society for Afro-Cuban Studies was explicit. 
Jose Antonio Ramos wrote in the first issue in his article entitled “Cubanity and 
the Mixture of Races”:
Cuba will comprise a mixture of races . . . or it will not be Cuba. Objectively and 
subjectively, both realistically and spiritually, Cuba is neither white nor black. It 
is mulata, mestiza. . . . The first obstacle that confronts us is the development of 
Cubanity, this definite national spirit, within the larger colonial family, we must 
identify with this, and with our historical destiny that unites us. One must truly be 
an idiot to ask, again, for another opportunity to create a white Cuba, which would 
please the bankers in New York who oppose our views on mixed race. Don’t they 
secretly rely upon Hitler’s help to create a pure Aryan race!
13
What emerges from the writings of the Havana Afrocubano movement is 
the belief that both America and its system of race relations were direct threats 
to the formation of an independent Cuban nation. For Cuba to liberate itself 
from American neocolonialism and American and European paradigms of race, 
it had to redefine what it meant to be Cuban. This ideological project implied 
resistance to the “Colossus of North.” The intellectuals within the Afrocubano 
movement argued for creating an alternate paradigm of race that would unite the 
Cuban nation against American oppression.
14 For them, to be Cuban was to con-
sciously create a culture that united the African and Spanish cultural traditions. 
This was the Cuban nationalist and patriotic project.
15 Fernando Ortiz himself 
had a grander vision. While Guillen, Herminio Portell Vila, Ramos, Guerra, and 
Cabrera focused on uniting Africans and Spanish into one Cuban nation, Ortiz 
went further to urge the inclusion of mestizos and Chinese in the new definition 
of the Cuban nation. His definition of the Cuban nation was dynamic rather than 
static. It provided for the incorporation of multiple groups into the definition of 
Cuban identity.
16
The Havana Afrocubano intellectuals who encouraged the inclusion of Afri-
canity worked on fertile ground. Cuba, like Brazil, was a place where African 
religious traditions survived. Three factors can explain the vibrancy of African 
culture in these two countries: (1) the large number or proportion of Africans 
brought to those countries; (2) the long period of slavery (slavery was abolished 
in Cuba in 1886 and in Brazil in 1888); and (3) the possibilities for survival of 
African deities within the pantheon of saints of the Roman Catholic Church. 
Protestantism (embraced by the black churches in the United States), with its 
absence of a pantheon of saints, has not provided fertile ground for the sur-
vival of African religions in either North America or the British Caribbean. The 
roles of the Roman Catholic and Protestant churches, their different styles of 
Christianity, and their different potentials for the syncretism of non-Christian 
beliefs into Christian beliefs have become crucial to the transcultural survival of 
African practices.
In Cuba, Yoruba culture is prevalent, perhaps dominant. Yoruba cultural 
dominance became possible because it was culturally flexible and structurally 
pal-mara-08.indd   108pal-mara-08.indd   108 7/25/08   1:23:46 PM7/25/08   1:23:46 PM


--- PAGE 118 ---
The Havana Afrocubano Movement and the Harlem Renaissance 109
compatible with the other dominant island religion, Catholicism. Yoruba orishas 
(West African deities) merged with multiple saints of the Catholic Church, and 
in some cases the practice included the Chinese gods San-Fan-Con (Gwan Gung 
in Cantonese) and the Buddha, forming a pan ethnic religion. Yoruba cultural 
flexibility also incorporated its only serious African religious rival on the island 
(the religion of the Mayombe ethnic group).
17 Yoruba influence is not only preva-
lent in Cuba but also readily observable in Brazil’s candomble religious tradition 
and, to a lesser extent, in T rinidad’s chango religion and Haiti’s voudou. It is in 
Cuba, however, where it is claimed that the Yoruba tradition has been most faith-
fully preserved.
18
Cuban intellectuals and working-class Cubans fashioned and practiced a def-
inition of Cuban national identity that included the African and Spanish tra-
ditions. Although racism and colorism exist in Cuba, the definition of what it 
means to be Cuban synthesizes these traditions. In the United States, a different 
course of identity formation occurred, due to a long history of entrenched Ameri-
can nationalism that centers on antiblack and anticolor politics.
Definitions of “American,” in terms of cultural nationalism and institutional 
politics were once and still are the discursive bastion of white exclusionary poli-
tics. The geographic entities that were first the English colonies of North America 
and that became the United States have been profoundly racist and exclusionary 
in their definition of who could become “American.” From its inception, the 
predominant cultural paradigm for emulation in America was Anglo-Saxon Prot-
estant society. Blacks by practice and by law were excluded from the definition 
of what it meant to be American. Early Asian arrivals were similarly excluded. 
Labeled “nagurs,” a “new type of mulatto,” and a “slight removal from the Afri-
can race,” they were denied the rights to citizenship, to own property, to tes-
tify in court, and to attend white schools.
19 White non-Anglo-Saxons, including 
Irish and Italians, were initially marginalized before becoming integrated into the 
definition of “American.” Even Catholics did not really believe that they fully 
belonged to America. Only the election of President John F . Kennedy granted 
them the legitimacy they wanted. Most non-Anglo-Saxon groups in the United 
States have been excluded to some degree from the definition of what it means to 
be American. The Anglo-Saxon ethnic is at the center of that definition.
With this paradigm already in place, the writers and artists of the Harlem 
Renaissance movement engaged in cultural and political objectives that were 
dissimilar to the tactics and strategies undertaken by the Havana Afrocubano 
movement. Intellectuals of the Afrocubano movement worked on the project of 
cultural inclusion. The principal leaders in the Harlem Renaissance did not work 
toward cultural inclusion but rather toward cultural comparability and parallel-
ism. After the Harlem Renaissance transpired (arguably with a denouement by 
James Baldwin), America underwent a cultural process that empowered and cul-
turally “legitimized” African Americans. Nevertheless, the Harlem Renaissance 
did not change the systemic realities of a national culture based on profound 
separatism and exclusion from the seventeenth century onward.
pal-mara-08.indd   109pal-mara-08.indd   109 7/25/08   1:23:46 PM7/25/08   1:23:46 PM


--- PAGE 119 ---
Transnational Blackness110
After the Harlem Renaissance, America had two admirable cultures: Anglo-
Saxon American and African American. This process, it was hoped, would result 
in two cultural Americas that would examine each other with respect, which is 
something that is still in contention today. Principal proponents of the Harlem 
Renaissance movement wanted, in the words of Alain Locke, to move in a direc-
tion of creating a “New Negro” who would be acceptable to the dominant society. 
T o accomplish this, the New Negro’s culture had to be high bourgeois culture, 
mostly divorced from “low” grassroots culture or African folk tradition. The prin-
cipal leaders of the Harlem Renaissance attenuated aspects of culture that were 
explicitly African. The New Negroes marginalized those who tended to emphasize 
African folk culture in their work, like Zora Neale Hurston. In their view, such 
work was too lowbrow and inconsonant with their aspirations. The leaders of the 
movement, by ascribing to “high” culture, were reconstructing Africanity selec-
tively and symbolically while avoiding the direct inclusion of African culture in 
what it meant to be African American.
Mainstream Harlem Renaissance theorist Alain Locke, in his work “The New 
Negro,” emphasized uplifting the African American so that African American 
culture would become admirable to whites in Europe and the Americas. Locke 
revealed his rationale for the emphasis on class, stating: “The particular signifi-
cance in the re-establishment of contact between the more advanced and repre-
sentative classes is that it promises to offset some of the unfavorable reactions of 
the past, or at least to re-surface race contacts somewhat for the future.”
20 In his 
work, there was little discussion claiming Africanity. Rather, the New Negro, as 
a more socially and culturally “advanced” representative and class, was separable 
from the African. Locke venerated the African tradition while placing it in a cat-
egory that was different from and inferior to African American culture. Locke 
described African art as “pure art” and “exotic art” that contributed to modern 
artistic movements in Europe, including cubism. Yet he rejected connecting Afri-
can art to African American art, calling African art “stagnant,” “decadent,” and 
“dismal.”
21 In his article “The Legacy of the Ancestral Arts,” Locke also main-
tained that African American art was severable from African art.
In his “The Criteria of Negro Art,” W . E. B. Du Bois claimed that legitimate 
art is linked to propaganda that uplifts the race, but he did not include African 
art in his arguments.
22 Given this preference, one can understand how Du Bois’s 
influential journal shaped African American public opinion in the direction of 
respecting African American art forms that were only indirectly related to African 
iconography. In contrast, the Havana Afrocubano movement specifically revered 
African, and usually Yoruba, art forms. Still, Du Bois began the initial deconstruc-
tion of Americanism when he wrote of the “twoness” of the black man as being 
“American” and being “negro” in Souls of Black Folk. An Americanism equated 
with whiteness, as Du Bois pointed out, does not include the darker races. In the 
United States, the deconstruction of American identity and the “Africanizing” of 
America remained in question, while in Cuba, the Africanizing of Cuban cul-
ture had already begun. American people of color recognized and lived within 
pal-mara-08.indd   110pal-mara-08.indd   110 7/25/08   1:23:46 PM7/25/08   1:23:46 PM


--- PAGE 120 ---
The Havana Afrocubano Movement and the Harlem Renaissance 111
Europeanized culture but white Americans had yet to recognize the colored heri-
tage of its national identity and culture. Both Locke and Du Bois believed that 
they were among a vanguard of intellectuals who would serve as “the advance-
guard of the African peoples” (this advance guard embraced being African Ameri-
can while rejecting African culture itself) and lead the way toward the restoration 
of legitimacy for African American culture and people. This movement, however, 
could be devoid of a specific African cultural content. The New Negroes spoke 
of pan-Africanism, yet they admired African culture without fully embracing it. 
Locke, Du Bois, and Richard Wright also rejected Zora Neale Hurston’s alleged 
lowbrow “minstrelsy.” T o varying degrees, Hurston and others (such as Langston 
Hughes, Wallace Thurman, Jean T oomer, Aaron Douglas, Claude McKay, and 
John P . Davis) integrated folk culture and, in some cases, explicit references to 
Africa and Africanity into the experience of African Americans. In their “Negro 
quarterly of the arts” called Fire!, they tried to distinguish themselves from the 
genteel New Negroes who eschewed “lowbrow” folk culture.
23
The New Negroes, Du Bois in particular, disliked the publication and roasted 
it because of its allegedly crude depictions of the African American working 
class.
24 This literary and artistic vision of working-class black America was one 
that the New Negroes would have preferred had never been published. In his essay 
“The Negro Artist and the Racial Mountain,” Langston Hughes criticized “Nor-
dicized Negro intelligentsia,” praised T oomer’s Cane, and urged the creation of 
a true Negro art in the United States that would provide expression for “truly 
racial art” and “the low-down folks” who were being excluded from the emerg-
ing definition of the African-American identity.
25 Hughes wrote of “the man in 
the ditch.”26 Hughes’s close colleague Hurston went further to incorporate folk 
culture and the vernacular into her writings, to make linkages between African-
American culture and African culture, and to observe Caribbean culture.
27 She 
linked African American images of angularity to African sculpture, claimed Afri-
can shields as the only “true Negro painting,” and observed that African American 
folklore was rooted in West African culture.
28
The dancer and choreographer Kathleen Dunham also linked Africanity to her 
work. She researched African religious and cultural traditions in the Caribbean 
and included these traditions in her choreography, creating forms that embraced 
African culture. By so doing, she incorporated Africanity into the meaning of 
what it meant to be African American. Perhaps no one focused as much as Dun-
ham did on the inclusion of African traditions. Both Hurston and Dunham had 
anthropological training and were willing to use those techniques to reinvigorate 
their art with respect to African culture. However, the politics of sexism and class 
within the Harlem Renaissance marginalized both women. “Any discourse that 
contradicted the ideology of the New Negro was excoriated, silenced, or other-
wise dismissed.”
29 Hurston’s rural, radical voice that invoked a possibly African 
past was incompatible with the projection of an African America as bourgeois. 
Langston Hughes suffered criticisms from traditionalists but ultimately did not 
suffer as much.
pal-mara-08.indd   111pal-mara-08.indd   111 7/25/08   1:23:46 PM7/25/08   1:23:46 PM


--- PAGE 121 ---
Transnational Blackness112
Still, neither the “radicals” such as Hughes, Hurston, and Dunham nor the 
“mainstreamers” such as Locke, Du Bois, or Countee Cullen really examined the 
long-range implications and possibilities of incorporating Africanity into what 
it meant to be African American or what it meant to be “American.” Here is a 
consistent point of departure between the Havana Afrocubano movement and 
the Harlem Renaissance. The activists in the Afrocubano movement embraced 
cultural, religious, and racial boundary crossings involving African and Euro-
pean cultural and social endeavors. The intellectuals in the Harlem Renaissance, 
because they were placed in a radically different social, political, and cultural 
milieu, struggled with issues involving class and race, “highbrow” and “lowbrow” 
art and culture, and “American” and “African” identity. In the end, the Harlem 
Renaissance intellectuals created an African American culture that became com-
parable to Anglo-Saxon culture while maintaining its separateness.
The success of the “New Negroes” had significant implications for future iden-
tity movements in the United States. Because of the success of those in the Harlem 
Renaissance and their descendants (principally Ralph Ellison, Richard Wright, 
and James Baldwin), the definition of American nationality remains grounded 
in racial and cultural separateness. The African American identity movement’s 
progeny—the Latino movement and Asian American movement—have similarly 
established identity and cultural discourses that have been implicitly based upon 
racial and cultural separation and the politics of “authenticity.”
These movements—because of the operation of the law, the development of 
history and politics, and the role of the intellectual—have not created an inter-
cultural paradigm for the definition of national identity. They operate under the 
paradigm of cultural separateness and even conflict. The cultural project of racial 
separateness is reified by dominant structures of power and image-making. This 
paradigm is understood under the code word “multiculturalism,” a term of deri-
sion for conservatives and celebration for liberals. We need to critically examine 
how the multicultural movement continues to disempower people of color and 
racialize the discussion of what it means to be American. The Cuban approach 
of cultural inclusion has not been discussed as an option, because it has not been 
understood by most Americans as an alternate cultural and identity model. Fur-
thermore, the Cuban model may not be replicated due to the obvious factors, 
such as American demographics, size, and so on. The Cuban model may not even 
be desirable to some. Nevertheless, it can be critiqued for future discussion of 
racial and national identity in the new millennium.
For African Americans, emerging from the legacy of North American slavery 
with the systemic destruction of the African family and traditions, the African 
American path toward its own cultural nationalism has been substantially severed 
from Africanity, at least from the perspective of Cuban and Brazilian culture. Now, 
more than 130 years after slavery and a half century after the Harlem Renaissance, 
with changes in racial politics, economic and cultural globalization, and the sig-
nificant impact of diasporic people of African descent from Latin America, the 
Caribbean, and Africa, we can reassess the relative inflexibility of this political and 
cultural model.
pal-mara-08.indd   112pal-mara-08.indd   112 7/25/08   1:23:46 PM7/25/08   1:23:46 PM


--- PAGE 122 ---
The Havana Afrocubano Movement and the Harlem Renaissance 113
Notes
 1. Aline Helg, Our Rightful Share: The Afro-Cuban Struggle for Equality, 1886–1912 (Chapel 
Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 1995), 56.
 2. Julio Le Riverend, La republica: Dependencia y revolución (Havana: Editorial de Ciencias 
Sociales, 1973).
 3. Robin Moore. Nationalizing Blackness: Afro-Cubanism and Artistic Revolution in Havana 
(Pittsburgh, PA: University of Pittsburgh Press, 1997), 27.
 4. Miguel Barnet, Biography of a Runaway Slave (Willimantic, CT: Curbstone, 1994), 194
 5. Helg, Our Rightful Share, 234–35.
 6. Ibid., 56, 193–226.
 7. Rafael Conte and Jose M. Capmany, Guerra de razas (Negros y blancos en Cuba) (Havana: 
Imprenta, 1912).
 8. Hugh Thomas, Cuba: The Pursuit of Freedom (New York: Da Capo, 1998), 524.
 9. Guillen, “EI Camino de Harlem,” Diario de la Marina (April 1929).
 10. Jose Antonio Ramos, “Cubanidad y mestizaje,” Estudios Afrocubanos I, no. 1 
(1937):107–8.
 11. Herminio Portell Vila, “Los prejuicios raciales y la integracion nacional norteamericana,” 
Estudios Afrocubanos 2, no. 1 (1938): 47.
 12. Ramiro Guerra, “Nuevas y fecundas orientaciónes,” Diario de la Marina, January 13, 
1929, p. 6.
 13. Fernando Ortiz, “La Cubanidad y los Negros,” Estudios Afrocubanos 3, no. 1 (1939): 
3–15.
 14. Lydia Cabrera, El monte (Havana: Ediciones C. R., 1954).
 15. Roger Bastide, Us Amériques noir (Paris: Payot, 1967).
 16. Ronald Takaki, A Different Mirror (New York: Penguin, 1989), 101, 329.
 
17. Alain Locke, “The New Negro,” in The Norton Anthology of African-American Literature, 
ed. Henry Louis Gates (New York: W . W Norton, 1997), 966.
 18. Locke, “A Note on African Art,” in The Critical T emper of Alain Locke: A Selection of His 
Essays on Art and Culture, ed. Jeffrey C. Stewart (New York: Garland, 1983), 135.
 19. Deborah G. Plant, Every Tub Must Sit on Its Own Bottom: The Philosophy and Politics of 
Zora Neale Hurston (Urbana: University of Illinois Press, 1995), 66.
 20. Locke, “Enter the New Negro,” Survey Graphic Harlem Number 6, no. 6 (1925): 632.
 21. Ibid, 631.
 22. W . E. B. Du Bois, “Criteria of Negro Art,” The Crisis 32 (1926): 290–97.
 23. Thomas, Cuba, 524.
 24. Locke, “The New Negro,” 966.
 25. Langston Hughes, “The Negro Artist and the Racial Mountain,” The Nation 122, no. 
3181 (1926): 693.
 26. Zora Neale Hurston, “Characteristcs of Negro Expression,” in Negro: An Anthology, ed. 
Nancy Cunard (New York: Continuum, 1996), 28.
 27. Ibid., 24.
 28. Ibid., 26.
 29. Plant, Every Tub, 66.
pal-mara-08.indd   113pal-mara-08.indd   113 7/25/08   1:23:46 PM7/25/08   1:23:46 PM


--- PAGE 123 ---
This page intentionally left blank


--- PAGE 124 ---
C HAPTER  9
Eslanda Goode 
Robeson’s African 
Journey
The Politics of Identification 
and Representation in the 
African Diaspora
Maureen Mahon
“I wanted to go to Africa.” This sentence opens Eslanda Goode Robeson’s 
1945 travel narrative African Journey, an account of her summer excursion to 
sub-Saharan Africa.1 A simple statement, it reflects the belief in historical, mate-
rial, and spiritual connections between people of African descent that motivated 
Robeson to study, visit, and write about Africa. Although best known as the wife 
of world-renowned singer, actor, and activist Paul Robeson (1898–1976), Eslanda 
Goode Robeson (1896–1965) was a scholar, writer, and activist in her own right. 
In 1934, Robeson began graduate study in anthropology at the London School 
of Economics and University College, London. Her goal was to learn more about 
African history and culture.
2 During the 1940s, she emerged as a critic of U.S. 
racial policy and a proponent of African nations’ independence from European 
colonial powers. She drew on the concepts she learned in anthropology seminars, 
her experiences traveling in sub-Saharan Africa, and her concerns as a U.S.-born 
African American woman to argue for the liberation of people of color around the 
world. Like many Pan-Africanists in her cohort, she viewed European colonialism 
in Africa and Asia and segregation and racism in the United States as linked forms 
of oppression. Using her visibility as the wife of one of the most recognized black 
pal-mara-09.indd   115pal-mara-09.indd   115 7/25/08   1:31:19 PM7/25/08   1:31:19 PM


--- PAGE 125 ---
Transnational Blackness116
Americans in the world, Robeson carved out a role as a progressive public intel-
lectual that lasted until her death in 1965.3
Robeson set out to earn a doctorate in anthropology, but she never focused 
her energy on academic writing. Instead, she communicated her critique through 
books, pamphlets, articles, and lectures that urged her audiences to shift long-
standing racial practices and ideologies. Concerned with changing the ways black 
and white Americans thought about Africa and their relationship to the continent, 
Robeson chose to challenge negative mainstream depictions of Africa by produc-
ing an image of a “Modern Africa.” This was a region involved in international 
politics and populated by intelligent citizens who maintained cultural traditions 
in spite of colonialism and were capable of self-governance. In the ensuing discus-
sion of Robeson’s writings and lectures about Africa, I show how a Pan-Africanist 
perspective influenced her intellectually and politically. This Third World view-
point informed her efforts to address the social and political restrictions placed on 
black people around the world. Throughout her career she worked with concepts 
of culture and identity that established bonds among people of African descent 
and celebrated the vibrancy of African people and culture.
Robeson’s decisions about what to study and how to interpret her experi-
ences were shaped by a diasporic politics of identification. This viewpoint rec-
ognizes, creates, and extends cultural and political connections among people of 
African descent. Built on a global perspective and rooted in a politicized black 
consciousness, a diasporic politics of identification is a self-conscious construc-
tion of connections among people of African descent that views their history and 
fates as linked and considers that link to be politically, culturally, and emotion-
ally meaningful. In this chapter the term “politics of identification” is used to 
stress the aspects of choice and construction that inform this engagement with 
Africa. Concerned with black solidarity and black liberation, this perspective is 
the foundation of intellectual and social movements, such as Pan-Africanism and 
Afrocentric thought. It also animates contemporary academic interest in African 
Diaspora studies.
4 This expanding field has developed alongside a general inter-
est in Diaspora and growing scholarly attention to globalization, migration, and 
transnational cultures. Much of this turn-of-the-millennium scholarship high-
lights differences within the African Diaspora and the impossibility of defining 
what constitutes authentic or representative blackness. Often, these contempo-
rary scholars struggle to articulate the relevance of racially based political con-
nections and social identities in the face of these differences (and in the face of 
acknowledging the spuriousness of biological race as a meaningful category along-
side recognition of the continued political, social, and economic marginalization 
of black people that make race feel quite real). This approach contrasts with that 
of Robeson and others in her cohort.
In the early twentieth century, a critical mass of black artists, intellectuals, 
and activists were working to reconstitute linkages among people of African 
descent that historical processes had severed.
5 These Pan-Africanists were con-
cerned with the political and social progress of black people who, whether in 
pal-mara-09.indd   116pal-mara-09.indd   116 7/25/08   1:31:20 PM7/25/08   1:31:20 PM


--- PAGE 126 ---
Eslanda Goode Robeson’s African Journey 117
the United States, the United Kingdom, the Caribbean, or Africa, were denied 
political rights, economic access, and social mobility. Pan-Africanist intellectuals 
and activists sought to consolidate a sense of connection rooted in shared African 
ancestry and enhanced by similar structural conditions—subordination by Euro-
peans and racialized marginalization. Some Pan-Africanists extended their con-
cept to all nonwhites struggling against colonialism and imperialism. Privileging 
their similar structural position over national, ethnic, and class differences, they 
used formations like “the colored world” and “the color line” to establish connec-
tions between blacks in the New World and people in sub-Saharan Africa, India, 
and China, all of which were battlegrounds for the liberation of people of color 
from the dominance of Western Europeans.
During this period there was no single form of Pan-Africanism, but whether 
Garveyite or Du Boisian, pan-Africanist activists worked to mobilize shifts in 
consciousness. Widely circulated colonial discourses taught that Africa was the 
“Dark Continent.” For Robeson and other Pan-Africanists it was a repository 
of black history and a positive source of identity. Pan-Africanist activists, then, 
were fighting for both political and psychological independence from Western 
hegemony. This led to political activism and to the development of cultural pro-
ductions that demonstrated pride in African heritage and forged connections 
across the Diaspora. African Journey was part of this project to build Pan-African 
consciousness. In her narrative, Robeson reimagined Africa, a much-maligned 
region, as a site of cultural development. She encouraged black Americans to 
recognize a connection with Africa, form politically meaningful connections with 
contemporary Africans, and eschew their negative views of sub-Saharan Africa. 
Her approach was built on a sincere embrace of African cultures and a belief in 
the significance of African connections, but it meant expanding, not rejecting, 
an American identity. It was also a strategic move that anticipated that increased 
political influence and positive black consciousness would develop if people of 
African descent recognized what they had in common.
Robeson’s efforts to produce alternative representations of Africa and Africans 
are also part of the tradition of “racial vindication” that developed among Afri-
can American intellectuals and activists in response to the ways black people are 
depicted in scholarship and public discourse. As Faye V . Harrison and Ira E. Har-
rison explain in their history of African American anthropologists, vindicationist 
writing and scholarship “emerged in reaction to racist assertions that Africans 
are degraded savages, that Africans and African Americans have no culture, that 
blacks are inherently inferior, and that miscegenation is degenerative to whites 
and white culture.”
6 In order to vindicate and uplift the race, these black intel-
lectuals overturned the old meanings associated with blackness. Typically, they 
argued for the validity of black culture while developing a socially and economi-
cally grounded critique of the power relations that marginalized black people. 
As a vindicationist and public intellectual, Robeson used her writing to provide 
information, comment on political conditions, and assert a particular type of 
pal-mara-09.indd   117pal-mara-09.indd   117 7/25/08   1:31:20 PM7/25/08   1:31:20 PM


--- PAGE 127 ---
Transnational Blackness118
black subjectivity. These tendencies were present in African Journey, her most 
widely circulated publication.
African Journey is an account of Robeson’s 1936 trip to South Africa and 
Uganda. Her prominence as the wife of a famous man and the book’s unusual 
subject matter combined to secure African Journey media attention. The book 
was reviewed in the New York Herald T ribune, the New York Times, the Chicago 
T ribune, and the Christian Science Monitor. African Journey sold out of its first 
printing and was selected by the American Library Association as one of the fifty 
outstanding books of 1945.
7 Also in 1945, the National Council of Negro Women 
named Robeson “one of twelve outstanding women in American life.”8 She began 
to lecture on Africa and civil rights and published on these issues in left and black 
presses. By the late 1940s, she was involved in electoral politics, co-founding 
and chairing the Connecticut Progressive Party. She ran (unsuccessfully) as the 
Progressive Party candidate for Connecticut Secretary of State in 1948 and for 
Congress in 1952. She was also active in the Council on African Affairs (CAA)—a 
New York organization whose members campaigned for decolonization in Africa.
9 
Paul Robeson was one of the organization’s founding members and its chairman. 
The CAA published E. G. Robeson’s pamphlet on contemporary conditions in 
sub-Saharan Africa and through her affiliation with the organization, she became 
an accredited observer at the United Nations.
10
It was a long-standing concern with the condition of black people and curios-
ity about Africa that led Eslanda to travel to the continent. Born in 1896 in Wash-
ington, DC, she was the maternal granddaughter of Francis Lewis Cardozo, who 
had been “a pioneer in Negro education and in the fight for Negro rights” and 
Secretary of State of South Carolina during the Reconstruction era.
11 Her father, 
John Goode, a clerk in the War Department, died when Eslanda was four years 
old. Her mother, Eslanda Cardozo Goode, supported Eslanda and her two broth-
ers by working as a beautician catering to a wealthy black and white clientele.
12 By 
1905 the family had moved to Manhattan where Robeson distinguished herself as 
a student. At sixteen years old, she graduated from high school and won a four-
year scholarship to the University of Illinois. In her senior year, she transferred to 
T eachers College, Columbia University and earned a B.S. in chemistry in 1923. 
From 1918 to 1925, she worked at New York City’s Presbyterian Hospital as a 
surgical technician and chemist in the Surgical Pathology Department.
13 The first 
African American to hold such a high position at the hospital, Robeson planned 
to become a doctor.
14 These plans changed after she married Paul, a star college 
athlete and Columbia University Law School student, in 1921. She gave birth to 
their only child, Paul, Jr., in 1927.
Reasoning that American racism would limit Paul’s prospects as a lawyer, 
Robeson encouraged her husband to pursue his interest in acting and became 
his business manager. T o capitalize on performance opportunities in England 
and Europe, the Robesons moved to London where they lived from 1928 to 
1939. During this period, Robeson’s interest in the history and culture of African 
Diaspora people flourished. She researched the African Diaspora community in 
pal-mara-09.indd   118pal-mara-09.indd   118 7/25/08   1:31:20 PM7/25/08   1:31:20 PM


--- PAGE 128 ---
Eslanda Goode Robeson’s African Journey 119
Paris and published a series of profiles about them.15 Her study of Africa intensi-
fied as she met African students who lived in London and followed the extensive 
coverage of African politics in the British press. Both Paul and Eslanda availed 
themselves of opportunities to learn about African culture in British universi-
ties: Paul studied African languages and Eslanda studied social anthropology. In a 
1934 letter, she explained: “I am working in anthropology at the London School 
of Economics and University College, both connected with London University, 
and will in due time take a Ph.D. in the subject. I am specializing in African cul-
tures, and am more interested in them than I have ever been in anything. When 
we get through, we will know something about ‘our people.”’
16
Eslanda began her graduate work at a fortuitous moment. In the mid-1930s 
when she started attending classes at the London School of Economics, Bronis-
law Malinowski, one of anthropology’s towering figures, was offering his weekly 
seminars in social anthropology and establishing fieldwork and his theory of 
functionalism as central to anthropological research.
17 In a social, political, and 
intellectual context that devalued non-Western people and their practices, British 
social anthropology sought to identify and understand the logic of non-Western 
cultures and thereby claim validity for them. The field offered an unusual aca-
demic opportunity to take nonwhites and their cultures seriously, even to present 
them in a positive light. Still, this attractive quality was sometimes undercut, 
Robeson learned, by a conservative streak in the discipline. The quest for knowl-
edge about the other that drove African studies in Great Britain was shaped by 
the colonial context out of which the field developed.
18 As a “colored” woman 
attending Malinowski’s seminars, Robeson encountered firsthand the ways Brit-
ish anthropologists labeled nonwhites and the Eurocentricism that shaped their 
attitudes. In African Journey she recalled, “After more than a year of very wide 
reading and intensive study I began to get my intellectual feet wet. I am afraid I 
began to be obstreperous in seminars. I soon became fed up with white students 
and teachers ‘interpreting’ the Negro mind and character to me. Especially when 
I felt, as I did very often, that their interpretation was wrong.”
19 Much to her 
chagrin, they also interpreted her mind. Her fellow students and the professors 
insisted that because of her class and education, she was more like the British 
anthropologists than the Africans they were discussing.
20 Although she followed 
many Euro-American cultural norms, she refused to abandon the connection she 
felt with African people. “I’m Negro. I’m African myself,” she recalled asserting. 
“I’m what you call primitive. I have studied my mind, our minds. How dare 
you call me European!”
21 She held to her position in part because she knew that 
her blackness prevented her from enjoying the rights guaranteed to people of 
European descent. In London, Paul and Eslanda avoided the daily indignities of 
de facto and de jure racism that prevailed in the United States. Still, neither had 
lost sight of the ways their race impeded their access to full equality or the way it 
shaped them as individuals. Affirming her Africanness was also a way to challenge 
the tendency of whites to make negative generalizations about black people and 
view successful blacks as exceptions who were more white than black.
22
pal-mara-09.indd   119pal-mara-09.indd   119 7/25/08   1:31:20 PM7/25/08   1:31:20 PM


--- PAGE 129 ---
Transnational Blackness120
Robeson recognized that part of the reason her colleagues so confidently made 
their proclamations was that they had conducted research in Africa and used their 
experience of fieldwork to claim the authority to speak about the other.23 Robeson 
decided she could establish authority of her own—beyond her being black—by 
conducting research in Africa. That Robeson could start her African fieldwork 
while living in Europe is a result of early twentieth-century transnational move-
ments of people. She and Paul began to “seek out all the Africans we could find, 
everywhere we went: in England, Scotland, Ireland, France; in the universities, 
on the docks, in the slums.”
24 In these encounters, Paul and Eslanda put aside 
obvious differences in language, culture, ethnicity, skin color, religion, and class 
between themselves and their African acquaintances; instead, they focused on 
what they shared. In African Journey, she reported: “The more we talked with 
them, the more we came to know them, the more convinced we were that we 
are the same people: They know us, we know them; we understand their spoken 
and unspoken word, we have the same kind of ideas, the same ambitions, the 
same kind of humor, many of the same values.”
25 Her book’s dedication, “For the 
brothers and sisters, who will know whom I mean,” underscores this identifica-
tion and connection with black Africans.
While Western European anthropologists debated which theoretical models 
and field methods would best contribute to the development of their discipline, 
Robeson approached anthropology as a tool that would enable her to contribute 
to the project of black liberation. Given this imperative, it is not surprising that 
she did not write a standard ethnographic monograph. Like Zora Neale Hurston, 
a black anthropologist who had voiced her enthusiasm about Eslanda’s foray into 
the discipline, Robeson constructed a text that reached beyond an academic audi-
ence while making an argument about the integrity of black culture.
26 Where 
Hurston focused on black Americans in the South, Robeson focused on the Afri-
cans she met in South Africa, Uganda, and the Congo. As with Hurston, Robeson 
wrote in an accessible style and placed herself in the text using first person nar-
rative. She also incorporated the insights of her travel partner, her nine-year-old 
son, Paul, Jr. (Paul, Sr., did not go on the trip). This positioning allows the reader 
to get a sense of Robseon’s personality—her sense of humor, her outrage over 
European colonialism—through her interpretations of African culture and poli-
tics. As with Hurston, her status as a black woman conducting research with black 
people upset the traditional, usually unquestioned, disciplinary dynamic in which 
a (usually male) person of European descent “studied” non-Europeans. The form 
and content of African Journey challenge this binary and the scientific distancing 
typically found in ethnographies and probably contributed to distancing Robeson 
from the mainstream of anthropology, both in her era and today. There has been 
some recent attention to Robeson’s work as an anthropologist, but for the most 
part Robeson is not talked about in the field of anthropology.
27 This is the case 
even though she held a Master’s degree in anthropology, did doctoral stud-
ies in anthropology, and identified herself as an anthropologist throughout her 
career. Robeson completed the course requirements for her PhD at the Hartford 
pal-mara-09.indd   120pal-mara-09.indd   120 7/25/08   1:31:20 PM7/25/08   1:31:20 PM


--- PAGE 130 ---
Eslanda Goode Robeson’s African Journey 121
Theological Seminary but, like Zora Neale Hurston who is similarly on the mar-
gins of the discipline, she did not complete her doctorate.
Robeson organized African Journey as a series of journal entries. They take the 
reader through her trip, describe the African and European people she encoun-
tered, and comment on the incidents that shaped her travels. Many of the entries 
are amplified with quotations from primary and secondary sources. Aware that 
racial commonality and the identification she openly felt with Africans might 
lead readers to accuse her of bias, Robeson cited the work of European writers to 
indicate that her views were grounded in a reality that others had also observed. 
The book’s opening chapter situates her journey in a desire to learn about people 
with whom African Americans shared a historical bond that slavery had ruptured. 
The body of African Journey documents the everyday life of black Africans. T wo 
broad questions inform the text: “What are African people like?” and “What 
is happening in Africa now?” The book is divided into two sections, the first is 
about South Africa and the second about Uganda. We follow the two travelers, 
“Essie” and “Pauli,” as they take a sea journey from London to South Africa; 
make excursions into South African cities and townships; travel to Uganda for 
a four-week stay with the T oro, a cattle-herding people; and undertake side trips 
to Dar-Es-Salaam, Zanzibar, Mombassa, the Congo, and Cairo. This would be 
quite a trip now and it was a serious adventure in 1936. Robeson documented 
the rough sea voyage, car breakdowns, and bouts with tropical fever, but she also 
commented on the warmth and hospitality of the African people that more than 
offset the difficulties.
The section on South Africa details the harsh conditions that black Africans 
contended with as people living under minority rule. Robeson traced the impact 
of European appropriation of land, the institution of the pass system, and the seg-
regation that shaped every aspect of daily existence.
28 T o Robeson’s mind, South 
Africa recalled the United States. At one point, she observed, “This traveling 
about Africa reminds me of traveling through the Deep South in America: You 
are passed from friend to friend, from car to car, from home to home, often cover-
ing thousands of miles without enduring the inconveniences and humiliations of 
the incredibly bad Jim Crow train accommodations and lack of hotel facilities for 
Negroes” (African Journey, 65). She learned the term kaffir, a South African word 
with the same connotations as “nigger” (59); had confrontations with white South 
Africans whose racist attitudes reminded her of “crackers” back home (71); and 
noted the ways housing segregation and the legal system stripped black Africans 
of rights and mobility in their own homeland (37, 73).
29 Her descriptions of the 
impact of poverty and racism detailed the uncivilized aspects of European colo-
nialism and argued for freeing South Africa from an abusive system. In her section 
on Uganda, where British colonial officials administered the local government, 
Robeson depicted everyday life as less oppressive than that in South Africa. The 
T oro, for example, were able to maintain many traditional practices, particularly 
cattle-herding, and their precolonial tribal structure and landholding patterns did 
not seem to have been as disrupted as those of blacks under South African rule. 
pal-mara-09.indd   121pal-mara-09.indd   121 7/25/08   1:31:20 PM7/25/08   1:31:20 PM


--- PAGE 131 ---
Transnational Blackness122
Robeson spent time with the Mukama (king) of T oro, the cousin of one of her 
London-based African friends. Here she conducted her fieldwork, focusing on 
work related to the care of cattle and the processes of milk production.
Robeson’s presentation of the life and landscape of southern and eastern Africa 
in African Journey demonstrated that black Africans were intelligent and engaged 
with the world beyond their borders. At one point, she recounted a discussion 
between South Africans and black Americans that covered the political situation 
in Africa, the United States, Italy, the Soviet Union, India, Spain, Germany, and 
Japan. She then stated:
And I thought as I talked and listened, These Africans, these “primitives,” make 
me feel humble and respectful. I blush with shame for the mental picture my fel-
low Negroes in America have of our African brothers: wild black savages in leopard 
skins, waving spears and eating raw meat. And we, with films like Sanders of the 
River, unwittingly helping to perpetuate this misconception.
30
In this passage, Eslanda acknowledged the role of media in perpetuating Ameri-
can ignorance about Africa. Released in 1935, Sanders was a bitter experience for 
Paul who had agreed to play the role of an African chief with the hope that the 
movie would present a realistic depiction of African culture. The resulting film, 
however, was a reaffirmation of British superiority and African inferiority.
31 Her 
husband’s Sanders experience underscored for Eslanda the fact that when Euro-
peans were in control of representation, Africans were all too often shown in a 
negative light. She chose to battle stereotypes by making her own representation 
of Africa and Africans.
The connection Robeson recognized between black Americans and Africa 
encouraged her to take a nontraditional approach to the classic anthropological 
encounter. Instead of seeking the difference of a non-Western other and con-
trasting it with a western self, she documented what people of African descent 
in Africa and the United States had in common and described Africa and the 
United States as contemporary.
32 She presented Africa as a region that had made 
important contributions to world civilization and that continued to play a role 
in world affairs. Similarly, she represented Africans as interested in the contem-
porary world. Inverting the image of Africa and Africans as primitive, Robeson 
insisted that this modern continent and these modern people were due respect 
and independence.
The choices Robeson made as a writer creating a representation of sub-Saharan 
Africa in the 1940s anticipate the critiques of the practice of fieldwork and the 
production of anthropological knowledge that have emerged from within the dis-
cipline over the last thirty years.
33 Robeson’s perspective contrasts with the tra-
ditional anthropological approach in which, as anthropologist Lila Abu-Lughod 
observes, “otherness and difference may have assumed . . . ‘talismanic qualities.’ 
Whether its goal is to engage in cultural self-critique or to assert enlightened tol-
erance through relativism, anthropology needs others that are different from the 
pal-mara-09.indd   122pal-mara-09.indd   122 7/25/08   1:31:20 PM7/25/08   1:31:20 PM


--- PAGE 132 ---
Eslanda Goode Robeson’s African Journey 123
self.”34 Abu-Lughod emphasizes that the anthropological concept of culture often 
has the effect of creating, exaggerating, and fixing difference between the (usu-
ally) Western anthropologist and the (usually) non-Western subject. 35 She fur-
ther observes that ethnographic writing has “trafficked in generalizations,” using 
“details and the particulars of individual lives to produce typifications” that can 
make people living in other societies “seem simultaneously more coherent, self-
contained, and different from ourselves than they might be.”
36
Robeson challenged the presumed distance between the researcher and the 
researched. She looked for—and found—connections, commonality, and “modern 
Africans.” African Journey introduced the reader to people who were knowledge-
able about issues that also concerned her American readers. Robeson reported, for 
example, that South African women were curious about women’s organizations in 
the United States and that the T oro women asked questions about the lifestyle of 
American women.
37 Throughout, she focused on contemporary conditions, par-
ticularly the impact of British colonialism. She had a network in Africa because 
of her contacts with African students based in London, the colonial metropole. 
She was able to conduct her research because many of her male and some of 
her female interlocutors spoke English, a consequence of prolonged contact with 
Europeans. Colonialism and the accompanying forced entry into modernity were 
inescapable. Domination by European powers was an experience that black Afri-
cans and black Americans had in common and this link could help establish Pan-
African consciousness.
Robeson’s race, nationality, gender, and class mediated her encounters. Her 
husband’s success as an entertainer gave her the financial means and leisure time 
to pursue the nonremunerative projects of writing, graduate study, and research 
travel. Like many female anthropologists, she took advantage of “honorary male” 
status. She was introduced to and interacted with men; indeed, she had to make it 
a point to ask to meet women.
38 Furthermore, although she was a person of Afri-
can descent, she was a foreigner and a scholar; as a result, she was also accorded 
a kind of “honorary white” status that helped her navigate South Africa and 
Uganda and allowed her access to arenas from which local blacks were excluded. 
Still Robeson identified with black Africans. This sense of connection led her to 
create a representation of a place where people were, in many ways, much “like 
us.” Her efforts to highlight the “normalness” of the Africans are evident in her 
textual descriptions and also in the visual images that supplement the text. Afri-
can Journey features over sixty black and white photographs that Robeson took 
during her trip and they provide a striking example of Robeson’s commitment to 
de-exoticizing Africans and Africa.
Anthropologist Deborah Poole observed that photographs of non-European 
people held a “scientific and voyeuristic fascination” for nineteenth-century Euro-
peans partly because they were “image objects [that] lent support to an emerging 
idea of race as a material, historical, and biological fact.”
39 In the 1940s, race 
was still being used uncritically as a way to classify people. The visual images 
Robeson incorporated into her text aimed to counter the dominant emphasis 
pal-mara-09.indd   123pal-mara-09.indd   123 7/25/08   1:31:20 PM7/25/08   1:31:20 PM


--- PAGE 133 ---
Transnational Blackness124
on racial ranking and difference. Here she followed the anthropological process 
of providing information to make “the exotic” seem familiar, selecting photo-
graphs that attacked dominant representations of “primitive Africa.” There are 
pictures of a wedding party, family groups, and neatly attired children standing 
outside their school. These are not wild-eyed natives but people who have homes 
and families. Their hair is carefully groomed and their clothes—whether West-
ern or African—are tidy. Many of the photo captions identify people by name 
or occupation, individualizing them and creating a feel of informal snapshots 
from a vacation rather than of scientific data. Robeson also included photos of 
traditional housing, goods for sale at a marketplace, and the physical terrain. 
T ogether, these pictures gave a sense of what Africa looked like and showed the 
reader that, while different, Africa was not a fundamentally incomprehensible 
place. Discussing the culturally and historically specific factors that inform the 
ways people “experience the pleasure of the visual,” Poole suggests that “the spell 
photography weaves around us is multiplied in images of people from the colo-
nial or non-European world who appear both like and not like us.”
40 Robeson 
was likely fascinated by the phenotypic similarities she saw when comparing 
Africans to African Americans, including herself and Paul. For her, the pleasure 
of looking and her interest in showing stemmed from a desire to mark similari-
ties and dismantle barriers. Her photographs amplified the text’s emphasis on 
connecting with “brothers and sisters” in Africa and advancing the then revolu-
tionary idea that “Africans are people.”
41
Robeson found that the Africans she met were in some respects more advanced 
than westerners. After spending time with herdswomen in Uganda, she reported:
I have learned a great deal about the very important business of living, and as a 
result have rearranged my sense of values to some considerable extent. The leisurely 
approach, the calm facing of circumstances and making the most of them, is very 
different from the European hustle and hurry and drive, and worry and frustration 
when things don’t go well. The African gets things done, gets a great deal done, but 
gets it done without the furious wear and tear on the nervous system.
42
Here and throughout African Journey, Robeson used a culturally relativist approach 
to shift the terms of evaluation and reveal the logic of African practices and the 
persistence of European biases.
As Robeson documented Africa’s complexity and modernity, she succumbed 
to some exaggeration. It was only the Europeans who were loutish, unattract-
ive, and ignorant. The Africans she met were dignified and wise, generous and 
patient. The continent would be in good hands, Robeson was suggesting, if the 
Europeans would return it to its rightful stewards. As with any representation, the 
one Robeson produced of Africa was selective and based on choices she believed 
would convey her larger points. In her pamphlet on Africa, she commented on 
this process, “Now, I don’t want to give you a misleading picture of Africa. There 
is frightful, ruthless exploitation, segregation, discrimination, oppression. The 
examples I have given are the exceptions, to show what the African can do, has 
pal-mara-09.indd   124pal-mara-09.indd   124 7/25/08   1:31:20 PM7/25/08   1:31:20 PM


--- PAGE 134 ---
Eslanda Goode Robeson’s African Journey 125
done, against terrific odds.”43 With the negative images of Africa and Africans so 
dominant, Robeson highlighted the positive. Robeson took from anthropology 
certain assumptions, like the importance of approaching culture from a rela-
tivistic point of view and the value of pursuing knowledge about non-Western 
cultures. She rejected, however, an emphasis on the difference of the “primitive 
other” and a synchronic analysis that ignored history, process, and change. With 
the publication of African Journey, she disseminated her representation of “Mod-
ern Africa” and was soon discussing it in public forums.
With the her 1941 return to the United States, Robeson continued her study 
of anthropology and embarked on a career as a public intellectual. In speeches and 
articles she attacked racism in the United States and European colonialism in the 
non-Western world. Working from a global perspective, she recognized the inter-
connections among the world’s nations. In the early 1940s she began to publish in 
black newspapers like the California Eagle, the New York Amsterdam News, and the 
Baltimore Afro-American, and was syndicated by the Associated Negro Press news 
service. She also wrote for left publications like The Daily Worker and New World 
Review and saw her articles reprinted in papers in England, India, and the Soviet 
Union. She began to give lectures about her travel in Africa in the early 1940s. In 
1947, for example, she went on a seventeen-city lecture tour that took her from 
her home in Connecticut to Massachusetts, New York, Ohio, Indiana, Arizona, 
and California. She spoke before audiences of librarians, teachers, women’s club 
members, social workers, church groups, high school and college students, mis-
sionaries, PTAs, and interracial groups. Whether she was discussing anticolonial 
movements in Africa, the politics of the cold war era, or race relations in the 
United States, a Pan-Africanist perspective informed her approach. Furthermore, 
she situated her comments within the anthropological frame of culture.
For Robeson, an anthropological perspective enabled social analysis that 
revealed and critiqued the logic that supported social inequality. She emphasized 
the context of human behavior and custom, particularly the practices and ideolo-
gies that kept black Americans subordinated to and segregated from white Ameri-
cans. In a lecture that she delivered on a number of occasions in the mid-1940s, 
Robeson outlined her definition of snthropology:
I like to think of Anthropology as the study of man and his behavior in relation 
to his fellow man, and to his changing environment. Thus it includes the study of 
primitive man under primitive conditions, of modern man under modern condi-
tions, of human relations, race relations, of education, of social institutions. Thus it 
includes the study of the migrations of man, of wars, of the Industrial Revolution. 
And it includes some religion, economics, sociology, science, politics, literature, 
music and art.
44
This “dynamic interpretation,” as she called it, allowed her to encompass the 
issues that interested her: the changing position of American women, the battle 
for African American civil rights, the situation of war refugees, juvenile delin-
quency, education, and the impact of the World War II on social life.
45 All of 
pal-mara-09.indd   125pal-mara-09.indd   125 7/25/08   1:31:20 PM7/25/08   1:31:20 PM


--- PAGE 135 ---
Transnational Blackness126
these matters, she explained, “definitely have to do with man’s attempt to adjust 
himself to his fellow man and his changing environment and so are clearly within 
the field of anthropology.”
46 For Robeson, anthropology went beyond British 
social anthropology’s study of “primitive sociology.” She saw anthropology as a 
means for understanding contemporary social organization and as a valuable tool 
for rebuilding ruptured social relations in the postwar era. “Maybe you think, 
as I once did,” she would tell her audiences, “that anthropology is a high-brow, 
intellectual, highly specialized subject, and therefore you are not interested in it. 
I thought I wasn’t interested in it. Now I can scarcely talk, think, live—without 
plunging smack into Anthropology.”
47 Robeson used anthropology to frame her 
presentation of information and, like Boasian anthropologists who were also pub-
lishing in the 1940s, to attack racism.
48
As Mrs. Paul Robeson, she was able to present her views to white audiences, 
an extraordinary situation for a black American woman in the post–World War 
II era. Robeson exhorted white Americans to think of African Americans as full 
American citizens and to recognize the responsibility the United States had on 
the world stage. In her estimation, the primary postwar issue was interracial and 
intercultural relations—that is, how people from different backgrounds and cul-
tures were going to get along in the world. Robeson stressed that if the United 
States was to become a truly democratic nation, whites would have to learn to 
coexist with nonwhites without depriving them of rights and opportunity. In 
speaking to black audiences, she noted that for black Americans to take their 
rightful place as American citizens, they would have to embrace their African 
heritage. She explained the reasons that this process was necessary:
The conditions under which we Negroes live in America have made us sensitive 
about Africa. Most of us feel somehow insulted if we are called African. . . . We 
do not want to look back to slavery, and therefore we do not look further back to 
Africa, fearing it might be even worse than slavery. I think it is now time for us, as 
a people, the Negro people, to look back; to find out about our background, our 
roots, our “old country.” No people have a future without a past. In the past there 
may be information and inspiration for the future. And when we look back now we 
can become very proud of our history and of our race.
49
Like anthropologists Franz Boas and Melville Herskovits whom she echoed here, 
Robeson described African accomplishments to counter the view—held by black 
and white Americans alike—that Africans were without culture.
50 She provided 
evidence of a tradition of African law, using the example of the Ashanti and Hausa 
legal codes and courts.
51 She noted that the Hausa had a publicly supported sys-
tem of policing long before Europeans did and explained that although “most 
people think of the so-called witch doctor and medicine-men as primitive igno-
rant men, playing upon the superstition of their people,” they in fact have “a 
considerable knowledge of materia medica, and treat diseases on purely scien-
tific principles.” She credited that Africans “were among the first people to raise 
pal-mara-09.indd   126pal-mara-09.indd   126 7/25/08   1:31:20 PM7/25/08   1:31:20 PM


--- PAGE 136 ---
Eslanda Goode Robeson’s African Journey 127
cattle and use their milk” and noted the influence West African masks and carved 
figures had on celebrated European artists like Picasso, Matisse, and Brancusi. 52 
She also indicated that Africans took what Euro-Americans might view as the 
“civilized” path before Europeans did so, citing Boas to make her case: “It seems 
likely that at a time when the European was still satisfied with crude stone tools, 
the African had invented the art of smelting iron. Neither ancient Europe nor 
ancient Western Asia, nor ancient China knew iron, and everything points to its 
introduction from Africa.”
53
While Boas and Herskovits recuperated Africa through a focus on the past, 
Robeson brought Africa into the present and attacked the common sense notion 
that “Africa is a long way away, and we as Americans haven’t really very much to 
do with Africa.”
54 Refusing the sharp distinction between “the field” and “home” 
that informed anthropological research of her era, Robeson showed that the west 
and the non-west were interdependent:
55
Every time you eat a chocolate bar, use soap, or ride in a car on rubber tires, you 
come into not-so-indirect contact with Africa and African labor, because most of 
the cocoa (chocolate), palm oil (soap) and a lot of the rubber come from West and 
Central Africa; a lot of the copper in your electrical wires, a lot of uranium for the 
atomic bomb, most of the gold come from Central and South Africa.
56
By focusing on contemporary African trade relations, Robeson identified the 
phenomena of globalization and transnational economic flows long before they 
became familiar academic concepts. She pointed out that the wealth that contrib-
uted, in the last four centuries, to the emergence of Western European nations 
and the United States as world powers was partly the result of extracting mate-
rial goods and human labor—notably slave labor—from Africa. Her critique of 
European exploitation of and dependence on Africa presages the argument that 
Walter Rodney explored in his seminal text on European colonialism in Africa.
57 
Robeson also dispelled Eurocentric myths about the colonization of Africa that 
painted Europeans as the bearers of civilization, countering the European colo-
nialists’ claim that their presence benefited the region. She argued that exploita-
tion, not development, was their motive, and stressed that Africans had resisted 
colonization “to the utmost of their ability.”
58 Similarly, in an effort to decenter 
European hegemony, she noted, “This really isn’t a White World at all. It is actu-
ally a predominantly Colored world with a White minority.”
59 With these obser-
vations, Robeson reframed debates about race relations and civil rights.
In the 1940s, few Americans of any race had traveled in Africa and there was 
a growing interest in the region. Robeson became known for her knowledge of 
Africa and her insight into race relations. This was also a time when public discus-
sion of African American civil rights was increasing. During the 1950s and early 
1960s, Robeson wrote and spoke about these issues and also covered the United 
Nations and the peace movement. Throughout, she called on the anthropologist’s 
trope of rendering the unusual understandable and worked from a Pan-Africanist 
commitment to African independence and African Diaspora interdependence.
pal-mara-09.indd   127pal-mara-09.indd   127 7/25/08   1:31:20 PM7/25/08   1:31:20 PM


--- PAGE 137 ---
Transnational Blackness128
Robeson’s work demonstrates the ways an African American public intellectual 
drew on a Pan-Africanist perspective and developed a politics of diasporic identi-
fication. The resulting practices of representation sought to reconfigure the public 
image of black people and contribute to their ideological and political liberation. 
Reflecting on her time in Africa, she observed, “Finding out about my new rela-
tions, about my African brothers and sisters, has been a thrilling and gratifying 
adventure. It answered vague questions and fulfilled vague yearnings which had 
faced me as a young American.”
60 This statement is a testament to the process 
of construction and the power of imagination that are a part of the formula-
tion of identities. In particular, it indicates the ways “Africa” could be collapsed 
and manipulated—as much an evocative idea as a physical place. Europeans may 
have “invented Africa,” but people of African descent living in the United States, 
the Caribbean, and Europe have also invented an Africa that is meaningful to 
their political and ideological projects.
61While rooted in the historical facts of 
common geographical roots and similar historical experiences, the views that sus-
tained early Pan-Africanists like Marcus Garvey and W . E. B. Du Bois and that 
inspire contemporary scholarly attention to the African Diaspora depend upon 
the elaboration of these imaginative constructions.
Sub-Saharan Africa, a region where blacks were the majority, has been a place 
that blacks who were marginalized in the West could imagine as a welcoming 
home. Although she did not frame her trip as “going back to Africa,” Robeson 
understood herself to be making a pilgrimage to her “old country.”
62 This was 
true even though she was traveling to South and East Africa, regions that were 
not involved in the transatlantic slave trade and to which black Americans do not 
have the ancestral connection that exists with West Africa. Nevertheless, because 
the areas she visited were part of black Africa and because they were subject to 
European rule, she felt a meaningful identification with the region. Her apparent 
delight in describing instances where she and her son were accepted as African is 
telling.
63 If she and Pauli had the experience of not being viewed as “really Afri-
can” that other black American travelers report, she does not mention them. This 
process illustrates the passionate and not wholly rational feelings that are part of 
diasporic identification. The desire to connect and a longing for home can trump 
clear cultural differences, historical ruptures, and, indeed, the lack of actual his-
torical connections. The motivations behind Eslanda and Paul’s trip to Africa 
exemplify the seductive contradictions of Diaspora: one can have an investment 
in a place where one does not literally belong and one can return to a home where 
one has never lived.
Unlike many of the Harlem Renaissance artists who embraced Africa, Robeson 
did not dwell on an African past. Nor did she seek African survivals as her con-
temporary Melville Herskovits did. These historical ties may have been of inter-
est to her, but for her purposes, the common present-day experiences of racism, 
exploitation, and marginalization were of greater significance. The Diaspora 
connections she formed and described to the reader were the consequence of 
her experiences of travel in the contemporary period and led her to emphasize 
pal-mara-09.indd   128pal-mara-09.indd   128 7/25/08   1:31:20 PM7/25/08   1:31:20 PM


--- PAGE 138 ---
Eslanda Goode Robeson’s African Journey 129
contemporaneity and modernity. Arguably, this focus was facilitated by the fact 
that, in her travels, many of the Africans she met were local elites and many 
had been educated in Europe. Beyond shared continental ancestry, similarity in 
status and education provided an immediate sense of connection. Robeson por-
trayed the less-privileged Africans she met as sympathetic figures who were sub-
jected to the whims of the white ruling class. Their economic situation was dire 
and she gave money to a number of the people she met. When discussing these 
encounters, she emphasized the dignity with which poor and working-class Afri-
cans accepted her donations; she did not, however, dwell on the class differences 
that so clearly separated her from them (and also from the working-class black 
Americans who could not afford to make their own African journeys).
64 Robeson 
negotiated the potentially treacherous differences in power and access through a 
stated and enacted political commitment to black unity and liberation that she 
hoped would bridge a vast gap.
Because Pan-Africanist activists confronted a context in which black people 
had not internalized a sense of connection across ethnic, religious, and cultural 
differences, a key part of their project was to produce a feeling of common cause 
among physically dispersed and culturally diverse people. In contrast to the Pan-
Africanist emphasis on unity, much contemporary African Diaspora scholarship 
makes attention to diversity within the diaspora a central theme. These contem-
porary scholars are interrogating the ways differences of ethnicity, gender, class, 
and nationality undermine often idealized claims about race-based commonality. 
It is dissimilarity and misunderstanding, they argue, that are central to and consti-
tutive of diaspora.
65 They remark on the coexistence of the desire for connections 
and the difficulties of achieving them, and their studies describe a condition of 
separation, displacement, dislocation, and movement.
Here the emphasis is on an analysis of the dialectics of similarity and differ-
ence, relations of connection and conflict, bridgeable and unbridgeable differ-
ences, gaps and translation, and varying degrees of power and powerlessness. In 
contrast, the Pan-Africanism of Robeson’s era grew out of a politics based on 
roots, unity, and cohesion as activists sought ways to heal what they considered 
a painful rupture and separation. Most surprising to earlier generations of Pan-
Africanists, perhaps, would be the fact that Africa is not at the center of contem-
porary African Diaspora scholarship; indeed, in some cases, it is marginal to, even 
absent from, the discussion.
66
The distinct but related projects of Pan-Africanism and African Diaspora stud-
ies reflect and contribute to debates about the formation of black identities glob-
ally and the forms of intellectual and political activity that shape and are shaped 
by these formations. Robeson’s work, like the work of contemporary Diaspora 
scholars, addresses the social, cultural, political, and intellectual project of cre-
ating ideological ties among Africans and people of African descent. Robeson’s 
visit to Africa was a transformative personal journey and a path into politicized 
practices of representation. By wanting “to go to Africa,” thinking in terms of 
Pan-Africanism, and seeking Diaspora connections, Robeson worked to effect the 
pal-mara-09.indd   129pal-mara-09.indd   129 7/25/08   1:31:20 PM7/25/08   1:31:20 PM


--- PAGE 139 ---
Transnational Blackness130
political and ideological changes that would promote greater equality for citizens 
of “the colored world.”
Notes
 1. Eslanda G. Robeson, African Journey (New York: John Day Company, 1945), 13.
 2. For biographical information used throughout the article, I have drawn from materials in 
Eslanda Robeson’s Biographical Sketches File, Personal Papers Box; Eslanda G. Robeson 
Papers in the Paul and Eslanda Robeson Collection, Moorland-Spingarn Research Center, 
Howard University, Washington, DC; Pearl S. Buck and Eslanda Goode Robeson, An 
American Argument (New York: John Day Company, 1949); Martin Bauml Duberman, 
Paul Robeson (London: Pan Books, 1989); and Paul Robeson, Jr., The Undiscovered Paul 
Robeson: An Artist’s Journey, 1898–1939 (New York: John Wiley & Sons, 2001).
 3. For example, see multiple authors, “T ribute to Eslanda Robeson,” Freedomways 6, no. 
4 (1966): 327–57; Faye V . Harrison and Ira E. Harrison, “Introduction: Anthropology, 
African Americans, and the Emancipation of a Subjugated Knowledge,” in African-Amer-
ican Pioneers in Anthropology, ed. I. E. Harrison and F . V . Harrison (Urbana: University of 
Illinois Press. 1999); Barbara Ransby, “Eslanda Goode Robeson, Pan-Africanist,” Sage 3, 
no. 2 (1986): 22–26; and Robert Shaffer, “Out of the Shadows: The Political Writings of 
Eslanda Goode Robeson,” in Paul Robeson: Essays on His Life and Legacy, ed. J. Dorinson 
and W . Pencak (Jefferson, NC: McFarland & Co. 2002). Shaffer provides a concise over-
view of Robeson’s writings and career as journalist and lecturer.
 4. Examples include Jacqueline Nassy Brown, Dropping Anchor, Setting Sail: Geographies of 
Race in Black Liverpool (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 2005); Tina Campt, 
Black Germans and the Politics of Race, Gender, and Memory in the Third Reich (Ann Arbor: 
University of Michigan Press, 2004); Kamari Clarke, Mapping Yoruba Networks: Power 
and Agency in the Making of Transnational Communities (Durham, NC: Duke University 
Press, 2004); St. Clair Drake, Black Folk Here and There: An Essay in History and Anthro-
pology (Los Angeles: Center for Afro-American Studies, UCLA, 1987); Brent Hayes 
Edwards, The Practice of Diaspora: Literature, Translation, and the Rise of Black Internation-
alism (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2003); Paul Gilroy, The Black Atlantic: 
Modernity and Double Consciousness (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1993); 
Faye V . Harrison, “Introduction: An African Diaspora Perspective for Urban Anthropol-
ogy,” Urban Anthropology 17, no. 2–3 (1988): 111–41; and Sidney J. Lemelle and Robin 
D. G. K
elley, eds., Imagining Home: Class, Culture, and Nationalism in the African Diaspora 
(London: Verso, 1994).
 5. For discussions of the impact of Pan-Africanism on black scholars and activists in the 
United States, see St. Clair Drake, “Diaspora Studies and Pan-Africanism,” in Global 
Dimensions of the African Diaspora, Second Edition, ed. J. E. Harris (Washington, DC: 
Howard University Press); Brent Hayes Edwards, “The Uses of Diaspora,” Social T ext 66, 
no. 1 (2001): 45–73; Joseph E. Harris, ed., Global Dimensions of the African Diaspora, 2nd 
ed. (Washington, DC: Howard University Press, 1993); Sidney Lemelle and Robin D. 
G. Kelley, “Imagining Home: Class, Culture, and Nationalism in the African Diaspora” 
(New York: Verso, 1994); Elliott P . Skinner, “Afro-Americans in Search of Africa: The 
Scholars’ Dilemma,” in Transformation and Resiliency in Africa As Seen by Afro-American 
Scholars, ed. P . T . Robinson and E. P . Skinner (Washington, DC: Howard University Press, 
1983); and Penny M. Von Eschen, Race Against Empire: Black Americans and Anticolonial-
ism, 1937–1957 (Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 1997).
pal-mara-09.indd   130pal-mara-09.indd   130 7/25/08   1:31:20 PM7/25/08   1:31:20 PM


--- PAGE 140 ---
Eslanda Goode Robeson’s African Journey 131
 6. Harrison and Harrison, “Anthropology, African Americans,” 12; cf. St. Clair Drake, 
“Anthropology and the Black Experience,” The Black Scholar (September–October 1980): 
2, 10; Skinner, “Afro-Americans in Search of Africa,” 6.
 7. Mildred C. Ludecke to Eslanda Robeson, February 15, 1946, Eslanda Robeson Corre-
spondence File, Eslanda G. Robeson Papers, Paul and Eslanda Robeson Collection.
 8. Duberman, Paul Robeson, 293.
 9. Hollis R. Lynch, Black American Radicals and the Liberation of Africa: The Council on 
African Affairs, 1937–1955 (Ithaca, NY: Africana Studies and Research Center, Cornell 
University, 1978), 19.
 10. Eslanda G. Robeson, What Do the People of Africa Want? (New York: Council on African 
Affairs, 1945); Lynch, Black American Radicals, 29, 34.
 11. E. G. Robeson, African Journey, 13.
 12. P . Robeson, Jr., The Undiscovered, 47.
 13. Buck and Robeson, American Argument, 15.
 14. P . Robeson, The Undiscovered, 47.
 15. E. G. Robeson, “Black Paris,” Challenge: A Literary Quarterly 1, no. 4 (1936): 12–18, and 
“Black Paris, II,” Challenge: A Literary Quarterly 1, no. 5 (1936): 9–12.
 16. E. G. Robeson to Carl and Fania Van Vechten, April 5, 1934, Carl Van Vechten Col-
lection: Box Rj-Rz, Folder 1934–39. Yale Collection of American Literature, Beinecke 
Rare Book and Manuscript Library, Yale University, New Haven, CT . 116 Souls Summer 
2006
 17. Adam Kuper, Anthropology and Anthropologists: The Modern British School, 3rd ed. (Lon-
don: Routledge, 1996). In addition to training a generation of anthropologists, Mal-
inowski taught African Diaspora leaders like Ralph Bunche, who became a civil rights 
activist and Nobel Prize winner, and Jomo Kenyatta, who became the first prime minister 
of independent Kenya.
 18. Talal Asad, ed., Anthropology and the Colonial E ncounter (London: Ithaca Press, 1973).
 
19. E. G. Robeson, African Journey, 14.
 20. Ibid., 15.
 21. Ibid.
 22. Ibid., 16.
 23. James Clifford, “On Ethnographic Authority,” in The Predicament of Culture: Twentieth-
Century Ethnography, Literature, and Art  (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 
1988).
 24. James Clifford, “On Ethnographic Authority,” 15.
 25. Ibid., 15.
 26. Zora Neale Hurston to Eslanda Robeson, April 18, 1934, Eslanda Robeson Correspon-
dence File, Eslanda G. Robeson Papers, Paul and Eslanda Robeson Collection.
 27. Zora Neale Hurston, Mules and Men  (New York: Perennial Library, 1978).
 28. For example, Harrison and Harrison, “Anthropology, African Americans,” 23–25; Faye V . 
Harrison, “Black Women Putting Anthropology into Action from Corporate Academia 
to the United Nations: The Unexpected Consequences and Unfulfilled Expectations of a 
Reclamation Project.” Paper presented at the Annual Meeting of the American Anthropo-
logical Association, 2002.
 29. Apartheid became official South African policy in 1948, but the country was highly seg-
regated at the time of Robeson’s visit in 1936.
 30. E. G. Robeson, African Journey, 65.
 31. Ibid., 47–48.
 32. For details about the filming, see Duberman, Paul Robeson, 178–82.
pal-mara-09.indd   131pal-mara-09.indd   131 7/25/08   1:31:21 PM7/25/08   1:31:21 PM


--- PAGE 141 ---
Transnational Blackness132
 33. For discussion and critique of these tropes of the other in anthropology, see James Clif-
ford and George E. Marcus, eds., Writing Culture: The Poetics and Politics of Ethnography 
(Berkeley: University of California Press, 1986); Johannes Fabian, Time and the Other: 
How Anthropology Makes Its Object (New York: Columbia University Press, 1983); Renato 
Rosaldo, Culture and Truth: The Remaking of Social Analysis (Boston: Beacon, 1993); and 
Mariana T orgovnick, Gone Primitive: Savage Intellects, Modern Lives (Chicago: University 
of Chicago Press, 1990).
 34. For examples, see Asad, Colonial Encounter; Clifford, “Ethnographic Authority”; Fabian, 
Time and the Other; Akhil Gupta and James Ferguson, “Discipline and Practice: ‘The 
Field’ as Site, Method, and Location in Anthropology,” in Anthropological Locations: 
Boundaries and Grounds of a Field Science, ed. A. Gupta and J. Ferguson (Berkeley: Univer-
sity of California Press, 1997); George E. Marcus and Michael M. J. Fischer, Anthropology 
as Cultural Critique: An Experimental Moment in the Human Sciences (Chicago: University 
of Chicago Press, 1986), and Rosaldo, Culture and Truth.
 35. Lila Abu-Lughod, Writing Women’s Worlds (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1993), 
12–13.
 36. Ibid., 7, 10–11.
 37. Ibid., 7; cf. Rosaldo, Culture and Truth, 201.
 38. E. G. Robeson, African Journey, 103.
 39. Ibid., 93.
 40. Deborah Poole, Vision, Race, and Modernity: A Visual Economy of the Andean Image World 
(Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1997), 15.
 41. Ibid., 17.
 42. E. G. Robeson, African Journey, 154, emphasis original.
 43. Ibid., 109.
 44. E. G. Robeson, What do the People of Africa Want, 15, emphasis original. What Do the
  
People of Africa Want? (New York: Council on African Affairs, 1945).
 45. Typescripts of these lectures with places and dates of lectures in Eslanda G. Robeson 
Papers: Box 12. Paul and Eslanda Robeson Collection.
 46. E. G. Robeson, “Inter-cultural and Inter-racial Relations,” April 7, 1944, 9. Typescript, 
Eslanda G. Robeson Papers: Box 10. Paul and Eslanda Robeson Collection.
 47. Ibid.
 48. Ibid., 9–10.
 49. Ibid., 1.
 50. Some representative examples include Ruth Benedict and Gene Weltfish, The Races of 
Mankind. Public Affairs Pamphlet 85 (New York: Public Affairs Committee, 1943); Mel-
ville J. Herskovits, The Myth of the Negro Past (1941; repr. Boston: Beacon, 1990); and M. 
F . Ashley Montagu, Man’s Most Dangerous Myth: The Fallacy of Race (New York: Columbia 
University Press, 1942). For an analysis of the role American anthropologists played in the 
construction and deconstruction of the concept of race, see Lee D. Baker, From  Savage 
to Negro: Anthropology and the Construction of Race, 1896–1954 (Berkeley: University of 
California Press, 1998).
 51. E. G. Robeson, “A Negro Looks at Africa,” Asia and the Americas November (1944): 
501.
 52. Franz Boas, “The Outlook for the American Negro,” in A Franz Boas Reader: The Shaping 
of American Anthropology, 1883–1911, ed. G. W . Stocking, Jr. (Chicago: University of 
Chicago Press, 1989); and Herskovits, Myth of the Negro Past.
 53. E. G. Robeson, “A Negro Looks at Africa,” 501.
 54. Ibid., 502.
pal-mara-09.indd   132pal-mara-09.indd   132 7/25/08   1:31:21 PM7/25/08   1:31:21 PM


--- PAGE 142 ---
Eslanda Goode Robeson’s African Journey 133
 55. Ibid. Boas made these comments in a speech delivered to the 1906 graduating class of 
Atlanta University at the invitation of W . E. B. Du Bois; Boas, “The Outlook,” 311.
 56. E. G. Robeson, “Africa: Its Cultural Heritage and Present Problems,” 1949, 10. Type-
script, Eslanda G. Robeson Papers: Box 12. Paul and Eslanda Robeson Collection.
 57. Gupta and Ferguson, “Discipline and Practice,” 12–15.
 58. E. G. Robeson, “Africa: Its Cultural Heritage,” 10.
 59. Walter Rodney, How Europe Underdeveloped Africa (Washington, DC: Howard University 
Press, 1974).
 60. E. G. Robeson, “The Negro Pattern of World Affairs,” 1947, 22–23, Typescript, Eslanda 
G. Robeson Papers: Box 12. Paul and Eslanda Robeson Collection.
 61. E. G. Robeson, “Race Relations Lecture,” 1944, 12. Typescript, Eslanda G. Robeson 
Papers: Box 10. Paul and Eslanda Robeson Collection.
 62. E. G. Robeson, “A Negro Looks at Africa,” 501.
 63. V . Y. Mudimbe, The Invention of Africa: Gnosis, Philosophy, and the Order of Knowledge  
(Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1988).
 64. E. G. Robeson, African Journey, 13.
 65. Ibid., 133.
 66. See, for example, discussions in Brown, Dropping Anchor; Campt, Black Germans; and 
Edwards, Practice of Diaspora.
pal-mara-09.indd   133pal-mara-09.indd   133 7/25/08   1:31:21 PM7/25/08   1:31:21 PM


--- PAGE 143 ---
This page intentionally left blank


--- PAGE 144 ---
C HAPTER  10
Du Bois’s Double 
Consciousness versus 
Latin American 
Exceptionalism
Joe Arroyo, Salsa, and 
Négritude
Mark Q. Sawyer
It has been tempting for observers to use W . E. B. Du Bois’s ideas 
of double consciousness to contrast U.S. race relations with those in Brazil and 
Cuba. In those cases, Du Bois’s theory becomes a paradigmatic representation of 
the inability of the United States to accept U.S. blacks’ basic humanity, while the 
obvious patriotism of blacks in places like Cuba and Brazil becomes a clear sign 
that racial politics there differ in important ways that contradict Du Bois’s propo-
sition (Glasco, 1992). However, I will contend in this essay that both the posi-
tions of blacks in Latin America and the United States are more nuanced both on 
the ground and as they relate to Du Bois’s theory of consciousness than most read-
ings would allow. By not applying Du Bois to racial politics in Latin America we 
obscure the struggles of Afro-Latinos for political, cultural, social, and economic 
equality and misread the legacy of black U.S. politics. I propose that the elegance 
of the construction of double consciousness is capable of capturing the differing 
dimensions of inclusion and exclusion in Latin America and the United States. 
By invoking Du Bois’s double consciousness in relation to Latin American racial 
politics, we are able to reconnect Latin America to the African Diaspora and build 
a bridge for critical engagement of black politics in Latin America. Consequently, 
pal-mara-10.indd   135pal-mara-10.indd   135 7/29/08   9:42:16 AM7/29/08   9:42:16 AM


--- PAGE 145 ---
Transnational Blackness136
I also argue that denying the existence of double consciousness in Latin America 
obscures the struggles of African descended people in Latin America and leaves 
little possibility for understanding assertions of black identity and challenges to 
racial oppression and inequality.
While this chapter is motivated by a substantive interest in racial politics in 
Latin America, I hope to equally provide a framework to consider comparative 
racial politics and theoretical issues of comparison more broadly. I argue that 
one can apply what political scientists David Collier and James Mahon, Jr., call 
a “radial category” to understand racial politics comparatively. There are a set 
of core concepts that define racial inequality—especially antiblack racism. These 
core concepts are: a history of oppression and unequal incorporation in social, 
political, and economic life of the nation; a negative and limiting set of stereotypes 
that operate to define the group; formal legal and informal barriers to achieve-
ment; and an ideology that justifies the domination and oppression of the group. 
As Collier notes, radial categories have a set of core attributes to identify cases 
but are frequently delineated by the combination through which these concepts 
appear in any given case.
1 This paper argues that scholars have foreclosed oppor-
tunities for comparison by not understanding that racial inequality is a radial 
category that has several elements. These scholars discard opportunities for com-
parison by not engaging these core concepts. Thus, the absence of one part of the 
core concepts causes them to prematurely reject the category altogether. Further, 
Du Bois’s theoretical conception of double consciousness defines a key idea in the 
antiracist struggle that crosses national boundaries. Thus, double consciousness 
applies not only to the U.S. context but also to the situation of African descended 
peoples in Latin America.
Blacks in Latin America are patriotic and a critical part of the national symbol.
2 
At the same time, they have historically had unequal access to social, political and 
economic power. It is this duality that developed in a growing literature on race 
and Latin America and that can be described as “inclusionary discrimination.”
3 
Hanchard describes this when he explains, “African elements of Brazilian culture 
were selectively integrated into the discourses of national identity. With the ascen-
dance of the ideologies of racial democracy and whitening, Afro-Brazilians came 
to be considered part of the cultural economy, in which their women and men 
embodied sexual desire and lascivious pleasure. At the same time, Afro-Brazilians 
were denied access to virtually all institutions of civil society that would have 
given them equal footing with the middle classes of modernizing Brazil.”
4 While 
Hanchard is writing specifically about Brazil, similar processes occurred through-
out Latin America. Despite miscegenation and a lack of formal segregation, a 
growing literature has pointed to manifestations of racial inequality in a variety 
of social structures in Latin America. However, it remains to be seen whether it is 
possible for comparisons to be drawn with the United States by using Du Bois’s 
construction of double consciousness as a pivot point.
Du Bois defined double consciousness with this statement:
pal-mara-10.indd   136pal-mara-10.indd   136 7/29/08   9:42:16 AM7/29/08   9:42:16 AM


--- PAGE 146 ---
Du Bois’s Double Consciousness 137
After the Egyptian and Indian, the Greek and Roman, the T euton and Mongolian, 
the Negro is a sort of seventh son, born with a veil, and gifted with second-sight 
in this American world . . . a world which yields him no true self-consciousness, 
but only lets him see himself through the revelation of the other world. It is a 
peculiar sensation, this double-consciousness, this sense of always looking at one’s 
self though the eyes of others, of measuring one’s soul by the tape of a world that 
looks on in amused contempt and pity. One ever feels this twoness,—an American, 
a Negro; two souls, two thoughts, two unreconciled strivings; two warring ideals in 
one dark body, who dogged strength alone keeps it from being torn asunder.
5
Du Bois, through the notion of double consciousness, grounded the struggle 
over the politics of representation and the unequal incorporation of blacks in the 
national project as well as in world systems. Yet Du Bois was not a separatist and 
saw room for a political system that recognized the specificity of the black experi-
ence while challenging, from a black perspective, injustice in national and world 
systems. The struggle over culture in Du Bois’s theory is paramount and can be 
seen in his concern for black culture and organizations. As Manning Marable 
notes, “he also fully identified with the cultures, heritage, and political resistance 
of people of color throughout the Third World, particularly in the Caribbean and 
sub-Saharan Africa. His academic research focused largely on the cultural and 
political role of Africa in world civilization.”
6
Thus Du Bois’s concept of double consciousness was in its inception an inter-
national construct that challenged the politics of representation. Representation 
was not confined to a brute political, but was also invoked in order to question 
the unequal inclusion of blacks, first as slaves or colonial subjects and later as sub-
jects without basic human rights or the ability for social mobility or development. 
These ideas were applied to Latin America. Du Bois wrote specifically about Latin 
America and challenged the myth of racial democracy and miscegenation as the 
road to racial paradise in his work:
We cannot allow the West Indies and Central America to be made deliberate slums 
for the profit and vacation activities of the whites. In South America we have long 
pretended to see a possible solution in the gradual amalgamation of whites, Indians 
and Blacks. But this amalgamation does not envisage any decrease of power and 
prestige among whites as compared with Indians, Negroes, and mixed bloods; but 
rather an inclusion within the so called white group of a considerable infiltration of 
dark blood, while at the same time maintaining the social bar, economic exploita-
tion and political disfranchisement of dark blood as such. We have thus the specta-
cle of Santo Domingo, Cuba, Puerto Rico and even Jamaica trying desperately and 
doggedly to be “white” in spite of the fact that the majority of the white group is of 
Negro or Indian descent. And despite facts, no Brazilian nor Venezuelan dare boast 
of his Black fathers. Thus, racial amalgamation in Latin-America does not always or 
even usually carry with it social uplift and planned effort to raise the mulatto and 
mestizos to freedom in a democratic polity.
7
However, the challenge to Du Bois’s ideas derive from a growing literature that, 
while acknowledging racial inequality in Latin America, seeks to challenge race 
pal-mara-10.indd   137pal-mara-10.indd   137 7/29/08   9:42:16 AM7/29/08   9:42:16 AM


--- PAGE 147 ---
Transnational Blackness138
as a frame for understanding social inequality there and discounts the use of race 
as a potential frame for social movements. The literature takes the lack of for-
mal segregation to extend the idea that there are few similarities or possibilities 
for comparison between the United States and Latin America. Theoretically, the 
United States is used as paradigmatic of racial oppression, and Du Bois is used as 
the predominate intellectual voice of a specifically black American perspective.
By localizing Du Bois to the United States, the ability to compare and draw 
parallels with the United States and construct diasporic politics is attacked. As 
philosopher Anthony Bogues explains, the struggle of blacks has consistently been 
to construct a tradition that is recognized for its broadness and depth. However, 
he notes more often than not, “At best this tradition continues to be viewed as 
particularistic, mired in fossilized, irrational conceptions and myths not worthy 
of serious study.”
8 Leaders in this literature include Laurence Glasco, Peter Fry, 
Alejandro de la Fuente, Pierre Bourdieu, and Loïc Wacquant. At issue has been 
the work of Michael Hanchard. His study of the Movmiento Negro Unificado 
(Unified Black Movement) in Brazil has been the center of a growing contro-
versy about the study of race in Latin America. Peter Fry, Pierre Bourdieu, and 
Loïc Wacquant have attacked Hanchard’s work as imposing an African American 
racial perspective on the politics of Brazil: “Instead of dissecting the constitution 
of the Brazilian ethnoracial order according to its own logic, such inquiries are 
most often content to replace wholesale the national myth of ‘racial democracy’ 
(as expressed for instance in the works of Gilberto Freire, e.g., 1978) by the myth 
according to which all societies are ‘racist,’ including those within which ‘race’ 
relations seem at first sight to be less distant and hostile.”
9
Bourdieu and Wacquant (1999) go on to attack the work of philanthropic 
organizations and other Non-Governmental Organizations (NGOs) that, they 
argue, have imposed an African American perspective on racial politics in Bra-
zil. Specifically they say that U.S. foundations have wrongly forced affirmative 
action upon Brazil. Further, they argue that the modes and paradigms of U.S. 
racial politics and resistance stemming from the civil rights movement are being 
imposed on Brazilians and other blacks in Latin America by U.S. researchers and 
foundations. In his article, “Race, National Discourse, and Politics in Cuba: An 
Overview,” Alejandro de la Fuente (1998) also expresses concern over the work of 
Aline Helg and Vera Kutzinski that follows a similar path to the work of Michael 
Hanchard. De la Fuente writes,
Recent scholarship has stressed, however, that this foundational discourse, fre-
quently referred to as “the myth of racial equality,” was an ideological construc-
tion of the elite that masked the objective structural subordination of Afro-Cubans 
in society. These researchers recognize that, once established and accepted, these 
myths become, as Viotti da Costa (1985: 235) puts it, an integral part of social 
reality, but they tend to see their effects in only one direction: That of the subordi-
nation and demobilization of Blacks. This is an interpretation that minimizes the 
capacity of subordinate groups to appropriate these Inclusionary ideologies and use 
them to their advantage.
10
pal-mara-10.indd   138pal-mara-10.indd   138 7/29/08   9:42:16 AM7/29/08   9:42:16 AM


--- PAGE 148 ---
Du Bois’s Double Consciousness 139
While Hanchard, Helg, and Kutzinski use a Gramscian model to discuss the 
struggle to overcome the myth of racial democracy, a philosophy that denies 
the existence of racism, de la Fuente sees that myth not as a constraint for black 
activism but as a discourse that prevented further discrimination and allowed 
blacks to be incorporated into the national project. De la Fuente questions the 
emphasis on constraint and suggests that black movements for racial equality 
in Latin America are not necessary because of the ability of existing discourses 
and institutions to accommodate black concerns. While recognizing some racial 
oppression, these authors emphasize difference from the United States and in 
so doing attack the idea of race as a principle category for analysis or political 
struggle in Latin America.
11
However, while de la Fuente has emphasized the inclusiveness of Latin Amer-
ican nations, historian Laurence Glasco (1992) has specifically taken up the issue 
of Du Bois. In his essay entitled “National Versus Racial Identity: Juan Gual-
berto Gomez of Cuba and W . E. B. Du Bois of the United States” he attempts to 
draw a contrast between the Cuban independence figure Juan Gualberto Gomez 
and Du Bois. Glasco asserts that, despite the challenging racial exclusion and 
sad realities of his day, he can still draw a contrast between Du Bois and Gomez 
and, in so doing, contrast the racial situations in Cuba and the United States. 
However, Gomez’s sense of black organizations was similar to that of Du Bois: 
“Gomez also founded two race-oriented newspapers in Cuba. La Fraternidad 
(Fraternity) and La Igualidad (Equality). Through their pages he helped to con-
vince Black Cubans that the struggle for independence was intimately linked 
with that for abolition and Black advancement. He also worked to unite the 
island’s colored societies, establishing the first Central Directory of the Societies 
of the Colored Race in order to protest discrimination and support the indepen-
dence struggle.”
12 Du Bois had a similar record. He helped found The Crisis and 
the NAACP , and he supported American national causes both for patriotic rea-
sons and as instrumental avenues toward full citizenship for blacks. Similarly, in 
1918, Du Bois wrote a call to African Americans to close ranks behind the U.S. 
war effort in World War I: “Let us, while this war lasts, forget our special griev-
ances and close ranks with our own fellow white citizens and the allied nations 
that are fighting for democracy. We make no ordinary sacrifice, but we make it 
gladly and willingly with our eyes lifted to the hills.”
13 His statement is directly 
parallel to Gomez’s call. Thus, Glasco selectively reads the record or ignores these 
parallels in order to construct a difference between the United States and Cuba.
Glasco’s exploration of Du Bois becomes a pivot to argue that race relations 
in Cuba were far gentler and did not require racial identification or organization 
among blacks. Like Bourdieu and Wacquant, he argues that any suggestion of 
comparison or similarity with the United States smacks of Black Nationalism 
and imposes an improper frame on Latin American racial politics. These authors 
also suggest that slavery in Cuba and Brazil were kinder and gentler than U.S. 
slavery. This is a topic de la Fuente takes up directly in his paper entitled, “Slave 
Law and Claims-Making in Cuba: The Tannenbaum Debate Revisited.” De la 
Fuente concludes that “one need not romanticize the experience of slavery in the 
pal-mara-10.indd   139pal-mara-10.indd   139 7/29/08   9:42:16 AM7/29/08   9:42:16 AM


--- PAGE 149 ---
Transnational Blackness140
Spanish colonies to realize that under Spanish law slaves, depending on their loca-
tion in the productive structure and the specific phase of development of the slave 
system, were able to claim some rights and to create some avenues for advance-
ment” (2003). Similarly in the postslavery era, Glasco comes to the conclusion 
that “Cuba was a country that discriminated, but whites were more accepting of 
blacks.”
14 In drawing this conclusion, Glasco obscures points in his own narra-
tive where Gomez himself employs what Du Bois describes as “second sight” to 
establish a critical position on the development of the Cuban national project. 
Glasco fails to understand that double consciousness does not imply separatism, 
but an uneven pattern of inclusion and exclusion that allow African Americans to 
complicate their relationship with the national project. Glasco ignores Du Bois’s 
radical integrationism in Souls of Black Folk where he wrote:
He would not Africanize America, for America has too much to teach the world and 
Africa. He would not bleach his Negro soul in a flood of white Americanism, for he 
knows that Negro blood has a message for the world. He simply wished to make it 
possible for a man to be both a Negro and an American, without being cursed and 
spit upon by his fellows, without having the doors of opportunity closed roughly 
in his face. This, then, is the end of his striving: to be a co-worker in the kingdom 
of culture, to escape both death and isolation, to husband and use his best powers 
and his latent genius.
It is exactly this form of complication that Gomez expresses and that also 
appears in the work of Nicolas Guillen. On black Cuban poet Nicolas Guillen, 
Glasco notes, “[he] explicitly rejected what he termed the North American ‘road 
to Harlem’, that of racial separation.”
15 While Guillen is known for his admira-
tion for mestizaje (or celebrating the harmonious mixed nature of the Cuban 
nation), his body of work and those of his contemporaries in the United States are 
far more complex. On one hand Glasco fails to understand that, for blacks in the 
United States during Du Bois’s life, segregation was imposed and was not a choice. 
On the other hand, Glasco fails to note Guillen’s stated admiration for Harlem 
Renaissance poet Langston Hughes and his profound respect for his ability to 
capture a certain image of blacks in the Diaspora. In fact, one of Guillen’s poems, 
“The Ballad of My T wo Grandfathers,” shatters the myth of a single undifferenti-
ated Cuba by emphasizing the specificity of the Afro-Cuban experience within 
the development of the Cuban nation. Guillen’s words in the poem challenge 
notions of relativism and the harmonious incorporation of blacks into the Cuban 
national identity. Glasco fails to recognize the radical integrationist project within 
Du Bois’ ideas. In short, for Glasco the predominant African American politi-
cal stance is one of Black Nationalism and the Cuban stance is one of integra-
tionism. This stands as an oversimplification of the politics of each group, both 
of which have pursued mixed strategies of integration and separation to achieve 
equality. This set of mixed strategies form a set of core concepts of black politi-
cal organization and black ideology. Further, as previously noted, Glasco ignores 
Du Bois’s call for African Americans to support U.S. intervention in World War I 
as a bridge to greater citizenship. Du Bois’s call was for the exact same reasons that 
pal-mara-10.indd   140pal-mara-10.indd   140 7/29/08   9:42:16 AM7/29/08   9:42:16 AM


--- PAGE 150 ---
Du Bois’s Double Consciousness 141
Gomez supported black participation in the Cuban independence movement—it 
sought to advance citizenship claims through service to the nation in the military 
(see Christopher Parker, Helg, etc.). So what is gained by challenging the stark 
boundary posed by Glasco?
By emphasizing this day-to-day struggle over representation, we can draw criti-
cal similarities and differences between U.S. and Latin American racial politics. 
Du Bois offers a bridge to understanding the challenge of achieving recogni-
tion and overcoming oppression that faces subalterns. While the previous “elite” 
expressions of “double consciousness are clear, it is important that we also turn to 
everyday expressions. The struggle envisioned by Du Bois manifests itself in the 
contested terrain of popular culture and, more specifically, in popular music. It 
is in the genre of salsa music that, in the cases of Latin America and the United 
States, inclusion versus exclusion is not the central pivot of struggle but rather the 
struggle is over defining the terms of inclusion. Thus Afro-Latinos have strategi-
cally asserted black identity and the specificity of the black experience to critique 
racial and other forms of inequality in Latin American societies.
It is important to first establish the intellectual project of Du Bois and the 
similarity of his ideas with those of another important thinker from the African 
Diaspora, C. L. R. James. Each of their work seeks to disrupt accounts of national 
projects and the experience of racialized individuals by powerfully writing their 
experiences into the national project in a way that affirms both their humanity 
and their struggle. As Bogues (2003) notes, James and Du Bois sought to vindi-
cate blackness by overcoming the erasure of black experiences in the writing of 
Western history and philosophy. He writes:
What C.L.R. James and W .E.B. Du Bois did in their books The Black Jacobins 
(1938) and Black Reconstruction (1935) was to place squarely before us historical 
knowledge about two major events that reorder the narrative structures of Western 
radical history. Their projects created seismic shifts in twentieth-century radical 
historiography. One major development in twentieth-century historiography is the 
ways in which social theory became an integral part of historical understanding. . . . 
Both James and Du Bois were rewriting history from a stance in which experiences 
were not captures—or, if they were, they had been captured from a standpoint that 
the Black subject was a savage or, in the case of the Reconstruction, that Black male 
political equality led to the most corrupt and morally bankrupt state regimes in 
American history.
16
Rewriting history also has its place in the contested terrain of popular culture 
in Latin America where these struggles can be witnessed. T urning specifically to 
salsa we can view the struggle over representations of blackness in history as it 
occurs in everyday cultural forms in Latin America. Thus, salsa music reflects 
the battle over representation described by Du Bois in his construction of 
double consciousness.
The salsa genre is one of the popular musical forms throughout Latin Amer-
ica. It is a form that was created out of an urban experience of Latinos (mostly 
Puerto Ricans) in New York but is based heavily on Afro-Cuban rhythms. It has 
pal-mara-10.indd   141pal-mara-10.indd   141 7/29/08   9:42:16 AM7/29/08   9:42:16 AM


--- PAGE 151 ---
Transnational Blackness142
become a Pan-Latin American musical genre connecting music with dance. The 
salsa movement, while connected to national projects, is also a part of a broader 
construction of Latin identity or Latinidad. That is, salsa music is simultane-
ously national and international in its formulation. There are differences of degree 
between Colombian salsa, Cuban salsa, and Puerto Rican salsa that sophisticated 
listeners can discern as well as different variations of salsa dancing connected to 
these subgenres. However, one thing that is ubiquitous within salsa music is the 
presence of El Negro, La Negra, or La Mulata. Salsa music, in its appropriation 
of African rhythms and fusion of more Western melodic structures, is frequently 
lauded as a living example of the tropical fusion of cultures. Salsa music is often 
posed as a manifestation of racial democracy because of its rhythms and themes 
of blackness within the lyrics. However, if we examine the role blacks have played 
in salsa music specifically and Latin music more generally, we find a series of 
problematic stereotypes.
The role these figures play in salsa music is most frequently as either sensual or 
playful icons. In this case, salsa music is not different from Latin musical genres 
that were its precursors (Moore 1997; Kutzinski 1993). In fact, there is a domi-
nant focus on the black or mulatto female body (especially their hips and legs) 
that move to the music. Frances Aparicio argues that the focus on the black female 
body in the music obscures the existence of racial oppression. She writes:
What is ironic in this synecdochal erasure is that it is precisely the Black woman’s 
hips, her pelvis, and her genitalia, her vagina, that have been subjected historically 
to racism through rape and sexual violence. This displacement, then, is one of signi-
fieds: by trivializing her hips only [sic] as a rhythmical and musical pleasurable entity, 
then Caribbean patriarchy can erase from the body of the mulata any traces of vio-
lence and racist practices for which it has been responsible throughout history.
17
Salsa songs construct black bodies as objects of play and desire available for 
consumption. This consumption via the act of sexual intercourse and marked 
by the climax is frequently expressed using metaphors of food. The expression, 
“Ay que rico” in reference to black bodies and the moment of climax is common. 
Aparicio emphasizes that salsa music is a patriarchal form, but when it comes to 
this form of objectification the bodies of black men and women are cast in quite 
similar terms. In a related genre, merengue, the phenotypically white and blond 
Puerto Rican singer Giselle, in a song where she challenges her mother’s scorn for 
her black lover, emphasizes that the source of her desire is, “Por que el tiene sabor 
el negro” (Because he has flavor, the black man). The reference to flavor again 
objectifies blackness and places the black male body, in this case, in a place of 
play, desire, and availability for consumption. These representations of blackness 
are frequently perceived to be positive and are used by black and white musicians 
alike. The presence of blackness is ubiquitous but can also be contested. Just as 
problematic representations of blackness in the American context are challenged 
by activists, academics, and popular culture figures, there are analogous challenges 
within the genre of salsa that cannot be read as impositions from African Ameri-
can forms of music, like soul or rap. Even in Du Bois’s work on “Sorrow Songs” he 
pal-mara-10.indd   142pal-mara-10.indd   142 7/29/08   9:42:16 AM7/29/08   9:42:16 AM


--- PAGE 152 ---
Du Bois’s Double Consciousness 143
highlights a similar politics of cultural production and its relationship to “authen-
tic” representations of blacks in the United States.
Afro-Colombian salsa singer Joe Arroyo—like Du Bois and even more similar 
to James—attempts to rewrite the history of Colombian racial politics by recast-
ing the image of La Negra in his song “Rebellion” (1999). The song parallels 
Du Bois’s chapter in Souls of Black Folks, “Of the Coming of John,” a tragic story 
of violence and revenge where a black man protects the virtue of a black woman. 
While Arroyo’s story is different, there are striking similarities in the theme. The 
song, in contrast to other salsa music, places the black woman’s body self-con-
sciously as a site of violence, oppression, and contestation. Line by line, the song 
challenges notions of a unified Colombian history and foregrounds the history of 
oppression and struggle that mark the specific Afro-Colombian story. While the 
refrain, “No le pegue a la negra” (Don’t hit the black woman), is patriarchal in 
that the black woman has no voice in the song and is protected by her husband, 
it is also a profound challenge to the presence of the black woman in salsa music. 
However, a close reading of Joe Arroyo’s “Rebelión” is necessary to understand the 
strength of the challenge to representations of blackness in salsa music particularly 
and throughout Latin America more broadly.
The song begins with Arroyo speaking rather than singing. In his light tenor 
he explains that he is going to tell a story:
Quiero contarle mi hermano un pedacito de la historia negra, de la historia nuestra, 
caballero.
[I want to tell you, my brother, a part of the black story, our story.]
It is important that he emphasizes that he is telling a black story. Through this 
the expression of Négritude is clear. Further, by emphasizing that it is our story 
Arroyo grasps a moment of empowerment for blacks to tell their own stories. 
Here he is expressing the vindicationism contained in the project. Arroyo goes on 
to set the scene in Cartegena, Colombia early in the development of the Colom-
bian nation:
En los anos mil seiscientos, cuando el tirano mando,
   las calles de Cartagena, aquella historia vivio.
 [In the 1600s, when tyranny ruled,
   in the streets of Cartegena, is where the story lived.]
In the next line Arroyo emphasizes the specificity of the black experience but 
disconnects it from the national experience by emphasizing blacks’ Africanness. 
Further, by emphasizing that they were placed in chains, Arroyo highlights the 
specificity of the black experience. In the next few lines he expresses the con-
tradiction of being glad to be on dry land, but experiencing the despair of their 
perpetual slavery:
pal-mara-10.indd   143pal-mara-10.indd   143 7/29/08   9:42:16 AM7/29/08   9:42:16 AM


--- PAGE 153 ---
Transnational Blackness144
Cuando alli llegaban esos negreros, africanos en cadenas,
  besaban mi tierra, esclavitud perpetua
  Esclavitud perpetua
  Esclavitud perpetua
[When they arrived here, these blacks, Africans in chains
  they kissed my land, perpetual slavery
  Perpetual slavery
  Perpetual slavery]
Later, Arroyo sets the stage for the powerful refrain by introducing a married 
couple and their Spanish master. Making the slave owner Spanish is a gesture 
that emphasizes his Europeanness in contrast to the Africanness of the enslaved 
couple. This binary is unlike the myth of racial democracy and constructions of 
mestizaje; Arroyo is emphasizing difference in his construction of the subjects of 
the song. The difference constructed by Arroyo culminates in violence not against 
the black man but against the black woman. Arroyo takes the more common rep-
resentation of the black woman in salsa music and transforms her body into a site 
of overt political contestation and historical struggle. The slave owner, through 
his actions, has denied the couple any “normal” domestic relationship and in a 
sense has emasculated the black male by his actions:
Un matrimonio africano, esclavos de un español,
    el les daba muy mal trato y a su negra le pego
  An African marriage, slaves of a Spaniard,
he mistreated them, and hit the black woman.
In the next lines Arroyo’s use of the term “guapo” to describe the black man 
carries several meanings. On one hand, guapo means handsome, emphasizing his 
sexuality. Other meanings for guapo include nice, tough, and brave. Arroyo casts 
the black man as a champion, a hero. From there, the hero then takes vengeance 
for his aggrieved wife while invoking the refrain, “Don’t hit my black woman.” 
From this point the chorus joins in, interrupting Arroyo’s singular voice, and 
expressing a more general community voice, “Don’t hit THE black woman.” Here 
the men of the community are responding and the slave revolt has begun:
Y fue alli, se revelo el negro guapo, tomo
   venganza por su amor y aun se escucha
   en la verja, no le pegue a mi negra.
   No le pegue a la negra.
   No le pegue a la negra.
   Oye man!!
      No le pegue a la negra.
[And went there, and revealed himself to him, the handsome black man, and took
 vengeance for his love. And you can hear
pal-mara-10.indd   144pal-mara-10.indd   144 7/29/08   9:42:17 AM7/29/08   9:42:17 AM


--- PAGE 154 ---
Du Bois’s Double Consciousness 145
 at the gate. Don’t hit my black woman.
 Don’t hit the black woman.Don’t hit the black woman.
 Listen, man!!
 Don’t hit the black woman.]
By examining this verse we see clearly that Arroyo seeks to disrupt versions of 
Colombian history specifically, and Latin American history more broadly, that 
marginalize the experience of blacks or obscure the specificity of black oppression. 
At the same time, he does it within a specific Latin American music genre that is 
known for its representation of the myth of racial democracy and mestizaje.
Challenging the usual representations of blackness within the genre defies 
critics who argue that expressions of black identity and resistance are imported 
from the African American experience. Arroyo articulates his point of view as an 
extremely popular and recognized Colombian artist with an international audi-
ence. His challenge expresses the existence of inclusionary discrimination in the 
music and in Latin American societies. Arroyo’s authenticity as one of the leading 
figures in Colombian salsa suggests that expressions of black resistance are not 
contaminations from the U.S. black experience but fractal forms of response to 
oppression and culture as described by Paul Gilroy in his Black Atlantic. Arroyo 
invokes a second sight with regard to Colombian history and emphasizes differ-
ence, violence, and specificity of black oppression in the Americas. Salsa artists 
from Colombia of Arroyo’s era self-consciously engaged the themes and traditions 
of soul music. Far from simply echoing their themes, they sought to address the 
politics that surround questions of race. Arroyo’s expressions reflect challenges to 
representations of racial democracy within other forms of music like Spanish rap 
and the Puerto Rican rap-reggae fusion called “reggaeton,” as well as the work of 
Brazilian groups like Olodum. These expressions are not entirely disconnected 
from emergent and continued social movements in places like Colombia, Brazil, 
Honduras, and Ecuador around issues of land rights, discrimination and other 
challenges that face populations of Afro-descendents. Critical to all of these strug-
gles is a conception of black identity that invokes twoness or challenges a portrait 
of a harmonious national project. For example, Arroyo, in his work, not only 
delineates warring ideals but also gives voice to a violent struggle for liberation. 
Du Bois’s work provides a useful lens to understand these challenges and offers 
the opportunity for creative comparisons across national borders.
Engaging Du Bois opens up critical possibilities to understand these cultural 
expressions and movements as they relate to national, subnational, and transna-
tional racial projects and counternarratives. Those who obscure the relevance of 
Du Bois, in contrast, attempt to render expressions of blackness parochial and 
limited to a specific national milieu. Thus, we have no ability to discuss trans-
national black politics or cross national comparisons. Further, in emphasizing 
difference with the United States, these discourses mistakenly minimize the expe-
riences of oppression of blacks in Latin America and deny the authenticity of 
their struggles for cultural, political, social, and economic rights and recogni-
tion. By not understanding the many components of the radial category of racial 
pal-mara-10.indd   145pal-mara-10.indd   145 7/29/08   9:42:17 AM7/29/08   9:42:17 AM


--- PAGE 155 ---
Transnational Blackness146
inequality, these authors fail to engage critical similarities between the struggles 
of blacks throughout the Americas. Ultimately, critical engagement with Du Bois 
illuminates voices in Latin America that are obscured by emphasizing differences 
with the United States. If we are to understand these movements and expressions 
beyond theories of “contamination,” we must be guided by theorists like Du Bois 
and James as international intellectuals. In that sense, we are doing justice to their 
understanding of their own critical projects. We need theoretical guides for such 
comparison and we cannot a priori reject comparisons or concepts, because we 
can identify differences in our cases. Making concepts travel is a fundamental 
goal of social science. By identifying the components of racial oppression and 
resistance we can develop important modes of comparison.
Notes
 1. F . Aparacio, Gender, Latin Popular Music, and Puerto Rican Cultures (Music/Culture) (New 
York: Wesleyan University Press, 1998). Anthony Bogues, Black Heretics, Black Prophets: 
Radical Political Intellectuals (New York: Routledge); P . Bourdieu and L. Wacquant,“On 
the Cunning of Imperialist Reason,” Theory, Culture and Society 16 (1999): 41–58.
 2. D. Collier and James E. Mahon, Jr., “Conceptual Stretching Revisited: Adapting Catego-
ries in Comparative Analysis.” The American Political Science Review 87, no. 4 (1993): 
845–55.
 3. M. Dawson, Black Visions: The Roots of Contemporary African American Political Ideologies 
(Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2001); A. de la Fuente, “Race, National, Dis-
course and Politics in Cuba,” Latin American Perspectives 25, no. 3 (1998), 43–70; de la 
Fuente“National Versus Racial Identity: Juan Gualberto Gomez of Cuba and W . E. B. 
Du Bois of the United States,” unpublished manuscript, 2003.
 4. W . E. B. Du Bois, The Souls of Black Folks (New York: Modern Library, 2003); Nadine 
Fernandez, “Race, Romance, and Revolution: The Cultural Politics of Interracial Encoun-
ters in Cuba.” PhD Dissertation-University of California, Berkeley, 1996; P . Gilroy, The 
Black Atlantic: Modernity and Double Consciousness (Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 
1994).
 5. L. Glasco, “National Versus Racial Identity: Juan Gualberto Gomez of Cuba and W . E. B. 
Du Bois of the United States,” in Nord und Süd in Amerika, Vol. 1, ed. Wolfgang Reinhard 
and Peter Waldmann, 410–84 (Berlin: Rombach, 1992).
 6. M. G. Hanchard, Orpheus and Power: The Movmiento Negro of Rio de Janeiro and Sao 
Paulo Brazil, 1945–1988 (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1994).
 7. M. G. Hanchard, “Black Cinderella?: Race and Public Sphere in Brazil,” The Black Public 
Sphere: A Public Culture Book (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1995).
 8. D. Hellwig, African American Reflections on Brazil’s Racial Paradise (Philadelphia: T emple 
University Press, 1992).
 9. A. Helg, Our Rightful Share: The Afro-Cuban Struggle for Equality, 1886–1912  (Chapel 
Hill: U
niversity of North Carolina Press, 1995).
 10. V . Kutzinski, “Sugar’s Secrets: Race and the Erotics of Cuban Nationalism (New World 
Studies)”, in The Black Public Sphere Collective, 169–78 (Charlottesville: University of 
Virginia Press, 1993).
 11. Mara Loveman, “Comment: Is ‘Race’ Essential?” American Sociological Review 64, no. 6 
(1999): 891–98.
 12. Manning Marable, Black Leadership. (New York: Columbia University Press, 1998).
pal-mara-10.indd   146pal-mara-10.indd   146 7/29/08   9:42:17 AM7/29/08   9:42:17 AM


--- PAGE 156 ---
Du Bois’s Double Consciousness 147
 13. A. W . Marx, Making Race and Nation: A Comparison of the United States, South Africa and 
Brazil, 1st ed. (New York: Cambridge University Press, 1998).
 14. R. D. Moore, Nationalizing Blackness: Afrocubanismo and Artistic Revolution in Havana, 
1920–1940 (Pitt Latin American Series) (Pittsburgh, PA: University of Pittsburgh Press, 
1997); Melissa Nobles, Shades of Citizenship: Race and the Census in Modern Politics (Stan-
ford: Stanford University Press, 2000).
 15. L. Glasco, “National versus Racial Identity: Juan Gualberto Gomez of Cuba and W . E. B. 
Du Bois of the United States,” in Nord und Süd in Amerika, Vol. 1, ed. Wolfgang Reinhard 
and Peter Waldmann, 410–84 (Berlin: Rombach, 1992).
 16. Christopher Parker, Fighting for Democracy: Race, Service to the State and Insurgency in the 
Jim Crow South (unpublished manuscript, 2005).
 17. J. Sidanius, Y. Peña, and M. Sawyer, “Inclusionary Discrimination: Pigmentocracy and 
Patriotism in the Dominican Republic,” Political Psychology 22 (2001): 827–51.
pal-mara-10.indd   147pal-mara-10.indd   147 7/29/08   9:42:17 AM7/29/08   9:42:17 AM


--- PAGE 157 ---
This page intentionally left blank


--- PAGE 158 ---
C HAPTER  11
“Long Live Third 
World Unity! Long Live 
Internationalism”
*
Huey P. Newton’s 
Revolutionary 
Intercommunalism
Besenia Rodriguez
Whenever death may surprise us, it will be welcome, provided that . . . our battle cry 
reaches some receptive ear, that another hand stretch out to take up weapons. . . . Let 
the flag under which we fight represent the sacred cause of redeeming humanity, so 
that to die under the flag of Vietnam, of Venezuela, of Guatemala, of Laos, of Guinea, 
of Colombia, of Bolivia, of Brazil, to name only a few of the scenes of today’s armed 
struggles, be equally glorious and desirable for an American, an Asian, an African, or 
even a European.
—Ernesto Guevara, cited by Huey P . Newton
1
It is our goal to be in every single country there is. We look at a world without any 
boundary lines. We don’t consider ourselves basically American. We are multi-national; 
and when we approach a government that doesn’t like the United States, we always say, 
“Who do you like; Britain, Germany? We carry a lot of flags.”
—Robert Stevenson, Executive President of Ford, 
Business Week, cited by Huey Newton
2
* Yuri Nakahara Kochiyama, Passing It On—A Memoir, ed. Marjorie Lee, Akemi Kochiyama-Sardinha, 
and Audee Kochiyama-Holman (Los Angeles: UCLA Asian American Studies Center Press, 2004), 173.
pal-mara-11.indd   149pal-mara-11.indd   149 7/25/08   1:38:06 PM7/25/08   1:38:06 PM


--- PAGE 159 ---
Transnational Blackness150
The first thing the American power structure doesn’t want any Negroes to start is 
thinking internationally.
—Malcolm X 3
In 1992, filmmaker Spike Lee released Malcolm X to critical acclaim. 4 The film 
had an enormous cultural impact, with celebrities and youth donning hats and  
T-shirts with the letter “X.”5 Soon after, Gerald Horne’s article, “Myth and the 
Making of Malcolm X,” presented a critique of Lee’s rendering, arguing that 
the film participated in constructing a mythology of figures like Malcolm X that 
“neglect[s] highly relevant and persuasive evidence because it does not necessarily 
comport with the contemporary lessons that one is to draw from these myths.”
6 
Lee’s film, an intervention in a historiographical and popular record of the black 
freedom struggle that has “centered on Martin Luther King, Jr., with Rosa Parks 
and the Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee (SNCC) playing pivotal 
supporting roles,”
7 creates an alternative mythology that, like the prevailing “King 
years” myth, fails to include the concurrent history of leftists like Claudia Jones, 
William Patterson, and Paul Robeson. Glaringly absent from Lee’s film, Horne 
contends, is Malcolm’s “embrace [of] a more progressive form of nationalism—
when he followed in Patterson’s footsteps seeking to take the Black Question to 
the United Nations.” Also absent were his disputes with Louis Farrakhan, his rela-
tionships with “world leaders—especially on the African continent,” and his early 
interpretations of the 1955 Bandung conference of African and Asian leaders “as 
spelling doom for the ‘white devils.’”
8
Readings of Malcolm, as Horne argues, have been “heavily influenced by a 
pervasive narrow nationalism” and, like the King myth, have largely failed to 
“encompass the international dimension.”
9 “T o do so,” he asserts, “might neces-
sitate encompassing a now taboo history involving the Council on African Affairs 
and the black Left.”
10 Similarly, Farrakhan is completely absent from Malcolm X, 
Horne contends, because including him “would have been too difficult to explain 
and would have disturbed a major myth.”
11
Like his meeting with Fidel Castro in Harlem’s Hotel Theresa in 1960, Mal-
colm’s close relationship with Yuri Kochiyama was absent from Malcolm X.12 This 
omission is particularly misleading because of what this friendship illustrates 
about Malcolm’s allegiances and his ever-developing analysis of racism. The two 
met briefly in 1963 at the Brooklyn courthouse, where a timid Kochiyama told 
Malcolm that she admired his work but disagreed with his stance against integra-
tion. He invited her to his 125th Street office but was soon silenced by Elijah 
Muhammad for his infamous remarks following Kennedy’s assassination. Three 
months later, Kochiyama invited Malcolm to a reception at her home for three 
atomic bomb survivors of the Hiroshima-Nagasaki World Peace Mission who 
were on a global tour speaking against nuclear arms proliferation.
More than anyone else, they wanted to meet Malcolm X. Although she never 
received a response, on June 6, 1964, Kochiyama organized a reception for Mal-
colm with the assistance of the Harlem Parents Committee.
pal-mara-11.indd   150pal-mara-11.indd   150 7/25/08   1:38:06 PM7/25/08   1:38:06 PM


--- PAGE 160 ---
“Long Live Third World Unity! Long Live Internationalism” 151
Hopeful, “the Kochiyama family waited excitedly” in their Harlem apartment 
for Malcolm X to arrive.13 Soon after, Malcolm arrived with three security guards; 
he apologized for not having responded to Kochiyama’s letters and promised to 
write to her should he travel again. He thanked the guests for touring the “World’s 
Worst Fair”—that is, Harlem, itself “scarred . . . by the bomb of racism,” instead 
of the World’s Fair in Queens.
14 He spoke of Europe’s colonization of Asia and the 
similarities between African and Asian history, which he studied while in prison, 
and of his admiration for Mao Tse-tung for fighting feudalism and imperialism. 
An astute observer of international events, he spoke of the war in Vietnam two 
months before President Johnson ordered that additional military advisors be 
sent to Vietnam and nine months before the first U.S. combat troops landed. “If 
America sends troops you progressives should protest,” he told them, insisting 
that “the struggle of Vietnam is the struggle of the whole Third World: the strug-
gle against colonialism, neo-colonialism, and imperialism.”
15 He kept his promise 
to Kochiyama, writing her eleven times from nine different countries, including 
Egypt, England, Saudi Arabia, Kuwait, Ethiopia, Kenya, and Nigeria before his 
assassination in early 1965.
16 In turn, Kochiyama joined his Organization of Afro-
American Unity (OAAU). “Without question,” her daughter and granddaughter 
wrote in the preface to her autobiography forty years later, “Malcolm X was and 
still is the single most influential person in Yuri’s political development.” Kochi-
yama herself has called Malcolm her “political awakening.”
17
Had Kochiyama been represented in the film, cradling Malcolm’s head as 
his aides attempted to revive him, as in the photograph made famous by Life 
magazine, the image would have been largely unintelligible to an audience inun-
dated by a mythology in which figures equated with “Black Power” like Malcolm 
and the Black Panther Party (BPP), are understood uncomplicatedly as “Black 
nationalists.”
18 This mythology renders invisible aspects of their ideologies that 
fail to conform to existing frameworks. The BPP is often understood as the ideo-
logical heir to Malcolm X and explicitly claimed this tradition for itself. In revisit-
ing Malcolm’s deeply antiracist concept of world revolution, influenced by the 
Conference of Nonaligned Nations in Bandung, Indonesia, and the movements 
that emerged in its wake, this article examines the BPP’s debt to Malcolm X 
through an alternative lens. It focuses on the construction of a tricontinental 
ideology and a set of solidarities beyond race and nation that belie the traditional 
interpretations of figures canonized as “Black Nationalists” or “Pan-Africanists,” 
highlighting the extent to which these figures, at times explicitly, rejected these 
political and ideological categories.
19
The Black Panthers espoused a critique that linked their own oppression with 
that of other racialized and oppressed groups in the United States and linked 
oppression at home with imperialism throughout the Third World. They pro-
moted a variant of tricontinental socialism closely aligned with that of Castro and 
Mao Tse-tung and set up community programs throughout the nation to counter-
act the detrimental effects of racial capitalism. The BPP was influenced as much 
by the writings of Mao, Ho Chi Minh, Amilcar Cabral, and the events unfolding 
pal-mara-11.indd   151pal-mara-11.indd   151 7/25/08   1:38:06 PM7/25/08   1:38:06 PM


--- PAGE 161 ---
Transnational Blackness152
in Cuba, Vietnam, China, and Palestine as it was by the ideologies of Malcolm 
X and Robert F . Williams and events in Oakland, Detroit, and New York. Their 
shifting philosophies and internal ideological conflicts provide a valuable oppor-
tunity to examine the inherent multiplicity and instability of any discourse. For 
instance, they evolved from self-described “Black Nationalists” to “revolutionary 
nationalists,” “internationalists,” and finally, to “revolutionary intercommunal-
ists” between 1966 and 1972.
20 Panthers have written extensively about the peri-
ods they spent traveling the globe and in exile; nonetheless this article limits its 
focus to the BPP’s tricontinentalism, owing a considerable debt to Malcolm X as 
it did, through the lens of its chief theoretician, Huey P . Newton.
21
The concept of the “Third World” has largely been associated with the period 
during which the Panthers emerged, borne of the 1955 conference in Bandung 
and the anticolonial movements in Asia, Africa, and Latin America of the 1960s 
and 1970s. Nonetheless a central feature of the erasure of this tricontinental tra-
dition has been the oversight of the direct and indirect impact of two events one 
year apart on Malcolm X and the Black Panthers, the Bandung Conference and 
the Suez Crisis: “And once you study what happened at the Bandung conference 
. . . it actually serves as a model for the same procedure you and I can use to get 
our problems solved. At Bandung . . . there were dark nations from Africa and 
Asia. . . . Despite their economic and political differences, they came together. All 
of them were black, brown, red, or yellow.
22
On November 10, 1964, at the Northern Grass Roots Leadership Conference 
in Detroit organized by Grace Lee Boggs, Malcolm X gave what would become 
one of his most celebrated speeches, “A Message to the Grassroots.” In a fierce 
censure of the civil rights establishment, which he referred to as “house Negroes,” 
Malcolm spoke of the March on Washington as a “picnic” and a “circus.” In sharp 
contrast, he cited the Kenyan, Chinese, Algerian, and Cuban revolutions, which 
have been “bloody . . . hostile . . . [and which knew] no compromise.”
23 The inter-
national focus of Malcolm’s speech, which emphasized the need for political unity 
borne of a shared oppression, was all the more extraordinary given that much of 
the black press and leadership was focused on the events taking place in the U.S. 
South, including the passing of the Civil Rights Act and the murder of three civil-
rights workers in Mississippi.
24
In the wake of the proliferation of nuclear weapons and the cold war battle 
for the markets of the newly independent Asian and African nations, Indonesian 
Prime Minister Ali Sastroamidjojo delivered a speech in August of 1953 reflect-
ing his view that “strong cooperation between [Asian and African] countries will 
strengthen the efforts in creating peace in the world.” A few months later at a 
meeting later known as the Colombo Conference, leaders of four other Asian 
countries met in response to Sastroamidjojo’s call and to discuss ways to address 
those problems created by racial colonialism and left unaddressed by the newly 
formed United Nations. This conference gave way to the establishment of the 
Asian-African Conference to be hosted by Indonesia and co-sponsored by India, 
pal-mara-11.indd   152pal-mara-11.indd   152 7/25/08   1:38:06 PM7/25/08   1:38:06 PM


--- PAGE 162 ---
“Long Live Third World Unity! Long Live Internationalism” 153
Ceylon (later Sri Lanka), Burma, and Pakistan. Among other aims, the Asian-
African Conference sought to “discuss the matters, particularly related to Asian-
African nations, for example matters related to national sovereignty, racialism, 
and colonialism” and “to observe the position of Asia and Africa, and their nations 
in the world, to observe what they can give to promote peace and cooperation in 
the world.”
25
The Indonesian government invited twenty-five countries, including the 
People’s Republic of China, Egypt, Ethiopia, the then-Gold Coast, Syria, Iran, 
Lebanon, Libya, and Northern and Southern Vietnam, to the mountain city of 
Bandung April 16–24, 1955. Representatives of South Africa’s African National 
Congress (ANC) also attended. In his opening speech, “Let a New Asia and New 
Africa Be Born,” Indonesian President Sukarno highlighted themes that would 
become a central feature of tricontinentalism. He told the participants, who 
represented over half of the world’s population from different nations, “social, 
cultural, religion, political background, and even different skin color,” that they 
could be united by their experiences of colonialism and “by the same devotion 
to defend and strengthen the world peace.” “The nations of Asia and Africa,” he 
declared, “are no longer the tools and playthings of forces they cannot influence.” 
He ended, “I hope [this conference] will give evidence of the fact that we, Asian 
and African leaders, understand that Asia and Africa can prosper only when they 
are united, and that even the safety of the world at large can not be safeguarded 
without a united Asia-Africa. . . . I hope that it will give evidence . . . that a New 
Asia and New Africa have been born!”
26
The conference resulted in the “T en Principles of Bandung,” which affirmed 
the nations’ commitment to promoting “respect for fundamental human rights, 
[for] . . . justice, [and] for the sovereignty and territorial integrity of all nations” 
as well as the “recognition of the equality of all races and of the equality of all 
nations large and small” and a call for all the signatories to “refrain from acts 
or threats of aggression” against any other territory.
27 Condemning “colonialism 
in all of its manifestations,” including U.S. and Soviet neo-colonialism, Indian 
Prime Minister Jawaharlal Nehru declared, “If I join any of these big groups I 
lose my identity.”
28 The conference’s Final Communiqué emphasized the need 
for tricontinental nations to “loosen their economic dependence on the leading 
industrialized nations by providing technical assistance to one another through 
the exchange of experts and technical assistance for developmental projects, as 
well as the exchange of technological know-how and the establishment of regional 
training and research institutes.”
29
Fifty-years later, Indonesian and South African leaders issued the following 
statement: “following the historic Asian-African Conference in Bandung in 1955, 
the world has witnessed the emergence of new nations in the two continents 
and the births of a sense of kinship and solidarity between them. This ‘Bandung 
Spirit,’ brought about by the conference, subsequently became the underlying 
inspiration for these new nations to continue to strive towards the attainment 
of a just, peaceful, progressive and prosperous world order.”
30 Bandung, and the 
pal-mara-11.indd   153pal-mara-11.indd   153 7/25/08   1:38:06 PM7/25/08   1:38:06 PM


--- PAGE 163 ---
Transnational Blackness154
Nonaligned Movement it spawned six years later at its founding summit in Bel-
grade, constituted “the major political expression of the developing countries of 
the Third World.” Nonaligned nations developed increasingly audacious con-
demnations of racism, imperialism, and neo-colonialism, emboldened by charter 
members like Yugoslavia, Cuba, and Egypt, each of whom hosted major confer-
ences. For instance, in Belgrade, Cuban leader Osvaldo Dorticos charged, “If we 
dare to condemn the colonialist domination of Algiers and Angola, let us also 
condemn the colonialist domination of Puerto Rico,” raising the ire of an already 
antagonistic United States.
31
Harlem watched the events unfolding in Bandung with anticipation. Repre-
sentative Adam Clayton Powell and novelist Richard Wright were in attendance, 
along with Margaret Cartwright (the first black reporter assigned to the UN) 
and journalist William Worthy; messages were read from Paul Robeson and 
W . E. B. Du Bois, whose passports were confiscated by the State department. 
Robeson’s newspaper, Freedom, published articles on the conference, talking with 
Harlem residents on the significance of the declarations and solidarities forged 
in Bandung for their lives. In an article entitled, “War and Jim Crow Set Back at 
Bandung,” journalist Kumar Goshal noted that, “since the conference laid great 
stress on political and economic imperialism and the evils of racialism, it was 
of supreme importance to all Americans, especially Negro Americans.”
32 Goshal 
continued, “for as India’s Nehru emphasized in his speech, it is the U.S-sponsored 
North Atlantic T rade Organization (NATO), the Southeast Asia T reat Organiza-
tion (SEATO), and other military alliances that are today helping maintain what 
remains of imperialist rule in Asian and African colonies.” He noted that “by 
and large, the Negro press in America was fully conscious of the importance and 
significance of Bandung. The Afro-American felt that the conference ‘signaled the 
end of a centuries-old era of colonialism,’ and asked ‘Western statesmen . . . to 
heed this solemn warning that the old order of things no longer exists.”
33
In “Harlem Speaks . . . About Bandung,” a Freedom journalist “took [a] cam-
era and notebook to one of Harlem’s busiest streets, to ask Mr. and Miss aver-
age Harlemite what they thought about the doings at . . . the historic Bandung 
[Conference].”
34 T o varying degrees, the “average Harlemite,” a homemaker, a 
photographer, a high school student, and a veteran, agreed that the conference 
would have a “good effect” on U.S. blacks, indicating that perhaps for many, the 
events in Bandung had a diffuse impact; yet the response from leading activist-
intellectuals speaks to the centrality of the Bandung Conference for the develop-
ment of a broader tricontinental imaginary.
35
As cheers rang from the audience at Bandung, one participant recited Robeson’s 
speech.36 He expressed his “profound conviction that the very fact of the conven-
ing of the Conference . . . will be recorded as an historic turning point in all world 
affairs,” stating that the gathering opened “a new vista of human advancement in 
all spheres of life.”
37 In a resounding statement, Robeson declared, “the time has 
come when the colored peoples of the world will no longer allow the great natural 
wealth of their countries to be exploited and expropriated by the Western world 
pal-mara-11.indd   154pal-mara-11.indd   154 7/25/08   1:38:06 PM7/25/08   1:38:06 PM


--- PAGE 164 ---
“Long Live Third World Unity! Long Live Internationalism” 155
while they are beset by hunger, disease and poverty.”38 He then discussed his “deep 
and abiding interest in the cultural relations of Asia and Africa” and lamented not 
being able to see his “brothers from Africa, India, China, Indonesia, and from 
all the nations represented at Bandung . . . old friends I knew in London years 
ago, where I first became part of the movement for colonial freedom—the many 
friends from India and Africa and the West Indies with whom I shared hopes and 
dreams of a new day for the oppressed colored peoples of the world.”
39 “Fully 
endors[ing] the objectives of the Conference to prevent . . . [another H-bomb 
and] . . . the demand of Africa and Asia for independence from alien domination 
and exploitation,” Robeson attempted to speak in behalf of U.S. and Caribbean 
blacks. He wrote, “Typical of my people’s sentiments are these words from one 
of our leading Negro newspapers: ‘Negro Americans should be interested in the 
proceedings at Bandung. We have found this kind of fight for more than 300 
years and have a vested interest in the outcome.’”
40
T wo years later, Robeson, Du Bois, former Council on African Affairs secretary 
W . Alphaeus Hunton, and labor leader Jose´ Santiago spoke at a Harlem event 
commemorating the anniversary of the Bandung Conference.
41 In his speech, 
Robeson acknowledged, “we American Negroes can no longer lead the colored 
peoples of the world because they far better than we understand what is hap-
pening in the world today. But we can try to catch up with them.”
42 Once again 
challenging his audience to broaden its antiracism to include internationalism, 
anti-imperialism, and anti-capitalism, he urged them to “learn about China and 
India and the vast realm of Indonesia rescued from Holland . . . [and] of the new 
ferment in East, West, and South Africa. We can realize by reading . . . how social-
ism is expanding over the modern world and penetrating the colored world.”
43
From the Bandung Conference emerged the concept of the “Third World.” 
As the antiracist labor leader James Boggs would note in 1974, it was not until 
after the 1939–45 war that the “people living in Latin America, Africa, Asia, and 
the Middle East . . . [began] to struggle as a social force to determine their own 
destiny and the future of the world. . . . There was no concept of Third World 
Peoples until approximately twenty years ago . . . created on the basis of the real 
historical struggles of the colonial peoples in Africa, Asia, Latin America and the 
Middle East.”
44 He told his audience, “As independence was being fought for by 
many countries and won by a few, a conference was held in Bandung, Indonesia. 
. . . Out of the Bandung and subsequent conferences of Asia, Africa, Arab, and 
Latin American nations, came the concept of the Third World, referring to those 
countries struggling for independence, . . . which had been systematically damned 
into a state of underdevelopment by capitalism.”
45 In the United States, Boggs 
observed, “the identification of black Americans with the Third World was really 
a question of solidarity, i.e., the feeling that progressive and revolutionary people 
all over the world should have for each other in their common struggle for the 
advancement of humanity.”
46 Yet he criticized those who, “in order to express the 
fact that as non-whites they have all experienced discrimination and segregation 
in the United States, . . . adopted the phrase ‘Third World’ to describe themselves, 
pal-mara-11.indd   155pal-mara-11.indd   155 7/25/08   1:38:06 PM7/25/08   1:38:06 PM


--- PAGE 165 ---
Transnational Blackness156
even though this phrase and this concept came from a totally different set of his-
torical circumstances.”47
Four years earlier Yuri Kochiyama’s article “Third World,” printed in the Asian 
Americans for Action’s newsletter, provided an example of this tendency among 
U.S. radicals. “Whether in the Black, Brown, Red, or Yellow movement, the 
term Third World makes its appearance on flyers; is hurled about in speeches, 
pops up in raps; is unfurled on banners and carried on posters.”
48 Kochiyama 
continued, “This world, Africa, Asia, and Latin America, is the world of the 
Black, Brown, and Yellow people seeking independence of the first two worlds.” 
In a resounding statement illustrating the tricontinentalism that evolved from 
her Malcolm-inspired political awareness, she added,
the cause of Palestine is that of Vietnam’s; the liberation struggles of Mozambique 
and Angola are related to the guerrillas’ involvement in Uruguay and Bolivia. The 
Philippines’ sentiment against military colonialism is mutual with that of Puerto 
Rico’s. The black man’s [sic] degrading experience in Amerika corresponds with 
the treatment of the Indians, Eskimos, and Chicanos in both Amerikas, and the 
Aborigines in Australia. The uprisings in the Caribbean . . . and the demands of 
the Okinawans are all the voices of the Third World, the world’s oppressed. . . . 
The Third World and its descendents in the western hemisphere are in motion. It 
is a life-and-death struggle to cast off the shackles of imperialism and colonialism, 
and obliterate racism. . . . The Third World must oppose, challenge, confront and 
halt transgression of imperialistically-inclined powers, including those in their own 
world, for imperialism knows no color or geographic lines. The Third World must 
offer an alternative—a more humane way of life, where diversity of peoples, cul-
tures, religions, and ideologies will enhance civilization, rather than proscribe life.
49
The second event, Gamal Abdel Nasser’s nationalization of the Suez Canal 
Company in 1956, did not receive as much coverage in the U.S. black press as 
the Bandung Conference had, yet Nasser’s “successful weathering of an invasion 
. . . made him a hero” not just for the “Bandung” or “Third World” nations but 
also “among many African Americans.”
50 Over five thousand miles away, Du Bois 
wrote an acerbic poem entitled “Suez.” In it Du Bois presented a caustic critique 
of the United States, the United Kingdom, and Israel—which he had supported 
in the past. He praised Nasser for rising in the face of “lions” with their “pockets 
full of gold” and declaring “what’s mine is mine!”
51
No U.S. black activist-intellectual had a more intimate connection with the 
Middle East or its postcolonial hero, Nasser, than Shirley Graham Du Bois.52 Her 
book, written within the framework of Egyptian history, Gamal Abdel Nasser: 
Son of the Nile, was the first biography on Nasser to be published in the English 
language. Graham Du Bois discussed the Bandung Conference, criticizing the 
United States and Europe, including John Dulles’s threats toward Egypt if it par-
ticipated in the conference with “communist countries.”
53 Nasser’s comments at 
Bandung, pledging Egypt’s commitment to “the welfare of peoples beyond our 
borders” and its “support . . . of self-determination for all peoples,” led to his hail-
ing as “Champion of Africa and Asia.”
54 As Graham Du Bois wrote, “there was no 
pal-mara-11.indd   156pal-mara-11.indd   156 7/25/08   1:38:07 PM7/25/08   1:38:07 PM


--- PAGE 166 ---
“Long Live Third World Unity! Long Live Internationalism” 157
doubt that [Nasser] emerged from the Bandung Conference a hero in the eyes of 
his own people and in the Middle East as a whole.” 55 He emerged as “the most 
important leader of the Arab world and as one of the major figures of the non-
aligned movement.” Along with “Cuba’s Castro and Ghana’s Kwame Nkrumah,” 
notes historian Melani McAlister, “Nasser represented an emotionally explosive 
convergence of anticolonial defiance and postcolonial global consciousness.”
56
In May of 1956 Nasser further defied Eisenhower by announcing that diplo-
matic relations had been established with the People’s Republic of China.57 The 
United States and United Kingdom reneged on their loans for the building of a 
High Dam at Aswan.
T wo months later, Nasser announced, “We Egyptians will not permit any 
imperialists or oppression to rule us, militarily or economically. We will not sub-
mit to dollar dictatorship.”
58 He vowed that the dam would be completed without 
Western assistance. On July 26, 1956, the anniversary of King Farouk’s abdica-
tion, Nasser told a “wildly cheering crowd: ‘T oday we take over our Canal.’” The 
Suez Canal would be nationalized and managed by the Egyptian Canal Authority 
and Nasser would build the dam with its revenue.
59 Paraphrasing a Saidi proverb, 
Nasser shouted, “and if the imperialists don’t like it, they can choke on their 
rage!”
60 According to Graham Du Bois, Egyptians “were hysterical with joy. They 
screamed! Men threw their arms about each other and wept. Not only Egyptians 
and Arabs, but subject peoples throughout the world were thrilled by Nasser’s 
daring gesture.”
61
For many seeking tricontinental solidarity, Nasser’s actions “represented a par-
ticular connection between black and Arab anticolonialism.”62 As McAlister con-
vincingly argues, “Just as Egypt was geographically positioned at the intersection 
of the Middle East and Africa, in the years after Bandung, Nasser positioned 
himself as a leader in connecting African and Asian anticolonial movements.”
63 
For instance, Nasser, who had met Kwame Nkrumah at Bandung two years prior, 
sent a large delegation to Ghana’s independence celebrations in 1957 and, upon 
Nkrumah’s visit to Egypt shortly thereafter, Nasser awarded him Egypt’s high-
est decoration. The two joined five other leaders in calling the First All-African 
Peoples Conference in Accra in 1958.
64
Malcolm’s relationships with U.S. activists of color like Kochiyama, his exten-
sive knowledge of global events, and his travels throughout the Middle East 
and Africa contributed to his emergent “independent ‘Third World’ political 
perspective.”
65 He showed signs of this perspective as early as the 1950s, when 
he gave a speech suggestive of “A Message to the Grassroots,” comparing the 
developing crisis in Vietnam with the Mau Mau rebellion in Kenya, “framing 
both of these movements as uprisings of the ‘Darker races’ creating a ‘Tidal 
Wave’ against U.S. and European imperialism.”
66 Yet, as historian Robin Kelley 
observes, “Africa remained his primary political interest outside black America.”67 
In this way, Malcolm X’s anticolonial Pan-Africanism differed from the triconti-
nental identity, inclusive of the nonblack world that many of his successors would 
develop: “Malcolm X was the first political person in this country that I really 
pal-mara-11.indd   157pal-mara-11.indd   157 7/25/08   1:38:07 PM7/25/08   1:38:07 PM


--- PAGE 167 ---
Transnational Blackness158
identified with. . . .We continue to believe that the Black Panther Party exists in 
the spirit of Malcolm.”68
Black Panther Party co-founders Huey Newton and Bobby Seale did not seek 
to replicate Malcolm’s OAAU. Nonetheless, his teachings were “fundamental in 
structuring the Black Panther Party for Self-Defense, as the group was originally 
named in October 1966.”
69 Newton was introduced to Malcolm’s speeches and 
writings while attending Oakland City College. The previous year, he and Seale 
witnessed eruptions in Watts as well as the Highway Patrol and Oakland Police’s 
“determin[ation] to rule by force,” carrying shotguns in full view.
70 “Out of 
this need [Newton and Seale] had no choice but to form an organization that 
would involve the lower-class brothers” or what Karl Marx referred to as the 
lumpen proletariat.
71
Long before outlining the BPP’s ten-point platform, Newton and Seale held 
informal political education sessions at Seale’s house, studying “the literature of 
oppressed people and their struggles for liberation in other countries . . . to see 
how their experiences might help us to understand our plight.”
72 These included 
the work of Frantz Fanon, Mao Tse-tung, and Ché Guevara. 73 Reflecting upon 
the BPP’s early influences, Newton wrote, “We read these men’s works because 
we saw them as kinsmen; the oppressor who had controlled them was control-
ling us, both directly and indirectly.”
74 For Newton, learning how these freedom 
fighters confronted imperialism and racism was critical to creating a strategy for 
a U.S.-based struggle. Newton and Seale were careful not to “import ideas and 
strategies” and believed it necessary to “transform what we learned into principles 
and methods acceptable to the brothers on the block.”
75 Thus, they studied Rob-
ert F . Williams’s Negroes with Guns, which “great[ly] influence[d] . . . the kind of 
party we developed.”
76 While they identified with Williams’s calls for self-defense 
in Monroe, North Carolina, his appeal to working-class activists, and his analysis 
of the global effects of racial capitalism, Newton was dissatisfied with Williams’s 
requests for assistance from the federal government, which Newton viewed as “an 
enemy, the agency of a ruling clique that the controls the country.”
77 Malcolm, 
with his razor-sharp critiques of the U.S. government rooted in a sense moral 
superiority, provided a model ideological ancestor.
78
While Newton considered the BPP “a living testament to [Malcolm’s] life’s 
work,” which they studied carefully—Seale collected all of his speeches from papers 
like The Militant and Muhammad Speaks—the BPP remained largely the creation 
of its chief theoretician, Newton.
79 The two young men furthered Malcolm’s ide-
ology, “rejecting his black nationalism,” as chief-of-staff David Hilliard notes, as 
well as his concentration on Africa, “while incorporating a class-based political 
analysis that owed much to the writings of” Fanon, Guevara, and Mao.
80
Following Newton’s July 1970 acquittal on charges in the death of Oakland 
police officer John Frey, the BPP entered a period of immense transition. As Hill-
iard notes, Newton’s arrest in October 1967 galvanized the BPP’s first wave of 
“political fervor”; “his release engendered a number of equally historic changes 
from 1971 to 1972.”
81 Newton traveled to Africa, where he met Mozambique 
pal-mara-11.indd   158pal-mara-11.indd   158 7/25/08   1:38:07 PM7/25/08   1:38:07 PM


--- PAGE 168 ---
“Long Live Third World Unity! Long Live Internationalism” 159
President Samora Moises Machel, and to Asia, where he met Premier Chou En-
lai, who, given events such as the United States’ escalating encroachments upon 
Central American and southeast Asian sovereignty, helped shape Newton’s most 
groundbreaking and prescient ideological formation, “intercommunalism.”
When Newton and Seale formed the BPP in 1966, the organization was 
avowedly “Black Nationalist”—by this they meant that they “realized the con-
tradictions in society, the pressure on black people in particular, and we saw 
that most people in the past had solved some of their problems by forming into 
nations.”
82 They assumed that the sufferings of people of African descent would 
end “when we established a nation of our own.” Newton and Seale sought a 
method of analysis that would fill the gaps left by existing groups. The two were 
involved in numerous organizations, some of which they joined, such as Oakland 
City College’s Afro-American Association, many of which they did not, such as 
the Progressive Labor Party and the Nation of Islam. In addition to the “mysti-
cal or religious aspect,” Newton paradoxically stated that he “found it difficult 
to accept some of the Black nationalist ways.”
83 For Newton, Black Nationalism 
involved an “attitude of great hatred for . . . white people,” an attitude that he 
could not fully internalize without feeling a “certain guilt about it,” for which he 
was subsequently criticized.
84 Thus the BPP’s initial self-identification as a Black 
Bationalist organization existed uneasily with Newton’s own discomfort with the 
term and his 1971 statement that “from its very conception,” the BPP “was meant 
as an antiracist party.”
85
Because of these contradictions, they soon redefined themselves as “revolution-
ary nationalists”—“that is, nationalists who want revolutionary changes in every-
thing, including the economic system the oppressor inflicts upon us.”
86 During 
this phase, Newton adopted the language of internal colonization, linking the 
oppression of “black communities throughout the country—San Francisco, Los 
Angeles, New Haven” with traditional colonies throughout the Third World.
87 
The Panthers made explicit that they were “individuals deeply concerned with 
the other people of the world and their desires for revolution.”
88 Allying itself 
with colonized peoples throughout the world, the BPP soon defined itself as an 
“internationalist” organization.
89
At their first large-scale public appearance, the Panthers issued a speech that, 
for those who could look past the rifles and black uniforms, demonstrated the 
BPP’s broad analysis of the interplay of global events and hinted at its budding 
commitment to developing ties that transcended racial and national borders. 
Executive Mandate Number One was written by Newton and read by Seale at 
the Sacramento State Capital on May 2, 1967 in protest of the Mulford Bill—or 
“Panther Bill” as it was alternately known—which criminalized open displays of 
loaded firearms.
90 While “racist police agencies throughout the country intensify 
the terror, brutality, murder, and repression of Black people,” Newton argued, 
the California legislature was attempting to keep “Black people disarmed and 
powerless.”
91 He wrote, “At the same time that the American Government is 
pal-mara-11.indd   159pal-mara-11.indd   159 7/25/08   1:38:07 PM7/25/08   1:38:07 PM


--- PAGE 169 ---
Transnational Blackness160
waging a racist war of genocide in Vietnam, the concentration camps in which 
Japanese-Americans were interned during World War II are being renovated and 
expanded.” Newton continued, invoking a phrase made famous by Malcolm X: 
“Since America has historically reserved its most barbaric treatment for nonwhite 
people, we are forced to conclude that these concentration camps are being pre-
pared for black people who are determined to gain their freedom by any means 
necessary.” Reminding listeners of the racist treatment historically meted out to 
racialized people within and beyond U.S. borders at the hands of the U.S. govern-
ment, Newton wrote,
The enslavement of Black people at the very founding of this country, the genocide 
practiced on the American Indians and the confinement of the survivors on reser-
vations, the savage lynching of thousands of Black men and women, the dropping 
of atomic bombs on Hiroshima and Nagasaki, and now the cowardly massacre in 
Vietnam all testify to the fact that toward people of color the racist power structure 
of America has but one policy: repression, genocide, terror, and the big stick. . . . As 
the aggression of the racist American Government escalates in Vietnam, the police 
agencies of America escalate the repression of Black people throughout the ghettos 
of America.
92
Even as Newton struggled to classify his organization’s burgeoning ideology, 
the speech delivered at the BPP’s first attempt at gaining national attention illus-
trated a commitment to a “people of color”—or what I refer to here as a tricon-
tinental—politics, one which holds the U.S. government accountable for its acts 
of aggression against racialized peoples wherever they are found. A central feature 
of this tricontinental politics, which Newton’s statement evinces, is a sense of 
solidarity among peoples who have been subjected to this shared racist oppres-
sion. It is this shared exploitation, this understanding of race as primarily a tool of 
oppression rather than as a biological fact, that drives the BPP’s alliances with the 
tricontinental region and with its anticolonial and antiracist politics.
The following year, the Panthers expanded their actions beyond patrolling 
police officers by taking their critiques and calls for justice to the UN “dele-
gations of revolutionary countries” and calling a press conference to “alert the 
American people, the people of the world, and particularly the oppressed and 
colonized people of the world, to an already dangerous situation which is rapidly 
deteriorating.”
93 By this, the BPP meant the “racist imperialist power structure’s” 
attempted “silencing” Newton by falsely charging him with murder. 94 Citing 
Newton’s opposition to both “the imperialist aggression of the United States in 
International affairs and the vicious oppression of black people in the domes-
tic areas,” the Panthers called upon “oppressed and colonized people to organize 
demonstrations before the embassies, consulates, and property of the imperialist 
exploiters of the United States whenever they have access to such installations and 
property, to show and manifest solidarity with Huey P . Newton and the black 
liberation struggle.” They also called upon UN member nations to authorize the 
stationing of “UN Observer T eams” throughout U.S. cities “wherein black people 
pal-mara-11.indd   160pal-mara-11.indd   160 7/25/08   1:38:07 PM7/25/08   1:38:07 PM


--- PAGE 170 ---
“Long Live Third World Unity! Long Live Internationalism” 161
are cooped up and concentrated in wretched ghettos.” 95 In doing so, they drew 
on a tradition of antiracist activists who sought to combat the U.S. struggle before 
an international arena, including the National Negro Congress, the Civil Rights 
Congress, and the SNCC.
In addition, the BPP’s newspaper published countless articles on the struggles 
of Chicanos, Puerto Ricans (particularly Young Lords), and Asian Americans, as 
well as anti-imperialist and anti-capitalist efforts in Africa, the Middle East, Latin 
America, and Asia, especially the Congo, Palestine, Bolivia, Cuba, and Vietnam.
96 
In an October 1968 article reprinted from the Cuban daily newspaper, Granma, 
the BPP’s Minister of Education, George Mason Murray, was quoted as having 
declared, “We have vowed not to put down our guns or stop making Molotov 
cocktails until colonized Africans, Asians and Latin Americans in the United 
States and throughout the world have become free.”
97 Murray and New York Pan-
ther leader Joudon Ford were in Cuba as guests of the Organization of Solidarity 
of the Peoples of Africa, Asia, and Latin America (OSPAAAL) participating in 
the “Day of Solidarity with the Struggle of the Afro-American people.” At a press 
conference, Murray, likely referencing the rebellions that reached Detroit the pre-
vious summer, stated, “We want to tell the people who are struggling throughout 
the world that our collective struggle can only be victorious, and the defeat of the 
murderers of mankind will come as soon as we create a few more Vietnams, Cubas 
and Detroits.”
98 “In order to bring humanity to a higher level,” U.S. blacks would 
“follow the example of Che Guevara, the Cuban people, the
Vietnamese people and our leader and Minister of Defense, Huey P . Newton 
[and] . . . Malcolm X, Lumumba, Ho Chi Minh and Mao Tse-tung.” Murray and 
Ford also referred to the armed struggles taking place in Bolivia, where Guevara 
had been assassinated, and told their audience of the coalitions between New York 
“blacks and Puerto Ricans,” who are “aware” of the tactics used by “imperialists 
[to create] . . . divisions between minority racial groups” and were “uniting to 
fight oppression.”
99
In July 1970, in an interview from his prison cell, Newton characterized the 
BPP as an international and indeed, antinational, organization. Grounded in 
Marxist-Leninism, it was logical that the BPP would seek solidarity with anti-
capitalists throughout the world. “When the people start to move,” he told inter-
viewer Mark Lane, “I guarantee you it’ll be international. The Black Panther Party 
is an international party. We have a coalition with all struggling people of the 
world. And we feel that we must be international because we’re fighting an inter-
national enemy.”
100 Newton reiterated the need to adapt “Marx-Leninism to our 
particular situation here in America.” He cited North Korean premier Kim Il 
Sung’s call for the “freedom for each nation to interpret Marx-Leninism according 
to its own needs, as he puts it, the chief thing is to fight against U.S. imperialism, 
World Enemy No. 1. . . . We struggle and support all of those countries and we 
want solidarity with them.”
101 The embrace of internationalism also provided a 
way to circumvent the antiwhiteness that Newton associated with Black Nation-
alism and pointed to his increasingly sophisticated analysis of the very concept of 
pal-mara-11.indd   161pal-mara-11.indd   161 7/25/08   1:38:07 PM7/25/08   1:38:07 PM


--- PAGE 171 ---
Transnational Blackness162
nationhood. Noting the scarcity of inhabitable land, Newton believed that creat-
ing a new nation would require becoming a “dominant faction in this one,” and 
yet the fact that oppressed people “did not have power was the contradiction that 
drove us to seek nationhood in the first place.”
102
Shortly after Newton’s release from prison, the BPP held a two-part Revo-
lutionary Peoples Constitutional Convention in Philadelphia on September 5, 
1970, and at Howard University in Washington, DC, in November 27–29 of 
that year. According to Newton, this meeting of “Revolutionary Peoples from 
oppressed communities throughout the world” was convened “in recognition of 
the fact that the changing social conditions throughout the world require new 
analyses and approaches in order that our consciousness might be raised to the 
point where we can effectively end the oppression of people by people.”
103
The delegates gathered to create a document that championed women’s self-
determination and queer rights and proposed concrete strategies for battling 
sexism, heterosexism, and homophobia.
104 Organized as a series of mass assem-
blies, the convention held a symbolic purpose as well as a political one—those in 
attendance gathered together because they perceived, according to Newton, “a 
common enemy [and] a common goal.” More importantly, it signified that “the 
geographical barriers which separated us from one another in the past are no longer 
obstacles to our revolutionary unity.” Newton’s welcome speech began, “Friends 
and comrades throughout the United States and throughout the world . . . we 
gather in the spirit of revolutionary love and friendship for all oppressed people of 
the world regardless of their race or the race and doctrine of their oppressors.”
105 
Newton then introduced his audience to the concept of intercommunalism, the 
notion that the rise of U.S. imperialism had “transformed all other nations into 
oppressed communities,” making it impossible for revolutionaries like the Pan-
thers to make their stand as nationalists or even as internationalists.
106
Beyond recognizing “commonalities” among the peoples oppressed by racial 
capitalism, Newton contended that the very categories and concepts which 
defined peoples were becoming obsolete: “We once defined ourselves as nations 
because we had distinct geographical boundaries . . . We see, however, that the 
growth of bureaucratic capitalism in the United States transformed the nation.”
107 
Departing from Lenin’s notion of imperialism as the highest stage of capitalism, 
Newton argued that capitalism, when traversing national boundaries to exploit 
the “wealth and labor of other territories,” transformed both the capitalist nation 
and the subjugated territory.
108 The rapid development of technology led to a shift 
in the relationships within and between nations. The “swiftness with which their 
‘message’ can be sent to these territories has transformed the previous situation,” 
Newton argued. Beyond becoming a colony or a neo-colony, these territories, 
unable to “protect their boundaries . . . political structure and . . . cultural institu-
tions,” are no longer nations, just as the United States is no longer a nation but an 
empire whose power transcends geographical boundaries.
109
In order to be classified as a neo-colony, he contended, a territory must have 
the capacity to return to its former state. “What happens when the raw materials 
pal-mara-11.indd   162pal-mara-11.indd   162 7/25/08   1:38:07 PM7/25/08   1:38:07 PM


--- PAGE 172 ---
“Long Live Third World Unity! Long Live Internationalism” 163
are extracted and labor is exploited within a territory dispersed over the entire 
globe?,” Newton asked rhetorically, “When the riches of the whole earth are 
depleted and used to feed a gigantic industrial machine in the imperialist’s 
home?” He explained that “the people and the economy are so integrated into the 
imperialist empire that it’s impossible to ‘decolonize,’ to return to the former 
conditions of existence.” If colonies cannot “return to their original existence as 
nations,” Newton contended, “then nations no longer exist. . . . And since there 
must be nations for revolutionary nationalism or internationalism to make sense 
. . . we say that the world today is a dispersed collection of communities.” Newton 
defined a community as a small entity with a collection of institutions that exist in 
order to serve a small group of people. The global struggle, according to Newton’s 
analysis, is between the small clique of individuals—and its ruling police force—
that “administers and profits from the empire of the United States, and the peo-
ples of the world who want to determine their own destinies.”
110 He termed the 
current age in which a ruling circle uses technology to controls all other people as 
“reactionary intercommunalism.”Grounded in dialectical materialism, Newton 
saw the contradiction inherent in the development of capitalism, which would 
eventually lead to its own demise.
The “communications revolution, combined with the expansive domination 
of the American empire, has created the ‘global village.’”
111 As the U.S. empire 
“disperses its troops and controls more and more territory, it becomes weaker and 
weaker. . . . And as they become weaker . . . the people become stronger.”
112 T ech-
nology has developed to the extent that it can provide material abundance—the 
“material conditions exist that would allow the people of the world to develop a 
culture that is essentially human. . . . The development of such a culture,” New-
ton argued, “would be revolutionary intercommunalism.”
113 Some communities, 
for instance in China, Cuba, Northern Korea, and Vietnam, have “liberated their 
territories and have established provisional governments.”
114 Nonetheless, no ter-
ritory can remain safe from the long arm of the U.S. empire indefinitely.
Newton’s concept of intercommunalism emerged soon after he offered troops 
to the National Liberation Front (NLF) of Vietnam in 1970. 115 After making 
his offer, Newton remained dissatisfied with his statement of solidarity because 
of its central contradiction—even as he relinquished all claims to nationalism 
and expressed the BPP’s ultimate goal as the “destruction of statehood itself,” he 
continued to offer support for revolutionary nationalism among the NLF and all 
“developing countries.”
116 Solidarity with the Vietnamese struggle seemed logical 
to Newton, for it “is also our struggle, for we recognize that our common enemy 
is the American imperialist who is the leader of international bourgeois domina-
tion. There is not one fascist or reactionary government in the world today,” he 
argued, “that could stand without the support of United States imperialism.”
117 
The United States ceased being a nation as it became a “government of interna-
tional capitalists and in as much as they have exploited the world to accumu-
late wealth, this country belongs to the world.” On the contrary, the developing 
countries “have every right to claim nationhood because they have not exploited 
pal-mara-11.indd   163pal-mara-11.indd   163 7/25/08   1:38:07 PM7/25/08   1:38:07 PM


--- PAGE 173 ---
Transnational Blackness164
anyone. The nationalism of which they speak is simply their rightful claim to 
autonomy, self-determination and a liberated base from which to fight the inter-
national bourgeoisie.” Because of their historic position as descendents of slaves 
without a sense of national belonging, U.S. blacks were in a vanguard position in 
the international struggle against racial capitalism and imperialism. As “the van-
guard party—without chauvinism or a sense of nationhood,” the Panthers offered 
troops to the NLF “and to the people of the world.”
118
Newton continued to hold U.S. blacks responsible for their government’s 
exploitative nationalism, “because we are all guilty on one level or another of 
being the exploiter or accepting the bride of the exploiter if we are not at war with 
him.”
119 The U.S. empire has taken the wealth of the communities of the world, 
centralizing it in a few hands; even those who did not participate in the exploita-
tion have “reaped the benefits from this violation. Intercommunalism expresses 
our view that the people of the world own the wealth of the United States and our 
obligation to give them their just desserts.”
120 Newton “disclaimed all of the black 
nationalists” in his statement, which caused conflict with other black organizations 
“because all of them, even the bourgeois ones, are somewhat nationalistic in tone 
and in goal.” His rejection of nationalism for U.S. blacks and support of national-
ism for Vietnamese rebels left him feeling as if he were “belittling them [or] being 
traitors to them.”
121 Even for those who claimed simultaneous nationalism and 
internationalism, Newton noted a contradiction; a show of respect for national 
boundaries alongside a need for international solidarity arising from the U.S. 
continual violation of national boundaries. In spite of this tension, Newton sent 
the statement, remaining “very dissatisfied and unhappy for about a month.”
122 
He woke up in his Oakland apartment with the concept of intercommunalism 
emerging “like a vision. . . . I had solved the contradiction in my sleep.”
123
Newton’s 1971 article, which appeared in The Black Panther’s Intercommu-
nal News section, provided both a contemporary example of reactionary inter-
communalism and evidence of his willingness to transcend race in his critiques 
of imperialism. He wrote, “In Addis Ababa, Ethiopia this week, Ethiopean [sic] 
overseer Haile Selassie sat down to lunch with Spiro Agnew, the reactionary inter-
communal public relations man for the U.S. Empire.”
124 The two leaders, which 
Newton charged, “expect god-like worship from the people,” enjoyed a “European 
style luncheon . . . in the plush ‘Jubilee Palace,’ which was built with the blood 
and sweat of Ethiopia’s oppressed citizens.”
125 Agnew and “his overseer, Selassie,” 
he wrote, shared similar goals “oppression of black and white.”126 He vowed that 
Panthers would “continue our struggle to free all people,” including those led by 
a former icon of black independence, “from the bonds of oppression.”
127
Newton predicted that reactionary intercommunalism, having sown the seeds 
to its own destruction, would yield to revolutionary intercommunalism. Ever crit-
ical of cultural nationalists’ romantic views of a precolonial past, he wrote, “Our 
hopes for freedom lie . . . in a future which may hold a positive elimination of 
national boundaries and ties; a future of the world, where a human world society 
may be so structured as to benefit all the earth’s people (not peoples).”
128 Newton 
pal-mara-11.indd   164pal-mara-11.indd   164 7/25/08   1:38:07 PM7/25/08   1:38:07 PM


--- PAGE 174 ---
“Long Live Third World Unity! Long Live Internationalism” 165
defined the transition to revolutionary intercommunalism as the phase in which 
the world’s masses would control their own institutions and seize the means of 
production, allowing them the freedom to “re-create themselves and to establish 
communism, a stage of human development in which human values will shape 
the structures of society.”
129 “Contradictions” such as “racism and all kinds of 
chauvinism” will not be resolved immediately, “but the fact that the people will be 
in control of all the productive and institutional units of society—not only facto-
ries, but the media too—will enable them to start solving these contradictions. It 
will produce new values, new identities; it will mold a new and essentially human 
culture as the people will resolve old conflicts based on cultural and economic 
conditions.”
130 Subsequently, a qualitative change would occur and revolutionary 
intercommunalism would be transformed into communism—the point in his-
tory when people will “produce according to their abilities and all receive accord-
ing to their needs.”
131
The most significant shift would be the creation of a universal identity. In Feb-
ruary 1971 Newton participated in a public discussion with psychoanalyst Erik 
Erikson, during which the two spoke at length about the concept of collective 
identity. Ultimately, Newton argued that the creation of an identity that “extends 
beyond family, tribe, or nation—an identity that is essentially human” was criti-
cal for the survival of human beings. “If we do not have a universal identity,” he 
declared to a somewhat hostile audience, “then we will have cultural, racial, and 
religious chauvinism, the kind of ethnocentrism we have now. Unless we cultivate 
an identity with everyone, we will not have peace in the world.”
132 Much of the 
resistance to Newton’s concept of intercommunalism—he was once booed while 
onstage—and the need for a “universal identity” was foreshadowed in the resis-
tance many demonstrated to the BPP’s alliances with white radicals, the interna-
tional focus of its newspaper, and the offer of troops to the NLF .
133 He believed 
that most of his audiences were “not ready for many of the things we talked 
about” and considered the problem of simplifying his ideology for the masses to 
be the BPP’s “big burden.”
134 It was the BPP because its leadership was trying “to 
do everything possible to get [average people] to relate to us . . . [without being] 
too far ahead of the people[’s] thinking. . . . We are being pragmatic . . . when that 
job is done, the Black Panther Party will no longer be the Black Panther Party,” 
he told an audience member.
135
In early 1969, the BPP’s newspaper printed Claude McKay’s famed 1919 poem, 
“If We Must Die.” Like Guevara in this article’s epigraph, McKay’s poem speaks 
of facing a “common foe” and of a “brave,” “noble,” and decidedly masculine 
death. For Newton and the Black Panthers, the enemy, which “far outnumbered” 
oppressed peoples throughout the world, “press[ing them] to the wall” with “their 
thousand blows” was the “technology and military might of the United States, 
[which] made it possible . . . to violate the territorial integrity of the peoples of 
the world, creating an empire here and destroying all their qualities of nation-
hood and making them dispersed communities of oppressed people.”
136 Newton 
defined “revolutionary intercommunalism” as a “higher level of consciousness 
pal-mara-11.indd   165pal-mara-11.indd   165 7/25/08   1:38:07 PM7/25/08   1:38:07 PM


--- PAGE 175 ---
Transnational Blackness166
than nationalism or internationalism,” which “recognizes the need for unity and 
solidarity among the dispersed communities against” the United States.137 Those 
who attended the Constitutional Convention where Newton first made public his 
concept of intercommunalism gathered to “organize our forces to move against 
the evils of capitalism, imperialism and racism” and “for the solemn purpose of 
formulating a new constitution for a new world.”
138 Capitalists, Newton argued, 
had “used the philosophy of racism to support their wicked oppression. Through 
the philosophy of racism all those in this country have been taught that people 
are better than others because of differences in physical and social characteristics, 
and therefore they have a right to exploit the other.”
139
By the mid-1970s, the BPP reached the height of its influence. In spite of the 
numerous assassinations, raids, trials, and incarcerations, there were over forty 
U.S. chapters: coalitions with Asian Americans, Latinos, white antiwar activists, 
feminists, and lesbians and gay men; chapters in England, Israel, Australia, and 
India; and solidarity committees in Germany, China, Japan, and Peru.
140 Among 
the reasons for their international appeal was Newton’s profoundly antiracist belief 
that “the physical and social characteristics of the people of our communities shall 
never be used as a basis for exclusion.”
141
Notes
 1. Huey P . Newton, “The T echnology Question,” in The Huey P . Newton Reader, ed. David 
Hilliard and Donald Weise (1972; repr. New York: Seven Stories Press, 2002), 261.
 2. Ibid.
 3. Malcolm X and Alex Haley, The Autobiography of Malcolm X (New York: Ballantine Books, 
1964), 147.
 4. The film was nominated for a Golden Globe and two Academy Awards, among several 
others.
 5. Lee ends the film with photos of T racy Chapman, Bill Cosby, and Janet Jackson wearing 
“X” caps.
 6. Gerald Horne, “Myth and the Making of ‘Malcolm X’,” American Historical Review 98, 
no. 2 (1993): 441.
 7. Ibid., 440.
 8. Maulana Karenga discusses the absence of Malcolm’s relationships with African leaders in 
New York, Amsterdam News, December 26, 1992, as cited in Horne, “Myth and the Mak-
ing of ‘Malcom X’,” 445. Horne calls to task historians and scholars as well, stating that in 
its failure to give a “proper account of the play of international forces . . . Lee’s flaw is not 
his alone.”
 9. Horne, “Myth and the Making of ‘Malcom X,’” 446.
 10. Ibid. The exceptional work produced in the ten years since Horne’s article was published 
has begun to fill the void of which Horne speaks. See, for example, Brenda Gayle Plummer, 
Rising Wind: Black Americans and US Foreign Affairs, 1935–1960 (Chapel Hill: University 
of North Carolina Press, 1996); Penny Von Eschen, Race Against Empire: Black Americans 
and Anticolonialism, 1937–1957 (Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 1997); Cynthia Young, 
“Soul Power: Cultural Radicalism and the Formation of a U.S. Third World Left” (PhD 
diss., Yale University, 1999); Robin D. G. Kelley and Betsy Esch, “Black Like Mao: Red 
China and Black Revolution,” Souls 1, no. 3 (1999); Robin D. G. Kelley, “‘But a Local 
pal-mara-11.indd   166pal-mara-11.indd   166 7/25/08   1:38:07 PM7/25/08   1:38:07 PM


--- PAGE 176 ---
“Long Live Third World Unity! Long Live Internationalism” 167
Phase of a World Problem’: Black History’s Global Vision, 1883–1950,” Journal of Ameri-
can History 86, no. 3 (1999); Nikhil Pal Singh and Andrew F . Jones, “Introduction,” in 
Positions, East Asia Cultures Critique; Special Issue: The Afro-Asian Century, ed. Nikhil Pal 
Singh and Andrew F . Jones (Durham: Duke University Press, 2003); Brent Hayes Edwards, 
The Practice of Diaspora: Literature, Translation, and the Rise of Black Internationalism 
(Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2003); Gerald Horne, Race Woman: The 
Lives of Shirley Graham Du Bois (New York: New York University Press, 2000).
 11. Horne, “Myth and the Making of ‘Malcolm X’,” 444.
 12. For more on the meeting between Malcolm and Castro in Harlem, see Rosemari Mealy, 
Fidel and Malcolm X: Memories of a Meeting (Melbourne, Australia: Ocean Press, 1997).
 13. Kochiyama, Passing It On, 68.
 14. Ibid.; Yuri Kochiyama, “With Justice in Her Heart: A Revolutionary Worker Interview 
with Yuri Kochiyama,” Revolutionary Worker Online, no. 986 (1998).
 15. Kochiyama, Passing It On, 70.
 16. Ibid., 69.
 17. Ibid., 74, 71.
 18. Ibid., xiv.
 19. Anonymous, “The Violent End of the Man Called Malcolm X,” Life, March 26, 1965.
 20. I use the term “tricontinental” to describe both the region known as the “global South” 
or the “Third World” and the political formation that aligned itself with this region and 
its emergent anticolonial and antiracist politics. Borrowing from Robert Young, I also 
use the phrase to invoke identification with the 1966 Havana T ricontinental Conference, 
which initiated the first anti-imperialist alliance of the peoples of the three continents as 
well as the founding moment of postcolonial theory in its journal, the T ricontinental. 
While the term itself was not used by these activist-intellectuals, “tricontinentalism” offers 
a useful framework for understanding their global, antiracist, and anti-imperialist politics. 
Robert Young, Postcolonialism: An Historical Introduction (Oxford: Blackwell). See also 
Besenia Rodriguez, “‘De la Esclavitud Yanqi a la Libertad Cubana’: U.S. Black Radicals, 
the Cuban Revolution, and the Formation of a T ricontinental Ideology,” Radical History 
Review 92 (Spring 2005): 62–87.
 21. Huey Newton, ed., To Die for the People: The Writings of Huey P . Newton (New York: Ran-
dom House, 1972), 32.
 22. In early 1971, due to discord manipulated and intensified by Hoover’s FBI, Newton 
expelled several members from the BPP , including the Intercommunal Section run from 
Algiers by Eldridge Cleaver. In hindsight, the early seeds of these differences can be appre-
ciated, for instance, in the divergent ways in which Newton and Hilliard, on the one hand, 
and Cleaver, on the other, viewed Malcolm X’s influence on their organization. Cleaver 
looked to Malcolm as one of his heroes, precisely because he saw him as “the father of 
revolutionary black nationalism.” Eldridge Cleaver, Revolution in the Congo (London: 
Revolutionary Peoples’ Communications Network, 1971), 7. Hilliard and Newton depart 
from Malcolm X precisely because of his nationalism and his focus on Africa to create a 
more expansive tricontinentalism, developing closer ties with antiracist groups of color 
in the United States and abroad. It is for these reasons that I focus on Huey P . Newton. 
For more on the internal divisions within the BPP and the FBI’s role in fomenting them, 
see J. Edgar Hoover, “Untitled FBI Memo re. COINTELPRO,” August 25, 1961. Dr. 
Huey P . Newton Foundation, Inc. and Black Panther Party Collections, Special Collec-
tions and University Archives, Stanford University, Stanford, California. Fred P . Graham, 
“F .B.I. Files T ell of Surveillance of Students, Blacks, War Foes,” New York Times, March 
25, 1971; Tim Butz, “COINTELPRO: Psychological Warfare and Magnum Justice,” 
Counter- Sp
y (1976); Ernest Volkman, “Othello,” Penthouse, April 1980. Ross K. Baker, 
pal-mara-11.indd   167pal-mara-11.indd   167 7/25/08   1:38:07 PM7/25/08   1:38:07 PM


--- PAGE 177 ---
Transnational Blackness168
“Panther Rift Rocks Whole Radical Left,” Washington Post, March 21, 1971; Earl Caldwell, 
“Internal Dispute Rends Panthers,” New York Times, March 7, 1971; Black Panther Party, 
“Expelled,” The Black Panther, February 13, 1971; Black Panther Party, “Enemies of the 
People,” The Black Panther, February 13, 1971; Black Panther Party, “Intercommunal 
Section Defects,” The Black Panther, March 20, 1971; Bobby Seale, “Bobby Seale: I am 
the Chairman of Only One Party,” The Black Panther, April 3, 1971.
 23. Malcolm X, “Message to the Grassroots” (paper presented at the Northern Grass Roots 
Leadership Conference, Detroit, MI, November 10, 1964).
 24. Ibid.
 25. Melani McAlister, “One Black Allah: The Middle East in the Cultural Politics of African 
American Liberation, 1955–1970,” American Quarterly 51, no. 3 (1999): 633.
 26. Republic of Indonesia and Republic of South Africa, Asian-African Summit 2005 and the 
Commemoration of the Golden Jubilee of the Asian-African Conference 1955 Asian Afri-
can Summit, 2005), http://asianafricansummit2005.org/history.htm (accessed August 18, 
2005).
 27. Ibid.
 28. Ibid.
 29. Shirley Graham Du Bois, Gamal Abdel Nasser: Son of the Nile, a Biography (New York: 
Third Press, 1972), 148.
 30. Indonesia and Africa, Asian-African Summit 2005 and the Commemoration of the 
Golden Jubilee of the Asian-African Conference 1955.
 31. Ibid.
 32. Wikipedia.org, B andung Conference Wikipedia.org, August 18, 2005), http://
en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bandung_Conference (accessed August 18, 2005); Jawaharlal 
Nehru, Speech to Bandung Conference Political Committee Fordham University, 1955), 
http://www.fordham.edu/halsall/mod/1955nehru-bandung2.html (accessed August 18, 
2005).
 33. Wikipedia.org, Bandung Conference.
 34. Indonesia and Africa, Asian-African Summit 2005 and the Commemoration of the 
Golden Jubilee of the Asian-African Conference 1955.
 35. T ed Roberts, “Cuba and the Non-Aligned Movement,” Center for Cuban Studies Newslet-
ter 3, no. 4–5 (1976): 68–81.
 36. Ibid.
 37. Kumar Goshal, “War and Jim Crow Set Back at Bandung,” Freedom (May–June 1955).
 38. Ibid.
 39. Unknown, “Harlem Speaks . . . About Bandung;” Ibid.
 40. Anonymous, “Harlem Speaks.”
 41. Goshal, “War and Jim Crow Set Back at Bandung,”
 42. Paul Robeson, “Greetings to the Asian-African Conference” (April, 1955). Paul Robeson 
Collection, Box 7:000150. Schomburg Center for Research in Black Culture, Bandung, 
Indonesia. Black History Matters 137.
 43. Ibid.
 44. Indeed, as Reuters and a New York Times reader noted, of the 2000 representatives in atten-
dance at the Bandung Conference, no representatives and only two advisors were women. 
Laili Roesad, “Women Advisers at Bandung,” New York Times, April 22, 1955; Reuters, 
“No Women Delegates Among 600 at Bandung,” New 
 York Times, April 18, 1955.
 45. Robeson, “Greetings to the Asian-African Conference.”
 46. W . E. B. Du Bois, “The American Negro and the Darker World,” (1957). Paul and 
Eslanda Robeson Collection. Moorland-Spingarn Research Center, Howard University, 
Washington, DC.pal-mara-11.indd   168pal-mara-11.indd   168 7/25/08   1:38:07 PM7/25/08   1:38:07 PM


--- PAGE 178 ---
“Long Live Third World Unity! Long Live Internationalism” 169
 47. Ibid.
 48. Ibid.
 49. James Boggs, “Correcting Mistaken Ideas about the Third World” (March 14, 1974). 
James and Grace Lee Boggs Collection, Walter P . Reuther Library of Labor and Urban 
Affairs, Wayne State University Archives, Detroit, Michigan. Box 3: 16.4.
 50. Ibid., 6.
 51. Ibid., 7.
 52. Ibid.
 53. Yuri Nakahara Kochiyama, “Third World,” Asian Americans for Action Newsletter, Octo-
ber 1970, 199.
 54. Ibid., 199–200.
 55. McAlister, “One Black Allah,” 632–33.
 56. S. G. Du Bois, Gamal Abdel Nasser, 163–64. The poem was published in several small 
progressive periodicals, including the December 1956 issue of Mainstream Magazine.
 57. In a dissertation chapter, I discuss Graham Du Bois’s tricontinental socialism, in par-
ticular, her interest in Egypt and the Middle East, which has often been understood as 
Pan-Africanist or dismissed entirely. I argue that her impassioned writings on the ongoing 
crisis in the Middle East provide significant insight into the global reach of her antiracist 
politics as well as her broader anti-imperialist project. See “Beyond Nation: The Forma-
tion of an Antiracist T ricontinental Discourse” (Yale University, in progress).
 58. S. G. Du Bois, Gamal Abdel Nasser, 141.
 59. Ibid., 152.
 60. Ibid., 154.
 61. McAlister, “One Black Allah,” 632–33.
 62. S. G. Du Bois, Gamal Abdel Nasser, 155; Erskine B. Childers, “The Road to Suez” (1962). 
Shirley Graham Du Bois Papers, Box 31:20. Arthur and Elizabeth Schlesinger Library on 
the History of Women in America, Cambridge, MA, 18.
 63. S. G. Du Bois, Gamal Abdel Nasser, 159.
 64. Ibid., 163.
 65. Ibid.
 66. Ibid., 163.
 67. McAlister, “One Black Allah,” 632.
 68. Ibid. McAlister also discusses the Nation of Islam’s endorsement of the Egyptian seizure of 
the Suez Canal.
 69. Nasser also developed warm ties with Guinea’s President Sékou T ouré. S. G. Du Bois, 
Gamal Abdel Nasser, 176.
 70. Robin D. G. Kelley, “House Negroes on the Loose: Malcolm X and the Black Bourgeoi-
sie,” Callaloo 21, no. 2 (1998): 431.
 71. Ibid.
 72. Ibid.
 73. Huey P . Newton, David Hilliard, and Donald Weise, The Huey P . Newton Reader (New 
York; London: Seven Stories, 2002), 52.
 74. David Hilliard, “Introduction,” in The Huey P . Newton Reader, ed. David Hilliard and 
Donald Weise (New York; London: Seven Stories, 2002), 11.
 75. Newton, Hilliard, and Weise, The Huey P . Newton Reader, 49.
 76. Ibid.
 77. Ibid., 50.
 78. Ibid.
 79. Ibid.
pal-mara-11.indd   169pal-mara-11.indd   169 7/25/08   1:38:07 PM7/25/08   1:38:07 PM


--- PAGE 179 ---
Transnational Blackness170
 80. Ibid. Robert F . Williams, “Robert Williams Speaks at Panther Benefit,” The Black Panther, 
December 27, 1969; Robert F . Williams, “Robert Williams Speaks at N.C.C.F . Panther 
Benefit; Detroit, Michigan,” The Black Panther, January 3, 1970.
 81. Newton, Hilliard, and Weise, The Huey P . Newton Reader, 50.
 82. Each May, the BPP’s newspaper, The Black Panther, published a commemorative issue 
celebrating Malcolm X’s birthday. See, for example, Black Panther Party, “The Heirs of 
Malcolm have picked up the gun and now stand millions strong facing the racist pig 
oppressor,” The Black Panther, May 19, 1970, cover.
 83. Black Panther Party, “They Work T ogether to Oppress Us. We’ll Work T ogether to Resist,’ 
The Black Panther Intercommunal News Service, February 5, 1972.
 84. Newton, Hilliard, and Weise, The Huey P . Newton Reader, 52.
 85. Hilliard, “Introduction,” 11. While Malcolm X identified largely with working-class black 
people and, often, with left-leaning causes, his increasing critiques of capitalism are rarely, 
if ever, discussed in Black Panther writings and references to his work. These critiques are 
highlighted to differing degrees by various scholars. See George Breitman, Malcolm X: The 
Man and His Ideas (New York: Merit Publishers, 1965); George Breitman, The Last Year of 
Malcolm X: The Evolution of a Revolutionary (New York: Merit Publishers, 1967); Eugene 
Wolfenstein, The Victims of Democracy: Malcolm X and the Black Revolution  (1981; repr. 
London: Free Association Books, 1989, 1981); Kelley, “House Negroes on the Loose.”
 86. David Hilliard, “Part Three: The Second Wave,” in The Huey P . Newton Reader, ed. David 
Hilliard and Donald Weise (New York; London: Seven Stories, 2002), 179.
 87. Huey Newton, “Revolutionary Intercommunalism,” in Revolutionary Intercommunalism 
and the Right of Nations
  to Self-Determination, ed. Amy Gdala (1971; repr. Newton, Wales: 
Cyhoeddwyr y Superscript, Ltd., 2004), 27.
 88. Ibid., 49.
 89. Ibid.
 90. Ibid.
 91. Ibid., 28.
 92. Ibid., 49.
 93. Ibid.
 94. BPP Chief-of-Staff David Hilliard cites Oakland’s history as pivotal in shaping Newton 
and the BPP’s internationalism. Hilliard discusses the city’s rich union tradition and its 
racially and ethnically integrated political environment: “Solidarity is the watchword, and 
we are surrounded by examples collectively asserting their power. The internationalism is 
emphasized by the fact that Oakland, like Mobile, is an integrated community. You don’t 
simply find whites and blacks, but yellows, browns, Native Americans too. These groups 
coexist in a particular way. New York is famous for its many ethnic communities. But 
whenever I visit there, I’m surprised at how groups don’t mix: the city is multiracial, not 
intraracial. But on July 4, when the young people of Oakland crowd the park by the bay 
to watch the fireworks, the array of skin shades is beautiful and impressive; couples claim 
five and six strains in their blood.” David Hilliard and Lewis Cole, This Side of Glory: the 
Autobiography of David Hilliard and the Story of the Black Panther Party (Chicago: Law-
rence Hill Books, 1993), 68.
 95. Hilliard, “Introduction,” 12.
 96. Newton, Hilliard, and Weise, The Huey P . Newton Reader, 69.
 97. Ibid., 70. In the years after these comments were made, Newton forged a relationship with 
allies representing, “oppressed people of Japan,” who formed the “Committee to Support 
Black Panthers in Japan.” These anti-imperialist activists, as critical of Japanese imperial-
ism as they were of U.S. imperialism, corresponded with Newton, sending a monetary 
donation and expressing their support for the BPP’s goals and most recently, Newton’s 
pal-mara-11.indd   170pal-mara-11.indd   170 7/25/08   1:38:07 PM7/25/08   1:38:07 PM


--- PAGE 180 ---
“Long Live Third World Unity! Long Live Internationalism” 171
“ideas of intercommunalism,” which they saw as “an enlightenment for many third-world 
people in Japan.” Newton, in turn, expressed his desire to accept the Committee’s invita-
tion to Japan, regretting that he could not do so during his visit to the People’s Republic 
of China. Newton wrote, “We were very glad to know that our Comrades in Japan have 
embraced the philosophy of revolutionary intercommunalism, for truly this will be a unit-
ing factor between our people and yours. . . . Our struggles, as you yourselves clearly 
pointed out, are one struggle; our enemies are the same enemy; our victories shall be 
common” and reprinted the Committee’s letter in the December 4, 1971, issue of The 
Black Panther. Matsuko Ishida and Japan Committee to Support the Black Panther Party 
to Huey Newton, September 25, 1971, Dr. Huey P . Newton Foundation, Inc. and Black 
Panther Party Collections, Box 7 (series 2): 3. Special Collections and University Archives, 
Stanford University; Matsuko Ishida and Japan Committee to Support the Black Panther 
Party to Huey Newton, September 25, 1971, Dr. Huey P . Newton Foundation, Inc. and 
Black Panther Party Collections, Box 7 (series 2): 3. Special Collections and University 
Archives, Stanford University; Huey Newton to Japan Committee to Support the Black 
Panther Party, November 29, 1971, Dr. Huey Black History Matters ^ 139 P . Newton Fd. 
Collection, Box 7 (series 2): 3; Huey Newton to Masao Omata, November 29, 1971, Dr. 
Huey P . Newton Fd. Collection, Box 7 (series 2): 3.
 98. For an excellent treatment of the Panthers’ policing of the police, which were aimed at 
capturing the imagination of local black communities by “subverting the state’s official 
performance of itself . . . turning the police . . . into the ‘symbols of uniformed and armed 
lawlessness,’” see Nikhil Pal Singh, Black is a Country: Race and the Unfinished Struggle for 
Democracy (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2004), esp. 199–211.
 99. Ibid.
 100. Black Panther Party for Self Defense, “Panthers Move Internationally: Free Huey at the 
U.N.,” The Black Panther, September 14, 1968; Black Panther Party, “Take Black Geno-
cide Before U.N.,” The Black Panther, March 21, 1970.
 101. Black Panther Party, “Interview: With William Patterson and Charles Garry,” The Black 
Panther, July 5, 1969; Party, “Take Black Genocide Before U.N.”; Charles W . Cheng, 
“The Cold War: Its Impact on the Black Liberation Struggle Within the United States, 
Part 1 of 2,” Freedomways 13, no. 3 (1973).
 102. See, for example, Black Panther Party for Self Defense, “Chinese Government Statement,” 
The Black Panther, July 20, 1967; Black Panther Party for Self Defense, “United States 
‘Democracy’ in Latin America,” The Black Panther, July 20, 1967; Black Panther Party for 
Self Defense, “Mexican- Americans Fight Racism,” The Black Panther, May 4, 1968; Black 
Panther Party for Self Defense, “Eyes of the Third World on U.S. Racism,” The Black 
Panther, May 4, 1968; Black Panther Party, “Chilean Workers Struggle Against Exploita-
tion,” The Black Panther, October 12, 1968; Black Panther Party, “Mexican Students 
Fight Against Repression,” The Black Panther, October 12, 1968; Black Panther Party, 
“Palestine Guerrillas,” The Black Panther, October 19, 1968; Black Panther Party, “Anti-
U.S. Rallies,” The Black Panther, October 19, 1968; Black Panther Party, “Che Guevara 
on Vietnam,” The
 Black Panther, October 19, 1968; Black Panther Party, “Cubans Sup-
port Movement,” The Black Panther, October 19, 1968; Huey Newton, “Los Siete de la 
Raza,” The Black Panther, June 28, 1969; Black Panther Party, “Boycott Lettuce,” The 
Black Panther Intercommunal News Service, September 23, 1972; Black Panther Party for 
Self Defense, “Bootlicker Tshombe Captured,” The Black Panther, July 20, 1967; Black 
Panther Party, “Bolivians Fight,” The Black Panther, February 2, 1969; Black Panther 
Party, “Bolivian ‘Niggers’ U.S.-Style Racism and Capitalism in Bolivia,” The Black Panther 
Intercommunal News Service, April 22, 1972; Black Panther Party, “Cuban Revolution 
10 Years Old,” The Black Panther, February 2, 1969; Black Panther Party, “The Heroic 
pal-mara-11.indd   171pal-mara-11.indd   171 7/25/08   1:38:07 PM7/25/08   1:38:07 PM


--- PAGE 181 ---
Transnational Blackness172
Palelestinian [sic] Women,” The Black Panther, July 26, 1969; Black Panther Party, “The 
Week of the Heroic Guerrilla,” The Black Panther, October 9, 1971. Black Panther Party, 
“Important Statements of a Brazilian Revolutionary Leader,” The Black Panther, August 
1, 1970; Black Panther Party, “International Communique No. 1,” The Black Panther, 
October 12, 1968.
 103. George Murray, “George Murray, Minister of Education, Black Panther Party, Relates 
Revolutionary History in the Making at Havana, Cuba Press Conference,” The Black 
Panther, October 12, 1968.
 104. Ibid.
 105. Ibid., 27.
 106. Mark Lane and Huey Newton, “Huey Newton Speaks,” September 1, 1970, Dr. Huey P . 
Newton Fd. Collection, Box 57 (series 1): 7. Special Collections and University Archives, 
Stanford University, Stanford, 6.
 107. Ibid.
 108. Newton, “Revolutionary Intercommunalism,” 27.
 109. Huey Newton, “Revolutionary Peoples Constitutional Convention: Resolutions and Dec-
larations, Washington, DC,” November 29, 1970, Dr. Huey P . Newton Fd. Collection, 
Box 11 (series 2).
 110. The idea for a Revolutionary Peoples Constitutional Convention emerged from the Con-
ference for a United Front against Fascism, organized by the BPP and other community 
organizations and held in Oakland July 18–20, 1969. See Black Panther Party, “A United 
Front Against Fascism,” The Black Panther, June 28, 1969; Eldridge Cleaver, “On the 
Constitution” (1970). Dr. Huey P . Newton Fd. Collection, Box 30 (series 2): 6.
 111. Black Panther Party and Youth International Party, “Revolutionary Peoples Constitutional 
Convention” (1970). Publications Relating to the Black Panther Party. Tamiment Library, 
New York University, New York.
 112. Huey Newton, “Huey’s Message to the Revolutionary People’s Constitutional Convention 
Plenary Session, Philadelphia” (September 5, 1970). Dr. Huey P . Newton Fd. Collection, 
Box 11 (series 2): 14.
 113. Newton, “Revolutionary Peoples Constitutional Convention.”
 114. Ibid., 1.
 115. Ibid.
 116. Ibid., 2.
 117. Newton, “Revolutionary Intercommunalism,” 31.
 118. Ibid., 36.
 119. Ibid.
 120. Ibid., 31.
 121. Ibid., 32.
 122. Huey Newton to Provisional Government of South Vietnam and National Liberation 
Front, 1970 Dr. Huey P . Newton Fd. Collection, Box 47 (series 1): 24. Nguyen Thi Dinh 
and South Vietnamese People’s Liberation Armed Forces to Huey Newton, October 31, 
1970, Dr. Huey P . Newton Fd. Collection, Box 7 (series 2): 3.
 123. Ibid.
 124. Ibid.
 125. Ibid.
 126. Newton, “Revolutionary Intercommunalism,” 119.
 127. Huey Newton, “Intercommunalism: A Higher Level of Consciousness” (n.d.). Dr. Huey 
P . Newton Fd. Collection, Box 48 (series 1): 4, 13.
 128. Newton, “Revolutionary Intercommunalism,” 119.
 129. Ibid.
pal-mara-11.indd   172pal-mara-11.indd   172 7/25/08   1:38:08 PM7/25/08   1:38:08 PM


--- PAGE 182 ---
“Long Live Third World Unity! Long Live Internationalism” 173
 130. Ibid.
 131. Within Black Atlantic political history, Selassie is perhaps most well known for being per-
ceived as God incarnate among Rastafari and for leading an independent Ethiopia while 
it was under attack by Italy’s Mussolini. By 1960, particularly after a failed revolutionary 
Marxist coup in December, Selassie became increasingly conservative, aligning with the 
United States, United Kingdom, and other Western nations. Black Panther Party, “Agnew 
Visits his Country Estate—Ethiopia,” The Black Panther, July 19, 1971.
 132. Ibid.
 133. Ibid.
 134. Ibid.
 135. Huey P . Newton, “Uniting Against the Common Enemy”; The Black Panther, October 
23, 1971.
 136. Newton, “Revolutionary Intercommunalism,” 33.
 137. Ibid., 45.
 138. Many Panthers, including Newton himself, have admitted that he was a far more effective 
thinker and writer than orator. He claimed that he received letters from “truly oppressed 
. . . welfare recipients . . . saying, “I thought the Party was for us; why do you want to give 
those dirty Vietnamese our life blood?” Ibid., 47.
 139. ‘If we must die—let it not be like hogs/ Hunted and penned in an inglorious spot,/ While 
round us bark the mad and hungry dogs,/ Making their mock at our accursed lot./ If we 
must die—oh, let us nobly die/ So that our precious blood may not be shed/ In vain; then 
even the monsters we defy/ Shall be constrained to honor us, though dead!/ Oh kins-
men! We must meet the common foe;/ Though far outnumbered let us show we’re brave, 
And for their thousand blows deal one death blow!/ What though before us lies the open 
grave!/ Like men we’ll face the murderous, cowardly pack,/ Pressed to the wall, dying, but 
fighting back!” Claude McKay, “If We Must Die,” The Black Panther, January 4, 1969 
[1919]. Newton, “Intercommunalism: A Higher Level of Consciousness.”
 140. Newton, “Huey’s Message to the Revolutionary People’s Constitutional Convention,” 4, 
6. 
 141. Newton, “Revolutionary Intercommunalism,” 5. Black History Matters, 141
pal-mara-11.indd   173pal-mara-11.indd   173 7/25/08   1:38:08 PM7/25/08   1:38:08 PM


--- PAGE 183 ---
This page intentionally left blank


--- PAGE 184 ---
C HAPTER  12
“A Free Black Mind Is a 
Concealed Weapon”
Institutions and Social 
Movements in the African 
Diaspora
Robin J. Hayes
My examination of the relationship between African liberation and Black 
Power engages discussions within the social movement literature about how sociall 
movements exchange ideas and tactics across national boundaries and the effects 
these exchanges have on the organizations and activists involved. Sociologists have 
confirmed that transnational exchanges between social movements are usually 
based on some form of mutual identification between the organizations or activ-
ists involved. According to social movement theorists such as Hanspeter Kriesi, 
Doug McAdam, and Dieter Rucht, this process, defined as “cross-national diffu-
sion,” involves the unidirectional transmission of concepts from one social move-
ment organization or activist to another.
1 The manner in which social movement 
leaders choose to promote their work or strategically borrow from the repertoires 
of organizations in other countries, in addition to “identity transforming mecha-
nisms” that can change the political perceptions of social movement activists or 
constituents and their relationships with other groups, can facilitate the process 
of cross-national diffusion.
2 However, interviews with Black Power activists and 
archival data reveal that institutions indigenous to historically marginalized com-
munities also play a critical role in facilitating transnational interactions between 
social movements. Institutions indigenous to the African Diaspora are identity 
transforming mechanisms that serve as communication networks, draw upon 
their communities’ cultural frameworks to delineate (and sometimes expand) the 
pal-mara-12.indd   175pal-mara-12.indd   175 7/25/08   1:53:38 PM7/25/08   1:53:38 PM


--- PAGE 185 ---
Transnational Blackness176
boundaries of group membership, and validate the work, “performances,” and 
“claims” of social movement actors.3 My research provides empirical evidence of 
how institutions in the African Diaspora encourage black social movements to 
identify with each other in spite of national boundaries and reciprocally exchange 
their ideas and tactics.
Institutions indigenous to historically marginalized communities are perceived 
by their constituencies to be intended for community consumption and con-
trolled by esteemed community members. Strong institutions can provide the 
resources necessary for social movements to interact across national boundaries, 
take advantage of political opportunities, and collect and disseminate informa-
tion.
4 By providing sites for formal and informal discussions about issues that are 
relevant to their communities, indigenous institutions also help frame cultural 
and political discourses in historically marginalized communities and facilitate 
the construction of interpersonal networks that are important to the survival 
and success of community members.
5 The environments created and sustained 
by these institutions help foster political protest because, “institutional life . . . 
draws people into the settings within which collective action can erupt.”
6 In her 
groundbreaking work The Boundaries of Blackness, political scientist Cathy Cohen 
demonstrates how indigenous institutions can also exclude the most vulnerable 
members of their communities by defining certain behaviors and beliefs as guide-
lines for membership in historically marginalized groups.
7 Anthropologist Kamari 
Clarke agrees that institutions in the black Atlantic have “substantive rules and 
regulations that legitimate norms” and “protocol and procedures by which norms 
can be derived.”
8 Therefore the identity shaping the work of institutions that 
are indigenous to the African Diaspora is grounded in dynamic conceptions of 
racial kinship and group consciousness. My research reveals how these concep-
tions affect the way indigenous institutions provide information about the ideas 
and tactics of social movements in other countries.
Scholars of the African Diaspora have established that black institutions express 
solidarity with communities of African descent in other countries, because they 
recognize how the ideology of race and mechanisms of white supremacy operate 
globally in a variety of contexts.
9 The transnational interests of these institutions 
are grounded in a tradition of engagement with people, institutions, and ideas in 
the black Diaspora and a desire to address the wounds caused by the traumatic 
forced dispersal of their people from their African homeland, which is both geo-
graphically “real” and culturally, politically, and historically “imagined.”
10 His-
torians Sidney Lemelle and Robin D. G. Kelley explain that black institutions 
construct and maintain the systems of knowledge that reproduce this “imagined 
community” and thus have a significant effect on the construction of African 
diasporic identity.
11 These transnational imaginings, and the meanings that are 
invested in these visions by institutions, are the consequences of social practices 
that involve forms of work, negotiations between individuals and “globally defined 
fields of possibility.”
12 The research I have conducted illustrates that indigenous 
institutions mediate transnational relationships between black social movements 
pal-mara-12.indd   176pal-mara-12.indd   176 7/25/08   1:53:38 PM7/25/08   1:53:38 PM


--- PAGE 186 ---
“A Free Black Mind Is a Concealed Weapon” 177
by articulating to their constituencies how the ideas and tactics of these move-
ments embody the strategies of resistance best suited for what they define as the 
common diasporic good.
Method
This study draws from semi-structured interviews that I conducted with par-
ticipants in the American Committee on Africa (ACOA), Black Panther Party 
(BPP), Organization of Afro-American Unity (OAAU), and Student Nonvio-
lent Coordinating Committee (SNCC). I chose each of these interview subjects 
because my prior examination of these organizations’ records, memoirs of Black 
Power activists, and secondary source data confirmed that they would be able to 
provide information about the issues most relevant to this research. I met with 
each subject in person for sessions that lasted between ninety minutes and three 
hours between June 2004 and June 2006. The interviews took place at locations 
of the subjects’ choosing (usually their workplaces or homes) in the New York 
City metropolitan area, Philadelphia, Jackson, New Haven, and Lusaka. Each of 
these subjects spoke with me extensively about their work as antiracist activists, 
their involvement with African American institutions, and their observations of 
interactions between Black Power organizations and African independence move-
ments between 1957 and 1971. During interviews, former participants in the 
ACOA, BPP , OAAU, and SNCC explained how they received information about 
African independence movements through historically black colleges and univer-
sities and emancipated spaces and how this information influenced the ideas and 
tactics of the organizations with which they were involved.
This study also draws from archival sources. I reviewed the Dr. Huey P . Newton 
Foundation Collection at Stanford University Library’s Division of Special Col-
lections and University Archives, which includes Newton’s correspondence, BPP 
records, and a variety of audiovisual materials. In addition, I reviewed the Student 
Nonviolent Coordinating Committee Papers, 1959-1972 and The Student Voice. 
My research for this chapter also included writings and eyewitness accounts by 
Eldridge and Kathleen Cleaver, two of the leaders of the International Section of 
the BPP in Algiers, speeches by Malcolm X and Stokely Carmichael, and memoirs 
by activists who were involved in the leadership of the BPP , OAAU, and SNCC, 
including David Hilliard, Malcolm X, Stokely Carmichael (Kwame T ure), James 
Forman, and John Lewis.
This chapter explores how historically black colleges and universities (HBCUs) 
and emancipated spaces—helped facilitate exchanges between Black Power and 
African independence organizations. Among the most influential institutions 
in the African American counterpublic, historically black colleges and universi-
ties and emancipated spaces help organize and develop resources that are signifi-
cant to social movement emergence, including leaders, solidarity incentives, and 
communication networks.
13 My research revealed that HBCUs create physical 
and discursive environments in which dominant narratives of black inferiority 
pal-mara-12.indd   177pal-mara-12.indd   177 7/25/08   1:53:38 PM7/25/08   1:53:38 PM


--- PAGE 187 ---
Transnational Blackness178
are discredited through curriculum and practices that emphasize the heritage 
of communities of African descent and their successful struggles against rac-
ism. This work also examines how emancipated spaces fostered cross-national 
exchanges between African independence and Black Power, because interpersonal 
exchanges between activists are critical to communication throughout the Diaspo-
ra.
14 I use the term “emancipated spaces” to describe physically and intellectually 
safe areas within the African Diaspora that are organized by antiracist activists, 
such as conferences, salons, or more intimate gatherings, where frank dialogues 
and earnest interpersonal exchanges between activists of African descent can take 
place. These spaces are emancipated because they offer activists opportunities to 
devise and exemplify alternatives to white supremacist practices. HBCUs and 
emancipated spaces are important to the African American tradition of resistance 
and are able to facilitate mutual identification between black social movements 
across national boundaries by providing information to their constituencies about 
organizations and activists in other countries and offering resources to support 
transnational political activism.
“A Free Black Mind is a Concealed Weapon”
Interviews with activists indicate that historically black colleges and universities 
create environments that facilitate the political involvement of students by offer-
ing information about antiracist strategies, fostering group consciousness, and 
exposing them to social movement activity. I learned about Peter Bailey from 
my research about Malcolm X and the OAAU. He served as the editor of the 
OAAU’s newsletter, the Blacklash, and authored Seventh Child: A Family Memoir 
of Malcolm X. He recently retired from his position as editor of Vital Issues: a Jour-
nal of African American Speeches. From the office of Vital Issues and the National 
Council of Black Women in Silver Spring, Maryland, which is decorated with a 
stately portrait of Sojourner T ruth, Peter Bailey informed me that his early politi-
cal involvement occurred when students organized solidarity demonstrations at 
Woolworth’s in Washington, DC, to support the original sit-in demonstrators 
from Greensboro, North Carolina: “My first political activism was at Howard . 
. . they had some serious, in the ’60s . . . you know, students there. You know, 
when we used to go . . . [to] Woolworth’s it was not a whole bunch of us. Maybe 
about twenty-five, thirty of us would go over there to do the picketing. . . . I 
thought that was a major move and my first political activism. And I think that 
was because of the fact that you had . . . some very, very sharp and well aware 
students at Howard.”
15
Mr. Bailey’s recollections of the discursive environment at Howard are corrob-
orated by Stokely Carmichael, former chairperson of the SNCC, who explained 
in his autobiography that he decided to attend Howard University after meeting 
members of the Nonviolent Action Group (NAG) who impressed him “as smart, 
serious, political, sassy—and they were black.”
16 Both Carmichael and Marian 
Wright Edelman, an alumnus of Spelman College and former SNCC activist, 
recall building close relationships with HBCU professors who supported their 
pal-mara-12.indd   178pal-mara-12.indd   178 7/25/08   1:53:38 PM7/25/08   1:53:38 PM


--- PAGE 188 ---
“A Free Black Mind Is a Concealed Weapon” 179
political activism.17 During the late 1950s and 1960s, HBCUs served as part of an 
antiracist communication network that linked young, educated African Ameri-
cans from different economic and national backgrounds through geographic and 
discursive space.
Although HBCUs were critical to the development of the SNCC, students, 
faculty, and administrators at historically black colleges and universities had a 
variety of opportunities to interact with other Black Power organizations and 
activists. The Nashville consortium of black institutions of higher learning, which 
included Fisk, T ennessee State College, American Baptist Theological Seminary, 
and Meharry Medical School, developed into a movement center that devised 
tactics and strategies and trained a variety of future SNCC leaders to implement 
them, including Diane Nash, James Bevel, Marion Barry, Cordell Reagon, Ber-
nard Lafayette, and Mathew Jones.
18 T uskegee students also invited Malcolm X, 
principal of the OAAU, to speak on the campus on February 3, 1965, just three 
weeks before he was assassinated.
19 While he was still a minister with the Nation 
of Islam, Malcolm X also participated in a legendary debate at Howard Univer-
sity with March on Washington coordinator Bayard Rustin, which was entitled 
“Integration or Separation?” and orchestrated by Rustin to present X’s ideas to the 
Howard community.
20 In this period, the manner in which historically black col-
leges and universities provided resources to support group consciousness-raising 
activities appears closely related to the emergence and sustenance of radical Afri-
can American activism.
HBCU student activists eventually adapted the slogan “a free black mind is a 
concealed weapon,” and even wary administrators were unable to deny the sup-
port these students enjoyed from the grassroots of the African American com-
munity.
21 The theoretical grounding and political interests of HBCU students 
affected the Black Power movement in a variety of ways. In August 2005 I inter-
viewed Bob Moses, whom civil rights movement historians and activists identify 
as one of the most committed and inspirational SNCC organizers. Bob Moses is 
the founder and head of the Algebra Project, which aims to advance the struggle 
for equality by assisting students in inner city and rural areas to achieve math-
ematics literacy. From his classroom in Jackson, Mississippi at the historically 
black Lanier Public High School, a few minutes drive from where fellow antira-
cist organizer Medgar Evers was assassinated, Bob Moses observed that HBCU 
students who were involved in SNCC had received a political education, which 
informed their political praxis:
many of them . . . helped lead SNCC into the whole country . . . there’s not just 
style but there’s an issue of argumentation . . . who can stand up in public meet-
ings and actually argue and persuade . . . a lot of the students . . . are learning how 
to do this, but they’re doing it in a style, which evolves from the work itself, and 
not from the university . . . and it’s not just academic, it’s in the sense of youth 
who are oriented to real political discussion, not something they’ve done in the 
classroom. It’s something that they’ve gathered together and are doing as radical-
ized young students. . . . They’re radicalized on the one hand by movement and 
pal-mara-12.indd   179pal-mara-12.indd   179 7/25/08   1:53:38 PM7/25/08   1:53:38 PM


--- PAGE 189 ---
Transnational Blackness180
they’re radicalized on the other hand by intellectuals who are interested in these 
kind of movements.22
The impact of HBCU students’ political education on their activism with the 
SNCC exemplifies how institutions indigenous to the African Diaspora build 
community and arm their constituencies with the intellectual tools to challenge 
white supremacist discourses and practices.
During the 1960s, HBCUs also facilitated connections between this new gen-
eration of activists and African anticolonialism in a manner that further enhanced 
the image of Africa as a redemptive and inspirational icon. Former SNCC chair-
person and HBCU alumnus John Lewis recalled how the success of African inde-
pendence movements raised the stakes for African American insurgency:
When I came back to Nashville in the fall of 1958 . . . [t]here was a sense of urgency 
and awareness spreading . . . among black students throughout the city. There was 
a growing feeling that this movement for civil rights . . . demanded our involve-
ment. This wasn’t even just an American movement anymore. Amazing changes 
were happening in Africa . . . and we couldn’t help being thrilled . . . but also a little 
ashamed. Here were black people thousands of miles away achieving liberation and 
independence from nations that had ruled them for centuries . . . and we couldn’t 
even get a hamburger and a Coke at a soda fountain.
23
HBCU students had a variety of opportunities to interact with representa-
tives from African independence movements on campus. For example, Stokely 
Carmichael remembered that Bayard Rustin brought Kenneth Kuanda, leader 
of the Zambian independence movement, to a meeting of NAG shortly after he 
had been elected president and that Howard’s proximity to the new African dip-
lomatic corps enabled interactions between the student activist group and Afri-
can independence representatives.
24 In August 1968, Howard University hosted 
the Eighth Annual Conference of the Pan-African Students Organization in the 
Americas (PASOA) entitled “African Solidarity at Home and Abroad,” which 
featured presentations by African “diplomats and celebrated artists.”
25 The 1970 
Congress of African People, which “aimed to make a sharp and penetrating analy-
sis of the conditions that oppress [people of African descent] and develop strate-
gies and programs for liberation,” was held at several Atlanta University Center 
(AUC) campuses, including Morehouse, Spelman, and Morris Brown.
26 Confer-
ence organizers featured a screening of the film “Angola Liberation Struggle” and 
invited independence leaders Julius Nyerere and Sékou T ouré as keynote speak-
ers.
27 The T uskegee Institute bestowed honorary degrees at special convocations 
upon Nnamdi Azikiwe, Kwame Nkrumah, T om Mboya, and Leopold-Sédar Sen-
ghor, who respectively helped lead nationalist struggles in Nigeria, Ghana, Kenya, 
and Senegal.
28 HBCUs also hosted several South African independence activists, 
including African National Congress Youth League co-founder Oliver Tambo and 
Pan-Africanist Congress co-founder Vusumzi Linda Make, who were traveling 
throughout the United States on speaking tours organized by the ACOA.
29 These 
events illustrate how historically black colleges and universities, as institutions 
pal-mara-12.indd   180pal-mara-12.indd   180 7/25/08   1:53:38 PM7/25/08   1:53:38 PM


--- PAGE 190 ---
“A Free Black Mind Is a Concealed Weapon” 181
indigenous to the African Diaspora, used their resources to provide information 
to their constituencies in a manner that could facilitate transnational exchanges 
between social movements. Black Power activists who were involved with HBCUs 
were politicized by these educational institutions and exposed to the ideas and 
tactics of social movements in other parts of the Diaspora.
“A Whole Window Has Been Opened”
The manner in which Black Power activists encountered African independence 
movements within emancipated spaces in the black Diaspora also affected their 
political ideas and tactics. Emancipated spaces enable the physical and discursive 
articulation of Diaspora through the relationships and correspondence that they 
engender by actualizing African descent as a frame of cultural identity and antira-
cist praxis.
30 Historian Penny Von Eschen pointed to the Pan-African Congresses 
of the early twentieth century (1900, 1919, 1921, and 1927) and the Bandung 
Conference in 1955 as examples of diasporic gatherings in which transnational 
strategies for combating white supremacist practices were discussed and relation-
ships between activists were developed and strengthened.
31 Through the boundar-
ies of group membership that emancipated spaces delineate with decisions about 
invited participants and programmatic content, these institutions also valorize 
and criticize certain kinds of antiracist politics. Similar to other institutions indig-
enous to the African Diaspora, emancipated spaces help build group conscious-
ness and enable antiracist dialogues and practices to take place.
Following his engagement with African independence activists in discursively 
and geographically emancipated spaces during his 1964 tour of decolonized Afri-
can nations, Malcolm X’s political and tactical strategies demonstrated that he 
believed African anti-colonialism were directly relevant to the struggles of African 
Americans. In May 2005, I interviewed former OAAU participant and Muham-
mad Speaks editor Sylvester Leaks in the Crown Heights brownstone where he 
has lived for forty years. Since his involvement with the OAAU, he has continued 
his work as a journalist and community activist. Mr. Leaks informed me that the 
founding charter of the OAAU was directly influenced by the Organization of 
African Unity (OAU): “we went to the United Nations and got a copy of [the 
constitution of the OAU] [laughs] And [copied it] almost verbatim. . . . Unite. 
Unite. Unite. Unite black people whatever his or her persuasion. . . . Unity was 
the first, foremost and last thing that was needed.”
32
Peter Bailey observed that the audiences of OAAU weekly rallies at the Audu-
bon Ballroom in Harlem, which were as large as six or seven hundred people, 
were attended by “students . . . working class brothers and sisters, some black 
professionals . . . real regular black folks who had become disaffected from the 
traditional civil rights organizations and were looking for another way of doing 
things.”
33 Mr. Leaks also observed that the OAAU’s consciousness-raising work 
during its weekly rallies helped address the African American community’s desire 
to learn about Africa.
34 For example, Malcolm X introduced Tanzanian Minister 
pal-mara-12.indd   181pal-mara-12.indd   181 7/25/08   1:53:38 PM7/25/08   1:53:38 PM


--- PAGE 191 ---
Transnational Blackness182
of Economic Development Muhammad Babu to his constituents: “[He was] the 
one who came forth and suggested that the African summit conference pass a res-
olution thoroughly condemning the mistreatment of Afro-Americans in America 
and thoroughly supporting the freedom struggle for human rights of our people 
in this country was President Julius Nyerere. I was honored to spend three hours 
with him, when I was in Dar es Salaam and Tanganyika.”
35
The considerable impact of Malcolm X’s experiences in emancipated spaces 
in postcolonial Africa on his political ideas and strategies illustrates how this 
indigenous institution offers valuable resources and information that encourage 
activists to identify with and emulate organizations in other countries of the 
African Diaspora.
In June 2005, I interviewed George Houser, who served as the executive direc-
tor of ACOA between 1954 and 1981, at the woodland home that he shares 
with his wife, Jean, in a cooperative community in Pomona, New York. ACOA 
became one of the most prominent organizations that advocated for U.S. for-
eign policies that supported autonomy and economic justice in Africa. ACOA 
developed strong ties with African American institutions and activists during 
its decades of activism against colonialism and neo-colonialism.
36 Although he 
is semi-retired, Mr. Houser’s home office is filled with manuscripts, newspaper 
clippings and photographs of him with African dignitaries, including Nelson 
Mandela. During our meeting, he informed me that SNCC activists accepted 
an invitation that was sent through ACOA by Harry Belafonte to visit Guinea 
in 1964, because they were interested in Guinean independence leader Sékou 
T ouré, “[who] was looked upon as one of the radical leaders in Africa, along with 
Nkrumah [and] Lumumba.”
37
SNCC activists recognized newly independent Guinea as an emancipated 
space partly because of the widespread presence of black Africans in leadership 
positions. Bob Moses, who participated in the SNCC delegation to Guinea, 
along with James Forman, John Lewis, Bob and Dona Moses, Prathia Hall, 
Julian Bond, Ruby Doris Robinson, Bill Hansen, Donald Harris, Matthew Jones, 
and Fannie Lou Hamer, remembered how members of the delegation eagerly 
engaged and learned from people during their trip: “I think certainly, for Fan-
nie Lou Hamer, it was an astonishing experience . . . she was wonderful because 
language was no barrier. She didn’t speak a word of French, but she never stopped 
talking . . . she would just grab people and talk to them and talk to them. And, 
of course, when you do that and you can do that from some place very central 
and deep within you, then you’re communicating . . . it’s like a whole window 
has been opened.”
38
While meeting with SNCC activists, Sékou T ouré encouraged them to take a 
broad view of the goals of their struggle, which appreciates the close relationship 
between what SNCC did in the United States and what happened in Africa.
39 
T ouré also told the delegation, “it is fundamental that you see the problem as 
exploitation. While you should speak to black people first of all, it is the entire 
pal-mara-12.indd   182pal-mara-12.indd   182 7/25/08   1:53:38 PM7/25/08   1:53:38 PM


--- PAGE 192 ---
“A Free Black Mind Is a Concealed Weapon” 183
community that must be liberated.” 40 The impact of these experiences on the 
delegates is exemplified by Mrs. Hamer’s observations: “All my life I’ve lived in 
America and no president ever came to see me. I go to Guinea, and the first day, 
the president himself come to where we staying to say hello. . . . It was ordinary 
people like me, who were running everything. The ones who were left back and 
never had no chance. Now they have the chance to run they own country.”
41
The SNCC delegation’s experiences in postcolonial Guinea illustrate how Black 
Power activists in emancipated spaces engaged African independence movements. 
After their return to the United States, the SNCC incorporated an increasingly 
transnational perspective and interest in building coalitions with African libera-
tion movements.
42 This evidence suggests that transnational encounters between 
activists in emancipated spaces can have a significant influence on the antiracist 
praxis of black social movements.
The BPP engaged African independence movements in the emancipated space 
of postcolonial Algeria. Former Minister of Information Kathleen Cleaver observed 
that Algerian interest and support of the BPP was enhanced by their belief that 
“the liberation of Blacks from racist oppression and capitalist exploitation required 
a social revolution to transform the economic and political institutions of the 
United States.”
43 Following the Front de Libération Nationale’s bloody victory over 
the French, the organization used its newly acquired state authority to transform 
Algiers into a subversive metropole. The 1969 Pan-African Cultural Festival in 
Algiers—which was attended by hundreds of people from all over Africa, the 
Middle East, and Europe, including representatives from the SNCC, other politi-
cal figures, African American jazz musicians, playwrights, actors and actresses, 
poets, scholars, writers, and political activists (among them Nina Simone, Archie 
Shepp, Ed Bullins, Dr. Nathan Hare, and Haki Madhubuti)—provided the BPP 
with an opportunity to both learn from and engage African anti-colonialism.
44 
Muhammed Ben Yaya, Algeria’s Minister of Information, allowed the BPP to set 
up an exhibition in connection with the festival that featured an Afro-American 
Information Center, the art work of Black Panther illustrator Emory Douglass as 
well as large framed posters of Black Panther martyrs and brightly colored draw-
ings showing Afro-Americans holding guns or fighting the police.
45 In his autobi-
ography, former BPP Chief of Staff David Hilliard recalled his emotional response 
to spending time at the festival: “I’ve gone through the cobblestone streets of the 
Casbah with a guide showing us the houses where Ali La Pointe—the hero of the 
great film The Battle of Algiers—actually hid out, met some of the revolutionary 
leaders who knew Fanon. My stomach clenches with its familiar ache. We’ve come 
a long way . . . we’ve become a part of history.”
46
The BPP’s successful participation in the Pan-African Cultural Festival led 
to the establishment of an officially recognized International Section that was 
headed by Kathleen and Eldridge Cleaver in Algiers and would eventually include 
Don and Barbara Easley Cox, Michael Cetewayo Tabor, Connie Matthews, Pete 
and Charlotte O’Neal, Sékou Odinga, Denise Oliver, and Larry Mack.
pal-mara-12.indd   183pal-mara-12.indd   183 7/25/08   1:53:38 PM7/25/08   1:53:38 PM


--- PAGE 193 ---
Transnational Blackness184
Political scientists Charles Jones and Michael Clemons explained that Algeria 
became a “valuable political sanctuary for Panther expatriates” in which they had 
interactions with representatives from the African Party for the Independence 
of Guinea-Bissau and Cape Verde Islands (PAIGC), African National Congress 
(ANC), Pan-Africanist Congress (PAC), and the Zimbabwe African People’s Union 
(ZAPU).
47 The official recognition that the Front de Libération Nationale (FLN) 
granted to the International Section came with the ability to receive entrance and 
exist visas for guests and members of the organization, a monthly stipend, and 
political credibility within the activist community in this emancipated space.
48 
Eldridge Cleaver explained to a New York Times reporter: “In Algiers, the Panthers 
are respected as one of approximately a dozen liberation movements accredited 
by the Algerian Government and provided with assistance and support in their 
task of overthrowing the governments in power in their respective countries. This 
. . . is the first time in the struggle of the black people in America that they have 
established representation abroad . . . Here in Algiers . . . we internationalize our 
struggle, we show that oppression is an international problem.”
49
By validating the BPP as a revolutionary organization on par with other Afri-
can nationalist liberation movements, the FLN encouraged these activists to fur-
ther radicalize their political ideology and organizing strategies.
I contacted Barbara Easley Cox through her husband, Don Cox, who is cur-
rently in exile in the French Pyrenees. Historical accounts confirm that the Coxes 
were part of the leadership of the Oakland chapter of the BPP before they joined 
the International Section in Algeria. In July 2005, I interviewed Ms. Cox at home 
in north Philadelphia, which is decorated with a quote from SNCC co-founder 
Ella Baker that states, “We who believe in freedom cannot rest.” Her home is near 
the church in which she eulogized fellow Panther Fred Hampton, who was assas-
sinated by members of the Chicago police department in 1969. Barbara Easley 
Cox told me that while she lived in Algeria, her friendships with African and 
Arab women as well as other representatives of African liberation movements 
profoundly influenced her political worldview:
I met women from other liberation movements, and that’s where my knowledge 
of the world became more focused, because when people say, “I’m from so and 
so and so,” you start looking at the world map, whether it’s Asia, Africa, South 
America, and then you start listening to other people’s historical battles, and then 
you realize that you’re not the only group of little black people, this select group 
of African-Americans in America that are fighting for that freedom. . . . Once you 
travel abroad and you deal with other peoples, you start realizing it is not a white-
skinned person that is the enemy. It is a class distinction, and I think the class 
distinction is, you know, based on a few people having a whole lot and everybody 
else getting nothing.
50
Ms. Cox’s experiences further illustrate how, by attracting activists from through-
out the African Diaspora and providing resources to social movements, emanci-
pated spaces facilitate transformative exchanges of antiracist ideas and tactics.
pal-mara-12.indd   184pal-mara-12.indd   184 7/25/08   1:53:39 PM7/25/08   1:53:39 PM


--- PAGE 194 ---
“A Free Black Mind Is a Concealed Weapon” 185
Conclusions
This article illustrates how institutions indigenous to the African Diaspora can 
help facilitate cross-national mutual identification between black social move-
ments by devoting their resources to providing information about strategies for 
resisting white supremacy, facilitating interpersonal exchanges between activists 
and offering valuable resources for transnational political activism. HBCUs and 
emancipated spaces educated their African American constituencies about African 
independence movements, enabled African independence and Black Power activ-
ists to dialogue with one another, and offered a variety of resources to support 
the work of both movements. The work of these institutions led to transnational 
exchanges between the OAAU, SNCC, BPP and African anti-colonial organiza-
tions that directly affected the political ideas and tactics of Black Power.
This chapter points toward a theory of transnational engagement between 
social movements in the African Diaspora that I am currently exploring through 
further research. My work suggests that institutions indigenous to the African 
Diaspora help facilitate transnational exchanges between black social movements 
in three ways. First, indigenous institutions devote their resources to gathering and 
sharing information about social movement organizations and activists through-
out the Diaspora. Second, these institutions filter this information through the 
master injustice frames that their communities use to continuously oppose their 
marginalization. Master injustice frames are the philosophies, narratives, symbols, 
and actions that historically marginalized communities most consistently utilize 
over time to articulate their subjugation as unjust and build collective identity. 
Third, indigenous institutions authenticate the claims and work of black social 
movements in other countries that are consistent with the parameters of their 
communities’ master injustice frames. In performing these functions, institutions 
indigenous to the African Diaspora enhance and perpetuate the mutual identi-
fication across national boundaries that is necessary for transnational exchanges 
between social movements.
Notes
 1. Hanspeter, Kriesi, “Cross-National Diffusion of Protest,” in New  Social Movements in 
Western Europe, ed. Hanspeter Kriesi, et al. (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota., 
1993), 181–206; Doug McAdam and Dieter Rucht, “The Cross-National Diffusion of 
Movement Ideas,” Annals of the American Academy of Political and Social Science 528 (July 
1993): 56–74.
 2. Doug McAdam, Sidney Tarrow, and Charles Tilly, Dynamics of Contention, ed. Doug 
McAdam, Sidney Tarrow, and Charles Tilly, Cambridge Studies in Contentious Politics, 
paperback ed. (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2001), David A. Snow and Rob-
ert D. Benford, “Alternative Types of Cross-National Diffusion in the Social Movement 
Arena,” in Social Movements in a Globalizing World, ed. Donatella della Porta, Hanspeter. 
Kriesi, and Dieter Rucht (New York: St. Martin’s, 1999).
 3. McAdam, Tarrow, and Tilly, Dynamics of Contention, 157–58.
pal-mara-12.indd   185pal-mara-12.indd   185 7/25/08   1:53:39 PM7/25/08   1:53:39 PM


--- PAGE 195 ---
Transnational Blackness186
 4. Margaret E. Keck and Kathryn Sikkink, Activists Beyond Borders: Advocacy Networks in 
International Politics (Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 1998).
 5. Melissa Harris-Lacewell, Barbershops, Bibles and Bet: Everyday T alk and Black Political 
Thought (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 2004).
 6. Frances Fox Piven and Richard A. Cloward, Poor People’s Movements: Why They Succeed, 
How They Fail (1979; repr. New York: Vintage, 1979), 11.
 7. Cathy Cohen, The Boundaries of Blackness: Aids and the Breakdown of Black Politics (Chi-
cago: University of Chicago Press, 1999).
 8. Kamari Maxine Clarke, Mapping Yoruba Networks: Power and Agency in the Making of 
Transnational Communities (Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 2004), 40.
 9. Brent Hayes Edwards, The Practice of Diaspora: Literature, Translation and the Rise of 
Black Internationalism (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2003); Penny M. Von 
Eschen, Race against Empire: Black Americans and Anti-Colonialism, 1937-1957  (Ithaca, 
NY: Cornell University Press, 1997).
 10. Robin D. G. Kelley, “‘But a Local Phase of a World Problem’: Black History’s Global 
Vision, 1883–1950,” The Nation and Beyond: Transnational Perspectives on United States 
History; A Special Issue 86, no. 3 (December 1999): 1045–77.
 11. Benedict Anderson, Imagined Communities: Reflections on the Origin and Spread of Nation-
alism (London: Verso, 1983); Sidney Lemelle and Robin D. G. Kelley, “Introduction 
Imagining Home: Pan-Africanism Revisited,” in Imagining Home: Class, Culture and 
Nationalism in the African Diaspora, ed. Sidney. Lemelle and Robin D. G. Kelley (Lon-
don: Verso, 1994), 7.
 12. Arjun Appadurai, Modernity at Large (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 1996), 
31.
 13. Harris-Lacewell, Barbershops, Bibles and Bet; Aldon Morris, Origins of the Civil Rights 
Movement: Black Communities Organizing for Change (New York: Free Press, 1984).
 14. E
dwards, The Practice of Diaspora; Kelley, “‘But a Local Phase of a World Problem’”; 
Ronald W . Walters, “The Pan African Movement in the United States,” in Pan Africanism 
in the African Diaspora: An Analysis of Modern Afrocentric Political Movements (Detroit: 
Wayne State University Press, 1997).
 15. Robin Hayes, interview with A. Peter Bailey, Silver Spring, Maryland, 2005.
 16. Stokely Carmichael and Michael Ekwueme Thewell, Ready for Revolution: The Life and 
Struggles of Stokely Carmichael (Kwame T ouré) (New York: Scribner, 2003), 112.
 17. Ibid., 137; Harry G. Lefever, Undaunted by the Fight: Spelman College and the Civil Rights 
Movement, 1957-1967 (Macon, GA: Mercer University Press, 2005), 167.
 18. Morris, Origins of the Civil Rights Movement, 176.
 19. New York Federal Bureau of Investigation, “Organization of Afro-American Unity Inter-
nal Security—Miscellaneous,” in FBI File on Organization of Afro-American Unity (New 
York: 1965).
 20. Jervis Anderson, Bayard Rustin: Troubles I’ve Seen: A Biography (Berkeley: University of 
California Press, 1998).
 21. Carmichael and Thewell, Ready for Revolution, 254.
 22. Hayes, interview with Robert (Bob) Moses, Jackson, Mississippi, 2005.
 23. John Lewis and Michael D’Orso, Walking with the Wind: A Memoir of the Movement (New 
York: Simon and Schuster, 1998), 81.
 24. Carmichael and Thewell, Ready for Revolution.
 25. Pan-African Students Organization in the Americas, “Press Release: 8th Annual Confer-
ence at Howard University,” in Student
  Nonviolent Coordinating Committee Papers, 1959-
1972 (Sanford, NC: Microfilming Corporation of America, 1968).
pal-mara-12.indd   186pal-mara-12.indd   186 7/25/08   1:53:39 PM7/25/08   1:53:39 PM


--- PAGE 196 ---
“A Free Black Mind Is a Concealed Weapon” 187
 26. “Congress of African People,” in Dr. Huey P . Newton Foundation Inc. Collection, 1968-
1994 (Palo Alto, CA: 1970), http://content.cdlib.org/view?docId=tf3k40032t&chunk
.id=c02-1.9.6.3.10&query=audio%20&brand=oac.
 27. Ibid.
 28. Federal Bureau of Investigation, “Organization of Afro-American Unity Internal 
Security.”
 29. Hayes, interview with George Houser, Pomona, New York, 2005.
 30. Stuart Hall, “Cultural Identity and Diaspora,” in Identity: Community, Culture, Difference, 
ed. Jonathan Rutherford (London: Lawrence & Wishart, 1990).
 31. Von Eschen, Race against Empire.
 32. Hayes, interview with Sylvester Leaks, Brooklyn, New York, 2005.
 33. Hayes, interview with A. Peter Bailey.
 34. Hayes, interview with Sylvester Leaks.
 35. George Breitman, ed., Malcolm X Speaks: Selected Speeches and Statements (New York: 
Grove, 1965), 101.
 36. In 2001, the American Committee on Africa merged with the Africa Fund and the Africa 
Policy Information Center (APIC) to become Africa Action (http://www.africaaction
.org).
 37. Hayes, interview with George Houser.
 38. Hayes, interview with Robert (Bob) Moses.
 39. Clayborne Carson, In Struggle: SNCC and the Black Awakening of the 1960’s (Cambridge, 
MA: Harvard University Press, 1995), 104.
 40. James Forman, The Making of Black Revolutionaries: A Personal Account (New York: Mac-
millan, 1972).
 41. Carmichael and Thewell, Ready for Revolution, 613; emphasis original.
 42. Donna Richards, “Memo Re: A Sync African Project,” in Student Nonviolent Coordinat-
ing Committee Papers, 1959-1972 (Sanford, NC: Microfilming Corporation of America, 
1961–1967 [n.d.]).
 43. Kathleen Neal Cleaver, “Back to Africa: The Evolution of the International Section of the 
Black Panther Party (1969–1972),” in The Black Panther Party (Reconsidered), ed. Charles 
E. Jones (Baltimore: Black Classic, 1998), 212.
 44. Conrad Clark, “Pan-African Cultural Festival Draws Blacks,” New York Amsterdam News, 
July 26, 1969; “Ed Bullins Attends First Pan-African Festival,” New York Amsterdam News, 
August 30, 1969.
 45. Cleaver, “Back to Africa,” 213.
 46. David Hilliard and Lewis Cole, This  Side of
  Glory: The Autobiography of David Hilliard 
and the Story of the Black Panther Party (Boston: Little, Brown and Company, 1993), 
267.
 47. Michael L. Clemons and Charles E. Jones, “Global Solidarity: The Black Panther Party in 
the International Arena,” in Liberation, Imagination and the Black Panther Party: A New 
Look at the Panthers and Their Legacy, ed. Kathleen Cleaver and George Katsiaficas (New 
York: Routledge, 2001).
 48. Ibid.
 49. Sanche de Gramont, “Our Other Man in Algiers,” New York Times Magazine, November 
1 1970.
 50. Hayes, interview with Barbara Easley Cox, Philadelphia, 2005.
pal-mara-12.indd   187pal-mara-12.indd   187 7/25/08   1:53:39 PM7/25/08   1:53:39 PM


--- PAGE 197 ---
This page intentionally left blank


--- PAGE 198 ---
P ART  IV
Europe and Asia on the 
Color Line
pal-mara-13.indd   189pal-mara-13.indd   189 7/29/08   9:41:28 AM7/29/08   9:41:28 AM


--- PAGE 199 ---
This page intentionally left blank


--- PAGE 200 ---
C HAPTER  13
Tokyo Bound
African Americans and Japan 
Confront White Supremacy
Gerald Horne
In the period before World War II, Japan was probably the nation most 
admired among African Americans. W . E. B. Du Bois, Marcus Garvey, Booker 
T . Washington, and others may have had conflicts among themselves, but they 
all looked to T okyo as evidence for the proposition that modernity was not solely 
the province of those of European descent and that the very predicates of white 
supremacy made no sense. This is an important point to consider for many 
reasons. Those who have focused on the appeal of the former Soviet Union to 
Americans need to consider that the choice was not necessarily between the her-
renvolk democracy of the United States and the imperfect socialism of Moscow, 
but Imperial Japan was also considered as an alternative. Furthermore, historians 
have increasingly begun to point to external factors as a major reason for why Jim 
Crow began to crumble in the United States. This is usually put in the context 
of the cold war, Soviet aid to African liberation movements, and the indisputable 
point that Washington had difficulty winning hearts and minds in Africa and 
elsewhere among the world’s majority as long as peoples of African descent in the 
United States were faced with Jim Crow. This focus on external factors as a cause 
for the erosion of Jim Crow is important, because it sheds light on why progress 
toward racial equality tends to flag when external pressure seems to lessen. But 
in assessing this external factor, we must take into account the specter of Japan, 
particularly in the first four decades of the twentieth century and not just the 
USSR from 1917 to 1991.
In addition, scholars on the left have been criticized for not treating race as an 
independent variable or an unmediated factor. Bringing Japan into the equation 
suggests the difficulty of seeking to treat race as an independent variable, just as 
pal-mara-13.indd   191pal-mara-13.indd   191 7/29/08   9:41:28 AM7/29/08   9:41:28 AM


--- PAGE 201 ---
Transnational Blackness192
the fact that scholars doing historical research on race—even those examining the 
first four decades of the twentieth century—commit scholarly malpractice when 
they fail to take T okyo into account.
T o be fair, part of the difficulty in unraveling Japan’s influence is the reticence 
of European and Euro-American elites when it comes to confronting the race 
question beyond the black–white dyad. For example, in fighting the inaugural 
war of U.S. imperialism—that is, the war against the Philippines at the turn of 
the twentieth century—one general order of the U.S. Army declared that “such 
delicate subjects as . . . the race question, etc. will not be discussed at all except 
among ourselves and officially.”
1 This trend continued during the Pacific War. 
Theodore White, one of the most highly regarded U.S. journalists of the twen-
tieth century, acknowledged during his tenure in China during the war that “the 
ethic of the time forbade one from reporting in terms of race.”
2 Frank Furedi, who 
has authored one of the more salient books on race in recent years, writes that 
not only was there reticence but also that “[It] is striking how little racist thinking 
was questioned before the Second World War. Even radical critics of imperialism 
were reluctant to criticize the racist justification for national expansion.” Refer-
ring mostly to Europe, he adds. “It is striking to note how much more willing 
writers were to discuss class rather than race.” The fear of racial revenge, which, 
unlike class revenge, conceivably did not have limits at least as far as Europeans 
were concerned, “was a major reason for this relative silence.’”
3
James Belich, the leading scholar of the titanic wars that led to a stalemate 
between the British invaders and the indigenous people of New Zealand, argued 
that as a result of this humbling episode, Great Britain resorted to its “final safety 
net,” which was “to forget.”
4 John Dower writes,
If one asks Americans today in what ways World War II was racist and atrocious, 
they will point overwhelmingly to the Nazi genocide of the Jews. When the war was 
being fought, however, the enemy perceived to be most atrocious by Americans was 
not the Germans but the Japanese and the racial issues that provoked greatest emo-
tion among Americans were associated with the war in Asia, . . . Japan’s aggression 
stirred the deepest recesses of white [supremacy] and provoked a response bordering 
on the apocalyptic.
5
The war with Japan awakened the idea of racial revenge, that is, that Japanese 
in league with African Americans and other Asians would seek retribution for a 
racialized colonialism and imperialism. So provoked, European and Euro-Amer-
ican elites moved, even as the war was unfolding, to begin the reluctant and ago-
nized retreat from apartheid, though like a child awakening from a nightmare, 
they largely chose to forget a major reason why they were taking this monumental 
step.
Such a retreat was far from the mind of Commodore Matthew C. Perry of 
the U.S. military when he stepped onto the shores of Japan in 1853, prying that 
nation out of more than two centuries of self-imposed isolation. Interestingly, 
at this turning point in world history, Perry decided to wade ashore, “marching 
pal-mara-13.indd   192pal-mara-13.indd   192 7/29/08   9:41:28 AM7/29/08   9:41:28 AM


--- PAGE 202 ---
Tokyo Bound 193
between two orderlies, both tall and stalwart Negroes.”6 Other than the fact that 
in the nineteenth century a disproportionate number of U.S. sailors were black, it 
is unclear why Perry chose to be accompanied by blacks at this fraught moment. 
Perhaps he thought that the fact that Euro-Americans could subordinate and sub-
jugate “tall and stalwart Negroes” would convince the Japanese of the invaders’ 
power while warning them of what fate awaited them if they did not acquiesce.
Japan took the hint and over the next few decades engineered an amazing 
turnaround that led to the construction of the first major non-European power 
by the end of the century. Rather quickly, Japan became a beacon of attraction for 
African Americans, who thought they could learn lessons from T okyo in how to 
subdue white supremacy. Du Bois was among the many Africans and Asians who 
saw the beginning of the end for white supremacy in Japan’s defeat of Russia in 
1905, since, as he wrote, “the Negro problem in America is but a local phase of 
a world problem.”
7 In 1912, Washington told an inquiring Japanese correspon-
dent, “Speaking for the masses of my own race in this country I think I am safe 
in saying that there is no other race outside of America whose fortunes the Negro 
peoples of this country have followed with greater interest or admiration . . . in 
no other part of the world have the Japanese people a larger number of admir-
ers and well-wishers than among the black people of the United States.”
8 A few 
years later, the FBI reported nervously that Garvey “preached that the next war 
will be between the Negroes and the whites unless their demands for justice are 
recognized, and that with the aid of Japan on the side of the Negroes, they will be 
able to win such a war.”
9
Du Bois, Washington, and Garvey were simply expressing the widespread 
admiration for Japan that permeated Afro-America. T o cite one example, mem-
bers of the African Methodist Episcopal (AME) Church, according to one scholar, 
“believed that the ability of Japanese to compete with Europeans and Americans 
on their own terms dispelled the myth of white superiority. Thus, AME leaders 
wholeheartedly supported the Japanese in the war against Russia. . . . Japan fasci-
nated church members, who demanded information on every aspect of Japanese 
life and culture.”
10
Of course, the organization that was to become the Nation of Islam was prob-
ably the most zealous of the pro-T okyo elements in black America, with its leader 
Elijah Muhammad even going so far as to claim that Negroes were “Asiatic,” not 
African. But even before he arrived at this conclusion, others had beaten him to 
the punch. Harry Dean was a grandson of the legendary Paul Cuffee. In the early 
nineteenth century, Cuffee may have been the most prominent African American 
in the nation and certainly one of the most affluent in that he controlled a num-
ber of ships. In the late 1890s, Dean, who stressed, “I am an African and proud 
of it,” sailed to southeast Africa where he encountered a chief whose “name was 
T eo Saga” and who was “more Japanese than African.” Dean was told that, “before 
the cataclysm South Africa, Madagascar, Sumatra, Java and even Korea and Japan 
were all connected by land, and formed a great, illustrious, and powerful empire. 
The people were highly cultured, the rulers rich and wise. When the great flood 
pal-mara-13.indd   193pal-mara-13.indd   193 7/29/08   9:41:28 AM7/29/08   9:41:28 AM


--- PAGE 203 ---
Transnational Blackness194
came over the land it left only the remote provinces. However that may be, one 
may still find such Japanese names as T eo Saga on the coast of Africa to this very 
day.”
11 This admiration for Japan was also reflected in literature. In 1913, The 
Crisis, journal of the NAACP , published a story that imagined a military alli-
ance of Japan and Mexico against the United States, further supported by black 
deserters from the U.S. Army and the secession of Hawaii, led by angry Japanese 
Americans. The U.S. president was forced to appeal to Jed Blackburn, a Jack 
Johnson-type character who led a force of ten thousand black soldiers on a sui-
cidal counterattack of Japan’s invasion of Southern California.
12
This literary provocation was matched across the Pacific. General Sato Kojiro’s 
1921 potboiler, Japanese-American War, imagined the surprise destruction of the 
U.S. Pacific fleet, occupation of Hawaii and an invasion by Japanese forces of 
the U.S. mainland supported by ten million blacks led by Marcus Garvey. There 
was more about Garvey and black unrest in the 1924 nonfiction book The Negro 
Problem by Mitsukawa Kametaro.
13
Interestingly, these stories mirrored real life events. In 1916, the Plan of San 
Diego was revealed. This plan allegedly involved an abortive attempt by Chicanos 
and Mexico in league with Japan and other foreign powers, to dismember the 
United States, kill all the white males in the west and southwest and establish 
independent black and Indian republics, while reclaiming territory for Mexico 
that had been lost to the United States when Mexico itself was dismembered 
seventy years earlier.
As this episode suggests, like other foreign nations seeking leverage over the 
United States, the Japanese catered to disaffected minorities. This was not a new 
tactic. France had a well-merited reputation for brutality in colonizing West 
Africa, yet African Americans as ideologically diverse as Josephine Baker, Richard 
Wright, James Baldwin, and others too numerous to mention viewed Paris as a 
welcoming second home. Of course, there are those in T el Aviv today who view 
the Arab minority in that nation as something of a security threat, subject to 
being wooed by less-than-friendly neighbors.
The Diplomatic Archives in T okyo reveal that the Japanese paid close attention 
to African Americans. They maintained details on blacks in the U.S. military, the 
racial breakdown of various states, and material on black illiteracy, death rates, 
occupational status, as well as lists of “influential Negro Leaders” and “important 
Negro publications.”
14
This attention from Japanese elites was mirrored among the Japanese masses. 
Walter White’s novel The Fire in the Flint was translated into Japanese with the 
title changed to Lynching; this new edition was a best seller, due in no small 
part to a publicity campaign by the Japanese government pointing out that the 
novel pictured the kind of barbarian acts that were tolerated and even encour-
aged in a nation (the United States) that was criticizing Japan’s policies in Chi-
na.
15 Even Japanese opposed to the policies of their government, for example, 
Katayama Sen—a founder of the Communist Parties of Japan, the United States, 
and Mexico, a man who had matriculated at Fisk University and was a friend 
pal-mara-13.indd   194pal-mara-13.indd   194 7/29/08   9:41:28 AM7/29/08   9:41:28 AM


--- PAGE 204 ---
Tokyo Bound 195
of the Jamaican-American poet Claude McKay—likewise found U.S. racial 
policies abhorrent.
Increasingly, on both sides of the Pacific, a perception was growing among 
peoples of color that they had a common enemy in white supremacy; certainly 
this was the viewpoint of Du Bois. He argued that the exclusion of Japanese from 
the United States had resulted from a deal between the South and the West in 
which the former endorsed the Oriental Exclusion Act of 1924 in exchange for 
the sacrifice of the Dyer federal antilynching bill. A similar analysis could be made 
concerning U.S. opposition to Japan’s attempt to insert a clause concerning racial 
equality in the post–World War I T reaty of Versailles. White Southerners feared 
what this might mean in terms of blacked united with those in the Far West who 
were concerned about what this might mean about Asian Americans and Native 
Americans. And of course, Japan’s bitter experiences at Versailles and with the 
1924 anti-immigrant bill worsened relations between T okyo and Washington.
16
Of course, Japanese and Negroes faced similar racist rationales. T om Ireland, a 
EuroAmerican who was regarded widely as one of Cleveland’s finest men, with a 
B.A. from Princeton and an L.L.B. from Harvard, wrote in 1935, “the Mongolian 
race is too divergent from a biological standpoint to intermarry or to assimilate 
with the Caucasian for the good of either. . . . Such miscegenation,” he added, 
“[is] invariably bad.” Hence, unlike Europeans, Asians should be barred from the 
United States.
17
Bruised by the indignities of white supremacy, T okyo adroitly played on these 
sentiments and made a concerted and not unsuccessful attempt to win over the 
black community to pro-Japan positions. The popular historian of the black expe-
rience J. A. Rogers traveled to Ethiopia to cover the Italian invasion and brought 
the eager readers of his newspaper columns stories about a possible merger through 
marriage of the Japanese and Ethiopian royal families; of course, it would have 
been ludicrous—perhaps even an offense worthy of a lynching—to even suggest 
a comparable merger through marriage of, say, the British and Ethiopian royal 
families. Supposedly Rogers was entertained royally in Japan and allegedly prom-
ised T okyo “favorable publicity” when he returned to the United States.
18
On the other hand, Rogers may have had an incentive to provide favorable 
publicity, even setting aside the courting he supposedly received. Rogers wrote in 
the Amsterdam News in 1934, even before the Italian invasion of Ethiopia, that 
Japan was aiding Africa by selling cheap clothes there. Before the arrival of their 
cotton goods, he argued that Africans wore clothes until they were filthy, thus 
breeding “lice, typhus and other diseases.” He quoted an “overworked doctor” in 
Tanganyika who said the “purchase of cheap Japanese rubber soled shoes has done 
more to check hookworm here than all the efforts of the health department.” The 
flood of Japanese imports into British-controlled territory was one of the many 
factors exacerbating tensions between the two island nations and accelerating the 
drive toward war.
19
Because of their sympathy for Japan, many African Americans were less than 
sympathetic to China after the Japanese invasion in 1931. The Pittsburgh Courier 
pal-mara-13.indd   195pal-mara-13.indd   195 7/29/08   9:41:28 AM7/29/08   9:41:28 AM


--- PAGE 205 ---
Transnational Blackness196
writer Ira Lewis summed up the sentiments of many when he argued in a front-
page article that “between the Japanese and the Chinese, the Negroes much prefer 
the Japanese. The Chinese are the worst ‘Uncle T oms’ and stooges that the white 
man has ever had.” With barely concealed rancor, he added, “as soon as he gets 
a chop suey place which is anything like decent, the first thing he does is put 
up a color bar.”
20 Du Bois tended to agree, as he contrasted invidiously what he 
saw as China’s tepid response to racist U.S. immigration laws with Japan’s robust 
response. He too referred the Chinese as “Asian Uncle T oms” of “the same spirit 
that animates the white folks in the United States.”
21 Many African Americans in 
the Far West held firmly to the perception that Japanese Americans were much 
more willing to flout the dictates of Jim Crow and serve black customers in their 
restaurants and hotels than Chinese Americans, who were seen as much more 
willing to observe the dictates of antiblack racism.
Moreover, many blacks were overreacting to the denunciation in the main-
stream U.S. press of the Japanese invasion in China, which they saw as hypo-
critical in light of these same papers’ failure to condemn the white supremacy 
that Europe and the United States had imposed on Shanghai, for example. 
Du Bois summed up the thoughts of many African Americans when he posed 
this query on arriving in China in the 1930s: “Why is it,” he inquired, “that 
you hate Japan more than Europe when you have suffered more from England, 
France and Germany than from Japan.” Du Bois announced in late 1941 that 
“the British Empire has caused more human misery than Hitler will cause if he 
lives a hundred years . . . it is idiotic to talk about a people who brought the 
slave trade to its greatest development, who are the chief exploiters of Africa and 
who hold four hundred million Indians in subjection, as the great defenders of 
democracy.”
22 Months after Pearl Harbor, Adam Clayton Powell, Jr., concurred 
with Du Bois when he noted that the “difference between nazism and crackeroc-
racy is very small,” since “crackerocracy [too] is a pattern of racial hatred.”
23 Par-
enthetically, as I examine Chinese foreign policy in the 1970s in southern Africa, 
which featured alliances with apartheid South Africa and U.S. imperialism, it is 
difficult to escape the idea that African American intellectuals may have been 
on to something when they complained about China’s willingness to collaborate 
with European and Euro-American imperialism. Thus, as tensions rose between 
the United States and Japan in the 1930s, T okyo came to realize that it might 
have an ally in African Americans.
This sentiment was cultivated assiduously by a number of Japanese nationals 
who resided in black communities like Harlem. A keen example was Yasuichi 
Hikida, an animated, graying man who always showed up at Negro social func-
tions accompanied by a Negro woman. Like many Japanese nationals in New 
York who were collaborating with T okyo, he worked for an affluent white family 
in Forest Hills while maintaining a residence in Harlem. He wrote an unpub-
lished biography of T oussaint L ’Ouverture and had one of the finest collections 
of books on blacks in New York short of the Schomburg Library (he was also a 
close friend of Arthur Schomburg). As late as 1941, he appeared at a debate in 
pal-mara-13.indd   196pal-mara-13.indd   196 7/29/08   9:41:28 AM7/29/08   9:41:28 AM


--- PAGE 206 ---
Tokyo Bound 197
Harlem where, as he put it idiomatically, “Chinese were Jim Crowed by whites.” 
He also referred to blacks as “our darker brothers.” Hikida was not unusual. W . C. 
Handy, composer of the “St. Louis Blues,” recalled a Japanese cook who traveled 
about the country for five years as a member of his vaudeville troupe and who 
later turned out to be an eavesdropping Japanese army officer. The Japanese valet 
of the actor Charlie Chaplin also turned out to be an agent for T okyo.
24
The U.S. government was not totally oblivious to these maneuvers. Before 
Pearl Harbor, U.S. intelligence agencies intercepted a Japanese message that spoke 
of their use of a “Negro literary critic” whose purpose was to “open a news service 
for Negro newspapers. The Negro press is so poor that it has no news service of 
its own and as I have told you in various messages, [we] had been getting rela-
tively good results . . . because of the advantage we have in using men like this 
. . . as an experiment,” the message went on ominously, “I am now instructing Mr. 
[name deleted] of the National Youth Administration, and a graduate of Amherst 
and Columbia to be a spy.” The message continued, “in organizing our schemes 
among the Negroes . . . Washington . . . should be our hub”; though it was added, 
“in the arsenals of Philadelphia and Brooklyn there are also a few unskilled Negro 
laborers, so I would say that in the future there will be considerable profit in our 
getting Negroes to gather military intelligence for us . . . we have already estab-
lished connections with very influential Negroes to keep us informed with regard 
to the Negro movement.”
25 Scholar T ony Matthews has argued that T okyo turned 
for spying toward the “American Negroes, a massive force of largely disgruntled 
citizens, many of whom had a special racial axe to grind.”
26
Of course the antifascist tendencies among African Americans should not be 
underestimated, though I should add that I find it striking that the man consid-
ered the “brains” of U.S. fascism—a man who met with Mussolini, attended the 
Nazi Party gathering at Nuremberg in 1937, and wrote voluminously—was a 
black graduate of Exeter and Harvard: Lawrence Dennis. On the other hand, it 
is arguable that pro-Japan organizations attracted many more adherents among 
blacks than their pro-Soviet counterparts. Thus Robert Hill, the leading scholar 
of Garveyism, writes that the Pacific Movement of the Eastern World “gained a 
substantial black nationalist following during the 1930s. One longtime leader, 
David D. Erwin, claimed that it had forty thousand members in 1936, while 
other estimates went as high as one million.”
27 Nor should we forget that one of 
the more influential organizations among African Americans today, the Nation of 
Islam, is a direct descendant of this pro-T okyo movement.
Robert Leonard Jordan was one of the key leaders of this movement. Born in 
Jamaica in 1900, he moved to England at the age of fourteen and at eighteen left 
on a Japanese ship; by 1920, like so many other Jamaicans, he was in Harlem. By 
1936, he was President General of the Ethiopia Pacific Movement with an office 
at 204 Lenox Avenue in Harlem. That year he addressed a lengthy letter to the 
Japanese foreign minister, Hachiro Arita; the stationary listed one “T . Kikuchi,” 
a Japanese national, as the group’s “chief business advisor.” This letter, which can 
be found in the Diplomatic Archives in T okyo, noted that “we the dark race of 
the Western Hemisphere through the Ethiopia Pacific Movement . . . are putting 
pal-mara-13.indd   197pal-mara-13.indd   197 7/29/08   9:41:28 AM7/29/08   9:41:28 AM


--- PAGE 207 ---
Transnational Blackness198
our entire confidence in the Japanese people with the hopes that in the very near 
future, we will desire a very close relationship with the Japanese govemment.”28
Along with Elijah Muhammad, Jordan was among the most prominent of the 
pro-T okyo spokesmen in the United States; certainly he was the most prominent 
of this group in Harlem. The FBI reported that, while toiling for the aforemen-
tioned Japanese shipping company and residing in Japan, he “found the Japanese 
to be very friendly to the Negroes and that he had the privilege of studying the 
customs of the Japanese and becoming a member of . . . society in Japan.”
29
By early 1942, Japan’s largely successful invasion of Asia revealed that many 
Asians saw no reason why they should fight for colonial masters who openly 
professed white supremacy in London and The Hague. African Americans like 
Jordan were arriving at the same conclusion. In January of that year, a meeting of 
black leaders voted thirty-six to five (with fifteen abstaining) that African Ameri-
cans were not 100 percent behind the war. Before that, in 1939, the FBI reported 
that “‘enlightened Negro leaders’ had told them ‘that between eighty and ninety 
per cent of the American colored population who have any views on the subject 
at all, are proJapanese as a result of the intensive Japanese propaganda among 
this racial group.’” Right after Pearl Harbor, one-half of the blacks interviewed in 
New York City told black interviewers that they would be better off, or at least no 
worse off, under Japanese rule.
30
Inferentially on December 13, 1941, days after the attack on Pearl Harbor, the 
Amsterdam News revealed some of the linkages that tied blacks to T okyo:
Immediately following [Pearl Harbor, the NYPD] invaded Harlem and began 
rounding up all Japanese suspects. . . . In view of the fact that with the exception of 
marked facial distinction there is somewhat of a striking similarity in hue between 
the [Japanese] and many Harlemites . . . colored policemen played an invaluable 
role in the mass arrests . . . the area on Lenox Avenue between 110th and 116th 
street [is] noted for [some] Japanese restaurants. . . . Many of the sons of Nippon 
. . . declared “me colored man too” when they were tabbed.
Yet it was men like Jordan and also Carlos Cooks, a man venerated by Elombe 
Brath, one of Harlem’s leading black nationalists of today and a host of a popular 
radio program on Pacifica Radio, who were in the vanguard of this trend. But 
between Jordan and Cooks, it was the former who was probably better known in 
Harlem at the time. The People’s Voice, a popular front newspaper that despised 
these nationalists, conceded that Jordan, whom it called the “Harlem Mikado,” 
had an “eloquence [that] is said to have driven a number of competing street 
speakers to introduce [Japanese] propaganda in their talks to hold audiences.”
This evident ideological hegemony of Jordan apparently drove the popular 
front in Harlem to distraction. The People’s Voice told its readers that Japan had a 
“BB Plan,” that is,
Black Followers of Buddhism [which] preached Buddhism as the religion of peo-
ple of color the world over [and] the key to racial success. . . . Under the BB 
pal-mara-13.indd   198pal-mara-13.indd   198 7/29/08   9:41:28 AM7/29/08   9:41:28 AM


--- PAGE 208 ---
Tokyo Bound 199
Plan, American Negroes who become Buddhists automatically won Japanese citi-
zenship, would get chances to visit Japan, study sciences and professions, receive 
military and naval training. . . . Success of the plan would mean establishment of 
a black empire in Africa . . . PV’s investigations have uncovered the fact that there 
may be some connection between the world B plan and the activities of Duse 
Mohammed Ali.
In trumpeting this alliance between Buddhists and Muslims and followers of 
Moorish Science, this left-wing paper noted that “the scope of the world B Plan 
of the Japanese is almost unbelievable”; it scornfully denounced the “cunning of 
an Oriental group” that has “gone back to the wars of the Crusaders in the interest 
of Christianity.”
31
What had driven the popular front to the point of hysteria was the fear that 
pro-Japan sympathies among African Americans, carefully cultivated over the 
years by T okyo and propelled by a vile white supremacy, could complicate the 
war effort and lead to the victory of the anti-Comintern Axis. In the fall of 1942, 
many of these pro-T okyo blacks were arrested. The indictment of James Thorn-
hill, one of these leaders in New York, charged that he said that “colored United 
States soldiers should not fight the Japanese” and that, like the man who became 
Malcolm X, he might “shoot the wrong man” if drafted and given a rifle. Thorn-
hill was also born in the Caribbean (U.S. Virgin Islands); like Jordan he derisively 
referred to the United States as the “United Snakes of America.” Repeatedly he 
told Harlemites, “you should learn Japanese”; “when they tell you to remember 
Pearl Harbor, you [should] reply ‘Remember Africa.’” With fervor he added, “the 
white man brought you to this country in 1619, not to christianize you but to 
enslave you. This thing called Christianity is not worth a damn. I am not a Chris-
tian, we should be . . . Moslems.”
32
With evident anxiety, the FBI reported in 1943 that “numerous complaints 
have been received that the American Negroes favor a Japanese victory in the 
present war.”
33 This sentiment was not unique to black Americans. The Colonial 
Secretary in Kingston, Jamaica was told in 1941 that at one “Cold Supper Shop” 
there was frequent “anti-British talk” heard via the “wireless.”
34 It should not be 
forgotten, even when analyzing communists’ approach to the war, that it was 
hard for many, particularly those of African descent, to accept the argument that 
Britain was the fountainhead of democracy, particularly when Churchill already 
had announced that the Atlantic Charter’s promise of democracy did not apply 
to those subjected to a racialized colonialism. Even Hugh Mulzac, a member in 
good standing of the popular front, wrote that there was a “strong feeling among 
colored Americans in 1941 that the colonial powers be allowed to destroy each 
other. As a former British subject I felt this keenly.”
35
Thus, just as black nationalists expressed outright sympathy for T okyo, some 
blacks on the left found it difficult to provide unalloyed support for the Allies 
in light of the latter’s white supremacy. As Du Bois put it, “If Hitler wins, down 
with the blacks! If the democracies win, the blacks are already down.”
36 The Allies 
were well aware of this black hostility to white supremacy that made Africans 
pal-mara-13.indd   199pal-mara-13.indd   199 7/29/08   9:41:28 AM7/29/08   9:41:28 AM


--- PAGE 209 ---
Transnational Blackness200
worldwide susceptible to T okyo’s siren call. Hence, during the war, the British 
Colonial Office was reluctant to initiate an anti-German campaign among West 
Africans because officials calculated that such propaganda might encourage a 
revolt against rule as such. “Having been encouraged to hate one branch of the 
white race, they may extend the feeling to others,” warned one memorandum.
37
Strikingly, the ideological ancestors of today’s black conservatives also were 
both sympathetic to T okyo and highly critical of the Allies. George Schuyler is the 
main example in that regard. A prolific journalist and novelist, he too had been 
courted by T okyo and wrote a series of articles on Japan in the 1930s that were so 
pro-Nippon that his publisher refused to print them.
38
In September 1940, as many black communists were scoring T okyo because of 
its policies in China, Schuyler took an opposite tack; he saw this invasion as an 
exemplar of the:
progressive deflation of white supremacy and arrogance in the Orient. Where white 
men once strutted and kicked coolies into the street, they now tread softly and talk 
in whispers. . . . The Japanese have done a fine job in making the white man in 
Asia lose “face” and shattering the sedulously nurtured idea of white supremacy. Of 
course the white people hate them because they fear them.
39
In his withering denunciations of white supremacy, the conservative Schuyler 
often used rhetoric that would have made black nationalists proud. By 1944 the 
fervor in the black community for the Double V campaign against fascism at 
home and abroad had dissipated as many shifted to a pro-Allies stance, but not 
George Schuyler. Days after D-Day in Europe, he wrote acerbically that:
the Europeans have been a menace to the rest of the world for the past four hundred 
years, carrying destruction and death wherever they went. . . . T rue, their system of 
world fleecing directly benefited only a handful of Europeans, but indirectly it ben-
efited millions of supernumeraries, labor officials and skilled workers. . . . Europe 
has been a failure and a menace. The European age is passing. One can derive a 
certain pleasure from observing its funeral.
40
Schuyler was likely the staunchest critic of the internment of Japanese Ameri-
cans in the United States, returning to this subject again and again in his work. 
That this internment, he asserted, was “a scheme to grab [Japanese-American] 
holdings and hand them over to white people is shown by the efforts to prevent 
Negroes from taking them over. . . . This may be a prelude to our own fate. Who 
knows? . . . Once the precedent is established with 70,000 Japanese-Americans,” 
he added ominously, “it will be easy to denationalize millions of Afro-American 
citizens.”
41
Ironically, after the war concluded, U.S. elites cracked down on the black com-
munists, who were harshest in their condemnation of T okyo, whereas those like 
Schuyler who took an opposing position were promoted. Interestingly black com-
munists, who were the most consistently anti-T okyo force among blacks during 
pal-mara-13.indd   200pal-mara-13.indd   200 7/29/08   9:41:28 AM7/29/08   9:41:28 AM


--- PAGE 210 ---
Tokyo Bound 201
the war, suffered most after T okyo was defeated. The assault on black Reds created 
favorable conditions for the rise of black nationalists, who had been pro-T okyo; 
thus the organization that was to become the Nation of Islam rose, just as the 
popular front and the left in the black community diminished. The end of the 
war also marked the decline of pro-T okyo sentiments among African Americans 
as Japan became a reliable ally of Washington. Indeed, the kind of sympathy for 
Asia that these pro-T okyo movements symbolized did not arise again until the era 
of Maoist China.
On the other hand, this veritable race war, in which those who defined them-
selves as “white” seemed to be losing in the early stages of the conflict, helped to 
convince sober-minded elites in Washington to retreat from the more egregious 
aspects of white supremacy. Even as the war was unfolding, the United States 
sought to do away with the “white primary,” which limited black voting rights, 
and struck from the books most of the Chinese exclusion laws. There is nothing 
like the prospect of losing a race war to convince even the most obtuse of the 
necessity of eroding racism.
Still, in 1944 during the height of the war, Du Bois concluded, “the greatest 
and most dangerous race problem today is the problem of relations between Asia 
and Europe.”
42 Yet in the United States today, race discourse not only focuses on 
the black–white dyad but also refuses to stray beyond the shores of this nation. 
Indeed, though black intellectuals of an earlier era wrote voluminously about 
Asia, few do so today. This may be because blacks of an earlier day were effectively 
denied citizenship and therefore were compelled to be internationalist; ironically, 
part of the downside of full citizenship rights has been the erosion of black inter-
nationalism. Moreover, the decision made decades ago to shroud the race question 
in Asia has borne fruit by helping some to think that the vaunted “color-blind” 
approach characterizes relations between those of Asian and European descent. 
This misconception is heightened by the use of the vague term “westerner,” which 
is used to describe Europeans who reside to the west of Asia as well as Austra-
lians and New Zealanders who live east of there. African Americans are no longer 
“T okyo bound,” but race remains a global concern.
Notes
 1. Brian McAllister Lin, Guardians of Empire: The U.S. Army and the Pacific, 1902–1940 
(Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 1997), 60.
 2. Frank Furedi, The Silent War: Imperialism and the Changing Perception of Race (London: 
Pluto, 1998), 164.
 3. Ibid., 6, 101.
 4. James Belich, The New Zealand Wars and the Victorian Interpretation of Racial Conflict 
(Auckland, New Zealand: Auckland University Press, 1986), 235, 321.
 5. John Dower, Japan in War and Peace: Essays on History, Culture and Race (London: Fon-
tana, 1996), 258–59.
 6. Samuel Etiot Morison, “Old Bruin”: Commodore Matthew C. Perry, 1794–1858 (Boston: 
Little, Brown, 1967), 332.
pal-mara-13.indd   201pal-mara-13.indd   201 7/29/08   9:41:28 AM7/29/08   9:41:28 AM


--- PAGE 211 ---
Transnational Blackness202
 7. W . E. B. Du Bois, “The Color Line Belts the World,” in Writings by W .E.B. Du Bois 
in Periodicals Edited by Others, ed. Herbert Aptheker (Millwood, NY: KrausThomson, 
1982), 330 (from Collier’s Weekly. October 20, 1906).
 8. Booker T . Washington to Naoichi Masaoka, December 5, 1912, in ed. Louis Harlan and 
Raymond W . Smock, Booker T . Washington Papers, Volume 12: 1912–1914 (Urbana: Uni-
versity of Illinois Press, 1982), 84.
 9. “Bureau of Investigation Reports,” New York, December 5, 1918, in ed. Robert A. Hill, 
The Marcus Garvey and Universal Negro Improvement Association Papers, Volume 1, 1826–
August 1919 (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1983), 306.
 10. Lawrence C. Little, “A Quest for Self-Determination: The African Methodist Episcopal 
Church During the Age of Imperialism. 1884–1916” (PhD diss., Ohio State University, 
1993), 227, 252.
 11. Harry Dean, Umbala: The Adventures of a Negro Sea-Captain in Africa and on the Seven 
Seas in His Attempt to Found an Ethiopian Empire (London: George Harrap, 1929), 93.
 12. Kevin K. Gaines. Uplifting the Race: Black Leadership, Politics and Culture in the Twentieth 
Century (Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 1996), 206.
 13. David Levering Lewis, W . E. B. Du Bois: The Fight for Equality and the American Century, 
1919–1963 (New York: Henry Holt, 2000), 392.
 14. Reports, November 28, 1933, circa 1930s and 1940s, 1460-1-3, Diplomatic Archives, 
T okyo.
 15. Walter White, A Man Called White: The Autobiography of Walter White (Athens: University 
of Georgia Press, 1995), 69.
 16. Lewis, W . E. B. Du Bois, 416.
 17. T om Ireland, War Clouds in the Skies of the Far East (New York: G. P . Putnam, 1935), 288, 
292.
 18. Patrick Washburn, A Question of Sedition: The Federal Government’s Investigation of the 
Black Press during World War II (New York: Oxford University Press, 1986), 261.
 19. New 
York Amsterdam News, June 9, 1934.
 20. Washburn, A Question of Sedition, 110; Pittsburgh Courier, March 28, 1942.
 21. New York Amsterdam News, November 18, 1931; Lewis, W . E. B. Du Bois, 413–15.
 22. People’s Voice, May 2, 1942.
 23. People’s Voice, September 12, 1942.
 24. Roi Ottley, Inside Black America (London: Eyre & Spottiswoode, 1948), 256.
 25. Intercepted messages, July 2, 1941, May 9, 1941, Box 2, Franklin D. Roosevelt Papers, 
Franklin D. Roosevelt Library, Hyde Park, New York.
 26. T ony Matthews, Shadows Dancing: Japanese Espionage against the West, 1939–1945 (Lon-
don: Robert Hale, 1993), 27.
 27. Robert A. Hill, The Marcus Garvey and Universal Negro Improvement Association Papers, 
Volume 7: November 1927–August 1940 (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1991), 
506.
 28. Robert Jordan to Hchiro Arita, November 18, 1936, A461, ET/II, Diplomatic Archives, 
T okyo.
 29. J. Edgar Hoover to Jonathan Daniels, August 11, 1943, Box 6, 4245g, Official File, 
Franklin D. Roosevelt Papers, Franklin D. Roosevelt Library, Hyde Park, New York.
 30. Marc Gallicchio, The African American Encounter with Japan and China: Black Interna-
tionalism in Asia, 1895–1945 (Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 2000), 
107, 121, 142.
 31. People’s Voice, February 28, 1942; March 7, 1942; March 21, 1942.
 32. USA v. J
ames Thornhill, Southern District Court of New York, Box 1049, R33.18.2.5, 
C-113–264, 1942, National Archives and Records Administration, New York.
pal-mara-13.indd   202pal-mara-13.indd   202 7/29/08   9:41:29 AM7/29/08   9:41:29 AM


--- PAGE 212 ---
Tokyo Bound 203
 33. Hill, ed., The FBI’s RACON: Racial Conditions in the United States during World War II 
(Boston: Northeastern University Press, 1995), 81.
 34. T o Colonial Secretary, September 4, 1941, “Fifth Column Activity,” 1B/5/77/49, CSO 
750, 1941, National Archives of Jamaica.
 35. Hugh Mulzac, A Star to Steer By (New York: International Publishers, 1963), 129.
 36. Ibid.; Lewis, W . E. B. Du Bois, 467.
 37. Mulzac, A Star to Steer By, 129; Furedi, The Silent War, 184.
 38. George Schuyler, Black Empire (Boston: Northeastern University Press, 1991), 281.
 39. Pittsburgh Courier, September 14, 1940.
 40. Pittsburgh Courier, June 17, 1944.
 41. Pittsburgh Courier, April 25, 1942; May 29, 1943.
 42. Du Bois, “Prospect of a World without Race Conflict,” American Journal of Sociology 49, 
no. 5 (March 1944): 450–56, 451.
pal-mara-13.indd   203pal-mara-13.indd   203 7/29/08   9:41:29 AM7/29/08   9:41:29 AM


--- PAGE 213 ---
This page intentionally left blank


--- PAGE 214 ---
C HAPTER  14
Femme Négritude
Jane Nardal, La Dépêche 
Africaine, and the 
Francophone New Negro
T. Denean Sharpley-Whiting
From henceforth there would be some interest, some originality, some pride in being 
Negro, to turn oneself towards Africa, the cradle of the Negro, to remember a common 
origin. From these new ideas, new words, have come the revealing terms: Afro-
American, Afro-Latin.
—Jane Nardal, “Black Internationalism,” La Dépêche africaine
It is a peculiar sensation, this double consciousness, this sense of always looking at one’s 
self through the eyes of others, of measuring one’s soul by the tape of a world that looks 
on in amused contempt and pity. One ever feels his two-ness-an American, a Negro; 
two souls, two thoughts, two unreconciled strivings; two warring ideals in one dark 
boy, whose dogged strength alone keeps it from being torn asunder.
—W . E. B. Du Bois, The Souls of Black Folks
Coined between 1936 and 1937 by the Martiniquan poet Aimé Césaire 
during the writing of his now-celebrated Cahier d’un Retour au Pays Natal [Note-
book of a Return to My Native Land], Négritude as a poetic, literary, cultural, and 
intellectual movement, signaled the birth of a Pan-Africanist cultural nationalism 
among black Francophone writers, a “New Negro” from the Francophone world. 
Although the neologism is readily traceable to Césaire, mapping the concept of 
Négritude as the inauguration of black humanism, as a “theory of black cultural 
importance and autonomy,”
1 remains the stuff of a panoply of critical works.
Before the 1935 publication of L ’ Etudiant Noir, a one-issue journal sponsored 
by the Association des Etudiants Martiniquais en France that featured, accord-
ing to Georges Ngal, at least, “les deux textes fondateurs du mouvement de la 
pal-mara-14.indd   205pal-mara-14.indd   205 7/25/08   1:30:09 PM7/25/08   1:30:09 PM


--- PAGE 215 ---
Transnational Blackness206
Négritude” [the two founding texts of the Négritude movement],2 by Aimé Cés-
aire and the Senegalese poet Léopold Sédar Senghor, there were a number of 
black Francophone novelistic and journalistic precursors that treated the themes 
of assimilation, colonialism, race consciousness, and identity. The most notable 
among those texts were Rene Maran’s 1921 Prix Goncourt-winning Batouala; 
veritable roman negre; Suzanne Lacascade’s 1924 Claire-Solange, une Africaine; the 
journals La Dépêche Africaine, Le Cri des Negres, and La Revue du Monde Noir; 
and the 1932 Marxist-Surrealist pamphlet Légitime Défense. Other race-related 
journals appeared and disappeared in the early to late 1920s. But it was not until 
September 1931 that Senghor made the acquaintance of Césaire and the Guya-
nese Leon-Gontron Damas, who was the third voice of this poetic trilogy, thus 
setting the stage for their collective exploration of their conflicting identities, the 
“tormenting question,” in the words of Senghor, of “Who am I?” their experi-
ences of being black, African, African-diasporic, and French. For Césaire and 
Damas, “in meeting Senghor, [they] met Africa.” Through Damas and Césaire, 
Senghor’s horizon was opened to the dynamism of the literary and cultural worlds 
of West Indians and African Americans living in Paris in the 1930s. For their 
part, Césaire, Senghor, and Damas, the designated founders of this poetics in 
the French-speaking world, provide a conspicuously masculine genealogy of their 
critical consciousness. They credit the writers of the Harlem Renaissance, spe-
cifically Claude McKay, Langston Hughes, James Weldon Johnson, and Sterling 
Brown; Du Bois’ Souls of Black Folk; the philosopher Alain Locke’s 1925 anthology 
The New Negro: An Interpretation; Carter G. Woodson’s Opportunity, the popular 
organ for the Urban League; and the National Association for the Advancement 
of Colored People’s (NAACP) political vehicle The Crisis as primary influences on 
their consciousness about matters of race and identity. As Senghor revealed in an 
article in Présence Africaine entitled “Problematique de la Négritude,” “the general 
meaning of the word [Négritude], the discovery of black values and recognition 
for the Negro of his situation, was born in the United States of America.”
3
The masculinist genealogy constructed by the poets and shored up by literary 
historians, critics, and Africanist philosophers continues to elide and minimize 
the presence and contributions of black women, namely their Francophone coun-
terparts, to the movement’s evolution. In effect, if African American writers of 
the 1920s radicalized the consciousness of these young and aspiring Francophone 
black writers, if the race-conscious New Negro of the United States planted the 
seeds of Négritude in their collective imagination, then the three future Négritude 
poets also received inspiration from Mesdemoiselles Jane and Paulette Nardal.
4 In 
a letter written in February 1960, Senghor revealed: “We were in contact with 
these black Americans during the years 1929–34, through Mademoiselle Paulette 
Nardal, who, with Dr. Sajous, a Haitian, had founded La Revue du Monde Noir 
[Review of the Black World]. Mademoiselle Nardal kept a literary salon, where 
African Negroes, West Indians, and American Negroes used to get together.”
5 
In correspondence also dated in the year 1960 and sent to Senghor’s biographer 
Louis Jacques Hymans, Paulette Nardal “complained bitterly” of the erasure of 
pal-mara-14.indd   206pal-mara-14.indd   206 7/25/08   1:30:09 PM7/25/08   1:30:09 PM


--- PAGE 216 ---
Femme Négritude 207
her and Jane Nardal’s roles in the promulgation of the ideas that would later 
become the hallmarks of Césaire, Damas, and Senghor. They “took up the ideas 
tossed out by us and expressed them with flash and brio.” In effect, Nardal wrote, 
“we were but women, real pioneers—let’s say that we blazed the trail for them.”
6
The soeurs Nardal, with their Sunday literary salon and review, did more than 
provide a cultured place (their apartment) and literary space (La Revue du Monde 
Noir) for the intellectual coming-of-age of the trio. In the words of Guadelou-
pean writer Maryse Condé, “It is an accepted fact that French Caribbean lit-
erature was born with Négritude.”
7 But what is not such a widely accepted or 
acknowledged fact is that women writers and thinkers of the Négritude era, such 
as Jane Nardal, were at the movement’s literary and philosophical centers and, 
often too, at the vanguard.
On February 1928 the journal of the Comité de Defense des Interets de la Race 
Noire (CDIRN), La Dépêche Africaine, was published in Paris under the editorial 
direction of the Guadeloupean Maurice Satineau, secretary of the comité, with a 
prestigious multiracial board of collaborators.
8 The newspaper’s motto, “Defendre 
nos colonies, c’est fortifier la France” [T o defend our colonies, is to fortify France] 
sums up the interesting patchwork of militant colonial reformism, assimilation-
ism, and cultural Pan-Africanism found in its monthly columns. Serving as a 
means of correspondence “between Negroes of Africa, Madagascar, the Antilles 
and America,” La Dépêche Africaine maintained that, in the assimilationist and 
colonial reformist fashion of the era, “the methods of colonization by civilized 
nations are far from perfect; but colonization itself is a humane and necessary 
project.”
9 As the spiritual inheritor of writer René Maran’s defunct bimonthly 
Les Continents, La Dépêche Africaine consistently evoked the ideas of 1789 France 
and Schoelcherism, that is, the liberal principles of Victor Schoelcher, a French 
administrator responsible for abolishing slavery in the French colonies. In this 
après-guerre France, where unemployment emerged unchecked alongside xeno-
phobia, racism, and paternalism and where primitivism (the realm of “Negro”) 
became the rage in Paris as people attempted to forget the war-ravaged and mor-
ally bankrupt Europe and exotic literature amply filled in the spaces in between, 
black French-speaking intellectuals wanted to revive France as a paragon of lib-
erty, fraternity, and equality—as a civilizing and civil nation.
With its global readership, La Dépêche Africaine was quite popular during its 
four year publication run. In the November 1928 issue, under the rubric “Une  
Bonne Nouvelle” (“A Piece of Good News”), the organ announced that by Janu-
ary 1929 the monthly would become a bimonthly periodical, appearing the first 
and the fifteenth of each month: “The increasingly favorable reception that the 
colonial and metropolitan public reserves for our organ obliges us to augment our 
frequency.”
10 According to a report filed by the police prefecture with the Minis-
try of Colonies in November 1928, La Dépêche Africaine had nearly ten thousand 
copies in circulation.11 But by January 1929, the journal apologized to its reader-
ship, explaining that it would “momentarily be unable to appear two times per 
month as previously announced due to administrative reorganization.”
12 And by 
pal-mara-14.indd   207pal-mara-14.indd   207 7/25/08   1:30:09 PM7/25/08   1:30:09 PM


--- PAGE 217 ---
Transnational Blackness208
May 1929, the journal’s management settled on publication on the thirtieth of 
every month.13
But La Dépêche Africaine continued to inconsistently publish on the first, 
fifteenth, or thirtieth of any given month. Such inconsistency would later be 
revealed in reconnaissance reports as financially tied. According to a report on the 
activities of the journal filed by government officials on May 30, 1930, the edi-
tors were in need of funds: “Les dirigeants de La Dépêche Africaine sont parvenu 
a rassembler les fonds necessaire pour faire paraitre leur feuille” [The managers of 
La Dépêche Africaine came up with the necessary funds to publish the newspaper], 
and “Le numero date Fev-Mars est sorti des presses de l’imprimeur au debut d’ 
Avril” [The issue scheduled for February-March left the printing presses at the 
beginning of April].
14
The journal’s mission was to address social, political, and economic issues: 
“La Dépêche Africaine [is] . . . an independent journal of correspondence between 
blacks, for the moral and material interests of the indigenous populations, through 
the objective study of the larger colonial questions considered from political, eco-
nomic, and social points of view.”
15 In this diasporic vein, the periodical infre-
quently published a section in English subtitled “United We Stand, Divided We 
Fall,” under the editorship of Fritz Moutia.
Delving into anglophone black politics, the organ took on the Scottsboro case 
in the United States. The Scottsboro case involved nine black men who allegedly 
raped two white women. Coerced by authorities into giving false statements, the 
women later retracted the allegations. Seven of the men were nonetheless fac-
ing execution. In the April 1, 1932, issue, La Dépêche Africaine ran a front-page 
article and letter to President Herbert Hoover. Under the headline “Un supreme 
appel au President Hoover: L ’ execution des sept Negres serait un crime con-
tre I’Humanité” [A Supreme Appeal to President Hoover: The Execution of the 
Seven Negroes Would Be a Crime Against Humanity], Maurice Satineau and 
Georges Forgues, president of the CDIRN, appealed thus: “Profoundly moved by 
the sentence that the Supreme Court of Alabama is about to hand down against 
the seven Negroes accused of rape, we are making an appeal to your greater con-
science, to your sense of justice, humanity and equity in order to prevent such an 
execution which would be considered, by all races and notably, the black race . . . 
as a crime of which one cannot predict the repercussions.”
16
The official French government response to La Dépêche Africaine was dogged 
monitoring of its editor, Satineau, and the newspaper’s contents. With its Pan-
Africanist politics, La Dépêche Africaine was linked, according to officials, in 
spirit, politics, and content to René Maran’s reformist journal Les Continents and 
Garveyism—thus a potential threat to the colonial powers that be.
According to one agent’s report, “The address and telephone number are pres-
ently those of the management of the journal La Dépêche Africaine. It is thus 
no longer possible to deny the relations that unite this paper and the pan-black 
organization [United Negro Improvement Association, UNIA]. This explains as 
pal-mara-14.indd   208pal-mara-14.indd   208 7/25/08   1:30:09 PM7/25/08   1:30:09 PM


--- PAGE 218 ---
Femme Négritude 209
well why we remarked in the note of last February, page 10: ‘La Dépêche Africaine 
reminds one of the defunct pan-black organ Les Continents.’“17
The fact that after his expulsion from the United States, Marcus Garvey set up 
offices in the seventh arrondissement of Paris at 5 rue Paul Louis Courieur, the same 
address as La Dépêche Africaine and with the same telephone number, certainly 
gave the administration canon fodder. It was also more than pure coincidence 
for the government that La Dépêche Africaine announced that it would augment 
publication following Garvey’s October 1928 visit: “le journal announce qu’il 
va devenir bientôt bi-mensuel: serait-ce une consequence du passage de Marcus 
Garvey à Paris?”
18 Internal divisions also plagued La Dépêche Africaine. Although 
some of the collaborators “energetically conformed to Garveyist ideas,” others, 
like Satineau, wanted to strike a balance between Garvey’s pan-black agenda—to 
maintain UNIA financial support—and curry favor from the colonial adminis-
tration.
19 In response to being targeted as Garveyists, the management shifted 
the organ’s focus to Guadeloupean politics and began to feature sympathetic 
articles on colonial administrators, which government agents regarded as mere 
“camouflage.”
20 After 1930, the political content was viewed less cynically and as 
nonsubversive to French colonial interests. Garveyism, with its glorification of the 
black race and the recognition of ancient African civilizations, Du Bois’s racially 
imbued Pan-Africanism, and the cultural emphasis of Locke’s New Negro Move-
ment would nonetheless continue to be filtered through a Francophone lens and 
appropriated in La Dépêche Africaine’s cultural and literary criticism.
The sections “La Dépêche Politique,” “La Dépêche Economique et Sociale,” 
and “La Dépêche Litteraire” owed their cultural and literary pan-noirisme to the 
global literacy of Mademoiselles Jane and Paulette Nardal. La Dépêche Africaine’s 
first issue in February 1928 presented its prestigious collaborators. A photo-
graph of Jane Nardal listed her qualifications as “Licencée-des-lettres.” Paulette 
Nardal joined the magazine’s roster in June 1928. She was duly titled “Professeur 
d’Anglais,” and her contribution to the journal would be to “write a series of 
articles on the economic and literary evolution of Black Americans.”
21 Paulette 
Nardal’s specialties were, however, more literary and artistic than socioeconomic. 
Both sisters were Sorbonne-educated, bilingual Martiniquans. Their race-con-
scious transnational finishing school was at the salon of René Maran where they 
met various African American artists and writers, such as Alain Locke, Claude 
McKay, Augusta Savage, and Langston Hughes. Paulette, the elder of the two, 
wrote seven pieces for the journal, including two short stories, a comparative 
essay on Antillean and black American music entitled “Musique Negre: Antil-
les et AfraAmerique,” and an extensive article (with photographs) of Harlem 
Renaissance sculptor Augusta Savage’s work.
22 Jane, on the other hand, wrote two 
provocative essays on literary exoticism and black cultural internationalism and 
coined the neologism “Afro-Latin.” Although their work has been often referred 
to as “proto-Négritude” and, hence, as setting the stage for the veritable move-
ment, such an assessment is primarily tied to the fact that the word itself would 
pal-mara-14.indd   209pal-mara-14.indd   209 7/25/08   1:30:09 PM7/25/08   1:30:09 PM


--- PAGE 219 ---
Transnational Blackness210
not come into being for at least another eight years. But Jane Nardal’s “lnterna-
tionalisme Noir,” an essay that discusses race consciousness among the African 
Diaspora and cultural métissage, would provide an essential kernel of the philo-
sophical foundation for the literary and cultural movement later celebrated the 
world-over as Négritude.
Jane Nardal’s article appeared in the “Dépêche Economique et Sociale” section 
of the first issue of La Dépêche Africaine. Her name and an appraisal of her essay 
as politically “modest” in tone also appeared in a March 1928 agent’s résumé of 
activities of “Blacks from the colonies in the Metropole.”
23 Her article outlines in 
broad brush strokes several concepts that would become pivotal in early Négri-
tude parlance: après-guerre nègre, global community, Black Internationalism, 
Afro-Latin, conscience de race, New French-speaking Negro, esprit de race (spirit 
of race). In an après-guerre commentary, Nardal begins by suggesting that one of 
the aftereffects of World War I was an attempt to break down barriers between 
countries. The peace conference at Versailles, as well as the meeting of “four 
unobtrusive gentlemen” in Paris in 1919 to settle the “destinies of mankind,” as 
Du Bois remarked, underscore Nardal’s observation.
24 Like Du Bois, Nardal links 
the broader implications of the formation of a Euro-American community after the 
war to that of the global black community in formation. If the war led European 
and American world powers to envision themselves as a human community with 
common interests, the war also gave rise to “a vague sentiment” among blacks that 
they too were part of that human community who “in spite of everything belong 
to one and the same race.”
25 The renewed spirit of humanism, which weighed 
heavily in the post–1918 air that by turns attempted to exclude and marginalize 
blacks, had actualized among black elites un esprit de race. Although the concept 
of a unified black race was not a necessarily novel idea among those who helped 
to construct and shore up the idea from Buffon to Jefferson to Gobineau, the 
subjects—“blacks”—of their philosophies of race did not, according to Nardal, 
accept in principle such a notion: “Previously the more assimilated blacks looked 
arrogantly upon their brothers of color, believing themselves to be clearly from 
another species; on the other hand, those blacks who had never left African soil, 
who had never experienced slavery, looked upon those who had at the whim of 
whites been enslaved, then freed, then modeled into the imago of the white as vile 
cattle.”
26 This Nardalian vista of ethnic schisms between the Francophone African 
Diaspora is a shocking one that underscores conflict rather than identification.
World War I and its attendant hardships, the unfulfilled promises of citizen-
ship and dashed hopes of equal rights, the presence of black soldiers of various 
ethnic backgrounds in Europe, the discovery of l’art negre by European votaries 
of the “primitive” and African literature, civilizations, religions, and sculpture, 
Negro spirituals, and the publication of philosopher Alain Locke’s “New Afro-
American Poetry” in Les Continents combined to evoke sentiments of diasporic 
connectedness and sentimental glances toward the ancestral homeland of Africa.
Africa was no longer the European stereotyped and promulgated land of sav-
ages but rather a cultural mecca, henceforth to be proudly claimed by its Diaspora. 
pal-mara-14.indd   210pal-mara-14.indd   210 7/25/08   1:30:09 PM7/25/08   1:30:09 PM


--- PAGE 220 ---
Femme Négritude 211
From the rubble of enslavement, bestowed freedom in the French West Indies, 
and the tangle of French assimilation, a new consciousness about Africa and race 
inspired the invention of a new identity: the Afro-Latin. Nardal imagines a sym-
biosis between her Frenchness, Latinness. and Africanness into a new identity, a 
new self-consciousness. She would not renounce her latinité or her africanité. This 
symbiosis was to bring into existence an authentic self-consciousness. The Afro-
Latin shares the experience of the Afro-American, of Du Boisian double con-
sciousness, of double-appartenence (“double belonging”) in, “which one merge[s] 
his double self into a better and truer self. In this merging he wishes neither of 
the older selves to be lost. He would not Africanize America, for America has too 
much to teach the world and Africa. He would not bleach his Negro soul in a 
flood of white Americanism, for he knows that Negro blood has a message for the 
world. He simply wishes to make it possible for a man to be both a Negro and an 
American.”
27 Similarly, in its use of the masculinist language of the time as well as 
in its philosophic content, “Black Internationalism” is not merely about the for-
mation of a global black community or emergent race consciousness but also the 
synergy of the “Afro,” or African and the Latin world, an embracing of cultural 
métissage, of double-appartenance, in order to return “en soi” [to the self]:
From these new ideas, new words, have come the revealing terms: Afro-American, 
Afro-Latin. They confirm our thesis all in casting a new meaning on the nature 
of this Black Intemationalism. If the Negro wants to be himself, to affirm his per-
sonality, not be the copy of such and such type of another race (which often earns 
him contempt and mockery) it does not follow however that he becomes resolutely 
hostile to all contributions of another race. He must to the contrary profit from the 
acquired experience, from the intellectual richness, through others, but in order to 
better know himself and affirm his personality. T o be Afro-American, Afro-Latin, 
that means to be an encouragement, a comfort, an example, for the blacks of 
Africa in showing them that certain benefits of white civilization do not necessarily 
lead to a denial of their race. . . . Africans on the other hand can profit from this 
example by reconciling these teachings with their ancient traditions of which they 
are rightly proud.
28
Nardal’s cultural mixing does not dismiss African traditions or reserve for 
Africa the gift of emotion rather than reason—a racialist distortion of her theo-
rizing that would later crop up in Léopold Senghor’s “Humanisme et Nous” and 
Liberté: Négritude et Humanisme. Her fatalism, if you will, emerges around the 
French colonial project. In turn, however, she calls for symbiosis as a path of 
cultural and racial resistance to passive assimilation. In her analysis, the Afro-
Latin will assimilate the Latin rather than be wholly assimilated by it. And 
yet hostility to “une autre race,” an allusion to the more strident interpreta-
tions of Garveyist thinking, clearly undermines the new humanist spirit that 
she attempts to outline. The return to the self, the excavation of the glories of 
the black race with European critical tools of engagement, allows for a better 
understanding of who one is as “black” and “French,” “Afro,” and “Latin.” In 
pal-mara-14.indd   211pal-mara-14.indd   211 7/25/08   1:30:09 PM7/25/08   1:30:09 PM


--- PAGE 221 ---
Transnational Blackness212
keeping with the ‘“benefits of colonialism” ideological paradigm of La Dépêche 
Africaine, she shifts the concept of Afro-Latinité from the West Indian context 
to the Franco-African terrain, where mass indigenous resistance to the colonial 
project had proven most formidable. Versed in the ethnological and sociologi-
cal literature of the day on Africa, Maurice Delafosse, Leo Frobenius, and Jean 
PriceMars’s Ainsi Parla l’Oncle, Nardal writes that “the cultivated man” would 
not treat Africans en masse as savages since “sociological works have made known 
to the white world the centers of African civilizations, their religious system, 
their forms of government, their artistic riches.”
29
Although sympathetic to the “bitterness” that the Africans express in seeing 
the effects of colonization on these “millenaire” traditions, she argues conversely 
that colonial policy in Africa could be a source of “racial solidarity” and race 
consciousness among the “different African tribes.”
30 She further offers up “Afro-
Americans” as pioneers of cultural resistance, innovation, preservation, and race 
consciousness blended with their fierce Americanism, suggesting to her Franco-
phone readers that they immerse themselves in Locke’s New Negro. The combined 
socioeconomic, political, and historical realities of black life under the yoke of 
American racism contributed to the formation of a unique Afro-American culture 
that speaks to such experiences that chronicle the coming-into-being of the “New 
Negro.” For Nardal, without the hardships of those experiences as marginalized 
Americans there would not have been the creation of the other: a race-conscious 
new American Negro. The French-speaking black, the “Afro-Latin,” reasons 
Nardal, “in contact with a race less hostile to the man of color than the Anglo-
Saxon race, has been retarded in this path” of race consciousness, “authentic” 
cultural development, and race solidarity.
31 The Afro-American will, for Nardal, 
serve as a model for the Afro-Latin, for Afro-Latin literature, art, and culture as 
such is nonexistent. Nardal encourages the Afro-Latin to recognize that Africa 
and “le pays latin” are not “incompatibles.”
32 She then prophesies the emergence 
of New Francophone Negroes, who “encouraged by the example of black Ameri-
can intellectuals, will distinguish themselves from the preceding generation . . . 
[and], schooled in European methods, will make use of them to study the spirit of 
their race, the past of their race, with the necessary critical verve.”
33
As Promethean around issues of identity and race in the black Francophone 
context as Nardal’s concepts of Afro-Latinité and cultural métissage were in 1928, 
they were also importantly subversive and indeed went philosophically counter 
to the univeralism supposedly inherent in French humanism, culture, and colo-
nial policies on “nos colonies et nos indigenes” [our colonies and our natives]. 
Nardal suggests a decentering of Frenchness. Yet, for France, the essence of 
the words “culture” and “civilization” are French. With sword or gun in hand, 
France believes it is imparting the “souverainete de ses lois et la marque de son 
genie” [the sovereignty of its laws and the mark of its genius] to the conquered.
34 
They will “do them [the natives] good in spite of themselves” through the gift of 
Frenchness, as Frantz Fanon noted in his critique of French colonialism in Alge-
ria.
35 Indeed, Jules Michelet wrote in his L ’lntroduction a l’ Histoire Universelle:
pal-mara-14.indd   212pal-mara-14.indd   212 7/25/08   1:30:10 PM7/25/08   1:30:10 PM


--- PAGE 222 ---
Femme Négritude 213
The Frenchmen wants above all to imprint his personality on the vanquished, not 
because it is his, but because it is the quintessence of the good and the beautiful; 
this is his naive belief. He believes that he could do nothing that would benefit 
the world more than to give it his ideas, customs, ways of doing things. He will 
convert other peoples to these ways, sword in hand, and after the battle, in part 
smugly and in part sympathetically, he will reveal to them all that they gain by 
becoming French.
36
Ideas of difference, integration, symbiosis, synergy, syncretization, and 
hyphenations were threatening to l’esprit français national, the body politic, 
and the belief in the “plus grande France.”
37 And although Nardal advocated 
racial identity politics for specifically cultural and literary purposes, politically 
such race-conscious politics would prove to be the bane of French colonialism 
in Africa in the coming decades, for it would set in motion the historical pro-
cesses of decolonization. Was Nardal aware at the time of the insurgent sub-
text of her black humanism and cultural pan-blackness? Years later, she and 
her sister Paulette would insist on their unique intentions to create a cultural, 
not political, movement similar to that of Locke’s New Negro in America. Jane 
Nardal’s “Black Internationalism,” however, with its somewhat embellished 
résumé of a nascent race consciousness among Francophone blacks, which 
would lead to a cultural explosion à la mode American, that is, to Négritude, 
interestingly mapped out the first stage in the dialectics of liberation for the 
colonized. Such a politically charged stand would arouse government suspi-
cions and shadow the two sisters in their future race consciousness-raising 
cultural collaboration, the bilingual La Revue du Monde Noir.
Notes
 1. Aimé Césaire, Notebook of a Return to My Native Land [Cahier d’un retour au pays natal], 
trans. Abiola Irele (Ibadan, Nigeria: New Horn Press, 2005).
 2. Georges Ngal, “Lire,” Le Discours sur Ie Colonialisme (Paris: Presence Africaine, 1994), 
12.
 3. Janet Vaillant, Black, French, African: A Life of Leopold Sédar Senghor (Cambridge, MA: 
Harvard University Press, 1990), 1.
 4. Georges Ngal, “Lire,” Le Discours sur Ie Colonialisme (Paris: Presence Africaine, 1994), 
13.
 5. Leopold Sédar Senghor, “Problematique de la négritude,” Présence Africaine 78 (1971): 
12–14.
 6. The three future Négritude poets also received inspiration from Cuban writer Nicolas 
Guillen and Haitian writers Jacques Roumain and Jean Price-Mars and employed as tools 
of critical engagement the ethnology of Frobenius and Delafosse.
 7. A 1960 letter written by Senghor cited in Lilyan Kesteloot, Black Writers in French: A 
Literary History of Négritude, trans. Ellen Conroy Kennedy (Washington, DC: Howard 
University Press, 1991), 56.
 8. Louis Jacques Hymans, Leopold Sédar Senghor: An Intellectual Biography (Edinburgh: Uni-
versity Press of Edinburgh, 1971), 36.pal-mara-14.indd   213pal-mara-14.indd   213 7/25/08   1:30:10 PM7/25/08   1:30:10 PM


--- PAGE 223 ---
Transnational Blackness214
 9. Maryse Condé, “Language and Power,” College Language Association Journal 3, no. 1 
(1995): 19.
 10. La Dépêche Africaine stopped publication in 1932, then resumed in 1938 for one year 
before it eventually folded for good.
 11. “Notre But-Notre Programme,” La Dépêche Africaine, February 15, 1928, p. 1. All trans-
lations provided by the author.
 12. “Une Bonne Nouvelle,” La Dépêche Africaine, November 15, 1928, p. 2.
 13. Archives d’Outre Mer in Aix-en-Provence (ADO), Slotfom V , 2 La Dépêche Africaine, 
November 29,1928.
 14. La Dépêche Africaine, January 15, 1929, publicity page.
 15. La Dépêche Africaine, May 30, 1929, p. 3.
 16. See ADO, Slotfom V , 2 “La Dépêche Africaine et reports policiers.”
 17. “Notre But-Notre Programme,” La Dépêche Africaine, February 15, 1928, p. 1.
 18. “Un supreme appel,” La Dépêche africaine, April 1,1932, p. 1.
 19. ADO, Slotfom III, 81, no. 595. The original French report notes: “C’est l’addresse et ce 
numero de telephone sont presentement ceux de la direction du journal ‘La Dépêche Afric-
aine.’ II n’est plus possible de nier les relations qui unissent cette feuitle et I’organization 
pan-noire. Ceci explique pourquoi, ainsi qui nous Ie signalions dans la note du Fevrier 
demier page 10, ‘La Dépêche Africaine’ a evoqué le souvenir du defunt organ pan-noir ‘Les 
Continents.”
 20. ADO, Slotfom III, 81, no. 678, Decembre 18, 1928: “Le numero 9 de la “Dépêche afric-
aine” apparu le 15 Novembre. Le camouflage persiste: Ie portrait du nouveau ministre des 
colonies est publie en premier page avec de commentaire sympathique.” (“Issue number 
9 of ‘La Dépêche africaine’ appeared on November 15th. The camouflage persists: the 
portrait of the new Minister of Colonies is published on the front page with sympathetic 
commentary”).
 21. “La Dépêche Iitteraire,” La Dépêche Africaine, June 15, 1928, p. 4.
 22. Paulette Nardal, “Musique negre: Antilles et AfraAmerique,” La Dépêche Africaine, June 
15, 1930, p. 5; “Vne femme sculpteur noire,” La Dépêche Africaine, September 15, 1930, 
p. 5.
 23. ADO, Slotfom III, 81, no. 132, March 13, 1928.
 24. W . E. B. Du Bois, “Negro at Paris,” in Writings by W E. B. Du Bois in Periodicals Edited by 
Others, vol. 2, 1910–1934, ed. Herbert Aptheker (Millwood, NJ: Kraus-Thomson Ltd., 
1982), 127.
 25. Jane Nardal, “Internationalisme noir,” La Dépêche Africaine, February 15, 1928, p. 5.
 26. Ibid.
 27. W . E. B. Du Bois, The Souls of Black
  Folk: Essays and Sketches (New York: Fawcett, 1961), 
17.
 28. Nardal, “lntemationalisme noir,” 5.
 29. Ibid.
 30. Ibid.
 31. Ibid.
 32. Ibid.
 33. Ibid. The original French reads: “jeunes AfroLatins” (“young Afro-Latins”) who, “aides, 
encourages par les intellectuels noir americains, se separant de la generation precedente 
. . . les formes aux methodes europeenes, ils s’ en serviront pour etudier l’ esprit de leur 
race, Ie passe de leur race, avec tout l’ esprit critique necessaire.”
 34. Raoul Girardet, Le Nationalisme franrais: Anthologie, 1871–1914 (Paris: Seuil, 1983), 86.
 35. Frantz Fanon, A Dying Colonialism (New York: Grove, 1965), 63.
 36. Jules Michelet, L ’1ntroduction a l’histoire universelle (Paris, 1834), 78–79.
 37. Girardet, Le Nationalisme, 86.
pal-mara-14.indd   214pal-mara-14.indd   214 7/25/08   1:30:10 PM7/25/08   1:30:10 PM


--- PAGE 224 ---
C HAPTER  15
Regionalism against 
Racism
The TransEurope Struggle for 
Racial Equality
Clarence Lusane
Europe is poised to make the most sweeping changes in anti-discrimination 
legislation since the beginning of unification. While a few states have specific 
legislation against discrimination, most current members of the European Union 
(EU) and those that will be joining over the next few years do not. The obliga-
tion to implement the EU’s Article 13 Race Directive and Employment Directive 
will radically transform discourse and policy regarding racism and equality across 
much of Europe.
1 Whether this effort will be met with a serious commitment by 
states to enforce the new legislation will determine to what degree Europe will 
genuinely become multicultural and multiracial in content as much as in form.
Despite decades of aggressive activism and legislation, premature declarations 
that racism has been addressed and official denial that racism even exists, grass-
roots organizing and global conferences, in nation after nation racial and ethnic 
inequalities, marginalization, and psychological and physical violence doggedly 
persist. At the same time there is a growing number of regional laws and poli-
cies against racism. The increased number and range of these policies, which are 
mandatory under regional agreements, provide an important resource for activ-
ists and policy makers who are seeking remedies for issues related to racialized 
social exclusion and discrimination. No other regional political machinery has 
generated the breadth of legislation, policies, and enforcement mechanisms to 
address discrimination. Recent political developments in Europe, specifically the 
defeat and withering of Social Democratic governments, might erode or even 
reverse this progress. The emerging debate in the EU on developing a cooperative 
pal-mara-15.indd   215pal-mara-15.indd   215 7/25/08   1:40:27 PM7/25/08   1:40:27 PM


--- PAGE 225 ---
Transnational Blackness216
cross-national immigration policy, deep differences on Iraq, and growing eco-
nomic competition have generated fissures in the alliance that are likely to last for 
some time to come. For the moment, however, the forces of antiracism, antiracist 
legislators, and non-governmental organizations (NGOs) are having significant 
success as new legislation continues to be created and passed.
Attempts at supra-national governance are rarely effective in addressing issues 
of racism and discrimination. Although UN declarations and condemnations 
have been plentiful, the capacity to enforce an antiracist policy framework has 
had only limited success at the international level.
2 European regionalism, with a 
stronger coercive ability due to the willingness of states to concede significant sov-
ereignty in many areas, perhaps offers the best way of addressing racism beyond 
the limits of the nation-state.
The World against Racism
Since at least the end of World War II, many policymakers, activists, and scholars 
have seen the struggle against racism in supra-national terms.
3 In the immediate 
postwar period, following the racist rampage that the Nazis unleashed upon the 
world, the international community concluded that racism and extreme intoler-
ance should no longer be considered solely a matter of national concern. As the 
founding charter of the United Nations states in chapter 1, article 1, one of the 
main purposes of the United Nations is “T o achieve international cooperation in 
solving international problems of an economic, social, cultural, or humanitarian 
character, and in promoting and encouraging respect for human rights and for 
fundamental freedoms for all without distinction as to race, sex, language, or reli-
gion.” The struggle against racism is also highlighted in articles 2 and 16 of the 
1948 United Nations Universal Declaration of Human Rights (UDHR). More 
ideologically muscular than the charter or the UDHR were the declarations and 
resolutions passed in the 1960s and 1970s. The most important of these was the 
International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimina-
tion (ICERD) passed in 1965 and went into effect in 1969. The ICERD has one 
of the largest number of signatures and ratifications of any of the UN conventions, 
more than 165 states at last count. Article 1, section 1 of the ICERD proposes a 
broad definition of racial discrimination as “any distinction, exclusion, restriction 
or preference based on race, color, descent, or national or ethnic origin which has 
the purpose or effect of nullifying or impairing the recognition, enjoyment or 
exercise, on an equal footing, of human rights and fundamental freedoms in the 
political, economic, social, cultural or any other field of public life.” Although its 
definition of racial discrimination is problematic and difficult to use in legisla-
tion, countless activists and scholars have employed and cited it.
4
The convention also created the Committee for the Elimination of All forms 
of Racial Discrimination (CERD), which serves as the monitoring body for the 
ICERD. Signatories are required to present bi-annual reports to the CERD 
on the status of racial equality in their states and the actions taken to address 
pal-mara-15.indd   216pal-mara-15.indd   216 7/25/08   1:40:28 PM7/25/08   1:40:28 PM


--- PAGE 226 ---
Regionalism against Racism 217
inequality and discrimination. This committee of nonpartisan experts reviews the 
reports and then makes recommendations to states on improvements. The value 
of this reporting scheme is that it forces states to confront, at least officially, the 
issue of racism and to offer some solutions.
5
At the same time, a fundamental contradiction has always existed in this effort. 
The politics of antiracism clashes with the equally recognized and sanctioned 
politics of nation-state sovereignty, which declares that extranational, regional, 
and international authorities and actors cannot cross political borders and inter-
fere in a state’s “internal affairs.” Broadly speaking, sovereignty has won the battle 
between the two and the UN has lacked the legal, political, and economic author-
ity to enforce its policies, achieve its aims, or have states live up to their commit-
ments regarding racial discrimination.
6
The UN World Conference against Racism (WCAR), held in Durban in the 
fall of 2001, reflects both the strengths and limits of UN efforts to tackle this 
question. Bringing together thousands of activists, NGOs, policymakers, world 
leaders, and others, the WCAR placed the issue of equality on a global stage and 
drafted a wide range of progressive recommendations through its Final Declara-
tion and Program of Action. Few believe, however, that most states will follow 
through on their commitments to the recommendations or that the UN will have 
the power or resources to ensure that effective follow-up occurs.
A Trans-Europe Approach
This dilemma was recognized fairly early by many outside observers and thus 
has shaped how regional and non-UN transnational bodies approached the issue. 
In Europe, the EU, the Council of Europe (COE), the European Parliament, 
and even the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) 
have addressed these concerns.
7 Learning from the UN experience, governing 
regional institutions in Europe have struggled to create binding agreements that, 
like international treaties and domestic laws, would be enforceable either through 
legal measures or through political or economic sanctions or incentives.
It must be emphasized that a robust legal regime is not in itself a cure for rac-
ism. In the United States, where relatively strong civil rights laws have existed for 
half a century and constitutional protections have existed for twice as long, racism 
in the form of social and economic disparity, racial profiling, political disfran-
chisement, media stereotypes, Islamophobia, and institutionalized discrimination 
continues. The same can be said for other racially tense states that have laws 
against racism, such as Canada, South Africa, Brazil, and Colombia.
Legal remedies nevertheless play an important and often determinant role in 
the context of a broader antiracism policy. Particularly in Europe, where anti-dis-
crimination law has had little currency in weak states with vacuous legal systems, 
regional policies are a potential bridge to democratic rights for the socially mar-
ginalized. Legal remedies, as opposed to political will, may be the most expedi-
tious and realistic means for redress and justice for racial and ethnic minorities in 
pal-mara-15.indd   217pal-mara-15.indd   217 7/25/08   1:40:28 PM7/25/08   1:40:28 PM


--- PAGE 227 ---
Transnational Blackness218
many European states. As James Goldston points out, “For members of minority 
groups . . . strategic litigation aimed at politically independent judges may be the 
only means of vindicating fundamental rights in societies where numerical major-
ities retain the political power to deny those rights at will.”
8 The creation of these 
laws in Europe with nearly universal support from member states and a relentless 
effort by NGOs indicate a will to address the issue of racism even if only in lim-
ited terms and in the name of national interest. In turn, the laws become potential 
mobilizing vehicles for regional and domestic antiracist forces. The laws, in sig-
nificant ways, legitimate the antiracist movement, even as conservative media and 
politicians decry them as “race baiting” and “political correctness.”
In post-9/11 Europe, those who are or are believed to be Arab or Muslim have 
come under media slander (fear of the “bogus” asylum seeker rhetoric) and verbal 
and physical attacks.
9 Politicians of all parties, the media, and the extreme right 
have demonized (and racialized) immigrants and refugees, especially asylum seek-
ers. The electoral advances of the Far Right in a number of states reflect a growing 
tension over the development of growing racial, ethnic, and religious diversity in 
the region. Disturbing long-term trends of racial and ethnic disparities in hous-
ing, health care access, policing and criminal justice, educational attainment and 
exclusions, negative media images, and lack of political representation underscore 
these relatively recent events.
The struggle for a unified Europe takes place on many terrains, including that 
of human rights. Human rights activism in Europe, seen in its broad context, 
includes addressing the tension between the majority white populations of the 
region with the permanent and growing communities of different colors, voices, 
and religions. The face of Europe has changed dramatically in the last two gen-
erations. It is a fact that many people embrace these changes as positive and wel-
come the diversity and amalgamated cultural changes that they bring. However, 
a significant number of political leaders and individual citizens, the mass base for 
“Fortress Europe,” are fiercely resistant to these changes and are mobilizing across 
the region. It is these forces of obstruction that antiracism must confront.
Crises of Transition: 
Race and Racism in Contemporary Europe
Europe finds itself in a very different political and social world than where it was a 
decade and a half ago. The earthshaking political and economic transitions—the 
dissolution of the Soviet Union, the war in the Balkans, unprecedented immigra-
tion from the global south, and the growing policymaking role of the EU—have 
generated xenophobia and political opportunism. Furthermore, this crisis of tran-
sition is long-term and growing more complex and multifaceted as intersecting 
forms of oppression, identity, and interest search for an elusive common ground.
A major factor driving the antiracist legislative agenda in the EU and the COE 
is the rapid rise and electoral success of far-right political parties in a number of 
states. More clever and politically sophisticated than in the past, these parties use 
pal-mara-15.indd   218pal-mara-15.indd   218 7/25/08   1:40:28 PM7/25/08   1:40:28 PM


--- PAGE 228 ---
Regionalism against Racism 219
the coded language of anti-immigration, crime, and “cultural cohesion” to build 
broad mass support. While explicit references to particular racial groups as unde-
sirables are mostly avoided and some groups even include people of color, it is 
clear that the anti-immigrant rhetoric is not concerned with white refugees from 
Canada, the United States, or New Zealand. However, when it comes to Muslims, 
explicit racist language is often employed without hesitation. Such verbiage was 
the political capital of the late Dutch right-wing political leader Pim Fortuyn 
among others. Most worrisome is the rise of these parties in the so-called liberal 
welfare states (Norway, Denmark, and Sweden), as well as the Netherlands and 
Belgium. More than fifteen million Europeans have voted for far-right parties in 
the last ten years.
Three racial episodes in 2002 gave antiracist activists in the region reason to 
pay attention to Europe’s swing rightward: the second-place finish of the far-right 
candidate Jean-Marie Le Pen in the May first-round presidential election in France; 
the rise, success, and subsequent assassination of Pim Fortuyn in the Netherlands; 
and the election of three British National Party candidates to local office in the 
United Kingdom, a number that has expanded by five times in 2003. In each of 
these campaigns, the right used racialized anti-immigration and xenophobia to 
their advantage.
10 Unlike their peers of a generation or two ago, the extremists 
no longer stand outside of the mainstream political system and often tone down 
their rhetoric or disguise their aims. Strong antiracism laws in the region effec-
tively prevent overtly racist parties from being accepted into mainstream political 
life. The willingness of the EU to censure Austria after the Freedom Party gained 
enough votes to become part of a coalition government demonstrates the success 
of anti-racist activists and policymakers in outlawing explicit racism. Virtually all 
far-right political leaders with aspirations to national office are forced to declare 
themselves not racist and even to bring a token number of racial or ethnic minori-
ties into their public circles.
11
The danger is not that the far-right is going to dominate electoral politics, 
since in no European state has any far-right party won more than 30 percent of 
the popular vote nationally. The ideological and political danger of the moment 
is that far-right parties are determining political and policy agendas across the 
region. It is their spin on immigration, jobs, crime, education, and culture that 
is shaping events and social intercourse. In all of these areas, new initiatives are 
being appropriated from the playbook of the Right, (sometimes) massaged by 
spinmeisters and made more palatable, and then transformed into mainstream 
policy by conservative, centrist, and even Social Democratic governments. In the 
areas of crime and immigration, for example, conservative and even ostensibly 
liberal parties have used rhetoric and proposed harsh policies very similar to those 
advocated by the Right.
Even as these parties assert themselves, a rash of racist and deadly violence 
from neo- Nazi and ultra-fascist groups continues in the region. In the last two 
years alone, there have been brutal beatings and murders in the United Kingdom, 
Norway, Spain, Germany, Russia, and elsewhere.
12 These attacks are tied to the 
pal-mara-15.indd   219pal-mara-15.indd   219 7/25/08   1:40:28 PM7/25/08   1:40:28 PM


--- PAGE 229 ---
Transnational Blackness220
discourses from the Right on crime, immigration, and cultural purity as they 
helped create an atmosphere of intolerance where such assaults are acceptable. 
The September 11th attacks in the United States have given new energy to the 
Far Right and to racist forces in Europe and elsewhere. Exploiting the fears of 
millions of citizens, they not only offer easy and bigoted solutions to complex and 
deeply rooted problems, but they also pose a challenge to democracy that drives 
current European efforts at antiracism.
European Antiracism Laws and Policies
Europe has responded to these challenges in a manner that is more regional than 
domestic. While only a few states have actually changed their domestic laws to 
specifically outlaw particular racist behavior (such as hate language, use of certain 
symbols, or distribution of hate materials), regional institutions have taken giant 
steps in that direction. In addition, they have made it mandatory for membership 
in the EU and the COE that states have, at a minimum, signed the key interna-
tional and regional human rights, anti-discrimination, and antiracism conventions 
and covenants. Though the efforts are under-resourced and politically tenuous, 
the institutions have also backed up this legislation with judicial power and moni-
toring groups. The European Court of Human Rights, which was founded by 
the COE and handles cases that are in violation of the European Convention on 
Human Rights (ECHR), has binding authority making its rulings enforceable.
13 
The Council and the EU have the power to sanction, fine, or even expel recalci-
trant members who refuse to abide by the court’s rulings or decisions.
The regional anti-discrimination laws, as a whole, are more progressive than 
domestic laws in the various nations, which in some instances have attempted 
to replicate inappropriately U.S. policies. In the United Kingdom, for example, 
the Race Relations Act (1976) was modeled, to a significant degree, on U.S. civil 
rights legislation. While a “one size fits all” approach is not tenable, a genuine 
cross-national effort by the regional institutions makes sense in helping states 
with little experience in constructing anti-discrimination legislation or who are 
reluctant to do so. The strength of regional antiracist laws lie in their collective 
and cumulative impact. The body of conventions, laws, protocols, policies, and 
monitoring bodies together constitute a broad and comprehensive, though still 
incomplete, legislative regime against racism. No one instrument alone does the 
job, but together they complement each other.
While the Race Directive (described later in this chapter) does not specifi-
cally protect asylum seekers (article 3.2), the proposed Protocol 12’s prohibition 
against “discrimination on any ground such as sex, race, colour, language, religion, 
political or other opinion, national or social origin, association with a national 
minority, property, birth or other such status” does (article 1.1). The ECHR does 
not technically allow for antiracist complaints to stand alone (article 14), but 
Protocol 12 (article 1.1 and article 3) corrects that problem. Both Protocol 12 and 
the ECHR do not adequately address indirect discrimination, however, the Race 
pal-mara-15.indd   220pal-mara-15.indd   220 7/25/08   1:40:28 PM7/25/08   1:40:28 PM


--- PAGE 230 ---
Regionalism against Racism 221
Directive strongly outlaws all forms of racism, including more covert, oblique 
versions (article 2.2b).
European Union
What began as primarily an economic effort, the European Economic Com-
munity, has evolved into a much wider body that also addresses issues of social 
policy, such as human rights. Article 13 of the 1997 T reaty of Amsterdam, long 
fought for by European human rights groups and antiracist organizations, pro-
vided the EU with a legal basis to authorize direct and formal action against 
discrimination based on sex, disability, religion or belief, sexual orientation, age, 
and racial or ethnic origin. As a consequence, in 2000 the European Commission 
adopted two directives that required the members and candidate members of the 
EU to make substantial changes in their domestic laws and policies regarding 
this discrimination. The Race Directive (RD) and the Employment Directive 
(ED)—which cover age, religious, sexual orientation, and disability—afford pro-
tectionin the areas of employment, self-employment, working conditions, mem-
bership in workers’ organizations, and whistle-blowing. The RD also provides 
protection in the areas of education, social security, access to goods and services, 
and cultural life.
According to James Goldston, Senior Counsel of the European Roma Rights 
Center, the RD “is the most important and far-reaching development in the field 
of European discrimination law in recent times.”
14 All EU member states (and 
those seeking accession) must create laws, policies, regulations, and administrative 
bodies that reflect the principles and guidelines outlined in the directive. Both 
direct and indirect discrimination are addressed and defined in article 2 of the 
RD. The RD defines indirect discrimination more forcefully than the existing 
definition in the UK Race Relations Act, one of the few states with such legisla-
tion. Article 3 defines the scope of the legislation as covering both the public and 
private sectors with no small firm exemption. This provision covers many job 
occupations as well as social areas and the provision of goods and services. In sec-
tion 3.2, it is noted that the RD “does not cover difference of treatment based on 
nationality” or apply to “any treatment which arises from the legal status of the 
third-country nationals and stateless persons concerned.” A broad interpretation 
of this statement would mean that little or no protection exists for refugees and 
asylum seekers. However a more narrow reading, given the principles of the RD 
and its explicit declaration in the preamble that “prohibitions against discrimina-
tion should also apply to nationals of third countries,” implies that this provision 
should only concern the area of immigration law where states are usually given 
broad leeway in international law. As states transpose the RD into domestic law, it 
will be critical to ensure that this provision does not become a cover for draconian 
and racist policy attacks on refugees and asylum seekers.
In article 5, the notion of “positive action,” as opposed to “positive discrimina-
tion,” is promoted. This means that states can take steps to voluntarily promote 
pal-mara-15.indd   221pal-mara-15.indd   221 7/25/08   1:40:28 PM7/25/08   1:40:28 PM


--- PAGE 231 ---
Transnational Blackness222
and institute means of generating racial equality (positive action) but are pro-
hibited from imposing quotas or penalizing members of the majority popula-
tion (positive discrimination). In the past, European law was not too keen on 
the stronger positive discrimination when it came to race. In carefully worded 
language, article 5 notes that states can adopt “specific measures to prevent or 
compensate for disadvantages linked to racial or ethnic origin.”
This has been one of the most controversial approaches in the field of anti-
racist policy-making. An extensive and sometimes successful campaign against 
“affirmative action” has existed in the United States for many years. In many 
nations in Europe, where minority communities are vastly underrepresented in 
countless occupations and education, positive action will probably not be enough 
to address these concerns. Activists will find that they must push for stronger 
positive discrimination or affirmative action to achieve their equality goals. The 
importance of protecting those who expose racist behavior (a protection written 
into article 9) is made clear by the numerous cases of harassment launched against 
employees who speak out against racist language and behavior.
One continuing problem with the European antiracist laws is that relatively 
few people know about them. Addressing this concern, article 10 calls for the 
promotion of a public media campaign as well as the training of public bodies 
around the policies and principles of the RD. It will be important that antiara-
cist activists are involved in both governmental and non-governmental educa-
tion campaigns around the RD and other laws. Article 12 requires governments 
to consult and communicate with relevant NGOs and other organizations 
around the implementation and interpretation of the RD. As with many other 
regional and international legal instruments, there is a reporting obligation, 
which in this case is every five years. This process is open to comments and views 
of relevant NGOs.
Activists have also called for aggressive implementation of the RD, funding 
access to legal aid, extension of the scope for positive action, meaningful and 
effective consultation, effective publicity, and communication. The Starting Line 
Group, a coalition of Europe-wide antiracist and human rights NGOs, which 
worked for a number of years to develop and lobby for the passage of the RD, 
has offered a number of additional recommendations to strengthen the directive. 
These include a call for extending the RD to cover religious bias; inclusion of a 
ban on incitement or pressure to discriminate; express protection for legal persons 
and third-country nationals against discrimination; coverage in national imple-
menting legislation of all public bodies, particularly the police and immigration 
authorities; provisions in national implementing legislation that allow relevant 
organizations to bring cases in their own name and on behalf of other complain-
ants; and provisions in national implementing legislation that allow relevant orga-
nizations to initiate investigations of alleged discrimination among others.
15
A large number of human rights, antiracist, and minority rights NGOs have 
struggled for a progressive transposition of the Race Directive into domestic law. 
The European Network Against Racism (ENAR) is one network that has been 
pal-mara-15.indd   222pal-mara-15.indd   222 7/25/08   1:40:28 PM7/25/08   1:40:28 PM


--- PAGE 232 ---
Regionalism against Racism 223
active throughout the region in mobilizing grassroots involvement around the 
new laws. It is comprised of about six hundred NGOs from around the region. 
In January 2003 and February 2004, it held conferences to assess the progress in 
transposing the directive into national law and to share organizing experiences.
The target date for implementation by member states of the RD was to be no 
later than July 2003. However only about half of the states of the fifteen-member 
EU—Belgium, Denmark, France, Italy, the Netherlands, Portugal, Sweden, and 
the United Kingdom—had full or partial legislation either in place or drafted by 
that time.
16 Activists will have to continue to monitor and lobby states vigorously 
to achieve full implementation of the directive. They will also have to monitor 
and work with the anti-discrimination efforts of the COE.
Council of Europe
The COE has historically expressed great concern regarding the issue of racism. 
The clearest example is in article 14 of the 1950 ECHR that reads, “The enjoyment 
of the rights and freedoms set forth in this Convention shall be secured without 
discrimination on any grounds such as sex, race, colour, language, religion, politi-
cal or other opinion, national or social origin, association with a national minor-
ity, property, birth or other status.” In addition, other provisions of the ECHR 
can also be interpreted as protections against racism, including article 3 (right to 
liberty and security), article 6 (right to a fair trial), article 7 (the legal principle 
of “no punishment without law”), article 9 (freedom of thought, conscience, and 
religion), and article 10 (freedom of expression). Other relevant legal instruments 
and policies from the COE include the European Social Charter (1961), Euro-
pean Convention on the Legal Status of Migrant Workers (1983), Framework 
Convention for the Protection of National Minorities (1995), European Con-
vention on Nationality (1997), Convention on the Participation of Foreigners 
in Public Life at the Local Level (1997), and EuropeanCharter for Regional and 
Minority Languages (1998).
The biggest crack in the political armor of the ECHR rests in article 14, pre-
viously cited. Article 14 is not “self-executing” and can only be invoked in rela-
tion to another violation of the Convention. In other words, a charge of race or 
sex discrimination, for instance, cannot be made separate from another rights 
violation in the Convention, such as the provisions against torture (article 3) or 
enslavement (article 4). While this linkage is used on occasion, article 14 has been 
vastly underused for the most part. Furthermore, Article 14 does not define what 
discrimination entails or what grounds are covered; that is, it is an open-ended 
provision that has also made it difficult to bring cases under its ambit.
17
The definition of a violation of article 14 based on the cases that the European 
Court of Human Rights has accepted, argues Livingstone, consists of three ele-
ments: different treatment, lack of legitimate justification, and disproportionate 
implementation.
18 In the Court’s rulings, different treatment—discrimination—is 
allowed if there is legitimate justification and there is proportional application of 
pal-mara-15.indd   223pal-mara-15.indd   223 7/25/08   1:40:28 PM7/25/08   1:40:28 PM


--- PAGE 233 ---
Transnational Blackness224
that different treatment. It is important to note that different treatment need 
not mean that a particular injury has occurred. This has led to rather complex 
interpretations of the balance between justification and proportionality and an 
unstable and ill-defined threshold.
Another area of considerable debate is the definition and constitution of racial 
groups. This is not covered by the ECHR and leads to some legalistic contradic-
tions. In the United Kingdom, for example, where the ECHR has been translated 
into domestic law—the Human Rights Act—this vagueness has led to legal bias. 
The current definition, as laid down by Lord Fraser in Mandela v. Dowell, means 
that Sikhs and Jews are defined as racial groups and, therefore, receive full protec-
tion under the Race Relations Act while Rastafarians, who are not seen as having 
a long history, and Muslims, who are not seen as homogeneous, are not defined 
as legal racial groups and not covered under the Act.
While it is arguable that other UK laws, particularly regarding religious rights, 
offer protection, the glaring distinction between what many would consider 
groups that fall into the same category underscores the need for clarity in defini-
tion of terms. Activists have long sought to have Article 14 as a “stand alone” pro-
vision. In 2000, to address this concern, the COE proposed Protocol 12. Unlike 
the RD and ED, which became law upon passage, Protocol 12 must be signed 
and ratified by ten member states before it becomes law. More than twenty-five 
member states of the COE have signed but not ratified Protocol 12. Georgia was 
the first state to ratify it in June 2000. While the United Kingdom has thus far 
refused to sign, let alone ratify the Protocol, a campaign has started to push for 
its passage.
The European Commission against Racism and Intolerance (ECRI), the 
Council’s monitoring body on racism, operates in a way similar to the CERD. It 
investigates and publishes reports on the status of race relations in all forty-three 
member states. Similarly, it makes recommendations on how states can improve 
their antiracist policy efforts. ECRI works with NGOs in the region in compiling 
the report.
Conclusion
Overall, the initiatives from the EU and COE will have an important impact on 
antiracist legislation and practice in Europe and the United Kingdom. European 
institutions will find themselves under increasing pressure to limit the drive of 
antiracism as representatives of conservative governments likely have more and 
more input into these bodies. How the new laws will be implemented and how 
they will affect current law remains to be seen. The translation of the frameworks 
into concrete laws and policies will be determined by the degree of collaboration 
and agreement reached by governments, NGOs, the private sector, and other 
interested parties. As elsewhere, some will argue that this legislative activity is 
driven by the devil of political correctness and that racism has effectively been 
eliminated or curtailed, especially in the modern, advanced states of France, 
pal-mara-15.indd   224pal-mara-15.indd   224 7/25/08   1:40:28 PM7/25/08   1:40:28 PM


--- PAGE 234 ---
Regionalism against Racism 225
Germany, and the United Kingdom. After all, black and Asian faces are more 
prominent than ever in the media, sports, parliaments, and even business spaces 
of these states. Beneath this surface of inclusion is a very pervasive and persistent 
regime of discrimination, inequality, and bigotry. Antiracist campaigners will have 
to continue to make the case for the necessity of the legislation being proposed 
at the regional level by carefully documenting and presenting a rendering of con-
temporary racism. Building on the current wave of legislation progress, equality 
activists in Europe have the opportunity to produce some of the most important 
antiracist, anti-discrimination, and human rights policies available anywhere.
Notes
 1. The text of Article 13 reads: “Without prejudice to the other provisions of this T reaty, and 
with the limits of the powers conferred by it upon the Community, the Council, acting 
unanimously on a proposal from the Commission, and after consulting the European 
Parliament, may take appropriate action to combat discrimination based on sex, racial 
or ethnic origin, religion or belief, disability, age, or sexual orientation.” The full title of 
the Race Directive is “Council Directive Implementing the Principle of Equal T reatment 
Between Persons Irrespective of Racial and Ethnic Origin” (OJ L 180, 19/07/2000), and 
the full title of the Employment Directive is “Council Directive Establishing a General 
Framework for Employment Equality” (OJ L 303, 02/12).
 2. See, for example, UNESCO’s four statements against racisms—a Statement on Race 
(1950), Statement on the Nature of Race and Race Differences (1951), Statement on 
the Biological Aspects of Race (1964), and Statement on Race and Racial Prejudice 
(1967)—as well as the United Nations Declaration on the Elimination of All Forms of 
Racial Discrimination (November 20, 1963) among others.
 3. Prior to World War II, many black activists in the United States, Asia, and Latin America 
advocated a global thrust against racism, particularly in their colonial manifestations. The 
leading global powers, however, did not seriously address the issue until Nazism demon-
strated the disaster of unchecked racism. See Paul Gordon Lauren, Power  and Prejudice: 
The Politics and Diplomacy of Racial Discrimination (Boulder, CO: Westview, 1996).
 4. Many problems arise out of the ICERD definition, including the lack of a definition 
of race and a definition of racial discrimination that is far too broad to be useful. The 
ICERD definition is a political one, and it fails at the practical policy level, which is why 
few states or policy makers have actually employed it.
 5. The United States government signed the ICERD in 1969 but did not ratify it until 1994. 
It submitted its first report in 2000.
 6. There is considerable debate over whether the ICERD is “self-executing,” that is, whether 
it has the force of domestic law after being signed and ratified by a state. The U.S. govern-
ment has consistently insisted that the UN conventions and covenants do not have the 
force of law or authority within the United States or any of its territories.
 7. The principle OSCE agency for addressing human rights and discrimination is its Office 
for Democratic Institutions and Human Rights. In September 2003, the OSCE held 
a conference specifically focused on racism. See “OSCE Conference on Racism, Xeno-
phobia, and Discrimination,” Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe, 
PC.DEL/1146/03, October 1, 2003.
 8. James Goldston, “Race Discrimination in Europe: Problems and Prospects,” European 
Human Rights Law Review, no. 5 (1999): 464.
pal-mara-15.indd   225pal-mara-15.indd   225 7/25/08   1:40:28 PM7/25/08   1:40:28 PM


--- PAGE 235 ---
Transnational Blackness226
 9. See Anti-Islamic Reactions in the EU After the T errorist Attacks Against the USA: United 
Kingdom, Report on Islamophobia, European Monitoring Centre on Racism and Xeno-
phobia (Vienna, May 2002).
 10. At one point in May 2002, although without an official title, the person second in leader-
ship of the Pim Fortuyn List party, behind Fortuyn himself, was Joao Valera, an immigrant 
from Cape Verde. France’s right-wing demagogue Jean-Marie Le Pen has also presented 
black and even Jewish supporters of his cause.
 11. See European Race Bulletin (London, January 2002), http://www.irr.org.uk (accessed 
March 2002).
 12. See the European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental 
Freedoms (1950), popularly known as the European Convention on Human Rights.
 13. James Goldston, “Race Discrimination in Europe,” 464.
 14. Mark Bell, “Meeting the Challenge? A Comparison Between the EU Racial Equality 
Directive and the Starting Line,” in The Starting Line and the Incorporation of the Racial 
Directive into the National Laws of the EU Member States and Accession States, ed. Isabelle 
Chopin and Jan Niessen (London: Commission for Racial Equality, 2001), 22–49.
 15. ENAR General Overview on the T ransposition of the COUNCIL DIRECTIVE 2000/43/
EC of 29 June 2000” (Public Hearing, July 8, 2003), http://www.enar-eu.org/en (accessed 
August 2003).
 16. See Anne F . Bayefsky, “The Principle of Equality or Non Discrimination in International 
Law,” Human Rights Law Journal 11, nos. 1–2 (1990): 1, 5; and Stephen Livingstone, 
“Article 14 and the Prevention of Discrimination in the European Convention on Human 
Rights,” European Human Rights Law Review 1 (1997): 25–34.
 17. Livingstone, “Article 14 and the Prevention of Discrimination,” 29–30.
 18. Karon Monaghan, “Limitations and Opportunities: A Review of the Likely Domestic 
Impact of Article 14 in the ECHR,” European Human Rights Law Review, no. 2 (2001): 
172.
pal-mara-15.indd   226pal-mara-15.indd   226 7/25/08   1:40:28 PM7/25/08   1:40:28 PM


--- PAGE 236 ---
P ART  V
Crafting Resistance
Identity, Narrative, and Agency
pal-mara-16.indd   227pal-mara-16.indd   227 7/25/08   1:39:23 PM7/25/08   1:39:23 PM


--- PAGE 237 ---
This page intentionally left blank


--- PAGE 238 ---
C HAPTER  16
Salvaging Lives in the 
African Diaspora
Anthropology, Ethnography, 
and Women’s Narratives
Irma McClaurin
Salvage: the rescue of any property from destruction or waste.
—Webster’s New World Dictionary 1979, 423
I am the last girl of a family of seven baby girls, baby sister. My parents were very poor. 
My father was an alcoholic. He died when I was seven and my mother had to work to 
raise us, so I grew up among brothers, so I was a very rough little girl. I climbed trees 
and admired their courage. When I grew up, things slowed down. I started to see what 
happens to women who live with an alcoholic. I tell myself, I don’t want to go through 
that the pain, the anguish. I met my husband at eighteen. But there was a problem. We 
were not of the same ethnic group. He was Indian [Maya] and I Garifuna.
1
—Rose
With these words, I am invited into the narrative of a young woman who is 
the same age as I and, like me, has two children: a son and a daughter. We share 
so much and yet our lives are so different. With these words, I am introduced 
to a marginal woman (Rose), who lives in a marginal district (T oledo), often 
referred to as “God’s backside” or the “tail end” of a country, which is a marginal 
place (Belize, formerly British Honduras), of which few people have heard. And 
even if they have heard of Belize, most people fail to realize that it is uniquely 
situated in Central America as the only English-speaking enclave in an expanse 
of Spanish language and culture—a metaphoric Caribbean island in a very real 
Spanish environment.
pal-mara-16.indd   229pal-mara-16.indd   229 7/25/08   1:39:23 PM7/25/08   1:39:23 PM


--- PAGE 239 ---
Transnational Blackness230
Rose’s words also mark the beginning of my journey as an “authentic” anthro-
pologist, trained to study the other by people who sometimes, conveniently, forget 
that I am the other. Her words mark the beginning of my attempts to understand 
gender as lived experience. They bear witness to my desire as a scholar to salvage 
(i.e., recover, record, and reveal) the words and memories that constitute women’s 
“life stories,” which according to Susan Chase are “narratives about life experience 
that . . . [are] of deep and abiding interest to the interviewee.”
2 Rose’s words bear 
witness to my obsession, “a beautiful obsession,” with narrative, which I view as 
a transformative experience that reveals more often than not who the speaker has 
become more so than what they were socialized to be. I see narrative as a bridging 
of representations—the new and transformative (articulated in the telling) with 
the old and enculturated (out of which the speaker weaves herself anew). In this 
respect, narrative construction is a form of particularized social knowledge pro-
duction and a process of identity formation undertaken by the actor as a means 
of making sense out of her social world. In effect, narrative serves as a way for us 
to see how personhood, culture, history, and memory are mediated through the 
telling of a story and the production of a particular life.
So what does it mean when an anthropologist ventures into the heady post-
modernist realm to engage these issues of meaning, interpretation, situated iden-
tities, and transformative narratives? I think the best way to respond is, of course, 
through narrative—that is, to create and explicate my own transformative story, 
to produce my own particularized social knowledge, shaped by my experiences as 
a black woman (who is simultaneously mother, sister, daughter, friend), a writer, 
a feminist, and an anthropologist.
Many, many years ago, in a place far removed from where I live now, I set 
off to explore the unknown, the other, and like every well-trained anthropology 
graduate student, I was armed with my anthropological toolkit, which included, 
among other things, an agenda: I arrived in Belize, Central America wanting to 
study women’s grassroots organization, armed with the usual social science para-
phernalia: random sample methods, questionnaires, feminist theories, theories of 
culture, and so forth.
While I adhered to H. Russell Bernard’s Research Methods like something akin 
to a religious convert, what I discovered was that some of these methods simply 
did not work on the ground. For example, in my experience, trying to construct 
a random sample from an outdated census was nothing short of frustrating, while 
trying to fit the way women’s groups organized themselves in Belize, Central 
America into the Western feminist paradigms of how women’s organizations and 
support groups ought to work made little sense in the context of what I discov-
ered in Belize.
3
Ultimately, as I conducted my survey, using “purposive” and “snowball” sam-
pling methods, what intrigued me the most and captured my attention was what 
women talked about after my survey was completed or, rather, what they said 
around the corners of my questions. T o explicate what I mean by “talking around 
the comers of my questions,” I refer to Karen Sacks’s critique of the methods she 
pal-mara-16.indd   230pal-mara-16.indd   230 7/25/08   1:39:23 PM7/25/08   1:39:23 PM


--- PAGE 240 ---
Salvaging Lives in the African Diaspora 231
used to study women involved in a labor strike. Identifying some of the limita-
tions of survey questions in eliciting rich data, Sacks observes: “the questions 
I posed to the women were sociological, and women responded in that mode, 
giving me answers that linked sociological variables to personal militance.” 
She concludes, “their answers were as abstract and uninformative as my own 
thinking.”
4 I experienced a similar situation in Belize. I, too, found that when 
I confined myself to formulaic survey questions or attempted to elicit responses 
to standard demographic queries, I received formulaic, short, and uninteresting 
responses in exchange. When I relaxed, however, and sat with women at kitchen 
tables or spoke with men at bars, worked in the shops with women and helped 
them with their sewing, cooking, and washing, their narratives disclosed much 
more about the politics of the “culture of gender”
5 than anything my survey ques-
tions could have elicited.
Sacks’ point, which is also mine, is that sometimes the conventional method-
ological forms we use may work to obscure the very aspects of human interaction 
and experiences that we wish to illuminate. As a consequence of these and other 
encounters, in my own methodological praxis, I have come to conceptualize nar-
rative as a tool, as a process, as an experience, and as a form of thinking. Under-
standing narrative in this way is one route out of the methodological conundrum 
that I have experienced and that Sacks describes.
I have found the elicitation of life histories to be an extremely effective strategy 
for exacting data for the kind of experience-based, interpretive research I conduct. 
One of my baseline assumptions is a strong belief that every member of a society 
has some interesting perspective to offer. In Belize, I conveyed this by simply ask-
ing women to “tell me what it was like growing up in Belize as a young girl,” to 
acquire information about gender enculturation and “tell me what your life has 
been like,” to get them to recover their lives through memories and to trace their 
personal history to the present moment. I think both feminist and indigenous 
scholars
6 who are interested in documenting and salvaging—that is, rescuing from 
waste, destruction, and invisibility—the richness of the past and the nuances of 
the present, have efficaciously used narrative in their diverse configurations of life 
histories, testimonies, autoethnographies, memories, and memoirs as a precise 
and rigorous methodological tool.
A concern with which I grapple when applying this narrative method is, how 
do I effectively capture a life through this research strategy? As an anthropologist 
committed to producing what Lila Abu-Lughod calls the “ethnography of the 
particular”
7 or what those of a postmodernist tendency might term “situated” or 
“subjugated” ethnographies, I continuously grapple with the most originative way 
to render (depict and translate), without force, lived experiences and write about 
it in forms that are neither anachronistic nor static. I struggle with what are the 
best forms to convey all the complexities, richness, layers, and contradictions that 
inhabit individual lives in social fields of action and that, to fall back upon C. W . 
Mills, link the “subjective to the political.”
8
pal-mara-16.indd   231pal-mara-16.indd   231 7/25/08   1:39:23 PM7/25/08   1:39:23 PM


--- PAGE 241 ---
Transnational Blackness232
One question that may plague you at this juncture is whether these are appro-
priate questions or the kinds of issues with which an anthropologist and eth-
nographer should concern herself. You may also be wondering, Are these mere 
afternoon musings, flights of fancy, fantastical whims of yet another delusional 
anthropologist who has had one too many field trips in tropical climates or, even 
more to the point, the rants of a wannabe humanist posing as a social scientist? 
I assure you to the contrary and strongly assert that issues of method, textual-
ity, and experience-based knowledge production are some of the most critical 
concerns of contemporary anthropology. These are the issues that speak directly 
to the nature of anthropological content and epistemology, to anthropological 
subjects and theory, and to anthropological method and interpretation. Without 
a doubt these issues touch upon the very soul of anthropology in all its human-
istic impulses.
Moreover, these are questions and issues that lie at the crux of current debates 
about the present and future direction of this discipline. And as George W . Stock-
ing, Jr., the discipline’s historiographer, asserts, such tensions and intellectual 
polarizations are not new to anthropology but rather are endemic, arguing that, 
“anthropology, in short, has been a discipline pulled between the pole of two 
radically divergent impulses, one ‘scientizing; the other relativizing.”’
9 However, 
as inspirational as proposing a new approach that leans so heavily upon the tenets 
of postmodernism may seem, my goal is to follow the lead of Eric Wolf,
10 who 
argues, quite persuasively, that new approaches and new theories in anthropol-
ogy, need not be contentious and need not be predicated on the demise of old 
thoughts and theories. Rather, he asserts, there is sufficient space in the intel-
lectual forest of anthropological theories and paradigms to accommodate new 
thoughts and approaches.
There is no dearth of neophytes to these new interpretive approaches to 
anthropology and experimental ethnography. Key scholars like Ruth Behar assert 
the need for a new kind of anthropology—the kind “that makes you cry.” 
11 This 
visceral anthropology is often met with hostility and tremendous resistance from 
others in the discipline who adhere to a more “scientific,” object-oriented anthro-
pology. From the point of view of these latter scholars, often labeled “positivists” 
or “materialists,” anthropology is in crisis. Richard A. Shweder characterizes the 
debate this way:
These days in cultural anthropology, the discipline seems palpably and conspicu-
ously divided over three very different conceptions of the field: (1) cultural anthro-
pology as an agora for identity politics and as a platform for moral and political 
activism in the struggle against racism, sexism, homophobia, capitalism and colo-
nialism; (2) cultural anthropology as an open forum for skeptical postmodern cri-
tiques of objective knowledge and ethnographic representation; and (3) cultural 
anthropology as a positive (i.e., value-neutral and non-moralizing) science designed 
to develop general explanatory theories and test specific hypotheses about objec-
tively observable regularities in social and mental life, thereby protecting the disci-
pline from identity politics and postmodern critiques.
12
pal-mara-16.indd   232pal-mara-16.indd   232 7/25/08   1:39:23 PM7/25/08   1:39:23 PM


--- PAGE 242 ---
Salvaging Lives in the African Diaspora 233
In my mind, the future of anthropology lies in its capacity to embrace what 
Stocking calls its “enduring epistemological tension.” 13 Moreover, though there 
may be some who hear the death knell for positivism, I would suggest that the 
scientizing approach, one that Jerome Bruner 14 describes as “logical-scientific 
thinking,” is not the endangered species postmodernists would like to pretend it 
is, that is, not as long as grant agencies continue to privilege positivist, material-
ist, scientific grant proposals over those that are more experimental, experiential, 
and interpretive and that seek to blur the boundaries between anthropology and 
the humanities.
One of the chief innovators of this new humanistic and literary approach is 
Ruth Behar, an anthropologist who challenges those of us who would sink into 
a kind of disciplinary complacency and who nostalgically, in the midst of post-
modernism’s antitheoretical posture, support a return to the traditional and to a 
past that in actuality was not as wonderful as we choose to remember and that we 
romanticize.
15 Behar characterizes modern anthropology as a discipline caught in 
a period of indeterminacy, but it is a condition abounding with creative possibili-
ties. Bihar’s mission, in this context of unpredictability, is to reconfigure anthro-
pology, interrupt its linear trajectory, and set it upon a new path that leads to 
the mapping of “an intermediate space we can’t quite define yet, a borderland 
between passion and intellect, analysis and subjectivity, ethnography and autobi-
ography, art and life.”’
16
In this new anthropological borderland of interpretive and reflexive anthro-
pology, much more is required—anthropologists must acknowledge that we are 
nothing more (and nothing less) than “vulnerable observers” whose subjectivity 
is inextricable from our social observation.
17 If we accept this burden of respon-
sibility, according to Behar, we are on the road toward what she advocates for 
herself and practices, that is, writing a kind of anthropology that “breaks your 
heart.”’
18 In the process, we achieve a qualitative depth to our analysis, reach wider 
audiences beyond our peers, and, perhaps, just perhaps, in the case of applied 
anthropology, enhance the potential policy impact of research results. As Behar 
notes: “When you write vulnerably, others respond vulnerably. A different set of 
problems and predicaments arise which would never surface in response to more 
detached writing.”
19 It is this humanistic evocation that today is laying claim to 
its place as a legitimate heir of a contemporary anthropology under the rubric of 
experimental, new, and postmodern ethnography.
Notwithstanding its persuasiveness, its significance, and its appeal, this heart-
breaking anthropology is not unproblematic. The most common critique, which 
seems to gravitate toward Behar in particular, is that vulnerable anthropology 
elides issues of power and inequality within the research domain by emphasiz-
ing the emotional and aesthetic dimensions of anthropology and ethnography. 
Yet as Nicole Polier and William Roseberry assert in their essay “T riste T ropes: 
Postmodern Anthropologists Encounter the Other and Discover Themselves,”
20 
“discourses are not self-referential but are instead constructed within social fields 
pal-mara-16.indd   233pal-mara-16.indd   233 7/25/08   1:39:23 PM7/25/08   1:39:23 PM


--- PAGE 243 ---
Transnational Blackness234
of force, power and privilege,”21 In their critique of “dialogic” ethnography, they 
also remind us that “the ethnographic context as one of ‘cooperative story mak-
ing’ . . . does not address the context in which discourses are situated . . . [for 
in] social life all ‘genres, texts and voices’ are not created equal. . . . [I]n the 
production of ethnographic texts, the ethnographer’s privilege is precisely a dis-
course on the discourse.”
22
Specifically, the forms of power that pervade social life and determine who has 
the means and resources to produce narratives or to have those narratives made 
public, are elusive, masked, and ignored as issues in most discussions of a new 
anthropology. More to the point, writers such as Behar
23 invite critique because 
they often fail to link their aesthetic and humanistic agenda to a specific set of 
actions or any critical perspective in anthropology, a fact that leaves their work 
languishing more in the realm of literature than ethnography and subjects it to 
denouncements of “solipsism,” flawed by a hyper-reflexivity that is more akin to 
“navel-gazing”
24 and of questionable value to anthropology. The “critical” is an 
inescapable and defining trait of anthropology; it is what distinguishes it from 
other disciplines that merely utilize cultural description. I would like to suggest 
that the engagement of the humanistic and the critical, the positivist and the 
interpretive, need not be antagonistic. Rather, they can be viewed as equal sides 
of a Janus-like anthropology.
T oward this end, Jerome Bruner, in his Culture of Education, offers a pos-
sible bridge between these two tremendously polarized positions.
25 Bruner, who 
is concerned with how individuals and cultures relate to each other and with the 
role of education in that process, suggests that the human species organizes and 
manages knowledge in two ways, of which “one seems more specialized for treat-
ing of ‘physical’ things, the other for treating of people and their plights.” He 
identifies these two ways of thinking as “logical-scientific and narrative.” Bruner 
sees both forms as “universal,” rooted in the “human genome,” and “givens in the 
nature of language.” He states that logical-scientific thinking and narrative think-
ing “have varied modes of expression in different cultures, which also cultivate 
them differently. No culture is without both of them, though different cultures 
privilege them differently.”
26 Bruner’s definition of narrative is one that posits 
it as both “a mode of thought and . . . a vehicle of meaning making.” 27 Bruner 
argues that narrative, in its dualistic form, is the “glue” that produces cultural 
cohesion and the mental skeleton that structures individual lives.
28 For Bruner, 
the significance, power, and necessity of narrative are clear and vital: “It seems 
evident, then, that skill in narrative construction and narrative understanding is 
crucial to constructing our lives and a ‘place’ for ourselves in the possible world 
we will encounter.”
29 Moreover, the task of scholars is also clear: “Obviously, if 
narrative is to be made an instrument of mind on behalf of meaning making, 
it requires work on our part-reading it, making it, analyzing it, understanding 
its craft, sensing its uses, discussing it.”
30 Along these lines, anthropologists like 
Behar are well-advanced. Both Behar and Bruner, thus, become starting points 
pal-mara-16.indd   234pal-mara-16.indd   234 7/25/08   1:39:23 PM7/25/08   1:39:23 PM


--- PAGE 244 ---
Salvaging Lives in the African Diaspora 235
for me to explore my own use of narrative, especially in the interest of recoup-
ing and developing an African Diaspora perspective. Borrowing from Guy A. 
M. Widdershoven, I would assert that “from a hermeneutic point of view, life is 
a process of interpretation in and through stories,”
31 therefore I shall begin this 
explication by telling another story.
If what Michael J. Fischer asserts in his essay “Ethnicity and the Post-Modern 
Arts of Memory”32 is true, which is that “the ethnic, the ethnographer, and the 
cross-cultural scholar in general often begin with a personal empathetic ‘dual 
tracking,’ seeking in the other clarification for processes in the self,”
33 then my 
primary attraction to anthropology can be seen as an extension of a very personal 
search for the meaning of cultural identity. Central to this quest has been the use 
of narrative, which enables me to see culture as more than material conditions, as 
more than a shared set of beliefs or patterns of social relations. Culture, I argue, is 
a living entity that is continuously being created individually and collectively and 
is most frequently represented through individual life narratives.
The use of narrative has been central to the shaping of my life and scholarship 
as a way of understanding the experiences of the African Diaspora, a place that 
is part memory and part geography, populated by the descendants of enslaved 
Africans who were forced through the Middle Passage, dispersed throughout the 
Americas, and endured and continue to endure patterns of economic and social 
stratification and exclusion as a consequence of their ancestry and phenotype. The 
emergence of this “narrative sensibility”
34 is traceable through much of my writ-
ing, which began early in life in poetic form. A powerful evocation for me of nar-
rative as a “vehicle of meaning making”
35 is captured in the poem “Pearl’s Song,” 
because it shows several efforts: (1) my attempts to recover the life of an ordinary 
woman (my mother) in the African Diaspora rendered invisible by class, race, and 
gender; (2) my creation of a narrative structure within which to lend coherency to 
the bits and pieces that I have gleaned of my mother’s life over the years; and (3) 
my own personal journey of meaning making as I explore my relationship to this 
woman whom I call mother. The poem, through themes of segregation, migra-
tion, black female abandonment, invisibility, and racialized gender continuity, 
creates its own geography of narrative, and thus identity—mine, hers, ours.
 Pearl’s Song
     My mother, called Pearl
     was born in red clay country of Alabama
     Sapling planted in April
     Fine brown Alabama girl, thrust outward
    into an older man’s hands to escape red clay, jim crow and home.
2
She is a good singer, this woman. Men have known her as she leaned
    against Chicago doorways,
    Swaying to the movements of day; They touched her
    hands, bronzed her face, her eyes, and planted seeds inside her.
    Four times she bent to drop shoots:
pal-mara-16.indd   235pal-mara-16.indd   235 7/25/08   1:39:24 PM7/25/08   1:39:24 PM


--- PAGE 245 ---
Transnational Blackness236
twice boys, twice girls Fine, brown Alabama girls. Still no one heard her sing,
  no one watched her ooze each child out
  Knifing the hospital in two octaves.
3
Bronze cast figurine, she chiseled it till often I woke her song in my throat,
   Now it settles against the windows,
   dusting the curtains.
   Lately, turning into my mirror, I glimpse her inside
   my face, her dark eyes shut away; her gray hair hidden . . . 
   Standing over my stove, or seeing myself in the windows of this wallpaper 
    I hear her song,
   see it dancing in the wild sunlight.
36
“A Work for the Feminist Imagination”37 is at the heart of feminist theory and is 
that which John Gwaltney sees as emanating from the narratives he collected of 
“core black culture.”38
From these narratives—these analyses of the heavens, nature, and humani-
ty—it is evident that black people are building theory on every conceivable level. 
An internally derived, representative impression of core black culture can serve 
as an anthropological link between private pain, indigenous communal expres-
sion, and the national market place of issues and ideas. These people not only 
know the trouble they have seen but have profound insight into the meaning of 
those vicissitudes.
39
In narrative then, history and biography, theory and lived experience, the indi-
vidual, the local, the national, and the global all intersect and become not atom-
ized elements but rather discourses that are “implicated and intertwined with 
each other.”
40
The desire to develop a narrative schema devoted to recovering the hidden lives 
of women of the African Diaspora in other forms besides poetry actually prefig-
ures my encounter with ethnography. It began in 1984, when I started research 
under my own aegis, on the life and suicide of Leanita McClain, a black middle-
class female journalist in Chicago:
41 I had not yet entered anthropology and so 
lacked the formal terminology to describe my approach to this research; all I had 
at that moment was a desire to salvage, explicate, and reconstruct as much of this 
woman’s life as I could through interviews with family and friends and through 
analyses of her journalistic writings, essays, and poetry; the poetry was neatly col-
lected and organized, and left almost as a narrative requiem or a road map by her 
deathbed to guide us on the journey to reconstruct her life.
As I negotiated the theoretical terrain of anthropology and feminism, I was 
able to create a space in which I could engage my own views on how to interpret 
life in the African Diaspora as well as produce a critique of the inability of conven-
tional anthropology and feminist approaches to do the same. In 1990, I reflected 
that critique in my essay on Leanita’s life and death:
pal-mara-16.indd   236pal-mara-16.indd   236 7/25/08   1:39:24 PM7/25/08   1:39:24 PM


--- PAGE 246 ---
Salvaging Lives in the African Diaspora 237
When a young black woman dies, it is usually of passing interest, except to those 
who knew her. When the same black woman has traversed the usual social boundar-
ies and established a place for herself in professional and political spheres tradition-
ally occupied by white males, then her death calls our attention to questions about 
her life. This is true of Leanita McClain, a gifted black journalist who worked for 
the Chicago T ribune. By studying her life I hope to bring out the contradictory ele-
ments that emerge as a result of the complex interactions of race, class, and gender 
and the positioning of the individual in the construction of social reality.
42
Using the life history method, my goal was to employ narrative as a “tool of 
inquiry,”43 that is, as a way of deriving meaning from the suicide of a black mid-
dle-class professional woman whose life seemed to embody the American Dream 
paradigm of success and achievement, a paradigm that ultimately offered her little 
immunity from clashes with sexual, racial, and class barriers. By examining the 
narratives imbedded in interviews with family and friends, Leanita’s own poetry, 
journalistic writings, and personal letters to friends, I hoped to make sense of 
how an individual’s personal understandings of race, class, and gender inequality 
informed her decision about survival and about sustaining the will to live.
T o some extent, this exploration of Leanita’s life is also an exercise in auto-
ethnography, which Alice Deck sees as an “introspective personal engagement” 
wherein “authors rely upon their native ethnographic knowledge to assemble a 
portrait that is a combination of personal memories (autobiographical) and gen-
eral cultural descriptions (ethnography).”
44 This conflation of personal experience, 
memory, and biography is possible because my story and Leanita’s are intercon-
nected. We lived in the same city, were of the same generation, attended the 
same high school, worked on school events together, and had mutual high school 
friends. Thus however I reconstruct the Chicago of Leanita’s past, it is invariably 
filtered through my own memories of what it was like to grow up in inner-city 
Chicago in the 1960s. Also, lurking behind each question I posed explicitly to 
the people who knew Leanita was a silent, implicit question of my own: Why or 
how had I survived the madness and she had not? Ruthellen Josselson argues that 
“narrative approaches to understanding bring the researcher more closely into the 
investigative process than do quantitative and statistical methods,”
45 and feminist 
scholars like Sandra Harding46 assert the absolute necessity of feminist researchers 
locating themselves in the same research plane as the women they study. I was able 
to bring these two perspectives together in my study of Leanita.
As a result of trying to document and interpret Leanita’s life and death, I would 
venture one step beyond both Josselson and Harding to suggest that the researcher 
becomes a crucial part of the social action of narration at the moment it occurs by 
entering into a dialogic relationship with the other person, resulting in what Wid-
dershoven, citing Hans Georg Gadamer, calls a “fusion of horizons.”
47 Although 
Gadamer is referring to texts and readers, Widdershoven argues that this “theory 
of interpretation can be applied to the relation between experience and story 
in individual life. In telling stories about past experiences, we try to make clear 
what these experiences mean.”
48 Thus, “interpretation . . . [emerges] as a form of 
pal-mara-16.indd   237pal-mara-16.indd   237 7/25/08   1:39:24 PM7/25/08   1:39:24 PM


--- PAGE 247 ---
Transnational Blackness238
dialogue in which both participants try to come to grips with the truth in a pro-
cess of mutual understanding.” 49 This constitutive sharing was evident during 
my fieldwork in Belize where I collected narratives in order to understand the 
“culture of gender”
50 that prevailed in that country. The following excerpt from 
my field notes gives some indication of my growing awareness of the narrative 
process as dialogic: “Life history informants are not just found, they are made. 
In the engagement between interviewer and interviewees, something clicks. In 
the process of asking survey questions, I looked for a level of self-reflection and 
thoughtfulness. Even if the informant has little schooling, you can tell that they’ve 
given thought to their lives. It is “awareness,” ‘consciousness’ if you will, that lets 
you know intuitively that there is a story.”
51 Of course, the engagement with 
Leanita is somewhat unusual because she is no longer alive, but I assert that there 
is still a conversation, a dialogue, and an engagement occurring nonetheless. I am 
fully aware that when writing a life based on documents, partial letters, and inter-
views recorded immediately after the trauma of her death, the account is likely to 
be incomplete in many respects. Moreover, suspicions may abound in the reader: 
after all, how could I know how to interpret anything I discovered or heard? In an 
early essay based on Leanita’s life, I tried to anticipate and respond to these ques-
tions and to address the implicit skepticism that emerges when reconstructing a 
life. T o a large extent, I default to Clifford Geertz’s belief that anthropology is at 
best an imprecise “science,” which should have as its main goal not explanation 
but interpretation. 
52
I have taken Leanita’s life and writings and tried to interpret them in a way that 
is meaningful to her particular situation but that also places her within a given 
history. Some may disagree over whether I have accurately discerned the “truth” of 
Leanita’s life. T o them, I can only respond that in the dialogic process there is no 
single truth but rather many voices, each telling only what they know.
53
Moreover, I concur with Geertz that ethnographic descriptions are at best rep-
resentations and not truths.54 That is, even when dealing with living people who 
are predictably unpredictable, we as ethnographers, biographers, and historians 
can never really know. It is precisely for this reason that I aim in narrative works 
not to capture truths but rather to explore meaning. In this sense, I am aligned 
with Widdershoven, who interprets Jacques Derrida as arguing that there is nei-
ther “origin nor continuity in the history of interpretation.”
55 According to Wid-
dershoven, Derrida rejects the idea of fixed meanings in texts and argues instead 
for a “principle of intextuality”
56 in which new meanings are constantly produced. 
As Widdershoven explains: “In our life we are constantly citing ourselves and 
others, thus creating new patterns of meaning. Life itself is an infinite process of 
differance, creating ever new texts and contexts.”
57
Derrida’s belief that there is no ultimate continuity in individual life stories 
but ever-emerging instances of divergences as the narrative is brought into “a 
new web of relations”
58 suggests that the type of certainty and replicability 
that a “scientific” approach requires is unattainable when studying people.
pal-mara-16.indd   238pal-mara-16.indd   238 7/25/08   1:39:24 PM7/25/08   1:39:24 PM


--- PAGE 248 ---
Salvaging Lives in the African Diaspora 239
Much of what I learned during the process of recovering Leanita’s life narrative 
proved to be of immense value to me when I conducted fieldwork in Belize. In 
this new context I was interested not only in documenting and recording wom-
en’s voices and listening to the sounds of their lives, but also in the relationship 
between the individual and her community. What I hoped to achieve was clarity 
about the relationships between the individual, the local, the national, and global 
social processes. I also wanted to understand how these processes create and sus-
tain the culture of gender. As was the case with Leanita, I sought to understand 
by what mechanisms individuals achieved empowerment (a sense of personal 
autonomy) as they negotiated cultural constraints. Although I focused initially on 
women of the African Diaspora, which in Belize meant Creole and Garifuna, in 
recognition of the country’s ethnic heterogeneity I cast my net wider and included 
East Indian women (another group whose voices were frequently invisible in local 
and national political discourses) in my research.
During the process of writing my dissertation Women and the Culture of 
Gender in Belize, Central America,
59 and eventually the ethnography Women of 
Belize,60 I struggled to contextualize the corpus of my data (women’s narratives) 
in several dimensions: in relation to my own lived experiences as a black female 
anthropologist, in relation to the communities in which these women lived with 
their family and friends, in relation to the national agenda of development and 
nation-building, and in relation to global concerns about gender inequality in the 
world. T o achieve these ends, I constantly mediated between an emic (insider) 
and an etic (outsider) perspective. As a reflexive anthropologist, I was aware of my 
involvement in the narrative process and tried to remain vigilant about what my 
impact was on the production of the narratives. The conscious negotiation of self, 
subject, and research objectives are perhaps most evident in the narrative entitled 
“A Birthday Celebration.” It is my “arrival story” to my field site and is a direct 
transcription of field notes recorded at that moment.
This experience took place less than forty-eight hours after I arrived in Lem-
ongrass. It illustrated for me, in a vivid way, the problems and issues that women 
face in this country and gave me insights into the ways in which the gender sys-
tem in Belize is constructed and maintained by both men and women. Listening 
to Evelyn, Elana, and their friends, I learned that in Lemongrass women’s value, 
either ascribed or self-attributed, comes from the degree to which they conform to 
social norms of a “good wife or mother” and the degree to which they contribute 
to the society through biological and social reproduction.
Any other incidents I encountered in Belize make it clear, as many feminist 
scholars have argued, that gender is far more than an analytical construct or a 
structural form. Gender, far from being an abstract concept, is a pervasive set of 
obligations and limitations that saturate the entire being and make up one’s iden-
tity.
61 What all of this suggests to me is that narrative, as “a mode of thought and 
. . . a vehicle of meaning making,”62 is one of the most significant ways in which we 
acquire insights into understanding the role of culture in structuring the human 
condition and achieve understanding of the human response to the social facts of 
pal-mara-16.indd   239pal-mara-16.indd   239 7/25/08   1:39:24 PM7/25/08   1:39:24 PM


--- PAGE 249 ---
Transnational Blackness240
class, race, gender, and other forms of oppression. Explication of the social and of 
human agency through ethnography is one the most significant contributions of 
anthropological inquiry.
If there was ever a contested domain in anthropology today it is ethnography. 
Scholars like James Clifford have described ethnographies as “fictions” that are, by 
definition, “inherently partial,” unpredictable, uncontrollable, and imbued with 
a destiny of their own making.
63 He explains, “Even the best ethnographic texts’ 
serious, true fictions are systems, or economies of truth. Power and history work 
through them, in ways their authors cannot fully control.”
64 Polier and Roseberry 
also have something to say on the matter. Highly critical of postmodern turns in 
ethnography, they see the new forms as lacking in “contextualization and repre-
sentativeness,” which they assert are more important than current emphasis upon 
“artistic production.”
65 “In grafting a literary conceptual framework onto social 
analysis, a sleight-of-hand is accomplished: it becomes possible to analyze ethnog-
raphy just as one would a work of fiction. . . . In the end, using literature as more 
of an homologue than a limited analogue mystifies more than it illuminates the 
practice and process of social research.”
66 Finally, Polier and Roseberry caution 
against what they see as the most problematic and extreme aspect of these new 
approaches to ethnography, “an attitude [that] can lead to an individualistic and 
self-centered approach in which“ethnography is reduced to personal therapy.”
67
Such critiques of experimental forms are not only legitimate but also neces-
sary if we are to create new ways of writing about human experience. Moreover, 
Polier’s and Roseberry’s desires for an approach in which there is “a sophisticated 
consideration of the intellectual, institutional and political forces that shape and 
constrain the ethnographic encounter and the production and consumption of 
knowledge in the late twentieth-century academy”
68 is certainly consistent with 
my own perspective. However, they spend so much time critiquing the new that 
little attention is given to mapping out a strategy for producing the kind of eth-
nographies they want. They do suggest that such an approach should blend post-
modernist thought and world-systems theory in order to produce ethnographies 
that view “anthropological subjects within combined and contradictory historical 
processes, processes that should be seen as at once determinate (they are estab-
lished in particular fields of power) and contingent (the fields of power, as histori-
cal products themselves, are subject to change and transformation).”
69 It is toward 
the production of just such an ethnography that I aim in my salvaging of nar-
ratives in the African Diaspora, My own ethnographic strategy borrows heavily 
from feminist approaches to ethnography that, according to Balsamo, “delineate 
ways in which we can think anew the simultaneous construction of the personal 
and the cultural, the one and the many.”
70 Balsamo explains, “feminism argues 
that all interpretive practices, including those inherent in ethnographic research 
and writing, are political acts that forge links between history and biographies for 
all participants.”
71
This perspective is quite similar to that articulated by Filomina Chioma Steady 
in her African Feminism in which she posits that “in Africa, as well as in the 
diaspora, black women engaged in research on the black woman are involved 
pal-mara-16.indd   240pal-mara-16.indd   240 7/25/08   1:39:24 PM7/25/08   1:39:24 PM


--- PAGE 250 ---
Salvaging Lives in the African Diaspora 241
in a process of liberation, as well as in scholarly endeavor, since research, being 
essentially a product of the power structure, has sometimes been used as a tool of 
domination.”
72 I can envision no worthier task for anthropology, ethnography, 
or narrative than in the service of decolonizing scholarship and rescuing from 
destruction and waste the cultural lives, daily experiences, and social action of the 
people who constitute the African Diaspora.
Notes
 1. Irma McClaurin, Women of Belize: Gender and Change in Central America (New Bruns-
wick, NJ: Rutgers University Press, 1996), 47.
 2. Susan E. Chase, “Review,” Gender and Society 9, no. 2 (April 1995): 259–60.
 3. McClaurin, Women of Belize.
 4. Karen Brodkin Sacks, “T owards a Unified Theory of Class, Race, and Gender,” American 
Ethnologist 16, no. 3 (August 1989): 534–50.
 5. McClaurin, Women of Belize.
 6. Lila Abu-Lughod, Remaking Women (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1998); 
Ruth Behar, “Introduction: Women Writing Culture; Another T elling of the Story of 
American Anthropology,” Critique of Anthropology 13, no. 4 (1993): 307–25; Johnnetta 
B. Cole, “The Education and Endowment of Black Women,” Equity and Excellence in 
Education 25, nos. 2–4 (1991): 130–32; Jose Limon, “Representation, Ethnicity, and the 
Precursory Ethnography: Notes of a Native Anthropologist,” in Recapturing Anthropology: 
Working in the Present, ed. R. G. Fox (Santa Fe, NM: School of American Research Press, 
1991); Gloria Wekker, “I Am Gold Money: (I Pass through All Hands, but I Do Not Lose 
My Value),” doctoral thesis, University of California–Los Angeles, 1992.
 7. Abu-Lughod, “Writing against Culture,” in Recapturing Anthropology: Working in the Pres-
ent, ed. R. G. Fox (Santa Fe, NM: School of American Research Press, 1991).
 8. Anne Balsamo, “Rethinking Ethnography: A Work of the Feminist Imagination,” Studies 
in Symbolic Interactionism 11 (1990): 75–86.
 9. George W . Stocking, Colonial Situations: Essays on the Contextualization of Ethnographic 
Knowledge (Madison: University of Wisconsin Press, 1991), 23.
 10. Eric R. Wolf, “Distinguished Lecture: Facing Power—Old Insights, New Questions,” 
American Anthropologist 92, no. 3 (1990): 586–96; Behar, The Vulnerable Observer: 
Anthropology That Breaks Your Heart (New York: Beacon Press, 1997).
 11. Richard A. Shweder, Richard Jessor, and Anne Colby, Ethnography and Human De
vel-
opment: Context and Meaning in Social Inquiry (Chicago: University of Chicago Press,
1996), l.
 12. Stocking, The Ethnographer’s Magic and Other Essays in the History of Anthropology (Madi-
son: University of Wisconsin Press, 1992), 279.
 13. Jerome Bruner, The Culture of Education (Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1996).
 14. Behar, The Vulnerable Observer; Behar, Women Writing Culture (Berkeley: University of 
California Press, 1995).
 15. Behar, The Vulnerable Observer, 174.
 16. Ibid, 5.
 17. Ibid, 161.
 18. Ibid, 16.
 19. Nicole Polier and William Roseberry, “T ristes T ropes: Post-modern Anthropologists 
Encounter the Other and Discover Themselves,” Economy and Society 18, no. 2 (May 
1989): 245–64.
 20. Ibid., 251.
pal-mara-16.indd   241pal-mara-16.indd   241 7/25/08   1:39:24 PM7/25/08   1:39:24 PM


--- PAGE 251 ---
Transnational Blackness242
 21. Ibid.
 22. Ibid., 251–52; emphasis original.
 23. Behar, “Introduction: Women Writing Culture”; Behar, Women Writing Culture; Behar, 
The Vulnerable Observer.
 24. In The Vulnerable Observer, Behar takes an opportunity to respond to critiques of her work 
by scholars like Daphne Patai (“Sick and Tired of Nouveau Solipsism,” Point of View Essay 
in Chronicle of Higher Education, February 23, 1994). Behar defends her form of style in 
the following way: “The charge that all variants of vulnerable writing that have blossomed 
in the last two decades are self-serving and superficial, full of unnecessary guilt or exces-
sive bravado, stems from an unwillingness to even consider the possibility that a personal 
voice, if creatively used, can lead the reader, not into miniature bubbles of navel-gazing, 
but into the enormous sea of serious social issues” (Behar, The Vulnerable Observer, 14).
 25. Bruner 1996.
 26. Ibid., 39–40; emphasis added.
 27. Ibid., 39.
 28. Ibid., 40.
 29. Ibid.
 30. Ibid., 41.
 31. Michael M. J. Fischer, “Ethnicity and the Post-modern Arts of Memory,” in Writing Cul-
ture: The Poetics and Politics of Ethnography, ed. James Clifford and George E. Marcus 
(Santa Fe, NM: School of American Research Press, 1986).
 32. Ibid., 199.
 33. Bruner 1996.
 34. Ibid., 39.
 35. McClaurin, Pearl’s Song (Detroit: Lotus Press, 1988). Reprinted with permission from 
author.
 36. Balsamo, “Rethinking Ethnography.”
 37. John Langston Gwaltney, Drylongso: A Self-Portrait of Black America (New York: Random 
House,1980).
 38. Ibid., xxvi.
 39. Balsamo, “Rethinking Ethnography,” 46.
 40. Irma McClaurin-Allen, “Incongruities: Dissonance and Contradiction in the Life of a 
Black Middle-Class Woman,” in Uncertain T erms: Negotiating Gender in American Cul-
ture, ed. Faye Ginsburg and Anna Tsing (New York: Beacon Press, 1990).
 41. Ibid., 315.
 42. Ruthellen Josselson and Amia Lieblich, Interpreting Experience: The Narrative Study of 
Lives (New York: Sage, 1995), x.
 43. Ibid.
 44. Alice A. Deck, “Autoethnography: Zora Neale Hurston, Noni Jabavu, and Cross-Disci-
plinary Discourse,” Black American Literature Forum 24, no. 2 (1990): 237–56. 
 45. Josselson and Lieblich, Interpreting Experience, ix.
 46. Sandra G. Harding, Feminism and Methodology: Social Science Issues (Bloomington: Indi-
ana University Press, 1987).
 47. Guy A. M. Widdershoven, “The Story of Life: Hermeneutic Perspectives on the Relation-
ship between Narrative and Life History,” in The Narrative Study of Lives, ed. J
 osselson 
and Lieblich (New York: Sage, 1993), 13.
 48. Ibid.
 49. Ibid.
 50. Irma McClaurin, Women and the Culture of Gender in Belize, Central America (Amherst: 
University of Massachusetts at Amherst Press, 1993).
pal-mara-16.indd   242pal-mara-16.indd   242 7/25/08   1:39:24 PM7/25/08   1:39:24 PM


--- PAGE 252 ---
Salvaging Lives in the African Diaspora 243
 51. Clifford Geertz, The Interpretation of Cultures: Selected Essays (New York: Basic Books, 
1973).
 52. McClaurin-Allen, “Incongruities,” 330.
 53. Geertz, The Interpretation of Cultures.
 54. Widdershoven, “The Story of Life,” 14.
 55. Ibid.; emphasis original.
 56. Ibid.; emphasis original.
 57. Ibid.
 58. McClaurin 1993.
 59. McClaurin, Women of Belize.
 60. Ibid.
 61. Ibid.,18–21.
 62. Bruner 1996.
 63. James Clifford and George E. Marcus, eds., Writing Culture: The Poetics and Politics of 
Ethnography (Santa Fe, NM: School of American Research Press, 1986), 6–7.
 64. Ibid., 7.
 65. Polier and Roseberry, “T ristes T ropes,” 255.
 66. Ibid., 249.
 67. Ibid., 255.
 68. Ibid., 246
 69. Ibid., 258.
 70. Balsamo, “Rethinking Ethnography,” 56.
 71. Ibid.
 72. Filomena Steady, “African Feminism: A Worldwide Perspective,” in Women in Africa and 
the African Diaspora: A Reader, ed. Rosalyn T erborg-Penn and Andrea Benton Rushing 
(Washington, DC: Howard University Press, 1987), 4.
pal-mara-16.indd   243pal-mara-16.indd   243 7/25/08   1:39:24 PM7/25/08   1:39:24 PM


--- PAGE 253 ---
This page intentionally left blank


--- PAGE 254 ---
C HAPTER  17
Going Back to Our Own
Interpreting Malcolm X’s 
Transition from “Black Asiatic” 
to “Afro-American”
Elizabeth Mazucci
The thing that has made the so-called Negro in America fail, more than any other 
thing, is your, my, lack of knowledge concerning history.
—Malcolm X, December 1962 1
The late Imam Benjamin Karim clearly remembered the day in late 
December 1962 when he introduced Minister Malcolm X to over one thousand 
Muslims and other curious folk packed into Harlem’s Mosque No. 7, anxious 
to hear him speak on “Black Man’s History.”
2 In this lecture Malcolm described 
the disparate genealogies of “Black Asiatics” and white Europeans but focused 
most of his energy on the devilish nature of whites. Malcolm ended the talk with 
a summary of the eschatological beliefs held by his organization, the Nation of 
Islam (NOI), which center on the imminent destruction of the white man. It is 
implied in this epigraph that Malcolm believed in employing historical knowl-
edge to effect change. Malcolm may have been drawing from his own personal 
experience: he eventually rose from a young inmate doomed to failure in 1946 to 
the second most sought-after speaker on college campuses in 1964,
3 propelled by 
the “true knowledge” he acquired along the way. According to The Autobiography 
of Malcolm X, Malcolm’s successful conversion to the Nation was, in part, facili-
tated by the revelation that black people are systematically denied representation 
in history books. While in prison, the notion of a suppressed, glorious history 
of the black man struck Malcolm profoundly and inspired reading marathons in 
his jail cell. The Nation’s focus on history, according to Malcolm, was “one rea-
son why Mr. Muhammad’s teachings spread so swiftly all over the United States, 
pal-mara-17.indd   245pal-mara-17.indd   245 7/25/08   1:35:22 PM7/25/08   1:35:22 PM


--- PAGE 255 ---
Transnational Blackness246
among all Negroes, whether or not they became followers.” 4 It is not surpris-
ing, then, that Karim fondly recalled how Malcolm X engaged his audiences by 
indicting white America for silencing black history. Malcolm honed his rhetoric 
during his tenure as the Nation’s spokesman and persisted with the same general 
arguments even when the content of his speeches shifted rather dramatically. 
Although many scholars have correctly argued that Malcolm’s religious transfor-
mation while on Hajj in 1964 was largely overdrawn in the Autobiography, exam-
ining the origin of and apparent shift in Malcolm’s self-identity—from “Black 
Asiatic” to “Afro-American”—helps us understand Malcolm’s post-Nation polit-
ical philosophy. This shift adds another layer of complexity to the increasingly 
hostile relationship between the Nation and Malcolm in 1964 and 1965.
The issue of ethnic or racial self-identity has been overlooked by most Mal-
colm X scholars.
5 Ethnic identities are manifestations of experience and interro-
gating the ways Malcolm X identified himself is one way to access his experience. 
The scholars that do address Malcolm’s abandonment of the Nation of Islam’s 
race theory posit it in terms of his religious experience in Asia and Africa. My goal 
is to frame this transition in terms of his political experience and maturation in 
1964. While this essay aims to develop a hypothesis regarding the impetus for 
Malcolm’s shifting identities, it does not present a meticulous analysis of how 
his thought evolved. Such a task would be monumental, since Malcolm’s numer-
ous remarks on his heritage varied depending on the context of the speech or 
discussion.
6 Rather, my objective is to illustrate the likely origins of the Nation’s 
genealogical myth in order to elucidate some of Malcolm X’s more cryptic and 
vitriolic statements regarding Elijah Muhammad’s teachings from late 1964 until 
his death. In doing so, this chapter will also reveal the ironically central place 
of European anthropology in the Nation’s (re)construction of black identity by 
delineating an etymology of “Black Asiatic.” After leaving the Nation, Malcolm 
X not only rejected Elijah Muhammad’s race-based theology but also repudiated 
his “Black Asiatic” identity. Moreover, I suggest that through his experiences in 
Africa in 1964, Malcolm X came to realize that the Nation perpetuated a racist, 
colonialist perspective of Africa and its people. I will begin by situating aspects of 
early Nation theology within the broader context of African American religion in 
the early twentieth century.
The industrial age of the early twentieth century marked a period of exponen-
tial development in the diversification of African American religion. The emer-
gence of hundreds of small-scale sects was due mainly to the mass migration of 
rural, southern blacks to the urban North from 1915 to 1930. Several circum-
stances encouraged millions of people to migrate, the primary reasons being natu-
ral disasters that impeded farming productivity (such as the destruction of crops 
by the Mexican boll weevil and soil erosion) and the increased demand for cheap 
labor in the period between the wars. Race-based violence in the rural South, 
particularly a horrific rise in lynching, also compelled blacks to migrate; however, 
life was not much better once they arrived in the northern cities. This enormous 
population shift, xenophobic northerners, and the reemergence of the Ku Klux 
pal-mara-17.indd   246pal-mara-17.indd   246 7/25/08   1:35:22 PM7/25/08   1:35:22 PM


--- PAGE 256 ---
Going Back to Our Own 247
Klan ignited race riots in city streets. Riots in Chicago and East St. Louis claimed 
eighty-five lives and injured well over one thousand people. Racial tensions cul-
minated in the Red Summer of 1919, during which twenty-six riots broke out 
in the overpopulated northern cities. It is within this context of provocation and 
displacement that certain African American religious sects such as the Moorish 
Science T emple emerged.
7
African Americans in the rural South often gathered in small-scale Bap-
tist and Methodist communities that offered temporary refuge from the social 
and economic inequalities they encountered daily. Upon arrival in the North, 
many migrants discovered that, despite the variety of religious denominations 
from which to choose, small-scale community centers and congregations were 
absent from urban life. Indeed, the population explosion overextended many 
of the established Baptist and Methodist churches. For some of the migrants, 
their lively approach to worship, familial connection to the church, and social 
status clashed with urban sensibilities.
8 Consequently many poor migrants felt 
that these churches were inadequate for their particular needs. New storefront 
and house churches were established to meet the needs of southern blacks in the 
same predicament; they were also places to comfortably reminisce about their 
former churches in the South. The types of sects that emerged ranged from the 
integrated, eclectic Father Divine Peace Mission to a separatist black Jewish sect 
that called itself the Church of God.
9 These congregations were directed by char-
ismatic leaders who, in many cases, were formerly preachers in the South. Arthur 
Fauset’s seminal 1944 urban ethnography, Black Gods of the Metropolis, describes 
and contrasts a motley set of new religious movements. His first-hand experience 
with these “cults” is useful in explaining their appeal: “Negroes are attracted to the 
cults for the obvious reason that with few normal outlets of expression . . . the cults 
offer on one hand the boon of religion . . . and on the other hand they provide for 
certain Negroes with imagination and other dynamic qualities, in an atmosphere 
free from embarrassment or apology, a place where they may experiment in activi-
ties such as business, politics, social reform, and social expression.”
10 These newly 
established religious sects offered much more to followers than a creed and a space 
in which to worship. The attempt to build black-owned and -operated businesses 
reflected a surge in Black Nationalist thought among the masses, engendered most 
famously by Marcus Garvey’s political movement, which took root in the United 
States in 1916. The Universal Negro Improvement Association (UNIA) provided 
the social and political blueprint from which most sectarian leaders constructed 
their ideologies. Garvey’s message was directed toward lower-class and working-
class people of African descent, especially concerning their economic position and 
lack of political voice in the cities. Garvey proposed a “Back to Africa” program, 
which sought to return Diaspora Africans to the motherland to create a unified 
nation of black people.
11
Although forging unity among all people of African descent was at the heart of 
the UNIA, Garvey apparently did make an effort to identify his struggling people 
pal-mara-17.indd   247pal-mara-17.indd   247 7/25/08   1:35:22 PM7/25/08   1:35:22 PM


--- PAGE 257 ---
Transnational Blackness248
with a specific geographic location: Ethiopia. 12 The reasons for Garvey’s explicit 
identification with Ethiopia is undoubtedly due to its remarkable ancient Chris-
tian civilization, its role in biblical prophecy, and the Bible’s generic use of the 
term “Ethiopian” when referring to Africans. Not surprisingly, Garvey’s Christian 
beliefs and political philosophy were inextricable. He firmly believed that, with 
faith in one God, black people would “rise up with their risen Lord and take a 
firm hold of their heritage as made in God’s image, expressed in the soil of Africa, 
and act courageously to become fully human.”
13 Paradoxically, Garvey’s mission 
was for people of African descent to realize self-determination and to “civilize” 
and Christianize Africans. Given his identification with Ethiopia and emphasis 
on the beauty of blackness, it is curious that Garvey considered blacks to be blood 
brothers with “some Indians and even southern Europeans.”
14 Garvey focused a 
great deal of energy on describing the wealth of long-lost kingdoms in Africa as a 
way to imagine the possibilities for Africa that lie ahead. His talent for using the 
past to inspire and motivate the masses would be emulated by many—including 
ministers of the Nation—in the decades to come.
At the same time that Garvey was spreading his Christian-oriented, Black 
Nationalist message, Timothy Noble Drew Ali developed a unique type of Islamic 
heterodoxy. Drew Ali established the Moorish Science T emple of America (MSTA) 
in 1913 in Newark, New Jersey. Arguing that racism is inextricably woven into 
the fabric of American Christianity, Drew Ali sought to evade the numerous 
problems confronting poor blacks by presenting a mélange of theologies under 
the umbrella of “Islam.” He selected excerpts of teachings from four texts: the 
Qur’an, the Bible, The Aquarian Gospels of Jesus Christ, and Unto Thee I Grant 
but was also influenced by Garveyism, Theosophy, Sufism, and the Shriners.
15
Through his religious teachings, Noble Drew Ali attempted to replace a race 
category, “Negro,” with an ethnic category. He rejected the terms “Negro,” 
“black,” and “colored,” maintaining that his African American followers were 
“olive-skinned.”
16 He taught that African Americans are “Asiatics” or “Moors” 
whose ancestors were forcibly removed from Morocco, enslaved, and stripped of 
their cultural and religious heritage.
17 The MSTA’s genealogical theory centered 
on a bloc of ethnicities—the descendants of Canaan and Ham—that represented 
what he considered to be the civilized, “original Asiatic nations.” The peoples who 
fall into this category, according to historian Richard Brent T urner, include “the 
Egyptians, the Arabians, the Japanese, the Chinese, the Indians, the people of 
South America and Central America, the T urks, and the African Americans.”
18
Parallel to Malcolm X’s contention that a people are doomed to failure without 
knowledge of history, Drew Ali believed that “the name means everything; by 
taking the Asiatic’s name from him . . . the European stripped the Moor of his 
power, his authority, his God and every other worth-while possession.”
19 While 
the MSTA may have succeeded in envisioning an alternate ethnicity that sym-
bolically reversed the imposed feeling of inferiority and deflected self-hatred, 
the movement ultimately did little in the way of actively improving conditions. 
Moreover, it failed to generate a sense of pride in the great spectrum of dark skin 
pal-mara-17.indd   248pal-mara-17.indd   248 7/25/08   1:35:22 PM7/25/08   1:35:22 PM


--- PAGE 258 ---
Going Back to Our Own 249
color and in the African roots of black people in America. Despite his reverence 
for and adoption of portions of Garvey’s teachings, Drew Ali’s esoteric Orientalist 
theology hardly dealt with Africa, save the presumed Asiatic presence in Morocco 
and Egypt. While Garvey was preaching about the need for a physical return to 
Africa, Drew Ali attempted to psychically (re)discover his brethren’s roots while 
remaining in the United States. The UNIA and the MSTA, with their different 
approaches to empowering African Americans, together set the stage for the larg-
est, most influential black religious movement to develop.
In 1930 an enigmatic figure, most commonly known as W . D. Fard, began to 
preach a distinct Muslim message to inner-city blacks in Detroit who were suf-
fering through the Great Depression. His arrival was timely: Marcus Garvey was 
deported in 1927, while Noble Drew Ali was assassinated in 1929. Fard initially 
peddled ordinary items like raincoats and “exotic” items such as silk door-to-door. 
The foreignness of some of these items engendered a conversation with the poor 
African Americans he would eventually proselytize. According to one follower, 
Fard told the migrants that “the silks he carried were the same kind that our 
people used in their home country and that he had come from there. So we all 
asked him to tell us about our own country.”
20
Despite its sensationalistic title, Erdmann Doane Beynon’s 1938 article “The 
Voodoo Cult among Negro Migrants in Detroit” is a useful source for under-
standing the early teachings of Fard, especially because Beynon conducted sev-
eral interviews with Fard’s followers. Members claimed that Fard “was born in 
Mecca, the son of wealthy parents of the tribe of the Koreish, the tribe from which 
Mohammed the Prophet sprang, and that he was closely related by blood to the 
dynasty of the Hashimide sheriffs of Mecca who became kings of the Hejaz.”
21 
Beynon reports that most of Fard’s followers, representing the last wave of the 
Great Migration, were previously exposed to and influenced by the teachings of 
Marcus Garvey and Drew Ali, albeit indirectly. A few of the early followers were 
former members of the MSTA, which primed them for Fard’s similar heritage 
claims. “The newer migrants,” according to Beynon, “entered a social milieu in 
which the atmosphere was filled with questions about the origin of their people. 
Long before their new prophet appeared among them they were wondering who 
they were and whence they had come.”
22 Moreover, some authors assert that in 
the early days Fard attracted new members by claiming that he embodied Drew 
Ali’s reincarnated spirit.
23
Fard used his purported Saudi heritage as a paradigm for his conceptualiza-
tion of African American ethnicity. “The Black men of North America,” Fard 
maintained, “are not Negroes, but members of the lost tribe of Shabazz, stolen 
by traders from the Holy City of Mecca 379 yrs ago.”
24 Similar to Drew Ali’s 
proclamation that African Americans are ethnically Asiatic, Fard also taught his 
followers that they were Asiatic people but of a presumably fictitious tribe of 
nobles from Saudi Arabia.
25 While the MSTA situated their preslavery origins 
in Morocco (Africa), Fard’s proto-Nation sect believed that their people merely 
crossed Africa when they were kidnapped from Mecca (Asia). Unlike Drew Ali’s 
pal-mara-17.indd   249pal-mara-17.indd   249 7/25/08   1:35:22 PM7/25/08   1:35:22 PM


--- PAGE 259 ---
Transnational Blackness250
assertion that African Americans are “olive-skinned Asiatic people,” Fard used his 
followers’ black skin as a feature to be esteemed, proclaiming that they are “Black 
Asiatics.” In collecting the broken strands of Drew Ali’s escapist Asiatic religion 
and Garvey’s inspirational notions of black uplift and self-determination, Fard 
began to weave together a powerful new vision.
Fard’s role quickly progressed from peddler to prophet as his congregation 
took shape. He founded the first University of Islam (actually a primary school) 
in Detroit in 1931. That same year, in the former UNIA assembly hall in Detroit, 
Fard spoke to a few hundred listeners about the tenets of Islam, the origins of 
blacks in America, and the path to paradise. One of the listeners was Elijah Poole, 
a migrant from Georgia who was a former corporal of the UNIA’s Chicago chap-
ter and would later become Fard’s Supreme Minister.
26
Soon after his conversion, Poole changed his name to Elijah Muhammad, 
replacing his “slave name” with a surname that identified him with his newfound 
origin.
27 T ogether, Fard and Elijah established a temple in Chicago and started 
to set up one in Milwaukee, but in 1934 Fard disappeared. Despite the FBI’s 
attempts to locate him and testimonies by some members who claim that Fard 
was in continuous communication with Elijah Muhammad, the truth regarding 
Fard’s obscure origins, his mysterious arrival in Detroit, and his equally mysteri-
ous disappearance will probably never be thoroughly understood. The movement 
became factionalized; Elijah Muhammad vied for the leadership with the claim 
that Fard was actually Allah in the flesh. He relocated his followers to Chicago 
and began to teach them that he was the prophet of Allah.
28 Guided by Fard’s 
vision and his own experience, Elijah Muhammad extrapolated elements from 
Drew Ali’s religious teaching and Garvey’s political philosophy but ultimately 
declared that “both men failed to bring about the redemption of the race because 
they did not possess ‘the key’ and because the ‘time was not ripe.’”
29 The “key” 
to which Elijah Muhammad refers is the revelation that all white men are devils. 
Though it was implied in Drew Ali’s teachings—he associated the white man with 
Satan—Fard explicitly claimed that the white man is the devil.
30
Nation theology centered on two fundamental parables (that were conveyed as 
truth): the stories of the so-called Negro’s Asiatic origin and of the devilish nature 
of the white man. According to Nation doctrine, over eight thousand years ago 
a brilliant but malevolent geneticist of the T ribe of Shabazz named Yacub used 
his scientific knowledge to create the white man out of the original (black) man 
by gradually mutating the latter’s genes. The history of the naturally weak and 
wicked white man, according to the Nation, only reaches back six thousand years 
to the moment when the first white man was “grafted.” Little is known about the 
extent to which Fard directly contributed to the canonization of these narratives, 
especially since during the formative years (1930s to mid-1950s) teachings were 
mostly transmitted orally.
31
The appeal of the Nation was largely based on its discourses of identity and 
black pride borne out of reclaiming and reshaping history. Viewing the Nation as 
pal-mara-17.indd   250pal-mara-17.indd   250 7/25/08   1:35:22 PM7/25/08   1:35:22 PM


--- PAGE 260 ---
Going Back to Our Own 251
a movement gestating in the context of the Great Migration, Great Depression, 
headless MSTA, and dismantled UNIA explains how their peculiar genealogical 
myths could enchant thousands of poor African Americans. The question remains 
as to whence Fard and Elijah Muhammad acquired the particular concepts they 
preached. The words of Malcolm X during his involvement with the Nation (ca. 
1952–March 1964) remains the earliest clear expression of Elijah Muhammad’s 
message.
32 Therefore, it is appropriate to turn to Malcolm’s speeches and inter-
views in order to properly examine the Nation’s heritage claims.
In the summer of 1960, Malcolm X met with Nat Hentoff of The Reporter to 
explain the distinctive culture of the Nation, a sect that was around for decades 
but became known to the world only a year earlier.
33 Malcolm remarked that black 
people have been miseducated about Africa and fooled into believing the endur-
ing stereotype of the uncivilized African. “Most so-called Negroes,” said Malcolm, 
“know less about their cultural background than a native in deepest Africa. Many, 
in fact, still think of Africa—despite the growth of African states—as a continent 
of naked, flesh-eating barbarians. We teach [so-called Negroes] how rich their past 
is; we teach them there were Black men on earth before the whites, and that we 
are the chosen of Allah.”
34 The juxtaposition of the latter two sentences creates the 
impression that the Nation teaches that the black man originated in Africa. This 
sentiment appears to be a far cry from Fard’s contention that the T ribe of Shabazz 
arrived from Mecca some four hundred years ago. In fact, in the overwhelming 
majority of public speeches that Malcolm and other ministers give in this period, 
it is strongly stated that the Nation identifies with Africa. By examining speeches 
given inside the mosques to followers, the seeming contradiction of being both 
African and Asiatic is clarified.
According to an FBI informant, in 1957 Minister Malcolm X explained to 
followers that their origins lie in Asia, not Africa:
Who is the Original Man? The Honorable Elijah Muhammad has taught us the 
truth. It is the Asiatic Black Man. Why do we say the Asiatic Black Man? Why not 
the African Black Man or any other Black Man?
Before the white man knew of the planets, they [Black Men] had their true 
Arabic names but since the White Man has made his culture supreme the whole 
universe has been altered. Originally this entire planet (that is now called Earth) was 
called Asia. The first man on it was the Black Man. From him came the brown, red, 
yellow, and even the white man.
35
The history of “our own kind,” then, had presumably become more complicated 
and elaborate in the decades after Fard’s disappearance. That Malcolm addressed 
the question as to why they are not African suggests that the Nation may have 
been distinguishing itself from competing Black Nationalist ideologies. Malcolm 
offered the most thorough description of the Asiatic black Man in his aptly titled 
1962 speech, “Black Man’s History,” delivered one year before Elijah Muhammad 
silenced him.
pal-mara-17.indd   251pal-mara-17.indd   251 7/25/08   1:35:22 PM7/25/08   1:35:22 PM


--- PAGE 261 ---
Transnational Blackness252
Fifty thousand years ago . . . [a] scientist named Shabazz took his family and wan-
dered down into the jungles of Africa. Prior to that time no one lived in the jungles. 
Our people were soft; they were black but they were soft and delicate, fine. They 
had straight hair. Right here on this Earth you find some of them look like that 
today. They are black as night, but their hair is like silk, and originally all our people 
had that kind of hair. But this scientist took his family down into the jungles of 
Africa, and living in the open, living a jungle life, eating all kinds of food had an 
effect on the appearance of our people. Actually living in the rough climate, our hair 
became stiff, like it is now. We undertook new features that we have now.
36
Malcolm’s teaching differs significantly from that of Fard’s, which implied that 
the T ribe of Shabazz merely crossed over Africa from Mecca en route to the 
United States 379 years ago. In this altered myth of their lineage, the T ribe of 
Shabazz settled in Africa long enough to acquire “African” features. Malcolm fur-
ther explained that the original man had existed in Asia for sixty-six trillion years 
and migrated to Africa fifty thousand years ago.
37 This dramatic revision may have 
reflected a consequence of the drastic increase in Nation membership and noto-
riety among the black masses: members may have sought a precise creation story, 
one that is (more) compatible with the fact that slaves were taken from Africa, not 
Asia. The story, at times, may have been even more confusing for new converts; 
the “true knowledge” explained to Malcolm in prison through letters written by 
his siblings, was that “Original Man was black, in the continent called Africa 
where the human race had emerged on the planet Earth.”
38
The most flagrant contradiction in Nation theology, it seems, is that the teach-
ings simultaneously embrace and repel biblical narratives. On the one hand, Eli-
jah and Malcolm often drew from the Bible to illustrate the African American 
experience. For example, in the last speech Malcolm gave as Elijah Muhammad’s 
chief spokesman, he explained that
Moses’ message to the slave master [Pharaoh] was simple and clear: “Let my peo-
ple go. . . . Let them no longer be segregated by you; stop trying to deceive them 
with false promises of integration with you; let them separate themselves from you.” 
. . . Moses was trying to restore unto his people their own lost culture, their lost 
identity, their lost racial dignity . . . the same as The Honorable Elijah Muhammad 
is trying to do among the twenty-two million “Negro” slaves here in this modern 
House of Bondage today.
39
On the other hand, in both early Nation doctrine and in Malcolm’s other speeches, 
it is revealed that “Moses never went down into Egypt. Moses went into the caves 
of Europe and civilized the white man.”
40 T o the descendents of Shabazz, the 
Bible is the devil’s history. Thus Adam was the first white man grafted by Yacub’s 
gang. Malcolm explains this belief in his “Black Man’s History” speech:
The Honorable Elijah Muhammad teaches us that that man, Adam, was a white 
man; that before Adam was made the black man was already there. The white man 
will even tell you that, because he refers to Adam as the first one. He refers to the 
pal-mara-17.indd   252pal-mara-17.indd   252 7/25/08   1:35:22 PM7/25/08   1:35:22 PM


--- PAGE 262 ---
Going Back to Our Own 253
Adamites as those who came from that first one. He refers to the pre-Adamites 
as those who were here before Adam. . . . And he always refers to these people as 
“aborigines,” which means what? BLACK FOLK!!!
41
Benjamin 2X explained that Malcolm used biblical narratives as metaphors for 
black experience, because his followers likely could relate to those stories. “If black 
people have only one book to their name,” Benjamin asserted, “chances are that 
book will be the Bible, and most of them have at least a nodding acquaintance 
with portions of it. Much of the time Malcolm would use familiar portions of the 
Bible to illustrate his point, such as his comparing Moses and the slaves in ancient 
Egypt to our situation here in present-day America.”
42 The notion that black 
people are pre-Adamite beings reflects an awareness of an intellectual debate from 
the Enlightenment period engendered by the transatlantic slave trade concerning 
the nature of humanity.
43 The theological explanation for the creation of human-
kind was insufficient for these European “men of reason.” One school of thought, 
polygenism, or the theory of a separate creation of the races, held that the Negroid 
race was subhuman (and therefore pre-Adamite) as compared to their Caucasian 
counterpart. For, as Edith Sanders points out, “the Western world, which was 
growing increasingly rich on the institution of slavery, grew increasingly reluctant 
to look at the Negro slave and see him as a brother under the skin.”
44 The Nation’s 
beliefs concerning the disparate genealogies of the races was a deliberate reversal 
of this race theory that was used to authorize and justify slavery.
What of Malcolm’s peculiar claim that Shabazz wanted to toughen his people 
by leading his straight-haired tribe into the jungles of Africa? It is worth noting 
that in the Autobiography’s lengthy passage denouncing the “self-defacing conk,” 
Malcolm/Haley does not raise this aspect of the Nation’s genealogy.
45 Beynon 
provides some insight by merely reporting on some of the books Fard used as 
study guides—and likely passed on to Elijah Muhammad—during the forma-
tive years of the movement. Along with texts on Freemasonry and the Jehovah’s 
Witnesses (unfortunately, Beynon does not specify which ones), in meetings Fard 
read excerpts from two very popular history books: James Henry Breasted’s Con-
quest of Civilization (1926) and Hendrik Van Loon’s Story of Mankind (1922).
46 
Van Loon’s book was intended for children; Breasted’s work was originally pub-
lished in 1916 as the standard textbook for young people—so widely read, in fact, 
that scholars adopted the term “Fertile Crescent” from it.
47 While The Conquest of 
Civilization focuses on prehistory to ancient Roman times, The Story of Mankind 
gives a brief overview of human history, from “Our Earliest Ancestors” to “The 
Great War” (World War I). Despite their grandiose titles, these historiographies 
privilege Western civilization and ignore Africa entirely, save Egypt. Both authors 
concede that while peoples of “the Orient” (comprising Egypt, Babylonia, Assyria, 
Persia, and the Hebrews) were building nations and developing high civilization, 
Europeans of the Late Stone Age were struggling with their primitive stone tools 
in the dark. Breasted, an Egyptologist, wrote: “It was the culmination of that long 
commingling of ancient Oriental civilizations gathering from Egypt and Asia and 
pal-mara-17.indd   253pal-mara-17.indd   253 7/25/08   1:35:22 PM7/25/08   1:35:22 PM


--- PAGE 263 ---
Transnational Blackness254
forming that Egypto-Asiatic culture nucleus which eventually transformed the 
life of once savage and barbarous Europe.”48 This historical “fact” was sifted from 
these (and probably other similar) books only to be exploited and incorporated 
into the Nation’s version of history. “When the black princes of Asia and Africa 
were wearing silks and plotting the stars,” Minister Louis X asserted, “the white 
man was crawling around on his all-fours in the caves of Europe. The reason why 
the white man keeps dogs in the house today, and sleeps with them and rides with 
them about in cars is that he slept with the dogs in the caves of Europe and he has 
never broken the habit.”
49
However, according to Breasted, because Africans were isolated from “any 
effective intrusion” by the “Great White Race,” “the negro and negroid peoples 
remained without any influence on the development of early civilization.”
50 As 
for the Egyptians, they belonged to a subgroup of the “Great White Race,” “not-
withstanding their tanned skins.”
51 While there is some suggestion by Van Loon 
that the Egyptians were part African, his observations are similar to Breasted’s: 
“The fame of the Valley of the Nile must have spread at an early date. From the 
interior of Africa and from the desert of Arabia and from the western part of Asia 
people had flocked to Egypt to claim their share of the rich farms. T ogether these 
invaders had formed a new race which called itself ‘Remi’ or ‘the Men,’ just as we 
often call the Hebrews ‘the Chosen People.’”
52 How is it that this idea of an Asian 
invasion of Africa, civilizing in its wake, came to be? Why did Van Loon and 
Breasted consider ancient Egypt to be an “Oriental civilization?” Furthermore, 
did the Nation merely absorb and perpetuate this blatantly racist view of Africa? 
Since Elijah Muhammad and his followers believed that Fard was Allah incarnate, 
it is reasonable to assume that Elijah continued to use these texts after Fard’s 
disappearance. Beynon reports that Fard intended these texts to be understood 
“symbolically,” though he did use them to establish “proofs about themselves.”
53 
While Elijah Muhammad attempted to Africanize the Shabazz narrative by incor-
porating a fifty thousand–yearslong sojourn in Africa, what remains in his revi-
sion is this myth of a (black) Asiatic migration.
In Black Messiahs and Uncle T oms, Wilson Jeremiah Moses compares the black 
Jews with the Nation and the efforts of Pan-Africanism, Pan-Islamism, and Zion-
ism in general. He explains the ways in which black Jews and Muslims have 
responded similarly to a racist environment that has thwarted their aspirations. 
Where they differ, Moses argues, is in the former group’s insistence that Afri-
can culture is Judaic, in “contempt” of “indigenous African culture”—thereby 
“leav[ing] them with strange bedfellows.”
54 He traces the beliefs of the Ethiopian 
Hebrew Nation and that of other similar Jewish groups to what is now known as 
the “Hamitic Hypothesis,” a theory Moses attributes to the anthropologist C. G. 
Seligman,
55 which holds that any and every vestige of civilization on the African 
continent must have been the work of Asian or European settlers (Hamites), 
not of the people indigenous to Africa. The Ethiopian Hebrew Nation, argues 
Moses, conflated the Semites with the Hamites, allegedly a racial and ethnic 
pal-mara-17.indd   254pal-mara-17.indd   254 7/25/08   1:35:22 PM7/25/08   1:35:22 PM


--- PAGE 264 ---
Going Back to Our Own 255
sub-classification of the Caucasian race. The truth is, however, that the black Jews 
and the Nation have more in common than Moses realized.
The Hamitic Hypothesis was amplified but not created by Seligman; the history 
of its use is much more complex and expansive than Moses’ research suggested. 
Recent research shows that the Hamitic Hypothesis has influenced historical, 
philosophical, anthropological, and archaeological study throughout Africa from 
the late eighteenth century to the modern day.
56 In Edith Sanders’ 1969 article 
entitled “The Hamitic Hypothesis: Its Origin and Functions in Time Perspec-
tive,” she carefully traces the racialization of Ham to the sixth century CE.
Sanders postulates that there were three different phases of the Hamitic myth. 
The original, biblical myth from the book of Genesis held that Noah had three 
sons: Shem, Japhet, and Ham. Noah cursed Ham’s son, Canaan, because Ham 
failed to avert his eyes in shame from his drunken, naked father. The Bible does 
not describe Ham or his progeny as black; the curse on Canaan only promised 
that “a servant of servants shall he be.” The assertion that Ham was black emerged 
in the second manifestation of the Hamitic myth, “out of a need of the Israelites 
to rationalize their subjugation of Canaan.”
57 This revision was concretized in the 
Babylonian Talmud of the sixth century CE.
Napoleon’s 1798 invasion of Egypt inspired the third version of this hypoth-
esis. The French rediscovery and popularization of ancient Egypt was obviously 
problematic in light of slavery. Members of Napoleon’s expedition described both 
the representation of ancient Egyptians on wall paintings and the physical fea-
tures of living Egyptians as Negroid.
58 The problem was this: “If the Negro was 
the descendent of Ham, and Ham was cursed, how could he be the creator of 
a great civilization?”
59 Enlightenment intellectuals deduced that Canaan, son of 
Ham, was cursed, but Ham and his other sons were not. While the Canaanites 
had been preordained for slavery, Ham and his other sons were conveniently 
deemed black but not Negroid but rather Caucasians under a black skin.
60 Sub-
sequent discoveries of civilized African nations in the late nineteenth century 
compelled explorers to associate every remnant of high civilization and cultural 
achievement to this mythical Hamitic race. “The confusion surrounding the 
‘Hamite,’” Sanders argues, “was steadily compounded as the terms of reference 
became increasingly overlapping and vague. The racial classification of ‘Hamites’ 
encompassed a great variety of types from fair-skinned, blonde, blue-eyed [Ber-
bers] to black [Ethiopians].”
61
Sander’s epistemological study explains the classification of ancient Egypt as an 
Oriental civilization: Breasted’s “Egypto-Asiatic culture nucleus” was another way 
of attributing African achievement to this popular myth of the migratory Ham-
ites. It is hardly surprising that Drew Ali and Elijah Muhammad developed their 
genealogies in the manner and using the rhetoric that they did—this was the only 
material on Africa with which they had to work. Similar to teaching that the poly-
genists were correct (black people are pre-Adamite—and proud!), the Nation’s 
genealogical myth merely represented the inverse of the Hamitic Hypothesis: a 
“Black Asiatic” invasion of Africa. Rather than dispute the veracity of the tenuous, 
pal-mara-17.indd   255pal-mara-17.indd   255 7/25/08   1:35:22 PM7/25/08   1:35:22 PM


--- PAGE 265 ---
Transnational Blackness256
faith-based claims put forth by historians and anthropologists, Drew Ali, Fard, 
and Muhammad manipulated European historiographies of Africa to forge a well-
documented, “legitimate” history of black people in America.
Whether Malcolm X ever believed in the Nation’s genealogy or whether he 
promoted it only as a propagandistic device is not the issue. Identifying with a 
particular movement, ethnicity, or group does not necessitate belief. T eaching and 
promoting these genealogies is equivalent to identifying with them. While schol-
ars such as Louis DeCaro have argued that in the 1950s Malcolm was already 
using more ambiguous and inclusive phrases such as the “Dark World” to simul-
taneously embrace African and Asian identities,
62 his promotion of unity among 
all people of color does not preclude his self-identification as Asiatic. Malcolm 
declared his “nationality” most emphatically in his 1962 “Black Man’s History” 
speech to fellow Muslims, but he also did not hesitate to divulge an abbreviated 
version of this history to the public. For example, in the fall of 1963 Malcolm 
gave a speech entitled “The Old Negro and the New Negro” to a mixed college 
audience at the University of Pennsylvania, in the question and answer period, 
Malcolm stated that “the entire earth was once known as Asia and all of the 
people on it at that time were Asiatic. . . . On my draft card it says Asiatic. And 
anything that anybody puts in front of me that wants to know what is my race or 
my nationality, any Muslim will put down Asiatic and that ends it.”
63 Malcolm’s 
comment demonstrates that he continued to tout the T ribe of Shabazz narrative 
in the last year of his ministry for the Nation, however it would be the last time 
(to my knowledge) that he would publicly comment on being of Asiatic origin.
Moreover, there is no indication that after leaving the Nation Malcolm initially 
sought to subvert the black Muslim dogma of separation and black supremacy 
with his new organization. During the press conference on March 12, 1964, at 
which he announced his defection from the Nation and the founding of the Mus-
lim Mosque, Incorporated (MMI), Malcolm declared, “I am and always will be a 
Muslim. My religion is Islam. I still believe that Mr. Muhammad’s analysis of the 
problem is the most realistic, and that his solution is the best one. This means that 
I too believe the best solution is complete separation, with our people going back 
home, to our own African homeland.”
64 In fact, Malcolm originally envisioned 
the MMI as a more activist (however unaffiliated) branch of the Nation, where he 
would still teach the tenets of the Nation faith.
65
While the Autobiography may have overemphasized the dramatic changes in 
Malcolm’s religious beliefs as a result of his conversion to Sunni Islam in April 
1964, it should be noted that Malcolm did not publicly criticize the tenets of the 
Nation upon his return to the United States—that is, until he was prodded with 
threats and slandered in public. By June 1964, when Malcolm X announced the 
formation of his secular, Pan-Africanist political group, the Organization of Afro-
American Unity (OAAU), he was openly criticizing Elijah Muhammad’s char-
acter in the press.
66 Alex Haley reports that after returning from his second trip 
to Africa in late November 1964, Malcolm treated the subject of Muhammad’s 
teachings with increasingly “bitter accusations,” more “than he ever had.”
67 While 
Haley attributes this “sudden . . . spate of attacks” to a September court decision 
pal-mara-17.indd   256pal-mara-17.indd   256 7/25/08   1:35:23 PM7/25/08   1:35:23 PM


--- PAGE 266 ---
Going Back to Our Own 257
to evict Malcolm and his family from their East Elmhurst home, it is likely that 
his virulent criticism of Elijah Muhammad was in response to the culmination of 
problems he had with Muhammad’s organization. Malcolm’s initial set of criti-
cisms was centered on the Nation’s disinclination to activate its ranks in response 
to injustices, their mishandling of funds, and Muhammad’s infidelities.
68 The 
looming threat of assault by Nation members coupled with the relentlessly nega-
tive coverage of him in Muhammad Speaks undoubtedly exacerbated the resent-
ment Malcolm felt toward his former spiritual leader.
69 However, interpreting 
Malcolm’s public denouncements of Elijah Muhammad and the Nation as mere 
knee-jerk reactions to this hostile atmosphere overlooks the profound insights 
embedded in his criticisms. Before the Harvard Law School Forum on December 
16, 1964, Malcolm remarked:
Many people will tell you that the black man in this country doesn’t identify with 
Africa. Before 1959, many Negroes didn’t. But before 1959, the image of Africa 
was created by an enemy of Africa, because Africans weren’t in a position to create 
and to project their own images. The image was created by the imperial powers of 
Europe. Europeans created and popularized the image of Africa as a jungle, a wild 
place where people were cannibals, naked and savage in a countryside overrun with 
dangerous animals. Such an image of the Africans was so hateful to Afro-Americans 
that they refused to identify with Africa. We did not realize that in hating Africa and 
the Africans we were hating ourselves. . . . We Negroes hated . . . the African nose, 
the shape of our lips, the color of our skin, the texture of our hair . . . it was not an 
image created by African or by Afro-Americans, but by an enemy.
70
The notion that European colonialists were responsible for circulating negative 
propaganda about Africans would be expressed in a very similar manner and 
tone in most of the speeches Malcolm gave throughout 1964 until his death on 
February 21, 1965.
71 At first glance it does not appear that his argument had 
shifted significantly from what he was describing in the Reporter interview of 
1960. Malcolm expounded on his views in his January 1965 speech “On Afro-
American History:”
They say mankind is divided up into three categories—Mongoloid, Caucasoid, and 
Negroid. . . . And all black people aren’t Negroid—they’ve got some jet black ones 
that they classify as Caucasoid. But if you’ll study very closely, all the black ones 
that they classify as Caucasoid are those that still have great civilizations, or still 
have the remains of what was once a great civilization. The only ones that they clas-
sify as Negroid, are those that they find no evidence that they were ever civilized; 
then they call them Negroid. But they can’t afford to let any black-skinned people 
who have evidence that they formally occupied a high seat in civilization, they 
can’t afford to let them be called Negroid, so they take them on into the Caucasoid 
classification.
72
While Malcolm’s rhetoric may appear to be the same, his argument had evolved 
dramatically from his Nation-sanctioned comments on the etymology of the 
term “Negro.” In those earlier statements, Malcolm deduced that the white man’s 
pal-mara-17.indd   257pal-mara-17.indd   257 7/25/08   1:35:23 PM7/25/08   1:35:23 PM


--- PAGE 267 ---
Transnational Blackness258
system of classification was flawed and inconsistent: “If Frenchmen are of France 
and Germans are of Germany, where is ‘Negroland’? I’ll tell you: it’s in the mind 
of the white man! . . . You don’t call Minnie Minoso a “Negro,” and he’s blacker 
than I am. You call him a Cuban!”
73 The important shift lies in his broadening 
of the focus group—from analyzing the uniqueness of the so-called American 
Negro’s problem (“Nkrumah is an African—a Ghanaian—you don’t call him a 
‘Negro’”)
74 to seeing how colonialist typologies have oppressed people of color 
worldwide. He continues:
And actually, Caucasoid, Mongoloid, and Negroid—there’s no such thing. These 
are so-called anthropological terms that were put together by anthropologists 
who were nothing but agents of the colonial powers, and they were purposely 
given such scientific positions in order that they could come up with definitions 
that would justify the European domination over the Africans and the Asians. So 
immediately they invented classifications that would automatically demote these 
people or put them on a lesser level. All of the Caucasoids are on a high level, 
the Negroids are kept at a low level. This is just plain trickery that their scientists 
engage in in order to keep you and me thinking that we never were anything, and 
therefore he’s doing us a favor as he lets us step upward or forward in his particular 
society or civilization.
75
Malcolm’s argument presents a more mature and informed version of the senti-
ments implied while on hajj in April 1964, namely that race is a social construc-
tion—not a scientific fact. During his pilgrimage to Mecca, Malcolm had his 
Muslim Mosque, Inc. issue a press release that read (in part): “Throughout my 
travels in the Muslim World, I have met, talked to, and even eaten with people 
who would have been considered ‘white’ in America, but the religion of Islam 
in their hearts has removed the ‘white’ from their minds.”
76 It is important to 
recognize that Malcolm’s views regarding the veracity of race as a scientific truth 
had by this point permeated both his religious and political agendas. Indeed, 
Malcolm’s experiences after leaving the Nation enabled him to argue what appears 
to be the antithesis of Elijah Muhammad’s program, that “we [black people] were 
scientifically produced by the white man.”
77 Given his astute statements regard-
ing the colonialist discourse on Africans and the spurious taxonomies authored 
by anthropologists, it is reasonable to deduce that Malcolm had recently become 
familiar with the deceptions inherent in the Hamitic Hypothesis.
At least twice in February 1965 Malcolm attributed the shift in his views to 
conversations he had while on his second, longer trip to Africa the previous year, 
from July through November 1964. “During my conversations with these men 
[presidents of several countries], and other Africans on that continent, there was 
much information exchanged that definitely broadened my understanding and, I 
feel, broadened my scope.”
78 Malcolm’s shrewd observations regarding the colo-
nialist hand in African historiography was undoubtedly influenced by the con-
temporaneous African nationalist effort to reconstruct their own histories. The 
pal-mara-17.indd   258pal-mara-17.indd   258 7/25/08   1:35:23 PM7/25/08   1:35:23 PM


--- PAGE 268 ---
Going Back to Our Own 259
extent to which Malcolm engaged with African intellectuals directly involved in 
the rewriting of history will likely become known when the diaries of his trips are 
released to the public.
79
Juxtaposing Malcolm’s perspective on historiography circa February 1965 
with some of the passing comments made about Elijah Muhammad’s teachings 
from this period suggests very strongly that the criticism was geared toward 
Muhammad as much as toward European writers of African history, albeit in a 
far subtler manner. On two occasions in late February, Malcolm was speaking 
“off the cuff” about his break with the Nation. On the first occasion, Malcolm 
was responding to questions after a speech at an OAAU rally held in the Audu-
bon Ballroom on February 15. He remarked, “You cannot read anything that Eli-
jah Muhammad has ever written that’s pro-African. I defy you to find one word 
in his direct writings that’s pro-African. You can’t find it.”
80 Malcolm elaborated 
on this assertion during a panel discussion on WINS Radio in New York, three 
days later:
Stan Bernard: (moderator): Let me ask you this, Malcolm. You at one time espoused 
complete separation of the races.
Malcom X: I must say this concerning what Elijah Muhammad said about separa-
tion. He didn’t espouse separation. What he said was this: that the government 
should—if the government can’t give complete equality right now, then the 
government should permit Black people to go back to Africa—He didn’t ever 
say back to Africa. Elijah Muhammad has never made one statement that’s 
pro-African. And he has never, in any of his speeches, written or oral, said 
anything to his followers about Africa.
Bernard : What about a Black state in the United States?
Malcom X: He was as anti-African as he was anti-white.
Bernard: Did you say a Black state in the United States?
Malcom X: No. So what he said was, “We should go back to our own.” And he 
phrased it like that, because if he spelled it out, he would have to point to some 
geographic area, and he would have to have the consent of the people in that 
geographic area, which he knew he couldn’t get.
81
Malcolm’s revised understanding of history was not exclusively a recognition 
and condemnation of the mechanisms of colonialism. Malcolm realized that the 
Nation’s genealogical myth deprived members of the truth about their African 
origin. Noble Drew Ali and Elijah Muhammad internalized racism to the extent 
that despite attempting to subvert racist ideology, they appropriated it. Malcolm 
X sought to revolutionize historiographies of black people rather than merely 
manipulate the European versions already in place. His comments concerning 
Elijah Muhammad’s treatment of Africa in his teachings show that in his last 
months Malcolm was also critiquing the Black Nationalist tradition from which 
he sprang.
pal-mara-17.indd   259pal-mara-17.indd   259 7/25/08   1:35:23 PM7/25/08   1:35:23 PM


--- PAGE 269 ---
Transnational Blackness260
Notes
 1. Malcolm X, “Black Man’s History,” in The End of White World Supremacy, ed. Imam 
Benjamin Karim (New York: Seaver Books, 1971), 26.
 2. Ibid., 11, 13. During the period Karim worked with Malcolm X he was known as Benja-
min 2X.
 3. See Alan Dershowitz’s comment in Malcolm X, Archie Epps, ed., The Speeches of Malcolm 
X at Harvard (New York: William Morrow, 1968), 161.
 4. Malcolm claimed that “the teachings of Mr. Muhammad stressed how history had been 
‘whitened’—when white men had written history books, the black man simply had been 
left out. Mr. Muhammad couldn’t have said anything that would have struck me much 
harder.” Malcolm X, The Autobiography of Malcolm X (New York: Ballantine Books, 
1992), 201.
 5. Richard Brent T urner’s Islam in the African-American Experience (Indianapolis: Univer-
sity of Indiana Press, 1997) is one exception, and I rely heavily on his important work 
throughout this chapter. However, T urner’s work covers the variety of Muslim religious 
identities that crop up among blacks in America throughout history, sparing relatively 
little time on Malcolm’s own ideas about his origins.
 6. Several relationships and moments in his life that could inform that type of inquiry 
immediately come to mind (and could stand alone as essays unto themselves): analyzing 
Malcolm’s alliances with other Black Nationalists in Harlem, especially Louis Michaux; 
investigating personal correspondence dating to the period when his sister and confidante 
Ella renounced the divinity of Fard; and tracking Malcolm’s close relationships with Eli-
jah’s Sunni-leaning sons, Wallace and Akbar Muhammad. Certainly, the cache of original 
documents that Malcolm’s six daughters have lent to the Schomburg Center for Research 
in Black Culture in Harlem—but, alas, have not yet released as of this writing—would 
likely be instrumental in this undertaking.
 7. T urner, Islam, 73, 75.
 8. Hans A. Baer and Merrill Singer, African-American Religion in the Twentieth Century: Vari-
eties of Protest and Accommodation (Knoxville: University of T ennessee Press, 1992), 51.
 9. Arthur Fauset, Black Gods of the Metropolis: Negro Religious Cults in the Urban North (Phil-
adelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press, 1975), 52–68, for Father Divine, 31–41 for 
the Church of God.
 10. Ibid., 107–8. In using the term “cult,” Fauset was simply referring to the size of the sect 
and the strength and unusual charisma of the leader.
 11. This, of course, was not the first time the idea of returning to Africa was publicly 
expressed—church leaders in the mid-nineteenth century first advocated and acted on 
this idea. See Gayraud S. Wilmore, Black Religion and Black Radicalism: An Interpreta-
tion of the Religious History of African Americans, 3rd ed. (Maryknoll, NY: Orbis Books, 
1998), 125–62. For a comprehensive look at Garvey, see E. David Cronon’s, Black Moses: 
The Story of Marcus Garvey and the Universal Negro Improvement Association (Madison: 
University of Wisconsin Press, 1969).
 12. Erdmann Doane Beynon, “The Voodoo Cult among Negro Migrants in Detroit,” Ameri-
can Journal of Sociology
  43, no. 6 (May 1938): 898; and E. U. Essien-Udom, Black Nation-
alism: A Search for An Identity in America  (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1962), 
58.
 13. Philip Potter, “The Religious Thought of Marcus Garvey” in Garvey: His Work and Impact, 
ed. Rupert Lewis and Patrick Bryan (T renton, NJ: Africa World, 1991), 161–62.
 14. Arnold Hughes, “Africa and the Garvey Movement in the Interwar Years” in Garvey: 
Africa, Europe, the Americas, ed. Rupert Lewis and Maureen Warner-Lewis (T renton, NJ: 
Africa World, 1994), 102.
pal-mara-17.indd   260pal-mara-17.indd   260 7/25/08   1:35:23 PM7/25/08   1:35:23 PM


--- PAGE 270 ---
Going Back to Our Own 261
 15. According to T urner, The Aquarian Gospels of Jesus Christ is “an occult version of the New 
T estament” and Unto Thee I Grant was published by the Rosicrucians, a Masonic order 
that is preoccupied with Egyptian mysticism. T urner, Islam, 93–94. Curiously, the only 
white, mainstream Masonic lodge that accepted black members in the early twentieth 
century was the Alpha Lodge No. 116, located in New Jersey. It is possible that Drew Ali 
was aware of the Alpha Lodge’s mixed membership, though it is highly doubtful that he 
had direct connections to this lodge. See William J. Whalen, Christianity and American 
Freemasonry (San Francisco: Ignatius, 1998), 29.
 16. Fauset, Black Gods, 47. Associating black people in America with North Africans (and 
other people of color who tend to be light-complexioned) perhaps reflects the politics of 
color and its relationship to status—ideas that were pervasive in this period. For example, 
Malcolm X remarks on the favoritism his father showed him (ca. late 1920s) and asserts 
that it was due to him being the lightest child. See Malcolm X, Autobiography, 5, 7.
 17. Fauset, Black Gods, 41; T urner, Islam, 92–93, 96.
 18. T urner, Islam, 93.
 19. Fauset, Black Gods, 47.
 20. Sister Denke Majied, one of Fard’s early followers. Quoted in Beynon, “The Voodoo 
Cult,” 895.
 21. Ibid., 897.
 22. Ibid., 898–99.
 23. See Clifton E. Marsh, From  Black Muslims to Muslims: The Transition from Separatism to 
Islam 1930-1980 (Metuchen, NJ: Scarecrow, 1984), 51; Karl Evanzz, The Messenger: The 
Rise and Fall of Elijah Muhammad (New York: Vintage Books, 1999), 68.
 24. Beynon, “The Voodoo Cult,” 900. Beynon uses the spelling “Shebazz”; in this essay I will 
write “Shabazz,” because this is how the tribe is spelled in Nation literature. For a compel-
ling study on the etymology of “Shabazz,” see Yahyah Monastra, “The Name Shabazz: 
Where Did it Come From?” Islamic Studies 32, no. 1 (Spring 1993): 73–76.
 25. Benyon, “The Voodoo Cult,” 906.
 26. T urner, Islam, 154.
 27. Fard had initially named Poole “Karriem” but later upgraded it to “Muhammad.” See C. 
Eric Lincoln, The Black Muslims In America, 3rd ed. (T renton, NJ: Africa World, 1994), 
15. Other members would later substitute an “X” for their slave names. The “X” signified 
an unknown family lineage, but it also, perhaps, r
epresented Fard’s teaching about their 
lost culture, which included “higher mathematics.” See Beynon, “The Voodoo Cult”, 900. 
For a thorough description of the process of discarding slave names, see Lincoln, Black 
Muslims, 105–6.
 28. Beynon, “The Voodoo Cult”, 907.
 29. Essien-Udom, Black Nationalism, 63.
 30. Marsh, From Black Muslims, 56.
 31. Beynon cites two key “textbooks” authored by Fard: T eaching for the Lost Found Nation of 
Islam in a Mathematical Way and Secret Ritual of the Nation of Islam. The Bible was used in 
the early period, presumably before Fard’s texts were composed. T eaching . . . in a Math-
ematical Way was written in code, requiring Fard’s interpretation. At the time of Beynon’s 
writing (1939), few copies of Secret Ritual existed; the knowledge was transmitted orally. 
See Beynon, “The Voodoo Cult,” 895, 898; and Lincoln, The Black Muslims, 14.
 32. Elijah Muhammad’s Message to the Black Man in America (Chicago: Muhammad Mosque 
of Islam No. 2, 1965), published after Malcolm X’s death, provides the most comprehen-
sive description of the histories of whites and the original people, but this study concerns 
the Nation’s beliefs during Malcolm’s lifetime.
pal-mara-17.indd   261pal-mara-17.indd   261 7/25/08   1:35:23 PM7/25/08   1:35:23 PM


--- PAGE 271 ---
Transnational Blackness262
 33. In July 1959, “The Hate That Hate Produced,” an inflammatory news report on the 
Nation of Islam, aired in five installments on WTNA-TV in New York. Malcolm X, 
Autobiography, 271, 273–76.
 34. Nat Hentoff, “Elijah in the Wilderness,” The Reporter 23 (August 4, 1960): 39-40.
 35. FBI T eletype, Malcolm X FBI File, July 11, 1957. Activities of Malcolm Little in New 
York, New York on June 21, 1957.
 36. Malcolm X, “Black Man’s History,” 48 (emphasis original). Elijah Muhammad offered an 
abbreviated version of the story at a 1960 Chicago convention. Bontemps and Conroy, 
Anyplace, 226.
 37. Malcolm X, “Black Man’s History,” 44–49.
 38. Malcolm X, Autobiography, 187. Perhaps his siblings were guided more by the Garveyite 
elements in Nation doctrine, since this type of thinking was central to how they were 
raised. See T ed Vincent, “The Garveyite Parents of Malcolm X,” The Black Scholar 
(March–April 1989): 10–13.
 39. Malcolm X, “God’s Judgment of White America” in The End of White World Supremacy, 
ed. Imam Benjamin Karim (New York: Seaver Books, 1971), 126–27 (emphasis original). 
This was a common theme for Malcolm throughout his tenure with the Nation. An early 
example can be found in Malcolm X’s FBI file. A Chicago-based informant describes a 
speech given by Malcolm X in 1955 or 1956: “Little cited the ordeals encountered by 
the children of Israel when they were held captive by the Egyptians in biblical times and 
likened this to the condition of the Negro in America today.” FBI T eletype, Malcolm X 
FBI File, April 23, 1957. Activities of Little in Chicago, Illinois.
 40. Malcolm X, “Black Man’s History,” 64.
 41. Ibid., 42–43; emphasis original.
 42. Imam Benjamin Karim, “Introduction,” in The End of White World Supremacy, ed. Imam 
Benjamin Karim (New York: Seaver Books, 1971), 16–17. Malcolm himself remarked on 
his pedagogical style, “I had learned early one important thing, and that was to always 
teach in terms that the people could understand.” Malcolm X, Autobiography, 254.
 43. See, for example, Mahmood Mamdani, When Victims Become Killers (Princeton: Princ-
eton University Press, 2001), 81–82.
 44. Edith R. Sanders, “The Hamitic Hypothesis: Its Origin and Functions in Time Perspec-
tive”, The Journal of African History 10, no. 4 (1969): 524.
 45. Given Malcolm’s emphasis on hair politics while preaching for the Nation, it is curious 
that he did not reconcile this inconsistency in any of his letters or speeches. See Malcolm 
X, Autobiography, 62–65.
 46. Beynon, “The Voodoo Cult,” 900; James Henry Breasted, The Conquest of Civilization 
(New York: Harper & Brothers, 1926); Hendrik Van Loon, The Story of Mankind (Lon-
don: George G. Harrap & Co., 1922).
 47. Breasted, Conquest, 117.
 48. I
bid., xiii.
 49. Lincoln, Black Muslims, 114–15. Minister Louis X later took the name Louis Farrakhan.
 50. Ibid., 113. Note that Breasted wrote “Great White Race” in capitals and “Negro” and 
“Negroid” in lower-case letters.
 51. Ibid.
 52. Van Loon, Story of Mankind, 22.
 53. Beynon, “The Voodoo Cult,” 900.
 54. Wilson Jeremiah Moses, Black Messiahs and Uncle T oms: Social and Literary Manipula-
tions of a Religious Myth (University Park: The Pennsylvania State University Press, 1982), 
183–84, 189.
pal-mara-17.indd   262pal-mara-17.indd   262 7/25/08   1:35:23 PM7/25/08   1:35:23 PM


--- PAGE 272 ---
Going Back to Our Own 263
 55. Moses, Black Messiahs, 189. Seligman’s major text is Races of Africa (London: Oxford 
University Press, 1930).
 56. For a summary of the effects of the Hamitic Hypothesis on black theology in nineteenth-
century America, see Wilmore, Black Religion, 145–47. For work done on the influence 
of the Hamitic Hypothesis on the Hutus and T utsis, see Mamdani, When Victims, 79–87. 
For work done on Nigeria, see Philip S. Zachernuk, “Of Origins and Colonial Order: 
Southern Nigerian Historians and the ‘Hamitic Hypothesis’ c. 1870–1970,” Journal of 
African History 35 (1994): 427–55. For the role of the Hamitic Hypothesis in justify-
ing slavery, see Robin Blackburn, “The Old World Background to European Colonial 
Slavery,” William and Mary Quarterly 54, no. 1 (January 1997): 90–97; and Benjamin 
Braude, “The Sons of Noah and the Construction of Ethnic and Geographical Identities 
in the Medieval and Early Modern Periods,” William and Mary Quarterly 54, no. 1 (Janu-
ary 1997): 103–42. For the role of the Hamitic Hypothesis in African Historiography, see 
Joseph C. Miller, “History and Africa/Africa and History,” The American Historical Review 
104, no. 1 (February 1999): 1–32. For the use of the Hamitic Hypothesis in interpreting 
the archaeological remains at Great Zimbabwe, see Martin Hall, “The Legend of the Lost 
City; Or, the Man with Golden Balls,” Journal of Southern African Studies 21, no. 2 (June 
1995): 179–99.
 57. Sanders, “Hamitic Hypothesis,” 522.
 58. Mamdani, When Victims, 82.
 59. Sanders, “Hamitic Hypothesis,” 526.
 60. Mamdani, When Victims, 82–83.
 61. Sanders, “Hamitic Hypothesis,” 529.
 62. DeCaro, On the Side of My People: A Religious Life of Malcolm X (New York: New York 
University Press, 1996), 122.
 63. Malcolm X, “The Old Negro and the New Negro,” The End of White World S
 upremacy, 
ed. Imam Benjamin Karim (New York: Seaver Books, 1971), 106.
 64. Malcolm X, “A Declaration of Independence,” Malcolm X Speaks, ed. George Breitman 
(New York: Grove Weidenfeld, 1990), 20. The idea of going back to Africa does not nec-
essarily contradict the Shabazz narrative, since the T ribe of Shabazz presumably called it 
home for the fifty thousand years prior to their enslavement.
 65. See M. S. Handler, “Malcolm X Splits with Muhammad,” New  York Times, March 9, 
1964, p. 1; “Malcolm’s Brand X,” Newsweek, March 23, 1964, p. 32.
 66. “Malcolm X Flees For Life; Muslim Factions at War,” New York Amsterdam News, June 20, 
1964, pp. 1–2.
 67. Malcolm X, Autobiography, 484.
 68. In his eviction trial appearance before dozens of Elijah Muhammad’s followers, Malcolm 
accused Muhammad of “fathering almost a dozen illegitimate children.” See “Malcolm X 
Flees For His Life,” Pittsburgh Courier, July 11, 1964, p. 4.
 69. See “Malcolm X Flees For Life; Muslim Factions at War,” New York Amsterdam News, June 
20, 1964, pp. 1–2.
 70. Malcolm X, The Speeches . . . at Harvard, 167–68.
 71. See “The Oppressed Masses of the World Cry Out for Action Against the Common 
Oppressor,” in February 1965: The Final Speeches, ed. Steve Clark (New York, Pathfinder, 
1992), 53; “Educate Our People in Politics,” in February 1965, 94; “Not Just An Ameri-
can Problem,” in February 1965, 157, 161; and “A Global Rebellion of the Oppressed 
Against the Oppressor,” in February 1965, 178.
 72. Malcolm X, Malcolm X On Afro-American History, ed. George Breitman (New York: Path-
finder, 1967), 17–18.
pal-mara-17.indd   263pal-mara-17.indd   263 7/25/08   1:35:23 PM7/25/08   1:35:23 PM


--- PAGE 273 ---
Transnational Blackness264
 73. Malcolm X at the Boston University Human Relations Center, February 15, 1960. Lin-
coln, Black Muslims, 64–65. Minnie Minoso is the baseball legend who broke Chicago’s 
“color barrier” when he signed with the White Sox in 1951.
 74. Ibid.
 75. Malcolm X, On Afro-American History, 17–18.
 76. This letter was published internationally. See, for example, “An Open letter from Malcolm 
X,” Uganda Argus (Kampala), July 28, 1964, p. 2, in Box 1, Aliya Hassen Papers, Bentley 
Historical Library, University of Michigan. The collection also contains the press release 
on Muslim Mosque, Inc. letterhead, dated April 20, 1964.
 77. Malcolm X, On Afro-American History, 15.
 78. Malcolm X, “Not Just an American Problem,” 147; also see Malcolm X, WINS Panel 
Discussion, in February 1965, 204.
 79. Malcolm X’s daughters placed a presumably extensive collection of Malcolm’s speeches, 
letters, photos and diaries on long-term deposit with the New York Public Library’s 
Schomburg Center for Research in Black Culture sometime between late December 2002 
and early January 2003. As of this writing, some of the materials have been processed but 
nothing has been released. Some of the “most significant” items are diaries written during 
Malcolm’s trips to Asia and Africa in 1964. In the epilogue to the Autobiography, Alex 
Haley recalled that Malcolm withheld information from him about his trip, because he 
was hoping that his “carefully kept diary might be turned into another book.” This sug-
gests that a wealth of information about Malcolm’s meetings and contacts in Africa can 
be found in the diaries at the Schomburg Center. See “Malcolm X Papers Will Come to 
New York Public Library’s Schomburg Center for Research in Black Culture,” Schom-
burg Center Press Release, January 7, 2003, http://www.nypl.org/press/malcolmx.cfm 
(accessed February 2003).
 80. Malcolm X, “There’s A Worldwide Revolution Going On,” in February 1965, 132.
 81. Malcolm X, WINS Panel Discussion, in February 1965, 205.
pal-mara-17.indd   264pal-mara-17.indd   264 7/25/08   1:35:23 PM7/25/08   1:35:23 PM


--- PAGE 274 ---
C HAPTER  18
Linking African and 
Asian in Passing and 
Passage
Lisa Yun
Ships tekin’ Chinese people to Cuba and Sout’ America to work in de sugar field 
because African slavery done. A lot a crimp, dem beat up people and put den pan de 
ship. . . . I hear de Prince Alexander tekin’ Chinese laborers to Jamaica. When I reach 
Jamaica, I will find a boat gain’ Cuba. I don’t ’fraid even though I hear some bad story 
’bout what happen to indentured people. Indentured Chinese is jus’ like African slave, 
I hear. Me no believe it. . . . Almas’ seven hundred Chinese ’pan de boat gain’ Jamaica. 
Right away I see is true: I sign meself ina slavery. We down in de ship and we don’t 
see daylight. Hakka an’ Cantonese too. People fightin’. People sick. People hungry an’ 
t’irsty  . . . T oo much people. T oo much story.
—Margaret Cezair-Thompson, The True History of Paradise
How many days now, how many nights, had he lain there—the rats walking his face 
and teasing his veins, waiting; his trousers cruddy with stains and stinking; his tongue 
swollen with thirst and leathery in his mouth; his head in torment  . . .  These were 
not the stupendous journeys his father had outlined. How had his people been swayed 
like this, fired up by this, when in truth the Chinese he had seen below, during his 
nocturnal stalkings, were there dying, were there starving and ill with disease. were 
there chained to one another, chained to iron railings? Chained. An iron gang.
—Patricia Powell, The Pagoda
T wo recent novels by Afro-Jamaican writers attempt to bring the 
Chinese diasporic experience in the Caribbean into creative realization. The  
Pagoda (1998) by Patricia Powell concerns the saga of the Chinese middle pas-
sage during the 1860s and life in Jamaica up through the 1890s.
1 The True 
History of Paradise (1999) by Margaret Cezair-Thompson presents a multira-
cial, multigenerational narrative of Jamaica that includes “Mr. Ho Sing” and his 
pal-mara-18.indd   265pal-mara-18.indd   265 7/29/08   9:40:14 AM7/29/08   9:40:14 AM


--- PAGE 275 ---
Transnational Blackness266
descendants among the main protagonists. 2 The appearance of these two novels 
complements current work from the Caribbean Diaspora and provides insight 
regarding the perception of Asians in the narrative of nation-building in the 
Caribbean. Naturally, one cannot talk of the Asian Diaspora in the Caribbean 
without examining the East Indian presence (in countries such as Guyana and 
T rinidad East Indians constitute approximately half of the population). In fact, 
Cezair-Thompson’s True History of Paradise begins with the burial of a young 
Indo-Jamaican woman, an event that casts a shadow for the remainder of the 
novel. This chapter, though, will focus on the Chinese Diaspora, since it pro-
vides a focus for Powell’s novel and her conceptualization of passage.
During the past fifteen years Chinese of the Caribbean have provided liter-
ary interpretations of creolized experience in the Caribbean. Among others these 
include Willi Chen’s vignettes of comic violence in King of the Carnival and Other 
Stories (1988), set in T rinidad; Easton Lee’s poetry collection From  Behind the 
Counter (1998) and Victor Chang’s short story “Light in the Shop” (1997), set in 
Jamaica; Jan Lo Shinebourne’s The Last English Plantation (1986) and Timepiece 
(1988), novels about Indo-Chinese women in the context of Guyanese self-deter-
mination; Meiling Jin’s Gifts from My Mother (1985) and Songs of the Boatwoman 
(1996), poetry and stories of Chinese Guyanese Diaspora. More recently, there 
are Jamaican poets like Staceyann Chin and Lori Tsang, who have performed their 
work in New York. Much earlier was Severo Sarduy’s novel of Cuban cultural 
multiplicity, which plays on the instability (and absurdity) of language and mean-
ing and the search for a Chinese opera diva in El  Barrio Chino, De donde son los 
cantantes (1967).
Each writer offers a markedly different vision of creolized culture and cul-
tural politics. The creative impulse also reveals a desire to inscribe narratives of 
Chinese Diaspora into an inclusive Caribbean narrative and history. Severo Sar-
duy, himself a Cuban with Chinese ancestry, expressed this sentiment when he 
emphasized that Chinese culture, along with the African and Spanish, was at the 
center of Cuban identity formation. He went so far as to state in an interview: 
“Los chinos han sido muy importantes en Cuba porque, aparte de su influencia en 
el orden cultural, estan en el centro de la concepcion del mundo cubano.”
3 Jamaican 
writers Powell and Cezaire-Thompson include the Chinese in works that draw on 
the inheritance of colonialism and the contestations of race and gender. Powell 
and Cezair-Thompson write about the Chinese in the context of Creole culture, 
a concept that has been placed on the margins of Chinese diasporic discourses. In 
their works, creolization emerges as an “historically affected socio-cultural con-
tinuum” but does so in terms that expand this continuum to also include Asians 
in the making of Jamaican history and culture.
Creolization in Chinese diasporic study has remained marginal until recently. 
The “immigrant narrative” has dominated representations of Chinese diasporas, 
calling on tropes of immigrant success, “middleman” roles, cultural traditions, 
and generational conflict. Both Powell and Cezair-Thompson, however, write 
cultural narratives that emerge from the conflict and cooperation of different 
pal-mara-18.indd   266pal-mara-18.indd   266 7/29/08   9:40:14 AM7/29/08   9:40:14 AM


--- PAGE 276 ---
Linking African and Asian in Passing and Passage 267
racial groups, which is not a benign cultural process but one fraught with contest-
ing claims of raced and gendered survivals. In both novels, the Chinese characters 
are grocers whose shops are burned down. Cezair-Thompson makes reference to 
the Anti-Chinese Riots of 1918. Powell makes a shop-burning the central event 
of her novel. With this narrative she hoped to open dialogue rather than foreclose 
it: “I wanted to convey the idea of a Chinese history in Jamaica still writing itself, 
still making itself, still largely undocumented. . . . I wanted to create this open-
ended feel to the novel as another way of reflecting on the absence of a conclusive 
Chinese history and alerting readers to the fact that the story is simply part of an 
ongoing dialogue about the documentation of Chinese history and culture in the 
Caribbean.”
4 While still working on the novel in 1996, Powell also acknowledged 
the question of authority in this work, saying, “I can’t imagine what space I’ll 
occupy with the publication of The Pagoda.”
5 After completing the novel, Powell 
again referred to the imposition of authenticity, “It took me a long time to write 
this because I felt I didn’t know if I had any business writing about this. But again, 
I wanted to push myself.” The act of a black and female author writing from a 
diasporic location, creating “Mr. Lowe” as the main protagonist—a cross-dressing 
Chinese woman in nineteenth-century Jamaica who becomes intimately involved 
with a light-skinned Jamaican woman who is passing as white, no less—becomes 
immediately vulnerable to marketplace demands for authenticity and authority. 
Furthermore, Powell suggests a reading of diasporic formation as transgressive 
and subversive. In the process, the text opens questions of identity as removed 
from identity politics and more akin to questions of locating power.
Powell focuses on the “coolie” and small shopkeeper history at the turn of the 
century, whereas Cezair- Thompson focuses on the middle- and upper-class strata 
of Jamaica of 1980s. Powell’s descriptions of Chinese coolies and shopkeepers 
actually reveal grounding in historical research (not that this should be required 
of fictional work), while the text situates diasporic culture as a shifting renego-
tiation in itself, I focus here primarily on Powell’s use of passing and passage as 
doubled-edged tropes that construct a Chinese diasporic narrative as linked to 
African diasporic experience in the history of colonialism and nation-building.
6 
Although passing and passage bring cross-racial linkage in The Pagoda, they also 
destabilize the racial narrative, resulting in a creative interpretation of Diaspora as 
a continually challenged formation. For this reason—the linkage between Asian 
and African diasporic experience—a reading of such works might offer interven-
tions in the fields of Asian American, Asian Diaspora, and Caribbean studies. 
Identifying a linkage in itself is not necessarily of great significance, but rather 
more interesting are the tropes and methods that both writers have used to con-
struct these linkages (I use the term “linked” to suggest commonality and shared 
history but not equivalency or homogeneity in experience).
What is unusual about Powell’s and Cezair-Thompson’s novels is that both 
implicitly and explicitly link the Chinese to Africans via the middle passage. Pow-
ell and Cezair-Thompson (to a lesser degree) depict the Chinese transoceanic pas-
sage in terms of the “coolie trade,” including details on the more slave-like aspects 
pal-mara-18.indd   267pal-mara-18.indd   267 7/29/08   9:40:14 AM7/29/08   9:40:14 AM


--- PAGE 277 ---
Transnational Blackness268
of the “coolie passage.” In actuality, both authors produce a Caribbean story 
of the passage that hybridizes features of the coolie passage to both the former 
English and the former Spanish Caribbean and that hybridizes the history of both 
Chinese indentured laborers and Chinese kidnapped slaves, although it is the lat-
ter history that is least known, although it is well-documented. Like the Africans 
who preceded them, Chinese coolies were brought to the Americas in the holds 
of European and American ships, “under the hatches.”
7 Some Chinese journeyed 
voluntarily but large numbers were taken by force, The trafficking of Chinese 
coolies to Cuba was known as the “coolie-slave trade.”
8 In this case, labor histori-
ans conclude that the majority of the almost quarter-million Chinese of the Span-
ish colonies of Cuba and Peru were taken against their will, with approximately 
50 percent mortality within eight years. The fact that newspapers documented 
sixty-eight Chinese coolie mutinies on coolie ships, some resulting in total death 
of the human cargo, suggests that the Chinese were hardly free emigrants at sea.
9 
The term “coolie” comes from the Hindi kuli, meaning “bonded labor” and the 
Chinese ku li, meaning “bitter labor.” By including this history, both authors 
offer Caribbean narratives that provide linkage between Asian and African labor 
histories in the Caribbean.
10 The creative narrating of the passage allows for the 
tracing of diasporic emergence and process in profoundly human and sometimes 
violent terms.
The representation of diasporic culture as mainly predicated on “process” 
rather than the recuperation of “origin” is illustrated when Jamaican novelists like 
Powell and Cezair-Thompson offer “memories” of the passage. The question of 
origin, “Where do I come from?” becomes eclipsed by questions of emergence 
and process, such as, “How did I come to be?”
11 Powell’s novel emphasizes more 
of the “how” and not just the “where.” The protagonist asks in a moment of 
frustration: “What would it matter whether or not his daughter knew how he’d 
arrived there on the island exactly and why? What would it matter how he and 
Cecil had lived down in the gut of that ship? How he and Miss Sylvie lived up 
there in that house all these years? How the daughter was born and who were the 
rightful parents?”
12 The protagonist’s preoccupations concern remembering the 
“how.” Likewise, Cezair-Thompson’s character Mr. Ho Sing arrives aboard the 
Prince Alexander (an actual ship that arrived in Jamaica in the 1880s). He tells 
his story but dwells little on a story of origin. Instead, he emphasizes the “how”: 
“Awright, awright, I goin’ tell you how I reach Jamaica. But keep in mind what I 
really want to tell you ’bout is Miss Rema and Marshal Bloom, an’ how a ’ooman 
an’ a racehorse did mek an ole man life sweet.”
13 Of the nine pages devoted to 
Mr. Ho Sing’s monologue, only one paragraph refers to his village in China. Mr. 
Ho Sing’s “me one dream” is captured instead in a symbol of motion and risk: 
Marshal Bloom, a racehorse. Around Mr. Ho Sing’s deathbed the family awaits 
his last words. Mumbling, he clutches the shirt of a Chinese translator, Perhaps he 
will whisper, “Take me back to China.” Instead, the translator says, to the surprise 
of the family, “Him say ‘Gimme one adem Benson an’ Hedges.’ A ripple went 
through the room, the hilarity of it all, the old man begging a cigarette, not in 
pal-mara-18.indd   268pal-mara-18.indd   268 7/29/08   9:40:14 AM7/29/08   9:40:14 AM


--- PAGE 278 ---
Linking African and Asian in Passing and Passage 269
Chinese, but in the Jamaican patois that they all spoke” (9). Mr. Ho Sing emerges 
as a primary Jamaican character and an example of “Asian Creoleness,”14 speaking 
in the richness of patois. Cezair-Thompson noted in an interview that “Mr. Ho 
Sing is the one that I write most purely in the dialect.”15
It is this passage that makes Powell’s and Cezair-Thompson’s works of particu-
lar interest. Powell described her writing about the passage as a gnawing desire to 
know what happened on “that other middle passage from China to the Caribbean, 
where immigrants died from sadness or starvation or suffocation or infectious dis-
ease on board ships where they were beaten to death if suspected of revolt, where 
so many vessels sunk or were gutted by fires and the charred, bloated bodies were 
swallowed by the jagged jaws of circling sharks.”
16 This description of the Chinese 
coolie passage echoes historical accounts of the coolie traffic, one that profited 
British, American, and Spanish empiric trades (three of the top five leaders in the 
coolie traffic and the African slave traffic). The Chinese coolie passage was so rife 
with inhumanities and brutalities that it was commonly called “the buying and 
selling of pigs.”
17 Powell’s novel concurs with numerous published accounts of 
the time, many being testimonials by Chinese coolies themselves.18 Her inclusion 
of this history offers a basis for a shared Chinese and African narrative of forced 
labor in the Caribbean. The novel points out the deception and false contracts 
and indicates how Chinese were “captured and taken prisoner, kidnapped and 
sold to agents with foreign ships” (43). Powell notes the shame experienced by the 
buying and selling of countrymen: “Then they would become speechless again, 
broken down and ashamed at how they had been sold like dogs by their own, 
crimps working for the dirty foreigners” (43). In The Pagoda, images of the pas-
sage and metaphors of ship voyage repeatedly appear: the ship’s hull, the darkness 
and lurching, shelves and sailcloth, the rats, “the great undulating vessel.”
In the end, Lowe attempts to build a community center that is fashioned as a 
pagoda, a place that marks “arrival.” Obviously, the pagoda is symbolic of Lowe’s 
attempts to make space for his creolized descendants in a Jamaican narrative. 
The novel ends, however, with the pagoda in a precarious state, sporadically built 
and not finalized. The notion of creolization as an open-ended trope takes on an 
added dimension of process when Powell’s treatment of the body is included as an 
integral strand of diasporic experience.
Mr. Lowe and the “Terrain of his Body”
In The Pagoda, the experience of the passage is inseparable from experience of 
the body, gender, sexuality, and power; this inseparability of history, culture, and 
the body becomes the basis for experience of Diaspora and creolization. Like 
the African passage, the Chinese passage to the Caribbean was one that involved 
violation of the body under the maritime state. It is on the ship that Lowe is 
almost killed and then forced to serve the captain’s sexual needs. Lowe is not 
“sure he would make it to the island alive, or in one piece, whole” (1998, 98). 
Powell, however, locates Lowe’s passing and passage from the beginning. Lowe’s 
pal-mara-18.indd   269pal-mara-18.indd   269 7/29/08   9:40:14 AM7/29/08   9:40:14 AM


--- PAGE 279 ---
Transnational Blackness270
past is described as that of a girl who was dressed as a boy by her doting father, a 
poor coffin maker and former shipbuilder who was sixty by the time Lowe was 
conceived. Eventually, Lowe is given away as a girl-wife, as a debt payment, to 
a pedophilic “old cripple” (243). It is from this situation that Lowe breaks away 
and boards a coolie ship, where again Lowe dresses as a boy.
The Chinese passage, domain of a male migration narrative, becomes unfixed 
by the insertion of Lowe,
19 Although Chinese migrations to the Americas were 
dominated by men, Chinese and East Indian women did arrive in smaller num-
bers in the West Indies during the nineteenth century.
20 “Passage” and “passing” 
become established as concurrent strands of boundary crossing and transgression 
in Diaspora. As Lowe’s life progresses, he deploys multiple identities; he becomes 
“father,” “mother,” “husband,” “lover,” “whore,” and “shopkeeper.” Passing, in 
this case, becomes more than a binary course (the passing from “one” to the 
“other”). Lowe engages in multiple, simultaneous passings. Powell’s work allows 
for the reading of Diaspora as a passage through cultural formation with deliber-
ate deployment of social and sexual capital. Powell adopts the narrative conceit 
of referring to the woman Lowe as “he” and “Mr. Lowe” throughout the text, in 
keeping with “the fabulous masquerade that was his life” (33).
Thus “passing” occurs in the meta-narrative; the references to Lowe as “he” 
and “Mr.” continue long after the early revelation of his sex. The continued ref-
erence to Lowe as “he” by the author, reader, and imagined characters replicates 
the struggle over the terrain and ownership of Lowe’s body. At the same time, it 
allows for transgressive recognition of Lowe’s performance as both a “man” and a 
“woman.” This reading of the text raises the necessary question: How should one 
refer to Lowe? As “Lau A-yin,” his/her Chinese name as revealed at the end of the 
story? As Ms. Lowe? As “she” who is “Mr. Lowe”? As “Mrs. Lowe,” since Lowe 
and Sylvie are living together under the pretense of marriage? Perhaps the ques-
tion in itself is limiting: “How should one refer to Lowe?” implies the limits of 
language and the totalizing nature of naming. But for the purposes of consistency 
with the text’s narrative strategy, I refer to Mr. Lowe as “he” while also referring 
to Lowe’s experiences as a woman who performs masculine gender. In this sense, 
The Pagoda offers possibilities for a reading that ruptures standardized narrative 
treatments of gendered body and mind,
This litany of Lowe’s multiple questions leads one to ask: Is this a Caribbean 
Orientalism? The text invites such a reading—the familiar recitation of exotic 
Asian, the mysterious Other, feminized native, deceptive “Oriental” on the island 
of Jamaica.
21 The use of the “pagoda” as a Chinese symbol in the novel also smacks 
of a touristic orientalizing of Lowe’s past. Although these aspects certainly invite 
an Orientalist critique, another kind of reading exposes contradictions. Lowe is 
not passive (partly what “Oriental” implies); Lowe is not “feminine” (he resists 
this categorization); and Lowe disrupts essentialist notions of gender and sexuality 
(partly what “Orientalism” implies). Lowe’s mysteriousness and deceptiveness are 
juxtaposed with those of Miss Sylvie, the deceptive Jamaican passing as white.
pal-mara-18.indd   270pal-mara-18.indd   270 7/29/08   9:40:14 AM7/29/08   9:40:14 AM


--- PAGE 280 ---
Linking African and Asian in Passing and Passage 271
For both of them, their deceptiveness is posed as survival. The contradictions 
invite a reading that accounts for subversion. Lowe engages in a struggle with 
racialized and gendered hierarchies that ultimately lead to a web of masking 
and unmasking by various parties. At times, the novel reads like a postmodern, 
cross-dressing telenovela
22 with identities destabilized and confounded: Lowe as 
a woman passing as a man is raped by the ship captain Cecil. Lowe bears the 
captain’s child in secret, a baby girl, and continues to masquerade as a man. Lowe 
cohabits with a white Jamaican woman named Miss Sylvie, whom Cecil intro-
duces to Lowe. Lowe’s daughter is misled to believe that Sylvie is her mother and 
Lowe is her father. Sylvie’s black servant burns down Cecil’s shop and Cecil in it. 
Sylvie later reveals herself to be an “octoroon” who is passing as white, has mur-
dered her white husband, and has given away her three dark-skinned babies for 
fear of being discovered as black; Lowe engages in sexual relations with men and 
women and finally falls in love with Sylvie, even though she leaves him.
The plot thickens and it is easy to become engrossed in this (or dismiss this as) 
high drama.
23 Yet this is drama that breaches all the conventions of class, color, 
and sex. Lowe thinks of the complex trap that he is in: “Here he was Chinese, and 
here he was co-habiting with this white-skinned woman, Miss Sylvie, and here 
he was now living in the biggest house in the district with a dark-skinned maid 
and a dark-skinned yard boy” (108). The many plot twists speak to the complex 
codes of racial and class tensions in nineteenth-century Jamaica while implicating 
gender and sexuality. Lowe’s life becomes a power struggle of resistance, negotia-
tion, and strategies of “passing.” As a Chinese woman who performs as “he” and 
“she,” Lowe is a survivor but an “outsider” in the hierarchies of race and gender. 
The regulation of social status becomes directly tied to regulation of the racial-
ized body. Lowe curses “the audacity of these porcelain alabaster people to want 
to control his life so thoroughly and completely” (107). Regulation of the racial-
ized body is illustrated in Lowe’s relationship with the ship captain Cecil. Lowe 
attempts to kill Cecil twice, yet Lowe also realizes that he needs Cecil to survive. 
Cecil rapes Lowe but then becomes Lowe’s benefactor and sets up Lowe as “Mr. 
Lowe,” the manager of a small shop that Cecil owns. Cecil also introduces Lowe 
to fair-skinned Miss Sylvie, who provides a “front” of respectability for Lowe 
while Cecil is mostly away engaging in the coolie trade. Lowe is sponsored yet 
confined by a white ship captain and a “white” woman of means. She is one of 
“the porcelain alabaster people who for decades through marriage tried to bleach 
stains of black Africa from their skins” (91). Ironically, it is the captain’s coolie 
trafficking, the exploitation of other Chinese, that provides the capital for Lowe 
(and Sylvie) to survive while entrapping Lowe in a lifelong and life-threatening 
secret. Lowe, as a liminal figure in the making of creolized culture, stands as a 
symbol of its limitations and boundaries. Powell’s novel speaks to codes enforced 
upon the body and the complicity of the community in constructing the other to 
reinforce social “order.” The chain of blackmail in the novel implies the regulatory 
power of such codes, with the most successful blackmail entailing life-threatening 
consequences. Within Sylvie’s house are contained the knowledge of “crimes” 
pal-mara-18.indd   271pal-mara-18.indd   271 7/29/08   9:40:14 AM7/29/08   9:40:14 AM


--- PAGE 281 ---
Transnational Blackness272
against normative society: transgressions of race, gender, sexuality, and class. Syl-
vie as black woman passes as a high-class white woman and wife, and Lowe as 
a destitute Chinese woman passes as a male shopkeeper and husband. They are 
sleeping with each other.
Lowe wonders if the town found them out, “would they just descend on the 
house with their tins of kerosene and catch them on fire? Would they parade both 
him and Miss Sylvie through the road, stoning them with rocks and lashing them 
with insults? Would they tie them to posts and leave them there in the scorching 
sun to die?” (129). As a means of survival, Lowe continues his association with 
Cecil and Sylvie—as Lowe says, “we all do things to save our lives” (7). These 
things are uneasy associations based on punitive constructs of knowledge, power, 
and implicit violence sanctioned by a communalism of heterosexual and racial 
strictures.
24 Lowe “could detect the precise moment at which innocent conversa-
tions verged on violence, when a demure innuendo could leap out of hand, when 
boundaries were crossed” (118).
As a Chinese person, Lowe is made aware of the clear line between whites and 
“others.” As a result, he resists Sylvie by refusing to respond during sex and yet 
allows Sylvie’s performance of sex to continue. In their most intimate moments, 
Lowe’s experience of sex with Sylvie becomes conflated with racialized and gen-
dered betrayal: “For who is to say she wouldn’t fold up her fantasies into him and 
turn him further into something he wasn’t, as his father had done and then Cecil? 
And who is to say she wouldn’t abandon him once her mission was accomplished. 
Who is to say?” (113–14), Sylvie’s need for Lowe contains scripted roles of power. 
Sylvie needs “Mr. Lowe” as a “husband” publicly (particularly as she continues 
her relationship with a “Miss Whitley” on the side) but also desires that Lowe 
privately wear corsets and be a “wife.” Lowe resists being feminized as the wife, 
not because he rejects femaleness but because he rejects the disempowerment 
associated with Sylvie’s fantasy. The instance of being Chinese and wife and les-
bian lover to Sylvie, in this moment, becomes tripled in its potentials for Lowe’s 
disempowerment.
25 Likewise, Captain Cecil’s need for Lowe contains scripted 
roles of power and fantasy. It is ambiguous whether Cecil fantasizes Lowe as a 
“girl” or a “boy,” particularly as he cuts Lowe’s hair and dresses him, again, as a 
boy. The captain’s assaults on Lowe are from behind: “his callused hands rough on 
Lowe’s shoulders, his breathing quick and sharp in Lowe’s ears; Cecil’s face buried 
in the back of Lowe’s head” (96). With “everyone else having claims to his body” 
(179), the struggle over “cultural” expression is the struggle over the body and the 
mind. Lowe’s transgendered actions reveal a certain agency that Lowe decides to 
exercise even at great risk. Thus Powell creates a character of the Diaspora who 
breaks social taboos upheld by normative conventions.
Lowe and “So He Operate”
Powell’s linking of Lowe and Sylvie in passage and passing, Chinese and African, 
becomes the novel’s beginning marker for understanding the island’s multiracial 
pal-mara-18.indd   272pal-mara-18.indd   272 7/29/08   9:40:15 AM7/29/08   9:40:15 AM


--- PAGE 282 ---
Linking African and Asian in Passing and Passage 273
past. Lowe and Sylvie both contend with systems of color and capital that struc-
ture the terms of self and community. Both Lowe and Sylvie are blackmailed 
and held under debt by Cecil, who is described as coming from a family of slave 
traders (67). In fact, Lowe’s passage is aboard a former slaver ship that Cecil 
inherits. Slave ships were the models for coolie ships, and the same slave-trading 
nations, shippers, investors, and plantations reaped profits by turning to the coolie 
trade.
26 Powell also links the African and coolie passages by indicating the trans-
atlantic route (25, 45). Coolies were taken to the Caribbean via both transpacific 
and transatlantic routes. The novel’s connection of coolie ships to slave ships, and 
their routes, is reflective of the maritime history and global economy of the nine-
teenth century. Whereas Lowe is indebted to a coolie trader, Sylvie lives under the 
shadow of her first husband, a slave trader, a “big government man with money 
and clout and a face to hold up and a lot of people working for him and capturing 
black people and still selling them” (143, also 219). Coolie trade and slave trade 
cast shadows over Lowe’s and Sylvie’s lives and order the social structure in which 
they live. Sylvie reveals her own coercion as a black woman under colonial regimes 
of color and class. Sylvie’s husband, a powerful white man, discovers that she is a 
“nigger” (146) and plans to kill her “for shaming him like that” (146). As Sylvie 
reveals, she kills him first: “‘I kill a man, Lowe . . . I kill a man, a white man. My 
husband’” (142). When Sylvie reveals herself, Lowe feels for the first time that he 
understood “her silences and her double life,” and he saw “that their fates were 
linked together” (144). It is only after this revelation that Lowe begins to love 
Sylvie (178, 222). Yet Lowe’s secret euphoria becomes short-lived as he thinks, 
“There was still the daughter to contend with, his marriage to Miss Sylvie, and the 
fabulous masquerade that was his life” (33). The ramifications of the social and 
racial configurations that the colonial system created still remain.
Powell’s vision of Jamaica’s, history of color, and creolization reveals the strug-
gle and the fissures. She stated in an interview:
I’ve been thinking about the racial/ethnic/political/social spaces that those Jamai-
cans who are neither of African nor European descent occupy. About the space 
they occupy in the minds of the dominant racial group. In researching the history 
of the Chinese in Jamaica, I’ve had to reflect on the images of the Chinese that are 
portrayed in Caribbean literature and culture. and the racial fears and stereotypes 
of the Chinese I absorbed while growing up in Jamaica. It’s been making me think, 
too, about the East Indians and the other non-white/black groups and their experi-
ences of exile and displacement, their experiences of otherness and of home, there 
on the island.
27
Powell illustrates the operations of colonialism that foment friction between 
Africans and Asians. Lowe comes to a painful awareness of being despised and 
misunderstood, Lowe refers to the black violence against Chinese as “common 
accord for them to burn down the Chinese people’s shops. Common accord for 
them to loot. The more militant types intending to clear his [Lowe’s] people out 
of the country” (32). In public, Lowe is even avoided by an old Chinese restau-
rant proprietor, whose face tightens when Lowe attempts to speak a few words of 
pal-mara-18.indd   273pal-mara-18.indd   273 7/29/08   9:40:15 AM7/29/08   9:40:15 AM


--- PAGE 283 ---
Transnational Blackness274
Chinese (56). The Chinese warn each other not to amass publicly, speak Chinese, 
or draw attention to themselves. The country is composed of “men of a million 
assortments of brown,” but it is “erased of its original inhabitants” and “composed 
of a transplanted citizenry” (55). Lowe’s experience of “transplantation” and the 
island’s creolization is an uneven and conflicted one in a nation and political 
process that is not automatically inclusive in itself. The novel also indicates a new 
kind of presence; Lowe notices “America’s growing involvement” and “increasing 
unemployment” (168). As Lowe struggles with the realization “they had been 
brought there only to supply cheap labor and keep down wages. They had been 
brought there only to keep the Negro population in check” (45). The burning of 
the shop hangs over Lowe as he attempts to rebuild his own trust in the people 
around him and grapples with his own anger. Lowe begins to resent the villagers 
for their resentment of him—a circle of suspicion and hate. Yet Lowe knows little 
of their lives and history and they know little of him.
Social relationships become fractured due to interests of the ruling class: “the 
few Europeans who controlled the country, ever since they arrived” (6). This 
divisive history erodes Lowe’s relations with both the villagers and his daugh-
ter. Although the term “benefactor” imparts positive connotations, Cecil aids 
Lowe’s survival but only on Cecil’s terms—terms that isolate Lowe and divide 
Chinese populations from black ones. Lowe’s attempts to build relations with 
black Jamaicans are thwarted by the self-serving actions of Cecil, “for every time 
Cecil came, it disrupted the relationship he [Lowe] had built up with the villag-
ers. . . . Every time Cecil came, he [Lowe] was assaulted with the memories of the 
ship” (95–96). Although Lowe recognizes the logic of survival, he barely contains 
his anger, wanting Cecil dead for a life of entrapment, “shackled to the shop,” the 
target of unwanted envy and hostility. Lowe hides this history from the villagers 
and also from his daughter, thus resulting in familial estrangement: “For what else 
could he have said: that her father was a trickster, a rapist, a thief, a smuggler of 
illegal Chinese, a kidnapper, a madman, a demagogue?” (66).
It is a shop burning that destroys Cecil, who is sleeping in the shop. Here Pow-
ell rewrites history, as the burnings of Chinese shops in Jamaica resulted in the 
deaths of Chinese, not white men. The displacement of the Chinese shopkeep-
ers’ death with Cecil’s death skews the history of anti-Chinese violence and shop 
burnings. As a result, Powell’s novel sidesteps the ramifications of racialized “oth-
ering” and the loss of Chinese lives. But at the same time, the creative decision 
points to something deeper. The novel effectively narrates the conflict between 
Africans and Chinese but also shifts this conflict to African with Chinese against 
European. The creative decision displaces the localized violence and points the 
finger at the macro-structure of colonial politics. Cecil, the white man-capitalist-
trader-owner, dies as a consequence of his profits and ownership of the people. 
Lowe gains a modicum of freedom upon Cecil’s death: “strangely enough he was 
relieved. . . . He felt clean and unburdened from the shop and from Cecil’s plans 
. . . somewhere deep inside he knew that for the first time he could sort out what 
it was he wanted to do with his life. . . . He could rethink again those reasons that 
pal-mara-18.indd   274pal-mara-18.indd   274 7/29/08   9:40:15 AM7/29/08   9:40:15 AM


--- PAGE 284 ---
Linking African and Asian in Passing and Passage 275
had brought him to the island and try to live out some of his dreams” (32). The 
burning of the shop fulfills one of Lowe’s deepest desires, as he had wished Cecil 
dead before.
Lowe’s History “From the Edges”
What the minority voice cannot tell becomes history unrecorded: “He would 
have no history for his daughter; he had told her nothing, taught her nothing” 
(213). The narrative depicts Lowe’s isolation as cultural isolation driven by colo-
nial politics rather than simply “cultural differences” and in this way anchors the 
culturalist argument in terms of power formation. Lowe’s and his daughter’s entry 
into Jamaican society are accompanied by the resentment of white merchants 
and black villagers and the burning of the shop (57). Lowe manages to place his 
daughter in a “convent school which only as an exception admitted the children 
of the Chinese and those of the porcelain alabasters” (114) and manages to make 
a meager living in a shop while local villagers watch with simmering envy. But it 
is the telling of history that becomes critical for Lowe, something that implies the 
sharing and knowing of history as critical to the building of a creole culture, that 
is, the inclusion of multiple histories. By Lowe telling his story, Powell’s narrative 
writes the story of the Chinese passage into a Jamaican narrative. Lowe attempts 
to share the passage with his grandson, couched in “storytelling,” calling Cecil 
(the boy’s grandfather) a man who did “try hard” (70) yet also revealing him as a 
man who, “two, three times a day he bring them [Chinese] out for air, walk them 
up and down the deck, a chain gang of them clanking as they drag the iron. He 
hose them down with jaze and then water to kill crab lice and then leave them 
there little to dry off, to yabber at one another. . . . Half of them were already 
dead’ and thrown overboard or just leaning up next to one another, stiff with 
rigor mortis” (71). Lowe’s telling also leads to a lasting relationship with Afro-
Jamaican Omar, who stays with Lowe in the end. It is Lowe’s telling that help him 
(and Omar) to make sense of the circumstances under which Lowe came to and 
entered Jamaica. It is repeatedly reinscribed as the memory enters his mind over 
and over, as “the shelves of his mind tumbled again, down into the rusty hull of 
Cecil’s ship” (47).
As Omar tells Lowe that the way to tell the story is “from the edges” (228). 
Images and sounds of slapping waves, decaying maps, tied wrists, the ship’s hum, 
steps of men, and a dark cabin repeatedly enter “the edges” of Lowe’s conscious-
ness. At moments, the shop, the ship, and the house overlap as metaphors of 
containment and with this Lowe’s identities as shopkeeper, whore, and wife. At 
the shop, he paces between the “barred windows of the shop that looked out 
at the squalling rain, and back again to the locked door that faced the empty 
square. And back again to the barred window that looked out at the silvery slant 
of persistent squalls” (97). This echoes Lowe’s ship passage and confinement and 
his earlier circumstance as a girl-wife waiting behind the “barred windows of a 
house” (179). Ship, house, and island become conflated; the dynamics of passage 
pal-mara-18.indd   275pal-mara-18.indd   275 7/29/08   9:40:15 AM7/29/08   9:40:15 AM


--- PAGE 285 ---
Transnational Blackness276
and passing, and the politics of class, color, and gender are accentuated in the 
power structures of a coolie ship, ship-as-island, house as society. These become a 
combined metaphor for a life story that Lowe must negotiate.
The term “whore” also becomes a metaphor that links the colonial underclass 
for Lowe and Omar. Repeatedly, “whore” enters Lowe’s telling of passage and 
passing as a figurative and literal term that speaks to Lowe being prostituted by 
Cecil on several levels. When Lowe charges that Cecil “turned me into his whore,” 
Omar replies, “He turn everybody into whore, sir, man and woman. Young or 
old. He blackmail everybody, sir. So he operate” (227). Lowe puts it to Omar:
And then there was the pregnancy, and all through that he was so good. I didn’t 
know ’bout the man markets, I didn’t know bout the hellish plantations that kill 
people with work. You know how many Chinese die on the ship with me? I didn’t 
know which life was better, the one underneath him whenever he want, the one tie 
up, shackle underneath the ship. And then he sew the clothes so people wouldn’t 
know, in the heart of night he smuggle me out. Put me up at some friend or other. 
Pay some woman to help me deliver the baby, strengthen me again. Then he give 
me the shop. Give me the money, but every time coming back for more of me, 
wanting to humiliate me, remind me. (227)
The allegory of race and labor and their costs is summed up by Omar, who repeats, 
“Yes, sir, so he operate.”
The ownership of Lowe as underclass Chinese is marked by his elevation to 
the “whore” of the captain. Lowe becomes the captain’s “mistress,” while below 
are “eight hundred of us [Chinese] pack up down there. Eight hundred. And 
you should see how little the ship, . . . [f]ive hundred of them kidnap. . . . Yes, 
Kidnap. Drag out of bed deep into the night. Tie up and beat up and bundled 
off”(68). Lowe’s limited ability to escape is compounded with fear that hordes 
of men might descend on him if he should resist the captain. Lowe also fears 
“being thrown down below into that sewer of human waste with the other Chi-
nese” (100). This passage thus reinforces the forced art of passing: the art of con-
sciousness and of controlling one’s movement, being, and expression. It becomes 
a technique of survival for Lowe on board, as it would be for the remainder of his 
life, as woman and immigrant made “other” and “illegal.” Lowe “learned how to 
stifle sneezes and hold back coughs, how to lock the muscles in his rectum and 
tighten his kidneys, how to squat for long long hours behind crates of shimmer-
ing silk and handcrafted fans, dodge between cargoes of fuel tea and silver dishes 
wrapped with ropes, dart between towering columns that divided the ship into 
small, neat boroughs. And always there was the fear clanging in his chest, thud-
ding in the veins by his head” (16–17). As the captain approaches, Lowe lunges 
out and stabs him in an unsuccessful defense. (This marks one of several times 
when Lowe initiates force—he later chokes his son-in-law and pulls a knife on 
Sylvie’s manservant. Lowe’s behaviors confound the stereotypical categorization 
of so-called passive-female or active-male behaviors.) The combination of sex, 
gender, class, and race evolve as the factors that characterize Lowe’s passage to 
pal-mara-18.indd   276pal-mara-18.indd   276 7/29/08   9:40:15 AM7/29/08   9:40:15 AM


--- PAGE 286 ---
Linking African and Asian in Passing and Passage 277
Jamaica. Lowe’s telling of this continues to the very end, when he writes a letter to 
his daughter, an act of passing down a “history.” The writing of the letter becomes 
a device for Lowe to address “past and future” to his daughter, who becomes the 
next generation in a creolized nation, marked by the legacy to which she was born 
as a biracial daughter, conceived by rape on a coolie ship and now married to an 
Afro-Jamaican.
Lowe and the Writing of “Surprise” History
Powell’s novel suggests a definition of belonging for the Chinese in the commit-
ment to stay and build community. Lowe becomes vested in maintaining a claim 
to a “narrative” of Jamaica, even after the blackmail, the antagonism of the local 
villagers, and the destruction of his shop. Lowe remains committed to his life 
in Jamaica with dreams of opening a community center or school. When Sylvie 
suggests that they leave Jamaica, he is incensed: “Jesus Christ, where? We belong 
here, this where we live” (142). For him, there is no such thing as a “fresh history,” 
something that Sylvie offers by proposing that she take him to another island. 
She repeatedly talks to Lowe about moving to Barbados or Panama (149), Lowe 
rejects the idea as simply undesirable and does not “want to live out anybody 
else’s fantasy. . . . He wanted to have the Pagoda right here on the island” (145). 
Lowe’s commitment to community-building and to Jamaica makes him more a 
part of Jamaica’s Creole identity. Still there is cultural negotiation and creolization 
emerges as a loss of language. Among other things, Lowe writes of the pagoda to 
his daughter, suggesting that the daughter might learn about Chinese-Jamaican 
history and hear some of the Chinese language that was erased. Importantly, it 
is fellow Jamaicans who aid in the building of the pagoda and who eventually 
become Lowe’s closest friends, Jake and Omar. The diasporic story, as presented 
here, resists the standardized understanding of Diaspora as the extended practice of 
maintaining heterosexual structures and reproducing patriarchal traditions. In the 
last version of the letter Lowe writes to his daughter, he begins with a queering of 
his history. The sharing of his body as politic becomes an act of claiming and writ-
ing his history and body. His body had become “a familiar source of commentary” 
(172) for Cecil, Sylvie, and members of the community but now also for himself. 
Although Lowe’s “passing” is constructed as a strategic method of survival, it is 
also an act of queering and transgendering Lowe’s diasporic history such that it is 
not easily commodified or homogenized.
28 Yet Lowe’s letters are never sent dur-
ing the course of the book. Lowe’s history is tenuous and contingent, along with 
Miss Sylvie’s “decaying correspondence” and Cecil’s moldy, disintegrating travel 
journal “with pages that had been ripped out”(65). Lowe’s own writing of history 
is only viewed by himself. Thus Lowe’s own desires are simultaneously intimated, 
“presented,” yet still unvoiced and unshared history. He discovers that “People 
don’t like surprises. They don’t like the truth” (240). Moments of Lowe’s struggle 
are presented as grim yet dryly humorous. When Lowe tells Omar point-blank, 
“You know I’m a woman,” and begins to strip, confirming Omar’s suspicions, 
pal-mara-18.indd   277pal-mara-18.indd   277 7/29/08   9:40:15 AM7/29/08   9:40:15 AM


--- PAGE 287 ---
Transnational Blackness278
Omar panics and says, “Oh God Mr. Lowe”: and runs out the room. The surprise 
is an historical act outside the narratives of normative society. Lowe’s truth is one 
of several truths or perhaps the resistance to fixing one “truth.” The novel implies 
that “official” history is maintained yet subverted by the people on another level. 
Those in Sylvie’s house, along with people in the village, have known of Lowe’s 
passing for a long time. As Omar once said to him, “These eyes don’t miss any-
thing at all, Mr. Lowe. I see everything. I know what is going on in that house. I 
know the show” (126). As well, a village woman named Joyce Fine informs Lowe 
that his laugh is what gave him away as a woman and “sometimes is a walk, a 
look, sometimes is a silence, a dis-ease” (153). She adds: “But you know, Lowe, 
everybody seducible. Man or woman” (153). The “disease” is one of fear, as Lowe 
apprehensively thinks of Joyce’s policeman husband. (The brief story also alludes 
to the rumored cause of the Anti-Chinese Riot in 1918: a relationship between a 
Chinese shopkeeper’s wife and a policeman.) Joyce’s “wink” at Lowe, her complicit 
knowledge of Lowe’s passing, and her philosophy that everyone is sexual, whether 
“man or woman,” is also a “wink” shared by the villagers. The complicity of the 
villagers and Lowe is one of recognition but also one of boundaries that divide the 
unspoken from spoken and the official history from the “surprise” history. Lowe’s 
efforts become a constant struggle to write history or to claim his body. Lowe 
writes his surprise history in letters that seem to never get sent, and then he writes 
more. He signs the last one, “Lau A-yin,” his birth name. Still, throughout the 
novel Lowe has been unable to shake the name “Mr. Lowe.” Lowe has discovered 
that the power to name and represent becomes a struggle between society, state, 
and individual. Creole culture, with the need to name and represent the history 
of all its subjects, from its subjects, becomes an ongoing creolization that relies on 
continual challenge to its constitution, something that the novel implies by the 
writing of this letter and the writing of Lowe’s “body.”
Notes
 1. Patricia Powell, The Pagoda (New York: Knopf, 1998).
 2. Margaret Cezair-Thompson, The True History of Paradise (1999; repr. New York: Plume, 
2000).
 3. Emir Rodriguez Monegat, El Arte de Narrar (Caracas: Monte Avila Editores,1998), 277.
 4. Faith Smith, “An Interview with Patricia Powell,” Callaloo 19, no. 2 (1996): 324–29.
 5. Edward Brathwaite, The Development of Creole Society in Jamaica 1770–1820 (Oxford: 
Clarendon, 1977), 309–10. I also thank Donette Francis for suggestions regarding Creole 
identity during my revision of this chapter.
 6. Patricia Powell, “The Dynamics of Power and Desire in The Pagoda,” in Winds of Change, 
ed. Adele Newson and Linda Strong Leek (New York: Peter Lang, t 998), 194.
 7. Faith Smith, “An Interview with Patricia Powell,” Callaloo 19, no. 2 (1996), 324–29.
 8. Craig S. Semon, review of The Pagoda, by Patricial Powell, Mantachusett T elegram & 
Gazette, February 6, 2000, p. 6.
 9. I do not suggest a trope that is emptied of historical significance and experience. In the 
case of Chinese coolies, the trope is one of historical grounding. See Joan Dayan’s concerns 
pal-mara-18.indd   278pal-mara-18.indd   278 7/29/08   9:40:15 AM7/29/08   9:40:15 AM


--- PAGE 288 ---
Linking African and Asian in Passing and Passage 279
regarding the middle passage as metaphor in “Paul Gilroy’s Slaves, Ships, and Routes: The 
Middle Passage As Metaphor,” Research in African Literatures 27, no. 4:7–9.
 10. See Harper’s Monthly and the New York Herald Sun for articles during the 1850s to 1870s 
on American involvement in the coolie trade. See Juan Perez de la Riva, Juan Jimenez 
Pastrana, Jose Baltar, Basil Lubbock (maritime history), Evelyn Hu DeHart, Denise Helly, 
Gary Okihiro, and Rebecca Scott. Also see travel literature of the era. See Lisa Yun, “Under 
the Hatches,” Amerasia Journal (2001); and Lisa Yun and Ricardo Laremont, “Chinese 
Coolies and African Slaves,” Journal of Asian American Studies 4, no. 2 (June 2001).
 11. At the same time, the Chinese passage has been exploited and appropriated as propaganda 
for white labor politics. Conflating “coolie” passage with all Chinese immigration, some 
American politicians argued to halt Chinese immigration in the nineteenth century. See 
Stuart Lyman, “The Chinese Question and American Labor Historians,” New  Politics 
7, no. 4 (Winter 2000); and John Tchen, New York Before Chinatown: Orientalism and 
the Shaping of American Culture, 1776-1882 (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 
1999). Similarly, the “illegal” passages of Chinese and Africans in the twentieth century 
have been strategically used by the American media and politicians for bordering and 
consolidating an “American nation.”
 12. Powell, The Pagoda, 24.
 13. Cezair-Thompson, The True History of Paradise, 77.
 14. Also see Jean Bernabé, Patrick Chamoiseau, Raphael Confiant, and Mohamed B. Taleb 
Khyar, “In Praise of Creoleness,” Callaloo 13, no. 4 (Autumn 1990): 894, 886–909.
 15. Randall Kenan’s interview, “Margaret Cezair-Thompson,” BOMB, no. 69 (Fall 1999): 
55–59.
 16. Powell, The Pagoda, 190.
 17. Also see Loni Ding’s well-researched and award-winning documentary film Ancestors: Coo-
lies, Sailors, Settlers, which narrates coolie trade to the Americas, http://www.answers.com/
topic/ancestors-in-the-americas-coolies-sailors-settlers-tv-episode?cat=entertainment.
 18. See Eldon Griffin, Clippers and Consuls (Ann Arbor, MI: E
 dwards Brothers, 1938; repr. 
Taipei).
 19. Powell, Pagoda, 172.
 20. Also see Cezair-Thompson’s novel, in which Ho Sign’s second wife, Lim Su, arrives from 
the passage and never quite recovers. Cherry, the Ho Sing family matriarch, observes: 
“You don’t know what go on in dem faraway places, what kind a meanness go on ’pan dem 
ship” (254).
 21. See Lai, The Chinese in the West Indies, 149–53, 166–67; Crawford, Scenes from the History 
of the Chinese in Guyana, 32–36, 112; and Kirkpatrick, From  the Middle Kingdom to the 
New World, 65–20.
 22. See also various critiques of David Henry Hwang’s play M Butterfly (which includes a 
cross-dressing character who performs gender and racial fantasy) that interrogate the poli-
tics of body trace, orientalism, and subject performativity, such as Dorinne Kondo’s About 
Face (New York: Routledge, 1997); and David Eng’s essay “Heterosexuality in the Face of 
Whiteness,” in Q & A: Queer in Asian America, ed. David Eng and Alice Hom (Philadel-
phia: T emple University Press, 1998).
 23. The popular genre of televised Latin novellas is well-known for its particular brand of 
soap opera that often reinforces middle-class norms of color, class, and sexuality. I suggest 
the term “cross-dressing novella” to mean one that flip-flops norms while maintaining the 
genre of high drama.
 24. One New York Times reviewer dismissed the novel as a misconceived modem romance: 
“It can be a glorious thing to make a modem romance out of a remote time and person, 
to heighten the colors as you go along, painting pictures for the sake of having pictures. 
pal-mara-18.indd   279pal-mara-18.indd   279 7/29/08   9:40:15 AM7/29/08   9:40:15 AM


--- PAGE 289 ---
Transnational Blackness280
The trouble is that The Pagoda feels more like painting for the sake of painting, a technical 
exercise from an astonishingly fluent writer who may be suffering just a temporary pas-
sion deficiency (Michael Pye, review of The Pagoda, by Patricia Powell, New York Times, 
November 1, 1998, Sect. 7, p. T5).
 25. See Thomas Glave, “T oward a Nobility of the Imagination: Jamaica’s Shame,” Small Axe 
(March 2000): 122–25; Timothy Chin, “Jamaican Popular Culture, Caribbean Litera-
ture, and the Representation of Gay and Lesbian Sexuality in the Discourses of Race and 
Nation,” Small Axe (March 1999): 14–33; Timothy Chin, “‘Bullers’ and ‘Battymen’: 
Contesting Homophobia in Black Popular Culture and Contemporary Caribbean Litera-
ture,” Callaloo (Winter 1997): 127–41; Lawson Williams, “Homophobia and Gay Rights 
Activism in Jamaica,” Small Axe (March 2000): 107–11; and “Boom Bye-Bye Batty-Boy,” 
The Economist (February 17, 2001): 42.
 26. See also Richard Fung’s essay “Looking·for My Penis,” in Asian American Sexualities, ed. 
Russell Leong (New York: Routledge, 1996).
 27. Faith Smith, “An Interview with Patricia Powell,” Callaloo 19, no. 2 (1996): 324–29.
 28. Smith, “An Interview with Patricia Powell,” 328.
pal-mara-18.indd   280pal-mara-18.indd   280 7/29/08   9:40:15 AM7/29/08   9:40:15 AM


--- PAGE 290 ---
C HAPTER  19
Out of Chaos
Afro-Colombian Peace 
Communities and the Realities 
of War
Asale Angel-Ajani
Queremos vivir en paz
Como veníamos viviendo,
Que nos respeten la vida
Al pueblo indígena y negro.1
Displacement’s Lament
TWILIGHT FINALLY MANAGED TO BREAK THROUGH NIGHT’S BRUTAL EXCHANGE BETWEEN 
the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (FARC) and the Colombian military. In 
Andalucia, a small river community along a cuenca (a tributary) off the Río Atrato, 
we rattled our way through our morning rituals, bodies still sleeping, minds alert, our 
ears filtering out the sounds of the jungle for man-made chaos. Weeks of nocturnal 
combat piled on months of the presence of armed actors joined with years of threats, 
displacements, forced recruitment, and death and more death renders this a war zone. 
But this plot of land, this carved out community on top of a hill surrounded by sug-
arcane is more than just the space between warring armies. In this soil lives memory’s 
ghost. First words were spoken here. The trees contain the maps to dreams carefully 
crafted in the once quiet evenings. On the walls, sounds of laughter and first love 
are recorded.
This morning we move like mute ants, busy with the work of defiance. Older 
girl children gather up toddlers and corral young boys into order. Women crowd 
around an open flame to cook the last bit of food, and the men, the few that 
pal-mara-19.indd   281pal-mara-19.indd   281 7/29/08   9:38:06 AM7/29/08   9:38:06 AM


--- PAGE 291 ---
Transnational Blackness282
remain, tend to the boats down at the river. Visiting human rights activists and 
academics from Bogotá and the United States dissect time’s significance and cata-
logue the history of what cannot be taken on our journey. T ogether we defy the 
universal classifications that are the spoils of war: civilians, noncombatants, and 
collateral damage. Collectively, the women, men, and children of Andalucia, like 
many of the families who live up and down the river, resist the proselytizing of 
violence’s disciples. This is a Peace Community, one of fifty-nine that struggles to 
maintain a life of dignity in the midst of the reigning chaos of war.
We have little so we take everything, leaving only the shells of small houses 
and our souls that live in them. When a military helicopter hovers overhead, the 
sound of the blade slicing through the sky momentarily disorients us. We congre-
gate at the base of the Peace Community bandera, a white flag attached to a pole 
cut from a long tree branch.
The flag is a symbol of all the incalculable ways war has changed life’s rou-
tine. Widows and mothers of the disappeared have gone through the corridors 
of Hades’ knowledge and earned doctorates in steel-plated truths. Children have 
learned to restrain their laughter with thick ropes and have developed the habit of 
reading the invisible script of fear. These are dubious honors.
Forty years ago, peace was driven out of this country. Since then, Colombians 
were left with the corpse of soldiers, hollowed-out men and women who have 
tasted the power to give and take life. Their righteousness is sanctioned by the 
state or by their ideologies, all of which are fueled by greed. The North and 
South Americans, the Europeans, Israelis, and the Japanese all have a hand in the 
kidnapping of peace. But here, on the margins of the nation, in a place that is 
unseen by the eye of the cartographer, we have dared to envision a world of non-
violence. Hope in tomorrow and in our children’s tomorrow; faith in the beauty 
of love and humanity is what makes us subversive. Our will has made a home of 
our conviction.
We begin our descent to the river. We carry our future on our backs. Our eyes are 
braver than our mouths. They cast us forward into the unknown. Our feet compel 
us to stay for this will be the last time they touch the smooth earth of Andalucia. We 
are heading down river to the Peace Community of Costa de Oro where we will, for 
now, be safe. Our souls heave with excruciating sobs. Our memories of home drop 
from our bodies like birth. We are silent. The leaves look on as we pull our boats 
down the river and whisper their good-byes. The wind dances off the water, taking 
with it our secrets.
The dead speak in Colombia. So do the living, if one cares to listen. They con-
firm that Colombia has, in recent years, held the record for the worst human rights 
violations in the hemisphere. It has been the record keeper long before George W . 
Bush promised to extend the Clinton Administration’s 1.3 billion dollar aid pack-
age known as Plan Colombia. Well before 2000, the year Plan Colombia came 
into effect, the country was drowning in violence and had been for four decades. 
The violence displaced over two million people.
2 Colombia shares the long sad 
history of political violence that plagues Latin America and can count the United 
pal-mara-19.indd   282pal-mara-19.indd   282 7/29/08   9:38:06 AM7/29/08   9:38:06 AM


--- PAGE 292 ---
Out of Chaos 283
States among its most fervent accomplices. Since 1986, Mathew Knoester notes 
that more Colombians have died at the hands of the military and right-wing para-
military forces each year than “throughout the entire seventeen years of political 
repression in Chile under the Pinochet dictatorship.”
3 The Andean Commission 
of Jurist reported that in 1988 and 1989 there were eleven political killings a 
day. Between 1988 and 1992 there were 9,500 politically motivated assassina-
tions, 830 disappearances, and, in a period of just two years, 313 massacres. The 
victims were mostly poor rural farmers. As Noam Chomsky writes, “Throughout 
these years, as usual, the primary victims of state terror were peasants. In 1988, 
grassroots organizations in one southern department reported a ‘campaign of 
total annihilation and scorched earth, Vietnam-style,’ conducted by the military 
forces ‘in a most criminal manner, with assassinations of men, women, elderly 
and children. Homes and crops were burned, obligating the peasants to leave their 
lands.”
4 Critical observers of Colombia’s conflict have found that the rhetoric 
from U.S. officials about the continued financial support for the “war on drugs,” 
a partnership that was the brainchild of George H. W . Bush in 1989
5 and the “war 
on terror,” the brainchild of George W . Bush, has never amounted to anything 
more than a counterinsurgency campaign similar to the other U.S. campaigns 
waged in other parts of Latin America—but perhaps far worse. For example, 
nearly half of all of the Latin American graduates of the notorious School of the 
Americas, a combat training school for Latin American soldiers, were Colombian 
officers. In 1998, it was reported that a least fifty of these officers trained in this 
Fort Benning, Georgia school were “involved in ten civilian massacres, totaling 
over 521 victims.”
6 Between the U.S.-led military training and the weapons that 
are either given or bought with the funding from the United States (for example, 
the promised thirty UH-1 “Huey” and sixty Blackhawk helicopters—sixteen of 
which are already in the country, or the sixty super Huey helicopters) makes living 
in Colombia a very dangerous proposition, if you are among the targeted popula-
tions: the poor, community leaders, trade unionists, journalists, teachers, nuns, 
priests, women, human rights activists, lawyers, and children.
The United Nations High Commissioner has deemed Colombia one of the 
most unstable countries in the world. In 2001, a Colombia Commission of Jurists 
report found that there were twenty deaths a day directly connected to the politi-
cal situation; about six thousand people were kidnapped a year, and three hundred 
thousand people were forcibly displaced a year. Edward S. Herman and Ceci-
lia Zarate-Laun despair that some in the international community may regard 
Colombians as “unworthy victims.”
7 This may well be true if we consider which 
classes of people mostly face the brutal consequences of the forty-year conflict.
In 2001, Carlos Rosero, an Afro-Colombian activist from the Proceso de 
Comunidades Negras (PNC) based in Buenaventura, told me that the war has 
disproportionately impacted the lives of Afro-Colombians with alarming results. 
Indeed 49 percent of the internally displaced are Afro-Colombians. At the 
same time, countless other Afro-Colombians have fled into neighboring coun-
tries seeking safe-havens, sometimes to little avail.
8 Sadly, Afro-Colombians are 
pal-mara-19.indd   283pal-mara-19.indd   283 7/29/08   9:38:06 AM7/29/08   9:38:06 AM


--- PAGE 293 ---
Transnational Blackness284
among the most marginalized and disfranchised of any community struggling to 
carve out an existence in Colombia today. In August of 2001, the major daily 
newspaper, El Tiempo, published a long two-page report establishing the fact that 
Afro-Colombians do exist in large numbers—“Son 10 millones y medio!”—and 
discussed the abysmal social and political climate for 26 percent of Colombia’s 
population.
9 The paper’s two-page story publicly corrected the official oversight 
of the Administrative Department of National Statistics (DANE), which reported 
in 1993 that there were only six hundred thousand Afro-Colombians. However 
what was perhaps most shocking for this nation, which has the third highest 
population of African descendants in the Americas (after the United States and 
Brazil), were the realities confronting black people. An astounding 80 percent of 
all black people live below the poverty line. When there is paid work, 74 percent 
receive salaries less than the minimum wage. Only two out of every one hundred 
blacks who finish high school in all of Colombia go on to university. Fifty per-
cent of blacks who live in rural areas are illiterate—three times more than the 
national average.
Afro-Colombians have historically faced rampant discrimination and the state 
has actively and unabashedly undermined the community. In 1959, for example, 
a law was passed that designated the Pacific Basin as public lands. The 1959 law 
placed regulations on these public lands to ostensibly conserve natural resources. 
Bettina Ngweno notes that, “this dispossession by the state included lands that 
had been previously titled to Afro-Colombian families . . . making them ille-
gal occupants of their lands.”
10 Afro-Colombian Senator Piedad Cordoba Ruiz 
states the case more firmly for black people when she writes of the 1959 law: “As 
a result they lost forty percent of their traditional territory, which was divided 
among diverse institutions, mostly private businesses. Since then, legal efforts to 
grant Afrocolombians’ autonomy in their territories have been realized on paper 
only.”
11 The Constitution of 1991 attempted to rectify the inequalities that were 
created by the 1959 law. Ironically, while the Constitution of 1991 authorized 
state protection and recognition of ethnic diversity and territorial, cultural, and 
political rights, Marino Córdoba, originally a community activist from Riosu-
cio and later a founder of AFRODES (an association for displaced Colombians) 
writes, “Blacks were not represented in that . . . [a]ssembly, but we asked the 
indigenous representatives to take up the defense of our culture and land rights. 
They won some recognition of our rights that were small, but important.”
12 
While there was some reluctance to grant protective measures for black commu-
nities, the T ransitory Article 55 was included. This paved the way for what Sena-
tor Piedad Cordoba Ruiz considers to be the most significant piece of legislation 
for black communities, Ley 70 (Law 70), which was passed in 1993. In theory, 
Law 70 opened the space for black communities to apply for collective land titles 
to their ancestral lands. Additionally, the law sought to improve the material 
conditions for black communities by outlawing discrimination and improving 
access to credit, education, and training.
13 It was mandated that education in the 
pal-mara-19.indd   284pal-mara-19.indd   284 7/29/08   9:38:06 AM7/29/08   9:38:06 AM


--- PAGE 294 ---
Out of Chaos 285
communities had to foreground black cultural traditions. In practice, Law 70 has 
been a whole other matter.
Colombia is a country that is swimming in the riches of its natural resources. 
Given the long-standing tradition of wholesale corporate extraction of these 
resources (for example, the 1959 law), the requirement that Colombia increase 
exports of primary goods under structural adjustment policies, and privatization 
and “free” trade (to widen under the Free T rade Area of the Americas), black com-
munities, the indigenous, and mestizo campesinos are in the way of corporate 
profit. For instance, the department of Chocó, which has the highest popula-
tion of blacks (roughly 88 percent), is considered to be among the world’s rich-
est regions in biodiversity. Journalists Edward Herman and Cecilia Zarate-Laun: 
“The Chocó area in the Northwest part of Colombia below Panama is rich in 
minerals and oil and contains one of the world’s last pristine rain forests. It has 
been rapidly opened up to mining, oil and timber exploitation, and pipelines, 
ports, railroads, a canal, and the last 65 miles of the Pan American Highway are 
being pushed forward to bring this region into the global market. Free trade zones 
are in the planning stages for the Chocó area.”
14 Many Afro-Colombians and 
others view Colombia’s conflict as not being a “drug war” but rather a war over 
resources.
15 Marino Córdoba and other black activists, journalists and policy mak-
ers, have all argued that the very communities that have sought to legally obtain 
land titles under Law 70 have been victimized by armed actors. Spanish journalist 
Paco Gómez Nadal, who wrote about the largest massacre in the country’s history 
that occurred in the Afro-Colombian community of Bellavista (medio Atrato, 
located in the Bojayá municipality of Chocó), has asked why armed groups use 
so much force in the expulsion of these communities, especially the ones that 
have advanced in the process of collective land titling?
16 Gómez Nadal shows that 
massacres in Chocó, which directly caused the displacement of hundreds of thou-
sands of people, coincide with land titling. On December 13, 1996, Riosucio, 
located along the Atrato River (bajo Atrato), received the first six collective titles 
for sixty-one thousand hectares of land for two hundred and fifty families. Four 
days later, on December 17, paramilitaries began fighting in and around Riosu-
cio, eventually taking over the community two days later on the December 20, 
1996.
17 With assistance from the Colombian Army, the paramilitaries (considered 
to be illegal right-wing terrorist forces in official discourse) violently undermined 
the legal rights of black communities. Marino Córdoba, then a community leader 
in Riosucio before he was forced to flee the area, describes the violent events of 
December 1996, which began at 5 o’clock in the morning:
Paramilitary groups arrived in my town . . . intent on murdering the leaders and 
their families. Many were taken from their beds and paraded naked through the 
streets. Anyone who resisted was killed. The shouts woke me up. I ran to take refuge 
in the swamp along with many others. At 8:00 am, army helicopters started patrol-
ling. The paramilitaries radioed the pilots to attack the swamp, claiming the people 
were guerrillas. The army attacked us with bombs and rifles, killing many people. 
pal-mara-19.indd   285pal-mara-19.indd   285 7/29/08   9:38:06 AM7/29/08   9:38:06 AM


--- PAGE 295 ---
Transnational Blackness286
Those who survived stayed in the water for three days until hunger and desperation 
forced us out.18
In Riosucio alone, the paramilitaries killed 750 people and nearly 50,000 were 
displaced between 1996 and 2000. In 2001, the year I was first in Riosucio with 
writer Victoria Sanford, and again a year later in 2002, the paramilitaries were still 
in the community. In fact, they occupied much of the bajo Atrato area by 2002 
and still worked in collaboration with the Colombian military. In addition to the 
massacres in Riosucio in 1996 and Bellavista in 2002, there have also been mas-
sacres in Bagadó in 1997—in which the entire community of more than twenty 
thousand people fled, also in 2000 in Anchicaya, Vigía del Fuerte, and Bellavista 
(again), in the communities of Naya and Yurumangui in 2001, and most recently 
in Zabaletas, a municipality of Buenaventura in June of 2003.
19
Perhaps Gómez Nadal is right when he says that, “except in dramatic cases, 
Chocó doesn’t exist. Only the dead are visible.” 20 Or that indeed “Chocó is a 
specimen in the laboratory of the forgotten.” 21 But massacres in the name of 
profit are only half of a very troubling reality.
In the wake of violence, communities in Urabá-Chocó and Antioquia have 
organized themselves into peace communities as a viable way to nonviolently 
resist the armed conflict that has dominated their lives. At the end of 1995 and 
the beginning of 1996, communities along varying points of the Río Atrato 
endured threats, bombardments, selective homicides, massacres, and blockades 
on their food supply. Several thousand people were forcibly displaced from their 
homes; many traveled by land and by river for nearly a month to reach safer loca-
tions. By the end of 1996, many communities in the Riosucio municipality living 
along the river basins of Curbaradó, Jiguamiandó, Salaquí, T ruandó, Quiparadó, 
and others committed their lives to peace. Thousands of people, largely Afro-
Colombians, indigenous, and mestizos have declared themselves to be part of a 
large network of communities seeking peace, autonomy, justice, dignity, and the 
right to raise their children outside of the context of war. However, even under 
the banner of the San Francisco de Asís Peace Communities, families still endure 
pressure and the threat of death by armed groups who do not respect the will of 
communities who are pursuing a life of nonviolence as a means to end the cycle 
of war. As Sanford shows, the Urabá-Chocó peace communities are currently the 
only effective alternatives to war.
22
Men, women, and children in these small rural communities have gone beyond 
what the Colombian state claims to want to provide for their citizens. As poor, 
mostly black and indigenous campesinos who are marginalized by the state and 
brutalized by the guerillas, paramilitaries, and the army, they have asserted their 
right to not participate in the conflict at great personal risk. Writing about her 
time in 2000 with the Afro-Colombian peace community of Cacarica—a com-
munity that had been displaced by the paramilitaries and the army during 1997 
and 1999—Sanford tells of the principles that guide all peace communities: “At 
the entrance to Cacarica, a hand-painted sign in the rainbow colors of the peace 
pal-mara-19.indd   286pal-mara-19.indd   286 7/29/08   9:38:06 AM7/29/08   9:38:06 AM


--- PAGE 296 ---
Out of Chaos 287
community states: ‘We are a Peace Community. We are special because we do 
not carry any weapons. No armed actors, whether legal or illegal are permitted 
in our community.’”
23
The mandate of peace communities is that they will in no way voluntarily 
support or collaborate with armed actors. Often when communities—mainly 
women—are forced to provide food or shelter to one group, they become tar-
gets for the next group that moves into the area. This could be a never-ending 
cycle of terror if communities do not actively resist armed actors through peace-
ful means.
In 2002, I returned to the Urabá-Chocó region with Sanford to join a cel-
ebration that commemorated the five-year anniversary of the formation of the 
peace communities. In the village of Curbaradó, where we had been a year a 
earlier, families and representatives of several peace communities, international 
non-governmental organizations (NGOs) and Colombian-based NGOs gathered 
to remember the dead and disappeared and honor the remarkable efforts of the 
living. As community members stood in line with crosses baring the names of 
victims, it was clear that, over the past five years in particular, violence shook 
the foundation upon which peace communities are built. Despite the presence 
of the international NGOs and the military (who were brought in to “protect” 
them), it was clear that members of these peace communities struggled to remain 
alive, despite the fact that Colombian and international NGOs (for example, 
the United Nations, Red Cross, and Doctors without Borders) have abandoned 
them. As a result, these communities are not able to receive ongoing medical care, 
educational support (i.e., teachers and school supplies), or food. Only a handful 
of local NGOs have offered any real support to peace communities.
On a very limited budget, members of the Pastoral Social of the Diócesis de 
Apartadó and Quibdó and CINEP (Research and Popular Education Center) and 
Justicia y Paz have been the only organizations providing consistent assistance 
to peace communities in the Urabá-Chocó region.
24 In addition to humanitar-
ian aid, one of the many ways that these organizations support the survival of 
peace communities is through accompaniments. Small teams of people working 
for the Pastoral Social, the social and humanitarian wing of the diocesis, travel to 
rural communities providing support. Increasingly, communities are asking the 
Pastoral Social to accompany their communities out of combat zones to safer 
locations, and several communities have requested those accompaniment teams 
to stay on in their community, hoping that their presence will provide a mea-
sure of security. Often, accompaniment team members, who are extraordinary 
Colombians—many of whom have themselves been displaced and have families 
of their own—work over twenty days out of each month moving from one con-
flict zone to another to reach local communities, sometimes working without 
pay. The ability for these organizations to do accompaniments effectively means 
that peace communities do not fall prey to violence at the hands of the military, 
paramilitaries, and guerilla.
pal-mara-19.indd   287pal-mara-19.indd   287 7/29/08   9:38:06 AM7/29/08   9:38:06 AM


--- PAGE 297 ---
Transnational Blackness288
From October 13 to October 20, 2003, Urabá-Chocó peace communities met 
in Costa de Oro and Domingodó to commemorate their continued existence and 
collectively organize about the best ways to assert their right to live in peace. T o 
be sure, their political project illuminates the very ways in which the Colombian 
state and the international community have failed the average citizen. These small 
rural peace communities exist in a context where more than half the country of 
thirty-three million people live between “absolute poverty” and a poverty that is 
called “absolute misery.” The top 3 percent, the elite, own more than 70 percent 
of the arable land; the campesinos, who make up 63 percent of the rural popula-
tion and who own less than 5 percent of the land, are fast becoming an extinct 
population because of war related causes: displacement, murder, disease, and mal-
nutrition. Peace community members are defying long-standing social orders that 
have placed their communities in feudal-like relationships to the state. Sanford 
further argues the case: “The construction of the peace communities becomes a 
new site from which the international community can judge the Colombian state 
and put pressure upon it for the way in which the state exercises power. In this 
way, river communities, while still geographically isolated, are no longer simply 
sites of surveillance and violence, but also new sites of state legibility.”
25
Audre Lorde once wrote that “survival is not an academic skill. It is learning to 
stand alone, unpopular and sometimes reviled, and how to make common cause 
. . . and seek a world in which we can all flourish.”
26 The need to recognize the 
realities confronting black communities and support the necessary life work of 
their peace communities must be part of black America’s political agenda. Why 
not? As Father Honelio Mercado, a young Afro-Colombian priest who cites the 
teachings of Martin Luther King, Jr., to his black constituents, has asked me on 
many occasions: “Do you think black Americans would care what they are doing 
to us here?” Once he added, “We [Afro-Colombians] know of the struggles of 
blacks there. After all, we arrived to the Americas the same way, as slaves. Isn’t it 
only a matter of where our boats landed that separates our struggles?”
Notes
 1. Paco Gómez Nadal, Los muertos no hablan (Bogotá, Colombia: Editora Aguilar, 2002), 
30.
 2. The March 14, 2001, Bureau of Western Hemisphere Affairs notes that Plan Colombia 
is actually a 7.5 billion dollar multilateral aid effort. Plan Colombia is the largest military 
assistance package to any Latin American country from the United States since El Salva-
dor in the 1980s.
 3. Justicia y Paz estimated that the Colombian military and their allies, the paramilitaries, are 
responsible for 70 percent of killings there. Further, in 1997, the U.S. State Department 
found that of the twenty thousand political murders since 1986, the paramilitaries were 
responsible for 59 percent of them. In 1996, the State Department found that the para-
military killings, “increased significantly, often with the alleged complicity of individual 
soldiers or of the entire military units and with the knowledge and tacit approval of senior 
military officials.” Cited in Mathew Knoester 1998, “Washington’s Role in Colombian 
Repression,” http://www.zmag.org/zmag/articles/jan98knoes.htm (accessed April 2001).
pal-mara-19.indd   288pal-mara-19.indd   288 7/29/08   9:38:07 AM7/29/08   9:38:07 AM


--- PAGE 298 ---
Out of Chaos 289
 4. Noam Chomsky, “The Culture of Fear,” Z  Magazine online, http://www.zmag.org/
chomsky/other/ culture-of-fear.html (accessed May 21, 2001).
 5. In 1969, Nixon first officially declared a “war on drugs and crime.” In 1988, the office of 
the Drug Czar was formed. Under these auspices, Bush Sr. officially invited Colombia to 
join U.S. drug interdiction activities in 1989.
 6. Mathew Knoester, “Washington’s Role in Colombian Repression,”Z Magazine, http://
www.zmag.org/zmag/articles/ jan98knoes.htm (accessed May 21, 2001).
 7. Edward S. Herman and Cecilia Zarate-Luan, “Globalization and Instability: The Case 
of Colombia,” Z Magazine Online, http://www.zmag.org/articles/herman%202.htm 
(accessed May 21, 2001).
 8. For example, the Panamanians illegally and involuntarily repatriated over one hundred 
people who fled to Panama in the 1990s.
 9. Nadal, Los muertos no hablan, 103.
 10. Bettina Ng’weno, “Displacement, Violence and Afro-Colombians” Against the Current 
104 (May–June 2003), http://solidarity.igc.org/atc/ngweno104.html (accessed August 
16, 2003).
 11. Piedad Cordoba Ruiz, “Black in Colombia: Organizing to Promote Afrocolombian T er-
ritorial Rights,” Revista: Harvard Review of Latin America (Spring 2003): 84–85, http://
www.drclas.harvard.edu/revista/issues/view/16.
 12. Marino Córdoba, “The Afro-Colombian Struggle for Land and Justice,” News and Letters, 
(May 2002), http://www.newsandletters.org (accessed August 1, 2003).
 13. Peter Wade, “Law 70 (Law of Black Communities): Legislation Recognizing and Benefit-
ing Afro-Colombians,” http://diaspora.northwestern.edu/cgi-bin/WebObjects/DiasporsX
.woa/wa/displayArticle? atomid=691 (accessed August 25, 2003).
 14. Edward S. Herman and Cecilia Zarate-Laun, “Globalization and Instability: The Case of 
Colombia,” Z Magazine, http://www.zmag.org/articles/herman%202.htm (accessed May 
21, 2001).
 15. Mary Jo McConahay, “For Afro-Colombians, the War is Not About Drugs,” NCM New 
Online, June 2002, http://news.ncmonline.com/news/view_article.html?article_id=504 
(accessed August 16, 2003).
 16. On May 2, 2002, 119 people where killed in Bellavista—forty-five of whom were 
children.
 17. Nadal, Los muertos no hablan, 35.
 18. Ibid., 34.
 19. Marino Córdoba, community leader in Riosucio.
 20. “Massacre in T erritory of the Black Communities, Colombia,” http://colhrnet.igc.org/
newitems/jun03/ afsc.615.htm (accessed August 13, 2003.
 21. Nadal, Los muertos no hablan, 14.
 22. Ibid., 20.
 23. Victoria Sanford, “Peacebuilding in a War Zone: The Case of Colombian Peace Commu-
nities,” International Peacekeeping10, no. 2 (Summer 2003): 107–18.
 24. Ibid., 109.
 25. 
Victoria Sanford writes, “The Catholic-based Justicia y Paz and the Diocese of Apar-
tado have worked with some forty-five thousand internally displaced people (IDPs) in the 
Uraba-Choco region since their displacement in the 1990s. They have also worked with 
the 12,000 IDPs who decided to return to their lands and who have organized themselves 
into 59 peace communities,” “Peacebuilding in a War Zone,” 113.
 26. Audre Lorde, “The Master’s T ools Will Never Dismantle the Master’s House,” This Bridge 
Called My Back: Radical Writings by Women of Color (New York: Kitchen Table Press, 
1983), 98.
pal-mara-19.indd   289pal-mara-19.indd   289 7/29/08   9:38:07 AM7/29/08   9:38:07 AM


--- PAGE 299 ---
This page intentionally left blank


--- PAGE 300 ---
P ART  VI
Race, Power, and 
Politics in Africa
pal-mara-20.indd   291pal-mara-20.indd   291 7/25/08   1:23:10 PM7/25/08   1:23:10 PM


--- PAGE 301 ---
This page intentionally left blank


--- PAGE 302 ---
C HAPTER  20
African American 
Expatriates in Ghana 
and the Black Radical 
Tradition
Kevin K. Gaines
The African American radical tradition, particularly in the post–World 
War II era, is a subject shrouded in historical amnesia and misunderstanding. 
One of the most striking misunderstandings surrounding black radicalism—and 
the left more generally—concerns their interaction and, at critical times, conver-
gence with mainstream politics. It has become reflexive for many commentators 
to dismiss the black left, asserting its marginality or claiming that it is “out of 
touch” with black communities and interests. On this point, white liberals and 
black nationalists alike have found themselves in unexpected agreement.
Such a refusal to note the affinities and tensions between radical and centrist 
politics is fatal to historical analysis. T o reflect on the African American radical 
tradition, then, is to recall the conditions that made personal and social transfor-
mation possible. There was, first, a moment in which African American radicals 
emphasized the mutuality of the U.S.-based civil rights movement and African 
liberation struggles and confronted the postwar emergence of U.S. global hege-
mony. African American radicals’ (and liberals’) indictment of the contradiction 
between American “free world” ideals and the denial of civil and voting rights was 
steadily approaching a consensus in American (and international) youth cultures, 
over against the cold war’s suppression of dissent. In addition, possibilities for free-
dom were manifested in the vitality of black popular culture, including rhythm 
and blues, the church origins and resonances of which eventually symbolized the 
moral authority of desegregation. In addition, after World War II, modern jazz 
was a site for cross-cultural African diasporic collaboration and global political 
pal-mara-20.indd   293pal-mara-20.indd   293 7/25/08   1:23:11 PM7/25/08   1:23:11 PM


--- PAGE 303 ---
Transnational Blackness294
awareness (despite U.S. attempts to claim jazz musicians as “goodwill ambassa-
dors”). Finally, the emergence of African states from colonial rule, most famously 
the republic of Ghana under the leadership of Kwame Nkrumah, further lent a 
sense of historical momentum to U.S.-based freedom struggles and inspired black 
diaspora solidarities. For many coming of age at this moment, these developments 
were hardly marginal but deeply and ineluctably formative. At such moments, 
for many such persons, aspects of cultural radicalism define the mainstream; they 
foster new hopes, aspirations, and identities and constitute a sense of participa-
tion in the making of history.
African American radicals, in tandem with the masses of southern blacks 
mobilized in revolt against segregation, were among the earliest exponents of 
an emerging consensus for freedom and social transformation in the late 1950s 
and early 1960s, shaped by the movements for civil rights and African liberation. 
This is not to deny tensions or fissures among and between black radicals and 
their allies. Nor would it be appropriate to minimize the conservative influence 
of cold war anticommunism in mass journalism, educational films, newsreels, 
and the like. Nor, in addition, would it be accurate to deny that there were 
fundamental disagreements between African American radicals and liberals on 
the crucial matter of the relationship of the civil rights movement and African 
liberation to the cold war. But we should not underestimate the fact that, for 
many, oppositional perspectives were undermining the legitimacy of official pro-
nouncements and positions.
The hold of Ghana and African liberation on the political imagination of 
so many is demonstrated by the phenomenon of African American expatriates, 
whose political outlook was representative of that moment’s sense of radical pos-
sibility.
1 At the height of the civil rights movement—between the late 1950s 
and 1966—hundreds of African Americans, including intellectuals, technicians, 
teachers, artists, and trade unionists, left the United States for Ghana, the first 
sub-Saharan African nation to gain its independence from colonial rule. There 
was nothing accidental about this extraordinary migration. Kwame Nkrumah, 
Ghana’s first president, studied in the United States during the 1930s. In several 
visits to the United States during the 1950s, Nkrumah strengthened his ties to the 
African American intelligentsia, recruiting its members to contribute their skills 
to Ghana in the name of Pan-African solidarity. W . E. B. Du Bois, for example, 
spent his last years as a citizen of Ghana and the director of the Encyclopedia 
Africana project. Ghana was a magnet for African Americans, whose support for 
Nkrumah’s politics of nonalignment, African continental unity, and revolution-
ary Pan-Africanism was reinforced by their frustration with the racial inequities 
and cold war constraints of U.S. society.
The independence of Ghana and emerging African states had an impact 
on black Americans’ consciousness and worldview. Black expatriates in Ghana 
represented an independent black radical critique of cold war liberalism. Dur-
ing the early civil rights era, Ghana was, for the expatriates and other support-
ers, an inspirational symbol of Black Power (which I distinguish from the later 
pal-mara-20.indd   294pal-mara-20.indd   294 7/25/08   1:23:11 PM7/25/08   1:23:11 PM


--- PAGE 304 ---
African American Expatriates in Ghana 295
articulation of “Black Power,” namely the militant slogan that arose among black 
activists in the United States). Emblematic of this prior incarnation of Black 
Power, blacks throughout the Diaspora celebrated Ghana and Nkrumah for their 
leadership in the cause of Pan-African liberation. The example of Ghana reaf-
firmed for many civil rights activists in the United States the conviction that 
history was on their side. For others, Ghana stood as the realization of traditional 
African American aspirations for African nationhood dating back to the origins of 
the Pan-African movement, Garveyism, and the Italian invasion of Ethiopia dur-
ing the 1930s. With such black Diaspora intellectuals as C. L. R. James, George 
Padmore, Richard Wright, and others inclined to look beyond European and 
Soviet Marxisms, nonaligned Ghana served as an exemplary expression of their 
socialist politics. Indeed, Wright’s 1954 account of the independence struggle in 
Ghana was titled Black Power.
As Ghana attempted to carve out a position of nonalignment in the cold 
war that was independent from both the Soviet Union and the United States, 
the black American expatriates in Ghana and their allies in the United States 
waged a similar struggle for independence against cold war ideology and the U.S. 
government’s attempts to impose limits on the political language and tactics of 
black activists and movements. The radical promise of Ghana’s first republic and 
its potential influence on the nature and terms of struggle in the United States 
beyond campaigns for civil rights and formal equality led to concerted official 
strategies of surveillance and containment. In fact, during the early civil rights era, 
black radical militancy was expressed in moral critiques of cold war liberalism, 
support for the abolition of the House Un-American Activities Committee, an 
advocacy of armed self-defense against what was perceived as official tolerance of 
segregationist violence, support for the Cuban revolution, and advocacy of Afri-
can liberation. This was what black militancy looked like during the late 1950s 
and early 1960s, and this radical outlook reflected an important trend in black 
politics, however foreclosed or forgotten. The legacy of black politics during the 
1960s cannot be fully understood without reference to Ghana and the interna-
tional radicalism embodied by the expatriates.
Black radicals, emboldened by the radicalism of Ghana and Nkrumah, were 
engaged in an ongoing debate over Pan-African identity during the cold war. 
During and immediately after World War II, claims of black solidarity connecting 
African Americans activism with the independence struggles of African peoples 
was central to black radical politics. But as Penny Von Eschen has shown in Race 
Against Empire: Black Americans and Anticolonialism, 1937–1957,
2 with the cold 
war persecution of Paul Robeson, Du Bois, and others, black Americans’ advo-
cacy for anticolonial struggles on the African continent risked official censure as 
intolerable criticisms of the U.S. government’s policies at home and abroad.
With the convergence of the civil rights movement and African liberation 
struggles, African American jazz musicians, performing artists, and intellectuals 
challenged the dominant cold war strictures that attempted to circumscribe black 
Americans’ political identities and, indeed, to airbrush the political activism of 
pal-mara-20.indd   295pal-mara-20.indd   295 7/25/08   1:23:11 PM7/25/08   1:23:11 PM


--- PAGE 305 ---
Transnational Blackness296
the post–World War II era from black collective memory. The well-publicized 
independence of Ghana from colonial rule in 1957, coinciding with violent racial 
unrest in the South, sparked resurgence in black protest and solidarities.
The late 1950s also saw the founding of the American Society of African Cul-
ture (AMSAC) by the political scientist and civil rights activist John A. Davis. 
AMSAC sought to promote cultural exchange, collaboration, and heightened 
mutual awareness between African and African American intellectuals. Although 
its leading intellectuals were cold war liberals, AMSAC provided a space for radi-
cal and liberal black musicians, artists, and writers to independently enact their 
international visions of solidarity. The jazz musicians Abbey Lincoln and Max 
Roach; members of the Harlem Writers Guild, including John Oliver Killens and 
the future luminaries Rosa Guy, Maya Angelou, Audre Lorde, and Paule Mar-
shall; contributors to the radical Harlem journal Freedomways, including Julian 
Mayfield and John Henrik Clarke; and the poet laureate of black America, Langs-
ton Hughes, were all associated with AMSAC.
African American journalists were also crucial to this network of activist intel-
lectuals, including the foreign correspondents Marguerite Cartwright, Charles 
Howard, and William Worthy. The actors Ossie Davis, Ruby Dee, Sidney Poitier, 
and Harry Belafonte shared the radical internationalism of the playwright Lor-
raine Hansberry. As members of the Cultural Association for Women of African 
Heritage, Angelou, Guy, and Lincoln organized the demonstration against the 
United Nations and its role in the arrest and assassination of Patrice Lumumba, 
the revolutionary Pan-Africanist and prime minister of the independent Congo. 
Such prominent writers as Lorraine Hansberry and James Baldwin defended the 
demonstration and excoriated cold war liberals’ attempts to Red-bait and dismiss 
independent black dissent.
African American expatriates in Ghana shared the outlook of the radical dis-
senters in the United States who were sharply critical of a narrowly conceived civil 
rights agenda, cold war anticommunism, federal indifference to segregationist 
violence, and interventionist U.S. foreign policy. This group placed the highest 
priority on black and African struggles for equality and refused to subordinate 
these causes to cold war anticommunism. The group revered Robeson for his 
refusal to mute his criticisms of U.S. racism by capitulating to anticommunist 
witch-hunts. The examples of Robeson, Du Bois, and others taught this transna-
tional cohort of black radicals that cold war anticommunism was a barrier to anti-
racist struggles at home and abroad. From the outset, these radicals were sharply 
critical of the U.S. government, which seemed throughout the early 1960s more 
concerned with African states’ perceptions of a United States rent with racial strife 
than with responding directly and immediately to the demands of civil rights 
protesters. For American policy makers who tended to see racial discord as a pro-
paganda windfall for the Soviets, it was crucial that African American leadership, 
Ghana, other African nations, and the domestic civil rights movement refrain 
from openly challenging U.S. domestic and foreign policies.
pal-mara-20.indd   296pal-mara-20.indd   296 7/25/08   1:23:11 PM7/25/08   1:23:11 PM


--- PAGE 306 ---
African American Expatriates in Ghana 297
For the expatriates, there were many paths to Ghana, ranging from volun-
tary relocation to forced exile. Nevertheless, they were united in their abhorrence 
of American racism and their advocacy of the cause of African liberation. From 
their unique vantage point, such figures as the novelist and actor Julian Mayfield, 
the social scientists St. Clair and Elizabeth Drake, W . E. B. and Shirley Graham 
Du Bois, the writer Maya Angelou, the art historian Sylvia Arden Boone, and 
their stateside allies articulated during the early 1960s critiques of U.S. racism and 
empire that would become commonplace by 1968. As thousands marched in the 
nation’s capital for jobs and freedom in August 1963, a delegation of the Ghana 
expatriates picketed the U.S. embassy in Accra, condemning Kennedy’s inter-
ventions in Cuba and Vietnam, the administration’s appeasement of the apart-
heid regime in South Africa, and its foot-dragging on civil rights. Such forceful 
criticism of the Kennedy administration was carefully censored from the offi-
cially managed March on Washington. The expatriates’ parallel demonstration in 
Ghana, arguably the most radical of several international demonstrations, was in 
sympathy with the March.
3
Washington, DC, accordingly attracted far more U.S. government scrutiny 
than the others (including those held in Paris, Oslo, Munich, and T el Aviv). 
This was evident in the detailed State Department memorandum describing the 
protest, which included the expatriates’ original petition to President Kennedy. 
The demonstration received extensive coverage in the Liberator, the magazine 
of the Liberation Committee on Africa, a radical black organization based in 
New York.
As the most politically active intellectual among the Ghana expatriates, Julian 
Mayfield contributed greatly to such demonstrations. Mayfield reached Ghana 
in 1961, fleeing federal agents investigating his role in the armed self-defense 
movement led by Robert Williams in Monroe, North Carolina (Williams himself 
was a fugitive living in exile in Cuba). In Ghana, Mayfield worked for Nkrumah 
as a speech writer and edited the African Review, an independent left journal 
on Pan-African politics. Expatriates gathered frequently at the home of Mayfield 
and his wife, Ana Livia Cordero, a physician from Puerto Rico who ran a pub-
lic clinic for women in Accra. Mayfield’s journalistic writings promoted Ghana’s 
policies of continental unity and socialist development and were widely circulated 
throughout the United States (in Freedomways, Muhammed Speaks, and other 
black newspapers) and on the African continent. His columns in the Ghana-
ian press often carried graphic exposes of white southerners’ violent resistance to 
desegregation and voting rights for blacks. Such efforts made Mayfield the most 
notorious member of the American expatriate community in the eyes of U.S. 
embassy personnel.
The circumstances of Mayfield’s exile to Ghana and his activities there 
reflect the uneasy relationship between the expatriates and U.S. officialdom, 
and even with the mainstream civil rights movement. Indeed, several expatri-
ates, including Du Bois, Alphaeus Hunton, and the trade unionist Vicki Garvin, 
were political refugees from McCarthyism. Mayfield and others questioned the 
pal-mara-20.indd   297pal-mara-20.indd   297 7/25/08   1:23:11 PM7/25/08   1:23:11 PM


--- PAGE 307 ---
Transnational Blackness298
movement’s emphasis on nonviolent protest and demanded broadening the 
struggle to address the economic plight of African Americans in northern ghet-
tos. From their standpoint, nonviolent protest lacked credibility when the U.S. 
government itself seemed unwilling to protect civil rights organizers or punish 
segregationist vigilantes. The expatriates’s skepticism regarding nonviolence was 
shaped not only by the reign of terror in the Jim Crow South but also by the 
violent repression of African peoples and their liberation movements, including 
the Sharpeville massacre in South Africa and the assassination of the indepen-
dent Congo’s Prime Minister Patrice Lumumba in 1961. With the bombing two 
years later of Birmingham’s Sixteenth Street Baptist Church (which killed four 
children), the commitment to nonviolence among many activists did not extend 
beyond lip service.
The Ghana expatriates and their allies in the United States were highly skep-
tical of orthodox views of domestic race relations. Indeed, their international 
outlook was a product of the gamut of local and global experiences of white 
racism in the cosmopolitan black community of Harlem (which extended down-
town to the United Nations). For black radicals, this internationalism informed 
their struggles against police brutality and school and housing segregation in the 
North. All these issues, domestic and international, received thorough coverage 
in the Nation of Islam weekly, Muhammed Speaks. This deep awareness of the 
global dimensions of black struggle and U.S. resistance also informed the politics 
of participants in the Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee’s (SNCC) 
struggle for voting rights in Mississippi and the Deep South, many of whom, 
including Robert Moses, John Lewis, and Fannie Lou Hamer, toured Africa dur-
ing 1965. Moses and his then wife, Dona Edwards, planned to join the expatriate 
community in Ghana. With the military overthrow of Nkrumah’s government in 
1966, Moses and Edwards eventually relocated to the next destination for radical 
expatriates: Tanzania.
For African American expatriates, Ghana’s Black Power was multifaceted. They 
experienced Ghana and Africa variously as a political sanctuary, as a haven for 
professional and technical opportunities unfettered by racism, and, more impor-
tant, as the last best hope for democracy and human freedom.
More romantically, some of them regarded Ghana and Africa as a homeland. 
The crucial point is that for the expatriates, “home” was where they identified 
the vanguard of black struggle, and during the early 1960s this was understood 
as Ghana. Relatively unencumbered there by the repressive cold war climate that 
branded antiracist dissent “un-American” and that scorned attempted linkages 
of domestic and international struggles for democracy, the expatriates reveled 
in the expanded horizons in Ghana for black statehood and for black identity. 
From Ghana, Mayfield penned a critical appreciation of James Baldwin, which 
appeared in Freedomways in 1963, defending him in the face of a rising chorus of 
dogmatic and homophobic attacks by African American militants.
4
One important aspect of the transformative significance of Ghana for black 
identity is the extent to which black feminist consciousness was shaped by the 
pal-mara-20.indd   298pal-mara-20.indd   298 7/25/08   1:23:11 PM7/25/08   1:23:11 PM


--- PAGE 308 ---
African American Expatriates in Ghana 299
expatriate experience. During the early 1960s, Ghana and Mali hosted interna-
tional conferences on the status of women of Africa and African descent. It was 
axiomatic for many of the expatriate women that gender equality was integral to 
their revolutionary agenda. Such ideology was tested and ultimately reinforced 
by the profoundly gendered nature of the expatriate experience in Africa, con-
trasting male sexual adventurism with obstacles to women’s independence. This 
confrontation between feminist ideals and patriarchal realities contributed in part 
to several women expatriates’ early formulations of black feminism by the decade’s 
end. Indeed African American male expatriates, as well, were compelled to reflect 
on tensions arising from the differently gendered experiences of the expatriates. 
Mayfield noted that African American women enjoyed an advantage in gaining 
access to the higher echelons of Ghanaian politics, an access that was not avail-
able to most African American men. He also confessed that men like himself 
would visit Maya Angelou, Alice Windom, and Vicki Garvin for home cooking, 
which would invariably be served with a scathing critique of their exploitation of 
Ghanaian women. In a lengthy analysis of the Ghana coup, Sylvia Boone identi-
fied sexism and the exclusion of black women from leadership as the downfall of 
black progressive movements. Interestingly, Boone exempted the late Malcolm X 
from her indictment, identifying him as the only black male leader who, in her 
view, granted women equal status in his fledgling Organization of Afro-American 
Unity. The Ghana expatriates were unique for their gender diversity and egalitari-
anism, which emerged out of their vision of racial solidarity.
The coup that exiled Nkrumah to Guinea, where he spent the rest of his 
days, also occasioned the dispersal of most of the black expatriate community. 
Although the coup extinguished the independent radical project embodied by the 
expatriates, the Ghana experience was too deeply formative in their lives to end 
with Nkrumah’s overthrow. Back in the United States, the expatriates remained a 
self-constituted, tightly knit group of colleagues, though it should be added that 
some remained in exile, unwilling or unable to return to their country of origin. 
For most, the expatriate interlude in Ghana informed their subsequent activities, 
as they supported and promoted each other’s intellectual endeavors.
They continued to champion African and Third World liberation, yet their 
focus was on the United States, as they sought to nurture the evolving African 
American political consciousness. In 1968 Mayfield, along with attorney Conrad 
Lynn, publicly took issue with Harold Cruse’s scorched earth polemic against 
black left intellectuals in The Crisis of the Negro Intellectual. In 1970, Sylvia Boone 
convened a path-breaking conference at Yale titled “The black Woman,” at which 
Maya Angelou, Shirley Graham Du Bois, and John Henrik Clarke spoke. Against 
formidable odds, Mayfield, St. Clair Drake, and other returned expatriates offered 
their perspectives and experiences in hopes of effectively channeling the anger of 
young militants who, in Mayfield’s estimate, had taken Cruse’s one-sided account 
to heart and mistakenly believed that history began with themselves.
What was the legacy of the radical internationalist vision of the Ghana expa-
triates and their allies? In No  Name in the Street,
5 James Baldwin produced a 
pal-mara-20.indd   299pal-mara-20.indd   299 7/25/08   1:23:11 PM7/25/08   1:23:11 PM


--- PAGE 309 ---
Transnational Blackness300
scathing indictment of the crimes of Western colonialism and cold war liberalism. 
The spectacle of anti-Stalinist intellectuals remorselessly betraying each other and 
principles of civil liberties had begotten the bloody betrayals of the civil rights 
movement. Baldwin furiously denounced what he described as an international 
conspiracy of white supremacy determined to crush black dissent. Powerless to 
obtain the release of an assistant, a black man falsely imprisoned for murder by 
corrupt New York City police and courts, Baldwin concluded that white America’s 
self-congratulatory vision of civil rights was limited to the matter of transform-
ing hearts and was ultimately blind to the necessity of fighting inequality in the 
streets. Angrily renouncing the place offered him at the “welcome table” as darling 
of the American literary establishment, Baldwin devoted himself to affirming in 
his subsequent fiction the distinctive ethical sensibilities and outlook of black 
communities, a tradition refined by the community’s historical struggle to survive 
the destructive forces of racism.
Baldwin’s indictment of police brutality and the criminal justice and prison sys-
tems as instruments of racial discrimination is sadly prescient for understanding 
the contemporary plight of African Americans. And tragically, with the killing by 
NYPD officers in early 1999 of Amadou Diallo, an unarmed African immigrant, 
internationalism is no less relevant for black consciousness. As African Ameri-
can militants, elected officials, professionals, and business leaders joined with 
other citizens of conscience to protest former mayor Rudolph Giuliani’s arrogant 
attempt to stonewall justice in the Diallo case, we are reminded once again that 
African American radicalism, as a response to racial oppression and state violence, 
is central to ongoing struggles for justice and a more democratic society.
Notes
 1. Richard Wright, Black Power (New York: Harper and Bros., 1954).
 2. Penny Von Eschen. Race Against Empire: Black Americans and Anticolonialism. 1937–1957 
(Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 1997).
 3. Harold Cruse, The Crisis of the Negro Intellectual (New York: Quill, 1984).
 4. Julian Mayfield, “And Then Came Baldwin,” Freedomways 3 (Spring 1963): 148–49.
 5. James Baldwin, No Name in the Street (New York: Dial Press, 1972).
pal-mara-20.indd   300pal-mara-20.indd   300 7/25/08   1:23:11 PM7/25/08   1:23:11 PM


--- PAGE 310 ---
C HAPTER  21
“Crimes of History”
Senegalese Soccer and the 
Forensics of Slavery
Michael Ralph
One of the largest migrations of history was also one of the greatest crimes of history.
—George W . Bush
Locked Up
Senegalese American hip-hop rhythm and blues singer Akon soared to 
the top of U.S. music charts in 2004 with his autobiographical gangsta bal-
lad, “Locked Up.” The track chronicles Akon’s frustration with being profiled, 
harassed, and ultimately imprisoned by law enforcement officials. Though Akon’s 
narrative centers on his experience in the United States, the sense of captivity out-
lined in his hit song—with its chorus, “I’m locked up, they won’t let me out”—
parallels events that took place in his native Senegal the previous year.
According to those interviewed, U.S. military personnel arrived on Gorée Island 
on the morning of July 8, 2003, around 4 o’clock in the morning, accompanied 
by bomb-sniffing dogs. Soldiers evacuated and then searched homes; afterward, 
they moved most of the island’s residents onto a local soccer field. The field, once 
packed to capacity, was barricaded. The small satchels of water distributed hap-
hazardly provided little relief for the crowd during the eight hours—from nearly 
6:00 a.m. to 2:00 p.m.—some of them spent in the same spot, though the visit, 
which lasted less than two hours, took place between 11:00 a.m. and 1:00 p.m. 
All cell phone communication was disabled during this time.
pal-mara-21.indd   301pal-mara-21.indd   301 7/29/08   9:37:16 AM7/29/08   9:37:16 AM


--- PAGE 311 ---
Transnational Blackness302
The reaction of the local population can be distilled into a Wolof phrase that 
appears frequently in transcripts from my interviews: Da fa mélni Diaam mo gna 
watt [It was like slavery had returned].
How should we understand this discourse on slavery more than 150 years after 
the institution was officially abolished in French territories, andwhy during a visit 
from the United States?1 This scenario provokes more questions than answers in 
my mind: Who designed the security measures taken for Bush’s visit? Why did the 
Senegalese government comply andunder what conditions? This repressive treat-
ment contradicts the political congeniality that exists between George W . Bush 
and Abdoulaye Wade: for their July 8 trip to Gorée, I was told, the two men used 
the Senegalese president’s personal yacht. There is but one way to enter and exit 
the island. What exactly concerned U.S. security personnel? Did this community 
of people on a small island off the coast of Senegal really constitute a threat to the 
U.S. Commander-in-Chief?
What does it mean that a soccer field was the setting where African bodies 
faced the coercive presence of U.S. power on Senegalese soil? In recent years, 
Senegal has gained international notoriety as a soccer powerhouse, especially after 
its upset victory over France in the 2002 World Cup. For several years now, soc-
cer has been one of the most effective ways for Senegal to distinguish itself—even 
assert its potential—to the world. The priority of sport, in other words, is not 
simply evident in local competition but also part of an idea that has folded back 
into the Senegalese political imagination with startling implications. This essay 
is concerned with understanding the way this perspective on sport operates with 
regard to these two distinct but interconnected pursuits.
These differential aims are embedded in ethnographic events and historical 
developments that this chapter seeks to untangle by highlighting the shifting 
shape of Senegalese geopolitics and the country’s fascination with representing 
itself through sporting successes. T o do this, I dribble back and forth between a 
series of overlapping events tied to Senegal’s response to the World T rade Center 
attacks of September 11, 2001, on the one hand, and the country’s aggressive 
2002 World Cup bid and its Cinderella-esque victory over defending champions 
France in the opening round, on the other. After exploring these two distinct tra-
jectories, I show the way they yield political anxieties that collapse clumsily into 
President George W . Bush’s 2003 visit and become intensified through the way 
that moment is represented.
Given that both the U.S. and Senegalese governments were complicit in the 
ritual of captivity that marked Bush’s 2003 visit, one is tempted to ask not simply 
how we grapple with “crimes of history” but also what they are. Who is guilty 
of what? Who is the judge? Who makes up the jury? So that I might develop a 
theoretical strategy for tracking the agents and events that form the subject of this 
chapter, I pursue a brief methodological detour through which I develop what I 
call a “forensic” approach to anthropology: in the effort to understand historical 
events, we have only their traces—in conversations, material objects, and media 
imprints—from which to construct some sense of the action.
pal-mara-21.indd   302pal-mara-21.indd   302 7/29/08   9:37:16 AM7/29/08   9:37:16 AM


--- PAGE 312 ---
“Crimes of History” 303
More empirical than methodological, my second reason for studying Senegal 
by means of a “forensic” inquiry is simple: postcolonial Africa is often viewed as 
a criminal context.
Evidence of Corruption
Lawlessness and criminal violence have become integral to depictions of postcolonial 
societies. . . .
—Jean and John L. Comaroff, Law and Disorder in the Postcolony (2006, 6)
The idea of democracy is nowhere more suspicious than in the African postcol-
ony. Military regimes in Nigeria, coups in Ghana and Uganda, and chronic politi-
cal instability in Angola, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, and Sudan are 
often taken as evidence of inadequate, if not illegitimate, institutions of authority. 
Senegal, by contrast, is considered “one of Africa’s model democracies,”
2 as one 
of only five African countries not run by dictatorships (Taylor 2005). But despite 
its pristine reputation there is reason to question the dominant perception of 
Senegalese republicanism.
Leopold Sédar Senghor, who led the country to independence, steered the 
course of a nation that went more than a decade without holding competitive elec-
tions so that, for much of his presidency, there was only one legal political party. 
Though Senegal officially achieved independence in 1960, it was 1976 before 
Senghor passed legislation permitting the presence of three political parties—
one Marxist-Leninist, one Democratic Socialist, and the last, Liberal—which, 
he argued, represented the dominant political inclinations of Senegalese people 
(Fatton 1987). Perhaps more democratic than a one-party state, this development 
created the pretense of much improved electoral participation but nevertheless 
placed constraints on political involvement.
Known throughout the world as one of the greatest poets in the French lan-
guage and as co-founder of the Négritude movement Senghor, for Nobel laureate 
Wole Soyinka, evidenced “the transcendence of the humanist over the trappings 
of” the postcolonial presidency. This was a “lesson in power” Soyinka (2002, 2) 
“wished so desperately other African Heads of State would heed.” Still, Senghor is 
known as much for “the misappropriation of funds” as for instituting a civil code 
that protected individual rights. The same man who defended the political and 
cultural integrity of the Senegalese nation is also known for agricultural collapse 
and industrial ruin (Diagne 2002, 13).
And when Senghor finally left office in 1981, he did so in a nonelection year 
so that the presidency was, constitutionally, transferred to his prime minister and 
protégé, Abdou Diouf, which means that, for the first forty years of independence 
Senegal was ruled by Senghor’s party and the political course he had established. 
Despite pioneering changes in the national constitution in order to institute 
competitive elections, Diouf simultaneously faced accusations of vote-tampering 
and electoral fraud.
pal-mara-21.indd   303pal-mara-21.indd   303 7/29/08   9:37:16 AM7/29/08   9:37:16 AM


--- PAGE 313 ---
Transnational Blackness304
Though Diouf served as the Senegalese Head of State for two decades after 
Senghor’s departure in 1981, the dominance of the Parti  Socialiste (Socialist 
Party) was officially shattered when long-time opposition leader Abdoulaye 
Wade became president in 2000. But Wade’s politics are suspicious for other 
reasons. A presidential candidate as far back as 1993, he was then implicated 
in the assassination of constitutional court judge Babacar Seye, even though he 
insisted the Parti Socialiste was responsible (Sy 2005).
3
It is a true testament to Senghor’s political genius that, despite a dubious com-
mitment to democracy and policies that failed to stave off economic crisis, schol-
ar-activists like Soyinka and specialists of African politics have taken what could 
be understood as a rather ambivalent relationship to democracy as a success story 
for the Senegalese nation-state in a narrative that, according to this reading, sets 
it apart from criminal states (Bayart, Hibou, and Ellis 1999) elsewhere in Africa 
whose claims to authority are considered spurious. In these alternate contexts, 
the suspension of democracy structures governmental politics and, paradoxically, 
protocols of protest. The Nigerian government, for instance, has accused Wole 
Soyinka of treason for condoning violent acts of rebellion against the state. Mean-
while Soyinka, instead of defending himself against this assertion, contends his 
challenge to the Nigerian state is justified, since it aims to topple a government 
that is illegitimates anyway (Pietz 1997b).
Soyinka and his adversaries tend to insist that each side has violated well-recog-
nized democratic standards (usually, the national constitution, or legislated forms 
of due process). Yet the way transnational oil conglomerates that wreak envi-
ronmental devastation (Apter 2005; Smith 2005)—and which have been impli-
cated in the assassinations of student activists who protest against them (Pietz 
1997b)—shape domestic policy could, from a different angle, be viewed as the 
most sinister aspect of Nigerian politics rather than the state’s tendency to violate 
juridical standards.
4 Thus while scholars concerned with theorizing “corruption” 
have made it possible to see the limits of statecraft and to trace the contours of 
social exclusion (Smith 2001, Chabal and Daloz 1999; Bayart, Ellis, and Hibou 
1999; Gupta 1995; Bayart 1993; Achebe 1983), this designation inadvertently 
encourages undue confidence in republicanism as a mode of governance. T o insist 
that democracy fails in Nigeria simply because the reigning government is “cor-
rupt” (Soyinka 1996) is to imply that the political instruments in question are 
pristine and that if a few culprits can be dethroned and, perhaps, imprisoned, the 
problem would be solved. But what if—as the foregoing analysis suggests—the 
concept of political (il)legitimacy is rather more complex? What if, indeed, there 
is an intimate relationship between law and lawlessness in the African postcolony, 
and not only there (Comaroff and Comaroff 2006a)? What implications might 
this have for political theory?
After all Soyinka has admittedly (and, one could argue, justifiably) resorted 
to extra-legal violence as a means to convey his own political position, “In 1965, 
he took over a radio station in Ibadan at gunpoint and persuaded the engi-
neers to play a tape denouncing the fraudulent federal election results that the 
pal-mara-21.indd   304pal-mara-21.indd   304 7/29/08   9:37:16 AM7/29/08   9:37:16 AM


--- PAGE 314 ---
“Crimes of History” 305
government [had] planned to air” (Masiki 2006). That he was subsequently 
imprisoned for three months but later acquitted—as much as the fact that two 
years later he was jailed on spurious charges—indicates the idea of “corruption” 
in Nigeria is, at best, an imprecise and unstable signifier.
These issues weigh heavily on a Senegalese context where democracy is con-
sidered crucial to the national political project but simultaneously undermined. 
In contrast to countries like Ethiopia and the Gambia, long criticized for impris-
oning journalists, Senegalese government officials promote free press (they even 
permit the easy circulation of international press), yet the state censures critique 
by charging dissenting media with libel. And Abdoulaye Wade, who is himself a 
lawyer by training, has routinely used untenable treason accusations and other 
forms of political malfeasance to silence potential rivals, most famously in the 
case of Idrissa Seck, a man instrumental in Wade’s ascent to the nation’s top 
office in 2000
5 who—in 2005, after widespread speculation that he might run 
for president—was held in police custody on dubious “corruption allegations” 
stemming from his alleged mismanagement of state funds. Subsequently, there 
were even more serious charges, and Seck was transferred to a prison although 
the new charges were never made public.
6 That Wade secures his political vitality 
through a crime defined as an attempt to sabotage and violate state sovereignty 
is especially ironic given that his economic strategy implicitly hinges on the out-
migration of Senegalese citizens whose remittances account for one of the nation’s 
largest incomes. The challenge for specialists of Senegal to reckon with the charge 
of treason tendered by a nation-state that envisions itself as increasingly border-
less is not the expressed aim of this chapter but still something to be considered 
in what follows, though the state’s power to reconstitute itself, paradoxically, on 
the very grounds through which it displaces its primary responsibility (of, for 
instance, providing its citizens with opportunities for employment) is precisely 
what gives Senegalese politics the criminal quality I hope a forensic inquiry might 
help us theorize.
7
As a method specifically designed to help analysts reconstruct historical 
events—as a theoretical toolkit concerned with tracking agency by ascertaining 
culpability (which is surely this method’s greatest strength and limitation)—the 
discipline of forensics might prove a useful point of engagement regarding the 
crimes that characterize Senegalese postcoloniality.
The Value of Forensics
Forensic anthropology has, historically, been concerned with themes one now 
finds even in the popular television dramas its techniques have inspired (CSI, 
Bones, and Forensic Files): the way human remains figure in ideas about life and 
death and evidence related to criminal cases. In the latter they help investigators 
determine “what really happened.” But given that all narratives are structured 
by certain assumptions, these methods—instead of leading us to the truth—are 
better served helping us consider the politics and assumptions of alterity that 
pal-mara-21.indd   305pal-mara-21.indd   305 7/29/08   9:37:16 AM7/29/08   9:37:16 AM


--- PAGE 315 ---
Transnational Blackness306
structure competing discourses.8 In this way, forensic insights might help us refine 
tools of inquiry in the social sciences. Apart from continuously being infused with 
technologies for deciphering human difference in criminal cases, forensics has 
simultaneously provided a format for enacting compacts that assuage the injured 
party to a civil dispute, though it clearly, in both instances, has been concerned 
with making sense of the historical events that structure legal episodes.
One prevalent story about the origins of forensic science traces it to a famous 
murder in 1905. When an elderly British couple was discovered murdered in 
the shop they owned, the stage was set for a “scientific breakthrough that solved 
one of England’s most brutal murders and forever changed the criminal justice 
system.”
9 But besides this specific concern with tracking the material residue of 
human activity, I would like to emphasize a second, different, argument for the 
origins of forensic science relevant to theoretical issues I raise during the course 
of this chapter.
In this alternate account, the science of forensics was born some time between 
the 1830s and 1840s, when the birth of the railroad industry resulted in sudden, 
unexpected, and tragic deaths in the English countryside. T rying to determine 
how much families and heirs should be compensated, insurance companies were 
“faced with the brand new challenge of trying to assess the money value of a 
human life” (Pietz 1997b, 97).
10 This case, thus, marks a historical shift in civil 
litigation as understood in the Anglo-American legal tradition.
“Criminal laws,” says Rudolph Peters (2005, 1) “give an insight into what a 
society and its rulers regard as its core values.” But since criminal and civil suits 
are often linked to emotional and commercial concerns, forensic insights might 
cue us to emergent forms of symbolic and economic value. As a theoretical frame-
work concerned with the intersection between history, alterity, technology, social 
belonging, and value—as configured in social contexts and cultural artifacts—
forensics might provide a reliable way to excavate the present.
11 In that spirit, this 
discussion draws from several different sources for evidence: speeches, interviews, 
and newspaper articles, such as those I will now discuss, which return us to the 
event sketched at the outset so we might better understand how Senegal became 
the stage for one of Bush’s most significant campaigns against Islamic terrorism.
Before the tragic events of September 11, 2001, were even ten days old, Sen-
egalese President Abdoulaye Wade had already formed an African coalition to 
fight terrorism. What the nation lacked in firepower it made up in enthusiasm. 
Positioning himself as a representative for the African continent, Wade declared 
that his coalition condemned the terrorist acts committed against the United 
States and made it clear that, following the lead of the Western coalition fighting 
terrorism, he would create a committee of seven African nations dedicated to the 
same cause. This was a collective he expected to include, at least, the leaders of 
Nigeria, South Africa, and Algeria, as Wade
12 assured the world he would do his 
part to ensure no African nation financed or otherwise enabled terrorist activi-
ties.
13 Complicating Bush’s idea of a “crusade” against Islamic terrorism, Wade 
remained convinced there were no clandestine activities of this sort underway in 
Senegal despite leading a country that is more than 90 percent Muslim.
14
pal-mara-21.indd   306pal-mara-21.indd   306 7/29/08   9:37:17 AM7/29/08   9:37:17 AM


--- PAGE 316 ---
“Crimes of History” 307
By the time Wade’s summit was convened on October 17 in Dakar, it boasted 
fifteen African heads of state. 15 The countries assembled created a “Déclaration 
de Dakar” ultimately signed by twenty-seven nations, which expressed a convic-
tion that Africa remain free of all terrorist activity whether motivated by political, 
philosophical, ideological, racial, ethnic, or religious concerns. The signatories 
believed the guidelines of the United Nations and the Organization of African 
Unity offered the best blueprints for fighting terrorism and recommended that 
the “Pact Against T errorism,” proposed and coordinated by Senegal, be ratified 
through official protocol.
16
Thirteen days later, President Bush would publicly affirm his appreciation for 
Senegal’s newest foreign policy objective at the “Forum for African Economic and 
Commercial Cooperation.” There, Bush announced that the United States would 
create a $200 million fund to stimulate private investment for countries in sub-
Saharan Africa and would offer American corporations certain protections against 
risk to encourage interest in the continent.
17
African economic recovery was a prominent issue in the world that year. In 
January 2001, Wade had unveiled his Omega Plan, which stressed the need to 
improve physical and human capital in Africa and to bring continent-wide devel-
opment plans under the aegis of a single international authority (Nabudere 2002, 
8). The project was formerly introduced to the public during an international 
conference six months later. Eventually the Omega Plan was combined with South 
African President Thabo Mbeki’s Millennium Partnership for African Recovery pro-
gram. The result was NEPAD, the New Partnership for African Development, an 
initiative the United States has endorsed, alongside other donor nations.
18
The United States has so quickly become one of Senegal’s most important 
financiers and political allies, in fact, that French President Jacques Chirac held 
talks with President Wade in 2004 to “remind” him which country has historically 
been his greatest ally.
19 This alliance, more meaningful for both countries since 
2001, started to assume its present contours during the cold war. While Senegal 
has operated differently from many socialist nations in its historic reluctance to 
align itself with other socialist or communist countries, it was never intimate with 
the United States either. But this trend started to change in the 1980s, “With its 
adamant opposition to any Soviet influence in Africa, the Reagan administration” 
began to see Senegal, which had “sharply criticized Cuban and Soviet involvement 
in Angola and Ethiopia, as a friend and potential ally” (Gellar 1982, 82–83).
20
The “war on terror” (Kraxberger 2005) offered the perfect occasion to bol-
ster this alliance: Bush’s $200 million investment fund sent a message that the 
United States was prepared to support Senegal’s foreign policy both rhetori-
cally and financially. As African nations are frequently expected to demonstrate 
their commitment to democracy as a precondition for receiving foreign direct 
assistance, Senegal’s fight against terrorism, from Bush’s perspective, indicated 
that the country was committed to sustaining and enhancing democratic 
political institutions.
From Bush’s perspective, one either supported or sabotaged the fight against 
terror. He aspired to recruit allies in various international arenas—and these 
pal-mara-21.indd   307pal-mara-21.indd   307 7/29/08   9:37:17 AM7/29/08   9:37:17 AM


--- PAGE 317 ---
Transnational Blackness308
domains did not even have to be explicitly political: he threatened to boycott 
U.S. participation in the 2002 World Cup, for instance, if other nations did not 
demonstrate a satisfactory commitment to fighting against the encroachment of 
global terrorist networks.
Ultimately, however, Bush must have been pleased that he decided not to do 
so because the U.S. national team reached the quarterfinals. This was the subject 
of a friendly conversation with another world leader whose team had also played 
exceptionally well during tournament competition. As they met in 2002 to dis-
cuss each country’s newest foreign policy initiatives, George W . Bush and Abdou-
laye Wade joked that if both teams continued to excel in their respective divisions 
the United States and Senegal would face off in the World Cup Championship.
21 
At the same time, soccer was becoming increasingly significant for Senegalese 
subjects locally.
Thus it seems that even as Senegal worked to bolster public faith in the appear-
ance of its commitment to democracy through its own African-led war against 
terrorism, it was pursuing another course of action partially aimed at improving 
the international perception of Senegalese potential.
This leads us back to a question posed at the outset: why did residents of Gorée 
Island experience slavery again for the first time on the island’s only soccer ter-
rain? T o explore that question, I draw from certain key events surrounding the 
political campaign of President Abdoulaye Wade, on the one hand, and Senegal’s 
participation in the 2002 World Cup, on the other. Soccer, here, is key to the way 
neoliberal aspirations play out.
In 2000, Abdoulaye Wade became Senegal’s third president, because he man-
aged to secure the support of Senegal’s most powerful and disaffected constitu-
ency: the youth. In a nation where more than 50 percent of the population is 
under the age of twenty (Diouf 1996) and where “urban youth” 
22 constitute more 
than 40 percent of the total 48 percent unemployed population,23 the youth labor 
problem is the nation’s most significant economic obstacle.
Wade intended for Senegalese youth to become the engine of national pro-
ductivity—and production, more specifically. His inaugural speech, in which he 
referred to youth as the country’s most valuable “capital resource,” builds to a 
crescendo that closes with the motto that immediately made him famous: “Il n’y 
a pas de secret: il faut travailler, encore travailler, beaucoup travailler, toujours tra-
vailler” [There is no secret [to success]: you should work, work some more, work a 
lot—always work]. Wade’s words were memorialized and resurface in a number of 
popular mbalaax songs throughout Senegal. “Il faut travailler, beaucoup travailler, 
encore travailler, toujours travailler” is always the refrain.
The most popular song was made by the group Pape et Cheikh. But as the 
song ends, the chorus changes, the most significant word in the mantra being 
transformed by the writers’ efforts to index what they surely hoped would be the 
outcome of all this hard work, “Il faut gagner, encore gagner, beaucoup gagner, 
toujours gagner” [You should win, win some more, win a lot, always win].
As Senegal marched through its qualifying matches for the 2002 World 
Cup, national enthusiasm increased with every victory. News that the team was 
pal-mara-21.indd   308pal-mara-21.indd   308 7/29/08   9:37:17 AM7/29/08   9:37:17 AM


--- PAGE 318 ---
“Crimes of History” 309
officially selected occasioned an impromptu parade as the populace flooded 
downtown Dakar in celebration of this momentous achievement. For his part, 
President Wade cut short an official trip to France so he could party with the 
national team at home: “At this time, it’s the most important thing that could 
happen to any country and I will join the team and the nation in celebrating by 
reducing the amount of time I was expected to stay in Paris.” He offered, as well, 
his sentiments about the importance of this moment, “My deepest congratula-
tions go to the courageous Lions who have made history for Senegal.”
24
The president resurfaced in Senegal wearing the jersey of striker El-Hadji 
Diouf to join the “madness” that characterized local celebrations, according to 
one spectator. A few days later, Wade held a special ceremony and concert at 
the presidential palace, where each team member was presented a bonus of 10 
million FCFA (then $15,000),
25 this was in addition to cash rewards offered by 
the nation’s wealthiest residents and families.26 From the perspective of El-Hadji 
Diouf, the team’s best but also its most controversial player, “People” was acting 
like Senegal had already “won the World Cup.”
27
The drama was heightened once fans realized Senegal, in its first World Cup 
match, was slotted to battle France. Supporters stressed the geopolitical dimen-
sions of this occasion, “Senegal-France is an historic match. . . . This is the Euro-
pean country that colonized us. And, God willing, we will beat them.”
28
The government, in its effort to galvanize support for the team, promoted the 
slogan that the Lions de T eranga—as the team is affectionately called—hail from 
“Le Senegal qui gagne” [The Senegal that wins]. Where the slogan came from is 
not altogether clear, but in the days, weeks, and months leading up to the match 
against France, the motto littered fliers, posters, and signs across the country. Le 
Sénégal qui gagne. Once emblazoned across the nation, the phrase stuck.
El-Hadji Diouf seemed profoundly to understand the political consequences 
of this postcolonial drama. As the team swept through qualifying competition on 
the strength of his eight goals, he found himself in the position to command the 
Senegalese forces for this important battle. “It’s like being the leader of a coun-
try,” he explained when asked to describe his feelings about the ensuing match 
against France.
29
So when Senegal pulled off the 0-1 upset victory, fans poured into the 
streets of Dakar gravitating, significantly, around Le Place de l’Independance and 
the presidential palace. Red, yellow, and green Senegalese flags, hats, scarves, 
T-shirts, and African-style boubous, were the only acceptable attire to commem-
orate the occasion.
One supporter, Omar Ly, extended the meaningfulness of this event beyond 
Senegal’s national boundaries. In his words, it was “a victory for black peo-
ple everywhere.” As he elaborated, “I’m Senegalese, but I’ve lived in the U.S. 
and France. I’ve experienced racism. I’m so happy to be here for this.”
30 
Whether in terms of the old or new superpower ally, this win communicated an 
important message.
Yet the victory camouflaged a complicated relationship between Senegal and 
its former colonizer. In the months leading up to the match, Khalilou Fadiga, who 
pal-mara-21.indd   309pal-mara-21.indd   309 7/29/08   9:37:17 AM7/29/08   9:37:17 AM


--- PAGE 319 ---
Transnational Blackness310
actually scored the game-winning goal, was quoted as saying it would be difficult 
for him to play against France, “The truth is that I know the streets of Paris better 
than the streets of Dakar.” Fadiga left Senegal when he was six. He grew up in 
France. These factors would make it tough for him to line up against the represen-
tatives of a place that was so special to him, “but,” he was careful to add “if I play 
in the World Cup finals, I’ve got to try my best to beat them.”
Fadiga’s loyalties ultimately rested with his ancestral land. “I feel Senegalese,” 
he eventually concluded.“When I was home, everybody would speak our lan-
guage and we listened to Senegalese radio and music. We ate Senegalese food.” 
The significance of his heritage went even beyond his acculturation, “I share both 
[French and Senegalese] cultures but I have a lot of family over in Senegal and my 
color is Senegalese.”
31
Fadiga’s affectionate testimony highlights an important paradox. Many of the 
Senegalese players spend at least as much time in Europe as they do in Africa, 
if not more. T o the extent that they spend most of the year playing for club 
teams—in France, Switzerland, and England, for instance—they are seldom in 
Senegal.
32 Yet they are its emissaries on important diplomatic missions, such as 
this one.
This seeming contradiction exposes a significant feature of Senegalese social 
life, especially during the postcolonial period: whether in terms of professional 
athletes, musicians, students, politicians, merchants, or professors, the persons 
occupying the highest ranks of power and wealth are those who have spent some 
period of time absent from the nation (Diouf 2000, 700). Socioeconomic mobil-
ity in this context means moving out to move up.
Still, this team of citizens with multiple national allegiances was constituted, 
in the World Cup moment, as a coalition of the nation’s best talent. Suddenly Le 
Sénégal qui gagne referred not simply to a nation with the ability to win but also to 
one that had proved it could and was destined to do so. Supporters delivered the 
chant when welcoming the national team back home. It was a slogan that, when 
offered, immediately invoked the euphoria attached to this victory. The motto 
followed the national team through World Cup competition.
The president was quick to associate himself with this turn of events. Imme-
diately declaring a national holiday in honor of the team’s win, Wade appeared at 
the national parade in a vehicle with the top open so everyone could see him jug-
gling a soccer ball to commemorate this important event. Having been in office 
only two years at that point, Wade’s presidency had coincided with Senegal’s erup-
tion onto the world scene as a soccer team of renown. His undying emotional 
and financial support for the squad made him into a national hero of sorts, even 
as Wade’s opposition criticized what they considered to be vulgar opportunism. 
“Our president is trying to capture this performance of the Senegalese boys, but I 
think I it is very childish . . . because [this victory] is not the result of some foot-
ball policy,” said Amath Dansokho, leader of the Independence and Labor Party.
33 
For some people, the president had done little—in terms of sports or politics—to 
influence the national athletic successes for which he credited himself.
pal-mara-21.indd   310pal-mara-21.indd   310 7/29/08   9:37:17 AM7/29/08   9:37:17 AM


--- PAGE 320 ---
“Crimes of History” 311
Senegal would win again before tying a match and losing another to finally exit 
World Cup competition. But they had already made history affirming a place in 
the international spotlight for the country and its president.
What are we to make of the team’s success and of its ability to cast a positive 
spin on Abdoulaye Wade’s tenure at the nation’s helm? This athletic spectacle 
eclipsed the government’s inability to cope with recurring energy shortages or 
the countless jobs lost to agricultural stagnation amidst the escalating numbers 
of youth crowding urban areas for the past few decades in search of work as 
a result.
Without even offering an elaborate treatment of the gender issues under con-
sideration, Dansokho provokes us to consider them by complaining about the 
way Wade appropriates the hard work of the Senegalese boys who achieved inter-
national acclaim in athletic competition. Indeed, one of the most prominent 
features of Senegalese neoliberalism has been the way it valorizes masculinity 
in aspirational narratives. From overseas traders to athletes, Senegalese success 
stories frequently privilege male subjects with extensive access to foreign capital. 
This tendency is tied to the way Senegalese politics was characterized during the 
past several decades by increased reliance on structural adjustment and dona-
tions from wealthier nations. The state, instead of building a national infrastruc-
ture, hopes private investment will engender economic revitalization.
34 Taking 
my cue from the way this ideology is entangled with the nation’s commitment 
to highlighting sporting successes, I have tentatively called this set of political 
commitments gagnism.
Gagner is, of course, the French verb meaning “to win.” Concerning Senega-
lese politics, the government is presently proceeding as if it believes neoliberal 
capitalism furnishes a set of rules that, when followed, will automatically yield the 
desired results. This is the same idea promoted in athletic competition, which a 
proper disciplinary regime automatically translates into victory. For that reason, 
the parallels are startling.
Yet the ideology of gagnism is rather more elaborate than Senegal’s commitment 
to winning by pursuing this particular formula.
35 Athletic competition always 
presumes an idealized subject imagined to be best suited for certain sporting con-
tests. Just as teams—as firms—try their best to select the athletes most capable 
of attaining desired results, a key aspect of Senegalese neoliberalism involves con-
vincing potential donors that it has achieved a form worthy of their investment.
36 
Every country is expected to fit a particular profile: democracy according to a par-
ticular definition, for instance. Otherwise, it is considered unfit for sponsorship 
and is, in these instances, disqualified from competition altogether (Taylor 2005; 
Pender 2001).
37 NEPAD, after all, “calls on African leaders to put their houses in 
order in exchange for foreign direct investment” (Owusu 2003: 1660, emphasis 
added; cf. African Development Report 2004: 28–29).
38
The male-focused image of success and emphasis on foreign investment that 
structure Senegal’s pursuit of prosperity help explain why a soccer field was the 
pal-mara-21.indd   311pal-mara-21.indd   311 7/29/08   9:37:17 AM7/29/08   9:37:17 AM


--- PAGE 321 ---
Transnational Blackness312
site for a neoliberal spectacle that provoked comparison with this region’s most 
inhumane traffic in human commodities historically. All of my interviewees 
insisted that, during George W . Bush’s visit to Gorée, the entire population of 
the island was taken to a soccer stadium and locked inside. I later learned it was 
a sandlot soccer field, barricaded to prevent escape. Yet by referring to the field as 
a solid fortification, interviewees suggested the makeshift barriers had, for them, 
become concrete enclosures.
Though U.S. foreign policy in Senegal has crystallized through the successive 
visits of different presidents, interviewees contrasted the repressive treatment that 
accompanied Bush’s arrival with the enriching experience of hosting Bill and Hil-
lary Clinton in 1998. “Bill would be in the countryside playing with little chil-
dren,” a thirty-something-year-old female vendor insisted. Hillary, meanwhile, 
participated in a debate on female genital mutilation.
39 Bush’s 2003 visit, by con-
trast, was considerably more coercive: reporters noticed that, even before the U.S. 
president arrived, security personnel had placed his anticipated hotel under strict 
surveillance,
40 besides cutting down centuries-old baobab trees to enhance visibil-
ity and, ultimately, imprisoning much of the island population on a soccer ter-
rain. And few people missed the profound irony that all this took place a few feet 
from the historic Maison des Esclaves (slave house or slave “dungeon”) (Hartman 
2002, 766), which is responsible for the tourism that usually provides this island 
economy’s primary revenue.
Some scholars have, in recent years, challenged Gorée’s historical legitimacy 
as a central port in the transatlantic slave trade, suggesting the current site of the 
Maison des Esclaves served primarily as a private residence for one Anne Pépin 
(Hinchman 2004a, 49). Although Pépin sometimes engaged in various minor 
forms of overseas exchange and occasionally held enslaved Africans in the base-
ment of the residence (Hinchman 2004b), the Maison was apparently not the 
pivotal site of Atlantic dispersion it is often imagined to be (Austen 2001). Given 
all this, the slavery discourses that emerged in the aftermath of July 8, 2003, seem 
at best exaggerated, at worst, unjustified.
41
The Bush visit, though, ultimately hinges on a profound irony: the technique 
of coercion used to subdue Senegalese peoples in that moment reproduced the 
way enslavement historically occurred on Gorée Island more faithfully than any 
event that has ever occurred at the Maison des Esclaves, for slavery in this locale 
typically did not proceed through dungeons and warehousing. Instead, enslaved 
Africans were usually hoarded together and bound in open-air captiveries (Samb, 
ed. 1997),
42 awaiting placement onto ships that would send them across the 
Atlantic. The residents of Gorée Island conveyed to me that, besides a few invited 
guests, they were treated similarly on July 8, 2003.
43
Though Bush’s speech was ostensibly directed toward the people of Sen-
egal, many were too busy fighting heat exhaustion and too far removed from 
the podium to hear his address. The speech nevertheless had a purpose and an 
audience; for these reasons, we might consider how this address could be read 
from the vantage of Senegal’s new relationship with the United States.
pal-mara-21.indd   312pal-mara-21.indd   312 7/29/08   9:37:17 AM7/29/08   9:37:17 AM


--- PAGE 322 ---
“Crimes of History” 313
With the power and resources given to us, the United States seeks to bring peace 
where there is conflict, hope where there is suffering, and liberty where there is 
tyranny. And these commitments bring me and other distinguished leaders of my 
government across the Atlantic to Africa.
—George W . Bush, in his address at Gorée Island
Beginning some time around 11: 45 a.m., the U.S. Commander-in-Chief situ-
ated his remarks in the context of transatlantic slavery:
For hundreds of years on this island, peoples of different continents met in fear 
and cruelty. T oday we gather in respect and friendship, mindful of past wrongs and 
dedicated to the advance of human liberty.
At this place, liberty and life were stolen and sold. Human beings were delivered 
and sorted, and weighed, and branded with the marks of commercial enterprises, 
and loaded as cargo on a voyage without return. One of the largest migrations in 
history was also one of the greatest crimes of history.
Below the decks, the middle passage was a hot, narrow, sunless nightmare; weeks 
and months of confinement and abuse and confusion on a strange and lonely sea. 
Some refused to eat, preferring death to any future their captors might prepare for 
them. Some who were sick were thrown over the side. Some rose up in violent rebel-
lion, delivering the closest thing to justice on a slave ship. Many acts of defiance and 
bravery are recorded. Countless others, we will never know.
Here Bush endorses resistance as a feasible strategy for Africans who refuse to 
accept their own captivity. Perhaps Bush believes that, when faced with a “crimi-
nal,” or tyrannical regime people ought to pursue their freedom by any means 
necessary.
And yet, Senegal became an important U.S. ally at this historical juncture 
because of President Wade’s expressed disdain for Islamic jihads waged by Mus-
lims who see the United States as an imperial regime. But Bush certainly could 
not be speaking about them. The “War on T error” entailed an effort to identify 
rogue militants associated with an international axis of evil, not commending 
people who declare themselves revolutionaries in the face of a political super-
power. This phraseology, then, applauds a nebulous sense of resistance that does 
not correspond to any particular historical actors or events. Perhaps this explains 
why no specific personages or sites of struggle are named, though Bush would be 
more specific at other moments in his speech.
Those who lived to see land again were displayed, examined, and sold at auctions 
across nations in the Western Hemisphere. Because families were often separated, 
many were denied even the comfort of suffering together. . . .
In America, enslaved Africans learned the story of the exodus from Egypt and 
set their own hearts on a promised land of freedom. Enslaved Africans discovered a 
suffering Savior and found he was more like themselves than their masters. Enslaved 
Africans heard the ringing promises of the Declaration of Independence and asked 
the self-evident question, “then why not me?”
pal-mara-21.indd   313pal-mara-21.indd   313 7/29/08   9:37:17 AM7/29/08   9:37:17 AM


--- PAGE 323 ---
Transnational Blackness314
In this passage, Bush establishes a parallel between the people of Senegal and the 
descendants of “enslaved Africans” who now live in the United States. Such a 
move is rhetorically strategic, since in 2001 the U.S. government was criticized 
for leaving a United Nations conference on racism in Durban, South Africa where 
many believed it would have been asked to issue an apology for its participation 
in the transatlantic slave trade and to deliver a formal statement concerning its 
position on the issue of reparations for African Americans. By establishing a cor-
relation between African Americans and Africans in Senegal, Bush commends the 
latter while paying homage to the former, yet he avoids detailing a specific com-
mitment to either population.
In this same phrasing, Bush speaks of the Church’s role in the slave trade but 
does not condemn it. Instead of addressing the contradictions that structured 
Christianity in the context of plantation enslavement in the United States, Bush 
submits that European Christians were not Christian enough. Thus, Africans 
who discerned spiritual lessons in the Bible taught Christians what they really 
needed to learn about humanity, so all those “generations of oppression” could 
not “defeat the purposes of God,” intentions that perhaps align with Bush’s ten-
dency, in the aftermath of September 11, 2001’s devastating World T rade Center 
attacks, to use “religious arguments that encourage[d]” the U.S. military’s “aggres-
sive tendencies” in his speeches (Lincoln 2007).
In the struggle of the centuries, America learned that freedom is not the possession 
of one race. We know with equal certainty that freedom is not the possession of one 
nation. This belief in the natural rights of man, this conviction that justice should 
reach wherever the sun passes leads America into the world. . . .
African peoples are now writing your own story of liberty. Africans have over-
come the arrogance of colonial powers, overturned the cruelties of apartheid, and 
made it clear that dictatorship is not the future of any nation on this continent. In 
the process, Africa has produced heroes of liberation—leaders like Mandela, Seng-
hor, Nkrumah, Kenyatta, Selassie and Sadat. And many visionary African leaders, 
such as my friend, have grasped the power of economic and political freedom to lift 
whole nations and put forth bold plans for Africa’s development.
44
The narrative of “liberty” that figures prominently in this speech glorifies Afri-
can “fathers” of independence: a roll call that includes Senghor and someone 
Bush refers to as his “friend,” who remains unnamed. Most likely he is referring 
to Wade, who he commends for having “grasped the power of economic and 
political freedom to lift whole nations and put forth bold plans for Africa’s devel-
opment.” Here, Bush affirms his support for NEPAD, an initiative that, in the 
words of Francis Owusu (2003, 1655), “support[s] neoliberalism and sees global 
integration as the key to Africa’s development” (see also Nabudere 2002; Taylor 
2005). Wade, as I have indicated, was one of the proposal’s main architects and is 
one of its biggest advocates in Africa.
Because Africans and Americans share a belief in the values of liberty and dig-
nity, we must share in the labor of advancing those values. In a time of growing 
pal-mara-21.indd   314pal-mara-21.indd   314 7/29/08   9:37:17 AM7/29/08   9:37:17 AM


--- PAGE 324 ---
“Crimes of History” 315
commerce across the globe, we will ensure that the nations of Africa are full partners 
in the trade and prosperity of the world. Against the waste and violence of civil 
war, we will stand together for peace. Against the merciless terrorists who threaten 
every nation, we will wage an unrelenting campaign of justice. Confronted with 
desperate hunger, we will answer with human compassion and the tools of human 
technology. In the face of spreading disease, we will join with you in turning the 
tide against AIDS in Africa.
We know that these challenges can be overcome, because history moves in the 
direction of justice. There is a voice of conscience and hope in every man and 
woman that will not be silenced—what Martin Luther King called a certain kind 
of fire that no water could put out. That flame could not be extinguished at the 
Birmingham jail. It could not be stamped out at Robben Island Prison. It was seen 
in the darkness here at Gorée Island, where no chain could bind the soul. This 
untamed fire of justice continues to burn in the affairs of man, and it lights the way 
before us.
May God bless you all.
45
And with that benediction Bush ends his speech, though even then it is not clear 
who he was addressing. Given the way Senegalese citizens in the immediate vicin-
ity were, by and large, locked away, it seems the speech was aimed not at them but 
at an audience located elsewhere who would apprehend the speech as it would be 
mediated by print journalism, snapshots, and televisual snippets.
What was he saying to them? Bush’s initial concern with the African American 
protest tradition blends easily, in the latter part of his address, with the political 
inclinations of all “Americans,” typified by the utopian impulse Martin Luther 
King, Jr., embodied. African Americans, as far as Bush was concerned, had joined 
his “unrelenting campaign for justice.” But in speaking of a shared commitment 
to “dignity . . . [i]n a time of growing commerce across the globe,” Bush implicitly 
references the legacy of Senegalese traders in the United States, by now so preva-
lent that a section of Harlem’s renowned 125th street marketplace has become 
known locally as Le Petit Sénégal. In that regard, the epigraph to this chapter offers 
a relationship between “migrations” and “crime” we should perhaps consider at 
greater length, especially in terms of the distinctions the president draws between 
“Africans” and “Americans”: “We are never so steeped in history as when we pre-
tend not to be” (T rouillot 1997, xix)
While theorizing the activities of Senegalese actors in U.S. commercial 
spheres, some scholars have been complicit in reproducing the dubious notion 
that their success grows from a work ethic that sets them apart from their Afri-
can American peers operating in shared contexts. In some of the literature, the 
African American traders who work alongside Senegalese merchants are, under-
standably, beyond the scholar’s analytic focus (Buggenhagen 2003). Elsewhere, 
though, some writers uncritically recycle the ethno-racial stereotype that, “Enter-
ing legally, working furtively, leaving harmlessly,” the Senegalese trader is a model 
citizen (Millman 1997, 180). The anthropologist Paul Stoller (2002, 88–90), in 
his discussion of New York City’s Senegalese traders, troubles the assumption they 
are all law-abiding citizens but nevertheless imbues them with a devotedness to 
pal-mara-21.indd   315pal-mara-21.indd   315 7/29/08   9:37:17 AM7/29/08   9:37:17 AM


--- PAGE 325 ---
Transnational Blackness316
their work ethic, which implies that other people occupying the African American 
communities in which they tend to operate fail to achieve comparable levels of 
prosperity because they do not apply themselves to the same principles (cf. Mill-
man 1997, 177). When these merchants arrived in the Big Apple for commercial 
opportunities in the early 1980s, Stoller tells us, they immediately applied to the 
Consumer Affairs Board for vending licenses. As a result of the excessive harass-
ment state agents rained upon them, the traders quickly racked up thousands of 
dollars worth of fines. As a result, these vendors quietly allowed their licenses to 
expire then “continued their operations outside the regulatory aegis of New York 
City” (Stoller 2000, 88). This, from Stoller’s perspective, is a success story even 
though these merchants had willingly entered the unregulated—and illicit—in-
formal economic sector (90). Not, in their view, an indication of the harassment 
traders racialized as black are likely to experience, Stoller and others consider this 
one more example of the way “West African merchants in New York City use their 
familial traditions to construct long-distance trade networks in North America.” 
Stoller is especially interested in the way African actors use the perceived cultural 
impoverishment of African Americans as an economic advantage—as a strategy 
for marketing “Afrocentricity” (Stoller 2000, 90). Little regard is shown here for 
the way African Americans manage to develop economic opportunities despite 
battling state-sponsored forms of social exclusion (Venkatesh 2000; Wacquant 
1999) or the moments when Senegalese traders and African Americans embrace 
shared categories of racial or cultural identification (Ralph 2007), at times in the 
context of illicit enterprise.
By contrast when Akon released the hit single “Locked Up” in 2004, he was 
joined by the African American rapper Styles P . Styles who, to date, has garnered 
more critical attention than commercial sales and is well-known for gritty tales 
about drug trafficking and critique of hypocrisy in the criminal justice system. 
Appropriately, Akon summoned Styles for a song that discussed his own trials 
with law enforcement officials. The album, tellingly entitled, Trouble, hit shelves 
soon after Akon was released from prison for an auto theft conviction. Subse-
quently, he formed the label “Konvict Musik,” and showed up in songs from a 
range of rap artists—from Snoop to Young Jeezy to Eminem—between 2004 
and 2006. In 2005 Styles P joined Akon in Dakar for a concert; during their 
stay the Senegalese artist was declared a “youth ambassador,” (Checkoway 2007, 
92) besides being received at Wade’s presidential palace. In this moment, Akon 
embodied the Senegalese emigrant’s success story: son of the famed percussionist 
Mior Thiam, Akon was raised in the United States where he eventually became 
a top-selling recording artist. Yet what separates this story from others of a simi-
lar ilk is the sense that Akon came of age in unmonitored economic enclaves 
alongside African American actors likewise interested in seizing available eco-
nomic opportunities. For Akon this entailed being the “leader of a national car-
theft operation” (Checkoway 2007, 94).
46
T o his credit Stoller, in moments, seems concerned to highlight the socio-
logical dimensions of Senegal’s “astute entrepreneurs” who seize the “economic 
pal-mara-21.indd   316pal-mara-21.indd   316 7/29/08   9:37:17 AM7/29/08   9:37:17 AM


--- PAGE 326 ---
“Crimes of History” 317
advantage” to be gained from the new forces of “global restructuring” (Stoller 
2000, 88–90), yet what is meant to be a flattering portrayal of Senegalese ven-
dors unfortunately—in overstating the role of “familial traditions”—reproduces 
a primitive sense of African genius, which is ultimately a dehumanizing gesture. 
Besides that, his sense that Senegalese immigrants to the United States invariably 
understand themselves to occupy a different ethno-racial category is empirically 
wrong.
47 Akon, when questioned by law enforcement officials about the stolen 
luxury cars he regularly resold, strategically used American stereotypes about Afri-
cans to his advantage, “[I would speak] with an accent as if my English ain’t no 
good . . . like I didn’t know what they’re talking about. . . . [The police] bought it. 
And I stuck with that story forever” (Checkoway 2007, 94–95).
Stoller’s assessment ultimately relies too heavily on an absolute irreconcilability 
of racial categories one that, in quite a few instances, sabotages his analytic. In 
place of this ethnic reification, I would suggest greater recognition of the indeter-
minacy of identity that arises in moments as part of the African diasporic expe-
rience and which sometimes structures commercial and affective engagements. 
While conducting research among Senegalese basketball players—in Dakar and 
in New York City—who aspired to play professional basketball in the United 
States, I regularly encountered players who insisted they had a natural advantage 
over competitors from other racial categories simply because they were “black, 
just like African Americans” (Ralph 2006b).
The African American encounter not simply with Senegalese people but also 
with the nation of Senegal forces one, in moments, to confront the tangled web of 
Diaspora.
48 I first visited Gorée Island with Mark, a graduate student in psychol-
ogy from Howard University who was, like me, in Senegal to conduct research for 
a doctoral thesis. Mark was interested in seeing Gorée Island for what he hoped 
would enable him to connect with a vital part of his personal legacy, one which 
geographical distance and alternate financial obligations had previously prevented 
him from experiencing. Mark once asked some of our Senegalese friends whether 
they might be interested in accompanying him to Gorée and was subsequently 
outraged when they responded with enthusiastic offers to join him for a swim in 
Gorée’s beautiful beaches. Mark was disgusted by the thought of lounging in the 
same body of water where some of his ancestors had drowned centuries before, 
though the U.S. dollars in his possession still eventually contributed to Gorée’s 
primary industry, a significant component of which is “heritage” tourism of the 
kind he typified. Thus Gorée achieves a symbolic resonance for vacationers, mer-
chants, and visitors, evidencing a complicated set of relationships too easily elided 
in some of the scholarly literature and in Bush’s Gorée Island address.
The U.S. Commander-in-Chief’s extended political meditation on the affec-
tive ties between Africans and African Americans—as well as his implicit theo-
rization of the way people inhabiting the former position come to occupy the 
latter—invites comparison with one recent accomplished, albeit anecdotal, dis-
cussion of these processes.
pal-mara-21.indd   317pal-mara-21.indd   317 7/29/08   9:37:17 AM7/29/08   9:37:17 AM


--- PAGE 327 ---
Transnational Blackness318
Saidiya’s Hartman’s acclaimed memoir, Lose Your Mother, evidences one writ-
er’s journey through scholarly discourse, into and then beyond archives, across 
the Atlantic to the slave castles (or dungeons) of Cape Coast and Elmina, Ghana. 
Breathtaking in its prose Hartman’s account is, from its opening pages, framed as 
a case of unrequited longing for an ancestral connection. Brilliant as an exposi-
tion of diasporic angst, Hartman, like Stoller, unfortunately treats categories of 
identification with undue veracity.
Hartman (2007, 4) in her account is, from the moment she arrives in Accra, 
treated as a “foreigner from across the sea.” A “stranger,” in her words, as “ con-
firmed by her appearance”: a “vinyl” jacket, a “gait best suited to navigating the 
streets of Manhattan,” and “German walking shoes.” This sense that appearance 
provides a reliable way to track Afrodiasporic difference includes, for Hartman, 
phenotypic distinctions. In her “jumble of features,” Hartman writes, “no certain 
line of origin could be traced,” as if to contrast her own hybrid heritage with the 
ethnic affiliations of her Ghanaian counterparts: “Clearly, I was not Fanti, or 
Ashanti, or Ewe or Ga” (Hartman 2007, 5).
I do not mean to suggest that Hartman invents the social exclusion she experi-
ences. In her account she is, immediately upon her arrival, understood to be obruni 
(a designation variously understood as “white, foreign, or stranger,” depending on 
the context). Curious, though, for a scholar of the Afrodiasporic world, she credits 
this term with scientific precision (“I didn’t relish this label. . . . But then I learned 
to accept it. After all, I was a stranger from across the sea” (Hartman 2007, 4, 
emphasis added).
49
The certainty with which Hartman understands herself to be a stranger undoes 
the complicated indeterminacy of diasporic belonging theorized in much of the 
scholarly literature (Edwards 2003, 2001, 1998; Clifford 1997; Tölölyan 1996; 
Hall 1990) especially, for instance, in Kenneth Warren’s “Appeals for (Mis)rec-
ognition: Theorizing the Diaspora.” Langston Hughes’ frustration at not being 
received as an African in Liberia despite wanting to be seen in that light under-
scores a “comedy of misrecognition where Hughes who appeals for misrecogni-
tion as an African is misrecognized as white,” meanwhile his comrade, “George 
who appeals for misrecognition as a Kentuckian is misrecognized as African.” 
These necessarily imprecise performances of geo-racial positioning highlight, for 
Warren, “the condition of the diasporan subject” (Warren 1993, 400), which 
is marked by identities that crystallize in moments but never in any absolute 
manner. Hartman, by contrast, confines the African American to a very specific 
“slot” (T rouillot 2003) in the diasporic imagination, “We all avoided the word 
‘slave,’ but we all knew who was who.” Yet the complicated history of the African 
Diaspora always threatens to unravel the certainty with which Hartman’s discus-
sion proceeds.
50
Given that the transatlantic slave trade was structured in part through histori-
cal contingencies, even actors who occupy fixed positions at one moment might 
find themselves in other roles at another point in the evolution of this economic 
pal-mara-21.indd   318pal-mara-21.indd   318 7/29/08   9:37:17 AM7/29/08   9:37:17 AM


--- PAGE 328 ---
“Crimes of History” 319
and social matrix. In other words, if even Africans who were complicit in the sale 
of people from elsewhere on the continent could themselves later be enslaved, as 
we know, “who,” indeed, “is who”? Hartman is quite correct to note that a slave 
is always, to some extent, an “outsider.” But given that outsiders are produced 
from the inside—and vice versa—these seem more like historical gradations than 
ontological (or even epistemological) categories.
51 They certainly are not categori-
cal differences, as they appear too often in Hartman’s work.52
The Senegalese case makes it especially difficult to retain such a view since, 
despite the presence of distinct ethnic affiliations, Wolof language and culture 
constitute the shared social currency of the country.
53 And Senegalese political 
aspirations retain a fluid quality based on the preponderance of pragmatic Islamic 
traditions that, in moments, blend with Christianity but in other ways accom-
modate different political sensibilities as well as one historical consequence of a 
nineteenth-century French colonial experiment that granted Senegalese inhabit-
ants of the Quatre Communes citizenship rights (Diouf 1998, 671–94; Johnson 
1971). The cosmopolitan quality of Senegalese social life has fed transnational 
labor migrations that intensified during recent decades of economic distress, so 
that Senegalese people of various social classes benefit from the circulation of 
European luxury goods through informal domestic markets and as part of remit-
tance packages sent home from overseas (Buggenhagen 2003). Although Hart-
man felt the sting of social dislocatedness as a result of the “German” shoes she 
wore upon her arrival in Accra, commodities from wealthy nations alone do not 
render one a cultural outsider in Dakar. I support Hartman’s (2007, 234) ulti-
mate endeavor to seek diasporic solidarity in a shared commitment to ongoing 
political transformation instead of simply in a sense of kinship or descent. But I 
think the promising critical project she outlines requires greater compassion for 
the ingenuity of historical narratives that manage to override ritualized violence 
and closer attention to the contradictory and inconsistent ways identities become 
institutionalized, since social actors discover their political inclinations, in part, 
by developing forms of historical consciousness that prepare them to negotiate 
different subject positions simultaneously.
The complicated relationship between race, ethnicity, gender, sexuality, and 
nation that shapes diasporic relationships also structures political performances as 
evidenced in Bush’s Gorée Island speech, to which I now return.
The U.S. president emphasized in his speech, the need to make Senegalese 
people “full partners in the trade and prosperity of the world.” The alternative—
not being “full partners . . . in . . . trade”—is linked, in his view, to all manner 
of social problems, including the spread of AIDS and civil wars—both infectious 
diseases that, apparently, run rampant in Africa. Not to “move in [this] direction,” 
too, would fuel the efforts of “merciless terrorists.” Senegal’s historic mission, in 
Bush’s view, would not allow it to do that, given the way its present geopolitical 
projects dovetail with the spirit that sustained Martin Luther King, Jr., in his 
Birmingham jail and Nelson Mandela in his Robben Island cell. These leaders 
pal-mara-21.indd   319pal-mara-21.indd   319 7/29/08   9:37:18 AM7/29/08   9:37:18 AM


--- PAGE 329 ---
Transnational Blackness320
endured imprisonment to awaken a sense of “hope” that dwells in the “human 
heart” of every “man and woman.”
Bush’s message was apparently directed at all segments of the population, 
which explains its gender-inclusive phraseology. Yet, the leaders mentioned were 
all men. How are Senegalese women to understand the part they play in the “full 
partnership” that the country’s historical arc is leading it to embrace in the world? 
Will this “partnership” be realized as well in the social spaces with which they are 
familiar? Or does their exclusion here correspond to the way the enslavement of 
Senegalese people is hidden and silenced as a seemingly necessary part of this new 
economic enterprise?
What of the specific images used to anchor Bush’s address, in particular the 
sense communicated toward the end of his speech that Martin Luther King, Jr., 
and Nelson Mandela dramatize and communicate to the world a powerful mes-
sage of “hope”? Who, after all, was charged with maintaining “hope” for the Sen-
egalese people incarcerated during that same moment in the center of the island 
where they reside? This question is not mine alone: the French word for “hope” 
(espoir) was scrawled on the wall of the Gorée Island site where Senegalese peoples 
were detained.
This word has a special significance for me, based on my researches and tra-
vails in Senegal. As I moved back and forth between my base in Chicago and my 
research site, friends would invariably ask what I could do to facilitate their career 
pursuits. The word “espoir” was always used to articulate their aspirations.
My friend Lamine, a sculptor, once asked if I might be interested in join-
ing him for a new commercial venture. If I could front the money for a major 
purchase of wood from Mali, Lamine suggested, he could produce a number of 
sculptures in bulk, then split the profits with me. He recognized this was a long-
term investment but was sure we both stood to gain: “I know it’s a lot to ask, 
Michael,” he conceded, “But you’re my last hope [dernier espoir].”
Some months after a research trip to Senegal in 2002, I received a letter from 
Pierre, a security guard in the home where I had stayed. He was writing to ask 
if I knew of any security or law enforcement opportunities in the United States 
for which he might be suited. As the letter drew to a close he, too, made sure to 
indicate that I was his dernier espoir (last hope).
Significantly, I think, the phrase of note was dernier espoir—always in French, 
even for my friends who usually only spoke Wolof and conceded they were barely 
literate in the European language. I still struggle to grasp the semantic significance 
of communicating the concept in French, but I suspect it has do in part with the 
sense that opportunities exist in a context connected to the elsewhere. For Sen-
egalese people usually start to learn Wolof from the moment they are born. French 
then, as the language of official business and formal education, dwells in a register 
of expanded possibility.
This term “espoir” as an index of desperation stood apposite another, which 
was used to articulate the prospect of prosperity: gagner.
pal-mara-21.indd   320pal-mara-21.indd   320 7/29/08   9:37:18 AM7/29/08   9:37:18 AM


--- PAGE 330 ---
“Crimes of History” 321
Lamine and Pierre (who don’t know each other), used to both say they needed 
my assistance, because in Senegal it was difficile à gagner quelque chose (difficult 
to find something). Among others, a former basketball player I once interviewed 
likewise insisted that, “In Senegal, it is difficile à gagner quelque chose [difficult 
to find a job] unless you are well-connected [bien placé].” The phrase difficile à 
gagner quelque chose, though relatively simple, resists translation; the sense being 
communicated is that it is “hard to find something” or “difficult to find work.” 
But the word gagner was usually deployed by interviewees to speak about pros-
pects for earning money. They hoped an opportunity would enable them to “earn” 
an income. Gagner, then, means at once to “find,” “win,” or “earn,” revenue.
In this context, being imprisoned on Gorée Island during a visit from the 
“leader of the free world” reminded Senegalese citizens of the extent to which 
they are “trapped” in a marginal economic and political position, just as it led 
other Senegalese citizens I interviewed to the conclusion that, although the treat-
ment they received was indeed “unjust,” the Bush visit was something the country 
“needed” to improve its stature in the world of nations:
What is ghastly and really almost hopeless in our racial situation now is that the 
crimes we have committed are so great and so unspeakable. (Baldwin 1965, 10)
As important were the silences and evasions. (Hartman 2007, 16)
Why would the Senegalese state enable its population to be “enslaved”? Why 
did the trope of enslavement figure so prominently in Bush’s visit and why such 
emphasis on the criminal nature of this cruel traffic in human beings? The pre-
cise motivations driving this political performance are difficult to discern, but 
this sort of narrative has become more frequent in recent years (cf. Brooks, ed. 
1999). Michel-Rolph T rouillot (2000, 171) for instance, has noted that, “collec-
tive historical apologies are increasing worldwide.” Not simply evidence of but 
also factors in historical transformation, “these rituals of apology create pastness 
by connecting existing collectivities to past ones that either perpetrated wrongs or 
were victimized,” even though, frequently, the events to which these “apologies” 
refer took place several centuries before. It is not always clear, then, who is even 
being addressed in many of these speech events.
Still, given that the point about such claims may be less what they assert 
than the fact of their assertion” (T rouillot 1995, xvii), we might look for the 
true significance of a performance like this one in the structure of the message 
and its relationship to the historical context the utterance helps to construct, 
“As transformative rituals, apologies always involve time . . . [t]hey mark a 
temporal transition: [a] wrong done in the past is recognized as such, and this 
acknowledgement itself creates or verifies a new temporal plane, a present ori-
ented toward the future” (T rouillot 2000, 174). Indeed, from the evidence mar-
shaled in this chapter, it seems people from both Senegal and the United States 
were interested in using evidence of a “wrong done in the past”—in this case, 
pal-mara-21.indd   321pal-mara-21.indd   321 7/29/08   9:37:18 AM7/29/08   9:37:18 AM


--- PAGE 331 ---
Transnational Blackness322
the transatlantic traffic in human beings—to erect “a present oriented toward” a 
mutually beneficial future.
In a time of economic desperation, moments like July 8, 2003, emerge as an 
opportunity for the nation to attract a capital commitment that could, potentially, 
reverse its economic course. The victims of the “enslavement” that characterized 
Bush’s Gorée Island visit might be skeptical of the message he promoted, but a 
message need not be well-received to transform a social context. For at least the 
second time, delivering a speech at Gorée Island helped a U.S. president cultivate 
foreign policy in Africa while strategically evading the social consequences of the 
United States’ historic participation in the transatlantic slave trade. As a way to 
meditate on the way alterity structures the multiple mediations this sort of politi-
cal performance requires, I quote this passage from U.S. News & World Report 
about Clinton’s visit to Africa in 1998:
In stopovers in Africa last week, President Clinton was careful not to issue a formal 
apology for America’s slave past, but rather to express regret and contrition. One . . . 
factor—rarely discussed by the White House—is concern over the legal implications 
of an apology. If Clinton, as head of the U.S. government, issues such a statement, it 
could increase legal, as well as moral, pressure for reparations to the descendants of 
slaves . . . That’s why the White House is particularly grateful for the Rev. Jesse Jack-
son’s defense of Clinton’s handling of the issue. White House officials say privately 
that Jackson, who accompanied Clinton to Africa, has been especially effective in 
giving Clinton credibility on the apology question within the press corps and, they 
believe, with many African-Americans.
54
As evident as much in the speech Bush delivered as the one Clinton avoided, 
political performances frequently rely on “abortive rituals”—infelicitous speech 
acts that nevertheless resonate with audience members, because of what they 
superficially signify (T rouillot 2000)—to help people “erase” past actions that 
would otherwise undermine present pursuits perhaps, in this case, by indicating 
the escape route the perpetrators of historical “crimes” have taken.
But though T rouillot’s erudition helps us to understand what is at stake in 
these speech acts, his term for them—”historical apologies”—is something of a 
misnomer in this case. Bush, despite the lyrical gymnastics he undertook to elabo-
rate the horrors of transatlantic enslavement, did not actually offer the apology for 
slavery many feel is long overdue.
55 T rouillot’s suggestion that apologies are used 
to create “pastness” between the perpetrator and recipient of a “wrong” perhaps 
explains why the United States government has never heeded that request, neither 
at the 2001 United Nations World Conference on Racism where the U.S. delega-
tion left early nor on this fateful day at Gorée. Maybe there is something about 
the historical trajectory of U.S. political and economic ambitions that, from the 
perspective of the state, renders slavery inhumane but prevents it from being con-
sidered “wrong.” Maybe even beyond the widely acknowledged point that slavery 
and freedom are conditions of each other’s possibility (Palmié 1985, ix, Morgan 
1975) slavery, as a form of economic extraction, remains difficult to disentangle 
pal-mara-21.indd   322pal-mara-21.indd   322 7/29/08   9:37:18 AM7/29/08   9:37:18 AM


--- PAGE 332 ---
“Crimes of History” 323
from the structure of capitalism (Graeber 2006), although it is imagined in popu-
lar discourses as part of a rather different historical epoch. This is a sorry state of 
affairs, although apologies of the kind we see here (even when they are felicitous) 
serve only to undermine and eclipse present wrongs—“crimes,” even.
56 In that 
regard, can we consider Bush’s meditation on slavery as, if not exactly an apology, 
a kind of confession—though one that, in line with the Fifth Amendment to the 
U.S. Bill of Rights, lacks the power to incriminate its issuer?
With an eye to forensics, we might conclude that “slavery” emerged as a way to 
categorize the injustices perpetrated on Gorée Island, because it captures the com-
plex symbolic and economic exchanges taking place between the United States and 
Senegal.
57 A discourse on slavery is always a commentary across regimes of value: 
the interior emotional complexity of the human condition versus the economic 
value that can potentially be extracted from laboring bodies.
58 T o the extent that 
many African nations are in the curious position of having to demonstrate a cer-
tain fitness for democracy as a prerequisite for foreign aid, these symbolic displays 
have concrete economic consequences—and “legal implications.” Countries like 
Senegal cannot simply promise they are committed to democracy, their devotion to 
this political ideal must be demonstrated, just as a legally binding promise cannot 
simply be affirmed but requires the additional element of “material consideration” 
(Drake 1905). William Pietz (2002, 38) offers an example that, in the interest of 
brevity, makes this point forcefully. In referring to the cinematic reproduction of 
John Grisham’s novel The Client, Pietz describes a scene where a young boy who 
will stand trial for his knowledge of a mob murder “hires a sympathetic lawyer 
by handling her a crumpled dollar bill”: “The real transfer of even this nominal 
sum can cause a contractual relationship, in this case the lawyer-client relation, 
to come into existence. . . . Although she accepts the dollar, the lawyer does not 
regard it as a partial payment for her services. It is just [a retainer,] the technical 
requirement for establishing the contractual relationship.”
On the face of it, the scenario Pietz discusses here has little to do with Senegal 
or the events that took place on July 8, 2003. No formal legal document was 
prepared to confirm Senegal’s commitment to democracy or even to assure that 
the United States would serve as the country’s representative in any legal arena.
59 
Still, in being packaged and presented using the same techniques deployed by 
those who enslaved Africans centuries before, the population of Gorée appears 
as a bundle of value that, while not exchangeable in any concrete form, provides 
Senegalese consent to the terms of this informal contractual arrangement. Which 
is why, although, “The requirement to give up control over some material object 
that in value might be a mere trifle might sound like a pointless formality or an 
empty ritual left over from a more primitive age consideration . . . as a positive 
doctrine and concrete legal reality . . . has [in fact] survived to the present day 
both as a legal object in judicial decisions and,” even more relevant to this case, 
“as a practical reality in social transactions” (Pietz 2002: 39). In this “transaction,” 
Bush traded on the spectral capital afforded by the virtual enslavement of Senega-
lese citizens for his own purposes: to cleanse the United States of any culpability 
pal-mara-21.indd   323pal-mara-21.indd   323 7/29/08   9:37:18 AM7/29/08   9:37:18 AM


--- PAGE 333 ---
Transnational Blackness324
concerning its historic involvement in the T ransatlantic slave trade, ironically, by 
re-staging the exchange of bonded Africans.60
Consideration might seem an inappropriate concept to invoke, since there 
was no formal exchange at Gorée like there is in the case of a legal retainer, as 
previously mentioned. Yet, at least in Anglo-American law, where the notion of 
“material consideration” operates, it is not crucial that the second party formally 
take possession of the object tendered. “Consideration is a social fact brought into 
being by the voluntary alienation of a valuable material object” (Pietz 2002, 38): 
“What is necessary for an enforceable contract is [only] that the person receiv-
ing the promise . . . effectively separates himself from something valuable under 
his control. The person making the promise need not actually take possession 
of it. She need only agree that this alienation of an object of material value [in 
this instance, a horde of ‘enslaved’ Africans] . . . is an acceptable consideration.” 
Apparently Wade, who aspired to secure U.S. geopolitical might and financial 
resources found this informal social compact “acceptable,” as did Bush, who 
stood to benefit from Senegalese cultural capital, through a spectacle staged in the 
crucible of national aspiration: a soccer field, some miles off the country’s Atlantic 
coast.
61 This tension between slavery and neoliberal freedom, play, and impris-
onment structures the contradictory experience of economic transformation in 
Senegal. “Sport,” says Gerald Early, “is how human beings perform the art and 
craft of competition” (1996, 5). Neoliberalism, by contrast, is a game with more 
losers than winners. And, it’s difficult to trust the referees. So even when people 
genuinely believe they are playing fair, they sometimes overlook the fact that it’s 
hard to compete with shackles around your feet.
Notes
 1. “The reenactment of the event of captivity,” as Saidiya Hartman (2002, 760) insists, “con-
trives an enduring, visceral, and personal memory of the unimaginable” and not simply 
for people from the African Diaspora returning to Senegal as part of a heritage crusade but 
also for this Senegalese population, many of whom acknowledged no previous link to the 
history of the transatlantic slave trade, despite inhabiting a region steeped in the history 
of its commercial transactions. Saidiya Hartman, Lose Your Mother: A Journey along the 
Atlantic Slave Route (New York: Farrar, Straus and Giroux, 2007).
 2. BBC News, “Country profile: Senegal,” BBC News, http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/world/
africa/country_profiles/1064496.stm (accessed May 15, 2005).
 3. Tidiane Sy, “Senegal opposition to amnesty law,” BBC News, January 11, 2005.
 4. Postcolonial “lawlessness,” thus, often “turns out to be a complex north-south collabora-
tion” (Comaroff and Comaroff 2006a, 8).
 5. Seck was once so close to Wade that when the president appointed him prime minister 
of Senegal “he told the media that he knew the president so well that he did not even 
need directions to ‘transform Wade’s vision’ into concrete acts.” Seck, in fact, claimed he 
was “an embodiment of the President’s vision.” And yet, in the early months of 2005, 
rumors began circulating that Seck hoped first to have Wade displaced from the presi-
dency through means as unspecified as they were clandestine, then to gain control over 
parliament in the elections of 2006, and ultimately to run for president in 2007. What 
pal-mara-21.indd   324pal-mara-21.indd   324 7/29/08   9:37:18 AM7/29/08   9:37:18 AM


--- PAGE 334 ---
“Crimes of History” 325
was once a political alliance disintegrated into a criminal conspiracy—a conspiracy theory, 
at least.
 6. A short time later, opposition leader Abdourahim Agne was charged with “threatening 
state security” after making a speech that encouraged Senegalese people to “go into the 
streets by the millions and demonstrate peacefully for change,” so they might be able to 
improve the country’s “dire state.” The director of a film “examining Abdoulaye Wade’s 
election promises” Agne—his lawyer told reporters—“had been charged under laws ban-
ning attempts to overthrow the state.” The state’s charge against Agne seemed to render 
explicit what remained hidden behind the “more serious charges” added to the case against 
Seck after the fact of his arrest, that is, Wade’s fear that he might be displaced either 
through a rival the people preferred or through a radical critique. For more on Agne’s case, 
see “Senegal opposition leader charged,” BBC News, May 31, 2005.
 7. DJ Awadi’s song “Sunuugal,” whose name is inspired by a word that means “canoe” in 
Wolof, but which is also the etymological root of the word Sénégal, features this lyrical 
critique of Wade: You promised me I would have a job/ You promised me I would have 
food, You promised me I would have real work and hope/ But so far—nothing, that’s why 
I am leaving, that’s why I am taking off in this canoe . . . I would prefer to die than to live 
in this hell (Winter 2006).
 8. “Alterity” is used here because forensic inquiries entail assumptions about human differ-
ence. They rely sometimes on historical patterns unique to specific demographics and 
nearly in every instance on bodily signatures like fingerprints (Beavan 2002), footprints 
(Abbott 1964), and even voices (Hollien 2002).
 9. This extraordinary claim appears on the back cover of Colin Beavan’s (2002) Fingerprints: 
The Origins of Forensic Detection and the Murder Case that Launched Forensic Science.
 10. “In 1846,” as Williams Pietz has shown, “the British Parliament abolished England’s 
ancient quasi-religious law that compensated wrongful death accidents according to the 
money value of the lethal object. It was replaced with . . . [t]he Fatal Accidents Act of 
1846 [which] established the modern method for determining the money value of human 
life that has been used ever since in Anglophone capitalist societies (Pietz 2002, 36).” The 
“quasi-religious” law of the deodand—which had been in operation for centuries—was 
finally eradicated, because it was believed, as noted legal reformer Lord Campbell argued, 
this doctrine was “not applicable to the present state of society.” As far as he was con-
cerned, in this period—which also witnessed “the legal revolution that created modern 
corporations” (Pietz 1997b, 105)—it should no longer be upheld “that the life of a man 
was so valuable that they could not put an estimate upon it” (Hansard’s Parliamentary 
Debates 1846; also cited in Pietz 1997b). This was the same period in which clinical 
pathologists began routinely using invasive surgical procedures on a human body that was 
suddenly, neither in that context, too sacred for more rational and scientific treatment 
(Foucault 1975).
 11. Methodologically and conceptually, forensics offers ethnographers a powerful set of tools. 
It is, of course, the science of human traces, of that which is “written in blood” (Wil-
son 2003; cf. Chaplan 1984; Walls 1974). Ideally, it connects us with the “‘action’ to be 
recounted” (Rhine 1998, xix). Thus while it is usually concerned with identifying and 
treating human remains (Nafte 2000; El-Najjar and McWilliams 1978; Weston and Wells 
1974) or with assisting in legal investigations (Ferllini 2002; Rhine 1998; Ubelaker and 
Scammell 1992), it need not be restricted to these contexts (van Duyne et al 2003). In 
its inception, after all, the word has a rather broad field of signification. That which is 
“forensic” in Latin derives from the word “forum”—a meeting ground or market. Forensis, 
consequently, “means belonging to a public space, since in Roman times, legal trials, sen-
tencing, and executions were . . . literally for the public to view” (Nafte 2000, 5). I ask 
pal-mara-21.indd   325pal-mara-21.indd   325 7/29/08   9:37:18 AM7/29/08   9:37:18 AM


--- PAGE 335 ---
Transnational Blackness326
the reader to retain this sense of forensics as particular kind of perspective, as I consider 
the relationship between sports, spectatorship, and the fetishization of subject positions in 
athletic contests and in the political projects with which they share discursive thematics.
 12. Wade’s determined position on the matter did not reflect the nuanced exchanges taking 
place in Senegalese popular media. Critical of the way Bush’s coalition was driven by 
what seemed to many to be a divine right to fight, Cheikh Bamba Dioum published an 
article entitled, “God bless the USA . . . and Afghanistan.” (Le Soleil, Friday, 12 Octo-
ber 2001, emphasis added.) Malick Ndiaye, Leader of the Collective Social Forces for 
Change, declared that he supported “neither Bush nor Ben Laden” in his L ’info 7 piece 
(“Les partisans du ‘Ni Bush ni Ben Laden’ remittent ça aujourd’hui,” L ’info 7, Wednesday, 
7 November 2001). Religious theorist Ebrahim Moosa (2006) has noted parallels between 
the two adversaries: “Both Bush and Bin Laden claim to have divine mandates, to have 
access to secret spiritual knowledge that obliges them to do certain things, even if those 
things run counter to their religions’ most basic ethical teachings. Both men claim they’re 
going to save people through their actions” (“In God’s Name,” The Sun, April 2006, Issue 
364, 12). Moosa contends, furthermore, that both men “believe they have messianic mis-
sions to fulfill” (ibid.).
 13. See “Pour la création d’un Pacte africaine contre le terrorisme,” L ’info 7, Jeudi September 
20, 2001; and “Le président Wade propose un ‘Pacte africaine contre le terrorisme,’” 
Soleil, Vendredi September 21, 2001.
 14. No doubt this course of action was easier for Wade to pursue, because his Islamic nation is 
ruled by a secular state. “Islamic law [differs dramatically from] common law or civil law 
systems” (like the French codes Senegal uses); instead, it is structured largely by the “opin-
ions of religious scholars, who argue, on the basis of the text of the Koran, the Prophetic 
hadith and the consensus of the first generations of Muslim scholars, what the law should 
be” (Peters 2005, 1); emphasis original.
 15. “Les chefs d’État réaffirment l’engagement sans faille de l’Afrique,” Le Soleil October 18, 
2001, 3.
 16. Ibid.
 17. Ibid. “M. Bush également annoncé la création d’un fonds de soutien des investissements 
privés dans la région . . . des garantie et une couverture du risque politique pour leurs 
projets en Afrique sub-saharienne.”
 18. Greg Mills (2004) cites the preponderance of paramilitary groups operating within the 
African continent and the fact that NEPAD was ratified in October of 2001 as evidence 
that African leaders share with their Western counterparts an interest in fighting ter-
rorism. It is doubtful that African heads-of-state would envision their struggle against 
militia groups and rogue soldiers in the same uncompromising way that Bush envisioned 
his crusade against terrorism. Mills’ claim that, “had there never been a September 11, 
2001, President George W . Bush arguably never would have made a visit to Senegal, 
South Africa” and other African countries (Mills 2004, 158), on the other hand, it is 
compelling to think about how U.S. Foreign Policy in Africa is, at times, structured by 
historical contingencies.
 19. For more on this burgeoning alliance, see Lara Pawson’s (2004) article, “France tackles 
U.S. trend,” in BBC News. French President Jacques Chirac holds talks with Senegal’s 
President Abdoulaye Wade in Paris on Thursday. The meeting comes as French-Senegalese 
ties appear to be under pressure, largely due to the West African state’s more recent 
friend—the United States. France, the former colonial power, remains Senegal’s biggest 
donor and trading partner. Dakar has played down the talks, insisting that relations are 
very good . . . But skeptics say the meeting is a chance for Paris to remind Senegal who 
pays out millions of dollars in donor assistance each year.
pal-mara-21.indd   326pal-mara-21.indd   326 7/29/08   9:37:18 AM7/29/08   9:37:18 AM


--- PAGE 336 ---
“Crimes of History” 327
 20. It should be noted that Senegal also started to gain favor with the United States during 
Reagan’s presidency for its willingness to serve as a contingency landing site for space 
shuttle missions. During the presidency of George H. W . Bush, Senegal supported the 
United States by condemning the bombing of Pan Am flight 103, for which two Libyan 
men were convicted (although suspicions have been raised, subsequently, about the extent 
to which due process was upheld during the trial).
 21. “Bush et Wade rêvent d’une finale Sénégal-USA,” Le Soleil Wednesday June 19, 2002. The 
front-page headline translates as “Bush and Wade dream of a Senegal-USA final match.” 
The article heading itself, on the newspaper’s interior, carries a similar sentiment, “Bush et 
Wade souhaitent USA-Sénégal” (“Bush and Wade wish for a USA-Senegal final”).
 22. Admittedly, it is not altogether clear how this demographic label is being deployed. T o the 
extent that “youth”—as a sociological moniker—often refers not simply to people of a cer-
tain age but also to those who have not yet accessed well-recognized institutions of social 
reproduction (marriage, parenthood, and stable employment in Senegal), it encompasses 
people from ages associated with adolescence up through age thirty—and beyond. What’s 
more, the term is typically, as the Senegalese case emphasizes, gendered as male.
 23. See statistics provided by the United States Central Intelligence Agency. See www
.ciaworldfactbook.com/senegal.
 24. See “Senegal celebrates Cup heroics,” British Broadcast Corporation Sport, July 21, 2001, 
emphasis added.
 25. “Senegal back to heroes welcome,” BBC Sport, July 22, 2001.
 26. Ibid.
 27. “Lions players rule in France,” BBC Sport, August 13, 2001.
 28. “Africa’s obsession with soccer,” BBC Sport, August 18, 2001.
 29. “Senegal in fever over World Cup debut,” BBC Sport, May 14, 2002.
 30. “Soccer fever,” June 12, 2002.
 31. See “Divided loyalties for Fadiga,” BBC Sport, April 8, 2002; emphasis added.
 32. “The whole of the Cameroonian squad plays abroad, along with 22 Senegalese, 21 Nige-
rians, 16 South Africans, and nine T unisians.” Isabelle Saussez, “Africa on the sidelines,” 
The Courier ACP-EU (July–August 2002).
 33. “Senegal’s success story,” BBC Sport, June 16, 2002.
 34. This includes granting amnesty to Murids who, besides accounting for one of Senegal’s 
largest incomes via remittance packages sent home from overseas, make valuable dona-
tions to the government in return for tax leniencies. In this way, their holy city of T ouba 
can be considered, from a certain perspective, privatized.
 35. Birdsall and Nellis (2003), for instance, assess the impact of privatization in Senegal by 
distinguishing between “winners and losers.”
 36. For elites, “the watchwords of the sporting canon—competition . . . ‘fair play’ . . . trans-
pose quite naturally from his [or her] individual conduct to that of a company or indeed a 
nation. Here they may take on fancier, more imposing titles: Free Enterprise, Competitive 
T rading Position . . . the National Interest, Equality before the Law, etc., but the inherent 
ideas are still the same” (Brohm 1978, ix).
 37. International lending agencies, North Atlantic economists, and donor nations seem agreed 
that good governance correlates with economic prosperity despite the fact that Angola, the 
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Equatorial Guinea, Nigeria, and, increasingly, the 
Sudan, have topped the list of African countries receiving foreign investment capital dur-
ing the past decade (Ferguson 2006, 196, Reno 2001, 187) despite, for different reasons, 
evidencing some of the continent’s most glaring forms of political and civil unrest. Devel-
opment discourses still insist, however, that Cote d’Ivoire’s recent political turmoil and 
pal-mara-21.indd   327pal-mara-21.indd   327 7/29/08   9:37:18 AM7/29/08   9:37:18 AM


--- PAGE 337 ---
Transnational Blackness328
Sierra Leone’s protracted social crisis surrounding fierce competition for diamonds are to 
blame for lackluster economic performance (African Development Report 2004).
 38. In this regard, we might consider one of the World Bank’s most recent poverty reduc-
tion efforts in Africa, the Comprehensive Development Framework (CDF). These mea-
sures were taken with the understanding that structural adjustment programs had been 
ill-conceived and seldom successful. CDFs promote autonomy for countries receiving 
assistance, but they contain a selectivity predicated on the presence of a “good policy 
environment” that is so ambiguously defined it tends to undermine the program’s 
expressed guarantee of country ownership, restricting national autonomy (Pender 2001; 
Taylor 2005).
 39. See “Pèlerinage à la Maison des Esclaves,” Le Soleil Samedi le 3 Vendredi 1998.
 40. See “Le Méridien Président sous haute surveillance,” L ’info 7 le 2 Juillet 2003. The writer 
who chronicled the modes of surveillance Bush’s security forces used found it important 
to emphasize that not even Clinton’s 1998 visit seemed to necessitate such precautions: “Il 
faut souligner que meme la visite que le prédéceseur de Bush, Bill Clinton, avait effectuée 
au Sénégal avant l’alternance, n’avait nécessité autant de precautions.”
 41. Bayo Holsey’s 2003 work on slave tourism to Ghana reveals the cleavage between the 
absence of historical work on the slave trade in Ghanaian educational curricula and the 
diasporic discourses prevalent among African Americans that encourage them to visit 
Cape Coast and Elmina to confront a key point of departure for their ancestors who, it is 
believed, embarked on a transatlantic journey to the Americas from these sites (cf. Rich-
ards 2005).
 42. Djibril Samb, ed. 1997. Gorée et l’esclavage: Actes du Séminaire sur “Gorée dans la Traite 
atlantique: mythes et réalités.” Dakar: IFAN.
 43. Scholars have not, as yet, considered how or why the experience of being corralled on a 
soccer field during the Bush visit provoked comparison with the Middle Passage. Despite 
inhabiting a different historical epoch, a good deal remains to be learned, I think, from 
studying the infrastructure(s) through which capital—symbolic and economic—contin-
ues to circulate in transatlantic circuits and the political networks that sustain these forms 
of exchange.
 44. Bush here suggests the United States government is using its “power and resources” to 
introduce “peace” and “end conflict” in ways that are especially beneficial to African peo-
ple. The millennial captiveries at Gorée, it hardly needs to be emphasized, tell a very dif-
ferent story (cf. Hesse 2002).
 45. For the full transcript of his speech, see “President Bush Speaks at Gorée Island,” Remarks 
by the President on Gorée Island, July 8, 2003, as posted on the official Web site of 
the White House, http://www.whitehouse.gov/news/releases/2003/07/20030708-1.html 
(accessed April 19, 2007).
 46. And “criminality” has, for young actors in postcolonial and postindustrial contexts, pro-
vided if not exactly “a means of production” a repertoire of techniques for achieving the 
“productive redistribution” of resources among those people “alienated by new forms of 
exclusion” (Comaroff and Comaroff 2006b, 278; cf. Venkatesh 2006). Ironically, this was 
less true for Akon than it most likely was for his peers in the underworld. The top-selling 
recording artist was, by his own, admission raised “middle-class” though he “gravitated 
toward the ’hood, running with tough crews in all the cities where his parents moved” 
(Checkoway 2007, 94).
 47. Laura Checkoway’s (2007, 92) Vibe magazine article Akon quotes as saying, “Bend . . . 
over, look back, and watch me,” to former “it” girl Tara Reid whose legs were then wrapped 
around his waist as the hip-hop balladeer performed, “Smack that,” before an audience 
at the 2006 Sundance Film Festival. Crucial to the way Akon understands himself to be 
pal-mara-21.indd   328pal-mara-21.indd   328 7/29/08   9:37:18 AM7/29/08   9:37:18 AM


--- PAGE 338 ---
“Crimes of History” 329
racialized in ways consonant with African Americans is his concern with celebrating what 
I have elsewhere termed “hip-hop fantasy,” an ideational frame that hinges on perfor-
mances of material excess and the insistence—at least in the public persona of many hip-
hop (and, in this case, hip-hop R & B) artists—of depicting the female body as a personal 
adornment and vehicle for sexual escapades (Ralph 2006a).
 48. I use the term “African American” with a sense of its complicatedness given that I was born 
in Canada and raised in the United States in a family that is originally from Guyana, a 
Caribbean country which, technically, forms part of the South American mainland.
 49. Hartman mentions encountering in Ghana “visiting scholars, artists, and journalists” who 
paid “obruni prices for rent and everything else” without “receiving the quality of goods 
and services that the powerful commanded and that Ghanaians exacted” (2007, 25). Yet 
her critique of the way Ghanaians skillfully exploit African Americans says nothing about 
opportunistic enterprises rendered in reverse. Looking in the opposite direction, what are 
we to make of Andrew Young, whose persistent interest in maintaining extensive diplo-
matic ties to Africa (especially Nigeria) throughout his tenure as a United Nations Ambas-
sador subsequently translated into commercial interest in Nigerian oil reserves (Dart 
2002, Ashley 1995) through his GoodWorks International consulting firm amidst local 
protest among students that oil exploitation had upset the local ecosystem. In the late 
1990s GoodWorks was, in Nigeria, rumored to be behind the murder of local youth who 
protested oil deals that Young’s company had helped to negotiate. It was never confirmed 
that Young nor any of his associates were guilty of such allegations. Yet one cannot but 
help notice the irony that a former U.S. Ambassador and freedom movement leader now 
finds himself in the curious position of having to defend corporate policies and profit-
seeking projects linked to death and environmental destruction in Nigeria. Young has 
been soundly criticized for implicitly endorsing—or at least refusing to condemn—injus-
tices perpetuated by Nigerian political officials, like President Olegun Obasanjo, whose 
regime remains mired in “corruption, crime, poverty, and violence” according to Human 
Rights Watch (Gentry and Poole 2007), forcing some to now question the former civil 
rights leader and Mayor of Atlanta whose political credentials no longer seem sufficient 
to defend his newest ventures in Africa (Meier 2007). Young, it should be noted, first met 
the Nigerian leader in his capacity as ambassador though he kept in touch with Obasanjo 
even after he resigned from the Carter Administration, not simply making it possible for 
his sons to attend to Morehouse College and Georgia T ech in Atlanta (Suggs 2000) but 
also providing him with “books, tapes, and a Bible” when Obasanjo was imprisoned under 
a previous president (ibid.).
 50. If “slavery” ultimately “stripped your history to bare facts and precious details,” Hartman 
(2007, 11) seems unable to imagine a history apart from any “trace” of ancestral evidence 
(7). I am sensitive to the formidable challenge of reckoning with one’s past in the absence 
of documentation, of trying to form a narrative despite the innumerable “blank spaces” 
(12) that occasion the “bare bones” (11) recollections of familiar lore. Still it seems, 
paradoxically, evidence of too strong a romance with the violent dehumanization of 
enslavement to suggest “towns vanished from sight and banished from memory” are all 
any African American “can ever hope to claim” (9). What of the historical understand-
ings African people developed beyond the rigid criteria of verifiable proof (cf. Brown 
2003), the meaningful ties they manage to forge despite “the slipperiness and elusiveness 
of slavery’s archive” (Hartman 2007, 17)? Whose ancestral connection, after all, is indu-
bitably real?
 51. The overlapping articulation of actors and constituencies that participated in the transat-
lantic slave trade (and domestic circuits connected to it) are difficult to discern given the 
pal-mara-21.indd   329pal-mara-21.indd   329 7/29/08   9:37:18 AM7/29/08   9:37:18 AM


--- PAGE 339 ---
Transnational Blackness330
way Hartman (2007, 208) theorizes this historical matrix, “Simply put, slaves were stolen 
from one group, exchanged by a second group, and then shipped across the Atlantic and 
exploited in the Americas by a third group.”
 52. I find Hartman’s quest to locate an appreciation for Africa steeped “in the efforts 
thwarted and realized, of revolutionaries intent upon stopping the clock and instituting 
a new order” promising, and think it not simply commendable but also appropriate that, 
instead of longing for the myth of a glorious past, she claims a position “articulated in the 
ongoing struggle to escape, stand down, and defeat slavery in all its myriad forms.” Still, 
rendering this the preferred posture of a “lost tribe” (Hartman 2007, 234–35)—instead 
of theorizing the diasporic connection as an admittedly prosthetic but nevertheless conse-
quential political alliance forged by people occupying similar structural positions linked 
through certain critical sensibilities who also share something of a historical trajectory 
(Edwards 2003,13–15, 143, 282, 303)—seems remarkably complicit with the peculiar 
institution’s inevitable project to sever the histories of its captives. From whence this 
extraordinary efficacy?
 53. Beyond the historical particulars of Senegalese social life, Jean Loup-Amselle (1990; repr. 
1998) has convincingly argued that, instead of fixed ethnic distinctions, many African 
societies were marked by an originary syncretism that appears as a fixed tribal identity 
more readily in ethnographic accounts and, apparently, personal meditations than it does 
in reality.
 54. “Jackson,” said one senior official, “has given us a lot of help on this, and we’ll all remem-
ber him for it,” see “Clinton Opposes Slavery Apology,” in Brooks, ed. (1999, 352); 
emphasis added.
 55. In November 2006, British Prime Minister T ony Blair called the transatlantic slave trade 
a “crime against humanity” but, like Bush, “stopped short of issuing a full apology.” See 
“Blair ‘sorrow’ over slave trade,” BBC News, November 27, 2006.
 56. As Malcolm Gladwell (2006: 138) is careful to remind us, “Crime . . . isn’t a single dis-
crete thing, but a word used to describe an almost impossibly varied and complicated set 
of behaviors.” T o the extent that Bush’s speech reframed the legacy of U.S. activity in the 
Afro-Atlantic world by “silencing” so much of “the past,” (T rouillot 1997) he produced a 
version of history at least as criminal as the virtual enslavement of the Senegalese people 
who, on July 8, 2003, understood their predicament through the lens of bondage.
 57. Recall the scene in Voltaire’s Candide when a mutilated slave who has escaped from a 
plantation in Surinam confronts the novel’s young protagonist to display fleshy scars that 
remind him, “It is at this price that you eat sugar in Europe.” It is at a similar price that 
Senegal might enjoy their slice of the neoliberal pie.
 58. If “slavery” successfully “established a measure of man and a ranking of life and worth 
that has yet to be undone” (Hartman 2007, 6), forensic methods of calculation during 
the nineteenth century provided what was then considered to be objective criteria for 
determining “worth” in emergent forms of monetized value by drawing on a shift in 
Anglo-American legal perspective, which suddenly made human beings, previously con-
sidered more sacred than scientific, available for quantification (Pietz 1997a, 98) based on 
the physiological and demographic variables planters considered in the “slave pens” where 
they examined prospective chattel (Johnson 1999, 118).
 59. That such a legal concept could nevertheless fit this scenario so appropriately makes one 
question whether this militaristic spectacle is evidence of the way “force ‘trumps’ law” or 
if “the very concept of law” if, indeed, “juridical reason itself, includes a priori a possible 
recourse to constraint or coercion and, thus, to a certain violence” (Derrida 2005, xi; cf. 
Bourdieu 1997, 95). Though, as the foregoing discussion suggests, I believe legal concepts 
pal-mara-21.indd   330pal-mara-21.indd   330 7/29/08   9:37:18 AM7/29/08   9:37:18 AM


--- PAGE 340 ---
“Crimes of History” 331
and categories are to be engaged and not dismissed as mere “ideologized obfuscations of 
how social life really comes about and operates . . . studied only in order to debunk them” 
(Pietz 2002, 35).
 60. These Senegalese “slaves,” then, might be considered “virtual commodit[ies]” (T rouillot 
1994) in both senses of the term.
 61. Apropos here, articles 1109 and 1117 of the Code civil des français (French civil code) 
indicate that a contract is not valid if consent derives from misapprehension (erreur), is 
achieved under duress (violence), or results from misrepresentation (dol ). For the articles 
in question, see the Code civil: “Il n’y a point de consentement valable, si le consentement 
n’a été donné que par erreur, ou s’il a été extorqué par violence ou surpris par dol” (Article 
1109). “La convention contractée par erreur, violence ou dol, n’est point nulle de plein 
droit; elle donne seulement lieu à une action en nullité ou en rescision” (Article 1117).
pal-mara-21.indd   331pal-mara-21.indd   331 7/29/08   9:37:18 AM7/29/08   9:37:18 AM


--- PAGE 341 ---
This page intentionally left blank


--- PAGE 342 ---
C HAPTER  22
Nuclear Imperialism 
and the Pan-African 
Struggle for Peace and 
Freedom
Ghana, 1959–1962*
Jean Allman
We face neither East nor West: we face forward.
—Kwame Nkrumah, Positive Action Conference for 
Peace and Security in Africa, Accra, 2 April 1960
In 1962 Professor St. Clair Drake prepared a paper for the Accra Assembly 
on the World without the Bomb—a high-profile international gathering in Gha-
na’s capital of nearly a hundred activists, statesmen, scientists, teachers, and clergy 
opposed to nuclear armament.
1 Drake, a renowned Pan-Africanist and then profes-
sor of anthropology at Roosevelt University, served as the head of the Department 
of Sociology at the University College of Ghana from 1958–61. In his paper, “The 
African Revolution and the Accra Assembly” Drake predicted: “History will record 
a significant fact about the African Revolution, that it was led by men who always 
exhibited an unusual concern for minimizing the violence of the revolutionary 
struggle, for seeking solutions through the United Nations wherever possible; and 
who were always concerned to insulate the revolution from Cold War politics so 
that Africa would not run the danger of becoming the spot from which World 
* Gwendolyn Mikell and Elliott P . Skinner, Women and the Early State in West Africa, Working Paper #190 
(East Lansing, MI: Women in International Development, 1988).
pal-mara-22.indd   333pal-mara-22.indd   333 7/29/08   9:25:37 AM7/29/08   9:25:37 AM


--- PAGE 343 ---
Transnational Blackness334
War III—the nuclear war began.”2 Regrettably, Drake—an extraordinarily incisive 
and prescient social critic—was not on target with this particular historiographi-
cal prediction. By and large these are not the “facts” of the “African Revolution” 
that history has chosen to remember. While we have heretofore managed to avoid 
World War III (an accomplishment increasingly imperiled with each passing day), 
the achievements of the “African Revolution” have, for the most part, been buried 
beneath the detritus of coups and counter-coups, debt, civil war, and structural 
adjustment. What many have termed an “Afro-pessimism”—“nothing good ever 
comes out of Africa”—has erased the vision, the new world order that so many 
sought to build.
3
What I would like to accomplish with this chapter is rather simple. I want to 
recount a story—for some it may be a familiar story—of one small episode in that 
African Revolution. I wish to focus on the movement against what was called by 
activists at the time “nuclear imperialism,” as it emerged out of the Pan-African 
struggle for freedom from colonial rule in the late 1950s and early 1960s. It is a 
story I reconstruct out of the private papers and recollections of participants, gov-
ernment documentation, and newspapers, both in Ghana and the United States. I 
want to revisit this moment in Africa’s past and in the history of Pan-African revolt 
for three basic reasons. First of all, and quite simply, it is important to remember 
in these days of war, torture, and U.S. imperialism run amok that there was a 
time when Africa was at the very center of the global peace movement and when 
radical visions of a new world order were being generated from the streets of Accra 
to the mountains of Kenya, from the townships of apartheid South Africa to the 
Qasbah in Algiers. Secondly, I offer these stories as a reminder, if not a corrective, 
to the new discourse on globalization that has washed across so many campuses in 
North America. New transnational and global studies programs and institutes are 
popping up everywhere, offering “new” ways to understand the world that tran-
scend political and national borders. They are either oblivious to or strategically 
dismissive of the fact that interdisciplinary programs like African American stud-
ies and Peace studies have been “global”—in subject and method—from the out-
set.
4 The movement against nuclear imperialism that took root in the Pan-African 
freedom struggle showcases the “global” and the “transnational” in ways that need 
to be recovered and remembered. We must not forget that Pan-Africanists like W . 
E. B. Du Bois, Paul Robeson, George Padmore, Kwame Nkrumah, Walter Sisulu, 
and Patrice Lumumba were, in many ways, on the frontline in confronting the 
harsh realities of our current world order—the postwar imperial world that the 
United States has sought to make in its own racist image.
Thirdly and finally, this story stands as a counter-narrative, a corrective, I 
would argue, to the so-called afro-pessimism that has dominated scholarship on 
Africa since the 1980s. The focus of much of that pessimism has been on the fail-
ure of the African nation. Ever since the promise of the newly independent Afri-
can nation states of the 1950s and 1960s and the celebratory historiography that 
heralded their rise crashed against the hard rocks of neocolonialism and neoliber-
alism, many scholars of African nations and nationalism have been immobilized 
pal-mara-22.indd   334pal-mara-22.indd   334 7/29/08   9:25:37 AM7/29/08   9:25:37 AM


--- PAGE 344 ---
Nuclear Imperialism and the Pan-African Struggle for Peace 335
by what has been widely deemed the failure of the nationalist and Pan-African-
ist project in Africa. As a result, few, if any, have transcended the moderniza-
tion-bound question, What went wrong?
5 Even when scholars have deployed 
counter-modernization theories of dependency and underdevelopment, the ques-
tion has, in many ways, remained the same. This profound, almost discipline-
defining pessimism—a pessimism that seems consistently fueled by horrors 
transpiring in places like Rwanda, Liberia, and more recently the Sudan—has 
prevented us from comprehensively recognizing, problematizing, and historiciz-
ing the legacies of nation and Pan-Africanism in late colonial and neocolonial 
Africa. Yet these are stories we need to remember, perhaps more so now than 
ever—“nation time,” liberation times, times when Pan-Africanism recognized no 
boundaries and a United States of Africa was considered not a pipe dream but a 
plan just shy of a blueprint.
6
Black Internationalism and Emergent Ghana
These kinds of stories always have multiple beginnings and manifold genealo-
gies of origin.7 The story I wish to tell here, for example—though it unfolds in 
West Africa during the first years of Ghana’s independence—is inextricably con-
nected to stories of radical black internationalism, especially in the United States. 
Thanks to the works of Horne, Plummer, Richards, Meriweather, Kelley, Von 
Eschen, Gaines, and many others we know that in the United States there was an 
efflorescence in black internationalism in the wake of Italy’s invasion of Ethiopia 
in 1935—an internationalism that continued to insist on the inextricable con-
nections between struggles for equality and racial justice in the United States 
and anticolonial resistance in Africa and Asia.
8 Through biographical accounts, 
through histories of organizations like the Council on African Affairs, and through 
careful readings of African American press, we can trace the paths and reconstruct 
the meetings and rallies that brought radical black internationalists into alliance, 
debate, and common struggle across the globe. We can follow Du Bois, Robeson, 
Max Yergan, and the Council on African Affairs from 1937 until the height of 
the cold war;
9 or we can look at the NAACP’s colonial conference in April 1945, 
which brought together participants from throughout the colonial world, includ-
ing Kwame Nkrumah.
10 In Manchester, England at the Fifth Pan-African Con-
gress in October of that very same year, Padmore, Nkrumah, Jomo Kenyatta, 
Du Bois, Amy Ashwood Garvey, and many others made sure that Africa and an 
African agenda for liberation was front and center.
11 A year later, the Big Three 
Unity Rally in New York in 1946 emphatically placed an antinuclear agenda in 
the foreground of struggles against colonialism and racial oppression, as explicit 
connections were made between new U.S. investments in Africa (for example 
in the mining of uranium in the Belgian Congo for the construction of atomic 
bombs) and issues of social justice in the United States.
12 Those connections—be-
tween Pan-Africanism, anticolonialism, and global peace—continued to resonate 
throughout the Cultural and Scientific Conference for World Peace in New York 
(March 1949) and at the World Peace Conference in Paris (April 1949).
13
pal-mara-22.indd   335pal-mara-22.indd   335 7/29/08   9:25:37 AM7/29/08   9:25:37 AM


--- PAGE 345 ---
Transnational Blackness336
But by the early 1950s, as many historians have argued, the Red Scare, McCa-
rthyite repression, and the systematic persecution of black internationalists in 
the United States, including the confiscation of both Robeson’s and Du Bois’s 
passports, “limited the scope and capped the resources of many mass organiza-
tions that had been militant during the war years. Cold war rhetoric questioned 
the legitimacy of anticolonialism and pacifism in a world dominated by armed 
superpowers.”
14 As a result, the cold war “severed the black American struggle for 
civil rights from the issues of anticolonialism and racism abroad.” The politics 
of black internationalism in the United States, Von Eschen concludes, “did not 
survive the beginnings of the Cold War.”
15
Without minimizing the devastating impact of the cold war on black radi-
cal internationalism in the United States, it remains important to understand 
the ways in which that internationalist vision so deftly reconstructed by Horne, 
Plummer, Von Eschen, and others continued throughout the 1950s—albeit in 
very different forms and often in very different places.
16 For example, the so-called 
Bandung Conference in Indonesia in 1955, was one of the great watersheds in 
the history of struggles for peace, freedom, and nonalignment—and it provided 
an important context for radical black internationalists to continue to engage, 
on a global stage, with the newly emergent nonaligned world, despite the ravages 
of the cold war.
17 The famed African American writer, Richard Wright, was in 
attendance and, though Robeson was denied a passport for travel, he sent a long 
message of support that powerfully foregrounded the inextricable connections 
between colonialism, nuclear proliferation, and racial injustice.
18 After Bandung, 
the center of gravity for black internationalism, shifted decisively from what was 
fast becoming the center of a new global empire, that is, the United States, toward 
its margins—a small country in West Africa, under the leadership of a staunch 
Pan-Africanist, Kwame Nkrumah. Nkrumah spent a decade in the United States 
as a student from 1935–45. These were the very years that black internationalism 
was coming into its own and Nkrumah contributed directly to the forging of that 
radical internationalist agenda in the United States. In many ways, then, the shift 
from Harlem in 1945 to Bandung in 1955 to independent Ghana after 1957 was 
predicted by and directly predicated upon the Pan Africanist Congress in Man-
chester, which witnessed African leaders taking center stage for the first time.
19 
Indeed, as Du Bois wrote to Immanuel Wallerstein in 1961, “Pan-Africanism was 
not dormant between the Manchester meeting in 1945 and the Accra meeting in 
1958. It was alive in the plans of Nkrumah, Padmore and many others . . . but the 
question was where it could meet and how far its program could go.”
20
Ghana, the Sahara Team, and the Pan-African 
Struggle against Nuclear Imperialism
Du Bois’s second question—just how far did or might the radical Pan-Africanist 
agenda go—remains open. But his first question—the where—was addressed, 
at least until 1966, by Ghana’s independence. The powerful initiatives of black 
pal-mara-22.indd   336pal-mara-22.indd   336 7/29/08   9:25:37 AM7/29/08   9:25:37 AM


--- PAGE 346 ---
Nuclear Imperialism and the Pan-African Struggle for Peace 337
internationalism, particularly with regard to anticolonialism, nonalignment, and 
peace resonated throughout the First Conference of Independent African States 
(Accra, April 1958), which demanded an end to the “production of nuclear and 
thermo-nuclear weapons” and the suspension of “all atomic tests in any part of 
the world and in particular the intention to carry out such tests in the Sahara.”
21 
Developing a position that he termed “positive neutrality,” Nkrumah explained 
to Ghana’s National Assembly in February of that same year that “Ghana has a 
vested interest in peace; our constant concern is national security, in order that we 
may get on with the job of economic and social reconstruction in an atmosphere 
of peace and tranquility.”
22
That African liberation was inextricably bound to struggles for peace, secu-
rity, and nonalignment echoed throughout the continent in the months follow-
ing Ghana’s independence. At the All-African People’s Conference (AAPC) in 
December 1958—a conference hailed by the Chicago Defender as proof that “Pan-
Africanism is more than a vague dream of expatriates in London or Negroes in 
Harlem”
23—the East-West conflict and the prospects for nonalignment were cen-
tral to discussions.24 Many black radicals joined Du Bois in considering the AAPC 
the direct successor of the 1945 Pan-African Congress—a sixth congress, as it 
were. Robeson was able to attend the historic gathering in Accra, though Du Bois 
was not. His message to participants was delivered by his wife Shirley Graham 
Du Bois.
25 T ogether conference members decried the ways in which imperialists 
“are now coordinating their activities by forming military and economic pacts 
such as NATO, European Common Market, Free T rade Area . . . for the pur-
pose of strengthening their imperialist activities in Africa.” Participants—Patrice 
Lumumba from the Congo and T om Mboya of Kenya among them—pledged 
their “full support to all fighters for freedom in Africa . . . as well as to all those 
who are compelled to retaliate against violence to attain national independence 
and freedom for the people.”
26
The following year, when France made clear its intent to begin testing a new 
atomic bomb in the Sahara desert in the very near future, the connections between 
colonialism and nuclear proliferation took on an even greater urgency for African 
nationalists and Pan-Africanists. In August 1959 the Monrovia Conference on 
Algeria, which included foreign ministers from nine independent African states 
who gathered to discuss support for the Algerian nationalist struggle, passed a res-
olution denouncing the decision to conduct nuclear tests in Africa.
27 T wo months 
later, when the AAPC steering committee met in Accra, Nkrumah demanded that 
the major world powers “stop all nuclear tests, stop research on, and manufactur-
ing of nuclear weapons, destroy all existing stocks of atomic and hydrogen bombs 
and dismantle all rocket bases. . . . [N]uclear weapons,” he declared, “constituted 
the ‘sword of Damocles hanging over the head of mankind . . . which we must 
remove by positive action.’”
28
But by the time Nkrumah addressed the AAPC steering committee, con-
crete plans were already well underway—for one of the first times anywhere in 
the world—to make manifest the combined struggle against imperialism and 
pal-mara-22.indd   337pal-mara-22.indd   337 7/29/08   9:25:37 AM7/29/08   9:25:37 AM


--- PAGE 347 ---
Transnational Blackness338
campaigns for nuclear disarmament. Ghana’s central role in articulating a Pan-
African vision, in reanimating black internationalism in the wake of systematic 
cold war repression, and in aiding anticolonial movements throughout the con-
tinent made it a logical place for mobilizing against France’s nuclear imperial 
threat. And the Ghanaian government, as we will see, ended up providing signifi-
cant logistical and practical support for the specific plans that began to unfold in 
April 1959. Yet the monumental work of engineering this crucial alliance between 
anti-imperial, Pan-African struggles for freedom and the antinuclear movement 
fell not to Nkrumah or his government but to two African American radical 
peace activists—Bill Sutherland and Bayard Rustin, who, like Nkrumah, were 
very much participants in and products of the efflorescence of black internation-
alism in the previous decade and were profoundly influenced by the Pan-African 
vision of T rinidadian revolutionary George Padmore.
29 Both Rustin and Suther-
land resisted the draft during World War II and as a result of their actions were 
sentenced to federal prison—Rustin for three years, Sutherland for four.
30 Both 
were active in the Fellowship of Reconciliation31 and in founding the Congress of 
Racial Equality in 1942 and had participated in the Committee for Non-Violent 
Action and a range of international campaigns for nuclear disarmament, includ-
ing Britain’s Direct Action Committee against Nuclear War. Indeed, Rustin was 
one of the main speakers at the T rafalgar Square launch of the famous Aldermas-
ton March to protest nuclear armament on April 9, 1958.
Bill Sutherland settled in Ghana at the beginning of 1954.
32 On Bayard Rus-
tin’s recommendation, he had originally planned to travel to Nigeria to work with 
Nnamdi Azikiwe on the West Africa Pilot, but his visa was endlessly delayed by the 
British Colonial Office. Then one afternoon, as Sutherland recounts it, “Padmore 
had me meet him at a sidewalk café in Paris, where he was discussing politics 
with African American author Richard Wright. Wright had just begun working 
on the book that was to become Black Power, and was filled with exciting stories 
about his recent trip to the Gold Coast.” Based on Padmore’s recommendation, 
Sutherland headed for Ghana. After several years working on an educational proj-
ect, he became the personal secretary of Ghana’s first post-independence Finance 
Minister K. A. Gbedemah, who shared a background in international peace activ-
ism. According to Sutherland’s recollections, he first learned of the French plans 
from April Carter and Michael Randle, who were centrally involved in the Direct 
Action Committee of the British antinuclear movement. Fortunately, because of 
his travels back and forth to Britain as Gbedemah’s secretary, Sutherland was able 
to liaise closely with his British counterparts, with Africans residing in London, 
and with the Convention People’s Party (CPP) in Ghana in order to work out 
plans for how peace activists should respond to the impending French threat to 
explode an atomic bomb in the Sahara.
33 In September, Sutherland also made his 
way to New York in an effort to build further support for direct action against the 
French threat. There he met with Bayard Rustin, who had played an absolutely 
critical role in organizing nonviolent protest during the Montgomery Bus Boycott 
and whom Sutherland considered crucial to any action against the French.
34 “Not 
pal-mara-22.indd   338pal-mara-22.indd   338 7/29/08   9:25:37 AM7/29/08   9:25:37 AM


--- PAGE 348 ---
Nuclear Imperialism and the Pan-African Struggle for Peace 339
only,” as John D’Emilio writes, “did [Rustin] have more experience organizing 
complex direct action projects than did any of the British pacifists, but the fact 
that he was black and so deeply involved in the Southern freedom struggle would 
bring credibility among Africans.” Ever the political tactician, Rustin was quickly 
persuaded by Sutherland and by the strategic possibilities of linking the struggles 
of African peoples to the campaign for nuclear disarmament. 
35 By October, the 
War Resistors League agreed to fund Rustin’s journey to Britain and Ghana to 
help develop a plan for direct action.
Kevin Gaines argues in his pathbreaking American Africans in Ghana that 
Ghana “provided an independent forum for black American radicals . . . offering 
them the opportunity to participate in a transnational culture of opposition to a 
Western culture seeking the preservation of colonial and neo-colonial dominance 
over the majority of the world’s peoples.”
36 Certainly Ghana provided an impor-
tant forum for African American activists, like Rustin and Sutherland, but we 
must also appreciate the reciprocal processes at work: what black radicals from 
the United States and the broader Diaspora brought to Ghana. Ghana became 
the new focal point of a “transnational culture of opposition,” in no small part 
because of the ongoing work of black internationlists like Du Bois, Robeson, 
Padmore, Rustin, and Sutherland. These activists were not simply accessing an 
existing (and heretofore separate) struggle for peace and freedom by locating their 
work in Ghana. They were generating and constituting that struggle—literally 
mapping it with their movements across borders and boundaries, as they forged 
links between pacifism, nuclear disarmament, and civil rights and reinvigorated 
the Pan-African struggle against colonial domination. In Ghana in 1959, it was 
Bayard Rustin and Bill Sutherland who sought to bring the lessons of Montgom-
ery, Aldermaston, and the All African People’s Conference on to the same page.
Yet the work of forging and maintaining transnational links—especially given 
the primacy of “nation” and “national interests” in a cold war world—was not 
always easy, even when operating from black internationalism’s new center of 
gravity in an independent African state. Indeed, as D’Emilio points out, many in 
the civil rights movement, including Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr., and A. Philip 
Randolph, were not pleased with Bayard Rustin’s decision to travel to Ghana 
during what was understood as a critical moment in the Black Freedom Move-
ment. They urged Rustin not to participate in any action that might result in a 
prison term and thereby prevent him from returning to the United States. Mean-
while, Rustin’s pacifist allies urged him on.
37 Unsure of how to proceed, Rus-
tin—already in Ghana—requested that his allies from the civil rights and pacifist 
movements meet. The results of that meeting, held in Randolph’s office in Har-
lem, were reported to Rustin by telegram: “‘Randolph expressed firm view civil 
rights struggle paramount and decisively important to African colonial struggle 
as well as peace fight. Your indispensable role in domestic actions requires return. 
. . . Muste holds that Africa project potentially more important, capable of major 
contribution to civil rights struggle here as well as struggle against new nuclear 
colonialism.’”
38 In the end, Rustin found his own way, moving forward with his 
pal-mara-22.indd   339pal-mara-22.indd   339 7/29/08   9:25:37 AM7/29/08   9:25:37 AM


--- PAGE 349 ---
Transnational Blackness340
participation in the protest, while making arrangements, in consultation with 
Nkrumah and other protesters, for pacifist A. J. Muste (Fellowship of Recon-
ciliation activist and then chair of the Committee for Non-Violent Action) to 
replace him in due course. 
39
Just what that protest would entail was “the culmination,” according to April 
Carter, “of . . . negotiation and planning between Accra, New York, and Lon-
don; journeys to France; deputations to African Embassies in London; and debate 
about the politics, route, personnel and financing of the team.”
40 Rustin, Suther-
land, Scott, Randle, Carter, and a handful of others ultimately decided that the 
protest team should assemble in Accra and then travel north through Upper Volta 
and the French Soudan, continuing directly to the test site in Algeria.
41 The plan 
had the full support of Ghana’s ruling party—the Convention People’s Party. In 
fact, the Ghana Council for Nuclear Disarmament (GCND), headed up by E. C. 
Quaye, chair of the Accra City Council, approached Ghana’s Cabinet in October 
of 1959 with a request for assistance to send the protest team from Ghana “across 
West Africa into the atomic testing ground at El Hammoudia near Reggan”—ap-
proximately two thousand miles to the north of Accra some time in November.
42 
After much discussion, the cabinet decided that it would provide a special grant of 
G£2,757 to the African Affairs Committee, “which in turn could make the sum 
available” to the GCND. Concerned about maintaining an image of government 
neutrality, the Cabinet directed the GCND “not to publicise the source of their 
income in order to avoid possible embarrassment to the Government.”
43 Such 
budgetary laundering through African Affairs, however, could not have disguised 
government support for the protest. The African Affairs Committee met regularly 
at Flagstaff House, Nkrumah’s residence in Accra, and included all of the top 
government ministers and CPP activists.
44
By November 1959, international activists began to converge on Accra. Rev-
erend Michael Scott, the renowned anticolonial, antiapartheid peace activist, 
who had been arrested for civil disobedience in South Africa in 1946 and would 
become a major figure in the movement for colonial freedom in southern Africa, 
arrived in mid-November.
45 Joining him was Muste (who founded the Ameri-
can Committee on Africa) and Randle (chair of the Direct Action Commit-
tee against Nuclear War from 1958–61). In addition to Bayard Rustin, Francis 
Hoyland (an art teacher and painter from Britain),and Esther Peter (a peace 
activist who worked for the Council of Europe in Strasbourg) made their way 
to Accra, although H. O. Hakansson, a professional dancer and lifelong pacifist 
from India who was supposed to join the team was not able to come.
46 As the 
team members assembled in Accra, they began the process of applying for travel 
documentation. The French government’s immediate response to the activists’ 
requests was to deny visas and entry permits to all team members, including 
Esther Peter, a French citizen. In a statement published in the Ghanaian Times, 
Rustin, serving as the team’s secretary, responded by reaffirming the group’s 
determination to proceed:
pal-mara-22.indd   340pal-mara-22.indd   340 7/29/08   9:25:38 AM7/29/08   9:25:38 AM


--- PAGE 350 ---
Nuclear Imperialism and the Pan-African Struggle for Peace 341
The French authorities, by imprisoning us, will hardly silence our voices. We can-
not believe that the French people want to defy world opinion as expressed at the 
United Nations by exploding a bomb while the present nuclear powers are seeking 
an agreement to end all testing. We cannot believe that the French people want to 
perpetrate the infamy of violating and desecrating the soil of Africa in the interests 
of a new nuclear imperialism. . . . There is one thing that will cause us to abandon 
our mission—the abandonment of the Sahara T est.
47
While diplomatic responses unfolded outside of Ghana, public fundraising 
for the campaign within Ghana reached a fever pitch with a mass rally at West 
End Arena on November 19 when Finance Minister K. A. Gbedemah appealed 
to the nation on behalf of the team and the GCND. “‘We the people of Africa,’” 
Gbedemah declared, “can under no circumstances permit our God-given land to 
be used for the destruction of humanity.’” Over G£4,000 were collected at that 
rally.
48 Meanwhile, the Ghanaian government continued to battle at the United 
Nations. In New York, Ghana’s Permanent Representative to the United Nations 
sharply questioned French sovereignty over the Sahara: “the whole question of 
French sovereignty in the Sahara is today being debated on the field of battle 
between the armies of France and the forces of the Provisional Government of the 
Algerian Republic. . . . If France must explode its bomb, they are quite welcome 
to do so somewhere in metropolitan France. . . . Those days when the destiny of 
Africa was decided at the conference tables outside Africa . . . are over.”
49
On December 5, 1959, the night before the team’s departure, Rev. Scott told 
Radio Ghana listeners that the desert “‘was being prepared as a base for nuclear 
war in North Africa and the Middle East.’ Their journey would be ‘a holy war, a 
non-violent war, against the inhumanity of nuclear war.’”
50 The following morn-
ing the Sahara Protest T eam, which now included eighteen members, began its 
trek after a dawn farewell rally at the Arena. The members included eleven Gha-
naians (C. Ablorh, B. M. Akita, K. M. Arkhurst, George Asante, K. A. Dornu, 
K. Frimpong-Manso, F . A. Koteye, P . G. Marshall, George Odoe and R. Orleans-
Lindsay); a Nigerian student, H. Arinze; Ntsu Mokhekle, president of the Basu-
toland National Congress; Hoyland, Randle and Scott from Britain; Peter from 
France; and Rustin and Sutherland from the United States. Muste remained in 
Accra in charge of communications, though he planned to meet up with the team 
briefly when it reached the border. The team’s departure captured world media 
attention the moment it left Accra.
51 By the afternoon of day one the team had 
reached Kumasi—the capital of the historical Asante empire—where it was met 
by an enthusiastic crowd. As Muste later wrote, “I wish that all activists in the 
United States and Britain could witness these scenes—the big rallies, the people 
lined along the streets and roads shouting, ‘Freedom!’ and ‘Sahara T eam!’ as the 
huge truck and the Land Rovers rolled by.”
52
After leaving Kumasi, the team continued its journey north, reaching the town 
of Bolgatanga on December 7, where members then made the decision to try to 
cross the border at the frontier town of Bawku.
53 From Bawku, the team passed 
into French territory but had to travel sixteen miles before reaching the first 
pal-mara-22.indd   341pal-mara-22.indd   341 7/29/08   9:25:38 AM7/29/08   9:25:38 AM


--- PAGE 351 ---
Transnational Blackness342
French government post at Bittou. There team members met three French offi-
cers and Michael Scott immediately set about explaining their mission. Accord-
ing to Muste’s account, “one of the officers interrupted him and said: ‘you do 
not need to speak at length. We know all about your group. . . . But we are here 
under instructions from Paris to forbid you to proceed.’”
54 And it was there, at 
Bittou, that the team sat for several days in a strange kind of limbo: they were not 
allowed to pass nor were they arrested. Sutherland recalls that they “maintained 
their presence in Bittou, handing out leaflets. . . . Once it was clear that the group 
was well received, evident by local offers of food and shelter, the French police 
surrounded them.”
55 Esther Peter, as a French citizen, was the only one allowed to 
move about, but she could only do so under guard.56 At times, the situation grew 
quite tense. As Sutherland recalls, Bayard Rustin at one point said, “‘Let’s start 
up our motors and see what happens.’” Apparently, seconds later, “the French 
paramilitary came and took their positions with their weapons at the ready and 
the team members stopped the motors.” The team withdrew to Bolgatanga to 
reconsider their strategy.
Several days later, the Ghanaian Times announced the protesters’ new strategy 
with a bold headline: “Protest T eam Makes Second Dash.” A smaller group of 
seven, led by Michael Scott, left Bolgatanga on December 17, this time heading 
toward Po in the Upper Volta. The team included Randle, Scott, Sutherland, and 
four others. While this group made their move, other members agreed to focus on 
propaganda in Ghana, the surrounding region, as well as Europe and the United 
States.
57 But the smaller version of the team was again halted at the end of Decem-
ber at the frontier post of Po. There they camped for some time, unable to move. 
Finally, as Sutherland recounts:
After getting to know the African guards, the second team moved early one morn-
ing across the border. “The guards did not try to stop us physically,” Bill remem-
bered, “but they did alert their French superiors, who arrested us after we advanced 
about one mile into Upper Volta. We were put into jail. . . . The next morning, we 
were all put into a large van and the amiable military officer in charge led the way 
in a small Land Rover. We did not know where they were taking us, but we drove 
for several hours. Unfortunately, the officer’s land rover skidded and turned over on 
the very sandy road. The team of seven of us was allowed out of our van to help put 
the overturned vehicle right and we continued on our way! Eventually . . . we . . . 
were dumped unceremoniously into Ghana.”
58
As all of the personal accounts of the protesters attest that the standoff between 
the team and the French officers was incredibly tense, though there were, at times, 
surprising moments of easy interaction with the soldiers. Michael Scott recounts 
several of these, including one on Christmas day when soldiers approached the 
camp and the protesters were sure they were about to be arrested. Instead, “the 
soldiers had come to share food and drink with us,” Scott remembers, “and sing us 
French songs.”
59 On another occasion, when the protesters were moving through 
French territory under French escort, one of their truck’s tires was punctured 
pal-mara-22.indd   342pal-mara-22.indd   342 7/29/08   9:25:38 AM7/29/08   9:25:38 AM


--- PAGE 352 ---
Nuclear Imperialism and the Pan-African Struggle for Peace 343
and they were forced to stop. The soldiers who had been following them pulled 
up along side and set their rifles down, knowing that no one could flee. Then, 
according to Scott, “Michael Randle, who had a guitar, started singing and play-
ing. The soldiers became interested and the whole thing ended up with them 
doing their dances and our people doing ours. The French officers, three of them, 
eventually arrived and found their own troops dancing with us, their rifles parked 
by the side of the road.”
60
Such light-hearted moments notwithstanding, by January team members 
were utterly exhausted, though they made several more attempts to cross the bor-
der, urged on, according to Sutherland, by the enthusiasm of Finance Minister 
Gbedemah.
61 Finally, in mid-January, the team again crossed the border—not 
at an official post—with the help of a “local guide along a path usually used by 
smugglers.”
62 They hid in the bush and slept under blankets draped over tree 
branches for shade, and moved only at night, on foot, toward Ougadougou. 
Exhausted and without water, they eventually hitched a ride with a truck. But 
their relief gave way to dismay when, as Scott recalls, “Instead of being taken 
to the next town, we found ourselves being driven right into the compound of 
the French authorities. One of the French officers who had had the Christmas 
dinner with us lifted up the flap of the lorry and said, ‘Bon jour. Good to see 
you again.’”
63 The team members were again arrested and again they refused to 
cooperate with the police. They were then carried, one by one, into a van, driven 
south, and dumped, for the last time, on the Ghana side of the border.
64
After this failed attempt, the Sahara Protest T eam, as it came to be known, 
returned to Accra where it now had a permanent office and was officially co-
chaired by E. C. Quaye and Michael Scott, with Randle as secretary. Its work-
ing committee included Abdoulaye Diallo, E. J. Duplain, K. A. Gbedemah, R. 
T . Makonnen, Bayard Rustin, Bill Sutherland, and N. A. Welbeck.
65 For sev-
eral months team members continued their struggle on a range of fronts. Scott 
left Accra for T unis on January 25 for the AAPC, where he announced that he 
was “prepared to fly into the Sahara test area, if he could find a plane and a 
take-off strip.”
66 Rustin and Muste returned to the United States where dem-
onstrators, organized by the Committee to Support the Sahara Protest T eam, 
marched in protest against the testing outside the French T ourist office in the 
heart of Manhattan.
67
But as peace activists—African, American, and European—strategized around 
new transnational peace tactics, France’s plans continued apace for the first atomic 
bomb testing. The only factor hindering French efforts in late January and early 
February was the weather and when those conditions improved, they exploded 
their first nuclear device at 6:00 a.m. on February 13, 1960. At an emergency 
cabinet meeting, Nkrumah proposed and cabinet members agreed that all of the 
assets of French firms operating in Ghana should be frozen and no permits for the 
transfer of assets issued.
68 Several weeks later, on April 1, the French exploded a 
second bomb—reported by the Ghana Evening News as “representing thrice the 
strength of the bomb which devastated Hiroshima.” 69 The cabinet immediately 
pal-mara-22.indd   343pal-mara-22.indd   343 7/29/08   9:25:38 AM7/29/08   9:25:38 AM


--- PAGE 353 ---
Transnational Blackness344
met to discuss “stronger measures.” The government then suspended diplomatic 
relations with France, recalled J. E. Jantuah, the Ambassador to France, refused 
visas to French citizens, and froze all assets and properties of French citizens resid-
ing within Ghana’s borders.
70
Outrage at France’s unilateral disregard for African soil and African lives was 
expressed throughout the continent and beyond, although as David Birmingham 
rightly points out, there was “no outcry from the neo-colonial puppets”—most 
notably from Côte d’Ivoire’s Felix Houphouet-Boigny.
71 The only act of colo-
nial aggression to elicit a similar level of outrage in the Pan-African press was 
Italy’s invasion of Ethiopia in 1935, which had galvanized black internationalism 
throughout the world. More than a few speakers and editorialists pressed the con-
nection. “There is only one incident in living memory,” an editorial in the Ghana 
Evening News exclaimed, “that compares in magnitude with the ephemeral, almost 
agonizing, triumph of Might over Right at Reggan last week—Mussolini’s rape 
of Abbysinia with the gas bombs and mass slaughter that eventually sounded the 
death-kneel of the League of Nations. . . . Then as now, certain nations, loud in 
their profession of humanity, fraternity, justice and democracy sat complaisantly 
as Ethiopia, nailed to the wall, stretched her bleeding hands for succor.”
72
The most dramatic Pan-African-led response to the French tests occurred 
shortly after the second bomb exploded at the beginning of April. Building 
directly on the twinned legacies of Pan-Africanism and peace that were manifest 
at the 1945 Pan Africanist Congress, the 1949 Peace Conferences in New York 
and Paris, the Asian-African Conference in Bandung, as well as at the AAPC in 
1958, Ghana hosted the Positive Action Conference for Peace and Security in 
Africa. From April 7 to 10 delegates gathered from throughout the continent 
(officials from independent states and representatives of liberation movements), as 
well as nonvoting observers from Japan, India, Britain, Sweden, the United States, 
Yugoslavia, and France.
73 Nonvoting delegates also represented the Committee 
for Non-Violent Action, the Montgomery Improvement Association (Ralph 
Abernathy), and the American Friends Service Committee. The conference was 
initially planned as a specific and direct response to the French testing but in 1960 
history was moving faster than conference planners possibly could, and dramatic 
events of the moment demanded a rapid expansion in the conference agenda. On 
March 21, 1960, South African police fired on a group of unarmed demonstra-
tors who were peacefully protesting the government’s increasingly harsh and racist 
pass laws. In a matter of seconds, 63 lay dead and over 180 were wounded. The 
Sharpeville Massacre and the rapidly escalating violence and repression in Algeria 
that same month forced organizers to expand the conference mandate—a shift 
that generated some concern, especially from officials of invited governments. 
Nigerian Prime Minister Abubakar Balewa wrote to Nkrumah on March 25 that 
he was concerned not only by the expanded mandate but also by the expanded 
participant list: “I must also tell you that I find the proposed Conference very 
confusing in that delegations of Governments, of political parties, and of trade 
unions are all to join in together. I consider that this unorthodox procedure will 
pal-mara-22.indd   344pal-mara-22.indd   344 7/29/08   9:25:38 AM7/29/08   9:25:38 AM


--- PAGE 354 ---
Nuclear Imperialism and the Pan-African Struggle for Peace 345
make it very difficult for the delegations representing the elected Governments of 
their countries.”74 In the end, Nkrumah was able to assure concerned leaders that 
the threat of the atomic tests was paramount, but that
on an occasion when so many of our brothers are able to meet together for an 
exchange of ideas in respect of the welfare of our motherland, advantage ought to 
be taken of any little opportunity that presents itself for the consideration of some 
of the most vital problems facing us as a people . . . it is precisely in the peculiar 
nature of our assemblies that we have an opportunity to provide new lessons to 
the older nations. The mobilization of the total African body politic in Confer-
ence is an achievement transcending the bounds of procedures, when the urgency 
of the matter and the colossal importance of protecting our interests are taken 
into consideration.
75
In the end, the delegations that expressed concern about the conference’s expanded 
mandate and the mixing of state and non-governmental agents agreed to attend.
Nkrumah carefully set out the conference’s agenda in his opening address, as 
he explained to delegates that they had come to Accra “first to discuss and plan 
future action to prevent further use of African soil as a testing ground for nuclear 
weapons; secondly to consider effective means to prevent further brutalities 
against our defenceless brothers and sisters in South Africa, brutalities which are 
the result of the South African Government’s racial policy of apartheid. Thirdly, 
this conference must consider the ways and means whereby Algeria can be helped 
to bring an end to this dismal flow of human blood consequent upon this linger-
ing physical conflict.”
76 At the start of the conference, the Sahara Protest T eam, 
echoing the connections between the antinuclear struggle and African liberation, 
presented its manifesto to the delegates, calling not only for an end to nuclear 
tests and nuclear arms but also for a thousand volunteers for a renewed Sahara 
protest movement: “By joining with Africans from other parts of our Continent 
in positive non-violent action against nuclear imperialism they can make a deci-
sive contribution to the liberation of all Africa.”
77
As the conference’s aim was to mobilize the “total African body politic” in 
assemblies that did not privilege ministers and government representatives, del-
egates convened in separate committees to take on the specific questions of the 
conference’s expanded mandate. Defying cold war rhetoric, they worked to bring 
substance to Nkrumah’s famous dictum, “we face neither East nor West, we face 
forward,” as they strategized about how to address the French atomic tests, the 
war in Algeria, apartheid South Africa, and the full liberation of the continent. 
In the end, resolutions were passed by all of the committees. The first commit-
tee called for total disarmament; the second (on Algeria) recommended support 
for the Algerian fight for independence and encouraged the independent Afri-
can states to “consider formation of African volunteer corps to fight side by side 
with their Algeria brothers.” The third committee called on African states to sup-
port victims of apartheid, to consider imposing sanctions on South Africa, and 
to demand that the South African mandate over South West Africa be revoked. 
pal-mara-22.indd   345pal-mara-22.indd   345 7/29/08   9:25:38 AM7/29/08   9:25:38 AM


--- PAGE 355 ---
Transnational Blackness346
Finally the fourth committee on the liberation of Africa requested the United 
Nations to call a conference to consider a time table for the total liberation of all 
African countries.78
But perhaps what was more important than the resolutions passed at the Posi-
tive Action Conference was the process that had unfolded—that is, “the peculiar 
nature” of the assembly, as Nkrumah termed it. It was a process that was trans-
national, nonaligned, progressive, multi-pronged and not solely reliant on the 
power and expertise of the state. As Sutherland recalls:
When Nkrumah asked the international grouping of mainly pacifist advisors to see 
what they could “come up with,” even the most experienced amongst them found 
it to be a formidable task. Veteran US. Tacticians A.J. Muste and Ralph Abernathy 
worked long into the night with such figures as Madame T omi Kora of Japan, 
Madame Asha Devi of India, Esther Peter and Pierre Martin of France and Britian’s 
Michael Randle.
79
Like its many precursors—from Manchester to Bandung—the Positive Action 
Conference sought to take on imperialism as a many-headed hydra—the forces 
of power that linked the atomic bomb with apartheid in South Africa and white 
rule in Algeria.
But if the conference demonstrated the common terrain upon which both 
Pan-Africanists and peace activists could work, even in the debilitating climate 
of the cold war, it also exposed the fissures that would eventually pull the move-
ments apart. In this important way, then, it constituted a momentous turning 
point in the Pan-African struggle against nuclear imperialism. In the wake of 
Sharpeville and in the face of French intransigence in Algeria, the issue of non-
violence suddenly became a question. Among those attending the conference was 
Frantz Fanon. “He spoke in a quiet and sober voice,” recalls Sutherland, “explain-
ing his view of the regrettable necessity for armed struggle . . . ‘we tried [nonvio-
lent means, Fanon explained] . . . but the French came into the Casbah, broke 
down door after door and slaughtered the head of each household in the center 
of the street. When they did that about thirty-five consecutive times, the people 
gave up on non-cooperation.’”
80 And in many ways, the massacre at Sharpeville 
brought home a similar lesson: nonviolent direct action was only met with vio-
lence, murder, and massacre.
In the end, therefore, the Positive Action Conference brought the challenges 
and contradictions of the struggle against a nuclear imperialist world into sharp 
relief. Nkrumah, echoing the manifesto of the Sahara Protest T eam, opened the 
conference with a call for continuing nonviolent positive action as the primary 
tactic against nuclear proliferation, apartheid, and entrenched settler rule on the 
continent. By the end of the conference, as Sutherland notes, there was “only a 
passing reference to the original proposals.” While the conference ended with 
concrete plans for the setting up of a training center on nonviolent protest tac-
tics, as a wing of the proposed Ideological Institute at Winneba, even those plans 
were off the table within a year.
81 It is hard to imagine how it could have been 
pal-mara-22.indd   346pal-mara-22.indd   346 7/29/08   9:25:38 AM7/29/08   9:25:38 AM


--- PAGE 356 ---
Nuclear Imperialism and the Pan-African Struggle for Peace 347
otherwise, given events unfolding in Algeria, South Africa, Angola, the Congo, 
Mozambique, and Zimbabwe. As Drake would later write, “Nkrumah, as a pro-
ponent of ‘non-violent positive action’ was committed to setting up a training 
center at Winnebah for activists from southern Africa until 1961 when the begin-
ning of armed struggle made this an untenable position for a leading Pan-Afri-
canist. Sharpville [sic] and Lumumba’s murder also pushed Nkrumah away from 
a Gandhist position.”
82
Patrice Lumumba, the dynamic, progressive, and democratically elected 
leader of the Congo, was murdered by Congo secessionists with the complicity 
of Belgium and the U.S. Central Intelligence Agency on January 17, 1961. With 
Lumumba’s assassination, the escalating violence in Algeria, and in the wake of 
Sharpeville, the transnational radical peace movement was severed from its Pan-
African moorings. Ghana kept an official foot in the door of the international 
peace movement when it hosted the Accra Assembly in 1962—a gathering, which, 
as I noted at the outset, drew a cast of experts and activists from throughout the 
world.
83 But the parameters of that assembly were much narrower than those of 
1960. The conference focused almost exclusively on the nuclear arms race—any 
radical transformative social agenda had disappeared.
84 The Assembly was official 
and in many ways predictable. As Sutherland recalled:
Nkrumah was undoubtedly the leading voice of Pan-Africanism on the continent, 
and had become the leading African voice on the world scene. The nonviolence 
advocacy so prominent in the 1958 All African People’s Conference, in the 1959 
Sahara Protest T eams, and in the planning for the 1960 Positive Action Conference 
were all but eliminated from the mainstream political discourse. The Ghanaian gov-
ernment continued to provide support for the more conventional peace politicians 
. . . hosting the World Without the Bomb Accra Assembly . . . but there was little 
space or time for the radical experimentation of the previous years.
85
In other words, as cold war lines were drawn ever more sharply, as the space to 
speak from a position of nonalignment grew narrower, and as evidence mount-
ed—from Algeria, South Africa, Angola, and the Congo—of the lengths the neo-
colonial powers would go to preserve control and entrench their profits, time, 
experimentation, and the space to imagine new worlds must have appeared as 
luxuries no one could now afford.
Lessons and Legacies?
So, why remember the story of the Sahara Protest T eam or recount the “peculiar 
assembly” of the Positive Action Conference that promised so much in 1960? The 
Sahara T eam never made it more than a few kilometers north of the Ghana border 
and the “radical experimentation” of the Positive Action Conference dissolved in a 
matter of months. Certainly contemporary observers and participants considered 
the dramatic efforts of the Sahara Protest T eam of immense historical significance. 
“It would not matter if not a single person ever reached the site,” Nkrumah wrote, 
pal-mara-22.indd   347pal-mara-22.indd   347 7/29/08   9:25:38 AM7/29/08   9:25:38 AM


--- PAGE 357 ---
Transnational Blackness348
“for the effect of hundreds of people from every corner of Africa and from out-
side it crossing the artificial barriers that divide Africa to risk imprisonment and 
arrest, would be a protest that the people of France . . . could not ignore. Let us 
remember that the poisonous fall-out did not, and never will, respect the arbitrary 
and artificial divisions forged by colonialism across our beloved continent.”
86 
Sutherland’s more recent recollections were just as positive: “this joining up of 
the European anti-nuclear forces, the African liberation forces, and the U.S. civil 
rights movements could help each group feed and reinforce the other. Both the 
civil rights struggle and the CND were on a high at that time; they were really 
strong, people’s movements. Then, to be sponsored by a majority political party 
in government clearly marked a unique moment in progressive history.”
87 And 
radical pacifist Muste echoing Sutherland’s enthusiasm, characterized the Sahara 
protest as “an immense propaganda job for the idea of nonviolence . . . among 
the masses.”
88 The reflections of Nkrumah, Sutherland, and Muste remind us, 
I would argue, of the ways in which national liberation and nation-building, 
pan-Africanism and the radical, transnational peace movement were constitutive 
political struggles. Building upon two decades of sustained black internationalist 
struggle, Ghana’s leadership role in the Pan-African movement of the postwar era 
was forged in the context of the antinuclear movement and, just as importantly, 
that radical, direct action struggle for peace gained some of its most dramatic 
impetus from the leadership and participation of Pan-Africanists from through-
out Africa and the Diaspora.
Their “global emancipatory vision,” as Gaines has termed it, and their “radi-
cal experimentation” toward realizing that vision in the first years of Ghanaian 
independence is not without its legacies—legacies that we would do well to recall, 
especially when we hear that “nothing good ever comes out of Africa.” 
89 Indeed, 
in many ways one of the most significant legacies of those years is the very nation 
of Ghana—a nation that has managed to endure despite the fact that its disinte-
gration, like that of so many African countries, appeared overdetermined by the 
antidemocratic colonial legacies of dependence, uneven development, kleptoc-
racy, and outsized militaries. “What is astonishing,” as C. L. R. James reminded 
us in 1972, “is not the failures but the successes. When did so many millions 
move so far and so fast?”
90 The stories of the Sahara Protest T eam and the accounts 
of the radical experimentation that defined the Pan-African struggle in those criti-
cal years force us to remember not only the persistence and resilience of black 
internationalism during the worst ravages of the cold war but also the possibili-
ties and promise of the African Revolution in ways that fulfill Drake’s prediction 
of nearly a half century ago. They expose the inextricable connections between 
war, racism, and empire (whether it be the imperialism of DeGaulle’s France or 
of Bush’s U.S. hegemony) and remind us not only of the necessity of combining 
struggles for peace with movements against racism, economic injustice, and impe-
rialism but also of the absolute centrality of Africa to each and every one of those 
struggles. As Nkrumah wrote nearly a half century ago, “the future of the world 
will be decided in Africa.”
91
pal-mara-22.indd   348pal-mara-22.indd   348 7/29/08   9:25:38 AM7/29/08   9:25:38 AM


--- PAGE 358 ---
Nuclear Imperialism and the Pan-African Struggle for Peace 349
Notes
 1. In the end, Drake was unable to attend, but his paper is included in the volume produced 
out of the assembly. A list of those who accepted invitations, along with their affiliation, 
can be found in the Ghanaian Times, June 14, 1962. See also, Accra Assembly, Conclusions 
of the Accra Assembly (Secretariat of the Accra Assembly, 1962); and Julian Mayfield, ed. 
The World Without the Bomb: Selections from the Accra Assembly Papers (Accra: Govern-
ment Printer, 1962).
 2. St. Clair Drake, “The African Revolution and the Accra Assembly,” St. Clair Drake Papers, 
SC MG 309, Box 67, Schomburg Library. Also reprinted in, Mayfield, ed., World Without 
the Bomb, 33–37.
 3. For an excellent overview of afro-pessimism, see Waful Okumo, “Afro-Pessimism and 
African Leadership,” The Perspective (April 5, 2001), http://www.theperspective.org/
afro_pessimism.html (accessed March 2005), which makes special mention of the works 
of Paul Kennedy, David Lamb, Peter Marnham, and Robert D. Kaplan. See also Man-
thia Diawara, In Search of Africa (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1998); and 
Goren Hyden, “African Studies in the Mid-1990s: Between Afro-Pessimism and Amero-
Skepticism,” African Studies Review 39, no. 2 (September, 1996): 1–17. For a defense of 
afro-pessimism, see David Rieff, “In Defense of Afro-Pessimism,” World Policy Journal 15, 
no. 4 (1998–99): http://www.worldpolicy.org/journal/rieff.html (accessed March 2005). 
Disillusionment set in early with scholars of Ghana, see especially, Dennis Austin, Ghana 
Observed: Essays on the Politics of a West African Republic (Manchester: Manchester Univer-
sity Press, 1976), 2–5.
 4. See the special issue of Radical History Review 87 (2003), “T ransnational Black Studies,” 
ed. by Lisa Brock, Robin D.G. Kelley, and Karen Sotiropoulos.
 5. Among the many scholars who have grappled with this question for Ghana since 1966 
are: Bob Fitch and Mary Oppenheimer, Ghana: End of an Illusion (New York: Monthly 
Review, 1967); Samir Amin, Neo-Colonialism in West Africa (New York: Monthly Review, 
1973); Dennis Austin and Robert Luckham, Politicians and Soldiers in Ghana, 1966-1972 
(London: Frank Cass, 1975); Dennis Austin, Ghana Observed; C. L. R. James, 
 Nkrumah 
and the Ghana Revolution (London: Allison and Busby, 1977); Manning Marable, African 
and Caribbean Politics: From Kwame Nkrumah to Maurice Bishop (London: Verso Books, 
1987); Kofi Buenor Hadjor, Nkrumah and Ghana: The Dilemma of Postcolonial Power 
(London: Kegal Paul International, 1988); David Rooney, Kwame Nkrumah: The Politi-
cal Kingdom in the Third World (New York: St. Martin’s, 1988); and most recently, Kevin 
Gaines, American Africans in Ghana (Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina, 2006).
 6. The promise of those years is eloquently captured in Gaines, American Africans, esp. 
19–26.
 7. The difficulty of finding beginnings and examining “intricate connections” is described in 
the preface to Marable’s African and Caribbean Politics, vii.
 8. See firstly, Paul Robeson, Here  I Stand (1958; repr. Boston: Beacon, 1988); and W . E. B. 
Du Bois, The World and Africa (New York: International Publishers, 1979). The literature 
produced by U.S.-based scholars, particularly over the last decade, on the development 
of black internationalism during World War II and the fate of that radical agenda during 
the cold war is quite substantial. See, for example (by date of publication): Gerald Horne, 
Black & Red: W .E.B. Du Bois and the Afro-American Response to the Cold War, 1944–1963 
(Albany, NY: State University of New York Press, 1986); Brenda Gayle Plummer, Rising 
Wind: Black Americans and U.S. Foreign Affairs, 1935–1960  (Chapel Hill: University of 
North Carolina Press, 1996); Robin D.G. Kelley, Race Rebels: Culture Politics and the Black 
Working Class (New York: Basic Books, 1996); Penny Von Eschen, Race against Empire: 
pal-mara-22.indd   349pal-mara-22.indd   349 7/29/08   9:25:38 AM7/29/08   9:25:38 AM


--- PAGE 359 ---
Transnational Blackness350
Black Americans and Anticolonialism, 1937–1957 (Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 
1997); Yevette Richards, “African and African-American Labor Leaders in the Struggle 
over International Affiliation,” International Journal of African Historical Studies 31, no. 
2 (1998): 301–34; Gerald Horne, Race Woman: The Lives of Shirley Graham Du Bois  
(New York: New York University Press, 2000); Yevette Richards, Maida Springer: Pan-
Africanist and International Labor Leader (Pittsburgh, PA: University of Pittsburgh Press, 
2000); Robin D. G. Kelley, “Stormy Weather: Reconstructing Black (Inter) National-
ism in the Cold War Era,” in Is It Nation Time? Contemporary Essays on Black Power and 
Black Nationalism, ed. Eddie S. Glaude, Jr. (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2002), 
67–90; James H. Meriwether, Proudly We Can Be Africans: Black Americans and Africa, 
1935–1961 (Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 2002); Penny Von Eschen, 
Satchmo Blows Up the World: Jazz Ambassadors Plays the Cold War (Cambridge, MA: Har-
vard University Press, 2004); Brenda Gayle Plummer, ed., Window on Freedom: Race, Civil 
Rights, and Foreign Affairs, 1945–1988 (Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 
2003); Nikhil Pal Singh, Black is a Country: Race and the Unfinished Struggle for Democ-
racy (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2004); and Gaines, American Africans. 
In addition to these, see the following, which look specifically at U.S. foreign policy and 
race within the United States: Mary L. Dudziak, Cold War Civil Rights: Race and the Image 
of American Democracy (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 2000); Azza Salama 
Layton, International Politics and Civil Rights Policies in
  the United States, 1941–1960 
(Cambridge, MA: Cambridge University Press, 2000); Thomas Borstelmann, The Cold 
War and the Color Line: American Race Relations in the Global Arena (Cambridge, MA: 
Harvard University Press, 2001); and George White, Jr., Holding the Line: Race, Rac-
ism, and American Foreign Policy toward Africa, 1953–1961 (Lanham, MD: Rowman and 
Littlefield, 2005).
 9. On the Council on African Affairs, see Robeson, Here  I Stand, esp. Appendix D, “A Note 
on the Council on African Affairs,” by Alphaeus Hunton, 117–21; Horne, Black and Red, 
esp. Chapter 11, passim; Plummer, Rising Wind, esp. 116–18; Von Eschen, Race Against 
Empire; Meriwether, Proudly We Can Be Africans, esp. 59–68.
 10. Horne, Red and Black, 28–30; Meriwether, Proudly We Can Be Africans, 63–64.
 11. On the Pan African Congress and its connections to U.S. black internationalism, see 
Horne, Black and Red, 29–47; Plummer, Rising Wind, 154–61; Von Eschen, Race Against 
E
mpire, 45–53; Meriwether, Proudly We Can Be Africans, 182–85. See also Kwame Nkru-
mah, Ghana: The Autobiography of Kwame Nkrumah (London: Thomas Nelson and Sons, 
1957), 52–55.
 12. Von Eschen, Race Against Empire, 103–7
 13. See Horne, Black and Red, 119–26; and Robeson, Here I Stand, 41–47.
 14. Plummer, Rising Wind, 213. The argument was first set out in Horne, Red and Black.
 15. Von Eschen, Race Against Empire, 2–33.
 16. For a similar argument, but utilizing the life and work of Lorraine Hansberry, see Fanon 
Che Wilkins, “Beyond Bandung: The Critical Nationalism of Lorraine Hansberry, 1950–
1965,” Radical History Review 95 (Spring 2006): 191–210.
 17. The Asian-African Conference received wide coverage in the African American press. See, 
for example, Horne, Black and Red, 190–91.
 18. Robeson, Here I Stand, 45–47. See also Richard Wright, The Color Curtain (New York: 
World, 1956).
 19. Von Eschen points out that in Drake’s subsequent overviews of Pan-Africanism, “The 
work of Paul Robeson, Alphaeus Hunton, and the CAA was invisible.” Even in discus-
sions of Padmore and Nkrumah, there is “scant mention of their roots in the left and with-
out reference to their early alliances with African Americans or the repercussions of the 
pal-mara-22.indd   350pal-mara-22.indd   350 7/29/08   9:25:38 AM7/29/08   9:25:38 AM


--- PAGE 360 ---
Nuclear Imperialism and the Pan-African Struggle for Peace 351
Cold War for that generation of anticolonial activists.” Von Eschen, Race Against Empire, 
176. See St. Clair Drake, “Diaspora Studies and Pan-Africanism,” in Global Dimensions 
of the African Diaspora, ed. Joseph Harris (Washington, DC: Howard University, 1982), 
451–514.
 20. Du Bois, letter to Wallerstein, May 3, 1961. Cited in Horne, Black and Red, 336.
 21. T ext reproduced in Colin Legum, Pan-Africanism: A Short Political Guide (New York: 
Praeger, 1963), 147. See also Kennett Loves, “African Nations Ask Nuclear Ban,” New 
York Times, April 23, 1958; and Kwame Nkrumah, I Speak of Freedom: A Statement of Afri-
can Ideology (New York: Praeger, 1961), 130. As Kwesi Armah points out, Ghana’s com-
mitment to a nuclear-free world actually pre-dated independence: “Ghana was consistent 
in this policy as expressed in the position taken on the eve of independence with regard to 
the Bandung Conference of Afro-Asian Countries in 1955.” Kwesi Armah, Peace without 
Power: Ghana’s Foreign Policy, 1957-1966 (Accra: Ghana Universities Press, 2004), 137. 
See also Michael Dei-Anang, The Administration of Ghana’s Foreign Relations, 1957-1965 
(London: Athlone Press, 1975), 19–20.
 22. Nkrumah, I Speak of Freedom, 151.
 23. Homer A. Jack, “African Confab Results,” Chicago Defender, January 17, 1959.
 24. See, for example, Bill Sutherland and Matt Meyer, Guns and Gandhi in Africa: Pan Afri-
can Insights on Nonviolence, Armed Struggle and Liberation in Africa (T renton, NJ: Africa 
World, 2000), 35.
 25. Horne, Black and Red, 342; and Horne, Race Woman, 156.
 26. All-African P
eople’s Conference News Bulletin 1, no. 4 (Accra: AAPC, 1959): 2.
 27. “Special Conferences,” International Organization 16, no. 2 (Spring 1962): 445.
 28. Reported in the Ghanaian Times, October 3, 1959.
 29. See Nkrumah, Ghana, 49–63; Gaines, American Africans, 34–39. As Gaines writes, “Pad-
more was the leading theoretician, strategist, and publicist of anticolonialism and African 
liberation, linking metropolitan agitation to the nationalist movements on the African 
continent.” (34). He first met Nkrumah in London in 1947. After Ghanaian indepen-
dence, he relocated to Ghana and worked as Nkrumah’s key advisor on African Affairs. 
Padmore died suddenly in London on September 23, 1959. See also Marable, African 
and Caribbean Politics, 120–23; Von Eschen, Race against Empire, 13–15, 45, as well as 
Padmore’s Africa and World Peace (London: M. Secker and Warburg, 1937), and Pan-
Africanism or Communism (London: Dobson, 1956).
 30. For Rustin’s life story, see John D’Emilio’s authoritative, Lost Prophet: The Life and Times 
of Bayard Rustin (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2003). For Sutherland, see Suther-
land and Meyer, Guns and Gandhi. See also Gaines, American Africans, 103–6. T o situate 
Rustin and Sutherland in the broader context of African American international activ-
ism, see Brenda Gayle Plummer’s introduction to her edited, Window on Freedom: Race, 
Civil Rights, and Foreign Affairs, 1945–1988 (Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina, 
2003), 1–16.
 31. Nkrumah joined the Fellowship while he was teaching philosophy at Lincoln University 
in Pennsylvania. See Gaines, American Africans, 43.
 32. Sutherland and Meyer, Guns and Gandhi, 5–7, 21–22. See also, Ernest Dunbar, The 
Black Expatriates: A Study of American Negroes in Exile  (New York: E.P . Dutton, 1968), 
88–109.
 33. Sutherland and Meyer, Guns and Gandhi, 36. See also D’Emilio, Lost Pr
 ophet, 280.
 34. For an account of Rustin’s work in Montgomery, see D’Emilio, Lost Prophet, 223–48.
 35. D’Emilio, Lost Prophet, 280.
 36. Gaines, American Africans, 13.
 37. D’Emilio, Lost Prophet, 283–86.pal-mara-22.indd   351pal-mara-22.indd   351 7/29/08   9:25:38 AM7/29/08   9:25:38 AM


--- PAGE 361 ---
Transnational Blackness352
 38. D’Emilio, Lost Prophet, 285, citing Muste and Levison to Bayard Rustin, 11/14/59, 
Bayard Rustin Papers, University Publications of America.
 39. D’Emilio, Lost Prophet, 286.
 40. April Carter, “The Sahara Protest T eam,” in Liberation without Violence, ed. A. Paul Hare 
and Herbert H. Blubert (London: Rex Collings, 1980), 130.
 41. When Rustin arrived in London he began to meet with officials and various embassies, 
including the Moroccan Embassy, which offered to secretly provide financing for the team. 
According to D’Emilio, Rustin was concerned about the strings that might be attached to 
such an offer. See D’Emilio, Lost Prophet, 281.
 42. National Archives of Ghana, Accra [NAG], ADM 13/2/65, Cabinet Memorandum, 23 
October 1959.
 43. NAG, ADM 13/1/28, Cabinet Minutes, October 23, 1959
 44. NAG, Special Collections, Bureau of African Affairs [SC/BAA] 251, African Affairs Com-
mittee Minutes, 19 November 1959. [File is in the process of being renumbered as RG 
17/1/465.] Committee members included: Nkrumah himself, Ako Adjei, N. A. Welbeck, 
Kofi Baako, Abdullai Diallo, Tawiah Adamafio, T . R. Makonnen, E. J. Du Plain, John 
T ettegah, Kwaku Boateng, Yankeh, Joe Fio Meyer, Eric Heymann, A. K. Barden, Kojo 
Botsio, Amoah Awuah, A. Y. K Djin, and Mbiyu Boinange.
 45. For Scott’s life story, see Michael Scott, A Search for Peace and Justice: Reflections of Michael 
Scott, ed. Paul Hare and Herbert H. Blumbert (London: Rex Collings, 1980).
 46. Ghanaian Times, October 1, 1959 and October 22, 1959. For reconstructions of the pro-
test based on participants’ accounts, see Bayard Rustin, The Reminiscences of Bayard Rus-
tin, no. 8: Interview of Bayard Rustin by Ed Edwin, November 6, 1985 (Alexandria, VA: 
Alexander St., 2004), 341–44; D’Emilio, Lost Prophet, 279–88; Scott, Search for Peace, 
131–37. For brief secondary accounts of the Sahara protest, see also, Armah, Peace without 
Power, 138. Gaines, American Africans, 103–6.
 47. Ghanaian Times, November 30, 1959.
 48. Ghanaian Times, November 21, 1959.
 49. Full text reprinted in Ghanaian Times, November 23, 1959.
 50. Daily Graphic, December 5, 1959.
 
51. Many scholars have noted the decline in coverage of African affairs in African American 
newspapers in the wake of the cold war. See esp. Meriwether, Proudly We Can Be Africans, 
153–57; and Von Eschen, Race Against Empire, 107, 118, 152. Ghana’s leadership role in 
the antinuclear movement received some coverage in the African American press before 
Rustin, Sutherland, and others assembled in Accra. See, for example, Chicago Defender, 
September 13, 1958, January 17, 1959, August 8, 1959; and September 16, 1959. The 
Sahara protest itself was covered in the mainstream U.S. press: New York Times, October 
15, 1959, November 5, 1959; November 20, 1959; January 5, 1960; January 31, 1960; 
and February 10, 1960; Washington Post, October 15, 1959; and November 20, 1959. 
However, the Sahara protest did not receive coverage in the Chicago Defender or the Pitts-
burgh Courier—two of the leading African American papers.
 52. Muste, Essays, 398.
 53. For a full account see Muste, Essays, 398–400.
 54. Ibid., 400.
 55. Sutherland and Meyer, Guns and Gandhi, 38.
 56. Daily Graphic, December 14, 1959.
 57. From late December until early January, Pierre Martin, a peace activist and teacher in a 
mass education unit in North Africa fasted outside the French Embassy in Accra to protest 
the proposed French tests. See Daily Graphic, January 5, 1950; and Ghana Evening News, 
January 1, 1950. In an interview with Mabel Dove, Martin explained, “There are two 
pal-mara-22.indd   352pal-mara-22.indd   352 7/29/08   9:25:38 AM7/29/08   9:25:38 AM


--- PAGE 362 ---
Nuclear Imperialism and the Pan-African Struggle for Peace 353
Embassies in Ghana today. I, Pierre Martin, I am the Ambassador presenting the people 
of France and the Embassy on the fifth floor of Ghana House represents French Official-
dom” Ghana Evening News, January 1, 1950.
 58. Sutherland and Meyer, Guns and Gandhi, 38–39. For Scott’s account see his Search for 
Peace, 132.
 59. Scott, Search for Peace, 131.
 60. Ibid., 132.
 61. In early January, Sutherland and Randle traveled to Accra to confer with government 
officials and activists there. See Daily Graphic, January 7, 1960.
 62. Sutherland and Meyer, 39.
 63. Scott, Search for Peace, 131.
 64. See Sutherland and Meyer, Guns and Gandhi, 39–40; and Daily Graphic, January 19, 
1960.
 65. See NAG, SC/BAA 514, Sutherland to Nkrumah, dd. Accra, August 26, 1960.
 66. Ghana Evening News, 1, 29–60.
 67. Ibid.
 68. NAG, ADM 13/1/29, Cabinet Minutes, February 13, 1960. See also, “Ghana to Freeze 
Assets of French,” New York Times, February 14, 1960. Over the next ten days, Profes-
sors R. W . H Wright, A. H. Ward, and John Marr of the University College of Ghana 
conducted extensive testing to measure fallout. They noted that there was a dramatic 
increase in levels of radiation throughout Ghana, all the way to Accra, but nowhere did 
measures exceed “what is considered to be the maximum safe dose.” See ADM 13/2/69, 
“Confidential: Radioactive Fallout Effect in Ghana Following the French Atom Bomb 
T est,” February 23, 1960.
 69. Ghana Evening News, April 4, 1960
 70. NAG, ADM 13/2/71, Cabinet Memorandum, “Second French Nuclear T est in the 
Sahara,” April 1, 1960. See also, Armah, Peace without Power, 138–39.
 71. David Birmingham, Kwame Nkrumah: The Father of African Nationalism (Athens: Ohio 
University Press, 1998), 104.
 72. Ghana Evening News, February 17, 1960.
 73. A pamphlet, “Positive Action Conference for Peace and Security, April, 1960,” which 
includes Nkrumah’s opening and closing speeches, resolutions of the conference, and the 
manifesto submitted by the Sahara Protest T eam can be found in NAG, ADM 16/24.
 74. NAG, SC/BAA 68, Abubakar Balewa to Nkrumah, dd. Lagos, March 25, 1960.
 75. NAG, SC/BAA 68, Nkrumah to Balewa, dd. Accra, April 2, 1960.
 76. 
For Nkrumah’s opening address, see ADM 16/24, “Positive Action Conference.” A slightly 
different version of the speech is reprinted in Nkrumah, I Speak of Freedom, 211–22.
 77. ADM 16/24.
 78. Ibid.
 79. Sutherland and Meyer, Guns and Gandhi, 40.
 80. Ibid., 41.
 81. Ibid. In August 1960, after conversations with Scott, Muste, and Rustin, Sutherland wrote 
to Nkrumah to follow up on plans for the “Non-Violent Positive Action T raining Centre” 
but realized that “the Congo Crisis naturally took precedence over everything else.” See 
NAG, SC/BAA 514, Sutherland to Nkrumah, dd. Accra, 26 August 1960. [File to be 
renumbered as RG 17/1/411]
 82. St. Clair Drake, “Nkrumah’s ‘Ban the Bomb’ Conference,’ (handwritten note, no date), 
St. Clair Drake Papers, SC MG 309, Box 67, Schomberg Library. Sutherland also believed 
the murder of Lumumba was crucial: “After the 1961 murder of Lumumba—a murder 
that was originally planned by the U.S. Central Intelligence Agency (CIA)—Nkrumah’s 
pal-mara-22.indd   353pal-mara-22.indd   353 7/29/08   9:25:39 AM7/29/08   9:25:39 AM


--- PAGE 363 ---
Transnational Blackness354
disillusionment with nonviolent strategies became solidified.” Sutherland and Meyer, 
Guns and Gandhi, 47.
 83. The papers and proceedings of the Assembly were edited and introduced by playwright 
Julian Mayfield. See Mayfield, ed., World  Without the Bomb. For a brief account, see 
Gaines, American Africans, 164.
 84. See NAG, SC/BAA 137, “The Accra Assembly, 10–17 May 1962,” (pamphlet). Invitees 
to the Assembly were to come as individuals, not as delegates or representatives. As the 
preliminary program explained, “The Assembly will be composed of about one hundred 
individuals invited in their personal capacity who have been active in putting forward 
proposals independent of the policies of any Power Bloc.”
 85. Sutherland and Meyer, Guns and Gandhi, 42.
 86. Nkrumah, I Speak of Freedom, 215.
 87. Sutherland and Meyer, Guns and Gandhi, 59, citing a 1993 conversation in Brooklyn, 
New York.
 88. Muste, Essays, 397. Many years later, as Scott reflected on both the significance of the 
Sahara protest and its limitations, he considered the government’s support of the protest 
or rather the reliance on the government a problem: “any time we wanted to go further, 
we had to send people back to Accra to find out whether the government would be willing 
to put up the necessary funds to allow the action to continue. Bayard Rustin and Michael 
Randle had to go back to Accra for several days in order to keep us ‘on location’, so to 
speak. In the end the decision was really made by the Ghanaian government, that they 
were willing to risk their trucks.” Scott, Search for Peace, 134.
 89. Gaines, American Africans, 285. On “radical experimentation,” see Sutherland and Meyer, 
Guns and Gandhi, 42.
 90. C. L. R. James, At the Rendezvous of Victory: Selected Writings (London: Allison and Busby, 
1984), 184.
 91. Nkrumah, I Speak of Freedom, 220.
pal-mara-22.indd   354pal-mara-22.indd   354 7/29/08   9:25:39 AM7/29/08   9:25:39 AM


--- PAGE 364 ---
About the Editors
Dr. Manning Marable is one of the United States’ most influential and widely 
read scholars. Since 1993 he has been professor of public affairs, political science, 
history, and African-American studies at Columbia University in New York City. 
From 1993 to 2003 Dr. Marable served as the founding director of the univer-
sity’s Institute for Research in African-American Studies, one of the nation’s most 
prestigious academic centers of scholarship on the black American experience. 
Since earning his PhD three decades ago, Dr. Marable has written over two hun-
dred articles in academic journals and edited volumes, and has written or edited 
twenty-five books and scholarly anthologies. In 2002 Dr. Marable established 
the Center for Contemporary Black History (CCBH) at Columbia University, 
an advanced research and publications center that examines black leadership and 
politics, culture, and society. CCBH produces Souls: A Critical Journal of Black 
Politics, Culture, and Society, a quarterly academic journal of black studies, which 
is published and distributed internationally by Taylor and Francis Publishers. 
CCBH also directs the Amistad Digital Resource Project, funded by the Ford Foun-
dation, which is developing multimedia resources for teaching African American 
history in secondary schools. He is currently completing a biography of Malcolm 
X, to be published by Viking Press.
Vanessa Agard-Jones is the managing editor of Souls: A Critical Journal of 
Black Politics, Culture, and Society. She is a PhD candidate in anthropology 
and French studies at New York University, where she works on the politics of 
sexuality, nationalism, and la mémoire de l’esclavage (the memory of slavery) in 
France and its Départements d’Outre Mer (Martinique, Guadeloupe, Guyane, 
and Réunion). She holds a Master of Arts degree from Columbia’s Institute for 
Research in African-American Studies and a Bachelor of Arts degree from Yale 
University. She has worked as both the director of a prison abolitionist nonprofit 
in California (the Prison Activist Resource Center) and as a teacher in elementary 
and middle schools in Georgia and is the former Chair of the Board of Direc-
tors of New York’s Audre Lorde Project: A Community Organizing Center for 
Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, T ransgender, T wo Spirit, and Gender Non-Conforming 
People of Color.
pal-mara-23aboutau.indd   355pal-mara-23aboutau.indd   355 7/25/08   1:53:04 PM7/25/08   1:53:04 PM


--- PAGE 365 ---
This page intentionally left blank


--- PAGE 366 ---
About the Contributors
Jean Allman teaches African history at Washington University and has authored 
and edited numerous works on West African history, including The Quills of the 
Porcupine: Asante Nationalism in an Emergent Ghana, “I Will Not Eat Stone”: A 
Women’s History of Colonial Asante (with V . Tashjian), and Fashioning Africa: Power 
and the Politics of Dress. Allman co-edits the New  African Histories book series at 
Ohio University Press and is the co-editor of the Journal of Women’s History.
Asale Angel-Ajani is a professor in the Gallatin School at New York Univer-
sity. She is the author of numerous articles on the transnational traffic in African 
women and women’s roles in drug trafficking. Angel-Ajani has also published 
widely on human rights, migration, displacement, conflict, and postconflict. 
Most recently, she is co-editor of the book Engaged Observer: Anthropology, Advo-
cacy, and Activism (Rutgers University Press, 2006) with Victoria Sanford. Angel-
Ajani earned her MA and PhD in Anthropology from Stanford University.
Kevin Gaines is the director for the Center for Afroamerican and African Studies 
and professor in the Department of History at the University of Michigan. He is 
author of Uplifting the Race: Black Leadership, Politics, and Culture in the Twentieth 
Century and American Africans in Ghana: Black Expatriates and the Civil Rights 
Era (University of North Carolina Press, 2006). Professor Gaines is a past winner 
of the John Hope Franklin Book Prize of the American Studies Association and 
has received fellowships from the National Humanities Center and the Center for 
Advanced Study in the Behavioral Sciences.
Faye V. Harrison is director of African American studies and professor of anthro-
pology at the University of Florida. Her publications include Resisting Racism 
and Xenophobia: Global Perspectives on Race, Gender, and Human Rights (ed.) and 
Outsider Within: Reworking Anthropology in the Global Age (University of Illinois  
Press, 2008).
Scholar and filmmaker Robin J. Hayes is an assistant professor of ethnic studies 
at Santa Clara University. While completing a combined doctorate at Yale Uni-
versity in African American studies and political science she served as co-founder 
and facilitator of the Black Resistance Reading Group and program coordinator 
for the Center for the Study of Race, Inequality and Politics. Robin has pub-
lished and presented several articles about black politics and culture and served 
pal-mara-24contr.indd   357pal-mara-24contr.indd   357 7/29/08   9:24:32 AM7/29/08   9:24:32 AM


--- PAGE 367 ---
About the Contributors358
on the faculty of Williams College and Northwestern University. In addition, she 
produced, directed, and co-wrote Beautiful Me(s): Finding our Revolutionary Selves 
in Black Cuba, a documentary film about the historical relationship between Afri-
can Americans and Afro-Cubans. Her current book project, African Liberation, 
Black Power and the Diasporic Underground, generates a theory about transna-
tional exchanges between social movements in the African Diaspora by exploring 
the relationship between African anti-colonialism and the Black Panther Party, 
Organization of Afro-American Unity, and Student Nonviolent Coordinating 
Committee. Robin thanks the Ford Foundation for their support of the research 
that appears in her contribution.
Gerald Horne has published twenty books including, most recently, The White 
Pacific: U.S. Imperialism and Black Slavery in the South Seas after the Civil War  
(University of Hawaii Press, 2007), and The Deepest South: The U.S., Brazil and 
the African Slave Trade (New York University Press, 2007).
Joseph Jordan is associate professor of African/Afro-American studies and director 
of the Sonja Haynes Stone Center for Black Culture and History at the University 
of North Carolina at Chapel Hill. He previously served as director of the Auburn 
Avenue Research Library on African-American Culture and History, was found-
ing chair of African/African-American Studies at Antioch College, and taught at 
Howard and Xavier Universities. He is editor of a forthcoming collection on Afri-
can Americans and Native Americans and is a contributor to No Easy Victories, a 
collection of essays on the U.S. antiapartheid movement (Africa World, 2008). 
His curatorial work includes Without Sanctuary: Lynching Photography in America. 
He currently serves as Senior Policy Advisor at T ransAfrica Forum.
Ricardo Rene Laremont is professor of political science and sociology at the 
State University of New York at Binghamton. He is the author of Islam and the 
Politics of Resistance in Algeria, 1783-1992 (Africa World, 1999). He is editor of 
The Causes of War and the Consequences of Peacekeeping in Africa (Greenwood, 
2001) and Borders, Nationalism, and the African State (Lynne Rienner, 2005).
Clarence Lusane is an author, activist, scholar, and well-respected expert in the 
areas of human rights, global racism, and international relations. He is the author 
of seven books on human rights, political rights, and global black politics. He has 
lectured on these topics in numerous foreign nations, including Colombia, Cuba, 
England, France, Germany, Guadeloupe, Guyana, Haiti, Japan, the Netherlands, 
Panama, Switzerland, T urkey, and Zimbabwe, among others. His latest book is 
Colin Powell and Condoleezza Rice: Foreign Policy, Race, and the New American 
Century (Praeger, 2006). His current research is focused on the intersection of jazz 
and international r elations, the impact of the H
urricane Katrina crisis on black 
politics, and new grassroots human rights movements in the global South.
pal-mara-24contr.indd   358pal-mara-24contr.indd   358 7/29/08   9:24:32 AM7/29/08   9:24:32 AM


--- PAGE 368 ---
About the Contributors 359
Anthony W. Marx is the President of Amherst College. Before coming to Amherst 
he was on the faculty at Columbia University where he was professor and director 
of undergraduate studies in political science. Marx is a respected teacher and an 
internationally recognized scholar who has written three books on nation-build-
ing, particularly in South Africa but also in the United States, Brazil, and Europe. 
He also has established and managed programs designed to strengthen second-
ary school education in the United States and abroad. Marx is the author of a 
dozen substantive articles and three books: Lessons of Struggle: South African Inter-
nal Opposition, 1960-1990 (Oxford University Press, 1992), Making Race and 
Nation: A Comparison of the United States, South Africa and Brazil (Cambridge 
University Press, 1998), and Faith in Nation: Exclusionary Origins of Nationalism 
(Oxford University Press, 2003). Making Race and Nation received the American 
Political Science Association’s 1999 Ralph J. Bunche Award (co-winner for the 
best book on ethnic and cultural pluralism) and the American Sociological Asso-
ciation’s 2000 Barrington Moore Prize (for the best book of the preceding three 
years in comparative-historical sociology).
Maureen Mahon is an assistant professor of anthropology at the University of 
California, Los Angeles. Her research interests include African American expres-
sive culture and the intersection of music, race, and identity. Right to Rock: The 
Cultural Politics of Black Music and Black Authenticity, her book about the Black 
Rock Coalition, is published by Duke University Press (2004). She earned a PhD 
in anthropology from New York University.
Elizabeth Mazucci has been affiliated with the Malcolm X Project at Columbia 
University since 2003. As researcher and former project manager, she has focused 
on the discovery and analysis of primary source material, particularly government 
records. She holds a BA in religion and archaeology from the University of Roch-
ester and an MA in anthropology (archaeology) from Columbia. Her master’s 
thesis examines what Malcolm X carried in his pockets at the moment he was 
assassinated; it is currently being adapted and expanded for publication. Mazucci 
has worked in the archives at the American Red Cross September 11 Recovery 
Program, Bausch & Lomb, the New York City Department of Records, and the 
New York City Department of Parks and Recreation.
Irma McClaurin is an activist anthropologist, writer, teacher, and administra-
tor, who has had a commitment to eradicating social inequality for over thirty 
years. She was associate professor of anthropology at the University of Florida 
(1995–2006), the Mott distinguished professor of women’s studies at Bennett 
College for Women (2004), deputy provost at Fisk University (2002–04), and 
an American Association for the Advancement of Science Diplomacy Fellow at 
USAID (2000–2001). She is currently a program officer at the Ford Foundation. 
McClaurin has a BA in American studies, an MFA in English, and holds both the 
MA and PhD in anthropology. She is the author of Women of Belize: Gender and 
pal-mara-24contr.indd   359pal-mara-24contr.indd   359 7/29/08   9:24:32 AM7/29/08   9:24:32 AM


--- PAGE 369 ---
About the Contributors360
Change in Central America (Rutgers 2001 [1996]) and the editor of Black Feminist 
Anthropology: Theory, Politics, Praxis and Poetics (Rutgers 2001), a 2003 Choice 
Outstanding Academic Title. She is also a poet and has published Black Chicago 
(1971), Song in the Night (1974), and Pearl’s Song (1988).
Brian Meeks is professor of social and political change in the Department of 
Government at the University of the West Indies, Mona. He is the director of 
the Centre for Caribbean Thought and a former chairman of the Michael Man-
ley Foundation. He has published five books and many articles on Caribbean 
politics and political theory. Among them are Envisioning Caribbean Futures: 
Jamaican Perspectives; Caribbean Revolutions and Revolutionary Theory: An Assess-
ment of Cuba, Nicaragua and Grenada (University of the West Indes Press, 2001) 
and Radical Caribbean: from Black Power to Abu Bakr, Narratives of Resistance: 
Jamaica, Trinidad, the Caribbean, and he is editor of Culture, Politics, Race and 
Diaspora: The Thought of Stuart Hall (Ian Randle, 2007). His first novel, Paint the 
Tow n Red, was published in 2003 by Peepal T ree.
Leith Mullings is a distinguished professor of anthropology at the Graduate Cen-
ter of the City University of New York. She received her PhD in anthropology 
from the University of Chicago. Her books include: Therapy, Ideology and Social 
Change: Mental Healing in Urban Ghana (University of California Press, 1984), 
Cities of the United States (Columbia University Press, 1987), On Our Own T erms: 
Race, Class and Gender in the Lives of African American Women (Routledge, 1996), 
Let Nobody Turn Us Around: Voices of Resistance, Reform and Renewal, An Afri-
can America A
nthology (Rowman and Littlefield 2000, co-edited with Manning 
Marable), Stress and Resilience: The Social Context of Reproduction in Central Har-
lem (Springer Press 2001, with Alaka Wali), Freedom: A Photohistory of the African 
American Struggle (Phaidon 2002, with Manning Marable), and Gender, Race, 
Class and Health: An Intersectional Approach (Jossey Bass 2005, co-edited with 
Amy Schulz). She has written articles on such subjects as stratification, ethnicity, 
race, gender, health, globalization, participatory research, and public policy. In 
1993 Professor Mullings was awarded the chair in American Civilization at the 
Ecole des Hautes Etudes en Sciences Sociales in Paris, France, and in 1997 she 
received the Prize for Distinguished Achievement in the Critical Study of North 
America from the Society for the Anthropology of North America. She is cur-
rently serving as a member of the Executive Board of the American Anthropologi-
cal Association.
Gina Perez is assistant professor of comparative American studies at Oberlin 
College. Her research interests include U.S. Latinos, gender, political economy, 
migration, transnationalism, urban anthropology, poverty, militarization and 
Latino youth, Latina feminisms. She earned a PhD in anthropology in 2000 from 
Northwestern University.
pal-mara-24contr.indd   360pal-mara-24contr.indd   360 7/29/08   9:24:32 AM7/29/08   9:24:32 AM


--- PAGE 370 ---
About the Contributors 361
Michael Ralph completed his PhD in anthropology at the University of Chicago. 
He is now an assistant professor in the Department of Social and Cultural Analy-
sis at New York University.
Besenia Rodriguez earned a PhD in African American and American studies 
from Yale University. She lives in Los Angeles, California.
Mark Q. Sawyer currently holds appointments as an associate professor with the 
Department of Political Science and with the Bunche Center for African Ameri-
can Studies at UCLA. He is also the director of the Center for the Study of Race, 
Ethnicity & Politics at UCLA. His book Racial Politics in Post Revolutionary Cuba 
(Cambridge University Press, 2005) received the Du Bois Award for the best book 
by the National Conference of Black Political Scientists 2006. He earned a PhD 
from the University of Chicago.
T. Denean Sharpley-Whiting is professor of African American and Diaspora 
studies, French director of African American and Diaspora studies, and director of 
the W . T . Bandy Center for Baudelaire and Modern French Studies at Vanderbilt 
University. She has recently published a book on young black women, feminism, 
and hip-hop culture, Pimps Up, Ho’s Down: Hip Hop’s Hold on Young Black Women 
(NYU, 2007). Her other works include Négritude Women (University of Min-
nesota Press, 2002), Black Venus: Sexualized Savages, Primal Fears, and Primitive 
Narratives in French (Duke University Press, 1999), and Frantz Fanon: Conflicts 
and Feminisms (Rowman and Littlefield, 1998). She has co-edited three volumes, 
the latest of which includes The Black Feminist Reader (Blackwell, 2000).
Howard Winant is professor of sociology at the University of California, Santa 
Barbara, where he is also affiliated with the Black Studies and Chicano Studies 
departments. He founded and directs the UCSB Center for New Racial Stud-
ies. Winant’s work focuses on the historical and contemporary importance of 
race in shaping economic, political, and cultural life, both in the United States 
and globally. He is the author of The New Politics of Race: Globalism, Difference, 
Justice (University of Minnesota Press, 2004), The World is a Ghetto: Race and 
Democracry Since World War II (Basic Books, 2001), Racial Conditions: Politics, 
Theory, Comparisons (University of Minnesota Press, 1994), Racial Formation in 
the United States: From the 1960s to the 1990s (co-authored with Michael Omi, 
Routledge 1994 [1986]), and Stalemate: Political Economic Origins of Supply-Side 
Policy (Praeger, 1988).
Lisa Yun is associate professor of English and Asian and Asian American studies at 
the State University of New York at Binghamton. She is the author of The Coolie 
Speaks: Chinese I
ndentured Laborers and African Slaves in Cuba (T emple University 
Press, 2007).
pal-mara-24contr.indd   361pal-mara-24contr.indd   361 7/29/08   9:24:32 AM7/29/08   9:24:32 AM


--- PAGE 371 ---
This page intentionally left blank


--- PAGE 372 ---
Abernathy, Ralph, 344, 346
ACOA. See American Committee on Africa
Africa, ii, 2–4, 11–12, 15–16, 57, 91, 
111–12, 115–29, 137, 140, 152–53, 
155–58, 161, 177, 180–84, 191, 
193–96, 199, 205–7, 210–13, 217, 
240, 246–49, 251–60, 271, 297, 298, 
299, 303–4, 307, 310, 313–15, 319, 
322, 333–41, 344–48, 357, 358, 359; 
African Diaspora, ii, 4, 7, 23, 33, 82, 
90, 96, 115–18, 127–29, 135, 140–41, 
175–76, 178, 180–82, 184–85, 210, 
229, 235–36, 239–41, 247, 270, 272, 
277, 294, 295, 317–19, 339, 348, 358, 
360, 361. See also North Africa, South 
Africa
African National Congress (ANC), 47, 49, 
57–61, 153, 184
Afrikaner, 56, 58–59
Alexander v. Sandoval, 47
American Committee on Africa 
(ACOA),177, 180, 182
American Negro Academy, 1
American Society of African Culture 
(AMSAC), 296
AMSAC. See American Society of African 
Culture
ANC. See African National Congress
Angelou, Maya, 296–97, 299
Angola, 154, 156, 180, 303, 307, 347
apartheid, 12, 16, 19, 21, 23–28, 34, 36, 41, 
43, 47–48, 50–52, 56–60, 89, 95, 105, 
192, 196, 297, 314, 334, 340, 345–46, 
358
Asia(n), 2, 4, 11–12, 15–16, 23, 26, 46, 57, 
79, 109, 112, 115, 127, 149–57, 159, 
161, 166, 184, 192–93, 195–96, 198, 
200–1, 225, 245–46, 248–56, 258, 
265–70, 273, 335, 344, 361
Baldwin, James, 109, 112, 194, 296, 
298–300, 321
Bandung Conference, 16, 150, 152, 154–57, 
181, 336
Belgian Congo. See Congo, the
Belize (British Honduras), 95, 145, 229
Bertram, Arnold, 77
Biko, Steven, 3, 57
Black Consciousness (BC) movement, 57–58
Black Panther Party (BPP), 151–52, 158–62, 
164–65, 177, 183, 184, 358
Black Power, 3, 151, 175, 177, 178, 179, 
181, 183, 185, 294, 295, 298, 338, 
358, 360
Black Studies, 2, 355, 361
Boggs, Grace Lee, 152
Boggs, James, 155
Bolivia, 95, 149, 156, 161
Bond, Julian, 182
BPP . See Black Panther Party
Brazil, 5, 13–14, 27, 44–45, 49–50, 52, 
60–61, 77, 94, 102, 108–09, 112, 
135–39, 145, 149, 217, 284, 358, 359
Bunche, Ralph, J., 22; Award, 359; Center, 
360
Bush, George H. W ., 4, 283
Bush, George W ., 5, 31, 78, 95, 282–83, 
301–2, 306–8, 312–15, 317, 319–24, 
348
Index
pal-mara-25idx.indd   363pal-mara-25idx.indd   363 7/29/08   9:23:19 AM7/29/08   9:23:19 AM


--- PAGE 373 ---
364    Index
capitalism, 5, 7, 11–12, 15–16, 20–22, 25, 
43, 65, 96, 151, 155, 158, 162–64, 
166, 232, 311, 323
Cardoso, Fernando Henrique, 49
Cardozo, Francis Lewis, 118
Caribbean, ii, 2–4, 12, 27, 29–30, 32, 
82–83, 88, 95–96, 108, 111–12, 117, 
128, 137, 142, 155–56, 199, 207, 229, 
265–70, 273, 360; Commonwealth, 
20; studies, 3
Cartwright, Marguerite (Margaret), 154, 296
Castro, Fidel, 102, 150–51, 157
Césaire, Aimé, 48, 101, 205–7
Cezair-Thompson, Margaret, 265–69
Clarke, John Henrik, 296, 299
Clarke, Kamari, 176
Congo, the, 120–21, 161, 296, 298, 303, 
327n37, 335, 337, 347, 353n81
Congress of South African T rade Unions 
(COSATU), 58
Cordero, Ana Livia, 297
COSATU. See Congress of South African 
T rade Unions
Costa Rica, 95
Cuba, 6, 21, 29, 32–33, 95, 101–12, 135, 
137–40, 152, 154, 161, 163, 265–66, 
268, 297, 358, 360, 361
Cultural Association for Women of African 
Heritage, 296
Davis, John A., 296
Davis, John P ., 111
Davis, Ossie, 296
Dee, Ruby, 296
Democratic Republic of the Congo, the. See 
Congo, the
Drew Ali, Timothy Noble, 248–50, 255–56, 
259
Du Bois, Shirley Graham, 156, 297, 299, 
337
Du Bois, W . E. B., 1–7, 11, 22, 51, 102, 
110–12, 117, 128, 135–43, 145–46, 
154–57, 191, 193, 195–96, 199, 201, 
205–6, 209–11, 294–97, 299, 334–37, 
339
Ecuador, 29, 94, 145
Edelman, Marian Wright, 178
Edsall, Thomas, B., 4–5
Egypt, 2, 137, 151, 153–54, 156–57, 
248–49, 252–55, 313
Ethiopia, 151, 153, 164, 195, 197, 248, 
254–55, 295, 305, 307, 335, 344
Fard, W . D., 249–54, 256
Farrakhan, Louis (Louis X), 150, 254
Forman, James, 177, 182
Freedomways, 296, 297, 298
Gambia, 305
Garvey, Amy Ashwood, 335
Garvey, Marcus, 3, 128, 191, 193–94, 209, 
247–50; Garveyism, 197, 209, 248, 
295; Garveyist, 208, 209, 211 248; 
Garveyite, 117
Garvin, Vicki, 297, 299
Ghana, 157, 180, 258, 293–99, 303, 318, 
333–44, 347–48, 357, 360
Guatemala, 77, 94, 149
Guy, Rosa, 296
Guyana, 266, 358
Hall, Prathia, 182
Hamer, Fannie Lou, 182–83, 298
Hansberry, Lorraine, 296
Hansen, Bill, 182
Harlem, 3, 107, 140, 151, 154–55, 181, 
196–98, 206, 209, 296, 298, 336–37, 
339, 360; Parents Committee, 150; 
Renaissance, 101–02, 106, 109–12, 
128
Harlem Writers Guild, 296
Harris, Donald, 182
Hernstein, Richard, 22
Hilliard, David, 158, 177, 183
Houser, George, 182
Howard University, 162, 178–80, 317
Howard, Charles, 296
Hughes, Langston, 111–12, 140, 206, 296, 
318
human rights, 16, 19–25, 27, 29, 31–32, 
34–36, 41, 44, 46, 51, 76, 89, 137, 
153, 182, 216, 218, 220–25, 282–83, 
357, 358
Hunton, W . Alphaeus, 155, 297
Hurston, Zora Neale, 111–12, 120–21
ICERD. See International Convention on 
the Elimination of All Forms of Racial 
Discrimination
IMF . See International Monetary Fund
pal-mara-25idx.indd   364pal-mara-25idx.indd   364 7/29/08   9:23:20 AM7/29/08   9:23:20 AM


--- PAGE 374 ---
Index 365
Indonesia, 6, 16, 151–53, 155, 336
Inkatha Freedom Party, 57–60
International Convention on the Elimina-
tion of All Forms of Racial Discrimina-
tion (ICERD), 28, 31, 216, 225
International Monetary Fund (IMF), 20, 21, 
23–24, 32, 35
Iran, 5, 153
Iraq, 4–5, 216
Jamaica Labour Party (JLP), 74, 78, 81
Jamaica(n), 3, 20, 73–78, 80–84, 104–05, 
137, 195, 197, 199, 265–67, 268–71, 
273–75, 277–78, 360
James, C. L. R., 141, 295, 348
Jim Crow, 3, 4, 7, 104, 105, 121
JLP . See Jamaica Labour Party
Jones, Matthew, 182
Karenga, Maulana, 2, 3
Kennedy, John F ., 109, 150, 297
Kenya, 151, 334–35, 337
Killens, John Oliver, 296
King, Martin Luther, Jr., 42, 47, 150, 288, 
315, 320, 339
Kochiyama, Yuri, 150–51, 15, 6–157
Kuwait, 151
Latin America, 4, 6, 12–13, 28–30, 32, 
35, 87, 90–91, 93–94, 96, 102, 112, 
135–39, 141–43, 145–46, 152, 
155–56, 161, 225, 282–83
Lee, Spike, 150
Lewis, David Levering, 22
Lewis, Ira, 196
Lewis, John, 177, 180, 182, 298
Lincoln, Abbey, 296
Lorde, Audre, 288, 296
Lumumba, Patrice, 161, 182, 296, 298, 334, 
337, 347
Magdoff, Fred, 5
Magdoff, Harry, 5
Malcolm X, 3, 48, 150–52, 156–58, 
160–61, 177–79, 181–82, 199, 
245–46, 248, 251–53, 256–59, 299, 
355, 359
Manley, Michael, 74, 81, 360
Marshall, Paule, 296
Mayfield, Julian, 296–99
Mbeki, Thabo, 59–60
Middle East, 4–5, 12, 27, 155–57, 161, 183, 
341
MNU. See Movimento Negro Unificado
Moses, Bob, 179, 182, 298
Moses, Dona Edwards, 182, 298
Moses, Wilson Jeremiah, 254
Movimento Negro Unificado (MNU), 50, 52
Mozambique, 156, 158, 347
Muhammad, Elijah (Elijah Poole), 150, 193, 
198, 245–46, 250–59
Muhammad Speaks, 158, 181, 257
Murray, Charles, 22
Murray, George Mason, 161
Nasser, Gamal Abdel, 156–57
NATO. See North Atlantic T reaty 
Organization
North Atlantic T reaty Organization 
(NATO), 154, 337
Neocolonial(ism), 23, 25, 106, 108, 334–35, 
347
Neoliberalism, 4–5, 7, 20, 23, 25–26, 74, 
80–81, 83, 311, 314, 324, 334
New Racial Domain (NRD), 7
Newton, Huey P ., 149, 152, 158–66, 177
NGO. See Non-Governmental 
Organizations
Nigeria, 49, 151, 180, 303–6, 338, 341, 344
Nkrumah, Kwame, 3, 157, 180, 182, 258, 
294–295, 297, 298–99, 314, 333, 
334–38, 340, 343–348
Non-Governmental Organizations (NGO), 
93, 96, 138, 216–18, 222–24, 287; 
Forum, 15–16, 23, 27
North Africa, 32, 341
Northern Grass Roots Leadership Confer-
ence, 152
NRD. See New Racial Domain
OAAU. See Organization of Afro-American 
Unity
Omega Plan, 307
Organization of Afro-American Unity 
(OAAU), 151, 158, 177–79, 181, 185, 
256, 259
Padmore, George, 3, 295, 334–36, 338–39
Palestine, 22, 27–28, 152, 156, 161
Pan Africanism, 2, 16, 89, 91, 111, 116–17, 
129, 157, 207, 209, 254, 294, 335–37, 
344, 347–48
pal-mara-25idx.indd   365pal-mara-25idx.indd   365 7/29/08   9:23:20 AM7/29/08   9:23:20 AM


--- PAGE 375 ---
366    Index
Pan-African(ist) Congress (PAC), 3, 57, 181, 
184, 335, 337
People’s National Party (PNP) (Jamaica), 
70–71, 74–76, 78, 81
Peru, 94, 166, 268
Phipps, Donald “Zeeks,” 74; Riots, 74–75
PNP . See People’s National Party
Poitier, Sidney, 296
Powell, Adam Clayton, Jr., 154, 196
Powell, Patricia, 265–75, 277
Puerto Rico, 65–67, 69–70, 95, 137, 154, 
297
Race Directive (RD), 221–24
Race Relations Act, 220–21, 224
Racism, 11–13, 15–16, 21–27, 34–36, 
42–43, 52, 56, 93–94, 102–3, 105, 
109, 115, 118–19, 121, 125–26, 128, 
136, 139, 142, 150, 151, 154, 156, 
158, 165–66, 178, 196, 201, 207, 212, 
215–25, 232, 248, 259, 296–98, 300, 
309, 314, 322, 336, 348, 357–58
Reagan, Ronald, 4, 307
Roach, Max, 296
Robeson, Eslanda Goode, 115–30
Robeson, Paul, 115, 118, 150, 154–55, 
295–96, 334–37, 339
Robinson, Ruby Doris, 182
Rustin, Bayard, 179–80, 338–43
Santiago, José, 155
Saudi Arabia, 151, 249
Seale, Bobby, 158–59
SEATO. See Southeast Asia T reaty 
Organization
SNCC. See Student Nonviolent Coordinat-
ing Committee
South Africa, 3–4, 12, 15, 23–25, 27, 
45, 47–49, 50, 52, 55–61, 95, 118, 
120–23, 127, 153, 155, 180, 193, 196, 
217, 297–98, 306–7, 314, 334, 340, 
344, 345–47, 359
Southeast Asia T reaty Organization 
(SEATO), 154
Student Nonviolent Coordinating Com-
mittee (SNCC), 150, 161, 177–80, 
182–84, 185, 298
Sukarno, 153
Syria, 5, 153
Third World, 12, 21, 59, 61, 116, 137, 149, 
151–52, 154–57, 159, 299
T ure, Kwame (Stokely Carmichael), 177, 
178, 180
Uganda, 118, 120, 303
United Nations, 6, 77, 118, 127, 150, 152, 
181, 216, 283, 287, 296, 298, 307, 
314, 322, 333, 341, 346
United Negro Improvement Association 
(UNIA), 3, 208, 209, 247, 249–51
Uruguay, 95, 156
Venezuela, 29–30, 137, 149
Wade, Abdoulaye, 302–11, 313–16, 324
Wade, Peter, 88–89
Washington, March on (1964), 152, 179, 
297
WCAR. See World Conference Against 
Racism
Williams, Robert F ., 152, 158, 297
Wilson, David L., 20
Windom, Alice, 299
World Bank, 16, 21, 23–24, 32
World Conference Against Racism (WCAR), 
13–16, 23, 27, 28, 31, 36, 217
World Institute for Development, 6
World T rade Organization (WTO), 21, 
23–24, 32, 35, 79
Worthy, William, 154, 195, 296
Wright, Richard, 111–12, 154, 194, 295, 
336, 338
Zanzibar, 121
Zimbabwe, 60–61, 184, 347, 366
pal-mara-25idx.indd   366pal-mara-25idx.indd   366 7/29/08   9:23:20 AM7/29/08   9:23:20 AM

