=== EXTRACTED TEXT FROM: twentytwoyears as a slave40 tears as a free man.pdf ===
Extraction Method: PyPDFLoader
Total Pages: 382
Timestamp: 2026-01-04T17:06:51.532943
================================================================================


--- PAGE 1 ---
)L*?*sjS&amp;gt;i
Brc^Bll


--- PAGE 2 ---



--- PAGE 3 ---



--- PAGE 4 ---



--- PAGE 5 ---



--- PAGE 6 ---



--- PAGE 7 ---



--- PAGE 8 ---



--- PAGE 9 ---
TWENTY-TWO YEARS A SLAVE,
AND
FORTY YEARS A FREEMAN;
EMBKACHTO A
COKRESPONDEtfCE OF SEVERAL TEAKS, WHILE
PRESIDENT pj?
1
\nLBEJfcfcCJlWi: COLONY,
LONDON, dANADA WEST,
BT
AUSTIN STEWAKD
tl
FOURTH EDITION.
CANANDAIQUA, N. Y.:
PUBLISHED BY THE AUTHOR.
1867.


--- PAGE 10 ---
ENTERED awjcorcling lq;*Ac4*of Ctopgresa^in th^ year 18it, by
&quot;.&quot;* ALLTNG*
*
In the Clerks Office, of the Dwvict Court of the U. S. for th
Northern District of NewYork.
COLYW & CKOWKLL, Stereotypera.


--- PAGE 11 ---
FEOM GOVERNOR CLARK.
STATE or NEW YORK,
EXECUTIVE DEPARTMENT,
Albany, May 10, 1856
MR. A. STEWARD, Canandaigua,
DEAR SIR : I notice a paragraph in the &quot;Ontario
Times&quot; of this date, making the announcement that you are
preparing
&quot;a sketch of events occurring under your own obser
vation during an eventful life,&quot; to be entitled,
&quot;
Twenty Years a
Slave, and Forty Years a Freeman;&quot; and that you design soon to
make an effort to obtain subscribers for the book.
Being desirous of rendering you what encouragement I may
in the work, you are permitted to place my name on your list
f subscribers.
Respectfully Yours,
MYRON H. CLARK
961212


--- PAGE 12 ---
ROCHESTER, SEPTEMBER, 1856.
Ma. WM. ALLING,
Dear Sir: The undersigned hare heard with
pleasure, that you are about issuing a Book made up from inci
dents in the life of AUSTIN STEWARD. We have been the early-
acquaintances and agsociates of Mr. Steward, while a business
man in Rochester in an early day, and take pleasure in bearing
testimony to his high personal, moral and Christian character.
In a world of vicissitude, Mr. Steward has received no ordinary
share, and we hope, while his book may do the world good, it
may prove a substantial benefit to him in his declining years.
ASHLEY SAMPSOW,
THOMAS KEMPSHALL,
FREDERICK STARR,
CHAS. J. HILL,
L. A. WARD, .
EDWIN SCRAWTOM,
JACOB GOULD.


--- PAGE 13 ---
RECOMMENDATORY.
ROOHKSTIB, JULY 1, 1856.
A. STEWARD, ESQ.,
Dear Sir: In reply to your letter upon the
propriety of publishing your life, I answer, that there is not only no
objection to it, but it will be timely, and is demanded by every con
sideration of humanity and justice. Every tongue which speaks for
Freedom, which has once been held by the awful gag of Slavery, is
trumpet-tongued and he who pleads against this monstrous oppres
sion, if he can say,
&quot;
here are the scars,&quot; can do much.
It is a great pleasure to me to run back to myboyhood, and stop at
that spot where I first met you. I recollect the story of your wrongs,
and your joy in the supposition that all were now ended in your
freedom; of your thirst for knowledge, as you gathered up from the
rudimental books not then very plenty a few snatches of the
elements of the language; of playing the school-master to you, in
&quot;setting copies&quot; for your writing-book; of guiding your mind and
pen. I remember your commencement in business, and the outrage
and indignity offered you in Rochester, -by white competitors on no
other ground than that of color.* I saw your bitter tears, and recol-
* The indignity spoken of wag this : Mr. Steward had established a grocery and
provision store on Buffalo Street, in a part of Abner Wakelee s building, opposite
the Eagle Hotel. lie put up his sign, a very plain and proper one, and at night,
Borne competitors, whom he knew, as well as he could know anything which he
could not prove, smeared his sign with black paint, utterly destroying it I But the
misguided men who stooped to such an act the victims of sensuality and excess
have years ago ended their journey, and passed to the bar of a higher adjudi
cation.


--- PAGE 14 ---
VI RECOMMENDATORY.
lect assuring you what afterwards proved true that justice would
overtake the offenders, and that you would live to see these enemies
bite the dust ! I remember your unsullied character, and your pros
perity, and when your word or endorsement was equal to that of any
other citizen. I remember too, when yourself, and others of your
kind, sunk all the gatherings of years of toil, in an unsuccessful
attempt to establish an asylum for your enslaved and oppressed
brethren and, not to enumerate, which I might do much farther, I
remember when your &quot;old master,&quot; rinding you had been successful,
while he himself had lost in the changes on fortune s wheel came
here and set up a claim to yourself and your property a claim which
might have held both, had not a higher power suddenly summoned
him to a tribunal, where both master and slave shall one day answer
each for himself I
But to the book. Let its plain, unvarnished tale be sent out, and the
story of Slavery and its abominations, again be told by one who has
felt in his own person its scorpion lash, and the weight of its grind
ing heel. I think it will do good service, and could not have been
sent forth at a more auspicious period. The downfall of the hateful
system of Slavery, is certain. Though long delayed, justice is sure
to come at length; and he must be a slow thinker and a poor seer,
who cannot discern in the elements already at work, the mighty
forces which must eventually crush this oppression. I know that
you and I have felt discouraged at the long delay, years ago, when
we might have kept up our hopes by the fact that every thing that is
slow is surt. Your book may be humble and your descriptions tame,
yet truth is always mighty; and you may furnish the sword far some
modern Sampson, who shall shout over more slain than his ancient
prototype. I close with the wish, that much success may attend
your labors, in more ways than one, and that your last days may be
your best and am,
Your old Friend,
And obed t serv t,
EDWIN SCRANTOM.


--- PAGE 15 ---
CONTENTS.
SLAVE LIFE ON THE PLANTATION,
PA&amp;lt;
13
AT THE GEEAT HOUSE,
III.
HBSB-EACINQ AND ITS CONSEQUENCES, - - 40
IV.
JOTONEY TO OUK N\VHOME IS N*.W YoEff, - 52
Y.
INCIDENTS AT SODHS,
YL
REMOVAL FROM SODUS TO BATH, -
Yn.
DUELING, -----


--- PAGE 16 ---
Viii CONTENTS.
Yin.
PACK.
HORSH-RAOING AND GENKBAL TUAINI^G, .... 69
IX.
DEATH-BED AND BRIDAL SCENES, ..... 84
X.
IIIBED OUT TO A NEW MASTER, ...... 92
XL
THOUGHTS ON FREEDOM .......106
XII.
CAPTAIN HELM DITORCE KIDNAPPING, - - - - lib
XIII.
LOCATE IN THE VILLAGE OF ROCHBSTER, ..... 124
XIY.
INCIDENTS IN ROCHESTER AND VICINITY, - - - - 138
XY.
SAD REVERSES OF CAPTAIN HLM, ... - 145
XYI.
BRITISH EMANCIPATION OF SLAVERY, ..... 149
XYIL
ORATION TERMINATION OF SLAVERY IN THE BRITISH POSSESSIONS. 153
XYIII.
CONDITION OF FREE COLORED PEOPLE, ..... 164


--- PAGE 17 ---
CONTENTS.
XIX.
.
PERSECUTION OF THE COLORED PKOPLB, .... 173
XX.
REMOVAL TO CANADA, ....... 193
XXL
ROUGHIKG IT IN THE WlLDS OF CANADA, .... 1QQ
XXII.
NARROW ESCAPE OF A SMUGGLES, - ... 195
XXIII.
NARRATIVE OF Two FUGITIVES FROM VIRGINIA, .... 202
XXIY.
PLEASANT RE-UHION OF OLD AND TRIED FRIENDS, ... 210
XXY.
PRIVATE LOSSES AND PRIVATE DIFFICULTIES, .... 219
XXYL
INCIDENTS AND PECULIARITIES OF THE INDIANS, ... 223
xxvn.
OUR DIFFICULTIES WITH ISRAEL LEWIS, - ... 232
xxvm.
DJJSPERATION OF A FUGITIVE SLAVE, 245
XXIX.
ANARROW ESCAPE FROMMY ENEMIES, .....253
A*


--- PAGE 18 ---
CONTENTS.
DEATH OF B. PAUL AND RETURN or HIS BROTHER, -
XXXI.
PAOK.
257
FAMILY RETURN TO ROCHESTER,
XXYTT
THE LAND AQEXT AKD THE SQUATTEE, ..... 374
CHAEAOTEK AWD DEATH or ISBAEL LEWIS, - - - . ,282
xxxrv.
MY RETURN TO ROCHESTER, --.... 290
XXXY.
BISHOP BROWN DEATH OF MY DAUGHTER, .... 299
XXXYI.
CELEBRATION OF THE FIRST OF AUGUST, - - - - 311
XXXYIL
CONCLUSION, - ---.....315
CORRESPONDENCE, ........ 341


--- PAGE 19 ---
PREFACE.
THE author does not think that any apology is necessaiy for this
issue of his Life and History. He believes that American Slavery is
now the great question before the American People
: that it is not
merely a political question, coming up before the country as the
grand element in the making of a President, and then to be laid
aside for four years; but that its moral bearings are of such a nature
that the Patriot, the Philanthropist, and all good men agree that it is
an evil of so much magnitude, that longer to permit it, is to wink at
sift, and to incur the righteous judgments of God. The late outrages
and aggressions of the slave power to possess itself of new soil, and
extend the influence of the hateful and God-provoking
&quot;
Institution,&quot;
is a practical commentary upon its benefits and the moral qualities of
those who seek to sustain and extend it. The author is therefore
the more willing nay, anxious, to lay alongside of such arguments
the history of his own life and experiences aft a slave, that those who
read may know what are some of the characteristics of that highly
favored intitulion, which is sought to be presei-ved and perpetuated.
&quot;
Facts are stubborn things,&quot; and this is the reason why all systems,
religious, moral, or social, which are founded in injustice, and sup
ported by fraud and robbery, suffer so much by faithful exposition.
The author has endeavored to present a true statement of the prac
tical workings of the system of Slavery, as he has seen and felt it
Idtnself. He has intended
&quot;
nothing to extenuate, uor aught set down


--- PAGE 20 ---
Xll PREFACE.
in malice;
&quot;
indeed, so far from believing that he has misrepresented
Slavery as an institution, he does not feel that he has the power to
give anything like a tnie picture of it in all its deformity and
wickedness; especially that Slavery which is an institution among an
enlightened and Christian people, who profess to believe that all
men are bora free and equal, and who have certain inalienable rights,
among which are life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness.
The author claims that he has endeavored since he had his
freedom, as much as in him lay, to benefit his suffering fellows in
bondage; and that he has spent most of his free life in efforts to
elevate them in manners and morals, though against all the opposing
forces of prejudice and pride, which of course, has made much of his
labor vain. In his old age he sends out this history presenting as
it were his own body, with the marks and scars of the tender mercies
of slave drivers upon it, and asking that these may plead in the
name of Justice, Humanity, and Mercy, that those who have the
power, may have the magnanimity to strike off the chains from the
enslaved, and bid him stand up, a Freeman and a Brother !


--- PAGE 21 ---
CHAPTER I.
SLAVE LIFE ON THE PLANTATION.
I
&quot;WAS born in Prince William County, Virginia.
At seven years of age, I found myself a slave on
the plantation of Capt. William Helm. Our family
consisted of my father and mother whose names
were Robert and Susan Steward a sister, Mary,
and myself. As was the usual custom, we lived in
a small cabin, built of rough boards, with a floor of
earth, and small openings in the sides of the cabin
were substituted for windows. The chimney was
built of sticks and mud; the door, of rough boards;
and the whole was put together in the rudest possible
manner. As to the furniture of this rude dwelling,
it was procured by the slaves themselves, who were
occasionally permitted to earn a little money after
their days toil was done. I never knew Capt. H.
to furnish his slaves with household utensils of any
description.


--- PAGE 22 ---
14 WEEKLY ALLOWANCE OF FOOD.
The amount of provision given out on the planta
tion* per week, wad Invariably one peck of corn or
meal for eaclx .clave. ^ This allowance was given in
meal when it could be obtained; when it could not,
they received corn, which they pounded in mortars
after they returned from their labor in the field. The
slaves on our plantation were provided with very
little meat. In addition to the peck of corn or meal,
they were allowed a little salt and a few herrings.
If they wished for more, they were obliged to earn it
by over-work. They were permitted to cultivate
small gardens, and were thereby enabled to provide
themselves with many trifling conveniences. But
these gardens were only allowed to some of the more
industrious. Capt. Helm allowed his slaves a small
quantity of meat during harvest time, but when the
harvest was over they were obliged to fall back on
the old allowance.
It was usual for men and women to work side by
side on our plantation; and in many kinds of work,
the women were compelled to do as much as the men.
Capt. H. employed an overseer, whose business it was
to look after each slave in the field, and see that he
performed his task. The overseer always went around
with a whip, about nine feet long, made of the
toughest kind of cowhide, the but-end of which was
-oaded with lead, and was about four or five inches in
circumference, running to a point at the opposite


--- PAGE 23 ---
SLAVE LIFE ON THE PLANTATION. 15
extremity. This made a dreadful instrument of tor
ture, and, when in the hands of a cruel overseer, it
was truly fearful. With it, the skin of an ox or a
horse could be cut through. Hence, it was no
uncommon thing to see the poor slaves with their
backs mangled in a most horrible manner. t.0ur over
seer, thus armed with his cowhide, and with a large
bull-dog behind him, followed the slaves all day; and,
if one of them fell in the rear from any cause, this
cruel weapon was plied with terrible force.^ Hewould
strike the dog one blow and the slave another, in
order to keep the former from tearing the delinquent
slave in pieces, such was the ferocity of his canine
attendant.
It was the rule for the slaves to rise and be ready
for their task by sun-rise, on the blowing of a horn or
conch-shell; and woe be to the unfortuate, who was
not in the field at the time appointed, which was in
thirty minutes from the first sounding of the horn. I
have heard the poor creatures beg as for their lives, of
the inhuman overseer, to desist from his cruel punish
ment. Hence, they were usually found in the field
&quot;betimes in the morning,&quot; (to use an old Virginia
phrase), where they worked until nine o clock. They
were then allowed thirty minutes to eat their morning
meal, which consisted of a little bread. At a given
signal, all hands were compelled to return to their
work They toiled until noon, when they were


--- PAGE 24 ---
16 MODE OF COOKING.
permitted to take their breakfast, which corresponds
to our dinner.
On our plantation, it was the usual practice to have
one of the old slaves set apart to do the cooking. All
the field hands were required to give into the hands
of the cook a certain portion of their weekly allow
ance, either in dough or meal, which was prepared in
the following manner. The cook made a hot fire
and rolled up each person s portion in some cabbage
leaves, when they could be obtained, and placed it in
a hole in the ashes, carefully covered with the same,
where it remained until done. Bread baked in this
way is very sweet and good. But cabbage leaves
could not always be obtained. When this was the
case, the bread was little better than a mixture of
dough and ashes, which was not very palatable. The
time allowed for breakfast, was one hour. At the
signal, all hands were obliged to resume their toil.
The overseer was always on hand to attend to all
delinquents, who never failed to feel the blows of his
heavy whip.
The usual mode of punishing the poor slaves was,
to make them take off their clothes to the bare back,
and then tie their hands before themwith a rope, pass
the end of the rope over a beam, and draw them up
till they stood on the tips of their toes. Sometimes
they tied their legs together and placed a rail between.
Thus prepared, the overseer proceeded to punish the


--- PAGE 25 ---
SLAVE LIFE ON THE PLANTATION. 17
poor, helpless victim. Thirty-nine was the number
of lashes ordinarily inflicted for the most trifling
offence.
Who can imagine a position more painful? Oh,
who, with feelings of common humanity, could look
quietly on such torture? Who could remain un
moved, to see a fellow-creature thus tied, unable to
move or to raise a hand in his own defence; scourged
on his bare back, with a cowhide, until the blood
flows in streams from his quivering flesh ? And for
what? Often for the most trifling fault; and, as
sometimes occurs, because a mere whim or caprice
of his brutal overseer demands it Pale with pas
sion, his eyes flashing and his stalwart frame trembling
with rage, like some volcano, just ready to belch forth
its fiery contents, and, in all its might and fury, spread
death and destruction all around, he continues to
wield the bloody lash on the broken flesh of the poor,
pleading slave, until his arm grows weary, or he
sinks down, utterly exhausted, on the very spot where
already stand the pools of blood which his cruelty has
drawn from the mangled body of his helpless victim,
and within the hearing of those agonized groans and
feeble cries of &quot;Oh do, Massa! Oh do, Massa!
Do, Lord, have mercy! Oh, Lord, have mercy!&quot; &c.
Nor is this cruel punishment inflicted on the bare
backs of the male portion of slaves only. Oh no!
The slave husband must submit without a murmur, to


--- PAGE 26 ---
18 CRUELTY OF THE OVERSEER.
see the form of his cherished, but wretched wife, not
only exposed to the rude gaze of a beastly tyrant, but
he must unresistingly see the heavy cowhide descend
upon her shrinking flesh, and her manacled limbs
writhe in inexpressible torture, while her piteous cries
for help ring through his ears unanswered. The wild
throbbing of his heart must be suppressed, and his
righteous indignation find no voice, in the presence of
the human monster who holds dominion over him.
After the infuriated and heartless overseer had sati
ated his thirst for vengeance, on the disobedient or
delinquent slave, he was untied, and left to crawl
away as best he could; sometimes on his hands and
knees, to his lonely and dilapidated cabin, where,
stretched upon the cold earth, he lay weak and bleed
ing and often faint from the loss of blood, without a
friend who dare administer to his necessities, and
groaning in the agony of his crushed spirit. In his
cabin, which was not as good as many of our stables
at the North, he might lie for weeks before recovering
sufficient strength to resume the labor imposed upon
him, and all this time without a bed or bed clothing,
or any of the necessaries considered so essential to the
sick.
Perhaps some of his fellow-slaves might come and
bathe his wounds in warm water, to prevent his
clothing from tearing open his flesh anew, and thus
make the second suffering well nigh equal to the first;


--- PAGE 27 ---
SLAVE LIFE ON THE PLANTATION. 19
or they might from their scanty store bring him such
food as they could spare, to keep him from suffering
hunger, and offer their sympathy, and then drag their
own weary bodies to their place of rest, after their
daily task was finished.
Oh7 you who have hearts to feel; you who have
kind friends around you, in sickness and in sorrow,
think of, the sufferings of the helpless, destitute, and
down-trodden slave. Has sickness laid its withering
hand upon you, or disappointment blasted your fairest
earthly prospects, still, the outgushings of an affec
tionate heart are not denied you, and you may look
forward with hope to a bright future. Such a hope
rfcidoin animates the heart of the poor slave. He toils
on, in his unrequited labor, looking only to the grave
to find a quiet resting place, where he will be free
from the oppressor.


--- PAGE 28 ---
CHAPTEK II.
AT THE GREAT HOUSE.
WHEN
eight years of age, I was taken to the
&quot;
great house,&quot; or the family mansion of my
master, to serve as an errand boy, where I had to
stand in the presence of my master s family all the
day, and a part of the night, ready to do any thing
which they commanded me to perform.
Mymaster s family consisted of himself and wife,
and seven children. His overseer, whose name was
Barsly Taylor, had also a wife and five children.
These constituted the white population on the plan
tation. Capt. Helm was the owner of about one
hundred slaves, which made the residents on the plan
tation number about one hundred and sixteen per
sons in all. One hundred and seven of them, were
required to labor for the benefit of the remaining
nine, whopossessed that vast domain; and one hundred
of the number doomed to unrequited toil, under the


--- PAGE 29 ---
AT THE GREAT HOUSE. 21
lash of a cruel task-master during life, with no hope
of release this side of the grave, and as far as the
cruel oppressor is concerned, shut out from hope
beyond it.
And here let me ask, why is this practice of work
ing slaves half clad, poorly fed, with nothing or
nearly so, to stimulate them to exertion, but fear of
the lash? Do the best interests of our common
country require it ? I think not. Did tbs true inter
est of Capt. Helm demand it ? Whatever may have
been his opinion, I cannot think it did. Can it be for
the best interest or good of the enslaved ? Certainly
not; for there is no real inducement for the slave
holder to make beasts of burden of his fellow men,
but that which was frankly acknowledged by Gibbs
and other piiates: &quot;we have the power,&quot; the power
to rob and murder on the high seas! which they
will undoubtedly continue to hold, until overtaken
by justice; which will certainly come some time, just
as sure as that a righteous God reigns over the earth
or rules in heaven.
Some have attempted to apologize for the enslaving
of the Negro, by saying that they are inferior to the
Anglo saxon race in every respect. This charge I
deny; it is utterly false. Does not the Bible inform
us that
&quot;
God hath created of one blood all the natic ^
of the earth ?
&quot;
And certainly in stature and physiwu
foro-e the colored man is quite equal to his wrute


--- PAGE 30 ---
22 CAPT. HELM, A GREAT GAMESTER.
brother, and in many instances his superior;
but were
it otherwise, I can not see why the more favored class
should enslave the other. True, God has given to the
African a darker complexion than to his white brother:
still, each have the same desires and aspirations. The
food required for the sustenance of one is equally
necessary for the other. Naturally or physically,
they alike require to be warmed by the cheerful fire,
when chilled by our northern winter s breath; and
alike they welcome the cool spring and the delightful
shade of summer. Hence, I have come to the con
clusion that God created all men free and equal, and
placed them upon this earth to do good and benefit
each other, and that war and slavery should be ban
ished from the face of the earth.
My dear reader will not understand me to say, that
all nations are alike intelligent, enterprising and indus
trious, for we all know that it is far otherwise; but to
man, and not to our Creator, should the fault be
charged. But, to resume our narrative,
Capt. Helm was not a very hard master; but gen
erally was kind and pleasant. Indulgent when in
good humor, but like manyofthe southerners, terrible
when in a passion. He was a great sportsman, and
very fond of company. He generally kept one or two
*a,ce norses, and a pack of hounds for fox-hunting,
which at that time, was a very common and fashion
able diversion in that section of country. He was not


--- PAGE 31 ---
AT THE GREAT HOUSE. 23
only a sportsman, but a gamester, and was in the
habit of playing cards, and sometimes betting very
high and losing accordingly.
I well remember an instance of the kind: it was
when he played cards with a Mr. W. Graham, who
won from him in one sweep, two thousand and seven
hundred dollars in all, in the form of a valuable horse,
prized at sixteen hundred dollars, another saddle-
horse of less value, one slave, and his wife s gold
watch, The company decided that all this was fairly
won, but Capt. Helm demurred, and refused to give
up the property until an application was made to Gen.
George Washington, &quot;(the father of his country,&quot;)
who decided that Capt. Helm had lost the game, and
that Mr. Graham had fairly won the property, of
which Mr. G. took immediate possession, and con
veyed to his own plantation.
Capt. Helm was not a good business man, unless
we call horse-racing, fox-hunting, and card-playing,
business. His overseer was entrusted with every
thing on the plantation, and allowed to manage about
as he pleased, while the Captain enjoyed himself in
receiving calls from his wealthy neighbors, and in
drinking what he called
&quot;grog,&quot; which was no more
nor less than whisky, of which he was extremely
fond, notwithstanding his cellar contained the choicest
wines and liquors. To show his partiality for his
favorite beverage, I will relate an incident which


--- PAGE 32 ---
24 MRS. HELM USES THE COWHIDE.
occurred between Capt. Helm and Col. Charles
Williamson. The Colonel, believing wine to be
a healthier beverage than whisky, accepted a bet
made by Capt. Helm, of one thousand dollars, that he
would live longer and drink whisky, than the Colonel,
who drank wine. Shortly after, Col. Williamson was
called home by the British government, and while on
his way to England, died, and his body, preserved in.
a cask of brandy, was taken home. The bet Capt.
Helm made considerable effort to get, but was unsuc
cessful.
Mrs. Helm was a very industrious woman, and
generally busy in her household affairs sewing, knit
ting, and looking after the servants; but she was a
great scold, continually finding fault with some of
the servants, and frequently punishing the young
slaves herself, by striking them over the head with a
heavy iron key, until the blood ran
;
or else whipping
them with a cowhide, which she always kept by her
side when sitting in her room. The older servants
she would cause to be punished by having them
severely whipped by a man, which she never failed
to do for every trifling fault. I have felt the weight
of some ofher heaviest keys on my own head, and for
the slightest offences. No slave could possibly escape
being punished I care not how attentive they might
be, nor how industrious punished they must be, and
punished they certainly were. Mrs. Helm appeared


--- PAGE 33 ---
AT THE GREAT HOUSE. 25
to be uneasy unless some of the servants were under
the lash. She came into the kitchen one morning and
my mother, who was cook, had just put on the
dinner. Mrs. Helm took out her white cambric hand
kerchief, and rubbed it on the inside of the pot, and
it crocked it ! That was enough to invoke the wrath
of my master, who came forth immediately with his
horse-whip, with which he whipped my poor mother
most unmercifully far more severely than I ever
knew him to whip a horse.
I once had the misfortune to break the lock of
master s shot gun, and when it came to his know
ledge, he came to me in a towering passion, and
charged me with what he considered the crime of
carelessness. I denied it, and told him I knew
nothing about it; but I was so terribly frightened
that he saw I was guilty, and told me so, foam
ing with rage ;
and then I confessed the truth. But
oh, there was no escaping the lash. Its recollection
is still bitter, and ever will be. I was com
manded to take off my clothes, which I did, and
then master put me on the back of another slave, my
arms hanging down before him and myhands clasped
in his, where he was obliged to hold me with a vise-
like grasp. Then master gave me the most severe
flogging that I ever received, and I pray God that I
may never again experience such torture. And yet
Capt. Helm was not the worst of masters.
B


--- PAGE 34 ---
26 HUMILITY OP SLAVES.
These cruelties are daily occurrences, and so degrad
ing is the whole practice of Slavery, that it not only
crushes and brutalizes the wretched slave, but it
hardens the heart, benumbs all the fine feelings of
humanity, and deteriorates from the character of the
slaveholders themselves, whether man or woman.
Otherwise, how could a gentle, and in other respects,
amiable woman, look on such scenes of cruelty, with
out a shudder of utter abhorrence? But slaveholding
ladies, can not only look on quietly, but with appro
bation
;
and what is worse, though very common, they
can and do use the lash and cowhide themselves, on
the backs of their slaves, and that too on those of
their own sexI Far rather would I spend mylife in
a State s Prison, than be the slave of the best slave
holder on the earth !
When I was not employed as an errand-boy, it was
my duty to stand behind my master s chair, which
was sometimes the whole day, never being allowed to
sit in his presence. Indeed, no slave is ever allowed
to sit down in the presence of their master or mistress.
If a slave is addressed when sitting, he is required to
spring to his feet, and instantly remove his hat, if he
has one, and answer in the most humble manner, or
lay the foundation for a flogging, which will not be
long delayed.
I slept in the same room with mymaster and mis
tress. This room was elegantly furnished with damask


--- PAGE 35 ---
AT THE GREAT HOUSE. 27
curtains, mahogany bedstead of the most expensive
kind, and every thing else about it was of the most
costly kind. And while Mr. and Mrs. Helm reposed
on their bed of down, with a cloud of lace floating
over them, like some Eastern Prince, with their slaves
to fan them while they slept, and to tremble when
uhey awoke, I always slept upon the floor, without a
pillow or even a blanket, but, like a dog, lay down
anywhere I could find a place.
Slaves are never allowed to leave the plantation to
which they belong, without a written pass. Should
any one venture to disobey this law, he will most
likely be caught by the patrol and given thirty-nine
lashes. This patrol is always on duty every Sunday,
going to each plantation under their supervision,
entering every slave cabin, and examining closely the
conduct of the slaves; and if they find one slave
from another plantation without a pass, he is imme
diately punished with a severe flogging.
I recollect going one Sunday with my mother, to
visit my grand-mother; and while there, two or three
of the patrol came and looked into the cabin, and see
ing my mother, demanded her pass. She told them
that she had one, but had left it in another cabin, from
whence she soon brought it, which saved her a whip
ping but we were terribly frightened.
The reader will obtain a better knowledge of the
character of a Virginia patrol, by the relation of an


--- PAGE 36 ---
28 A KIND MASTER.
affair, which came off on the neighboring plantation
of Col. Alexander, in which some forty of Capt.
Helms slaves were engaged, and which proved rather
destructive of human life in the end.
But I must first say that it is not true, that slave
owners are respected for kindness to their slaves.
The more tyrannical a master is, the more will he be
favorably regarded by his neighboring planters; and
from the day that he acquires the reputation of a kind
and indulgent master, he is looked upon with sus
picion, and sometimes hatred, and his slaves are
watched more closely than before.
Col. Alexander was a very wealthy planter and
owned a great number of slaves, but he was very
justly suspected of being a kind, humane, and indul
gent master. His slaves were always better fed,
better clad, and had greater privileges than any I
knew in the Old Dominion
;
and of course, the patrol
had long had an eye on them, anxious to flog some of
&quot;those pampered niggers, who were spoiled by the
indulgence of a weak, inefficient, but well-meaning
owner.&quot;
Col. A. gave his slaves the liberty to get up a grand
dance. Invitations were sent and accepted, to a large
number of slaves on other plantations, and so, for
miles around, all or many of the slaves were in high
anticipation of joining in the great dance, which was
to come off on Easter night. In the mean time, the


--- PAGE 37 ---
AT THE GREAT HOUSE. 29
patrol was closely watching their movements, and
evinced rather a joyful expectancy of the many they
should find there without a pass, and the flogging
they would give them for that, if not guilty of any
other offence, and perhaps they might catch some of
the Colonel s slaves doing something for which they
could be taught
&quot;to know their place,&quot; by the appli
cation of the cowhide.
The slaves on Col. A. s plantation had to provide
and prepare the supper for the expected vast &quot;turn
out,&quot; which was no light matter; and as slaves like
on such occasions to pattern as much as possible after
their master s family, the result was, to meet the
emergency of the case, they took, without saying, &quot;by
your leave, Sir,&quot; some property belonging to their
master, reasoning among themselves, as slaves often
do, that it can not be stealing, because &quot;it
belongs to
massa, and so do we, and we only use one part of his
property to benefit another. Sure, tis all massas.&quot;
And if they do not get detected in this removal
of
&quot;
massas property&quot; from one location to another,
they think no more of it.
Col. Alexanders slaves were hurrying on with their
great preparations for the dance and feast; and as the
time drew near, the old and knowing ones might be
seen in groups, discussing the matter, with many a
wink and nod
;
but it was in the valleys and by-places
where the younger portion were to be found, rather


--- PAGE 38 ---
30 AT THE GREAT HOUSE.
secretly preparing food for the great time corning.
This consisted of hogs, sheep, calves; and as to
master s poultry, that suffered daily. Sometimes it
was missed, but the disappearance was always easily
accounted for, by informing &quot;massa&quot; that a great num
ber of hawks had been around of late; and their
preparation went on, night after night, undetected.
They who repaired to a swamp or other by-place to
cook by night, carefully destroyed everything likely
to detect them, before they returned to their cabins in
the morning.
The night for the dance came at last, and long
before the time, the road leading to Col. Alexander s
plantation presented a gay spectacle. The females
were seen flocking to the place of resort, with heads
adorned with gaudybandanna turbans and new calico
dresses, of the gayest colors, their whole attire
decked over with bits of gauze ribbon and other
fantastic finery. The shades of night soon closed over
the^plantation, and then could be heard the rude
music and loud laugh of the unpolished slave. It
was about ten o clock whenthe aristocratic slaves began
to assemble, dressed in the cast-off finery of their
master and mistress, swelling out and putting on airs
in imitation of those they were forced to obey from
day to day.
When they were all assembled, the dance com
menced; the old fiddler struck up some favorite tune,


--- PAGE 39 ---
SUFFERING AND TOIL FORGOTTEN. 31
and over the floor they went; the flying feet of the
dancers were heard, pat, pat, over the apartment till
the clock warned them it was twelve at midnight, or
what some call &quot;low twelve,&quot; to distinguish it from
twelve o clock at noon; then the violin ceased its
discordant sounds, and the merry dancers paused to
take breath.
Supper was then announced, and all began to pre
pare for the sumptuous feast. It being the pride of
slaves to imitate the manners of their master and
mistress, especially in the ceremonies of the table,
all was conducted with great propriety and good
order. The food was well cooked, and in a very
plentiful supply. They had also managed in some
way, to get a good quantity of excellent wine, which
was sipped in the most approved and modern style.
Every dusky face was lighted up, and every eye
sparkled with joy. However ill fed they might
have been, here, for once, there was plenty. Suffer
ing and toil was forgotten, and they all seemed with
one accord to give themselves up to the intoxication
of pleasurable amusement.
House servants were of course,
&quot;
the stars&quot; of the
party; all eyes were turned to them to see how they
conducted, for they, among slaves, are what a military
man would call u
fugle-men.&quot; The Held hands, and
such of them as have generally been excluded from
the dwelling of their owners, look to the house


--- PAGE 40 ---
32 AT THE qfoEAT HOUSE.
&amp;gt;
servant as a pattern of politeness and gentility. And
indeed, it is often the only method of obtaining any
knowledge of the manners of what is called
&quot;
genteel
society;&quot; hence, they are ever regarded as a privileged
class; and are sometimes greatly envied, while others
are bitterly hated. Andtoo often justly, for many of
them are the most despicable tale-bearers and mischief-
makers, who will, for the sake of the favor of his
master or mistress, frequently betray his fellow-slave,
and by tattling, get him severely whipped; and for
these acts of perfidy, and sometimes downright false
hood, he is often rewarded by his master, who knows
it is for his interest to keep such ones about him;
though he is sometimes obliged, in addition to a
reward, to send him away, for fear of the vengeance
of the betrayed slaves. In the family of his master,
the example of bribery and treachery is ever set
before him, hence it is, that insurrections and stam
pedes are so generally detected. Such slaves are
always treated with more affability than others, for the
slaveholder is well aware that he stands over a vol
cano, that may at any moment rock his foundation to
the center, and with one mighty burst of its long
suppressed fire, sweep him and his family to destruc
tion. Whenhe lies down at night, he knows not but
that ere another morning shall dawn, he may be left
mangled and bleeding, and at the mercy of those
maddened slaves whom he has so long ruled with a
rod of iron.


--- PAGE 41 ---
THE PARTY SURPRISED BY THE PATROL. 33
But the supper, like other events, came to an end at
last. The expensive table service, with other things,
which had been secretly brought from the &quot;great
house,&quot; was hurriedlycleansed bythe slaves, and care
fully returned. The floor was again cleared, the violin
sounded, and soon they were performing another
&quot;break down,&quot; with all the wild abandon of the
African character, in the very midst of which, the
music suddenly ceased, and the old musician assumed
a listening attitude. Every foot was motionless;
every face terrified, and every ear listening for the
cause of the alarm.
Soon the slave who was kept on the &quot;look-out,&quot;
shouted to the listeners the single word &quot;patrol!&quot;
and then the tumult that followed that announcement,
is beyond the power of language to describe !
Many a poor slave who had stolen from his cabin, to
join in the dance, now remembered that they had no
pass
!
Many screamed in affright, as if they already
felt the lash and heard the crack of the overseer s
whip; others clenched their hands, and assumed an
attitude of bold defiance, while a savage frown con
tracted the brow of all. Their unrestrained merri
ment and delicious fare, seemed to arouse in them the
natural feelings of self-defence and defiance of their
oppressors. But what could be done? The patrol
was nearing the building, when an athletic, powerful
slave, whohadbeen but a short time from his &quot;father-
B*


--- PAGE 42 ---
34 AT THE GREAT HOUSE.
land,&quot; whose spirit the cowardly overseer had labored
in vain to quell, said in a calm, clear voice, that we
had better stand our ground, and advised the females
to lose no time in useless wailing, but get their things
and repair immediately to a cabin at a short distance,
and there remain quiet, without a light, which they
did with all possible haste. The men were terrified
at this bold act oftheir leader; and manywith dismay
at the thought of resistance, began to skulk behind
fences and old buildings, when he opened the door
and requested every slave to leave who felt unwilling
to fight. None were urged to remain, and those
who stood by him did so voluntarily.
Their number was now reduced to twenty-five men,
but the leader, a gigantic African, with a massive,
compact frame, and an arm of great strength, looked
competent to put ten common men to flight. He
clenched his powerful fist, and declared that he would
resist unto death, before he would be arrested bythose
savage men, even if they promised not to flog him.
They closed the door, and agreed not to open it
;
and
then the leader cried,
&quot;
Extinguish the lights and let
them come! we will meet themhand to hand !
&quot;
Five
of the number he stationed near the door, with orders
to rush out, if the patrol entered, and seize their
horses, cut the bridles, or otherwise unfit them for
use. This would prevent them from giving an alarm
and getting a reinforcement from surrounding planta-


--- PAGE 43 ---
THE SLAVE S PLAN RESISTANCE. 35
tions. In silence they awaited the approach of the
enemy, and soon the tramping ofhorses feet announc
ed their approach, but when within a few yards of the
house they halted, and were overheard by one of the
skulking slaves, maturing their plans and mode of
attack. There was great hesitancy expressed by a
part of the company to engage in the affair at all.
&quot;
Coming events cast their shadow before.&quot;
The majority, however, seemedto think it safe enough,
and uttered expressions of triumph that they had got
the rascals at last.
&quot;Are you not afraid that they will resist?
&quot;
said
the weaker party.
*
Kesist ?
&quot;
was the astonished answer.
&quot;
This old
fellow, the Colonel, has pampered and indulged his
slaves, it is true, and they have slipped through our
fingers whenever we have attempted to chastise them
;
but they are not such fools as to dare resistance !
Those niggers know as well as we, that it is death, by
the law of the State, for a slave to strike a white man.&quot;
&quot;Yery true,&quot; said the other, &quot;but it is dark and
long past midnight, and beside they have been indulg
ing their appetites, and we cannot tell what they may
attempt to do.&quot;
&quot;Pshaw!&quot; he answered, contemptuously, &quot;they are
unarmed, and I should not fear in the least, to go in
amongthem alone, armed only with my cowhide !
&quot;


--- PAGE 44 ---
36 AT THE GREAT HOUSE.
&quot;As you please, then,&quot; he said, rather dubiously,
&quot;but look well to your weapons ;
are they in order?&quot;
&quot;
In prime order, Sir.&quot; And putting spurs to their
horses, were soon at the house, where they dismount
ed and requested one of the party to remain with the
horses.
&quot;
What,&quot; said he,
&quot;
are you so chicken-hearted as to
suppose those d d cowardlyniggers are going to get
up an insurrection ?&quot;
&quot;
Oh no,&quot; he replied, carelessly, but would not con
sent to have the horses left alone.
&quot;
Besides,&quot; said he,
&quot;
they mayforget themselves at this late hour
;
but if
they do, a few lashes of the cowhide will quickentheir
memory, I reckon.&quot;
The slaves were aware of their movements, and
prepared to receive them.
They stepped up to the door boldly, and demanded
admittance, but all was silent
; they tried to open it,
but it was fastened. Those inside, ranged on each side
of the door, and stood perfectly still.
The patrol finding the slaves not disposed to obey,
burst off the slight fastening that secured the door, and
the chief of the patrol boundedinto their midst, follow
ed by several of his companions, all in total darkness !
Yain is the attempt to describe the tumultuous scene
which followed. Handto handthey fought and strug
gled with each other, amid the terrific explosion of fire
arms, oaths and curses, mingled with the prayers of


--- PAGE 45 ---
THE FEARFUL FIGHT. 37
the wounded, and the groans of the dying
! Two of
the patrol were killed on the spot, and lay drenched in
the warm blood that so lately flowed through their
veins. Another with his arm broken and otherwise
wounded, lay groaning and helpless, beside the fallen
slaves, whohad sold their lives so dearly. Anotherof
his fellows was found at a short distance, mortally
wounded and about to bid adieu to life. In the yard
lay the keeper of the horses, a stiffened corpse. Six
of the slaves were killed and two wounded.
It would be impossible to convey to the minds of
northern people, the alarm and perfect consternation
that the above circumstance occasioned in that commu
nity. The knowledge of its occurrence was carried
from one plantation to another, as on the wings of the
wind; exaggerated accounts were given, and pro
phecies of the probable result made, until the excite
ment became truly fearful. Every cheek was blanch
ed and every frame trembled when listening to the
tale, that &quot;insurrection amongthe slaves hadcommenc
ed on the plantation of Col. Alexander
;
that three or
four of the patrol had been killed, &c.&quot; The day af
ter, people flocked from every quarter, armed to the
teeth, swearing vengeance on the defenceless slaves.
Nothing can teach plainer than this, the constant and
tormenting fear in which the slaveholder lives, and
yet he repents not of his deeds.
The kind old Colonel was placed in the most dim-


--- PAGE 46 ---
38 AT THE GREAT HOUSE.
cult and unenviable position. His warmheart was fill
ed with sorrow for the loss of his slaves, but not alone,
as is generally the case in such instances, because he
had lost so much property. He truly regretted the
death of his faithful servants, and boldly rebuked the
occasion of their sudden decease. When beset and
harrassed by his neighbors to give up his slaves to be
tried for insurrection and murder, he boldly resisted,
contending for the natural right of the slaves, to act, in
their own defence, and especially when on his own
plantation and in their own quarters. They contend*
ed, however, that as his slaves had got up a dance, and
had invited those of the adjoining plantations, the pa
trol was only discharging their duty in looking after
them
;
but the gallant old Colonel defended his slaves,
and told them plainly that he should continue to do so
to the extent of his ability and means.
The poor slaves were sad enough, on the morning
after their merry meeting, and they might be seen
standing in groups, conversing with a very different
air from the one they had worn the day before.
Their business was now to prepare the bodies of
their late associates for the grave. Eobert, the brave
African, who had so boldly led them on the night be
fore, and who had so judiciously provided for their es
cape, was calmly sleeping in death s cold embrace.
He left a wife and five slave children. Two of the
other slaves left families, whose pitiful cries it was
painful to hear.


--- PAGE 47 ---
FUNERAL OF THE MURDERED SLAVE. 39
The Colonel s family, deeply afflicted by what was
passing around them, attended the funeral. One of
the slaves, who sometimes officiated as a minister, read
a portion of Scripture, and gave out two hymns;
one
of which commences with
&quot;
Hark ! from the tomb a doleful sound.&quot;
Both were sung with great solemnity by the congre
gation, and then the good old man offered a prayer;
after which he addressed the slaves on the shortness of
human life and the certainty of death, and more than
once hinted at the hardness of their lot, assuring, how
ever, his fellow-slaves, that if they were good and
faithful, all would be right hereafter. His master, Col.
Alexander, was deeply affected by this simple faith
and sincere regard for the best interests of all, both
master and slave.
Whenthe last look at their fellow-servants had been
taken, the procession was formed in the following
manner: First, the old slave minister, then the remains
of the dead, followed bytheir weeping relatives
;
then
came the master and his family; next the slaves
belonging to the plantation ; and last, friends and
strangers, black and white
;
all moved on solemnly to
the final resting-place of those brave men, whose
descendants may yet be heard from, in defence of
right and freedom.


--- PAGE 48 ---
CHAPTER III.
HOKSE-KACING AND ITS CONSEQUENCES.
CAPT.
Helm had a race-course on his plantation,
on which he trained young horses for the fall
races. One very fine horse he owned, called Mark
Anthony, which he trained in the most careful manner
for several months previous to the races. He would
put him on the course every morning, sometimes
covering him with a blanket, and then put him to his
utmost speed, which he called
&quot;
sweating him.&quot; Mark
Anthony was to be put on the race-course in October
following, as a competitor for the purse of ten thou
sand dollars, which was the amount to be lost or gain
ed on the first day of the fall races. Capt. H. had
also another younghorse, called Buffer, under a course
of training, which he designed to enter the lists for the
second day. His course of training had been about
the same as Mark Anthonys, but being a yeai or two
younger, it was thought that he had not sufficient
&quot;bottom&quot; to risk so much money on, as was at stake
on the first day.


--- PAGE 49 ---



--- PAGE 50 ---
&quot;Away they go, sweeping round the course with lightning speed, while every
spectator s eye is strained, and every countenance flushed with intense anxiety.&quot;
Page 41.


--- PAGE 51 ---
THE FIRST HEAT. 41
When the time for the races to commence came, all
was bustle and excitement in the house and on the
plantation. It was a fine October morning, and the
sun shed a mellow radiance on all around, when people
began to throng the race-course. Some came with
magnificent equipages, attended by their numerous
train of black servants, dressed in livery, some in
less splendid array, and others on foot, all hurrying
on to the exciting scene. There the noblest blood of
Old Virginia, of which many are wont to boast, was
fully represented, as was also the wealth and fashion
of the country for many miles around.
All were in high spirits, and none seemed to fear
that they would be the losers in the amount of money
about to change hands. And for what, pray, is all
this grand outlay this vast expenditure? Merelythe
pleasure and gratification of witnessing the speed of a
fine horse, and the vanity ofprejudging concerning it.
The arrangements were at length completed, the
horses regularly entered, Mark Anthony among the
rest, and then the word
&quot;
go
I&quot; was given, wheneach
horse sprang as if for his life, each striving to take the
lead. Away they go, sweeping round the course with
lightning speed, while every spectator s eye is strained,
and every countenance flushed with intense anxiety.
Some of the noble animals were distanced the first
heat, and others were taken away by their owners.
The judges allowed twenty minutes to prepare the


--- PAGE 52 ---
42 AT THE GREAT HOUSE.
horses for the second trial of their speed a trial which
must enrich or empoverish many of the thousands
present. Already there were sad countenances to be
seen in the crowd.
The horses were again in readiness, and the word
given, awaythey flew with the fleetness of the wind,
to come in the second time.
But who can describe the anxiety written on every
face, as they prepared for the third and last trial ? I
cannot. Many had already lost all they had staked,
and others who had bet high began to fear for the re
sult. Soon, however, all was again prepared andthose
foaming steeds, after having exerted their animal power
to the utmost, have accomplished their task and come
in for the last time. The purse was won, but
not ly Mark Anthony. Capt. Helm was more fortu
nate the second day. Buffer won the smaller parse,
but the Captain came from the races, a much poorer
man than when they commenced. These repeated
failures and heavy losses had the effect to arouse him
to a sense of his pecuniary position, and he soon after
began to think and talk about going to some new
country.
He resolved at last to visit the far-off &quot;Genesee
Country,&quot; which he shortly after put in practice, and
after an absence of about three weeks he returned in
goodhealth, and delighted with the country ;
the more
so, doubtless, because he said,
&quot;
the more slaves a man


--- PAGE 53 ---
CAPT. HELM SELLS OUT AT AUCTION. 43
possessed in that country the more he would be re
spected, and the higher would be his position in
society.&quot;
Capt. Helm finally concluded to sell his plantation
and stock, except the slaves, and remove to the Gene-
see Country, where he designed to locate his future
residence.
The plantation and stock (retaining the slaves) were
advertised for sale, and on a certain day named, all
would be disposed of at a public sale, or to the high
est bidder.
When the day of sale arrived, there flocked from all
parts of the surrounding country the largest assem
blage of people I ever saw in that place. A large
number of wealthy and respectable planters were
present, whose gentlemanly behavior should have been
an example to others. *
The majority of that vast crowd, however, were a
rough, quarrelsome, fighting set, just such as mightbe
expected from slave-holding districts. There were
several regularly fought battles during the first day of
the sale.
One ThomasFord, a large, muscular, ferocious-look
ing fellow, a good specimen of a southern bully and
woman-whipper, had been victorious through the day
in numerous fights andbrawls
;
but he had to pay dear
for it when night came. Some one or more of
the vanquished party, took advantage of the dark


--- PAGE 54 ---
44 AT THE GREAT HOUSE.
night to stab him in both sides. The knife of the as
sassin had been thrust into his thigh, tearing the flesh
upward, leaving a frightful and dangerous wound;
but what is most singular, both sides were woundedin
nearly the same manner, and at the same time, for so
quickly was the deed committed that the offenders
made their escape, before an alarm could be raised for
their detection
;
nor have I ever heard of any one
being arrested for the crime.
Fords groans and cries were painful to hear, but his
brother acted like a madman; rushing hither and
thither, with a heavy bludgeon in his hand, with
which he indiscriminately beat the fences and what
ever came in his way, crying
&quot;
Oh my brother, my
poor brother ! Whohas murdered mypoor brother?&quot;
Physicians cameto the aid of the wounded manwho
at first thought he might recover, but in a climate like
that of Virginia it was impossible. His friends did all
they could to save him, but the poor wretch lingered
a few days and died. Thus ended the life of a bad
man and a hard master.
And who will wonder, if his slaves rejoiced to hear
of his death? If they must be sold to pay his debts,
they could not fall into the hands of a more heart-
less tyrant. Who then can blame those feeble women
and helpless children, long held as chattels in his iron
grasp, if they are grateful that the man-steeler is no
more?


--- PAGE 55 ---
DRUNKENNESS AND MURDER AT THE SALE. 45
This Ford was a fair specimen of that class, known
in more modern parlance as a
&quot;
Border Kuffian.&quot; Such
as are at this time endeavoring, by their swaggering
and bullying, to cast on the fair fields of Kansas the
deep curse of Slavery a curse which, like the poison
of the deadly Upas, blights all within its influence :
the colored and the white man, the slave and the
master. We were thankful, however, that no more
lives were lost during the vendue, which was com
menced with the stock
;
this occupied two days.
Thereaderwill see that we had cause to be grateful,
when he takes into consideration that drinking and
fighting was the order of the day, and drunkenness
and carousing the order of the night.
Then too, the practice of dueling was carried on in
all its hideous barbarity. If a gentleman thought him
self insulted, he would immediately challenge the
offender to mortal combat, and if he refused to do so,
then the insulted gentleman felt bound by that bar
barous code of honor, to take his life, whenever or
wherever he might meet him, though it might be
in a crowded assembly, where the lives of innocent
persons were endangered.
Acase of this kind happened in Kentucky, where
the belligerent parties met in a large concourse of
people, the majority of them women and children;
but the combat ensued, regardless of consequences.
One woman was shot through the face, but that


--- PAGE 56 ---
46 AT THE GREAT HOUSE.
was not worthy of notice, for she was only a colored
woman; and in that, as in other slave States, the
laws give to the white population the liberty to trample
under foot the claims of all such persons to justice.
Justly indignant ladies present remonstrated, but all to
no purpose. The Governor of the State was there
and was in danger of being wounded by their flying
bullets, and it is possible that if he had been in the
place of the poor African, some action would have
been taken, and laws made to protect the people
against such inhuman practices. But I must return to
Capt. Helm and the vendue.
The sale continued for several days, during which
there was no such thing as rest or sleep or one quiet
moment on the premises. As was customary in that
State, Capt. Helm provided the food and drink for all
who came, and of course a great many came to drink
and revel and not to buy; and that class generally
took the night time for their hideous outbreaks, when
the more respectable class had retired to their beds or
to their homes. And many foul deeds and cruel out
rages were committed; nor could the perpetrators be
detected or brought to justice. Nothing could be done
but to submit quietly to their depredations.
One peaceable old slave was killed by having his
head split open with an ax. He was found in the
morning lying in the yard, with the bloodyinstrument
of death by his side. This occaisoned some excite-


--- PAGE 57 ---
I
THE SLAVES DKEAD A KEMOVAL. 47
ment among the slaves, but as the white people paid
but little attention to it, it soon passed off, and the sor
rowful slaves put the old mans remains in a rough
box, and conveyed them to their last resting-place.
After the sale was over, the slaves were allowed a
holiday, with permission to go and visit their friends
and relatives previous to their departure for their new
home in a strange land.
The slaves generally on Capt. Helms plantation
looked uponthis removal as the greatest hardship they
had ever met; the severest trial they had ever en
dured
;
and the separation from our old home and fel -
low-slaves, from our relatives and the old State of Vir
ginia, was to us a contemplation of sorrowful interest.
Those who remained, thought us the most unfortunate
of human beings to be taken away off into the State
of New York, and, as they believed, beyond the
bounds of civilization, where we should in all proba
bility be destroyed by wild beasts, devoured by canni
bals, or scalped by the Indians. We never expected
to meet again in this life, hence our parting interviews
were as solemn as though we were committing our
friends to the grave. But He whose tender mercies
are over all his creatures, knew best what was for our
good.
Little did Capt. Helmthink whenbringing his slaves
to New York that in a few short years, they wouldbe
singing the song of deliverance from Slavery s thrall-


--- PAGE 58 ---
4& HORSE-RACING AND ITS CONSEQUENCES.
dom
;
and as little thought he of the great and painful
change, to be brought about in his owncircumstances.
Could any one have looked into futurity and traced the
difficult path, mymaster was to tread, could any one
have foreseen the end to which he must soon come,
and related it to him in the days of his greatness and
prosperity, he would, I am certain, have turned from
such a narrator of misfortune in a greater rage thaa
did Kamaan when the man of Glod told him &quot;to go
and dip seven times in the Jordan.&quot;
He could not have believed, nor could I, that in a
few years the powerful, wealthy slaveholder, living in
luxury and extravagance, would be so reduced that
the necessaries of life even, were beyond his means, and
that he must be supported by the townI
But I anticipate. Let us return to the old planta
tion which seems dearer than ever, now that we are
about to leave it forever.
Wethought Capt. Helms prospects pretty fair, and
yet we shuddered when we realized our condition as
slaves. This change in our circumstances was calcu
lated to awaken all oui fears that had been slumber
ing, and bring all the perilous changes to which we
might be subjected most vividly to mind.
&quot;We were about to leave the land of our birth, the
home of our childhood, andwefelt that untried scenes
were before us. Wewere slaves, it is true, but we
had heart-felt emotions to suppress, when we thought


--- PAGE 59 ---
MELANCHOLY REFLECTIONS. 49
of leaving all that was so familar to us, and chose
rather to
&quot;
bear the ills we had, than to fly to those
we knewnot of.&quot; Andoh, the terrible uncertaintyof
the future, that ever rests on the slave, even the most
favored, was nowfelt with a crushingweight. To-day,
they are in the old familiar cabin surrounded by their
family, relatives and friends
; to-morrow, they may be
scattered, parted forever. The master s circumstances,
not their own, may have assigned one to the dreadful
slave-pen, and another to the distant rice-swamp ;
and
it is this continual dread of some perilous future that
holds in check everyjoyous emotion, every lofty aspi
ration, of the most favored slave at the South. They
know that their owners indulge in high living, and
they are well aware also that their continual indul
gences engender disease, which make themvery liable
to sudden death
;
or their master may be killed in a
duel, or at a horse-race, or in a drunken brawl
;
then
his creditors are active in looking after the estate
;
and
next, the blow of the auctioneer s hammer separates
them perhaps for life.
Now, after the lapse of so many years, when my
thoughts wander back, as they often do, to my native
State, I confess that painful recollections drive from
my mind those joyful emotions that should ever arise
in the heart of man, when contemplating the familiar
scenes of his youth, and especially when recurring to
the venerable shades and the sheltering roof under
C


--- PAGE 60 ---
50 HOKSE-BACING AND ITS CONSEQUENCES.
which he was born. True, around the well-reineni-
bered spot where our childhood s years were spent,
recollection still loves to linger; yet memory, ever
readywith its garnered store, paints in glowing colors,
Virginia s crouching slaves in the foreground. Her
loathsome slave-pens and slave markets chains,
whips and instruments of torture
;
and back of all
this is as truthfully recorded the certain doom, the re
tributive justice, that will sooner or later overtake her;
and with a despairing sigh I turn away from the im
aginary view of my native State.
What though she may have been justly styled,
&quot;
The Mother of Presidents?&quot; What avails the honor
of being the birth-place of the brave and excellent
Washington, while the prayers and groans of the
down-trodden African daily ascend to heaven for re
dress? What though her soil be fertile, yielding a
yearly product of wealth to its possessors? And
what matter is it, that their lordly mansions are em
bowered in the shade of trees of a century s growth,
if, through their lofty and tangled branches, we espy
the rough cabin of the mangled bondman, and know
that the soil on which he labors has drunk his heart s
blood?
A.h! to me, life s sweetest memories are all embit
tered. Slavery had cast its dark and fearful shadow
over my childhood, youth, and early manhood, and I
went out from the land of my birth, a fettered slave.


--- PAGE 61 ---
EXTRAVAGANCE OF CAPT. HELM. 51
A land which I can regard only as
&quot;
the house of
bondage and the grave of freedom.&quot; But God forgive
me for having envied my master his fair prospects at
this time.
After the sale of the plantation, Capt. Helm was in
possession of quite a large sum of money, and having
never paid much attention to his pecuniary interests,
he acted as if there could be no end of it. He realized
about forty thousand dollars from the sale of his estate
in Virginia, which would have been a pretty sum in
the hands of a man who had been accustomed to look
after his own interests
;
but under the management of
one who had all his life lived and prospered on the
unrequited toil of slaves, it was of little account. He
bought largely of every thing he thought necessary
for himself or the comfort of his family, for which he
always paid the most extravagant prices. The Captain
was not as well qualified to take care of himself and
family as some of his slaves were;
but he thought
differently, and so the preparations for leaving the old
plantation for a home in the wilds of New York,
went on under his direction, and at last we bade a
final adieu to our friends and all we held dear in the
State of Virginia.


--- PAGE 62 ---
CHAPTER IY.
JOURNEY TO OUR NEW HOME IN NEW YORK.
ALL
things having been prepared for our depart
ure, our last &quot;Good-bye&quot; spoken, and our last
look taken of the old plantation, we started, amid the
sobs and prolonged cries of separating families, in
company with our master, the overseer and another
white man named Davis, who went with us to take
back the five-horse &quot;Pennsylvania team,&quot; which was
provided for the conveyance of the food for the slaves,
and what little baggage they might have, and also
that of the overseer.
Capt. Helm had determined to leave his family until
he could get his slaves settled in their future quarters,
and a home provided for himself, when they were
expected to join him.
&quot;We traveled northward, through Maryland, Penn
sylvania, and a portion of New York, to Sodus Bay,
where we halted for some time. We made about


--- PAGE 63 ---
FAREWELL TO OLD VIRGINIA. 53
twenty miles per day, camping out every night, and
reached that place after a march of twenty days.
Every morning the overseer called the roll, when
every slave must answer to his or her name, felling to
the ground with his cowhide, any delinquent who
failed to speak out in quick time. After the roll had
been called, and our scanty breakfast eaten, we
marched on again, our company presenting the ap
pearance of somenumerous caravan crossing the desert
of Sahara. When we pitched our tents for the night,
the slaves must immediately set about cooking not
their supper only, but their breakfast, so as to be
ready to start early the next morning, when the tents
were struck; and we proceeded on our journey in this
way to the end.
At Sodus Bay there was then one small tavern,
kept by a man named Sill.
The bay is ten miles in length and from a half to
two miles in breadth, and makes an excellent harbor.
The surroundingcountry then was almost an unbroken
wilderness.
After Capt. Helm had rested a few days at Sodus,
he went six miles up the bay and purchased a large
tract of land lying on both sides of that beautiful
sheet of water, and put his slaves on to clear and cul
tivate it. Then came the &quot;tug of war.&quot; Neither the
overseer nor the slaves had the least knowledge of
ckaring land, and that was the first thing to be done.


--- PAGE 64 ---
54 JOURNEY TO OTJK NEW HOME.
It was useless to consult the Captain, for he knew still
less about matters of that kind. To obviate this
difficulty, our master bought out a Mr. Cummings,
who had some cleared land on the west side of the
bay. On this he put the overseer and a part of the
slaves, and then hired a Mr. Herringtonto take charge
of the remainder. Herrington and his gang of slaves
was sent to the east side to chop down the heavy
timber and clear the land for cultivation, all of which
had first to be learned, for we knewnothing of felling
trees, and the poor slaves-had rather a hard time ofit.
Provisions were scarce and could not be procured
for cash in that section. There was no corn to be had,
and we had but little left. &quot;We had no neighbors to
assist us in this trying time, and we came near starva
tion. True, the wild, romantic region in which we
were located abounded in game, elk, deer, bear,
panther, and wolves, roamed abroad through the dense
forest, in great abundance, but the business of the
slaves was not hunting or fishing, but clearing the
land, preparatory to raising crops of grain the coming
season.
At last Capt. Helm chartered a boat, and manned
it to go to the mouth of the Genesee Eiver to buy
corn. They embarked under favorable auspices, but
soon there came on such a tremendous storm, that
the boat could no longer be managed, and the crew in
despair threw themselves on the bottom of the boat to


--- PAGE 65 ---
STAKVATION THREATENED. 55
await their inevitable destruction, when one of their
number, a colored man named Dunbar, sprang to the
helm, andwithgreat difficulty succeededinrunningher
safely into a Canadian port, wheretheywere obliged to
part with every thing in their possession to obtain the
means to return to their families in Sodus, who had
given them up as lost. But, to tne great joy of all,
they came back at last with their lives, but with
nothing for the famishing slaves. Before another
boat could be sent for our relief, we were reduced to
the last extremity. Webecame so weak wecould not
work, andit was difficult to drag ourselves about, as we
were nowobliged to do, to gather up all the old bones
we could find, break them up fine and then boil them;
which made a sort of broth sufficient barely to sustain
life. This we drank, and merely existed, until at last,
the long looked for boat returned, loaded with por-
vision, which saved us from starvation and gave us
strength to pursue our labor.


--- PAGE 66 ---
CHAPTEK Y.
INCIDENTS AT SODUS BAY.
ABOUT
this time two slaves who were laboring
in the forest, instead of returning to theii
cabin as was expected, got lost, and wandered eight
days in the dense forest without provision, except
what they could procure from roots and the bark of
trees. Great exertion was made to find them; guns
were fired, horns blown, and shouts raised, but all to
no purpose. Finally, we gave them up, supposing
they had starved to death or had been killed by wild
beasts. One of them was an elderly man, named
Benjamin Bristol, and the other, Edmund Watkins, a
lad of about eighteen years of age. They wandered
in an easterly direction, a distance of some sixty or
seventy miles, through an unbroken wilderness, vainly
trying to find their way home. On the eighth day, to
their inexpressible joy, they came out on the shore of
Lake Ontario, near Oswego;
but young Watkins was


--- PAGE 67 ---
TWO MEN LOST BEAK KILLED. 57
..
-
completely exhausted that he declared himself
incapable of further exertion, and begged to be left to
his fate. Bristol, however, who chewed tobacco,
which it was supposed kept him from sinking so low
as his companion, took him on his back, and carried
him home, which they reached in a famished state and
reduced to skeletons. All were thankful for the pre
servation of their lives, and, with the best we could
do for them, they soon recruited and became strong
as ever.
One day, two others and myself thought we saw
some animal swimming across the bay. We got a
boat and went out to see what it was. After rowing
for some time we came near enough to perceive it was
a large bear. Those who watched us from the shore
expected to see our boat upset, and all on board
drowned, but it was not so to be
;
the bear was struck
on the nose with a blow that killed him instantly, and
he was hauled ashore in great triumph.
While these things were transpiring on the east side
of the bay, the overseer on the west side determined
to punish one of the slaves who worked on the east
side. The name of the slave was Williams;
a strong,
athletic man, and generally a good workman, but he
had unfortunately offended the overseer, for which
nothing could appease his wrath but the privilege of
flogging him. The slave, however, thought as he was
no longer in Virginia, he would not submit to such
C*


--- PAGE 68 ---
68 INCIDENTS AT SODUS.
chastisement, and the overseer was obliged to content
himself with threatening what he would do if he
caught him on the west side of the bay.
Ashort time after, the overseer called at the cabin
of one of the slaves, and was not a little surprised to
find there the refractory slave, Williams, in company
with three other men. He immediately walked up to
him and asked him some question, to which Williams
made no reply. Attended, as he always was, by his
ferocious bull-dog, he flourished his cowhide in great
wrath and demanded an instant reply, but he receiv
ed none, whereupon he struck the slave a blow with
the cowhide. Instantly Williams sprang and caught
him by the throat and held him writhing in his vise-
like grasp, until he succeeded in getting possession of
the cowhide, with which he gave the overseer such a
flogging as slaves seldom get. Williams was seized at
once by the dog who endeavored to defend his brutal
master, but the other slaves came to the rescue, and
threw the dog into a huge fire which was near by,
from which, after a singeing, he ran off, howling worse
than his master when in the hands of Williams. He
foamed and swore and still the blows descended
;
then
he commanded the slaves to assist him, but as none,
obeyed, he commenced begging in the most humble
manner, and at last entreated them as
&quot;
gentlemen&quot; to
spare him; but all to no purpose. When Williams
thought he had thrashed him sufficiently, he let him


--- PAGE 69 ---
&quot;
Instantly Williams sprang and caught him by the throat, and held him writhing
in his vice-like grasp, until he succeeded in getting possession of the cowhide, with
which he gave the overseer such a flogging as slaves seldom get.&quot; Page 58.


--- PAGE 70 ---



--- PAGE 71 ---
THE OVERSEER RETURNS TO VIRGINIA.
go and hurried to his boat and rowed down the bay,
instead of crossing it. The overseer no sooner found
himself at liberty than he ran out, calling to a servant
girl to bring his rifle, which was loaded. The rifle
was brought, but before he could get to the bay,
Williams had gone beyond his reach; but unfortu
nately another boat was at this moment crossing the
bay, which he, mad with rage, fired into. The men in
the boat immediately cried out to him not to repeat
the shot, but he was so angry that he swore he would
shoot somebody, and sent another bullet after them.
No one was hurt, however, but the brave overseer
was vanquished. Crest-fallen and unrevenged, he
shortly after called on Capt. Helm for a settlement,
which was granted, and bidding a final adieu to the
&quot;Grenesee Country,&quot; he departed for Virginia, where
he could beat slaves without himself receiving a cow-
hiding. ISTo one regretted his absence, nor do I think
any but the most heartless would cordially welcome
his return to the land of Slavery.


--- PAGE 72 ---
CHAPTEE VI.
REMOVAL FROM SODUS TO BATH.
CAPT.
Helm went to Virginia for his family, and
returning with them, concluded to locate his
future residence in the village of Bath, Steuben
County. He purchased a large tract of land near the
village, a large grist mill, and two saw mills; also,
two farms; one called the &quot;Maringo,&quot; east of the
village; and the other, called &quot;Epsam,&quot; north of it;
and a fine house and lot in the village. He also kept
a distillery, which in those days was well patronized,
for nearly every body drank whisky;
and with Capt.
Helm it was a favorite beverage.
Theslaves were removed to Bath, where our master
was well suited, and was everywhere noted for his
hospitality. He had a great deal of land to cultivate,
and carried on a multiplicity of business.
Soon after we were settled at Bath, Capt. Helms
eldest daughter, Jenny, was married to Mr. John


--- PAGE 73 ---
WEDDING OF MISS JENNY HELM. 61
Fitzhugh, her cousin, who had come from Virginia to
claim his bride.
The wedding was a splendid affair. No pains were
spared to make it more imposing than any thing that
had ever happened in that country. Never before had
the quiet village of Bath seen such splendor. All
that wealth, power and ambition could do, was done
to make the event one of great brilliancy. Europe
contributed her full proportion; Turkey, the Indias,
East and West, were heavily taxed to produce their
finest fabrics to adorn the bride and bridal guests;
and
contribute delicacies to add elegance to the festal scene.
Two days previous to the wedding, the invited guests
began to arrive with their retinue of servants, and on
the evening of the marriage the large mansion was
thrown open, and there was the most magnificent
assemblage I ever beheld. In the drawing-room,
where the ceremony took place, every thing was
surpassingly elegant. Costly chandeliers shed their
light on the rich tapestry, and beautiful dresses glitter
ing with diamonds, and the large mirrors everywhere
reflecting the gay concourse. While the servants
were preparing supper it was announced that the hour
had arrived for the ceremony to commence. The
bridal pair took their place in the center of the apart
ment. Pearls, diamonds, and jewelry glittered on the
bride with such luster, that it was almost painful to
the eye to look upon her.


--- PAGE 74 ---
62 KEMOVAL FEOM SODUS TO BATH.
Theminister, after askingGod to bless the assembled
guests, and those he was about to unite in the holy
bonds of wedlock, proceeded in a very solemn and
impressive manner with the marriage service. The
ceremony concluded, and good wishes having been
expressed over the sparkling wine, the man of
God took his leave, two hundred dollars richer than
when he came. The company were all very happy,
or appeared so; mirth reigned supreme, and every
countenance wore a smile. Theywere seated at tables
loaded with luxuries of every description, and while
partaking, a band of music enlivened the scene.
All business was suspended for several days, the
wedding party making a tour of ten days to Niagara
Falls. After a while, however, affairs assumed their
usual aspect, and business took its regular routine.
The grist mill belonging to the Captain was the
only one for many miles around, and was a source of
great profit to him
;
the saw mills also, were turning
out a large quantity of lumber, which was in good
demand; and the distillery kept up a steaming busi
ness. It yielded, however, a handsome income to
Capt. Helm, who was now, for the first time since I
knew him, overseeing his affairs himself, dispensing
altogether with the service of a regularly installed
overseer.
The oldest son of our master had been absent from
home for sometime, nor did he return to attend his


--- PAGE 75 ---
FKANK HELM OBTAINS A COMMISSION. 63
sister s grand wedding. He had sought and obtained
a commission in the United States service as a Lieu
tenant. This had been his own choice; he had
preferred the service and hardships of a soldier, to a
plantation well stocked with slaves, and the quietude
of domestic life. He had cheerfullv given up his
friends and prospects as a planter, and entered the
service of his country. Frank Helm, the second son,
soon followed the example of his older brother, Lina.
He obtained a like commission, but he did not, like
his brotherx get along quietly. His prospects as an
officer were soon blighted, and all hope of bei] g
serviceable to his country vanished forever.


--- PAGE 76 ---
CHAPTER VII.
DUELING.
LIN
A. Helm was an easy, good-natured, clever fel
low
;
but his brother Frank was his opposite in
nearly every thing ; proud, fractious and unyielding.
As might be expected, Frank, soon after entering the
army, got into an
&quot;
affair of honor,&quot; according to the
duelist s code of laws. He was not, however, the
principal in the difficulty. One of his friends and a
brother officer, had a quarrel with a gentleman whom
he challenged to mortal combat. Frank was the
bearer of his friend s challenge, and on presenting it,
the gentleman refused to accept it, saying that the
challenger
&quot;
was no gentleman.&quot; Then, according to
the rules of dueling, no alternative was left for Frank,
but to take his brother officer s place, andfight. This
he did and came from the bloodyfield disabled for life.
In consequence of his lameness, he was under the ne
cessity of resigning his commission in the army, which


--- PAGE 77 ---
65
he did, and came home a cripple, and nearly unfitted
for any kind of business whatever
While on the subject of dueling, permit me to
record some of the incidents of another
&quot;
affair of
honor,&quot; which occurred in the District of Columbia,
between Gen. Mason and Mr. MCarter, two antago
nistic politicians.
MCarter offered his vote to the inspectors, and Ma
son challenged it. MCarter offered to swear it in,
when Mason said if he did so he would perjure him
self. This blew what appeared to be but a spark into
an angry blaze, and a duel was momentarily expected;
but their warlike propensities subsided into a news
paper combat, which was kept up for several weeks,
each party supposing they had the advantage of their
adversary. In this stage ofthe quarrel, Gen. Jackson,
with one ofhis aid-de-camps, Dr. Bruno, visited Wash
ington. Dr. Bruno was a friend of Gen. Masons, and
to him the General submitted the correspondence,
desiring his opinion relative to the advantage one had
obtained over the other. Dr. Bruno decided against
his friend, which probably exasperated him still more,
and the General expressed his determination to fight
his antagonist. Dr. Bruno wrote to MCarter to come
to Washington, and he came immediately, and was as
readily waited upon bythe Doctor, who inquired if he
would receive a communication from his friend, Gen.
Mason. MCarter replied, that he
&quot;
would receive no


--- PAGE 78 ---
66 DUELING.
communication from Glen. Mason, except a challenge
to fight.&quot; The challenge was therefore sent, and
accepted, and the Doctor appointed to make the neces
sary arrangements for the duel. He proposed the
weapons to be pistols, and the distance, ten paces ;
to
which MCarter objected, because he said, &quot;the Gene
ral was a dead shot with the pistol, while he hardly
knew how to use one.&quot; Then it was left to MCarter
to choose the mode of warfare. He proposed muskets
and ten paces distance. This was agreed upon, and
finally the morning arrived for the conflict, and people
began to assemble in great numbers to witness this
murderous scene.
The belligerent parties unflinchingly took their
place, each with his loaded musket at his shoulder,
and gazing in each other s face, with feelings of the
most bitter hatred, while their eyes flashed vengeance.
Oh! what a state of mind was this in which to
meet inevitable death? How could intelligent men,
or gentlemen, if you please so to term them, look
placidly on such a horrid scene ? Was there no heart
of humanity to interfere and arrest the murderous
designs of these madmen? Alas, no! The slave
holder s
&quot;
code of honor&quot; must be acknowledged,
though it outrage the laws of God and his country.
Dr. Bruno asks,
&quot;
Gentlemen, are you ready
?&quot; and
the duelists take their deadly aim at each other. The
signal to fire is given, andboth weapons are discharged,


--- PAGE 79 ---
GENERAL MASON KILLED. 67
and when the smoke had cleared away, what a spec
tacle was there presented to the duellist and spectator?
Gen. Mason, a husband, a father, a statesman, and a
kind friend, lies bleeding, and gasping for breath.
He is no more! Who will bear to his loving and
unsuspecting wife, the sad intelligence of her sudden
bereavement? Who will convey his lifeless body to
his late residence, and throw grief and consternation
into the bosom of his family, and drape in sadness his
whole household ? And yet this painful task must be
performed. The family of General Mason remained
entirely ignorant of what was transpiring regarding
the duel, until his mangled corps was brought into his
dwelling, from which he had so recently gone forth in
all the vigor of life and manhood. And here let us
drop the curtain, nor intrude on that scene of domestic
affliction around the deserted hearth-stone of the
bereaved family of General Mason.
But where is Mr. McCarter, the more fortunate party
in the duel? Hurrying away from the frightful scene,
his hands dripping with the blood of his fellow-man,
he skulks about, until an opportunity is given him to
step on board a vessel bound to a foreign port ;
he
leaves home, friends and country, in the vain hope of
finding peace of mind, and ridding himself of that guilt
and censure which must attach itself to a crime so
heinous as that of taking the life of another.
I can but regard the inhuman practice of dueling
as the legitimate fruit of Slavery.


--- PAGE 80 ---
68 DUELING.
Men who have been raised in the Slave
where, if the laws do not give them the power, they
do not restrain them from cruelly punishing every
offender with personal violence, even unto death, if
their insulted dignity seems to demand it. It is, how
ever, encouraging to know that for a few years past
the practice of dueling has somewhat fallen into disre
pute among the more humane and candid class of
community.


--- PAGE 81 ---
CHAPTER YIII
HORSE-RACING AND GENERAL TRAINING.
AFTER
the return of the wedding party, Mr. Fite-
hugh purchased a tract of land near that of
Capt. Helm, on which the newly-married couple com
menced keeping house. They, however, became
dissatisfied with their location, and soon after sold
their possessions and returned to the South.
Capt. Helm still continued to take the oversight of
his slaves, and was out every day, superintending his
business, just as his overseer used to do.
About this time a man named Henry Tower came
to Bath to hire &quot;slave boys,&quot; as we were called.
The Captain hired to him Simon and myself, and a
Mr. Baker also hired to him one slave named Yol.
McKenzie. We three started for Dresden, Ontario
County, where we arrived in due time.
Mr. Tower had just bought a tract of land, three
miles this side of the village of Lyons, on the Canan-
daigua outlet. Here Mr. Tower contemplated making


--- PAGE 82 ---
70 HORSE-RACING AND GENERAL TRAINING.
great improvements, building mills, opening stores
&c. This tract of land was comparatively wild, there
being but a small frame house for a dwelling, one for
a store, and another for a blacksmith shop. Mr.
Tower had two brothers
; James, the eldest, who took
charge of the store, and John, the younger, who took
charge of the hands whoworked on the farm
; Henry
himself superintending the buildingof the mills. This
firm, had a great number of men in their employ that
year. I was kept busy helping the women about the
cooking and house-work. And here, for the first time
in my life, I had a comfortable bed to sleep on, and
plenty of wholesome food to eat
;
which was some
thing both new and strange to me.
The Towers were thorough-going business-men;
they built a large grist mill, with four run of stone,
and also a distillery. In those days it was customary
for nearly all classes to drink spirituous liquors ; hence,
the distilleries were sources of great pecuniary interest
to those who owned them. But having lived to see
the dreadful evils which the drinking of alcoholic
beverages have produced on community, I can hardly
speak of distilleries in the favorable light in which
they were then regarded.
The Towers, with commendable enterprize, cleared
a great number of acres of land during the first year
I lived with them, besides doing a heavy business in
the mill, store and distillery.


--- PAGE 83 ---
ATTEND A HORSE-BACK
It was customary then for men to assemble at some
public place for the purpose of drinking whisky and
racing horses.
One Saturday afternoon there was to be a race, and
all was excitement. Being young, I wished to go
with the rest. I hurried through my work as fast as
possible, and then, with a trembling heart, set off in
search of mymaster, fearing lest he would refuse me
the simple request. But he happened to be in uncom
mon good humor, and readily gave his consent;
and
away I went,
&quot;
as happy as a lark.&quot; When I reached
the race-ground, they were just preparing to run the
horses. Seeing me, they knew me to be a poor friend
less little slave boy, helpless and unprotected, and they
could therefore do with me as they pleased, and have
some fine sport at my expense.
&quot;When I was asked to ride one of the fast horses, I
felt proud of the honor conferred, and was assisted to
mount, feeling highly elated with the lofty position I
had gained.
The word
&quot;go,&quot;
was shouted, and the horse whirled
off, and it seemed to me as if he flew with the speed of
lightning. Myhat fell off the first thing;
and there
I was, clinging with might and main to the neck of
the fiery animal, my head bare, my feet bootless, and
my old stripped shirt blown from my back, and
streaming out behind, and fluttering like a banner in
the breeze
; my ragged pants off at the knees, and my


--- PAGE 84 ---
72 HORSE-RACING AND GENERAL TRAINING.
long legs dangling down some length below
;
and at
the same time crying &quot;Whoa! whoa!&quot; as loud as I
could. Nor was this all
; frightened as I was, nearly
to death, I cast a despairing look behind me, and the
loud, derisive laugh of the bystanders rung in my
ears.
Ludicrous as I must have appeared, this was too
much, I felt a giddiness coming over me, my brain
reeled, my hold relaxed, and the next instant I had
fallen to the ground, where all consciousness left me.
When I came to my senses I was lying in bed, sur
rounded by all the appurtenances of a dying person.
The first thing I heard was Mr. Tower scolding the
men who put me on the horse, and threatening them
with a law-suit for presuming to do such a thing with
out his permission. Mr. Tower considered himself
holden to Capt. Helm for my safe return, and was
therefore justly indignant at their placing my life in
such peril. It was indeed a narrow escape, for the
horse was running with all his speed when I fell. My
bones were unbroken, however, and I suppose it must
have been the tremendous jar I got when I fell that
rendered meunconscious ;
nor do I think it impossible
that the fright may not have contributed somewhat to
the catastrophe.
It was while I was living with that gentleman that
the greatest
&quot;
general training&quot; ever known in Western
New York, came off at
&quot;
Oaks Corners,&quot; in the town


--- PAGE 85 ---
73
of Phelps. It really seemed to me that the whole
world were going to the training, and I, of course, felt
a great curiosity to go where &quot;all creation&quot; appeared to
be going. Mr. Tower permitted me to go, and I
started off in high spirits. When I arrived within
two or three miles of the place the road was almost
blocked up with people, and when I got to Oaks
Corners the crowd beggared all description ; carriages
of all sorts were there, containing eatables of all kinds,
and tents of all dimensions were on the road-side, for
the houses could not begin to accommodate the people.
The entire brigade was to meet at that place, and Grov.
Lewis was expected to review the different companies,
and all were anxious to see the Governor, for, in those
days, it was a rare thing to see so high a dignitary in
Western New York;
the eastern portion of the State
having had every thing of that kind their own way.
Nor was the means and mode of traveling brought
to such perfection as now. The roads were new and
rough, and our best public conveyances only the slow
lumbering stage-coach ; yet, notwithstanding these
inconveniences, there was an innumerable crowd
gathered at that place. I spent the day in walking
about the encampment, and seeing what was to be
seen, for it was all new to me.
Officers were riding over the ground, dressed in
uniform, and mounted on their splendid steeds : their
plumes waving over their cocked-hats in true military
D


--- PAGE 86 ---
74 HORSE-RACING AND GENERAL TRAINING.
v
array. Abandof music, as is usual, accompanied the
soldiers. There was also a
&quot;
sham-fight,&quot; before the
breaking up of the encampment, and it was really ter
rifying to me, who had never seen a battle fought, to
witness two columns of troops drawn up, and, at the
roll of the drum, behold them engage in deadly con
flict, to all appearance, and the smoke curling up in
a blackened mass toward heaven; and, above all, the
neighing of horses, with the feigned groans of the
wounded and dying. I inwardly prayed to God that
those men might ever drawtheir weapons in a feigned
encounter.
The first night I spent at the encampment was one
long to be remembered ;
it was like the confusion of
Babel. Of all the hideous noises I ever heard
none could exceed those made therethat night. They
fired guns, quarreled, drank, and swore, till day light.
There was such a crowd at the tavern that I did not
suppose I could get a bed, so I threw myself down
upon a door-step, and began to compose myself to
sleep, when a man came and wakened me, inquiring
at the same time whose boy I was. I replied that I
lived with Mr. Tower. &quot;Follow me,&quot; said he; I
arose and followed him into the house, where he pro
cured for me a bed, to be shared with another
&quot;
boy,&quot;
who had already occupied it.
I hadjust began to dose, when the explosion offire
arms startled all in the house. The keeper of the


--- PAGE 87 ---
NAEKOWLY ESCAPE BEING SHOT. 75
tavern ran up stairs in great alarm, and when an ex
amination was made, we found that a drunken fellow
had discharged his musket in the room below the one
where we were sleeping, and that the ball had passed
up through the second floor and completely through
the bed on which I slept, to the roof, where, having
passed through that also, rolled from thence to the
ground
! And jet, strange as it may appear, no one
was injured, though the house was filled to overflow
ing with guests.
There were groups of disorderly and drunken men
continually roaming over the camp-ground at night,
who seemed to have no other object than to annoy
others, and torment any one they might find sleeping,
by shaking them, or, if soundly asleep, draggingthem
out of their beds by their feet. Among these thus
annoyed by them was a physician from Canandaigua.
Being a passionate man, they seemed to think it fine
sport to arouse him from sleep and hear him scold.
The first time they dragged him from his tent he
merely remonstrated in a very gentlemanly manner,
and quietly crept back again. The rowdies were dis
appointed; they had expected a
&quot;
scene.&quot; As soon as
he was asleep they attacked him again, dragging him
out by the heels
;
then he was angry, and told them
if they repeated the offence it would be at the peril of
their lives, and a third time retired to his tent
;
but a
third party soon came, and one, more bold than the


--- PAGE 88 ---
76 HORSE-RACING AND GENERAL TRAINING.
rest, entered the tent andlaid hold of the Doctor. He
sprang to his feet and drew his sword, which he ran
through the body of a man supposed to be that of his
tormentor
;
but oh! what sorrow andconsternation pos
sessed him when he found he hadtaken the life of a
quiet, unoffending person whohappened to be standing
by, attracted to the spot probably by the noise of the
revelers. TheunhappyDoctor was obliged to flee from
his country for a time, but after a while the shadows
which had so suddenly fallen on his fair prospects
were cleared away, and he returned to his home
and country.
The second day of the encampment was one of sur
passing beauty. The sun shone in all its softened
radiance on that vast concourse of human beings.
The field presented a spectacle which must have been
imposing to those of more experienced vision than
mine; but to me, in my ignorant simplicity, it was
superbly grand ; facinating beyond mypower of resist
ance, and made an impression on my mind never to
be effaced.
The brigade was drawn up in a line, each colonel
stationed just so many paces in front of the line, and
all the other officers, such as majors, quarter-masters,
&c., were stationed at an equal distance in the rear.
When all were paraded, the Governor of the State
made his appearance, dressed in full uniform, his hat
being one of the Bonaparte style, attended by his


--- PAGE 89 ---
THE GRAND REVIEW. 77
aid-de-camp, who was dressed much in the same man
ner as his Excellency Governor Lewis, who, after the
salute, took his place at the head of the brigade, and
the military exercises commenced. When the Gov
ernor issued his orders, they were first given to his aid,
who passed them to the officers, and they gave the
word of command to the soldiers
;
for instance if the
Governor wished the brigade to
&quot;
shoulder arms,&quot;
the order went to the officer who commanded the first
regiment, and he repeated the order, and was obeyed;
then the same order passed to the next, and so on,
until the whole brigade had complied with the order
of his Excellency.
But this, I believe, was the first and last time that
the military were ever called out on so large a scale,
in the State of New York. It was supposed that the
effect would be decidedly injurious to a community
and the idea wasabandoned. Youngmenwere so liable
to be fascinated by the magnificent spectacle, that not
the rabble only were attracted by the &quot;trappings of
war,&quot; but they have a tendency to induce young, and
old men even, of fair prospects, to neglect their agricul
tural interests for military pursuits, which, in a new
country, were certainly of paramount importance, if
not the greater of the two.
I know that it became very hard for me to content
myself to labor as I had done, after witnessing this
grand display. I was completely intoxicated with a


--- PAGE 90 ---
78 HORSE-RACING AND GENERAL TRAINING.
military spirit, and sighed for the liberty to go out
on the lines&quot; and fight the British.
The martial music, the waving plumes, and magni
ficent uniform, had driven from my mind entirely the
bloodshed and carnage of the battle field
; beside, I was
sick and tired of being a slave, and felt ready to do
almost any thing to get where I could act and feel like
a free man.
I became acquainted with a Mr. McClure, a mer
chant in Bath, who, while on a journey to Philadel
phia, to purchase goods, was taken suddenly ill and
died ; when his brother, George McClure, came on to
attend to his diseased brother s business. He was a
fine, persevering kind of man, and very soon got to be
General McClure, and commanded the brigade in
Steuben County, and, as such, was liable to be called
at any time when his services were required, to go to
the frontier and guard our lines from the invasion of
the English army.
To him I applied for a situation as waiter, which he
readily agreed to give meif I could get the consent of
Captain Helm. I thought there would be no trouble
about that
;
and oh! how I dreamed of and anticipated
the happiness of being something beside a slave, for a
little while at least. Almost every day I went to the
store to talk to Gen. McClure of this greatest happiness
imaginable,
&quot;
going to the lines !&quot; and was impatient
for the chance to arrive that would send me there.


--- PAGE 91 ---
DESIRE TO BECOME A SOLDIER FRUSTRATED. 79
At last Gen. McCliire wrote to Gen. Armstrong, to
say that he was ready to obey any order that he might
send him, and march to
&quot;
the lines,&quot; if his services
were needed ; and, to my inexpressible joy, marching
orders were returned. I nearly flew in search of Capt.
Helm, never once suspecting that he would object;
becauseIknewthat he did not then require myservices
himself, and the pay would be quite as good as he had
been receiving for my time ; besides I had so com
pletely set my heart on going, that it was impossible
for me to dream of a disappointment so bitter as that
of being denied going
&quot;to the lines.&quot;
Oh! how then were myhigh hopes fallen, and how
much more hateful appeared that slavery which had
blighted all my military prospects? Nor was Capt.
Helms heartless and mercenary reply to my humble
pleading any antidote to my disappointed feelings and
desire for freedom. He said,
&quot;
you shall not go ;
I
will permit nothing of the kind, so let there be an end
to it. Thepay is all well enough, I know, but if you
get killed your wages will stop ;
and then who, do
you suppose, will indemnify me for the loss? Go
about your business, and let me hear no more of such
nonsense!&quot;
There was an emergency I had not provided for
;
and, as I then believed, the master could make no
demand on or for the slaves beyond the grave, I was
silent ; but both master and myself were mistaken on


--- PAGE 92 ---
80 HORSE-RACING AND GENERAL TRAINING.
that point;
for I havesince learned numerous instances
where slaves have fought and died in the service of
their master s country, and the slave-owner received
his wages up to the hour of his death, and then
recovered of the United States the full value of his
person as property
!
Gen. McClure left soon after for the frontier; my
saddened heart followed him, and that was all; my
body was in slavery still, and painful though it was,
I must quietly submit.
The General, however, reaped but few if any
laurels in that campaign;
he burned the small village
of Newark, in Canada, for which he got very little
credit on either side of the lake
;
so I comforted my
self as well as I could with the reflection, that all who
&quot;went to the wars&quot; did not return covered with glory
and laurels of victory.
I continued to live with the Towers; and in the
fall of that year, I had the misfortune to cut my foot
badly. While chopping fire wood at the door, I acci
dentally struck my ax against a post, which glanced
the blow in such a manner that it came down^with
sufficient force to nearly sever my great toe from
my left foot, gashing upward completely through
the large joint, which made a terrible wound. Dr.
Taylor was immediately called, and sewed the flesh
together, taking two stitches on the upper, and one
on the under, side of the foot, before it began to swell ;


--- PAGE 93 ---
WOUNDED FOOT RETURN TO BATH. 81
but when the swelling came on, the stitches on the
upper side gave way, which occasioned the toe to fall
over so much, that I have been slightly lame from
that day to this. For several weeks I was unable to
be moved, and was regularly attended by Dr. Taylor,
but as soon as it could be done without danger, I was
taken back to Capt. Helms, where I found things in
much the same condition as when I left them over
a year before.
On leaving the family of Mr. Tower, I endeavored
to express to them as well in my power the gratitude
I felt for their kindness, and the attention I had re
ceived during my lameness.
Wereturned to Bath in a sleigh, and arrived with
out accident or any great suffering. But the kind
treatment I had always received from the Messrs.
Tower and family, made it very hard for me to
reconcile myself to my former mode of living;
especially now that I was lame and weak, from sick
ness and long confinement; besides, it was cold
weather. Oh ! how hard it did seem to me, after
having a good bed and plenty of bed clothes every
night for so long time, to now throw myself down,
like a dog, on the &quot;softest
side&quot; of a rough board, with
out a pillow, and without a particle of bedding to
cover me during the long cold nights of winter. To
be reduced from a plentiful supply of good, whole
some food, to the mere pittance which the Captain
allowed his slaves, seemed to me beyond endurance.
n*


--- PAGE 94 ---
82 HORSE-RACING AND GENERAL TRAINING.
And yet I had always lived and fared thus, but I
never felt so bitterly these hardships and the cruelties
of Slavery as I did at that time
; making a virtue of
necessity, however, I turned my thoughts in another
direction.
I managed to purchase a spelling book, and set
about teaching myselfto read, as best I could. Every
spare moment I could find was devoted to that em
ployment, and when about my work I could catch
now and then a stolen glance at my book, just to
refresh my memory with the simple lesson I was
trying to learn. But here Slavery showed its cloven
foot in all its hideous deformity. It finally reached the
ears of mymaster that I was learning to read; andthen,
if he saw me with a book or a paper in my hand, oh,
how he would swear at me, sending meoff in a hurry,
about some employment. Still I persevered, but was
more careful about being seen making any attempt to
learn to read. At last, however, I was discovered,
and had to pay the penalty of my determination.
I had been set to work in the sugar bush, and I
took my spelling book with me. When a spare
moment occurred I sat downto study, and so absorbed
was I in the attempt to blunder through my lesson,
that I did not hear the Captain s son-in-law coming
until he was fairly upon me. He sprang forward,
caught my poor old spelling book, and threw it into
the fire, where it was burned to ashes
;
and then came


--- PAGE 95 ---
FLOGGED FOR LEARNING TO READ. 83
my turn. He gave me first a severe flogging, and
then swore if lie ever caught me with another book,
he would &quot;whip every inch of skin off my back,&quot; &c.
This treatment, however, instead of giving me the
least idea of giving it up, only made me look upon it
as a more valuable attainment. Else, why should my
oppressors feel so unwilling that their slaves should
possess that which they thought so essential to
themselves ? Even then, with my back bleeding and
smarting from the punishment I had received, I
determined to learn to read and write, at all hazards,
if my life was only spared. About this time Capt.
Helm began to sell off his slaves to different per
sons, as he could find opportunity, and sometimes
at a great sacrifice. It became apparent that the
Captain, instead of prospering in business, was getting
poorer every day.


--- PAGE 96 ---
CHAPTEB IX.
DEATH BED AND BBIDAL SCENES.
%
&quot;VTEITHEB Capt. Helm nor his wife made any
.L i religious pretensions. I hardly know whether
or not they were avowed infidels
;
but they alike
ridiculed all religious professions and possessed some
very singular notions regarding life and death.
I have often heard the Captain say, that no person
need die unless they choose to do so
;
and his wife
was of the same belief. I have frequently heard her
remark that if mankind would firmly resist death it
would flee from them.
An opportunity, however, was soon after given to
test the truth of this strange dogma. Mrs. Helms
health began to decline, but she would pay no atten
tion to it, following her usual course and regular
routine of household duties
;
but all in vain
;
she was
taken down, alarmingly ill, and it became apparent to
all, that the &quot;king of terrors&quot; had chosen his victim.


--- PAGE 97 ---



--- PAGE 98 ---
&quot;
If any one had ever envied Mrs. Helm in her drawing room, richly attired and
sparkling; with jewels, or, as she moved with the stately step of a queen among her
trembling slaves, they should have beheld her on her deathbed.&quot; Page 85.


--- PAGE 99 ---
DEATH OF MRS. HELM. 85
She tried with all her natural energy of character, to
baffle his pursuit and escape his steady approach, but
all to no purpose.
&quot;
The valley and the shadow of
death&quot; were before her, and she had no assurance that
the &quot;rod and staff&quot; of the Almighty would sustain
and comfort her through the dark passage. She
shrank with perfect horror from the untried scenes of
the future.
If any one had ever envied Mrs. Helm in her
drawing-room, richly attired and sparkling withjewels,
or as she moved with the stately step of a queen
among her trembling slaves, they should have beheld
her on her death bed!
They should have listened to
her groans and cries for help, while one piercing
shriek after another rang through the princely man
sion of which she had been the absolute mistress I
Surrounded as she was with every elegance and
luxury that wealth could procure, she lay shrieking
out her prayers for a short respite, a short lengthening
out of the life she had spent so unprofitably;
her eyes
wandering restlessly about the apartment, and her
hands continually clinching the air, as if to grasp
something that would prevent her from sinking into
the embrace of death ! There was not a slave present,
who would have exchanged places with her. Not
one of those over whom she had ruled so arbitrarily
would have exchanged their rough, lowly cabin and
quiet conscience, for all the wealth and power she had
ever possessed.


--- PAGE 100 ---
86 DEATH BED AND BRIDAL SCENES.
Nothing of all she had enjoyed in life, nor all that
she yet called her own, could give her one hour of life
or one peaceful moment in death !
Oh! what a scene was that ! The wind blew, and
great drops of rain fell on the casements. The room
lighted only with a single taper; the wretched wife
mingles her dying groans with the howling of the
storm, until, as the clock struck the hour of midnight
she fell back upon her pillow and expired, amid the
tears and cries ofher family and friends, who not only
deplored the loss of a wife and mother, but were
grieved by the manner in which she died.
The slaves were all deeply affected by the scene ;
some doubtless truly lamented the death of their
mistress; others rejoiced that she was no more, and all
were more or less frightened. One of them I remem
ber went to the pumpand wet his face, so as to appear
to weep with the rest.
What a field was opened for reflection, by the
agonizing death of Mrs. Helm? Born and reared in
affluence; well educated and highly accomplished,
possessed of every means to become a useful woman
and an ornament to her sex; which she most likely
would have been, had she been instructed in the
Christian religion, and had lived under a different
influence. As infidelity ever deteriorates from the
female character, so Slavery transforms more than one,
otherwise excellent woman, into a feminine monster.


--- PAGE 101 ---
DANGER OF THE SOCIAL GLASS. 87
Of Mrs. Helm, with, her active intellect and great
force of character, it made a tyrannical demon. Her
race, however, is ended;
her sun gone down in dark
ness, and her soul we must leave in the keeping of a
righteous God, to whom we must all give an account
for the deeds done in the body. But in view of the
transitory pleasures of this life; the unsatisfactory
realization of wealth, and the certainty of death, we
may well inquire,
&quot;
What shall it profit a man to gain
the whole world and lose his own soul ?
&quot;
Some little time after the scene just recorded, there
came to Bath a young physician named Henry, who
commenced practice under very flattering prospects.
He was an accomplished young man, well educated
and very skillful in his profession. He was affable
and gay in his manners, and very fond of company.
An intimate acquaintance was soon formed with
Capt. Helm and family, and he called almost daily to
chat and drink wine with the Captain, both being
quite fond of a social glass.
One night in the depth of winter, the Doctor was
called to see a patient who lived six miles down the
Conhocton river. Previous, however, to the call, he
had accepted an invitation to attend a party at Capt.
Helms, and there he was found. Theyhad music and
dancing, while the wine passed around very freely.
None seemed to join in the dance and other amuse
ments of the evening with more enjoyment than did


--- PAGE 102 ---
88 DEATH BED AND BEIDAL SCENES.
Dr. Henry; but after lie was sent for, it being a most
bitter cold night, he asked the Captain for a horse to
ride to see his patient, to which he readily assented,
and had his fine race-horse (for the Captain had not left
off all his old habits), brought out from the stable, and
the Doctor sprang lightly into the saddle. Unfortu
nately his way led by the race-course, and when the
trained animal came to it he started with such speed
as to throw the Doctor to the ground, where he lay
all that terrible cold night. In the morning, some
person going after wood, came in sight of the Doctor
as he was trying to creep awayon his frozen hands
and feet. He was put into the sleigh and taken to the
village with all possible speed. All was done for him
that could be, but his feet and legs were frozen solid.
His uncle, Dr. Henry, was brought as soon as possible,
who decided that nothing could save his life but the
amputation of both legs, just below the knee. This
was done
; but what a change in the prospects of this
promising young man! Instead of stepping lightly
about as he used to do, with a smiling countenance,
he at last came forth after a tedious confinement, a
cripple for life, hobbling about on his knees, sad and
dejected. And what, think you, was the cause of
this terrible calamity ? What prevented the Doctor
from an exertion to save his life ? Wine, intoxicating
wine, was undoubtedly the occasion of the heedless
and reckless conduct of both himself and Capt. Helm.


--- PAGE 103 ---
CAPT. HELM MARRIED AGAIN. 89
And should not this circumstance be a warning to
parents and guardians, to young menand children,
&quot;
to
look not upon the wine whenit is red,&quot; and remember
that at last
&quot;
it will bite like a serpent and sting like an
adder?&quot; Should it not also remind those who have
guests to entertain, of the sinfulness of putting the
cup to their neighbor s lips ? Certainlyit should. But
I must resume my story.
About this time Major Thornton of Bath, died. He
had long been an intimate friend and acquaintance of
Capt. Helm, and as the reader is already informed of
the death of Mrs. Helm, they will not be surprised to
know that he began to look earnestly after the widow
of his late friend. It become apparent that his solici
tude for the loneliness of Madam Thornton was not so
much as a disconsolate widow, as that of making her
the future Mrs. Helm
;
nor was it less observable that
the new-made widow accepted the Captain s atten
tions with great favor, and more as a lover than a
comforter.
The result was, after the Major had been dead six
weeks, Capt. Helm was married to his widow, and
brought her and her servants in great triumph to his
house, giving her the charge of it. His own servants
were discharged, and hers took their places.
All went on pleasantly for a while
;
then the slaves
began to grow sullen and discontented; and two of
them ran away. Capt. Helm started a man named


--- PAGE 104 ---
90 DEATH BED AND BKIDAL SCENES.
Morrison, a Scotchman, in pursuit, who hunted them
ten days, and then returned without any tidings of
the absconding slaves. Theymade good their escape
and were never heard from afterwards, bythose whose
interest suffered by the loss.
I was one afternoon at a neighbor s house in the
village, when I was suddenly taken so violently ill
with painin myhead and side, that I had to be carried
home. When we arrived there, I was allowed a
pallet of straw to lie on, which was better than
nothing. Day after day, my disease increased in
violence, and my master employed a physician to
attend me through my illness, which brought me very
low indeed. I was constantly burning with fever,
and so thirsty that I knew not what I would have
given for a draught of cold water, which was denied
me by the physician s direction. I daily grew weaker
until I was reduced to helplessness, and was little else
than
&quot;
skin and bones.&quot; I really thought mytime had
come to die
;
and when I had strength to talk, I tried
to arrange the few little business affairs I had, and
give my father direction concerning them. And then
I began to examine my own condition before God.
and to determine howthecase stood between Him and
my poor soul. And &quot;there was the rub.&quot; I had
often excused myself, for frequent derelictions in duty,
and often wild and passionate outbreaks, on account
of the hardness of my lot, and the injustice with


--- PAGE 105 ---
SICK-BED REFLECTIONS. 91
which I was treated, even in mybest endeavors to do
as well as I knew how. But now, with death staring
me in the face, I could see that though I was a friend
less &quot;slave-boy,&quot; I had not always done as well as I
knew how
;
that I had not served God as I knew I
ought, nor had I always set a good example before my
fellow-slaves, nor warned them as well as I might,
&quot;to
flee the wrath to come.&quot; Then I prayed myHeavenly
Father to spare me a little longer, that I might
serve Him better; and in His mercy and gracious
goodness, He did so; though when the fever was
turning they gave me up;
and I could hear them say,
when they came to feel mypulse,
&quot;he is almost gone,&quot;
&quot;it will soon be over,
7
&c., and then inquire if I
knew them. I did, but was too weak to say so. I
recollect with gratitude, the kindness of Mrs. H. A.
Townsend, who sent me many delicacies and cooling
drinks to soften the rigor of my disease
;
and though
I suppose she has long since
&quot;
passed away&quot; and gone
to her reward, may the blessing of those who are
ready to perish, rest upon the descendants of that
excellent woman.
Capt. Helm was driving on in his milling, distillery
and farming business. He now began to see the
necessity of treating his slaves better by far than he
had ever done before, and granted them greater
privileges than he would have dared to do at the
South. Many of the slaves he had sold, were getting
their liberty and doing well.


--- PAGE 106 ---
OHAPTEE X.
HIKED OUT TO A NEW MASTER,
W^&quot;HILB
I was staying with my master at Bath, he
havinglittle necessity for my services, hired me
out to a man by the name ofJoseph Robinson, for the
purpose of learning me to drive a team. Robinson
lived about three miles from the village of Bath, on a
small farm, and was not only a poor man but a very
mean one. He was cross and heartless in his family,
as well as tyrannical and cruel to those in his employ;
and having hired me as a
&quot;
slave boy,&quot; he appeared
to feel at fall liberty to wreak his brutal passion on
.
me at any time, whether I deserved rebuke or not
;
nor did his terrible outbreaks of anger vent them
selves in oaths, curses and threatenings only, but he
would frequently draw from the cart-tongue a heavy
iron pin, and beat me over the head with it, so unmer
cifully that he frequently sent the blood flowing over
my scanty apparel, and from that to the ground,
before he could feel satisfied.


--- PAGE 107 ---
{SURPRISED BY A RATTLE-SNAKE. 93
These kind of beatings were not only excessively
painful, but they always reminded me of the blows
I had so often received from the key, in the hand of
Mrs. Helm, when I was but a little waiter lad
;
and in
truth I must say that the effect of these heavy blows
on the head, have followed me thus far through life
;
subjecting me to frequent and violent head-aches, from
which I never expect to be entirely free. Even to
this day I shudder at the thought, when I think how
Robinson used to fly at me, swearing, foaming, and
seeming to think there was no weapon too large or
too heavy to strike me with.
He and I were at one time logging with a yoke of
oxen, which it was my business to drive. At that
time rattle-snakes were numerous, and a great terror
to the inhabitants. To be bitten by one of these
poisonous reptiles was certain and almost instant
death
; hence, the greatest caution and constant vigi
lance was necessary to avoid them while at work. I
had been sent with the oxen to draw a log to the pile,
and when I came up to it, I observed that it appeared
to be hollow
;
but stepping forward, with the chain in
myhand, ready to attach it to the log, when, oh, hor
ror! the warning rattle of a snake sounded like a
death-knell in my ears, proceeding from the log I was
about to lay hold of. I was so much frightened by
the sound, that I dropped the chain as though it were
red hot. left my team, and ran with all the speed in


--- PAGE 108 ---
94 HIRED OUT TO A NEW MASTER.
my power, screaming
&quot;
murder, murder I&quot; as loud as I
could.
This proceeding, which was the fearful impulse of
the moment, offended Eobinson, and gave him another
opportunity to beat me most cruelly. He was him
self as much afraid of rattle-snakes as I; but he
was the master and I the
&quot;
slave boy,&quot; which made a
vast difference. He caught hold of me, and, with
horrid oaths, beat me with his fist again and again ;
threatening me with awful punishment if I did not
instantly return and bring the log to the desired spot.
I never can forget the mortal agony I was in, while
compelled byhis kicks and blows to return and fasten
the chain around the log containing the deadly ser
pent. I, however, succeeded with trembling hands,
and drove the oxen, but keeping myself at the far
therest possible distance from them and the log
When I finally arrived at the pile, Mr. Eobinson and
some other men, cut a hole with an ax in the log, and
killed the large, venomous rattle-snake that had occa
sioned me so much alarm and such a cruel beating.
Nor was the uncontrolable and brutal passion of Ro
binson his only deficiency ;
he was mean as he was
brutal.
He had, at one time, borrowed a wagon of a neigh
bor living two miles distant, through a dense forest.
On the day of the total eclipse of the sun, it entered
his head that it would be fine sport, knowing


--- PAGE 109 ---
MY NEW MASTER, A HEARTLESS MAN. 95
my ignorance and superstition, to send me, just as
the darkness was coming on, to return the borrowed
wagon. I accordingly hitched the ox-team to it and
started. As I proceeded through the wood, I saw,
with astonishment and some alarm, that it was grow
ing very dark, and thought it singular at that hour of
the day. When I reached the place of mydestination
it was almost total darkness, and some persons, igno
rant as myself, were running about, wringing their
hands, and declaring that they believed the Day of
Judgment had come, and such like expressions.
.
The effect of all this was, however, very different
from what my master had expected. I thought,
of course, if the judgment day had come, I should
be no longer a slave in the power of a heartless
tyrant. I recollect well of thinking, that if indeed all
things earthly were coming to an end, I should be
free from Kobinson s brutal force, and as to meeting
my Creator, I felt far less dread of that than of meet
ing my cross, unmerciful master. I felt that, sinful as
I had been, and unworthy as I was, I should be far
better off than I then was
; driven to labor all day,
without compensation ;
half starved and poorly clad,
and above all, subjected to the whims and caprices of
any heartless tyrant to whom my master might give
the power to rule over me. But I had not much time
for reflection, I hurried home
; my mind filled with
the calm anticipation that the end of all things was at


--- PAGE 110 ---
96 HIRED OUT TO A NEW MASTER.
hand
;
which greatly disappointed my expectant mas
ter, whowas looking for meto return in a great fright,
making some very ludicrous demonstration of fear and
alarm. But after a few months more of hardship I
was permitted to return to Capt. Helms, where I was
treated much better than at Kobinson s, and much
better than the Captain used to treat his slaves.
Capt. Helm, not having demand for slave labor as
much as formerly, was in the practice of hiring out
his slaves to different persons, both in and out of the
village ;
and among others, my only sister was hired
out to aprofessed gentleman living in Bath. She had
become the mother of two or three children, and was
considered a good servant.
One pleasant Sabbath morning, as I was passing the
house where she lived, on mywayto the Presbyterian
church, where I was sent to ring the bell as usual, I
heard the most piteous cries and earnest pleadings
issuing from the dwelling. To my horror and the
astonishment of those with me, my poorsister madeher
appearance, weeping bitterly, and followed by her
inhuman master, who was polluting the air of that
clear Sabbath morning, with the most horrid impreca
tions and threatenings, and at the same time flourish
ing a large raw-hide. Yery soon his bottled wrath
burst forth, and the blows, aimed with all his strength,
descended upon the unprotected head, shoulders and
back of the helpless woman, until she was literally cut


--- PAGE 111 ---
MY SISTER INHUMANLY FLOGGED. 97
to pieces. She writhed in Ms powerful grasp, while
shriek after shriek died away in heart-rending moan
ings ;
and yet the inhuman demon continued to beat
her, though her pleading cries had ceased, until
obliged to desist from the exhaustion of his own
strength.
&quot;What a spectacle was that, for the sight of a bro
ther ? The God of heaven only knows the conflict of
feeling I then endured
;
He alone witnessed the tumult
of myheart, at this outrage of manhood and kindred
affection. God knows that my will was good enough
to have wrung his neck
;
or to have drained from
his heartless system its last drop ofbloodI And yet I
was obliged to turn a deaf ear to her cries for assist
ance, which to this day ring in my ears. Strong and
athletic as I was, no hand of mine could be raised in
her defence, but at the peril of both our lives
;
nor
could her husband, had he been a witness ofthe scene,
be allowed any thing more than unresisting submis
sion to any cruelty, any indignity which the master
saw fit to inflict on his wife, but the other s slave.
Does any indignant reader feel that I was wanting
in courage or brotherly affection, and say that he
would have interfered, and, at all hazards, rescued his
sister from the power of her master
;
let him remem
ber that he is a freeman; that he has not from his
infancy been taught to cower beneath the white mans
frown, and bow at his bidding, or suffer all the rigor
E


--- PAGE 112 ---
98 HIRED OUT TO A NEW MASTER.
of the slave laws. Had the gentlemanly woman-
whipper been seen beating his horse, or his ox, in the
manner he beat mypoor sister, and that too for no
fault which the law could recognize as an offence, he
would have been complained ofmost likely ; but as it
was, she was but a &quot;slave girl,&quot; with whom the
slave law allowed her master to do what he pleased.
Well, I finally passed on, with a clinched fist and
contracted brow, to the church, and rung the bell,
I think rather furiously, to notify the inhabitants of
Bath, that it was time to assemble for the worship of
that (rod who has declared himself to be &quot;no respec
ter of persons.&quot; With my own heart beating wildly
with indignation and sorrow, the kind reader may
imagine my feelings when I saw the smooth-faced
hypocrite, theinhumanslave-whipper, enterthe church,
pass quietly on to his accustomed seat, and then
meekly bow his hypocritical face on the damask
cushion, in the reverent acknowledgment of that reli
gion which teaches its adherents &quot;to do unto others
as they would be done by,&quot; just as if nothing
unusual had happened on that Sabbath morning.
Can any one wonder that I, and other slaves, often
doubted the sincerity of every white mans religion ?
Can it be a matter of astonishment, that slaves often
feel that thereis nojust God for the poor African?
&quot;Nay, verily ; and were it not for the comforting and
sustaining influence that these poor, illiterate and suf


--- PAGE 113 ---
CAPT. HELM SELLS AUNT BETSEY. 99
fering creatures feel as coming from an unearthly
source, they would in their ignorance all become infi
dels. To me, that beautiful Sabbath morning was
clouded in midnight darkness, and I retired to ponder
on what could be done.
For some reason or other, Capt. Helm had supplied
every lawyer in that section of country with slaves,
either by purchase or hire; so when I thought of seek
ing legal redress for my poor, mangled sister, I saw at
once it would be all in vain. The laws were in favoi
ofthe slave owner, and besides, every legal gentleman
in the village had one or more of the Captain s slaves,
whoweretreated with more or less rigor ;
and of course
they would do nothing toward censuring one of their
own number, so nothing could be done to give the
slave even the few privileges which the laws of the
State allowed them.
The Captain sold my aunt Betsy Bristol to a distin
guished lawyer in the village, retaining her husband,
Aaron Bristol, in his own employ;
and two of her
children he sold to another legal gentleman named
Cruger. One day Captain Helm came out where
the slaves were at work, and finding Aaron was not
there, he fell into a great rage and swore terribly. He
finally started off to a beach tree, from which he cut
a stout limb, and trimmed it so as to leave a knot on
the but end of the stick, or bludgeon rather, which
was about two and a half feet in length. With this


--- PAGE 114 ---
100 HIRED OUT TO A NEW MASTER.
formidable weapon he started for Aarons lonely cabin.
When the solitary husband saw him coming he sus
pected that he was angry, and went forth to meet him
in the street. They had no sooner met than my mas
ter seized Aaron by the collar, and taking the limb he
had prepared by the smaller end, commenced beating
him with it, over the head and face, and struck him
some thirty or more terrible blows in quicksuccession;
after which Aaron begged to know for what he was
so unmercifully flogged.
&quot;Because you deserve
it,&quot;
was the angry reply
Aaron said that he had ever endeavored to discharge
his duty, and had done so to the best of his ability;
and that he thought it very hard to be treated in that
manner for no offence at all. Capt. Helm was aston
ished at his audacity ;
but the reader will perceive
that the slaves were not blind to the political condition
of the country, and were beginning to feel that they
had some rights, and meant to claim them.
Poor Aaron s face and head, however, was left in a
pitiable condition after such a pummelling with&quot; a
knotty stick. His face, covered with blood, was so
swollen that he could hardly see for some time
;
but
what of that? Did he notbelong to Capt. Helm, soul
and body;
and if his brutal owner chose to destroy his
own property, certainly had he not a right to do so,
without let or hindrance? Of course; such is the
power that Slavery gives one human being over
another.


--- PAGE 115 ---
SLAVES PROUD OF THEIR MISTERS WEALTH. 101,
And yet it must be confessed that among the poor,
degraded and ignorant slaves there exists a foolish
pride, which loves to boast of their master s wealth
and influence. lA white person, too poor to own
slaves, is as often looked upon with as much disdain
by the miserable slave as by his wealthy owner.*
This disposition seems to be instilled into the mind of
every slave at the South, and indeed, I have heard
slaves object to being sent in very small companies to
labor in the field, lest that some passer-by should
think that they belonged to a poor man, who was
unable to keep a large gang. j^Nor is this ridiculous
sentiment maintained by the slaves only ; the rich
planter feels such a contempt for all white persons
without slaves, that he does not want them for his
neighbors. I know of many instances where such
persons have been under the necessity of buying or
hiring slaves, just to preserve their reputation and
keep up appearances ;
and even among a class of peo
ple who profess to be opposed to Slavery, have I
known instances of the same kind, and have heard
them apologize for their conduct by saying that
&quot;
when in Eome, we must do as the Eomans do.&quot;
Uncle Aaron Bristol was one of Capt. Helms slaves
who had a large amount of this miserable pride ;
and
for him to be associated with a white man in the same
humble occupation, seemed to give him ideas of great
superiority, and full liberty to treat him with all the


--- PAGE 116 ---
102 HIRED OUT,TO A NEW MASTER.
scorn and sarcasm lie was capable of, in which my
uncle was by no means deficient.
At this time the Captain owned a fine and valuable
horse, by the name of Speculator. This horse,
groomed by uncle Aaron, stood sometimes at Bath
and sometimes at Geneva; and at the latter village
another horse was kept, groomed by a white man.
The white groom was not very well pleased with
Aarons continual disparagement of the clumsyanimal
which my uncle called
&quot;
a great, awkward plow-
horse;&quot; and then he would fling out some of his
proud nonsense about
&quot;
poor white people who were
obliged to groom their own old dumpy horses,&quot; &c.
Well, things went on in this unpleasant manner for
several weeks, when at last the white groom and
Aaron met at Geneva, and the horse belonging to the
former, designedly or accidentally, escaped from his
keeper, and came with full speed, with his mouth
wide open, after Speculator. When the fiery fellow
had overtaken uncle Aaron he attempted to grasp the
wethers of Speculator with his teeth, instead of which
he caught Aaron on the inside of his thigh, near the
groin, from whence he bit a large piece offlesh, laying
the bone entirely bare
;
at the same moment flinging
Aaron to the ground, some rods off; and the next
instant he kicked Speculator down a steep embank
ment. Aaron was taken up for dead, and Dr. Henry
sent for, who dressed his wounds;
and after several


--- PAGE 117 ---
UNCLE AARON TAKES &quot;FRENCH LEAVE. 103
months confinement he finally recovered. It is pro
bable that the biting and overthrow of Aaron saved
his life, as he must have otherwise been killed in the
encounter of the two horses.
Awhile after his recovery, uncle Aaron succeeded
in procuring a team and some kind of vehicle, in
which he put his wife and children, and between two
days, took
&quot;
French leave&quot; of his master as well as of
the lawyer to whom his wife belonged.
The lawyer, however, was far from being pleased
when he missed his property, and immediately set his
wits to work to reclaim her. All was kept secret as
possible, but it was whispered about that it was to be
done by a State s warrant, for removing the clothing
and furniture they had taken, and so, being thus
arrested,
&quot;
Madam Bristol&quot; would be glad to return to
her work in the lawyer s kitchen. But Aaron was a
smart, shrewd man, and kept out of their reach, where
he soon found friends and employment, and could go
where he pleased, without having an infuriated master
to beat and disfigure him with a knotted stick, until
his clothes were bespattered with blood. Theyappre
ciated their liberty, and lived and died in peace and
freedom.
Capt. Helm continued his old manner of treating
slaves, dealing out their weekly allowance of corn or
meal
; but living as we now did, so much more inti
mately with white inhabitants, our condition was mate-


--- PAGE 118 ---
104: HIRED OUT TO A NEW MASTER.
rially improved. The slaves became more refined in
manners and in possession of far greater opportunities
to provide for themselves, than they had ever before
enjoyed, and yet it was /Slavery. Any reverse in the
fortunes of our master would be disadvantageous to
us. Oh, how this fearful uncertainty weighed upon
us as we saw that our master was not prospering and
increasing in wealth ;
but we had not the dismal fears
of the loathsome slave-pen, rice swamps, and many
other things we should have to fear in Virginia. We
werestill slaves, and yet wehadso muchgreater chance
to learn from the kind, intelligent people about us, so
many things which we never knew before, that I
think a slave-trader would have found it a difficult
task to take any one of us to a Southern slave market,
if our master had so ordered it.
The village of Bath is rather an out-of-the-way
place, hemmed in on all sides by mountains of consid
erable height, leaving an opening on the north,
through a pleasant valley, to the head of Crooked
Lake. Produce of every kind, when once there, met
a ready sale for the New York market.
In the first settlement of the country this was the
only outlet for the country produce, which was trans
ported in rude boats or vessels called arks, built dur
ing the winter season to await the spring freshet
;
then
they loaded them with wheat or other produce, and
sent them to Baltimore or elsewhere. They used also


--- PAGE 119 ---
AN ATTEMPT TO STAB ME. 105
to obtain great quantities of fine lumber, and floated
it through the same rivers every spring ;
but it was
attended with great loss of life and property.
Bath assumed a warlike appearance during the last
war with Great Britain; the public square was dotted
all over with officers, marquees, and soldiers tents.
Some of these soldiers were unprincipled and reckless
men, who seemed to care very little what they did.
One evening I was walking aroundthe encampment
in company with a Mr. James Morrison, a clerk in
the land office, looking at the soldiers, until we came
near a sentinel on duty. He kept his gun to his
shoulder until we came near enough, and then he
attempted to run me through with his bayonet.
Young Morrison sprang forward, and seizing the mus
ket, told me to run
;
I did so, which probably saveu
my life.
E*


--- PAGE 120 ---
CHAPTER XI.
THOUGHTS ON FREEDOM.
AFTER
living sometime in Bath, and having the
privilege of more enlightened society, I began
to think that it was possible for me to become a free
man in some way besides going into the army or
running away, as I had often thought of doing.
I had listened to the conversation of others, and
determined to ask legal counsel on the subject the
first opportunity I could find. Yery soon after, as I
was drawing wood, I met on the river bridge, Mr. D.
Cruger, the eminent lawyer before mentioned, and I
asked him to tell me if I was not free, by the laws of
New York. He started, and looked around him as if
afraid to answer my question, but after a while told
me I was not free. I passed on, but the answer to my
question by no means satisfied me, especially when I
remembered the hesitancy with which it was given.
I sought another opportunity to speak with Mr.


--- PAGE 121 ---
ADVISED BY THE MANUMISSION SOCIETY. 107
Cruger, and at last found him in his office alone; then
he conversed freely on the subject of Slavery, telling
me that Capt. Helm could not hold me as a slave in
that State, if I chose to leave him, and then directed
me to D. Comstock and J. Moore
;
the first being at
the head of a manumission society, and the last named
gentleman one of its directors.
Our condition, as I have said before, was greatly
improved;
and yet the more we knew of freedom the
more we desired it, and the less willing were we to
remain in bondage. The slaves that Capt. Helm had
sold or hired out, were continuallyleaving himand the
country, for a place of freedom
;
and I determined to
become my own possessor.
There is no one, I care not how favorable his con
dition, who desires to be a slave, to labor for nothing
all his life for the benefit of others. I have often
heard fugitive slaves say, that it was not so much the
cruel beatings and floggings that they received which
induced them to leave the South, as the idea of drag
ging out a whole life of unrequited toil to enrich their
masters.
Everywhere that Slavery exists, it is nothing but
slavery. I found it just as hard to be beaten over the
head with a piece ofiron in NewYork as it was in Vir
ginia. Whips and chains are everywhere necessary to
degrade and brutalize the slave, in order to reduce
him to that abject and humble state which Slavery


--- PAGE 122 ---
108 THOUGHTS ON FKEEDOM.
requires. Nor is the effect much less disastrous on the
man who holds supreme control over the soul and
body of his fellow beings. Such unlimited power,
in almost every instance transforms the man into a
tyrant ;
the brother into a demon.
When the first of our persecuted race were brought
to this country it was to teach them to reverence the
only true and living God
;
or such was the answer of
Her Majesty Queen Elizabeth of England, when her
subjects desired the liberty to bring from their native
land the poor, ignorant African. &quot;Let them,&quot; said the
Queen,
&quot;
be brought away only by their own consent,
otherwise the act will be detestable, and bring down
the vengeance of heaven upon
us.&quot; Avery different
position truly, from the one assumed at the present
day by apologists for the traffic in human flesh. But,
to return to myself.
I had determined to make an effort to own myself,
and as a preliminary step, I obtained permission of
Capt. Helm to visit some friends living in Canandaigua
and Geneva. This was in the winter of 1814. I
went first to Geneva; from there to Canandaigua.
Between the two villages I met a company of United
States troops, returning from Buffalo, where they had
been to repel an invasion of the British.
The two villages above named, were small but very
pretty, having been laid out with taste and great care.
Some wealthy and enterprising gentlemen had come


--- PAGE 123 ---
TOLD THE STORY OF MY WRONGS. 109
from the East into this great Western country, who
were making every improvement in their power. The
dense forest had long since fallen under the stroke of
the woodmans ax, and in that section, flourishing
villages were springing up as if by magic, where so
lately roamed wild beasts and rude savage?, both
having fallen back before the march of civilization.
I called on James Moore, as directed by Mr. Cruger,
and found he was one of the directors of the &quot;Manu
mission Society,&quot; as it was then called. This was an
association of humane and intelligent gentlemen
whose object it was to aid any one who was illegally
held in bondage. The funds of the society were
ample;
. and able counsel was employed to assist those
who needed it. The late lamented John C. Spencer,
one of the most eminent lawyers in Western New
York, wasthen counsel for that society.
I soon got an interview with Mr. Moore, to whom I
related the history of my life, the story of my
wrongs and hardships. I told him about my having
been .hired out by Capt. Helm, which he said was
sufficient to insure my freedom! Oh! how my heart
leaped at the thought
! The tears started, mybreast
&amp;lt;
heaved with a mighty throb of gratitude, and I could ;
hardly refrain from grasping his hand or falling down
at his feet; and perhaps should have made some
ludicrous demonstration of my feelings, had not the
kind gentleman continued his conversation in another
direction.


--- PAGE 124 ---
110 THOUGHTS ON FREEDOM.
He said that indispensable business called him to
Albany, where he must go immediately, but assured
me that he would return in March following ;
then I
must come to him and he would see that I had what
justly belonged to me my freedom from Slavery.
He advised me to return to Bath and go on with my
work as usual until March, but to say nothing of my
intentions and prospects. I returned according to his
directions, with a heart so light, that I could not
realize that my bonds were not yet broken, nor the
yoke removed from off my neck. I was already free
in spirit, and I silently exulted in the bright prospect
of liberty.
Could mymaster have felt what it wastobe relieved
of such a crushing weight, as the one which was but
partially lifted from my mind, he would have been a
happier man than he had been for a long time.
I went cheerfully back to my labor, and worked
with alacrity, impatient only for March to come; and
as the time drew near I began to consider what kind
of an excuse I could make to get away. I could
think of none, but I determined to go without one,
rather than to remain.
Just before the time appointed for me to meet
Mr. Moore, a slave girl named Milly, came secretly to
Bath. She had been one of Capt. Helms slaves, and
he had a while before sold her to a man who lived
some distance west of the village. Milly had now


--- PAGE 125 ---
SLAVE GIRL MILLY RUNS AWAY. Ill
taken the matter into her own hands. She had left
her master to take care of himself, and was in short,
&quot;running away,&quot; determined as myself, that she
would be a slave no longer; resolved on death, or
freedom from the power of the slaveholder.
The time I had set for my departure was so near at
hand, that I concluded to accompany her in her flight.
When the dark night came on, we started together,
and traveled all night, and just as the day dawned
we arrived at Manchester, where we stopped a short
time with one Thomas &quot;Watkins.
But I was not to be let go so easily. I had been
missed at Capt. Helms, and several men started in
immediate pursuit. I was weary, and so intent on
getting a little rest that I did not see mypursuers
until they had well nigh reached the house where I
was
;
but I did see them in time to spring from the
house with the agility of a deer, and to run for the
woods as for life. And indeed, I so considered it. I
was unarmed to be sure, and not prepared to defend
myself against two or three men, armed to the teeth;
but it would have gone hard with me before I surren
dered myself to them, after having dreamed as I
had, and anticipated the blessings of a free man. I
escaped them, thank God, and reached the woods,
where I concealed myself for some time, and where I
had ample opportunity to reflect on the injustice and
cruelty of my oppressors, and to ask myself why it


--- PAGE 126 ---
112 THOUGHTS ON FKEEDOM.
was that I was obliged to fly from my home Why
was I there panting and weary, hungry and destitute
skulking in the woods like a thief, and concealing
myself like a murderer? What had I done? For
what fault, or for what crime was I pursued by armed
men, and hunted like a beast of prey? God only
knows how these inquiries harrowed up myvery soul,
and made me well nigh doubt the justice and mercy
of the Almighty, until I remembered my narrow
escape, whenmy doubts dissolved in grateful tears.
But why, oh why, had I been forced to flee thus
from my fellow men? I was guilty of no crime; I
had committed no violence ;
I had broken no law of
the land
;
I was not charged even with a fault, except
of the love of liberty and a desire to be free ! I had
claimed the right to possess my own person, and
remove it from oppression. Oh my God, thought I,
can the American People, who at this very hour are
pouring out their blood in defence of their country s
liberty; offering up as a sacrifice on the battle field
their promising youngmen, to preserve their land and
hearthstones from English oppression ;
can they,
will they, continue to hunt the poor African slave
from their soil because he desires that same liberty, so
dear to the heart of every American citizen ? Will
they not blot out from their fair escutcheon the foul
stain which Slavery has cast upon it ? Will they not
remember the Southern bondman, in whom the love


--- PAGE 127 ---
MADE MY ESCAPE, BUT WAS PURSUED. 113
of freedom is as inherent as in themselves ;
and will
they not, when contending for equal rights, use their
mighty forces &quot;to break every yoke, and let the
oppressed go free?
&quot;
God grant that it may be so !
As soon as I thought it prudent, I pursued my
journey, and finally came out into the open country,
near the dwelling of Mr. Dennis Comstock, who, as I
have said, was president of the Manumission Society.
To him I freely described my situation, and found
him a friend indeed. He expressed his readiness to
assist me, and wrote a line for me to take to his
brother, Otis Comstock, who took me into his family
at once. I hired to Mr. Comstock for the season, and
from that time onward lived with him nearly four
years.
When I arrived there I was about twenty-two years
of age, and felt for the first time in mylife, that I was
myown master. I cannot describe to a free man, what
a proud manly feeling came over me when I hired
to Mr. C. and made my first bargain, nor when I
assumed the dignity of collecting my own earnings.
Notwithstanding I was very happy in my freedom
from Slavery, and had a good home, where for the
first time in my life I was allowed to sit at table with
others, yet I found myself very deficient in almost
every thing which I should have learned when a boy.
These and other recollections of the past often sad
dened my spirit;
but hope, cheering and bright, was


--- PAGE 128 ---
114 THOUGHTS ON FREEDOM.
now mine, and it lighted up the future and gave me
patience to persevere.
In the autumn when the farm work was done, I
called on Mr. Comstock for some money, and the first
thing I did after receiving it I went to Canandaigua
where I found a book-store kept by a man named
J. D. Bemis, and of him I purchased some school
books.
No king on his throne could feel prouder or grander
than I did that day. With nfy books unde* my arm,
and moneyof myown earning in mypocket, I stepped
loftily along toward Farmington, where I determined
to attend the Academy. The thought, however, that
though I was twenty-three years old,. I had yet to
learn whatmost boys of eight years knew, was rather
a damper on my spirits. The school was conducted
by Mr. J. Comstock, who was a pleasant young man
and an excellent teacher. He showed me every kind
ness and consideration my position and ignorance
demanded; and I attended his school three winters,
with pleasure and profit to myself at least.
When I had been with Mr. Comstock about a year,
we received a visit from my old master, Capt. Helm,
who had spared 110 pains to find me, and when he
learned where I was he came to claim me as &quot;his
boy,&quot; who, he said he &quot;wanted and must have.&quot;
Mr. Comstock told him I was not &quot;his
boy,&quot; and as
such he wouldnot give me up; and further, that I was


--- PAGE 129 ---
CAPT. H. SURRENDERS ALL CLAIM TO ME. 1^
free by the laws of the State. He assured the Captain
that his hiring me out in the first instance, to Mr.
Tower, forfeited his claim to me, and gave me a right
to freedem, but if he chose to join issue, they would
have the case tried in the Supreme Court
;
but this
proposition the Captain declined: he knew well
enough that it would result in my favor
;
and after
some flattery and coaxing, he left me with my friend,
Mr. Comstock, in liberty and peace
I


--- PAGE 130 ---
CHAPTEE XII.
CAPT. HELM DIVOKCE KIDNAPPING.
THE
business affairs of Capt. Helm had for some
time been far from prosperous ;
and now he was
quite poor. His slave property proved a bad invest
ment, and Madam Thornton a far worse one. She
had already applied for a divorce, and a good share of
the estate as alimony;
both of which she succeeded in
getting, the Captain allowing her to take pretty much
her own course. These troubles, with costs of law
suits, bad management, &c., had now emptied the
coffers of my old master almost to the last farthing|
and he began to cast about him for some way to
replenish his purse, and retrieve his fallen fortunes.
Had Capt. Helm been brought up to honorable
industry, and accustomed to look after his own pecun
iary interests, he doubtless would have sustained his
position ;
or if reverses were unadvoidable, he would
have by persevering industry, regained what he had


--- PAGE 131 ---
CAPT. HELM BECOMES A KIDNAPPER, 117
lost. But he had been raised in a slave State, and
Southern principles were as deeply instilled into his
mind, as Southern manners were impressed on his life
and conduct.
He had no partiality for labor of any kind
;
horse-
racing and card-playing were far more congenial to his
tastes
;
reduced as he nowwas, he would deny himself
no luxury that his means or credit would procure.
His few remaining slaves were given into the hands
of an idle, brutal overseer while they, half fed, half
clothed, grew more and more discontented, and ran
away on every opportunity that offered.
The Captain at last hit upon a method of making
money, which, if it had been carried into operation on
the high seas, would in all probability have been
called by its right name, and incurred the penalty of
the gallows as piracy. Ought it then to be deemed
less criminal because transpiring on the free soil of the
American Republic ? I think not. Nor was it less
censurable on account of its failure.
The Captain s plan was to collect all the slaves
he had once owned, many of whom had escaped
to the surrounding villages, and when once in his
grasp, to run them speedily into a slave State, and
there sell them for the Southern market. To carry
forward this hellish design, it was necessary to have
recourse to stratagem. Some person must be found to
lure the unsuspecting slaves into the net he was


--- PAGE 132 ---
118 CAPT. HELM DIVORCE KIDNAPPING.
spreading for them. At last he found a scoundrel
named Simon Watkins, who for the consideration of
fifty dollars, was to collect as many of the slaves as he
could at one place ; and when he had done so, he was
to receive the money, leaving Capt. Helm to do the
rest.
Simon set immediately about the business, which
was first to go to Palmyra, and in great kindness and
generosity, give a large party to the colored people,
desiring that all Capt. Helms former slaves, in par
ticular, should be present to have a joyous re-union,
and celebrate their freedom in having a fine time
generally.
Invitations were sent to all, and extensive prepar
ation made for a large
&quot;
social party,&quot; at Palmyra, at
the house of Mrs. Bristol. My parents were invited ;
and Simon took the pains to come to Farmington to
give me a special invitation. When the tune arrived
for the party, I went to Palmyra with the intention
of attending. I had not the least suspicion of any
thing wrong; yet, by some mysterious providence, or
something for which I can not account, a presentiment
took possession of my mind that all was not right. I
knew not what I feared, and could in no way define
my apprehensions ; but I grew so uneasy, that I
finally gave up the party and returned home, befoie
the guests were assembled.
Capt. Helm and his assistants came on to Palmyra


--- PAGE 133 ---
FIGHT BETWEEN SLAVES AND KIDNAPPERS. 119
in disguise, before evening, and secreted themselves in
one of the hotels to await the arrival of their victims.
At the appointed hour the slaves began to assemble
in large numbers and great glee, without the least
suspicion of danger. They soon began their amuse
ments, and in the midst of their mirth, Capt. Helm
and party stealthily crept from their hiding place and
surrounded the house
;
then bursting in suddenly upon
the revelers, began to make arrests. Such a tumult,
such an affray as ensued would be hard to describe.
The slaves fought for their lives and their liberty,
and the Captain s party for their property and power.
Fists, clubs, chairs, and any thing they could get hold
of, was freely used with a strength and will of men
whohad tasted the joys of freedom. Cries and curses
were mingled, while blows fell like hail on both sides.
Commands from our old master were met with shouts
of bold defiance on the part of the negroes, until
the miserable kidnappers were glad to desist, and
were driven off not stealthily as they came, but in
quick time and in the best way they could, to escape
the threatened vengeance of the slaves, who drove
them like &quot;feathers before the wind.&quot; But it was
a terrible battle and many were severely wounded;
among them was my father. He was taken to his
home, mangled and bleeding, and from the effects of
that night s affray he never recovered. He lingered
on in feeble health until death finally released him


--- PAGE 134 ---
120 CAPT. HELM DIVORCE KIDNAPPING
from suffering, and placed Mm beyond the reach of
kidnappers and tyrants.
The Captain and his party, enraged and disap
pointed in their plans at Palmyra, returned to Bath to
see what could be done there toward success, in getting
up a gang of slaves for the Southern market. When
they came among the colored people of Bath, it was
like a hawk alighting among a flock of chickens at
noon-day. Theyscattered and ran in every direction,
some to the woods, some hid themselves in cellars,
and others in their terror plunged into the Conhocton
River. In this manner the majority of the negroes
escaped, but not all
;
and those were so unfortunate as
to get caught were instantly thrown into a large
covered &quot;Pennsylvania wagon,&quot; and hurried off,
closely guarded, to Olean Point. Among those taken
were Harry Lucas, his wife, Lucinda, and seven
children; Mrs. Jane Cooper and four children, with
some others, were also taken.
When Capt. Helm arrived at Olean Point with his
stolen freight of human beings, he was unexpectedly
detained until he could build a boat, -which, to his
great dismay took himseveral days.
The sorrow and fearful apprehension of those
wretched recaptured slaves can not be described nor
imagined by any one except those who have experi
enced a like affliction. They had basked for a short
season in the sunshine of liberty, and thought them-


--- PAGE 135 ---
RECAPTURED SLAVES RESIST. 121
selves secure from the iron grasp of Slavery, and the
heel of the oppressor, when in the height of their
exultation, they had been thrust down to the lowest
depths of misery and despair, with the oppressor s
heel again upon their necks. To be snatched without
a moments warning from their homes and friends,
hurried and crowded into the close slave wagon,
regardless of age or sex, like sheep for the slaughter,
to be carried they knew not whither
; but, doubtless
to the dismal rice swamp of the South, was to them
an agony too great for endurance. The adult portion
of the miserable company determined at last to go no
farther with their heartless master, but to resist unto
death if need be, before they surrendered themselves
to the galling chains they had so recently broken, or
writhed again under the torturing lash of the slave-
driver.
Harry Lucas and wife, and Jane Cooper, silently
prepared themselves for the conflict, determined to sell
their lives as dearly as possible. &quot;When they were
nearly ready to start, Jane Cooper sent her oldest
daughter and younger sister, (she who is now our
worthy friend Mrs. P. of Bath), into the woods, and
then when the men undertook to get Lucas and the
twowomenon board the boat the struggle commenced.
The women fought the Captain and his confederates
like a lioness robbed of her whelps
!
They ran and
dodged about, making the woods ring with their
F


--- PAGE 136 ---
122 CAPT. HELM DIVOKCE KIDNAPPING.
screams and shouts of
&quot;
Murder ! Murder !
Help I
Help
! Murder!
&quot;
until the Captain s party, seeing
they could do nothing to quell them, became so
exceedingly alarmed lest they should be detected in
their illegal proceedings, that they ran off at full
speed, as if they thought an officer at their heels.
In their hurry and fright they caught two of Harry s
children, and throwing them into the boat, pushed off
as quick as possible, amid the redoubled cries of the
agonized parents and sympathizing friends, all trying
in every way possible, to recover from the merciless
grasp of the man-stealer, the two frightened and
screaming children. Guns were fired and horns
sounded, but all to no purpose they held tightly the
innocent victims of their cupidity, and made good
their escape.
Mr. D. C
,
a gentleman of wealth and high
standing in Steuben County, became responsible for
the fifty dollars which Capt. Helm promised to pay
Simon Watkins for his villany inbetraying, Judas-like,
those unsuspecting persons whom it should have been
his pleasure to protect and defend against their com
mon oppressor, his own as well as theirs.
In addition to this rascality, it can not appear very
creditable to the citizens of Steuben County, that
Capt. Helm and Thomas McBirney should both hold
high and important offices at the time, and after
they had been tried and convicted of the crime of


--- PAGE 137 ---
CAPT. HELM CONVICTED OF KIDNAPPING. 123
kidnapping. Both of these gentlemen, guilty of a
State s prison offence, were judges of the common
pleas. T. McBirney was first judge in the county,
and Capt. Helm was side judge; and notwithstanding
their participation in, and conviction
*
of, a flagrant
outrage on the laws of God and man, they managed
not only to escape the penalty, but to retain their
offices and their respectable standing in community
for years after.


--- PAGE 138 ---
CHAPTER XIII.
LOCATE IN THE VILLAGE OF ROCHESTER.
I
CONTINUED to labor in the employ of Mr. O.
Comstock, whose son, Zeno, was married during
the year 1816, and purchased a farm on the site of the
present flourishing village of Lockport, to which he
moved his family and effects; but from a mistaken
supposition that the Erie Canal, which was then under
contemplation, would take a more southern route, he
was induced to sell his farm in Hartland, which has
proved a mine of wealth to the more fortunate pur
chaser.
In the winter of that year, I was sent by my em
ployer to Hartland with a sleigh-load of produce, and
passed through the village of Eochester, which I had
never before seen. It was a very small, forbidding
looking place at first sight, with few inhabitants, and
surrounded by a dense forest.
I recollect that while pursuing my journey, I over-


--- PAGE 139 ---
DEATH OF FATHER IN PALMYHA. 125
took a white man driving a span of horses, who con
tended that I had not a right to travel the public high
wayas other mendid, but that it was myplace to keep
behind him and his team. Being in haste I endeavored
to pass him quietly, but he would not permit it and
hindered me several hours, very much to my annoy
ance and indignation. This was, however, but a slight
incident indicating the bitter prejudice which every
man seemed to feel against the negro. Nomatter how
industrious he might be, no matter how honorable in
his dealings, or respectful in his manners, he was a
&quot;nigger,&quot; and as such he must be treated, with a
few honorable exceptions.
This year also, myfather died in the village of Pal
myra, where, as I have before mentioned, he received
injuries from which he never entirely recovered.
After about six months severe illness which he bore
with commendable patience and resignation, his spirit
returned to God who gave it; and his sorrowing
friends and bereaved family followed his remains to
their final abode, where we laid him down to rest
from unrequited labor and dire oppression, until &quot;all
they who are in their graves shall hear the voice of
the Son of God, and they that hear shall live forever,&quot;
where the &quot;tears shall be wiped from off all faces&quot;
and where the righteous bondman shall no longer fear
the driver s lash or master s frown, but freely join in
the song of &quot;Alleluia! The Lord God Omnipotent
reigneth
!
&quot;


--- PAGE 140 ---
LOCATE IN THE VILLAGE OF ROCHESTER.
Myfather had a good reputation for honesty and
uprightness of character among his employers and
acquaintances, and was a kind, affectionate husband
and a fond, indulgent parent. His, I believe was the
life and death of a good man.
&quot;
Peace be to his
ashes.&quot;
The followingseason Icommenced a newbusiness
that of peddling in the village of Eochester such
articles as myemployer, Mr. Comstock, desired to sell :
the products of his farm, wheat, corn, oats, butter,
cheese, meat, and poultry all of which met a ready
sale, generally for cash at liberal prices. That market
was then but little known to the generality of farmers,
and the enterprising gentlemen of that place, were
desirous of encouraging commerce with the surround
ing country, offered every encouragement in their
power. Hence, we found it a profitable business,
which I continued in for several months.
The present flourishing city of Eochester was then,
as I have said, but a village in its infancy, situated
near the upper falls of the Genesee Eiver, and about
seven miles from its mouth. Here, some time pre
viously, three gentlemen from Maryland bought a
large tract of land, and as no business man could fail
to observe and appreciate its rare advantages they
commenced laying out a village. Sirs Fitzhugh, Car
roll, and Eochester, composed the company; but the
management of the business devolved almost wholly


--- PAGE 141 ---
PEDDLE PRODUCE IN ROCHESTER. 127
on Col. Kochester, whose wealth, enterprise, and intel
ligence well qualified him for the undertaking;
and
as it had been assigned him to cognominate the new
village, I have heard it said that he jocularly gave his
reason for selecting its present title, as follows:
&quot;
Should he call it Fitehuyh or Carroll, the slighted
gentleman would certainly feel offended with the
other; but if he called it by his ownname, theywould
most likely both be angry with him
;
so it was best to
serve them alike.&quot;
There was then two grist mills, one owned by Mr.
Ely, andthe other by Mr. Brown
;
one small building
for religious worship, occupied by the Presbyterians
on Carroll street (now State street) ;
and but two stone
buildings within what now comprises that beautiful
city. There were then no brick buildings at all, but
business was good; merchants and mechanics from
the East soon began to settle there and give it a thriv
ing aspect.
About this time another company was formed,
whose moving spirit was Mr. E. Stone, a man of
worth and talent; the object of which was to locate
another village at the head of navigation and about
half way between the mouth of the river and Koches-
ter, which they called Carthage.
The company commenced building and improving
the place so rapidly, that many who came to purchase
residences and business stations were at a loss to decide


--- PAGE 142 ---
128 LOCATE IN THE VILLAGE OF ROCHESTER.
which, of the two places would finally become the
center of business. It, however, was soon perceivable
that the advantage of water privileges, stone, and
access to both, was greatly in favor of Eochester. At
Carthage the Grenesee is narrow and its banks steep
and abrupt, rising in many places three hundred feet
above the bed of the river, which of course render
the privileges and business on it far less easy of
access for building purposes. I may have occasion to
speak hereafter of the expensive and magnificent
bridge at Carthage, which was the wonder and admir
ation of the times.
The following year I concluded to go into business
for myself, and was as much at loss as others,
whether to locate at Eochester or Carthage; but
after considering the matter in all its bearings, and
closely watching the progress of events, my choice
preponderated in favor of Eochester, and to that place
I went, designing to enter into business on my own
account.
It was indeed painful to my feelings to leave the
home and family of Mr. Comstock, where I had
experienced so much real comfort and happiness,
where I had ever been treated with uniform kindness,
where resided those kind friends to whom I felt undei
the greatest obligation for the freedom and quietude ]
then enjoyed, as well as for the little knowledge of
business and of the world that I then possessed.


--- PAGE 143 ---
MYSTERIOUS DEATH. 129
Thinking, however, that I could better my condition,
I subdued, as well as I could, my rising emotions, and
after sincerely thanking them for their goodness and
favors wishing themlonglife and prosperity, I took
my departure for the chosen place of my destination.
Soon after I left Mr. Comstock s, that gentleman
sent his hired man, named John Cline, to Rochester
with a wagon load of produce to sell, as had been his
custom for some time. In vain the family looked for
his return at the usual hour in the evening, and began
to wonder what had detained him
;
but whatwas their
horror and surprise to find, when they arose the next
morning, the horses standing at the door, and the poor
unfortunate man lying in the wagon, dead! How
long they had been there nobody knew
;
no one had
heard them come in; and how the man had been
killed was a matter of mere conjecture. The coroner
was sent for and an inquest held, and yet it was diffi
cult to solve the whole mystery.
The most probable explanation was, that he was
sitting in the back part of the wagon, and fell over on
juis left side, striking his neck on the edge of the
wagon box, breaking it instantly.
The verdict of the jury was, in accordance with
these facts, &quot;accidental death,&quot; &c.
&quot;When I left Mr. Comstock s I had acquired quite a
knowledge of reading, writing, arithmetic, and had
made a small beginning in English grammar.
F*


--- PAGE 144 ---
130 LOCATE IN THE VILLAGE OF ROCHESTER.
It had been for some time a question which I found
hard to decide, whether or not I should pursue my
studies as I had done. If I went into business as I
contemplated, I knew it would end my proficiency
in the sciences; and yet I felt a desire to accumu
late more of the wealth that perisheth. Considering
too that I was advancing in age, and hadno means of
support but by my own labor, I finally concluded
to do what I have from that time to this deep
ly regretted, give up the pursuit of an education,
and turn my attention wholly to business. I
do not regret having desired a competency, nor for
having labored to obtain it, but I do regret not having
spared myself sufficient leisure to pursue someregular
system of reading and study ;
to have cultivated my
mind and stored it with useful knowledge.
Truly has it been said,
&quot;
knowledge is power.&quot;
But it is not like the withering curse of a tyrant s
power;
not like the degrading and brutalizing power
of the slave-driver s lash, chains, and thumb-screws
;
not like the beastly, demonical power of rum, nor like&quot;
the brazen, shameless power of lust
;
but a power that
elevates and refines the intellect
;
directs the affections
;
controls unholy passions;
a power so God-like in its
character, that it enables its possessor to feel for the
oppressed of every clime, and prepares him to defend
the weak and down-trodden.
What but ignorance renders the poor slave so wea


--- PAGE 145 ---
ESTABLISH A MEAT MARKET. 131
and inefficient in claiming his right to liberty, and the
possession of his own being
! Nor will that God who
is &quot;no respecter of persons,&quot; hold him guiltless who
assumes unlimited control over his fellow. The chain
of Slavery which fetters every slave south of Mason
andBixon s Line, is as closelylinked arounb the master
as the slave. The time has passed by when African
blood alone is enslaved. In Virginia as well as in
some other slave States, there is as much European
blood in the veins of the enslaved as there is African;
and the increase is constantly in favor of the white
population. This fact alone speaks volumes, and
should remind the slave-breeding Southerner of that
fearful retribution which must sooner or later over
take him.
In September, 1817, I commenced business in
Kochester. Having rented a room of Mr. A.Wakely,
I established a meat market, which was supplied
mostly by my former employer, Mr. Comstock, and
wasliberally patronized bythe citizens;
but there were
butchers in the village who appeared to be unwilling
that I should have any share in public patronage.
Sometimes they tore down my sign, at others painted
it black, and so continued to annoy me until after I
had one of their number arrested, which put a stop to
their unmanly proceedings.
The village was now rapidly increasing, and yet the
surrounding country was mostly a wilderness. Mr.


--- PAGE 146 ---
132 LOCATE IN THE VILLAGE OF ROCHESTER.
E. Stone, whothen owned the land on the east side of
the river, thought his farm a very poor one; he,
however, commenced clearing it in the midst of wild
beasts and rattlesnakes, both of which were abundant,
and in a few years was richly rewarded for his labor,
in the sale of village lots, which commanded high
prices.
In the summer of 1818, I commenced teaching
a Sabbath School for the neglected children of our
oppressed race. For a while it was well attended, and
I hoped to be able to benefit in some measure the poor
and despised colored children, but the parents inter
ested themselves very little in the undertaking, and it
shortly came to nought. So strong was the prejudice
then existing against the colored people, that very few
of the negroes seemed to have any courage or am
bition to rise from the abject degradation in which the
estimation of the white man had placed him.
This year, also, I purchased a lot of land, eighteen
by fifty feet, situated on Main street, for which I was
to pay five hundred dollars. Having secured my
land, I began making preparations for building, and
soon had a good two story dwelling and store, into
which I moved my effects, and commenced a more
extensive business.
Some disadvantage as well as sport was occasioned
Onbusiness men, who resided on the confines of On
tario and Genesee Counties. It was indeed laughable


--- PAGE 147 ---
QUEEK FEEAKS OF POOK DEBTOES. 133
to witness the races and maneuvering of parties in
those days when men were imprisoned for debt. If a
man in Ontario County had a suspicion that an officer
was on his track, hehad only to step over the line into
Grenesee, to be beyond the power of an officer s
precept.
Agreat deal of trouble as well as unpleasant feeling
was engendered by the exercise of that law, which
allowed the creditor so great advantage over the
debtor. This, together with the fact that very many
of the citizens of Kochester were men of small means,
the more wealthy portion felt called upon to protect
their interests, by forming themselves into what was
called a &quot;Shylock Society,&quot; the object of which was
to obtain a list of all the names of persons who had
been, or were then, on &quot;the limits&quot; for debt. This
list of names was printed, and each member of the
society furnished with a copy, which enabled him to
decide whether or not to trust a manwhen he came to
trade. The formation of this society gave rise to
another, whose members pledged themselves to have
no dealing with a member of the
&quot;
Shylock Society,&quot;
and also to publish all defaulters in
&quot;
high life,&quot; which
served to check these oppressive measures and restore
harmony.
Among others who came to settle in the thriving
village of Kochester, was a colored man named Daniel
Furr, who came from the East. He soon became


--- PAGE 148 ---
134 LOCATE IN THE VILLAGE OF KOCHESTER.
acquainted with a very respectable young white lady,
of good family, who after a short acquaintance
appeared to be perfectly enamored of her dusky
swain; and notwithstanding the existing prejudice,
she did not scruple to avow her affection for him,
a devotion which appeared to be as sincerely returned
by the young
&quot;
Othello.&quot; They resolved to marry;
but to this, serious objections arose, and all that the
lady s family and friends could do to break off the
match was done, but without effect. They could,
however, prevail on no one to perform the marriage
ceremony in the village, and finally concluded to go to
a magistrate in the town of Brighton, four miles
distant. At this stage of the proceedings I was
appealed to, to accompany them. I took the matter
into consideration and came to the conclusion that I
could take no active part in the affair, nor bear any
responsible station in the unpleasant occurrence. Is it
no sin in the sight of the Almighty, for Southern
gentlemen (?) to mix blood and amalgamate the races?
And if allowed to them, is it not equally justifiable
when the commerce is prompted by affection rather
than that of lust and force ? But I at length consented
to accompany them, after learning that all the mischief
was already done that could be feared, and that the
gallant lover desired to marry the lady as the only
atonement he could make for the loss of her repu
tation.


--- PAGE 149 ---
AN UNFORTUNATE MARRIAGE. 135
Wearrived at the house of the magistrate about one
o clock at night, and all were soundly sleeping. They
were, however, aroused, and when our business was
made known, an exciting scene followed. The magis
trate refused at first to marry them
;
and the lady of the
house took aside the intended bride, spending two
hours in endeavoring to dissuade her from the contem
plated union
; assuring her that her house should be
freely opened to her, that no attention should be
spared during her expected confinement, &c.; but all
to no purpose. Theyreturned to the parlor where the
magistrate again tried his power of persuasion, but
with as little success as his lady had met: and then he
reluctantly married them. The newly-made husband
paid a liberal fee, and we took our leave. I returned
to my home to reflect on the scenes of the past night,
and Mr. and Mrs. Furr to the house of a friend of the
bride in Penfield.
The report soon reached the village that the mar
riage had been consummated, which produced a great
excitement. Threats of an alarming character were
openly made against the &quot;nigger&quot; who had dared to
marry a white woman, although at her own r.equest.
And there was also a class of persons who associated
together, professing great friendship for the persecuted
husband, and often drew him into their company, pre
tending to defend his cause while they were un
doubtedly plotting his destruction.


--- PAGE 150 ---
136 LOCATE IN THE VILLAGE OF ROCHESTER.
One day, after Furr had been drinking rather freely
with his pretended friends, he was taken so violently
ill, that a physician was immediately called. I was
with him when the doctor arrived. He gazed upon
the suffering man with an angry expression, and
inquired in a tone of command, &quot;Daniel, what have
you been doing ?
&quot;
In vain the poor creature begged
for relief, the doctor merely repeating his question.
After looking at him for some time, he finally admin
istered a potion and hastily left the room, saying as he
did so,
&quot;
that Furr was as sure to die as though his
head had been cut off.&quot; And so it proved, though not
so speedily as the medical man had predicted;
nor did
he ever visit him again, notwithstanding he lingered
for several days in the most intense agony. It was a
strong man grappling with disease and death, and the
strife was a fearful one. But death at last ended the
scene, with none of all his professed friends, except
his faithful but heart-broken wife, to administer to his
necessities. No sound save that of the moaning
widow broke the stillness of his death-chamber. A
few friends collected, who prepared the emaciated
body for the grave; enclosing it in a rude board
coffin it was conveyed to its last resting place, followed
bythreeor four men,just as the shades of evening had
fallen upon this sin-cursed world ;
there in darkness
and silence we lowered his remains, and left the
gloomy spot to return to his disconsolate wife, who
had been too ill to join the meager procession.


--- PAGE 151 ---
HEARTLESS PERSECUTION. 137
It has ever been my conviction thai Furr was
poisoned, most likely bysome of his false friends who
must have mingled some deadly drug with his drinks
or food
;
nor do I believe that the medicine adminis
tered by the physician was designed to save his life.
But to Him who knoweth all things, we leave the
matter.
His despised, forsaken, and bereaved wife soon fol
lowed him to the grave, where she sleeps quietly with
her innocent babe byher side
;
andwhere probablythis
second Pesdemonia finds the onlyrefuge which would
have been granted her by a heartless and persecuting
world.
Oh, when will this nation
&quot;
cease to do evil and
learn to do well?
&quot;
When will they judge character
in accordance with its moral excellence, instead of the
complexion a man unavoidably bears to the world?


--- PAGE 152 ---
CHAPTEE XIY.
INCIDENTS IN ROCHESTER AND VICINITY.
AFTEE
long petitioning, the inhabitants of that
section succeeded in having the new county of
Monroe set off from Grenesee and Ontario Counties, in
1821, which gave a new impulse to the business
interests of the already flourishing town, which had
heretofore labored under some disadvantages in conse
quence of having all public business done at Canan-
daigua or Batavia.
About this time, too, was the Carthage bridge
built by a company of enterprising gentlemen of that
village, which at that day was considered one of the
wonders of the age ;
but as its history is well known
to all interested in the enterprises of those days, it is
only necessary to say, that the magnificent structure,
so grand in its appearance, such a pattern of mechan
ical ingenuity, exhibiting in all its vast proportions,
both strength and beauty, combined with utility and


--- PAGE 153 ---
FALL OF CARTHAGE BRIDGE. 139
grandeur;
and erected at such an enormous expense
of time, labor, and cash, was destined soon to fall.
It had cost some ten thousand dollars; and had
been warranted by the builders to stand one year.
How great then must have been the loss and disap
pointment when in a little more than twenty-four
hours after the time specified, the ruins of that beauti
ful structure were found floating on the broad bosom
of the Genesee 1 Andyet whenwetake into consider
ation the vast amount of human life which hourly
passed over its solid surface, we can but wonder at the
intervention of a kind Providence which prevented
any loss of life at the time of its fall. Achild had
but just passed over it, whenwith one general crash it
sank to the waters below ; mocking in its rapid
flight, the wisdom of the architect and foresight of
frail humanity. The fall of Carthage bridge was
indeed a calamity felt by the public generally, and
sounded the death-knell of all future greatness to
Carthage, or at least for some years to come.
About this time the village was thrown into a state
of excitement by the arrest of a colored woman named
Ellen, who it was charged had escaped from service
due to a Mr. D., south of Mason and Dixon s Line.
She had been arrested in accordance with a law passed
by Congress in 1793, which forbids persons owing
service in one State to flee to another
;
and which also
obliges those receiving such service, to render to the


--- PAGE 154 ---
140 INCIDENTS IN ROCHESTER AND VICINITY.
claimant any fugitive from labor due, &c. Poor
Ellen ! She had many friends and able counsel, but
nothing short of an open violation of the law of the
land, could prevent herreturn to the houseofbondage.
She was tried and given up to him who claimed
dominion over her. Hopeless and heart-broken, she
was escorted from the boasted land and village of
freedom, by a company of the &quot;Light Horse,&quot; under
the command of Capt. Curtis. One poor, persecuted
slave woman, upon whose heart had fallen.a shadow
darker than death s
; driving every earthly hope of
liberty from her wounded spirit ; helpless and forlorn I
She indeed must have required this military parade
this show of power
! And that too, by men who
throw up their caps with a shout for freedom and
equal rights
!
Oh,
&quot;
consistency, thou art a jewel
!
&quot;
As I recollect but one other incident of the kind
occurring in Eochester, I will now name it.
A colored man named Davis, generally known as
&quot;Doctor Davis,&quot; with a reputation unsullied for indus
try, truth and sobriety, was arrested as a fugitive from
slave labor in Kentucky. Twomencame on from that
State, acting in the double capacity of agents for the
claimant and witnesses against the slave. They em
ployed Mr. L. as counsel, and hastened on the trial of
the afflicted African. When it became generally
known that Davis was arrested, and about to be tried,
the excitement grew intense among all classes; but


--- PAGE 155 ---
ARREST OF A FUGUTIVE SLAVE.&quot; ill
more particularly among the colored people. When
the trial came on, the Court room was crowded to
overflowing, and every avenue leading to it densely
thronged with deeply anxious persons, assembled to
witness the result. It became evident, however, that
the poor manmust be given up to his grasping master,
unless some means were devised to rescue him from
the power of an unjust law. His friends were on the
alert, and as the trial proceeded, the colored men found
an opportunityto get him into a corner ofthe crowded
apartment; where, while the officers stood at the door,
they dressed him in disguise, and otherwise so com
pletely changed his personal appearance, that he
passed out of the Court room, undetected by the
officers, and as all supposed was safely pursuing his
way to Canada.
The hawk-eyed counsel for the Kentuckians, how
ever, too soon observed exultation written on every
dusky countenance, to keep quiet. Starting to his feet
in great alarm, he cried out
&quot;
Where is Davis?
&quot;
And
oh, how that question startled every one present.
Every eye gazed hither and thither, and every ear
intently listened for the answer. After a moment of
breathless silence, the excited counsellor was assured
that the &quot;bird had flown,&quot; which announcement was
received with a rapturous shout of joy by the audi
ence, greatly, however, to the discomfiture of the
gentlemen from Kentucky, who had thought them-


--- PAGE 156 ---
142 INCIDENTS IN ROCHESTER AND VICINITY.
selves so sure of their prize. Nor would they be
thwarted now. It was not yet too late to overtake
their victim, and slavery required at their hands a
sacrifice which they were ready to make. Hand-bills
were ta immediate circulation, offering a reward of
fifty dollars for the apprehensionof the flying fugitive.
Fifty dollars, for the bodyand soul of a manto plunge
into the degradation of Slavery
!
Fifty dollars for the
ruin of a fellow being, for whom Christ gave his
precious life! Yes, fifty dollars are offered to any
human blood-hound who will hunt and worry the
poor slave, who must fly from this boasted land of
liberty, to seek protection in the dominion of Eng
land s Queen !
Unfortunately for Davis, some of these hand-bills
were thrown on board the very packet on which he
had embarked for Buffalo
;
nor was this all. The bills
would have left him uninjured, but a scoundrel an
apology for a man was there also, who, for the con
sideration of fifty dollars was willing to compromise
all pretensions to manhood and humanity, and drag
from the boat the panting slave, whomhe cast beneath
the heel of his oppressor. When Davis was finally
retaken, those Kentucky dealers in human chattels,
held him with a grasp that banished all hope of escape
by flight; and then in his sorrow and despair the
wretched, hopeless man cried out
&quot;
Oh, my God, must
I return to the hell of Slavery ? Save me, Oh, dear


--- PAGE 157 ---
ESCAPE, RE-ARREST, AND ATTEMPTED SUICIDE. 143
Lord, save this, thy helpless, friendless servant, from
a fate so dreadful I
Oh, Christian friends and neigh
bors, I appeal to you to rescue me from a life far more
terrible than death in any form!
Oh, God, is there no
protection for me in the laws of New York? I claim
it, by all that is sacred in her past history
1 Give me
liberty or death ! or death !
&quot;
he repeated, with a
shudder
;
then casting one glance of hopeless agony
on his persecutors, he secretly drew from his pocket a
razor, and before he could be prevented he drew it
across his throat, and fell gasping in the midst of his
slave-hunting tormentors, while a collection of by
standers cried
&quot;
Shame 1 shameI on the institution
of Slavery
!
&quot;
Poor Davis was not dead, but supposing he soon
would be, these gentlemen were requested to give
security, and indemnify the town for all expenses it
might incur on P^vis
7
account. But instead of giving
their bond as .^quested, they took a sudden start
for Kentucky, where it was very generally desired
they might remain.
With good treatment, Davis, after a long time, re
covered sufficiently to be removed by his friends to a
place of safety;
and when so far restored as to be able
he returned to Rochester, where he received assistance
which enabled him to reach Canada. I have often
heard from him during his residence in that country,
where no slaves exist and he has done well, having


--- PAGE 158 ---
144 INCIDENTS IN ROCHESTER AND VICINITY.
quite an extensive practice in medicine, and lives in the
quiet enjoyment of that liberty which he struggled so
hard to obtain and came so near losing ; yet, to this
day he prefers death to Slavery. And who does not &quot;{
None, who have breathed the air of freedom after an.
experience of unrequited toil to enrich a brutal and
selfish master. Truly is it said,
&quot;a contented slave ts
a degraded being.&quot;


--- PAGE 159 ---
CHAPTER XT.
SAD REVERSES OF CAPT. HELM.
I
MUST again introduce to the kind reader my
old master, Capt. Helm, who we left residing in
Bath, several years ago. And as I have before inti
mated he had now become a very poor man
;
indeed
so reduced was he now that he lived with one of his
slave women, and was supported by public charity
I
Learning, too, that I had saved by my industry a few
hundred dollars, it seemed very congenial with his
avaricious habits to endeavor to obtain what I pos
sessed. In accordance with his plan he employed a
lawyer named Lewland to come to my place of busi
ness, which he did, and demanded of me to pay Capt.
Helm two hundred dollars. He also left a notice,
forbidding all persons to take or destroy any property
in my possession ;
and then impudently inquired how
I expected to gain my freedom
;
if I thought of
applying for a writ of hat&amp;gt;ceu$ corpus; and many
Q


--- PAGE 160 ---
146 SAD REVERSES OF GAPT HELM.
other questions;
to which I replied that I should pay
no money on the order of Capt. Helm; apply for no
writ; but should continue to maintain my personal
rights and enjoy the freedom which was already mine,
and which I designed to keep, assuring him that the
Captain had forfeited his claim, if he had any, to me or
my services, when he hired me to Mr. Tower.
He hung about me for a day or two, and then left
me to pursue my business I saw no more of him.
Some time afterward Mr. H. E. Eochester informed me
that he had a subpoena for me, which I found was
issued by the direction of Capt. Helm. By Mr.
Kochester s counsel, I took it to Mr. A. Sampson, who
assured me that my old master had commenced a suit
against me in the Court of Equity, and the case would
be tried before Wm. B. Kochester, Esq., who was one
of the circuit judges. Capt. Helm claimed every
particle ofpropertyI possessed;
aclaimthat occasioned
me great anxiety and some cost.
Mr. Sampson encouraged me to hope, however,
that the case would be dismissed as two other cases of
that kind had been.
I labored to the best of my ability to prepare
myself for the trial, which was to decide whether I
had a right to possess myself and command my own
services and earnings, or whether all belonged to Capt.
Helm. As I looked forward with anxious forebodings
to the day appointed for the suit to commence, I was


--- PAGE 161 ---
DEATH OF CAPT. HELM. 147
startled by the announcement of my old master s
death ! Yes, Capt. Helm was dead
;
and with him
died the law suit. He who had so wronged me, who
had occasioned me so much suffering and sorrow had
gone to his account. He who had once been thought
to be one of the wealthiest as well as one of the
greatest men in the county, died a pauper neglected
and despised, and scarcely awarded a decent burial.
Like his wife, who died such a horrid death, he had
been reared in affluence and was an inheritor of vast
possessions, but his home was in a slave State
;
he was
raised on a plantation, and nurtured in the atmosphere
of Slavery.
In his youth he had contracted the habit of drinking
to excess, beside that of gambling, horse-racing and
the like, which followed him through life. Forgotten
and scorned in his povertyby manywhohad partaken
of his abundance, sipped his wine, and rode his fast
horses.
During the last war his princely mansion was ever
open to the officers of the army, and many a wounded
soldier has been cheered and comforted by his hospi
tality. But now he is regarded as no better than his
poorest slave, and lies as lowly as they, in the narrow
house appointed for all the living.
Myold master had two brothers: the oldest, Thomas
Helm, was a Captain in the United States Army, and
had been in many hard-fought battles. His younger


--- PAGE 162 ---
148 SAD REVERSES OF CAPT. HELM.
brother, William, was a Captain also
;
but Thomas
was the man to awaken curiosity. I have lived with
him, but never knew of his going unarmed for an
hour, until he left Virginia and came to Steuben
County, where he died. &quot;When at the South, I have
seen strangers approach him, but they were invariably
commanded to
&quot;
stand&quot; and to
&quot;
approach him at their
peril.&quot; He finally came to the State of New York,
bringing with him his
&quot;
woman&quot; with whom he lived,
and two children, with whom he settled on a piece of
land given him by my old master, where the old
soldier lived, died, and was buried on one of his small
&quot;
clearings&quot; under an old apple tree. Heowned a few
slaves, but at his death his
&quot;
woman&quot; collected every
thing she could, and among the rest, two or three
slave children, to whom she had no right or claim
whatever, and made her way to Kentucky. About a
year ago I visited the spot where the brave old
defender of his country had been buried, but found
very little to mark the resting place of the brother of
myold master. Theyhad passed away. Their wealth,
power and bravery had come to nought; and no
tribute was now paid to the memory of one of
&quot;
Old
Virginia s best families.&quot; The Hood of which they
were wont to boast, was now no more revered
than that which commingled with the African and
circulated in the veins of his despised and down
trodden slaves.


--- PAGE 163 ---
CHAPTER XYI.
BRITISH EMANCIPATION OF SLAVERY.
AS
time passed on I found myself progressing in a
profitable business. I had paid for my house
and lot, and purchased another adjoining, on which I
had erected a valuable brick building. The Lord
prospered all my undertakings and I felt grateful for
my good fortune. I kept all kinds of groceries
and grain, which met a ready sale
;
and now I began
to look about me for a partner in life, to share my
joys and sorrows, and to assist me on through the
tempestuous scenes of a life-long voyage. Such a
companion I found in the intelligent and amiable Miss
B
,
to whom I was married on the eleventh of
May, 1825. She was the youngest daughter of a
particular friend, who had traveled extensively and
was noted for his honesty and intelligence.
About this time, too, &quot;Sam Patch&quot; made his last
and fatal leap from a scaffold twenty five feet above


--- PAGE 164 ---
150 EKITISH EMANCIPATION OF SLAVERY.
the falls of Genesee, which are ninety-six feet in
height. From thence he plunged into the foaming
river to rise no more in life. The following spring
the body of the foolish man was found and buried,
after having lain several months in the turbulent
waters of the Genesee.
This year was also rendered memorable by the
efficient labors of Professor Finney, through whose
faithful preaching of the gospel, many were brought
to a saving knowledge of the truth.
The
&quot;
Emancipation Act&quot; had nowbeen passed, and
the happy time for it to take effect was drawing nigh.
Slavery could no longer exist in the Empire State nor
receive the protection of her laws. Would to God it
had so continued to be what it professed the refuge
of the bondman and the home of the free. But alas !
Nowthe flying fugitive from Slavery finds no security
within her borders
;
he must flee onward, to the
dominion of Queen Yictoria, ere he rests, lest the
exaction of the odious &quot;Fugitive Slave Law&quot; return
him to the house of bondage.
But the Emancipation Bill had been passed, and the
colored people felt it to be a time fit for rejoicing.
They met in different places and determined to evince
their gratitude by a general celebration. In Eochester
they convened in large numbers, and resolved to
celebrate the glorious day of freedom at Johnson s
Square, on the fifth day of July. This arrangement


--- PAGE 165 ---
GREAT CELEBRATION. 151
was made so as not to interfere with the white popula
tion who were everywhere celebrating the day of
their independence
&quot;
the Glorious Fourth,&quot; for amid
the general and joyous shout of liberty, prejudice
had sneeringly raised the finger of scorn at the poor
African, whose iron bands were loosed, not only
from English oppression, but the more cruel and
oppressive power of Slavery.
They met according to previous appointment, Mr.
A. H
, having been chosen president, Mr. H.
E
, marshal, and Mr. H. D
,
reader of the
&quot;Act of Emancipation,&quot; and &quot;The Declaration of
Independence.&quot; A large audience of both white
and colored people assembled, and the day which had
been ushered in by the booming cannon, passed by
in the joyous realization that we were indeed free
men. To the music of the band the large procession
marched from the square to the hotel, where ample
provision was made for dinner, after listening to
the following oration, which I had been requested to
deliver.
I must not omit to mention that on the morning of
that happy day, a committee of colored men waited
upon the Hon. Matthew Brown, and in behalf of the
citizens of Monroe County, presented their thanks for
his noble exertions in the Legislature, in favor of the
Act by which thousands were made free men.
They were received by that worthy gentlemen


--- PAGE 166 ---
152 BRITISH EMANCIPATION OF SLAVERY.
with grateful and pleasing assurances of his continued
labor in behalf of freedom.
Now I will lay before the reader myaddress to the
audience on that eventful day.


--- PAGE 167 ---
CHAPTER XVII.
?
ORATION&quot; TERMINATION&quot; OF SLAVERY.
FT1HE age in which we live is characterised in no
J_ ordinary degree, by a certain boldness and
rapidity in the march of intellectual and political
improvements. Inventions the most surprising; re
volutions the most extraordinary, are springing forth,
and passingin quick succession before us, all tending
most clearly to the advancement of mankind towards
that state of earthly perfection and happiness, from
which they are yet so far distant, but of which their
nature and that of the world they inhabit, are most
certainly capable. It is at all times pleasing and in
structive to look backward bythe light of history, and
forward bythe light of analogical reasoning, to behold
the gradual advancement of man from barbarism to
civilization, from civilization toward the higher perfec
tions of his nature
;
and to hope nay, confidently be
lieve, that the time is not far distant when liberty and
G*


--- PAGE 168 ---
154 ORATION.
equal rights being everywhere established, morality
and the religion of the gospel everywhere diffused,
man shall no longer lift his hand for the oppression of
his fellow man
;
but all, mutually assisting and as-
sited, shall move onward throughout the journey of
human life, like the peaceful caravan across the burn
ing sands of Arabia. And never, on this glorious
anniversary, so often and so deservedly celebrated by
millions of free men, but which we are to-day for the
first time called to celebrate never before, has the
eye been able to survey the past with so much satis-
actioii, or the future with hopes and expectations so
brilliant and so flattering; it is to us a day of two-fold
joy. &quot;We are men, though the strong hand of preju
dice and oppression is upon us; we can, and we will
rejoice in the advancement of the rapidly increasing
happiness of mankind, and especially of our own
race. We can, and we will rejoice in the growing
power and glory of the country we inhabit. Although
Almighty Grod has not permitted us to remain in the
land of our forefathers and our own, the glories of
national independence, and the sweets of civil and reli
gious liberty, to their full extent
;
but the strong hand
of the spoiler has borne us into a strange land, yet has
He of His great goodness given us to behold those
best and noblest of his gifts to man, in their fairest
and loveliest forms
;
and not only have we beheld
them, but we have already felt much of their benig-


--- PAGE 169 ---
TERMINATION OF SLAVERY. 155
nant influence. Most of us have hitherto enjoyed
many, very many of the dearest rights of freemen.
Our lives and personal liberties have been held as
sacred and inviolable
;
the rights of property have
been extended to us, in this land of freedom
;
our
industry has been, and still is, liberally rewarded;
and so long as welive under a free and happy govern
ment which denies us not the protection of its laws,
why should we fret and vex ourselves because we
have had no part in framing them, nor anything to do
with their administration. When the fruits of the
earth are fully afforded us, we do not wantonly refuse
them, nor ungratefully repine because we have done
nothing towards the cultivation of the tree which pro
duces them. No, weaccept themwith lively gratitude;
and their sweetness is not embittered by reflecting
upon he manner in which they were obtained. It is
the dictate of sound wisdom, then, to enjoy without
repining, the freedom, privileges, and immunities
which wise and equal laws have awarded us nay,
proudly to rejoice and glory in their production, and
stand ready at all times to defend them at the hazard
of our lives, and of all that is most dear to us.
But are we alone shut out and excluded from any
share in the administration of government? Are not
the clergy, a class of men equally ineligible to
office? A class of men almost idolized by their
countrymen, ineligible to office ! And are we alone


--- PAGE 170 ---
156 OKATIOtf.
excluded from what the world chooses to denominate
polite society ? And are not a vast majority of the
polar race excluded? I know not why, but mankind
of every age, nation, and complexion have had lower
classes; and, as a distinction, they have chosen to
arrange themselves in the grand spectacle of human
life, like seats in a theater rank above rank, with
intervals between them. But if any suppose that hap
piness or contentment is confined to any single class,
or that the high or more splendid order possesses any
substantial advantage in those respects over their more
lowly brethren, they must be wholly ignorant of all
rational enjoyment. For what though the more
humble orders cannot mingle with the higher on terms
of equality. This, if rightly considered, is not a
curse but a blessing. Look around you, my friends :
what rational enjoyment is not within your reach?
Your homes are in the noblest country in the world,
and all of that country which your real happiness
requires, may at any time be yours. Your industry
can purchase it ;
and its righteous laws will secure you
in its possession. But, to what, myfriends, do you owe
all these blessings ? Let not the truth be concealed.
You owe them to that curse, that bitter scourge of
Africa, whose partial abolishment you are this day
convened to celebrate. Slavery has been your curse,
but it shall become your rejoicing. Like the people
of God in Egypt, you have been afflicted; but like


--- PAGE 171 ---
TERMINATION OF SLAVERY. 157
them too, you have been redeemed. You are hence
forth free as the mountain winds. Whyshould we,
on this day of congratulation and joy, turn our view
upon the origin of African Slavery ? Why should
we harrow up our minds by dwelling on the deceit,
the forcible fraud and treachery that have been so
long practised on your hospitable and unsuspecting
countrymen ? Why speak of fathers torn from the
bosom of their families, wives from the embraces of
their husbands, children from the protection of their
parents; in fine, of all the tender and endearing
relations of life disrrolved and trampled under foot, by
the accursed traffic in human flesh? Why should
we remember, in joy and exultation, the thousands
of our countrymen who are to-day, in this land of
gospel light, this boasted land of civil and religious
liberty, writhing under the lash and groaning beneath
the grinding weight of Slavery s chain? I ask, Al
mighty God, are they who do such things thy chosen
and favorite people? But, away with such thoughts
as these; we will rejoice, though sobs interrupt the
songs of our rejoicing, and tears mingle in the cup we
pledge to Freedom
;
our harps though they have long
hung neglected upon the willows, shall this day be
strung full high to the notes of gladness. On this
day, in one member at least of this mighty Republic,
the Slavery of our race has ceased forever ! No more
shall the insolent voice of a master be the main-spring


--- PAGE 172 ---
158 ORATION,
of our actions, the sole guide of our conduct; no more
shall thers hands labor in degrading and profitless
servitude. Their toils will henceforth be voluntary,
and be crowned with the never failing reward of
industry. Honors and dignities mayperhaps never be
ours
;
but wealth, virtue, and happiness are all within
the compass of our moderate exertions. And how
shall we employ a few moments better than in reflect
ing upon the means bywhich these are to be obtained.
For what can be more proper and more profitable to
one who has just gained an invaluable treasure, than
to consider how he may use it to the best possible
advantage? And here I need not tell you that a
strict observance to all the precepts of the gospel
ought to be your first and highest aim;
for small will
be the value of all that the present world can bestow,
if the interests of the world to come are neglected and
despised. None of you can be ignorant of what the
gospel teaches. Bibles may easily be obtained; nor
can there be a greater disgrace, or a more shameful
neglect of duty than for a person of mature age, and
much more, for any father of a family to be without
that most precious of all books the Bible. If, there
fore, any of you are destitute of a Bible, hasten to
procure one. &quot;Will any of you say that it can be of
no use to you, or that you cannot read it? Look
then to that noblest of all remedies for this evil, the
Sunday School that most useful of all institutions.


--- PAGE 173 ---
TERMINATION OF SLAVERY. 159
There you may learn without loss of time or money,
that of which none should be ignorant to read.
Let me exhort you with earnestness to give your
most sincere attention to this matter. It is of the
utmost importance to every one of you. Let your
next object be to obtain as soon as may be, a compe
tency of the good things of this world; immense
wealth is not necessary for you, and would but
diminish your real happiness. Abject poverty is and
ought to be regarded as the greatest, most terrible of
all possible evils. It should be shunned as a most
deadly and damning sin. What then are the means
by which so dreadful a calamity may be avoided?
I will tell you, myfriends, in these simple words hear
and ponder on them; write them upon the tablets of
your memory; they are worthy to be inscribed in
letters of gold upon every door-post
&quot;
industry, pru
dence, and economy.&quot; Oh!
they are words of power
to guide you to respectability and happiness. Attend,
then, to some of thelaws which industryimpose, while
you have health and strength. Let not the rising sun
beholdyousleeping orindolentlylyinguponyourbeds.
Rise ever with the morning light ; and, till sun-set, give
not an hourto idleness. Saynot human nature cannot
endure it. It can it almost requires it. Sober, dili
gent, and moderate labor does not diminish it, but on
the contrary, greatly adds to the health, vigor, and
duration of the human frame. Thousands of the


--- PAGE 174 ---
160 ORATION.
human race have died prematurely of disease engen
dered by indolence and inactivity. Few, very few
indeed, have suffered by the too long continuance of
bodily exertion. As you give the day to labor, so
devote the night to rest; for who that has drunk and
reveled all night at a tippling shop, or wandered about
in search of impious and stolen pleasures, has not by so
doing not only committed a most heinous and damning
sin in the sight of Heaven, but rendered himself wholly
unfit for the proper discharge of the duties of the
coming day. Nor think that industry or true happi
ness do not go hand in hand; and to him who is
engaged in some useful avocation, time flies delight
fully and rapidly away. He does not, like the idle
and indolent man, numberthe slow hours with sighs
cursing both himself and them for the tardiness of
their flight. Ah, my friends, it is utterly impossible
for him who wastes time in idleness, ever to know
anything of true happiness. Indolence, poverty,
wretchedness, are inseparable companions, fly them,
slum idleness, as from eminent and inevitable destruc
tion. In vain will you labor unless prudence and
economy preside over and direct all your exertions.
luMnomlvr at all times that money even in your own
hands, is power; with it you may direct as you will
the actions of your pale, proud brethren. Seek after
and amass it then, by just and honorable means ; and
once in your hand never part with it but for a full and


--- PAGE 175 ---
TERMINATION OF SLAVERY. 161
fair equivalent;
nor let that equivalent be something
which you do not want, and for which you cannot
obtain more than it cost you. Be watchful and dili
gent and let your mind be fruitful in devises for the
honest advancement of your worldly interest. So
shall you continually rise in respectability, in rank
and standing in this so late and so long the land of
your captivity.
Above all things refrain from the excessive use of
ardent spirits. There is no evil whose progress is so
imperceptible; and at the same time so sure anddeadly,
as that of intemperance;
and by slow degrees it under
mines health, wealth, and happiness, till all at length
tumble into one dreadful mass of ruin. If God has
given you children, he has in so doing imposed upon
you a most fearful responsibility; believe me, friends,
you will answer to God for every misfortune suffered,
and every crime committed by them which right
education and example could have taught them to
avoid. Teach them reverence and obedience to the
laws both of God and man. Teach them sobriety,
temperance, justice, and truth. Let their minds be
rightly instructed imbued with kindness and brother
ly love, charity, and benevolence. Let them possess
at least so much learning as is to be acquired in the
common schools of the country. In short, let their
welfare be dearer to you than any earthly enjoyment;
so shall they be the richest of earthly blessings.


--- PAGE 176 ---
162 ORATION.
My countrymen, let us henceforth remember that
we are men. Let us as one man, on this day resolve
that henceforth, by continual endeavors to do good to
all mankind, we will claim for ourselves the attention
and respect which as men weshould possess. So shall
every good that can be the portion of man, be ours
this life shall be happy, and the life to come, glorious.
The opinion of the public regarding the celebration
and performances of that day, together with the
behavior of the colored people, will be seen by the
following short extract from the Rochester Daily Adver
tiser, published soon after the occurrence of those
events :
&quot;ABOLITION OF SLAVERY.
&quot;
The extinction of that curse by the laws of our
State, was marked with appropriate rejoicings on the
part of the African race in this neighborhood. A
procession of considerable length and respectable
appearance, preceded by a band of music, moved
from Brown s Island through the principal streets to
the public square, yesterday forenoon, where a stage
and seats were erected, for the speakers and audience.
The throne of Grace was addressed by the Eev. Mr.
Allen, a colored clergyman. The act declaring all


--- PAGE 177 ---
TERMINATION OF SLAVERY. 163
slaves free in this State, on the fourth day of July,
1827, was read, which was succeeded by the reading
of the Declaration of Independence and delivery of
an oration by Mr. Steward. Wehave heard but one
opinion from several gentlemen who were present,
and that was highly complimentary to the composition
and delivery of the same.
&quot;
The exercises were concluded by a short discourse
from the Rev. Mr. Allen, and the procession moved
off to partake of an entertainment prepared for the
occasion. The thing was got up in good order, and
passed off remarkably well. The conduct of the
emancipated race was exemplary throughout, and if
their future enjoyment of freedom be tinctured with
the prudence that characterised their celebration of its
attainment, the country will have no reason to mourn
the philanthropy that set them free.&quot;
Thus ended our first public celebration of our own
and our country s freedom. All conducted themselves
with the strictest propriety and decorum, retiring to
their homes soberly and in proper season.


--- PAGE 178 ---
CHAPTEK XVIII.
CONDITION OF FREE OOLOKED PEOPLE.
PURSUANT
to a call given in the summer of
1830, by the colored residents of Philadelphia,
for a National Convention of their race, I started in
company with a friend to attend it; having previously
engaged seats inside Mr. Coe s stage-coach as far as
Utica, K. Y., to which place we had paid our fare the
same as other passengers.
We rode on to Auburn very pleasantly, but when
at that place, we with others moved to resume our
seats
;
we were met by a stern rebuke for presuming
to seat ourselves on the inside, and were ordered to
ride on the outside of the coach. In vain we expos
tulated in vain we reminded the driver of the
agreement, and of our having paid for an inside seat ;
we were told to take the outside of the coach or
remain behind.
Desiring to attend the convention, weconcluded to go


--- PAGE 179 ---
ATTEND COLORED NATIONAL CONVENTION. 165
on, submitting to this rank injustice and dishonesty,
until our return, when we determined to sue the pro
prietor of that line of stages. An opportunity was
offered soon after, when I commenced a suit for
damages against Mr. Sherwood, who was the great
stage proprietor of those days. He, however, cleared
himself bydeclaring that he was in no wayresponsible
for the failures of Mr. Coe, to whom I must look
for remuneration. I never found it convenient to sue
Mr. Coe, and so the matter ended.
Wepassed through New York City to the place of
our destination, where we found manyof our brethren
already assembled.
Philadelphia, which I now saw for the first time, I
thought the most beautiful and regularly laid out city
I ever beheld. Here had lived the peaceable, just, and
merciful William Penn
;
and here many of his ad
herents still reside. Here, too, was the place where
the Kt. Eev. Bishop Allen, the first colored American
bishop in the United States, had labored so success
fully. When the Methodists sought to crush by cruel
prejudice the poor African, he stepped boldly forward
in defence of their cause, which he sustained with
a zeal and talent ever to be revered.
Thousands were brought to a knowledge of the
truth, and induced &quot;to seek first the kingdom of
heaven and its righteousness,&quot; through his instrumen
tality. Through the benign influence of this good


--- PAGE 180 ---
166 CONDITION OF FREE COLOEED PEOPLE.
man, friends and means were raised for his poor
brethren, to build houses of worship, where they
would no more be dragged from their knees when in
prayer, and told to seat themselves by the door. Oh,
how much good can one good and faithful man do,
when devoted to the cause of humanity following in
the footsteps of the blessed Christ
; doing unto others
as they would be done by;
and remembering those in
bonds as bound with them. What though his skin be
black as ebony/if the heart of a brother beats in his
bosom? Oh, that man could judge of character as
does our Heavenly Father
;
then would he judge
righteous judgment, and cease to look haughtily down
upon his afflicted fellow, because &quot;his skin is colored
not like his own.&quot;
Weconvened at the specified time, and organized
by appointing Kev. E. Allen, president, A. Steward,
vice-president, and J. C. Morrell, secretary. The
convention which continued in session three days,
was largely attended by all classes of people, and
many interesting subjects were ably discussed
;
but
the most prominent object was the elevation of our
race. Eesolutions were passed calculated to encourage
our brethren to take some action on the subjects of
education and mechanism. Agricultural pursuits
were also recommended
;
and here allow me to give
my opinion in favor of the latter, as a means of suste
nance and real happiness.


--- PAGE 181 ---
AGRICULTURE PREFERABLE TO SERFDOM. 167
I knew many colored farmers, all of whom are well
respected in the neighborhood of their residence. I
wish I could count them by hundreds
;
but our people
mostly flock to cities where they allow themselves to
be made
&quot;
hewers of wood and drawers of water;&quot;
barbers and waiters, when, if they would but retire
to the country and purchase a piece of land, cultivate
and improve it, they would be far richer and happier
than theycan be in the crowded city. It. is a mistaken
idea that there is more prejudice against color in the
country. True, it exists everywhere, but I regard it
less potent in the country, where a farmer can live less
dependant on his oppressors. The sun will shine, the
rains descend, and the earth bring forth her increase,
just as readily for the colored agriculturist as for his
pale face neighbor. Yes, and our common mother
Earth will, when life is ended, as readily open her
bosom to receive your remains in a last embrace, as
that of the haughty scorner of our rights.
In the city, however, there is no escape from the
crushing weight of prejudice, to ramble over fields of
your own cultivation
;
to forget your sorrows in the
refreshing air that waves the loaded branches of an
orchard of your own planting;
nor to solace yourself
with a gambol over the green meadow with your little
ones. It is all toil, toil, with a burthened heart until
shadows fall across the hearth-stone, and dismal fore
bodings darken the fireside, from whence the weary


--- PAGE 182 ---
168 CONDITION OF FREE COLORED PEOPLE.
wife retires to refresh herself in broken slumber for
the renewed toil of another day. Will not my friends
think of these and many other advantages in favor of
a country life, and practice accordingly ?
After the close of the convention, I returned to my
business in Eochester.
Until the discussion, which commenced about this
time on the subject of temperance, I hadbeen engaged,
as most other grocers were at that time, in the sale of
spirituous liquors somewhat extensively. Myattention
had never before been called especially to the subject,
though I had witnessed some of its direst evils
;
but
now, when I saw the matter in its true light, I resolved
to give it up. I was doing well and making hand
some profits on the sale of alcoholic beverages. I had
also experienced a good deal of trouble with it. My
license allowed me to sell any quantity less than five
gallons; but it was a fine of twenty-five dollars if
drunk on the premises, one half of the sum to go to
the complainant. If a vicious man got out of funds
it became both easy and commonfor him to give some
person a sixpence, half of which was to be spent for
whisky, which made him a witness for the other, who
would make immediate complaint, and collect his
share of the fine. Nor could I prevent men who came
with bottles, and purchased whisky, from drinking it
where they pleased ; consequently I was often called
to answer to such complaints.


--- PAGE 183 ---
ABANDON THE LIQUOE TRAFFIC. 169
One morning a manentered my store and called for
liquor, which the clerk gave him. After drinking it,
he went directly to the office of A. House, Esq., and
entered a complaint against the clerk who had served
him
;
then stepped out for consultation with his coun
sel. At that moment I arrived at the office of the
magistrate to whom I immediately made complaint
against myself, relating to him also just how the
event happened. In afew minutes the original com
plainant returned, to whom Squire House explained
that he should have arraigned the proprietor of the
store, and not the clerk as he had done. Determined
on making a speculation, however, he demanded a
precept for myself. The Squire, laughing most
heartily, informed him that he was too late, that Mr.
Steward had the start of him, having just entered a
complaint against himself, by which he saves one half
of the fine. The man walked out, looking rather
&quot;
cheap,&quot; nor did he or others annoy meafterwards by
making complaints of that kind.
But now I saw, as never before, the sin of selling
that which would make beasts of men, and only
stopped to inquire what was duty in the matter. All
the arguments in favor of its sale were more forcible
then than now. All classes ofpersons used and drank
the article
; and it required more moral courage, to
relinquish the business than it does now. Neverthe
less, it appeared plain to mymind, that duty to Grod
H


--- PAGE 184 ---
170 CONDITION OF FREE COLORED PEOPLE.
and myfellow-men required it, and I cheerfully gave
it up forever.
I could not conscientiously, nor do I see how any
man can, continue to traffic in this most fruitful source
of pauperism and crime. No benefit whatever arises
from its use as a beverage or from its sale. It is a
curse to the drinker, to the seller, and to the com
munity. Those who- are licensed venders take from
the government fifty dollars for every one put into the
treasury. The money paid for licenses is a very
meager compensation for the beggary, crime, and
bloodshed which rum produces. All who have any
knowledge of the statistics of the State, or of our
prison and police records know, that intemperance has
donemore to fill the prisons, work-houses, alms-houses,
and asylums of the State than all other influences
combined; and yet men uphold the traffic. Their
favors are for those who love its use and sale, and
their anathemas for him who is striving to save a
nation of drunkards from swift destruction ; yea, their
own sires, sons, and brothers from the grave of the
inebriate.
When in Eochester a short time since, soliciting
subscribers for this work, I stepped into a distillery
and asked a man to subscribe for it. He hesitated in
his decision until he took a tumbler and filling it with
brandy, invited me to drink. I thanked him, saying
I never drink brandy.
&quot;
Never drink!
&quot;
he growled,


--- PAGE 185 ---
REFLECTIONS ON INTEMPERANCE. 171
&quot;then I tell you, sir, that you stand a much better
chance of being struck by lightning than of getting a
subscriber here.&quot; Oh, very well; most likely had
he agreed to take a copy, he would have been sorely
displeased with my views of the liquor traffic, and
perhaps with the compliment I have here paid him.
But in the foregoing remarks I have said but a tithe
of what my heart feels, when I think of the sufferings
occasioned by drunkenness.
Even the cup of the burthened slave, writhing in
his chains and toiling under the lash, is not full of
bitterness until the demon rum throwsin its dregs and
fills it to overflowing.
How often does it occur that a passionate master,
heated with wine, mad with himself and all about
him, pours out his vengeful ire on the head and back
of some helpless slave, and leaves him weltering in
his blood I How often may be heard the agonized
wail of the slave mother, deploring the departure of
some innocent child that has been lost in gambling,
while the master was intoxicated !
How often do the shrieks of the poor but virtuous
slave girl, ring through the midnight air, as she, plead
ing for death rather than life, rushes screaming away
from a brutal master, infuriated and drunk ! If it is
a fact, and certainly it is, that the master is tbus
affected by his costly wine; what, think you, will be
the temper and condition of the coarse and heartless


--- PAGE 186 ---
172 CONDITION OF FREE COLORED PEOPLE.
overseer who drinks his miserable whisky or bad
brandy? It is horrible, beyond description. I have
often myself seen a drunken overseer, after pouring
down dram after dram, mount his horse and ride
furiously among the slaves, beating^ bruising, mangling
with his heavy cowhide every one he chanced to meet,
until the ground presented the appearance of a battle
field.


--- PAGE 187 ---
CHAPTER XIX.
PERSECUTION OF THE COLORED PEOPLE.
WHILE
the colored population of New York
were rejoicing in the measure of freedom
allowed them by the more wholesome laws of that
State, our brethren in Ohio were being oppressed and
maltreated by the unjust and odious
&quot;
black laws&quot; of
that professedly free State, enacted with special refer
ence to the disposition of the colored race.
In Cincinnati, 0., within sight of the slave land of
Kentucky, a terrible persecution had commenced, and
an effort was made to drive all colored persons from
the place.
Our people had settled there in large numbers, but
now a mob had assembled in that city with the deter
mination to drive them, not only from their homes and
city, but from the State. Abloody conflict ensued, in
which the white and black mans blood mingled
freely. So great had been the loss of property ;
and


--- PAGE 188 ---
174 PERSECUTION OP THE COLOEED PEOPLE.
BO horrid and fearful had been the scene, that our
people chose to leave, rather than remain under such
untoward circumstances. They lived in constant fear
of the mob which had so abused and terrified them.
Families seated at the fireside started at every breath
of wind, and trembled at the sound of every approach
ing footstep. The father left his family in fear, lest on
his return from his daily labor, he should find his wife
and children butchered, and his house left desolate.
Meetings were held to devise plans and means for
leaving the place where they had been so cruelly
treated. But where should they go? And why
should they be compelled to leave the State of Ohio ?
The fact is, that the African race there, as in all parts
of this nominally free Republic, was looked down
upon by the white population as being little above the
brute creation
; or, as belonging to some separate class
of degraded beings, too deficient in intellect to provide
for their ownwants, and must therefore depend on the
superior ability of their oppressors, to take care of
them. Indeed, both the time and talents of eminent
men have been wasted in unsuccessful research for the
line of demarkation, between the African and the
highest order of animals, such for instance as the
monkey or the ourang-outang. Some even, have ad
vanced the absurd idea, that wicked Cain transmitted
to them the
&quot;
mark&quot; which the Almighty set upon
him for the murder of his brother; and that he, (who


--- PAGE 189 ---
THE COLORED RACE NOT INFERIOR. 175
then must have survived the deluge), is the progenitor
of that despised and inferior race the negro slave of
the United States of America !
If it be true, that the natural inferiority of the black
man, connects him so closely with the animal creation,
it looks passing strange to me that he should be made
responsible for the violation of laws which he has
been declared too imbecile to aid in framing or of
comprehending. Nor is it less strange to see him
enslaved and compelled by his labor to maintain both
his master and himself, after having declared him
incapable of doing either. Whynot let him go then?
Whyhold with an unyielding grasp, so miserable and
useless a piece of property ? Is it benevolence that
binds him with his master s chain? Judge ye.
Stranger still is the fact of attaching such vast influ
ence to his presence and so much concern regarding
his movements, when in a state of freedom, if indeed,
he is of so little worth and consequence, and so nearly
related to the brutes that perish.
Surely, the Legislature of Ohio, or of any other
state, would never feel called upon to sit in grave
.ounsel, for the purpose of framing laws which would
impose fine and imprisonment on a monkey, should
one chance to locate within its jurisdiction; nor would
they think it advisable for the court to assemble, or a
jury to be empanneled, to drive from their midst an
ourang-outang. And yet this and more must be done
to get rid of the hated negro, who has been born in


--- PAGE 190 ---
176 PERSECUTION OF THE COLORED PEOPLE.
that State, or has fled to it for protection from the
manstealer.
When strangers pass hastily through this country,
and after a careless glance at the colored population,
report them to be &quot;an indolent, improvident, and
vicious class of persons,&quot; they should consider some
of the manyobstacles thrown in the way of the most
favored of that race. Knowing as they do, the rigor
of the law, and feeling as they do, the oppressive
power of prejudice, it becomes almost impossible for
them to rise to that station they were designed to fill,
and for which their natural abilities as certainly
qualify them, as though they had never been robbed
of their God-given rights. But let us return to our
tried friends in Cincinnati.
They finally resolved to collect what they could of
their possessions and establish a colony in Canada.
In accordance with this resolution, they agreed to first
send an agent to obtain liberty to settle there, and if
successful to select and purchase a large tract of land,
making such arrangements as he thought best for their&quot;
speedy removal to their new home. Israel Lewis was
their appointed agent, who departed immediately for
Upper Canada to perform his mission; and there for
the present wewill leave him and return to Eochester
Ourmore favored brethren in NewYorkfelt a deep
sympathy for their outraged countrymen in Cincin
nati ; a sympathy equaled only by their indignation
at the cause of such demand.


--- PAGE 191 ---
CANADA SELECTED AS AN ASYLUM. 177
Ameeting expressive of their views and feelings
on that subject, was convened in the city of Kochester,
during which, the following preamble and resolutions
were read and unanimously adopted:
Whereas, The city of Cincinnati has again become the scene of
another dreadful mob and bloodshed, where nothing buc terror and
confusion reigned for a number of hours together.
And Whereas, Our brethren and fellow citizens were left exposed
to the fury of an ungovernable mob, made up of the base, the igno
rant, and vile, the very dregs of society ; and probably led on by
slaveholders, who of all men are the most execrable ; while boasting
of liberty, he tramples on the dearest rights of men and i the
greatest robber of it on earth.
Resolved, That we deprecate an appeal to arras by any class of our
fellow citizens, except in extreme cases, and we think that such a
case hasbeen presented in the late outrage at Cincinnati.
Resolved, That when a class of men so far forget the duty they owe
to God, their fellow men, and their country, as to trample under their
feet the very laws they have made, and are in duty bound to obey
and execute, we believe it to be the duty of our brethren and fellow
citizens, to protect their lives against such lawless mobs ; andif in the
conflict, any of the motocrats perish, every good citizen should say
Amen.
Resolved, That we do truly sympathize with the friends of Gods
poor ; the friends of the oppressed, throughout this boasted land of
liberty, in the losses they have sustained in consequence of the mob.
Resolved, That we believe the time is not far distant, when the
Queen City of the West, shall be redeemed from the hateful influence
of the slaveholder ; redeemed fromthat cruel prejudice of caste which
hangs like a mill-stone around the neck of our people ; redeemed
from all those unequal laws, which have a tendency to make the
H*


--- PAGE 192 ---
178 PERSECUTION OF THE COLORED PEOPLE.
strong stronger and the &quot;weak weaker; redeemed from their false
hearted friends, whose sarcastic smile is more to be feared than the
frowns of an open enemy.
Resolved, That the untiring exertions of our friends, and the inde-
mtigable industry of our brethren, are sure guarantees that the State
of Ohio will not long be what she now is, a hissing and by-word
on account of her iniquitous laws ; but that she will rise above every
narrow minded prejudice, and raise up hei sable sons and daughters
and place them on an equality with the rest of her citizens.
Resolved, That we deeply deplore the loss our friends have sus
tained in the destruction of their printing press in Cincia ati
Resolved, That we as an oppressed people, feel i! c a claty to give
our undivided support to the press and the laborers in our cause.
Mr. Israel Lewis made his way to Canada, and
having obtained permission to establish a colony, he
bargained with the Canada Company for one township
of land, for which he agreed to pay the money
demanded, in a few days, and then returned to Cincin
nati, by way of Eochester. Thf poor, persecuted
colored people, had in the mean ti~ue made ready for
their flight from their homes, their native land, and
from this boasted free Eepublic, to seek a residence in
the cold and dreary wilds of Canada
;
to claim that
protection from the English government which had
been denied them in the land of their birth; and
like the overtasked Israelites, &quot;they went out with
their wives and their little ones,&quot; but with smaller
possessions.
During the stay of Mr. Lewis in Eochester, he


--- PAGE 193 ---
LEAVE ROCHESTER FOR CANADA. 179
reported there and elsewhere, that eleven hundred
persons were then in the dense woods of Canada in a
state of actual starvation, and called upon the humane
everywhere, to assist them in such extreme suffering.
To me he also told the story of their destitution,
which affected me deeply. I had at that time just
made a public profession of my faith in the Christian
religion and my determination to be governed by its
holy precepts. I felt for the distressed and suffering
everywhere;
but particularly for those who had fled,
poor and destitute, from cruel task-masters, choosing
rather the sufferings of cold and hunger, with liberty,
than the meager necessities of life and Slavery. I
concluded to go to Canada and try to do some good;
to be of some little service in the great cause of
humanity.
As soon as practicable therefore, I left Eochester for
Toronto, the capital of Upper Canada, which I found
quite a thriving town, and containing some fine brick
buildings, and some I saw were built of mud, dried in
the sun, wearing rather a poor than pretty appearance.
AtToronto we hired a team to take us on to Ancaster,
fifty miles distant. We traveled now through a new
country; the roads were very bad, and the inhabitants
few. We, however, reached Ancaster, a small village,
where we remained one night and netmorningpursu
ed our journey to the settlement of the poor fugitives
from Cincinnati. After some hard traveling, we


--- PAGE 194 ---
180 PERSECUTION OF THE COLORED PEOPLE.
finally arrived at the place where we found our
brethren, it is true, but in quite destitute circum
stances. Our fare was poor indeed, but as good as
they could get. The township was one unbroken
wilderness when purchased for the colony, and of
course their lands must be cleared of the heavytimber
before crops could be got in, hence, there was a great
deal of destitution and suffering before their harvest
could ripen after the land was prepared for the seed.
The day after I arrived at the settlement, which
consisted of a few rude log cabins, a meeting was
called to give the township a name. Several were
suggested, but I at length motioned to name it in
honor of the great philanthropist, Wilberforce. This
was carried, and the township from that time has been
known by that name. It is situated on what is
known as the Huron Tract, Kent County, London
District, and is the next north of the township of
London. Our neighbors on the south, were a com
pany of Irish people, who owned the township, and
on the west side were a township of Welshmen,~-a
hardy, industrious and enterprising people.
In Wilberforce there were no white inhabitants;
the land appeared level and handsome, with but one
stream of any magnitude running through it
;
this was
the Oxsable, which was dry during a part of the
year. All was one vast forest of heavy timber, that
would compare well with that of Western New York.


--- PAGE 195 ---
PRODUCE OF THE SETTLEMENT. 181
Beech, maple, ash, elm, oak, whitewood, bass, balm
of gilead, &c. The soil was good for corn, wheat,
rye, oats, and most kinds of the grain and vege
tables raised in New York, and was a superior grazing
country, about fifteen miles from London. This was
a village containing perhaps thirty dwellings, and two
hundred inhabitants ;
a court-house and jail all under
one roof, built of stone and plastered ;
small doors and
windows in the style of some of the old English
castles. London was built in the forks, or between
the east and west branches of the river Thames;
hence, you would hear people speak of
&quot;
going to the
forks,&quot; instead of the village; it is about two hundred
miles from Buffalo, and the nearest port between the
two is Port Stanley, thirty miles from London.
I returned from Canada, where I had seen an
oppressed people struggling with the hardships and
privations of a new settlement
;
I had seen wretched
ness in some places, but by no means sufficient to
justify the report made by Mr. Lewis, and I deter
mined I would remove there with my family, and do
sll in my power to assist the colored people in
Canada.
I had witnessed a disposition on the part of some
to prevent our brethren from settling in WHberforce,
while the colonizationists made a grand argument of
it in favor of their wicked policy. All must see that
it became a necessity with those who fled to Canada


--- PAGE 196 ---
182 PERSECUTION OF THE COLORED PEOPLE.
to save themselves from constant abuse or iron?
Slavery, and in some instances their lives; and not
because they admitted the justice of one portion of
American citizens driving another from their native
land; nor their right to colonize them anywhere on
the habitable globe.
All these things taken into consideration, deter
mined me to join them in the enterprize of building
up an asylum for the oppressed, where our colored
friends could obtain a home, and where, by their
industry they could obtain a competency for them
selves, besides providing a safe retreat for the weary
fugitive from Slavery; guiding by its beacon light of
liberty, the destitute and oppressed everywhere, to
home and plenty.
I felt willing to make any sacrifice in mypower to
serve my Lord, by administering to the necessities of
my down-trodden countrymen. How far my desire
has been accomplished God only knows, but I do
know that the purest motives influenced me, and an
honest purpose directed my steps in removing to
&quot;Wilberforce. Not so with all, however. Some there
were, Judas-like, who &quot;cared not for the poor; but
because he was a thief and had the bag, and bare
what was put therein,&quot; made great exertions for a
time in favor of the settlement. It too soon became
apparent that to make money was the prominent
object with by far too great a number of the colonists;
hence, our future difficulties.


--- PAGE 197 ---
CHAPTER XX.
REMOVAL TO CANADA.
IN
1830, I closed my business in Rochester, pre
paratory to leaving for Canada. Some of my
friends thought I had better remain in the States and
direct emigrants to Wilberforce ;
while others were
certain I could benefit them more by going myself at
once, the latter I had determined to do
;
but as the
time drew near for me to start, an unaccountable
gloominess and forebodings of evil took possession of
mymind. Doubts of the practicability of the under
taking began to arise, though nothing unfavorable had
occurred. To the throne of grace, I often bore the
subject and besought myHeavenly Father to enlighten
mymind, and direct mysteps in duty s path regarding
it
;
but to confess the truth, I never received any great
encouragement from that source, though it occupied
my mind constantly. During the hours of slumber I
was continually being startled by frightful dreams,


--- PAGE 198 ---
184 REMOVAL TO CANADA.
sometimes I thought I saw a monstrous serpent as
large as a log stretched across the road between
Eochester and the Genesee Kiver; at another I
thought myself in the air so high that I could have a
full view of the shores of Lake Ontario, and they
were alive with snakes
;
and then I saw a large bird
like an eagle, rise up out of the water and fly toward
the south.
Notwithstanding these omens, I turned my steps
toward Wilberforce. In May, 1831, we bid adieu to
our friends in Kochester, and taking passage to
Buffalo on a canal boat, we arrived in due time, and
from whence we sailed for Port Stanley, or as it is
sometimes called, Kettle Creek. It took a week to
make this trip, which, with favorable wind might have
been made in two days. The mouth of the creek
makes a safe harbor at that place, where there is also
a dock, one ware-house and several farm houses. The
place was then verywild andpicturesque in its appear
ance; we did not stop long, however, to admire its
beauty, but engaged a farmer to take us on to London.
Ten miles on our way, and we came to a newly laid
out village, called St. Thomas, from whence we pur
sued our journey through a new country to London,
where we arrived tired and hungry, and put up for
the night with a Mr. Faden. There I purchased a
span of horses for one hundred and fifty dollars, and
putting them before a new lumber wagon brought on


--- PAGE 199 ---
ARRIVAL WITH FAMILY AT WILBERFORCE. 185
from Rochester, westarted for our wild and new home
in good spirits, at which we arrived in good time.
The colony was comprised of some fourteen or
fifteen families, and numbered some over fifty persons
in all. The first business done after my arrival, was
to appoint a board of managers, to take the general
oversight of all the public business of the colony.
The board consisted of seven men, chosen by the
settlers, and as I was now one of them, they gave me
the office of President. It was also resolved by the
board, to send out two agents for the purpose of soli
citing aid for the erection of houses for worship, and
for the maintenance of schools in the colony.
The Rev. N. Paul was chosen one of their agents,
and he received from me a power of attorney,
authorising himto collect funds for the above purposes
in England, Ireland, and Scotland;
the other, I. Lewis
was empowered to solicit and collect funds for the
same objects in the United States.
Preparations were immediately madeto fit Mr. Paul
out for his mission to England, from whence he was to
remit any funds he might receive to Arthur Tappan,
of New York City; first to pay for his outfit, and
afterwards to the treasurer of the board of managers,
for the support of schools in Wilberforce. Mr. Paul,
however, still lacked money to proceed to England,
and therefore went to Eochester, where he found my
old and tried friend Everard Peck
; who was ever


--- PAGE 200 ---
186 REMOVAL TO CANADA.
known as the poor mans friend, and the support of
the weak everywhere. To this good man, whose
memory is still dear to thousands, Mr. Paul showed
his power of attorney, at the same time informing him
of the condition and wants of the colony ;
and as was
ever his wont, when help was needed, his purse,
(though not one of the, heaviest), was at his service.
Through the kind influence of Mr. Peck, and some of
the colored friends in that city, a note for seven
hundred dollars was drawn up, signed by Mr. P. and
cashed at the Bank, which enabled the agent to
make the voyage without further delay. He reached
England, and collected quite large sums of money, but
entirely failed in the remittance of any sums, either to
Mr. Tappan or myself. When the note of seven
hundred dollars became due, Mr. Peck was obliged
to pay, and lose it. It was out of my power, nor had
any of the friends the means to do any thing towards
paying it, inasmuch as they had assisted Paul all they
could and got nothing in return. There was one
thing, however, that the reverend gentleman did do,~
he wrote me from time to time, to keep me advised of
the success of his mission, and once informed me that
he had then twelve hundred dollars on hand
;
but not
a farthing could we get. We wrote him again and
again, reminding him of the bank debt, and the
uneasiness of his friends on account of it, but all to no
purpose, the Atlantic was between us, and he was


--- PAGE 201 ---
DISHONEST AGENTS. 187
making money too easily, to like to be interrupted.
He never paid one dollar.
Let us now look after the other agent, who had
likewise been fitted out, to prosecute his mission in
the States. That he collected money professedly for
the assistance of the colony, is too well known to
require proof, but how much, wecould not determine;
we had reason to believe, however, that he retained
quite a large sum. He would neither pay it over to
the board, nor give any account of his proceedings.
Very little did he ever pay over to the aid of the
colony as designed. He was frequently written to,
and every means in our power used, to induce him to
give some account of his mission, but in vain; he
would do nothing of the kind. Things went on in
this way for two years, when it became evident that
he had no intention of satisfying the minds of the
settlers
; and farther, that he meant to collect what he
could, and use it as he pleased. &quot;We learned too, that
when abroad, he lived extravagantly, putting up at
the most expensive hotels, giving parties, and doing
many things, not only beyond his means, but that
&quot;brought dishonor on the cause and colony. When he
returned to the settlement, he would, if he had funds,
make presents to his particular friends instead of
paying it to the treasurer, as he was pledged to do,
until the majority of the colony became thoroughly
dir.gusted with his heartlessness and dishonesty. It


--- PAGE 202 ---
188 REMOVAL TO CANADA.
was also perceivable that Lewis and Paul both, were
getting weary of the solicitations of the board and
complaints of the settlers, and were anxious to be rid
of them, and enjoy their ill gotten gains in their own
way.
It was never intended by the managers, to send out
agents to beg money to be divided among the colo
nists; but to support schools, &c. Most of the settlers
were able to work and did so; and were now getting
along quite pleasantly.
Finally, after we had tried every means in vain, to
get a settlement with Lewis, and to obtain his papers,
there was nothing more we could do, but to warn the
public against him, by publishing the facts in the
case; this we did in various newspapers of Canada
and in the States. Anarticle inserted in the &quot;Koches-
ter Observer,&quot; to that effect, was like throwing a
lighted match into a keg of powder. The excitement
was intense on the part of Lewis and his friends, who
were joined by the friends of N. Paul, to destroy, if
they could, the board of managers. I, however, being
the only member of that devoted board, who happened
to be extensively known in the States, their anathemas
were all poured out on me, and all their energies
brought forward to insure my destruction. They
were few in number, it is true, but they had money,
and I had little to spend in litigation ; besides, Lewis
was in debt, and his creditors did not like to see his


--- PAGE 203 ---
MALIGNITY OF AGENTS. 189
means of paying them swept away. The Canadians
seemed to think there was no harm done if Lewis did
get money out of the &quot;Yankees,&quot; as long as it came
into their hands at last, and so, on the whole, they
raised a tremendous storm, designed, however, to
sweep nobody away but myself; and I have con
tinued to this day, notwithstanding all their artful
malignity. Nothing, I am persuaded, could have
saved me from imprisonment at that time, had I not
possessed a high reputation for truth . and honesty
during my previous sojourn in the colony.
Lewis had dealt somewhat extensively with Mr.
Jones, who was the principal agent for the Canada
Company;
but failing to fulfil his agreement, regard
ing the payment for a large tract of land, it so
exasperated Mr. Jones, that he declared he would
have nothing to do with any of the colored people;
and so when I wanted to buy a lot of land, he would
not sell it to nie because he so despised Lewis.
How much harm can one wicked man doI and yet
it cannot be right to judge the character of a whole
class or community by that of one person.


--- PAGE 204 ---
CIIAPTEK XXI.
ROUGHING IT IN THE WILDS OF CANADA.
THE
&quot;Canada Company,&quot; of which I have so
frequently spoken, was an association of wealthy
gentlemen, residing in England; something like the
East India Company, especially regarding the title of
lands. They had sent on their agent and purchased a
large tract of land known as the &quot;Huron Tract,&quot;
extending from London to Lake Huron, where they
laid out a village, named Goderich, sixty miles distant
from Wilberforce. With this company, Mr. Lewis
had contracted for a township of land, as agent for tha
Cincinnati refugees ;
but failing to meet the demand,
the company kindly extended the time of paymeiit;
but when that time also passed without receiving any
thing from Lewis, the general agent, Mr. Jones
became so indignant, that he utterly refused to sell a
foot of land to any colored person whatever. This


--- PAGE 205 ---
LIBERALITY OF THE SOCIETY OF FKIENDS. 191
proved to be one of the greatest detriments to the
prosperity of the colony it ever met.
The Society of Friends at this time, however, with
commendable sympathy for the oppressed and abused
colored residents of Cincinnati, and with their prover
bial liberality, raised a sum of money sufficient to
purchase eight hundred acres of land of the Canada
Company for the benefit of the colony. The funds
were placed in the hands of one of their number,
Frederick Stover, who went to Canada as their agent,
purchased the land, and settled colored people upon it,
which comprised nearly all of the Wilberforce settle
ment. This occurred before I settled in Canada, and
the consequence was, when I desired to purchase land,
none could be obtained. At the time, however, of
which I am speaking, the Canada Company were
constructing a road through their possessions, some
seventy miles in length, and the principal contractor,
Mr. Ingersoll, had agreed to take land in part pay
ment for his services on the road. In accordance with
this agreement, he accepted one lot of land situated
within the Wilberforce settlement, which he agreed to
sell to Mr. Lewis for twenty-five dollars. Mr. Lewis,
knowing that I was anxious to purchase, accepted the
offer, and then came and showed the contract, offering
it to me on condition that I paid him the twenty-five
dollars which he had just paid Mr. Ingersoll. This I
was glad to do
;
I paid the demand
;
took an assign-


--- PAGE 206 ---
192 ROUGHING IT IN THE WILDS OF CANADA.
ment on the back of the receipt, and passed into
immediate possession of the land. He at the same
time requested me to take up a note of twenty-five
dollars for him; which I did, on his promising to
refund the money in a short time.
I commenced laboring on the wild land I had pur
chased; cleared some ten acres, which in consequence
of its being so heavily timbered, cost me at least
twenty-five dollars per acre;
built a house and barn
supposing myself its legal possessor, until I chanced
to meet Mr. Ingersoll, who informed me that Mr.
Jones had refused to sell him the land to be disposed
of to a colored person; that he had duly informed
Lewis of the fact, and had returned to himthe twenty-
five dollars received. Not a word of this, had Lewis
communicated to me, though he knew I was making
expensive improvements, in the faith that I was its
only owner. Instead of atoning for the wrong already
done me, he made it the basis of a deeper injury.
i After one year s residence in Wilberforce, I found
it necessary to return to Eochester to settle some
unfinished business; and when on my way thither I
stopped at London, where I found Lewis, who had
not only preceded me but had taken out a capias, for
forty pounds currency. I was therefore obliged to get
bail for myappearance at court, after which I pursued
myjourney.


--- PAGE 207 ---
RETURN TO ROCHESTER ON BUSINESS. 193
On my arrival in Rochester, I found business at a
stand
;
and the community in a state of excitement
and alarm, on account of that fell destroyer, the
cholera. This was its first visit to the United States,
and the fearful havocit was making, spread terror and
consternation throughout the land. I returned t(j
Canada; but found on my arrival at London, that
&quot;the pestilence that walketh at noon-day,&quot; had pre
ceded me, and taken from that village my friend, Mr.
Ingersoll, with several others. So great had been the
alarm, that instead of my appearing at court as I
expected to do, I found it adjourned, and the judge
returned to his home.
I hastened on to Wilberforce, which had fortunately
escaped the fearful scourge, with terrible apprehen
sions.
Having a little spare time, I went out with myrifle,
in search of deer
; but soon came upon a large wolf,
which I wounded with the first shot; he, however,
sprang aside and was gone. On looking about for
him I espied another! reloading myrifle, I fired, and
he fell dead at my feet, while my dog at the same
time I heard barking furiously. Having dispatched
this second intruder, I saw that my dog had the first
one, entangled in the branches of a fallen tree. I
searched for myballs, and was vexed to find that I
had left them at home. In this predicament I cut
with myknife, a knotfrom a beech limb, put it in my
I


--- PAGE 208 ---
19-i ROUGHING IT IN THE WILDS OF CANADA.
rifle, and took deadly aim at the enraged wolf. The
wooden ball struck him between the eyes and killed
him on the spot.
The two dead animals, with their skins, I sold for
nine dollars and a half, making pretty good wages
for a few hours labor.
Hunting was very generally pursued by the settlers,
with great earnestness and considerable skill. The
forest abounded with deer, wolves, bears, and other
wild animals. Bears were plenty, and very trouble
some because so dangerously tame. One day, our
children had built for themselves a play-house, a few
rods from the door, and were enjoying their play
when they were called in to dinner. Amoment after,
I observed one of the settlers gazing intently at the
play-house; I called to know what so attracted his
attention, and he informed me that an old bear, with
three cubs, hadjust then taken possession of the play
house. And sure enough there they were I
knocking
about among the dishes, and munching the crumbs of
bread which the children had left. The man was sup
plied with a loaded rifle and urged to shoot them, but
he begged to be excused from a pitched battle with so
many;
and the bears leisurely took their departure for
the woods without molestation. The play-house,
however, was soon deserted by the children after
these unbidden guests had made so free with it
;
and
we were ourselves somewhat alarmed for the safety


--- PAGE 209 ---
VISITED BY BEARS AT WILBERFORCE. 195
of our children, who were accustomed to roam in the
edge of the forest, and make swings of the luxuriant
grape vines.
But such incidents are common in a new country,
surrounded as we were by a dense wilderness.


--- PAGE 210 ---
CHAPTER XXII.
NARROW ESCAPE OF A SMUGGLER.
FROM
the time I first settled in Wilberforce, my
house had ever been open to travelers and
strangers;
but a conversation I happened to overhear,
led me to take a course different from what I had at
first intended. I was at a public house about twenty
miles from home, when I heard the landlord advising
his guest to eat heartily, for, said he, &quot;you will find
nothing more worthy of your attention, until you
reach Wilberforce. When you arrive at that settle
ment, inquire for A. Steward, from the States, and he
will give you a meal fit for a prince.&quot; I began to
reflect on the subject and concluded, inasmuch as
people would send company to me, it would be better
to make some preparation for entertaining them. I had
plenty of furniture, and all I needed was a larger
supply of food, to commence keeping a tavern. Thia


--- PAGE 211 ---
A STRANGE VISITOR. 197
was easily obtained, and I opened a public house
which was well patronized.
One day while I was absent from home, a man
drove to the door the finest span of horses, I think I
ever saw. black as jet, witn proudly arched necKs,
and glossy tails that nearly swept the around. The
gentleman sprang from his carriage, bounded through
the open door, and in the most excited manner, began
to inquire &quot;who owns this establishment? When
will he return ? Can I be accommodated? Can I see
your barn?
&quot;
&c. The stable boy took him to the
barn, from whence he soon returned
;
his face flushed,
and breathing so heavily as to be heard all through
the apartment; trembling so violently that he could
scarcely speak at all, but made out to inquire,
&quot;
if
there was not some place besides the barn where he
eould put his horses?
&quot;
He was told that there was a
email shelter built for cows, in bad weather, and the
next moment he was examining it. In a very short
time he had his horses and carriage stowed away in
the cow-shed. He acted like a crazy man
;
but when
he had secured his horses, he re-entered the house and
frankly apologized for his conduct.
&quot;
I may as well
tell you the truth,&quot; said he;
&quot;I am suspected of
smuggling goods; a reward is offered for my arrest,
and the constables are on my track, in pursuit of me.
My name is Cannouse, and I am from M , in
Ontario County.&quot;


--- PAGE 212 ---
198 NARROW ESCAPE OF A SMUGGLER.
But perhaps they can not prove you guilty of
smuggling, said I, in an after conversation.
&quot;Ah,&quot; said he, &quot;there is for me no such hope or
probability: I have been engaged for the last few
montns in tne sale of dress-goods and broad-cloths,
and my exposure and flight is the consequence of mr
own folly. &quot;While in the village of St. Catharines, I
took a young girl out to ride, after she had engaged
to accompany another young fellow, which of course
offended him
;
and he being too well posted up on my
affairs, went directly to the custom house officer and
informed against me. I was sitting in the parlor,
perfectly at ease, when a young man, a relative of the
young lady in question, burst into the room, shouting,
l
FlyI fly
I for your life ! The officers are uponyou
!
And I did fly ;
with barely time to reach the woods,
for as I sprang through the back door, the officers
entered through the front door. Myhorses were my
first consideration ; theyhad been raised by my father,
and should I lose them, I should never dare to meet
him again. In my hasty flight, I engaged the young
man to conceal them till night, and then to drive them
to a certain place where I would meet him. This he
did, and I kept on my flight until I came to the house
of a friend, where I halted to make inquiries. The
gentleman had just come from London, and had
seen handbills at every conspicuous place, describing
me and my horses. I asked him what I should do?


--- PAGE 213 ---
THE SMUGGLER PURSUED. 199
He said, you are not safe a moment; there is no
hope but in flight ; avoid the main road, and get to
the colony if you can; if you succeed, go to A.
Steward; he is an upright man and will never betray
you for money. And nere I am: if I am arresteu,
six months imprisonment, three hundred dollars fine,
ana the forfeiture of myfather s valuable and favorite
horses, will be my portion. I have had no regular
meal for the last three days, and my head aches
violently.&quot;
Wegave himsome refreshment, and conducted him
to a room, assuring him that he should have it to
himself. All remained quiet until midnight, when a
man knocked cautiously at our door. I opened it
myselfj and a gentleman, looking carefully about the
place, inquired,
&quot;Are you full?&quot;
&quot;No,&quot; said L
&quot;
Have you any travelers here to night ?
&quot;
&quot;Yes.&quot;
&quot;How many?&quot;
&quot;Two.&quot;
&quot;Where are they?&quot;
&quot;
In this room; walk in, sir.&quot;
He took the light from my hand, and stepping
lightly up to a bed, where two travelers were quietly
sleeping, he closely examined their faces. He soon
returned the light, and without further inquiry retired


--- PAGE 214 ---
200 NARROW ESCAPE OF A SMUGGLER,
from the house. When his companions came up, I
distinctly heard him tell them that the smuggler was
not there.
4
You mav be mistaken.&quot; said the other, &quot;ana we
must search the barn for his horses.&quot;
This they did thoroughly, after procuring a lantern
but without finding any thing to reward their diligem
search ;
and they finally drove off.
When they had gone, Cannouse groaned most
bitterly, and trembled from head to foot at the
thought of his narrow escape. The next day an
officer rode up to where the children were playing,
with a handbill which he read, and inquired if they
had seen a person bearing that description, pass that
day? They answered negatively, and he rode on.
The poor frightened Cannouse stayed with us a week;
and nearly every day during the time, the house and
barn were searched for him. The children kept
watch, and when they saw any one coming they
would let him know, in time to take himself and
horses into a thicket near by. When he thought
pursuit was over, he started to leave ; but when, in a
half hour after, a posse of men drove up to my door,
flourishing their handbills, I thought it all over with
Cannouse. I told them that he was not there
;
but
they chose to have another search, and when they
found nothing, the officer sprang into his carriage,
exclaiming, &quot;come on, boys; well soon have him


--- PAGE 215 ---
THE SMUGGLER MAKES GOOD HIS ESCAPE. 201
now
; we have tracked him here, and he can t be far
off/
Cannouse had left us, feeling quite secure ; but he
had traveled but a short distance, when he observed a
horse shoe loose, and to get it fastened he drove down
to a blacksmith s shop, which happened to stand at
the foot of a hill
;
and between it and the highway
there had been left standing a clump of trees which
nearly hid it from view. While there, getting his
horse shod, the officers passed him unobserved, and
he finally escaped.
Some time after, a gentleman called on us who had
seen Cannouse in Michigan, where he was doing well.
He had succeeded in reaching Detroit, from whence
he passed safely to his home;
but probably learned a
lesson not to be forgotten. He was a talented young
man one who would have felt deeply the disgrace
of imprisonment, and it was indeed a pleasure to me
to do what I could, to effect his release from an
unenviable position. I would never have betrayed
him
; but happily I was not asked directly for him,
until he was gone from my house and protection.


--- PAGE 216 ---
CHAPTER XXIII.
NARRATIVE OF TWO FUGITIVES FROM VIRGINIA.
settlers in Wilberforce, were in general, in-
I dustrious and thrifty farmers :
they cleared their
land, sowed grain, planted orchards, raised cattle, and
in short, showed to the world that they were in no
way inferior to the white population, when given an
equal chance with them. In proof of this let me say,
that it was uniformly the practice of persons traveling
from London to Groderich, to remain in our settlement
over night, in preference to going on to find entertain
ment among their own class of people. And we
believe that the whites are bound to admit, that the
experiment of the Wilberforce colony proves that the
colored man can not only take care of himself, but is
capable of improvement; as industrious and intelli
gent as themselves, when the yoke is taken from off
their necks, and a chance given them to exercise their
abilities. True, many of them had just escaped from


--- PAGE 217 ---
APPEARANCE OF A SLAVE DEALER. 203
cruex task-masters; ignorant of almost every thing
but the lash, but the air of freedom so invigorated
and put new life into their weary bodies, that they
soon became intelligent and thrifty.
Among the settlers might be gathered many a
thrilling narrative, of suffering and hair-breadth
escapes from the slave-land, one of which I will
tell as twas told to me.
In a small rude cabin, belonging to one of the large
plantations in Virginia, sat at a late hour of the night,
an afflicted slave-man and his devoted wife, sad and
weeping. At length the husband repeated what he
before had been saying
:
&quot;
I tell you, wife, wemust flee fromthis place, with
out delay. Oh, I cannot endure the idea of seeing
you sold for the Southern market, to say nothing of
myself; and we shall most likely be separated, which
I can t bear! Oh, Eosa, the thought distracts me,
I can t bear it!&quot;
&quot;
Are you sure,&quot; said Kosa, &quot;that master thinks of
such a frightful doom for us?
&quot;
&quot;
Oh yes, I know it; I heard master to-day making
a bargain with the slave dealer that has been hanging
about here so long; and when it was finished, I heard
him reading over the list, and our names, wife, are
the first on it.&quot;
&quot;Oh, dear!&quot; sobbed the wife, &quot;we shall certainly


--- PAGE 218 ---
204 NARRATIVE OF TWO FUGITIVES.
be retaken and whipped to death; or else we shall
starve in the wilderness! Oh, it is very hard to be
compelled to leave all our friends and the old planta
tion where we were born !
&quot;
&quot;Yes; it is both hard and unjust,&quot; said Joe, and an
indignant frown contracted his brow, &quot;here is our
birth-place, and here, for forty years have I toiled
early and late to enrich mymaster
;
and you, my poor
wife, a few years less; and now we are to be sold,
separated, and all without a choice of our own. We
must go, Eosa. If we die, let us die together
!
&quot;
&quot;It shall be as you say, Joe,&quot; she replied, &quot;but it
frightens me to think of the hardships of the way,
and the danger of being recaptured.&quot;
&quot;
Courage, wife : no fate can be worse than the one
designed for us
;
and we have no time to lose To
morrow night, then, we must make the first effort to
gain our liberty, and leave all that is dear to us except
each other !
&quot;
And they retired to rest, but not to
sleep.
The following night was very dark ; and as soon as
all was quiet on the plantation, they stole out of their
cabin and stealthily crept over the ground until they
reached the highway ;
and then, guided only by the
north star, they made their way to the nearest woods.
So fearful had they been of being suspected, that they
took no provision of any kind with them. All night


--- PAGE 219 ---
TRIALS AND HUNGER IN THE WILDERNESS. 205
they plunged forward through the tangled thicket and
under-brush, sorrounded by thick darkness, glancing
now and then upward to their only light,
&quot;Star of the North! though night winds drift the fleecy
drapery of the sky,
Between thy lamp and thee, I lift, yea, lift with hope
my sleepless eye.&quot;
When day dawned they threw their weary bodies
on the ground, famished and thirsty, and waited for
the darkness to again conceal them while they pursued
their journey. The second day of their flight, the
pain of hunger became almost beyond endurance.
They found a few roots which relieved them a little
;
but frequently they lost their way, and becoming be
wildered, knewnot which wayto go; they pushed on,
however, determined to keep as far from their pursuers
as possible. Their shoes were soon worn out; but
bare-footed, bare-headed, and famishing with hunger,
they pressed forward, until the fourth day, when they
found themselves too weak to proceed further. Hope,
the anchor of the soul, had failed them! They
were starving in a dense forest ! No track or path
could they find, and even had they seen a human
being, they would have been more terrified than at
the sight of a wild beast !
Poor Kosa, could go no farther her strength was
all gone and as her emaciated husband laid her on


--- PAGE 220 ---
206 NARRATIVE OF TWO FUGITIVES.
the cold earth, he exclaimed,
&quot;
Oh, dear God! must
we, after all our efforts, starve in this dark wilder
ness! Beside his fainting wife, he finally stretched
himself, sheltered only by a few bushes, and tried to
compose himself to die! but resting a few moments
revived him, and he aroused himself, to make one
more effort for life I
&quot;
Stay you here, wife, and I will
try once more to find the highway;
it cannot be far
from here
;
and if I amtaken, I will submit to myfete
without a struggle ; we can but die.&quot; So saying, he
left her, and began to reconnoitre the country around
them. Much sooner than he expected he emerged
from the wood, and not far distant he saw a house in
the direction from whence he came; being, however,
as most of the slaves are, superstitious, he thought it
would be a bad omen to turn backward, and so
continued to look about him. It seemed, he said, that
some unseen power held him, for though starving as
he was, he could not take a step in that direction
;
and
at last as he turned around, to his great joy, he saw
another dwelling a little way off, and toward that he
hastened his now lightened footsteps. With a palpi
tating heart, he approached the door and knocked
cautiously. The man of the house opened it, and as
soon as he sawhim, he said, &quot;You are a fugitive slave,
but be not alarmed, come in
;
no harm shall befall you
here
;
I shall not inquire from whence you came; it is
enough for me to know that ycu are a human being


--- PAGE 221 ---
THE GOOD SAMARITAN. 207
in distress
;
consider me your friend, and let me know
your wants.&quot;
&quot;
Bread! Oh, for a morsal of bread!&quot; said the
famished creature, while his hitherto wild and sunken
eyes, began to distil grateful tears. The &quot;good
Samaritan&quot; stepped to another apartment aud brought
him a piece of bread, which he expected to see him
devour at once, but instead, he looked at it wistfully,
literally devouring it with his eyes ;
turned it over
and over, and at last stammered out,
&quot;
mygoodmaster,
without a piece of bread for my poor starving wife, I
can never swallow this, tempting as it is.&quot;
&quot;Poor man,&quot; said his benefactor, &quot;can it be that
you have a wife with you, wretched as yourself?
&quot;
He brought out a loaf ofbread, some cheese and meat,
and while the fugitive was preparing to return, the
kind gentleman said,
&quot;I am glad you came to me;
had you called at the house you first saw, you would
have been betrayed, and immediately arrested. You
must remember,&quot; he continued,
&quot;
that you are young
and valuable slaves, and that your master will make
every effort in his power to find you, especially since
he has made a sale of you. To-day and to-night,
remain in the woods, and the next morning you
may come to me, if all is quiet; should I see danger
approaching you, I will warn you of it by the crack
my rifle. Go now, to your poor wife, and listen for
the signal of danger; if you hear none, come to me at


--- PAGE 222 ---
208 NARRATIVE OF TWO FUGITIVES.
the appointed time.&quot; He returned, and after feeding
his helpless Eosa, she revived, and soon felt quite
comfortable and grateful.
When the morning came for them to leave their
retreat, they listened intently, but hearing nothing,
Joe started for the residence of his friend. He had
been gone but a short time, when his wife, who lay in
the bushes, thought she heard the tramp of horses,
she crept nearer the highway, and peeping through
the bush Oh, horror! what was her consternation
and sickening fear, to find herself gazing upon the
well-known features of her old master, and two of
his neighbors, all armed to the teeth 1 Her heart
seemed to stand still, and the blood to chill in her
veins. Had she been discovered she would have been
an easy prey, for she declared that she could not move
a step. In the meantime her husband had got about
half way to the residence of his preserver, when his
quick ear detected the sound made by the feet of
horses, and as he stopped to listen more intently, the
sharp crack of a rifle sent him bounding back to his
concealment in the forest.
The party of horsemen rode on to the dwelling of
the kind hearted gentleman, and inquired whether he
had seen any fugitive slaves pass that way.
&quot;I saw,&quot; said he,
&quot;a man and woman passing
rapidly along the road, but do not know whether
they were fugitives, as I did not see their faces.&quot; The


--- PAGE 223 ---
ARRIVAL AND SETTLEMENT IN CINCINNATI. 209
human blood-hound, thanked the gentleman for the
information, and immediately set out in pursuit; but,
just as the informant had intended, in a direction
opposite to that tne slaves nad taken. That night, Joe
and Kosa visited the house of their benefactor, where
they were supplied with clothing and as much food
as they could carry;
and next day they went on their
wayrejoicing. Theysettled in Cincinnati, where they
lived happily, until the mob drove them with others,
to the &quot;Wilberforce settlement, where they are in no
danger of the auction block, or of a Southern market;
and are as much devoted to each other as ever.


--- PAGE 224 ---
CHAPTER XXIV.
PLEASANT RE-UNION OF OLD AND TRIED FRIENDS.
IT
is well known to those who have assisted in
clearing land in a new country, that bears, who
are not Jews, are very troublesome, and levy a heavy
tax on the settlers, to supply themselves with pork
their favorite food. One old bear in particular, had
for a long time annoyed the colonists, byrobbing their
hog-stys almost every night. We failed in all our
plans to destroy his life, until a woman saw him one
day, walking at ease through the settlement. Ahalf
dozen of us gave chase immediately, and came up
with him after traveling two miles. So anxious was I
to kill him, that I fired at first sight and missed him,
which gave us another two miles chase. When, how
ever, we came up, he was seated on a branch of a tree,
leisurely surveying us and the dogs, with great com
placency. Thecontents of myrifle brought himto the
ground, and stirred his blood for battle. One blow


--- PAGE 225 ---
VISITED BY WHITE MEN IN DISGUISE. 211
from his powerful paw, sent my fine greyhound some
yards distant, sprawling upon the ground, and when
he renewed the attack, Bruin met him with extended
jaws, taking and munching his head in his mouth.
Myrifle was now reloaded, and the second shot killed
Him on the spot. Wetied his legs together, and lifting
him on a pole, marched in triumph into tho settle
ment, where guns were discharged and cheers given,
in approbation of our success.
One winter s evening we had drawn closely around
the blazing fire, for the air was piercing cold without,
and the snow four feet deep on a level. Now and
then, a traveler might be seen on snow-shoes; but
though our cabin was situated on the king s highway,
we seldom saw company on such a night as this.
While the wind whistled, and the snow drifted about
our dwelling, we piled the wood higher in our ample
fire-place, and seated ourselves again, to resume the
conversation, when I was startled by a loud and
furious knocking at the door. I opened it to what I
supposed to be three Indians. Their costume was
that of the red man
;
but the voice of him who
addressed me was not that of an Indian.
&quot;
Can you
keep three poor devils here to night?&quot; said he, and
when I made further inquiry, he repeated the same
question; &quot;we can sleep,&quot; he continued, &quot;on the soft
side of a board
; only give us poor devils a shelter.&quot;
I told him we were not accustomed to turn away


--- PAGE 226 ---
212 RE-UNION OF OLD AND TRIED FRIENDS.
any one on such a night;
that they were welcome to
come in
;
and they were soon seated around our large
and cheerful fire.
They iiad laid aside their snow-shoes and Jniap-
sacks, and the heat of the fire soon made their
blankets uncomfortable; but as one of them made a
move to throw it off, another was heard to whisper,
&quot;
wait a little
;
we are among strangers, you know; so
do not make a display ofyourself.&quot; The fellow drew
his blanket about him; but we had heard and seen
enough to awaken curiosity, if not suspicion. In
passing out of the room soon after, I heard one of
these pretended Indians say to his companion,
&quot;
I
know these folks are from the States, for I smell
coffee.&quot; Whenthey finally sat down to table, and saw
silver upon it, they cast surprised and knowing
glances at each other, all of which we closely observ
ed, and were convinced, that they were not red men
of the forest, but belonged to that race who had so
long looked haughtily down upon the colored people ;
that the least exhibition of comfort, or show of refine
ment astonished them beyond measure.
In the meantime, my wife had whispered to me
that she was sure that the principal speaker was no
other than the aristocratic Mr. G , of Canan-
daigua. I could not believe it
;
I could not recognize
in that savage costume, one who had been bred in
affluence, and
&quot;
the star&quot; of genteel society. But my


--- PAGE 227 ---
THE NEW VISITORS RECOGNIZED. 213
wife soon developed the affair to our mutual satisfac
tion: G
,
on taking from her a cup of coffee,
remarked, &quot;this looks good; and I have had no good
coffee since I left my mothers house.&quot;
&quot;Does your mother still reside in C ?&quot;
asked Mrs. Steward.
&quot;My mother! mymother! what do you know of
my mother!&quot; said he, looking sharply at her; but
observing that they were recognized, they began to
laugh, and we had a hearty congratulation all round ;
while Gr
, starting up from table, exclaimed,
&quot;Come, boys, off with this disguise; we are among
friends now.&quot;
Our Indian guests, now appeared in costume more
like
&quot;
Broadway dandies,&quot; than savages. Dressed in
the finest cloth, with gold chains and repeaters ; and
all that constituted the toilet of a gentleman. After
tea they requested to dry some costly furs, which they
took from their knapsacks and hung around the fire.
The following day they took their leave, with many
apologies and explanations, regarding their appearance
and conduct. Theywere in the wilderness, they said,
trading for very valuable furs; they had money,
jewelry and rich goods, which they had taken that
method to conceal.
*
During all this time, there had been another visitor
in the house, who was sitting in a corner, absorbed in
writing. Our mock Indians had noticed him, and not


--- PAGE 228 ---
214: RE-UNION OF OLD AND TRIED FRIENDS
knowing who he was, expressed a determination
&quot;
to
quiz that deaf old devil,&quot; after supper. We all
seated ourselves around the fire, and our Canandaigua
friends, though no longer savages, had not forgotten
the silent man in the corner
; they began to question
him, and he aroused himself for conversation; nor
was it long before they forgot their design to quiz
him, and found themselves charmed listeners to the
brilliant conversation, of that world-renowned cham
pion of humanity, Benjamin Lundy, for he it was.
On this particular evening, he gave us a sketch of
his journey to Hayti ;
to accompany there and settle
some emancipated slaves
;
which I thought very inter
esting, and as I have never seen it in print I will here
relate it, as near as I can, in his own words:
In the State of Maryland, there lived a slaveholder,
the proprietor of some sixty slaves, and being some
what advanced in years, he determined to free them,
in accordance with the laws of that State, which
required that they be sent out of it.
He had thought the matter over, but being unde
cided where to send them, he sent for Mr. Lundy to
assist him in his proposed plan ;
who was only too
glad to comply with a request calculated to carry out
his own plans of philanthropy and equal rights.
When he had listened to the suggestions and ex
pressed desires of the planter, he offered his arguments
in favor of the West India Islands; and it was


--- PAGE 229 ---
NARRATIVE OF BENJAMIN LUNDY. 215
decided to send them to Hayti, as their future place of
residence.
Six weeks were allowed for preparations ;
then Mr.
Lundy was to return and take charge of them on the
voyage, and see them settled in their new homes.
When the appointed time arrived, Mr. Lundy was
there to accompany them on board a vessel bound for
Hayti;
on which was furnished as comfortable quar
ters, as the kindness of their conscientious master and
his own benevolent heart could suggest. When all
was ready, the Christian master came on board, to
take leave of those faithful servants, many of whom
had served him from their childhood, and all of whom
he had bound to his heart by kindness and Christian
benevolence. It was a sad parting; not because the
slaves did not love liberty, but because they appreci
ated their master s kind forbearance, and solicitude for
their future welfare. He had ever been a humane and
indulgent master
;
one who lightened the burthen of
the poor slave, all in his power. Amoments reflection
will show, that it is invariably this conscientious kind
of slaveholders, who are induced to emancipate their
slaves
;
and not the avaricious, cruel tyrant, whoneither
fears God nor regards his fellow man.
The master of the slaves had kindly informed them
of his intentions, of the probable length of the
voyage, and the unavoidable sickness they would
experience, &c.
;
but now, they were gazing up into


--- PAGE 230 ---
216 HE-UNION OF OLD AND TRIED FRIENDS.
his kind face for the last time, as lie knelt in prayer,
commending that numerous flock raised on his own
plantation to the care and protection of Almighty
God, beseeching Him to protect them in the storm
and dangers of the ocean
;
to guide them through this
life, and save them in the world to come
;
until the
sobs and cries of the poor slaves drowned his utter
ance. He at length took his final leave of them, and
of Mr. Lundy; and the ship sailed immediately.
They, however, met storms and adverse winds, which
detained them; and then the poor, ignorant slaves
began to believe what they had before suspected: that
this was only some wicked plan of Mr. Lundys, laid
to entice them awayfrom a kind master, and to plunge
them into some dreadful degradation and suffering.
&quot;
Master&quot; had not told them of the adverse winds, and
they were certain that some mischief was intended ;
they grew sullen and disobedient; andnotwithstanding
the kindness of Mr. Lundy, they murmured and com
plained, until his kind heart sank within him
;
still he
pursued the even tenor of his way, trusting in God
for deliverance. He watched over them in sickness,
and administered to all their wants; but his tender
solicitude for their health and comfort, only excited
suspicion, and increased their ungrateful ill humor.
One pleasant evening, Mr. Lundy paced the deck
in deep thought. He was sad, and well nigh hopeless.
He had seen enough in the fierce look and sullen


--- PAGE 231 ---
NARRATIVE CONTINUED. 217
scowl
;
and had heard enough of the bitterness, and
threatening anger of the negroes, to knowthat a storm
was gathering, which must soon burst in all its wild
fury over his devoted head. He was a small, feeble
man, compared with those who watched his every
movement, and gnashed their teeth upon him so
fiercely. None but the Almighty could save him
now; and to Him who &quot;rides upon the wings of the
wind, and maketh the clouds His chariot,&quot; he drew
near in fervent prayer; after which he retired in peace
and confidence to his berth. During the night, a fine
breeze sprang up; and when he went on deck the
next morning, they were in sight of the luxuriant
shore of Hayti! The officers of the island boarded
the ship ;
but their language was unintelligible to the
negroes, who still looked daggers at every one who
spoke. They landed
;
but the fearful, and ungrateful
slaves continued sullen and forbidding. Mr. Lundy
left them, however, and went into the country, where
he selected their future residence; and made every
preparation for their comfort and convenience in his
power; saw them conveyed to their neat, pleasant
homes, and all happily settled. This work was accom
plished; and he merely called to bid adieu to his
ungrateful charge, when he found that one of the
slaves had been appointed to speak to him, in behalf
of the whole number, and confess how deeply they
had wronged him. While they were conversing, the
K


--- PAGE 232 ---
218 HE-UNION OP OLD AND TRIED FRIENDS.
others gathered around, with tears and prayers for
forgiveness; and finally fell at his feet, imploring
pardon for themselves, and blessings on the kind,
patient and humane Benjamin Lundy. He hurried
from the affecting scene, and soon after returned to
America.
Thus that cold evening passed more pleasantly
away in our rude cabin
;
and our Canandaigua
gentlemen, after an agreeable acquaintance, and plea
sant chat with Mr. Lundy, retired for the night not
like savages, but like gentlemen as they were; and I
doubt not, with a more exalted opinion of
&quot;
the deaf
old devil in the corner
&quot;


--- PAGE 233 ---
CHAPTER XXV.
PRIVATE LOSSES AND PBIVATE DIFFICULTIES.
SOON
after settling in Wilberforce, I found that
the rumor I had heard in the States, concerning
the refusal to sell land to colored persons, wasliterally
correct, and myfarm being too small to yield a sup
port for myfamily, and knowing it would be useless
to apply for more land, I engaged to carry packages
for different merchants in the adjoining villages, as
well as to and from the settlement. Possessing a pair
of excellent horses and a good wagon, I found it a
profitable business, and the only one I could well do,
to eke out the proceeds of my farm, and meet my
expenses.
One day as I was returning from the village, one of
my horses was taken suddenly ill. I took him to
a tavern near by, and as I could discover no cause for
his illness, I concluded to leave him a few days, sup


--- PAGE 234 ---
220 PRIVATE LOSSES AND DIFFICULTIES.
posing rest would soon restore him. I accordingly
hired another horse, and returned to the colony. In
a day or two after, I collected my packages as usual,
and started on my route, designing to leave the hired
horse and take my own; but when I arrived at the
tavern, I found some Indians engaged in taking off
the hide and shoes of my poor, dead horse. This was
indeed, a great loss to me
;
but I consoled myself with
the thought that I had one good horse left, yet he
would hardly be sufficient to accomplish alone, the
labor I had engaged to perform ;
nor had I the means
to spare, to purchase another. I therefore hired one,
and commenced business again, with the determination
to make up myloss by renewed diligence and perse
verance, I started in good spirits ;
but had proceeded
but a few miles, when my remaining horse, which I
had supposed perfectly sound, reeled and fell in the
harness ! And before I could relieve him of it, my
noble animal and faithful servant, had breathed his
last I Without a struggle or a movement he lay life
less on the cold earth. I was sad. I deplored the
loss of my good, and valuable team
;
but more the
mystery and suspicion that hung over the event. I
returned home and sat down to devise some plan of
procedure. What could I do? Half the means of
our support had been suddenly and mysteriously
snatched from us. What could I do next? While
thus ruminating, I arose to answer a summons at the


--- PAGE 235 ---
TEMPTATION RESISTED. 221
door, and who should enter but Mr. B. Paul, a brother
to our foreign agent, who had so long absented
himself from our house, that I was indeed surprised
to see him at this time. He, however, seated himself,
with great apparent concern for my recent loss, which
he soon made the subject of conversation and the
object of his visit.
&quot;There has been,&quot; said he,
&quot;a
great deal of un
pleasant feeling, and injudicious speaking on both
sides, for which I am heartily sorry. The colony is
too weak to sustain a division of feelings and now,
that your recent losses have left you in a far less
favorable condition to sustain yourself and family, I
have called to make a settlement of our former dim-
culties, and to offer you two hundred and fifty dollars
out of the collections for the colony.&quot;
I saw through the plan at once, and considered it
only a bribe, to prevent my exposing the iniquity of
others. Should I consent to take a part of the ill-
gotten spoils, with what confidence could I attempt to
stay the hand of the spoiler. I wanted money very
much, it is true
;
but after a moments reflection, not
enough to sanction the manner in which it had been
obtained; and though I confess, the offer presented to
me a strong temptation, I am thankful that I was
enabled to resist it. I refused to accept the money;
and after sending away the tempter and his offered


--- PAGE 236 ---
222 PRIVATE LOSSES AND DIFFICULTIES.
gain, I felt myheart lighter, and my conscience more
peaceful than is often the lot of sinful, erring man in
this world of trial and conflict; and yet I could but
feel that the mystery in which the death of myhorses
was involved, was partially at least, explained.


--- PAGE 237 ---
CHAPTEE XXVI.
INCIDENTS AND PECULIARITIES OF THE INDIANS
DURING-
our residence in Canada, we were often
visited by the Indians, which gave us an oppor
tunity to learn their character, habits and disposition
:
and some incidents illustrative of the peculiarities of
that abused people, I will here mention.
I recollect one bitter cold night, about eleven
o clock, I happened to awake, and looking out toward
the fire, I was surprised to see standing there, erect
and quiet, a tall, brawny Indian, wrapped in his
blanket;
his long hunting knife and tomahawk dang
ling from his belt ;
and his rifle in his hand. Had he
been in his own wigwam, he could not have looked
about himwith more satisfaction and independence. I
instantly sprang to my feet, and demanded his errand.
&quot;
Me lost in the woods, and me come to stay all
night,&quot; was his grave reply.
&quot;
Then,&quot; said I, &quot;give me your weapons, and I will


--- PAGE 238 ---
224: INDIAN INCIDENTS AND PECULIARITIES.
make no objection.&quot; He disarmed himself, and gave
his weapons to me, with an air of haughty disdain for
myfears. I put them in a place of safety and then
prepared his bed, which was nothing more than the
Joor, where they choose to sleep, with their head to
the fire. My offer of anything different from this he
proudly resented as an insult to his powers of endur
ance, and would say,
&quot;
beds for pale faces and women;
hard board for Indians.&quot; He threw himself down,
drew his blanket about him, and was soon sleeping
soundly. As soon as the day began to dawn, he was
up, called for his arms, and after thanking me in the
brief Indian style of politeness, departed for the
forest. He had found our doors all fastened, save a low
back door, through which he entered, passing through
a back room so full of miscellaneous articles, that it
was difficult to go through it in the day time without
upsetting something; but the Indian understood all
this, he made no noise, nor would he have spoken at
all, had I not awakened; and yet, he would have
scorned to injure any one beneath the roof that gave
him shelter, unless he had been intoxicated.
One sabbath afternoon, one of my children was
sitting in the door, when a tall, emaciated Indian came
up and said,
&quot;
Will my little lady please to give me
a drink of water?&quot; While she went for it, I invited
him to a seat within. There was something dignified
and commanding in his appearance, and something in


--- PAGE 239 ---
VISIT FROM ONE OF TECUMSEH S BKAVES. 225
his voice and countenance, that won my confidence
and respect at once. He remained in the place some
time, and I learned his history.
In his younger days he had been a great warrior ;
and even now, when recounting, as he often did, the
scenes of the battle field, his eye would burn with
savage fire, lighting up his whole countenance with
the fiercest kind of bravery, and often with a hideous
yell that would startle our very souls, he would burst
from the room and bound over the fields and forest,
with the fleetness of a deer making the woods ring
with his frightful war-cry, until the blood seemed
ready to curdle in our veins. He had also been
one of the famous Tecumsehs braves
;
and had stood
by him when he fell on the fifth of October, 1813.
This old brave, whenever he called the name of
Tecumseh, bowed his head reverently; and would
often try to tell us how very deeply they mourned
when it could no longer be doubted that the brave
heart of Tecumseh, brother of the celebrated Wabash
prophet, had ceased to beat.
&quot;
Had an arrow pierced the sun and brought it to
myfeet,&quot; said the old warrior,
&quot;
I could not have been
more astounded than at the fall of Tecumseh. Then
he told us that once, after a great andvictorious battle,
Tecumseh, in his war paint and feathers, stood in the
midst of his braves, when a little pale faced girl made
her way weeping to him and said, &quot;My mother is
K*


--- PAGE 240 ---
226 INDIAN INCIDENTS AND PECULIARITIES.
very ill, and your men are abusing her, and refuse to
go away.&quot; &quot;Never,&quot; said the Indian, &quot;did I see a
frown so terrible on the face of Tecumseh, as at that
moment; when he with one hand clutched his toma
hawk, and with the other led the little girl to the
scene of riot. He approached the unruly savages
with uplifted tomahawk, its edge glittering like silver,
and with 6ne shout of
*
begone !
they scattered as
though a thunderbolt had fallen in their midst.&quot;
But the old warrior at Wilberforce fought no more
battles, except in imagination those of the past. After
peace was declared he bought a valuable piece ofland,
with the intention of spending the remainder of his
life more quietly ;
but unfortunately there lived not
far fiom him a man who had once been the possessor
of that farm, and had lost it in some way, and was
now in reduced circumstances.
He was both envious and vicious ;
and because he
could not himself buy the land, he was determined
that the old Indian should not have it. After having
tried many ways to get it from him, he finally com
plained of him, for fighting for the British and against
the country where he now resided. This was success
ful; he was arrested and thrown into prison, and
without a trial, removed from one prison to another,
until he, with several others, was sent South to be tried
as traitors. While on the way, the keeper of this
Indian wished to call on his mother, who lived in a


--- PAGE 241 ---
WRONGS OF THE RED MAJT. 227
little cottage by the roadside, to bid her farewell. She
was an aged woman, and when her son left her to join
his companions, she followed himto the door weeping,
wringing her hands in great distress, and imploring
the widow s God to protect her only son. She had had
four; all of whom went forth, with an American
mother s blessing, to fight in defence of their country;
and this one alone, returned alive from the field of
battle. Now as he took his final departure for the
South, she clasped her hands, raised her tearful eyes to
heaven, and while large drops rolled over her wrinkled
cheeks, she cried,
&quot;
Oh, God, protect myonly one, and
return him to me in safety, ere I die.&quot; This scene, the
imprisoned, and as some supposed, heartless Indian,
watched with interest
;
no part of it escaped his atten
tion
;
but they passed on, and safely reached Detroit.
The prisoners were conducted to a hotel and secured
for the night ;
our Indian hero being consigned to an
attic, which they supposed a safe place for him. There
happened to be on that night, a company of showmen
stopping at that hotel, and exhibiting wax-work;
among the rest, was a figure of General Brock, who
fell at Queenston Heights, and a costly cloak of fur,
worn by the General previous to his death. Nothing
of this escaped the eagle-eye and quick ear of the
Indian. When all was quiet in the hotel, he com
menced operations, for he had made up his mind to
leave, which with the red man is paramount to an


--- PAGE 242 ---
228 INDIAN INCIDENTS AND PECULIARITIES.
accomplishment of his design. He found no great
difficulty in removing the window of his lofty apart
ment, out of which he clambered, and with the agility
of a squirrel and the caution of a cat, he sprang for
the conductor and on it he slid to the ground. He was
now free to go where he pleased;
but he had heard
something about the cloak of Gren. Brock
;
he knew
too, that the friends of the General had offered fifty
guineas for it, and now he would just convey it to
them.
With the sagacity of his race, he surveyed the hotel,
and determined the exact location of the show-room.
Stealthily and noiselessly, he entered it; found the
cloak took it and departed, chuckling at his good
fortune. As he was creeping out of the apartment
with his booty, a thought struck him, which not only
arrested his footsteps, but nearly paralized his whole
being. Would not his keeper be made to answer, and
perhaps to suffer for his escape and theft ? Of course
he would.
&quot;
Then in the darkness I saw again,&quot; said
the old brave, &quot;that old pale-faced mother, weeping
for the loss of her only son, when he immediately
returned the cloak to its place, and with far more
difficulty than in his descent, he succeeded in reaching
his attic prison, where he laid himself down, muttering
to himself, &quot;not yet, poor old pale-face got but
one.&quot;
Theytook him to Virginia, where, instead of a trial,


--- PAGE 243 ---
INDIAN STRATAGEM. 229
they gave him about the same liberty they do their
slaves. He staid one winter; but when the spring
opened, the fire of the red mantook possession of him,
and when sent to the forest to chop wood, he took a
bee-line for his former residence. But what was he to
do for food ? With a rifle, he could live happily in
the woods, but he had none
;
so after considering the
matter, he said to himself,
&quot;
Me must get a rifle,&quot; and
instantly started for the highway. The first cabin he
saw, he entered in great apparent excitement, and told
the woman of the house, that he had seen a &quot;big
deer in the woods, and wanted a rifle to shoot it.
When you hear my gun,&quot; he said,
&quot;
then you come
and get big deer.&quot; She gave him her husbands
excellent rifle and a few bullets; he looked at them,
and said he must have more, for &quot;it was a big deer;&quot;
so she gave him the bullet-mould and a piece of lead,
with which he departed, after repeating his former
injunction, to come when she heard the rifle
; but, said
he,
&quot;
she no hear it
yet.&quot;
He at length arrived at his own farm, from which
he had been so cruelly driven, and concealed himself
behind a log in sight of his own house, to watch the
inmates. He soon learned that it was occupied bythe
man who had persecuted him in order to obtain it, his
wife and one child. All day until midnight, he
watched them from his hiding place, then assuming
all the savage ferocity of his nature, and giving him-


--- PAGE 244 ---
230 INDIAN INCIDENTS AND PECULIARITIES.
self the most frightful appearance possible, he entered
the house, and noiselessly passed to their sleeping
room, where he placed himself before them with a
long knife in his hand. Having assumed this frightful
attitude, he commanded them in a voice of thunder,
to get up and give him some supper. They were
awake now. Oh, horror! what a sight for a guilty
man, and a timid woman! &quot;Me come to kill you!
&quot;
said the Indian, as he watched their blanched cheeks
and quivering lips. They tottered about on their
trembling limbs to get everything he asked for, im
ploring him for Gods sake to take all, but spare their
lives. &quot;Me will have scalps,&quot; he answered fiercely;
but when he had eaten all he desired, he adjusted his
blanket, and putting on a savage look, he remarked as
if to himself,
&quot;
Me go now get mymen and kill him,
kill he wife, and kill he baby!
&quot;
and left the house for
his post of observation.
The frightened inmates lost no time, but hastily
collecting some provisions, fled to the frontier, and
were never heard of afterwards.
The Indian immediately took possession of his own
and quite an addition left by the former tenants.
While the kind-hearted old Indian repeated to me
the story ofhis wrongs, it reminded me ofthe injustice
practised on myself, and the colored race generally.
Does a colored man by hard labor and patient in
dustry, acquire a good location, a fine farm, and


--- PAGE 245 ---
DESTINY OF THE COLOEED MAN. 231
comfortable dwelling, lie is almost sure to be looked
upon by the white man, as an usurper of his rights
and territory; a robber of what he himself should
possess, and too often does wrong the colored man
out of, yet, I am happy to acknowledge many hon
orable exceptions.
I have often wondered, when looking at the rem
nant of that once powerful race, whether the black
man would become extinct and his race die out, as
have the red men of the forest
;
whether they would
wither in the presence ofthe enterprisingAnglo-Saxon
as have the natives of this country. But now I have
no such wondering inquiries to make
; being persuaded
that the colored man has yet a prominent part to act
in this highly-favored Eepublic, of what description
the future must determine.


--- PAGE 246 ---
CHAPTEE XXVII.
OUR DIFFICULTIES WITH ISKAEL LEWIS.
BEING-
under the necessity ofreferring again to the
difficulties existing in the Wilberforce colony,
I shall here introduce a circular, published in New
York city, which will give the reader an understand
ing of the real cause of our embarrassments, and the
character of our agent, Israel Lewis.
CIRCULAR
New York, May Mh, 1836.
The committee of colored citizens of the city of New York, as
servants of the public, sincerely regret the necessity of bringing the
within subject before the public. Their duty to God, to society, and
to themselves, only actuates them in this matter.
The fact that many individuals in different sections of the country,
have long suspected the integrity of Israel Lewis, but possessing no
authentic documentary evidence, they have been prevented from


--- PAGE 247 ---
making an effort, to counteract his too successful attempts and those
of his agents, in the collection of funds from the public, has induced
us to transmit this circular.
THEODORE S. WRIGHT, DAVID RUGGLES,
PETER OGDEN, JOHN STANS,
THOMAS DOWNING, WILLIAM P. JOHNSON,
GEORGE POTTS, WILLIAM HAMILTON,
CHARLES B. EAT, SAMUEL E. CORNISH.
ISRAEL LEWIS.
Wlberforce, U. C., March 28tk, 1836.
The board of managers of the Wilberforce settlement, met and
passed unanimously the following resolutions Present, Austin Stew
ard, Philip Harris, Peter Butler, William Bell, John Whitehead,
Samuel Peters.
Resolved, 1st That we deeply regret the manner in which our
friends in the States have been imposed upon by Israel Lewis ; and
that we hereby inform them, as a board of managers or otherwise,
that we have received less than one hundred dollars of all the money
borrowed and collected in the States.
Resolved, 2d. That although we have not received one hundred
dollars from said Lewis, yet, when we shall have received the funds
collected by our agent, the Rev. Nathan Paul, in England, we will
refund as far as our abilities will allow and our friends may require,
the money contributed for our supposed benefit, by them in the
States.
Resolved, 3d. That we tender our sincere thanks to our beloved
friends, Arthur Tappan and others, who have taken such deep inter
est in the welfare of oui little colony.
Resolved, 4th. That the foregoing resolutions be signed by the


--- PAGE 248 ---
234: OUR DIFFICULTIES WITH ISRAEL LEWIS.
whole board, and se. t to the States to be published in the New York
Observer and other papers.
AUSTIN STEWARD, Presidevi,
PETER BUTLER, Treasurer,
JOHN HALMES, Secretary.
PHILIP HARRIS,
&quot;|
WILLIAM BKLL,
JOHN WHITEHEAD, r
SAMUEL PETERS, J
New York, April 25*A, 1836.
At a public meeting of the colored citizens of New York city,
held in Phoenix Hall, Thomas L. Jennings in the Chair, and Charles
B. Raj, Secretary, the following resolutions were passed unani
mously
:
Resolved, That the thanks of this meeting be tendered to the Rev.
Samuel E. Cornish, for the able and satisfactory report of his mission
to Upper Canada, especially to the Wilberforce settlement.
Resolved, That this meeting deem it their imperative duty, to
announce to the public, that in view of facts before them, Israel
Lewis* has abused their confidence, wasted their benevolence, and
forfeited all claim to their countenance and respect.
Resolved, That a committee of ten, be appointed to give publicity
to the foregoing resolutions ; also, to the communication from the
managers of the Wilberforce settlement, as they may deem necessary
in the case.
THOMAS L. JENNINGS, Chairman,
CHARLES B. RAY, Secretary.
It will now appear that I was not the only unfortu
nate individual who had difficulty with Mr. Lewis.
It necessarily follows that the public should withhold their moneyfrom his sub
ordinate agents.


--- PAGE 249 ---
MR. TAPPAN EXPOSES LEWIS. 235
Mr. Arthur Tappan made known through the press,
about this time, that Israel Lewis was not a man to be
fully relied upon in his statements regarding the Wil-
berforce colony; and also, if money was placed in his
nands for the benefit of the sick and destitute among
the settlers, it would be doubtful whether it was faith
fully applied according to the wishes of the donors.
For this plain statement of facts, Mr. Lewis com
menced a suit against Mr. Tappan, for defamation of
character; laying the damages at the round sum of
ten thousand dollars. It appeared that Lewis valued
his reputation highly now that he had elevated
himself sufficiently to commence a suit against one of
the best and most respectable gentlemen in NewYork
city;
a whole souled abolitionist withal;
one who had
suffered his name to be cast out as evil, on account of
his devotion to the colored mans cause both of the
enslaved and free; one who has, moreover, seen his
own dwelling entered by an infuriated and pro-slavery
mob
;
his expensive furniture thrown into the street as
fuel for the torch of the black mans foe; and, amid
the crackling flame which consumed it, to hear the vile
vociferations of his base persecutors, whose only
accusation was his defence of the colored man. This
noble hearted, Christian philanthropist, who took
&quot;joyfully the spoiling of his goods&quot; for the cause of
the oppressed, was the chosen victim of Lewis wrath
and violent vituperation; and that too, where he was


--- PAGE 250 ---
236 OUK DIFFICULTIES WITH ISRAEL LEWIS.
well known as a most honorable, humane gentleman ;
and all for naming facts which were quite generally
known already.
Lewis returned to Wilberforce, flushed and swag
gering with the idea of making his fortune in this
speculation of a law-suit against Mr. Tappan; and to
remove all obstacles, he sent a man to me, to say that
if I would publish nothing, and would abandon the
interests of the colonists, he would give me a hand
some sum of money. I soon gave him to understand
that he had applied to the wrong person for anything
of that kind
;
and he then laid a plan to accomplish
by fraud and perjury, what he had failed to do by
bribery.
I have before mentioned the fact of my having
taken up a note of twenty-five dollars for Mr. Lewis,
on condition that he would soon refund the money. I
did it as a favor, and kept the note in my possession,
until about a year afterward, when I sued him to
recover my just due on the note. Wehad then began
to differ in our public business, which led to other
differences in our transaction of both public and
private matters relating to the colony. He of course
gave bail for his appearance at court, and it ran along
for some time until he found he could not bribe me to
enter into his interests, and then for the first time, he
declared that I had stolen the note! And finally suc
ceeded in getting meindicted before the grand jury I


--- PAGE 251 ---
BITTER PERSECUTION BY LEWIS. 237
In this I suppose Lewis and his confederates had
two objects: first, to get rid of me; secondly, that they
might have a chance to account for my continued
hostility, by saying that it arose in consequence of a
private quarrel, and not for any true interest I had in
their collecting money deceptively.
Lewis appeared so bent on my destruction, that he
forgot it was in my power to show how I came by the
note. The Court of Kings Bench met, but in conse
quence of the cholera, was adjourned, and of course,
the case must lie over until another year.
When the time for the trial drew near, I was, in the
midst of my preparations to attend it, counselled and
advised by different persons to flee from the country,
which I had labored so hard and so conscientiously to
benefit, and received in return nothing but detraction
and slander. But conscious of my innocence, I de
clared I would not leave
;
I knewI had committed no
crime; I had violated no law of the land, and I
would do nothing to imply guilt. He who hath
formed the heart, knoweth its intent and purpose, and
to Him I felt willing to commit my cause. True, the
court might convict, imprison, and transport me away
from my helpless family of five small children; if so,
I was determined they should punish an innocent
man. Nevertheless, it was a dark time; I was not
only saddened and perplexed, but my spirit was
grieved, and I felt like one
&quot;
wounded in the house of


--- PAGE 252 ---
238 OUR DIFFICULTIES WITH ISRAEL LEWIS.
his friends,&quot; ready to cry out,
&quot;
had it beenan enemy
I could have borne
it,&quot;
but to be arraigned, for the
first time in my life, as a criminal, by one of the very
people I had spent my substance to benefit, was
extremely trying. Guiltless as I knew myself to be,
still, I was aware that many incidents had transpired,
which my enemies could and would construe to my
disadvantage; moreover, Lewis had money, which he
would freely distribute to gain his point right or
wrong, and to get me out of his way.
In due time the trial came on, and I was to be tried
for theft! Lewis had reported all through the settle
ment that on a certain time I had called at his
house, and from a bundle of papers which his wife
showed me, I had purloined the note, which had
caused me so much trouble. To prove this it was
necessary to get his wife to corroborate the statement.
This was not an easy matter. Mrs. Lewis, indignant
and distressed by her husband s unkindness, had left
him and taken up her abode in the family of a hospi
table Englishman. After Lewis had been sent out as
an agent for the colony, finding himself possessed of
sufficient funds to cut a swell, he associated and was
made a great deal of, by both ladies and gentlemen in
high stations of life
;
the consequence of which was,
he looked now with disdain upon his faithful, but
illiterate wife, who like himself had been born a slave,
and bred on a Southern plantation;
and who had with


--- PAGE 253 ---
LEWIS SHAMEFUL TREATMENT OF HIS WIFE. 239
him escaped from the cruel task-master, enduring with
him the hardships and dangers of the flying fugitive.
Now her assistance was necessary to carry forward
his plans, and he endeavored in various ways to
induce her to return, but in vain. When he sent
messengers to inform her howsorry he felt for his past
abuse, she said she feared it was only some wicked
plot to entice her away from the peaceable home she
had found. Lewis saw that he must devise some
other method to obtain her evidence. He therefore
called on the brother of the Englishman in whose
family Mrs. Lewis was, and in a threatening manner
told him that he understood his brother washarboring
his wife, and that he intended to make him pay dear
for it. The brother, to save trouble, said he would
assist him to get his wife, and that night conducte&amp;lt;
Lewis to her residence. ISTo better proof can be given
that Mrs. Lewis possessed the true heart of a woman,
than that the moment her husband made humble con
cessions, and promised to love and protect her hence
forth, she forgave him all his past infidelity and
neglect, and looked with hope to a brighter future. In
return Lewis presented her with a note, telling her to
take it to a certain person and present it, and he
would give her twenty dollars on it. This would, he
doubtless thought, leave her in his power.
AsMrs. Lewis could not read, the unsuspectingwife
presented the paper all in good faith. The gentleman.


--- PAGE 254 ---
OUR DIFFICULTIES WITH ISRAEL LEWIS.
looked at her sharply, suspiciously, and then asked
her, if she was not aware that she was presenting him
a paper completely worthless ! The poor woman was
mortified and astonished; and instead of returning to
her husband, fled to Wilberforoe, and called at our
house. Knowing how disastrous to me would be her
false statement, and ignorant of her state of mind, I
asked her if she had come to assist Mr. Lewis by
swearing against me. I saw at once, that she had not
yet been informed of her husband s design.
&quot;
Swear against you, Mr. Steward!
&quot;
said she.
&quot;
I
knownothing to swear that would injure you;
I have
always known you as an honest, upright man, and you
need not fear my turning against an innocent person,
for the benefit of one I know to be guilty. Nor
would I have left myplace, had I known what I now
do.&quot; So all help and fear was ended in that quarter.
When at length the appointed morning arrived, I
arose early, but with a saddened heart. I looked upon
my wife and helpless family, reflecting that possibly
this might be the last time we should all assemble
around the breakfast table in our hitherto quiet home,
and I could scarcely refrain from weeping. I, how
ever, took my leave, and a lad with me, to bring back
a message of the result, if the court found sufficient
cause to detain me for trial. But when I found that I
must be tried, I felt too unhappy to make others so,
and kept out of the lad s way. He returned without


--- PAGE 255 ---
BITTER PERSECUTION AGAIN FOILED. 241
a message ;
and I took my seat in the prisoner s box.
I had just taken a letter out of the post office, from
Rochester, containing recommendations and attesta
tions from the first men in the city, of my good
character, which relieved my feelings somewhat;
nevertheless, my heart was heavy, and especially
when, soon after I took my seat, a trap-door was
opened and a murderer was brought up and seated by
my side !
Chief Justice Eobinson, made his appearance in
great pomp di-essed in the English court style then
the crier, in a shrill voice, announced the opening of
the court, and finished by exclaiming,
&quot;
God save the
King!
&quot;
His lordship then called the attention of the
jury to the law of the land; particularly to that
portion relating to their present duty;
and the grand
jury presented me to the court, for feloniously taking
a certain promissory note from the house of Israel
Lewis. The Kings Attorney had but one witness,
and that was Lewis. He was called to the stand,
permitted to relate his story, and retire without any
cross-examination on the part of my Attorney; but
that gentleman called up three respectable white men,
all of whom swore that they would not believe Israel
Lewis under oath ! Then submitted the case to the
jury without remark or comment, and the jury, with
out leaving their seats, brought in a verdict of
&quot;
NOT
GUILTY.&quot; Thus ended myfirst andlast trial for theftI
L


--- PAGE 256 ---
242 OUR DIFFICULTIES WITH ISRAEL LEWIS.
Oh, how my very soul revolted at the thought of
being thus accused; but now that I stood justified
before God and my fellow-men, I felt relieved and
grateful;
nor could I feel anything but pity for Lewis,
who, like Haman, had been so industriously engaged
in erecting
&quot;a
gallows fifty cubits high&quot; for me, but
found himself dangling upon it. He raved like a
madman, clutched the armofthe Judge and demanded
a new trial, but he shook him off with contempt and
indignation, as though he had been a viper. In his
wild fury and reckless determination to destroy my
character, he had cast a foul stain upon his own, never
to be effaced. I had felt bound to preserve my repu
tation when unjustly assailed, but it had been to me a
painful necessity to throw a fellow-being into the
unenviable and disgraceful attitude in which Lewis
now stood ;
and yet, he would not, and did not yield
the point, notwithstanding his ignominious defeat.
He very soon began to gather his forces for another
attack upon me, and followed the same direction for
his accusation, the land purchase.
The reader will recollect without further repetition,
that as I could purchase no land of the Canada Com
pany, because of their indignation against Lewis, I
was glad to accept of the contract he had made with
Mr. Ingersoll, for lot number four in the colony ;
that
I paid the sum demanded, and took his assignment on
the back of the contract, and as we then were on good


--- PAGE 257 ---
AGAIN VICTORIOUS OVER WICKED PLOTTING. 243
terms, it never occurred to me that a witness was
necessary to attest to the transaction. But after his
failure to prove me a thief, his next effort was to
convict me of forgery
! It will be remembered that
Lewis after selling out to me, returned the contract to
Mr. Ingersoll, and that I had lost by the means, the
land, and at least five hundred dollars worth of im
provements. Then I brought a suit against Lewis, to
recover the money I had paid him for the contract;
and then it was that he asserted and attempted to
prove, that I had forged the assignment, and therefore,
had no just claim on him for the amount paid. But
in this, as in the other case, he met a defeat and made
an entire failure. I recovered all that I claimed, which,
was only my just due. One would suppose that after
so many unsuccessful attempts to ruin me, he would
have left me alone, but not so with Lewis: he had
the ambition of a Bonaparte; and doubtless had he
possessed the advantages of an education, instead of
having been born and bred i slave, he might, like an
Alexander or Napoleon, have astonished the world
with his deeds of daring. I am, however, no ad
mirer of what the world call &quot;great men,&quot; one
humble, self-sacrificing Christian, like Benjamin Lun-
dy, has far greater claim on myrespect and reverence.
Lewis, failing in his second attack, backed up as he
had been in all his wicked course, bya friend wearing
the sacred garb of a minister of the gospel, cooled off,


--- PAGE 258 ---
244 OUR DIFFICULTIES WITH ISRAEL LEWIS.
and it became evident to all, that he was meditating
some different mode of warfare. To this concealed
confederate, I must attach great blame, on account of
the influence his station and superior learning gave
him, not only over Mr. Lewis, but the colonists gener
ally, and which should have been exerted for the good
of all, in truth and honesty.


--- PAGE 259 ---
CHAPTER XXVIII.
DESPERATION OF A FUGITIVE SLAVE.
WE
had as yet received no funds from our
foreign agent,
N&quot;.
Paul, and the board of
managers had resolved to send a man after him. An
Englishman and a white man named Nell, would
gladly undertake the mission, leaving his wife and five
children among the settlers. Again was I under the
necessity of returning to New York, to obtain the
funds required to send out Mr. Nell after our agent in
England.
The night before I left home, I had a singular
dream which I will briefly relate. I dreamed of jour
neying on a boat to Albany, and of stopping at a
house to take tea. Several persons, I thought, were
at the table, and as a cup of tea was handed me, I
saw a woman slyly drop something into it. I, how
ever, drank the tea, and dreamed that it made me
very sick.


--- PAGE 260 ---
246 DESPERATION OF A FUGITIVE SLAVE.
I found it difficult to drive from my mind th
unpleasant impression this dream had made upon it,
but finally succeeded in doing so, attributing it to the
many and malicious threatenings which had been
made by Lewis and his associates. They had boldly
asserted, that
&quot;
if I went to the States, I would never
return alive,&quot; and several other threats equally malig
nant. I, however, started with Mr. Nell for Kochester,
where we made an effort to raise money to aid in
defraying the expenses of the voyage, and succeeded
in collecting about a hundred dollars. From thence
we passed on to Albany, where we fell in company
with a number of Mr. Paul s friends, who appeared
to be terribly indignant, and accused me of coming
there to expose their friends, Paul and Lewis. We
had some warm words and unpleasant conversation,
after which they left me very unceremoniously, and
appeared to be veryangry. Ashort time after, one of
them returned, and in the most friendly manner in
vited me to his house to tea. I was glad of an oppor
tunity to show that I harbored no unpleasant feelings
toward them, and immediately accompanied him
home. The moment that we were all seated at the
table, an unpleasant suspicion flashed through my
mind. The table, the company all seemed familiar
to me, and connected with some unpleasant occurrence
which I could not then recall. But when the lady of
the house poured out a cup of tea, and another was


--- PAGE 261 ---
DEATH PREFERRED TO SLAVERY. 247
about to pass it, I heard her whisper,
&quot;I intended that
for Mr. Steward,&quot; mydream for the first time, flashed
through mymind, with all the vivid distinctness of a
real incident I endeavored to drive it from my
thoughts, and did so. Pshaw! I said to myself; I
will not be suspicious nor whimsical, and I swallowed
the tea; then took my leave for the steamboat, on our
way to New York city.
&quot;When we had passed a few miles out of Albany,
the boat hove to, and there came on board four men
one of the number a colored man. The white men
repaired to their state-rooms, leaving the colored man
on deck, after the boat had returned to the channel.
He attracted my attention, by his dejected appearance
and apparent hopeless despair. He was, I judged,
about forty years of age; his clothing coarse and very
ragged; and the most friendless, sorrowful looking
being I ever saw. He spake to no one, but silently
paced the deck; his breast heaving with inaudible
sighs;
his brow contracted with a most terrible frown;
his eyes dreamily fastened on the floor, and he ap
peared to be considering on some hopeless undertaking.
I watched him attentively, as I walked to and fro on
the same deck, and could clearly discover that some
fearful conflict was taking place in his mind; but as I
afterwards repassed him he looked up with a happy,
patient smile, that lighted up his whole countenance,
which seemed to say plainly, I see a way of escape,


--- PAGE 262 ---
248 DESPERATION OF A FUGITIVE SLAVE.
and have decided on my course of action. His whole
appearance was changed; his heart that before had
beat so wildly was quiet now as the broad bosom of
the Hudson, and he gazed after me with a look of
calm deliberation, indicative of a settled, but desperate
purpose. I walked hastily forward and turned
around, when, Oh, my God ! what a sight was there !
Holding still the dripping knife, with which he
had cut his throat ! and while his life-blood oozed
from the gaping wound and flowed over his tattered
garments to the deck, the same exultant smile beamed
on his ghastly features !
The history of the poor, dejected creature was now
revealed: he had escaped from his cruel task-master
in Maryland; but in the midst of his security and
delightful enjoyment, he had been overtaken by the
human blood-hound, and returned to his avaricious
and tyrannical master, now conducting him back to a
life of Slavery, to which he rightly thought death was
far preferable.
The horrors of slave life, which he had so long
endured, arose in all their hideous deformity in his
mind, hence the conflict of feeling which I had
observed, and hence the change in his whole appear
ance, when he had resolved to endure a momentary
pain, and escape a life-long scene of unrequited toil
and degradation.
There happenedto be on the boat at the time, several


--- PAGE 263 ---
&quot;
I walked hastily forward and turned round, when, Oh, my God ! what a sightthere ! He still held the dripping knife with which he had cut his throat.
Page 248,


--- PAGE 264 ---



--- PAGE 265 ---
VISIT NEW YORK CITY. 249
companiesofcitizen soldiers, who, shockedbythe awful
spectacle, expressed their decided abhorrence of the in
stitution of Slavery, declaring that it was not for such
peculiar villainy, that their fathers fought and bled on
the battle field. So determined were they in their
indignation ;
so loudly demanded they a cessation of
such occurrences on board our boats, and the soil of
a free State, that the slaveholders became greatly
alarmed, and with all possible dispatch they hurriedly
dragged the poor bleeding slave into a closet, and
securely locked the door
;
nor have I ever been able
to learn his final doom. Whether the kindly messen
ger of death released him from the clutches of the
man-stealer, or whether he recovered to serve his
brutal master, I have never been informed.
After this exciting scene had passed, I began to
realize that I was feeling quite ill
;
an unusual load
seemed to oppress my stomach, and by the time we
had reached New York city, I was exceedingly dis
tressed. I hastened to a boarding house, kept by a
colored woman, who did everything in her power to
relieve me
;
but I grew worse until I thought in
reality, I must die. The lady supposed I was dying
of cholera, sent to Brooklyn after Mr. Nell; but
having previously administered an emetic, I began to
feel better; and when I had finally emptied my
stomach of its contents, tea and all, by vomiting, I felt
into a profound sleep, from which I awoke greatly
L*


--- PAGE 266 ---
250 DESPERATION OF A FUGITIVE SLAVE.
relieved. The kindness of that lady I shall not soon
forget. She had a house full of boarders, who would
have fled instantly, had they known that, as she sup
posed, I was suffering from cholera; and instead of
sending me to the hospital, as she might have done,
she kept all quiet until it was over, doing all she could
for my relief and comfort; yet, it was a scene of
distress which I hope may never be repeated.
On the following morning, I saw in the city papers,
&quot;
ACard,&quot; inserted by the owner of the poor slave
on board the steamboat, informing the public that he
was returning South with a fugitive slave, who, when
arrested, evinced great willingness to return
;
whohad
confessed also, that he had done very wrong in leaving
his master, for which he was sorry, but he supposed
that the abolitionists had been tampering with him.
That was all ! Not a word about his attempt to take
his life ! Oh no, he merely wished to allay the excite
ment, that the horrid deed had produced on the minds
of those present.
I was indignant at the publication of such a de
liberate falsehood, and immediately wrote and publish
ed that I too was on board the same boat with the
fugitive; that I had witnessed an exhibition of his
willingness to return to Slavery, by seeing him cut his
throat, and lay on the deck wallowing in his blood ;
that the scene had so excited the sympathies of the
soldiers present, that his owner had been obliged to
hurry him out of their sight, &c.


--- PAGE 267 ---
SEND A SECOND MESSENGER TO ENGLAND. 251
When this statement appeared in the newspapers, it
so exasperated the friends of the slaveholder, that I
was advised to flee from the city, lest I might be
visited with personal violence; but I assured my
advisers that it was only the wicked who
&quot;
flee when
no man pursueth, but the righteous are bold as a lion.&quot;
I therefore commenced the business that brought me
to that city. Messrs. Bloss, Nell, and myself, made an
effort, and raised between three and four hundred
dollars for the purpose of sending Mr. Nell after Eev.
N. Paul.
Most of the funds collected, we gave to Mr. Nell,
who sailed from New York, and arrived safely in
England, just as N. Paul was boarding a vessel to
return to New York.
Had Mr. Nell acted honorably, or in accordance
with his instructions, he would have returned with
the agent;
but he remained in England, and for aught
I know is there yet. He was sent expressly after Mr.
Paul, and when he left that kingdom, Nell s mission
was ended. He proved himself less worthy of confi
dence than the agent, for he did return when sent for,
and he did account for the money he had collected,
though he retained it all
;
but Mr. Nell accounted for
nothing of the kind
;
and if he has ever returned, I
have not seen him. Mr. N. Paul arrived in New
York in the fall of 1834, and remained there through
the winter, to the great disappointment and vexation


--- PAGE 268 ---
252 DESPERATION OF A FUGITIVE SLAVE.
of the colonists. I wrote him concerning our condition
and wants, hoping it would induce him to visit us
immediately; but he had married while in England,
an English lady, who had accompanied him to New
York, where they were now living ;
nor did he
appear to be in any haste about giving an account of
himself to the board of managers who had employed
him.


--- PAGE 269 ---
CHAPTER XXIX.
A NARROW ESCAPE FROM MY ENEMIES.
DUKINGr
my absence in New York city, Lewis
and his confederates were prophesying that I
would never trouble them more, and shaking their
heads quite ominously at the happy riddance. One
day, our hired man entered the house and inquired
of my wife, when I was expected home. She told
him she did not know, having received no intelligence
from me. He assured her that a letter had been
received by some one in the colony; that he had
seen it, and had heard Mr. Lewis speak of conveying
it to her, but as it did not come, she gave it up, sup
posing some mistake had been made. I had, however,
written, naming the time when she might expect me;
but no letter of mine reached her, during mylong ab
sence, for which she could not account. Ashort time
before that specified for my return, a woman, whose
husband was an associate of Mr. Lewis, came to my


--- PAGE 270 ---
254 A NARROW ESCAPE FROM MY ENEMIES.
house, and urged my wife &quot;to leave word at the
village of London, to have Mr. Steward detained
there, should he arrive toward evening, and by no
means allow him to start for the colony after dark.&quot;
Myfamily had so often been alarmed by such warn
ings, and had so frequently been annoyed by the
violent threatenings of Lewis, that they ceased to
regard them, and paid little attention to this one.
I arrived at London on the day I had appointed for
my return, but was detained there until a late hour ;
feeling anxious, however, to get home that night,
supposing that I was expected, I therefore hired a
horse to ride the remaining fifteen miles to the settle
ment.
The road from London to Wilberforce led through
a swamp, known as &quot;McConnell s Dismal Swamp,
*
and it was indeed, one of the most dreary places in all
that section of country. I am certain that a hundred
men might conceal themselves within a rod of the
highway, without being discovered.
The horse I had engaged, was a high spirited
animal, and to that fact, I doubtless owe my life. The
moon shone brightly, and nothing broke the stillness
of the night, as I rode onward, but the clatter of my
horse s hoofs, and an occasional
&quot;
bow-wow&quot; of some
faithful watch-dog.
WhenI reached the swamp and entered its darkened
recesses, the gloom and stillness was indeed fearful;


--- PAGE 271 ---
WAY-LAID, WHILE KETUKNTNG HOME. 255
my horse started at every rustling leaf or crackling
brush, until I attempted to pass a dense thicket, when
I was started by the sharp crack of a rifle, and a
bullet whizzed past me, close to my ear! The fright
ened horse reared and plunged, and then springing as
if for life, he shot off like an arrow, amid the explo
sion of fire arms discharged at me as I rode away. I
lost mybalance at first, and came near falling, but
recovering it I grasped the rein tightly, while my
fiery steed flew over the ground with lightning speed;
nor did I succeed in controlling him until he had run
two miles, which brought me to my own door.
I found my family well, and very grateful that I
had arrived safely after so fearful an encounter.
When morning came I sent a person out to inquire
whether any of the settlers were out the night pre
vious, and the report was, &quot;Israel Lewis and two
other menwere out all night;
that they had been seen
near the Dismal Swamp;&quot; moreover, Lewis was seen
to come in that morning with his boots covered with
swamp mud, these the Eev. Mr. Paul s boys cleaned
for him, all of which was evidence that he it was,
who had way-laid me with criminal intent.
I afterwards learned, that those three men left the
settlement at dusk, for the swamp; that they stationed
themselves one rod apart, all on one side of the road,
each man with a loaded rifle, the poorest marksman
was to fire first, and if he did not bring me down,


--- PAGE 272 ---
256 A NARROW ESCAPE FROM MY ENEMIES.
probably the second would; but Lewis being the
best shot of the three, was to reserve his fire until
the last, which they supposed I could not escape. It
was quite dark in the thicket, and my spirited horse
plunged in every direction so furiously, that they
could take no aim at me, until he had started to run,
when we were soon beyond their reach.
Wehad already had so much difficulty in our little
colony that we were getting heartily sick of it. I was
well aware that Lewis was thirsting for revenge; that
he wished to do me a great wrong; and yet I was
thankful on his account, as well as on my own, that
he had been prevented from imbruing his hands in
the blood of a fellow being.
Had he succeeded in taking my life, as he undoubt
edly intended to do, he would have been arrested
immediately, and most likely punished as a murderer.
He had boldly threatened my life, and the colonists
were expecting something of the kind to take place.
Had I not arrived at the colony, it was known at
London that I had started for the settlement that
night, and an immediate search would have been insti
tuted
;
nor could the wicked deed have brought the
least peace to the mind of Lewis or his companions.
&quot;
No peace of mind does that man know,
Who bears a guilty breast ;
His conscience drives him to and fit),
And never lets him rest&quot;


--- PAGE 273 ---
CHAPTER XXX.
DEATH OP B. PAUL, AND RETURN OF HIS BROTHER.
FT1HE bold and wicked attempt to take my life,
I recorded in the preceding chapter, aroused a
feeling of indignation in the community against
Lewis, and completely destroyed the little influence he
had left; moreover, he had now been so extensively
published as an impostor, that he could collect no
more money on the false pretense of raising it for the
benefit of the colony. As soon as his money was
goneand his influence destroyed, manywhohad beer
his firmest friends, turned against him, and among this
class was the Rev. Benjamin Paul. He had ever pro
fessed the greatest friendship for, and interest in the
success of Mr. Lewis. Heretofore, whenever he went
to the States hewas commissioned bythat gentleman s
family, to purchase a long list of expensive articles,
which the poor colonists were seldom able to buy;
and he generally returned to them richly laden with


--- PAGE 274 ---
258 DEATH OF BENJAMIN PAUL.
goods, purchased with money given to the poor, sick,
and destitute in the colony.
Mr. B. Paul had ever been a very proud man, but
not a very healthy one. He was inclined to pulmo
nary diseases
;
but had kept up pretty well, until Lewis
was effectually put down, and his own character
involved in many of his notorious proceedings, to
gether with the disappointment occasioned by his
brother remaining so long in England, when his
health failed, and he sank rapidly under accumulating
disasters, to the grave.
The Welshmen had partially engaged him to preach
for them the ensuing year, but something they had
heard of himchanged their minds, and they were about
appointing a meeting to investigate his conduct, when
they were informed of his illness, and concluded to
let it pass. His son, with whom he lived, became
deranged, and his oldest daughter on whom he was
greatly dependent, had been dismissed from school,
where she had been for some time engaged in teach
ing. All these unpleasant circumstances in his sickly
state weighed heavily upon his proud heart
;
and he
not only declined in health, but sank into a state of
melancholy and remorse for his past course of living.
As he lay pining and murmuring on his death bed, I
could but reflect how different the scene from that of
an apostle of the LordJesus Christ, who could exclaim,
when about to be offered,
&quot;I have fought a good fight,


--- PAGE 275 ---
DEATH-BED SCENE. 259
I have finished my course, I have kept the faith;
henceforth there is laid up for me a crown of right
eousness.&quot;
I called to see him as he lay writhing in agony, his
sunken eyes gleaming wildly, rolling and tossing from
side to side, while great drops of perspiration stood
upon his forehead, continually lamenting his misspent
time, and the life he had led I He took myhand in his
cold, bonyfingers, thanking methat I did not so despise
him, that I could not come to see him in his sorrow
and affliction. Generally, however, when he raved
and talked of his wicked life, his family excluded all
persons from his room except his attendants.
Pride, which had ever been his besetting sin, dis
played itself in his conduct to the last, for he had a
lengthy will made, dispensing some sixteen hundred
dollars to different individuals, when he must have
known that his whole possessions would not amount
to half that sum. As I looked upon him I could
but reflect on the mysterious ways of Providence.
Before me lay a man, who had for years arrayed him
self against me, using all his influence as a man and a
minister to injure me, by setting Lewis forward in his
wickedness; his family living in extravagance and a
style far beyond their means, while mine had labored
hard and were sometimes destitute, often harrassed
and perplexed on every side by himself and party.
And for what? Because I would not join hands


--- PAGE 276 ---
260 DEATH OF BENJAMIN PAUL.
with iniquity, and deeds of darkness. Notwithstandi tg
the contrast, when I heard his bitter lamentations and
self-reproaches, I could lift my heart to God, in
gratitude for His protecting goodness, which had
preserved me an honest man. I had often erred no
doubt, but it had never been designedly ;
and never
did I value a good conscience more than when stand
ing by the death-bed of Benjamin Paul, who now had
passed the Jordan of death
;
and it is enough to know
that his future, whether of joy or woe, will be meted
out to him, by a merciful and just God, nevertheless,
his last moments on earth were such as ought to
arouse every professed Christian, to redoubled diligence
in watchfulness and prayer, lest they fall into tempta
tion, lest they determine to become rich, and thereby
fall into diverse and hurtful lusts, and pierce them
selves through with many sorrows.
Soon after the event above narrated, a law was
passed in the Province, allowing each township to
elect three commissioners, whose duty it should be, to
transact the public business pertaining to the township.
Each township should also elect one township clerk,
whose business it should be, to hold and keep all
moneys, books, and papers belonging to said town;
with power to administer oaths, and in fact, he, with
the commissioners, were to constitute a board, possess
ing all the power of a court, in relation to township
business.


--- PAGE 277 ---
ELECTED TOWNSHIP CLEEK. 261
In our colony, located in the township of Bidulph,
the colored people were a large majority of the inhab
itants, which gave us the power to elect commisioners
from our own settlement, and therefore, three black
men where duly chosen, who entered on the duties of
their office, while your humble servant, A. Steward,
was elected township clerk, with all the responsi
bility of the office resting upon him and the same
power given him as though he had been born in
Her Brittanic Majesty s dominion, with a face as
white as the driven snow. I felt the responsibility
of my office, but not more deeply than I did this
assurance of entire confidence, and respect shown me
bymytownsmen, after all the cruel persecutions I had
met; after all the accusations of theft, forgery, &c.,
that vicious person could bring against me.
The Eev. Nathaniel Paul, with his lady, arrived at
Wilberforce in the spring of 1835, to the great joy of
the colonists, to find that his brother had gone the
way of all the earth, and his remains quietly resting
on his own premises, where his afflicted family still
resided.
In the colony there was a great deal of excitement
regarding the course our agent would pursue, and all
waited with anxious expectancy to see him enrich the
treasury with his long-promised collections.
We had agreed, on sending him forth as an agent
for the colony, to give him fifty dollars per month for
his services, besides bearing his expenses


--- PAGE 278 ---
262 KETU.RN OF EEV. NATHANIEL PAUL.
The reverend gentleman, charged, on his return to
the colony, the sum specified, for four years, three
months,and twenty days. Wespent several days in
auditing his account, with increased fearful forebod
ings. &quot;We found his receipts to be, in the United
Kingdoms of Great Britain, one thousand six hundred
and eighty-three pounds, nineteen shillings; or, eight
thousand and fifteen dollars, eighty cent^ His expen
ditures amounted to one thousand four hundred and
threepounds, nineteenshillings; or, seventhousandand
nineteen dollars, eighty cents. Then his wages for over
four years, at fifty dollars per month, left a balance
against the board of several hundred dollars, which
we had no funds to cancel, inasmuch as the reverend
gentleman had paid us nothing of all he had collected
in Europe, nor even paid a farthing toward liquidating
the debts incurred for his outfit and expenses.
There was also in Mr. Paul s charge against the
board of managers, an item of two hundred do lars,
which he had paid to Wm. Loyd Garrison, while that
gentleman was also in England;
but bywhose author
ity he had paid or given it, it was hard to determine.
We gave him no orders to make donations of any
kind. To take the liberty to do so, and then to charge
it to our poor and suffering colony, seemed hard to
bear; still we allowed the charge. Had we, in our
straitened and almost destitute circumstances, made a
donation of that, to us, large sum of money to Mr.


--- PAGE 279 ---
NO AID KECEIVED FROM PAULS LABOES 263
Garrison or any body else, certainly we should, at
least, have had the credit of it; and as Mr. Garrison
had made no acknowledgment of the receipt, I wrote
him on the subject, and his answer will be found,
heading our correspondence, in this volume.
Not a dollar did the treasurer ever receive of the
Rev. N. Paul, unless we call the donations he had
made without our permission, a payment. He did, it
is true, award to the board, the sum of two hundred
dollars, paid by him to Mr. Garrison, and fifty dollars
more given by himself to Mr. Nell, on his departure
from England. Not a farthing could we get of him
;
and in short, as far as the monied interest of the
colony was concerned, his mission proved an entire
failure. How much good the reverend gentleman
may have done in spreading anti-slavery truth, during
his stay in Europe, is not for me to say. The English,
at that time held slaves
;
and report speaks well of his
labors and endeavors to open the eyes of that nation
to the sin of slavery and the injustice of the coloniza
tion scheme. It is said that he continually addressed
crowded and deeply interested audiences, and that
many after hearing him. firmly resolved to exert
themselves, until every chain was broken and every
bondman freed beneath the waving banner of the
British Lion. Perhaps his arduous labors assisted in
freeing the West India islands of the hateful curse of


--- PAGE 280 ---
264: RETURN OF REV. NATHANIEL PAUL.
Slavery; if so, we shall not so much regret the losses
and severe trials, it was ours to bear at that time.
The indignant and disappointed colonists, however,
took no such view of his mission ; and knowing as
they did, that he had paid not a cent of cash into the
treasury, nor liquidated one debt incurred on his
account, they became excited well nigh to fury, so
much so, that at one time we found it nearly impos
sible to restrain them from having recourse to Lynch
law. They thought that the reverend gentleman
must have large sums of money at his command
somewhere -judging from his appearance and mode
of living, and that a little wholesome punishment
administered to his reverence, by grave Judge Lynch,
enthroned upon a &quot;cotton bale,&quot; might possibly bring
him to terms, and induce him to disgorge some of his
ill-gotten wealth, which he so freely lavished upon
himself, and was withholding from those to whose
wants it had been kindly contributed.
Just, as was their dissatisfaction, I was satisfied by
the examination of his accounts, that he had spent
nearly all of the money collected for us
;
his expenses
had been considerable ; beside, he had fallen in love,
during his stay in England, with a white woman, and
I suppose it must have required both time and money
to woo and win so fine and fair an English lady, said
also to possess quite a little sum of money, that is,


--- PAGE 281 ---
EXTRAVAGANCE IN THE WOODS. 265
everal thousand dollars, all of which our poor, little
suffering colony must pay for, the reverend gentle
mans statement to the contrary notwithstanding.
Wesucceeded at last, after a tedious effort, in satis
fying the minds of the settlers to the extent, that a
violent outbreak was no longer to be feared or
dreaded. When all was quiet in the colony, I ven-
turned to make my first call on the wife of N. Paul,
who was then stopping with the widow of the late
Eev. B. Paul, residing some three miles from us.
The houses of the colonists were generally built of
logs, hewnon both sides, the spaces chinked with mor
tar, and the roof constructed of boards. The lower
part was generally left in one large room, and when
another apartment was desired, it was made by draw
ing a curtain across it. When we arrived at the
residence of Mrs. Paul, we were immediately ushered
into the presence of Mrs. Nathaniel Paul, whom we
found in an inner apartment, made by drawn curtains,
carpeted in an expensive style, where she was seated
like a queen in state, with a veil floating from her
head to the floor
;
a gold chain encircling her neck,
and attached to a gold watch in her girdle;
her fingers
and person sparkling with costly jewelry. Her
manners were stiff and formal, nor was she handsome,
but a tolerably fair looking woman, of about thirty
years of age: and this was the wife of our agent for
the poor Wilberforce colony
!
M


--- PAGE 282 ---
266 BETUKN OF EEV. NATHAJSTEL PAUL.
&quot;N. Paul had now settled his business with the
colonists, and being about to leave for the States, we
appealed to his honor as a manand a Christian, to call
at Eochester and pay the seven hundred dollar bank
debt, for which he was justly and legally holden, and
relieve honorably, those kind gentlemen who had
raised the money for him. He well knew the condi
tion of our friend E. Peck, and that the names of
some of our colored friends were also attached to the
note
; all of whom were relying implicitly on his or
our honorto paythe obligation. That wehadno funds
in the treasury he was well aware; also, that all were
deeply concerned about that debt. All this he knew;
and in answer to our earnest and repeated injunction,
he promised most faithfully and solemnly that he
would call at Eochester, and take up the note. On
those conditions he was allowed to leave the colony,
and when parting with me, no more to meet in this
life, his last assurance was, that he would cancel that
obligation. What then could we think of his word,
when we learned soon after that he passed Eochester,
without calling, direct to Albany; nor did he ever
return, or make any explanation of his conduct; nor
give any reason why his promise was not redeemed
and the money pu*d.
He preached in Albany until his health failed, then
he was obliged to live the best way he could, and at
last to depend on charity.


--- PAGE 283 ---
DOMESTIC TEIALS AND DEATH OF N. PAUL. 267
His disease was dropsy, from which he suffered
deeply, being unable to lie down for some time pre
vious to his death. I have been told that his domestic
life was far from a peaceable or happy one, and that
in poverty, sorrow and affliction, he lingered on a long
time, till death at last closed the scene.


--- PAGE 284 ---
CHAPTEK XXXI
MY FAMILY RETURN TO ROCHESTER.
I
&quot;WAS now seriously meditating a return to
Rochester. Mypurpose in going to Canada, has
already been made known to the reader, as well as
some of the disappointments I met, and some of the
trials and difficulties I had to encounter.
Now, after laboring, and suffering persecution for
about five years, mywaywas comparatively clear; still
I wished to leave the Province and return to the States,
in which prospect my family greatly rejoiced. Doubt
less most persons in the position I then occupied,
would have chosen to remain
;
but for several reasons,
I did not.
Notwithstanding I had been during my youth, a
poor, friendless, and illiterate slave, I had, through the
mercy of God and the kindness offriends, not only ob
tained my freedom, but I had by the industry and per
severance of a few years, acquired a tolerable English


--- PAGE 285 ---
HAD A COMPETENCY ON LEAVING ROCHESTER. 269
education, established a profitable business, built for
myself a good and extensive business reputation, and
had laid the foundation for increasing wealth and
entire independence.
Indeed, so far as a competency is concerned, I pos
sessed that when I left Kochester. My house and
land was paid for; my store also, and the goods it
contained were free from debt; beside, I had several
hundred dollars in the bank for future use, nor do I
boast, when I say that the comfort and happiness of
myself and family, required no further exertion on
my part to better our worldly condition. &quot;We were
living in one of the best countries on the earth, sur
rounded by friends, good and intelligent society, and
some of the noblest specimens of Christian philan
thropy in the world. My wife and children, had not
only been accustomed to the comforts, if not the
luxuries of life, but also to associate with persons of
refinement and cultivation
;
and although they had
willingly accompanied me to Canada, where they had
experienced little less than care, labor and sorrow, it
cannot be thought very strange that they should
desire to return. Wewere colored people to be sure,
and were too often made to feel the weight of that
cruel prejudice, which small minds with a perverted
education, know so well how to heap upon the best
endeavors of our oppressed race. Yet truth and
justice to my Mends, compel me to say, that after a


--- PAGE 286 ---
270 MY FAMILY RETURN TO ROCHESTER.
short acquaintance, I have usually been treated with
all that kindness and confidence, which should exist
between man and man.
At my house of entertainment in Canada, it was
not uncommon for gentlemen of my former acquain
tances, to stop for a friendly chat; merchants, jour
neying through our settlement, after goods, would
frequently call, with their money, watches, and other
valuables, carefully concealed about their persons;
but
when they learned our name, and had become ac
quainted a little, they would not only freely expose
their wealth, but often place all their money and
valuables in my hands, for safe keeping; nor was
their confidence ever misplaced to my knowledge.
Another thing: when I went to Wilberforce, I sup
posed that the colonists would purchase the whole
township of Bidulph, and pay for it, which might
have been done, had they been fortunate enough to
put forward better men. Then when we had a suffi
cient number of inhabitants, we could have sent a
member to Parliament, one of our own race, to repre
sent the interests of our colony. In all this we were
disappointed. The Canada Company, in their unjust
judgment of a whole people, by one dishonest man,
had stopped the sale of lands to colored persons, which
of course, put an end to the emigration of respectable
and intelligent colored men to that place; nor was
there any prospect of a favorable change. Moreover,


--- PAGE 287 ---
DEPARTURE FROM WILBERFORCE. 271
the persecutions which gave rise to the colony, had in
a great measure ceased; anti-slavery truth was taking
effect on the minds of the people, and Godwas raising
up many a friend for the poor slave, to plead with
eloquent speech and tears, the cause of the dumb and
down-trodden.
These, with other considerations, influenced me in
my decision to leave Canada. As soon, however, as
myintentions were made known, I was importuned
on all sides, by persons both in and out of the settle
ment, to remain awhile longer, at least. This will be
seen by a reference to the appendix.
After due deliberation, I concluded to send my
family to the States, and remain myself until myyear
should terminate, for which I had been elected town
ship clerk. In accordance with this determination, I
made preparation to take my family to Port Stanley,
forty miles distant. But what a contrast was there be
tweenourleaving Eochester, five years before, and our
removing from the colony! Then, we had five two-
horse wagon loads of goods and furniture, and seven
in family; now, our possessions were only a few
articles, ina one-horse wagon, with an addition of two
members to our household! The settlers collected
about us, to take an affectionate leave of my wife and
children; but tears and sobs, prevented an utterance
ofmorethan a
&quot;
Godbless you,&quot; and a few like expres
sions. The scene was indeed an affecting one: all the


--- PAGE 288 ---
272 MY FAMILY RETURN TO ROCHESTER.
weary days of our labor; all the trials and difficulties
we had passed; all the sweet communion we had
enjoyed in our religious and social meetings; all the
acts of neighborly kindness, seemed now to be indel
ibly impressed on every memory, and we felt that a
mutual regard and friendship had bound us closei
to each other, in the endearing bonds of Christian
brotherhood bonds not to be broken by the adverse
scenes incident to frail human life.
Arrived at Port Stanley, wewere kindlyentertained
by a Mr. White, a fugitive slave from Virginia, who
owned a snug little farm on the bank of Kettle Creek,
and who appeared to be in a good and prosperous
condition. Being detained there, waiting for a boat,
on which I was anxious to see my family comfort
ably situated before I left them, I was aroused at an
early hour on the second morning of our stay, by a
loud rapping at the door
;
and hearing myselfinquired
for, I dressed myself immediately, and followed Mr.
White into the sitting room, where I saw two strange
men, armed with bludgeons! I soon learned, how
ever, that one of them was the under-sheriff, who had
come to arrest me for a debt of about forty dollars,
and the other armed man had come to assist him. I
assured them I was ready to accompany them back to
London, which I wasobliged to do, a prisoner, leaving
my family among comparative strangers. The debt
had become due to a man who had worked for us in


--- PAGE 289 ---
CLOSE UP BUSINESS AT WILBERFOKCE. 273
the building of a saw-milL I arranged the matter
without going to jail, but before I could return to
Port Stanley, my family, kindly assisted by Mr.
White, had departed for Buffalo. The weather was
cold and the lake very rough, but they safely arrived
in Rochester, after a journey of three days. During
their passage up the lake my oldest daughter took a
severe cold, from which she never recovered.
I returned to the colony to attend to the duties of
my office, and to close my business with the colony,
preparatory to joining my family, who were now
settled in Rochester, but in very different circum
stances from those in which they had left it. I had
deposited quite a sum of money in the Rochester
Bank
;
but our continual expenditures at Wilberforce,
in my journeyings for the benefit of the colony, and
in the transacting of business pertaining to its inter
ests, had left not one dollar for the support of my
family, or to give me another start in business.
Nevertheless, I felt willing to submit the case to Him
who had known the purity of my intentions, and
who had hitherto
&quot;
led me through scenes dark and
drear,&quot; believing he would not forsake me now, in
this time of need.
Consoling myself with these reflections, I renewed
my endeavors to do mybest, leaving the event with
my God.
M*


--- PAGE 290 ---
CHAPTEK XXXII.
THE LAND AGENT AND THE SQUATTER.
I
HAYE named, I believe, that all the colored
people, who purchased lands of Lewis, could get
no deed nor any remuneration for their improvements.
This they thought hard and unfair. Some had built
a house and barn, cleared land, &c.; but when they
wished to pay for their farms, they could get no deed,
and were obliged to lose all their labor.
This raised such a general complaint against the
land agents, that they finally agreed to pay the squat
ters for their improvements, if they would leave their
farms. An opportunity was soon offered to test their
sincerity in this agreement. A shrewd fellow, who
had been many years a sailor, named William Smith,
iiad made valuable improvements on land, for which
he could get no deed, and then he wished to leave it.
His wife, also, died about this time, leaving him with
eight children, which determined him to leave the


--- PAGE 291 ---
FRAUDULENT LAND AGENTS. 275
colony, and after providing homes for his children, to
return to his former occupation on the high seas
;
but
he also determined not to leave without receiving the
pay which the agents had agreed to give for his im
provements.
11
Oh yes,&quot; said they, in answer to his repeated soli
citations,
&quot;
you shall be paid, certainly, certainly; you
shall be paid every farthing.&quot; But whenthe appointed
day came for the pompous land agents to ride through
the settlement, you might see Smith station himself at
first one and then another conspicuous place on the
road, hoping they would have the magnanimity to
stop and pay him, especially, as he had informed them
of his destitute and almost desperate condition, with
eight young children to maintain, and no means to do
so, after giving up to them the farm. Before them as
usual rode their body servant, of whom Smith would
inquire at what hour the agents might be expected.
And most blandly would he be informed of some
particular hour, when perhaps, within the next ten
minutes, the lordly agent would fly past him, on their
foaming steeds, with the speed of a &quot;lightning train.&quot;
This course they repeated again and again. One day,
when all of the land agents rode through the settle
ment in this manner, Smith followed them on foot
over fifty miles. He at last intercepted them, and they
promised with the coolest indifference, that on a cer
tain day, not far distant, they would certainly pay him.


--- PAGE 292 ---
276 THE LAND AGENT AND THE SQUATTER.
all he claimed, if he would meet them at a certair
hotel in London. To this he agreed ;
and the poor
fellow returned to the colony almost exhausted.
His funds were nearly all spent, and he wished to
take his children to NewYork
; yet his only hope was
in the integrity and honor of the land agents.
On the day appointed, he was at London long before
the hour to meet, had arrived. He entered the village
with a determined air, and saw the agents just riding
up to a hotel, but not the one they had told him to
call at. He, however, waited for no invitation, but
entered the hotel and inquired of the servant for his
master. He said his master was not there !
&quot;I know he is, said Smith,
&quot;
and I want to see
him.&quot;
The servant withdrew, but soon returned to say
that his master was engaged and could not see him
that day. Smith followed the servant iiito the hall,
calling out to him in the most boisterous manner
demanding to be told the reason why he could not see
his master. The noise which Smith purj^aely made,
soon brought into the hall one of the ag-tnta, a Mr.
Longworth, a short, fat man, weighing in Kho neigh
borhood of three hundred pounds! When he saw
Smith, he strutted about, assuring him that this ois-
graceful uproar was quite uncalled for, and finally
putting on a severe look, told hirn that he could not
nave anything for his improvements;
of course not,


--- PAGE 293 ---
NOVEL WAY OF ENFORCING PAYMENT. 277
he really could not expect; certainly not, &c. Smith
plainly assured the agent that his &quot;blarney&quot; wouldavail
him nothing;
he had come by their own appointment
to get his pay, and that he ceartainly should have if
not in the waythey themselves agreed upon, he would
choose his own method of getting it ! Thus saving,
he stepped back, threw downhis woollyhead, and goat
fashion, let drive into the fat Englishmans &quot;brp$d
basket!&quot; He sprawled about and soon recovers!
his standing, but continued to screum and halloo witt
rage and mortification, more than with pain, until he
had brought to the spot landlord, boarders, and ser
vants, to witness the affray; but Smiih, nothing daunt
ed, administered two or three more effectual butts with
his hard head into the lordly agent, when the sub
dued and now silent English gentleman, drew from
his pocket book, and carefully counted out, every
dollar Smith had at first demanded. Smith accepted
it pleasantly, thanked him and withdrew, amid the
shouts and jeers of the spectators, which the agei*
was more willing to avoid than he. That was the way
the land agent paid the squatter.
It seemed, however, a little too bad, to make a fine
English gentleman, feel as &quot;flat&quot; as Longworth ap
peared to feel
; yet it wasundoubtedlythe onlymethod
by which Smith could recover a farthing. The agents,
it was supposed, did not design to pay for any im
provements ; indeed, some very hard and unjust


--- PAGE 294 ---
278 THE LAND AGENT AND THE SQUATTEE.
incidents occurred in connection with that matter,
and probably Smith was about the only one, who
ever received the full value of his claim.
There was committed about this time, a most shock
ing murder, in the London district Afarmer who
had a respectable family, consisting of a wife and
several children, became so addicted to the use of
spirituous liquors, that he neglected both his family
and farm so much, that his friends felt called upon to
request the distiller, who was his near neighbor, to
furnish him with no more intoxicating drink. This,
so exasperated the poor, ruined and besotted wretch,
that he raved like a madman such as he undoubtedly
was crazed and infuriated, by the contents of the
poisoned cup of liquid damnation, held to his lips by
a neighboring distiller; a fellow-being, who for the
consideration of a few shillings, could see his neighboi
made a brute and his family left in destitution and
sorrow. Perhaps, however, he did not anticipate d
termination so fearful
; yet that is but a poor excus&amp;lt;
for one who lives by the sale of rum. When a rum*
seller gives that to a man, which he knows will u stea
1
awayhis brains,&quot; and make him a maniac, how can h&amp;lt;
anticipate his future conduct? And who is respon
sible? Ah, who?
When Severin found he could get no more intox
icating beverage, he in his demoniacal rage, conceived
the idea of despatching his whole family, and se*


--- PAGE 295 ---
FIENDISH MURDERS. 279
about Ms purpose by first snatching the young babe
and casting it into the fire ! When the poor wife and
mother came shrieking to the rescue of her darling
infant, he with one furious blow, laid her a bleeding
corpse at his feet! Two other young children he
next murdered, and left them mingling their blood
with that of their mothers, while he ran furiously
after the two older ones, who were endeavoring to
escape to a neighbor s for assistance ;
and overtaking,
killed them both! &quot;When the miserable wretch had
completed his hellish design, he started for his nearest
neighbor, named Smith, and told him that there was a
black and a white man at his house, murdering his
family, requesting him to go to their assistance. Mrs.
Smith, believing that Severin designed to murder her
husband, insisted on his calling his young men to
assist him, which he did; and on arriving at the scene
of slaughter, a most horrid spectacle was before them:
five dead bodies weltering in blood, aside from that of
the innocent babe, whose little form lay roasted and
charred, on the fatal and bloody hearthstone of the
drunkard! Victims all, of an intoxicated husband
and father! When the guilty man saw the mangled
remains of his household, he only increased his de
pravity by trying to make others responsible for the
wicked deed, exclaiming in feigned anguish, &quot;my
dear wife! my poor children! I was afraid they
would murder you ! Oh, my lost family
!
&quot;
&c


--- PAGE 296 ---
280 THE LAND AGENT AND THE SQUATTER.
Community was soon alarmed; Severin, arrested,
tried, convicted, and sentenced to suffer the extreme
penalty of the law.
It is sufficient for us to say, that the evidence was
clear and conclusive, that he was the only murderer
of his family; nor was it doubted that Mrs. Smiths
suspicion was correct; yet, with all the array of posi
tive testimony brought against him, he denied the
commission of the crime to the last moment of his
life ! When brought out for execution, he was placed
under the gallows, and the rope with its fatal noose
adjusted around his neck, when one of the attorneys
arose, and with great solemnity, addressed him, in the
most impressive manner: &quot;We have done,&quot; said he,
&quot;all in our power to save your life; but you are justly
condemned, and in a few minutes more, will enter the
presence of the All-seeing eye of Jehovah
;
now let
me beseech your in the name of Grod, to tell the truth,
before you die.&quot; Severin declared himself innocent
of the crime, for which he was about to suffer
;
but
was consoled, he said, with the belief that he should,
*n a few short moments, meet in blissful re-union his
dear, murdered wife and children in heaven, to part
no more!
Prayers were read
;
and during the reading
ofthe Lords prayer, at the words
&quot;
Thy will be done,&quot;
the hardened wretch was launched into eternity.
No room was left to doubt the fact, that Severin
with his own hand destroyed the life of his unhappy


--- PAGE 297 ---
EXECUTION OF THE MURDERER. 281
and abused wife, and also that of Ms helpless family.
Yet in one sense, may we say with the murderer, it
was not he who committed the awful and inhuman
deed, but boldly and truthfully charge it to mans
bitterest foe Rum! What but the maddening effects
of spirituous liquors, could so demoralize, so demonize
a man, as to convert the once loving husband and
proud father, into a reckless fiend, a heartless savage?*
Oh, Rum! earth contains not another so fell a foe I
Should any who may read these humble pages, find
an effectual warning in the unhappy end of Severin,
one which shall induce them to pause in their course,
or at once and forever abandon the use of alcoholic
drinks, I shall gratefully feel that I have not written
this incident in vain.
Before I left Wilberforce, the Rev. S. E. Cornish,
made a visit, and preached the Word of Life to the
colony, greatly to the satisfaction and comfort of the
settlers. After distributing liberally of his abundance,
to his poor brethren, he departed for the States,
attended by the prayers and blessings of the Wilber
force colonists.


--- PAGE 298 ---
CHAPTER XXXIII.
CHARACTEK AND DEATH OF I. LEWIS.
I
HAYE spoken in the preceding chapter, of a
visit from the Eev. S. E. Cornish, to the colony.
He had previously written me, concerning the object
of his proposed visit, which was to obtain the deposi
tions of the board of managers, relative to all the
money received through their agents for the colony.
He was sent to Canada then, and once afterwards, for
and at the expense of A. Tappan, on business pertain
ing to the law-suit instituted by I. Lewis against that
gentleman, for defamation of character. The depo
sitions taken in the colony, with the expense of
twice sending an agent to Canada, must have made a
round sum for that kind gentleman to pay, merely for
telling a truth already known!
Mr. Cornish had also been informed of myintention
to leave the colony, and that myfamily were already
gone. He, knowing something concerning the state of


--- PAGE 299 ---
DEATH OF ISRAEL LEWIS. 283
things, urged me to remain at least, until his arrival,
as will be seen by a reference to his letter in the
appendix.
As I look back on those scenes of labor and trial, I
find cause for deep humiliation and gratitude to God,
for His goodness and gracious protection, over my
frail life, through unseen dangers of various kinds,
and for his continued favors and unmerited blessings
Many of my fellow men have fallen in death s cold
embrace since that time, while my health and life has
been mercifully preserved.
Three of the leading characters of the Wilberforce
colony are now dead. Kev. Benjamin Paul, lies in
the silent grave-yard in Wilberforce, C. W. His
brother, Rev. Nathaniel Paul, also sleeps the dreamless
sleep of death, and his dust rests in the beautiful
cemetry in Albany, 1ST. Y.
Israel Lewis has also finished his earthly career
after robbing the poor of their just dues, and per
secuting those who endeavored to defend them
;
after
living in extravagance &quot;faring sumptuously every
day,&quot; he became reduced in circumstances ; despised
and dishonored, his proud spirit was at last broken.
His health gave way;
when at length, unattended and
alone, he found his way to a hospital in Montreal,
where he soon after died, leaving not enough of all
his gains to afford him a decent burial !
Oh, what a reward &quot;for all his kbor under the


--- PAGE 300 ---
284 CHARACTER AND DEATH OF I. LEWIS.
sunI
&quot;
His fame, his wealth, and his law-suits, all
have perished with his memory. Poor man !
Israel Lewis was born a slave, raised on a Southern
plantation, and subjected to all the cruelties and depri
vations of a bondman. His natural abilities were
above mediocrity, but having never had the advant
ages of an education, or the privileges of a society
calculated to cultivate and refine his natural aspiring
intellect, and to direct his indomitable will in the
acquirement of the more imperishable graces of the
human heart, he had come to manhood with a deter
mined, selfish disposition, to accomplish whatever
gratified his vanity or administered to the wants of
his animal nature.
And may we not, with propriety here inquire,
whether our common Father, who has declared him
self to be &quot;no respecter of persons,&quot; has endowed
men with enlarged capacities for the attainment of
that knowledge and wisdom, so requisite to the eleva
tion of character, for the express purpose of seeing
them made beasts of burden, and their superior facul
ties prostituted by the sensuality imposed by Slavery,
and to be sold as chattels, with impunity ? I tell you,
nay. The day when Almighty God will avenge the
work of his own hands, hasteth greatly
! Were it not
so, we might rejoice in the ignorance of the poor
slaves, and pray that none of them may ever be
endowed with a superior intellect to that of the brutes


--- PAGE 301 ---
HIS NATURAL SHREWDNESS. 285
they are made to resemble. Then would the proud
spirit no longer chafe, and manhood writhe in the
unbroken chain; but, like the ox to the yoke or the
horse to the harness, they might submit, without a
conscious violation of their dearest and Godgiven
rights. But we were speaking of Israel Lewis.
Anatural energy and strength of character, he had
inherited
;
a malicious, selfish, and consequently a de
ceptive disposition, his life as a slave had undoubtedly
bestowed upon him. Intellect must have scope, and
when nothing is left within its grasp but vice, can we
wonder that the slave possessing the most talent,
should generally prove the greatest villain.
Uneducated as was Lewis, his quick perception, his
ungoverned passions, and his native independence, not
only made him a dangerous slave, but an unfaithful
and overbearing companion. He, however, took a
wife a slave like himself, whose devotedness and
good sense, cannot be made manifest, more than in
her willingness to leave all that was dear to her on
earth, and flee from their birth-place, she knew not
whither
;
but confiding in the professed love and pro
tection of her husband, she cheerfully followed him to
the dense forest, in search of that freedom, denied
them in their native country, submitting herself
gladly to all the hardships and fearful anxieties of a
fugitive slave. What to her were horsemen, armed
with dirk and rifle I What though the trained and


--- PAGE 302 ---
\
286 CHARACTER AND DEATH OF I. LEWIS.
inhuman blood-hound bayed upon their track ! Was
not he who had sworn a life-long allegiance to her by
her side ! Should he be killed or retaken, what could
she desire, but to be his companion still !
Slavery
even, bitter as was the cup, might contain for her one
sweet drop, while connubial love lighted up their rude
cabin, and sweetened their daily toil; but the ad
ditional anticipation of LIBERTY, to their domestic
happiness oh blessed hope
! Howit quickened their
weary footsteps, and, with fixed eyes upon the star of
the North, they pressed forward through every diffi
culty, until they finally reached Cincinnati, 0. There
they lived quietly, and with others, suffered the
terrors of the mob, where also he was chosen agent,
to seek a more safe and quiet home for his afflicted
and outcast countrymen. The office was accepted,
and Lewis became the founder of the Wilberforce
colony.
The personal appearance of Israel Lewis was pre
possessing; his manner and address easy and com
manding. To those unacquainted with his private
life, his ungoverned passions, and his unprincipled,
revengeful disposition, he could appear the gentleman,
the philanthropist, and the Christian.
His education was limited
; yet he had managed to
gather a sufficient knowledge of the sciences to enable
him to read and write, together with quite a fund of
general information
;
and then his shrewdness and tact


--- PAGE 303 ---
ADDRESSES THE SENATE AT ALBAmr. 287
accomplished all the rest. To strangers he could
appear a ripe scholar, if left unquestioned. He was a
good speaker, and once spake with eloquence and
marked effect before the Legislature, assembled in the
Senate Chamber, at Albany, KY.
Had the childhood of Mr. Lewis been passed under
more favorable auspices ; had his intellectual faculties
been so cultivated as to predominate over his animal
propensities, and his towering aspirations directed
toward the accomplishment of acts, lofty in their
benevolence, noble in their sacrifice, high in their
honorable purpose, and great in their purity; I can
but believe that his powerful intellect would have
achieved the fame of a Lundy, or would have be
queathed to his brethren a memory like that of a
Clarkson. Instead, we have found him devoting his
energies to the gratification of his avarice, pride, and
ambition characteristics directly opposed to the de
portment of the humble Christian, and such as our
Heavenly Father has never promised to prosper.
How truly has &quot;the wise man&quot; said, &quot;He that is
greedy of gain troubleth his own house
;
but he that
hateth gifts shall live.&quot; How strikingly has this
passage been verified in the course of Lewis! For a
few paltry sums of gain, could he consent, not alone to
rob the poor, for whom it was kindly given as unto
the Lord, but to turn scornfully away from that poor,
illiterate, and humble slave wife, whom he had, in


--- PAGE 304 ---
288 CHARACTER AND DEATH OF I. LEWIS.
their mutual adversity, vowed to cherish in prosperity
as well as in all other circumstances through life. That
wife, who had borne with him the sorrows of
Slavery the humble choice of a bondman !
She,
who fled with him, anticipating additional happiness
in a life of freedomI Poor woman!
Disappointment
is of an earthly growth, yet God is merciful
;
notwith
standing we have the same authority as above, for
saying that
&quot;
Every one that is proud in heart is an
abomination to the Lord: though hand join in hand,
he shall not be unpunished.&quot;
In the hands of a righteous Judge we leave him,
who, for the wealth that perisheth, who, for worldly
honor and selfish gratification, could barterhis honesty
and integrity, as
&quot;
Esau, who sold his birth-right for a
mess of pottage.&quot;
To me the lesson is an impressive one, and I am
thinking it would be well for us all to examine the
foundation on which we stand. If based upon the
solid and broad foundation of Christianity, doing to
others in all things as we would they should do to us,
sacrificing on all occasions our own ease, and worldly
honor, for the benefit of our fellow-men, and the good
of our country, then indeed, we need fear no evil
;
if
the winds of adversity howl about our dwelling, we
shall find it will stand, being founded on a ROCK.
But if we build upon &quot;the sands&quot; of fame or self-
aggrandizement, and, like the towering oak. lift our


--- PAGE 305 ---
CHRISTIANITY THE SUREST FOUNDATION. 289
insignificant heads in proud defiance of the coming
storm, we may expect that our superstruction will
fall !
&quot;
And great wiU be the fall of it !
&quot;
N


--- PAGE 306 ---
CHAPTER XXXIV.
MY RETURN&quot; TO ROCHESTER.
HAYING-
closed my business in &quot;Wilberforce, I
prepared to leave on the expiration of my
term of office as township clerk, which was now near
at hand. Notwithstanding, I ever felt a sensation of
relief and pleasure, when I thought of returning to
my old home and friends m the States, yet as often
as I look abroad over the settlement and remember all
myglowing hopes, all mydelightful anticipations of
a prosperous future for those poor, struggling colonists;
when I recollected with what zeal and honest purpose,
with what sincerity and sacrifice I had prosecuted my
labor among them, a dark shadow of disappointment
would flit across my mind, however welcome it might
be. That I had firm and tried friends in the colony,
I had never the least reason to doubt, not to suppose
their number less after a five years residence with
them; but our expectations had not been realized.


--- PAGE 307 ---
RETURN TO ROCHESTER PENNILESS. 291
Our hope of settling a township, to be represented in
Parliament by one of our own people, was now for
ever blasted. I remembered too, that many of the
colonists had been unjustly incited against mycourse ;
but in the retrospect my heart did not condemn
me. Errors many, no doubt I had committed ;
but I
was grateful, when reviewing the whole ground, for a
conscience void of offence toward God and man
;
and
I finally took my leave of all, craving the choicest
blessings of Heaven to rest upon that infant colony
and its interests.
On the nineteenth day of January, 1837, I left
Wilberforce, passing through Brantford, Hamilton,
Queenston, Lewiston, and from thence to Kochester.
During my journey, I could not avoid feeling sad and
despondent, as my mind incessantly returned to the
review of my mission, upon which I could look with
no other decision than that of an entire failure. I had
spent my time, wasted mysubstance for nought, and
was now returning to my dependant family, that,
with myself, had been stripped of nearly
.
every
means of comfort and support.
What would my Eochester friends think of my
conduct? Notwithstanding all my despondency and
evil foreboding at that time, I am now well satisfied
that my labor was not all in vain, but that some good
did result from it.
As I drew near the city, a gloom like thick dark-


--- PAGE 308 ---
292 MY RETURN TO ROCHESTER.
ness overshadowed me: I thought of the unfavorable
transactions which had occurred between the directors
of the colony and myfriends in Eochester, and fell to
wondering how they would receive me.
On the twenty-third of January, 1837, I finally re-
entered the city penniless;
but as I soon found, not so
friendless as my fears would have it. Among, the
first to welcome me back to my old home, was that
friend of
&quot;
blessed memory,&quot; Everard Peck, who had
been apprised of some of the losses I had met and the
trials I had passed through. This gentleman was also
one of the first to propose to be one of five men, who
should loan me one hundred dollars each, for five
years. Through the disinterested kindness of this
worthy gentleman, I was in a few days after my
arrival, well established in a store of provisions and
groceries. The five kind gentlemen, to whom I was
so deeply indebted for the loan, were: Everard Peck,
George A. Avery, Samuel D. Porter, Levi W. Sibley,
and Griffith, Brother & Co.
This noble act of generosity and kindness, on the
part of my friends, to furnish me with the means to
commence business, especially whentheir prospect was
anything but flattering, regarding my ever being able
to refund their well-timed and gracious liberality,
affected me more deeply than all the censure and
persecution I had elsewhere received. Their frown
and displeasure, I was better prepared to meet than


--- PAGE 309 ---
KINDLY ASSISTED BY OLD FRIENDS. 293
this considerate act of Christian sympathy, which I am
not ashamed to say melted me to tears, and I resolved
to show my appreciation of their kindness by an
industry and diligence in business hitherto unsur
passed.
E. Bardwell, then a merchant on Exchange Street,
next laid me under a lasting obligation by offering to
sell me goods on credit; others proffered assistance
by promising their continual patronage, which was to
me the same as cash, and soon the store I had
opened on Main Street, was doing an extensive busi
ness. Myprofits were small to be sure, and I had a
heavy rent to pay for my store and dwelling, yet I
was making a comfortable living for my family, and
laying by something to reimburse the kind friends
who had helped me in the time of need, when I found
that the health of my family required more of my
time and assistance than ever before. My oldest
daughter, who, I have before mentioned, having taken
a violent cold on Lake Erie, was now confined to her
bed. All that could be done to save the life of a
darling child our first born was done; and if we
sometimes went beyond our means, it was a satisfac
tion to us to see her enjoy some of the comforts of
life of which my mission to Canada had deprived her.
One physician after another was employed to stay the
approach of the destroyer
: some said they could cure
her, if paid in advance; to all of which I cheerfully


--- PAGE 310 ---
294 MY RETURN TO ROCHESTER.
acceded, but only to see our beloved sink lower, and
patiently pine away.
No one but a parent who has watched the rapid
decline of a darling child, and marked with a bursting
heart the approaching footsteps of the spoiler, can
imagine how powerless we felt at that time. The
wealth of the Indias, had we possessed it, would have
been freely given, although it would have been un
availing, to shield that loved and gentle form from
pain, and we were obliged,to look hopelessly on, while
our little patient, suffering daughter sank lower and
lower every day. In vain were our parental arms
outstretched for her protection ; from death we could
not save her. She had long since ceased to glide
about the house, and soothe with her silvery tones all
the childish fears of the little ones. Helpless she now
lay, burning with fever, and wasting from our sight,
&quot;till soft as the dew on the twilight descending,&quot;
the cold damps of death gathered on her youthful
brow. One pleasant morning after passing a restless
night, I observed her to gaze earnestly upward, and a
moment after I called her name but received no
answer.
&quot;
Her languishing head was at rest ;
Its thinkings and achings were o er ;
Her quiet, immoveable breast,
Washeaved by affliction no more.&quot;
On the fifteenth day of April, 1837, she sweetly fell


--- PAGE 311 ---
PROSPERITY IN BUSINESS. 295
asleep, aged eleven years. Sorrowfully we followed
her remains to Mount Hope, where we laid her down
to rest until the resurrection morning. Death had
now made its first inroad in our family circle, and
since then we have laid two other loved ones by her
side. Wesorrowed, but not without hope.
Mybusiness continued to prosper, and I concluded
to buy a small variety store, containing some three or
four hundred dollars worth of goods on the corner of
Main and North Streets, formerly owned by Mr.
Snow, but, having two stores on myhands, I did not
make much by the trade.
The first summer after I letumed to Eochester, the
friends of temperance made a fine celebration, and
gave me the privilege of providing the dinner.
I considered it not only a privilege, but an honor,
and felt very grateful to the committee who conferred
the favor upon me.
The celebration came off on the Fourth ofJuly, and
was indeed a splendid affair. The multitude were
addressed on the public square, by some of the best
speakers in the country. I laid in a large quantity of
provisions of every available kind, built a bower,
hired waiters, and prepared seats for five hundred to
dine; but when the oration was over, and the multi
tude came to the table, I found that as many more
seats were wanted. We, however, accommodated as
many as we could, at one dollar each, and all passed
off well, to the great satisfaction of all concerned.


--- PAGE 312 ---
296 MY RETURN TO ROCHESTER.
When all was over, and the friends learned that I
had on hand a large amount of cooked provision, they
continued their kindness by purchasing it, thus pre
venting any loss on my part.
Mystore on the corner of Main and North Streets,
was at the head of the market, and I was enabled to
supply both of my stores with country produce on
the best possible terms. I kept two clerks at each
store, and all seemed prosperous for a time, when from
some cause, which I could never understand, my
business began to fail. My family had ever lived
prudently, and I knew that was not the cause. I
thought to better my circumstances by taking a store
in the Eochester House, but that proved to be a bad
stand for my business, and after one year, I removed
to Buffalo Street, opposite the Court House. I ought
to say, that as soon as I found that myincome was
getting less than my expenses, I went to the gentle
men who had loaned me the five hundred dollars, and
showed them the true state of my affairs, and they
kindly agreed to take fifty per cent., which I paid
them.
After locating on Buffalo Street, I took in a partner,
named JohnLee, a young man, active and industrious,
who paid into the firm three hundred dollars, with
which we bought goods. With what I had on hand,
this raised the joint stock to about a thousand dollars,
which we were making frequent additions, and on


--- PAGE 313 ---
MY GOODS DESTROYED BY FIRE. 297
which we had an insurance of six hundred dollars.
Our business was now more prosperous than at any
previous time, and we began to look up with hope
and confidence in our final success. One night I
returned to my home as usual, leaving Lee in the
store. About twelve o clock, Mr. Morris awoke me
with a few loud raps, and the announcement that
my store was on fire and a part of my goods in the
street! I hastened to the place, where I found, as he
had said, what was saved from the fire piled up in the
street and the fire extinguished- The building was
greatly damaged and the goods they rescued were
nearly ruined Now we were thrown out of busi
ness, and the firm was dissolved. With the assistance
of &quot;W. S. Bishop, a lawyer, we made out the amount
of damage, which was readily paid by the agent for
the insurance company.
When the Fourth of July came round again, the
temperance men resolved on having another demon
stration, and as before, I was requested to supply the
dinner, which I did, after the same manneras {he year
previous.
Having been thrown out of business by the fire, I
began to examine ray pecuniary matters, and found
that I was some three or four hundred dollars in debt,
which I had no means of paying. True, I had met
with a great misfortune, but I felt that to be an honest
man I must meet all obligations, whether legally
N*


--- PAGE 314 ---
298 MY RETURN TO ROCHESTER.
bound to do so or not
; yet it was beyond mypower at
that time, and I finally concluded to leave the city,
and try to better mycondition by some other business,
or at least to clear myself from debt.


--- PAGE 315 ---
CHAPTEK XXXV.
BISHOP BKOWN DEATH OF MY DAUGHTER.
1
REMOVED with my family to the village of
Canandaigua, where I commenced teaching a
school for colored children, assisted by my daughter.
The school was sustained partly by the liberality of
the citizens of the village, and partly by donations
from abroad. It was continued two years, and the
children made rapid progress while they were under
our tuition.
Soon after I left Rochester, I visited NewYork city,
and while there, I joined &quot;The African Methodist Epis
copal Conference.&quot; Bishop Brown, of Philadelphia,
presided over the deliberations of that body, and
appeared to be a man of deep piety, as well as apt in
business, and was a native of one of the Carolinas.
I found a pleasing acquaintance also, with Bishop
Walters of Baltimore, Md. He was small in stature
;
but a powerful speaker, and discharged every duty


--- PAGE 316 ---
300 BISHOP BROWN.
with &quot;an eye single to the glory of God.&quot; He has
now gone! to give an account of his stewardship, and
I pray that &quot;his mantle may
fall&quot;
upon one as
capable of leading our people as he. The conference
consisted of some sixty or seventy ministers of the
gospel, with these two Bishops at their head. The
conference continued its session ten days. When it
was closed, Bishop Brown, with several others, started
on a visit to the West. They called at Eochester, and
then passed over to Canada, where a conference was
to be holden. Wearrived, after a pleasant journey,
at Hamilton, where the English government have a
regiment of black soldiers stationed. It was common,
in passing through the streets of Hamilton, to meet
every few rods, a colored man in uniform, with a
sword at his side, marching about in all the military
pomp allowed only to white men in this free republic.
All being in readiness, Bishop Brown opened the
conference under the authority of Her Brittanic
Majesty, with great solemnity, which seemed to be
felt by the whole assembly. This meeting appeared
to me far more interesting than the one we had
attended in New York city. The colored people
were much more numerous in Hamilton, and in far
better circumstances than in New York. It is a hard
case to be poor in any large city, but to be both poor
and black, as was the condition of the majority of our
friends in New York, was indeed a terrible calamity


--- PAGE 317 ---
CONFERENCE OPENED IN HAMILTON, C. W. 301
Every class, no matter how worthless they might be,
would be allowed to rent a house in preference to a
colored man. The consequence was, our people were
crowded back into the most unhealthy alleys, in old
dilapidated tenements unfit for human beings to dwell
in, and such as could not be disposed of to any other
class of people. I am happy to say, however, that a
favorable change has taken place in New York, since
the time of which I am speaking. Capitalists have
noted the good reputation of the colored people as
tenants, and have of late erected good dwellings for
their accommodation. In Hamilton there was none
of that wretchedness and squalid poverty, nor any of
that drunken rowdyism so common in Eastern cities,
perceivable among the colored people.
Our conference was largely attended by all classes,
both black and white, many of the latter invited the
Bishop with his associates to their dwellings to dine,
indeed we seldom took a meal at our lodgings, so con
stantly were we solicited by friends to accompany
them home.
We also found many fugitive slaves in that city,
many of whom were intelligent mechanics. Some of
them took us about the place, showing us the different
buildings they were engaged in erecting; quite a
number were employed in building a church which
appeared to be done in a workman-like manner.
In the meantime our meeting was progressing in a


--- PAGE 318 ---
302 BISHOP BROWN.
very interesting manner, and whenthe closing services
were commenced, the house was filled to overflowing;
still many could not be accommodated. The preach
ing was solemn and impressive, and it really seemed
to me that the glory of God filled the house in which
we worshipped;
saints rejoiced and shouted
&quot;
glory to
God, in the highest,&quot; while sinners trembled and cried
out, &quot;what must we do to be saved from the wrath to
come.&quot; There were several hopeful conversions
during the session of conference; and after its close
we spent one day in making social calls, and viewing
the city and its surroundings.
Burlington Bay makes an excellent harbor for ship
ping, while Burlington Heights loom up on the north
in all their wild and terrific grandeur. Near the bay
resides Mr. McNab, so notorious in the history of the
Canadian revolution. Wewent in a large company
to look at his beautiful grounds and residence, over
which we were politely conducted by his amiable
lady. It was indeed a lordly mansion, with its sur
roundings laid out in the English style of princely
magnificence.
On our return to the city at evening, we were
invited to attend a grand soiree, got up in honor of
the Bishop s first visit to that place. Several families
of colored people combined to provide the splendid
entertainment, while one lady presided at the board.
She wasvery beautiful and very dark
;
but a complete


--- PAGE 319 ---
ATTEND A GKAND SOIREE. 303
model of grace and elegance, conversing with perfect
ease and intelligence with all, both black and white
ministers, who surrounded the festive board, as well
as our Irish friends, not a few of whom were present.
One honest son of the Emerald Isle entered, and not
understanding the matter, inquired of his brother
&quot;Pat,&quot; in rather a loud whisper, &quot;What s all them
nagurs setting to that table for?
&quot;
He, however, soon
satisfied himself, and all passed off quietly and in
excellent order. At a late hour the company, after a
benediction, withdrew and dispersed.
We left Hamilton the following morning, feeling
grateful and pleased with our meeting and visit.
It was a beautiful morning; the lake was still, no
sound was heard but the rushing waves, as our boat
moved on through its placid waters, toward our
destination, then called Fort George, now Niagara,
where we took stage for the Falls.
At that place of resort, we stopped to view the
stupendous work of Almighty Grod, and listen to the
ceaseless thundering of the cataract. How tame ap
pear the works of art, and how insignificant the
bearing of proud, punyman, compared with the awful
grandeur of that natural curiosity. Yet there, the
rich from all parts of the world, do congregate
!
There you will find the idle, swaggering slaveholder,
blustering about in lordly style; boasting of his
wealth; betting and gambling; ready to fight, if his


--- PAGE 320 ---
804 BISHOP BKOWN
slightest wish is not granted, and lavishing his cash
on all who have the least claim upon him* Ah, well
can he afford to be liberal, well can he afford to
spend thousands yearly at our Northern watering
places; he has plenty of hnman chattels at home,
toiling year after year for his benefit, The little hoe-
cake he gives them, takes but a mill of the wealth
with which they fill his purse; and should his
extravagance lighten it somewhat, he has only to
order his brutal overseer to sell soul and body
some poor creature; perchance a husband, or a wife,
or a child, and forward to him the proceeds of the
sale. While the wretched slave marches South with
a gang, under the lash, he lavishes his funds in
extravagant living, funds gathered from the tears
and blood of a helpless human being. Have you,
dear reader, ever watched the slaveholder at such
places as I have, gliding through the shady groves,
or riding in his splendid carriage, dressed in the
richest attire, and with no wish ungratified that gold
can purchase; and have you ever been guilty of-
envying him, or of wishing yourself in his condition?
If so, think of the curse which rests on him who
grinds the face of the poor. Think of his doom in
the day of final retribution, when he shall receive at
the bar of a righteous Judge,
&quot;
according to the deeds
done in the body,
&quot;
and not according to his wealth
and power. Think you, that the prayers, cries, and


--- PAGE 321 ---
JEWISH &quot;CITY OF REFUGE.&quot; 305
pleadings of the down-trodden slave that for years
have been ascending to the throne of a just God, will
never be avenged? Yea, verily, the day of reckon
ing hastens on apace, and though, &quot;He bear long
with them; He will surely avenge them of their ad
versaries; and that speedily
!
&quot;
As we pursued our journey to Buffalo, we passed
Grand Island, from whence Mordecai Emanuel Noah,
some years ago issued a proclamation, calling on the
Jews to come and build on that island the
&quot;
City of
Eefuge,&quot; but which I believe was not responded to,
as I saw it remained in its native wildness. He had
also a monument erected there at the time, which
might be seen from the highway and canal, consisting
of a white marble slab, six feet in height, with a suit
able inscription upon it, to direct the poor Jew to the
City of Eefuge.
It was quite conspicuous, but not so magnificent as
Gen. Brock s at Queenston Heights.
Arrived at Buffalo, we held several meetings which
were very interesting. The colored people were then
numerous in that city, and owned one of the largest
churches in Western New York. We found a large
and prosperous society under the superintendence of
Elder Weir, who was a good and talented man, setting
a godly example for his flock to imitate. At Buffalo I
parted with my pleasant and instructive traveling
companion, Bishop Brown, never to meet again on the


--- PAGE 322 ---
306 DEATH OF MY DAUGHTEE.
shores of time. Soon after that pleasant journey he
died, and passed from his labor to reward.
Buffalo was then, as now a great place for business.
Vessels from all parts of the country crowded the
docks, and I then thought that it must in time become
one of the largest cities in the Union. After a plea
sant visit with our people there, I returned to my
home in Canandaigua, where I now began to feel
quite settled.
I had been requested to act as agent for the &quot;Anti-
Slavery Standard,&quot; with which I complied, and
leaving my daughter to teach the school, I spent the
most of my time in traveling through the country to
advance the interests of that paper.
When I returned from Buffalo, she was complain
ing of poor health, nor was it long before we saw
that she was rapidly declining.
This beloved daughter, I had spared no pains nor
money to educate and qualify for teaching. I had
encountered all the trials and difficulties that every
colored man meets, in his exertions to educate his
family. I had experienced enough to make me fear
that I should not always be able to get my children
into good schools, and therefore determined at what
ever cost, to educate this child thoroughly, that she
might be able, not only to provide for her own wants,
but to teach her younger brothers and sisters, should
they be deprived of the advantages of a good school.


--- PAGE 323 ---
HEART-RENDING BEREAVEMENT. 307
Well had she rewarded my labor; well had she
realized all my fondest hopes and expectations, but
alas ! for human foresight and worldly wisdom! The
accomplishments and qualifications of a teacher were
attained; and proudly we looked for the achieve
ment of our long-contemplated design. How hard to
believe that the fell destroyer was upon her track !
Her education had qualified her for teaching the
sciences; but now I saw, that her faith in the religion
of the blessed Christ, was assisting her to teach her
own heart a lesson of patience, and quiet submission
to the will of Him who holds the issues of life, and
Oh, how difficult for us to learn the solomn lesson,
that her wasting form, her gradual sinking away, was
hourly setting before us.
Slowly her strength failed; she, however, saw our
sorrowful anxiety, and would try to relieve it with a
cheerful appearance. One day perhaps she would be
able to walk about, which would revive our wavering
hope; the next she was prostrate and suffering; then
hope died and we were sad! All the spring time she
languished; the summer came, the roses bloomed, and
the grain began to ripen, but she was wasting away.
The orchard yielded its golden harvest; the birds
sang merrily on the trees, but a dark shadow had
fallen on our hearthstone, and a gloom, like the pall of
death, rested on our household. Her place at table
was already vacant; no longer she called the little


--- PAGE 324 ---
808 DEATH OF MY DAUGHTER.
ones about her to hear them repeat their tasks, all
of which admonished us, that soon the bed where we
could now see her, would be vacated
;
and we should
no longer witness her patient smile, and know that
she was still with us. The pastor of the Baptist
church often called to pray with, and for, the quiet
sufferer, which she appreciated very highly, for she
was a Christian in every sense of the word.
On the thirtieth day of August, at about eleven
o clock, A. M., without a struggle or a groan, her
spirit returned to God who gave it. &quot;Sweetly as
babes sleep,&quot; she sank into the embrace of death.
Happily, triumphantly, had she seen the grim mes
senger approach ;
but she knew whom she had be
lieved, and that He was able to keep that which
she had committed to Him, unto the resurrection of
the just.
She had previously made a confession of her faith
in Christ, and had been buried with Him in baptism.
Afew days after her demise, a long, sad train wound
its way to the village church yard, where we ie-
posited the remains of our beloved, Patience Jane
Steward, in the eighteenth year of her age;
and then
returned to our desolate house, to realize that she had
left a world of pain and sorrow, where the fairest rose
conceals a thorn, the sweetest cup a bitter drop, for a
home where the flowers would never fade, and where
pain, sorrow and death will never come. Weall felt


--- PAGE 325 ---
THE PEACEFUL DEATH-BED CONTRASTED. 309
the solemn and impressive warning, &quot;Be ye also
ready, for in such an hour as ye think not, the Son of
Man cometh.&quot;
As often as I recalled her triumphant, peaceful
death, her firm reliance on God, and sweet submission
to His will, I could not forbear contrasting her de
parture with that of Mrs. Helm, whose death I have
elsewhere described
;
and could fervently pray, that I
might live the life of the righteous, that my last end
might be like hers.
&quot;
Behold the Western evening light,
It melts in deep ning gloom ;
So calmly Christians sink away,
Descending to the tomb.
The winds breathe low, the withering leaf
Scarce whispers from the tree,
So gently flows the parting breath,
When good folks cease to be.
How beautiful on all the hills,
The crimson light is shed ;
Tis like the peace the Christian gives,
To mourners round his bed.
How mildly on the wandering cloud,
The sunset beam is cast,
Tis like the memry left behind,
When loved ones breathe their last.


--- PAGE 326 ---
310 ,
DEATH OF MY DAUGHTER.
And now above the dews of night,
The yellow star appears ;
So faith springs in the breast of those,
&quot;Whose eyes are bathed in tears.
But soon the mornings happier light,
Its glory shall restore ;
And eyelids that are sealed in death,
Shall wake to close no more.&quot;


--- PAGE 327 ---
CHAPTER XXXYI.
CELEBRATION OF THE FIRST OF AUGUST.
fllHE anti-slavery friends in Canandaigua, had re-
J_ solved to celebrate the anniversary of the West
India emancipation, in suitable manner in that village,
for which funds had been unsparingly collected, to
defray the expenses of the coming demonstration.
The first of August, 1847, fell on Sunday, and our
people concluded to devote that day to religious meet
ings, and the second to their proposed celebration.
Frederick Douglass and Mr. VanLoon, from Pough-
keepsie, addressed the people on the Sabbath; and
also, on the same evening, a large concourse at the
Court House. The day following, there were not less
than ten thousand people assembled on the beautiful
grounds, belonging to the village Academy attentive
listeners all to the eloquent speeches delivered, and
interested spectators of the imposing exercises.


--- PAGE 328 ---
812 CELEBRATION OF THE FIRST OF AUGUST.
When the vast multitude had convened, the exer
cises were commenced by the Eev. S. E. Ward, who
addressed the throne of grace, after which, Mr. Fred
erick Douglass delivered an oration, in a style of
eloquence which only Mr. Douglass himself can equal,
followed by a song from the Geneva choir, and music
by Barring s band. Eev. H. H. Garnet, editor of
&quot;The National Watchman,&quot; next spake, and with
marked effect, followed by Messrs. Ward and Doug
lass
;
after which, the assemblage formed a procession,
and marching to the Canandaigua Hotel, partook of a
sumptuous dinner, provided by the proprietor of that
house. At six P. M., they again assembled on the
square, and were most eloquently addressed by both
Ward and Garnet; at the close, they repaired to the
ladies fair, where they found everything in a con
dition which spake well for the enterprise and indus
try of our colored sisters. Their articles for sale,
were of a choice and considerate selection, and such
as sold rapidly and at fair prices. When all was
pleasantly over, the ladies contributed twenty dollars
toward paying the speakers present.
Amost beautiful ode was composed by a warm and
generous friend of the cause, which was sung in the
grove, in a spirit which produced a thrilling interest:
Gladly would I give the reader the whole composi
tion, but its length makes it objectionable for this


--- PAGE 329 ---
MESSRS. DOUGLASS, WARD AND GARNET. 313
place, but should they happen to hear a soul-stirring
and sublime ode, commencing with,
** Hail I to this day returning ;
Let all to Heaven aspire,&quot; &amp;lt;fec.,
they may know it is the one to which I refer.
It was indeed, a glorious day for the colored popu
lation generally; and many were the indications of a
diminution of that prejudice so prevalent everywhere.
Some, who had supposed the colored man so inferior
to themselves as to be incapable of making an inter
esting speech, were convinced of their error, after
hearing Messrs. Douglass, Ward and Garnet. Mr. Yan
Loon was a white clergyman, but a brother indeed;
his soul illumined by the pure light of the gospel of
peace;
his heart full of sympathy for the oppressed ;
his tongue pleading eloquently for equal rights; and
his hands busily engaged in breaking every yoke,
resting on the necks of poor humanity. So vigor
ously, so zealously did he unfold the horrors of the
slave system; so truthfully and faithfully did he
expose the treachery of northern politicians, and so
pathetically did he appeal to the humanity of every
professed Christian to speak out boldly for the dumb;
to shield, by the holy principles of their religion, the
poor, bound, illiterate slave, from Southern cruelty
and bondage, that some of our aristocratic citizens,
some of our white savans, repaid his truthful elo
O


--- PAGE 330 ---
814 CELEBRATION OF THE FIRST OF AUGUST.
quence, by visiting upon him the bitterest male
dictions. From the negro, said they, we will
accept these statements as true, from him, they are
pertinent and forcible; but when such unpalatable
truths are uttered by a white clergyman, we cannot
abide, nor will we listen to them!
Let consistency blush, and justice hang down its
head ! Is not truth the same, whether proclaimed by
black or white, bond or free ? Is a falsehood to be
pardoned because uttered by a negro ? If indeed, as
was admitted, the sentiments expressed by our elo
quent colored speakers, were true, could they be false,
when enforced by our intellectual friend, Yan Loon?
Certainly not; nor would the case have been so
decided by these Solons, in any other case : or where
the prejudice against color had not warped and
blinded their otherwise good judgments. Our speak
er, however, performed his duty faithfully, and with
great satisfaction to the colored people and their true
friends present.
The remains of this fearless champion of liberty;
this humble disciple of the despised Nazarene, now
sleeps in death, beside the placid waters of the
Hudson, while his cherished memory lives in the
affections of thousands, who &quot;are ready to perish,&quot;
and is honored by the pure in heart, wherever his
name has been known throughout the land. In the
day of final reckoning, think you, he will regret


--- PAGE 331 ---
TKIBUTE TO THE LAMENTED VAN LOON. 315
having plead the cause of the bondman? Ah, no;
nor can we doubt that to him will be rendered the
welcome plaudits
:
&quot;
Well done, good and faithful
servant; enter thou into the joy of thy Lord. Thou
hast been faithful over a few things;
I will make thee
a ruler over many things.&quot; What then are the few
light afflictions endured in this life, when compared
with &quot;an eternal weight of glory,&quot; awarded to the
faithful in that which is to come?
Pleasant, happy, and beneficial, as had been the
re-union of old and tried friends, to celebrate a glo
rious event, yet, like all earthly enjoyments, it was
brought to a termination, reluctant as were the friends
to separate. Since that day, many have been the
demonstrations of grateful joy and gladness on the
glorious anniversary of the emancipation of slaves on.
the West India Islands; and yet, in this boasted &quot;land
of the free, and home of the brave;
&quot;
this famous and
declared free. Eepublic, the American slave still
clfinks his heavy chain, and wears the galling yoke
of the bondman!


--- PAGE 332 ---
CHAPTER XXXYII.
CONCLUSION.
FOR
several years past, anti-slavery truth has
been spreading, and in proportion as light has
shone upon the &quot;peculiar institution,&quot; exposing to the
world its crimes and blood, enstamping upon its
frontlet, &quot;THE SUM OF ALL VILLAINIES,&quot; has the
wrath of the impious slaveholder been kindled, and
his arm outstretched to strengthen the chain, and
press closer the yoke upon the helpless slave, proving
conclusively that he loves darkness because his deeds
are evil. Noris this all
;
he and his apologists will inso
lently tell you, that you are the guilty ones who have
tightened the bonds of the slave, increased his hard
ships, and blighted his prospect of freedom, by your
mistaken kindness, in showing the slaveholder the
enormity of his sin ! Can this be so ? Have we any
direct influence over his human chattels? None.
Then who is it that rivets the chain and increases the


--- PAGE 333 ---
CONCLUSION. 317
already heavy burden of the crushed slave, but lie
who has the power to do with him as he wills ? He
it is, who has been thrust, unwillingly perhaps, into
sufficient light to show him his moral corruption, and
the character of the sin he is daily committing; he it
is, whose avarice and idleness induces to hold fast
that which is to him a source of wealth, and by no
means to allow the same light to fall in upon the
darkened intellect of his slave property, lest his
riches &quot;take to themselves wings;&quot; or, as may be
more properly said, take to themselves legs and run
away.
What stronger proof can we ask in favor of our
position, than the intolerant spirit of the South? If
the system and practice of Slavery is a righteous one,
instituted by an All-wise God, certainly no human
power especially one so impotent and futile as the
abolition power is said to be can ever overthrow it.
Why then are the mails so closely examined, and
fines imposed on prohibited anti-slavery documents?
Is it beyond their power to confute the arguments
adduced, or are they fearful that a ray of Northern
light may fall on the mind of some listening slave,
and direct him to the depot of an under-ground rail
road? Judge ye
!
What but this same fearful and intolerant spirit,
this over-bearing, boasting spirit, was it, that cowardly
attacked a Christian Senator, while seated unsuspect-


--- PAGE 334 ---
318 CONCLUSION.
ingly at his desk, and felled him to the floor, bleeding
and senseless ? Was not the villainous blow which
fell upon the honored head of CHARLES SUMNER, dealt
by the infamous Brooks of South Carolina, aimed at
the free speech of the entire North? Was it, think
you, a personal enmity that the cowardly scoundrel
had toward our worthy Northern Senator, which
induced the attack? No, no. Brooks spake for the
South, and boldly has it responded AmenI
It has said through its representatives, that you
Northerners are becoming too bold in speaking of our
sin, and we will use brute force to repel it an argu
ment with which we are familiar. You have told us
that we ought not to hold slaves, nor extend slave
territory, which will in a measure destroy our slave
market, and prove injurious to our slave-breeding
population. You have told us we have no right to
usurp Kansas, no right to murder
&quot;
Free State men,&quot;
and no right to sustain there, a set of &quot;ruffians&quot; to
make Kansas a slave State. You have told us, that
we have no right to live on the unrequited toil of our
slaves; nor to sell them to the highest bidder; nor
spend the proceeds of the sale in idle extravagance.
Nowknow, all ye Northerners, by this cowardly blow
on the devoted head of your honored and respected
Senator, that we shall no longer permit you to tell us
such unpalatable truths, nor allow you the privilege
of free speech! Wehave too long held the balance


--- PAGE 335 ---
CONCLUSION. 319
of power in the government to yield it now;
and we
give you to know, that whatever we ask of this
government, we expect to obtain; nor will we hear
any of your objections. When we desire you to turn
blood-hound, and hunt for us our fugitive slaves, we
expect you to do it, and to see them returned to their
masters, without a murmur on your part. Should
you object or dare refuse, we shall certainly cane some
body, or else do what we have threatened for the last
quarter of a century,
&quot;
DISSOLVE THE UINON!
&quot;
Bah!
My house has ever been open to the fugitive slaves;
but more particularly when I resided in Eochester,
did I have occasion to see and feel the distresses
of that class of persons; and it appears to me, that
the heart must be of adamant, that can turn coldly
away from the pleadings of the poor, frightened, fly
ing fugitive from Southern bondage.
For many years past, I have been a close antf inter
ested observer of my race, both free and enslaved. I
have observed with great pleasure, the gradual im
provement in intelligence and condition of the free
colored people of the North. In proportion as preju
dice has diminished, they have gradually advanced;
nor can I believe that there is any other great impedi
ment in the way to a higher state of improvement.
That prejudice against color is not destroyed, we very
well know. Its effects may be seen in our down-cast,


--- PAGE 336 ---
320 CONCLUSION.
discouraged, and groveling countrymen, if no where
else. Notwithstanding the late diminution, it exists
in many of our hotels: some of them would as soon
admit the dog from his kennel, at table, as the colored
man; nevertheless, he is sought as a waiter; allowed
to prepare their choicest dishes, and permitted to
serve the white man, who would sneer and scorn to
eat beside him. Prejudice is found also, in many of
our schools, even in those to which colored children
are admitted; there is so much distinction made by
prejudice, that the poor, timid colored children might
about as well stay at home, as go to a school where
they feel that they are looked upon as inferior, how
ever much they may try to excel.
Nor is that hateful prejudice so injurious to the
soul, and all the best interests of the negro exclud
ed from the professed church of Christ. Oh, no; we
often find it in the house of worship, in all its cruel
rigor. Where people assemble to worship a pure and
holy God, who can look upon no sin with allowance
the creator of all, both white and black, and where
people professing to walk in the footsteps of the meek
and quiet Jesus, who has taught us to esteem others
better than ourselves; we often see the lip of some
professed saint, curled in scorn at a dusky face, or a
scowl of disapprobation if a colored person sits else
where than by the door or on the stairs. How long,
Lord, must these things be!


--- PAGE 337 ---
CONCLUSION. 321
Of my enslaved brethren, nothing so gratifies me,
as to hear of their escape from bondage;
and since the
passage of that iniquitous &quot;Fugitive Slave Bill,&quot; I
have watched with renewed interest the movements
of the fugitives, not only from Slavery direct, but
those who have been compelled to flee from the nomi
nally free States, and ask the protection of a monar-
chial government, to save them from their owners in
a land of boasted liberty
!
The knowledge I have of the colored men in
Canada, their strength and condition, would cause me
to tremble for these United States, should a war ever
ensue between the English and American govern
ments, which I pray maynever occur. These fugitives
may be thought to be a class of poor, thriftless,
illiterate creatures, like the Southern slaves, but it is
not so. They are no longer slaves; many of whom
have been many years free men, and a large number
were never slaves. They are a hardy, robust class of
men
; very many of them, men of superior intellect ;
and men who feel deeply the wrongs they have en
dured. Driven as they have been from their native
land; unprotected by the government under which
they were born, and would gladly have died, they
would in all probability, in case of a rupture, take up
arms in defense of the government which has pro
tected them and the country of their adoption.
England could this day, very readily collect a regi-
0*


--- PAGE 338 ---
322 CONCLUSION.
ment of stalwart colored men, who, having felt the
oppression of our laws, would fight with a will not
inferior to that which actuated our revolutionary
forefathers.
And what inducement, I ask, have colored men to
defend with their lives the United States in any case
;
and what is there to incite them to deeds of bravery?
Wherever men are called upon to take up arms in
defense of a country, there is always a consciousness
of approaching wrong and oppression, which arouses
their patriotism and incites to deeds of daring. They
look abroad over fields of their own cultivation ; they
behold too, churches, schools, and various institutions,
provided by their labor, for generations yet to come;
they see their homes, their cherished hearthstone,
about to be desecrated, and their wives and little ones,
with their aged sires, exposed to the oppression of a
ruthless foe. Then, with what cheerful and thrilling
enthusiasm, steps forward the husband, the father, the
brother, and bares his bosom to the sword, his head
to the storm of the battle-field, in defence of his
country s freedom, and the Grod-given rights of him
self and family
! But what sees the oppressed negro ?
He sees a proud and haughty nation, whose Congress
men yearly meet to plot his ruin and perpetuate his
bondage
! He beholds, it is true, a few Christ-like
champions, who rise up with bleeding hearts to defend
ids cause; but while his eye kindles with grateful


--- PAGE 339 ---
CONCLUSION. 323
emotion, lie sees the bludgeon of the South already
reeking in the blood of freemen raised and ready to
fall with murderous intent upon the head of any one,
who, like the illustrious Sumner, dare open his mouth
in defence of Freedom, or speak of the wrongs of the
poor negro, and the sins of the Southern autocrat 1
What inducement then, has the slave to shoulder
his musket, when the American drum beats the call,
&quot;
To Arms! To Arms!
&quot;
Does he not remember that
the wife of his bosom; the children, &quot;bone of his
bone, and flesh of his flesh,&quot; and the rude hearth
stone they for a time are allowed to surround, belong
not to himself, but to the tyrannical master, who
claims dominion over all he possesses. As his pro
perty then, let the slave owner go forth in defence of
his own, and lay down his life if he please ; but the
poor slave has no home, no family to protect; no
country to defend; nor does he care to assist in sus
taining a government that instead of offering him
protection, drives him from the soil which has been
cultivated by his own labor, to beg at the hand of
Englands Queen, &quot;life, liberty, and the pursuit of
happiness.&quot;
Humiliating as it is for an American citizen to
name these things, they are nevertheless true
;
and I
would to God that America would arise in her native
majesty, and divest herself of the foul stain, which
Slavery has cast upon her otherwise pure drapery I


--- PAGE 340 ---
324: CONCLUSION.
Then would she be no longer a hissing and by-word
among the nations; but indeed what she professes to
be, &quot;the land of the free, and the home of the brave;
*
an asylum for the oppressed of every clime.
But should the monarchial government of England
call for the services of the colored man, freely would
his heart s blood be poured out in her defence, not
because he has a particular preference for that form
of government;
not because he has ceased to love his
native country, but because she has acknowledgedhis
manhood, and given him a home to defend. Beneath
the floating banner of the British Lion, he finds
inducements to lay down his life, if need be, in
defence of his own broad acres, his family and fire
side, all of which were denied him under the Stars
and Stripes of his fatherland. But a short time agoy
the colored men of Cincinnati, 0., were promptly
denied the privilege they had solicited, to join with
other citizens, in celebrating the anniversary of
WASHINGTONS Birth Day
!
Oh, no
;
there must be
no colored man in the company, met to honor him
who still lives in the heart of every American citi
zen, &quot;the father of his country,&quot; and yet, who
scorned not to sleep beside his faithful negro! Nor
did the nephew of the illustrious General, despise the
command of the black regiment, which Gen. Jackson
so proudly commended for their bravery, and be
stowed upon it his personal thanks, for their services
on the field of battle.


--- PAGE 341 ---
CONCLUSION. 325
Do the Northern or Free States of the Union think
to clear their skirts of the abomination of Slavery, by
saying that they own no slaves ? Very true. But is
the poor, flying fugitive from the house of bondage,
safe one moment within your borders? &quot;Will he be
welcomed to your homes, your tables, your firesides ?
Will your clergymen bid you clothe and feed him, or
give him a cup of cold water, in the name of a disciple
of that holy Christ, who has said, &quot;inasmuch as yo
have done it unto one of the least of these little ones,
ye have done it unto me?&quot; Or will your own
miserable Fugitive Slave Law, close the mouth ofyour
clergy; crush down the rising benevolence of your
heart
;
and convert you into a human blood-hound, to
hunt downthe panting fugitive, and return him to the
hell of Slavery? Oh, my God! the fact is too hor
rible to acknowledge, and yet it is a stubborn one.
Not on one foot of land under the broad folds of
Columbias banner, can the slave say,
&quot;
I am free !
&quot;
Hungry, naked, and forlorn, he must flee onward;
nor stop short of the outstretched arms of an English
Queen. Yet, thanks be to our Heavenly Father, that
all have not bowed the knee to the Southern autocrat
or slave power. A few noble souls, thank God,
remain, who, in defiance of iniquitous laws, throw
open wide their doors to the trembling, fleeing bond
man, whose purses are freely emptied to supply his
wants, and help him on in his flight to the British


--- PAGE 342 ---
326 CONCLUSION.
dominion. But can these out-gushings of a benevo
lent heart the purest impulses of a noble nature be
permitted to flow out spontaneously, in open day
light ? Alas, no ! You must be quiet ; make no
noise, lest an United States Marshal wrest from you
the object of your Christian sympathy, and impose
on you a heavy fine, for your daring to do to another
as you would he should do to you.
Is not the necessity of an &quot;under ground railroad&quot;
a disgrace to the laws of any country ? Certainly it
is; yet I thank God, that it does afford a means of
escape to many, and I pray that the blessings of
Heaven may ever rest upon those who willingly
superintend its interests. Oh, my country! When
will thy laws, just and equal, supersede this humilia
ting necessity
!
Is my reader about to throw the blame of our
nation s wrong on England, and accuse her of first
tolerating Slavery? We admit it; but did she not
repent of the evil she had done, and speedily break
every yoke, and let the oppressed go free ? Certainly;
no slave now breathes in Englands atmosphere. But,
say you, her white poor are slaves to the aristocracy,
from which sentiment I beg leave to differ. Oppressed
they may be, and doubtless are, as the poor are apt to
be in any and every country;
but they are not sold
in the market, to the highest bidder, like beasts of
burden, as are the American slaves. No Englishman,


--- PAGE 343 ---
CONCLUSION. 327
however poor, destitute, or degraded lie may be, but
owns himself, his wife and children; nor does he fear
that they be sold and torn from his embrace, while he
is laboring for their support. Poverty, my friend,
does not comprise the bitterness of Slavery, no more
than &quot;one swallow makes a summer,&quot; nor does it
consist solely in ignorance and degradation. Its
bitterness arises from a consciousness of wrong; a
sense of the violation of every right God has given to
man, and the uncertainty of his future, over which he
has no control.
If the American people flatter themselves with the
idea of getting rid of the hated negro race, by colo
nizing them on the sickly soil of Liberia, or any other
country, they will surely find themselves mistaken.
They are Americans
;
allied to this country by birth
and by misfortune
;
and here will they remain, not
always as now, oppressed and degraded, for all who
have any interest in the matter, well know that the
free colored people, are rapidly advancing in intelli
gence, and improving their condition in every respect.
Men of learning and genius, are now found among
those with fleecy locks, and good mechanics with
dusky complexion.
This marked improvement in the condition and
rapid advancement in intelligence among our people,
seems to have alarmed the colonizationists, and made
them fearful that those very down-trodden slaves, who


--- PAGE 344 ---
328 CONCLUSION-.
have for years labored for nought; whose blood and
tears have fertilized the Southern soil, may, perchance,
become their equals in intelligence, and take ven
geance on their oppressors for the wrongs done them;
and lest they should do so, they would gladly remove
them to some far-off country.
Yet here, in North America, will the colored race
remain, and ere long in my opinion, become a great
people, equal with the proudAnglo-Saxonin all things.
The African has once been a powerful nation, before
Christian Englishmen invaded her coasts with rum,
and incited her chiefs to war, by purchasing with
gaudy, but worthless trinkets, her conquered captives ;
and we have every reason to believe, that though her
glory as a nation has departed, that her sons will yet
be acknowledged free men by the white population of
this country.
There have been black generals in the world before
Napoleon was born, and there may be again; and
to-day, notwithstanding all the prejudice against
color, that everywhere exists in this guilty nation,
there are men of talent among us, infenor to none on
the earth
;
nor are their numbers few, though rapidly
increasing.
Well may the South arouse herself, form societies,
replenish its treasury with a tax imposed on the free
colored people, to defray the expense of sending man
umitted slaves to Liberia !


--- PAGE 345 ---
CONCLUSION. 329
Listen a moment to the cant of the colonizationists.
Hear him talk ofthe duty he owes to Africa, and how
happy, how intelligent, how prosperous everything is
in Liberia. But when that delightful country asks to
be taken into fellowship with the United States, and
to have her independence recognized ah, then he
lifts his hands in horror and begs to be excused from
so close a relation.
This is all cant, in my humble opinion; and when
I see men so anxious to send the negro out of their
sight, I feel quite certain that they are conscious of
having deeply wronged him, and think to remove
him, to atone for their guilty consciences. Would
they refuse to acknowledge the independence of
Liberia, if their interest in the colored people was
genuine, especially when several other nations had
done so ? Oh, no. But that is not
&quot;
the rub&quot; How
could one of our lordly nabobs of the South, sit in
Congress with perhaps one of his own manumitted
slaves as a representative from Liberia or Hayti
! He
would die of mortification. Yery well then; but let
him talk no more of sending colored men to that
country to make them free men.
The colored people generally, I am happy to say,
have a right conception of the colonization plan, and
will never be induced to go to Africa, unless they go
as missionaries to the heathen tribes, who certainly
should have the gospel preached to them. Some,


--- PAGE 346 ---
380 CONCLUSION.
from a sense of duty, may go as teachers, which is
all well enough, but certain it is, that no amount of
prejudice or abuse, will ever induce the colored race
to leave this country. Long have they been oppress
ed; but they are rising coming up to an elevated
standard, and are fast gathering strength and courage,
for the great and coming conflict with their haughty
oppressors.
That there must be ere long, a sharp contest be
tween the friends of Freedom and the Southern
oligarchy, I can no longer doubt.
When our worthy ministers of the gospel, are sent
back to us from the South, clothed with a coat of tar
and feathers; when our best and most sacrificing
philanthropists are thrown into Southern dungeons ;
when our laboring men are shot down by haughty
and idle Southern aristocrats, in the hotels of their
employers, and under the very eye of Congress;
when the press is muzzled, and every editor, who has
the manliness to speak in defence of Freedom,
and the wickedness of the slaveholder, is caned or
otherwise insulted by some insignificant Southern
bully; and when at last, our Mr. SUMNER is attacked
from behind, by a Southern, cowardly scoundrel, and
felled senseless on the floor of the Senate chamber, for
his defence of Liberty, then, indeed, may Northern
men look about them ! Well may they be aroused
by the insolence and tyranny of the SouthI


--- PAGE 347 ---
CONCLUSION. 831
Andfor what is all this ? Do not our Southern
men know, that if light and truth are permitted to
reach the minds of the people, that Kansas will be
lost to them as slave territory, wherein the Southern
slave-breeder can dispose of his own flesh to the
highest bidder ! Hear them talk as they do, in their
pious moments, with upturned faces, in solemn mock
ery, of returning the negro to his native Africa ! How
many pure Africans, think you, can be found in the
whole slave population of the South, to say nothing
of their nativity ? Native Africa, indeed I Who
does not know, that in three-fourths of the colored
race, there runs the blood of the white master, the
breeder of his own chattels! Think you, that a
righteous God will fail to judge a nation for such
flagrant sins? Nay, verily. If the All-wise God,
who has created of one blood all nations of the
earth, has designed their blood to commingle until
that of the African is absorbed in that of the Euro
pean, then is it right, and amalgamation of all the
different races should be universally practiced and
approved. If it be right for the Southern slaveholder,
to cruelly enforce the mixture of the races, to gratify
his lust, and swell the enormity of his gains, certainly
it cannot be wrong to amalgamate from choice and
affection. Let us ask then, why did our Omnipotent
Creator make the marked distinction ? Certainly not
for the purpose that one race might enslave and


--- PAGE 348 ---
382 CONCLUSION,
triumph over another
;
but evidently, that each in his
own proper sphere might glorify God, to whom their
respective bodies and spirits belong. Why, indeed,
was the black man created, if not to fulfil his destiny
as a negro, to the glory of God?
Suffer me then to exhort you, my countrymen, to
cease looking to the white man for example and
imitation. Stand boldly up in your own national
characteristics, and show by your perseverance and
industry, your honor and purity, that you are men,
colored men, but of no inferior quality. The greatest
lack I see among you, is unity of action,, pardon
able, to be sure, in the eyes of those who have seen
your oppression and limited advantages ;
but nowthat
many of you have resolved to gain your rights or die
in the struggle, let me entreat you to band yourselves
together in one indissoluble bond of brotherhood,
to stand shoulder to shoulder in the coming conflict,
and let every blow of yours tell for Freedom and the
elevation of your race throughout the land. Speak
boldly out, for the dumb and enslaved of your unfor
tunate countrymen, regardless of the frowns and
sneers of the haughty tyrants, who may dare lift
their puny arm, to frustrate the design of the Al
mighty, in preserving you an unmixed and powerful
race on the earth.
While I would not that you depend on any human
agency, save your own unyielding exertion, in the


--- PAGE 349 ---
CONCLUSION. 33B
elevation of our race ; still, I would not nave you
unmindful of, nor ungrateful for, the noble exertions
of those kind white friends, who have plead the
cause of the bondman, and have done all in their
power to aid you, for which, may the God of the
oppressed abundantly bless them.
Let your attention be given to the careful training
and education of the rising generation, that they may
be useful, and justly command the respect of their
fellow-men. Labor for a competency, but give not
your whole attention to amassing the wealth that
perishes;
but seek to lay up for yourselves
&quot;
treasures
where moth doth not corrupt, nor thieves break
through and steal.&quot;
&quot;Suppose not, mybrethren, that your task is a light
one, or one that can be performed without years of
patient toil and unyielding perseverance. Our op
pressors are not very ready to credit our exertion,
too often forgetting the effects of our long degradation,
and vainly expecting to see us arise at once, to the
highest standard of elevation, able to cope successfully
with those who have known no such discourage
ments or disadvantages, as has been our lot to bear.
These and many other obstacles must be bravely
met, and assiduously removed, remembering that
Slavery has robbed some of us, and prejudice many
others, of that perseverance so necessary to the accom
plishment of any enterprize ;
but in the elevation of


--- PAGE 350 ---
334: CONCLUSION.
ourselves and race, let us never falter and grow
weary, until we have reached the elevated station
God designed us to occupy, and have fitted the rising
generation to fill and improve it after our earthly
course is finished and we leave to them the stage of
action.
Allow me, however, to entreat, that no success
which mayattend your determined efforts
;
no position
which you may attain, may ever so occupy your
mind, as to cause you to forget for one moment, the
afflictions of your countrymen, or to cease to remem
ber the groaning millions in bonds, until every slave
shall triumphantly chant the song of deliverance
from Slavery s dark prison house.
Bear with me, my dear brethren, while I claim a
friend s license, to say, that I would not that you
place implicit confidence in any of the political organ
izations of the present time; but remember that the
majority of those parties are diligently laboring for
their own interest. Look you then to yours; are
you less capable of securing your rights than
they? Never was there a time when indolence and
supineness among us, would be so unpardonable as
now, nor when so much depended on our active and
judicious exertions.
Let us not forget, that in the past, we could and
did truthfully complain, that we had no helper,
bound and crushed beneath an overwhelming weight


--- PAGE 351 ---
CONCLUSION. 335
of prejudice and ignorance, we lay helpless at the
feet of our political spoilers. Afavorable change has
since been effected in the public sentiment; and now
that we see thousands who are willing to aid us, and
as many more who will not hinder our labor, shall
we fold our hands in idleness ? or shall we renew
our energies, in the cause of freedom and of our own
advancement? Although we may not implicitly rely
upon the political exertion of others, let us not fear to
co-operate with the friends of liberty everywhere, as
far as a good conscience will permit, and our limited
privileges will allow, by our determined zeal for the
right, make our influence felt in the nation. See what
wrong and oppression our white brethren have met in
Kansas, from the slave power; and let their noble
deeds ofpatriotism; their liberal sacrifices for freedom,
be not only our example, but an incentive to do our
duty. Have they more at stake in that mighty
struggle than we, that they should leave their homes
of refinement and comfort, take their lives in their
hands and bravelycontend for their rights, surrounded
by scenes of blood and carnage ? Certainly not. No
people on the earth can have greater incentives to
arouse them to action, than the colored people of this
country now have; I trust therefore, that our future
independence and prosperity, will suffer nothing from
the inactivity of our race.
Some may entertain the belief that the African


--- PAGE 352 ---
336 CONCLUSION.
slave trade is entirely abandoned. I think not. Often
are seen strange, suspicious looking vessels, lying
along the African coast, for no other purpose than that
of kidnapping the poor, ignorant natives. Stealthily
the slave-trader lands his wicked crew, in the vicinity
of some negro village or cluster of huts, and when a
favorable opportunity occurs, he and his men rush
uponthe frightened African, burn their huts, and amid
the shrieks of the captives, and the groans of the help
less and aged, who have been trampled down in their
rude haste to secure the young and able-bodied
natives, bear them to the vessel, where they are
stowed away in the hold of the ship, which bears
them to Christian (?) America, where they are sold as
slaves.
Some years ago, a woman engaged in washing
clothes, near the sea coast, had a lad with her to take
care ofher twoyounger children -one a young babe
while she was at work. They wandered away a short
distance, and while amusing themselves under some
bushes, four men, to them strange looking creatures,
with white faces, surrounded them
;
and when the lad
attempted to run away, they threw the infant he held
in his arms, on the ground, and seizing the other two
children, bore them screaming with fear, to the ship.
Frantic and inconsolable, they were borne to the
American slave market, where they were sold to a
Virginia planter, for whom they labored sorrowfully


--- PAGE 353 ---
CONCLUSION. 837
and in tears, until old age deprived them of farther
exertion, when they were turned out, like an old horse,
to die; and did die destitute and uncared for, in their
aged infirmity, after a long life of unrequited toil.
That lad, stolen from Africa s coast, was my grand
father.
It is not, however, necessary for us to look beyond
our own country, to find all the horrors of the slave
traffic! A tour through the Southern States will
prove sufficient to satisfy any one of that fact;
nor will they travel over one of them, before if
they have a heart of flesh they will feel oppressed
by the cruel outrage, daily inflicted on their fellow-
beings. The tourist need not turn aside to seek
evidences: he will very readily observe the red flag
of the auctioneer floating over the slave pen, on which
he mayread in large letters, waving in the pure air of
heaven, &quot;SLAVES, HORSES, AND OTHER CATTLE, in lots
to suit purchasersI
&quot;
He may halt a moment, and look
at the multitude, collecting under the folds of that
infamous banner, where will be found a few gentle
manly appearing slave holding planters, superbly
mounted, and perhaps with their servants in waiting;
but the larger number he will find to be drunken,
coarse, brutal looking men, swaggering about in the
capacity of slave-traders.
Let him enter the low, dingy, filthy building, occu
pied by human merchandize, and he will there behold
P


--- PAGE 354 ---
838 CONCLUSION&quot;.
husbands and wives, parents and children, about to be
sold, and perhaps separated forever ! See the trader,
as he examines with inhuman indifference the bones
and sinews, the teeth and joints of the articles on
y
hand, even of females, and hear him make inquiries
concerning her capabilities, that would make a savage
blush! And see the miserable woman lift her red
and swollen eyes to the face of the heartless trader,
and the next moment cast a dispairing glance over the
motley crowd, in search of a compassionate look a
pitying eye. Should she see one countenance wearing
a kind, humane expression, it will most likely bring
her frantically to his feet, where, kneeling, with up
lifted hands, she pleads: &quot;Oh, Massa, do buy me! Do
buy me and little Sam! He be all of the chil ens I
got left ! O, Lord !
0, Lord!
Do, Massa, buy me,
and this one baby
I Oh, do Massa !
&quot;
But the
weight of the cow-hide drives her to the auction
block, where in mock solemnity she is represented as
&quot;an article of excellent breed, a good cook, a good
seamstress, and withal a good Christian, a ra al gene-
wine lamb of the flock !
&quot;
and then she is struck off
to the highest bidder, who declares that he &quot;won t
have the youngun any how, cause he s gwine to
drive her down to Lousianny.&quot;
He may see, too, the wild, dispairing look of some
frightened young slave girl, passing under the lustful
gaze of some lordly libertine, who declares himself
&quot;in search of a fancy article for his own use !
&quot;


--- PAGE 355 ---
CONCLUSION. 339
One after another is taken from the block, until all
are disposed of, amid the agonized wail of heart
broken wives and mothers, husbands and fathers, and
the piercing screams of helpless children, torn from a
parent s embrace, to be consigned to the care of
strangers.
Nor need I inform our traveler of the inhuman
method generally approved, in hunting with trained
blood-hounds, kept and advertised for the purpose of
recapturing any poor slave who may attempt to
escape from this cruel bondage. He may perchance,
come across the mangled and lifeless body of some
fugitive, which has just been run down and torn in
pieces by the dogs of the hunter ! Should he stop a
few moments, he will soon see a hole dug in the
ground, and the remains of the slave pitched into it,
covered sufficiently to hide the unsightly mass from
view, and there will be an end of the whole matter !
&quot;Shall I not visit for these things? saith the Lord;
and shall not my soul be avenged on such a nation as
this?&quot;
In giving to the public this unvarnished, but truth
ful narrative, of some of the occurrences of my
humble and uneventful life, I have not been influ
enced by a vain desire for notoriety, but by a wil
lingness to gratify a just and honorable request,
repeatedly made by numerous and respected friends,
to learn the truth concerning my connection with the


--- PAGE 356 ---
CONCLUSION.
Wilberforce colony; the events which there transpired
during my stay, and the cause of my losing a hard-
earned property. Eegarding the affairs of the colony,
I have, therefore, endeavored to be particular, be
lieving that duty to myself and brethren, required me
to give them the within information; but nothing
have I set down in malice. Much more might have
been said ralative to some of the leading characters in
that settlement, had I not been fearful of its assuming
the character of a personal enmity or retaliation. He
who knows and will judge the actions of men, will
bear me witness, that I have cherished no such
feelings toward any of those who then lived, but now
sleep in death.
In justification, however, of my statements regard
ing the character of Mr. Lewis, I will call the attention
of the reader to some of the many letters received
from good and eminent men, to show that I was not
alone in the low estimate of his virtues. Gladly I
leave that unpleasant subject, hoping that nothing in
our past history will serve to becloud the bright
future beginning to dawn on the prospects of our
disfranchised and oppressed countrymen.


--- PAGE 357 ---
CORRESPONDENCE.
LETTER FBOM A. STEWARD TO WM. L. GARRISON.
Mu. GAHBISOX,
Dear Sir: In a recent examination of the business
transactions between the Board of Managers of the &quot;Wilberforce
Colony, and their agent Rev. JST. Paul, I find a charge made by him,
and allowed by the board, of the sum of two hundred dollars, which
he paid to yourself. Finding no receipt or acknowledgment from
you, I write to ask you to favor mewith one, or an explanation of the
facts in the case, either of which will greatly oblige me, as I design
to make it public. Truly Yours, &amp;lt;fec.,
A. STEWARD.
Canandaigua, N. Y., May, 1856.
Ms. GARRISON S REPLY TO A. STEWARD.
DEAR SIR:
You state that Rev. N&quot;. Paul, as agent for the Wilberforce
Settlement, U. C., in rendering his accounts on his return from Eng
land, charged the Board of Managers with the sum of two hundred
dollars, paid by him to me while in England; that said sum was


--- PAGE 358 ---
342 CORRESPONDENCE.
allowed by the board; adding that you do not recollect of myac
knowledging or giving credit to the Settlement for it.
In reply, I can only assure you that there must be a mistake in
regard to this item. I borrowed no money, nor had I any occasion
to ask a loan of my friend Paul, my expenses being defrayed by
funds contributed by friends in this country; nor could I with pro]
priety receive, nor he give me any part of the money contributed for
the benefit of the Wilberforce Settlement; hence, a loan or gift from
him, could have been nothing more than a personal matter between
ourselves. Moreover, had he at that ~time or any other, given me m
good faith the sum named as belonging to the Settlement, (believing
that as we were laboring together, for the interest of one common
cause, the board would not hesitate to allow it,) he would certainly
have demanded a receipt, which it would have pleased me to give,
of course, that he might satisfy the board that their liberality had
been disbursed according to their wishes, or his judgment. But
receiving no money from your agent, will be a sufficient reason for
not acknowledging it, or giving due credit to the Settlement.
I can account for this charge on his part, in no way, except that as
he was with mea part of the time I was in London, and we traveled
together a part of the time, during which, he ably and effectively
assisted me in exposing that most iniquitous combination, &quot;The
American Colonization Society,&quot; he charged to me, (that is, to my
mission) sundry items of expense which he undoubtedly believed
justly incurred by his helping me to open the eyes of British phi
lanthropists to the real design of that society; and I shall ever
remember with gratitude, his heartiness and zeal in the cause and in
rny behalf. I owe much to the success that so signally crowned my
mission, to his presence, testimony, and eloquent denunciation of the
colonization scheme. I, however, received no money from him, and
can but think that the above explanation was the occasion of his
making the charge, and which I trust will leave on his memory, no
intentional wrong.
WM. L. GARRISON.
Boston, Mass., June, 1856.


--- PAGE 359 ---
CORRESPONDENCE. 343
FBOM MR. BAKER TO A. STEWARD.
JUfc. A. STEWARD,
Dear Sir: Israel Lewis, the former agent of your
Settlement, last spring represented to me the suffering condition
of your poor, and requested that I should forward some goods, for
which I should be paid; I did so, and sent goods to the amount of
one hundred thirty-six dollars and ninety-eight cents. The goods
were sold at cost.
I am also endorsed on a note for two hundred thirteen dollars
and ten cents, which falls due 24th of this month, and which I shall
hare to pay. This note was given by Lewis for the purpose of rais
ing money to fit out Mr. Paul, on his mission to England. I was
promised that the money should be here to meet it.
I have heard nothing from Lewis or this business since, and as I
understand you are the agent, I must look to you to make provision
to meet the note, and pay for the goods. Good faith requires that all
contracts by your agency be fulfilled.
Yours, Respectfully,
CORNAL BAKER.
NewYork City, Dec., 1533.
FROM MR. L. A. SPALDING TO A.
DEAR FRIEND:
In August last, Israel Lewis, accompanied by Rev.
Nathaniel Paul called upon me and exhibited a power of attorney
signed by you as president of the trustees of the colony, authorizing
Lewis to take loans, (fee., for the benefit of the colony.
Feeling a deep interest in the progress of the colony, I agreed to
become security with E. Peck, at the Bank of Rochester, for the
payment of seven hundred dollars, which soon was raised by Lewis
on the note, for the benefit of the colony. I was in hopes to have


--- PAGE 360 ---
8M CORRESPONDENCE.
seen you. E. Peck and myself, both are willing to aid you in your
noble enterprise, and may others feel the same disposition. But as
we have families and friends, who look to us for support and protec
tion, it is proper that we should have your personal pledge to save us
from embarrassment.
Weknow your character well, and we have also great confidence in
Israel Lewis, and the others engaged with you, but none of them
are so thoroughly known to us as yourself.
Our asking for your personal pledge, does not arise from any fears
that the note will not be paid ; but as it was signed to aid you, we
think it proper that you should respond by guaranteeing that we
shall not be injured.
I accordingly copy the note in question, and write a guarantee
&quot;vhich I wish you to sign and hand to my brother.
I feel much anxiety in regard to your progress ; in your forming
schools ; religious and temperance societies; and in your taking every
measure to elevate the unfortunate colored man who may go to youi
colony for protection and improvement.
Very Respectfully Yours,
AUSTIN STEWARD. LYMAN A. SPALDHSTG.
Lockport, N. Y., 1831.
FROM&quot; THE CONVENTIONAL BOARD, PHILADELPHIA, PA., TO A. STEWARD.
MR. AUSTIN STEWARD, &quot;Wilberforce, U. C.,
Esteemed Friend : I am charged by the con
ventional board, to inform you that at the last session of the general
convention, you was duly elected their General Corresponding Agent,
for the Wilberforce Settlement and parts adjacent. Respectfully and
in an official capacity, would I ask you to accept the appointment.
And in pursuance of the said appointment, the board would be
happy to have at least a monthly correspondence from you, on all
jjuch matters as may, in your opinion, be thought conducive to the


--- PAGE 361 ---
CORRESPONDENCE. 345
pro&perity of the settlement, the elevation and future happiness of
the free people of color.
In particular, we would wish you to give as accurate an account as
possible, of the number of settlers ; the number of acres as pur
chased ; at what price ; what number are improved and under
culture ; what number of houses or tenements are in the Settlement,
&amp;lt;fec,, &amp;lt;fec.
What are your present prospects in regard to crops; your political
advantages or disadvantages.
We would also respectfully ask you to inform us, what number of
settlers might emigrate there each year, without injuring the Settle
ment. Also, what kind of machines you most need ; also, what are
the terms for which laborers are contracted for and how paid.
The board have been thus particular, because they rely with full
confidence on your patriotism and capability, which have been
unanimously assigned to you.
You will perceive our object is, to contribute, as far as lays in our
power, pecuniary aid, and assist in securing you such agricultural
and mechanical emigrants as, in your opinion, the Settlement may
need; and in all our recommendations to you, we shall endeavor to
have an eye to character, knowing full well that by that alone you
must stand or fall.
Wehave been informed here by a letter (purporting to be written
by a Mr. Stover), that the Canada Company actually refuses to sell
land to colored persons; and that they are anxious to buy out the
colored settlers at Wilberforce.
Be pleased to inform me if that be a fact, with its particulars ; and
if there be any disadvantages in purchasing land by colored emi
grants.
The board would be happy to know if you have had any news
from your agent in England. If any, what are his prospects ?
You will please be particular and candid in stating your wants
(as well as disadvantages) to us, as we will do our utmost to satisfy
P*


--- PAGE 362 ---
346 CORRESPONDENCE.
them, as well as promote the happiness of the settlers, and the pros
perity of the Settlement.
Be pleased to answer as soon as possible, for we as brothers in
common, feel deeply interested.
With sentiments of sincere friendship,
I remain, yours,
JUNIUS 0. MORRELL.
Atrue copy from the record.
RESOLUTIONS PASSED BY THE BOARD OF MANAGERS OF THE WILBER-
FOROE COLONY.
At a meeting of the Board of Managers, held September 30th,
1831, to call the Agents to an account:
Resolved, That the Report of N. Paul be accepted, and unani
mously agreed to.
At a meeting of the Board of Directors, all the members present,
March 18th, 1832 :
Resolved, That we disapprove of the conduct of Israel Lewis, in his
being absent so long, and also his not communicating with the Board
of Directors, and not informing them from time to time, how he is
prosecuting his agency.
Resolved, That the chairman of this board be instructed to write
to said Lewis, to return home, and lay before this board his doings.
At a meeting of the Board, held April 1st, 1832, all the members
and Israel Lewis present with them, he made the following Report,
and resigned his office as agent, which was accepted
Lewis said that seven hundred dollars was all tliat he had col
lected. That he paid one hundred and fifty dollars for board in Nevr
Fork, thirty-five dollars for clothes, and two hundred dollars to N,
Paul, as an out-fit for England.


--- PAGE 363 ---
CORRESPONDENCE. 347
CIRCULAR.
THB.BOAKD OF MANAGERS FOR THE COLONY,
To the Christians and Philanthropists in the United States :
We, the undersigned inhabitants and Board of Managers for the
Colony of Wilberforce, beg leave to state that the frost cut off the
crops in this part of the country last year, and some of the colonists
are in great need of assistance. And we flatter ourselves that when
the peculiar circumstances of this infant Settlement are duly con
sidered, this appeal, to a generous and discriminating public, will not
be made in vain.
The board are sensible from the cause above stated, that the inhab
itants of Wilberforce will be compelled to ask aid from the friends of
humanity in the States, or they must suffer.
Under these circumstances they commissioned the Rev. James
Sharp, as their agent, and sent him to the States ; but owing to the
opposition of Israel Lewis, who had been formerly employed as
agent, but was removed from the agency ms labors were almost
wholly lost to the board.
Wewould simply say, that Lewis wasacting for a certain company
here ; but we have made inquiries, and find but one man in Wilber
force that belongs to said company, and he is an old man, in his
dotage. That man is Simon Wyatt. We might say more, but we
think there has been enough written to satisfy the public.
In consequence of the unfaithfulness of Israel Lewis, and the
numerous agents that may be looking around the country after him,
the board have come to the conclusion to dispense with a traveling
agent for the present.
And we would humbly request Lyman A. Spalding, Esq., of Lock-
port; E. Peck, Esq., of Rochester; Rev. Dr. Budd, of Auburn; Charles
Davis, Esq., of Ludlowville, Tompkins County, N. Y.; Aruthur Tap-
pan, Esq., city of New York; to act as receivers for the Colony. The
above named gentlemen, will see that the funds which they may
receive, be faithfully applied according to the wishes of the donors.


--- PAGE 364 ---
348 COEEESPONDENCE.
All moncj placed in each of the banks at Eochester and * &amp;lt;fr
pli
cate sent on to the Colony, may be cashed here with &amp;gt; &amp;lt;t
any
discount.
To Christiana we appeal
:
by the brotherhood of Christ, and by
their own hopes of being united in him, to extend to us tLe means
of obtaining bread; give us, in the name of Jesus, of your abun
dance; give us, as God has blessed you, for the poor among us want
bread and clothing.
It is to be hoped that every clergyman in the States, will lay this
circular before their respective congregations, and give every person
an opportunity to throw ill their mite into the treasury of the
Lord!
AUSTIN STEWARD, Preet
JOSEPH TAYLOK, Sccy.
PHILIP HARRIS,
JOHN WHITEHEAD,
PETER BCTLER,
SAMUEL PETERSON,
WILLIAM BROWN.
FROM EEV. J. BUDD TO A. STEWARD AND OTHERS.
MESSRS. PAUL AND STEWARD:
I have ever taken a great degree of
interest in the welfare of your colony, and have in various ways,
brought it before the public.
It has pained me deeply to learn that there are divisions among
you. The whole deportment and manner of Lewis, who has been
here, has evidently impressed the public in his favor. Although I do
not wish to take ground as his advocate, to the extinction of others, I
am not inclined to think him dishonest from the testimony now
before me.


--- PAGE 365 ---
COKKESPONDENCE. 349
But, apart from him, my present impression is that the most
effectual way for you to promote the cause of the Colony, is not, at
this stage of the business, to appear before the public in a hostile
attitude to Lewis.
I know some excellent and prominent gentlemen in this quarter,
who think he is unkindly treated ; at any rate, while the investiga
tion, lately commenced at Albany, is going on, it appears to me not
wise in you to put forth any further publication reflecting upon
Lewis. He may have acted imprudently ; but he has excited him
self very much, and should the idea prevail that you and he are in a
state of collision, it would be very bad for you.
I consider your Colony as a very important matter, and will do all
in my power to promote your welfare, but it is very material not to
prejudice the public against you.
Before I move in the matter, I wish to know the real state of the
matter between Lewis and the Colony. As soon as I can know that
he has defrauded you and deceived the public, I will not hesitate to
give my views on the subject, and put forth any efforts in my power
for your advancement.
There should no sectarian or party feeling be allowed to creep into
your institution.
I thank you for naming me as a receiver for your Colony, and
should anything come to me, I shall hand it over to James S. Sey
mour, Esq., Cashier of the Bank of Auburn, who should have been
named instead of me. I hope you will put his name in my place, or
at any rate, name him with me, for he has been from the first, much
interested in your behalf.
If you will allow me, I will briefly say, that my opinion is, your
best way to relieve your immediate wants, would be to issue a brief
circular, stating the failure of your crops, your newness of settle
ment, (fee., Ac.; and call upon the public for help, without naming
Lewis or alluding to your difficulty with him; let your papers be
properly authorized, and say that the agent you employ is not


--- PAGE 366 ---
350 CORRESPONDENCE.
engaged in getting funds to pay for land, found schools, cfcc., but to
get immediate provisions for the Colony.
If you will send an agent here and prepare your circular in this
way let it be short and I will print it and give copies of it to him
for circulation, free of charge.
&quot;With many prayers for the prosperity of your Colony,
I am your Friend,
JOHN BUDD.
Auburn, N. Y., May, 1833.
REPLY TO J. BUDD BY A. STEWARD.
To THE REV. J. Bunr,
Sir : We feel under renewed obligation to you,
for you friendly advice ; but we have already sent out several copies
of our circular to different places, and probably some of them have
beed printed before this time.
Wehave no object in view, but truth, justice, the greatest good of
the Settlement, and of our brethren in general. Israel Lewis has,
however, collected large sums of money, for otcr relief, of which we
have not had the benefit. Nearly two years ago, he was appointed
agent for the Colony, to collect funds to build a meeting-house, to
endow schools, &c. In less than one year he received more than two
thousand dollars, which he squandered; and we have neither vncd-
ing-house nor schools, nor never will have, so long as the money goes
into the hands of Lewis. All that we would have forgiven him
gladly, if he would consent to be still and not usurp the agency
against the wishes of the people.
Sir, is it not expected that he would appear well; as you say, that
&quot;
the whole deportment and manner of Lewis, who has been in this
place, evidently have impressed the people in his favor,&quot; while col
lecting moneywith the eye of the public upon him. But follow him
home into another kingdom, and there see the man in his true


--- PAGE 367 ---
CORRESPONDENCE. 351
character; stripped of his borrowed plumage, and we will guar
antee that you would agree with us, in believing that he is an arch
hypocrite.
We should be sorry to prejudice the public against our Settlement,
more especially when we are actuated by the purest motives, that
of preventing the Christian public from being imposed upon, by
drawing large sums from them for us, as they suppose, when in truth
such sums never reach us at all.
Sir, we know that you are actuated by the purest motives, but you
are deceived in the character of the man, (Lewis). When I was
living in the States and only saw him there, collecting money for the
poor, I thought him honest as you now do; but two or three years
residence in Wilberforce Colony, has abundantly satisfied me that
his object is to get money, that he may live in a princely style, and
not for the benefit of the poor as he pretends.
Such are the true facts in the case. We should be glad to have
the name of James S. Seymour, Esq., added to the list, and any
other prominent citizen you may think would help the cause.
In regard to the investigation at Albany, we do not see how the
public are to arrive at the facts in the case from any statement Lewis
may make; for all his statements that I have seen in print, are posi
tively void of truth, in the most essential part, so that they are of
little or no importance at all unless substantiated by other testimony.
The circular contains no testimony that has not been heretofore
laid before the public. Mr. Benjamin Paul recently wrote a letter to
the editors of
&quot;
The Baptist Register,&quot; in which he stated that Lewis
had fed and clothed the colonists like a father, which is not true; and
so sensible was Paul of the fact, that when the letter reached here,
together with the surprize it created wherever Lewis was known,
that Paul cheerfully contradicted it, confessed that he was mistaken,
and thus made it known to the public.
We certainly have no sectional feelings in the matter, though
Lewis has labored hard to impress the public with a contrary belief;
and he has even brought false charges of the basest kind against our


--- PAGE 368 ---
S52 CORRESPONDENCE.
most respectable citizens, all to drawthe attention of the
pubt;&amp;lt;r from
the time facts in the case.
It is a general time of health here in the Colony. The season in
very favorable; our crops look well, and with the blessings of God
we shall raise enough to supply our wants this year.
Yours, with due respect,
In behalf of the Colonists,
A. STEWARD.
Wilberforce, June, 1833.
FROM A. STEWARD TO Q. BAXKS AND OTHERS.
MESSRS. BANKS, WILBER, BROCEENBERG & HARRIS:
I have received a communication through your corres
ponding secretary, Mr. James C. Brown, and I hasten to answer it.
The last communication I have received from Mr. N&quot;. Paul, was
in December, 1833, at which time he was vigorously prosecuting his
mission, as will more fully appear by the annexed copy ofsaid letter,
which I cheerfully send you. His return is expected daily.
[Copy OF N. PAULS LETTER.]
MY DEAR BROTHER STEWARD:
When I last addressed you, I informed yon that 1
expected to leave this country before a return letter from yon could
be expected. I therefore stated, if I remember correctly, that you
need not write.
I now find that I shall be detained much longer than I then calcu
lated; and this detention is owing to the Slavery question. The
friends of the cause, advised me to forego my object, until that
question was settled ; and then they would turn their attention to my
cause, and render me what assistance they could.
All their united strength was needed now, while that question was


--- PAGE 369 ---
CORRESPONDENCE. 358
pending. But thanks be to God, that is now settled. On the first
day of August next, -will be the proudest day that ever Britain knew;
for from that time henceforth, there will not remain a single slave
throughout His Majesty s dominions.
The friends of the cause are nowturning their attention to Slavery
in the United States, and are about to form a society for the abolition
of Slavery throughout the world. They all think highly of our
Settlement, and will give it their cordial support.
The leading abolitionists have given me letters of recommendation
throughout the Kingdom,and have appointed one of their most effec
tive men to travel with me, his name is John Scoble, a very ready,
intelligent, earnest, and an eloquent speaker. I think I can do more
now in one month, than I could in three before the question was
settled in regard to their own slaves.
You will at once see that although the people concluded my object
to be an important one, yet, they generally thought that they ought
to lend all their aid in removing the stain from their own land first.
This stain is now effectually effaced, and my meetings are exceed
ingly crowded. I addressed an audience at Norwich of from three
to four thousand persons, week before last, when about five hundred
dollars was collected. So you see I am getting on. I start, the Lord
willing, next week for Scotland, and shall spend the winter
there and in the North of England. In the spring I shall return and
take passage for Canada. I doubt not, that you are anxiously looking
for my return; yet, you cannot wan-t to see me more than I want to
return; but I tell you now as I have told you before, that I shall not
return until I have done all that can be done by my labor.
Yours,
N. PAUL.
Sow:
The above copy will give you all the recent information we
have received concerning the mission of our foreign agent.


--- PAGE 370 ---
354 COKKESPOKDENCC
Please accept my kindest regards, with my acknowledgments of
your distinguished consideration, while I remain,
Yours truly,
AUSTIN STEWARD
Wilberforce, U. C.
FROM A. STEWARD TO MR. NELL.
DEAR SIB:
We are glad to acknowledge your favor of October last,
and to hear of your safe arrival in England, your health and fair
prospects.
Since my removal to Wilberforce, I have opened a school, which
Mrs. Steward has engaged to teach for one year; while I shall pro
bably devote my time to traveling through the States, for the benefit
of the Colony, which is indeed poor, and in want of some assistance;
and yet, not a dollar have we in the treasury to help them with.
Mi-. Paul has not returned, though we are daily expecting him.
Our friends in NewYork, still have confidence in his pledge to do
right; andwe are anxiously expecting its fulfilment.
Your wife, Mrs. Nell, and the children are well, and we are still
doing all in our power for their comfort; but my means, in conse
quence of having been so much abroad the past season, are limited;
by which you will see, my dear Sir, the necessity of remitting funds
to me, that I may make your family more comfortable in all things,
without distressing myown.
The settlers are well, and are looking with hopeful expectancy for
you to do something handsome for them, in which I do hope they
may not be disappointed. Lewis is still in New York. We have
appointed another agent, named Scott, but who is doing nothing for
the Colony now.
Maythe blessings of God rest upon you, and your endeavors; your
ijood deportment put to silence vour enemiep; maj they who foresee


--- PAGE 371 ---
CORRESPONDENCE. 355
that you
&quot;will cheat the poor colored children, be sadly mistaken, and
your good deeds finally enrol your name on the proud list of philan
thropists, headed by a Wilberforce and a Clarkson.
Yours, in great haste,
AUSTIN STEWARD.
Wilberforce, Dec., 1835.
FROM L. A. SPALDING TO A. STEWARD AND OTHERS.
DEAR FRIENDS:
I have received a letter from Israel Lewis, NewYork,
requesting me to forward fifty dollars to the treasurer of the Wilber
force Colony, which I will do at the first convenience. I sent fifty
dollars some time since, which I presume was received
I have also received a letter from B. Lundy, who speaks very
flatteringly of the Settlement; but gives mesome information relating
to Lewis, which will injure you, unless you act wisely.
Now I suggest for your consideration, whether it would not be best
to keep perfectly quiet relative to him, until after he returns and
settles with the directors. If he cannot then satisfy you, he will
no doubt surrender up his documents and agency like a ipan, and
leave you to appoint another.
By all means you must agree among yourselves, not suffering any
difference of opinion to become -public. Your enemies will seize
upon this, and injure your prospects; besides, you gain nothing byit.
Your friends too, could then say that you acted imprudently. I hope
to have a good account of the settlement of your difficulties if any
should exist.
Respectfully your Friend,
LYMAN A. SPALDING.
AUSTIN STEWARD & BENJ. PAUL.
Lockport, N. Y., 2d Mo., 4th, 1832.


--- PAGE 372 ---
356 CORRESPONDENCE.
FROM RET. S. E. CORNISH TO A.
DEAR STEWARD:
I have this day received your letter, and God wiHing&quot;,
I -will be with you in the course of ten or twelve days. Please to
keep your people together, until I come. I will see that they be
not oppressed by that notorious Israel Lewis. I believe him to be
one of the worst men living, whose deeds will yet come to light. Do
stay in the Colony and keep all things ass they are until I come.
Yours, with high esteem,
SAMUEL EL CORNISH.
P. S. I am glad that Mrs. Steward is in Rochester; your Colony
is by no means suited to her talents and refined mind. She never
could be happy there. My love to all the Colonists; I will do every
thing for them in my power. S. E. C.
FROM B. LUNDY TO A. STEWARD AND OTHERS.
ESTEEMED FRIENDS:
Again I take this method of communicating
some private information to mypersonal friends, relative to my pro
ceedings in Mexico. My last visit to that country, (like the one
preceding), having been prolonged far beyond the time which I had
anticipated, I feel it incumbent on me to explain the causes thereof
especially to such as take an interest in the enterprise in which I
have engaged, and those who have kindly assisted me with means to
defray the expenses of my journey, &c.
Soon after the date of my last printed letter, which was issued
from this place, I went to New Orleans, with the intention of taking
a passage by sea, to some port in Mexico; but after waiting in that
city about two weeks, and finding no opportunity to obtain one, 1
proceeded up the Red River, and journeyed through Texas again by


--- PAGE 373 ---
CORRESPONDENCE. 357
land. Myhealth continued very good for some length of time; but
when I reached the middle part of the Texas country, it was my
misfortune to come again in contact with the direful
&quot;
cholera,&quot; and
again I was the subject of its virulent attacks. My detention was
great, and affliction severe; though I finally expelled the disorder as
I had done before. My sufferings were somewhat aggravated in
several instances, by the fearful prejudices of the people among
whom I traveled. I was veiy anxious to get through my journey,
and often assayed to travel before I was in fact well enough. The
consequence was, that I frequently took relapses, and sometimes had
to lie out under trees, even in time of rain, within sight of houses,
the people being unwilling to give me shelter therein, fearing that my
disorder was contagious.
At length I reached the Mexican town of San Antonio de Bexar,
and there I tamed, until I had got pretty well rid of the cholera. I
then pursued myjourney to Monclova, the seat of government for the
State of Coahuila and Texas, in company with several Mexican
gentlemen and foreigners. Previous to this time, I had traveled
several hundred miles entirely alone, and generally encamped in the
woods or plains at night. On my arrival at Monclova, I was doomed
to encounter &quot;misfortune&quot; of a very different character. Here I
found that the Englishman, (mentioned in my other letter), with
whom I had contracted to petition for two grants of land, had totally
failed in his application. The petition had been laid before the
Governor, and he was about issuing the grants, when he received a
decree from the Legislature which was then in session forbidding
him to grant any more land, under any pretext. This measure was
taken to prevent the great land speculators from carrying on their
swindling operations in Texas. An act was soon after passed by that
body, repealing all their Colonization laws; and thus every hope that
I had so fondly entertained, and each fair prospect, seemingly so
near its realization, was instantly blasted and utterly destroyed! If ever
the fortitude of man was tried, mine was then. If ever stoic philoso
phy might be successfully called to the aid of human courage, I


--- PAGE 374 ---
858 CORRESPONDENCE.
felt the necessity of invoking it upon that occasion. Nearly two
years of toil, privation and peril, have been wasted. My sufferings
had been great, though my spirit soared on the bouyancy of hope.
Nowthe fair superstructure of an important enterprise, whose ideal
magnitude had employed my mind, to the exclusion of many hard
ships endured, suddenly vanished from my sight, and left before me
a hideous and gloomy void with no other encouragement than total
disappointment, conscious poverty and remediless despair
! What
should I then have done ? My health was restored, but my detention
and consequent expenses had been so great that my funds were
nearly exhausted. I came to the country for an important purpose;
and I reasoned with myself thus ; although my way is closed in this
State, cannot something be done elsewhere ? I will not boast of the
stoutest heart among men, but mine must not quail. Something fur
ther must be done if possible, and I will try.
In the course of mytravels, I had seen a part of the adjoining State
of Tamaulipas, and had been informed that the colonization laws
thereof were liberal. I was even aware that some parts of it are
more suitable for the culture of the sugar cane, than any tract I
could have obtained in Coahuila and Texas. And upon a little
reflection, I determined to make further investigations in Tamauli
pas, and had been informed of the State. As soon as my horse was
a little rested, I set out, alone, on a journey of between four and five
hundred miles, part of the way through an awfully mountainous
region, and much of it an uninhabited wilderness. I encamped oxtt
almost every night, during the whole journey; very seldom near any
human habitation. I had no fire-arms nor anything to defend myself
against the ferocious beasts of the forest, which I had evidence to
convince me were frequently numerous, and not far distant. In two
weeks I reached the city of Matamoras, in the State of Tamaulipas,
quite destitute of funds, after parting with almost every disposable
article belonging to my wardrobe, &c. The people of this place
being all perfect strangers to me, I did not for a while unfold to them
the real object of my visit; but instead thereof, I opened a shop, and


--- PAGE 375 ---
CORRESPONDENCE. 359
commenced working at my old trade the saddling business. I soon
got as much work as I could do supported myself, replenished my
pocket, made some acquaintance with a number of people, and
obtained more information respecting the Colonization laws of the
State. Afew weeks elapsed, while I was employed in this way. I
then mounted my horse again, and proceeded to the capital of the
State; and after negotiating for some time with the Governor and
Council of the State, I succeeded in obtaining a grant of land, upon
advantageous terms. I then performed another journey of almost
two hundred and fifty miles, &quot;alone,&quot; to Matamoras again; and soon
thereafter embarked for the United States.
My friends will thus perceive that I have not been idle; though
much time has been occupied in my last expedition. I shall not
attempt to excite their sympathy by exhibiting the twentieth part of
what I have suffered. I do not even like to look back upon some of
the scenes through which I have passed. But thanks to a kind and
all-sustaiuing Providence, complete success has at last crowned my
exertions. I strove hard to command it; and I leave it to others to
say whether I have deserved it or not.
The terms upon which I have obtained my grant of land
will be noticed in a public address, which I shall forward with this
letter.
Since my arrival in this place, I have been confined by sickness;
but am now convalescent, and shall visit my friends to the eastward,
as soon as circumstances will permit. I cannot close this communi
cation, without an expression of my sincere thanks to those kind
friends who rendered me assistance in defraying the expenses of my
last Mexican tour. Their favors will be most gratefully remem
bered, and I shall feel myself under additional obligations to labor
for the melioration of the condition of the poor and suffering
slave.
In the next numher of the
&quot;
Genius of Universal Emancipation,&quot;
I shall insert the names of those who contributed to aid me in the


--- PAGE 376 ---
360 CORRESPONDENCE.
prosecution of my enterprise; and correct information relative to
all proceedings therein, will be given in the pages of that work, as
the business connected with it progresses.
I am, most respectfully, your Friend,
N. & B. PAUL, B LUNDY.
AUSTIN STEWARD,
REV. J. SHARP.
Nashville, 5th Mo., 1835.
THE END.


--- PAGE 377 ---



--- PAGE 378 ---



--- PAGE 379 ---



--- PAGE 380 ---
fURN CIRCULATION DEPARTMENT
202 Main Library
ALL BOOKS MAY BE RECALLED AFTER 7 DAYS
1 -month loans may be renewed by calling 642-3405
6-month loans may be recharged by bringing books to Circulation Desk
Renewals and recharges may be made 4 days prior to due date
DUE AS STAMPED BELOW
JUN i ? i *MR 2 1 7986
RECEIVED Bft:
PR 871904
21
-m^
OftCUlATION DEFIL
84
NOV 07JUN 2 w 1989
SEP 1 4 NOV 7 2000
TO DISC SEP 2 8 1989
UNIVERSITY OF CALIFORNIA, BERKELEY
W\ NO. DD6, 60m, 12/80 BERKELEY CA 94720


--- PAGE 381 ---
LD-9 80m 11/80 (Bay
-&amp;gt;: 96121J2
THE UNIVERSITY OF CALIFORNIA LIBRARY
GENERAL LIBRARY - U.C. BERKELEY
BOOOfllSfl73


--- PAGE 382 ---
i

