=== EXTRACTED TEXT FROM: Unknown~120 Lessons for Life.pdf ===
Extraction Method: PyPDFLoader
Total Pages: 20
Timestamp: 2026-01-04T17:03:51.212854
================================================================================


--- PAGE 1 ---
SUPREME MATHEMATICS
1. Knowledge is to know, listen and observe. Knowledge is a body of accumulated
facts. Knowledge is the foundation for all things. As the sun is the foundation for our
solar system and man is the foundation for his family.
2. Wisdom is the manifestation of one's knowledge, the ways and actions one uses his
or her knowledge to know truth. Such as speaking wisely to the wise, to dumb or to
possess a wise mind. Wisdom is the woman.
3. Understanding is the mental picture one draws of knowledge, wisdom. To see things
much clearer for what they are, visible through the (all Seeing Eye) this is The mind!
Understanding is the child.
4. Culture or Freedom, culture is ones way of life. Islam is the culture of freedom, And
righteousness, the culture of peace in which all things coincide and live in harmony.
5. Power or Refinement, power is the truth. Truth in origin is the only means of
refinement; is to go according to the truth is to make ones self known again. Truth is
the power to resurrect the mentally dead from their present state of unawareness and
ignorance of self.
6. Equality means to be equal in all aspects of ones true self.
7. God is the original man, Allah is God, always has been always will be. The all eye
seeing, the all and all is 360 degrees, God is a wise man’s equality this is Build or
Destroy.
8. Build or Destroy; build means to add on to life a positive creation or education.
Destroy means to know of, take that which is untrue and add light to the Knowledge!
9. Born is to bring into existence a mental birth of self.
10. Cipher is the completion of a circle, 360 degree.


--- PAGE 2 ---
10.
SUPREME ALPHABETS
1. A- Allah is the Supreme Being, the Asiatic man from Asia. God of the Universe,
Lord of all the worlds from the highest to the lowest, the original man, the giver and
taker of life, the foundation of all life, the father of reality and the knowledge of the
sun. The following diagram shows the complete realm cipher of the Asiatic man’s
body keeping everything pure, true and living; blanket of protection 5x 72degree =
360degees. The power of God’s wisdom shows forth his cipher. A-arm = 72 degree
L-leg =72 degree L-leg =72 degree A-arm =72 degree H-head = 72 degree.
2. B - Be or Born is the realm or state of being born into existence. Born is to be aware
of everything because everything being that of the sun moon and stars; Man, Woman
and Child; past, present and future. Born is to be complete and to give birth to
wisdom. Knowing that everything is real, one must born his or her knowledge to
show your wisdom to be or being real.
3. C - See is to knowledge wisdom being born and gain a clear picture which will be the
understanding. To see is to be equipped with sight; both insight and eyesight; “C” is
also the cream.
4. D – Divine, means knowledge and wisdom, being understood, showing its
completion and manifesting a perfect state of existence equating the culture which is
(I) God. Divine being things that are sacred.
5. E - Equality is to be equal with all society and nations of the earth, showing and
proving with the power of equality that we are the fathers of civilization, also, to
equal all nations with the science of education. Equality is the woman.
6. F - Father is power build, the Father of the Gods and Earths, Father Allah or as the
Muslims called him Clarence 13x Smith. Fat-her to born the babies, all praise to
Father Allah the original man.
7. G – God is being himself at all times, by knowing his equality as God, dealing equal
with the knowledge known to Allah, Supreme Being, Man is Allah and this is /self
and / of IHVH. I is self, self is the true reality son of man God.
8. H - He or Her is the man or woman who has knowledge of self and is building a
strong foundation. He the true and living God; she who is the Earth, the Universe, the
woman planet, to bring about the Gods and Earths and teach them at birth. He or Her
without the knowledge of self nether builds nor destroy, but takes many limes.
9. I – Islam is self and self of man is God. Woman is Earth and also life when
advocated for the same cause, to be reborn into the knowledge of self, Islam as I
God.
10. J – Justice is the star, meaning your reward, regardless of whether it is one of
happiness of sorrow. These are rewards and / or penalties. Also, knowledge added to


--- PAGE 3 ---
the cipher. REWARD just-i-c-equality with which I have been blessed. PENALTY
just-ice: To be frozen at 32 degree.
11. K – King; God is the king of kings meaning that God is the only true king there is.
Ruler of a kingdom, the equivalent of God himself, Father and H. The king rules
because he is wise and just. One who knows the ledge of his knowledge for his word
is life. In the beginning was the word and the word is GOD ALLAH.
12. L – Love- Hell or Right (LORD) – Love is the emotion that God blessed the woman
with. Many men and women possess this motion and to those who have failed to
cope with it, it has been proven to be handicap. Love to those who have gotten over
this burden realize that love is understanding and not two separate qualities.
Understanding brings on love or hate love brings on understanding. Hatred can be
caused by what you understand or don’t understand. Those who have realized the
truth of love have proven that he is a LORD. Lord is the equivalent of GOD, KING,
HE, FATHER and thereby abides paradise (heaven). Hell is the home of the ignorant,
those who lack knowledge of self. God shows his love by manifesting the knowledge
of himself through his wisdom which reveals the hell one must go through in order to
be right. Knowledge the wisdom to bring forth love (Understanding).
13. M – Master is one who possesses 360 degree of knowledge wisdom, and
understanding, the equivalent of Lord, He, King, Father: God that is I! Also, one who
knows the ledge of his understanding enabling him to manifest the culture which is I-
God; to knowledge, understanding.
14. N – Now, (Nation), End Now is the time to get knowledge of self or end in a pit of
ignorance. Nation – the United Asiatic people; dark and light. The pale person is in a
race with time now to avoid the wrath of the Asiatic Nation (God). Knowing the
culture to show the
15. O – Ciphers are people, places and / or beings. A circle that consists of 360 degree or
a cycle of life. C-I-Power-Her; Her-Power-I-C.
16. P – Power is strength, energy, and magnetism. Truth is the ultimate power, star or
child knowing that knowledge is power, therefore equality itself is power.
17. Q – Queen is the woman factor of life known as substances. She becomes the Queen
after she is given the knowledge of God. This is savior equality unknown (sexually)
transmitted equality wisdom brings about build or destroy.
18. R – Rule (right, ruler) is a guide which God, the Asiatic man, uses to keeping
everything right and exact. Righteous are the Asiatic people according to nature.
Right is the proper nature of things and people. Ruler is one who leads a king and / or
queen when the king is not physically present.
19. S – Savior (Self) is the one possessing THE POWER OF God Allah and uses it to
resurrect the people after first saving self. One that saves all who want to be saved
and add on to self. Self is the reality of one, be it man or woman.


--- PAGE 4 ---
20. T – Truth or Square – Truth is understanding reality of wisdom. Allah shows his
powers and proves his powers, and presents the truth regardless of what angles of a
square, Ninety degrees to each angle (4 x 90 =360). The square is a multiple of four
and the cube is six.
21. U – The universe is the home of the solar system. The universe owns and belongs to
all Asiatic men and women. U-you and I verse. You is pertaining to the woman when
dealing in completing the home (child). You also mean self, king savior, Queen, her,
woman.
22. V – Victory – To obtain the knowledge, wisdom and understanding, a man that is
blind, deaf and dumb has to take on the Great seal of Victory to win.
23. W – Wisdom is wise words spoken by a wise man. This is power, When Allah
speaks it’s called wisdom, For when He speaks, it’s like an ocean that would never
go dry. Wisdom is the bridge to knowledge and understanding. Wisdom is the
woman.
24. X – Unknown is the identity of self, woman, man and God because they are not wise
to their true culture. X, in genetics is the female factor or chromosome (RNA and
DNA).
25. Y – Why- The question most asked to justify. Why does he like the devil? Why does
the devil call our people African? Why are there so many of our people still dead?
This is because of there own doing not accepting the truth. In genetics the male factor
or chromosome is Y, God knowledge on the Y having three points: Foundation, right
point and left point.
26. Z – Zig, Zag, Zig – meaning knowledge and understanding are alike and zag is un-a-
like my what? SELF!


--- PAGE 5 ---
12 Jewels of Islam
1. Knowledge is to know, it also means to respect. It is the foundation of all things in
existence. One must Born his Equality and knowledge the Power or Refinement showing and
proving ones Equality by dealing equally with the knowledge known only to God. (Know the
ledge before you fall off the edge)
2. Wisdom is wise words being spoken, for when God speaks it is like an ocean that will
never go dry. Wisdom is symbolic to water for when one speaks it takes moisture to bring
about that vibration that brings forth the word. (Building a understanding to bring about
peace of mind and to be wise)
3. Understanding is the mental picture one draws of knowledge and wisdom to see things for
what they are and not what they pretend to be. Understanding is the all eye seeing the third
eye which is the mind the cream that rises to the top. (Understanding is the child).
4. Freedom is a state of mind (Free-Dom for the dome is the top part of the head).
Freeing yourself from your present state of unawareness and ignorance of self (self is a truth
reality one be it man or women)
5. Justice is to Build or destroy with the power of God just I see equality which I have been
blessed or just-ice to be frozen at 32 degrees the freezing point of water.
6. Equality is to be equal in all aspects of ones true self with the (knowledge Power or
refinement). Equality is also anything that has weight and takes up space is physical like the
two equalities (The Earth and Moon).
7. Food nourishes the body, mental Foods are the supreme mathematics giving you the
foundation to everything in life which is the culture of I-God. This is the guild that the
original man uses to keeping everything right and exact.
8. Clothing is to shield your body from the cold of winter and heat of summer. Clothing is the
supreme alphabets these lessons will give you the power to build Gods civilization with the
science of education destroying the devils manifestation with separation by acknowledging
the truth and repelling the falsehood.
9. Shelter is ones house to shield you from the out of doors and to keep you and your family
warm and safe this is your (12 Jewels of Islam). The home is holy ground and one should
remove thy shoes upon entering because you’re in the house of God.
10. Love is understanding and not two separate qualities it is the knowledge and wisdom that
bring about the family of the original man proving that he is a Lord, he king, father God that
is I and thereby abides in paradise (Heaven) which is a state of mind.
11. Peace is the absence of confusion which there is know such thing as confusion but only a
lack of understanding. (Positive Education Activates Creative Elevation).


--- PAGE 6 ---
12. Happiness is the self satisfaction of ones self being…


--- PAGE 7 ---
Allah is God
WORD IS BOND
STUDENT ENROLLMENT
The following questions must be answered one hundred percent before submittance of
students to said lesson number 1
1. Who is the original man?
ANS: The original man is the Asiatic Blackman, the maker, the owner, the cream of the
planet earth, father of civilization and God of the Universe.
2. Who is the Colored man?
ANS: The colored man is the Caucasian (white man) or Yacub's grafted devil the white
man of the planet earth.
3. What is the population of the original nation in the wilderness of North America, and
all over the planet earth?
ANS: The population of the original nation in the wilderness of North America is
17,000,000 with the 2,000,000 Indians making it 19,000,000 all over the planet earth
4,400,000,000.
4. What is the population of the Colored people in the wilderness of North America, and
all over the planet earth?
ANS: The population of the colored people in the wilderness of North America is
103,000,000, and all over the planet, earth is 400,000,000.
5. What is the area of square miles of the planet earth?
ANS: The square mileage of the planet earth is 196,940,000 square miles.
6. What are the exact square miles of useful land that is used everyday by the total
population of the planet earth?
ANS: The useful land that is used everyday by the total population of the planet earth
is
29,000,000 square miles.
7. How much is used by the original man?
ANS: The original man uses 23,000,000 square miles.
8. How much of this useful land is used by the colored man?
ANS: The colored man uses 6,000,000 square miles.
9. What is the said birth record of the nation of Islam?
ANS: The nation of Islam has no birth record, it has no beginning nor ending it is older
than the Sun, Moon and Stars.
10. What is the birth record of the said nations other than Islam?
ANS: Buddhism is 35,000 years old Christianity is 551 years old.


--- PAGE 8 ---



--- PAGE 9 ---
ENGLISH LESSON NO. C1
1. My name W.F. Muhammad.
2. I came to North America by myself.
3. My uncle was brought over here by the Trader three hundred seventy-nine years ago.
4. My uncle cannot talk his own language.
5. He does not know that he is my uncle.
6. He likes the devil because the devil gives him nothing.
7. Why does he like the devil?
8. Because the devil put fear in him when he was a little boy.
9. Why does he fear now, since he is a big man?
10. Because the devil taught him to eat the wrong food.
11. Does that have anything to do with the above question, No. 10?
12. Yes, sir, that makes him other than his own self.
13. What is his own-self?
14. His own-self is a righteous Muslim.
15. Are there any Muslims other than righteous?
16. I beg your pardon, I have never heard of one.
17. How many Moslem sons are there in North America?
18. Approximately three million.
19. How many original Moslems are there in North America?
20. A little over seventeen million.
21. Did I hear you say that some of the seventeen million do not know that they are
Muslims?
22. YES, SIR!
23. I hardly believe that, unless they are blind, deaf, and dumb.
24. Well, they were made blind, deaf, and dumb by the devil when they were babies.
25. CAN THE DEVIL FOOL A MUSLIM?
26. NOT NOWADAYS!
27. Do you mean to say that the devil fooled them three hundred seventy-nine years
ago?
28. Yes, the TRADER made an interpretation that they receive GOLD for their labor
more than they were earning in their own country.
29. Then, did they receive gold?
30. No! The Trader disappeared and there was no one that could speak their language.
31. Then what happened?
32. Well, they wanted to go to their own country, but they could not swim nine thousand
miles.
33. Why didn't their own people come and get them?
34. Because their own people did not know that, they were here.
35. When did their own people find out that they were here?
36. Approximately sixty years ago.
After accomplishing this Lesson, No. C1. At once, ask for Lesson C2, which will bring
you a profit of $10.00 per word for studying it.


--- PAGE 10 ---
LOST FOUND MUSLIM LESSON NO. 1
47. 1. Why isn’t devil settle on the best part of the planet earth?
ANS: Because the earth belongs to the original man and knowing that, the devil is weak
and wicked, and there would not be any peace among them, so they put them on the
worst part and kept the best part preserved for his self. Ever since he made it, the best
part is in Arabia at the Holy City of Mecca. The colored man or Caucasian man is the
devil. Arabia is in the Far East and is bordered by the Indian Ocean in the South.
48. 2. Why did Musa have a hard time civilizing the devil in the year 2,000 B.C.?
ANS: Because he was a savage, savage means a person who has lost the knowledge of
himself and who is living a beast life. Musa was a half-original man, a prophet. 2,000
B.C. means before Christ. In the Asiatic world, it was in the year 11,000. Civilize means
to teach knowledge and wisdom of the human family of the planet earth.
49. 3. Why did we let the half-Original man like Columbus discover the poor part of the
planet earth?
ANS: Because the Original Black man is God and owner of the earth and knowing
every
square inch of it, has chosen for himself the best part. He did not care about the poor
part. Columbus was a half-original man and was born in Italy, which is Southeast
Europe. His full name is Christopher Columbus and the place that he discovered was
North America. He founded the Indians here, who were exiled 16,000 years ago from
India. They are Original people.
50. 4. Why did we run Yacub and his made devil from the root of civilization over the
hot Arabia desert into the caves of West Asia as they now call it Europe? What is the
meaning of EU and ROPE? How long ago? What did the devil bring with him? What kind
of life did the devil live then and how long before Musa came to teach the devil of their
forgotten trick knowledge?
ANS: Because they started making trouble among the righteous people, accusing the
righteous people of telling lies, causing them to fight and kill one another. Yacub was
an
original black man and was the father of the devil, he taught the devil to do this
devilishment. The root of civilization is in Arabia at the Holy City of Mecca, which
means
where knowledge and wisdom of the original man started when the planet was first
founded. We ran the devil over the hot Arabian Desert; we took from them everything
except their language and made them walk every step of the way. It was 2,200 miles. He
went savage and lived in the caves of Europe, EU means hillsides and ROPE means the
rope to bind in. It was 6,019 years ago. Musa came 2,000 years later and taught them
how to live a respectful life. How to build a home for himself and some forgotten trick
knowledge that Yacub taught him, which was devilishment, telling lies, stealing and
how
to master the original man. Musa was a half-original man, a prophet that was predicted
by the 23 scientist in the year one, 15,019 years ago.
51. 5. Why did we take Jerusalem from the devil? How long ago?


--- PAGE 11 ---
ANS: Because one of our righteous brothers, who was a prophet by the name Jesus,
was buried there and they used his name to shield their dirty religion, which is called
Christianity, also to deceive the people, so they would believe in him. Jesus teaching
was not Christianity. It was Freedom, Justice and Equality. Jerusalem is in Palestine in
Asia Minor. Jerusalem is a name given by the Jews, which means founded in peace,
and it was built first by the original man, which was called Jebus, Salem, and Oriel. We
took the city from the devil about 750 years ago.
52. 6. Why does the devil teach and keep our people illiterate?
ANS: So that he can use them for a tool, and a slave. He keeps them blind to
themselves, so that he could master them, Illiterate means ignorant.
53. 7. Why does the devil call our people African?
ANS: To make our people of North America believe that the people of that continent
are
the only people they have and are all savages. He brought a trading post in the jungles
of that continent. The original people live on that continent. They are the ones who
strayed away from civilization and they are living a jungle life. The original people call
this continent Asia, but the devil calls it Africa to try to divide them. He wants us to
think
that we are all different.
54. 8. Why does the devil keep our own people apart from their social equality?
ANS: Because he does not want us to know, how filthy he is in all his affairs. He is
afraid, because when we learn about him we will run him from among us. Social mean
to
advocate a society of men or group of men for one common cause, Equality means to
be equal in everything.
55. 9. Why does Muhummed make the devil study from 35-50 years before he can call
himself a Muslim Son and wear the greatest and only flag of the universe? In addition,
he must add a sword on the upper part of the holy and greatest universal flag of Islam.
ANS: So that he could clean himself, up. A Muslim does not love the devil regardless to
how long he studies. After he has devoted 35-50 years to try to learn and do like the
original man. He could come and do trading among us and we would not kill him as
quick as we would the other devils, that is who have not gone under this study. After he
goes through with this labor from 35-50 years, we permit him to wear our Holy flag,
which is the Sun, Moon, and the Stars; he must add the sword on the upper part. The
sword is an emblem of Justice and it was used by the original man in Muhammad’s
time.
Thus, it was placed on the upper part of the flag, so that the devil can always see it, so
he will keep it in mind that anytime that he reveals the secret, we gave him this chance,
so that he could clean himself up and come among us, his head would be taken off by
the sword. The Holy flag of Islam is the greatest and only flag known. In the universe is
everything the Sun, Moon, and the Stars. They are planets. Planets are some-thing that
is grown or made from the beginning and Holy is some-thing that has not been diluted,
mixed, or tampered with in any form.


--- PAGE 12 ---
56. 10. Why does Muhummed and any Muslim murder the devil? What is the duty of
each Muslim in regards to four devils? What reward does a Muslim receive by
presenting the four devils at one time?
ANS: Because the devil is 100% weak and wicked and will not keep and obey the laws
of Islam. His ways and actions are like those of a snake of the grafted type. Therefore,
Muhummed learned that he could not reform the devil, so they had to be murdered,
because they know he is a snake and if he were allowed to live, he would sting someone
else. Each Muslim was required to bring in four devils and by having and presenting
four
at one time, his reward was a button to wear on the lapel of his coat, also free
transportation to the Holy City of Mecca to see their brother Muhummed.
57. 11. Have you not heard that your word shall be bond regardless to whom or what?
ANS: yes, my word is bond, bond is life, and I will give my life before my word shall
fail.
58. 12. What is the meaning of F.O.I.?
ANS: The fruit of Islam: This is the name given to the military training of men that
belong
to Islam in North America.
59. 13. What is the meaning of C-A-P-T-A-I-N and L-I-E-U-T-E-N-A-N-T?
ANS: Captain and Lieutenant. The duty of a captain is to give the orders to the
lieutenant, the lieutenant's duty is to teach and, train the private soldier.
60. 14. What is the meaning of M.G.T. and G.C.C.?
ANS: Muslim Girl Training and General Civilization Class. This is the name given to
the
women and girls of Islam in North America, teaching them: How to keep a home, How
to
raise their children, How to keep a husband, sew, cock and in general, how to act at
home and abroad. Our prophet W.D. Fard named these training units.


--- PAGE 13 ---
LOST FOUND MUSLIM LESSON NO. 2
61. 1. Who made the Holy Qur’an or Bible? How long ago? And, will you tell us why
does ISLAM renew its history every 25,000 years?
ANS: The original man who is Allah the SUPREME BEING, Blackman from Asia,
makes the Holy Qur’an or Bible. The Qur’an will expire in the year 25,000, 9,080 years
from the date of this writing. The nation of ISLAM is all wise and does everything right
and exact. The planet earth, which is the home of ISLAM, is approximately 25,000
miles
in circumference. Therefore, the wise man of the east "Blackman" makes history or
Qur’an to equal his home circumference, a year to every mile. Thus every time his
history last 25,000 years he renews it for another 25,000.
62. 2. What is the circumference of the planet earth?
ANS: 24,896 miles, approximately 25,000 miles.
63. 3. What is the diameter of the planet earth?
ANS: 7,926 miles.
64. 4. What is the total square mileage of the planet earth?
ANS: 196,940,000 square miles.
65. 5. What are the total square mileage of land, and the total square mileage of water?
ANS: 57,255,000 square miles of land, and 139,685,000 square miles of water.
66. 6. What is the total weight of our planet?
ANS: Six sex tillion tons a unit followed by 21 ciphers.
67. 7. How fast does our planet travel?
ANS: 1,037 1/3 miles per hour.
68. 8. What makes rain, hail, snow, and earthquake?
ANS: The earth is approximately covered under water approximately 3/4 of its surface.
The sun and moon having attracting power on our planet, while it is traveling at that
terrific speed of 1,037 1/3 miles per hour on its way around the sun. The sun draws this
water up into the earth rotation, which is called gravitation in fine mist that the naked
eye
can hardly detect. As this mist ascends higher and increasing with other mist of water in
a
different current of the atmosphere until she becomes heavier than gravitation, then
she
distills back to the earth in the form of drops of water or drops of ice, which depends
on
how heavy the mist was and the current of the air she was in. There are some layers of
currents real cold and warm and some very swift and changeable. When this mist
strikes
a cold current it becomes solid ice in small round drops in form, or in a light fluffy
form,


--- PAGE 14 ---
which is called snow. This water is never drawn above 6 miles from the earth surface
by
the sun and moon, the reason it rains back on our planet, is because the water cannot
get
out of the earth atmosphere with its high speed of rotating around the sun makes it
impossible. Earthquakes are caused by the SON OF MAN experimenting with high
explosive. In fact all that above is caused by the SON OF MAN.
69. 9. Why does the devil teach the 85% that a mystery God brings all this?
ANS: To conceal the true and living God which is the SON OF MAN, and to make
slaves
out of the 85% by keeping him worshipping some-thing he cannot see (invisible) and he
makes himself rich from their labor. The 85% knows that it rain, hail, snow and also
hear
thunder above their heads, but do not try to learn who is causing all this to happen by
letting the 5% teach them, they believe in the 10% on face value.
70, 10. Who is that mystery God?
ANS: There is no mystery God. The SON OF MAN has searched for that mystery God
for trillions of years and was unable to find this so-so-called mystery God. Therefore,
they have agreed that the only God is the SON OF MAN. Therefore, they loose no time
searching for that, which does not exist.
71. 11. Will you set up home and wait for a mystery God to bring you food?
ANS: Emphatically no, me and my people who have been lost from home 379 years,
have tried this so-called mystery God for bread, clothing, and a home, and receive
nothing but hard times, hunger, nakedness and out of doors, also beaten and killed by
the
ones who advocated that kind of God. And, no relief came to us until the SON OF
MAN
came to our aid by the name of our Prophet W.D. Fard.
72. 12. Tell us why does the devil teach that?
ANS: Because he desires to make slaves out of all he can so that he can rob them and
live
in luxury.
73. 13. What brings rain, hail, snow, and earthquakes?
ANS: They continue daily to teach the 85% that all they see and hear such as rain, hail,
snow, and earthquakes comes from that mystery God that no one will be able to see
until
he dies. This is believed by the 85%. The 10% knows that when a man dies that he will
never come back and tell the living whether he lied or not, because the dead is never
known to return from the grave. In all the history of Islam, never revealed anyone
coming
back from a physical death. However, there is a chance for mental death. Because the
lost


--- PAGE 15 ---
found was once dead mentally and many of them recovered from it. However, they
were
not physically dead, only mentally dead.
74. 14. Who is the 85%?
ANS: The uncivilized people, poison, animal eaters, slaves from mental death and
power.
People who do not know the true and living God or their origin in this world, and
worship
that they know not, who are easily lead in the wrong direction, but hard to be lead in
the
right direction.
75. 15. Who is the 10%?
ANS: The rich, slave makers of the poor. Who teaches the poor lies to believe that the
almighty true and living God is a spook and cannot be seen by the physical eye,
otherwise known as the blood suckers of the poor.
76. 16. Who is the 5% of this poor part of the planet earth?
ANS: They are the poor, righteous teachers who do not believe in the teachings of the
10%. Who is all wise and know whom the true and living God is, who teach that the
true
and living God is the son of man, Supreme Being, Blackman from Asia, who teaches
freedom, justice and equality to all human family of the planet earth. Otherwise known
as
civilized people, also Muslim and Muslim sons.
77. 17. What is the meaning of civilization?
ANS: One having knowledge, wisdom, understanding, culture, refinement and is not a
savage in the pursuit of happiness.
78. 18. What is the duty of a civilized person?
ANS: The duty of a civilized person is to teach he who is savage, civilization,
righteousness, and the knowledge of himself and the science of everything in life, love,
peace, and happiness.
79. 19. If a civilized person does not perform his duty, what must be done?
ANS: If a civilized person does not perform his duty, which is teaching civilization to
others, he shall be punished with a severe punishment.
EZEKIEL CHAPTER 3:18
WHEN I SAY UNTO THE WICKED, THOU SHALL SURELY DIE: AND THOU
GIVEST HIM NOT WARNING, NOR SPEAKEST TO WARN THE WICKED FROM
HIS WICKED WAY, TO SAVE HIS LIFE; THE SAME WICKED MAN SHALL DIE
IN HIS INIQUITY: BUT HIS BLOOD WILL I REQUIRE AT THINE HAND.
ST. LUKE CHAPTER 12:47
AND THAT SERVANT, WHICH KNEW HIS LORD'S WILL, AND PREPARED NOT


--- PAGE 16 ---
HIMSELF, NEITHER DID ACCORDING TO HIS WILL, SHALL BE BEATEN WITH
MANY STRIPES.
80. 20. What is the prescribe laws of Islam to a said person of that ability.
ANS: That the civilized is held responsible for the uncivilized and must be punished by
the nation of Islam.
81. 21. Who is the founder of unlike attracts and alike repels?
ANS: An original man, who was a scientist by the name of Yacub, born 20 miles out
side
the Holy City of Mecca, in the year 8,400.
82. 22. How old was the founder?
ANS: When Yacub was six years old, while playing with two pieces of steel, he
discovered that one piece had magnetic in it and one did not. He learned that the piece
with the magnetic attracted the piece without. Then he told his people that when he was
old enough that he would build a nation that would be unlike and he would teach them
and they would rule for 6,000 years.
83. 23. Tell us what did he promise his nation he would do?
ANS: That he would make a devil, graft him from his own people, and teach them
trick-
knowledge and how to rule his people for 6,000 years.
84. 24. What was his idea of making the devil?
ANS: It was predicted of him to make devil 8,400 years, before he was born. So he was
born with a determined idea to make a people to rule for 6,000 years.
85. 25. How long did it take to make a devil?
ANS: 600 years of grafting the devil/ or making him from the black-man.
86. 26. In what year was that?
ANS: It was in the year 8,400, which means from the date of our present history or
Qur’an about 2,000 years before the birth of the prophet Musa.
87. 27. What was the name of the place where the devil was manufactured?
ANS: Pelan the same as PATMOS REVELATION CHAPTER 1:9 an island situated
on
the Aegean Sea.
I JOHN, WHO ALSO AM YOUR BROTHER AND COMPANION IN TRIBULATION,
AND IN THE KINGDOM AND PATIENCE OF JESUS CHRIST, WAS IN THE ISLE
THAT IS CALLED PATMOS, FOR THE WORD OF GOD, AND FOR THE
TESTIMONY OF JESUS CHRIST.
88. 28. What were Yacub's first rules and regulations including all laws enforced while
manufacturing the devil?
ANS: Yacub's first rule was to see that all his followers were healthy strong, and good


--- PAGE 17 ---
breeders, if not he sent them back, and all that was not good in multiplying would
marry
at the age of 16. Next Yacub gave his people law on birth control, which was to be
enforced while manufacturing the devil. Which was to destroy the alike and save the
unlike, which means to kill all the black babies and save the brown babies. This law
was
given to the Doctors, Ministers, Nurses, and Cremators. The Doctors law was to
examine
all that desired to marry must first be qualified by the Doctor, in return, he qualified or
disqualified them to the Ministers. The Ministers who would only marry those that,
were
unalike. The Nurses law was to kill the black babies at birth by sticking a pin in its
head.
Or feed it to some wild beast, and tell its mother a lie that her baby was an angel baby
and it was only taken to heaven, and that some day when she dies he would have
secured
for her a home in heaven. But save all the brown babies and tell its mother that she was
a
lucky mother and that her baby was a holy baby and that she should take good care of
it
and educate it and some day it will grow up to be a great man. All Doctors, Ministers
and
Nurses Yacub put under a death penalty if they failed to carry out the law. Also the
Cremators who would burn the black babies whenever the Nurses bring them, also
death
to anyone who revealed the secret. Yacub also had other rules and regulations, which
are
not being mentioned in this lesson.
89. 29. Tell us why was Yacub successful in all his undertaking?
ANS: Because the people who were his followers follow Yacub law; regardless to what
he told them to do, they did it, if not they paid with their lives for every law they broke.
Yacub did not build prison houses for his people, when one falls victim to the law, the
penalty was death and was enforced on everyone that fell a victim.
90. 30. Tell us what and how the devil is made?
ANS: The devil is made from the original people by grafting and separating the germs.
In
the Blackman’s body there exist two germs, a black germ and a brown germ. Yacub
with
his law on birth control separated the brown germ from the black germ and grafted it
into
white, by destroying the black germ. After following this process for 600 years, the
germ
became white and was no more original, also by thinning the original blood, the germ
became weak and wicked and was no more the same. Thus, this is how Yacub made the
devil.


--- PAGE 18 ---
91. 31. To make the devil, what must you first do?
ANS: To make the devil, one must begin grafting from the original.
92. 32. Tell us the mental and physical power of a real devil?
ANS: The mental power of a real devil is nothing in comparison to that of the original
man. He only has 6 ounces of brain, while the original man has 7 1/2 ounces of brain.
The devil has 6 ounces of brain and they are grafted brain. The devil is weak boned and
weak, because he is grafted from the original. The devils physical power is less than 1/3
that of the original man, therefore, his mental and physical power is much weaker than
the original man.
93. 33. What is a real devil?
ANS: Any grafted man, which is made weak and wicked; or any live grafted germ from
original is devil.
94. 34. Can you reform devil?
ANS; No, all the prophets have tried to reform him devil, but were unable, so they
agreed
that it cannot be done, unless, they grafted him back to the original man, which takes
600
years. So instead of losing time, we have decided to take him off the planet that only
numbers one to every 11 original men.
95. 35. Tell us the exact date of the expiration of the devil's civilization?
ANS: Expired 1914.
96. 36. Tell us the exact number of years, months, and days the devil being birth on our
planet?
ANS: 6,020 years, 72,241 months, 2,197,351 days, at the date of this writing.
97. 37. Tell us why the devil teaches the 85% that God is a righteous unseen being that
exist everywhere?
ANS: Allah is God in the earth and the heavens is just and true and there is not any
unrighteousness in him. But he is not unseen he is seen and heard everywhere, for he is
the all eye seeing.
98. 38. Then why did God make devil?
ANS: To show forth his power, that he is all wise and righteous, that he could make a
devil, which is weak and wicked and give him the power to rule the earth for 6,000
years,
and then destroy the devil in one day without falling a victim to the devil's civilization.
Otherwise, to show and prove that Allah is God, always has been always will be.
99. 39. Tell us would you hope to live to see the Gods take the devil into hell in the very
near future?
ANS: Yes! I fast and pray Allah that I live to see the hereafter, when Allah, in his own
good time takes the devil off our planet.


--- PAGE 19 ---
100. 40. What will be your reward in regards to the destruction of the devil?
ANS: Peace and Happiness. I will give all I have and within my power to this day for
which I have waited 379 years. This lesson number 2, which contains 40 questions, was
given by prophet W.D. Fard and answered by Elijah Muhammad one of the lost-found
in
the wilderness of North America, February 20, 1934.


--- PAGE 20 ---
ACTUAL FACTS
101. 1. The Pacific Ocean covers 68,634,000 sq. miles.
102. 2. The Atlantic Ocean covers 41,340.000 sq. miles.
103. 3. The Indian Ocean covers 29,321,000 sq. miles.
104. 4. Lakes and Rivers cover 1,000,000 sq. miles.
105. 5. Hills and Mountains cover 1,910,000 sq. miles.
106. 6. Deserts cover 14,000,000 sq. miles.
107. 7. Mount Everest 29,141 ft. high.
108. 8. Sound travels at 1,120 ft. per. second.
109. 9. Light travels at the rate of 186,000 miles per second.
110. 10. The Earth is 93,000,000 miles from the sun.
111. 11. 1,760 yds. Equals one mile.
12. The Artic Ocean covers 390,000 sq. miles.
13. There are 12 trillion, 478 billion, 118 million, 400 thousand inches on the planet
earth.
SOLAR FACTS
112. 1. Mercury is 36,000,000 miles from the Sun.
113. 2. Venus is 67,000,000 miles from the Sun.
114. 3. Earth is 93,000,000 miles from the Sun.
115. 4. Mars is 142,000,000 miles from the sun.
116. 5. Jupiter is 483,000,000 miles from the Sun.
117. 6. Saturn is 886,000,000 miles from the Sun.
118. 7. Uranus is 1,781,000,000 miles from the Sun.
119. 8. Neptune is 2,793,000,000 miles from the Sun.
120. 9. Pluto is 3,680,000,000 miles from the Sun.

