=== EXTRACTED TEXT FROM: V.Y Mudimbe-The-Invention-of-Africa.pdf ===
Extraction Method: PyPDFLoader
Total Pages: 255
Timestamp: 2026-01-04T17:32:40.677839
================================================================================


--- PAGE 1 ---
THE INVENTION
OF AFRICA
1


--- PAGE 2 ---
African Systems of Thought
General Editors
Charles S. Bird
Ivan Karp
Contributing Editors
Thomas O. Beidelman
James Fernandez
Luc de Heusch
John Middleton
Roy Willis
2


--- PAGE 3 ---
THE INVENTION 
OF AFRICA
Gnosis, Philosophy, and the 
Order of Knowledge
V.Y.MUDIMBE
INDIANA UNIVERSITY PRESS
Bloomington and Indianapolis
JAMES CURREY
London
3


--- PAGE 4 ---
© 1988 by V. Y. Mudimbe
All rights reserved
No part of this book may be reproduced or utilized in any form or by
any means, electronic or mechanical, including photocopying and
recording, or by any information storage and retrieval system, without
permission in writing from the publisher. The Association of American
University Presses’ Resolution on Permissions constitutes the only
exception to this prohibition.
Manufactured in the United States of America
Library of Congress Cataioging-in-Publication Data
Mudimbe, V. Y., 1941-
The invention of Africa.
(African systems of thought)
Bibliography: p.
Includes index.
I. Philosophy, African, 2. Knowledge, Theory of.
I. Title. II. Series.
B53IO.M84 1988    199'.6      87-4532.4
ISBN 0-253-33126-9
ISBN 0-253-20468-2 (pbk.)
2 3 4 5 6 94 93 92 91 90
British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data
Mudimbe, V. Y., 1941-
The invention of Africa : gnosis, philosophy, and the order of 
knowledge. - (African systems of thought).
1. African philosophy
I. Title II. Series
199'.6
ISBN 0-85255-203-3 (paper)
4


--- PAGE 5 ---
To the Memory of James S. Coleman
Mors ipsa beatior inde est, quod per
cruciamina leti via panditur ardua iustis, et ad 
astra doloribus itur.
- Pridentius, Hymnus Circa Exequias 
Defuncti
5


--- PAGE 6 ---
6


--- PAGE 7 ---
CONTENTS
INTRODUCTION IX
I. Discourse of Power and Knowledge of Otherness 1
II. Question of Method 24
III. The Power of Speech 44
IV. E. W. Blyden’s Legacy and Questions 98
V. The Patience of Philosophy 135
Conclusion: The Geography of a Discourse 187
APPENDIX, ETHIOPIAN SOURCES OF KNOWLEDGE 201
BIBLIOGRAPHY 205
INDEX 233
7


--- PAGE 8 ---
8


--- PAGE 9 ---
INTRODUCTION
This book evolved accidentally, as a result of an invitation to prepare a survey of 
African philosophy.  Strictly speaking,  the notion of African  philosophy refers  to 
contributions of Africans practicing philosophy within the defined framework of the 
discipline and its historical tradition (Horton, 1976; Hountondji, 1977). It is only 
metaphorically, or, at best, from a historicist perspective, that one would extend the 
notion of philosophy to African traditional systems of thought, considering them as 
dynamic processes in which concrete experiences are integrated into an order of 
concepts and discourses (Ladrière, 1979:14-15). 1 have thus preferred to speak of 
African gnosis. J. Fabian used the notion of gnosis in his analysis of a charismatic 
movement (1969). In this book, the wider frame seems better suited to the range of 
problems addressed, all of which are based on a preliminary question: to what extent 
can one speak of an African knowledge, and in what sense? Etymologically, gnosis is 
related to gnosko, which in the ancient Greek means "to know."
Specifically,  gnosis  means  seeking  to  know,  inquiry,  methods  of  knowing, 
investigation, and even acquaintance with someone. Often the word is used in a more 
specialized  sense,  that  of higher  and esoteric  knowledge,  and thus it refers  to a 
structured, common, and conventional knowledge, but one strictly under the control 
of specific procedures for its use as well as Transmission. Gnosis is, consequently, 
different from doxa or opinion, and, on the other hand, cannot be confused with 
episteme, understood as both science and general intellectual configuration.
The title is thus a methodological tool: it embraces the question of what is and 
what is not African philosophy and also orients the debate in another direction by 
focusing on conditions of possibility of philosophy as part of the larger body of 
knowledge on Africa called "Africanism." I use this central notion of conditions of 
possibility in accordance with a recent tradition in which Michel Foucault could, for 
example,  define  his  own  intellectual  ambition  in  terms  of  its  dependence  on 
alterations  that  jean  Hyppolite  introduced  into  Hegelian  philosophy  (Foucault, 
11982-:235-37).  What  the  notion  of  conditions  of  possibility  indicates  is  that 
discourses have not only sociohistorical origins but also epistemological contexts. It 
is the latter which make them possible and which can also account for them in an 
essential way.
I shall be dealing with discourses on African societies, cultures, and peoples as 
signs of something else. I would like to interrogate their modalities, significance, or 
strategies  as  a  means  of  understanding  the  type  of  knowledge  which  is  being 
proposed. In fact, I do not address the classical issues of African anthropology or 
history, the results of which might or might 
9


--- PAGE 10 ---
not mirror an objective African reality. Rather I am looking upstream of the results, 
precisely at what makes them possible, before accepting them as commentary on 
revelation, or restitution, of an African experience.
The book attempts, therefore, a sort of archaeology of African gnosis as a system 
of knowledge in which major  philosophical  questions recently have arisen:  first, 
concerning the form, the content, and the style of "Africanizing" knowledge; second, 
concerning the status of traditional systems of thought and their possible relation to 
the normative genre of knowledge. From the first chapters, which interrogate Western 
images  of  Africa,  through  the  chapters  analyzing  the  power  of  anthropologists, 
missionaries, and ideologists, to the last, on philosophy, I am directly concerned with 
the processes of transformation of types of knowledge.
This orientation has two consequences: on the one hand, an apparent attenuation 
of the originality of African contributions and, on the other, an overemphasis upon 
external procedures, such as anthropological or religious influences. The fact of the 
matter is that, until now, Western interpreters as well as African analysts have been 
using categories and conceptual systems which depend on a Western epistemological 
order. Even  in  the  most  explicitly "Afrocentric"  descriptions,  models  of analysis 
explicitly or implicitly, knowingly or unknowingly, refer to the same order. Does this 
mean that African Weltanschauungen and African traditional systems of thought are 
unthinkable  and  cannot  be  made  explicit  within  the  framework  of  their  own 
rationality? My own claim is that thus far the ways in which they have been evaluated 
and the means used to explain them relate to theories and methods whose constraints, 
rules, and systems of operation suppose a non-African epistemological locus. From 
this viewpoint the claim of some African philosophers such as O. Bimwenyi (1981a) 
and E Eboussi-Boulaga (1981) that they represent an epistemological hiatus should be 
taken seriously. What does this mean for the field of African studies? To what extent 
can their perspectives modify the fact of a silent dependence on a Western episteme? 
Would it then be possible to renew the notion of tradition from, let us say, a radical 
dispersion of African cultures?
These are the most important issues in the debate on African philosophy. They 
oblige me to clarify immediately my position about representatives of African gnosis. 
Who  is  speaking  about  it? Who  has  the  right  and  the credentials  to  produce  it, 
describe it, comment upon it, or at least present opinions about it? No one takes 
offense  if  an  anthropologist  is  questioned.  But  strangely enough,  Africanists-and 
among them anthropologists-have decided to separate the "real" African from the 
westernized African and to rely strictly upon the first. Rejecting this myth of the "man 
in the bush," J. Jahn chose to "turn to those Africans who have their own opinion and 
who will determine the future of Africa: those, in other words, of whom it is said that 
they are trying to revive the African tradition" (Jahn, (1961:16). Yet, Jahn's decision 
seems exaggerated. I would prefer a wider authority: intellectuals' discourses as a 
critical library and, if I could, the experience of rejected 
10


--- PAGE 11 ---
forms of wisdom which are not part of the structures of political power and scientific 
knowledge.
In sum, rather than simply accept the authority of qualified representatives of 
African cultures, I would like to study the theme of the foundations of discourse 
about Africa. It is obvious that in such a subjective work I cannot claim to offer an 
exhaustive report analyzing  all present tendencies or encompassing all within its 
frame.  This  book  is  only  a  critical  synthesis  of  the  complex  questions  about 
knowledge and power in and on Africa.
The presuppositions and hypotheses outlined above indicate a range of theoretical 
alternatives that I have been working on for the last fifteen years. If, from L'Autre 
face du royaume (1973) to L'Odeur du père (1982b) and this contribution, my general 
view has somewhat changed, I believe that my major thesis has remained the same 
with respect to the analogical form of the social sciences and the history of Africanist 
discourse.  These  disciplines  do  not  provide  a  real  comprehension  of  the 
Weltanschauungen studied. Yet one can also say that it is in these very discourses that 
African worlds have been established as realities for knowledge. And today Africans 
themselves read, challenge, rewrite  these discourses as a way of explicating and 
defining  their  culture,  history,  and  being.  It  is  obvious  that  since  its  inception 
Africanism  has  been  producing  its  own  motives  as  well  as  its  objects,  and 
fundamentally commenting upon its own being, while systematically promoting a 
gnosis. From this gnosis ultimately arose both African discourses on otherness and 
ideologies of alterity of which négritude, black personality, and African philosophy 
might be considered to be the best established in the present-day intellectual history 
of Africa.
Some of my critics (e.g., Mpoyi-Bwatu, 1983; N'Zembele, 1983; Willame, 1976) 
have aggressively urged me  to draw political  implications from my conclusions. 
Others, such as Mouralis (1981, 1984a), have instead thought my project, that of 
dealing with taboo themes, overly ambitious. I only hope that some people would 
agree that the task of bringing philosophy to some of its own limits and metaphors in 
social  science,  and  that  of  questioning  philosophy's  ambiguous  contacts  with 
unphilosophical  discourses,  justify my  commitment  not  to  philosophy,  nor  to  an 
invented Africa, but to what it essentially means to be an African and a philosopher 
today. I am grateful to L. Kaumba whose phenomenological study of the significance 
of  identity  in  my  literary  work  (Kaumba,  1986)  forced  me  to  reevaluate  the 
implications  of  my  theses  about  the  Same  and  the  Other  in  philosophical 
anthropology. Yet his critique meets my fundamental beliefs: identity and alterity are 
always given to others, assumed by an I- or a We-subject, structured in multiple 
individual histories, and, at any rate, expressed or silenced according to personal 
desires vis-à-vis an episteme.
This also implies that from a methodological viewpoint I think, as Foucault put it, 
that "discourse in general and scientific discourse in particular, is so complex a reality 
that we not only can but should approach it at different levels and with different 
methods" (11973: xiv). For this essay I have 
11


--- PAGE 12 ---
chosen  an archaeological  perspective  that  allows  me  to  address  the  issue of  the 
progressive constitution of an African order of knowledge. However, for reasons 
having  to  do  with  the  bizarre  nature  of  some  of  the  sources  usedmainly  the 
anthropological ones-1 have preferred not to distinguish the epistemological level of 
knowledge from the archaeological level of knowledge.
I am deeply indebted to the joint Committee on African Studies of the Social 
Science Research Council  in conjunction  with the American Council  of Learned 
Societies. They invited me to write this study and gave me the necessary facilities. A 
briefer and slightly different form of chapters three and five was published by the 
African Studies Review in 1985.
The bibliography at the end reveals my intellectual debt to many works and 
scholars. In this bibliography I present books I have indeed used. I did not think it 
important  to  include  such  authors  as  Aristotle,  Descartes,  Diderot,  Rousseau,  or 
Voltaire to whom I sometimes refer. In the same manner, it did not seem useful to 
include a number of narratives and texts by explorers, colonial theorists, and popes. 
They generally express a normative doxa and its submission to an episteme. As such, 
they reveal the development of anthropological and philosophical theories. As to 
non-English books I quote, I have often-but not always-consulted the originals, even 
when the existing translations were excellent. Yet apart from stated exceptions, I 
generally make reference to English versions when available. If an English edition is 
not mentioned in the bibliography, the translation is my own.
I must express explicitly my gratitude to some friends and colleagues without 
whom this book would, perhaps, not have been written, or certainly not yet finished: 
Elizabeth Boyi for her encouragement; Christie Agawu for her editorial assistance; 
Kofi  Agawu,  Paul  Riesman,  and  Ivan  Karp  for  their  critical  evaluations.  I  am 
particularly grateful to Arnd Bohm, Walter Michener, David Newbury, and Mildred 
Mortimer,  whose  patient  reading  of  the  entire  manuscript  and  critical  comments 
helped  me  clarify  many  points  and  translate  my  Gallic  style  into  the  English 
language. I extend my gratitude to Haverford College and in particular to Robert 
Stevens, Robert Gavin, Jr., Wyatt MacGaffey, and Judy Young for their support and 
generosity. Finally I have to express my special thanks to Shirley Averill for her 
useful suggestions, the typing of many drafts of the manuscript, and her unfailing 
patience.  Roberta  L.  Diehl  and  Janet  Rabinowitch,  my  editors,  deserve  grateful 
acknowledgment for their advice, support, and efficiency. Needless to say, the ideas, 
hypotheses,  and  interpretations  put  forth  in  this  book  are  completely  my 
responsibility.
12


--- PAGE 13 ---
THE INVENTION 
OF AFRICA
13


--- PAGE 14 ---
I
DISCOURSE OF POWER AND 
KNOWLEDGE OF OTHERNESS
Colonizing Structure and Marginality
Lord have pity on us! . . . “The human race?” 
Phyllis exclaimed, stressing the second word 
in her astonishment. “That’s what it says here,” 
Jinn assured her. “Don’t start off by 
interrupting me.”
P BOULLE, Planet of the Apes.
The scramble for Africa, and the most active period of colonization, lasted less than a 
century.  These  events,  which  involved  the  greater  part  of  the  African  continent, 
occurred between the late nineteenth and the mid-twentieth centuries. Although in 
African  history the  colonial  experience  represents  but  a  brief  moment  from the 
perspective of today, this moment is still charged and controversial, since, to say the 
least, it signified a new historical form and the possibility of radically new types of 
discourses on African traditions and cultures. One might think that this new historical 
form has meant, from its origins, the negation of two contradictory myths; namely, 
the “Hobbesian picture of a pre-European Africa, in which there was no account of 
Time; no Arts; no Letters; no Society; and which is worst of all, continued fear, and 
danger of violent death”; and “the Rousseauian picture of an African golden age of 
perfect liberty, equality and fraternity” (Hodgkin, 1957:174-75).
Although generalizations are of course dangerous, colonialism and colonization 
basically mean organization, arrangement. The two words derive from the latin word 
colére, meaning to cultivate or to design. Indeed the historical colonial experience 
does not and obviously cannot reflect the peaceful connotations of these words. But it 
can be admitted that the colonists (those settling a region), as well as the colonialists 
(those  exploiting  a  territory by dominating  a  local  majority)  have  all  tended  to 
organize and transform non-European areas into fundamentally European constructs.
14


--- PAGE 15 ---
I would suggest that in looking at this process, it is possible to use three main 
keys  to  account  for  the  modulations  and  methods  representative  of  colonial 
organization:  the  procedures  of  acquiring,  distributing,  and  exploiting  lands  in 
colonies; the policies of domesticating natives; and the manner of managing ancient 
organizations  and  implementing  new  modes  of  production.  Thus,  three 
complementary hypotheses and actions emerge: the domination of physical space, the 
reformation of natives' minds, and the integration of local economic histories into the 
Western perspective. These complementary projects constitute what might be called 
the  colonizing  structure,  which  completely  embraces  the  physical,  human,  and 
spiritual aspects of the colonizing experience (see, e.g., Christopher, 1984: z7-87). 
This structure clearly also indicates the projected metamorphosis envisioned, at great 
intellectual cost, by ideological and theoretical texts, which from the last quarter of 
the nineteenth century to the 1950s have proposed programs for “regenerating” the 
African space and its inhabitants.
A. Césaire thinks that
the great historical tragedy of Africa has been not so much that it was too late in making contact 
with the rest of the world, as the manner in which that contact was brought about; that Europe 
began to propagate at a time when it had fallen into the hands of the most unscrupulous financiers 
and captains of industry. (Césaire, 1972-:23)
He  refers  to  the  second  part  of  the  nineteenth  century,  emphasizing  the 
coexistence of “imperialist” ideology, economic and political processes for extending 
control  over  African  space,  and  capitalist  institutions  which  ultimately  led  to 
dependence and underdevelopment (see also Mazrui, 1974). In a recent book, D. K. 
Fieldhouse writes that “only a dogmatist would attempt to state categorically that 
colonialism  was  either  totally  inconsistent  with  economic  development  in  the 
dependencies or, alternatively, that it was the best possible medium for stimulating 
their growth. Colonialism was not sufficiently consistent over time to justify any such 
sweeping  assertions,  nor were  its objectives  sufficiently coherent  to achieve  any 
particular  result”  (1981:103).  Thus  colonialism has  been  some kind  of  historical 
accident, a “largely unplanned and, as it turned out, transient phase in the evolving 
relationship between more and less developed parts of the world” (1981:49). This 
accident, on the whole, according to this view, was not the worst thing that could have 
happened to the black continent.
Essentially, the argument is not new. It has a history that goes back' to the debate 
of the early decades of this century. In his book, Imperialism: A Study, J. A. Hobson 
linked the scramble for Africa to capitalism and capitalist search for higher profits 
from colonial conquests. For J. A. Schumpeter, in 1919, colonialism as well as its 
cause, imperialism, did not obey logic. It was “non-rational and irrational purely 
instinctual inclinations toward war and conquest” that guided “objectless tendencies 
toward forcible
15


--- PAGE 16 ---
expansion, without definite, utilitarian limits” (Schumpeter, 1951:83). Against the 
Leninist theme of Imperialism, the Highest Stage of Capitalism (1917), he stated that 
“a purely capitalist world offers no fertile soil to imperialist impulses . . . capitalism is 
by nature anti-imperialist” (1951:96). And in a voluminous document full of statistics, 
The  Balance  Sheets  o  f  Imperialism  (1936),  Grover  Clark  demonstrated  that 
colonialism was not only economically irrational but also ruinous for the colonial 
powers.
On the opposite side, at the risk of being labeled dogmatists, Marxist interpreters 
accept the essentials of Lenin's thesis. The contention of neo-Marxists such as Samir 
Amin,  Paul  Baran,  Andre  Gunder-Frank,  and  Immanuel  Wallerstein  is  that  if 
colonialism was inconsistent with economic development, it was at least, since its 
inception, quite consistent with its own economic interests and objectives.
Accordingly, colonialism should have produced a body of knowledge on the 
means of exploiting dependencies (Rodney, 1981). It should also have produced a 
kind of empirical technique for implementing structural distortions by positing four 
main political propositions: first, priority given-to the industrial revolution over the 
agricultural  revolution;  second,  the  simultaneous  promotion  of  all  branches  of 
industry with a preferential approach to heavy industry; third, emphasis on tertiary 
and service activities; fourth, preference for exports to the detriment of the total 
economic system (Amin, 1973). The outcome of these policies was the process of 
underdevelopment initiated everywhere colonialism occurred. This process can be 
summed up in three points: First, the capitalist world system is such that parts of the 
system always develop at the expense of other parts, either by trade or by the transfer 
of surpluses. Second, the underdevelopment of dependencies is not only an absence 
of development, but also an organizational structure created under colonialism by 
bringing non-Western territory into the capitalist world. Third, despite their economic 
potential,  dependencies  lack  the  structural  capacity  for  autonomy  and  sustained 
growth, since their economic fate is largely determined by the developed countries 
(Amin, 1974; Gunder-Frank, 1969; Wallerstein, 1979). From this last contention, 
some theorists have quickly hypothesized that if Japan has escaped the predicament 
of underdevelopment, it is because it is the only non-Western country to have escaped 
colonialism (Bigo, 1974:32, 60).
It seems impossible to make any statement about colonialism without being a 
dogmatist,  particularly  where  economic  organization  and  growth  are  concerned. 
Different as they are in form and intention, the Marxist and peripheral theories have 
nevertheless the same focus: overseas territory, totally reorganized and submitted to a 
Western model (Mommsen, 1983). The first theory considers colonial imperialism as 
a  calculated  and  inevitable  culmination  of  capitalism. If  the  latter  discounts  the 
planned aspect of colonialism, it still assumes the phenomenon to be a consequence 
of European industrialization and development, somehow bound to expand overseas. 
Whatever theory one accepts, the application remains the same, leading
16


--- PAGE 17 ---
inevitably to what I have called the colonizing structure responsible for producing 
marginal societies, cultures, and human beings (Emmanuel, 1969; Bairoch, 1971). 
Therefore, for the purpose of clarity further on, let me make clear the dichotomy that 
this structure creates and which is a sign of what I. Sachs calls “europeocentrism.” It 
is a model which
dominates our thought and given its projection on the world scale by the expansion of capitalism 
and  the  colonial  phenomenon,  it  marks  contemporary  culture  imposing  itself  as  a  strongly 
conditioning model for some and forced deculturation for others. (Sachs, 1971:22; quoted by Bigo, 
1974:2-3, n.3)
Because of the colonializing structure, a dichotomizing system has emerged, and 
with it a great number of current paradigmatic oppositions have developed: traditional 
versus modern; oral versus written and printed; agrarian and customary communities 
versus  urban  and  industrialized  civilization;  subsistence  economies  versus  highly 
productive economies. In Africa a great deal of attention is generally given to the 
evolution implied and promised by the passage from the former paradigms to the 
latter  (Mudimbe,  1980).  This  presupposed  jump  from  one  extremity 
(underdevelopment) to the other (development) is in fact misleading. By emphasizing 
the formulation of techniques of economic change, the model tends to neglect a 
structural mode inherited from colonialism. Between the two extremes there is an 
intermediate, a diffused space in which social and economic events define the extent 
of  marginality (Bigo,  1974:2-0;  Shaw,  1[985:33-36).  At  the  economic  level,  for 
example, if  the relatively low productivity of traditional  processes of production 
(formerly adapted to the then-existing markets and range of trade and exchanges) has 
been disrupted by a new division of labor which depends upon international markets, 
then  transformation  has  meant  a  progressive  destruction  of  traditional  realms  of 
agriculture and crafts (Meillassoux, 1975: 115). As a second example, one could 
regard the social disintegration of African societies and the growing urban proletariat 
as  results  of  a  destabilization  of  customary  organizations  by  an  incoherent 
establishment of new social arrangements and institutions (Turnbull, 1962; Memmi, 
1966; Mair, 1975). Finally, if at the cultural and religious levels, through schools, 
churches, press, and audio-visual media the colonializing enterprise diffused new 
attitudes which were contradictory and richly complex models in terms of culture, 
spiritual  values,  and  their  transmission,  it  also  broke  the  culturally  unified  and 
religiously integrated schema of most African traditions (Bimwenyi, 1981a). From 
that moment on the forms and formulations of the colonial culture and its aims were 
somehow the means of trivializing the whole traditional mode of life and its spiritual 
framework. The potential and necessary transformations meant that the mere presence 
of this new culture was a reason for the rejection of unadapted persons and confused 
minds.
17


--- PAGE 18 ---
Marginality  designates  the  intermediate  space  between  the  so-called  African 
tradition and the projected modernity of colonialism. It is apparently an urbanized 
space in which, as S. Amin noted, “vestiges of the past, especially the survival of 
structures that are still living realities (tribal ties, for example), often continue to hide 
the new structures (ties based on class, or on groups defined by their position in the 
capitalist system)” (1974:377). This space reveals not so much that new imperatives 
could achieve a jump into modernity, as the fact that despair gives this intermediate 
space its precarious pertinence and, simultaneously, its dangerous importance. As P 
Bigo put it recently:
The young nations  rightly fear  seeing their original world swallowed up in the whirlpools of 
industrial society and disappear forever, somewhat like animal species we try with difficulty and 
often in vain to protect against the invasion of technical man. (Bigo, 1974:23)
There  is  no  doubt  that  direct  or  indirect  colonialism  always  provokes  in  the  countries  that 
experience it cultural constraint, a contamination the more profound as it is hidden. Lifestyles and 
modes of thinking of the dominant nations tend to impose themselves on the dominated nations. 
Morever, they are accepted, even sought after. Models spring up, alienating factors for the people 
who adopt them. (Bigo, 1974:24)
At any rate, this intermediary space could be viewed as the major signifier of 
underdevelopment. It reveals the strong tension between a modernity that often is an 
illusion of development, and a tradition that sometimes reflects a poor image of a 
mythical past. It also  unveils the  empirical evidence of this tension  by showing 
concrete  examples  of  developmental  failures  such  as  demographic  imbalance, 
extraordinarily  high  birth  rates,  progressive  disintegration  of  the  classic  family 
structure,  illiteracy,  severe  social  and  economic  disparities,  dictatorial  regimes 
functioning  under  the  cathartic  name  of  democracy,  the  breakdown  of  religious 
traditions, the constitution of syncretic churches, etc. (Bairoch, 1971; Bigo, 1974).
In general, troubled by such confusion, social scientists prefer to plead for a 
reassessment of programs of modernization. No doubt many theories are still to be 
proposed and plans to be made. Yet one may already understand that this marginal 
space has been a great problem since the beginning of the colonializing experience; 
rather than being a step in the imagined “evolutionary process,” it has been the locus 
of  paradoxes  that  called  into  question  the  modalities  and  implications  of 
modernization in Africa.
Discursive Formations and Otherness
It is certain that the learned Antelle, without 
being a misanthrope, was not interested at all 
18


--- PAGE 19 ---
in human beings. He would often declare that 
he did not expect much from them anymore….
P BOUILLE, Planet of the Apes
The colonializing structure, even in its most extreme manifestations-such as the 
crisis of South Africa (see, e.g., Seidman, 1985)-might not be the only explanation for 
Africa's present-day marginality. Perhaps this marginality could, more essentially, be 
understood  from the  perspective  of  wider  hypotheses  about  the  classification  of 
beings  and  societies.  It  would  be  too  easy  to  state  that  this  condition,  at  least 
theoretically, has been a consequence of anthropological discourses. Since Turgot 
(who in the 1750s first classified languages and cultures according to “whether the 
peoples [are] hunters, shepherds, or husbandmen” [1913-1923, 1:172] and ultimately 
defined  an  ascending  path  from savagery to  commercial  societies),  non-Western 
marginality has been a sign both of a possible absolute beginning and of a primitive 
foundation of conventional history. Rather than retracing an already too well-known 
evolutionary hallucination (Duchet, 1971; Hodgen, 1971), let us take a different angle 
by examining  both  the  issues  derived  from  a  fifteenth-century painting  and  the 
allocation of an “African object” to nineteenth=century anthropology.
Commenting upon Las Meninas of Velasquez, M. Foucault writes: “the painter is 
standing a little back from his canvas. He is glancing at his model; perhaps he is 
considering whether to add some finishing touch, though it is also possible that the 
first stroke has not yet been made . . .” (1973:3). The painter is at one side of the 
canvas working or meditating on how to depict his models. Once the painting is 
finished, it becomes both a given and a reflection of what made it possible. And 
Foucault  thinks  that  the  order  of  Las  Meninas  seems  to  be  an  example  of  “a 
representation [which] undertakes to represent itself . . . in all its elements, with its 
images, the eyes to which it is offered, the faces it makes visible, the gestures that call 
it into being.” Yet in the amazing complexity of this painting there is remarkable 
absence:  “the  person  it  resembles  and  the  person  in  whose  eyes  it  is  only  a 
resemblance” (Foucault, 1973:16).
Now let us consider Hans Burgkmair's painting Exotic Tribe. Is the painter sitting 
back contemplating his exotic models? How many? It is not even certain that a model 
is  present  in  the  room  where  Burgkmair  is  thinking  about  ways  of  subsuming 
particular versions of human beings. The year is 1508. Miter is still alive. Burgkmair 
is by then a respected master of the new school of Augsburg he has founded. He 
would like to please the Fuggers and Welsers and has agreed to illustrate Bartolomdus 
Springer's  book  on  his  travels  overseas  (Kunst,  1967).  He  has  carefully  read 
Springer's diary, has probably studied some clumsy pencil or pen-and-ink sketches, 
and has decided to draw six pictures of “primitives.”
The first picture of the series seems to represent a family. Let us imagine 
19


--- PAGE 20 ---
the  painter  at  work.  He  has  just  read  Springer's  description  of his  voyage,  and, 
possibly on the basis of some sketches, he is trying to create an image of blacks in 
“Gennea.” Perhaps he has decided to use a model, presumably white but strongly 
built. The painter is staring at the pale body, imagining schemes to transform it into a 
black entity. The model has become a mirror through which the painter evaluates how 
the norms of similitude and his own creativity would impart both a human identity 
and a racial difference to his canvas. Perhaps the artist is already at work. Yet he has 
to  stop  regularly,  walk  around  the  model,  leave  the  luminous  space  before  the 
window, and retire into a discreet corner. His gaze addresses a point which is a 
question:  how  to  superimpose  the  African  characteristics  described  in  Springer's 
narrative onto the norms of the Italian contrapposto? If he succeeds, the painting 
should  be,  in  its  originality,  a  celebration  and  a  reminder  of  the  natural  link 
connecting human beings and, at the same time, an indication of racial or cultural 
differences. It should bear witness to the truth of similitudes, analogies, and possibly 
even the violence of antipathy. At any rate, Kunst notes that
The nude African depicted from behind conforms to the classical rule of contraposto expressed in 
the compensatory balance of symmetrical parts of the body in movement: one shoulder leaning on 
one leg and the other, raised above the free leg. One guesses that this nude man was copied from a 
classic model to which the artist gave characteristics, jewelry and swords, of an exotic people still 
strongly attached to nature. (Kunst, 1967:19-20)
It  is  easy to  dismiss my concern  about  similitude  in  this  particular  creative 
process.  Am  I  not  projecting  a  twentieth-century  perspective  onto  the  pictorial 
techniques of the early sixteenth century? The structure of figures is there in the first 
small painting, treated in a typical way. The fuss about similitude might just be, after 
all, only a contemporary hypothesis about the process of establishing links between 
beings and things from our present viewpoint. Yet it is possible to look for issues 
stemming from Burgkmair's representation. In effect, we can describe his artistic 
filiation  and  his  dependence  upon  the  classic  ideals  of  the  Renaissance  (Kunst, 
1967:2-o). We can also compare the principles of his technique with those apparent in 
some contemporary works directly or indirectly dealing with black figures, such as 
Erasmus Grasser's Moor Dancers (1480), Hieronymus Bosch's Garden of Delights 
(1500), Katleen the Moor Woman (1521) by Albrecht Dürer, and at the very end of 
the century, Cornelisz van Haarlem's Batseba (1594). Speculating about or analyzing 
the contrasts between white and black figures in these paintings, one could certainly 
search for a vision which refers to historically conventional explanations-for example, 
the sense of the characteristics and “the idea of design, that is to say, of expression by 
means of the pure disposition of contours and masses, and by the perfection and 
ordering of linear rhythm” (Fry, 1940:165). The complex play of colors in harmony 
and opposition, the order of shades between the white and the black, are
20


--- PAGE 21 ---
obviously based on such intellectual and conscious references. But does not our 
understanding of the colorful economies of canvases refer, in a very insistent manner, 
to invisible traces?
The contrasts between black and white tell a story which probably duplicates a 
silent but powerful epistemological configuration. Ex hypothesi it might simply be a 
similitude interplay: “Convenientia, aemulatio, analogy, and sympathy tell us how the 
world must fold upon itself, duplicate itself, reflect itself, or form a chain with itself 
so that things can resemble one another. They tell us what the paths of similitude are 
and the directions they take; but not where it is, how one sees it, or by what mark it 
may be recognized” (Foucault, 1973:23-24).
Let us return to Burgkmair's finished painting. The three black figures-a boy, a 
man, a seated woman with a baby pressed to her breast-have the right proportions to 
one another and to the wider context. All are naked and have either bracelets around 
their arms or 4 string around their necks, clear signs that they belong to a “savage” 
universe (Kunst, 1967:20). The little boy is dancing, his oversized head turned toward 
the sky. At the center of the canvas, the man, presented in clear, strong lines, is staring 
at a faraway horizon, brandishing an arrow with his left hand and holding two other 
arrows in his right hand. He incarnates power, not only because he occupies the 
central place in the painting, but also because he is the most well-defined signifier in 
.this scene. He is the locus defining the relationship between the boy at his left and 
the woman at his right, depicted with both a touch of hieratic sense and a slightly 
instinctual force. At the right, the woman with the baby is seated on a trunk. She 
seems to be staring pensively at the pelvic area of the man. The curves of her body 
are canonically executed.
The whole picture, in its simplicity and in the balanced rhythms of its lines, 
seems a truly charming and decorative painting. Yet what it really expresses is a 
discursive order. The structure of the figures, as well as the meaning of the nude 
bodies, proclaim the virtues of resemblances: in order to designate Springer's blacks, 
the painter has represented blackened whites. This was not rare during the sixteenth 
and the seventeenth centuries, as a great number of the drawings of the period reveal. 
That is the case for example, of the fifth picture in Filippo Pigafetta's 1591 edition of 
his Relatione del Reame di Congo, representing three Italianized African women, and 
that of the African king in the frontispiece of J. Ogilby's 1670 book on Africa. What is 
important in Burgkmair's painting, as well as in similar drawings, is their double 
representation.
The first, whose objective is to assimilate exotic bodies into sixteenthcentury 
Italian  painting  methodology,  reduces  and  neutralizes  all  differences  into  the 
sameness signified by the white norm, which, let us keep in mind, is more religious 
history than a simple cultural tradition. In concrete language this reference meant a 
“biblical solution to the problem of cultural differences [which] was regarded by most 
men as the best that reason and faith could propose” (Hodgen, 1971:254); that is, the 
same origin for all human
21


--- PAGE 22 ---
beings, followed by geographical diffusion and racial and cultural diversification. 
And it was believed that the Bible stipulated that the African could only be the slave 
of his brethren.
There is another level, a more discreet one. It establishes a second representation 
that unites through similitude and eventually articulates distinctions and separations, 
thus classifying types of identities. Briefly, I can say that in Burgkmair's painting 
there are two representational activities: on the one hand, signs of an epistemological 
order  which,  silently but  imperatively,  indicate  the  processes  of  integrating  and 
differentiating  figures  within  the  normative  sameness;  on  the  other  hand,  the 
excellence  of  an  exotic  picture  that  creates  a  cultural  distance,  thanks  to  an 
accumulation of  accidental  differences,  namely,  nakedness,  blackness,  curly hair, 
bracelets, and strings of pearls.
In  their  arrangements,  these  differences  are  pertinent  signs.  Because  of  the 
fundamental order which they reveal, and to which they bear witness, the virtues of 
resemblance erase physical and cultural variations, while maintaining and positing 
surface differences as meaningful of human complexity. Diego Velasquez's Juan de 
Pareja (1648) still actualizes this integrating reference, whereas major paintings such 
as  Peter  Paul  Rubens's  Study  of  Four  Blacks'  Heads  (16zo),  Rembrandt's  Two 
Negroes (1697), and Hyacinthe Rigaud's Young Black (1697) explicitly express and 
relate to another order. A new epistemological foundation was then functioning in the 
West. Theories of diversification of beings, as well as classificatory tables, explain the 
origins of constructing taxonomies and their objectives (Foucault, 1973:12-5-65). The 
framework of Linnaeus's Systema Naturae (1735) is just one of the paradigmatic 
classifications  of  species  and  varieties  of  Homo  Sapiens  (europaeus,  asiaticus, 
americanus,  afer)  distinguished  according  to  physical  and  temperamental 
characteristics  (Count,  1950:355)- It  would  be  too  easy to  link  it,  upstream,  to 
discursive  formations  about  the  great  chain  of  beings  and  its  hierarchy,  and, 
downstream, first to Blumenbach's craniology and, second, to the general anti-African 
bias of the philosophical and scientific literature of the eighteenth and nineteenth 
centuries (Lyons, 1975:24-85).
Two very different discursive formations-the discovery of African art and the 
constitution of the object of African Studies, that is, the “invention” of Africanism as 
a  scientific  discipline-can  illustrate  the  differentiating  efficiency of  such  general 
classifying  devices  as  pattern  of  reality,  designation,  arrangement,  structure,  and 
character. I have already suggested that resemblance has been pushed out of Rubens's, 
Rembrandt's, and Rigaud's perceptions of blacks. What is there, given in detailed 
description, might be considered as a naming and an analysis of an alterity and refers 
to a new epistemological ordering: a theory of understanding and looking at signs in 
terms of “the arrangement of identities and differences into ordered tables” (Foucault, 
1973:72).
Portuguese sailors brought to Europe the first feitiços, African objects supposedly 
having mysterious powers, in the late fifteenth century. One finds
22


--- PAGE 23 ---
them  mostly  in  well-organized  curio  cabinets,  along  with  Indian  tomahawks  or 
arrows, Egyptian artifacts, and Siamese drums. Some interpreters do consider them to 
be signs of a state of barbarism (Hodgen, 1971 : r 62-203 ). Yet one can firmly state 
that more frequently they are seen as simple curiosities brought back in accordance 
with the tenth task of the traveler observer in the table of Varenius's Geographia 
generalis (1650): to consider “famous Men, Artificers, and Inventions of the Natives 
of all countries” (Hodgen, 1971:167-68). On the whole, these objects are culturally 
neutral. Because of their shapes and styles, sometimes a bit terrifying, they account 
for the mysterious diversity of the Same (Bal, 1963:67). It is not until the eighteenth 
century that,  as strange  and  “ugly”  artifacts,  they really enter  into the  frame of 
African art.
The black continent was still on the maps a terra incognita, but its peoples and 
their material productions were more familiar to travelers, students of the human 
species,  merchants,  and  European  states.  From  the  beginning  of  the  eighteenth 
century, there had been a tremendous increase in the slave trade and a profitable 
trans-Atlantic  economy  which  involved  most  of  the  Western  countries.  In  West 
Africa,  Dahomey  was  a  powerful  commercial  partner  of  European  traders.  The 
Ashanti empire expanded, dominating the Akans and the Oyo kingdom further to the 
east and increasing its power as it grew. Freed slaves and impoverished Africans were 
settled by Europeansponsored organizations in present-day Sierra Leone. On the east 
coast, in 17zg, Africans expelled the Portuguese from their fortresses in the northern 
region of Mozambique; and down south, in 1770, there was the first war between 
Dutch immigrants and Bantus. Two years later, James Bruce, traveling from North to 
Central Africa, reached the source of the White Nile in the very year that Chief 
Justice  Mansfield  declared  in  England  that  slavery was  against  the  law  (Verger, 
1968).
In this atmosphere of intense and violent exchanges, feitiços became symbols of 
African art. They were viewed as primitive, simple, childish, and nonsensical. Mary 
H.  Kingsley,  at  the  beginning  of  this  century,  summed  it  up  with  an  axiomatic 
evaluation: “The African has never made an even fourteenth-rate piece of cloth or 
pottery”  (Kingsley,  1965:669).  It  seems to me  that  “a process  of aesthetization” 
(Baudrillard, 1972) took place from the eighteenth century onward. What is called 
savage or primitive art covers a wide range of objects introduced by the contact 
between African and European during the intensified slave trade into the classifying 
frame of the eighteenth century. These objects, which perhaps are not art at all in their 
“native context,” become art by being given simultaneously an aesthetic character 
and a potentiality for producing and reproducing other artistic forms. Taken in their 
initial  function  and  significance,  might  they  have  created  a  radical  mise  en 
perspective of the Western culture wedded to classifications (Baudrillard, 1972)? That 
is precisely an impossibility. Arts are based on criteria, and it is difficult to imagine 
that these standards can emerge from outside the “power-knowledge” field of a given 
culture, a field
23


--- PAGE 24 ---
which, at a historical period, establishes its artistic bible. Therefore it is obvious that 
fetishes and other “primitive” pieces of art are wonderful because their structure, 
character, and arrangement  demand a designation (Laude, 1979; Wassing, 1969). 
They are “savage” in terms of the evolutionary chain of being and culture, which 
establishes  a  correspondence  between  advancement  in  the  civilizing  process  and 
artistic creativity, as well as intellectual achievements.
At this point, paradoxically, it is a celebration of the African craftsmanship which 
confirms my analysis. Admiring the beauty of a “Negro sculpture,” the late R. Fry 
was puzzled:
It is curious that a people who produced such great artists did not produce also a culture in our sense 
of the word. This shows that two factors are necessary to produce the cultures which distinguish 
civilised peoples. There must be, of course, the creative artist, but there must also be the power of 
conscious critical appreciation and comparison. (Fry, r 940:90-9 r )
Fry is, I am afraid, utterly wrong. The two factors do not and cannot explicate types 
of cultures. They only constitute a basis for the production of art and its possible 
modifications over time (see Laude, 1979; Delange, 1967). They cannot completely 
account for the internal patterns of cultures. At any rate, it is the “power-knowledge” 
of an epistemological field which makes possible a domineering or humbled culture. 
From this perspective, the point that Fry makes immediately after has great sense: “It 
is likely enough that the Negro artist, although capable of . . . profound imaginative 
understanding  of  form,  would  accept  our  cheapest  illusionist  art  with  humble 
enthusiasm” (1940:91).
My thesis is  confirmed,  almost ad  absurdum, by B. Jules-Rosette's  study of 
contemporary African tourist art. She defines this art as an “art produced locally for 
consumption  by  outsiders”  (1984:9)  and  strongly  insists  on  the  paradoxical 
interaction  between  its  origin  and  its  destination,  that  is,  its  production  and  its 
consumption:
Although the concept of the tourist art system emphasizes how artists and their audiences perceive 
images  and  convert  them  into  economic  commodities,  it  does  not  neglect  the  expressive 
components of the interaction. Within the system, both images and actual objects constitute sources 
of exchange between producers and consumers. Although artists have a definite impression of the 
tourist audience, consumers often have little direct contact with the artists. (Jules-Rosette, 1984:10)
This  concept  of  tourist  art  implies,  in  principle,  a  critique  of  the  classical 
understanding of art. It also explicitly means a relativization of what the author calls 
“assumptions about the manner and quality of tourist art productions”; namely, its 
mass production character, the relative inexperience of present-day craftspeople, the 
collectivization in the artistic production, and the dominance of consumer demand 
over artistic creativity.
24


--- PAGE 25 ---
A limpid argument upholds the thesis of the study. Tourist art is both a symbolic 
and an economic exchange. This can be understood, according to Jules-Rosette, by 
reference to three models: First, the traditional African arts that have ceremonial and 
social significance may and do become objects produced primarily for external trade. 
Second, there are, in the very being of tourist art, signs of a major tension existing 
between “folk culture” and “haute culture.” Or, as Jules-Rosette puts it: “Folk culture 
is implicitly contrasted with something else-haute culture . . . There is an inherent 
tension and asymmetry between the ideals of high culture and the profit motives and 
new  reproductive  technologies  that  sustain  the  growth  of  the  market  of  popular 
cultures” (1984:23 ). As to the horizons of this artistic production, Jules-Rosette 
insists on the fact of Western reading of African creativity and its propositions for 
innovations in African workshops.
The international tourist art market depends upon the Western demand for “exotic” souvenir and 
gift items and the assumption that they should be procured abroad. The artists and craftspeople 
utilize this demand as a stimulus for creating new ideas and technologies to meet the needs of the 
expanding market. (Jules-Rosette, 1984:1192)
African  tourist  art  and  its  contradictions  (is  it  an  art?  in  which  sense  and 
according to what kind of aesthetic grid?) are just an ad vallem consequence of the 
process which, during the slave trade period, classified African artifacts according to 
the grid of Western thought and imagination, in which alterity is a negative category 
of the Same. It is significant that a great number of European representations of 
Africans, or more generally of the continent, demonstrated this ordering of otherness. 
For example, Andreas Schulter's painting, Africa (1700), is structured upon a complex 
relation between a nude black woman and a frightening lion standing protectively 
behind her voluptuous body. The African Allegory (1765) of Cesare Ripa's Iconologia 
(t.  IV,  fol.  164)  is  a  biblical  and  scientific  text.  The  continent's  name is  linked 
etymologically to Afer, Abraham's son, yet in contrast the continent's peculiarity is 
presented with powerful symbols: the black color of a horned woman, a monstrous 
animal with a human face surrounded by serpents and bizarre birds. The African has 
become not only the Other who is everyone else except me, but rather the key which, 
in its abnormal differences, specifies the identity of the Same. G. B. Tiepolo's Africa 
(1750-1753 ), Delacroix's Algerian Women (1834), and a multitude of other paintings 
can be read for their implications: traces of something else whisper, slips of color 
reveal the meanings, and treads of a secret stair indicate the magnitude of a new 
order.
These representations are contemporary with the Enlightenment discussions on 
such axiomatic propositions as “men are born unequal” and such questions as “the 
place of the savage in the chain of being” (Duchet, 1971; Hodgen, 1971). In the 
following years, the sagas of exploration begin with J.
25


--- PAGE 26 ---
Bruce's expedition into Ethiopia in 1770 and Mungo Park's journey to the river Niger 
in 1795. The novel text which emerges from these expeditions is not fundamentally 
original (see, e.g., Hammond and Jablow, 1977). It reveals characteristics already 
well circumscribed and established. The distinction between “savage Negro” and 
“civil Mohometan,” and the commentaries on the Africans' indolence, their unbridled 
passions, and their cruelty or mental retardation were already there. They formed part 
of the series of oppositions and of the levels of classification of humans demanded by 
the logic of the chain of being and the stages of progress and social development. 
Explorers just brought new proofs which could explicate “African inferiority.” Since 
Africans could produce nothing of value; the technique of Yoruba statuary must have 
come from Egyptians; Benin art must be a Portuguese creation; the architectural 
achievement of Zimbabwe was due to Arab technicians; and Hausa and Buganda 
statecraft  were  inventions  of  white  invaders  (Davidson,  1959;  Lugard,  1905; 
Randall-MacIver, 1906; Sanders, 1969; Mallows, 1984).
This tendency appears in other fields as well. Two French botanists, A. Chevalier 
in 1938 and R. Portères in the 1950s, suggested that the African continent could have 
been a very early locus of plant domestication (see e.g., Portères, 1950 and 1962). On 
the basis of linguistic data, the anthropologist G. P Murdock expounded a similar 
proposition and postulated a “Sudanic complex of crops” (Murdock, 1959). These 
hypotheses were dismissed, and today “by far the most popular view of the origins of 
cereal-crop agriculture in sub-Saharan Africa is that it was the product of human 
migration or some form of culture diffusion or stimulus deriving from south-west 
Asia” (Desmond Clark and Brandt, 1984:111; see also Reed, 1977).
Here is a last illustration. The work of M. Griaule and his disciples in Dogon 
country has demonstrated the complexity of Dogon astronomical knowledge and its 
symbolism (e.g., Griaule, 1948, 1952; Griaule and Dieterlen, 1965, 1976; Dieterlen, 
1941;  Heusch,  1985).  Carl  Sagan,  professor  of  astronomy at  Cornell  University, 
assumed the task of checking the validity of Dogon cosmology. Sagan begins by 
noting his surprise: “In contrast to almost all prescientific societies, the Dogon hold 
that the planets as well as the Earth rotate about their axes and revolve about the Sun . 
. .” (Sagan, 1983:81). Strangely enough, rather than using Griaule and his disciples' 
documentation,  Sagan  exploits  a  certain  Temple,  who  summarized  Griaule's 
discoveries: “The Dogon go further. They hold that Jupiter has four satellites and that 
Saturn is encircled by a ring . . . Unlike every astronomer before Kepler, the Dogon 
are  said  to  depict  the  planets  moving  correctly in  elliptical,  not  circular  orbits” 
(1983:81). Most amazing for Sagan seems to be the following:
[The Dogons] contend that [Sirius] has a dark and invisible companion star which orbits Sirius . . . 
once every fifty years. They state that the companion star is very small and very heavy, made of a 
special metal called “Sagala”
26


--- PAGE 27 ---
which is not found on Earth. The remarkable fact is that the visible star does have an extraordinary 
dark companion, Sirius B which orbits it in an elliptical orbit once each 50.04 ± 0.09 years. Sirius B 
is the first example of a white dwarf star discovered by modern astrophysics. Its matter is in a state 
called “relativistically degenerate,” which does not exist on Earth, and since the electrons are not 
bound to the nuclei in such degenerate matter, it can properly be described as metallic. (Sagan, 
1983:83)
How  can  we  explain  the  Dogons'  astronomical  knowledge?  Sagan  has  a 
hypothesis: “I picture a Gallic visitor to the Dogon people . . . He may have been a 
diplomat, an explorer, an adventurer or an early anthropologist . . .” (1983:87). This 
man has read, or perhaps still has, a copy of Sir Arthur Stanley Eddington's book, The 
Nature of the Physical World, published in 1928, in which the density of white dwarf 
stars is discussed.
The conversation turns to astronomical lore. Sirius is the brightest star in the sky. The Dogon regale 
the visitor with their Sirius mythology. Then, smiling politely, expectantly, they inquire of their 
visitor what his Sirius myth might be . . . The white dwarf companion of Sirius being a current 
astronomical sensation, the traveler exchanges a spectacular myth for a routine one. After he leaves, 
his account is remembered, retold and eventually incorporated into the corpus of Dogon mythology 
. . . When Marcel Griaule makes mythological inquiries in the 1930s and 1940s, he has his own 
European Sirius myth played back to him. (Sagan, 1983:88)
All  this  is  sheer  speculation.  Had  Sagan  carefully  consulted  knowledgeable 
sources (e.g., Griaule, 1948; Dieterlen, 1971; Griaule and Dieterlen, 1965) he would 
not have confused facts and symbolic levels in order to make his point about a 
beautiful “full-cycle return of a myth.” Let us note three facts. First, the orbiting cycle 
of  Sirius  B  is  analogized  and  reflected  in  the  celebration  of  the  sigui,  a  ritual 
introduced by a mythical ancestor of the Dogons, Dyongu Seru. It is celebrated every 
sixty years; a symbolic period that integrates the fifty years of the revolution of Sirius 
B (for Dogons, the “star of the fonio”) plus ten years which makes the ritual agree 
with the old Man& system of numeration by sixty and with its esoteric symbols 
(Dieterlen, 1971:2-3). The last sigui ritual took place in 1967 and was filmed by J. 
Rouch and G. Dieterlen and released under the title La Caverne de Bongo (1969, 35 
mm. in color). The preceding sigui performance was in 1907, and before that in 1847. 
“The  rite  is  celebrated  under  the  `sign'  of  the  `star  of  the  fonio.'  Indeed,  this 
`companion' of Sirius is the representation in the sky of the little fonio seed . . .” 
(Heusch, 1985:147). Second, if one wants to validate Sagan's hypothesis, one should, 
in fact, demonstrate that a European traveler hurried to the Dogon region just after the 
1844 discovery by E W Bessel of the sinusoidal motion of Sirius. He must have 
taught it well for the Dogons promptly to integrate it in their myths to the point that it 
could perfectly function in a set of major founding symbols in time for the 1847 ritual 
of sigui. Third, the preceding supposition seems difficult since the
27


--- PAGE 28 ---
existence of Sirius B was, in Western science, really discovered in 1862 by A. G. 
Clark. Dogons had already used the symbolism of the fonio in their r 84'7 and 1787 
rituals of sigui. Specialists in “oral civilizations” can easily check this. At the same 
time, they should evaluate the historical credibility and context of Dyongu Seru, who 
according to Dogon tradition is both the one “responsible for the loss of immortality” 
and the inventor of the sigui cycle (Heusch, 1985; Griaule and Dieterlen, 1965). On 
the other hand, I see another problem: the Dogons' concept of sagala, a metal which 
does not exist on earth and which constitutes the nature of Sirius's companion, is 
strongly linked to the sigui mythical cycle. It thus seems to go relatively far back in 
the  history  of  the  ritual,  whereas  in  Western  science  the  hypothesis  of  the 
“relativistically degenerate nature” of Sirius B was made for the first time in the 
1930s. Most scientists did not then accept  the concept,  which, by the  way,  was 
proposed by an Indian scholar, S. Chandrasekhar.
To conclude this long illustration of an epistemological ethnocentrism, I suppose 
by now it has become clear how controversial Carl Sagan's hypothesis is. Let us sum 
up. First, I do not believe that the Dogons got their astronomical knowledge from 
extraterrestrials. The “bad faith” (in the Sartrean sense) with which Sagan destroys 
the theses and fantasies of E. von Daniken who claims this in Chariots of the Gods 
(1970, New York) and Gods from Outer Space (1978, New York) makes me suspect 
that Sagan and von Daniken are probably closer than they suspect. Second, Sagan's 
way of treating the Dogons well illustrates the power of a will to truth. A metaphor 
might generalize this case. Let us imagine a theorist who is enclosed in Euclidean 
geometry.  He  thinks  about,  believes  in,  and  writes  on  the  impossibility  of 
non-Euclidean systems. These, in effect, would incarnate the possibility of incredible 
contradictions such as the intellectual reality of an intrinsic truth (e.g., a validly 
demonstrated theorem in Euclidean geometry), which would be simultaneously an 
extrinsic error, that is, a validly negated proposition in the logic of a non-Euclidean 
geometry. As we know, there are such things as non-Euclidean geometries. Thus my 
metaphor could at least become a symbol: it might not make sense at all to reduce 
non-Euclidean systems to Euclid's, since the systems spring from radically different 
postulates and sets of axioms.
In brief, although presented in the second part of the twentieth century, Carl 
Sagan's hypothesis belongs to nineteenth-century reasoning about “primitives.” In the 
name of both scientific power and knowledge, it reveals in a marvelous way what I 
shall define in the following chapter as an epistemological ethnocentrism; namely, the 
belief that scientifically there is nothing to be learned from “them” unless it is already 
“ours” or comes from us.
Explorers do not reveal otherness. They comment upon “anthropology,” that is, 
the distance separating savagery from civilization on the diachronic line of progress 
(see Rotberg, 1970). R. Thornton claims that “the discovery of Africa was also a 
discovery for paper. Had the great Victorian travellers not
28


--- PAGE 29 ---
written anything it would not be said today that they had `discovered' anything.” 
Strictly speaking,  however, it  seems difficult  to  prove in  a  convincing  way that 
“Livingstone, Stanley, Burton, Grant, Speke and others entered into the enterprise for 
the sake of the text” (Thornton, 1983:509). Other students can invoke other motives 
such as the classical ones of curiosity, courage, generosity, contempt (Killingray, 
1973:48).
At any rate, the explorer's text is not epistemologically inventive. It follows a 
path prescribed by a tradition. Expedition reports only establish a very concrete, vivid 
representation of what paintings and theories of social progress had been postulating 
since the Baroque period. In what the explorer's text does reveal, it brings nothing 
new besides visible and recent reasons to validate a discipline already remarkably 
defined by the Enlightenment (Lévi-Strauss, 1973:45-56). The novelty resides in the 
fact that the discourse on “savages” is, for the first time, a discourse in which an 
explicit  political  power  presumes  the  authority  of  a  scientific  knowledge  and 
vice-versa. Colonialism becomes its project and can be thought of as a duplication 
and a fulfillment of the power of Western discourses on human varieties.
The development of anthropology, which up to the very end of the eighteenth 
century was sought within travelers' narratives, now takes a radical turn. From now 
on  it  will  develop  into  a  clearly  visible  power-knowledge  political  system.  As 
Foucault put it:
Ethnology has its roots, in fact, in a possibility that properly belongs to the history of the European 
culture, even more to its fundamental relation with the whole of history . . . There is a certain 
position o f the Western ratio that was constituted in its history and provides a foundation for the 
relation it can have with all other societies . . . Obviously, this does not mean that the colonizing 
situation is indispensable to ethnology: neither hypnosis, nor the patient's alienation within the 
fantasmatic character of the doctor, is constitutive of psychoanalysis; but just as the latter can be 
deployed only in the calm violence of a particular relationship and the transference it produces, so 
ethnology  can  assume  its  proper  dimensions  only  within  the  historical  sovereignty-always 
restrained, but always present-of European thought and the relation that can bring it face to face 
with all other cultures as well as with itself. (Foucault, 1973:377 emphasis mine)
“African Genesis”
I would like to use Frobenius's expression “African genesis” (1937) to formulate 
hypotheses about the epistemological locus of Africa's invention and its meaning for 
discourses on Africa.
The genesis of anthropological science took place within the frame of mercantilist 
ideology.  We  know  that  during  the  eighteenth  century,  as  G.  Williams  puts  it, 
“colonies were . . . of value only insofar as they brought
29


--- PAGE 30 ---
material benefits to the mother country” (1967:17-30). On the other hand, it is during 
this  same  century  that,  paradoxically,  original  interpretations  of  “savages”  were 
proposed by Enlightenment social scientists (Duchet, 1971). And I quite agree with R. 
L. Meek that if we look at their work, “what shine out are its virtues rather than its 
vices,  its  brilliant  intuitions  rather  than  its  occasional  logical  lapses,  its 
adventurousness and novelty rather than its dogmatism” (1976:242). To defend this 
point,  Meek  quotes  Marvin  Harris,  The  Rise  of  Anthropological  Theory (1968), 
Benjamin Keen, The Aztec Image in Western Thought (1971), and Sidney Pollard, 
The  Idea  of  Progress  (1958).  I  may  add  Claude  Lévi-Strauss,  Anthropologie 
structurale II (1973) and M. Duchet, Anthropologie et histoire au siècle des lumières 
(1977).
The problem is that during this period both imperialism and anthropology took 
shape, allowing the reification of the “primitive.” The key is the idea of History with 
a capital H, which first incorporates St. Augustine's notion of providentia and later on 
expresses  itself  in  the  evidence  of  Social  Darwinism.  Evolution,  conquest,  and 
difference become signs of a theological, biological, and anthropological destiny, and 
assign to things and beings both their natural slots and social mission. Theorists of 
capitalism, such as Benjamin Kidd and Karl Pearson in England, Paul Leroy-Beaulieu 
in France, Friedrich Naumann and Friedrich von Bernhard in Germany, as well as 
philosophers, comment upon two main and complementary paradigms. These are the 
inherent  superiority of  the  white  race,  and,  as  already made  explicit  in  Hegel's 
Philosophy of Right, the necessity for European economies and structures to expand 
to “virgin areas” of the world (Mommsen, 1983).
From  this  point,  various  schools  of  anthropology  developed  models  and 
techniques to describe the “primitive” in accordance with changing trends within the 
framework of Western experience. These different trends can easily be explained 
from two angles. The first is an ideological one and concerns the relationship between 
an individual's projection of consciousness, the norms exemplified by one's society, 
and the social or the scientific dominant group (see, e.g., Baudrillard, 1972:174). On 
the other hand, mainly since the end of the eighteenth century, natural sciences have 
served as models for the progressive and wavering implementation of social sciences 
(Duchet, 1971:229-473). In concreto, one thinks of those “ideological interests of 
strata that are in various ways privileged within a polity and, indeed, privileged by its 
very existence” (Weber, 1978:920). On the other hand, Aristotle's invitation to study 
in beings the “plane of Nature” (Animal, I, 5) is mathematized (Veyne, 1984:63). 
New methodological grids link social facts to physical phenomena. Laws of structural 
organization  and  distribution,  patterns  in  individual  or  collective  development, 
account  for  historical  transformations.  The  social  scientist  tends  to  imitate  the 
naturalist  and  compresses  social  behaviors  and  human  cultures  into  “scientific 
paradigms.”  These  actually remain subsumed  by what  is  defined  as  the  goal  of 
knowledge. Paul Veyne recently made some strong statements about the confusion 
which comes out of this legacy:
30


--- PAGE 31 ---
Buffon thought that the fly should not hold a greater place in the concerns of the naturalist than it 
occupies in nature; on the other hand, he maintained a value relationship with the horse and the 
swan . . . But zoology has changed a great deal since then and, after Lamarck had pleaded the cause 
of the lower animals, every organism became of interest in the science.
Weber was indignant that the history of the Bantus could be studied as much as that of the Greeks. 
Let us not retort that times have changed, that the Third World and its nascent patriotism . . . that the 
awakening of the African people who are taking an interest in their past . . . it would be a fine time 
to see that patriotic consideration should be the criterion of intellectual interest and that Africans 
have more reasons to despise Greek antiquity than Europeans had to despise Bantu antiquity. 
(Veyne, 1984:62)
At  the  level  of  organization  of  discourses  these  two  factors-the  impact  of 
ideology  and  the  model  of  natural  sciences-can  serve  as  guides  to  the  relative 
epistemological unity of social sciences since the nineteenth century. For instance, it 
would be easy to draw a parallel between philology and anthropology. We wrongly 
tend today to consider the former, and particularly its offshoot, linguistics, as more 
scientific than the latter. Morgan's historicism in Systems o f Consanguinity and 
Affinity  of  the  Human  Family  (1871)  matches  the  positivism  of  Max  Muller's 
Lectures on the Science o f Language (1861 and 1864), in which fidelity to August 
Schleicher's Stammbaumtbeorie is integrated with Darwin's general postulations. In 
the same way, the Wellentbeorie which is central in J. Schmidt's work (e.g., Die 
Verwandtscbaftsverhdltnisse der Indo-Germanischen Spracben, 1872) is similar to the 
diffusionist perspective of Ankermann, Frobenius, and Graebner in anthropology. The 
principles of association and difference invoked by Boas and Lowie resemble many 
hypotheses  in  the  philological  field.  Examples  are  the  “Junggrammatiker” 
interpretations of analogy in the evolution of language exemplified by Meyer-Lubke's 
work, or the perspectives opened by H. Schuchardt's Uber die Lautgesetze, in which 
the major concept-the Sprachmischung-implies the necessity of subordinating general 
laws, such as those promoted by Darwin's disciples, to the complexity and alterity of 
the objects described and studied.
I do not mean that there is an unquestionable genealogical dependence or obvious 
synchronic  connection  between  these  theories.  It  is  clear,  for  example,  that 
Schuchardt deals extensively with multidimensional comparison, while Boas avoids 
it. In simpler words, I mean that anthropology and philology and all social sciences 
can  be  really understood  only in  the  context  of  their  epistemological  region  of 
possibility. The histories of these sciences as well as their trends, their truths as well 
as their experiences, being derived from a given space, speak from it and, primarily, 
about it. Given that, one also might agree that from the anthropology of Buffon, 
Voltaire, Rousseau, and Diderot to the most modern studies, such as J. Favret-Saada's 
study of witchcraft in France (1977), the basic concern of anthropology is not so
31


--- PAGE 32 ---
much the description of “primitive” achievements and societies, as the question of its 
own motives, and the history of the epistemological field that makes it possible, and 
in which it has flourished as retrospectivist or perspectivist philosophical discourse 
(see Sebag, 1964; Diamond, 1974). Thus ethnocentrism is both its virtue and its 
weakness. It is not, as some scholars thought, an unfortunate mishap, nor a stupid 
accident, but one of the major signs of the possibility of anthropology.
Some thinkers, such as Lévi-Strauss, thought that studying a diversity of cultures 
reduced the weight of ideology and allowed anthropologists to fight such falsehoods 
as those about the natural superiority of some races and traditions over others. From 
this ethical point of view, some scholars have wondered whether it was possible to 
think of an anthropological science without ethnocentrism (e.g., Leclerc, 1972-). It is 
surely possible, as functionalism and structuralism proved, to have works that seem to 
respect indigenous traditions. And one could hope for even more profound changes in 
anthropology, as R. Wagner proposes (1982 ). But so far it seems impossible to 
imagine any anthropology without a Western epistemological link. For on the one 
hand, it cannot be completely cut off from the field of its epistemological genesis and 
from its roots; and, on the other hand, as a science, it depends upon a precise frame 
without which there is no science at all, nor any anthropology.
I distinguish two kinds of “ethnocentrism”: an epistemological filiation and an 
ideological connection. In fact they are often complementary and inseparable. The 
first  is a link  to an  episteme,  that  is, an  intellectual  atmosphere which gives  to 
anthropology its status as discourse, its significance as a discipline, and its credibility 
as a science in the field of human experience. The second is an intellectual and 
behavioral attitude which varies among individuals. Basically this attitude is both a 
consequence  and  an  expression  of  a  complex  connection  between  the  scholar's 
projection of consciousness, the scientific models of his time, and the cultural and 
social norms of his society. Thus, for example, for the eighteenth century one might 
think  of  the  differences  existing  between  Goguet,  Quesnay,  and  Helvétius, 
independently of the content of their interpretations of the stages of evolution (see 
Duchet, 1971; Meek, 1976). Frobenius and Lévy-Bruhl differ in the same manner, 
and their ethnocentrism is quite different from that of, say, Michel Leiris, Margaret 
Mead, or Carl Sagan. I could say that the epistemological filiation maintains and 
sustains anthropology as a system of knowledge and as a developing science; cultural 
ethnocentrism explains ideological changes and struggles in the history and practice 
of the social science discipline.
The fact that universal civilization has for a long time originated from the European center has 
maintained the illusion that European culture was, in fact and by right, a universal culture. Its 
superiority over other civilizations seemed to provide the experimental verification of this postulate. 
Moreover, the encounter
32


--- PAGE 33 ---
with other cultural traditions was itself the fruit of that advance and more generally the fruit of 
Occidental science itself. Did not Europe invent history, geography, ethnography, and sociology in 
their explicit scientific forms? (Ricoeur, 1965:277)
In the colonizing experience, the mingling of these two aspects of ethnocentrism 
tended, almost naturally, to be complete in both the discourse of power and that of 
knowledge,  to  the  point  of  transforming  the  mission  of  the  discipline  into  an 
enterprise  of  acculturation.  And  the  anthropologist  decided  to  take  charge  of 
controlling evolutionary processes: “Anthropology, which used to be the study of 
beings and things retarded, gradual, and backward, is now faced with the difficult task 
of recording how the `savage' becomes an active participant in modern civilization” 
(Malinowski, 193 8:vii).
Still, it is clear that since the beginning of the nineteenth century, explorers' 
reports  had been useful for opening the  African  continent  to European  interests. 
Myths about “beastly savages,” “barbaric splendours,” or the “white man's grave” go 
along quite well with the “tropical treasure house theory,” the promises of the Golden 
Land or New Orphir, and with the humanitarian principles for suppressing the slave 
trade, and for Christianizing and civilizing the Africans (Hammond and Jablow, 1977; 
Leclerc, 1972,).
Theories  of  colonial  expansion  and  discourses  on  African  primitiveness 
emphasize a historicity and the promotion of a particular model of history. In other 
words, Mungo Park's Journal o f a Mission (1815) or Richard and John Lander's 
report (1838) essentially address the same issues that R. E Burton, V L. Cameron, H. 
M.  Stanley,  and  E  D.  Lugard  spelled  out  in  different  words,  and  on  which 
twentieth-century  anthropology  focuses.  This  is  the  discrepancy  between 
“civilization” and “Christianity” on the one hand, “primitiveness” and “paganism” on 
the other, and the means of “evolution” or “conversion” from the first stage to the 
second. From this point of view, it can be said that, for instance, J. Chaillet-Bert's 
programmatic theory of the steps of colonization (agriculture, commerce, industry) 
has the same significance as Lugard's views on the European mandate in Africa. What 
they propose is an ideological explanation for forcing Africans into a new historical 
dimension. Finally, both types of discourses are fundamentally reductionist. They 
speak about neither Africa nor Africans, but rather justify the process of inventing and 
conquering a continent and naming its “primitiveness” or “disorder,” as well as the 
subsequent means of its exploitation and methods for its “regeneration.”
In fact, the question might be a bit more complicated, and also dramatic, for the 
imperial power of Same, if we take into account, for example, Ricoeur's meditation 
on the irruption of the Other in the European consciousness:
When we discover that there are several cultures instead of just one and consequently at the time 
when we acknowledge the end of a sort of cultural
33


--- PAGE 34 ---
monopoly, be it illusory or real, we are threatened with destruction by our own discovery. Suddenly 
it becomes possible that there are just others, that we ourselves are an “other” among others. All 
meaning and every goal having disappeared, it becomes possible to wander through civilizations as 
if through vestiges and ruins. The whole of mankind becomes a kind of imaginary museum: where 
shall we go this week-end-visit the Angkor ruins or take a stroll in the Tivoli of Copenhagen? 
(Ricoeur, 1965:278)
In addition to Paul Ricoeur's anguished propositions, one should note the still 
strong anthropological spirit exemplified by N. Barley's small book, Adventures in a 
Mud Hut (1984). In 1978, Barley decided to turn his attention to the Dowayos, “a 
strangely neglected group of mountain pagans in North Cameroon . . . They were 
interesting  [for  him]:  they had,  for  example,  skull  cults,  circumcision,  a  whistle 
language, mummies and a reputation for being recalcitrant and savage” (1984: 13 ). 
The result is a brief memoir which ten years ago would have qualified as arrogant or, 
at  best,  disrespectful  of  both  fieldwork  and  the  peoples  described.  Between 
commentaries  on  “their  heavily  Africanized  version  of  Marianne,  the  French 
revolutionary heroine” (1984: 17) and the fact that it is “ridiculous that it should be in 
Africa that people of different races should be able to meet on easy, uncomplicated 
terms” (1984:21), one gets intrusive lessons. Among them, the following two sum up 
the  project's  scientific  interest.  About  the  “whole  business”  of  anthropology,  the 
author states:
Frankly, it seemed then, and seems now, that the justification for fieldwork, as for all academic 
endeavour, lies not in one's contribution to the collectivity but rather in some selfish development. 
Like monastic life, academic research is really all about the perfection of one's own soul. This may 
well serve some wider purpose but is not to be judged on those grounds alone. (Barley, 1984:10)
As  to  the  Dowayos,  his  adventures  in  a  mud  but  gave  Barley  reasons  for 
believing that “in attempting to understand the Dowayo view of the world I had tested 
the relevance of certain very general models of interpretation and cultural symbolism. 
On the whole they had stood up pretty well and I felt much happier about their place 
in the scheme of things” (1984:188).
This, wrote a reviewer in The Daily Telegraph, is “probably the funniest book 
that has been produced this year.” The evaluation has since served for publicizing the 
essay. In a more neutral manner, I would say that this book is epistemologically 
significant. It convincingly illustrates my two previously described dimensions of 
ethnocentrism in the social sciences: the pertinence of an individual's projection of 
consciousness and the perception of a discipline from the normative perspective of its 
practice and history; it comments upon itself from within a paradigmatic cultural 
model. Barley assumes a magnificent position which allegorically indicates the space 
of his introspectiveness and his African anthropology: “Face-to-face with Africa, the 
34


--- PAGE 35 ---
differences between a French botanist and an English anthropologist seem minimal 
and we talked far into the night” (1984:106).
Thus, we  are  not only dealing  with  a potential  imaginary museum but  with 
concrete constraints produced by two major orders: a topographical dimension which 
explains how and why discourses on the Same and the Other are expounded, and a 
cultural order which, in the disorder of what today seems to be a common humanity, 
indicates clear divisions, subtle frontiers, and sometimes the so-called openings to 
oneness.
I  suppose  that  it  is  now  clear  that  the  trouble  with  Barley's  text  is  not  its 
ideological orientation. In fact there seems to be none, at least no explicit one, apart 
from its superb interrogation of anthropology as a business of “old stories.” What it 
reveals,  at  the  end,  is  an  absolute  and  almost  amoral  hypercriticism  and  a 
metaphorization of cultural reading. So, for instance, this “English alien,” back in 
Europe, rediscovers la ville éternelle and notes: “I paced the streets of Rome like a 
Dowayo sorcerer whose unearthly slowness sets off his ritual role from everyday 
activities” (1984:183). Saved from Italian robbers and sent to England by the British 
Embassy in Rome, one of the most important things he remembers is being alien: “an 
hour after my arrival, I was phoned by one friend who merely remarked tersely: 
`Look, I don't know where you've been but you left a pullover at my place nearly two 
years ago. When are you coming to collect it?' In vain one feels that such questions 
are beneath the concern of a returning prophet” (1984:186). In effect, a topographical 
configuration accounts for Barley's discourse and a cultural atmosphere might explain 
his addiction to cream cakes and to anthropology. As to his impressionist message, it 
is a strikingly modernized lesson on Conrad's questions in Heart o f Darkness: Why is 
African culture a “barbarous” experience? What is European civilization and in which 
sense is it different?
For a history of African studies and discourses it is therefore important to notice 
that  apparent  changes  within  the  dominant  symbols  have  never  fundamentally 
modified the meaning of African conversion, but only the policies for its ideological 
and  ethnocentric  expression  and  practice.  Present-day  intellectual  categories  can 
allow, as demonstrated by Copans in This periodization, a distinction between travel 
literature, ethnology, and applied anthropology (Copans, 197ia). Yet it is erroneous to 
depend on this type of theoretical distinction, which is concerned with differences of 
ideological policies, in order to distinguish genres of “African knowledge.” Travelers 
in the eighteenth century, as well as those of the nineteenth and their successors in the 
twentieth (colonial proconsuls, anthropologists, and colonizers), spoke using the same 
type  of signs and symbols  and  acted  upon them. During the  colonial  era,  these 
consistently involved reduction of differences into a Western historicity. This does not 
imply that Western inventors of an “African genesis” did not distinguish levels and 
types of interpretations of Africa. The author of Ursprung der Afrikanischen Kulturen, 
for example, could, in an article on the origin of African civilizations, perceive that 
the
35


--- PAGE 36 ---
demands of his discipline were not met by travelers' information. “Far from bringing 
us answers to our questions, the travelers have increased our enigmas by many an 
addition” (Frobenius, 1899:637). Today, the best students, faced with contradictory 
reports, will ask pertinent questions: What are these reports witnessing to? Do they 
contribute to a better knowledge of the African past? Are they scientifically credible 
and acceptable? (see Vansina, 1962; If correctly answered, these propositions lead, in 
principle, to a new understanding of human history. As Veyne put it, “if the Bantu 
Homo historicus proved to be a more primitive organism than the Athenian, it would 
only add to the interest, for it would thus reveal a less known part of the plan of 
Nature. As for knowing-Weber . . . asks the question-how many pages are to be 
devoted to Bantu history and how many to Greek, the answer is simple . . . It all 
depends on the volume of documentation” (1984:62).
The question I am dealing with is one which would account for the possibility of 
anthropological knowledge, and its meaning for the foundation of both Africanist 
discourses  and  African  gnosis.  I am proposing  to  formulate  it  through  a critical 
synthesis  of  Foucault's  thesis  on  the  last  archaeological  rupture  in  Western 
epistemology,  a brief interpretation of Levi-Strauss's  notion  of savage  mind, and 
finally a plea for the importance of the subject in social sciences; a subject that 
structuralism too easily pretends to have killed. These philosophical questions of 
method should, I hope, affirm the usefulness of both an epistemological analysis and 
a critical understanding of Africanism.
36


--- PAGE 37 ---
II
QUESTIONS OF METHOD
Foucault's Proposition on the Disappearing Subject
I recalled the conclusions of a noted biologist 
concerning a similar experiment: it was
possible, he said, by so abusing an animal, to 
produce in him emotional disorders strangely 
reminiscent of neurosis in men, and 
sometimes even to send him out of his mind 
by repeating these maneuvers fairly often.
P. BOULLE, Planet of the Apes.
In the European Classical Age, the center of knowledge was, according to Foucault's 
archaeology (1973), the principle of order. The means of organizing this knowledge is 
the discourse, the table, and the exchange. One can observe in this epistemological 
landscape three major systems: (a) General grammar, “the study of verbal order in its 
relation to the simultaneity that it is its task to represent.” It has, as its object, the 
discourse in which the name dominates: “the task of Classical `discourse' is to ascribe 
a name to things and in that name to name their being.” (b) Natural history, or a 
theory of nature understood as the characterization, ordering, and naming of the 
visible. Its project is “to establish a general and complete table of species, genera and 
classes.” (c) A theory of wealth, rather than a political economy, analyzing “value in 
terms of the exchange of objects of need,” or “in terms of the formation and origin of 
objects whose exchange will later define their value in terms of nature's prolixity” 
(Foucault, 1973:79-211).
In other words, during the Classical Age there was one and just one episteme that 
“defines the conditions of possibility of all knowledge, whether expressed in a theory 
or  silently  invested  in  practice”  (Foucault,  1973:168).  In  the  last  years  of  the 
eighteenth century, a rupture appears. The episteme that allowed general grammar, 
natural history, and the theory of wealth gradually disappears. There is a radical 
mutation from the theme of order to that of history. In the space that systems of 
classical knowledge never occupied, new ways of knowing define themselves, thanks 
to new transcendentals: labor, life, and language. Economics replaces the theory of 
wealth and,
37


--- PAGE 38 ---
since Adam Smith, labor “reveals an irreducible, absolute unit of measurement,” and 
wealth “is broken down according to the units of labor that have in reality produced 
it”  (Foucault,  1973:217-36).  Biology  supplants  natural  history.  With  Lamarck, 
Jussieu, and Vicq d'Azyr, the principle of organic structure becomes the basis for 
taxonomies and thus separates the organic from the inorganic: the first defines the 
living, and the second, the nonliving. In the field of analysis of language, philology 
takes  the  place  of  general  grammar:  “language  no  longer  consists  only  of 
representations  and  of  sounds  that  in  turn  represent  the  representations  and  are 
ordered  among  them  as  the  links  of  thought  require;  it  consists  also  of  formal 
elements, grouped into a system, which impose upon the sounds, syllables, and roots 
an organisation that is not that of representations” (Foucault, 1973:235).
From this epistemological caesura, a new landscape develops.
The space of order, which served as a common place for representation and for things, for empirical 
visibility and for the essential rules, which united the regularities of nature and the resemblances of 
imagination in the grid of identities and differences, which displayed the empirical sequence of 
representations in a simultaneous table, and made it possible to scan step by step, in accordance 
with a logical sequence, the totality of nature's elements thus rendered contemporaneous with one 
another-this space of order is from now on shattered: there will be things, with their own organic 
structures, their hidden views, the space that articulates them, the time that produces them; and then 
representation, a purely temporal succession in which those things address themselves (always 
partially) to a subjectivity, a consciousness, a singular effort of cognition, to the `psychological' 
individual who from the depth of his own history, or on the basis of the relation handed on to him, is 
trying to know. (Foucault, 1973:2-40)
Thus, a new episteme imposes itself, different and opposed to its own history and 
prehistory.  More  importantly,  according  to  Foucault,  in the  very mutation  which 
brings it about-the metamorphosis of the theory of wealth into economics, natural 
history into biology, and general grammar into philology-for the first time, “man 
appears in his ambiguous position as both an object of knowledge and as a subject 
that knows” (1973:330). Foucault states that man is constituted at the beginning of 
the nineteenth century, and, thus:
For man, then, origin is by no means the beginning-a sort of dawn of history from which his ulterior 
acquisitions would have accumulated. Origin, for man, is much more the way in which man in 
general, any man articulates himself upon the already-begun of labour, life and language; it must be 
sought for in that fold where man in all simplicity applies his labour to a world that has been 
worked for thousands of years, lives in the freshness of his unique, recent precarious existence a life 
that has its roots in the first organic formations, and composes into sentences which have never 
before been spoken . . . words that are older than all memory. (Foucault, 1973:330)
38


--- PAGE 39 ---
Simply speaking, since the epistemological mutation at the end of the eighteenth 
century, three models impose themselves as essential paradigms: function and norm, 
conflict and rule, signification and system. They constitute and concurrently cover the 
field of all that can be known and said about humans. They strictly define what 
knowledge can offer about human beings. Foucault even thinks that the brief history 
of social and human sciences might be studied “on the basis of these three models.” It 
will suffice for students “to follow the dynasty of their privileges” by focusing on the 
temporal  succession  of  models  (biological,  economic,  and  philological  and 
linguistic), or by analyzing the regular shifts of categories and the meaning of their 
displacement.  An  example  might  be  the  receding  of  function,  conflict,  and 
signification, and the emergence of norm, rule, and system with Goldstein, Mauss, 
and Dumézil. Foucault also shows two major consequences of this reversal.
1. (a) as long as the functional point of view continued to carry more weight than the normative 
point of view . . . it was of course necessary, de facto, to share the normal functions with the 
non-normal; thus a pathological psychology was accepted side by side with normal psychology 
. . . in the same way, a pathology of societies (Durkheim), of irrational and quasi-morbid forms 
of belief (Lévy-Bruhl, Blondel) was also accepted;
(b) similarly, as long as the point of view of conflict carried more weight than that of the rule, 
it was supposed that certain conflicts could not be overcome, that individuals and societies ran 
the risk of destroying themselves by them;
(c) finally, as long as the point of view of signification carried more weight than that of system, 
a division was made between significant and nonsignificant; it was accepted that there was 
meaning in certain domains of human behaviour or certain regions of the social area, but not 
others.
2. When, on the other hand, the analysis was conducted from the point of view of the norm, the 
rule, and the system, each area provided its own coherence and its own validity; it was no 
longer possible to speak of `morbid consciousness' (even referring to the sick), of `primitive 
mentalities' (even  with  reference  to  societies  left  behind  by history), or  of  `insignificant 
discourse'  (even  when  referring  to  absurd  stories,  or  to  apparently  incoherent  legends). 
Everything  may be  thought  within  the  order  of  the  system,  the  rule,  and  the  norm.  By 
pluralizing itself-since systems are isolated, since rules form closed wholes, since norms are 
posited in their autonomy-the field of the human sciences found itself unified; it was no longer 
fissured along its former dichotomy of values. (Foucault, 1973:360 the arrangement of the 
quotation is mine)
39


--- PAGE 40 ---
With  these  suggestions, one might,  for methodological  purposes, classify the 
body  of  discourses  on  non-Western  societies  into  two  main  groups.  During  the 
nineteenth century and the first quarter of the twentieth, discourses were generally 
characterized by a functional perspective and a selfrighteous intolerance founded on 
the philosophical implications of the paradigms of conflict and significance. Thus the 
analysis,  through  a  temporaliza- tion  of  the  chain  of  being  and  of  civilizations 
(Duchet, 1971; Hodgen, 1971; Meek, 1976), could simultaneously account for the 
normality, creative dynamism, and achievements of the “civilized world” against the 
abnormality, deviance, and primitiveness of “non-literate societies.” This expression 
of a will to truth has been questioned only recently-thanks to the implications of 
Freud's work and the contributions of Dumézil, Mauss, Dumont, and Lévi-Strauss-to 
the point where today one agrees without difficulty with R. Wagner's statement that: 
“We might actually say that an anthropologist `invents' the culture he believes himself 
to  be  studying,  that  the  relation  is  more  `real'  for  being  his  particular  acts  and 
experiences than the things it relates” (1981:4).
Nevertheless, let us face Foucault's hypothesis of an archaeology of knowledge. 
The order o f things, he says, is not the archaeology, but an archaeology of human 
sciences (1980:82). First, one might ask: what in actuality is this archaeology which, 
according to its author, is different from the traditional history of ideas? (Foucault, 
1972: r 3 5-4o). The archaeologist may treat every discourse as a “monument,” and 
may emphasize  the  differential  analysis  of their  modalities  and the  silent  norms 
presiding  over  discursive  practices.  Yet  their  originality and  their  specificity are 
relative insofar as they are geographically determined and culturally integrated. Yes, 
Foucault  insists  on  the  vagueness  of  what  “his”  West  really is  (1980).  But  the 
succession of epistemes, as well as the procedures and disciplines that they allow, 
account for a historical activity and, indirectly, legitimate a social evolution in which 
knowledge  essentially  functions  as  a  form  of  power.  It  is  true  that  Foucault 
methodologically seeks to oppose this outcome by using four major principles. These 
are:  reversal,  in  order  to  “recognize  the  negative  activity  of  the  cutting-out  of 
discourse”;  discontinuity,  in  order  to  understand  discourse  as  “a  discontinuous 
activity”; specificity, in order to “conceive discourse as a violence that we do to 
things, or, at all events, as a practice we impose upon them”; and, exteriority, in order 
to  look  for  “the  external  conditions  of  existence”  of  the  discourse  (Foucault, 
1982:229). These principles, along with the notions that they bring, contribute to a 
new understanding of the Western experience, and at the same time clearly indicate 
its capacity to join knowledge and power.
History might have, as Foucault states, “abandoned its attempts to understand 
events in terms of cause and effect in the formless unity of some great evolutionary 
process, whether vaguely homogeneous or rigidly hierarchized.” Foucault's enterprise 
remarkably explains the conquering horizons 
40


--- PAGE 41 ---
of this history. Since the end of the eighteenth century, anthropological discourses 
represent it. They are constrained discourses and develop within the general system of 
knowledge which is in an interdependent relationship with systems of power and 
social  control.  Durkheim's  prescriptions  on  the  pathology  of  civilizations, 
Lévy-Bruhl's theses on prelogical systems of thought, as well as Frazer's hypothesis 
on  primitive  societies,  bear  witness,  from  a  functional  viewpoint,  to  the  same 
epistemological space in which stories about Others, as well as commentaries on their 
differences, are but elements in the history of the Same and its knowledge.
The Savage Mind's Kingdom
“Men!” Phyllis again exclaimed. “Yes, men,” 
Jinn asserted. “That's what it says.”
P BOULLE, Planet o f the Apes.
The  search  for  a  discrete  but  essential  order  is  what  unites  Foucault  and 
Lévi-Strauss.  In  a  broad sense,  Lévi-Strauss's  objectives  in  the  understanding  of 
history and anthropology are based on four principles: (a) true reality is never obvious 
and “its nature is already apparent in the care it takes to evade our attention”; (b) 
social  science  is  not  based  upon  events;  (c)  reality  and  experience  might  be 
complementary but “there is no continuity in the passage between them”; and (d) the 
social scientist's mission is “to understand being in relation to itself and not in relation 
to oneself” (Lévi-Strauss, 1963 and 1966).
According  to  Lévi-Strauss,  the  similarities  existing  between  history  and 
anthropology are more important than their differences. First, both disciplines are 
concerned with remoteness and otherness: while history deals with remoteness in 
time, anthropology deals with remoteness in space. Second, their goal is the same, 
namely, a better understanding of temporally or spatially different societies and, thus, 
a reconstruction, “a rewriting” of what “has happened” or of what “is happening” in 
those  societies. Finally,  in both cases, scientists  face  “systems of representations 
which differ for each member of the group and which, on the whole, differ from the 
respresentations of the investigator.”
The best ethnographic study will never make the reader  a native .... All that the historian  or 
ethnographer can do, and all that we expect of either of them is to enlarge a specific experience to 
the dimensions of a more general one, which thereby becomes accessible as experience to men of 
another country or another epoch. And in order to succeed, both historian and ethnographer must 
have the same qualities: skill, precision, a sympathetic approach and objectivity. (Lévi-Strauss, 
1963:I6-17)
41


--- PAGE 42 ---
Lévi-Strauss knows the classical distinction of methodologies. The historian's 
techniques  are based  on precise data and documents, whereas  the anthropologist 
constructs an understanding of an “oral civilization” on the basis of observation. 
Nevertheless, Lévi-Strauss does not consider this distinction pertinent:
The fundamental difference between the two disciplines is not one of subject, of goal, or of method. 
They share the same subject, which is social life; the same goal, which is a better understanding of 
man; and, in fact, the same method, in which only the proportion of research techniques varies. 
They differ, principally, in their choice of complementary perspectives: History organizes its data in 
relation to conscious expressions of social life, while  anthropology proceeds by examining its 
unconscious foundations. (Lévi-Strauss 1963:18)
One immediately recalls the following statements of Foucault. About history, he 
observes: “all knowledge is rooted in a life, a society, and a language that have a 
history; and it is in that very history that knowledge finds the element enabling it to 
communicate with other forms of life, other types of society, other significations” 
(1973:372).  About  anthropology,  he  asserts:  “ethnology  situates  itself  in  the 
dimension of historicity (of that perpetual oscillation which is the reason why the 
human sciences are always being contested, from without, by their own history)” 
(1973:376). The difference between the two positions, however, is clear. Foucault is 
emphasizing the possibility of a new anthropology and its dependence on Western 
historicity. As for Lévi-Strauss, he is distinguishing the methodological question from 
the epistemological one. The former is concerned with the future of anthropology; the 
latter, with ways of describing the solidarity that might exist between history and 
anthropology if one takes seriously Marx's statement: “men make their own history, 
but they do not know that they are making it” (Lévi-Strauss, 1963:23). Consequently, 
Lévi-Strauss thinks that it would be inaccurate to oppose the historian's method to 
that of the anthropologist.
[Anthropologists and historians] have undertaken the same journey on the same road in the same 
direction; only their orientation is different. The anthropologist goes forward, seeking to attain, 
through the conscious, of which he is always aware, more and more of the unconscious; whereas the 
historian advances, so to speak, backward, keeping his eyes fixed on concrete and specific activities 
from which he withdraws only to consider them from a more complete and richer perspective. 
(Lévi-Strauss 1963:24)
This conception of history and anthropology as a two-faced Janus has important 
implications. It means a reorganization of the social disciplines: history, sociology, 
social philosophy, ethnography, and anthropology. More important, it signifies both a 
disengagement of anthropology from self-explanatory paradigms of primitiveness and 
a different look at “primitive
42


--- PAGE 43 ---
societies”  and at “the savage mind.” Ex hypothesi, its momentum resides in the 
rejection  of  the  antinomy  between  the  logical  and  prelogical.  For  according  to 
Lévi-Strauss, the savage mind is logical (1966:268).
What exactly is the “savage mind”? Lévi-Strauss affirms that “the primitive mind 
is not the mind of a primitive or archaic humanity but an undomesticated thinking” 
(1962:289).  Disagreeing  with  Levi-Strauss,  Maurice  Godelier  states  that  “mythic 
thinking” is not only the thinking of savages, but also, by its status, a primitive 
thinking. He writes: “I think that I am disagreeing with Claude Lévi-Strauss because I 
do believe that mythic thinking is both undomesticated thinking and the thinking of 
primitives”  (1973  :  385  ).  Godelier's  argument  claims that  mythical  thinking  is, 
essentially,  constituted  by  processes  of  analogies,  dominated  by  relations  of 
similitude, as was, according to Foucault, the epistemological field of the West in the 
sixteenth century (1973:17-44).
These are the analogies drawn from the field of perception, from serviceable knowledge, which 
constitute  the  basis  with  which  the  thinking  of  primitives,  naturally submitted  to  the  formal 
principles  of  undomesticated  thinking,  builds  the  organization  of  ideas  in  which  is  reflected 
infinitely the reciprocal image of humans and the world and in which spring and function the 
illusions the primitive being holds of himself and the world. (Godelier, 1973:386)
Godelier's  position  is  challenging,  insofar  as  it  indicates  a  radical  and 
controversial hypothesis: the possibility of cross-cultural comparison of systems of 
thought dominated by themes of similitude, and thus a comparative study of types of 
knowledge defined within an infinite proliferation of resemblances (e.g., Mudimbe, 
1981b:195-97). On the other hand, one might fear that it only draws the cloak of 
historical materialism over the most traditional and controversial theses of social 
evolutionism. J. Goody has recently proposed the use of changes in communication 
as criteria for understanding this sort of otherness. Because those changes are critical 
in  nature  and  are  “multiple  rather  than  single  in  character,”  they  invalidate  the 
dichotomy between “primitive” and “advanced” (Goody, 1977:10). Moreover, Goody 
delineates  as  a  major  issue  the  necessity  of  accounting  for  observed  social 
transformations and types of domestication (1977: 16).
In fact, one is at first struck by the apparent static character of Levi-Strauss's 
analysis of the savage mind. Let us sum up the three major principles.
First, each human language is particular and expresses in an original way types of 
contacts that exist between man (producer of culture) and his environment (nature). 
Thus each language delineates in its own manner concepts, systems of classification, 
and knowledge. Traditionally the opposition between “primitive” and “advanced” has 
been explicated through the opposition of two systems of “order”: magic and science. 
Lévi-Strauss substitutes another opposition, science of the concrete versus science of 
the abstract.
43


--- PAGE 44 ---
Second, Lévi-Strauss thinks that magic and science should not be considered two 
different steps in a chronological evolution, the first primitive and only a harbinger of 
the  second.  They  are  two  different  and  parallel  systems  of  knowledge.  “Magic 
postulates a complete and all-embracing determinism” and is possibly “an expression 
of the unconscious apprehension of the truth o f determinism, the mode in which 
scientific phenomena exist.” Science, on the other hand, “is based on a distinction 
between levels: only some of these admit forms of determinism; on others, the same 
forms of determinism are held not to apply” (Lévi-Strauss, 1966:11 ). The parallelism 
would thus account for the fact that science can coexist with magic. The neolithic 
period shows this, being characterized by magic as well as such important discoveries 
and achievements as the invention of agriculture and the domestication of animals.
Third, a more pertinent opposition would therefore be the science of the concrete 
versus the science of the abstract; or, analogically speaking, an opposition between 
“bricolage” and “engineering,” that might introduce and mean the opposition between 
“mythical  thought”  and  “science.”  These  are  not  “two  stages  or  phases  in  the 
evolution of knowledge. Both approaches are equally valid” (Lévi-Strauss 1966:22). 
Lévi-Strauss insists on the relativity of the classical distinction between these two 
systems of ordering and acquiring knowledge.
It is therefore better, instead of contrasting magic and science, to compare them as two parallel 
modes of acquiring knowledge. Their theoretical and practical results differ in value, for it is true 
that science is more successful than magic from this point of view, although magic foreshadows 
science in that it is sometimes also successful. Both science and magic however require the same 
sort of mental operations and they differ not so much in kind as in the different types of phenomena 
to which they are applied. (Lévi-Strauss, 1966:13)
This  statement  about  “the  science  of  the  concrete”  articulates  Lévi-Strauss's 
reasons for the promotion and celebration of “primitive” myths as both “systems of 
abstract relations and as objects of aesthetic contemplation” (1964). Not only might 
the study of “primitive” myths open up avenues to understanding the hidden logic 
behind mythic thought, in its dual aspect as a logic of qualities and a logic of forms, 
but  it  might  also  create  an  opportunity  for  discovering  ethical  systems,  which 
Lévi-Strauss thinks can “give us a lesson in humility” (1979:507).
Goody's critique of Lévi-Strauss's dichotomy emphasizes the weakness of the 
premises, and  of  the  very distinction  of  “magic”  and  “myth,”  concepts  that  are 
“slippery to handle,” and “relics of some earlier folk contrast with religion on the one 
hand (as in sixteenth-century England) and history on the other (as in fifth-century 
Athens).” More important he believes that Levi-Strauss's opposition of “the science 
of the concrete” and “the science of the abstract” amounts to “a contrast between the 
domination of abstract science
44


--- PAGE 45 ---
Figure 1. Lévi-Strauss's Dichotomy
45


--- PAGE 46 ---
to changes in the means of communication and, specifically, to the introduction of 
writing.” Pushing forward a new distinction-the oral versus the written-Goody hopes 
to avoid both Lévi-Strauss's Grand Dichotomy and his “diffuse relativism that refuses 
to recognise long-term differences and regards each `culture' as a thing on its own, a 
law unto itself” (1977: 151 ).
Paradoxically, it is Lévi-Strauss's apparent diffuse relativism which appeals to me 
and, I think, to numerous students of non-Western Weltanschauungen and systems of 
thought (see, e.g., Heusch, 1982; Hallen and Sodipo, 1986). It makes sense not only 
by what it allows-a self-analytical anthropology but also in what it relativizes. As 
Tristes Tropiques demonstrates, the usefulness of a discourse on others goes beyond 
the gospel of otherness: there is not a normative human culture. It becomes a means 
for comprehending oneself. As Lévi-Strauss put it, in an excellent metaphor, the 
pleasure of listening to Debussy after Chopin is intensified; for the first constitutes an 
organized  preparation  for  the  second,  which  is  no  longer  perceived  as  arbitrary. 
“Perhaps, then, this [is] what travelling [and anthropology are], an exploration of the 
deserts of my mind rather than of those surrounding me” (1977:430). On the other 
hand, for the first time the anthropologist knows that he is the Other who may accept 
being in charge of reproducing a mythical state “which no longer exists, which has 
perhaps never existed and will probably never exist in the future” (1977:447). He can 
think about the impossible: in the exteriority of his own culture, he has come into 
contact with an episteme radically opposed to Western norms, which since Descartes, 
and  despite  Rousseau's  invitation,  have  enshrined  the  cogito  (1973:48-49). 
Presumably, Lévi-Strauss's perspective indicates a radical project of providing a body 
of knowledge that simultaneously could undermine a totalitarian order of knowledge 
and push knowledge into territories traditionally rejected as supposedly nonsensical.
Geertz states that “what Lévi-Strauss has made for himself is an infernal cultural 
machine” (1973:346). And regarding Foucault's enterprise, White notes that it “must 
seem to be little more than a continuation of a tradition of pessimistic, even decadent 
thought .... And it is true that [Foucault] not only finds little to lament in the passing 
of Western civilization, but also he offers less hope for its replacement by anything 
better”  (1979:113  ).  The  diagnosis  is  somewhat  familiar.  It  can  be  related  to 
Lévi-Strauss's and Foucault's doubts about the history of the Same.
Lévi-Strauss is opposed to the tyranny of history. “Even history which claims to 
be universal is still only a juxtaposition of a few real histories within which (and 
between which) very much more is left out than put in” (1966:2-57). One could even 
generalize from this view and think that history is fundamentally a myth and thus 
enlarge Lévi-Strauss's concern: “history is never history, but history for.” In effect, as 
Lévi-Strauss says, “what makes history possible is that a sub-set of events is found, 
for a given period, to have approximately the same significance for a contingent of 
individuals who have not necessarily experienced the events and may even consider 
them at an interval of several centuries” (1966:2-57).
46


--- PAGE 47 ---
Lévi-Strauss has chosen to pursue the analysis  of “mythological systems” in 
order to write his own myth about them by using intellectual “categories” as tools for 
revealing  an  abstract  and  universal  order  of  rationality  (Lévi-Strauss,  1968: 
Overture). In this process he simultaneously promotes the kingdoms of “primitive 
organizations” and advances the claim that the order of cultural changes is determined 
everywhere by the constraints of the human mind. In doing so he methodologically 
replaces the Freudian unconscious by positing, as his aim, a “super-rationalism,” a 
universal unconscious that subsumes all particularities. What is, de facto, rejected or 
diminished in this perspective is the sovereignty of both “dialectical reason” and 
“historical consciousness.” Referring to Sartre's Critique de la raison dialectique, 
(Lévi-Strauss, can affirm that in Sartre's system, history plays exactly the part of a 
myth (1966:256).
Foucault seems to be an unhappy “historian of the Same.” “I cannot,” he writes, 
“be satisfied until I have cut myself off from `the history of ideas,' until I have shown 
in what way archaeological analysis differs from the descriptions of `the history of 
ideas”' (7982:136). In sum, as an unbelieving historian, he “rewrites” the ambiguous 
passion of knowledge. All his books provide good examples of this exercise, which 
brings to light the long, difficult, and permanent struggle of the Same and the Other. 
By promoting a critical archaeology of knowledge, not only does he separate himself 
from a history but also from its classical presuppositions, which lead to and serve the 
arrogance  of  the  Same.  In  his  Discourse  on  Language,  Foucault  delineates  this 
objective: “to question [the Western] will to truth; to restore to discourse its character 
as an event; to abolish the sovereignty of the signifier” (1982:229).
Foucault's horizon is, one might say, a relativization of the truth of the Same in 
the dispersion of history; in other words “a decentralizing that leaves no privilege to 
any center.” It is striking that one can hear, from this very practice which “deploys a 
dispersion that can never be reduced to a single system of difference,” Lévi-Strauss's 
voice proclaiming after Rousseau: “Nothing is settled; everything can still be altered. 
What was done, but turned out wrong, can be done again. The Golden Age which 
blind superstition had placed behind [or ahead of] us, is in us” (1977:448).
I  think  that  the  positions  of  Lévi-Strauss  and  Foucault  signify  new  critical 
symbols as well as invitations to redefine and rework or transform the history of the 
Same. I also would like to integrate Ricoeur, who, studying the crisis of Western 
historicity, invites us to join our efforts “under the sign of (Plato's) `great class' which 
itself associates the Same and the Other. The Similar is the great category. Or better, 
the Analogue which is a resemblance between relations rather than between simple 
terms” (Ricoeur, 1984:25).
The following pages will show the real ambition of the Analogue. But in order to 
make it clearer, let me say that I shall be studying it with the passion of the Other, of 
that being which has been so far a mere object of the discourses of social and human 
sciences.
47


--- PAGE 48 ---
The masterful demonstrations by Lévi-Strauss and Foucault do not convince me 
that the subject in the discourse on the Same or on the Other should be a mere illusion 
or a simple shadow of an episteme. What they teach me is different; namely, that we 
lack a theory that could solve the dialectic tension between creative discourses and 
the  epistemological  field  which  makes  them  possible,  on  the  one  hand,  and 
Lévi-Strauss's  unconscious  that  sustains  discourses  and  accounts  for  their 
organization, on the other. In fact, there is an obvious way out of this problem by 
means  of  the  subject,  who  directly  or  indirectly,  consciously  or  unconsciously, 
participates in the modification or the constitution of an epistemological order. M. 
Foucault, for example, clearly knew what his subjective will meant for the promotion 
of  otherness  and  strongly  urged  us  to  reconsider  what  madness,  as  well  as 
incarceration and sexual “abnormality,” signify in a given society (see, e.g., Foucault, 
1965, 1977, 1978). As for Lévi-Strauss, it strikes me that he proves well in the 
Mythologiques that empirical categories can be used as keys to a silent code, leading 
to universals. When analyzed, such a project in social sciences can be pertinent only 
with regard to the intentionality of its inventor. In our case, it is in Lévi-Strauss's 
praxis expressing itself within a cultural and human environment which is an obvious 
practico-inert as illustrated by his confession in Tristes Tropiques. The cry that closes 
the book-that the Golden Age is not behind nor before us but in us-expresses the 
power  of  a  consciousness  and  its  liberty.  In  sum,  the  structuralist  method  that 
Lévi-Strauss develops and applies convincingly is an intellectual tool; its condition of 
possibility resides in an epistemological field in which the strength of the cogito has 
led  to  the  right  of  an  absolute  human  freedom,  and  consequently to  systematic 
meditations on the comparative virtues of the Same and Other.
One might meditate upon the grave moral conclusion that ends the Origin of 
Table Manners (1979), which demonstrates that the ambiguous idea of Sartre's “hell 
is other people” has not been entertained by Indians, who modestly state that “hell is 
us”  (Lévi-Strauss,  1979:422,).  This  philosophical  choice  completes the  lesson  of 
Rousseau's  Confessions  on  I  as  an  Other,  without  negating  or  suppressing 
Lévi-Strauss's  freedom to  meditate  on these  paradoxical  statements  and  compare 
them. In this particular situation, Lévi-Strauss to use an expression he likes-is in the 
situation of an astronomer looking at stars. To claim “I is an Other” would be, in this 
case, to propose a symbolic identification. The “I” who pronounces this sentence is, 
in Sartrean vocabulary, in anguish, a subject thinking about how to define himself. Is 
he the absolute subject of the praxis that the sentence expresses symbolically or a 
pure reflection of the Other as meant by the copula?
An African Amplification
After a certain period it would be the sound of 
the whistle alone that would produce the
48


--- PAGE 49 ---
effect. The men would have acquired what are 
known in scientific jargon as conditioned
reflexes.
P. BOULLE, Planet of the Apes.
Lévi-Strauss and Foucault have brought to African consciousness new reasons for 
developing original strategies within the social sciences. It is not my aim here to 
discuss the extent of their African presence, nor the possible deviation that their real 
or supposed disciples indicate in African social studies (see, e.g., Kinanga, 1[981; 
N'zembele, 1983). I will rather describe an atmosphere, that of an African prise de 
parole  about  philosophy  and  knowledge,  in  which  one  easily  recognizes  an 
amplification of Lévi-Strauss's and Foucault's major theses. Politically, one might 
also find on the surface strong coincidental resemblances to Sartre's dreams regarding 
liberation.
The notion of amplification implies direct or indirect causal relations. As I. D. 
London put it, “amplifying effects . . . can make minor events the progenitors of 
larger happenings.” More precisely, one can distinguish two main genres of effects: 
“an amplifying causal sequence may be seen as producing either of two effects. (1) It 
may converge upon expectation, in which case amplification is said to be convergent; 
(z)  it  may  diverge  from  expectation  in  which  case  amplification  is  said  to  be 
divergent” (1977).
The convergence is obvious, particularly in Francophone Africa, where the prise 
de parole took place in the 1960s and 197os as a discourse about anthropology and 
simultaneously, a critical reflection on African culture and its geography. The pre 
independence generation of African intellectuals was mostly concerned with political 
power and strategies for ideological succession. Since 1960 and more visibly since 
the 197os, a new generation prefers to put forward the notion of epistemological 
vigilance. This generation seems much more concerned with strategies for mastering 
intellectual  paradigms  about  “the  path  to  truth,”  with  analyzing  the  political 
dimensions of knowledge, and with procedures for establishing new rules in African 
studies.  As  E.  Mveng  expressed  it  recently,  the  principle  of  the  new  attitude  is 
different: “if political sovereignty is necessary, the scientific sovereignty is perhaps 
more important in present-day Africa” (Mveng, 1983:14).
Power  is  still  an  objective.  In  order  to  comprehend  the  most  original  of 
contemporary discourses, one can still refer to Aimé Césaire's wish for an “African 
Copernican  revolution”  (1956:12).  Whether  or  not  the  use  of  hatred  against 
(neo-)colonialist guardianship or policies still makes sense, it does not seem any 
longer to be an important factor in the struggle for maturity. There is an African 
literature that flatters condescending Western ears, in which Africans prove, by means 
of négritude and black personality rhetoric, that they are “intelligent human beings” 
who once had respectable civilizations that colonialism destroyed. This is considered 
by some representatives of the present generation of African intellectuals to be a 
childish  reaction  of  overcompensation  (Towa,  1971a;  Rombaut,  1976).  For,  as 
Adotévi expressed it:
49


--- PAGE 50 ---
The Black person who accepts his race is a good Black, but if he forgets our fall, if he forgets 
himself, if he faints in mystical ecstasy, if he sees black when he should see right, he or she loses 
himself or herself, loses the being Black in losing perspective. (Adotévi, 1972:102.)
African responsibility seems thus defined in terms of intellectual attitudes rather 
than in reference to an imperative political succession. Is this sort of strategy a sign of 
an amplification of the Western crisis of the social and human sciences? E. Mveng is 
explicit about the connections and their meaning: “The West agrees with us today that 
the way to Truth passes by numerous paths, other than Aristotelian Thomistic logic or 
Hegelian dialectic. But social and human sciences themselves must be decolonized” 
(1983:141). In a text presenting the mission of “philosophy” in Africa, P Hountondji 
insists  on  a  preliminary  awareness  and  the  necessity  of  destroying  myths  of 
“Africanity”  and mystifications inherited  from the  “inventors”  of Africa  and her 
culture.
Therefore it was necessary to begin by demythifying the concept of Africanity, reducing it to a 
status of a phenomenon-the simple phenomenon which per se is perfectly neutral, of belonging to 
Africa-by dissipating the mystical halo of values arbitrarily grafted on this phenomenon by the 
ideologues of identity. It was necessary, in order to think of the complexity of our history, to bring 
the theatre of this history back to its basic simplicity. In order to think of the richness of African 
traditions, it was necessary to weaken resolutely the concept of Africa, to rid it of all its ethical, 
religious, philosophical, political connotations, etc., with which a long anthropological tradition had 
overloaded it and the most visible effect was to close the horizon, to prematurely close history. 
(Hountondji, 1981:52)
The propositions are transparent. Mveng seems to be carrying Foucault's project 
further than the French philosopher himself would have. Hountondji emphasizes the 
necessity  of  considering  Africanity  as  a  fait,  in  the  sense  of  an  event.  Its 
demythification  should  sustain  a  critical  reinterpretation  of  an  African  history 
invented  from its  exteriority.  Hountondji's  invitation  to  appauvrir  (impoverish  or 
weaken) the very notion of Africa implies a radical break in African anthropology, 
history,  and  ideology.  The  convergence  with  Lévi-Strauss's  and  Foucault's 
predicaments is clear.
Although most Western anthropologists have continued up to now to argue about 
the best models to account for primitive societies, Lévi-Strauss, Foucault, and, since 
the 1960s, Africans have been destroying the classical frame of anthropology. By 
emphasizing the importance of the unconscious and questioning the validity of a 
universal subject as the center of signification, they simultaneously demand a new 
understanding of the strange object of the human sciences and a redefinition of at 
least three fields, anthropology, history, and psychoanalysis, as leading disciplines of 
self-criticism. Foucault dreamed of the prestige of an anthropology that will “seek its 
object in the area of the unconscious processes that characterize the system of a given 
50


--- PAGE 51 ---
culture” and “would bring the relation of historicity, which is constitutive  of all 
ethnology in general, into play within the dimension in which psychoanalysis has 
always been deployed.” The aim of this reconversion would be the definition of “a 
system of cultural unconsciousness.” Anthropology might, then, cease to be what it 
has  been  until  now,  a  questionable  discourse  on  “societies  without  history” 
(1973:373-81).  How  can  one  not  recall  Levi-Strauss's  definition  of  the 
anthropologist's goal?
His goal is to grasp,  beyond  the conscious and always  shifting images which men hold,  the 
complete range of unconscious possibilities.  These are  not unlimited, and the relationships  of 
compatibility  or  incompatibility  which  each  maintains  with  all  the  others  provide  a  logical 
framework for historical developments, which, while perhaps unpredictable, are never arbitrary. 
(Lévi-Strauss, 1963:23)
The outcome of this critique of anthropology has been devastating (Towa, 1971a; 
Leclerc,  1972;  Adotévi,  1972).  It  is  nevertheless  essentially  the  outcome  of  an 
external crisis (see, e.g., Schwarz, 1979, 1980). For example, Mveng explicitly refers 
to this reconversion and to the deconstruction of systems alleged to be the best way to 
truth.  On  Hountondji's  agenda  of  philosophical  tasks,  if  a  radical  criticism  of 
anthropology's products is a preliminary obligation, the ultimate objective  of the 
philosopher's  task  seems  defined  by  an  amplification  of  one  specific  lesson  of 
Althusser, bearing on a theory of scientific practice whose development depends upon 
the actual development of scientific knowledge (Hountondji, 1977:214). Yet even a 
casual reader will perceive an ethnocentric tone. Mveng writes “the West agrees with 
us” rather than “we learn from the West.” Hountondji emphasizes the uniqueness of 
the European scientific tradition and, at the same time, describes the new subject of 
thinking,  the  African  philosopher,  as  “a  human  being  among  human  beings,  an 
intellectual among his colleagues and a member of a given social class” (Hountondji, 
1977:70). A glance back at the literature of 1940-196o shows the originality of the 
present-day spirit. Then, as G. Balandier wrote in his Afrique ambiguë, the African 
was  challenging  “the  weaknesses”  of  the  West,  trying  “to  gain  recognition  as  a 
subject of history,” and, paradoxically, demanding “the attention of a world which has 
become more curious about his destiny” This period was for him a moment of an 
aggressive “self-expression,” “after having long been an object of exchange or an 
instrument in the hands of foreigners.” He was defining his rights to succession and 
dedicating himself to a possible new beginning. It was the era of Négritude and 
African Personality, in brief, the period of the African event as described by Claude 
Wauthier  in his overview  of the  Africa of African  intellectuals (1964).  A liberal 
French scholar could begin his book on LAvènement de l'Afrique noire . . . in a way 
that  today  would  be  cause  for  embarrassment.  Blacks  are  awakening  from  a 
centuries-long slumber:
Black Africa as a political event expresses itself as the slow evolution that led Blacks to participate 
actively on the international scene. For thousands of years, in effect, they did not seem to have 
taken any initiatives: neither in
51


--- PAGE 52 ---
antiquity, when they were nevertheless in contact with the civilizations of the Middle East and the 
Far East;  nor during the Middle  Ages when they provided slaves, gold, and incense  to Arab 
merchants living on the coasts of Mozambique and Somalia, and where the message of Islam had 
reached them from North Africa across the Sahara; nor in the modern era, when Europeans had 
encircled the African coasts with forts and factories. (Brunschwig, 1963:7)
In the 1950s, some of the best students of African affairs were still concerned 
with questions of African humanity,  intellectual capabilities, and moral  evolution 
(Griaule, 1950, 1952; Guernier, 1952; Ombredane, 1969; Van Caeneghem, 1956). J. 
Vansina was examining how orality could actualize neat factual texts and precise 
knowledge which, once well understood, could be reproduced and enshrined in the 
frame of scientific discourses (Vansina, 1[961). In America, particularly during the 
1960s, at least in political science, “the major objective sought by the comparativists 
at the time was the development of a framework and categories that were universally 
valid so as to permit comparison of all types of historical and contemporary political 
systems (particularly Western and non-Western) irrespective of scale, structure or the 
cultural matrix within which they are found” (Coleman and Halisi, 1983:40).
Some Africans-after the negritude generation-have been forcibly domesticated, 
intellectually  speaking.  In  principle,  they  should  easily  function  in  an  orthodox 
manner  within  the  consecrated  field  of  normative  discourse,  sophisticated 
intelligence, and scientific textuality. But rather than reinforcing in the normative 
manner their own competence, most of them, in a kind of instinctual reflex, began to 
question its significance, interrogate the credibility of their own prises de parole, and 
challenge  the  evaluative  scale  of  both  scientific  processes  of  examination  and 
ideological presuppositions of tasks in social sciences.
Among others, the following can be considered representative of this spirit: W. E. 
Abraham  (Ghana),  O.  Bimwenyi  (Zaire),  H.  Djait  (Tunisia),  E  Eboussi-Boulaga 
(Cameroon), A. P E. Elungu (Zaire), P J. Hountondji (Benin), E. Mveng (Cameroon), 
A. M. Ngindu (Zaire), T Obenga (Congo). T. Okere (Nigeria), J. O. Sodipo (Nigeria), 
I.  Sow  (Guinea),  M.  Towa  (Cameroon),  and  K.  Wiredu  (Ghana).  They  are  all 
members of the same generation: the oldest, Mveng, was born in 1930; the youngest, 
Hountondji, in 1942. They all published their major works between 1960 and 1970. 
Two external characteristics give to this group a relative homogeneity: the spiritual 
context  of  their  youth  and  their  formal  training.  Most  of  them  were  born  into 
Christian families, which constitute the second or the third generation of African 
Christians. Thus they were or still are profoundly marked by Christian principles and 
values. A number of them (Bimwenyi, Eboussi-Boulaga, Mveng, Okere, and Ngindu) 
are Roman Catholic priests, and others (Elungu and Towa, for example) at one time in 
their  lives  thought  about  becoming  priests.  The  second  external  unifying 
characteristic is the type of training that these persons received. To illustrate, let us 
note that they were educated at some of the most respected schools and universities in 
Europe, principally in
52


--- PAGE 53 ---
Belgium and France, and hold prestigious academic degrees. For example Djait 
and Hountondji attended the well-known Ecole Normale Supérieure in Paris and are 
both agrégés, in history and philosophy respectively. Abraham did his postgraduate 
program at the University of Oxford, where he received his D. Phil. Obenga holds an 
impressive  list  of  degrees  ranging  from  history  to  Egyptology  and  philology. 
Theologian and philosopher, trained within the curriculum studiorum of the Society 
of Jesus, Eboussi-Boulaga is a docteur en philosophie from the University of Lyon. 
Bimwenyi  and Okere  have doctorates  in theology and philosophy from Louvain 
University;  Ngindu  holds  a  doctorate  from  the  Catholic  School  of  Theology  in 
Kinshasa and a degree in social sciences from the University of Paris. Sow, an M.D., 
holds two doctorats d'Etat from the University of Paris, one in medicine, the second 
in human and social sciences. Elungu, Mveng and Towa, in addition to their doctorats 
de troisième cycle and various degrees in philosophy and letters, are docteurs d'Etat 
from the University of Paris.
On the basis of their academic achievements, these men hold important positions. 
They  are  university  professors,  and  some  have  had  important  political 
responsibilities. For a number of years, Abraham was the in partibus philosopher of 
President Nkrumah in Ghana; Obenga has been the minister of foreign affairs in the 
Congo;  and  Hountondji  and  Mveng  were,  for  years,  top  civil  servants  in  their 
respective countries, Benin and Cameroon. Their actual power is, however, in the 
intellectual and spiritual field that they control de facto. They are not only teachers 
but also in charge of regional, inter-African, or even international agencies working 
for the development of the continent. Bimwenyi, for example, was until recently a 
powerful  generalsecretary  of  the  influential  Zairean  episcopate.  Sow  is  active 
throughout  black  Africa  in  the  establishment  of  new  programs  in 
psycho-anthropology. Obenga brings to African history associations a critical view on 
Cheikh Anta Diop's theses and, at the same time, as director of a major research 
center  in Libreville,  fights  for  “an African  perspective”  and initiative  in  history. 
Sodipo, a university vice-chancellor, is the editor of Second Order, and Wiredu, his 
assistant  editor.  Hountondji  manages  the  General-Secretariat  of  the  InterAfrican 
Council of Philosophy. Mveng, who for a long time was GeneralSecretary of the 
African  Society  of  Culture  in  Paris,  is  now  serving  as  the  coordinator  of  the 
Ecumenical Association of Third-World Theologians; and Ngindu is the editor of the 
Bulletin of African Theology and the secretary of the Center of African Religions in 
Kinshasa and secretary of its journal, Cahiers des religions africaines.
All of these men are “in power,” and no one doubts their mission in the process of 
modernization. Through different lenses, they all more or less define and explain 
conditions  and  possibilities  of setting  in motion  principles  of  modernization  and 
defining the meaning of being African today. This is highly ideological and one could 
assert  that  their  contributions  are  no  more  than  “programatic  statements”  or 
“polemics.” This is a matter of subjective judgment. These intellectuals are producing 
a body of good works, which are both difficult, because of the amplifications that 
explain them, and extremely
53


--- PAGE 54 ---
sophisticated with respect to the relationships between power and knowledge. There 
is no doubt that a careful study of their works would locate weaknesses. However, it 
would also emphasize the complexity and ambiguity of propositions for creative 
capacities and multiple and nonrestrictive ways to truth. Indeed, the general ambition 
of these propositions for spiritual and intellectual autonomy silently assumes a severe 
political and ideological confrontation. Abraham put it aptly:
But what shall Africa, which is not of the West or of the East do? It would perhaps at least be an act 
of supine madness to ape the West or the East, indeed any point of the compass, like a new 
sun-worship, in ways which cannot leave the cultures of Africa the same without our having an 
interest in what is dominant in the external culture, or without bothering to understand its mechanics 
and rationale. (Abraham, 1966:35)
With the problem of truth, we are confronted with one of the most paradoxical 
forms of amplification and with the promotion of African alternatives. Indeed, it is on 
this particular question that African academics and scholars violently interrogate the 
European tradition. In order to clarify the meaning of this violence, let us note that 
since Descartes philosophy in the West has been, in a special way, concerned with the 
relationship between knowledge and truth: “to be a philosopher was to be concerned 
with the question, what is the truth? What is knowledge?” (Foucault, 1980:82). With 
Nietzsche, the question was modified and became: “what is the best way, the surest 
path to truth?” Accordingly, in his work on The Crisis of the European Sciences, 
Husserl was dealing, in actuality, with Nietzsche's promulgation. Foucault considers 
himself to represent a third moment, from which, looking backwards, he can ask: 
“What is the history of this will to truth? What are its effects? How is all this in 
relation to power?” (1980).
The  African  postulation  would  seem  situated,  metaphorically,  between 
Nietzsche's predicament and Foucault's enterprise. More precisely, it critically jumps 
the “bavardages” of colonial discourses and its “anthropological” applications, and 
centers on the system of signification that allowed the “colonial propositions” and 
their inferences. This critical jump is negatively described by Eboussi-Boulaga as a 
“way of survival.” Philosophizing becomes an urgent task: “si Pon veut survivre, il 
faut `vraiment' philosopher” (in order to survive one must philosophize). Concretely, 
the path to truth still seems, so far, an external model accomplished in the West, 
imposing rules for the renunciation of the African will to be self and, simultaneously, 
defining the principles for the abolition of regional histories:
It remains for the Muntu to realize for himself what is already in himself. To realize for oneself, for 
one's profit, by going to a good school, getting help or learning to produce, imitate, according to his 
capacity. His truth being realized outside of himself, he has no resource except to apply, imitate, 
turn to intermediaries. (Eboussi-Boulaga, 1977:95)
This principle that founded “colonial sciences” is, according to EboussiBoulaga, 
still operating in Africa. Even in the commitment of present-day
54


--- PAGE 55 ---
African philosophers and social scientists, one might find, subtle and silent, the 
acceptance of the thesis of the Western philosophical model as a “rationalité en acte.” 
Because of this situation, Eboussi-Boulaga hypothesizes a critical “récit pour soi,” 
which on a regional basis and from a new “reading” of one's own particular social 
experience,  can  organize  the  chaos  and  put  forward  the  rationality of  historical 
sequences, the links between facts from the standpoint of their finality, or from the 
genesis  of  this finality itself.  Thus, according  to  Eboussi-Boulaga,  the  récit  is  a 
reconstruction of history. By necessity a negation of the present, and also a negation 
of self, it is, at the same time, the only critical way to self. Its internal dynamism will, 
eventually,  guarantee  the  reconciliation  of the  historical  reason  and a reasonable 
freedom for the Muntu.
The historical reason and reasonable liberty are rested from experienced madness and arbitrariness. 
They are the inversion and reversal of madness and arbitrariness. The discourse which is being 
constituted by the being for-itself should describe in a concrete way the future of the for-itself in 
history, in a regional history, whose reach is universal because of the being of the subject, the 
subject of history. (Eboussi-Boulaga, 1977:223)
The notion of critical reading, as well as that of a récit pour soi that might 
produce a regional historical account of the global history of humankind, bring us 
back to Lévi-Strauss's and Foucault's annihilation of the mythologies of the Same.
From this perspective, B. Moore's classical rules on scientific strategies and their 
metaphors-e.g., “in science, as in art, we are compelled to make estimates about 
promising and unpromising lines of attack” (1958)-seem dreams of a questionable 
conjunction of science, knowledge, and power. Lévi-Strauss insists: Who is speaking 
about science? Do we know how to live with others? “The formula `hell is other 
people,' which has achieved such widespread fame, is not so much a philosophical 
proposition as an ethnographical statement about [Western] civilization. For, since 
childhood, we have been accustomed to fear impurity as coming from without. When 
they assert, on the contrary that `hell is ourselves,' savage peoples give us a lesson in 
humility  which,  it  is  to  be  hoped,  we  may  still  be  capable  of  understanding” 
(Lévi-Strauss, 1979:507). This ethical lesson stems from an anthropological context. 
Eboussi-Boulaga's discourse deploys itself in the order of an amplification conceived 
from an African perspective. Foucault, in the conclusion of his survey of the history 
of insanity in the Age of Reason, notes that “Nietzsche's last cry, proclaiming himself 
both Christ and Dionysos, is not on the border of reason and unreason, . . . but the 
point where [art] becomes impossible and where it must fall silent” (1965:287). I 
think  a  number  of  African  thinkers  would  identify  with  Nietzsche's  claim,  in  a 
figurative way.
The amplification is obvious. Is it pure accident that a great number of leading 
African intellectuals have, between 1955 and 1970, worked strenuously publishing 
works on some really “compromising” European
55


--- PAGE 56 ---
thinkers?  To  note  just  a  few:  Elungu  specialized  in  Malebranche's  philosophy; 
Hountondji  chose  Husserl  and  Comte;  Senghor  commented  upon  Teilhard  de 
Chardin's theses; Towa was then working on Hegel, Ngindu beginning his book on 
Laberthonnière, and Ugirashebuja completing his research on Heidegger. In these 
enterprises one notes a remarkable mediation between the rigor of a philosophical 
exercise and the fantasies of a political insurrection: the text commented upon is a 
mirror  which  reveals  the  self  to  the  reader  or  commentator.  From  an  idealist 
epistemology come questions and propositions which, on the one hand, seem close to 
Sartre's political aesthetics for the liberation of the Third World and, on the other, 
transpose  into  African  geography Foucault's  and  Lévi-Strauss's  critiques  of  such 
notions as history, culture, human space, and conventions.
This clear amplification is sufficient reason for me to state that despite their 
violence  against  the  rule  of  the  Same  and  the  history of  its  conquests  over  all 
regionalisms, specificities, and differences, Lévi-Strauss and Foucault, as well as a 
number  of  African  thinkers,  belong  to  the  signs  of  the  same power.  What  they 
represent could be considered an expression of the “intelligence” of the Same. As 
Foucault himself  stated,  referring  to his own intellectual filiation:  “Can one still 
philosophize where Hegel is no longer possible? Can any philosophy continue to 
exist  that  is  no  longer  Hegelian?”  And  more  precisely:  “truly  to  escape  Hegel 
involves an exact appreciation of the price we have to pay to detach ourselves from 
him. It assumes that we are aware of the extent to which Hegel, insidiously perhaps, 
is close to us; it implies a knowledge in that which permits us to think against Hegel, 
of that which remains Hegelian” (1982:2-35). One could also relate Lévi-Strauss's 
view to this same origin, or, more convincingly, to Kant's dream about metaphysics 
and anthropology (see Lévi-Strauss, 1968).
The  apparent  profanation  represented  by  these  projects  might  simply  be  an 
optical illusion. Lévi-Strauss and Foucault are engulfed in the history of the Same and 
its contradictions. I would not say that African intellectuals are engulfed in the same 
way. The passion that in Lévi-Strauss's and Foucault's works presents theories about 
norm, rule, and system only uncovers and seeks strictly to define this complex history 
of  an  identity.  In  the  name  of  the  same  methodological  principles,  Africans 
tend-despite differences of language and education-to doubt the ethical value of these 
estimations (see e.g., Hountondji, 1977; Wiredu, (1980).
Seen from the frontiers of the Western power-knowledge system, all these choices 
seem stimulating. Still, one can meditate on their projects as possible symbols of a 
failed will to transcendence, now expressing its desire towards an ambiguous new 
beginning.  However, it  is  important  to  note  that  African  ideology,  as a body of 
reflexions  and  questions,  springs  from the  same  lines  of  dissolution  that,  in  the 
kingdom of the Same, allowed Lévi-Strauss's and Foucault's crises. Metaphorically 
speaking,  in  Nietzsche's  confusion  there  is  not only the silence  of  an  art  and a 
power-knowledge,  but  also,  insistently,  there  are  all  the  promises  of  Kant's  old 
question on the possibility of an anthropology: how pertinent is it to speak about 
humans?
56


--- PAGE 57 ---
III
THE POWER OF SPEECH
The Missionary's Discourse and Africa's Conversion
In fact, I am now so accustomed to the 
paradoxes of this planet that I wrote the 
preceding sentence without thinking of 
the absurdity it represents.
P BOULLE, Planet of the Apes.
It  takes little imagination to realize  that  missionary discourses on Africans  were 
powerful. They were both signs and symbols of a cultural model. For quite a long 
time,  along  with  travelers'  accounts  and  anthropologists'  interpretations,  they 
constituted a kind of knowledge. In the first quarter of this century, it was clear that 
the traveler had. become a colonizer and the anthropologist, his scientific advisor, 
while the missionary, more vigorously than ever, continued, in theory as well as in 
practice, to expound the model of African spiritual and cultural metamorphosis.
The missionary's particular position in the process of Africa's conversion has led 
to  very  peculiar  results  (Bureau,  1962:248-62).  These  results,  intersecting  with 
ideological perspectives, have, on the one hand, fostered African theories of otherness 
and, on the other, brought about serious doubt concerning the pertinence of Western 
discourses on African societies. Thus, we have two magnificent actors: the missionary 
and  his  African  successor,  both  of  them  presenting  their  views  on  policies  of 
conversion, basing them on what African culture is supposed to be, and utilizing 
anthropology  as  a  means  of  dominating  or  liberating  African  people  (Hastings, 
1979:119-20).
The theme to investigate is the articulation between missionary language and its 
African echo or negation, and the ultimate  consequences  of this relationship  for 
anthropology. The investigation is appropriate in view of questionable hypotheses 
about missionaries' positive or negative contributions to African ideology, and, in 
general, of the controversial interpretations of this relationship in the crisis of African 
Studies.
For the sake of clarity, I shall address first the subject of missionary discourse; 
second, the African response; third, how they mingle historically and ideologically in 
an anthropological locus and have ad valorem responsibility in the building of an 
African ideology of otherness.
57


--- PAGE 58 ---
The  more  carefully  one  studies  the  history of  missions  in  Africa,  the  more 
difficult it becomes not to identify it with cultural propaganda, patriotic motivations, 
and commercial interests, since the missions' program is indeed more complex than 
the simple transmission of the Christian faith. From the sixteenth century to the 
eighteenth, missionaries were, through all the "new worlds," part of the political 
process of creating and extending the right of European sovereignty over "newly 
discovered" lands (Keller, Lissitzyn, and Mann, 1938). In doing so, they obeyed the 
"sacred  instructions"  of  Pope  Alexander  VI  in  his  bull  Inter  Caetera  (1493):  to 
overthrow paganism and establish the Christian faith in all barbarous nations. The 
bulls of Nicholas V-Dum Diversas (1452) and Romanus Pontifex (1455)-had indeed 
already given the kings of Portugal the right to dispossess and eternally enslave 
Mahometans,  pagans,  and  black  peoples  in  general  (Deschamps,  1971).  Dum 
Diversas clearly stipulates this right to invade, conquer, expell, and fight (invadendi, 
conquirendi, expugnandi, debellandi) Muslims, pagans, and other enemies of Christ 
(saracenos ac paganos, aliosque Christi inimicos) wherever they may be. Christian 
kings, following the Pope's decisions, could occupy pagan kingdoms, principalities, 
lordships,  possessions  (regna,  principatus,  Dominia,  possessiones)  and  dispossess 
them of their personal property, land, and whatever they might have (et mobilia et 
immobilia  bona  quaecumque  per  eos  detenta  ac  possessa).  The  king  and  his 
successors  have  the  power and right  to  put these peoples  into perpetual  slavery 
(subjugandi  illorumque  personas  in  perpetuam  servitutem).  (See  Bimwenyi, 
1981a:621
The missionaries, preceding or following a European flag, not only helped their 
home country to acquire new lands but also accomplished a "divine" mission ordered 
by  the  Holy  Father,  Dominator  Dominus.  It  was  in  God's  name  that  the  Pope 
considered the planet his franchise and established the basic principles of terra nullius 
(nobody's  land),  which  denies  non-Christian  natives  the  right  to  an  autonomous 
political existence and the right to own or to transfer ownership (Witte, 1958).
If the Reformation challenged the Holy Father's power "to give, grant and assign 
forever"  lands to European monarchs, the  new axiom, cuius regio, illius  religio, 
enforced the complementarity between colonial activity and religious conversion. For 
instance, the Christian kingdom of Congo, was officially recognized by the Holy See 
and  the  major  European  seapowers  in  the  sixteenth  and  seventeenth  centuries. 
However, it lost its special status in the mercantitist and Protestant eighteenth century. 
The prevalent economic ideal of a "balance of trade" was inseparable from the need 
to increase the nation's wealth and its strength, hence the great utility of colonial trade 
and possessions.
The Church's involvement in establishing Western sovereignty was important 
both before and after the Reformation. The mass celebrated on the Guinea Coast in 
1481,  under  a  big  tree  displaying  the  royal  arms  of  Portugal,  symbolized  the 
possession of a new territory. Among a multitude of other similar acts, Vasco Da 
Gama erected a pillar, engraved with the Portuguese
58


--- PAGE 59 ---
royal arms, on the east coast in the kingdom of Melinda, and Diego Caon constructed 
another in 1494 at the mouth of the Congo River. These symbols were part of a 
formal and elaborate ceremony of appropriation of a terra nullius. Generally, such a 
ceremony  presented  three  major  characteristics  (Keller  et  al.,  1938):  (a)  the 
construction of a physical sign bearing the royal arms, such as a pillar (Portuguese), a 
landmark or even a simple pile of stones (Spanish), or a cross (English and French); 
(b) a solemn declaration, perhaps presenting the letters patent received from the king, 
announcing the new sovereignty and indicating that the possession is taken in the 
name of, or for, the king; and (c) a symbolization of the new jurisdiction. Explorers 
from Roman Catholic nations, generally, performed a mass; whereas Anglo-Saxons 
symbolized their control over the land with a sacred formula or legal decree. For 
example,  on  August  5,  1583,  as  part  of  the  ceremony  of  taking  possession  of 
Newfoundland, Sir Humphrey Gilbert promulgated a code of three laws; namely, the 
establishment of the Church of England in the colony; the punishment as high treason 
of any act prejudicial to the Queen's right of possessing the new land; and, for "those 
uttering words to the Queen's dishonour, the penalty to be having their ears removed 
and their ship and goods confiscated" (see, e.g., Keller et al., 1938).
The missionary played an essential role in the general process of expropriation 
and, subsequently, exploitation of all the "new found lands" upon the earth. As G. 
Williams puts it, if in many areas his presence "helped to soften the harshness of 
European  impact  on  the  indigenous  peoples  whose  lands  were  invaded  and 
exploited,"  his  "fervour  was  allied,  rather  than  opposed  to  commercial  motive" 
(Williams, 196'7:29).
The scramble for Africa in the nineteenth century took place in an atmosphere of 
Christian revival: the age of Enlightenment and its criticism of religion had ended. 
Coleridge's  phrase,  "the  Bible  finds  you,"  was  an  apt  one  for  all  Christians.  In 
Catholic Europe, the First Vatican Council firmly reorganized Catholicism. A group 
of distinguished prelates even reevaluated the meaning of the so-called curse of Ham, 
hoping that "the interior of Africa may participate in the solemn coming joy of the 
Church's  triumph"  (Interior  Africa  solemnis  gaudii  proximi  Ecclesiae  triumphi 
particeps  fiat)  (Bimwenyi,  1981:625-26).  There  was,  besides,  a  general  spirit  of 
adventure  in  the  air  (Rotberg,  1970;  Betts,  1975).  The  European  political  and 
economic rivalries were an incentive to action overseas. The success of men like 
Cecil Rhodes reinforced the myth of an African treasure house and appealed to young 
and ambitious potential colonists. Above all, scientific curiosity and philanthropic 
objectives combined and confused the struggle against the slave trade, geographic 
explorations, and mythologies about "poor savage Africans" (Hammond and Jablow, 
1977).
Three major figures, from the fifteenth century to the end of the nineteenth, 
determined modalities and the pace of mastering, colonizing, and transforming the 
"Dark Continent": the explorer, the soldier, and the missionary (Christopher, 1984). 
The explorer, at the end of the fifteenth century,
59


--- PAGE 60 ---
was looking for a sea-route to India. Later on, he concerned himself with mapping out 
the continent and, in the nineteenth century, compiling information and organizing 
complex bodies of knowledge, including medicine, geography, and anthropology. The 
soldier constituted the most visible figure of the expansion of European jurisdiction. 
He built castles and forts on the coasts, was in charge of trading posts, participated in 
the slave-trade, and, in the nineteenth century, implemented colonial power. Finally, 
there was the missionary, whose objective has been, throughout the centuries, the 
most consistent: to expand "the absoluteness of Christianity" and its virtues.
Of  all  "these  bearers  of  the  African  burden,"  the  missionary  was  also, 
paradoxically, the best symbol of the colonial enterprise (see Kalu, 1977). He devoted 
himself  sincerely to  the  ideals  of colonialism: the expansion  of Civilization,  the 
dissemination of Christianity, and the advance of Progress. Pringle's 1820 vision sums 
it up nicely:
Let us enter upon a new and nobler career of conquest. Let us subdue Savage Africa by justice, by 
kindness, by the talisman of Christian truth. Let us thus go forth, in the name and under the blessing 
of God, gradually to extend the moral influence . . . the territorial boundary also of our colony, until 
it shall become an Empire. (Hammond and Jablow, 1977:44)
Obviously, the missionary's objectives had to be co-extensive with his country's 
political and cultural perspectives on colonization, as well as with the Christian view 
of his mission. With equal enthusiasm, he served as an agent of a political empire, a 
representative  of  a  civilization,  and  an  envoy  of  God.  There  is  no  essential 
contradiction  between  these  roles.  All  of  them  implied  the  same  purpose:  the 
conversion  of  African  minds  and  space.  A.  J.  Christopher  rightly  observes  that 
"missionaries,  possibly  more  than  members  of  other  branches  of  the  colonial 
establishment, aimed at the radical transformation of indigenous society . . . They 
therefore  sought,  whether  consciously  or  unconsciously,  the  destruction  of 
pre-colonial societies and their replacement by new Christian societies in the image 
of Europe" (1984:83).
One  might  consider  that  missionary  speech  is  always  predetermined, 
preregulated, let us say colonized. It depends upon a normative discourse already 
given, definitely fixed, clearly meant in "a vital connection between Christianity and 
Western culture as a whole" (Dickson, 1984:33). Missionary orthodox speech, even 
when imaginative or fanciful, evolved within the framework of what, from now on, I 
shall call the authority of the truth. This is God's desire for the conversion of the 
world in terms of cultural and sociopolitical regeneration, economic progress and 
spiritual  salvation.  This  means,  at  least,  that  the  missionary does  not  enter  into 
dialogue  with  pagans  and  "savages"  but  must  impose  the  law  of  God  that  he 
incarnates. All of the non-Christian cultures have to undergo a process of reduction 
to, or-in missionary language-of regeneration in, the norms that the missionary
60


--- PAGE 61 ---
represents. This undertaking is perfectly logical: a person whose ideas and mission 
come from and are sustained by God is rightly entitled to the use of all possible 
means, even violence, to achieve his objectives. Consequently, "African conversion," 
rather than being a positive outcome of a dialogue unthinkable per se-came to be the 
sole position the African could take in order to survive as a human being.
In dealing with this kind of general theory, we need models to refer to. I propose 
to use three men: the seventeenth-century Italian Giovanni Francesco Romano; the 
nineteenth-century  African  Samuel  Ajayi  Crowther;  and  the  twentieth-century 
Belgian  Placide  Frans  Tempels.  These  individuals  were  neither  the  best  of  all 
missionaries, nor necessarily the most remarkable. Yet one easily recognizes that each 
one, in his time, was an excellent example of sound commitment to religious interests 
and imperial policy.
Giovanni E Romano, a missionary in the Congo from 1645 to 1654, published in 
1648 a report of fewer than one hundred pages on his voyage to, and his sojourn in, 
that central African kingdom (Romano, 1648). He really presents no reasons for 
supposing  that  the  Congolese  cannot  understand  the  Gospel's  message.  His 
conception of mission  coincides  with traditional practice. It struck me  that, as a 
missionary, he could have accomplished the same type of work with St. Boniface in 
Germany.  He  boasts  of  the  number  of  people  converted,  masses  celebrated, 
sacraments  given,  churches  erected,  but  he  cannot  stand  the  presence  of  Dutch 
Protestants, those "enemies of the Catholic faith," nemici della Santa Fede Cattolica, 
who undermine the impression of European grandeur and unity. Romano defines his 
own mission as working "God's field" la Vigna del Signore, and "preaching God's 
news" predicare la parola di Dio, to the "poor and pagan" Congolese, questi gentili, 
quei poveri, etc. For a soldier of God, this does not exclude concern for the privileges 
of  rank  and  for  the  continuation  of  this  friendly  Christian  kingdom  of  Congo. 
Romano and his colleagues intervene in the conflict between the Congolese monarch 
and one of his rebel vassals, since a Christian monarch is a treasure that must be 
preserved at any cost. About the Catholic Congolese monarch Garcia II he wrote: 
"The devotion that His Majesty has showed for our religion, convent and school is a 
praiseworthy thing for eternity" (Romano, 1648:37).
Romano's language is a language of orthodoxy, the expression of the Holy Faith. 
Few derogatory words occur in his report. In his ethnographic description of the 
kingdom, the African customs are neither curious nor bizarre (Mudimbe-Boyi, 1977). 
Except for the king and his courtiers, all the inhabitants are poor and pagan people. 
This is not a paradox. Romano describes an African version of a Christian European 
kingdom with its dukes, earls and barons. With such a model, it is perfectly normal to 
observe a rigid hierarchy determined by social status and position or, in terms of the 
interpretation current in Romano's time, by God's will. The only major difference 
between the model and its African expression appears in a metaphor of colors-white 
versus black: "The natives of Congo are all of them
61


--- PAGE 62 ---
black, some more, some less. At birth, they are not black but white and then gradually 
they  become  black"  (Mudimbe-Boyi,  1977:375-83).  At  the  heart  of  Romano's 
conviction lies the desire for the universality of God's law. At the same time he hopes 
to  overcome  Satan's  presence  in  the  African  vigna  della  Christianita  (field  of 
Christianity) and promote the essenza della verita (essence of truth).
The second model is Samuel Ajayi Crowther. Born about 1806, this former slave 
and native of Yorubaland in Nigeria was educated at Fourah Bay College (Sierra 
Leone) and in England. Ordained a minister in 1843 within the Church Missionary 
Society, he became in 1864 the first Anglican bishop of "the territories of Western 
Equatorial  Africa  beyond  the  Queen's  Dominions."  An  untiring  missionary,  he 
participated in several explorations, among them the voyage that he related in his 
Journal of an Expedition Up the Tshadda Rivers, published in 1855.
Crowther believed that Africa could regenerate herself without the help of others 
(Meester,  1980b:72;  Sanneh,  1983:60-83).  However,  in  presenting  his  own 
experience, he tends to refer to contemporary classification of "savages" and from 
this  perspective  builds  his  own  project  of  converting  his  African  brethren  to 
civilization  and  Christianity.  About  his  11854  Niger  expedition,  for  instance, 
Crowther recalls:
I asked whether the inhabitants of Gomkoi were Pagans or Mohammedans; and was informed that 
they were all Pagans; that the males wore some sort of cloth around their loins, but the females only 
a few green leaves. On asking whether they were cannibals, I was answered in the negative. (In 
Hammond and Jablow, 1977:36)
What is interesting in this brief quotation is its classificatory implications, in 
particular  the  characteristics  selected:  paganism,  nakedness,  and  cannibalism. 
Western-assimilated, Crowther intends to relate an ethnographic case objectively, but 
he is very clearly describing the syndrome of savagery. As D. Hammond and A. 
Jablow rightly put it:
The  basic  attitudes  which  arbitrarily  relate  these  essentially  unrelated  qualities-paganism, 
nakedness, cannibalism-are those which assign all cultural differences to the single category of 
savagery; and one trait as it distinguishes a savage from a European becomes an index to the 
existence of the other traits which are part of the syndrome. (Hammond and Jablow, 1977:36-37)
In fact, far from making Crowther responsible for this syndrome, I am inclined to 
look at him as expressing the signs of an episteme. He simply shares a pervasive 
evolutionary assumption, a tendency to see in Africans only these indexed features 
and thus subsequently to indicate the necessity of a regeneration through both a 
cultural and spiritual conversion (see figure 2).
62


--- PAGE 63 ---
Figure 2. Ideological Model of Conversion: Colonial Rule
Premises Mediators Aims
Status Primitiveness Conversion  Civilization
Symbols Pagan (evil) Christianity  Christian (good)
or signs
Naked (child) Education  Civilized (adults)
annibal (beast) Evolution  "Evolue" (human being)
Method Anthropological Missiology, Colonial
presuppositions applied sciences
 anthropology,
                                        pedagogy
My third model is the Belgian Placide F Tempels, a missionary in Central Africa 
from 1933 to 1962 and author of Bantu Philosophy. Placide Tempels was a very 
serious and careful student of Bantu culture, despite allegations to the contrary made 
mainly  by  professional  anthropologists  and  philosophers,  who  are  inclined  to 
emphasize formal training as the sine qua non condition of sound work. Tempels had 
lived more than ten years among the Luba Katanga people, sharing their language and 
culture when he decided to publish his experiences (11979:3-25). Rather than as a 
philosophical treatise, his Bantu Philosophy could be understood simultaneously as 
an  indication  of  religious  insight,  the  expression  of  a  cultural  doubt  about  the 
supposed backwardness of Africans, and a political manifesto for a new policy for 
promoting  "civilization"  and  Christianity.  But  this  complexity  is  not  what  is 
commonly discussed when specialists speak of Tempels's philosophy.
It must be remembered that Bantu Philosophy is based on very simple ideas. 
They go like this. First, in all cultures, life and death determine human behavior; or, 
presented  differently,  all  human  behavior  depends  upon  a  system  of  general 
principles.  Second,  if  the  Bantu  are  human  beings,  there  is  reason  to  seek  the 
fundamentals of their beliefs and behavior, or their basic philosophical system. From 
this position, Tempels attempts "a true estimate of indigenous peoples," rejecting "the 
misunderstanding and fanaticism of the ethnology of the past and of the former 
attitude of aversion entertained with regard to them" (Possoz's preface in Tempels, 
1959:13-15). This meant questioning the classical doctrines about evangelization, 
civilization and colonization (Tempels, 1959:167-89).
These three models-Giovanni Francesco Romano, Samuel Ajayi Crowther, and 
Placide Frans Tempels-signify the authority of the truth, its signs and discourse. We 
can perceive in them an expression of a common ideology. They are, all of them, 
people for whom commitment to God is central. Concretely, they believe that they are 
the ones in charge of saving
63


--- PAGE 64 ---
Africa. This, for them, means the promotion of the ideals of Christian civilization. 
Finally,  they  are  secure  in  their  knowledge  of  the  correct  means  for  Africa's 
conversion. In brief, they prove right M. de Certeau's observation that "the credibility 
of  a  discourse  is  what  first  makes  believers  act  in  accord  with  it.  It  produces 
practitioners" (Certeau, 1984:148).
In his evaluation of Christianity from an African point of view, EboussiBoulaga, 
the  philosopher  from Cameroon,  holds  that  in  general  missionary  discourse  has 
always  been  presented  as  a  discourse  of  philosophical  reduction  and  ideological 
intolerance:
Christianity is the inheritor of Greek reason and it is the continuation and the achievement of the 
Judaic  revelation.  By these  two  traits  it  is  the  critic  of  the  falsehood  of  other  religions  and 
denounces their mythological character. Its proper element is language and history, but not the 
obscure regions of the cosmos nor of the imaginary. That is why it agrees with modernity and resists 
better than other systems the corrosion of modernity, the disillusion of the world in which it exists. 
(Eboussi-Boulaga, 1981:35)
Sharing this belief in the superiority of Christianity, expressed in its essential 
qualifications,  that  is,  its  identification  with  reason,  history,  and  power,  the 
missionary's  discourse  has,  according  to  Eboussi-Boulaga,  always  presented  five 
major features. First of all, it is a language of derision, insofar as it fundamentally 
ridicules the pagan's Gods. And one must not forget that since its birth Christianity 
has appropriated for itself both the only way to true communication with the divine 
and the only correct image of God and God's magnificence. Second, it is a language 
of refutation or systematic reduction: all pagan religions constitute the black side of a 
white transcendental Christianity, and this metaphoric opposition of colors means the 
opposition  of  evil  and  good,  Satan  and  God.  The  third  feature  illuminates  the 
missionary's  pragmatic  objectives:  his  action  is  supported  by  a  language  of 
demonstration, which reflects God's truth. In order to sustain his derision for and 
refutation  of  non-Christian  beliefs  and  practices,  the  missionary  emphasizes  the 
Christian faith in terms of its historical coherence and transforming virtues. Religious 
and biblical categories enter into the logic of his civilization, thus making sacred a 
cultural  model  and  giving  it  a  divine  seal.  Consequently,  there  is  a  fourth 
characteristic: the rule of Christian orthodoxy which relates Faith to knowledge of the 
only Truth. This is the cornerstone of the belief in the supremacy of the European 
experience, the support of a fantastic set of principles. It accounts for the following 
major principles: first, that the Christian characteristic resides in the quality of Faith 
and not in moral grandeur; second, that it is Faith which promotes and gives sense to 
ethics and not the contrary. The last trait of missionary discourse relates to these two 
axioms and their theological significance: it is a language that conforms to these 
vigorous axioms. Missionary speech and praxis prove that no human enterprise can 
succeed as long as the true God is not
64


--- PAGE 65 ---
acknowledged. The Christian God's spirit appears, therefore, as history's only force.
I would prefer to simplify this analytical perspective of Eboussi-Boulaga's into a 
simpler scheme. The missionary language of derision is basically a cultural position, 
the  expression  of  an  ethnocentric  outlook.  The  aspects  of  refutation  and 
demonstration rationalize the initial ethnocentric moment and are aimed explicitly 
towards an intellectual reduction that would complement the rules of orthodoxy and 
conformity. Thus we have three moments, rather than types, of violence in missionary 
language.  Theoretically,  they  are  expressed  in  the  concepts  of  derision, 
refutation-demonstration, and orthodoxy-conformity.
Taking into account the missionary theology of salvation, and more precisely the 
general policies of conversio gentium, it becomes clear that the same violence is 
linked to the spiritual and cultural process of conversion in a hypostatic union (see 
figure 3 ). All missionaries, whatever their denominations, operate according to the 
same canon of conversion.
Their language depends on three major types of data always considered a given 
and  taken  for  granted:  premises, mediators,  and  objectives.  All  of  them tend  to 
integrate cultural and religious aims, the mission being altogether oriented towards 
the cultural promotion and spiritual salvation of "savages." Thus, for instance, G. E 
Romano's preaching of the Holy Faith to "these needy" also implied involvement in 
political affairs to perpetuate a Western Christian dependent polity in Africa. Bishop 
Crowther was preoccupied with both Christianization and Westernization of "naked, 
cannibal, and pagan primitives." Tempels stated his philosophy of civilizing Bantu 
people in this way: "If the Bantu cannot be raised by a Christian civilization, they will 
not be by any other" (1959:186).
The pertinent categories arise from a structural combination. On the one hand, 
ethnographic commentaries on African peoples are arranged according to the prospect 
of  their  possible  conversion;  on  the  other  hand,  specific  socio-cultural  symbols 
designate the passage from primitiveness to civilization.
An  evolutionary  thesis  expresses  the  conversion  from  savagery  and  Satan's 
darkness  to  the  light  of  civilization  and  God's  kingdom.  The  transformation  is 
sometimes described as the introduction or restoration of health in a sick universe, the 
establishment of order in a world of disorder, madness, corruption, and diabolical 
illusions (see Pirotte, 1973; Fernandez, 1979). In its standard form, the process of 
conversion which is the path to a "civilized life" is presented as a gradual one: at the 
lowest level one finds primitives or pagans; these, infected by the "will to become 
Westernized" become catechumens; the zenith of their development is achieved when 
they become Christians or "evolués," that is, Westernized individuals. Accordingly, 
the  missionary's  language  presents  three  major  approaches:  derision  of  so-called 
primitive religions and their gods, refutation and demonstration to convince
65


--- PAGE 66 ---
Figure 3. The Missionary Theology of Salvation
Premises Mediators  Aims
Status Primitiveness Conversion Western Civilization and
                                                                                           Christianity
Symbols Illness to introduce Health
                                                           to restore
Disorder to establish  Order
(madness, satanic  (Christian models of faith
illusions, and corruption)  and behavior)
Darkness to promote The Light of God and
 Civilization
Method Derision Demonstration Conformity
the  evolving  Africans,  and  imposition of  rules  of  orthodoxy and  conformity for 
converts.
Quite inevitably the Christian Faith has for many years . . . been inextricably bound up with this 
Western aggression. But it has also to be admitted quite frankly that during these centuries the 
missionaries  of  the  Christian  Church  have  commonly  assumed  that  Western  civilization  and 
Christianity were two aspects of the same gift which they were commissioned to offer to the rest of 
mankind. This assumption was sometimes quite conscious and was explicitly stated. More often it 
was quite unconscious and would have been indignantly denied. But in neither case are we called 
upon to judge our fathers. Their sincerity can hardly be disputed. (Taylor, 1963:5-6)
Fundamentally,  an  evolutionary assumption  was  expressed  on  the  basis  of  a 
dualistic anthropology (see Ngimbi-Nseka, 1979:10 and 28-19). As Benedict XV put 
it in his encyclic, Maximum Mud (1919), missionaries must be determined to oppose 
Satan and to bring salvation to the "poor people of Africa victimized by evil forces." 
Yet one notes that Romano focused on mediators and aims rather than on premises. 
And Tempels absolutely doubted the classical process of conversion: he was not sure 
in the least that assimilation constituted the best way, and he hated the "evolués," 
whom he considered to be bad copies of Europeans. Moreover, he did not believe that 
to Christianize  meant  to impose a Western philosophical  anthropology (Tempels, 
1962).  However,  Tempels's  position  did  not  imply  a  complete  negation  of  the 
essential dualism but only indicated another type of guidance for the promotion of 
orthodoxy and conformity. The emphasis he gave to Bantu ontology, for example, 
means  that  he  had  faith  in  the  possibility  of  bringing  about  a  "new  Christian 
civilization" without destroying Bantu values or their underlying major principles, the 
concept and reality of "vital
66


--- PAGE 67 ---
force" (see, e.g., Mataczynski, 1984 and Donders, 1985). This outlook is simply a 
new  manner  of  demonstrating  and  promoting  the  essence  of orthodoxy,  the  aim 
remaining clearly the same: "Christianity is the only possible consummation of the 
Bantu ideal" (Tempels, 1959:186).
Tempels is not alone in looking for new policies for integrating Christianity into 
African cultures, and Ethiopian Christianity, African Islam and syncretic churches all 
over the continent witness to the vitality of a process of indigenization (Monteil, 
1980; Sundkler, 1964; Barrett, 1968; Brenner, 11984). In the 1960s, Taylor detected 
three main ingredients in the African challenge to Christianity: (a) Christian religion 
is "inherently Western" and "fails to correspond to the felt needs of Asia and Africa"; 
(b) This challenge poses a radical question: "can the Christian faith not only prove its 
ability to meet the deep human needs of our time but also make peoples of different 
backgrounds feel at home in the new world?"; (c) "The Christian Church has not yet 
faced  the  theological  problem  of  `co-existence'  with  other  religions"  (Taylor 
1963:6-8).
At any rate, the apparent success of Christianity is startling. After one century of 
evangelization, the Christian community represents today some forty-five percent of 
the population of the continent. Let us note that, according to the World Bank (1984), 
the total population of sub-Saharan Africa, which "rose from 270 million in 1970 to 
359 million in 1980, seems set to double by the turn of the century and significantly 
more than triple by the year zozo" (World Bank, 1984:26). Within this frame, the 
Catholic  church  has  today  some  seventy-six  million  members,  Protestant 
denominations acknowledge  fifty million  followers; the Ethiopian Coptic  church, 
thirty million members, and some thousand autonomous local churches bring the total 
Christian membership to roughly zoo million. When one keeps in mind that, through 
conversion,  and  especially  disproportionate  population  growth  (see  World  Bank, 
1984:82-83),  the  Christian  community  gains  between  five  and  six  million  new 
members each year, it becomes obvious that by the year zooo Africa could have the 
largest  concentration  of  Christians  in  the  world  (Barrett,  1970;  Meester  de 
Ravenstein, 1980a:215; Donders, 1985:1, 30). The trend is identical with the increase 
in the number of ministers. A 1985 Vatican statistical report shows that in Catholicism 
"the number of Diocesan clergy is increasing in Africa, South America and Oceania." 
In Central America, the figures remain "almost the same." In North America, the 
report notes a "modest drop," and "the most notable reduction [is] found in Europe." 
But the most significant shift is in the percentage of the world's major seminarians 
produced by different parts of the world. In Africa it jumped from 6.7 percent in 1973 
to 10.7 percent in 1983, while in North America it dropped to 10.9 percent from 19.2 
percent in the same period. In Europe, the percentage went down to 34.4 percent from 
41.1 percent.
If European Catholicism seems to be aging dangerously, the dynamism of its 
African  counterpart  belongs  either  to  a  holy nightmare or,  if  one  prefers,  to  an 
incredible miracle: monasteries are being built; new religious movements, 
67


--- PAGE 68 ---
both activist and charismatic, are appearing and organizing themselves successfully; 
there are not enough schools for potential catechists, nor are there sufficient convents 
for nuns. There is not enough room in seminaries for candidates to the priesthood, yet 
despite the increase in vocation, particularly in the countries with the highest fertility 
rates-Kenya, Nigeria, Tanzania, Zaïre-the number of priests is considered to be low. 
According to the Vatican statistical document mentioned above, in 1983 Europe had 
58.2 percent of the world's priests for 3 3.3 percent of the world's Catholics; North 
America had 17.1 percent of the world's priests for 7.7 percent of its Catholics; South 
America  had  8.4  percent  of  the  world's  priests  for  28.1  percent  of  the  world's 
Catholics; and Africa had 4.3 percent  of priests for eight percent  of the  world's 
Catholics (see also Laurentin, 1977; Meester de Ravenstein, 1980a:214). As to other 
Christian denominations, one notes that, for example, the most populous Quaker 
community in the world lives in the northern part of Kenya, and that it is in Uganda 
that one finds the most statistically important Anglican church in the world.
The question becomes: how really Christian is this converted Africa? A. Hastings 
proposes a vague, prudent answer:
As regards Catholics and Anglicans, [the Christian] advance could probably be charted in a rough 
but not unreliable way by the decline in ecclesiastical marriage rates. Its vast, amorphous mass of 
devotion, cult, belief superstition, new bonds of fellowship so often structured in ways that hardly 
accord with the rules of Rome, Geneva or Canterbury, may prove the most enduring ecclesiastical 
legacy of this quarter century. (Hastings, 1979:274)
This  evaluation  does  not  answer  the  question,  nor  does  it  explain  why 
Christianity seems so attractive. In his book on a Non-Bourgeois Theology, (1985), 
Donders emphasizes the appeal of the miracle of God in Jesus and the desire to be a 
member of a new communitas or communion (see also Oduyoye 1986:97-108). He 
also refers to a cultural reason: the necessity of an anthropological conversion.
David Barret believes that one of the main reasons Africans are so attracted to Christianity (and to 
Islam) is the community it offers. It is his opinion that the conversion movement at the grassroots 
level is due to the fact that Africans are turning away from their local tribal religions because they 
see no "salvation" in those organizations anymore. They want to belong to a larger human and 
religious community. (Donders, 1985:32)
In fact, this seems like Baeta's classical explanation: "the mission station was not 
merely a base for teaching the Christian discipline . . . and for propagating the Faith: 
it was also the pocket of [a] new invading civilization" (1968:15).
In a critical analysis of African Christianity, de Meester de Ravenstein names 
three antinomies: the complexity of the African critique of Western
68


--- PAGE 69 ---
Christianity,  which  implies  the  possibility  of  a  zero  degree  of  Christianity;  the 
difficulty of bringing together African "traditional" values and the absolute gratuity of 
God's gift; and the fundamental opposition between Christ's religion and the African's 
religious heritage 1980a-43-50). These evaluations from knowledgeable observers 
clearly show the confusing reality of African Christianity. Let us follow its recent 
history.
From the 1950s onward, new orientations appeared for the indigenization of the 
Church (Nyamiti, 1978; Hastings, 1979). Gradually, official policies shifted from the 
initial step of adaptation, one that insisted on the Africanization of some external 
aspects (music, hymns, etc.), to an examination of the content of Christianity in an 
African setting. New premises established a completely different perspective: the 
"pagan culture" is considered and analyzed as an abandoned field in which God's 
signs already exist (figure 4). Thus, if there can be only one aim-Christianity-methods 
are  arbitrary and  should  be  modified  and  adapted  to  circumstances and  cultures 
(Taylor, 1963:12-4). African intellectuals appealed "to the Church to `come to grips' 
with traditional practices, and with the world view that these beliefs and practices 
imply" (Hastings, 1979:119; see also Kalu, 1977).
The best illustrations of this current are Gravrand's Visage africain de l'eglise 
(1962), Mulago's Un visage africain du christianisme (1965), Bahoken's Clairières 
métaphysiques  africaines  (1967),  and  Mbiti's  New  Testament  Eschatology  in  an 
African Background (11971). In these contributions, the authors explicitly favor the 
search for Christianity's essential message, one which would penetrate African ways 
of thinking and living. A new vocabulary arises and, in principle, covers new forms of 
evangelization:  Africanization,  indigenization,  naturalization,  adaptation  of 
Christianity.  Some  theorists  even  speak  of  "indigenizing  the  Gospel"  and  "the 
Message" (Bimwenyi, 1981a:231). In Roman Catholic circles, the norms of the new 
policy are relatively well spelled out in two official documents of Pius XII; Evangelii 
Praecones (1951) and Fidei Donum (1957).
What  this  ambivalent  vocabulary  introduces  and  means  is  a  progressive 
displacement of responsibility insofar as the future of Christianity is concerned (see, 
e.g., Chipenda, 1977 and Setiloane, 11977). Historically, one can refer to Des Prêtres 
noirs  s'interrogent  (1956),  a  collection  of  black  priests'  articles  and  a  solidly 
nationalist  reflection  on  Christianity,  as  the  first explicit  manifestation  of a new 
radical current. Ironically, it was during this period that positive and sympathetic 
contributions  on  African  religions  were  produced  in  anthropology.  They include 
Deschamps's Les Religions d'Afrique noire (1954), Parrinder's African Traditional 
Religion (1954), and Witchcraft (1958), Lienhardt's Divinity and Experience (1961), 
Van Caeneghem's La Notion de Dieu chez les Balubas du Kasaï (1956), Schebesta's 
Le Sens religieux des primitifs (1963), Damann's Les religions de lAfrique (1964, a 
translation of his 1963 Die Religionen Afrikas), and African Systems of Thought 
edited by Fortes and Dieterlen (1965). African clergymen read these books looking 
for ways of transforming traditional religion or, at least, of
69


--- PAGE 70 ---
Figure 4. The Theology of Indigenization
Premises Mediators  Aims
Status Pagan Culture Conversion  Christianity
Symbols Abandoned field to plant, sow the Adapted Christianity
 African field
to spread the good
seed
Stepping stones of to establish and to Indigenized 
Christianity in pagan construct the Church Christianity 
traditions
Method Critical evaluation of Demonstration Conformity
 premises
using some of its elements in the process of adapting Christianity (Mulago, 1959). In 
the wake of independence, some of them became clearly radical: they suspected the 
good faith of anthropological descriptions and began to question the very meaning of 
the theologies of adaptation (Bimwenyi, 1980a: 172-89).
At first, the concept of `adaptation' was hailed on all sides, by African Christians as well as by 
missionaries. Even though it was not seen as committing the Church to religious dialogue with 
African tradition, and perhaps because of this, adaptation, as the means by which the African 
Church could develop its own life-style, was highly welcome. It was only slowly realized that the 
concept  of  adaptation  contained  within  itself  the  seeds  of  perpetual  western  superiority  and 
domination. The reaction has been quite violent. (Shorter, 1977: 150)
The fact is that even at the time of the manifesto of black priests (1956), the 
search for an African Christianity was already enveloped by the themes of cultural 
authenticity  and  independence.  It  clearly  implied  a  relative  rejection  of  both 
anthropologists' and missionaries' interpretations of African traditions and religions as 
well as the colonial presence.
The search had two major aspects: a nationalist reading and the introduction of an 
intellectual  rupture  in  colonial  history.  For  example,  Kagame  questions  the 
competence of Tempels and makes a journey back to his own roots with his La 
Philosophie bantu-rwandaise de l'être (1956), in which he describes Rwandan Bantu 
ontology,  a  criteriology,  psychology,  cosmology,  and  ethics.  I  am  afraid  Shorter 
confuses problems of method and ideological motivation when he states that "it is 
only because Kagame is inspired by European philosophy that the African thinks of 
trying  to  express  the  traditional  thought  of  his  people  as  a  conceptual  system" 
(1977:24). The inspiration is one thing, the objective another. What Kagame did was 
to use the
70


--- PAGE 71 ---
Aristotelian  model  in  order  to  demonstrate  that,  contrary to  anthropologists'  and 
missionaries'  accepted  opinions,  his  people  had  always  had  a  wellorganized  and 
systematic  "philosophy."  He  explicitly  intended  to  undermine  the  myths  which 
sustained both colonial policies and the Church's programs for an adapted Christianity 
(1976). Philosophically, one could debate Kagame's assumption about the possibility 
of collective  and non-explicit philosophies. Ideologically, however, his work was 
quite important, if considered to be an answer to hypotheses on "pagan" cultures and 
the premises of adaptation policies (see figure 4).
In  the  same  vein,  A.  Makarakiza  published  his  La  Dialectique  des  Barundi 
(1959),  E.  B. Idowu, Olodumare.  God in Yoruba Belief  (1962)  and  Towards  an 
Indigenous  Church (1965),  E.  Mveng,  L'Art d'Afrique  noire.  Liturgie  et  langage 
religieux (1965), and E M. Lufuluabo, a series of booklets presenting and analyzing 
traditional religiosity vis-à-vis Christianity (1962, 1964a and b, 1966). Significantly, 
the concept of African monotheism appeared and was used more and more frequently. 
Indeed, it refers to W. Schmidt's concept of primitive revelation (1931) and gives 
respectability to what was formerly called pagan and polytheist belief. One of the 
major assumptions of Schmidt's method is the existence of a universal theory or 
"philosophy" that each human community expresses in its own way and according to 
its own needs. This philosophy would be always and everywhere particular in its 
religious,  cultural,  and  historical  manifestations,  but  universal  in  its  essence.  Its 
presence  marks  the  difference  between  human  societies  and animal  communities 
(Schmidt, 1933-1949). A primitive revelation can thus be deduced from all human 
cultures and, with it, a basic monotheism. The concept of primitive revelation has not, 
so  far,  clarified  the  theoretical  questions  that  it  implies,  despite  the  brilliant 
discussions  and  stimulating  overviews  recently presented  by Mulago  (1973)  and 
Bimwenyi (1968, 1981a). K. Dickson even thinks that 
there are no easy solutions to the problem of the relation between God and the gods, and that it is 
much less enlightening than is thought to use such terms as monotheism and polytheism; in a sense 
they confuse the discussion. (Dickson, 1984:58)
On the other hand, the force of ideas for political and cultural autonomy had a 
direct impact on religious thinking. During the 1959 International Meeting of Black 
Writers and Artists in Rome, a Committee on Theology elaborated a text calling for 
another  Christianity  in  Africa.  Within  Catholicism,  two  Jesuit  priests  from 
Cameroon-Mveng and M. Hebga-were active in this area and their influence marked 
discussions on possible ways to reconcile Christianity and Africanity (Bimwenyi, 
1981a:227-30). A theology of incarnation was promoted with a particular emphasis 
on  new  premises:  négritude  and  black  personality as  expressions  of  an  African 
civilization, African history with its own symbols as a preparation for Christianity, 
and finally the experience of slavery, exploitation, and colonization as signs of the
71


--- PAGE 72 ---
suffering  of  God's  chosen  ones  (figure  5  ).  The  most  striking  feature  of  these 
intellectual positions resides in the theoretical distinction between the program of 
political liberation which should permit a transformation of the traditional civilization 
and that of rethinking Christianity as an integral part of the local culture (Idowu, 
1965; Hebga, 1963; Tchidimbo, 1963). There is a reason for this orientation, writes 
M. A. Oduyoye, a woman theologian of Ghana:
The  identity  crisis  in  Africa,  especially  among  the  urbanized,  the  Westerneducated,  and  the 
Christians, may be attributed to the loss of a dynamic perspective on life, which comes from 
knowing and living one's religio-cultural history. We cannot expect those who cannot tell their story, 
who do not know where they come from, to hear God's call to his future. (Oduyoye, 1986:54)
I have recently proposed that in the 1960s, a goal was clear and that it is now 
possible to discern the major trends which contributed to the progressive construction 
of a theology of incarnation (Mudimbe, 1983a:94-95). trends are:
(a) A strong interest in the Africanization of Christianity insofar as it would 
permit a divorce between Christianity and Western history and culture and would 
introduce African features into the Church.
(b)  A search  for  an  African  element  in  the  field  of  theology  and  religious 
activities, which might keep pace with the ideological objectives for political and 
cultural  autonomy.  This  trend  mainly  characterizes  Roman  Catholic  African 
theologians.
(c) A vigorous interest in traditional religions, leading to the supposition that in 
general  anthropologists'  and  missionaries'  works  are  neither  dependable  nor 
acceptable.  This  encourages  new  programs  and  projects  which  will  be  the 
responsibility  of  African  scholars  (see  also  Chipenda,  1977;  Setiloane,  1977; 
Oduyoye, 1986).
It  would  be  inaccurate  to  pretend  that  most  missionaries  supported  the  new 
African perspective. The Church's official policies in the late 195os and early 1960s, 
were as confusing as those of the colonial powers (Hastings, 1979:159-74). Despite 
the fact that the Church had trained most of the nationalist leaders and intellectuals, 
and also despite  widely held  doubts concerning the Church's commitment to the 
principles of Western supremacy in Africa, many a missionary did not welcome the 
outcome  of  ideologies  of  otherness  and  did  not  at  all  like  doctrines  of  African 
independence. Besides political fears, there was the feeling that these new theories 
were opening a new era and meant the end of missionary initiatives in Africa. As 
Hastings,  commenting  on  the  significance  of  the  assembly  of  the  International 
Missionary Council held in Ghana in 1958, put it:
The churches of the third world were becoming independent and the old missionary relationship 
which so clearly involved a status of dependence must
72


--- PAGE 73 ---
Figure 5. The Theology of Incarnation
Premises Mediators Aims
Status African Conversion A modern
 traditional African
 civilization civilization
 (Black personality- (Black personality
Negritude) Negritude)
Symbols African history Otherness African culture
 African, Muslim, (African Weltanschauungen,
 and European heritages African Christianity)
A particular experience: 
slavery, exploitation, 
colonization
Method Social science African  Autonomy
 Ideology
inevitably end. What role would there now be for missionaries? (Hastings, 1979:120)
The question was pertinent. By the mid-i96os the initiative became African and, 
generally speaking, integrated the essential theses of a new model of conversion 
(Meester  de  Raventstein,  198c,a).  The  emphasis  is,  then,  put  on  new  premises: 
négritude, blackness, African heritage and experience. It tends to present conversion 
in terms of critical integration into Christianity; that is, on the one hand, asserting 
cultural  autonomy  and,  on  the  other,  defining  Christianization  as  a  way  of 
accomplishing in Christ a spiritual heritage authentically African (Mulago, 1981:43; 
Bimwenyi, 1981b:47-60). Eboussi-Boulaga aptly wrote, that at least for Africans, the 
emergence of an African "We-Subject" was the major human phenomenon of the 
second half of this century (1978:339). Two major phenomena thus emerged (see 
figure 5 ). The first was a strong emphasis on history and a new anthropology as a 
means for a better understanding of both African tradition and identity. This led, in 
1966, to the creation of centers of African religions. In pastoral institutes-in Bodija 
(Nigeria), Bukumbi (Tanzania), Cocody (Ivory Coast), Kinshasa and Lubumbashi 
(Zaire), etc.-it generally gave birth to realistic programs taking into account native 
languages, local customs, and the social relations of production. Second, a striking 
ideological convergence became obvious: African theologians' interests blend with 
local nationalisms and the orientations of the African Society of Culture (ASC) and 
with  Présence  Africaine  (Paris)  on  the  significance  of  African  religions  (Basse, 
1977:12,938; Muzorewa, 1985:37-56; Oduyoye, 1986:45-55). Further, a succession 
of  scholarly meetings  in  the  1960s redefined  the  concept  of  conversion  and the 
purposes of studying African religions, while at the same time broadening 
73


--- PAGE 74 ---
the scope of the criticism of anthropology and the philosophy of Christian missions in 
Africa (Agossou, 1977; Appiah-Kubi and Torres, 1977):
1955: On Africa and Christianity. Meeting. (Accra, Ghana).
1959: On Christianity, Africanity and Theology. Meeting. Sub-Committee on Theology, Second 
Congress of African Writers. (Rome, Italy).
1961: On African Religions. ASC-Coloquium (Abidjan, Ivory Coast). Proceedings published by 
Présence Africaine, Paris, 1962..
1963: ASC-publication. African Personality and Catholicism. Paris: Présence Africaine.
11963:  Reincarnation  and  Mystic  Life  According  to  African  Religions.  Congress  (Strasbourg, 
France). Proceedings: Réincarnation et vie mystique en Afrique noire. 1965.
1965:  On  Africa's  Traditional  Religions.  Congress  (Bouaké,  Ivory  Coast).  Proceedings:  Les 
Religions africaines traditionnelles. Paris: Seuil.
1966: On African Theology. African Churches Conference. (Ibadan, Nigeria). Proceedings: Pour 
une théologie africaine. Yaoundé: Clé, 1969.
1968: Renewal of the Church and New Churches. Colloquium. (Kinshasa, Zaire). Proceedings: 
Renouveau de Peglise et nouvelles eglises. Mayidi: Revue de Clergé Africain, 11969.
1969: Understanding African Religions: A la rencontre des religions africaines. Secretariatus pro 
Non- Christianis. Rome: Libreria Editrice Ancora.
1970: On African Religion as a Source of Culture and Civilization. ASC Colloquium. (Cotonou, 
Benin). Proceedings: Religion africaine comme source de valeurs de culture et de civilisation. 
Paris: Présence Africaine. 1972.
In  the  1970s,  the  reconsideration  of  classical  grids  was  widespread  among 
African  scholars  (Hebga,  1976;  Kalilombe,  1977;  Ngindu,  1979).  At  scholarly 
conferences, no one really cared any longer about the scientific evidence of the past. 
African scholars now preferred to deal directly with the issues that involve African 
responsibility in theology and social sciences, as well as in the humanities (Glele, 
1981; Ngindu, 1985). In religious studies, the most challenging theological meetings 
were the following:  in 1976, the Assembly of Third  World Theologians  (Dar es 
Salaam, Tanzania) and the Pastoral Colloquium of Koumi (then Upper Volta); in 
11977, the Conference on Black Civilization and the Catholic Church in Abidjan and 
the Accra meeting which led to the constitution of an Ecumenical Association of 
African Theologians (Appiah-Kubi and Torres, 11977); and, in 1978, the Kinshasa 
Congress on African Religions and Christianity (see Arrighi, 1979).
The result of this process may best be illustrated by two quotations from African 
Roman Catholics.
The first is from Malula Cardinal Joseph-Albert, Archbishop of Kinshasa:
African Christianity cannot exist without African Theology. And this implies that it should be made 
clear that relations exist between the authentic religion
74


--- PAGE 75 ---
brought to us through Christ on the one hand and religions in general and more precisely African 
religions on the other hand. As Africa possesses today its own theologians, this task belongs in the 
very first place to those African theologians. (Malula, 1977:23)
The second is from Zoungrana Cardinal Paul, Archbishop; Rome:
Beyond refusing all external domination, our wish is to link up in depth with the African cultural 
heritage, which for too long has been misunderstood and refused. Far from being a superficial or 
folkloric effort to revive some traditions or ancestoral practices, it is a question of constructing a 
new African society whose identity is not conferred from outside.
Cardinals, even African ones, are not customarily extremist. On the contrary. 
Malula's and Zoungrana's pronouncements clearly indicate the concerns of the 1980s: 
an  analysis  of  the  complementarity  existing  between  Christianity  and  African 
religions; an African theology of incarnation, considered the responsibility of African 
theologians;  and,  finally,  a  permanent  search  for  an  identity  from  a  positive 
anthropological background (Tshibangu, 1977:2.9-31). And McVeigh could note in 
1980, that:
Africa  has  reached  its  theological  maturity  and  African  Christianity  is  searching  for  new 
interpretations of its faith. It is a time of turbulence and ferment, but also a time of excitement. 
Something new is happening, something unique and important. (McVeigh, 1980:91)
Is this impulse towards a new discourse purely activist? Does it express at an 
intellectual  level  a  confusion  implying  a  possible  transformation  of  ideological 
reference? It is obvious that new norms seem to be imposing themselves in the arena 
that the  voices  of missionaries, anthropologists, and colonial administrators  have 
dominated so far (see, e.g., Thomas, Luneau, and Doneux, 1969; Emmet, 1972; Pratt, 
1972.; Hallen, 1976; Oduyoye, 1986). It may be said that what is at stake for Africans 
is simply the appropriation of an initiative which is based on what paradoxically 
founded the power and the knowledge of the colonial system (see, e.g., Mazrui, 
1974). As T. Okere put it:
Hence the peculiar originality of African culture. It means the common experience of the trauma of 
the slave trade, of the humiliation that was colonization, of assault on traditional religion, of new 
won political independence, of present economic exploitation, of the ambivalent status of standing 
hesitatingly on the threshold of the age of industry. (Okere, 1978:279)
The  interrogations  which  carry  the  initiative  sometimes  slip  into  a  sort  of 
demagogical spiritual activism. However, that is perhaps  not as important as the 
struggle for an orthodoxy defined in terms of historical and cultural difference.
At a very general and vague level, the main characteristic of the new
75


--- PAGE 76 ---
discourse  is  its  own  self-definition  as  a  discourse  of  succession  (Mveng, 
1978:167-76). Looked at carefully, it can be divided into two complementary genres. 
One bears upon techniques of interpreting and reworking the signs of what was called 
paganism and primitiveness yesterday and which, today, is qualified as religion and 
God's symbolic discretion. The second genre tends to focus on the right of being 
Other and thus on the epistemological demands of the enterprise (see, e.g., Ngindu, 
1985). In the first case, studies evaluate the values of the past in terms of present 
exigencies  and  the  future  of  African  communities,  thus  inverting  the  order  of 
anthropology's classical description. Anthropology's fecundity has been based on the 
approach to "primitive organizations" as closed systems (see, e.g., Mubengayi, 1966; 
Mulago, 1973; Bujo, 1975; Massamba, 1976; Hebga, 1979). In the second case, 
ideological or philosophical  discussion  concentrates  upon the diversity of human 
experience. It consequently studies the relativity of cultural and political grammars, 
which, in their singularity, testify to an essential hidden meaning beneath the surface 
(e.g., Tshibangu, 1974; Boesak, 1977; Adoukounou, 1981; Eboussi-Boulaga, 1981; 
Bimwenyi,  1981b).  In  both  cases,  one  sees  that  the  new  discourse  on  African 
difference conveys an ambitious and explicit will to truth. As such, it generates and 
explicates its own presence in both history and the present knowledge about African 
realities (e.g., Eboussi-Boulaga, 1978: 339-70; Ela and Luneau, 1981).
A third trend is clearly political: the black theology of South Africa. Influenced 
by  Latin  American  liberation  theology  and  by  the  North  American  civil  rights 
movement of the 1960s, this current expresses itself in terms of the Exodus theme 
played  out in a  modern setting  (Boesak,  1977 and 1984a  & b;  Tutu,  1984).  Its 
formulation is based on three main principles: the importance of taking into account 
the sociopolitical context in which humans live, the obligation of espousing human 
dignity as the major concern, (thus theological practice meets political praxis) and the 
belief that Christian faith does not transcend ideologies (Boesak, 1977:99-122). Such 
a radical understanding of theology can only clash with the two preceding types of 
discourse, particularly the first. According to Buthalezi, for example, the theology of 
indigenization  is  not  acceptable  for  two  reasons:  "it  means  doing  a  superficial 
exercise of matching the already culturally-coloured Christian teaching, and African 
thought . . ." and "the emphasis that this procedure places on African life and thought 
is not realistic since it involves conjuring up the past which is not crucial to the 
African  in  his  present  socioeconomic  and  political  circumstances"  (in  Dickson, 
1984:127-28). To my knowledge, so far only Eboussi-Boulaga (r 98 r) has focused on 
the intellectual limits and ambiguities of this radical theological orientation. De facto, 
this trend sees itself as applied theology and explicitly submits to the politics of those 
who would become princes of a new organization of power. In doing so, it joins in the 
service of new political chauvinisms and idols, repeating the missionary's dream of 
conciliating God's glory and Caesar's power.
In its intention, as well as in its power, the new discourse on Christianity is
76


--- PAGE 77 ---
clearly the  result  of  cross-cultural  breeding.  One  might  choose  to  emphasize  its 
ambiguity (Ralibera, 1959: 15 4-87) or even review the paradoxical questions that 
allowed it to emerge. First, there is the question of knowing who can or should speak 
validly  about  Africa,  and  from  which  viewpoint.  Second,  there  is  the  issue  of 
promoting "discourses" on others now that we have learned an essential lesson from 
the criticism of anthropological and missionary discourse: "Savages" can speak, not 
only when their very being and their traditions are at stake, but also in order to 
evaluate procedures and techniques that pertain to the description of their being, 
traditions and beliefs (see Appiah-Kubi and Torres, 1977:189-95; Ngindu, 1985).
However, insofar as the new African discourse perceives its own course and fate 
in terms of epistemological rupture (Bimwenyi, 11981a; Eboussi-Boulaga, 1978 and 
19811), we may stop at this claim and interrogate its situation. That can be done 
through three questions: Who is speaking? From which context? In what grids and in 
what  sense  are  the  questions  pertinent?  I propose  that  one  of  the  best  ways  of 
answering these questions might be a careful rewriting of the relationships that have 
existed between African ethnography and the politics of conversion.
The Anthropologist's Influence: Ethnography and the Politics of 
Conversion
I must now admit that I adapted myself with 
remarkable ease to the conditions of life in my 
cage . . . I even grew so accustomed to 
thissituation that for more than a month, without 
feeling how outlandish or degrading it was, I
made no attempt to put an end to it.
P BOULLE, Planet o f the Apes.
Anthropology participated in colonization and promoted what MacGaffey calls 
"the mythological phase" with hypotheses "founded on a series of binary oppositions 
which contrasted the virtues of European civilization with their supposed absence 
from Africa." But I am not convinced that, as MacGaffey suggests by quoting G. I. 
Jones,  "the  early  descriptive  ethnographers  were  ill-served  by  the  speculative 
constructions  of  the  amateur  anthropologists  to  whom  they  turned  for  theories" 
(MacGaffey 1981:236). 1 believe that amateurism has strongly contributed to a solid 
foundation of anthropology. Its presence had, in my opinion, exactly the same status 
as amateurism during the emergence of the discipline in the eighteenth and early 
nineteenth centuries (see, e.g., Hodgen, 1974 The Central African bibliography of 
anthropology, for instance, is filled with the works of amateurs, mainly missionaries, 
which are important documents of anthropological information. MacGaffey thinks 
that:
77


--- PAGE 78 ---
Work by missionaries, priests and amateur ethnographers dealing with African religious beliefs or 
rites should not necessarily be regarded as anthropological . . . European writing about Africa 
presents itself in Africa with uniform authority as the product of sciences, itself a European property 
that Africans are told they should aspire to; an ethnographic account of this writing must recognize 
that much of what has been produced is of poor quality, and that what is good has not succeeded in 
replacing inaccurate representations of Africa in, say, the popular press. We would all like to 
identify our society with its best achievements, and we tend to forget or to excuse as aberration its 
mediocrities, horror, and blunders. (MacGaffey, 1981:265)
This is fine and correct. Nevertheless there are at least two points that I would 
like to discuss. The first concerns anthropological authority; the second, ethnographic 
interpretation.
It is in the name of science that MacGaffey makes the distinction between reliable 
and unreliable anthropology. In other words, science is science, and it should not be 
confused with its opposite. More precisely, although "good" anthropology shares the 
same epistemological framework as "bad," they are different in nature: the bad is bad 
insofar as it does not obey the rules of the "anthropological authority," that is-to use 
an expression of E. E. EvansPritchard - "a scientific habit of mind." As he put it:
It is true that some missionaries were well educated men and had learned to speak native languages 
with fluency, but speaking a language fluently is very different from understanding it, as I have 
often observed in converse between Europeans and Africans and Arabs . . . For someone who has 
not made an intensive study of native institutions, habits and customs in the native's own milieu 
(that is, well away from administrative, missionary, and trading post) at best there can emerge a sort 
of middle dialect in which it is possible to communicate about matters of common experience and 
interest. (EvansPritchard, 1980:7)
I understand well Evans-Pritchard's point when he writes of evolutionist theorists 
that: "none of the anthropologists whose theories about primitive religion have been 
most influential had ever been near a primitive people. It is as though â chemist had 
never thought it necessary to enter a laboratory" 1980:6) However, I do not follow 
him in his critique of missionaries' knowledge. If some missionaries, as he notes, 
were "well-educated men," it is fair also to recognize that a great number of them 
were,  by  training,  relatively  well-read,  not  only  in  social  sciences  but  also  in 
scholastic anthropology. Moreover, if one speaks seriously of Westerners who, far 
away from Westernized posts, lived with Africans and shared their ordinary life, one 
is  speaking  of  missionaries.  Records  and  proofs  exist.  Contrary  to  most 
anthropologists' ten months or, at best, two or three years of field research, many 
missionaries spent almost their  whole lives  among  Africans. And, in general,  an 
objective look at the facts indicates that their existential understanding of local habits
78


--- PAGE 79 ---
and customs is and was very often extraordinary. If there is a difference between 
missionaries'  and  anthropologists'  interpretations,  it  comes  from  the  intellectual 
particularity of their respective missions. In order to "save souls," the missionary 
undertakes the task of integrating his understanding of the local community into a 
process of reduction grounded in a theology of salvation defined within Western 
historicity. On the other hand, the anthropologist wants to contribute to the history of 
humankind  by  paying  careful  attention  to  all  of  its  regional  peculiarities  and 
interpreting them according to a methodological grid of analysis and generalization 
which,  also,  depends  upon  the  same  Western  historical  experience  (see,  e.g., 
Stavenhagen, 1971; Schwarz, 1979, 1980.
In addition, regarding credibility, both the missionary and the anthropologist use 
the same argument, which might be questioned by "natives": "I know them" or "I 
lived with them." Writing about this principle of authority, J. Clifford aptly stated 
recently: "many ethnographers . . . are still cast in the experimental mode, asserting, 
prior  to  any  specific  research  hypothesis  or  method,  the  `I  was  there'  of  the 
ethnographer as insider and participant. Of course, it is difficult to say very much 
about experience. Like `intuition' one has it or not, and its invocation often smacks of 
mystification" (Clifford, 1983:128). If one can speculate about the meaning of this 
authority, one could also admit that the missionary's authority does not make more 
sense  than  the  anthropologist's.  There  is,  however,  a  major  difference.  Both  the 
missionary and the anthropologist pretend to be "bilingual" in an African setting. But 
the former, generally speaking, refers to an existential experience, whereas the latter 
uses an experiential authority; the first may fluently speak the indigenous language; 
the second, in general, would rather use Evans-Pritchard's "sort of middle dialect." 
The first seeks to reduce the "primitives" to his faith and its cultural presuppositions. 
For the second, "primitives" constitute an "object topic," which might or might not fit 
into a scientific framework and must be accounted for. Fundamentally, there are two 
main problems: one, of comprehending cultures, the other concerning the significance 
of the interpretation offered.
At a basic level, missionaries, as well as anthropologists, when they return from 
the "primitive context," refer to the same context. To use M. Hollis's example and 
words: anthropologists and missionaries knew nothing about the "natives" when they 
started and seem to have discovered everything they know in the end. This is very 
well; how do they discover that the natives sometimes perceive what they perceive? 
Insofar as the anthropologist is concerned, M. Hollis has a response: "two possible 
answers are that he observes their behavior and that he translates their utterances" 
(1981:228)  This  explanation  is  annoying,  since  most  anthropologists  only speak 
pidgin. How could they translate a local language that they do not know, and that, 
paradoxically,  the  missionary shares  with  the  "natives"?  In  fact,  this  question  is 
frightfully ill-presented. It has unduly transformed an opposition of "missions" into a 
problem of competence for the interpretation of cultural texts
79


--- PAGE 80 ---
and subject matter. In any case, its exaggeration shows at least that, as matter of 
principles, the concept of a missionary as anthropologist should be thinkable. In 
effect, despite  the classical bias in the discipline,  nothing  ontological  prevents  a 
missionary from acquiring the methodological awareness and necessary skills of a 
good  fieldworker.  He  could,  then,  like  the  best  trained  specialists,  practice 
anthropology, that is build bridges between two cultures, two "texts," his own and the 
local one, and thus produce a clear representation of his own creative experience. In 
this case, as well as in anthropologist's, as R. Wagner notes, "the result is an analogy, 
or a set of analogies, that `translates' one group of basic meanings into the other, and 
can be said to participate. in both meaning systems at the same time in the same way 
that their creator does" (1981:9).
Let us take another of Hollis's images based on the Coherence Theory. As a 
metaphor, we should consider the African cultural organization as a text. By his 
training and mission, the missionary is and must be an "unbelieving" interpreter. The 
anthropologist, in principle, should be "believing"; otherwise his scientific project no 
longer makes any sense. The missionary is concerned with a complete conversion of 
the text, the anthropologist with the understanding of its internal rationality. It is 
because the missionary has been, generally, a nonbeliever that the anthropologist 
tends to reject his interpretations as approximations. In passing this judgement, the 
anthropologist often forgets what the missionary or, worse still, the "native" might 
remind him-that he is not perfectly bilingual and, therefore, despite his scientific 
background, his intellectual construction may well be just a questionable "invention."
One might object that this is not the point. From an archaeological viewpoint, one 
would  rather  emphasize  that  missionaries'  accounts  and  those  of  anthropologists 
witness to the same episteme.  In their variety and contradictions,  the discourses 
explicitly discuss European processes of domesticating Africa. If these discourses 
have to be identified with anything, it must be with European intellectual signs and 
not with African cultures.
Thus, Tempels can be related to M. Griaule and Evans-Pritchard, and Bantu 
Philosophy (Tempels, 1959) can be read in connection with Dieu d'eau (Griaule, 
1948, 1965) and Social Anthropology and other Essays (Evans-Pritchards, 1962). All 
of them share a similar perspective, an idealistic faith in the potentiality of African 
"culture," expressed in an agrarian metaphor, and the conviction that colonization is 
both a providential accident and a historical benefit. The analysis of this fact and its 
possible evaluation (e.g., Adotévi, 1972; Leclerc, 1971; Augé, 1979), show that, as G. 
Vilasco aptly put it: "all the stages that found as much the ethnological project as its 
object are seized with a `primary deformity' or a major vice, in other words "this 
obliteration  of  the  gaze  that  produced  an  ideology of  the  civilization"  (Vilasco, 
1983:23).
Despite  their  critical  positions,  Tempels,  Griaule,  and  Evans-Pritchard  still 
depend on the legacy of Lévy-Bruhl, Frazer, Morgan, and Tylor, who, after
80


--- PAGE 81 ---
A. Comte's loi des trois états, promoted a split in the human condition. Allegorically, 
it has been well illustrated in variations of theses for or against the axiom of the 
identity  of  human  nature.  And  we  are  all  painfully  aware  of  the  mystifications 
according to which all cultures pass through a succession of evolutionary phases: 
from magic through religion to science; from savagery to barbarism to civilization; 
from sexual promiscuity through matrilineality and finally to patrilineality. Tempels, 
Griaule, and Evans-Pritchard all believed that the colonial administration might use 
their science and experience to implement the conversion of the native society. As 
Evans-Pritchard put it:
If those who control policy believe in material prosperity, literacy, or whatever it may be, they feel 
that they have to give them to peoples of their colonial empire. Whether they are doing right or 
wrong  is  a  question  for  moral  philosophy,  not  for  social  anthropology.  (Evans-Pritchard, 
1962:119-10)
In other words, this idealistic perspective is likely to see and describe the value of 
local  customs  that  the  colonial  power  will  not  tolerate.  At  the  same  time,  the 
decription may help administrators to understand the indigenous culture and to better 
dominate  it.  Yet  the  frustrated  Evans-Pritchard,  who  would  have  liked  to  be  a 
government advisor on colonial policy, states:
I do not believe that [anthropological knowledge] can be applied to any extent in the arts of 
administration and education in any other than in this very general cultural sense-in the influence it 
has in shaping the attitude of the European towards native peoples. (Evans-Pritchard, 1961: 122)
Tempels and Griaule too experienced the same ambiguous feelings concerning 
the colonial mission. Human civilization was Western in the eyes of the colonizers, 
and Africans were, at least for Tempels in the 1930s, not quite human. What they 
were,  whether  pure children  or incipient  human beings in need of tutoring, was 
simply  the  result  of  the  application  of  Western  standards  within  a  non-Western 
context.
One  may  consider  this  perspective  general,  since  on  a  theoretical  level  it 
transcends  the  so-called  difference  between  French  and  British  anthropology. 
Therefore, I do not follow J. Copans (1971a) nor the traditional view which opposes 
the French and British, emphasizing the metaphysical aspects of the first as opposed 
to the pragmatism and empiricism of the second. This type of distinction is probably 
pertinent as far as a classification of intellectual  policies is concerned. From an 
epistemological standpoint, the French and British approaches essentially meant the 
same  things:  reduction  and  acculturation  (see,  e.g.,  Harik  and  Schilling,  1984). 
Moreover,  the  basic  ideological  ground  is  the  same.  First,  the  importance  of 
Durkheim's legacy in both schools accounts for the European scholar's responsibility 
in  shaping  Africa's  knowledge,  particularly  in  terms  of  the  classification  and 
interpretation of hierarchies in political and religious systems. Second, the essential 
reasons which led to the organization of the International African Institute in
81


--- PAGE 82 ---
Great Britain in 1926 and to the creation of the Institut d'Anthropologie in France 
stem from an identical philosophy of conquest.
The  essence  of  anthropology  in  France  and  in  England  is  the  same.  Its 
circumstantial tones and expressions vary but its aim seems identical (Leclerc, 1972). 
Paradoxically,  Lévy-Bruhl, despite  his opposition  to "the  English anthropological 
school," best reflected the Victorian ideology in which the evolution of culture as a 
parallel to the evolution of species explained the superiority of Europe as a result of 
biological and cultural achievement. But it was in England that social and cultural 
anthropologists  made  the  most  use  of  Durkheim's  doctrine  concerning  primitive 
societies.
In  fact,  from  a  more  general  historical  frame,  one  can  observe  three 
complementary genres of "speeches" contributing to the invention of a primitive 
Africa: the exotic text on savages, represented by travelers' reports; the philosophical 
interpretations about a hierarchy of civilizations; and the anthropological search for 
primitiveness. The complementarity of these speeches is obvious. It is perceived as a 
unity in the Western consciousness. The exotic text dominates in the seventeenth 
century. In the eighteenth century, it complements Enlightenment classifications of 
peoples and civilization. In the nineteenth century, an ideology of conquest appears in 
explorers' sagas, anthropologists' theories, and the implementation of colonial policy. 
However, until the beginning of the scramble for Africa, historical distinctions of 
genres can only be relative.
As far as I know, no one has yet made a detailed study of Greek and Latin writers' 
influence on the European invention of Africa. Miller's synthesis (1985:23-28) of the 
ambivalence about blackness in antiquity is too brief and, as such, a bit controversial. 
It refers to Snowden's thesis (1970), according to which Greeks and Romans were 
only  culturally  biased  and  distinguishing  the  civilized  from  the  barbaros, 
independently of race: "The Greeks and Romans attached no special stigma to color, 
regarding yellow hair or blue eyes as a mere geographical accident and developed no 
special  racial  theory  about  the  inferiority  of  darker  peoples  qua  darker  people" 
(Snowden, 1970:176). The problem is more complex than that. In the same vein as 
Snowden's  argument,  one  could  emphasize,  as  did  A.  Bourgeois,  evidences  of 
assimilation and cultural integration: "Greeks had traveled as far as Africa; inversely, 
blacks had visited or lived in Greece" (Bourgeois, 1971:120). It was the same in 
Rome.  Yet  what  do  these  cases  demonstrate?  Here  is  just  one  of  numerous 
counterexamples: during the reign of Hadrianus (A.D. 76-138), the poet Florus from 
the African province was denied a prize because, according to a witness, "the emperor 
. . . did not want to see Jupiter's crown going to Africa" (see, e.g., Schilling, 1944:26; 
Mudimbe, 1979). Miller's analysis is strictly a correction of Snowden's interpretation.
A systematic  study of  the  Ancients'  perceptions  may  distinguish  three  main 
problems. The first is a question of carefully locating and describing sources and then 
evaluating their credibility. For example, in his presentation of the
82


--- PAGE 83 ---
Greek  sources  of  African  history  (1972),  Mveng  begins  by  noting  that  a  rapid 
consultation of E Jacoby's Die Fragmente der griechischen Historiker shows that, 
from the 943 pages of Part III, there are 276 pages referring to Egypt, sixty to 
Ethiopia, nine to Libya and eight to Carthage, for a total of some 355 pages (Mveng, 
1972:13 ). This is an invitation to further research and not a closure. A vast field of 
research awaits scholars. The second issue concerns the content of the sources and 
both the physical and cultural "geographies" they unveil. How can we, today, read 
these texts and make sense of information and representations they offer? Finally, 
there is a question of method and it is twofold. On the one hand, how may we 
discriminate between myth and observed facts when they come out of genres so 
diverse as drama (e.g., Aeschylus, Aristophanes, Sophocles), poetry (e.g., Callimakos, 
Homer, Pindar), mythography (e.g., Apollodorus), technical and hermetic texts (e.g., 
Hesychius,  Hippocrates,  Xenophanes),  and  history  and  geography  (e.g., 
Agatharchides, Diodorus, Herodotus, Pliny)? At the same time, in drawing together 
information, we have to respect a hidden movement which accounts for chronological 
differences in methods of describing barbaroi in general. To put it in a more concrete 
way, I feel that it is obvious that Diodorus and Pliny, who describe northern Africa 
five centuries after Herodotus, add to and transform an old knowledge by integrating 
it in the order of their contemporary culture.
Herodotus's ethnographical map is a detailed one, from the Egyptian borders to 
the Tritonian lake. Each "tribe" or community is well typified on the basis of some 
major  paradigms:  habitation,  social  space,  food,  physical  features,  religion,  and 
marriage customs. The lake is Herodotus's reference point. He expands upon its 
mythological associations going back to the Argonauts (iv, 179) and, particularly, its 
Greek tradition in terms of sacrifice and customs: "the inhabitants of the Tritonian 
lake  region  mainly  sacrifice  to  Athene,  next  to  Triton  and  Poseidon"  (iv,  189). 
Herodotus's account of the regions westward of the lake becomes vague. Thus, for 
example,  the  distances  to  the  "Ammonians,"  "Garamantes,"  and  other  "tribes"  is 
expressed in days of travel. He writes: "I know and can tell the names of all the 
peoples that dwell on the ridge as far as the Atlantes [on Mount Atlas], but no farther 
than that" (iv, 185). That said, he describes the nomads who live in "movable houses" 
(iv, 19o), eat meat, drink milk, do not touch the flesh of cows (iv, 186). He notes that 
west of the Tritonian lake the country is savage, full of wild animals and strange 
creatures: "dog-headed humans," "headless peoples," and "human beings who have 
their eyes in their breasts," "besides many other creatures not fabulous"(iv, 191).
Pliny's chronicle follows different norms. First, it proceeds from west to east, 
specifically from Mauretaniae to the extreme eastern regions of Libya, the south of 
Egypt, and the Ethiopian cities of Napata and Meroë. Second, and more important, 
Pliny evaluates countries and peoples in terms of the presence or absence of Romans. 
One of the most striking illustrations may be his reflection about Ethiopia and the 
town of Napata: nec tamen arma
83


--- PAGE 84 ---
Romana ibi  solitudinem fecerunt  "It  was not the  forces  of  Rome  that  made  the 
country a desert" (N.H. vi, xxxv, 182). Pliny's geography details Roman colonies and 
portrays  ethnic  groups  in  terms  of  political  allegiance,  relative  autonomy,  and 
opposition to the Roman power. Geography reveals the expansion of the Imperium 
Romanun: conquered kingdoms and new colonies in Mauretania (Traducta Julia, Julia 
Constantia,  Zulil,  Lixus  etc.),  cities  of  Roman  culture  on  the  coast  of  the 
Mediterranean Sea (Portus Magnus, Oppidum Novum, Tipassa, Rusucurium etc.), 
strategic outposts on the edges of the Sahara desert (Augusta, Timici, Tigavae etc.) 
and, finally, Roman centers in the provinces of Numidia, Africa, and Cyrenaica.
From  the  background  of  this  normative  space,  which  is  the  equivalent  of 
Herodotus's  Tritonian  lake  region,  one  seizes  the  meaning  of  "a  geography  of 
monstrosity," that is, of the unknown spaces and their inhabitants. In the fifth century 
B.c., Herodotus could state: "to my thinking, there is no part of Libya of any great 
excellence whereby it should be compared to Asia or Europe, save only in the region 
which is called by the same name as its river Cinypus" (iv, 198). Five hundred years 
later, Pliny described the north of Africa in terms of the transformations brought 
about  by  Roman  civilization  (NH,  v,  r,  i4).  Yet,  his  geography  of  monstrosity 
faithfully mirrors Herodotus's description. To Herodotus's immense space of human 
monsters living in the eastern part of Libya, Pliny opposes a specific area around the 
"black river which has the same nature as the Nile" (N.H. V, Vita, 44) Strange beings 
live there: peoples who do not have individual names, cave-dwellers who have no 
language and live on the flesh of snakes, the "Garamantes" who do not practice 
marriage, the "Blemmyae" who are headless, satyrs, strapfoots, etc. (NH, V, VIII, 
45-46). Let us note briefly that Diodorus of Sicily's ethnography of Ethiopians (Book 
iii) conforms to this model. It is also antithetic and presents two types of Ethiopians. 
There are "civilized" ones who inhabit the capital city of Napata, and whose history is 
transformed for the better by a Greek-educated king, Ergamenes. Then there is the 
majority,  the  other  ethnic  group,  who  are  savage  (`agrioi)  and  black  in  color 
(melanes).
For centuries, questionable facts from Herodotus, Diodorus of Sicily, and Pliny 
were  widely  accepted.  In  the  sixteenth  century,  for  instance,  John  Lok,  who 
supposedly met West Africans, presented an account obviously derived from classical 
sources:  he  described  "Negroes,  a  people  of  beastly living,  without  a  God, law, 
religion"; "other people whose women are common"; "the region called Troglodytica, 
whose inhabitants dwell in caves and dens: for these are their houses, and the flesh of 
serpents their meat"; "and people without heads, having their eyes and mouths in their 
breast." This is a faithful recitation of Herodotus (see, e.g., Book iv), Diodorus of 
Sicily  (see  Book  III),  and  Pliny  (see  Book  v).  At  the  other  extreme, 
nineteenth-century anthropologists  depict  the  essential  paradigm of  the  European 
invention of Africa: Us/Them. Often they express the belief that the African is a 
negation of all human experience, or is at least an exemplary exception in terms of 
evolution.
84


--- PAGE 85 ---
The various philosophical perspectives of the Enlightenment did not negate this 
hypothesis  (Duchet,  1971;  Meek,  1976).  In  a  more  technical  discourse,  the 
Enlightenment defined the characteristics of savagery. Thus Voltaire's explanation of 
human inequality based on the metaphor of the inequality of trees in a forest and 
Buffon's principle of human advancement depending upon the use of intellectual 
capabilities are part of the very tradition that includes the European travelers' reports. 
Their particularity lies in their awareness of the possibility of translating foreign 
peoples'  experiences  and  reducing  them  to  theoretical  models  rather  than  just 
presenting them as exotic and incomprehensible. In his Discourse on the Origin of 
Inequality as well as in his treatise on The Origin of Language, Rousseau in this vein, 
suggests that inequality is produced by society. He claims that primitives are beyond 
the natural state and defines natural man as fictitious. Yet an elaborate ladder of 
cultures,  established  diachronically,  emerges  from  his  dialectic  of  necessity  and 
liberty. One could even relate the Enlightenment's critical discourse on primitiveness, 
the  historical  origin  of  peoples,  and  their  identification  as  objects  of  study  to 
subsequent variations on these theories. These include Hegel's contemptuous pages 
on blacks and "savages" in general and Lévy-Bruhl's assertion that primitives seem 
frozen in a state of prelogism, thousands of years behind Western civilization. More 
recently, one finds K. Jaspers's interpretation of the history of primitives who simply 
vanish in the presence of Western culture, and B. Malinowski's theory of cultural 
change, involving the African's dream of becoming "if not European, then at least a 
master or part master of some of the devices, possessions and influences which in his 
eyes constitute European superiority" (see Jahn, 1961).
In fact, our three genres of speech constitute variations on a single discourse. 
More precisely, they reveal the same archaeological ratio which both creates and 
explains them. To the extent that this analysis is correct, the question of accounting 
for  the  dependence  of  these  genres  of  speech  on  their  epistemological locus  of 
possibility is, in large measure, one of explaining intellectual procedures for reducing 
non-Western otherness to Western sameness; or, from a diachronic point of view, one 
of establishing their order of appearance.
I propose two periods and, therefore, two overlapping types of knowledge of 
Africa: before and after the 19zos, or, to use a marker, before and after Malinowski. 
Before 1920, this knowledge was organized in substantial congruence with Western 
"existence." It  is in its expression the negative side  of that  region that  Foucault 
describes as the sociological field "where the labouring, producing, and consuming 
individual offers himself a representation of the society in which this activity occurs, 
of  the  groups  and  individuals  among  which  it  is  divided,  of  the  imperatives, 
sanctions, rites, festivities and beliefs by which it is upheld or regulated" (1973:377).
Evolutionism,  functionalism,  diffusionism-whatever  the  method,  all  repress 
otherness in the name of sameness, reduce the different to the already known, and 
thus fundamentally escape the task of making sense of other
85


--- PAGE 86 ---
worlds (see Ake, 1979; Copans, 197ib; Coquery-Vidrovitch, 1969a; Mafeje, 1976). It 
is more than a matter  of methodological  limitations.  This limiting ethnocentrism 
testifies  to  a  kind  of  epistemological  determinism.  A  good  example  is  in 
Evans-Pritchard's Theories o f Primitive Religion. The book divides theories into two 
categories, psychological and sociological, the psychological being further divided 
into "intellectualist" and "emotionalist" theories. While the psychological trend is 
represented by works of Max Müller, Herbert Spencer, Edward Tylor, James Frazer, 
Andrew Lang, R. R. Marret, R. H. Lowie, and G. Van Der Leew, the sociological 
orientation  may  be  found  in  works  of  Fustel  de  Coulanges,  E.  Durkheim,  and 
Robertson Smith. Upon reading in the conclusion that none of the theories maintain 
popularity  any  longer,  one's  first  reaction  is  amazement.  Upon  closer  scrutiny, 
however, a careful reader realizes that what Evans-Pritchard is doing is highlighting 
methodological limits in the study of non-Western religions and cultures.
All this amounts to saying that we have to account for religious facts in terms of the totality of the 
culture and society in which they are found . . . they must be seen as a relation of parts to one 
another within a coherent system, each part making sense only in relation to other institutional 
systems as a wider set of relations. (Evans-Pritchard, 1980:112)
Thus  for  Evans-Pritchard  all  the  preceding  interpretations  were,  at  best, 
questionable because of two errors: the first being the evolutionary assumptions; the 
second, "that besides being theories of chronological origins they were also theories 
of  psychological  origins"  (1980:108).  Evans-Pritchard  also uses the  "if  I were a 
horse" hypothesis. By this he means that each of the scholars tried to imagine how he 
would  think  if  he  were  a  primitive,  then  drew  conclusions  from  these  futile 
introspections. According to EvansPritchard, it is Lévy-Bruhl who comes closest to 
handling primitive religions in a proper manner (1980:81).
Evans-Pritchard believed that "if we are to have a general sociological theory of 
religion, we shall have to take into consideration all religions and not just primitive 
religions; and only by doing so can we understand some of its essential features" 
(1980:113 ). But he does not indicate how the presentday scholar could deal with the 
problems  of  interpretation  that  confronted  earlier  interpreters.  In  a  recent  book 
(1977),  A.  Shorter  tried  to  analyze  the  most  prominent  schools  in  the  study of 
"primitive  religion."  In  the  beautiful  disorder  of  contradictory  hypotheses  and 
ideologies  from the  periods  before  and  after  the  1920,  Shorter  distinguishes  six 
schools:  (a)  the  particularist  approach,  the  classical  methodology  of  social 
anthropology, which is questioned by African scholars; (b) the enumerative method 
exemplified by G. Parrinder, which generally "fails to situate the facts it studies in 
whole contexts" and seems "sterile"; (c) the hypothesis of African religious unity (W 
E. Abraham, J. S. Mbiti) which is "unproven," and a "hypothesis,
86


--- PAGE 87 ---
nothing else"; (d) the historical approach, (T. O. Ranger, I. N. Kimambo) which is 
questionable for its heavy reliance on oral history; (e) the comparative methodology 
(Evans -Pritchard) which presupposes historical method; and (f) the categorical and 
thematic  approaches  (M.  Douglas,  J.  Goetz,  C.  H.  Sawyer)  which,  based  on 
theoretical models, are "designed to help a scholar understand any given situation, 
and [are] not a substitute for the serious study of each society in its own right" 
(Shorter, 1977:38-57). If progress is thinkable, Shorter states, it is on the basis of the 
creative potentiality that the combination of the last three methodologies represents. 
"The future of the comparative study of African religion appears to lie with the 
limited rather than the generalizing approaches" (1977:58).
A. J. Smet, a professor of philosophy at the Catholic School of Theology in 
Kinshasa,  proposes  a  historical,  rather  than  a  methodological,  classification.  He 
organizes  contributions  based  on  content,  emphasizing  those  which  brought  a 
sympathetic approach to the understanding of African "philosophy" (7980:27-107). 
Two names dominate this current: C. Van Overbergh and G. Van der Kerken. The 
first, president of the International Bureau of Ethnography, promoted the decisions of 
the 1905 International Meeting on Economic Expansion (Bergen) for a systematic 
description  of  African  Weltanschauungen  (Van  Overbergh,  1913).  The  second 
"discovered" the rationality of African systems, through African languages, thanks to 
his  sojourn  in  the  Belgian  Congo  (Smet,  1980:96).  Their  analyses,  contrary  to 
contemporary  descriptions,  depict  positive  aspects  in  three  main  areas:  culture, 
religion, and behavior (Smet, 198o:98-99). Van der Kerken is aware of the richness of 
the traditional literature, which is, for him, a form of a popular philosophy. He calls it 
practical philosophy and compares it to "the popular philosophy of the simple and 
unrefined folk of contemporary Europe" (Smet, 1980:102). Van der Kerken insists on 
the existence of an organized knowledge (connaissances and croyances) and a clear 
distinction of types of concrete knowledge (savoir and technique):
It is irrefutable that the Schools of Magicians [in Africa] have often been at the same time, as 
elsewhere in the world, in addition to being the first centers o f magic, the first religious, scientific 
and philosophical centers, that there was at least an oral teaching and that certain traditions passed 
from masters to disciples.
[Africans] possess practical notions of psychology (that they used in the education of children), of 
logic (that they use to present a problem before an African court or to refute an argument of an 
adversary), of ethics (on which they rely to reproach the conduct of a member of the clan), of 
politics (which they use to govern the village, etc.). (In Smet, 1980:101-2 emphasis mine)
Van der Kerken gives us a great deal of information about this repartition of 
psychology, logic, ethics, and politics. He writes that they do not, in reality, constitute 
an order of knowledge comparable to the European one. They are, rather, embryonic 
systems that have not yet developed sophistication.
87


--- PAGE 88 ---
At the same period, 1907-1911, a young seminarian, Stephano Kaoze, published two 
brief texts on "Bantu Psychology" in La Revue congolaise. Kaoze had been studying 
philosophy since 1905 and the influence of evolutionary hypotheses is clear in his 
thinking.  Civilization  means  for  him  the  regeneration  of  Africa  through  both 
Westernization  and  Christianization.  His  article  is  symbolically  subtitled:  "The 
Congolese seen by a civilized Congolese." Yet within the masochistic reasoning, in 
which Kaoze celebrates the superiority of the European and demonstrates the relative 
savagery of his own country, one encounters astounding confessions. The young 
clergyman  had hoped  to impress his compatriots  with questions  from his newly 
learned philosophy. Their answers surprised him: "They reason better than I do . . . 
They answered better than I thought. Thus I said  to myself  the human being is 
naturally a philosopher." (Kaoze, 1979:410-12)
In  the  19zos,  an  ambiguous  expression  surfaced  in  missionary  and 
anthropological studies: "oral philosophy" It still implies both the traditional notions 
of historical backwardness and its potentiality for evolution. It refers to two different 
types of experience: the first is that of being human and thus having the rationality of 
a Weltanschauung specifically proper to humans; the second provides the cultural 
bases  of  a  specific  Weltanschauung  through  collective  intellectual  constructions 
(myths, literature, proverbs, etc.) or by reference to a personal form of reasoning. In 
fact the expression is not new. One can find it in the writings of Frobenius at the 
beginning  of  the  century  and  later  on  in  various  anthropologists'  texts  (Smet, 
198o:95-96). The novelty is that the expression has been admitted at an institutional 
level and therefore signifies a possible reconversion of the policies of domesticating 
the black continent. Benedict XV's encyclic of 1919 (Maximum Illud) is just one sign 
among others.
For  a  long  time  in  anthropology  the  important  problem  has  been  the 
methodological  process  of  analysis,  following  the  model  of  natural  sciences.  It 
reduced people to the status of mere objects, so that an ethnocentric perspective could 
illuminate  "African  savagery"  from Western  norms (see  Leclerc,  1972;  Southall, 
1983; Terray, 1969). MacGaffey, following D. Sperber, speaks of a "semiological 
illusion"  and  rightly  suggests  as  a  possibility  that  "the  process  of  ethnocentric 
distortion in anthropology is much more complex than it is usually supposed to be: a 
two-way process, at least, in which African theories are shown to be capable of 
selling  well  in  world  markets"  (1981:252).  Even  African  anthropologists  have 
described their own culture from this viewpoint, smuggling "European concepts into 
African  contexts  and  [passing]  them  off  as  African  religion  or  philosophy" 
(1981:248).
Between the two World Wars in Europe, particularly in France and Germany, 
some  of  the  most  diligent  students  of  African  societies  promoted  new  ways  of 
speaking  about  "primitives."  They  include  scientists  or  missionaries  like  M. 
Delafosse, L. Frobenius, M. Rousseau, R. Schmitz, P Schumascher, G. Tessmann, G. 
Van der Kerken, and C. Van Overbergh. They were all Levy-Bruhl's contemporaries, 
and most of them had read his La Mentalité primitive. 
88


--- PAGE 89 ---
Even though some of these scholars explicitly tend to accept his pervasive ideas or, 
unwittingly, to reinforce them, it was already clear that a change was occurring in 
anthropology. Lévy-Bruhl, like many professional anthropologists, used to work by 
proxy. Those, like M. Delafosse, O. Le Roy or P Salkin, who had lived with Africans, 
could oppose him. Titles such as Weltanschauung and Charakter des Negers, L'Ame 
nègre, and La Raison primitive, and Essai de réfutation de le théorie du prélogisme 
constitute a new schema for research, or at any rate the possibility of interpretation 
from a new perspective.
However,  the  methodological  rules  remained  essentially  the  same.  They  are 
evolutionary, or functionalist, and still imply that Africans must evolve from their 
frozen  state  to  the  dynamism  of  Western  civilization.  The  policies  of  applied 
anthropology had taken the view of colonialism and focused on African structures in 
order  to  integrate  them  into  the  new  historical  process.  The  most  imaginative 
Africanists, like P Salkin, already imagined some of the consequences of political 
colonization and intellectual Westernization, foreseeing the independence movement 
and  its  possible  outcome, namely,  the  relative  autonomy of  a  Europeanized  and 
assimilated Africa.
Will African civilization victoriously resist the grip of European civilization? Or from reciprocal 
reactions of one upon the other will an intermediary civilization spring up which will conserve the 
African foundation and at the same time disguise it under a European cloak? (Salkin, 1916. Quoted 
by A. J. Smet, 1980:103)
A great  variety  of  interpretations  was  proposed,  particularly  about  African 
religions. But they still  all  followed  traditional  paths.  First  of  all,  the  notion  of 
religion  is hardly even  used to designate  African  beliefs  and  religious practices. 
Second,  explanatory  schemas,  theoretical  elaborations,  and  even  empirical 
descriptions cautiously follow the classic nineteenth-century models. That is the case 
even of such achievements as Trilles's work on Pygmies (1931) and Evans-Pritchard's 
study of the Azande (1937). Schmidt's ambitious enterprise in Die Ursprung der 
Gottesidee  and  his  concept  of  Urmonotheismus  (Schmidt,  1931)  constituted  a 
breakthrough  in  its  heuristic  objectives.  As  I  have  previously  noted,  one  major 
assumption of the method is the existence of a universal theory that each human 
community  expresses  in  its  own  way  and  according  to  its  own  needs.  This 
"philosophy" would be always and everywhere particular in its cultural and historical 
manifestations, and universal in its essence.
It was also during this period that more and more Africans became aware of their 
traditions. In the British colonies, it was the great period of applied anthropology, but 
also of the first monographs on African laws and customs (Ajisafe, 192-4; Danquah, 
2928). One can follow the same trend in Frenchspeaking countries: D. Delobson 
published  L'Empire  du  Mogho-Naba  (1932)  and  Les  Secrets  des  sorciers  noirs 
(1934), and M. Quenum, Au pays
89


--- PAGE 90 ---
des  Fons  (1938).  Le  Bulletin  de  l'enseignement  de  l'AOF  (Afrique  occidentale 
française) published articles by Africans (Delobson, Boubou Hama, Ahmadou Mapate 
Diagne,  Bendaoud  Mademba,  etc.)  on  local  cultures.  In  the  Belgian  Congo,  the 
official norms promoted the teaching and use of African languages. Journals, such as 
Nkuruse, written in Tshiluba, had a large circulation. Moreover, written literature in 
African  languages  exhibited  a  good  beginning  or,  in  some  countries,  a  positive 
vitality. I shall cite just a few examples. In Nigeria A. Abubakar Tafawa Balewa wrote 
in Hausa (Shaihu Umar, 1934) and A. Abubakar Iman became editor of a Hausa 
newspaper, Gaskiya Ta Fi Kwabo. In Malawi E. W Chafulumire taught history to his 
people and wrote in Nyanja about how to behave in contemporary times. In the same 
language, Yosia S. Ntara wrote Chief Msyamboza's history and wrote of the past of 
the Chewa community. In Rwanda Kagame,  editor of a Kinyarwanda newspaper 
(Kinyamateka) since 1941, began his important work of poetry in Kinyarwanda on 
the victorious drums and the source of progress. The same trend was apparent in a 
number  of  other  African  languages,  among  them  Bemba  (Zambia,  Zaire),  Ewe 
(Ghana), KiKongo (Angola, Congo, Zaire), Lingala (Congo, Zaire), Lozi (Zambia), 
Runyoro  (Uganda),  Swahili  (Tanzania,  Zaire),  and  Yoruba  (Nigeria).  The  most 
prosperous literature is surely in South African languages (Sotho, Tswana, Xhosa, and 
Zulu)  and was produced  by such writers  as  J. K.  Bokwe (1855-1922),  H.  I.  E. 
Dhlomo  (1903-1971),  M.  O.  M.  Seboni  (1912-1972),  and  B.  W.  B.  Vilakazi 
(1906-1947).
Yet the promotion of African literature and languages was basically a dubious 
enterprise. It kept pace with the philosophy of applied anthropology and questionable 
policies in education programs. Nevertheless, it seems legitimate to consider this 
literature in African languages as an expression of African condition; thus it is a voice 
of  anthropology  if  one  accepts  the  etymological  root  meaning  of  the  word: 
Anthropou-logos, a speaking about humans. This literature heavily relies on African 
experiences and milieux and can present another "view," different from that of the 
colonizers and Western anthropologists. Consequently, it takes on a power which 
could  ultimately  be  used  against  foreign  ideologies.  Two  other  facts  confer  a 
particular  weight  on this period:  the  collaboration, in both America  and Europe, 
between black Africans and black Americans (Shepperson, 1960); and, in France, the 
glorification  of  African  models  in  both  art  and  literature.  Of  those  involved, 
Apollinaire, Cendrars, Derain, Guillaume, Matisse, Picasso, and Vlaminck are the 
best known (Hauser, 1982). Both movements contributed to the emergence of a black 
African consciousness.
This consciousness firmly relies upon an anthropological perspective but does not 
always seem to follow the mainstream of anthropologists' conclusions. Within the 
postprimitivist  era,  for  example,  Paul  Hazoumé  wrote  Doguicimi  (1938),  an 
ethnological novel about the court of Abomey. In 1938, Jomo Kenyatta published 
Facing Mount Kenya, which is both a study of Kikuyu ways and style of life and a 
discreet political manifesto. During
90


--- PAGE 91 ---
those years a very popular kind of anthropology developed. More and more Africans 
published traditional tales and legends (see Blair, 1976:27-30). Later on, the influence 
of Griaule's and Dieterlen's works and the impact of cultural anthropology led African 
intellectuals to distinguish "good" and "bad" works about Africa, according to their 
conception of the value of their own civilization. The most extreme example of this 
ideological process is Cheikh Anta Diop's work on the cultural experiences of Africa 
(1954, 1960a, 1978).
In the 1950s it was clear that independence movements, in their opposition to 
colonialism,  also  tended  to  reject  the  essentials  of  anthropological  perspectives. 
African  intellectuals  began  to  question  the  methodological  reductionism  of  the 
discipline. Later, Africa's scholars preferred to speak about African history, regarding 
Western colonialism and its ideology as a parenthesis in the black African experience 
(Ajayi, 1969; Ki-Zerbo, 1972).
The  changes  that  began  circa  1950  were  not  the  doing  of  Africa  scholars.  They  were  the 
consequence of the rise of African nationalism in the form of political movements. Nationalist 
movements by their very existence challenged both implicitly and explicitly, the two basic premises 
of the previous work of Africa scholars. Frst, nationalist movements asserted that the primary arena 
of social and political action, in terms of legitimacy and hence of study, was and ought to be the 
colonial state/putative nation and not the "tribe" . . . Secondly, nationalist movements asserted that 
the relationship between Europeans and Africans had not been one of "culture contact" at all, but 
rather  one  of  a  "colonial  situation."  Culture  contact  could  be  good  or  bad  and  .  .  .  the 
anthropologists had devoted themselves politically to trying to make sure it was good rather than 
bad. (Wallerstein, 1983:157)
An analysis of some of the most representative works of this last period indicates 
a  bizarre  climate.  Some  classical  methodologies  of  social  philosophy  and 
anthropology continued to sustain scholarly works, such as Dike's book on trade and 
politics in the Niger delta (1956), Idowu's study on God in Yoruba belief (1962), W E. 
Abraham's  hypothesis  of  a  family resemblance  which  allowed  him to  use  Akan 
culture as a methodological paradigm (1966), Ogot's history of the Southern Luo 
(1967), E A. Arinze's account of Ibo religion (1970), Okot P'Bitek's presentation of 
Luo religion (1971), J. M. Agossou's study on relationships between God and man 
among peoples of South Dahomey (1972), and Deng's book on the Dinka (1972).
But  within  this  apparently classical  orientation,  a new  ideological  dimension 
appears.  For example,  E. B. Idowu, in his subsequent  book on African religion, 
questions  the  validity  of  Western  scholars'  works,  since  most  of  them  cannot 
understand African languages and conduct their studies "by proxy through research 
assistants  scattered  all  over  the  field  or  by  library  work"  (1965,  1975).  J.  B. 
Danquah's attempt ([1944] 1968) to link Akan religious categories to those of the 
Middle East is similar to L. Olumide's objective in his study of Yoruba religion 
(1948), in which he claims to demonstrate the
91


--- PAGE 92 ---
Egyptian origin of Yoruba tradition. This assertion is similar to the theme of Cheikh 
Anta Diop's works on the religious, linguistic, and cultural unity of Africa (1954, 
1960a, 1960b). In fact, no one will disagree that a nationalistic trend is present. More 
and more African scholars seem to rely on the hypothesis of African unity. The title of 
Abraham's book-The Mind o f Africa (1966)-is a program. Here one can also situate 
Mulago's enterprise (1973), which, after the major works of P. Colle, G. Hulstaert, 
Van  Caeneghem, and  others,  draws  a  new  frame  from Parrinder's  approach  and 
asserts the homogeneity of a Bantu religious vision of the world, "that some call 
Untu, Négritude, Africanity, three terms used one for the other." (Mulago, 1973:11).
It is easy to point out the paradox faced by these African scholars: on the one 
hand,  for  the  sake  of  their  own  pride  and  identity they deny exoticism and  its 
assumptions; on the other, they are sincerely ready for the practice of a positive social 
science,  and  so  for  a  conscious  alliance  with  science  in  the  frame  of  its 
epistemological field (e.g., Hountondji, 1980, 1981). It is from this exact point that 
we can observe and understand the contradictions of pan-Africanist ideology in social 
science  (Shorter,  1977:38-60).  Idowu's  postulations  or  Mulago's  Africanity,  as  a 
"common factor" of African cultures and religious beliefs, are just hypotheses, in the 
same way as  Abraham's family resemblance  is  an  assertion  and  not  a  scientific 
demonstration. Mbiti's theory of the cultural unity of the continent as a foundation for 
the coherence of African religions and philosophy is supported by nothing except his 
own subjectivity (1970:2).
This paradox may account for some tedious discussions that, in Africa, repeat 
"alternations  of  European  social  thought"  (MacGaffey,  1981:261).  From  this 
statement, however, it cannot be inferred that Africans must endeavor to create from 
their  otherness  a  radically new  social  science.  It  would  be  insanity to  reproach 
Western  tradition  for  its  Oriental  heritage.  For  example,  no  one  would  question 
Heidegger's right to philosophize within the categories of ancient Greek language. It 
is his right to exploit any part of this heritage. What I mean is this: the Western 
tradition of science, as well as the trauma of slave trade and colonization, are part of 
Africa's present-day heritage. K. Nkrumah rightly pointed out, in his Consciencism 
(chapter 3), that Africans have to take these legacies along with Muslim contributions 
and their own past and experience (see also Mazrui, 1974).
Moreover, one might also conceive the intellectual signs of otherness not as a 
project for the foundation of a new science, but rather as a mode of reexamining the 
journeys of human knowledge in a world of competing propositions and choices 
(Kane, 1961; Brenner, 1984:126-40). Concretely, from the background of the colonial 
politics of conversion, this mode seems imperative and one would agree with R. 
Horton:
The kind of comparative conceptual analysis that the "philosopher of" traditional thought could 
offer would do much to help the contemporary intellectual 
92


--- PAGE 93 ---
in his struggle to think through the relationship  between his two supercompartments  (that is, 
tradition and modernity). It would be supremely relevant to such questions as: Should there be a 
global stand in favour of traditional thought patterns and against modern patterns? Or should there 
be a global commitment to the running-down of the traditional in order to make way for the 
modern? Or again, should traditional thought-patterns be encouraged to coexist with modern? And 
if so, in what manner? Or yet again, is traditional thought a many-stranded thing, whose various 
strands must be disentangled and their appropriate relations to modernity considered one by one? 
(Horton, 1976:71)
Beyond as well as in the exposition of comparative studies, the logic of the mode 
would institutionalize a reevaluation of preceding norms, voices, and consensus. As a 
test of the fruitfulness of the new formulas and answers, one would look both at the 
durability  of  the  founding  arguments  and  at  processes  purifying  controversial 
assumptions in the field. I have read three rewarding and ambitious contributions: O. 
Nduka's brief essay on the implications of African traditional systems of thought, 
which  is  based  on  a  "critique  of  principles  of  causation  and  the  quality of  the 
understanding  of mechanical and organic  processes"  (Nduka,  1974:97);  Gyekye's 
note on the philosophical relevance of Akan proverbs and the paradigm of the African 
proverb  as  situational  (Gyekye,  1975);  and  Nkombe's  impressive  work  on 
paremiologic  symbols  (1979).  Using  the  logic  of  classes  in  order  to  describe 
metaphors and metonyms in Tetela proverbs, Nkombe succeeds in two ways: first, he 
makes an original contribution by demonstrating that it is possible to reformulate the 
logic of classes in terms of the logic of propositions; second, through this highly 
abstract  exercise,  he  analyzes  the  originality  of  an  African  culture  in  its  dual 
dimension-internal plenitude  and aspiration  towards universality.  A final  example 
taken from a quite different source is Horton's schema of common and contrasting 
features existing between African traditional thought and Western science. At the end 
of his demonstration, he writes: "Though I largely disagree with the way in which the 
`Négritude' theorists have characterized the differences between traditional African 
and modern Western thought, when it gets to this point I see clearly what they are 
after" (1981:170).
To sum up my position more theoretically, I would say that there is a mutation 
which  took  place  in  the  19zos  and  which  explains  both  the  possibility and  the 
pertinence  of  an  African  discourse  on  otherness.  This  mutation  signifies  a  new 
foundation for organizing a plurality of historical memories within the frame of the 
same episteme. Thus, fundamentally, it does not seem to matter whether Herskovits's 
propositions on African cultures, Vansina's methodological proposal on oral history, 
or Davidson's contributions to African history and Balandier's to African sociology 
created or determined the emergence of a new spirit against a reigning tradition. It 
does not mean either that, before the 193os, no one thought of questioning the grids 
through which the Same displayed its kingship. E. Blyden's thought,
93


--- PAGE 94 ---
which I shall look at carefully below, is, for instance, an annunciating sign of the 
rupture. On the other hand, the very fact that in the 193os and 1940s a Collingwood 
could concern himself with the theme of reenacting the glory of the Same by focusing 
on the documentary virtues of historical thought and its means does not invalidate my 
thesis. On the contrary, it rather shows the intellectual audacity of Herskovits or of 
Vansina, and its specificity as a question about both philosophical and historical 
imagination. The articulation of this mutation was already visible in the 1920s, and 
one of its most apparent signs is the fragmentation of the notion of civilization (see, 
e.g., Braudel 1980:177-217). In the first quarter of this century, critical thinkers like 
Blyden and Frobenius seemed to be simply transferring doxological modalities from 
their  own rationalizations  of African experiences, the  first hypothesizing a black 
personality culture on the basis of the most controversial racist recommendations, the 
second anxious to grant African social formations the practicality of a classification 
of its culturally distinct features. However, it seems clear that Blyden and Frobenius, 
however unknowingly, participated in a larger epistemological shift. In the 1920s, this 
shift  would,  among other  things,  reveal  its  presence  through  the  appearance  of 
ideologies of existence, subjectivity, otherness, and interest in "oral philosophies" and 
histories. Picasso and Cendrars's celebration of primitive imagination and works, and 
Schmidt's  description  of  the  universal  extension  of  an  Urmonotheismus  were 
predicated upon this epistemological shift, which makes them comprehensible.
The  specific  question  of  African  culture  is  probably  the  best  conceivable 
illustration  of  this  epistemological  mutation.  Within  the  framework  of  the  early 
twentieth-century epistemology, all discourses on alterity could only,  as Foucault 
suggested, be commentaries or exegeses on excluded areas: primitive experience, 
pathological societies, or non-normal functionality, subsumed by the Same defined 
and  understood  in  terms  of  a  biological  model  from  which  determining 
terms-function,  conflict,  signification-emerge  as  classifiers  with  the  power  of 
measuring the social, individual, or psychological distance vis-à-vis the model (see 
Foucault,  1973:360).  Anthropology,  as  well  as  missionary  studies  of  primitive 
philosophies, are then concerned with the study of the distance from the Same to the 
Other.  A reversal  of  categories  is  more  obvious  in  Schmidt's  enterprise  than  in 
Malinowski's postulations. The former, by the extension of diffusionist gradients and 
thus the universalization of properties of the Same, was, despite his preconceptions, 
marking the very possibility of a grid which, using new criteria-rule, norm, and 
system-could eventually account for the universality and the particularity of each 
cultural organization according to its own rationality and historical strategies. And we 
have seen that the outcome of this problem in the 1950s depends on a new manner of 
speaking  about  theodicies  and  cosmogonies,  which  in  their  differences  grant  a 
regional coherence and at the same time witness to properties of human mind and its 
universal  potentialities.  On  the  other  hand,  the  so-called  relativist  principles  of 
Malinowski seem to be just
94


--- PAGE 95 ---
sophisticated postulates which, concretely, in the particularity of social formations as 
radically autonomous bodies with respect to their functional organization, negated 
cross-cultural influences, or at any rate the validity of any comparative schema. More 
important, Malinowski enclosed the alterity of social formations in their own strictly 
limited  otherness  and  thus  very  clearly  underlined  the  regional  virtues  of  such 
paradigms  as  function,  conflict,  and  signification.  Thus  it  is  no  wonder  that 
Malinowski's best creation was applied  anthropology, a technique  for supposedly 
avoiding aberrant mixtures of the Same and the Other. The monstrosity is represented 
by a mixture "symptomatic and symbolic of culture change: the skokian, the famous 
concoction brewed, retailed, and consumed in the notorious slum yards of native 
South African locations . . . Anything which quickly increased the alcoholic content 
was added; calcium carbide, methylated spirits, tobacco, molasses and sugar, blue 
stone, are only a few examples" (Malinowski, 1938:xxi)- Independently from the 
significance of this violent symbol-how can anyone, even an African, survive after 
drinking  such  a  poison?-if  we  carefully  look  at  the  paradigms  which  produce 
Malinowski's  method  and  which,  essentially,  are  the  same  that  guided  applied 
anthropology,  we  can  state  that  there  is  no  epistemological  rupture  between 
Lévy-Bruhl's comments on prelogism and Malinowski's functionalism. All of them, 
as well as Durkheim (one of the guiding stars of functionalism) work at describing 
the  reversed  image  of  the  Same through  the  models  that  impose  the  notions  of 
function, conflict, and signification. The real change, that is, a reversal of grids, came 
later.
Yet we have to note a major difference between Levy-Bruhl and Malinowski. The 
French philosopher is strictly concerned with the notion of deviation (écart) and, 
through an exegesis of merits of the Same's function and signification, he challenges 
the identity of human nature through time and space. As everyone knows, Lévy-Bruhl 
was haunted by Tylor's theory about animism and Comte's Loi des trois états. He used 
"primitives" as an opportunity for distinguishing both the logical and the historical 
distance  that  separates  the  homogeneous  experience  of  the  Same  from  the 
heterogeneity and prelogical character of the Other. Malinowski, in contrast, was 
more imaginative, despite the fact that he believed, as Lévy-Bruhl did, that humans 
can be mere objects of science. He substituted the concept of an organic function of a 
social system for the determinism of the passage from prelogic to logical knowledge. 
In  doing  so,  Malinowski  was  promoting a  radical  possibility,  that  of  using  and 
referring  to  such  conceptual  tools  as  autonomous  rule,  social  norm,  and  the 
epistemology and singularity of regional cultural systems.
It becomes clearer that the voices which, from the 19zos to the 1950s spoke 
against  the  historicity  of  the  Same  and  its  scientism  do  indeed  repudiate 
anthropological policies and researches that are "anti-historical" insofar as African 
communities  are  concerned.  Particularly,  they  oppose  the  political  processes  of 
acculturation (see Wallerstein, 1983). In order to escape these
95


--- PAGE 96 ---
ideological limits, some of the participants prudently or boldly chose to claim that 
everything in human experience was simultaneously both culture and history. They 
were  just  inferring  lessons  of  an  epistemological  mutation  from  the  margins  of 
Malinowski's outlook. In effect, this rupture has led from an indecent curiosity about 
the  mysteriousness  of  the  Other  to  P  Veyne's  statement  (to  which  Herskovits, 
Lévi-Strauss,  Vansina,  Ajayi,  or  Cheikh  Anta  Diop  could  have  subscribed):  "the 
Romans existed in a manner just as exotic and just as ordinary as the Tibetans or the 
Nambikwara, for example, neither more nor less; so that it becomes impossible to 
continue to consider them as a sort of value-standard" (in Ricoeur, 1984:43).
The Panacea of Otherness
J.-P Sartre as an African Philosopher
Apes . . . descend from men? Some of us 
thought so; but it is not exactly that. Apes 
and men are two separate branches that have
evolved from a point in common but in 
different directions . . .
P BOULLE, Planet o f the Apes.
Up to the 1920s, the entire framework of African social studies was consistent 
with the rationale of an epistemological field and its sociopolitical expressions of 
conquest. Even those social realities, such as art, languages, or oral literature, which 
might have constituted an introduction to otherness, were repressed in support of 
theories of sameness. Socially, they were tools strengthening a new organization of 
power and its political methods of reduction, namely, assimilation or indirect rule. 
Within this context, negritude, a student movement that emerged in the 1930s in 
Paris, is a literary coterie despite  its political implications. Besides, these young 
menAimé Césaire, Léon Damas, Léopold Senghor-mostly used poetry to explore and 
speak about their difference as blacks (Blair, 1976:143-51; Kesteloot, 1965).
It  is  Sartre  who  in  1948  with  his  essay,  Black  Orpheus,  an  introduction  to 
Senghor's Anthology of New Negro and Malagasy Poetry, transformed negritude into 
a  major  political  event  and  a  philosophical  criticism  of  colonialism.  However, 
everyone would agree that the Indian criticism of colonialism, beginning in the 19zos, 
and the growing influence of Marxism from the 1930s onwards opened a new era and 
made way for the possibility of new types of discourses, which from the colonial 
perspective were both absurd and abhorrent. The most original include the negritude 
movement, the fifth Pan-African Conference and the creation of Présence Africaine. 
Eventually, these signs of an African will for power led to political and
96


--- PAGE 97 ---
intellectual confrontations (Conferences of Bandung, Paris, and Rome). In the 1950s, 
one also witnessed a radical criticism of anthropology and its inherent preconceptions 
of  non-Western  cultures.  Since  then,  a  stimulating  debate  about  the  African 
significance of social sciences and humanities has taken place.
In his foreword to Senghor's anthology, J.-P Sartre made the voices of negritude 
widely known. But what an ambiguity in raising the French existentialist to the rank 
of philosopher of negritude! The resources and promise of a young ideology devoting 
itself  to the  needs  of a  self-rediscovery were to  be  cast into  a very critical  but 
somehow stultifying mold. In Black Orpheus, Sartre presents means for a struggle 
against the dominant ideology and affirms the right of Africans to fashion a new 
mode of thought, of speech, and of life. What he proposes is much more than a 
brilliant game of opposites (with which Senghor might have been satisfied). "Today, 
these black men have fixed their gaze upon us and our gaze is thrown back in our 
eyes; black torches, in their turn, light the world and our white heads are only small 
lanterns balanced in the wind" (1976:7-8). Sartre goes further. With passion, he sets 
up paradigms that would allow the colonized black to assume control of a self (see 
Jeanson, 1949). "It is the efficiency alone which counts." "The oppressed class must 
first take conscience of itself." "This taking of conscience is exactly the opposite of a 
redescent into one's self; it has to do here with a recognition in and action of the 
objective situation of the proletariat." "A Jew, white among white men, can deny that 
he is a Jew, can declare himself a man among men. The Negro cannot deny that he is 
Negro nor claim for himself this abstract uncolored humanity." Sartre even specifies 
the exact significance of the Negro's revolt:
The Negro who vindicates his négritude in a revolutionary movement places himself, then and 
there, upon the terrain of Reflection, whether he wishes to rediscover in himself certain objective 
traits growing out of African civilization, or hopes to find the black Essence in the wells of his soul. 
(Sartre, 1976: 17)
The  negritude  which  he  thus  affirms  and  celebrates  is  simultaneously  the 
"triumph of Narcissism and suicide of Narcissus, tension of the soul outside of its 
culture,  words  and  every  psychic  fact,  luminous  night  of  non-knowledge." 
Immediately after this celebration, he warns that negritude can neither be sufficient 
nor must it live forever. It is made to be negated, to be exceeded. Among the ruins of 
the colonial era, its singers must again rework songs, reformulate their myths, and 
submit them to the service and to the need of the revolution of the proletariat.
It could be said of Black Orpheus that while correcting the potential theoretical 
excesses of the ideology of negritude, it did so in a high-handed manner, thwarting 
other possible orientations of the movement. At the same time, it subjugated the 
militants' generosity of heart and mind to the fervour of a political philosophy. Sartre, 
in the 1940s and early 1950s, was promoting, 
97


--- PAGE 98 ---
in  the  name  of  commitment,  the  moral  demand  of  choosing  political  sides.  A 
substantial part of Being and Nothingness is devoted to the tension between the for 
itself (pour-soi) and for others (pour-autrui). Now Sartre dedicated himself to the 
analysis  of  the  concrete  consequences  of  this  dialectic  as  illustrated  by colonial 
systems (Sartre, 1956). It was to the credit of Senghor that he was not stifled by the 
peremptory arguments and the vision of this first theoretician of negritude whom he 
had aroused: he had asked Sartre for a cloak to celebrate negritude; he was given a 
shroud.
Nevertheless, Black Orpheus is a major ideological moment, perhaps one of the 
most  important.  It  displays  both  the  potentialities  of  Marxist  revolution  and  the 
negation of colonialism and racism: "The Negro," states Sartre, "creates an anti-racist 
racism. He does not at all wish to dominate the world; he wishes the abolition of 
racial privileges wherever they are found; he affirms his solidarity with the oppressed 
of all colors. At a blow the subjective, existential, ethnic notion of Négritude passes 
as Hegel would say,  into the objective, positive, exact notion of the  proletariat" 
(1976:59). What Sartre did was to impose philosophically the political dimension of a 
negativity  in  the  colonial  history.  This  was  a  compelling  task  for  Africans.  By 
emphasizing the relativity and the sins of Western expansionism, he gave meaning 
and  credibility  to  all  signs  of  opposition  to  colonialism  and  called  for  a  new 
understanding  of  the  significance  of  violence  in  the  colonies.  Thus, Pan-African 
Conferences, Gandhi's noncooperation movement, and the NeoDestur party emerging 
in Tunisia would appear to have a dialectical and positive portent for the future: they 
could  influence  the  lives  of  the  colonized  and,  also  fundamentally,  provide  the 
possibility of new societies.
The  change  from  colonized  to  independent,  from  rule  by  divine  right  to 
liberation, may not seem to have any relation to anthropology in particular or African 
social studies in general. In fact, it does. First, Black Orpheus was in large measure 
responsible for the blossoming in Francophone Africa of the negritude literature of 
the 1950s (Blair, 1976; Wauthier, 1964). A littérature engagée, a highly political 
literature,  put  forward  Sartre's  basic  positions  concerning  African  spiritual  and 
political autonomy.  This new generation of writers born between 1910 and 1920 
includes  Cheikh Anta Diop, Bernard Dadié, René Depestre,  Frantz  Fanon, Keita 
Fodeba,  Camara  Laye,  and  Ferdinand  Oyono,  among  others.  Second,  black 
intellectuals,  particularly  Francophones,  read  Sartre,  discussed  his  anticolonialist 
positions and, generally speaking, upheld them. Fanon disagrees with Sartre yet offers 
a good example of his impact. In his Peau noire, masques blancs, Fanon accuses 
Sartre of treason, for Fanon does not believe that "Négritude is dedicated to its own 
destruction." Some years later, in Les Damnés de la terre, the West Indian theorist 
firmly applies Sartre's dialectical principle and bluntly states: "there will not be a 
Black culture," "the Black problem is a political one."
On the other hand, there is a connection between this black littérature engagée 
and the African ideology of otherness. In Black Orpheus Sartre proposes a Marxist 
paradigm. The founders of negritude do not disagree
98


--- PAGE 99 ---
with him on this point. Some West Indians, for instance Aimé Césaire, Etienne Lero, 
Jules Monnerot, and Jacques Roumain, have been at one time or another members of 
the  Communist  Party.  Mamadou  Dia,  Alioune  Diop,  Birago  Diop,  Jacques 
Rabemananjara, and Senghor are rather critical of communism, even when, as in the 
case  of  Senghor,  they are  socialists.  For  them communism is  merely (as  Sartre 
defined it) a traveling companion. They question the overemphasis on the fate of the 
international  proletariat  and  wish  to  determine  a  strategy  for  promoting  the 
individuality of African culture. As opposed to Marx's rigid interpretation  of the 
relations between values and peoples' aspirations in society, they look for ways of 
reinventing a sociohistoric foundation for independent African societies (Senghor, 
2962). Thus the basic premise of the African ideology of otherness: history is myth.
Is Sartre really the inspired guide of this revolution? Let us say that Sartre, 
philosopher in partibus of negritude-or, figuratively, Sartre as "Negro philosopher"-is 
a symbol. Since  the 1920s, writers like R. Maran, A. Gide, or M. Sauvage had 
criticized  the  colonial  enterprise.  In  anthropology,  scholars  such  as  Maurice 
Delafosse, Leo Frobenius, Marcel Griaule, and Théodore Monod had offered positive 
views of African social regimes. And in 1947, we found grouped around the press and 
journal, "Présence Africaine" and its founder, Alioune Diop, a significant number of 
French  intellectuals. Georges Balandier, Albert Camus, Emmanuel  Mounier, Paul 
Rivet, Gide, and Monod, for example, affirm the political and cultural implications of 
the  mythical  character  of  colonial  history  (Rabemananjara,  s.d.:24).  But  Sartre 
established a cardinal synthesis. By rejecting both the colonial rationale and the set of 
culturally eternal values as bases for society, his brief treatise posited philosophically 
a relativist perspective for African social studies.
Sartre did not necessarily influence George Balandier or Joseph Ki-Zerbo nor 
does he guide all African thinkers. Nevertheless, his insights illuminated the trends 
and  preoccupations  of  African  scholarship.  His  path  to  liberation  meant  a  new 
epistemological configuration under the sovereignty of dialectical reason (Jeanson, 
1949).  It  is  from  his  interpretation,  rather  than  from  communism,  that  the  two 
characteristics  of present-day African social  studies  presented  by Copans (197ia) 
make sense: on the one hand, a radical criticism of imperialism and, on the other, a 
"Marxist revival" which, in effect, has taken hold of the whole theoretical domain of 
African studies.
Despite the importance of the negritude movement, very little attention has been 
given  to  the  relationships  between  its  textual  organization,  its  sources,  and  its 
expressions  (Melone,  1962).  We  have known,  for instance,  that  negritude  was  a 
French invention but not how essentially French it was (Adotévi, 1972). We have 
been told that the negritude literature appears unified, but its structure and spirit are 
more in keeping with European sources than with immediately visible African themes 
(Gérard, 1964; Bastide, 1961). Hauser's voluminous book (1982) deals with these 
issues and is probably the most complete study to date on the negritude movement. 
The value of this work does not lie in any new discovery but in the manner in
99


--- PAGE 100 ---
which it addresses the issues of negritude's significance and objectives. According to 
Sartre, negritude signifies, fundamentally, tension between the black man's past and 
future. Thus it must always be ready to redefine itself. As Hauser says, it clothes itself 
in mythical forms offering its meaning as a mot de passe and its philosophy as an 
inversion and a reversal of Western theses. The result is a paradox: "Poets for the 
Blacks, the men  of the Negritude  movement  were read by Whites;  Poets  of the 
present, they are perceived in Africa as poets of the past" (Hauser, 1982:214). While a 
literary  language,  negritude's  content  reveals  an  ideological  system  and  even, 
according to Sartre, "a revolutionary project." It comments upon a Weltanschauung, 
interprets  a  given  world,  unveils  the  universe  (dire  le  monde),  and  gives  a 
significance to it (signifier le monde) (Melone, 1962; Diakhate, 1965). But at the 
same time, because it is an ideological discourse, negritude claims to be a key to a 
new understanding of history. And thus the problem of the political and cultural 
responsibility of the negritude movement (Senghor, 1964) appears as a responsibility 
which  Hauser  considers  ambiguous.  Insofar  as  negritude's  political  position  is 
concerned, Hauser states that negritude has not been a revolutionary movement nor 
even,  with  the  exception  of  Césaire,  a  movement  of  revolt  (Hauser,  1982:443). 
Moreover, in relation to its conditions of possibility, negritude stands as the result of 
multiple influences: the Bible, anthropologists' books, and French intellectual schools 
(symbolism,  romanticism,  surrealism,  etc.),  literary  legacies,  and  literary  models 
(Baudelaire,  Lautréamont,  Rimbaud,  Mallarmé,  Valéry,  Claudel,  St.  John  Perse, 
Apollinaire, etc.). Hauser presents multiple proofs of the Western sources of negritude 
and seriously doubts its African authenticity (Hauser, 1982:533).
It becomes immediately apparent from these internal contradictions of negritude 
that Sartre's proposition on the deadlock of the movement makes tremendous sense. 
Unless understood as metaphors, the signs of otherness that negritude might have 
promoted  in  literature,  philosophy,  history,  or  social  science,  seem  to  refer  to 
techniques of ideological manipulation. R. Depestre forcefully points this out.
The original sin of negritude-and the adventures that destroyed its initial project-come from the 
spirit that made it possible: anthropology. The crisis that destroyed negritude coincides with the 
winds  that  blow  across  the  fields  in  which  anthropology-be  it  cultural,  social,  applied, 
structural-with  black or  white  masks,  is used  to  carrying  out  its  learned  inquiries.  (Depestre, 
1980:83)
Ideologies for Otherness
In the wake of negritude, but also running parallel to it or even against it, is the 
affirmation of African political thought. It aimed initially at recognizing the black 
personality (la personalité nègre) and obtaining certain sociopolitical rights (Wauthier, 
1964). Only later, in the 1950s, did it really
100


--- PAGE 101 ---
serve  projects  for  African  independence  (Coquery-Vidrovitch,  1974).  It  is 
commonplace to see in it one of the important elements of African nationalism. The 
other is resistance to colonialism, whether passive or violent. It is noteworthy that its 
most distinguished promoters are drawn from among those first and best assimilated 
to Western culture and thought. Further, one almost senses that these Westernized 
Africans resented the need to return to their own sources and to state the right to be 
different (see Kesteloot, 1965; Wauthier, 1964; Dieng, 1983).
To consider this awakening as a special turning point in the history of the West is 
not, in any case, to disqualify it. In 1957, Nkrumah published his autobiography, in 
which he explained to what extent he had been influenced by communist and socialist 
writings, Black American political theories (particularly Marcus Garvey's Philosophy 
and Opinions), and Padmore's view on Pan-Africanism. He also wrote that he learned 
much from Hannibal, Cromwell, Napoléon, Mazzini, Gandhi, Mussolini, and Hitler. 
Senghor (1962) also presented his own orientation, writing in first-person plural to 
include his friends, the co-founders of the negritude movement. If they believed in 
affirming their difference, it was, according to him, because of anthropologists and 
Black Americans. Also, in the period between the two wars they were privileged 
witnesses of the crisis of Western values. Moreover, their recent discovery of Marx 
gave them reasons for utopian dreams.
Senghor's  explanation  is  plausible.  Up  to  the  1960s,  anthropology,  Black 
American  ideology,  and  Marxism  had  a  significant  impact  on  the  African 
intelligentsia. For the sake of brevity, let us mention as important points of reference 
three major types of contributions which gradually changed colonial thinking and 
practice. First, there were anthropological and missionary commitments to African 
values: for instance, Schmidt's enterprise in the 193os, and Tempels's, Griaule's, and 
Danquah's studies in the 1940s. In addition, contributions from African scholars such 
as Mulago (1955), and Kagame (1956), promoted the concept of African theodicy or 
of signs of a natural religion. They all established African religions as particular and 
original  experiences  of  a  universal  wisdom  or  philosophy.  Second,  there  was 
intervention by some Western sociologists and historians. Raymond Michelet in his 
African Empires and Civilizations (1945) and Basil Davidson and Georges Balandier 
in  their  numerous  publications  opposed  widely  accepted  conceptions  of  "living 
fossils"  or  "frozen  societies."  Third,  there  was  the  "awakening"  of  African 
intellectuals who began to speak about their past and their culture and attacked, or at 
least interrogated, colonialism and its basic principles (Dieng, 1979; Guisse, 1979).
This ideological rupture sounds sincere and quite probably was in the minds of 
scholars who participated in it. Yet, it is a magnificent paradox, an almost illusory 
sacrifice  of  applied  anthropology.  It  is  based  on  two  fragile  principles:  a 
methodological reversal and an intellectual discontinuity in African social studies. In 
their application, rather than opening up a new realm, these principles helped to 
confuse prospects for otherness and the
101


--- PAGE 102 ---
significance of this concept. The significance belongs to the studied Other and is 
revealed to perception and given to understanding through the reality of a concrete 
experience. As to the discourse on this significance, it is always a project and a 
transcendent idea which cannot be reduced to a mental apprehension. To teach, as did 
Danquah, Davidson, Michelet, or Mulago, that there are, in Africa, organized social 
structures,  sophisticated  systems  of  relations  of  production,  and  highly  complex 
universes  of  belief,  is  to  express  propositions  which  can  be  tested.  To  add 
commentaries or exegeses on black cultures which are essentially mystical, religious, 
and  sensuous,  is  to  decipher  a  possibly  controversial  myth  and,  at  any rate,  to 
elaborate on what is not the immanent significance of the object studied.
The anthropologist did not seem to respect the immanence of human experience 
and went on to organize, at scientific expense, methods and ways of ideological 
reduction:  concrete  social  experiences  were  looked  at  and  interpreted  from  the 
normativity  of  a  political  discourse  and  its  initiatives.  With  a  Michelet  and  a 
Herskovits,  the  forming  of  new  ideological  perspectives  in  the  field  produced  a 
reversal: African experiences, attitudes, and mentalities became mirrors of a spiritual 
and cultural richness. There is no mystery, nor scandal in this, if we agree that we are 
dealing with discourses bearing upon human experience and accounted for by an 
episteme. I should also make it clear again that we are not concerned with evaluating 
the ethical value of discourses, but only with designating a genealogy of knowledge. 
Michelet's, Davidson's, Balandier's or Mulago's studies do not transform the heart of 
the  object  matter,  but  rather  reverse,  as  Sartre  did  philosophically,  a  method  of 
narration and the techniques of describing the object. A shift has occurred. A new 
anthropology  has,  silently  but  powerfully,  put  in  place  its  basic  norms,  namely 
respectability and internal coherence for African systems and experience, as well as 
rules for their progressive integration into modernity.
One  may  observe  this  gradual  change  in  some  representative  domains: 
anthropology, history, and political thinking. In anthropology, studies of traditional 
laws were carried out by A. Ajisafe, The Laws and Customs o f the Yoruba People 
(1924), and J. B. Danquah, Akan Laws and Customs (1928). Analyses of African 
customs were published; for example, D. Delobson's, Les secrets des sorciers noirs 
(1934), M. Quenum's, Au Pays des Fons: us et coutumes du Dahomey (1938), J. 
Kenyatta's, Facing Mount Kenya (1938), J. B. Danquah, The Akan Doctrine of God 
([1944:  1968),  and  the  excellent  researches  of  K.  A.  Busia  and  P  Hazoume, 
respectively, The Position o f the Chief in the Modern Political System o f Ashanti 
(1951) and Le pacte du sang au Dahomey ([1937 1956). In the field of history, the 
most prominent contributions to African nationalism were J. C. de GraftJohnson's 
African Glory: The Story of Vanished Negro Civilizations (1954) and Cheikh Anta 
Diop's, Nations nègres et culture (1954), in which he analyses the notion of Hamites 
and the connections between Egyptian and African languages and civilizations.
102


--- PAGE 103 ---
It  was  in  the  political  essays  that  a clearly progressive  awakening  gradually 
affirmed  the  principles  of  African  nationalism  and  international  integration.  In 
Towards Nationhood in West Africa (1928), J. W. de Graft-Johnson still envisaged the 
future of West Africa in terms of the British Empire. But nine years later, W Azikiwe, 
in Renascent Africa (1937), was more critical of Western colonial programs. He 
emphasized the fact that the "renascent African" must know that his ancestors "made 
definite  contributions  to  history"  and  he  condemned  imperialism and  militarism. 
Major essays took into account the resolution of the Fifth Pan-African Congress of 
Manchester  (194  5)  which  stated:  "we  demand  for  Black  Africa  autonomy  and 
independence," a central theme in Nkrumah's Towards Colonial Freedom (1947), 
Césaire's  Discours  sur  le  colonialisme  (1950),  and  Fanon's  Peau  noire,  masques 
blancs (1952). For a number of African intellectuals, these works have been, and 
probably still are, major sources for their cultural autonomy.
In her doctoral dissertation (1965), L. Kesteloot provided a brief history of the 
contacts  with  Black  Americans  that  contributed  to  the  awakening  of  the 
consciousness of Africans (see also Shepperson, 1960). L. G. Damas, just before his 
death in 1978, strongly confirmed this thesis with reference to the contributions of W. 
E. B. DuBois, Langston Hughes, Carter Woodson, Countee Cullen, and, in particular, 
Mercer  Cook,  all  of  whom  he  considered  links  between  Black  Americans  and 
Africans (Damas, 1979:247-54). To these names, Senghor adds Claude MacKay and 
Richard Wright (Senghor, 2962).
It is difficult to say with certainty to what extent the ideological commitment of 
Black Americans made an impact on the African intelligentsia. It converged with the 
influence  of  the  Marxist  movement  and  particularly  with  that  of  the  French 
Communist Party which, before World War II, was the force best organized to fight 
openly for  the  black  man's  cause.  A number  of  Francophone  black  intellectuals 
became communists, including Césaire, J. Roumain, E. Lero, and J. S. Alexis. Others, 
like Nkrumah,  Nyerere, and Senghor, allied  themselves with socialist ideological 
principles. In any case, the association with Black Americans strongly influenced the 
critical views of black Africans with respect to the crisis of Western values. It also 
revealed differences in the sociohistorical conditions of both. Opposition had already 
appeared at the Second Pan-African Congress, in 1921, held successively in London 
(August 28), Brussels (August 29-September 2), and Paris (September 3 and 5). 
Surveying the history of the black race, DuBois had, to Blaise Diagne's great surprise, 
pleaded for the principle of the separation of races and of separate evolution. But 
Diagne imposed on the assembly the ethnological point of view that "the Black and 
the colored people were capable of progressive development which would allow 
[them] to reach the advanced state of other races" (Bontinck, 1980:604-605).
Nevertheless, the greatest influence on African thought from the 1930s to the 
1950s was Marxism. Significant examples of its impact are the warm support that 
Sartre gave to the negritude movement in 1948 with his essay,
103


--- PAGE 104 ---
Black Orpheus, the publication by Aimé Césaire of Discours sur le colonialisme in 
1950, and the meeting at the Sorbonne, in 1956, of the First International Congress of 
Black Writers and Artists.
That same year some black intellectuals stated publicly that they wished that 
Marxism could promote their cause, and not only the reverse. In frustration, Césaire 
(1956) left the French Communist Party. During the Sorbonne meeting, Marxism was 
at  the  center  of  the  debate.  A critical  distance  was  therefore  suggested,  without 
entailing total rejection. As A. Ly would say, "the blind refusal of Marxism would be 
as absurd as a total alienation to the Marxist system would be fatal for the evolution 
of humankind" (1956). Though expressed differently, it is this spirit that dominated 
the  debates  during  the  first  meeting  of  nonaligned  nationalists  in  Bandung. 
Ultimately, the principle of nonalignment would be projected in politics.
In literature (see Jahn, 1968), this position is expressed in three major ways: first, 
in  terms  of  domestication  of  political  power  (E.  Mphahlele,  Mongo  Beti,  and 
Sembene  Ousmane);  second,  in  a  criticism  of  colonial  life  (Chinua  Achebe,  D. 
Chraïbi, E Oyono); and third, in the celebration of the African sources of life (A. 
Loba, A. Sefrioui, Cheikh Hamidou Kane).
It  is  noteworthy  that  a  number  of  political  leaders  who  came  to  power  in 
independent Africa declared themselves pro-Marxist or socialist or, in some cases, 
defined ways of indigenizing socialism. Socialists or not, the African heads of state, 
attempting to link thought to action, have published much, perhaps too much. In the 
late 1950s, one of the most prestigious leaders, Ahmed Sekou Touré, dared to refuse 
the  progressive  route  to  political  autonomy  proposed  by  France.  In  1959,  he 
published more than a thousand pages on his socialist projects for the development of 
Guinea and the promotion of Africa (1959a, 1959b, 1959c). Aimé Césaire celebrated 
this "courageous" and "dynamic" thought (1959-1960). In its inspiration, as in its 
perspectives, it is close to that of Nkrumah. With the translation of his autobiography, 
Nkrumah's  influence,  already  immense  in  Anglophone  Africa,  came  to 
French-speaking countries in 1960. His work met increasing favor, whose highest 
point  was  the  welcome  given  to  his  Consciencism.  In  this  work,  as  in  others, 
Nkrumah incorporated fidelity to Marxism into the cause of decolonization and the 
struggle against imperialism. His friend Patrice Lumumba had neither the time to 
clarify his thought nor to refine his essays (1963) which appeared after his death. 
Sartre again put his talent to the service of African nationalism by introducing J. Van 
Lierde's book on Lumumba's political philosophy (Van Lierde, 1963).
Numerous other leaders expounded their points of view on the complex problems 
of independent Africa. The major issues concern the management of the State as well 
as the means for economic  liberation. Such leaders include Ahidjo in Cameroon 
(1964, 1969), Badian in Mali (1964), Mamadou Dia in Senegal (1957, 1960), and 
Kanza in the Belgian Congo (1959a, 1959b). Nyerere  in Tanzania  has promoted 
ujamaa (communalism) (1968a) and M. Ngouabi (Congo) insisted on the necessity of 
applying scientific socialism (1975). 
104


--- PAGE 105 ---
But the paths taken in politics, when they have not led to bitter failure, have often 
caused serious problems. When permitted, political reaction surfaced. In any case, 
different  schools  of  thought  have  arisen;  hence,  for  example,  the  satire  and  the 
polemics found in D. Ewande's mockery of the Negro State (1968). These schools of 
thought were asserted in cathartic terms, especially in fiction in the 1970s, through 
attacks on the incompetence and the abuses of the new African administrators. The 
theme  of  ruthless  colonial  exploitation  is  replaced  by  an  original  sociopolitical 
subject: "we are, in the main, to blame for our misfortunes" (Casteran and Langellier, 
1978; Pomonti, 1979). There is a proliferation of examples in the literary works of 
Kwei  Armah,  Kofi  Awoonor,  Cameron  Duodu,  Ahmadou  Kourouma,  Tierno 
Monenembo, Ngugi wa Thiongo, and Tati-Loutard.
Marx Africanized
The  political  image of  Africa  after  1965  is  indeed  distressing.  Authoritarian 
regimes have multiplied, rules and norms of democracy have been flouted or rejected 
(see  Gutkind  and  Wallerstein,  11976;  O'Meara  and  Carter,  1986).  Political 
dictatorships  have  been  imposed.  Some  charismatic  leaders  have  vanished  into 
obscurity.  Touré  was  isolated  in  his  dictatorship  and  Nkrumah,  challenged  and 
insulted, died in exile (Powell, 1984). Senghor remained a model. Yet he chose to 
remove Mamadou Dia, his opponent, whose economic ideas were considered in the 
1960s to be a necessary complement to Senghor's metaphysics of negritude. He did 
this to guarantee security for the African path to socialism (Kachama-Nkoy, 1963). 
Covered with honors, but criticized more and more by the new generation, Senghor 
struggled to make all his works accessible (1964, 1971, 1977, 1983). At the same 
time he continued, against all opposition, to define negritude as a value of dialogue 
and of openness and to clarify his humanist choices for socialist politics and for an 
economy based on an African reading of Marx (1976a). Nyerere, in these years, also 
appears as one of the more credible political thinkers.
Despite the crucial problems of its adaptation to the African context, socialism 
seemed the most fashionable doctrine. Its best known proponents are Fanon, Senghor 
and Nyerere. The West Indian Frantz Fanon, a solid Marxist, but also a good student 
of  Hegel,  Kierkegaard,  Nietzsche,  and  Sartre,  expressed  his  commitment  to  the 
African revolution in Peau noire, masques blancs (1952), Les Damnés de la terre 
(1962),  and  Pour la  révolution  Africaine  (1969).  His  commitment is  based  on a 
concrete  understanding  of  the  Hegelian  dialectic.  The  alienation  caused  by 
colonialism  constitutes  the  thesis,  the  African  ideologies  of  otherness  (black 
personality  and  negritude),  the  antithesis,  and  political  liberation  should  be  the 
synthesis. The similarity with Sartre's analysis  in Black Orpheus is striking. But 
Fanon, who was probably more concerned with details and practical contradictions 
because he knew them better, had come from a "colony," was himself black,
105


--- PAGE 106 ---
and participated actively in the Algerian revolution. In contrast to Sartre, he could 
address a wider range of problems.
The alienation of colonialism entails both the objective fact of total dependence 
(economic,  political,  cultural,  and  religious)  and  the  subjective  process  of  the 
self-victimization of the dominated. The colonized internalizes the imposed racial 
stereotypes, particularly in attitudes towards technology, culture, and language. Black 
personality and negritude appear as the only means of negating this thesis, and Fanon 
expounds  the  antithesis  in  terms  of  antiracist  symbols.  Negritude  becomes  the 
intellectual and emotional sign of opposition to the ideology of white superiority. At 
the same time, it asserts an authenticity which eventually expresses itself as a radical 
negation:  rejection  of  racial  humiliation,  rebellion  against  the  rationality  of 
domination, and revolt against the whole colonialist system. This symbolic violence 
ultimately turns into nationalism and subsequently leads to a political struggle for 
liberation.  The  synthesis  is  the  conjunction  of,  on  the  one  side,  "national 
consciousness" and "political praxis," and, on the other, the contradictions created by 
existing  social  classes:  national  bourgeoisie,  proletariat,  underproletariat,  and 
peasantry.
Whereas Fanon distinguishes the analysis of a struggle for liberation (first phase) 
from the promotion of socialism (second phase) Senghor tends to define African 
socialism as just a stage in a complex process beginning with negritude and oriented 
towards  a universal  civilization.  He  emphasizes three  major  moments: negritude, 
Marxism, and universal civilization.
(a) Negritude is "the warmth" of being, living, and participating in a natural, 
social, and spiritual harmony. It also means assuming some basic political positions: 
that colonialism has depersonalized Africans and that therefore the end of colonialism 
should promote the self-fulfillment of Africans. Thus, negritude is simultaneously an 
existential thesis (I am what I have decided to be) and a political enterprise. It also 
signifies a political  choice: among  European methods, socialism seems the most 
useful for both cultural reassessment and sociopolitical promotion.
(6)  Marxism  is,  for  Senghor,  a  method.  In  order  to  use  it  adequately,  the 
Senegalese thinker dissociates Marxism as humanism from Marxism as a theory of 
knowledge. The first offers a convincing explanation of the notion of alienation in its 
theory of capital and value and exposes the scandal of human beings under capitalism 
becoming mere means of production and strangers vis-à-vis the product of their work. 
For  this  reason,  Senghor  readily  accepts  Marxism's  conclusions  insofar  as  they 
indicate a recognition of the natural rights of humans, who are and must remain free 
agents and creators of culture. "We are socialist," writes Senghor, "because we accept 
Marx and Engels and believe in the usefulness of their analysis of societies. Yet we 
add to Marx and Engels' works the contributions of their successors." For Senghor, 
Marxism as a theory of knowledge nevertheless constitutes a problem. It is one thing 
to use its schemas for analyzing and understanding the
106


--- PAGE 107 ---
complexity  of  social  formations,  and  another  to  accept  the  idea  that  social 
complexities universally fit into the concept of the class struggle and express the need 
to deny religion.
(c) Negritude and Marxist humanism are, according to Senghor, only stages in a 
dynamic dialectic process towards a universal civilization. Interpreting hypotheses of 
Pierre Teilhard de Chardin, Senghor bases his ideas of a universal civilization upon 
laws  of  evolution.  He  believes  that  the  movement  from  microentities  to  more 
complex ones and finally consciousness expresses a natural law. This would imply at 
least  three  major  theses:  the  principle  of  development  of  all  human  beings,  the 
principle of harmony in development, and God's existence as a natural necessity. 
Senghor thinks that some basic African values are well expressed in this perspective: 
namely the idea of community, the principle of harmony between evolving humans 
and changing nature, and, finally, the vision of a unitary universe.
Senghor's  influence  on  contemporary  African  thought,  particularly  in 
Francophone countries, is considerable. The Senegalese writer, like the Ghanaian 
Nkrumah,  does  not  allow  himself  to  be  neutral.  Of  the  African  thinkers  of  this 
century, he will probably have been the most honored and the most complimented, 
yet probably also the most disparaged and the most insulted, particularly by the 
present generation of African intellectuals. It is significant that S. Azombo-Menda 
and M. Anobo, in their manual of African philosophy, believe they are obliged to 
explain the presence of Senghor in their text. "His thought has exerted on black 
intellectuals such influence that it would be regrettable were his principal theses to be 
ignored or passed in silence by sectarianism or because people felt incapable to 
discuss  them"  (Azombo-Menda  and  Anobo,  1978).  Does including  Senghor in  a 
textbook of African philosophy really require excuses?
It is fitting to note that Senghor has become a myth that is endlessly discussed. It 
is true that criticism, especially African, has mainly seen in Senghor the promoter of 
some famous oppositions which, out of context, could appear to embrace perspectives 
proper to certain racist theoreticians: Negro emotion confronting hellenistic reason; 
intuitive Negro reasoning through participation facing European analytical thinking 
through  utilization;  or  the  Negro-African,  person  of  rhythm  and  sensitivity, 
assimilated to the Other through sympathy, who can say "I am the other . . . therefore 
I am." On this basis, Senghor has been accused of seeking to promote a detestable 
model for a division of vocations between Africa and Europe, between African and 
European (e.g., Towa, 1971a; Soyinka, 1976). This seems quite wrong. Senghor's 
philosophy can be simply understood through a challenging proposition he offered to 
the Senagalese Socialist Party in July 1963: "Finally, what too many Africans lack, is 
the  awareness  of  our  poverty  and  creative  imagination,  I  mean  the  spirit  of 
resourcefulness" (1983 :152).
Nyerere's socialism is probably the most pragmatic  of all  African  socialisms 
(Duggan and Civile, 1976:181). Its basic assumption has been
107


--- PAGE 108 ---
spelled out in simple terms. In the expression "African socialism" the most important 
word is not socialism but African. In other words, according to Nyerere, an African 
does not need to convert to socialism or to democracy, since his own traditional 
experience is socialist and democratic:
The true African socialist does not look on one class of men as his brethren and another as his 
natural enemies. He does not form an alliance with the `brethren' for the extermination of the 
`non-brethren.' He  regards  all  men  as  his  brethren-as  members  of  his  ever-extending  family. 
Ujamaa, then, or `familihood,' describes our socialism. (Nyerere, 1968a:2-7)
Ujamaa, or communalism, rejects both capitalism (which "seeks to build a happy 
society on the basis of exploitation of man by man") and doctrinaire socialism (which 
"seeks to build its happy society on a philosophy of inevitable conflict between man 
and man"). For Nyerere, ujamaa means first of all the creation of a new society, a 
nation, based on the traditional model of family. Second, moving beyond the nation, 
the socialist project would imply a constant development of communalism for all 
peoples (Duggan, and Civile, 1976: 188-96).
The  Arusha  Declaration,  issued  by Nyerere's  party in  1967,  made  Nyerere's 
program more explicit. It presented the party's creed, its socialist charter, the policy of 
self-reliance, the philosophy of membership, and an official statement about socialist 
leaders. The creed presents the rationale of ujamaa. In the first part, it describes the 
major values (sharing, equality, rejection of alienation and exploitation of man by 
man, etc.). In the second part, it offers as ideological deductions its main political 
objectives. These are: first, the independence of the nation, but a socialist nation 
governed by a socialist government; second, cooperation with African countries and 
commitment to the liberation of Africa and her unity; and third, improvement of the 
conditions of equality and life in the nation and, therefore, nationalization of the 
means of production and political control of the fields of production.
The search for the construction of a new African society has also led in other 
directions.  Both  N.  Azikiwe's  interpretation  of  political  unity and  the  pragmatic 
federalism advocated  by O. Awolowo in Path to  Nigerian  Freedom (1947)  have 
followers.  Nkrumah's political  philosophy is  still  popular  all  over  the  continent, 
especially his concept of social revolution described in 1 Speak of Freedom (1961) 
and the materialism of Consciencism (1970), which exposes a sociopolitical system 
implying dialogue and the possibility of reconciling antagonistic forces and orienting 
them  towards  positive  social  change.  Unfortunately,  looking  back  at  Nkrumah's 
regime in Ghana, one might think that all was just rhetoric. Though a good Marxist 
theorist, Nkrumah, once in power, became a bad politician and rapidly turned into a 
dictator. The best that can be said is that he simply failed to put his theory into 
practice. Yet his theoretical legacy remains, challenging and stimulating
108


--- PAGE 109 ---
for the new generation of African Marxists looking for paradigms of revolutionary 
change and cultural dynamism. On a quite general level, one may still admire his 
critical evaluation of G. Padmore's Panafricanism or Communism, his views on the 
unity  of  the  continent,  and  the  pertinence  of  his  analyses  of  neocolonialism 
(Nkrumah, 2962, 1965).
It  is  my  feeling  that  in  general  the  new  African  trend  concentrates  on  the 
ideological  significance  of  the  failure  of  contemporary  African  society.  In 
French-speaking countries, the criticism is carried out in the context of present-day 
sociopolitical contradictions rooted in both the precolonial and colonial experience, as 
for example, by Pathé Diagne in Pouvoir politique traditionnel en Afrique occidentale 
(1967) and G. L. Hazoume with his book Idéologies tribalistes et nation en Afrique: 
le cas Dahoméen (1972). Under the circumstances, many thinkers tend to reevaluate 
African socialism and insist on the usefulness of applying the Marxist lesson in a 
more systematic manner. Majhemout Diop suggested this in his Contribution à l'étude 
des problèmes politiques en Afrique noire (1958). Osende Afana brilliantly applied 
Marxist  perspectives  to  the  economic  situation  of  West  Africa  in  L'Economie 
ouest-africaine.  Perspectives  de  développement  (1967,  1976).  The  Marxist  trend 
seems still to be dynamic, as shown by the writings of authors such as Diagne, 
Hountondji, and M. Ngouabi, as well as by the official ideological choices of the 
regimes of Angola, Benin, Congo, Ethiopia, and Mozambique. The newly created 
Journal o f African Marxists is also an indication of the Marxist revival in Africa. It 
has succeeded in bringing together intellectuals from all over the continent and states 
its task in terms of "providing a platform for Marxist thought to provide that element 
most needed now to enable Africa to throw off imperialist domination and capitalist 
exploitation" (1983, no. 4:3; see also Dieng:1979).
In contrast, and mainly in West Africa, other scholars continue to give priority to 
questions that have been asked again and again about tradition. M. Dia, for instance, 
with his works on Islamic humanism (1977, 1979), joins A. Hampate Ba and Boubou 
Hama, prestigious survivors  of an old team which, from the 1930s onward, has 
continued to invoke traditionalism and Islam as effective sources of regeneration (see 
also Brenner, 1984).
Present trends give the impression that the Africa of the 1980s is reliving the 
crises of the 1950s. To create myths which would give a meaning to its hopes for 
improvement, Africa seems to hesitate between two principal sources, Marxist and 
traditionalist, and to worry endlessly about the evidence about the superiority of the 
Same  over  the  Other  and the  possible  virtues  of  the  inverse  relationship.  But  a 
discrete and controverted current has quietly developed since 1954, the date of the 
publication of Cheikh Anta Diop's Nations nègres et culture. To many, this current 
appears as the only reasonable alternative to the present disorder. Using Marxism as a 
foil, it intends to study African tradition in depth, affirming the cultural unity of 
precolonial Africa, linguistic kinship, and common historic past (Diop,
109


--- PAGE 110 ---
1954, 1960a, 1967, 1981). Diop's learned investigations-assisted by the Congolese T 
Obenga (1973) and the Cameroonian Mveng (1972.)-seek to give Africa the moral 
benefit of being the cradle of humankind and of having influenced the history of 
ancient Egypt as well as Mediterranean  civilizations. But could these potentially 
mobilizing myths provide, as Diop hoped (1960c), the possibility of a new political 
order in Africa?
110


--- PAGE 111 ---
IV
E. W BLYDEN'S LEGACY AND 
QUESTIONS
The Ambiguities of an Ideological Alternative
Toute ma vie, politiquement, je me suis fait 
de la bile. J'en induis que le seul Père que j'ai 
connu (que je me suis donné) a été le Père 
politique.
Roland Barthes par Roland Barthes.
In his foreword to Selected Letters of Edward Wilmot Blyden (1978) collected by 
Hollis R. Lynch, L. S. Senghor celebrates Blyden as the “foremost precursor both of 
Nigritude  and  of  the  African  Personality”  (Lynch  1978:xv-xxii).  The  father  of 
negritude thinks that a century before the emergence of modern African ideology, 
Blyden  promoted  its  spirit.  First,  because  Blyden  treated  “both  the  virtues  of 
Négritude  and  and  proper  modes  of  illustrating  these  virtues:  through  scholarly 
studies, life styles and cultural creaton.” Second, because “through the stimulus of a 
`revolution of mentalities',” Blyden tried “to lead Negro-Americans to cultivate what 
is `authentically' theirs: their `African Personality' . . . and advocated already the 
method which is ours today: to find one's roots in the values of Négritude, while 
remaining open to those of non-African civilizations.”  Third, because  as a “true 
universal man,” Blyden “already believed, as we do today, that all progress in a 
civilization can only come from a mixing of cultures.” Lynch, author of a biography 
of Blyden, agrees with Senghor and writes that “the modern concept of Négritude . . . 
can find respectable historical roots in the writings of Blyden” (1967:2-52). He also 
stresses the influence of Blyden on such ideologues as the Nigerian Nnamdi Azikiwe 
and the Ghanaian Kwame Nkrumah and states that “Blyden was the ideological father 
of  the  idea  of  West  African  unity”:  “he  inspired  nationalism  in  the  individual 
territories,”  and  his  “pan-Negro  ideology  was  undoubtedly  the  most  important 
progenitor of Pan-Africanism” (1967:249-50)
A native of the Danish island of St. Thomas, E. W Blyden (1832-1912) settled in 
West Africa in 1851 and rapidly became one of the most careful
111


--- PAGE 112 ---
students of African affairs. A permanent resident of Liberia and Sierra Leone, he saw 
the beginning of the scramble for Africa, studied the arrival of European settlers on 
the West Coast, and observed the progressive establishment of colonial rule. He was 
the author of several works.
It is not my intention to present an exegetic interpretation of Blyden's work, nor 
to offer a new understanding of his life and achievements. I am concerned with a 
practical question in the precise field of the history of African ideologies: in what 
sense can we accept Senghor's and Lynch's statements about Blyden as the precursor 
of negritude and “African Personality”? Thus, I will not “interpret” Blyden's theses 
from the point of view of historical data now available, but instead will focus on their 
significance  and  limitations,  and  will  when  necessary,  situate  them  in  their 
“ideological  atmosphere.”  I  shall,  therefore,  describe  the  signs  and  symbols  of 
Blyden's ideology as expressed by such texts as Vindication o f the Negro Race 
(1857), Liberia's Offering (1862), The Negro in Ancient History (1869), Liberia: Past, 
Present and Future (1869), Christianity, Islam and the Negro Race (1888), and Africa 
and the Africans (1903). I use the themes of Christianity, Islam and the Negro Race as 
an organizing frame. This book, a miscellaneous collection of various texts-articles, 
speeches, reviews-is Blyden's major work (see Lynch, 1967:73-78). Quotations from 
his letters add subjectivity to some of Blyden's more formal theses.
In  this  first  section,  I  will  present  Blyden's  thesis  on  colonization  and  his 
interpretation of the “Negro's condition”; in the next, I will show how he sees the 
African  and  defines  his  own  political  philosophy.  My conclusion  on  his  legacy 
attempts a critical synthesis and studies Blyden's racial attitudes and “prophetism” 
and  proposes  a  critical  interpretation  of  Senghor's  and  Lynch's  statements.  The 
method used is simple. Blyden's work is not analyzed as sign or symbol of something 
else, but only in terms of its own density and spiritual limits, as it reveals its own 
irreducibility and specificity. At the same time, because this work was produced 
within a given historical period and a specific intellectual climate, I thought it valid to 
rewrite its “passion” in the manner of Foucault, as a simple discourse-object.
Given Blyden's personal situation-a West Indian Black who, denied education in 
the  United  States, emigrated to Liberia  (Blyden,  LO:8; Lynch,  1967:73)-one can 
understand that his ideas concerning colonization express both racial and nationalistic 
positions aimed at achieving a particular type of social revolution. On April 20, 1860, 
he  wrote  to  William Gladstone,  then  British  Chancellor  of  the  Exchequer  about 
Liberia: “this little Republic, planted here in great weakness, is no doubt destined, in 
the providence of God, to revolutionize for good the whole of that portion of Africa” 
(Blyden, LET: 30). But in a letter written on June 9 of the same year to the Rev. John 
L.  Wilson,  Corresponding  Secretary  of  the  Board  of  Foreign  Missions  of  the 
American  Presbyterian  Church,  Blyden  speaks  of  being  “instrumental  in  doing 
anything towards establishing the respectability of my race.” Significantly, he wishes 
that his efforts for the promotion of the “Alexander High
112


--- PAGE 113 ---
School” in Monrovia will contribute to ““a partial solution” to questions about the 
Negro's capabilities:
`The great problem to be solved is whether black men, under favorable circumstances, can manage 
their own affairs . . . with efficiency' Will the efforts now put forth in the Alex High School, if 
efficient and successful, contribute to a partial solution of the problem? And, on the other hand, if 
those efforts fail, will the impression be deepened that the problem is insolvable [sic], and will the 
gloom which has so long rested upon the race increase in density? If so, then let me be forever 
discarded by the black race, and let me be condemned by the white, if I strive not with all my 
powers, if I put not forth all my energies to contribute to so important a solution. (Blyden, LET: 31)
One might focus on this sign: an explicit need for over-compensation transformed 
into a will-for-power. But this will for “the progress of the race” is largely determined 
by an apologetic objective. For, as Blyden put it at the end of his treatise on The 
Negro in Ancient History, “we believe that as descendants of Hain had share . . . in 
the founding of cities and in the organization of government, so members of the same 
family, developed under different circumstances, will have an important part in the 
closing of the great drama” (NAH:28). In this regard, he denies to whites any positive 
cultural presence in Africa and frequently insists on the fact that only black peoples 
can transform the continent. Yet he seriously advocates colonization as one of the 
possible means of metamorphosis.
Blyden's understanding of the process of Africa's opening up to a white presence 
is ambiguous:
The modern desire for more accurate knowledge of Africa is not a mere  sentiment; it is the 
philanthropic impulse to lift up the millions of that continent to their proper position among the 
intellectual and moral forces of the world; but it is also the commercial desire to open that vast 
country to the enterprises of trade. (Blyden, CINR, 95)
There remains the “civilizing mission.” He even refers to the first years of slavery 
as being positive: “The slave trade was regarded as a great means of civilizing the 
blacks-a  kind  of  missionary  institution.”  Africans  were  at  that  time  “not  only 
indoctrinated into the principles of Christianity, but they were taught the arts and 
sciences.”  “The relation of the European  to the  African  in those  unsophisticated 
times, was that of guardian and protégé” (LPPF:7-8).
Despite the fact that Blyden certainly had knowledge of Belgian atrocities in the 
Congo, his stated opinion of King Leopold's enterprise in Africa was that “everyone 
has confidence in the philanthropic aims and the practical arid commercial efforts of 
the King of Belgians in the arduous and expensive enterprise he has undertaken in the 
Congo” (Lynch, 1967:208). In his Africa and Africans, written in 1903, he celebrated 
Leopold  and  the  Belgians  as  “providential”  agents  for  the  regeneration  of  the 
continent  and  added  that,  “retribution  for  their  misdeeds  will  come  from  God” 
(Blyden, AA:45;
113


--- PAGE 114 ---
Lynch, 1967:209). But the same year, in a letter to John Holt, he was quite angry 
about “the horrible proceedings in the Congo.” Identifying Leopold with a mythical 
and monstrous Pharaoh, he noted that the king and his aides “have the curse of God 
on them” (LET:474).
Blyden  also focused  on  the  commercial  interest  as  a second explanation  for 
colonization.  He believed  that  the European  project  of colonizing Africa  was an 
economic investment, for it would determine “the continuation of the prosperity of 
Europe”:
In their eager search, the explorers have discovered that Africa possesses the very highest capacity 
for the production, as raw material, of the various articles demanded by civilized countries. English 
and French, and Germans, are now in the struggles of an intense competition for the hidden 
treasures of that continent. (CINR:120)
We can assume that Blyden heard of the discovery of gold in Rhodesia by the 
German Karl Mauch in the 1860s. This discovery, widely publicized by white South 
African settlers, became the symbol of African treasure in the 1870s when it reached 
European  papers.  However,  Blyden  stressed  an  economic  theory  to  explain  the 
scramble for Africa:
Europe is overflowing with the material productions of its own genius. Important foreign markets, 
which formerly consumed these productions, are now closing against them. Africa seems to furnish 
the only large outlet, and the desire is to make the markets of Soudan easily accessible to London, 
Manchester and Liverpool. The depressed factories of Lancashire are waiting to be inspired with 
new life and energy by the development of a new and inexhaustible trade with the millions of 
Central Africa. (CINR:95)
This is a classical explanation from the middle of the nineteenth century, but 
written near its end. The so-called anti-imperialist “little England era” of the last 
quarter  of  the  eighteenth  century seems  a  fantasy (see  Robinson,  Gallagher  and 
Denny, 1961; Thornton, 1959; Langer, 1951). After J. B. Saw's thesis on economic 
balance and its endorsement by Mill and Bentham, almost all British economists 
advocated colonization as the best means to economic and social improvement at 
home. One of the most articulate theories, E. G. Wakefield's systematic colonization 
scheme, emphasized the extension of “land capital” or “field of production” as a 
solution to the “redundancy” of both capital and labor in England. For Wakefield, as 
for  most  of  the  leading  theorists  of  this  time  (like  R.  Torrens  and  R.  J. 
WilmotHorton), the acquisition of colonies was, to put it in John Stuart Mill's words, 
“the best affair of business in which the capital of an old and wealthy country can 
engage.” Its most obvious advantages were supposed to be: first, the expansion of the 
field of production and employment and, therefore, the possibility of creating new 
wealth;  second,  a  solution  to  the  problem  of  unemployment  by  moving  people 
overseas and integrating them into new
114


--- PAGE 115 ---
fields; and third, an organic extension of markets by the export of manufactured 
goods and the import of food and raw materials.
Blyden seems aware of these colonial objectives (Lynch, 1967:191-209) even 
while  accepting  European  “humanitarian  intentions-with  all  its  trappings  for 
civilizing,  instructing  and  elevating-“  (CINR:338).  The  man  is,  fundamentally,  a 
politician. He admires the British Empire and considers himself to be “acquainted 
with the character and temper of the men who, happily for humanity, come to the 
head of the Government.” He sincerely rejoices in “the spirit and intention of the 
Imperial  Government”  which,  according  to  one  Mr.  Bosworth  Smith,  whom  he 
quotes, presents “a rule unselfish and unaggressive, benevolent and energetic, wise 
and just.” Furthermore, he has a friendly regard for the British settlers in West Africa 
who “have numbered among their rulers, especially within the last twenty years, 
some of the best representatives of the English spirit” (CINR: 298-99). As to the 
French presence in West Africa, he says that “France is doing her part to pacify West 
Africa, to improve her material conditions, and to give an opportunity for permanent 
progress to the sons of soil”: “a work much needed, and suited to the genius of celtic 
race.” Germany is giving “her desirable quota” and Germans “are taking their part 
with intelligence, energy and capital” (Lynch, 1967:200-1).
Blyden does not seem to disapprove of European colonization. In 1896, he still 
states that Britain “ought to have unquestioned precedence in respect of territory and 
political  influence in West  Africa”  (Lynch,  1967:197; Blyden,  LO:25). When, in 
1906, Sir Frederick Lugard resigned, Blyden expressed his “very deep regret” to the 
colonial pro-Consul: “In the long list of British rulers in Africa who have deserved 
well of their country and of the natives, the universal sentiment will say to you `well 
done, go up higher”' (LET: 484). Yet there is an ambivalence in Blyden's praise of 
European colonization. For example, he wrote in 1878 to Sir Thomas Fowell Buxton:
The Christianizing and civilizing mission of your country will never be carried out by commerce 
and military demonstrations, nor even by schools only-but by the exemplification of those great 
principles of justice and humanity which the Great Teacher whom you profess to follow inculcated, 
but which, it is sad to see, are yet far from being understood or practically applied by Christian 
nations in their dealings with weaker races. (LET: 272)
In Christianity, Islam and the Negro Race, Blyden concentrated heavily on the 
English language as a means of African education. “Into the English, as into the 
bosom of a great central sea, all the streams of the past and present have poured, and 
are still pouring their varied contents” (LO:109). He considered English to be “the 
language  of  conquest-not  of  physical,  but  of  moral  and  intellectual  conquest” 
(CINR:368). He only regretted that on Western shores, English, like other European 
languages, has “come to the greater portion of the natives associated with profligacy, 
plunder, and cruelty, and devoid of any connections with spiritual things” (CINR:68). 
In reality,
115


--- PAGE 116 ---
the  logic  of  Blyden's  thinking  is  clear:  he  favors  both  English  language  and 
colonization  as  means  for  grafting  “European  progress  wholesale  on  African 
conservatism and stagnation” (CINR:300). In his own words:
The native African, like all Oriental or tropical people, can see no reason or property in extra work, 
as long as he has enough to supply his wants. But he is imitative. And as the English language is 
diffused in his country, vivified by its domiciliation on the American continent . . . the native will be 
raised unconsciously; and, in spite of hereditary tendencies and surroundings, will work, not, then, 
in order to enjoy repose-the dolce farniente-but to be able to do more work, and to carry out higher 
objects. (CINR:368)
What is at stake is a thesis on the perfectibility of “savages,” one widespread in 
European milieux and scholarly publications since the Age of Enlightenment (see 
Lyons, 1975) as well as the ideological theme of AngloSaxon responsibility, a view 
that sustained the saga of exploration during the nineteenth century. It is obvious that 
Blyden has no doubts about the necessity of the “regeneration” of Africa (LO:528). 
He  clearly shares  Livingstone's  conviction,  variously presented  in  almost all  the 
Anglo-American reports on African explorations: “It is on the Anglo-American race 
that the hope of the world for liberty and progress rest” (see Hammond and Jablow, 
1977). Blyden accepts the achievements of colonization under British law and views 
the British colonial experience as the best model for the promotion of civilization: 
“Under that enlightened system of government which protects the rights, the liberty, 
the life and the property of every individual, of whatever race or religion, the people 
have been advanced in civilization and well being” (CINR: 215 ).
It is well to keep in mind this general principle: Blyden considers colonization a 
way of elevating Africans to civilization and thinks that, if possible, this process must 
be done in English. As a theoretical explanation for the conquest of Africa it does not, 
at this level, differ from the philanthropic justification of Leopold II, King of the 
Belgians: “the extinction of Slavery and the introduction of a select civilization” 
(CINR:348) nor from the purposes of a multitude of colonial organizations. In his 
speech delivered at the anniversary of the American Colonization Society in 1883, 
Blyden praised the zealous curiosity of these associations which were “bringing all 
their resources to bear upon Africa's exploration and amelioration” (CINR:94). These 
were organizations such as the International African Association, created in 1876; the 
Italian  National  Association  for  the  Exploration  and  Civilization  of  Africa;  the 
Spanish  Association  for  the  Exploration  of  Africa;  the  German  Society  for  the 
Explorations of Africa, founded in 1872; the African Society in Vienna, founded in 
1876;  the  Hungarian  African  Association,  created  in  18  77;  the  National  Swiss 
Committee for the Exploration of Central Africa, etc. All these associations, wrote 
Blyden,  bring  to  the  task  a  “desire  for  more  accurate  knowledge  of  Africa,”  a 
“philanthropic  impulse  to  lift  up  the  millions  of  that  continent  to  their  proper 
position,” and
116


--- PAGE 117 ---
a “commercial desire to open that vast country to the enterprises of trade” (CINR:95).
The  particular  dimension  of  Blyden's  theory  of  colonization  resides  in  the 
assumption that the opening up and the development of the continent must be a black 
enterprise. In 1885, in a long letter to Sir Samuel Rowe, Governor of Sierra Leone, he 
expounded the essentials of his theory on colonization. The European interest “now 
directed to Africa” is positive in terms of its premises, since it is, according to his 
view, “the cause of civilization and progress.” “It is gratifying to know that England 
is waking up to her just claims to whatever advantages those countries may yield for 
commercial or imperial purposes.” On the basis of his “labours in connection with the 
Republic of Liberia, and to a limited extent with the Settlement of Sierra Leone,” he 
gave advice on how to impose a new “system” on “Natives”: “the most effectual is 
evidently that of annexation with a view to regular supervision and control of the 
annexed territories.” Yet he insisted that the “settlements of civilized blacks from 
America” was the best policy; “the most effective way of spreading civilization in 
inter-tropical Africa” (LET: 349-55) Blyden was convinced that “only the Negro will 
be able to explain the Negro to the rest of mankind” (CINR:263). For him, Liberia's 
case was exemplary as the most successful sign of this conviction. He wrote in “Hope 
for Africa” (1862) of the “fulfillment of a Divine plan”:
There are fifteen thousand civilized and Christianized Africans striving to accomplish the twofold 
work of establishing and maintaining an independent nationality, and of introducing the Gospel 
among untold millions of unevangelized and barbarous men. (LO: 19)
This is an idea he maintained till the end of his life. Equally strong were his 
invitations to Black Americans to emigrate to Africa. The motives he put forward 
were sometimes financial, sometimes psychological, and also attest to his concern for 
the “regeneration” of these potential immigrants. He makes this explicit in a letter of 
September 3, 1877, to W Coppinger, Secretary of the American Colonization Society:
I would be glad if you would point out to Africans in the United States these two facts:
1. There is great wealth in their fatherland of which if they do not soon avail themselves, others will 
get the first pick and perhaps occupy the finest sites.
2. Only in connection with Liberia or a properly established Negro nationality can they even attain 
to true manhood and equality. (LET: 260)
Let me underscore that Blyden had a quite restrictive understanding of what black 
meant.  He  did  not  wish  to  have  in  Africa  “people  of  mixed  blood”  (see,  e.g., 
LET:174, 271, 315) who, according to him, “never get thorough sympathy with the 
work.” This obvious racism is, paradoxically, based on
117


--- PAGE 118 ---
the European thinking that he should be opposing. In a letter to Charles T Geyer, he 
openly stated that “repatriation of civilized blacks from the Western hemisphere is 
indispensable in the work of African amelioration” (Blyden, LET).
Despite  such  clear  suppositions,  his  reasoning  emphasized  Africa's 
mysteriousness: she is a sphinx and “must solve her own riddle at last” (CINR: 127). 
In other words, Europe has to give  up “the idea of regenerating  Africa  through 
colonies  of  her  own  subjects”  (CINR:349),  because  “energetic  colonization  for 
Whites, must be in climates where the winter or cold weather brings its healthy and 
recuperative  influences  to  body  and  mind”  (CINR:349).  Blyden  sustained  his 
argument by giving some historical precedents (CINR:358), quoting M. Stanley who 
wrote that “the equatorial regions of Africa have for ages defied Islam, Christianity, 
science and trade . . . Civilization, so often baffled, stands railing at the barbarism and 
savagery that presents such an impenetrable front to its efforts (CINR:345). He also 
emphasized the colonizers' woes: Europeans cannot survive in Africa (CINR:128); 
they die or become physically ill and mentally deranged (CINR:263). In sum, “the 
chief obstacle to the wholesome influence of Europeans in Africa is the climate. From 
the earliest antiquity this has been the insuperable barrier” (CINR:341). In the letter 
he sent to Sir Lugard in 1906, he proposed the same explanation.
The principle of the `man on the spot,' however applicable it may be to other countries in healthier 
climates, is not always to be relied on when dealing with intertropical Africa. There the personnel is 
most important. Europeans do not, as a rule, retain their normal mental state, or, perhaps, even their 
moral equilibrium, after six months under the influence of that climate. (Blyden, LET:484; my 
emphasis)
Therefore, only Blacks could colonize and reform Africa. By Blacks, he meant 
“civilized Americans and West Indians of African descent.”
Blyden had some strange views concerning slavery, for example his belief that in 
the first years “it was a deportation from a land of barbarism to a land of civilization” 
(LO: 256). Remarkable also were some of his views of Black Americans. He wrote 
for instance, that Africa has never lost the better classes of her people. As a rule, those 
who were exported belonged to “the servile and criminal classes” (CINR: I26). Yet he 
continued to praise Black Americans and their capabilities and considered them as 
possible saviors of Africa. He believed that they “have never needed the stimulus of 
any organization of white men to direct their attention to the land of their fathers” 
(CINR:100). Pursuing this point of view to its furthest limits, he insisted on the 
particularity of this possible colonization and its racial implications:
The exiled Negro, then, has a home in Africa. Africa is his, if he will. He may 
ignore it. He may consider that he is divested of any right to it; but this will not 
alter his relations to that country, or impair the integrity of his title. (CINR: 124)
118


--- PAGE 119 ---
It is indeed impossible not to sympathize with the intelligent Negro, whose imagination, kindled by 
the prospects and possibilities of [America] the land of his birth, makes him desire to remain and 
share  in  its  future  struggles  and  future  glories.  But  he  still  suffers  from  many  drawbacks. 
(CINR:125)
As a rsult of their freedom and enlarged education, the descendants of Africa in [America] are 
beginning to feel themselves straightened. They are beginning to feel that only in Africa will they 
find the sphere of their true activity. (CINR: 125 )
In  New  York,  Philadelphia,  Baltimore,  Harrisburg,  and  other  cities  Blyden 
preached to “colored congregations” during the summer of 1862, stating: “now, while 
Europeans  are  looking  to  our  fatherland,  ought  not  Africans  in  the  Western 
hemisphere to turn their regards thither also?”; “We should not content ourselves with 
living among other races, simply by their permission or their endurance”; “We must 
build up negro states”; “An African nationality is our great need, and God tells us by 
his providence that he has set the land before us, and bids us go up and possess it” 
(L0:75-76), etc. The project is racially oriented; its foundation is racist:
In America we see how readily persons from all parts of Europe assimilate; [. . .] The Negro, the 
Indian, and the Chinese, who do not belong to the same family, repel each other, and are repelled by 
the Europeans. `The antagonistic elements are in contact, but refuse to unite, and as yet no agent has 
been found sufficiently potent to reduce them to unity.' (L0:88)
Blyden's ideas on African colonization are based both on theories cast in terms of 
race and on his own experience in Sierra Leone and Liberia. Sometimes they express 
a  personal  sense  of  over-compensation  which  accounts  for  some  of  the  strange 
reasons he proposes to Black Americans for going back to Africa. For example: “The 
Negro in the United States, however well educated and however qualified for it, will 
never have the opportunity of appearing in a diplomatic character at a European 
court-a privilege which the Liberian has in spite of the political insignificance of his 
country”  (LET:  260).  Nevertheless,  the  essential  point  is  that  he  envisioned  the 
extension of Liberia's experience to all the continent, convinced that in support of 
“black authenticity,” “whatever others may do for us, there are some things we must 
do for ourselves. No outward protection, no friendly intervention, no deed of gift can 
give  those  personal  virtues-those  attributes  of  manhood-self-reliance  and 
independence” (CINR:217).
This argument on African colonization represents a departure from two related 
theories which were generally accepted during the nineteenth century (see Lyons, 
1975:25-85). As Christopher Fyfe puts it in his introduction to one of Blyden's books, 
humankind “is divided into races, and . . . the movements of history and society can 
only be adequately explained in terms of their interaction” (CINR:xii). Blyden saw 
the  African  future  in  terms  of  racial  cooperation  and  integration  between  Black 
Americans and Africans.
119


--- PAGE 120 ---
He also shared the assumption widely held in the second part of the eighteenth 
century and throughout the nineteenth, that- only a certain race can adapt and survive 
in a given climate. “East is East and West is West; and never the twain shall meet” 
was a polygenist principle. With such assumptions, Blyden thought that the only 
alternative to the ongoing European colonization was a Black American presence 
which would necessitate  a reshaping of the African environment and result  in a 
transformation of  its  peoples.  This  argument consequently becomes one  that  we 
should call a tentative program for political and racial organization:
This seems to be the period of race organization and race consolidation. The races in Europe are 
striving to group themselves together according to their natural affinities [. . .] The Germans are 
confederated. The Italians are united. Greece is being reconstructed. And so this race impulse has 
seized the African here. The feeling is in the atmosphere-the plane in which races move. And there 
is no people in whom the desire for race integrity and race preservation is stronger than in the 
Negro. (CINR:122)
The fundamental theme in Blyden's writings is that Africans, from a historical 
point of view, constitute a universe apart and have their own history and traditions. 
This point is worth analyzing, since the European nineteenth-century literature on 
Africa emphasized this point too, but in a different way (see Battle and Lyons, 1970). 
Nineteenth-century  writers,  focusing  on  differences  between  Africa  and  Europe, 
tended to demonstrate the complete lack of similarity between the two continents and 
attempted to prove that in Africa the physical environment, the flora and fauna, as 
well as the people, represent relics of a remote age of antiquity. Arthur de Gobineau's 
Essai sur l' inegalite des races humaines (1853), Darwinism, and the debate between 
polygenists and monogenists provided “scientific” and “social” categories for racial 
thinking (see Haller, 1971). Linnaeus's classification of types and varieties of human 
beings within the natural system (1758) was then modified. G. Cuvier, for instance, 
offered a hierarchy of human types in Animal Kingdom (1827); S. Morton, a table of 
races and their cranial and intellectual capacity in Crania Americana (r 8 3 3 ); and G. 
Combe, A System o f Phrenology (1844), in which he demonstrated the relationships 
between  types  of  brain,  racial  differences,  and  degrees  of  spiritual  and  cultural 
development (see Curtin, 1965; Lyons, 1975). In sum, “though they did disagree 
among themselves about which European `races' were inferior to others, Western 
racial commentators generally agreed that Blacks were inferior to whites in moral 
fiber, cultural attainment, and mental ability; the African was, to many eyes, the child 
in the family of man, modern man in embryo” (Lyons, 1975:86-87).
This meant, in other words, that African peoples were considered as instances of a 
frozen  state  in  the  evolution  of  humankind.  They were  defined  as  “archaic”  or 
“primitive” human beings, insofar as they were supposed to represent very ancient 
social and cultural organizations which had been
120


--- PAGE 121 ---
present in Europe several thousand years earlier. Nineteenth-century anthropology 
was firmly based on this hypothesis and produced scholarly works on the principles 
of humankind's evolution to civilization, in which African peoples were considered 
signs of the initial primitiveness:
The mistake which Europeans often make in considering questions of Negro improvement and the 
future of Africa, is in supposing that the Negro is the European in embryo-in the undeveloped 
stage-and that when, by and by, he shall enjoy the advantages of civilization and culture, he will 
become like the European; in other words, that the Negro is on the same line of progress, in the 
same groove, with the European, but infinitely in the rear. (Blyden, CINR:276)
According to the twentieth-century political philosopher Hannah Arendt:
It is highly probable that the thinking in terms of race would have disappeared in due time together 
with other irresponsible opinions of the nineteenth century, if the `scramble for Africa' and the new 
era  of  imperialism  had  not  exposed  Western  humanity  to  new  and  shocking  experiences. 
Imperialism would have necessitated the invention of racism as the only possible `explanation' and 
excuse for its deeds, even if no race-thinking had ever existed in the civilized world. (Arendt, 
1968:63-64)
This is an interesting hypothesis, which Blyden missed. For quite understandable 
reasons, Blyden had to emphasize the idealogical structure of racethinking. Thus the 
major themes of his A Vindication o f the African Race (1857) deal with the myth of 
Ham's curse and the “idea of phrenological inferiority” (Blyden, LO: 31 and 55 ). He 
dismissed racist opinions and the socalled “scientific conclusions” by working around 
a provocative topic: “it was once said that `No good thing can come out of Nazareth” 
(L0:55).  His  position  is  one  of  common  sense  and  close  to  that  of  pro-African 
ideologists of the last two centuries, such as the British J. C. Prichard and the French 
priest H. Grégoire. Commenting on the curse of Ham, Blyden remarked that first, “it 
must be proved that the curse was pronounced upon Ham himself”; second, “that it 
was pronounced upon each of his sons individually”; and third, “if pronounced upon 
Canaan, that he was the only offspring of Ham.” He concluded: “we know that no one 
of these was the fact” (L0:35-36). Therefore, for him, the slavery experience was “no 
argument in favor of the hypothesis of malediction” (L0:41). As to the phrenological 
theses, Blyden did not accept them because among other good reasons, “external 
appearance  is  not  always  the  index  of  the  intellectual  man”  (L0:56),  and  “the 
intellectual and moral character of the African in freedom” cannot be inferred “from 
what  it  is  in  slavery”  (LO:  52-53  ).  Against  the  evolutionist  assumptions  that 
emphasized the climatic conditioning, he affirmed that “moral agencies when set in 
operation cannot be overborne by physical causes” (L0:81 ).
121


--- PAGE 122 ---
Blyden  did not  oppose  the  evolutionary assumption  scientifically.  He  simply 
mocked it and then took a different route, a relativist one, in order to refute it by 
ridiculing “the charges of superstition, etc. made against Africans and in consequence 
of which a hopeless `incapacity of amelioration' is sometimes attributed to the whole 
race”.
There is not a single mental or moral deficiency now existing among Africans -not a single practice 
now indulged in by them-to which we cannot find a parallel in the past history of Europe, and even 
after the people had been brought under the influence of a nominal Christianity. (CINR:58)
He laid the same charges against both Europe and Africa: polygamy, slavery, 
human sacrifices, sanguinary customs (CINR:58-59). He thus defended his own view 
in a negative manner by showing that the African is part of humanity, even though he 
seems weaker. In 1869 he noted that:
When, four hundred years ago, the Portuguese discovered this coast, they found the natives living in 
considerable peace and quietness, and with a certain degree of prosperity . . . From all we can 
gather, the tribes in this part lived in a condition not very different from that of the greater portion of 
Europe in the Middle Ages. (NAH:20)
The  same year,  in  his  address  delivered  on  Mount  Lebanon  in  Syria  at  the 
celebration of the nineteenth anniversary of the independence of Liberia, Blyden 
presented an ideological reading of the Liberian symbol within the “civilized world.” 
Black responsibility has become the sign of advancement and hope. It incarnates 
peace and liberation against the wars, emasculation, and oppression of the traditional 
native  cultures;  it  expresses  an  organized  authority  against  the  corruption  of 
“aboriginal chiefs”;  it institutionalizes civilization, trade,  and religion  against the 
mass of crimes and immorality of the slave trade. In brief, one has a paradoxical and 
romantic paradigm: here is Liberia symbolizing the New Negro opposed to both the 
“heathenism” of the “natives” and “the barbarism” of the slave-traders. By its very 
existence,  Liberia  implies  the  possibility  of  a  radical  transformation  of  Africa's 
history: “Anglo-American Christianity, liberty, and law, under the protection of the 
Liberian,  will  have  nothing  to  impede their  indefinite  spread  over  that  immense 
continent. I say, nothing to impede their indefinite spread” (LPPF:23). This almost 
mystical conviction is also present in later texts. So, for example, in 1884:
In view of all things my consolation is that the Lord is King. In spite of the mistakes and perversity 
of man, His plans will be carried out. I believe that the Colonization idea was from God, and that 
the American Colonization Society under the necessarily imperfect conditioning of humanity have 
been carrying out His purposes. (LET: 326)
122


--- PAGE 123 ---
And in 1888:
We are unwilling . . . to admit the idea that Africans cannot acquire those trusts and convictions and 
that moral and spiritual development essential to human peace and guidance in this world, and to 
life everlasting in the world to come, without being cast in European mould. (CINR:66)
These quotations indicate Blyden's complexity. He does not refute the standard 
view of African “primitiveness,” but rather emphasizes the relativity of social cultures 
and progress. This practice of arguing by means of sociological concepts, or, as he 
defines it, “the science of Race” (CINR:94), leads him to “the poetry” of politics:
It is the feeling of race-the aspiration after the development on its own line of the type of humanity 
to which we belong. Italians and Germans long yearned after such development. The Slavonic tribes 
are feelig after it. Now, nothing tends more to discourage these feelings and check these aspirations, 
than the idea that the people with whom we are connected, and after whose improvement we sigh, 
have never had a past, or only an ignoble past-antecedents which were `blank and hopeless,' to be 
ignored and forgotten. (CINR:197)
Blyden tends to avoid both the easy antislavery propaganda, with its myths about 
the “noble savage,” and also the technical debates on the hierarchy of races. Rather 
than defining the African as a “special” counterpart of the European-a “noble savage” 
or a “beastly primitive”-Blyden used his literary background to describe the African 
as a victim of a European ethnocentrism. For instance, he considered contempt of 
Africans  and  Negroes  to  be  a  modern  invention.  He  referred  to  Homer's  and 
Herodotus's  descriptions  of  blacks,  insisted  on  the  frequency  of  kalos  kagathos 
(handsome and good) Ethiopian in classical literature, and discussed the aesthetic 
value of the color black in the Bible (NAH:14; see also Bourgeois, 1971; Mveng, 
1972). In Christianity, Islam and the Negro Race, he affirmed that “In Greek and 
Latin languages and their literature, there is not, as far as I know, a sentence, a word, 
or a syllable disparaging to the Negro” (CINR:84). Commenting on a poem atributed 
to Virgil and quoting Homer's celebration of the Negro Eurybates at the siege of Troy, 
he states that “the disparagement began with European travellers, partly `from a 
desire to be unfair' or `from preconceived notions of the Negro,' `and partly, also, on 
the principle that it is easier to pull down than to build up”' (CINR:263 ). These 
explanations do not constitute a convincing historical description. Yet, in very general 
terms, they situate the ideological justifications used first by travelers and then by 
explorers  and missionaries  to establish a new order in the “dark continent”  (see 
Arendt,  1968:87).  This  meant  opening  Africa  to  trade,  European  education,  and 
Christianity, and thus setting up and enforcing a psychological domination:
123


--- PAGE 124 ---
In  all  English-speaking  countries  the  mind  of  the  intelligent  Negro  child  revolts  against  the 
descriptions given in elementary books-geographies, travels, histories-of the Negro; but, though he 
experiences an instinctive revulsion from these caricatures and misrepresentations, he is obliged to 
continue, as he grows in years, to study such pernicious teachings. After leaving school he finds the 
same things in newspapers, in reviews, in novels, in quasi-scientific works; and after a while-saepe 
cadendo-they begin to seem to him the proper things to say and to feel about his race. (Blyden, 
CINR:76)
Thinking of the condition of Black Americans in particular, Blyden generalized 
his analysis:
Those  who  have  lived  in  civilized  communities,  where  there  are  different  races,  know  the 
disparaging views which are entertained of the blacks by their neighbours-and often, alas! by 
themselves. The standard of all physical and intellectual excellencies in the present civilization 
being  the  white  complexion,  whatever  deviates  from  that  favoured  colour  is  proportionally 
depreciated, until the black, which is the opposite, becomes not only the most unpopular but the 
most unprofitable colour. (CINR:77)
Blyden dealt courageously with this difficult aspect of psychological dependence. 
He thought that the Negro was weak because he accepted the image imposed on him 
and that this complex of dependence could account for the “hesitancy,” the “modesty 
growing out of a sense of inferiority” found in the Black American pupil (CINR:148), 
as well as for the self-depreciation seen in the adult. “It is painful in America to see 
the  efforts  which  are  made  by  Negroes  to  secure  outward  conformity  to  the 
appearance of the dominant race” (CINR:77).
As for the Negro in general, Blyden pointed out that derogatory perspectives 
provide the intellectual framework of this psychological war. An opposition of colors, 
black versus white, becomes the paramount symbol of the distance in quality and 
virtue between Europeans and Africans, and justifies the white man's duty toward 
“despised races” (CINR: 138). But this duty seems a myth and its works will not last:
Victor Hugo exhorts the European nations to `occupy this land offered to them by God.' He has 
forgotten the prudent advice of Caesar to the ancestors of those nations against invading Africa. The 
Europeans can hold the domain `offered to them' by only a precarious tenure. (CINR:145-46)
Rejecting the theme of the barbarous Negro, Blyden focused on the connection 
between  degeneration  and  Westernization.  In  his  view,  not  all  European 
accomplishments are splendid and useful. On the contrary, “things which have been 
of great advantage to Europe may work ruin to us; and there is often such a striking 
resemblance, or such a close connection between the hurtful and the beneficial that 
we are not always able to discriminate”
124


--- PAGE 125 ---
(CINR:79). Furthermore, he observed that the most visible consequence for the 
Kingdom  of  Congo,  Westernized  and  Christianized  under  Portuguese  influence 
during the seventeenth century, was its disappearance (CINR:159).
One could even think that Blyden-although he was a Christian minister-did not 
believe in conversion, insofar as it is an expression of Westernization: “Pagans- of 
discernment know that the black man among them who `calls himself a Christian and 
dresses himself in clothes' adheres to European habits and customs with a reserved 
power  of  disengagement”  (CINR:59).  He  strongly  ridiculed  the  confusion  of 
sociocultural customs and Christian values and pessimistically noted that “the Gospel 
has failed to have free course in this land” (LET: 115). However, he believed that the 
“inconsistencies of Christians” (LET:99) might account for this relative failure. In 
actuality, what he rejected was the “thin varnish of European civilization” that a 
young  and  inexperienced  missionary  propagates.  “With  the  earnest  vigour  and 
sanguine temper which belong to youth he preaches a crusade against the harmless 
customs and prejudices of the people-superseding many customs and habits necessary 
and useful in the climate and for the people by practices which, however useful they 
might be in Europe, become, when introduced indiscriminately into Africa, artificial, 
ineffective  and  absurd”  (CINR:64).  However,  Blyden  seems  to  believe  that  the 
confusing  of  religious  values  and  cultural  customs  is  not  an  accident:  “The 
Anglo-Saxon mind and the African mind trained under Anglo-Saxon influence, seem 
to be intolerant of all customs and practices which do not conform to the standard of 
European tastes and habits” (LET: 114). This instance of cultural misunderstanding is 
neither  extraordinary nor unusual. Of at  least equal  significance is the supposed 
African response to Europeans and their culture.
There are those of other races who also sneer and scorn and `despise.' Some of the proceedings of 
Baker and Stanley in Africa must frequently have impressed the natives with the feeling that those 
energetic  travellers  came  from  much  `darker  continents'  than  any  of  their  unsophisticated 
imaginations had ever before suggested to them. (CINR: 138-9)
Mungo Park recorded his impressions as follows: Although the Negroes, in general, have a great 
idea of the wealth and power of Europeans, I am afraid that the Mohammedan converts among them 
think but very little of our superior attainments in religious knowledge . . . The poor Africans, 
whom we affect to consider as barbarians, look upon us, I fear, as little better than a race of 
formidable but ignorant Heathen. (CINR:343)
For Blyden, these incongruities revealed the general tone of a distorted contact as 
it existed under slavery and colonial imperialism. Moreover, to the degree that the 
European  presence  and  self-proclaimed  political  supremacy  affect  the  African's 
culture and confidence (L0:57), Blyden felt it necessary to overemphasize certain 
ideological issues which would eventually foster the African's silent resistance and 
would bring about a new climate of ideas. The
125


--- PAGE 126 ---
logic of this commitment led Blyden to formulate strong intellectual criticisms of 
Western ideology, principally through a critical evaluation of the European tradition, a 
new  interpretation  of  history,  and,  finally,  a  positive  evaluation  of  African  oral 
tradition.
Blyden's criticism of the European tradition is based on a relativist philosophy of 
cultures (AA:60). He believed that even though, in religious terms, the concept of 
humankind is the same throughout the world, “the native capacities of mankind differ, 
and their work and destiny differ, so that the road by which one man may attain to the 
highest  efficiency,  is  not  that  which  would  conduce  to  the  success  of  another” 
(AA:5-8; CINR:83). Fanciful excursions in the field of comparative history provided 
some comparisons to support his relativism.
The ancestors of these people [Africans] understood the use of the cottonplant, and the manufacture 
of cotton, when Julius Caesar found the Britons clothing themselves in the skins of wild beasts. 
Visitors to the British Museum may see, in the Egyptian department, cloth of the very same material 
and texture wrapped around the mummies. This cloth was made by those who understood the lost 
art of embalming, but who, when they retired by successive revolutions, into the interior . . . lost 
that valuable art, but never forgot the manufacture of the cloth used in the process. (CINR:196)
This is only one of many fragile comparisons. His comments on Leo Africanus's 
reports about the kingdom of Mali (CINR:195), Egyptian physical  characteristics 
(NAH:10), Ethiopian psychology (NAH:25-26), and destiny (CINR: 25: 2-3 ), or the 
civilization of the “Mohammedans of Negritia” (CINR:300) make explicit and uphold 
his ideas on the diversity of historical processes. This premise allowed him to state 
that:
The special road which has led to the success and elevation of the Anglo-Saxon is not that which 
would lead to the success and elevation of the Negro, though we shall resort to the same means of 
general culture which has enabled the Anglo-Saxon to find out for himself the way in which he 
ought to go. (CINR: 83 )
This critical position, in fact, also required a new understanding of history. Since the 
kind of political and cultural domination that was taking place in Africa served the 
particular historical perspective on which it was based and was, in return, justified by 
its own success, Blyden chose to revise the concept of history altogether.
Referring to E Harrison's classification, which distinguished “six leading epochs 
in  the  history  of  civilization”  (Theocratic  Society,  Greek  Age,  Roman  Period, 
Medieval  Civilization,  Modern  Age,  and  the  Age  since  the  French  Revolution), 
Blyden  proposed  to  exclude  the  study  of  the  last  two  ages  from  the  African 
curriculum. His reasons were quite simple. He observed that it was during these 
periods, especially the last, that “the trans-Atlantic slave
126


--- PAGE 127 ---
trade arose, and those theories-theological, social, and political-were invented for the 
degradation and proscription of the Negro.” On the other hand, he considered the first 
periods,  particularly  the  Greek,  the  Roman,  and  the  Medieval  to  be  exemplary: 
“There has been no period of history more full of suggestive energy, both physical 
and intellectual, than those epochs . . . No modern writers will ever influence the 
destiny of the race  to the same  extent  that the Greeks and Romans have done” 
(CINR:82). Thus a philosophical principle  of cultural  relativism accompanied an 
ideological rejection of a part of European history and permitted Blyden to justify his 
claim for authenticity, and, therefore, the relevance of the African past and its proper 
tradition. Following Volney (NAH: 5) and Hartmann, he had no doubts about “the 
strictly African extraction” of the pharaonic civilization (CINR:154n). But it was 
through an evaluation of Africa's oral traditions that he saw the basis for inspiration:
Now, if we are to make an independent nation-a strong nation-we must listen to the songs of our 
unsophisticated brethren as they sing of their history, as they tell of their traditions, of the wonderful 
and mysterious events of their tribal or national life, of the achievements of what we call their 
superstitions. (CINR:91 )
In sum, what Blyden put forward is a general criticism of Western ideology, not 
because  it  was  wrong,  but  because  it  seemed  to  him  irrelevant  for  African 
authenticity. This criticism, however, arose as a negation, and to some degree as a 
consequence,  of  the  most  intolerant  “race-thinking”  interpretations.  Thus,  it  is  a 
warping reworking of the most negative theories of the century. In a long letter to the 
British traveler Mary Kingsley in 1900, Blyden could agree with her: “ `The Negro 
must have a summit to himself'-a remark which is not the result, as has been alleged 
by  some,  of  prejudice  to  the  African,  nor,  as  it  has  been  held  by  others,  of 
latitudenarian  indifference  to  religious  truths”  (LET:461).  Playing  upon  the 
ambiguous significance of Swedenborg's expression that the African is a celestial 
man, he could also, in a most relativist fashion, conclude that “such a man among 
terrestrials must have a separate place-not a hole into which some would thrust him, 
nor a dead flat where others would fix him, but a summit.” Therefore, “for obvious 
reasons the conventional morality of Europe cannot be the conventional morality of 
Africa, so far as social or domestic matters are concerned” (LET: 461 ).
Three major considerations were central to Blyden's political philosophy: the 
basic organized  community under Muslim leadership, the concept of the African 
nation, and, finally, the idea of the unity of the continent.
The basic Islamic community appears to be his model of political organization. 
“There are no caste distinctions among them” nor “tribal barriers” (CINR: 175) nor 
racial prejudices (CINR: 15-27); “slavery and the slavetrade are laudable, provided 
the slaves are Kaffirs,” but the “slave who embraces Islam is free, and no office is 
closed against him on account of his
127


--- PAGE 128 ---
servile blood” (CINR:176). Did Blyden approve of this institutional slavery? It is not 
clear. One could perhaps argue that he was just presenting one case. We must keep in 
mind  that  throughout  his  publications  he  opposed  slavery  (e.g.,  L0:67-91;  LO: 
153-67). At any rate, what he admired in the system was that for Muslims the social 
relations of production are not determined  by racial factors but by their faith: “ 
`Paradise  is  under  the  show  of  swords,'  is  one  of  their  stimulating  proverbs” 
(CINR:9). “They gather under the beams of the Crescent not only for religious, but 
for  patriotic  reasons;  till  they  are  only  swayed  with  one  idea,  but  act  as  one 
individual. The faith becomes a part of their nationality, and is entwined with their 
affections” (CINR:231). The dynamism of these Muslim communities, their subtle 
and intelligent ways of proselytizing, and their trade assured Islam a brilliant future in 
Africa. “All careful and candid observers agree that the influence of Islam in Central 
and  West  Africa  has been,  upon the  whole,  of a  most  salutary character.  As  an 
eliminatory and subversive agency, it has displaced or unsettled nothing as good as 
itself” (CINR:174).
None  of the  Nigritian  tribes  have ever  abdicated  their  race  individuality or parted  with  their 
idiosyncrasies in embracing the faith of Islam. But, whenever and wherever it has been necessary, 
great Negro warriors have risen from the ranks of Islam, and, inspired by the teachings of the new 
faith . . . have driven them, if at anytime they affected superiority based upon race, from their 
artificial ascendancy. (CINR: 222)
According to Blyden, Islam is politically an excellent means of promoting an 
African  consciousness  and of  organizing  communities.  Unfortunately,  though the 
ideological  assumptions  can  be  accepted  in  principle,  the  historical  facts  badly 
contradict  Blyden's  belief  in  the  positive  capabilities  of  Islam.  Throughout  the 
nineteenth century in Central Africa, Islamic factions represented an objective evil 
and  practiced  a  shameful slave-trade.  And  here,  again,  we  face  an  unbelievable 
inconsistency in Blyden's thought: his naive admiration for Islam led him to accept 
the enslavement of non-Muslim peoples!
The concept of the African nation is perhaps the most puzzling, but also the most 
original one, in Blyden's writings. It implies the classical conception of “democracy” 
(LPPF:16) but with a special focus on the rejection of racial distinction, and at the 
same time, the paradoxical claim for the retention of racial individuality. In actuality, 
as a man of his time, Blyden used the romantic premises, which in the nineteenth 
century allowed some European theorists to rediscover their historical roots and then 
celebrate  the  authenticity of their  own culture  and civilization,  in terms of their 
identity with their origins. The most conspicuous example of this process is the 
debate  which  took  place  among  German  scholars  on  the  “Indo-European”  or 
“Indo-Germanic” culture, in which a most remarkable confusion existed about the 
notions  of  “race,”  “language,”  “tradition,”  and  “history”  (see,  e.g.,  Arendt, 
1968:45-64). Nevertheless, European nationalisms arose, in
128


--- PAGE 129 ---
part, from theoretical combinations of these complex and controversial notions and 
accounted  for  what  Blyden  called  “the  period  of  race  organization  and  race 
consolidation” (CINR:122). Like his European counterparts, Blyden did not doubt 
that a racial phenomenon must be the basis of nationalism and the foundation of the 
Nation:
On this question of race, no argument is necessary in discussing the methods or course of procedure 
for the preservation of race integrity, and for the development of race efficiency, but no argument is 
needed as to the necessity of such preservation and development. If a man does not feel it-if it does 
not rise up with spontaneous and inspiring power in his heart-then he has neither part nor lot in it. 
(CINR:122-23)
Thus, retaining the concept of racial individuality became the cornerstone in the 
construction of a nation. Paradoxically, Blyden wrote that he did not consider Haiti 
and Liberia, the two major black nations, as possible models for the African nation, 
because  “there  is a perpetual  struggle  between  the  very few who are  aiming  to 
forward the interests of the many, and the profanum vulgus, largely in majority” 
(CINR:273). Moreover, as he grew older, Blyden accepted the partition of Africa by 
European powers (see Lynch in LET:409), collaborated with them (LET:502), and in 
1909, worked very hard for the “reconstructing [of] Liberia by the United States”; 
and indeed for a process of administrative “colonization.”
Let the Republic retain her Executive, Legislative and Judicial Departments. But let America take 
the Republic under her `Protection' for the time being. Let the British officers, as they are doing 
now supervise the Customs and Treasury Departments. Let the French manage the Frontier Force 
under Liberian financial responsibility. Let America appoint a High Commissioner for Liberia-an 
experienced Southern man, if possible, surround him with the necessary white American officials to 
help. Abolish the American Legation at Monrovia or put a white man at the head. The High 
Commissioner should review the Executive, Legislative and Judicial decisions before they are 
sanctioned. (LET:496)
However, it is in his descriptions of Liberia and Sierra Leone that he offered his 
clearest  view  of  an  African  nation,  which  must  be  independent,  liberal,  and 
self-reliant but must trade with other foreign countries, a “good democracy” in which 
racial self-elevation would be the guiding principle.
Blyden's  Pan-Africanism  is  a  sort  of  prophetism.  He  envisioned,  first,  a 
collaboration and a fusion of African Christianity and the conquering force of Islam:
Where the light from the Cross ceases to stream upon the gloom, there the beams 
of the Crescent will give illumination; and, as the glorious orb of Christianity rises, 
the twilight of Islam will be lost in the greater light of the Sun of Righteousness. Then 
Isaac and Ishmael will be united. (CINR:233)
129


--- PAGE 130 ---
Second, he emphasized the cultural unity that Islam represents. It has placed African 
peoples “under the same inspiration” (CINR:229), giving them, by means of the same 
“language,  letters,  and books” (CINR:229),  both a,  political  unity and a cultural 
community (CINR:6). Finally, Africa will unite when it pays due attention to its 
experiences  with  Europe  and  America.  He  thus  maintained  the  thesis  that  “the 
political history of the United States is the history of the Negro. The commercial and 
agricultural history of nearly the whole of America is the history of the Negro” 
(CINR: 119; LET:476-77).
In sum, there would be unity and growth in Africa if black peoples all over the 
world would  reflect  upon their  own condition.  Blyden,  the  ideologue,  became a 
visionary:
In visions of the future, I behold those beautiful hills-the banks of those charming streams, the 
verdant plains and flowery fields . . . I see them all taken possession of by the returning exiles from 
the West, trained for the work of re-building waste places under severe discipline and hard bondage. 
I see, too, their brethren hastening to welcome them from the slopes of the Niger, and from its 
lovely valleys . . . Mohammedans and Pagans, chiefs and people, all coming to catch something of 
the inspiration the exiles have brought-to share . . . and to march back . . . towards the sunrise for 
the regeneration of a continent. (CINR:129)
A modern cultural and political organization would be achieved with the help of 
Americans of African descent.
The  interpenetration  of  religious  and  political  “nationalisms”  expresses  in 
Blyden's thought what we must call a policy of racial authenticity, oriented towards a 
cultural and political transformation of the continent. The instrumental role that he 
accorded  Black  Americans  and  West  Indians  by  selecting  them  as  “colonists” 
indicates his belief in “racial identity” and illustrates his peculiar philosophy about 
the salvation of Africa.
The restoration of the Negro to the land of his fathers will be the restoration of a race to its original 
integrity, to itself; and working by itself, for itself and from itself, it will discover the methods of its 
own development, and they will not be the same as the Anglo-Saxon methods. (CINR: 110)
Black people from America and West Indies have “served” and “suffered,” and 
Blyden did not hesitate to compare them to the Hebrews (CINR: 120). The possibility 
of their return to Africa becomes the hope for the promised land.
Blyden has been called the founder of African nationalism and PanAfricanism. 
Surely he is, insofar as he described the burden of dependence and the drawbacks of 
exploitation. He put forward “theses” for liberation, insisting on the necessity of both 
the indigenization of Christianity and the support of Islam. Despite its romanticism 
and inconsistencies, Blyden's
130


--- PAGE 131 ---
political vision is probably the first proposal by a black man to elaborate the benefits 
of an independent, modern political structure for the continent.
“Black Personality” as Common Locus
According to Blyden, the “Negro” that the West deals with in its literature as well 
as in its imperial enterprise is just a myth (Blyden, L0:52-54; 6768). The West has 
produced  this  myth  and  maintains  it  by  projecting  it  as  a  standard  image. 
Missionaries,  travelers,  and  colonial  settlers  are  equally wrong  in  the  way they 
portray the African personality:
The Negro of the ordinary traveller or missionary-and perhaps,  of two-thirds of the Christian 
world-is  a  purely  fictitious  being,  constructed  out  of  the  traditions  of  slave-traders  and 
slave-holders, who have circulated all sorts of absurd stories, and also out of prejudices inherited 
from ancestors, who were taught to regard the Negro as a legitimate object of traffic. (CINR:58)
More  generally,  Blyden  saw  this  false  image  as  both  the  product  and  the 
consequence of a long process which accompanied the European exploration of the 
world from the fifteenth century on. A prevailing ethnocentrism and a lack of sincere 
curiosity produced a totally absurd framework, in which African cultures and peoples 
constituted merely an inversion of European traditions and human types. This premise 
was used to justify “the indictment against a whole race” (NAH:27). For example, Sir 
Samuel Baker states: “Without foreign assistance, the Negro a thousand years hence 
will be no better than the Negro of today, as the Negro of today is in no superior 
position to that of his ancestors some thousand years ago” (CINR:269).
Blyden attacked this ideological positon, first by indicating the weakness of its 
view, stemming from an erroneous deduction; and then by criticizing the assumption 
that the Negro could be completely integrated into Western culture. Concerning the 
deduction, he wrote that the major mistake lies in a theoretical misinterpretation of 
the racial phenomenon and its cultural manifestations:
There is no absolute or essential superiority on the one side, nor absolute or essential inferiority on 
the other side. It is a question of difference of endowment and difference of destiny. No amount of 
training or culture will make the Negro a European; on the other hand, no lack of training or 
deficiency of culture will make the European a Negro. The two races are not moving in the same 
groove with an immeasurable distance between them, but on parallel lines. They will never meet in 
the plane of their activities so as to coincide in capacity or performance. They are not identical, as 
some think, but unequal; they are distinct but equal. (CINR:227; my emphasis)
The difficulty of this position lies in the complexity of the concept of race, and 
the various and extended connotations given to it by theorists and
131


--- PAGE 132 ---
ideologists. One could analyze the relationship between Blyden's thesis and the racial 
theories of his time (see, e.g., Fanoudh-Siefer, 1968; Hammond and jablow, 1977; 
Hoffmann, 1973; Jordan, 1968; Lyons, 1975). Since these theories are, generally 
speaking,  mixtures  of  poor  philosophy,  scientific  speculations,  and  heavy 
ethnocentrism, it is more pertinent to look at the problem in a different way and to 
relate Blyden to the founders of anthropology. First of all, there is a striking similarity 
between  Blyden's  conception  and  that  of  some  of  the  eighteenth-century 
anthropologists.  His  understanding  of  “anthropology,”  the  study  of  “practical 
features” of “a system,” and their influence on the natural man (CINR:232), seems to 
echo Rousseau. As H. R. Lynch rightly notes: “Blyden's `natural African man' is 
strikingly similar to Rousseau's `noble savage' living in a `perfect state of nature'-a 
state which they both claimed was the necessary prerequisite for the development of 
the spiritual resources of the mankind” (Lynch, 1967:62). Blyden's theory of race 
makes excellent sense when it is related to Arthur de Gobineau's Essai sur l'inégalité 
des races humaines (1853) and other widespread racial conceptions. For instance, 
Voltaire, seeking a hierarchy of races in both his Traité de métaphysique (1734) and 
Essai sur les moeurs, affirmed that black peoples constitute a completely distinct 
brand of humankind. In Voltaire's anthropology, this distinction implied and explained 
the Negro's inferiority (see Duchet, 1971:281-321). In contrast, Buffon, a scientist, 
presented in his Natural History (1749) the principle of the distinctiveness of all 
human  beings.  To  him,  even  “the  most  animal-like  of  human  beings”  does  not 
resemble “the most human-like of animals.” He called this principle an organizational 
identity.  He  also  claimed  to  have  evidence  of  racial  distinctions,  acknowledging 
within  every  race  the  possible  existence  of  “human  varieties”  dependent  upon 
environment and climate (See Duchet, 1971:229-80).
Believing in the distinctiveness of races, Blyden equated “purity” of race and 
“purity”  of  personality  or  blood.  This  accounts  for  his  “racist”  position  about 
mulattoes. He wrote, for example, against “the introduction on a very large scale of 
the  blood  of  the  oppressors  among  their  victims”  (LET:488),  denied  even  the 
possibility of a union between “the pure Negroes and mulattoes” (LET:388), and, in a 
most questionable manner, disparaged “Negroes who are as white as some white 
men” (LET:388). His thesis requiring the rejection of mulattoes from the “race” and 
from  the  African  experience  was  also  politically  motivated:  “If  this  difference 
between the Negro and the mulatto is understood hereafter, it will much simplify the 
Negro problem, and the race will be called upon to bear its own sins only, and not the 
sins also of a `mixed multitude”' (in Lynch, 1967:59).
Blyden seems to agree also with the principle of human variety within the race 
but added to it the fact of ethnic difference and social influence:
The cruel accidents of slavery and the slave-trade drove all Africans together, and no discrimination 
was made in the shambles between the Foulah and the Timneh, the Mandingo and the Mendi, the 
Ashantee and the Fantee, the Eboe
132


--- PAGE 133 ---
and the Congo-between the descendants of Nobles and the offsprings of slaves, between kings and 
their subjects-all were placed on the same level, all of black skin and woolly hair were `niggers,' 
chattels . . . And when, by any course of events, these people attempt to exercise independent 
government, they start in the eyes of the world as Africans, without the fact being taken into 
consideration that they belong to tribes and families differing widely in degrees of intelligence and 
capacity, in original bent and susceptibility. (CINR:274)
The  last  sentence  implies  the  concept  of  variety  by  establishing  a  relationship 
between  “intelligence”  or  “capacity”  and  ethnic  groups.  This  is  a  dangerous 
hypothesis, which during the last two centuries has been co-opted to legitimate every 
racism  and  has  supported  the  foundation  of  the  controversial  science  of  racial 
differences. In Blyden's ideological perspective, this concept is a powerful claim for 
regional identity: Africans are not identical, their social organizations are not equal, 
nor necessarily similar, and, finally, their traditions do not merely reflect each other 
and are not the same.
Nevertheless, Blyden claimed a general distinctiveness of Africa and her people 
and  defined  it  by listing  some  particular  characteristics  of  the  continent  and  its 
inhabitants in a clearly Rousseauist and ethnocentrist way.
Africa “has been called the cradle of civilization, and so it is.” Thinking of the 
Egyptian  past,  Blyden  wrote:  “The  germs  of  all  sciences  and  of  the  two  great 
religions  now  professed  by the  most  enlightened  races  were  fostered  in  Africa” 
(CINR:  116;  NAH:  5-9).  In  his  view,  it  was  a  brilliant  world,  a  continent  of 
“contentment  and  happiness”  where  people  feared  and  loved  God  and  showed 
remarkable hospitality (L0:82).
If the belief in a Common Creator and Father of mankind is illustrated in the bearing we maintain 
towards our neighbour, if our faith is seen in our works, if we prove that we love God, whom we 
have not seen, by loving our neighbour whom we have seen, by respecting his rights, even though 
he may not belong to our clan, tribe, or race, then I must say, and it will not be generally disputed, 
that more proofs are furnished among the natives of interior Africa of their belief in the common 
Fatherhood of a personal God by their hospitable and considerate treatment of foreigners and 
strangers than are to be seen in many a civilized and Christian community. (CINR: 215)
To illustrate his statement on African religiosity, Blyden recalled Homer's and 
Herodotus's  eulogies  of  the  “blameless  Black  peoples”  (NAH:10).  Concerning 
hospitality, besides some ethnographic analyses on Mandingo customs (CINR: 28 5) 
and Mungo Park's experience in the vicinity of Sego (CINR:206), he brought in 
explorers' testimonies, and among them, the amazing “long sojourn of Livingstone in 
that land . . . without money to pay his way, . . . another proof of the excellent 
qualities of the peoples” (CINR: 115)
Two other  characteristics  of Africans,  according  to Blyden,  are  their  love  of 
music (CINR:276) and their “teachableness” (CINR: 163 ). He focused on
133


--- PAGE 134 ---
this last capability because of its potential for Africa's future. It seemed to him all the 
more important since he was convinced of a general state of “degeneration,” at least 
among “Pagans.” But “Moslems,” generally, constitute an exception: “Wherever the 
Moslem is found on this coast . . . he looks upon himself as a separate and distinct 
being from his Pagan neighbour, and immeasurably his superior in intellectual and 
moral respects” (CINR: 175 ).
A century has  made  no  change for  better.  Mr.  Joseph  Thompson  [who]  visited  the  Nigritian 
countries last year [says]: There is absolutely not a single place where the natives are left to their 
own free will, in which there is the slightest evidence of a desire for better things. The worst vices 
and diseases of Europe have found a congenial soil, and the taste for spirits has risen out of all 
proportion to their desire for clothes. (CINR:342)
Thus, general degeneration exists mainly due to intemperance (CINR:67), the 
climatic  influences  (CINR:54),  and  the  European  presence  (CINR:46-47; 
LET:399-400). In order to stop this deadly process, Blyden proposed a course of 
action consisting of three principal methods for the African's conversion, all of them 
based on the capacity for learning.
First, there was to be an emphasis on “our past” and the objectivity of reality. For 
as Blyden remarked, “our teachers have of necessity been Europeans, and they have 
taught us books too much, and things too little.” Consequently, “the notion, still 
common among Negroes . . . is that the most important part of knowledge consists in 
knowing what other menforeigners-have said about things, and even about Africa and 
about themselves. They aspire to be familiar, not with what really is, but with what is 
printed” (CINR: 220). In daily existence the expression of this failure to distinguish 
between  “reality”  and  subjective  “interpretation”  leads  Africans  into  absurd 
situations.
The songs that live in our ears and are often on our lips are the songs which we heard sung by those 
who shouted while we groaned and lamented. They sang of their history, which was the history of 
our degradation. They recited their triumphs, which contained the records of our humiliation. To our 
great  misfortune,  we  learned  their  prejudices  and  their  passions,  and  thought  we  had  their 
aspirations and their power. (CINR:91)
According to Blyden, it is likely that this cultural trend will simply lead to the 
Negro's destruction. One means of conversion would be the development of “black 
consciousness,” since it is clear that “in spite of all, the “Negro race” has its part to 
play still-a distinct part-in the history of humanity, and the continent of Africa will be 
the principal scene of its activity” (CINR: 276). Yet he claims that we must place the 
Western perception of “us” and of “our past” in perspective and look for “what we 
are,” live it and write it according to “our own” experience.
134


--- PAGE 135 ---
We  have  neglected  to  study  matters  at  home  because  we  were  trained  in  books  written  by 
foreigners, and for a foreign race, not for us-or for us only so far as in the general characteristics of 
humanity we resemble that race . . . Therefore, we turned our backs upon our breathren of the 
interior as those from whom we could learn nothing to elevate, to enlighten, or to refine . . . We 
have had history written for us, and we have endeavoured to act up to it; where as, the true order is, 
that history should be first acted, then written. (CINR:221; my emphasis)
In other words, Africans have to create their own schemes for understanding and 
mastering social and historical data, “especially in this large and interesting country 
of theirs, about which the truth is yet to be found out-people and systems about which 
correct ideas are to be formed” (CINR:220-21). What Blyden refers to is, I suspect, 
the  necessity  to  implement  an  African  social  interpretation,  which  should  be 
undertaken as an African responsibility, since, as he expressed it in his address at the 
inauguration of Liberia College, “We have no pleasing antecedents-nothing in the 
past to inspire us . . . All our agreeable associations are connected with the future. Let 
us then strive to achieve a glorious future” (LO: 120).
On a second level, Blyden struggled against the theme of mimicry of social 
behavior:  “Fascinated  by  the  present,  [the  Negro]  harasses  himself  with  the 
ever-recurring and ever-unsatisfying and unsatisfactory task of imitating imitators” 
(CINR:147). As a sign of psychological domination, imitation of the white man or the 
secret desire to become white expresses a dependence. In any case; research and 
discussion about this must take place in the determination of African culture and 
proposals for its future (CINR:277-78).
In addition, new and vigorous canons should be initiated immediately for young 
Blacks. The aim would be “to assist their power of forgetfulness-an achievement of 
extreme  difficulty”  (CINR:79)  by  increasing  “the  amount  of  purely  disciplinary 
agencies”  and  reducing  “to  its  minimum  the  amount  of  distracting  influences” 
(CINR:80). The aim of these canons would also be “to study the causes of Negro 
inefficiency in civilized lands; and, so far as it has resulted from the training they 
have received, to endeavour to avoid what we conceive to be the sinister elements in 
that training” (CINR:80). Emphasizing the special nature of the Liberian experience, 
he insisted on the fact that “no country in the world needs more than Liberia to have 
mind properly directed” (L0:98). First, because the country is “isolated from the 
civilized world, and surrounded by a benighted people.” Second, the experience itself 
seems exceptional for it means “establishing and maintaining a popular government 
with a population, for the most part, of emancipated slaves” (L0:98). Referring to the 
first settlers, he insists on the necessity of “a practical education” (LO:101).
This  project  leads  directly to  the  third  major  step:  a  new  policy for  formal 
education, which ultimately would help the transformation of the continent. Using his 
own experience as a professional, he proposed very precise outlines for a program. 
Above all, he put forward this major thesis: “Lord Bacon says
135


--- PAGE 136 ---
that `reading makes a full  man'; but the  indiscriminate  reading by the  Negro of 
European literature has made him, in many instances, too full, or has rather destroyed 
his  balance”  (CINR:81).  From  this  position  it  is  easier  to  understand  the 
complementarity between his “classical perspective” and his “nationalist outlook” 
with respect to the curriculum. In addition to the critical presentation of history from 
an African point of view, he insisted on the study of classics-the Greek and Latin 
languages and their literaturesmathematics, and the Bible. The study of classics-“the 
key to a thorough knowledge of all the languages of the enlightened part of mankind” 
(LO: 108)-was necessary for two main reasons. First, “what is gained by the study of 
the ancient languages is that strengthening and disciplining of the mind which enables 
the student in after life to lay hold of, and, with comparatively little difficulty, to 
master any business to which he may turn his attention” (CINR:87). Second “the 
study of the Classics also lays the foundation for the successful pursuit of scientific 
knowledge.  It  so  stimulates  the  mind  that  it  arouses  the  student's  interest  in  all 
problems of science” (CINR:87; LO: 110). (Let us note that these are the two main 
reasons Senghor put forward some ninety years  later to promote the teaching of 
Greek, Latin, and classical literature in Senegal.) Blyden also advocated the study of 
physics,  and mathematics (LO:100), because “as instruments of culture, they are 
everywhere  applicable”  (CINR:87).  Finally,  the  study  of  the  Bible  is  essential. 
However, it must be a Bible “without note or comment,” since “the teachings of 
Christianity are of universal application . . . and the great truths of the Sermon on the 
Mount are as universally accepted as Euclid's axioms” (CINR:89).
Blyden's “nationalist” outlook is manifest in his intention to introduce into the 
curriculum the study of Arabic and African languages, “by means of which we may 
have intelligent intercourse with the millions accessible to us in the interior, and learn 
more of our own country” (CINR:88). In particular, the promotion of Arabic seems 
important to him. In a letter to the Reverend Henry Venn, he went so far as to write 
that “Roman letters will never prevail or be read by Mohammedan Africa” (LET:95). 
Blyden advocated not only the teaching  of Africa's languages but also an actual 
introduction to African society and its culture. And to Liberian citizens he said:
We have young men who are experts in the geography and customs of foreign countries; who can 
tell all about the proceedings of foreign statesmen in countries thousands of miles away; can talk 
glibly of London, Berlin, Paris, and Washington . . . But who knows anything about Musahdu, 
Medina, Kankan, or Sego-only a few hundred miles from us? Who can tell anything of the policy or 
doings of Fanfidoreh, Ibrahims Sissi, or Fahquehqueh, or Simoro of Boporu-only a few steps from 
us? These are hardly known. Now as Negroes, allied in blood and race to these people, this is 
disgraceful. (CINR:88)
In sum, the potentialities of African personality are given  in this impetus to 
promote a new perception of the past and present, the recovery of a psychological 
136


--- PAGE 137 ---
autonomy,  and  the  introduction  of  an  original  system  of  education.  With  this 
argument in mind, one cay say that Blyden was really presenting a formula for the 
“reinvention” of the African personality, from a “racial” point of view. He wrote: “We 
want the eye and ear of the Negro to be trained by culture that he may see more 
clearly what he does see, and hear more distinctly what he does hear” (CINR:277). 
And in terms of the future, he dramatically asserted:
When the African shall come forward with his peculiar gifts, he will fill a place never before 
occupied. Misunderstood and often misrepresented even by his best friends . . . he is, nevertheless, 
coming forward, gradually rising under the influences of agencies seen and unseen. (CINR:278)
It  is  not  difficult  to  see  Blyden's  originality  in  these  comments  on  African 
personality: Such independence of mind is, for better or worse, exceptional. At the 
very least, it explains Blyden's attitude towards Africanists. He advised Negroes to 
avoid three major categories of Europeans-“professional philanthropists,” “racists,” 
and the “indifferent.” The Negro should meet with people who “treat him as they 
would  a  white  man  of  the  same  degree  of  culture  and  behaviour,  basing  this 
demeanour  altogether  upon  the  intellectual  or  moral  qualities  of  the  man” 
(CINR:266).
In Blyden's conception of African personality, the most striking thing is his racial 
creed,  with  its  ambivalent  overtones:  “first,  [the  African]  will  not  fade  away or 
become extinct before Europeans, as the American and Australian aborigines; and, 
second,  .  .  .  in  any  calculations  looking  at  the  material  improvement  or 
aggrandisement of his native home, he cannot be wisely ignored” (CINR:263).
To present Blyden's political theory, I make the distinction between two domains, 
the religious and the political. I will first present them separately and then comment 
on their interpenetration or “economy.”
All  Africans,  wrote  Blyden,  believe  in  a  “Common  Creator  and  Father  of 
mankind” (CINR: 115) and this fundamental characteristic is the basic feature of their 
religion. This need not imply the existence of a formal and organized religion all over 
the continent. Nor does it mean, as some Africanists seem to think, that “an African's 
religion finds vent at his heels” (CINR:275), forgetting that the “`Shaker element' 
prevails chiefly, if not entirely, among Negroes or `coloured' people, who have been 
trained under the influence of the domination of which [the Africanist] himself is a 
distinguished ornament” (CINR:275). Blyden distinguished three religious systems: 
paganism, Mohammedanism, and Christianity. Concerning paganism, he recognized 
that he was discouraged “by what appears to us the obstinacy . . . the stubbornness of 
a hoary superstition.”  But “when we consider  how large tribes  . . . are kept  in 
subordination, and fulfill many a national function without any knowledge of letters 
or written revelation, it must appear that there is something in the Paganism of Africa 
as in the Paganism of other lands-some subtle, indefinable, inappreciable influence 
which
137


--- PAGE 138 ---
operates upon the people and regulates their life” (CINR:225-26). If he disapproved 
of pagan “fetichism,” he also opposed false generalizations and erroneous accounts of 
African religious practices, noting once again Africanists' mystifications: “There is 
something lamentable-we were going to say grotesque-in the ignorance of some who 
assume to be authorities and guides on African matters, of the condition of things at 
even a little distance from the coast” (CINR:61).
At  any  rate,  Blyden  praised  “the  decided  superiority  in  morality  which 
characterised the interior natives untouched by civilisations” (LET:462) and admired 
the Muslims. These two groups, according to him, “possess in their conditions of life 
more room for vigorous individual and racial growth, and are less compressed into set 
shapes than any others” (LET:462-63). Despite the fact that Blyden did not hesitate to 
draw a brief comparison between African paganism-“this religion of the imagination, 
or of the fancy”-and Socrates's wisdom and Greek and Roman mysteries, he clearly 
considered Islam superior to pagan beliefs:
No one can travel any distance in the interior of West Africa without being struck with the different 
aspects of society in different localities, according as the population is Pagan or Mohammedan. Not 
only is there a difference in the methods of government, but in the general regulations of society, 
and even in the amusements of the people. (CINR:6)
Islam seemed dynamic and well-organized. Blyden, in a letter to the Reverend 
Henry Venn, emphasized an external feature of Islam: its independence. Muslims, he 
wrote,  “carry  on  all  their  institutions,  educational  and  religious,  independent  of 
foreign aid (LET:98). Their religion is also powerful and influential. Blyden observed 
that he did not believe that “much can be done by attacking Islam on the coast” and 
proposed that “Christians should seek the favour of Muslims.” Only progressively by 
“means of Christian Arabic books, the character of Mohammedanism may be very 
much modified” (LET:98-99). Not only did the system seem superior, but according 
to Blyden, “the Moslem [seems] immeasurably . . . superior in intellectual and moral 
respects” (CINR:175). Blyden expounded two major reasons which could account for 
the success, the strength, and the superiority of Islam: the completeness of the Koran 
and the aggressiveness of this socio-religious system:
To the African Mussulman . . . the Koran is all-sufficient for his moral, intellectual, social and 
political needs. It contains his whole religion, and a great deal besides . . . It is his code of laws, and 
his creed, his homily, and his liturgy. He consults it for direction on every possible subject; and his 
Pagan  neighbour,  seeing  such veneration  paid  to  the  book, conceives  even  more  exaggerated 
notions of its character. (CINR:176)
In Central Africa, Islam is an aggressive, conquering force; and it is, of course, infinitely superior to 
the Paganism which it has abolished. It has established in
138


--- PAGE 139 ---
the minds of its adherents the sense of responsibility beyond this life, and the fear of God; and this 
sentiment-which is the condition of all other progressit is not only diffusing, but transmitting to 
posterity. This is the element which has given stability and upward impulse to the social and 
political forces of advanced countries; and it will have the same effect in the dark corners of this 
continent. (CINR:332)
Blyden wrote elsewhere that Arabic, the language of Islam, is in Africa a good 
preparation for Christianity (CINR:187) and an important means for an autonomous 
and regional policy of auto-regeneration (LET: 134-3 8). He firmly believed that 
Islam could have an excellent future throughout the continent. And as far as African 
interests are concerned, Blyden had faith in the practical superiority of Islam over 
Christianity:
Mohammedanism, in Africa, has left the native master of himself and of his home; but wherever 
Christianity has been able to establish itself, with the exception of Liberia, foreigners have taken 
possession of the country, and, in some places, rule the natives with oppressive rigour. (CINR:309)
This does not imply that  Blyden  could not or did not want to envisage the 
possibility of an African Christianity. He was a Christian minister, but refused to 
forget that he was black (see, e.g., LET:462). From his other views, one can see that 
he  was  bound  to  be  skeptical  about  European  Christianity  and  its  processes  of 
evangelization:  “There  is  no  evidence  that  Christianity,  or,  rather  professing 
Christians [. . .] would have been less unscrupulous in their dealings with natives of 
Africa,  than  they have  been  with  the  natives  of  America, of  Australia,  of  New 
Zealand” (CINR:309). His position must be understood against the background of 
racism and its consequences, which illuminates his reasons for stressing the generally 
negative influence of Christianity on Black people and “the innumerable woes which 
have attended the African race for the last three hundred years in Christian lands” 
(CINR:27). As he expressed it in his letter to Mary Kingsley in 1900: “Very few 
among races alien to the European believe in the genuineness of the Christianity of 
the white man. For neither in the teaching nor the practice of the lay white man do 
they see manifested, as a rule, anything of the spirit of Christianity” (LET:462).
Although he rejoiced in the apparent failure of Roman Catholicism in Liberia 
(LET:388),  he  seemed  to  admire  this  church,  which  in  his  opinion  presented 
remarkable characteristics: It is “an uncompromising front in the warfare against 
infidelity in all its forms” and “has always been and is now a protesting power . . . 
against  those  attacks  upon  constituted  authority.”  Further,  it  is  set  “against  the 
freeness and facility of divorce,” “respects the integrity of the family,” and “respects 
races.” Finally, it holds to those words of St. Paul that declare that `God hath made of 
one all nations of men to dwell upon the face of the earth”' (CINR:224-25). Blacks 
could  find  “Negro  saints”  in  its  calendar  (CINR:39),  could  observe  Negroes 
occupying important 
139


--- PAGE 140 ---
“civil,  military  and  social  positions”  in  Catholic  countries  (CINR:225),  and 
benefitting from political freedom (CINR:46). Thus, Negroes were able to see the 
Church  itself  relying  on  indigenous  elements  and  agencies  for  its  development 
(CINR:167).
This eulogy of the Church of Rome is fundamentally a criticism of Protestant 
policies. However, Blyden recognized the relatively positive effects of five American 
denominations (Baptists, Methodists, Episcopalians, Presbyterians, and Lutherans) 
established  on  the  West  African  coast,  where  “numerous  churches  have  been 
organized and are under a native ministry, and thousands of children are gathered into 
schools under Christian teachers” (CINR:49). But on the whole, he judged the results 
to be very weak: these churches are “in their largest measure . . . confined almost 
exclusively  to  the  European  settlements  along  the  coast  and  to  their  immediate 
neighbourhood” (CINR:49-50). At the end of his life, Blyden was quite pessimistic 
about  missionary  activities.  In  1910,  in  a  letter  to  R.  L.  Antrobus,  assistant 
under-secretary  at  the  British  Colonial  Office,  he  complained  about  “teaching 
mistakes” that created “a gulf between aborigines and colonists” (LET:499)
What was to be done for the successful promotion of Christianity in Africa? “In 
view of the serious obstacles which have so far confronted  the work of African 
evangelization and civilization through European agency, it is a matter of serious 
concern among Christian workers as to how the work should be done” (CINR: 160). 
His answer was clear and simple and followed from his racial views: only peoples of 
African descent could successfully evangelize the continent: “The method, the simple 
holding up of Jesus Christ; the instrument, the African himself” (CINR: 162 ). Thus, 
at the very beginning of the second evangelization of Africa in the nineteenth century, 
Blyden called for an African Christianity. The new faith would be propagated by 
black  missionaries  and  its  significance  would  be  transformed.  He  advocated  the 
translation of the Gospel into African tongues, which would “be far more effective 
instruments  of  conveying  to  the  native  mind  the  truths  of  the  Gospel  than  any 
European  language”  (CINR:68).  Bearing  in  mind  Islam's  ideological  impact  on 
African  peoples  (CINR:231),  he  fervently  envisioned  an  authentic  African 
Christianity. His metaphor was the meeting of Philip the apostle and the eunuch from 
Ethiopia: “Philip was not to accompany the eunuch, to water the seed he had planted, 
to cherish and supervise this incipient work. If he desired to do so-and perhaps he 
did-the Spirit suffered him not, for he `caught him away' “ (CINR: 161 ). The eunuch 
being the only messenger, he is the only one responsible for “a total revolution in his 
country through the words he had heard.”
While Lynch writes that though Blyden showed “a distinct partiality for Islam,” 
“he himself never became a Muslim” (1967:246), in spirit Blyden was a Muslim. He 
was truly concerned, especially in his old age, about the Muslim population and their 
education and commercial interests and even identified himself with their fate (see 
LET:402 and 409). The Muslims called
140


--- PAGE 141 ---
upon him to aid in their negotiations with the Liberian government (LET:425-27). In 
a letter to the British Colonial Office, he recognized that the Governor did not pay 
him “the  courtesy due  to  his  office  because  [he]  agree[d]  with  Mohammedans” 
(LET:479). In 1877, he stated that he had “more faith in the ultimate usefulness in 
Africa of the pagan and Mohammedan natives, through Christian influences, than in 
that of the AmericoLiberians, demoralized by slavery and deceived by a bastard 
Christianity”  (LET:235).  In  1889,  he  confided  to  E  J. Grimké his  long-standing 
conviction concerning “the superiority of the Soudan or Mohammedan Negroes to 
others” (LET:406 and 138). He seems to have had a precise objective. In 1888 he 
wrote:
My idea is that Islam is to be reformed and can be reformed. I am now writing . . . on `the Koran in 
Africa,' discussing its theology and practical teachings in their effect upon the Negro race, and 
showing  how  effectively,  if  Christians  understood  the  system,  it  might  be  utilized  in  the 
Christianization of Africa. (LET:399)
His aim was ambiguous. What did he mean by “reforming” Islam? This is a 
mystery. What is clear is his critical rejection of “missionary” Christianity. In any 
case,  in  1903  his  foremost  desire  was  “to  visit  the  College  of  Living  Oriental 
Languages in Paris” and also to “visit the famous Mohammedan University at Cairo, 
the Mosque Al-Azhar, and spend a month there studying their methods” (LET:473).
Spiritually and politically, Blyden was, at least from 1900 on, a Muslim. He 
opposed  “the  influence  of  so-called  Christianity  and  civilization”  and  tended  to 
emphasize the American lesson as he saw it: “in all the long and weary years of the 
Negro's bondage in America to White Christians-the slaves clung to Christ-but they 
did not believe in the religion of their white masters” (LET:462).
Did  Blyden  choose  between  Jesus  and  Mohammed?  There  is  no  answer. 
Nevertheless, his texts give a clue. What we are dealing with is, without doubt, what 
one would call nowadays a “theology of difference,” simultaneously supported by a 
racial consciousness and a pluralistic interpretation of the Bible. Such a viewpoint, 
from Blyden's position, allows for an original contribution by black Christians:
There are stars, astronomers tell us, whose light has not yet reached the earth; so there are stars in 
the moral universe yet to be disclosed by the unfettered African, which he must discover before he 
will be able to progress without wandering into perilous seas and suffering serious injury. (CINR: 
151)
Complementary to this mission, which only black Christians could successfully 
carry out (CINR:194), is another one: the promotion of an African nationalism and 
the unity of the continent.
Blyden presented as premises two relevant ideas. On the one hand, there is
141


--- PAGE 142 ---
the fact that Europe is an invader (CINR:338; L0:73-75). Blyden accepted the truth of 
the following sentence, written by a European: “the eighteenth century stole the black 
man from his country; the nineteenth century steals his country from the black man” 
(CINR:337). On the other hand, there is African opposition to the invasion. Blyden 
praised the resistance of the Ashanti and the Zulus as an “indication of the suddenness 
of Africa's regeneration” (CINR: 121).
The “Economy” of a Discourse
It was not the aim of this analysis to describe the historical or sociological climate 
in which Blyden's ideas evolved. These points have received  sufficient scholarly 
attention (Lynch, 1967; Holden, 1967; July, 1964; Shepperson, 1960). My objective 
was  to  present  Blyden's  “philosophy”  from  an  “archaeologic”  viewpoint  by 
uncovering the specificity of his discourse in “the play of analyses and differences” of 
a nineteenth-century atmosphere, and by looking for discrete relationships between 
his discourse and some nondiscursive fields. What remains to be said?
First of all, Blyden was a strange and exceptional man, who devoted his entire 
life to the cause he believed in. However, as C. H. Lyons rightly noted, “in seeking to 
answer the racists in their own terms Blyden developed a theory of race which, while 
vindicating the black man, derived an uncomfortably large measure of inspiration 
from late nineteenth-century European race-thinking” (Lyons, 1975:108). The frame 
of his thinking was a “traditional” one and may be summed up in three oppositions: a 
racial opposition (white vs. black), a cultural confrontation (civilized vs. savage) and 
a  religious  distance  (Christianity  vs.  paganism).  His  racial  theory  was  simply a 
relativization  of  the  supposed  superiority  of  the  categories  white,  civilized,  and 
Christian. His discourse, like the racist discourse that he opposed, is purely axiomatic. 
It is, in the modern sense, a discourse of intimidation; or, to put it in Barthes's 
language, it is “a language intended to bring about a coincidence between norms and 
facts, and to give a cynical reality the guarantee of a noble morality.”  (Barthes, 
1979:103). In this sense, it clearly distinguishes itself from the language and the 
mythologies of the “noble savage.” The “noble savage” was a romantic tool, “an aid 
to self-scrutiny at home” in Europe (Lyons, 1975:8). Even as an anti-slavery weapon, 
the “noble savage” was an idealized African presenting the most un-African features, 
and could, for example, “blush” and “turn pale” (Lyons, 1975:7). Blyden confronts 
these languages and mythologies on “blackness.” A. T Vaughan presents an accurate 
picture of the context:
Virtually all descriptions of the `dark continent' portray its inhabitants as unattractive, heathen, and 
grossly  uncivil.  In  theory  at  least,  the  Africans'  culture  could  be  ameliorated;  their  physical 
characteristics could not. And,
142


--- PAGE 143 ---
although  several  aspects  of  African  appearance-stature,  facial  features,  and  hair  texture,  for 
example-displeased the English eye, most striking and disturbing was the darkness of African skin. 
Descriptions of African people invariably stress their blackness, always disapprovingly. (Vaughan, 
1982:919)
In this atmosphere, Blyden simply opposed one racist view to another racist view, 
precisely  by  emphasizing  anti-mythologies  on  Africans,  their  cultures,  and  the 
necessity of unmixed Negro blood.
The ultimate objective  of such an anti-racism becomes, almost naturally,  the 
negation of the then-existing power relationships based on racial distinctions. This 
process might account for Blyden's conviction about the usefulness of American and 
West Indian Blacks in the transformation of the African continent, which is the basis 
of  the  project  for  “racial  growth”  and  its  myths  about  racial  nationality,  black 
creativity,  and  Pan-Africanism.  In  his  own  terms, the  reunion  of  the  “civilized” 
Christians of the West Indies and America with their “benighted” brothers in Africa 
would lead to a positive development from both a cultural and a religious point of 
view. Blyden's objectives (racial growth, cultural regeneration, Christianization) are a 
negation of what he considers African weaknesses. Fundamentally, the theory is both 
an argument against the European partition of the continent and a foundation for the 
ideology that allowed the creation of Liberia: “back to Africa.” As Blyden grew older, 
his theory conflicted with his pessimistic analysis of black leadership. He continued 
to think in terms of opposition between “civilization” and “African degenerance.” He 
accepted the efficiency of white colonization. However, to promote more realistically 
his dream for the transformation of the continent, he opposed the “American-Liberian 
demoralized  by  slavery”  to  the  “Mohammedan  native”  (LET:  235).  He  even 
contrasted “bastard Christianity” and its culture with the Islamic faith and its order. 
He  also  accepted  the  “reconstruction”  of  Liberia  under  American  protection 
(LET:496).  He  knew  that  “the  would-be  rulers  of  the  land  feel  it  their  duty to 
denounce [him] as a traitor to the country” (LET: 2- 3 5). He was flattered to be 
considered “the prophet of Liberia” (LET:496) and stated that he had “faith in the 
ultimate  usefulness  in  Africa  of  the  pagan  and  Mohammedan  natives,  through 
Christian influence” (LET: z35). It is striking that a similar conviction would later 
lead the British government to rely on “traditional local authorities as agencies of 
local rule” (see, e.g., Hailey, 1970:94) for the implementation of “the dogma that 
civilization was a blessing that its possessors ought to spread” (Mair, 1975:252).
These  theories  go  together  in  Blyden's  work,  contradicting  each  other  and 
accounting  for  philosophical  inconsistencies,  racist  propositions,  and  political 
opportunisms.  As  H.  R.  Lynch's  Edward  Wilmot  Blyden:  Pan-Negro  Patriot 
convincingly demonstrates, at the end of the last century Blyden “had established an 
intellectual ascendancy in West Africa, and many West Africans were prepared to 
follow where he led, but they looked to him in vain for a firm and sustained lead, or 
for clear directives. Many of them thought his ideas sophistical or contradicted by his 
actions” (1967:246).
143


--- PAGE 144 ---
In  what  sense  should  we  accept  Senghor's  statement  that  Blyden  was  the 
precursor of negritude and African personality? In his foreward to Blyden's Letters, 
Senghor himself recognizes that “we had, from time to time, come upon the name of 
Blyden, but we had not paid much attention to it . . . We had no knowledge of his 
correspondence,  nor  of  his  essays,  nor  of  his  weekly  newspaper  with  the  so 
significant title of Negro nor, finally, even of his major work, entitled Christianity, 
Islam,  and  the  Black  [sic]  Race”  (LET:xx).  In  his  intellectual  biography,  Pierre 
Teilhard de Chardin et la politique africaine (1962), the name of Blyden is not even 
mentioned.  Aimé  Césaire,  Léon  G.  Damas,  and  Jacques  Rabemenanjara,  other 
members of the negritude movement, never refer to Blyden. It is only in Anglophone 
West Africa that Blyden's real influence may be clearly seen, in Casely Hayford's 
ideas on West African unity, N. Azikiwe's “pan-Negro nationalism,” and possibly in 
Nkrumah's Pan-Africanism (Lynch, 196'7:248-50).
Blyden worked on racial issues in the nineteenth century. In order to oppose racist 
mythologies, he focused  on “the virtues  of black  civilization”  and promoted  the 
concepts of “blackness” and “Negro personality,” thus inventing positive new myths 
about race and the black personality. He had occasional disciples like C. Hayford and 
stimulated the nationalism of others, as in the case of the Nigerian Azikiwe. On the 
whole, the premises and even the essentials of his ideology were already in the air 
before he explicated his theses. They were present in the racist paradigms that his 
theses negated and thus might, for example, account for Mary Kingsley's relativist 
view on races (1965). They had already been used both politically and ideologically 
by the founders of Liberia (Lynch, 1967:10-3i) and by the Haitian revolutionaries, 
who at the beginning of the nineteenth century created the first black republic. At the 
time of Blyden's death in the first quarter of this century, these same premises were 
incorporated in W E. B. DuBois's Pan-Africanist ideology, and in the 79306 they 
were important in the genesis of the negritude movement in Paris (see Wauthier, 
1964).
Let  us  now take  a  different  look  at  the  ideological  significance  of  Blyden's 
ideology. How can we analyze it, and, more important, how might it be possible to 
understand it? Blyden's ideology of African identity is a “strain theory” in the sense 
that it should be understood against “the background of a chronic effort to correct 
socio-psychological disequilibrium” (Geertz, 1973:201). This interpretation should 
explain  his  suggestion  for  the  replacement  of  potential  European  colonizers, 
considered as “invaders,” by black peoples from America and the West Indies, who 
would become agents for the modernization of Africa. Thus, racial identity stands as 
an absolute precondition for any sociopolitical transformation of Africa. This choice 
seems to exclude the possibility of a methodology that, from “the background of a 
universal struggle for advantage,” would define an “interest theory.” This theory can 
present ideal relations: between the African process of production and the social 
relations of production (economic level); between the economic organization and its 
political reflections and interpretations 
144


--- PAGE 145 ---
(political  level);  and  between  the  ideological  structure  and  its  concrete  practices 
within the society (ideological level). This theory also does so by proposing a type of 
balance between the economic level and the ideological superstructures. It is, in 
principle, capable of generating a new African mode of production, and thus technical 
modernization, political democracy, and cultural autonomy.
Blyden's “strain theory” remains far from the Marxist perspective. Its roots are in 
the  sociology  of  races  and  more  precisely  in  the  controversial  principle  of 
irreconcilable differences between races. This brings Blyden's thought closer to the 
romantic philosophies of otherness which flourished in Europe during the nineteenth 
century and which largely supported European nationalism-in Germany and Italy, for 
instance-or,  a  posteriori,  explained  and  justified  them.  Nevertheless,  Blyden's 
perspective is particular. His political ideology arose as a response to racism and to 
some of the consequences of imperialism. It represents an emotional response to the 
European process of denigrating Africa and an opposition to the exploitation that 
resulted from the expansionism of Europe from the fifteenth century. At the same 
time, in order to prove its own significance, his ideology strongly asserts the thesis of 
pluralism in the historical development of races, ethnic groups, and nationalities. 
Consequently,  Blyden  can  reject  the  evolutionary  assumption  of  “identical  but 
unequal races” which provides grounds for the theme of the “White man's mission” 
and  thus  justifies  imperialism and  colonization.  In  its  place,  he  puts  a  different 
assertion: “distinct but equal.”
One  cannot  but  be  amazed  when  analyzing  this  thesis,  which  was  the  first 
articulate nineteenth-century theory of “blackness.” When compared to Senghor's 
negritude, the relevance of Blyden's commitment is still apparent, even though the 
concept of race is now generally considered an ideological trap. Even in his reverence 
for Greco-Roman culture, Blyden announced Senghor. Despite discrepancies due to 
differences  of  sociopolitical  contexts,  psychological  situations,  and  philosophical 
references,  Senghor,  on  the  whole,  pursued  Blyden's  ambiguous  thesis.  His 
pronouncements emphasize the African cultural and historical identity in terms of 
race and consider this concept to be essential.
Blyden's ideology is, however, mostly determined by a profound understanding 
of  the  burden  of  slavery.  It  is  as  a  negation  of  this  experience  that  Blyden 
recommends  a  role  for  Black  Americans  in  the  modernization  of  Africa.  This 
important dimension seems a defense against the experience of domination, and the 
prospect  of  Africa's  transformation  would  appear  to  institutionalize  a  negativity. 
Sartre put forward a similar theoretical perspective in Black Orpheus. Supporting 
negritude in Hegelian terms he insisted on its relevance but also noted the pertinence 
of the dialectical contradiction: the racial moment is always the promise of another 
step, another contradiction. The struggle for liberty would be won in terms of a 
general transformation of societies and negation of social classes. This is in keeping 
with the logic of an “interest theory.”
145


--- PAGE 146 ---
At any rate, Blyden established the “black personality movement” which stands 
for “the sum of values of African civilization, the body of qualities which make up 
the distinctiveness of the people of Africa.” This empirical equivalent of negritude 
has  been  instrumental  in  sustaining  the  struggle  for  African  independence  by 
opposing colonization as a process of falsification and depersonalization of Africans 
and  by  criticizing  imperialism  as  a  means  of  exploitation.  Blyden  foresaw  the 
immediate future of Africa. As C. Fyfe puts it, in the introduction to Christianity, 
Islam and the Negro Race:
Looking back from the 1960s we can see that in a period equivalent to the span of Blyden's life (he 
lived to be nearly 8o) Europeans have come and gone from the greater part of Africa, leaving 
Africans in political  control.  His reasoning may have been  faulty,  but his prophecy has been 
ultimately fulfilled. Similarly his claim that hundreds of thousands of American Negroes were ready 
to emigrate to Africa seemed, at the time, erroneous. Yet the passionate enthusiasm aroused in the 
United States, only a few years after his death, by Marcus Garvey's movement shows that here, too, 
he saw more deeply than his contemporaries. (CINR:xv)
Blyden  expressed  the  essentials  of  the  black  personality  movement  and  the 
Pan-Africanist  program,  with its focus  on  the  ideological  necessity of becoming 
reconciled with one's heritage and its particular sociohistorical experience and reality, 
which presaged Nkrumah's “Consciencism.” In the works of Blyden and Nkrumah, 
the political philosophy is based on a framework composed of at least three major 
sources  for  inspiration:  African  tradition,  an Islamic  contribution,  and  a Western 
legacy. The difference between the two systems resides in the fact that Nkrumah 
accepted materialism's presuppositions as the only relevant ones and organized his 
political  thought  by integrating  strain  and  interest  theories.  Because  of  his  own 
assumptions, Blyden did not weld a solid programmatic juncture between the tension 
of his wish for power and the contradictions of his racial anxiety. This failure would 
account for his visionary tendency, which led him to make impressive prophecies but 
not always to undertake valid sociohistorical analyses.
Nonetheless, this difficulty, which is the locus of Blyden's philosophical problems 
(accounting for most of his inconsistencies on colonization, structural slavery, Islam's 
future, etc.) paradoxically allowed him to emphasize a relativist view of history and 
its  interpretations  and,  therefore,  the  possibility  of  a  general  criticism  of  social 
sciences. He made this criticism by systematically focusing on the significance of 
European ethnocentrism and its various expressions. This meant, then as now, that an 
understanding  of  African  personality  or  African  culture  cannot  neglect  a  major 
dimension-the epistemological debate. Because of imperialism and its ideological 
reflections in moral and social sciences, this approach must question all discourses 
interpreting Africans and their culture. Blyden considered this a critical preliminary to 
establishing a unifying and productive  rapport between African ideology and the 
concrete practice of knowledge. It was not until the 1920s
146


--- PAGE 147 ---
that African intellectuals rediscovered Blyden's outlook: to benefit from the heritage 
of their own history rather than remaining mere objects of or obedient participants in 
Western social sciences, it was their duty to master knowledge of themselves and 
their own culture and to open a vigorous debate on the limits of anthropology. What 
Blyden wrote to J. R. Straton, commenting on a work of one of the most brilliant 
theorists of racism in France, might be applied to him in turn: “Le Bon's Psychology 
of Peoples ought to be carefully studied” (LET:466).
147


--- PAGE 148 ---
V
THE PATIENCE OF 
PHILOSOPHY
“Primitive Philosophies”
La première question que je [me] suis posée, 
rencontrant des paysans [français] qui
n'étaient ni crédules ni arriérés, fut alors 
celleci: la sorcellerie, est-ce que c'est
inconnaissable, ou est-ce que ceux qui le 
prétendent ont besoin de n'en rien savoir pour 
soutenir leur propre cohérence intellectuelle?
est-ce qu'un “savant” ou un “moderne” a 
besoin pour se conforter du mythe d'un paysan 
crédule et arriéré?
JEANNE FAVRET-SAADA, Les Mots, 
la Mort, les Sorts.
The expression “primitive philosophy” was current in the 1920s and 1930s. In a 
preceding chapter, I examined at length anthropologists' discourse and both its power 
and its ambiguity. The concept of “primitive philosophy” is part of this system, which 
since  the  end  of  the  nineteenth  century  had  been  colonizing  the  continent,  its 
inhabitants  and  its  realities.  It  also  belongs  to  an  intellectual  edifice  built  on 
Lévy-Bruhl's work, particularly on such cornerstones as Les Fonctions mentales dans 
les  sociétés  inférieures  (1910),  La  Mentalité  primitive  (1927),  L'Ame  primitive 
(19-27),  Le  Surnaturel  et  la  Nature  dans  la  mentalité  primitive  (1931),  and 
L'Expérience mystique et les symboles chez les primitifs (1938). They posit a radical 
difference between the West, characterized by a history of intellectual and spiritual 
reasoning, and “primitives,” whose life, Weltanschauung, and thinking were viewed 
as having nothing in common with the West. As Lévy-Bruhl wrote in La Mentalité 
primitive:
The attitude of the mind of the primitive is very different. The nature of the milieu in which he lives 
presents itself to him in quire a different way. Objects and beings are all involved in a network of 
mystical participation and exclusions. It is these which constitute its texture and order. It is then 
these  which  immediately  impose  themselves  on  his  attention  and  which  alone  retain  it.  (In 
Evans-Pritchard, 1980:80)
148


--- PAGE 149 ---
From  this  view  emerges  a  theory  of  two  types  of  mentality.  One  is  rational, 
functioning according to principles of logic and inquiring into causal determinations 
and  relations;  the  other,  prelogical,  seems  completely  dominated  by  collective 
representation and strictly depends upon the law of mystical participation. Westerners 
participate in logical thought. In the prelogical and symbolic, one finds “such peoples 
as the Chinese included with Polynesians, Melanesians, Negroes, American Indians, 
and Australian Blackfellows” (Evans-Pritchard, 1980:88).
By 1965, Evans-Pritchard could state that “there is no reputable anthropologist 
who today accepts this theory of two distinct types of mentality” 1980:88). I would 
only  note  that  what  the  present-day  “grand  dichotomy”  implies  might  not  be 
Lévy-Bruhl's model of opposed mentalities but would surely indicate a division of, 
reason between the so-called closed and open societies. At any rate, in the 1920s and 
1930s the division meant both the task of comprehending the primitive mentality as a 
poor and non-evolved entity and the possibility of restoring it at the beginning of the 
history of reason. It is within this framework that one understands such books and 
contributions  dealing  with  “primitive  philosophies”  as  Delhaisse's  Les  Idées 
religieuses et philosophiques des Warega (1909), Kaoze's La Psychologie des Bantu, 
des Bani Marungu (1907-1911), Correia's Vocables philosophiques et religieux des 
peuples Ibo (1925), or the well known texts of Brelsford on Primitive Philosophy (19 
3 5) and The Philosophy o f the Savage (1938 ).
I am not saying that all who were then studying “primitive organizations” (see 
Smet, 1978b, 1975a, 1975b) were disciples of Lévy-Bruhl, defending the thesis of a 
difference in reason between the “primitive” and the “civilized.” Rather, all of them, 
even those who, like Delafosse (1922, 1927), commented upon African structures and 
peoples with a vivid Einfühlung (sympathy), were concerned with the discrepancy 
between Europe and the black continent and wished to describe this difference and 
possibly classify it into a taxonomic grid of human cultures. The Belgian Franciscan 
Placide Frans Tempels, as I indicated in my analysis of missionary language, could be 
considered a paradigmatic illustration of this curiosity. He is a sign caught at the 
crossroads  of  several  currents:  evolutionary  assumptions  of  the  late  nineteenth 
century, Lévy-Bruhl's theses on prelogism, the European self-declared mission to 
civilize Africans through colonization, and Christian evangelization.
Within the arrogant framework of a Belgian colonial conquest meant to last for 
centuries, Tempels, a missionary in Katanga, wrote a small book of philosophy that 
still  disturbs  a  number  of  African  thinkers.  What  Tempels  knew  of  philosophy 
amounted, essentially, to the education he received during his religious training. He 
was not a professional philosopher, and his major preoccupations, beginning with his 
arrival in Africa in 1933, were of a religious nature. One of his exegetes, A. J. Smet, 
has suggested that Levy-Bruhl's influence is evident in the first texts, which tended to 
be ethnographical in outlook, and which Tempels published before Bantu Philosophy 
149


--- PAGE 150 ---
(Smet, 1977b:77-128). Tempels was fully committed to a mission, that of leading the 
black person (to whom he did not yet give the status of being a complete human) 
along the road to civilization, knowledge, and true religion. His style was that of a 
bulamatari (breaker of rocks), a spiritual master and authoritarian doctor (Tempels, 
1962:36). Bantu Philosophy could be considered a testimony to a revelation and as a 
sign of a change in the life of Tempels:
I must say that my goal, in this study of the Bantu was to feel myself “Bantu” at least once. I 
wanted to think, fell, live like him, have a Bantu soul. All that with the intention of adapting . . . 
There was doubtless in my attitude something more, or something else, than the simple scientific 
interest of an anthropologist who asks questions without the object of his science, the living man in 
front of him, necessarily being the objective of his investigations. My attitude perhaps included an 
element of sympathy towards this living individual and evoked in him a reaction of confidence 
towards me. (Tempels, 1962:37)
Looking back at the period that saw the publication of Bantu Philosophy, Tempels 
neatly differentiates himself from anthropologists. His aim is different, he says, and 
depends upon a radically different attitude, one of Einfühlung or sympathy. But his 
book had extraordinary repercussions. G. Bachelard greeted it as a treasure. Alioune 
Diop pledged his faith on this little work, appending a foreword to the French version 
and describing it as the most decisive work he had ever read (Diop, 1965). However, 
the book has not lacked enemies.
The  story  begins  in  Katanga,  in  the  former  Belgian  Congo,  where  Bishop 
Jean-Mix  de  Hemptinne  exercised  his  power  to  check  the  circulation  of  Bantu 
Philosophy, insisting that Rome condemn the book as heretical and that Tempels be 
expelled from the country (DeCraemer, 1977:29-30). The reason was that in the 
colonial milieu this book cast doubts on the greatness of the colonial venture. There 
were at the time rather respectable theoreticians who considered the right to colonize 
as a natural right. According to this doctrine, it was up to the most advanced humans 
to intervene in the “sleeping regions” of Africa and to exploit the wealth meant by 
God  for  all  humanity.  Through  his  presence  and  his  policies,  the  colonizer  was 
intended to awaken “lethargic peoples” and introduce them to civilization and true 
religion. For about ten years,  Tempels followed  this objective.  In the  fashion of 
colonial administrators, he derived two theses from his experience: that nature comes 
from God and that it is up to superior peoples to civilize their inferior brethren. Thus, 
the right to colonize was duplicated by a natural duty and a spiritual mission. A 
stirring metaphor very much in fashion in the 1930s supported his thesis: just as in a 
forest there are fragile, dependent forms of life, which can live and develop only 
under the protection of the stronger, so it is among human communities.
With his Bantu Philosophy, Tempels does not entirely reject this ideology
150


--- PAGE 151 ---
of natural domination, notwithstanding the fears of his critics. He mainly proposes 
more efficient means to his avowed goal, the task of civilizing and evangelizing 
Bantu peoples. As a priest true to the ideals of his mission, he offers a new program 
for the social and spiritual improvement of the indigenous people; that is, ways to 
establish Christian values on a Bantu cultural basis and construct a civilization which 
will be in harmony with the modes of thinking and of being Bantu. Tempels was 
persuaded that his Bantu Philosophy, and particularly his ontology, is the best tool 
Whites can use to encounter Africans and understand them.
Folklore alone and superficial descriptions of strange customs cannot enable us to discover and 
understand primitive man. Ethnology, linguistics, psychoanalysis, jurisprudence, sociology and the 
study of religions are able to yield definitive results only after the philosophy and the ontology of a 
primitive people have been thoroughly studied and written up. (Tempels, 1959:23)
Tempels's  conception  of  Bantu  philosophy  may  be  summarized  in  five 
propositions (see Eboussi-Boulaga, 1968; Tshiamalenga, 1981).
(1) Since Bantu are human beings, they have organized systems of principles and 
references. These systems constitute a philosophy even if Bantu are not “capable of 
formulating  a  philosophical  treatise,  complete  with  an  adequate  vocabulary” 
(Tempels, 1959:36). In sum, the philosophy is an implicit one, and it is Tempels, who, 
interpreting Bantu answers to his questions, unveils its organized and systematic 
character of beliefs and customs.
(2) This philosophy is an ontology. In the West, since the Greeks, philosophy has 
been concerned with defining and indicating the real in terms of being, through a 
static perspective accounted for by such expressions as “the reality that is,” “anything 
that exists,” or “what is.” Against this, Tempels notes that Bantu philosophy seems to 
offer a dynamic  understanding by giving a great deal of attention to the being's 
vitality and by relating being to its force:
We can conceive the transcendental notion of “being” by separating it from its attribute, “force,” but 
the Bantu cannot. “Force” in his thought is a necessary element in “being,” and the concept “force” 
is inseparable from the definition of “being.” There is no idea among Bantu of “being” divorced 
from the idea of “force.” (Tempels, 1959:50-51)
(3) Bantu ontology in its specificity implies that being, as understood in the 
Western tradition, signifies force in Bantu tradition, and therefore one can state that 
being  = force, or as the  Italian  translator entitled  his abridged  version of Bantu 
Philosophy: Forza = Essere (Tempels, 1979:23). It is thus force in its mysterious 
presence that provides a possibility of classifying beings in a hierarchy comprising all 
the existing realms: mineral, vegetable, animal, human, ancestral, and divine. On the 
other hand, in all of them vital force appears to be the essential sign of ordering 
identities, differences, and
151


--- PAGE 152 ---
relationships. From the extreme depth up to the level of God, there is a permanent and 
dynamic dialectic of energy: vital force can be nourished, diminshed, or stopped 
altogether. It increases or decreases in every being and from one transition to another; 
its reference remains the order of its fulfillment in God.
Bantu speak, act, live as if, for them, beings were forces. Force is not for them an adventitious, 
accidental reality, force is even more than a necessary attribute of beings: Force is the nature of 
being, force is being, being is force. (Tempels, 1959:51)
The origin, the subsistence or annihilation of beings or of forces, is expressly and exclusively 
attributed to God. The term to “create” in its proper connotation of “to evoke from not being” is 
found in its full signification in Bantu terminology (Kupanga in Kiluba). (1959:57)
All force can be strengthened or enfeebled. That is to say, all being can become stronger or weaker. 
(1959:55)
Within these uninterrupted exchanges, beings are not bound in upon themselves 
but constitute what Tempels calls a “principle of activity” (1959:51) and by their 
interactions account for the “general laws of vital causality,” namely,
(a) “Man (living or deceased) can directly reinforce or diminish the being of 
another man”;
(b)  “The  vitA  human  force  can  directly  influence  inferior  forcebeings 
(animal, vegetable, or mineral) in their being”;
(c) “A rational being (spirit, manes, or the living) can act indirectly upon 
another rational being by communicating his vital force to an inferior force (animal, 
vegetable, or mineral) through the intermediacy of which it influences the rational 
being” (1959:67-68).
(4) Bantu ontology can be thought of and made explicit only because of the 
conceptual frame of Western philosophy. Tempels put it in a rather direct way: “It is 
our job to proceed to such systematic development. It is we who will be able to tell 
them in precise terms, what their inmost concept of being is” (1959:36).
(5) Bantu ontology could be a guide to the ontologies of all “primitive peoples” in 
general. In effect, throughout his book Tempels indistinctly uses the terms Africans, 
Bantu,  primitives,  natives,  and  savages,  clearly  indicating  that  although  he  is 
presenting  the  “philosophy”  of  a  small  community  in  the  Belgian  Congo,  his 
conclusions could be valid for all non-Western societies. At least twice he expresses 
this ambition. He modestly notes that “many colonials who are living in contact with 
Africans  have  assured  me  that  I  have  set  out  nothing  new,  but  merely  set  out 
systematically what they had grasped vaguely from their practical knowledge of 
Africans” (1959: 37) and at the end of his first chapter, he explicitly expresses the 
possibility of drawing generalizations: 
152


--- PAGE 153 ---
“The problem of Bantu ontology, the problem of whether it exists or not, is thus open 
to  discussion.  It  is  legitimate  now  to  enter  upon  the  task  of  setting  out  their 
philosophy,  which  is  perhaps  that  common  to  all  primitive  peoples,  to  all  clan 
societies” (1959: 38).
What is one to think of Bantu Philosophy? Mbiti states that Tempels's main 
contribution is “more in terms of sympathy and change of attitude than perhaps in the 
actual  content  of  his  book”  (1970:14).  At  any rate,  Mbiti  has  doubts  about  the 
dynamic conception of Bantu ontology (1971:132). O. p'Bitek attacks Tempels for 
positing a possible generalization of Bantu ontology: “Tempels invites us to accept 
this thought-system, not only as Bantu, but as African. Can serious . . . scholars 
concerned with a correct appraisal and analysis of African beliefs and philosophy 
afford this kind of generalisation?” (1973:59). A Zairian philosopher specifies the 
criticism in a more satisfactory way:
In effect, Tempels's method is simply one of sympathy (Ein fühlung) and communion with Luba 
Shaba behavior, a method of rapid and superficial comparison, and premature generalization. If it is 
clear  that  sympathy  can  allow  a  hypothesis,  that  cannot  mean  that  the  latter  is  founded. 
(Tshiamalenga, 1981:179)
Tshiamalenga  then  focuses  on  three  points.  First,  one  cannot  conclude  that 
because the Luba Tempels studied pay a great deal of attention to the reality of force, 
that force is being. Second, an ontology cannot be constituted on the basis of its 
external signs. More important, the identification of the Bantu notion of force with 
the  Western  notion  of  being  does  not  seem to  make  sense.  (In  effect,  in  Bantu 
tradition the concept of force should be understood and defined in its relationships 
with  other  concepts,  while  in  the  West,  being  is  a  notion  transcending  all 
determinations  and  opposing  nothingness.)  Third,  the  equivalence  established 
between force and being should be considered as a simulacrum since it is unthinkable 
without  the  Western  conceptual  instrumentarium  Tempels  used  (Tshiamalenga, 
1981:179; see also Boelaert, 1946; Sousberghe, 1951). Tshiamalenga concludes that 
Tempels  constructed  a  philosophy  but  did  not  reconstruct  Bantu  philosophy 
(1981:179)
Perhaps one should also evaluate Tempels's enterprise within the context of an era 
in which Lévy-Bruhl's dogmas were congruent with the colonizing objectives as well 
as with the Christian mission expressed in an evolutionary grid (see Pirotte, 1973; 
Lyons, 1975)- Yet how should we interpret Tempels's own judgment about his book? 
He unpretentiously writes, at the beginning of his chapter on ontology, that “the 
present study, after all, claims to be no more than an hypothesis, a first attempt at the 
systematic development of what Bantu philosophy is” (1959:40). The debate about 
this “philosophy” that has since developed, and which is regularly repeated, appears 
to me unduly intellectual. Tempels's work is certainly ambiguous (see also Hebga, 
1982). It is not, however, worth the extreme responses that it sometimes provokes. 
Surely one could reproach Tempels for confusing the vulgar meaning 
153


--- PAGE 154 ---
of philosophy with its technical definition, but by returning insistently and incessantly 
to  this  weakness,  as  though,  philosophically,  it  constitutes  a  mortal  sin,  African 
philosophers obstruct more useful developments. Even though some of Tempels's 
disciples continue to use his controversial concept of being-force, they generally 
bring in stimulating African visions and conceptions (e.g., Kagame, 1956; Lufuluabo, 
1962; Mujynya, 1972). Yet after Aimé Césaire (1972-), one could also infer the 
political complicity continued in the book and better see its relationship to colonial 
ideology  (see  EboussiBoulaga,  1968).  Yet  without  doubt,  Bantu  Philosophy 
paradoxically opened some holes in the monolithic wall of colonial ideology,  as 
Alioune Diop noted in his foreword (1965). Of course, one is perfectly entitled to 
question  the  sociohistorical  significance  of  the  book,  and  to  fear,  with  Eboussi-
Boulaga, that Tempels's thesis of the evolution of Bantu thought simply means the 
reduction of Bantu temporality to a fixed past (Eboussi-Boulaga, 1968:5-40).
I suggest that the truth of Bantu Philosophy resides precisely in the tension of 
these contradictions. It is probable that the scholarly works of A. Smet, who has 
devoted years to establishing a more complete image of Tempels and his thought, will 
emphasize most clearly the fuzziness of a thought born of cross-breeding between 
ethnological curiosity, evangelical ambiguities, and colonial purpose. We should thus 
situate the book in the spiritual evolution of its author. While attempting to “civilize,” 
Tempels found his moment of truth in an encounter with people of whom he thought 
himself the master. He thus became a student of those he was supposed to teach and 
sought to comprehend their version of the truth. During this encounter, there was a 
discrete moment of revelation, which radically complicated the convictions of the 
civilizer.  The  adventure  ended  in  the  setting  up  of  a  sort  of  syncretic  Christian 
community,  the  jamaa “family”  (Smet,  1977c).  Tempels describes  its  spirit  in  a 
curious book (1962). Celebrating the themes of life, love, and fertility, the movement 
gained  ground  in  Central  Africa  before  being  excommunicated  by  the  Catholic 
hierarchy for unorthodoxy (DeCraemer, 1977; Mataczynski, 1984).
Had Tempels chosen for his essay a title without the term “philosophy” in it, and 
had he simply organized his ethnographic data on Luba and commented upon them, 
his book would perhaps have been less provocative. At least it could have offered a 
representation within regional limits, in the manner of Marcel Griaule's Conversations 
with Ogotemmêli ([1948] 1965). Praising Tempels's insights, Griaule  wrote what 
should have been the preface to the French version of Bantu Philosophy. It was 
published in Prisence Africaine (1949, no. 7). In this brief text, Griaule established 
links between Bantu ontology and conceptions of the Dogons. In the preface to Con-
versations, he makes explicit their proximity:
Ten years ago [G. Dieterlen's Les Ames des Dogon (1941), S. de Ganay's Les Devises (1941) and 
my own Les Masques (1938)] had already drawn attention to new facts concerning the “vital force” 
. . . They have shown the 
154


--- PAGE 155 ---
primary importance of the notion of the person and his relations with society, with the universe, and 
with the divine. Thus Dogon ontology has opened new vistas for ethnologists . . . More recently . . . 
the Rev. Fr. Tempels presented an analysis of conception of this kind, and raised the question of 
whether “Bantu thought should not be regarded as a system of philosophy.” (Griaule, 1965:1-2)
Griaule relied totally on an atypical informant-“ Ogotemmêli, of Lower Ogol, a 
hunter  who  had  lost  his  sight  by  an  accident”  and  who  was  “endowed  with 
exceptional intelligence and wisdom.” In thirty-three days, Ogotemmêli introduced 
him to the profound knowledge of Dogon belief and tradition.
Griaule's  essay  is  organized  around  the  informant's  interwoven  monologues. 
From creation to the origin of social organizations, the recitation follows two threads: 
a mythical decoding of the universe in its being and a symbolic interpretation of the 
foundation of history, culture, and society. The latter, says Griaule, defines “a world 
system,  the  knowledge  of  which  will  revolutionize  all  accepted  ideas  about  the 
mentality  of  Africans  and  of  primitive  peoples  in  general”  (1965:2).  The 
anthropological establishment decided that Griaule was lying. The conversations were 
a mystification: Dogons, as primitives, could not possibly conceive such a complex 
structuring  of  a  knowledge  which,  through  myths  and  rites,  unites,  orders,  and 
explains  astronomical  systems,  correspondences  of  worlds,  calendrical  tables, 
classifications of beings, and social transformations. Moreover, Griaule's book could 
not be really accepted: it claims to be a simple report of Ogotommêli's teaching and 
does not obey the sacred canons of social anthropology. As to the complexity of the 
“metaphysical”  dimension  of  Ogotemmêli's  recitation,  Luc  de  Heusch,  a  former 
disciple of Griaule, has recently responded forcefully to those who could not believe 
that “primitives” were able to manipulate intellectually abstract symbols.
Many of Griaule's detractors have questioned the interest of the Dogon's intellectual speculations, 
which  seemed  to  them  to  be  floating  in  a  sociological  void.  As  if  lineage,  family,  existed 
independently of the system of representations which they arrived at in order to explain existence, 
as if empirical social reality could be analytically disassociated from the symbolic. It is trivial to 
object that the thought of the Dogon `doctors' is not the same as that of ignorant men. In 1948 
Griaule already foresaw this argument and answered it forcefully: “One would not undertake to 
charge the Christian dogma of the transubstantiation with esotericism on the pretext that the man in 
the street does not know the word and has only glimmerings of the thing itself.” . . . Who would 
dare deny that Christianity . . . has, from its formation and throughout the centuries, established the 
ultimate reference point of our own social system, beyond the various modes of production which 
have marked its development. (Heusch, 1984:159)
At  any  rate,  Conversations  with  Ogotemmêli  indicates  the  far-reaching  im-
portance of myth in an African setting. The myth is a text that can break
155


--- PAGE 156 ---
down into pieces and reveal human experience and social order. We have known this 
since Durkheim and Mauss. But it is Lévi-Strauss who has definitely given force to 
this theory and has thus invalidated the method and conclusions of a great number of 
inferior works, which in the 1950s were still describing “primitive philosophies” (see 
bibliographies  in  Cahiers  des  religions  africaines,  1975,  no.  9:  17-18),  or 
“ethnophilosophies,”  as  they were  then  called  (see  Smet,  1980:i6i).  Holas's  and 
Zahan's sound studies on African spirituality and cosmology are exceptions.
It was in mainstream anthropology that an original reevaluation of “primitive 
philosophies,” took place. The publication in 1954 by D. Forde of a collection of 
essays on the African world concept was a major event. It brings together some of the 
most imaginative and perceptive students of Africa: M. Douglas, G. Wagner, M. 
Griaule, G. Dieterlen, K. Little, J. J. Maquet, K. A. Busia, and P Mercier, all of whom 
explore “the significance of cosmological ideas as expressions of moral values in 
relation to the material conditions of life and the total social order” and, specifically, 
“show this intricate interdependence between a traditional pattern of livelihood, an 
accepted configuration of social relations, and dogmas concerning the nature of the 
world and the place of men within it” (Forde, 1976:x). It has thus become possible to 
consider myths and rites as guides to comprehending symbolic dimensions as well as 
mirrors of systems of thought. Publications in this vein include Fortes's Oedipus and 
Job in West African Religion (19 5 9), Fortes and Dieterlen's African Systems o f 
Thought (1965), Middleton's Lugbara Religion: Ritual and Authority Among an East 
African People (ig6o), de Heusch's Le Symbolisme de l'inceste royal  en Afrique 
(1958), Holas's L'Image du monde Bete (1968), and Turner's magna opera (1975, 
1981).
Within this new intellectual atmosphere, Leach's statement on the pertinence of 
myth as sociocultural code makes great sense:
All stories which occur in the Bible are myths for the devout Christian, whether they correspond to 
historical fact or not. All human societies have myths in this sense, and normally the myths to which 
the greatest importance is attached are those which are the least probable. (Leach, i98o:r)
The most prudent (also the most trivial) generalization about African systems of 
thought might be that myth and society are autonomous but respond to one another. 
More exactly, the myth signifies human experience to the point that reality loses its 
meaning without it. It is, for example, a set of myths which gives the Lugbara of the 
Nile-Congo  the  history  of  the  shifting  connections  between  the  community,  its 
extension, and descendance (Middleton, 1980:47-6i). Tiv mythology, on the other 
hand, fuses with genealogy, defining the overall lineage of human brotherhood and 
presenting itself as a cosmic order (Bohannan, 1980:315-329). In the Dogon culture 
also, primary myths express linkages between social organization and the cosmic 
universe (Heusch, 1985:126-60). Virtually all Dogon cultural signs 
156


--- PAGE 157 ---
and social features are related to the egg o f the world with its seven vibrations and 
spiral motion (Griaule and Dieterlen, 1976:83-110).
Yet myth, despite its paradoxical forms and sometimes irrational contradictory 
versions, does not express only the mechanics of a discrete rationality giving an 
account  of  analogies,  dependences,  overlapping  or  antinomic  virtues  within  the 
natural, social and cosmic orders. It is not only a collective memory for a community 
which often relies on griots and other specialists in narrating and interpreting its past. 
One  cannot  consider  it merely a  complicated  “table  of  knowledge,”  maintaining 
valuable  memories,  important  discoveries,  and  significant  deeds  and  their 
interpretations, all handed down by ancestors. If one can look into an African myth or 
ritual and recognize in it, as in the case of Dogon myth (Heusch, 1985; Griaule, 1965; 
Dieterlen, 1941), a powerful and amazing organization of classifications, filiations, 
and their transformations and representations, it would be wrong to limit the meaning 
of the myth to this function. A careful student can always go beyond the formal 
systems  and  unveil  other  symbolic  networks,  of  which  the  members  of  the 
community might  be  absolutely unaware  (see  e.g.,  Turner,  ig6g;  Heusch,  1982). 
Myths  are autonomous  bodies,  as L. de Heusch put it in his conclusion to The 
Drunken King:
They are not the products of labor, and they defy all attempts at appropriation, whether private or 
collective. No copyright attaches to their telling, retelling, and transformation. They even elude the 
ideological function that the kings invariably try to force on them. They are borne along by the 
slack tides of history, but they dance with the rays of the sun and laugh with the rain, knowing no 
other master than themselves. (Heusch 1982:247)
The history of this new type of scholarship that searches for deep structures is the 
history  of  African  anthropology  in  its  most  inspiring  expressions  and  heresies. 
Tempels felt it necessary to leave the mainstream of the primitivist tradition. With his 
Bantu  Philosophy  he  wished  to  counterbalance  constructions  on  “primitive 
philosophies.” Griaule and his fellow workers have followed a similar path. “Dogon 
ontology” in its elaborate expression became for them a thesis: Dogons “were thought 
to present one of the best examples of primitive savagery” (Griaule, 1965: 1). Yet one 
of them, Ogotemmêli, reveals “to the European world a cosmogony as such as that of 
Hesiod . . . and a metaphysic that has the advantage of being expressed in a thousand 
rites and actions in the life of a multitude of living people” (Griaule, 1965:3). Again 
one may point to Einfiihlung. It is interesting to note that D. Forde refers to the 
impact of this orientation in constructing a framework for his collection of texts on 
cosmological ideas: Tempels's book is “an arresting essay on the pervasive effects of 
belief in the permeation of nature by dynamic spiritual forces” and, on the other hand, 
field  research  “among  some  peoples  of  the  Western  Sudan,  such  as  the  Dogon, 
Bambara,  and  Akan”  witnesses  to  “unsuspected  complexity  and  elaboration  of 
cosmological ideas”(1976:ix-x).
157


--- PAGE 158 ---
I am personally convinced that the most imaginative works that reveal to us what 
are now called African systems of thought, such as those of Dieterlen, de Heusch, and 
Turner, can be fundamentally understood through their journey into Ein fühlung. In 
the case of African scholars, it often becomes a case, as with Kagame correcting 
Tempels, of sympathy towards oneself and one's culture.
Kagame and the Ethnophilosophical School
I should like to reveal this astounding truth to 
you: not only am I a rational creature, not
only does a mind paradoxically inhabit this 
human body, but I come from a distant
planet.
P. BOULLE, Planet of the Apes, p. 84.
Kagame explicitly wants to check the validity of Tempels's theory (1956: 8) and 
to  correct  generalizations  and  intellectual  weaknesses.  A philosopher,  but  also  a 
knowledgeable  historian,  anthropologist,  linguist,  and  theologian  (see  Mudimbe, 
1982c; Ntezimana and Haberland, 1984), Alexis Kagame received his doctorate in 
philosophy in 1955 from the Gregorian University in Rome. Member of the Belgian 
Academy of Overseas Sciences since 1950, university professor, author of some one 
hundred works, Kagame was from the 1950s onwards one of the most respected and 
also  controversial  international  symbols  of  the  African  intelligentsia.  He  has 
profoundly marked the field of African philosophy with two monumental books. His 
first treatise, La Philosophie Bantu-Rwandaise de Pêtre (1956), deals with the Banya-
rwanda, a community well-defined by its history, language, and culture. The second, 
La Philosophie Bantu comparée (1976) expands this research to the whole Bantu 
area.  Both  works  rely heavily on  linguistic  analyses  of  Bantu  languages.  These 
languages are a subgroup of a larger group, Benue-Congo, which also comprises the 
Bantoid  non-Bantu  languages  (Nigeria,  Cameroon)  and  Grassfields  Bantu 
(Cameroon,  partially in  Nigeria).  Languages  of  the  Bantu  family are  spoken  in 
Cameroon, partially in Central African Republic, Kenya and Uganda; completely or 
predominantly  in  Gabon,  Equatorial  Guinea,  Congo,  Cabinda,  Zaire,  Angola, 
Rwanda, Burundi, Tanzania, Comores, Zambia, Malawi, Mozambique, Swaziland, 
Lesotho, Botswana, Zimbabwe, South Africa, and Namibia.
For Kagame, to speak of a Bantu philosophy implies above all a consideration of 
two conditions for its possibility, namely, the linguistic coherence of Bantu languages, 
which  uniformly  present  language  class  structures,  and  the  usefulness  of  a 
philosophical method  inherited from the West (Kagame, 1971:591). According to 
Kagame, the merit of Tempels's work lies in his
158


--- PAGE 159 ---
making the method available. However, Bantu Philosophy should be revised because 
Tempels  was  not  a  scholar.  He  did  not  pay  attention  to  Bantu  languages,  and 
moreover,  his  synthesis,  based  strictly on  his  experience  within  the  Luba-Shaba 
community,  does  not  offer  a  comprehensive  understanding  of  Bantu  cultures 
(Kagame, 1971:592).
Nevertheless, Kagame's formal schema is much the same as Tempels's. It unfolds 
into the classic chapters of scholastics. What is Kagame's method of analysis and 
interpretation? He recommends a systematic search for philosophical elements within 
a  specific  language,  carefully described,  and  then  an  extension  of  the  search  to 
include all the Bantu areas and a comparison of philosophical elements among them 
(Kagame, 1976:7).
[My method is:] To look for the elements of a Bantu philosophy first within a specific language; to 
affirm  nothing that  is  not  based  in  an  indisputable  cultural  proof,  transcribed  in  the  original 
language itself and translated literally into the language accessible to the foreign reader. Once in 
possession of these basic elements, to undertake the study on the scale of the Bantu area, to verify 
how each zone agrees with or differs with the results initially determined. (Kagame, 1971:592)  
The method can be justified. It is quite adequate and perfectly convincing as a 
preliminary step towards philosophizing. But the difficulty lies in Kagame's claim 
that the discovery, through an Aristotelian grid, of hitherto unknown elements of 
Bantu cultures, is a discovery of a collective, deep, implicit philosophy: “A collective 
system of profound thought, lived rather than deliberated upon, [of which one can] 
clearly see the superiority over the solitary labor of a licensed thinker amid a literate 
civilization” (1976:171)According to Kagame, this silent philosophy can be described 
by means  of  a  rigorous application  of  five  major  scholastic  grids:  formal  logic, 
ontology, theodicy, cosmology, and ethics (1956; 1971).
Formal logic. This is concerned with the notions of idea as it is expressed in a 
term, of judgement as signified by a proposition, and of reasoning as eXercised in a 
syllogism. Are these notions and relations produced in African “deep” philosophy? 
Kagame answers yes, noting that:
(a) Bantu distinguish the concrete from the abstract. Concerning the latter, a 
precondition  for  philosophizing,  they  separate  the  abstract  of  accidentality 
(expressing entities which do not exist independently in nature, such as bu-gabo 
[virility,  courage,  force])  from  the  abstract  of  substantiality  (expressing  entities 
existing independently in nature, such as bu-muntu [humanity]).
(b) The Bantu proposition is organized in agreement with two principles. The 
enunciation  of  actors'  names  is  always  made  at  the  outset  of  the  discourse.  A 
classificatory relative, that is, a linguistic classifier incorporated into substantives, 
corresponds  to names  of each  actor and allows a systematic  distinction  between 
subjects and complements in the discourse.
(c) The reasoning is elliptic. It may use a premise (major) but more
159


--- PAGE 160 ---
generally it  states  a general  observation  or  even  a proverb  directly leading  to  a 
conclusion.
Bantu Criteriology and Ontology. If in general terms Bantu criteriology does not 
seem to be particular, nor original when compared to other “analogous” cultures 
(Kagame, 1971:598), the ontology or general metaphysics is well-educated, thanks to 
linguistic systems of classes.
When one wishes to reach the essential thinking of the Bantu one considers any sample representing 
the terms belonging to any class. This term represents an idea, designates an object; for instance a 
shepherd, a child, a robber, etc.; all of these ideas thus represented lead to a unifying notion which 
is a human being. Similarly: a hoe, a spear, a knife, etc.; each one of these objects corresponds to 
the already unifying notion of instrument, surely, but if one goes further, the final unifying notion, 
beyond which there are no more, is the notion of thing. (Kagame, 19711:598-99)
There  are  ten  classes  in  Kinyarwanda.  But  Kagame,  and  after  him  Mulago 
(1965:152-53) and Mujynya (1972:13-14), emphasize that all the categories can be 
reduced  to  four  basic  concepts  (see  also  Jahn,  ig6i:ioo):  (a)  Muntu  =  being  of 
intelligence, corresponds to the Aristotelian notion of substance; (b) Kintu = being 
without  intelligence  or  thing;  (c)  Hantu  expresses  the  time  and  place  (presents 
variants such as Pa- in the eastern Bantu languages, Va- in the west and Go- + to/ro in 
the  south); (d) Kuntu indicates  the modality and thus centralizes all the  notions 
related to modifications of the being in itself (quantity or quality) or vis-à-vis other 
beings (relation, position, disposition, possession, action, passion). As such kuntu 
corresponds to seven different Aristotelian categories.
Bantu  ontology  in  its  reality  and  significance  expresses  itself  through  the 
complementarity and connections existing between these four categories, all of them 
created from the same root, ntu, which refers to being but also, simultaneously, to the 
idea of force. Kagame insists that the Bantu equivalent of to be is strictly and only a 
copula. It does not express the notion of existence and therefore cannot translate the 
Cartesian cogito. It is by enunciating muntu, kintu, etc., that I am signifying an 
essence or something in which the notion of existence is not necessarily present 
(1971:602).
When essence (ntu) is perfected by the degree of existing, it becomes part of the existing. The 
existing cannot be used as a synonym of being there, since in Bantu languages, the verb to be 
cannot signify to exist. The' opposite of the existing is nothing. In analyzing the cultural elements, 
one must conclude that the nothing exists and it is the entity which is at the basis of the multiple. 
One  being  is  distinct  from  another,  because  there  is  the  nothing  between  them.  (Kagame, 
1971:602-603)
Mulago specifies the basic notion of ntu. It cannot simply be translated by being. 
Ntu and being are not coextensive insofar as the ntu categories only
160


--- PAGE 161 ---
subsume created beings and not the original source of ntu, that is God: Imana in 
Kinyarwanda  and  Kirundi,  Nyamuzinda  in  Mashi  (Mulago,  1965:153;  Kagame, 
1956:109-10).  Ntu  is  the  fundamental  and  referential  basic  being-force  which 
dynamically  manifests  itself  in  all  existing  beings,  differentiating  them  but  also 
linking them in an ontological hierarchy:
The being is fundamentally one and all the existing beings are ontologically attached together. 
Above, transcendant, is God, Nyamuxinda, the beginning and end of all being; Imana, source of all 
life, of all happiness. Between God and humans are intermediaries, all the ascendants, the ancestors, 
the dead members of the family and the old national heroes, all the armies of disencarnated souls. 
Below humans are all the other beings, who, basically, are only means placed at human's disposition 
to develop her or his ntu, being, life. (Mulago, 1965:155)
In sum, the ntu is somehow a sign of a universal similitude. Its presence in beings 
brings them to life and attests to both their individual value and to the measure of 
their  integration  in  the  dialectic  of  vital  energy.  Ntu  is  both  a  uniting  and  a 
differentiating vital norm which explains the powers of vital inequality in terms of 
difference between beings. It is a sign that God, father of all beings-ishe w âbantu n 
ébintu  (Mulago,  1965:153)-has  put  a  stamp  on  the  universe,  thus  making  it 
transparent in a hierarchy of sympathy. Upwards, one would read the vitality that, 
from minerals through vegetables, animals, and humans, links stones to the departed 
and God. Downwards, it is a genealogical filiation of forms of beings, engendering or 
relating to one another, all of them witnessing to the original source that made them 
possible.  One  recalls  Foucault's  comment  upon  the  prose  of  the  world  in  the 
preclassical age of the West:
Every resemblance receives a signature; but this signature is no more than an intermediate form of 
the same resemblance. As a result, the totality of these marks, sliding over the great circle of 
similitudes, forms a second circle which would be an exact duplication of the first, point by point, 
were it not for that tiny degree of displacement which causes the sign of sympathy to reside in an 
analogy, that of analogy in emulation, that of emulation in convenience, which in turn requires the 
mark of sympathy for its recognition. (1973:29)
We are dealing with an African “implicit philosophy,” which, says Lufuluabo, 
commenting  upon  the  Luba  notion  of  being,  is  essentially dynamic because  the 
subject lives in accordance to a cosmic dynamism (1964:22). E. N. C. Mujynya, a 
disciple of both Tempels and Kagame, proposes the significance of this ontological 
dynamism in four principles (197Z:21-22): (a) each element in the universe that is 
each created ntu is a force and an active force; (b) everything being force, each ntu is 
thus always part of a multitude of other forces, and all of them influence each other; 
(c) every ntu can always, under the influence of another ntu, increase or decrease in 
its being; and (d) because each created being can weaken inferior beings or
161


--- PAGE 162 ---
can be weakened by superior beings, each ntu is always and simultaneously an active 
and fragile force. From these principles, Mujynya deduces two corollaries: first, only 
one who is ontologically superior can diminish the vital force of an inferior being; 
second,  whatever  action  is  decided  or  taken  by  a  being  apropos  another  being 
modifies  the  latter  by  increasing  or  decreasing  his,  her,  or  its  vital  force. 
Consequently,  one  understands  why  Mulago  refers  to  Bachelard's  evaluation  of 
Tempels's Bantu Philosophy and writes that it would be better to speak of Bantu 
metadynamics rather than metaphysics (Mulago, 1965:155-56).
Theodicy and Cosmology. Although God is the origin and meaning of ntu, he is 
beyond it to the point that, according to Kagame and Mulago, one cannot say that 
God is an essence (Kagame, 1968:215; 1971:603; Mulago, 1965:152). God is not a 
ntu but a causal and eternal being, who in Kinyarwanda is called the Initial One 
(lya-Kare)  or  the  Preexisting  one  (lya-mbere),  in  Kirundi  the  efficient  Origin 
(Rugira), and in Mashi the Creator (Lulema).
It is therefore improper, in the eyes of `Bantu' culture to call God the Supreme Being, since He does 
not belong to the category of beings and on the other hand the qualifier Supreme places him above 
beings in the same line of ntu. We must call Him the Preexisting One, an attribute that fits the 
Existing Eternal. (Kagame, :1971:603)
Referring  to  his  native  Luba  language  and  carefully  reviewing  Kagame's 
documentation, Tshiamalenga strongly opposes this interpretation. God is essence. He 
is ntu, even a muntu; and, in the same vein, the human being is, within the dialectic of 
vital forces, a thing, a kintu. In effect, Tshiamalenga believes that Kagame and his 
followers,  namely,  Mulago  and  Mujynya,  are  wrong  because  they  forget  that 
prefixing classifiers are formal and arbitrary, and are used to classify and distinguish 
the status of substantives, not that of ontological entities (Tshiamalenga, 1973).
As  to  Bantu  cosmology,  according  to  Kagame,  it  is  based  on  an  implicit 
metaphysic principle: every body, every extension has a limit; differently stated, an 
unlimited extension is impossible (Kagame, 1971:606). It follows that the Bantu 
Weltanschauung distinguishes three circular and communicating worlds: the earth, 
center of the universe because it is the home of muntu, master of all existing ntu; 
above, beyond the sky, the circle of life in which God dwells; and under our earth the 
world in which the departed dwell (see also, e.g., Van Caeneghem, 1956; Mbiti, 1971; 
Bamuinikile, 1971).
Rational Psychology and Ethics. In terms of psychology, the reference here is the 
human being as distinct from the animal. Both are living beings, have senses and the 
capacity of motion. Both are marked by similar patterns in terms of birth and death. It 
is, however, in their passing away that a major difference can be observed. The 
animal's vital force or shadow completely disappears. In the case of a human being, 
although shadow usually vanishes,
162


--- PAGE 163 ---
the  principle  of  intelligence  which  characterizes  him  as  human  being  remains, 
becomes the muzimu (modimo, motimo, etc.), and joins the subterranean universe. 
On the other hand, as long as they are alive, animals and human beings are viewed 
analogically as having two senses (hearing and sight) in common rather than the five 
senses  attributed  by  classical  Western  philosophy.  The  other  three  senses  are 
obviously  experienced,  but  according  to  Kagame,  the  knowledge  they  bring  is 
integrated into the sense of hearing (Kagame, 1956:186).
In terms of ethics, Bantu philosophy can be reduced to two essential principles.
(a) The first rule of action and utilization is based on the internal finality of the 
human being. Kagame notes that if one looks at the vital principle of a human being, 
one perceives that it is a two-pointed arrow: at one end is the faculty of knowing 
(intelligence) and at the other that of loving (will). Classical philosophy has put the 
emphasis on the first: we have “to know beings surrounding us in order to discern 
what is good and what is not good for us. We have to love who and what is good and 
avoid what is bad for us. At a second step we have to know and love the Preexisting 
One who made possible these beings so we can know and love them” (Kagame, 
1971:608).  Bantu  philosophy,  on  the  contrary,  would  emphasize  the  other  point: 
loving, and thus procreating, perpetuating the lineage and the community of human 
beings. By doing this it affirms a paradigm: the vital force is immortal.
(b) The second rule is related to the preceding one. The Bantu community defines 
itself  through  blood  filiation.  The  community stands  and  understands  itself  as  a 
natural and social body and infers from the authority of its being and its history the 
laws and mechanisms for territorial occupation, political insîitutions, customs, and 
rites.  The  most  striking  and  important  aspect  is  that  the  Bantu  community  has 
developed two radically opposed but complementary types of laws. First, there are 
juridical laws that the society controls through its judges and lawyers. They do not 
bind individual consciences, and whoever can escape them is considered intelligent. 
Second, there are taboo-laws, principally of a religious nature: these are generally 
negative and clearly specify what should be avoided. They contain in themselves an 
immanent power of sanction, and God is the sole judge. Therefore, whatever the 
transgression, no human being-not even chief, priest, or king-can sanction or forgive 
the taboo-sin. The problem and its resolution lie between the transgressor and God, 
and also between his or her still existing family on earth and the departed ancestors. .
Kagame's views may seem controversial. They are, however, deductions of a 
truly impressive and well grounded linguistic analysis. No one can seriously question 
his  talent  in  handling,  for  example,  grammatical  overviews  of  Bantu  languages. 
Nevertheless, many points are questionable, such as the geographical extension and 
the meaning of the category hantu, or the contiguity he establishes between terms and 
concepts, as if the relationships existing between signifiers and signifieds were not 
arbitrary. At any rate, with
163


--- PAGE 164 ---
Kagame's work, Bantu philosophy escapes Tempels's unsupported generalizations: it 
is now founded on a linguistic order. A second feature marks the rupture between 
Tempels and Kagame. Tempels spoke of Bantu philosophy as an intellectual and 
dynamic  system  which,  although  implicit,  exists  as  an  organized  and  rational 
construction awaiting a competent reader or translator. Kagame is more prudent. He 
claims that every language and culture is sustained by a deep and discrete order. Yet 
he  insists  that  his  work  unveils  not  a  systematic  philosophy  but  an  intuitive 
organization justified by the presence of precise philosophical principles. Moreover, 
this  organization  is  neither  static  nor  permanent,  as  indicated  by  changes  in 
present-day  mentalities  (1956:27).  Despite  the  evidence  of  its  cultural  roots 
(1976:117, 225), it should not be reduced to an absolute alterity. The third distinction 
is that for Kagame it would be nonsense to proclaim an absolute otherness since such 
important notions as idea, reasoning, and proposition cannot be thought of as offering 
a Bantu particularity.  In the same vein, formal logic as such does not present a 
definite  linguistic  character  (1956:38-40),  and  insofar  as  criteriology  and  the 
properties of intelligence are concerned, the problems of the former are co-naturels to 
all  human  beings  (1976:105)  and those  of the  latter  depend  on philosophy as a 
universal  discipline  (1976:241)There  is  thus  a  clear  universalist  dimension  in 
Kagame's philosophy. The fourth and last major point distinguishing Kagame from 
Tempels  concerns  Bantu  philosophy  as  a  collectively  assumed  system.  For  the 
Belgian Franciscan, this philosophy is a silent domain which has been functioning for 
centuries, perhaps in a sort of “frozen dynamism.” Kagame, on the contrary, names 
the founding thinkers of a system that for him is in its being a formulation of a 
cultural experience and its historical transformations (1976:193, 305). These thinkers 
are the historical fathers of the Bantu cultures (1976:193, 238), the creators of our 
languages (1976:83) and the first Bantu humans (1976:76).
These  four  differences  about  Bantu  philosophy-the  method  for  revealing  it, 
whether Bantu philosophy is a systematic or an intuitive philosophy, whether it is a 
strictly regional  or  a  universalist-oriented  system, and  whether  it  is  a  collective 
philosophy with or without authors-indicate a clear discontinuity from Tempels to 
Kagame. Yet elements of continuity exist in both the fluctuation that these differences 
imply and in the objectives of Bantu philosophy itself. For Tempels, as well as for 
Kagame  and his followers,  the affirmation and promotion of African  philosophy 
meant  a claim to  an original  alterity.  Their  argument,  in  its demonstration,  runs 
parallel to primitivist theories on African backwardness and savagery. If there is a 
dividing line between-.the two, it is a blurred one established primarily as a signifier 
of sympathy or antipathy. Tempels exploited visible signs of Bantu behavior in the 
name  of  Christian  brotherhood.  Kagame  and  most  of  his  disciples  implicitly or 
explicitly refer to a racial duty (Kagame, 1956:8) and stress the right to demand “an 
anthropological  dignity”  and  “the  assessment  of  an  intellectual  independence” 
(N'Daw, 1966:33). Once this difference is
164


--- PAGE 165 ---
established,  one  can  note  the  link  from  Tempels  to  Kagame  and  other 
“ethnophilosophers.” It is a body of judgments stemming from their analyses and 
interpretation of African cultures and can be summed up in three propositions: (i) a 
good application of classical  philosophical grids  demonstrates beyond doubt that 
there is an African philosophy which, as a deep system, underlies and sustains African 
cultures  and  civilizations;  (2)  African  philosophy  is  fundamentally  an  ontology 
organized as a deployment of interacting but hierarchically ordered forces; (3) Human 
vital  unity  appears  to  be  the  center  of  the  endless  dialectic  of  forces  which 
collectively determine their being in relation to human existence (Eboussi-Boulaga, 
1968:23-26; Hountondji, 1977; Tshiamalenga, 1981:178).
These principles sanction the domain of ethnophilosophy, whose geography is 
characterized by two features. The first is a break with the ideology inherent in the 
anthropologist's techniques of describing African Weltanschauungen. The second is a 
paradoxical claim according to which a satisfactory Western methodological grid is a 
requirement for reading and revealing a deep philosophy through an analysis and an 
interpretation of linguistic structures or anthropological patterns. So far, it has been 
possible to distinguish two principal orientations within this field: the first interro-
gates and explores  the  so-called  silent  philosophy (e.g., A. Makarakiza,  1959; E 
Ablegmagnon, ig6o; W. Abraham, 1966; Lufuluabo, 1962, 1964b; N'Daw, 1966; J. C. 
Bahoken,  1967;  J.  Jahn,  ig6i;  Mujynya,  1972;  Onyewueni,  1982).  The  second 
orientation studies this philosophy with respect to the value of those elements which 
could be used for the Africanization of Christianity (e.g., Gravrand, 1962; Taylor, 
1963; Mulago, 1965; Lufuluabo, 1964a, 1966; Nothomb, 1965; Mubengayi, 1966; 
Mpongo, 1968). J. Mbiti's methodology in New Testament Eschatology in an African 
Background (1971) is a good example of this second orientation. In order to look “at 
the encounter between Christianity and African traditional concepts” in the Akamba 
setting (1971:1), he distinguishes three steps: first, the presentation and semantic 
analysis of Akamba concepts, which can be considered to be related to eschatology 
(e.g., fire, treasure, pain, tears, heaven); second, the presentation and theological 
interpretation of Christian eschatological concepts; and third, the establishing of a 
table of conceptual correspondences and differences, and from it deriving norms for 
“acclimatizing” Christianity.
One might also add a third ethnophilosophical trend. It comprises a variety of 
racially and culturally oriented enterprises, some of which arose independently of the 
thesis of an African ontology. Without any doubt they participate in the ideological 
climate of negritude and intellectual policies for otherness. On the other hand, they fit 
in the space occupied by ethnophilosophical projects with which they have been 
interacting strongly, particularly since the 195os. These enterprises can be grouped 
under three entries: (a) the approach to traditional “humanisms” which in its standard 
forms leads to esoteric teachings (e.g., Ba and Cardaire, 1957; Ba and
165


--- PAGE 166 ---
Dieterlen, ig6i; Fu-Kiau, ig6g; Fourche and Morlighem, 1973: Zahan, 1979) and, 
sometimes, to a basic interpretation of the tradition from within (e.g., Ba, 1972-, 
1976); (b) the critical valorization of traditional elements as weapons for a radical 
criticism (e.g., Kalanda, 1967) and a reflection on present-day African modernity and 
its contradictions (e.g., Hama, 1972b; Dia, 1975; 1977-1981); (c) an exploitation of 
the tradition as a repository of signs and meanings of African authenticity. In its 
political application it has led, at least in one case, to a notorious mystification, the 
Zairian policy of “authenticity” and its dubious philosophical foundations (see, e.g., 
Kangafu, 1973; Mbuze, 1974, 1977).
In its conscious and erudite expressions, the search for an African authenticity 
raises the most fundamental questions of black identity. Césaire, for example, refers 
to the order of authenticity in his Discourse on Colonialism (1977.), as well as in his 
explanations  for  leaving  the  French  Communist  Party  (Césaire,  1956).  A.  Diop 
warmly acclaims Tempels's book as a tool for the possible emergence of authenticity. 
Recently,  in  a  polemic  article  against  African  academic  philosophy,  Hebga  has 
emphasized the demands of authenticity as imperative for cultural uniqueness (19 8 
2:3 8-3 9). Finally, it is on this very notion of authenticity that Eboussi-Boulaga 
established  his  La  Crise  du  Muntu:  Authenticité  africaine  et  philosophie  (1977), 
unfolding a problem of origin: what is an African and how does one speak of him or 
her and for what purpose? Where and how can one gain the knowledge of his or her 
being? How does one define this very being, and to what authority does one turn for 
possible answers? It is obvious that the significance of these questions has nothing to 
do  with  ethnophilosophy,  nor  with  a  cheap,  easy  exploitation  of  the  notion  of 
authenticity in the sense in which the Zairian government used it in the early 1970s. 
In effect, these questions originate elsewhere. They are ones I consider marked by the 
demands of a critical philosophy.
Aspects of African Philosophy
You're right, Jinn. That's what I think . . . 
Rational men? Men endowed with a mind? 
Men inspired by intelligence? No, that's not 
possible.
P BOULLE, Planet o f the Apes.
What are the major aspects of present-day African philosophy? Though we are 
now beyond Tempels's revolution, his ghost is still present. Implicitly or explicitly, 
the most inspiring trends in the field still define themselves with respect to Tempels. 
An African Jesuit priest, well-read in philosophy,  has recently written  that  those 
scholars presently opposing Tempels and belitding 
166


--- PAGE 167 ---
the  work  of  his  followers  by calling  it  pejoratively ethnophilosophy are  simply 
ungrateful to someone who made possible their philosophizing (Hebga, 1982). In 
fact, this statement indicates a post-Tempels climate and a reorganization of the field, 
which  today  reveals  a  plurality  of  trends  (Sodipo,  1975;  Maurier,  1976; 
Tshiamalenga, 1981). It is possible to distinguish three main approaches in this new 
era. The first is the philosophical critique of ethnophilosophy, which springs mainly 
from an academic lecture on the conditions for the existence of a Bantu philosophy, 
given by E Crahay in 1965 at the Kinshasa Goethe Institute. With his lecture, Crahay 
immediately imposed a new orthodoxy in the field. The second is the “foundational” 
trend, which since the ig6os, deliberately and in a hypercritical way, interrogates both 
the bases and representations of social and human sciences in order to elucidate 
epistemological conditions, ideological frontiers, and procedures for the practice of 
philosophy. The third approach is that of philological studies, critical anthropology, 
and hermeneutics, which indicate avenues to new praxes on African cultures and 
languages.
A Critique of Ethnophilosophy
The philosophical critique  of ethnophilosophy is not the reverse of Tempels and 
Kagame's school. It is a policy discourse on philosophy aimed at examining methods 
and  requirements  for  practicing  philosophy  in  Africa.  As  a  trend,  it  derives  its 
conviction from its status as a discourse which is firmly linked to both the Western 
tradition of philosophy as a discipline and the academic structures which guarantee 
institutionally  accepted  philosophical  practices.  As  such,  the  critique  of 
ethnophilosophy can be understood as subsuming two main genres: on the one hand, 
a reflection on the methodological limits of Tempels and Kagame's school and, on the 
other hand (at the other pole of what ethnophilosophical exercises represent), African 
practices and works bearing on Western subjects and topics in the most classical 
tradition of philosophy.
As we have seen, until the ig6os anthropologists, European missionaries, and 
some African clergymen were the only ones proposing directions in the field of 
“African  philosophy.”  Vaguely  defined,  this  term  conveys  the  meaning  of 
Weltanschauung, and more generally, that of practical and traditional wisdom, rather 
than  that  of  a  systematically  explicit  and  critical  system  of  thought  (Smet, 
1980:97-108).  A certain  amount  of  confusion  exists  insofar  as  most  hypotheses 
reflect, as in the case of Radin's Primitive Man as a Philosopher (1927), the authority 
of ethnographic description. Some syntheses, such as those of Frobenius (1893) and 
Delafosse  (1922,  1927),  and  even  Tempels (1959),  Griaule  (1965),  and  Kagame 
(1956, 1976), draw their textual necessity from an interpretation of patterns opposing 
or integrating nature and culture in order to illuminate or negate the existence of a 
regional rationality. Another element of confusion is, despite the recantation in Les 
Carnets de Lucien Lévy-Bruhl (1949), the pervasiveness of Lévy-Bruhl's
167


--- PAGE 168 ---
thesis on prelogism. For a long time it was kept alive by anthropologists, colonialists, 
and missionaries through such notions as collective consciousness in fragmentary 
societies, peoples still experiencing the simplicity of the state of nature, childish 
Blacks incapable of managing their lives and affairs rationally, and above all, the 
civilizing mission themes and the policies of Christian conversio gentium (Lyons, 
1975:123-63; Tempels, 1959:2629; Taylor, 1963:26-27; Onyanwu, 1975:151).
Within this context, the very notion of African philosophy as used by Tempels 
and his first disciples seemed absurd from a technical viewpoint. Considered as a key 
for entrance into “native” systems and ways of life in the sense proposed by Tempels, 
it is generally accepted as useful. However, since 1945, some professionals have 
feared that it could lead to intellectual heresies, because it promotes possibilities of 
ambiguous  commentaries  on  “primitive”  rationality  (Boelaert,  1946:90). 
Furthermore,  it  clearly seems  to  connote  an  intellectual  process  of  manipulating 
African experience and traditions (Sousberghe, 1951:825).
These are some of the main questions that E Crahay addressed in his famous 
speech of March ig, 1965 to Kinshasa's intelligentsia. The lecture was eventually 
published in Diogenes under the title, “Le `Décollage' conceptuel: Conditions d'une 
philosophie  bantoue”  (1965).  A  former  student  of  classics,  philosophy,  and 
psychophysiology at the universities of Louvain, Paris, and Liège where he received a 
doctorate  in  philosophy  in  1954,  Crahay  taught  logic  and  modern  European 
philosophy in the ig6os at Lovanium University, a Catholic institution in Kinshasa. 
He  had  no  interest  in  opposing  Tempels's  double  project  of  guiding  colonizers 
towards an “African soul” and stimulating original ethnographic studies. He respected 
the project in its practicality and intent.
Considering this book for what is meant to be its principal objective, a kind of guide to the Bantu 
soul,  one  should  limit  oneself  to  reproaching  its  title  without  insisting  too  much  upon  it. 
Considering what it intended to be in addition, an incentive for systematic study in the direction 
indicated, one would be acting in bad faith if one took it to task for being incomplete, too general, 
and questionable concerning several points of detail. Through the double purpose of the book one 
cannot fail praising the active sympathy it reveals. (Crahay, 1965:61-62)
Crahay's intervention is a philsophical lesson which claims only to clarify the 
confusion surrounding the very notion of “Bantu philosophy” by evaluating Tempels's 
book and determining the conditions of possibility for a rigorous Bantu philosophy. 
He does not question the pertinence nor the usefulness of Tempels's description of a 
Bantu Weltanschauung centered on the idea of vital force, but rather studies three 
weaknesses of the enterprise: the title of the book, which is based on an intellectual 
confusion of vicu (lived) and reflex if (reflective), and of the vulgar meaning of 
philosophy and its strict sense; the confusing of these differences throughout the 
book, even when
168


--- PAGE 169 ---
Tempels  is  dealing  with  such  specific  notions  as  metaphysics,  ontology,  and 
psychology; and the vagueness of Tempels's philosophical terminology, leading the 
reader to doubt the validity of a great number of his statements (Crahay, 1965:63).
To delineate the boundaries of a proper discussion, Crahay proposes a definition 
of  philosophy.  Philosophy is  a  reflection  presenting  precise  characteristics:  it  is 
“explicit, analytical, radically critical and autocritical, systematic at least in principle 
and nevertheless open, bearing on experience, its human conditions, significations as 
well as the values that it reveals” (1965:63). In a negative way, what is implied by this 
understanding of the discipline is that there is neither an implicit philosophy, nor an 
intuitive one, nor an immediate one. Philosophical language is not a language o f 
experience but a language about experience. Given these premises, what Tempels 
provided is not, strictly speaking, a philosophy. Insofar as his language witnesses to 
and comments upon experience, it only signifies the possibility of a philosophical 
reflection and is at best a rationalization of a Weltanschauung:
A vision of the world, insofar as it expresses itself, we can say is a language o f life, language of 
experience (anchored in a certain experience), language of living and acting, poetic or not, and in 
any case filled with symbols; a vision of the world that is immediate language, not critical; and 
nothing prevents it from being rhapsodic and, up to a certain point, irrational. (Crahay, 1965:64-65)
The  problem  Tempels  and  his  disciples  pose  is  a  methodological  one:  the 
confusion in which they indulge themselves by not distinguishing between a “vision 
of the world,” its reflexive potentialities, and the philosophical practice which can 
work on them. Crahay does not hesitate to state that unless one seeks to mystify 
people there is to date no such a thing as an African philosophy:
Let us speak frankly: if we do not want to compromise the very project of philosophy in Africa, 
confusing the technical use of this term with its vulgar use, and reduce philosophy to a simple 
vision of the world, we must say that until the present there has not been a Bantu philosophy. What 
exists surely, is a cohesive and original view of the world particular to Bantus, a kernel of wisdom. 
Given  an  ensemble  of  favorable  circumstances,  it  could  have  brought  about  earlier  a  real 
philosophy. (Crahay, 1965:68)
Philosophy as an intellectual practice is different in kind from Weltanschauung and 
from ethnographic descriptions paraphrasing a tradition, its wisdom and its linguistic 
richness.
Yet  philosophy  concerns  the  experience  of  humans,  although  it  cannot  be 
assimilated to it; philosophy bears on experience, reflects it without being congruent 
with it. For the promotion of philosophy in Africa, Crahay suggests five conditions 
determining the possibility of a conceptual décollage. 
169


--- PAGE 170 ---
These are: (a) the existence of a body of African philosophers living and working in 
an intellectually stimulating cultural milieu resolutely open to the world; (b) a good 
and critical use of external philosophical “reflectors,” which through the patience of 
discipline,  would  promote  in  Africa  a  cross-cultural  thought  (as  with  Aristotle's 
system, which had been inherited and reworked by medieval Arabs before passing as 
a legacy into the hands of European scholastics); (c) a selective and flexible inventory 
of  African  values-be  they attitudes,  categories  or  symbols-which  would  possibly 
donner à penser (provoke thought) in the sense proposed by P Ricoeur's hermeneutics 
(which would allow for ventures in Africa similar to Spinoza's rebuilding of a moral 
and political philosophy based on a critical reading of the Jewish tradition); (d) a 
clear  dissociation  of  reflexive  consciousness  from mythical  consciousness  which 
would imply, and in any case, amplify major contrasts (subject versus object, I versus 
the  Other,  nature  versus  supernature,  sensible  versus  metaphysical,  etc.);  (e)  an 
examination  of  African  intellectuals'  main  temptations-choices  of  philosophical 
systems  apparently  in  accordance  with  African  urgent  needs  (as  in  the  case  of 
Marxism and a pervasive cult of alterity which, despite its respectable objectives, 
might  become  an  end  in  itself).  In  sum, Crahay's  critique  grants  philosophy its 
privilege within a tradition. One could debate the validity of the definition and thus 
question the validity of the implications offered as conditions for the possibility of a 
future Bantu philosophy (see Tshiamalenga, 1977a). The real response to Crahay's 
lesson on philosophy is to be seen in the debate it has initiated. In any case, the 
formulated  dichotomy  establishing  the  opposition  between  philosophy  and 
“unphilosophy” as a preliminary and necessary condition of philosophizing coincides 
with a historical mutation in the brief history of African philosophy (Ruch, 1974; 
Maurier,  1976;  Tshiamalenga,  1977a  and  1981;  Yai,  1977).  Three  African 
philosophers-F. EboussiBoulaga (Cameroon), M. Towa (Cameroon) and P Hountondji 
(Benin)take on the task of completing the transformation by directing the debate 
towards two main issues: how and why the very question about the possibility of an 
African philosophy can be justified. What exactly can and cannot philosophy allow?
Eboussi-Boulaga,  in  a  text  (1968)  that  did  not  please  Présence  Africaine's 
editorial  committee  (see  editor's  note  in  Eboussi-Boulaga's  “Le  Bantou  l'rob-
lématique,” 1968:4-40), dwells on “Bantu philosophy” He first comments upon the 
shortcomings of Tempels's method, which occur because the method does not face the 
problem of its own origin. It does not ask how anthropology can be a source of, or a 
basis for philosophy, and it defines itself as a technique for transcribing values and 
expressing what is fundamentally unutterable (Eboussi-Boulaga, 1968:9-io). Second, 
Eboussi-Boulaga  elaborates  on  an  analysis  of  Tempels's  work,  focusing  on  the 
ambiguity of  the  ontological  hypothesis,  which  he  thinks  ultimately reduces  the 
Muntu to the primitiveness of an amoral and absolutely determining order of forces 
(1968:19-20). Finally, Eboussi-Boulaga presents the sociohistorical contradictions 
170


--- PAGE 171 ---
of  Tempels's treatise, repeating Césaire's radical question (Cèsaire, 1972:37-39): why 
was this book possible and how are we to interpret the structural similarity between 
the simulacrum of an ontological hierarchy and the socioeconomic hierarchy existing 
in  the  colonial  experience?  (EboussiBoulaga,  1968:-24-25).  Towa,  in  two 
complementary booklets (1971a and 1971b),  through  a general evaluation  of the 
works of Tempels (1959), Kagame (1956), N'Daw (1966), and Fouda (1967) links the 
critique  of  ethnophilosophy  to  negritude's  political  ambivalence  (Towa, 
1971b:24-25). According to him, the only results of the ethnophilosophical trend are 
two controversial achievements: first, a dubious terminological distinction between 
European  and  African  products  within  an  ambiguously  enlarged  domain  of 
philosophy;  second,  a  confusion  between  anthropological  structuring  of  beliefs, 
myths,  and  rites  on  the  one  hand,  and  metaphysics  on  the  other.  As  such, 
ethnophilosophy should be considered an ideology whose methodology betrays both 
philosophy and anthropology:
What ethnophilosophy praises in the past is not necessarily given by the analysis of the past. 
Retrojection is the method by which ethnophilosophy alters and disfigures traditional reality by 
secretly introducing at the descriptive onset present-day values and ideas which can be considered 
completely alien to Africa, rediscovering them in a militant profession of faith, “authenticated in 
terms of their so-called Africanity” (Tows, 1971b:32)
The second phase of the philosophical critique of ethnophilosophy begins with 
Hountondji's militant articles, which have made the debate an international one. His 
articles appear in a great variety of professional publications from the 1970s onwards: 
Présence Africaine (Paris, 1967, 61), African Humanism-Scandinavian Culture: A 
Dialogue  (Copenhagen,  1970),  Etudes  philosophiques  (Paris,  1970,  1),  Diogène 
(Paris, 1970, 71; 1973, 84), La Philosophie contemporaine (Florence, 1971, vol. iv, R. 
Klibansky ed.), Cahiers philosophiques africains (Lubumbashi, 1972, 1; 1974, 3-4), 
Cons6quence (Cotonou, 1974, 1), etc. He eventually collected some of them into a 
book, Sur la philosophie africaine (1977; English version, 1983), which since its 
publication  has  become  the  bible  of  anti-ethnophilosophers.  Hountondji's  great 
intellectual  authority,  at  least  in  French-speaking  countries,  springs  from several 
factors. First, he is a former student of the Ecole Normale Supérieure of the rue d'ulm 
in Paris, one of the most select and prestigious schools in the world. In philosophy, it 
has produced some of the most renowned modern thinkers: Merleau-Ponty, Sartre, 
Aron, Althusser, figures who have influenced or revolutionized the field. Second, his 
agr6gation  de  philosophie  gives  him  an  indubitable  prestige.  Finally,  one  must 
consider that Hountondji's academic career in Benin, West Germany, France, and 
Zaire, as well as his responsibilities in international philosophical institutions, have 
greatly promoted the dissemination of his ideas. Nevertheless, it is only fair to say 
that the brilliance of his texts, the soundness of his
171


--- PAGE 172 ---
reasoning, and the pertinence of his arguments probably constitute the real factors in 
the success of his critique of ethnophilosophy.
Hountondji's position can be described in the following manner: on the one hand, 
he gives two main reasons for the rejection of ethnophilosophy; on the other, two 
other reasons for a critique and an amelioration of Crahay's lesson. Let us look at the 
first  set.  (a)  In  Hountondji's  view,  ethnophilosophy is  an  imaginary,  intoxicating 
interpretation, which is never supported by any textual authority and depends totally 
on the interpreter's  whims. It  claims to translate  a non-existent  cultural text  and 
ignores its own creative activity and therefore its own liberty. Consequently, one can 
say that the ethnophilosophical imagination a priori prevents itself from attaining any 
truth, since truth presupposes that liberty relies upon an unimaginary order and is 
conscious of both the evidence of a positive order and its own space of creativity. (b) 
If Western establishments have valorized ethnophilosophy, it is due to an ethnocentric 
bias. When, for instance, such notables as G. Bachelard, A. Camus, L. Lavelle, J. 
Wahl,  J.  Howlett,  or  G.  Marcel  readily acclaim Bantu  Philosophy (see  Prisence 
Africaine, 1949, no. 7), it means that because of present-day international standards, 
they would accept anything (Hountondji, 1970), provided that it offers a sympathetic 
view of Africans. They do so even if it means entirely contradicting the theoretical 
implications of their own philosophical practice.
As to Hountondji's two-pronged critique of Crahay's lesson, it bears on the notion 
of conceptual décollage and on the destination of philosophical discourse. (a) For 
Hountondji, the notion of a conceptual take-off does not make sense as a general 
condition of existence of an African philosophy. He states that in all civilizations a 
conceptual take-off is always already accomplished even when human actors use or 
integrate mythical sequences into their discourse. By virtue of this characteristic, one 
could compare Parmenides's discourse to those of Confucius, Plato, Hegel, Nietzsche, 
or Kagame. (b) Hountondji believes that Crahay completely missed a major point: the 
destination of discourse. He rightly insists that, be it mythical or ideological, language 
evolves in a social environment, developing its own history and the possibility of its 
own philosophy (Hountondji, 1970 and 1983).
From  this  viewpoint,  Hountondji  argues  that  Mulago,  Kagame,  and  most 
ethnophilosophers are certainly philosophers insofar as they can recognize that their 
own texts are philosophical, but they are totally wrong when they claim that they are 
restoring an African traditional philosophy.
We  have  produced  a  radically  new  definition  of  African  philosophy,  the  criterion  being  the 
geographical origin of the authors rather than an alleged specificity of content. The effect of this is 
to broaden the narrow horizon which has hitherto been imposed on African philosophy and to treat 
it, as now conceived, as a methodical inquiry with the same universal aims as those of any other 
philosophy in the world. (Hountondji, 1983:66)
172


--- PAGE 173 ---
Hountondji's critique displays the superiority of a critical conception of philosophy: A 
disciple  of Canguilhem and Althusser, Hountondji looks at African  philosophical 
practices from a strictly normative viewpoint. But his philosophy seems to imply a 
thesis  which  is  controversial  to  many:  that,  until  now,  Africa  has  not  been 
philosophizing and that in her past there is nothing which might reasonably be called 
philosophical  (Koffi,  1976;  Yai,  1977;  Tshiamalenga,  1977a,  Laleye,  1982).  It  is 
important  to  note  that  for  Hountondji,  philosophy  must  be  understood  as 
metaphilosophy, that is, as “a philosophical reflection on discourse which [is itself] 
overtly and consciously philosophical.”
Hountondji's texts prompted a lively debate throughout Africa on the definition of 
African philosophy. Generally stimulating (Ruch, 1974; Odera, 1972; Sumner, 1980), 
sometimes a  bit  too  raucous  (Yai,  1977;  Koffi,  1977),  criticisms of  Towa's  and 
Hountondji's positions focus on three main problems. The first is the validity and 
meaning of the question: is there an African philosophy? To this Yai responds with 
another question: “What is the source of this inquiry? Who, at times such as these, 
arrogates  the  right  to  put  a  question  that  can  be  innocent  only in  appearance?” 
(1977:6). The second problem concerns Hountondji's reduction of philosophy to a 
body of texts explicitly self-defined as philosophical in nature. The last concerns the 
necessary relationship between the emergence  of individual philosophers and the 
existence  of  philosophy.  There  emerge  two  strong  reproaches  against  Towa  and 
Hountondji, but in a special way against the latter: elitism and Western dependency. It 
is almost a war against all African intellectuals “admitted by the conclave of the 
sacred  collège  of  agrégés  and  doctors  of  philosophy”  (Koffi  and  Abdou,  1980). 
According to Yai, the advocates of what he qualifies as speculative philosophy are 
“Young  Turks  who  have  several  points  in  common  with  the  Young  Hegelians 
castigated by Marx in The German Ideology” who “find in all discussions prior to 
their own, nothing but mythologies” (1977:4)- It is an “elite by definition” that has 
become “the elite of elite, a pedestal from which they are very careful not to climb 
down for a purpose so humble as empirical research among the masses” (1977:16). At 
any  rate,  according  to  Koffi  and  Abdou,  this  elite  represents  neocolonialism 
(1980:192).
In a special issue of Recherches philosophiques Africaines (1977, 1) devoted to 
African  philosophy,  members  of  the  philosophy  department  of  the  Faculté  de 
Théologie Catholique in Kinshasa-Tshiamalenga, Smet, and Elungu-achieved in an 
elegant way a provisional but organic compromise between Tempels's legacy and 
critical demands for the practice of African philosophy. Tshiamalenga, for example, 
agrees  with  Crahay  and  Hountondji  on  the  methodological  mistakes  of 
ethnophilosophy, particularly on the absurdity of speaking of an implicit collective 
philosophy. On the other hand, he points out the idealizing nature of Crahay's, Towa's 
and Hountondji's understanding of philosophy, which as given, even within the West-
ern philosophical experience, does not really correspond to any historically
173


--- PAGE 174 ---
attested  practice  (1977a).  From  those  positions,  Tshiamalenga  distinguishes  two 
domains  within  African  philosophy.  One  is  that  of  Negro-African  traditional 
philosophy constituted by explicit énoncis (statements and propositions) from the oral 
tradition pertaining to the nature of human society, the meaning of life, death, and the 
hereafter (cosmological and religious myths, didactic proverbs, maxims, apothegms, 
etc.) The other is that of contemporary African philosophy, that is, the totality of 
signed  texts  on  similar  subjects  using  a  critical  interpretation  of  the  traditional 
philosophy or springing from reflection on the contemporary condition of the African 
(Tshiamalenga, 1977a:46). In the same issue, Smet dissolves the methodological and 
ideological  oppositions  between  ethnophilosphers  and  their  critics  in  terms of  a 
diachronic complementarity of schools (1977a; see also, Elungu, 1978). One year 
later, Elungu made Smet's proposition more explicit by carefully specifying three 
historical trends: the first two are an anthropological philosophy or ethnophilosophy 
and an ideological philosophy or political philosophy-two currents that, in a mythical 
or nationalist  way,  contributed  to the  promotion of  African  dignity and  political 
independence. More recently has emerged a post-independence trend: the critical one, 
which with Crahay,  Hountondji  and others demands a rigorous reflection  on the 
conditions of philosophy as well as on the conditions of existing individuals and 
societies (Elungu, 1978).
Foundations
At the other extreme from ethnophilosophy and its critics, one finds works that have 
neither  the  form  of  anthropological  exegeses  nor  the  fashionable 
anti-ethnophilosophical vocabulary. They not only fit faithfully into the mainstream 
of the philosophia  perennis but sometimes indeed deal  with specifically Western 
topics. Many of the advanced degrees awarded in European universities to young 
African scholars attest to this trend. These scholars single out the universal historicity 
of a method. One can begin by referring to applied philosophy, as illustrated by 
Aguolu's study on “John Dewey's Democratic Conception and Its Implication for 
Developing Countries” (Aguolu, 1975) and more recently by Hallen and Sodipo's 
book on Knowledge, Belief and Witchcraft (1986). We shall refer as well to the best 
papers,  published  annually  by  the  department  of  philosophy  of  the  Faculté  de 
Théologie Catholique in Kinshasa. (They are among those whose major references 
accidentally coincide with the Franco-Belgian orthodoxy in philosophy.) We shall 
also refer to Wiredu's very British Philosophy and an African Culture (1980), which 
among other things “teaches” us that “it is a fact that Africa lags behind the West in 
the cultivation of rational inquiry” (1980:43) and indicates that “the ideal way to 
reform backward customs in Africa must, surely, be to undermine their foundation in 
superstition by fostering in the people . . . the spirit of rational inquiry in all spheres 
of thought and belief” (1980: 45).
There are in this special area quite orthodox and apparently purely speculative 
174


--- PAGE 175 ---
undertakings  but  also  some  intellectual  surprises.  Bodunrin's  essay  on  “The 
Alogicality of Immortality” (1975b) and Wiredu's “Logic and Ontology” (1973) are 
exemplary.  In  terms  of  voluminous  contributions  I  may  suggest  three  models: 
Elungu's systematic study on the concept of extent in Malebranche's thought (1973b), 
Ugirashebuja's  book on dialogue  and poetry according to Heidegger (1977), and 
Ngindu's  research  on  the  philosophical  problem  of  religious  knowledge  in 
Laberthonnière's thinking (1978). How can these choices of subject be justified? It is 
difficult to read authors' minds. The social and intellectual context in which these 
philosophers developed might account for their choices, just as it would for such 
notorious eighteenth-century cases as the African A. G. Amo's intellectual career in 
what was not yet  Germany and his works De Humana Mentis Apatheia (1734), 
Tractatus de Arte Sobrie et Accurate Philosophandi (1738), and the lost De Jure 
Maurorum in Europa (1729). Another case, this one scandalous, was that of Jacobus 
Capitein, an African who wrote and publicly presented a study at Leiden University 
in  the  Netherlands  on  the  nonexistent  opposition  between  slavery  and  Christian 
freedom: De Servitude, Libertati Christianae non Contraria (1742). At any rate, our 
contemporary students of philosophia perennis may also be troubling. One is surely 
taken aback when, in examining these very classical analyses, one comes across 
presuppositions on African otherness in the guise of logical deduction. For example, 
it  is  a  surprise  to  follow  Ugirashebuja  discovering  in  Heidegger's  writing 
Banyarwanda's language as a sign of being and its nomination, and to discover in the 
Rwandese philosopher's text the voice of Heidegger inviting all of us-Westerners, 
Africans, Asians-to listen to being in our respective languages (see Ugirashebuja, 
1977:227;  Dirven,  1978:ioil-6).  In  the  same  vein,  Ngindu,  in  a  sophisticated 
introduction to the fin de siècle modernist crisis within the Roman Catholic European 
circles of philosophy, digs up reasons for commenting on cultural imperialism in 
Africa and its epistemological force of reduction (Ngindu, 1978:19).
In this philosophical practice, which is completely foreign to African culture, or 
at best, a marginal but powerful space in which only ways of domesticating the 
African experience are elaborated, slips of the pen sometimes occur and murmurs are 
heard which resemble ethno-philosophical dreams. On the other hand, as the School 
of Kinshasa has demonstrated, it is not at all certain that Hountondji and his fellow 
anti-ethnophilosophers  are neocolonialist devils preventing people  from affirming 
their  otherness.  Strangely enough,  his responses  to  criticisms  (Hountondji,  1980; 
1981; 1982), reflect a well-balanced philosophical and nationalist imagination: “as 
Gramsci rightly used to say, only truth is revolutionary” (1982:67).
Both the ethnophilosophical trend and the critical school agree on their position 
about the existence of philosophy as an autocritical exercise and a critical discipline 
in Africa. Viewed in terms of its organic expression, this practice can be described 
from at least four different angles: the Ethiopian heritage, the solidity of an empiricist 
tradition in English-speaking countries,
175


--- PAGE 176 ---
the debate about the epistemological foundation of an African discourse in social and 
human sciences, and Marxist universalism.
My brief presentation of Sumner's editions of Ethiopian texts (see appendix) 
shows the particular situation of the Ethiopian tradition, whose Christianity goes back 
as far as the fourth century. Since that time, monks and scholars have been at work on 
intellectual  arguments,  theological  and  political  commentaries,  and  translations. 
Through the ages, a philosophy took shape. According to Sumner, The Book of the 
Wise Philosophers (see Sumner, 1974) and The Treatise of Zdrâ Yacob (Sumner, 
1978)  are  good  examples.  The  first  “presents  itself  as  the  quintessence  of  what 
various philosophers have said on a certain number of topics, most of which are 
ethical”  (Sumner,  1974:ioo).  Thus  philosophy,  fdlasfa,  is  understood  as  being 
principally  a  wisdom,  which  includes  both  a  knowledge  of  the  universe  and 
mankind's purpose in life. Adapted maxims from the Greek, Egyptian, and Arabic as 
well as maxims from Ethiopian tradition (as in the case of many numerical proverbs) 
guide the listener or the reader on topics such as matter, human physiology and 
psychology,  man's  social  dimension,  and  moral  concerns  (Sumner,  1974).  The 
Treatise o f Zdr â Yacob also presents propositions on moral issues (Sumner, 1983) 
and guidance about knowledge. Yet it is a unique and important sign which suggests a 
critical outlook in the seventeenth-century Ethiopian culture, to the point that A. 
Baumstark has compared it to “the Confessions of a fellow African, St. Augustine” 
(in Sumner, 1978:5). The method of Zdr'a Yacob is definitely new: it posits the light 
of reason as a “discriminating criterion between what is of God and what is of men” 
and can be compared to Descartes's clear idea (1978:70-71).
Another side of the foundation of African philosophical practice is the viability of 
the empiricist method in Anglophone countries. Their universities and philosophy 
departments are generally older. Van Parys, after a visit to twenty African countries 
having university departments of philosophy, noted in his evaluative synthesis that in 
Anglophone countries they were better organized and appeared more solid in their 
already tested traditions. (Van Parys, 1981:386). More directly, the quality of the 
biannual journal Second Order clearly preserves a sense of academic heritage.
Its aim is to publish first class philosophical work of all kinds, but it is especially concerned to 
encourage philosophizing with special reference to African context. Although the initiators belong 
to the Anglo-Saxon tradition of philosophy, they see it as their job to construe their subject rather 
widely: to regard inter-disciplinary boundaries as made for man, not man for them, and to watch out 
for growing points in their subject as it applies itself to new problems. (Cover of issues: 2.)
K. Wiredu's elegant book (1980) is a good example of this ambition. In fact, what 
determines the configuration of this empiricist practice is the very close relationship 
existing  between  Anglo-Saxon  philosophers  and  their  African  colleagues.  For 
example, Second Order's board of consultants includes
176


--- PAGE 177 ---
D. Emmet (Cambridge), E. Gellner (Cambridge), D.W. Hamilyn (London), R. Harré 
(Oxford), R. Horton (Ife), D. Hudson (Exeter), S. Lukes (Oxford), J.J. MacIntosh 
(Calgary), and A. MacIntyre (Brandeis). Also, in Anglophone countries teaching and 
research  in  philosophy  are  accepted  as  a  given,  and  the  departments  are  well 
distinguished from departments of African religions or sociology.
A third orientation in the practice of philosophy in Africa is the search for the 
epistemological  foundation  of  an  African  discourse.  We  shall  examine  a  few 
illustrative cases: the epistemological debate on African theology, the discussion on 
the significance of social sciences, and the deconstruction doctrine in philosophy.
An important debate on African theology took place in ig6o (Tshibangu and 
Vanneste, ig6o), stemming from a public discussion between A. Vanneste, dean of the 
School of Theology at Lovanium University and one of his students, T. Tshibangu, 
who  later  became  the  Roman  Catholic  auxiliary  bishop  of  the  archdiocese  of 
Kinshasa and rector of the university. When the university was nationalized in 1971 
by the Mobutu government, Bishop Tshibangu became the president of the National 
University of Zaïre.  The  debate  concerns  the  possibility of  an  African  Christian 
scientific theology. Tshibangu stated that under present world conditions it makes 
sense to promote the feasibility of an African-oriented Christian theology that epis-
temologically  would  have  the  same  status  as  the  Judeo-Christian,  Eastern,  and 
Western theologies. Dean Vanneste, although believing in the future of Christian 
theology in Africa, insisted on the demands of theology understood in its strict sense 
and defined it as a universal discipline (see Nsoki, 1973; Mudimbe, 1981a; Ngindu, 
1968 and 1979; Tshibangu, 1974).
At stake is the legitimacy of an exploratory inquiry: can one reconcile a universal 
faith  (Christianity)  and  a  culture  (African)  within  a  discipline  (theology)  that  is 
epistemologically and culturally marked? (Tshibangu and Vanneste, ig6o:333-352). In 
a great confusion, European and African scholars, notably J. Daniélou, A.M. Henry, 
H. Maurier, V Mulago, Ch. Nyamiti, A. Janon, and G. Thils (see Bimwenyi, 1981a; 
Mudimbe, 1981a) took sides. The debate also questioned indirectly the form and the 
meaning of the African presence in the field of Christian theology. This debate could 
only lead to an evaluation of the strictly scientific orientation of the Lovanium School 
of Theology. The School's intellectual configuration was subordinated to a number of 
principles  (scientific  rigour,  theological  tradition,  and  dogmatic  vigilance)  in  the 
manner of the best European Catholic institutions. This cult of scientific quality is 
exemplified in such contributions by Zaïrean theologians as Tshibangu's work on the 
complementarity between “speculative” and “positive” theology in the history of the 
Western Church (1965), Atal's philological analysis of John's prologue (197z), Mon-
sengwo's  semantic  study of  the  Bible  (1973),  and  Ntendika's  books  on  patristic 
philosophy and theology (1966, 1971). In which sense are these
177


--- PAGE 178 ---
highly sophisticated studies related to the concrete condition of African Christians, 
their human problems and spiritual hope?
The problem extends to all the social and human sciences and has been enlarged 
upon as both an epistemological and a political problem by the second meeting of 
Zaïrean philosophers in Kinshasa in 1977 (see also Adotevi, 1972; Bimwenyi, 1981a; 
Buakasa, 1978; Sow 1977,1978). We have seen that anthropological discourse was an 
ideological  discourse.  In  the  same  vein,  contemporary  African  discourse  is 
ideological too, and as a discourse of political power, it often depends upon the same 
type of ideologies (Hauser, 1982; Elungu, 1979). Gutkind thinks that “actual inten-
sification of capitalist control over the means of production in Africa increasingly 
reduces sections of the population to a landless rural or urban proletariat in whose 
live ancestral traditions, however modified, no longer mean anything” (in MacGaffey, 
1981). I would add that this has another significance. Large sections of the African 
people have nothing to do with the present-day economic and political structures 
within their own countries, nor with intellectuals' and universities' projects for linking 
Western experience to the African context.
It  is  because  of  this  situation  that  both  the  African  Marxists  and  “decon-
structionists”-the latter in harmony with the anti-ethnophilosophy current-base their 
arguments. For Towa, for example, the critical enterprise is a total vocation. The 
esprit critique must apply indiscriminately to European intellectual imperatives and to 
African constructions, the only acceptable “truth” being that there is nothing sacred 
that philosophy cannot interrogate (Towa, 1971b:30). Hountondji goes further, stating 
that philosophy is essentially history and not system, and thus there is no single 
doctrine that may claim truth in an absolute manner. The best understanding of truth 
resides in the process of looking for it. “In a way, then, truth is the very act of looking 
for truth, of enunciating propositions and trying to justify and found them” ([1197] 
1983:73)- Similar philosphical positions allowed T Obenga to reinvent the cultural 
relationships  that  existed  between  Egypt  and  Black  Africa.  In  the  process,  he 
criticized  European  theses  and  pinpoints  Cheikh  Anta  Diop's  methodological 
weaknesses. And J. Ki-Zerbo's  general  history of Africa  (1972) provoked a new 
thinking about the diversity of functions of African cultures.
All of the social and human sciences underwent this radical experience between 
1950 and 1980. Fundamentally,  the questioning is based on “the  right to truth,” 
implying a new analysis of three paradigms: philosophical ideal versus contextual 
determination,  scientific  authority  versus  sociopolitical  power,  and  scientific 
objectivity versus cultural subjectivity. Yet there are signs that, since the end of World 
War II, have meant the possibility of new theories in the African field. European 
theorists, then, seem to invert some values of colonial sciences and analyze African 
experience from a perspective that gradually institutionalizes the themes of contextual 
determination 
178


--- PAGE 179 ---
and cultural subjectivity. In the 1950s, J. Vansina and Y Person envisaged a new 
arrangement of the African past, interpreting legends, fables, and oral traditions as 
“texts” and “documents,” which with the help of archaeological data could contribute 
to the foundation of an “ethnohistory,” a discipline joining history and anthropology 
(Vansina, 1961). In the same period, G. Balandier wrote the first books on “African 
sociology”  Moreover,  with  his  anthropologie  dynamique,  he  reorganized  the 
discipline and described the traditional “object” of anthropology, the “native,” as the 
only  possible  “subject”  for  his  own  modernization.  In  the  psychological  field, 
scholars such as A. Ombredane re-examined, on a regional basis, the assumptions 
concerning  the  psychology  and  intelligence  of  blacks  (ig6g).  Frantz  Crahay 
confronted Tempels's heritage, J. Jahn's generalizations on African culture, and the 
limitations  of  Nkrumah's  philosophy,  and  proposed  conditions  for  a  critical 
philosophical maturity in Africa (1965). In the 1970s G. Leclerc, with Anthropologie 
et colonialisme (1972), and J. L. Calvet, with Linguistique et colonialisme (1974), 
among others, rewrote the history of ideological conditioning in the social and human 
sciences.
This  trend  of  Western  scholarship  has  had  an  impact  on  African  practice. 
Nevertheless, it is neither a direct ancestor nor the major reference for the African 
current we are examining. Although both are concerned with the same object, and 
both present, essentially, the same fundamental objective, there are at least two major 
differences that distinguish them. The first difference accounts for a paradox. These 
currents have the same origin in the Western episteme, but their beginnings did not 
coincide, and despite their similarity they constitute two autonomous orientations. 
They  have  all  developed  in  the  European  context  as  “amplifications”  of  theses 
coming from two loci. The first of these is the “library” constructed by such scholars 
as Frobenius, Delafosse, Théodore Monod, Robert Delavignette, B. Malinowski, and 
Marcel Griaule; the second, the intellectual atmosphere of the 1930s-1940s and surely 
the 1950s, which with the rediscovery of Marx, Freud, and Heidegger produced a 
critical reevaluation of the significance of links between objectivity and subjectivity, 
history and reason,  essence  and existence. On the basis of these questions, new 
doctrines  appeared:  neoMarxism,  existentialism,  and  also  negritude  and  black 
personality. These emphasized in different ways the pertinence and the importance of 
subjectivity, the unconscious, existence, relativity of truth, contextual difference, and 
otherness.
In this atmosphere, Africanism developed and took on a new visage. In the 1950s 
and 1960s, while in Anglophone countries M. Herskovits and B. Davidson promoted 
a new interest in African culture, the most dynamic schools of European Africanism 
in  Francophone  countries  were  Marxistdominated  and  heavily  influenced  by 
Lévi-Strauss's notions of “otherness” and “savage mind.” It is an Africanism of “big 
brothers.”  Y  Bénot,  C.  Coquery-Vidrovitch,  L.  de  Heusch,  C.  Meillassoux,  H. 
Moniot,  J.  Suret-Canale,  B.  Verhaegen,  and  others  link  the  emergence  of  new 
scientific and methodological 
179


--- PAGE 180 ---
approaches to the paradoxical task of teaching Africans how to read their otherness 
and of helping them formulate modalities that express their own being and their place 
in the world. Concurrently, in the Anglophone world, scholars such as J. Coleman, P 
Curtin, J. Goody, T Ranger, P Rigby, V Turner, and Crawford Young began to bring to 
light new representations of African history (Curtin, 1964, 1965; Ranger, 1967) and 
synchronic  analyses  of  sociocultural  “depths”  (Rigby,  1969;  Turner, 1964,  1975, 
1981; Young, 1965)
The “deconstruction” of colonial sciences those Western trends represented does 
not, however, coincide completely with the presuppositions of the critical African 
trends of Ki-Zerbo, T Obenga or Eboussi-Boulaga. The epistemological conditioning 
is obviously the same, and in some cases, on the surface, programs, projects and 
actions are oriented towards identical purposes. Such is the case of Terence Ranger 
and the School of Dar-esSalaam, Peter Rigby and the Africanist team at Makerere, 
and B. Verhaegan and the Zaïrean School of Political Science. However, a major 
difference  does  exist.  It  has  been amplified by the  new  generation  of European 
scholarsJ.  Bazin,  J.  E  Bayart,  J. P Chrétien,  B.  Jewsiewicki,  J.  C.  Willame, for 
example-who  are  more  conscious  of  the  objective  limitations  that  their  own 
subjectivity and regional sociohistoric determinations impose on their dealings with 
African matters. M. Hauser, for example, introduces such a comprehensive work as 
his  Essai  sur  la  poétique  de  la  négritude  (1982)  by  recognizing  that  the 
presuppositions that founded the project, the methods of analysis used, determine his 
study in a subjective locus, itself ideologically marked (1982:27).
On the other hand, since the 1960s African theorists and ideologues, rather than 
confiding in and depending on “big brothers,” have tended to use critical analysis as a 
means  for  establishing  themselves  as  “subjects”  of  their  own  destiny,  taking 
responsibility  for  the  “invention”  of  their  past  as  well  as  of  the  conditions  for 
modernizing  their  societies.  Thus,  the  dialogue  with  “big  brothers”  has  been 
ambiguous, from the beginning infused with mutual understanding and rejection, 
collaboration and suspicion (see Wauthier, 1964). Adotévi's Négritude et négrologues 
(1972) is a good illustration of this trend. Although epistemologically his book is an 
amplification of the Western crisis of the signification of social and human sciences, 
it  gives  a  radical  account  of  the  limits of  Africanism and  proposes  its  absolute 
negation as a new “explanation” for African integration into “history” and “modern-
ity”: “revolution is not accomplished with myths, even shattered ones” (Adotevi, 
1972:81).  Mabika  Kalanda's  study  in  1966  founded  the  principle  of  remise  en 
question as a means of intellectual and political liberation.
The second difference is a consequence of the first. In its perspective, the African 
critical trend displays its power as the only “common place” for both a positive 
knowledge of dynamic tensions and discourses on the foundation and justification of 
African human and social sciences. Thus, it tends to define its mission in terms of 
three paradigms: cultural renaissance of African
180


--- PAGE 181 ---
nations, new scientific vocation, and developmental applications, almost grudgingly 
accepting the fact that non-Africans might offer contributions to this struggle for 
power and truth.
From  this  intellectual  climate  spring  the  organizing  ideologies  that  sustain 
strategies for new relationships between knowledge and power and provide original 
frameworks  for  social  and  human  studies  in  Africa.  Hountondji  represents  the 
neo-Marxist ideology and insists on three complementary actions (1981:68): (a) the 
promotion of a philosophical critique and ideological clarification in order to oppose 
illusions, mystifications, and lies that continue to exist in Africa and about Africa; (b) 
rigorous studies,  assimilation, and true understanding of the best in international 
philosophy, including Marxism, which according to the author, is the only theory to 
provide pertinent concepts and means for analyzing the exploitation of Africa; (c) and 
a paradoxical task-stepping out of philosophy in order to meet and have dialogue with 
social reality.
Most  of  the  theorists,  however,  favor  different  views.  Bimwenyi,  Eboussi-
Boulaga,  and  Sow,  for  instance,  offer  a  more  systematic  criticism  of  Western 
philosophical anthropology as a precondition for the building of new interpretations. 
At the deepest level, they agree with Hountondji on the necessity of new choices. 
Their strategies, however, reveal the possibility of disturbing the epistemological 
arrangements  that  account  for  Africanism  and  also  for  Marxism.  The  basic 
assumption is a relativist one: cultures, all cultures, are blind in terms of the values 
they incarnate  and  promote  (Eboussi-Boulaga).  It  also  implies  a  critique  of  the 
concept of human nature. According to Sow, human nature is an abstract construction 
that does not really concern social and human sciences:
We are not persuaded that when looked at carefully the specific object of social sciences is the study 
of one universal human nature given a priori, because we do not know if such a human nature exists 
concretely somewhere. It may be that human nature (or human being in general, natural human 
being, etc.) is a theoretical fiction of general philosophy, or then, the activist generalization of a 
limited concrete experience. (Sow, 1977:256-58)
Sow thinks that the reality of human nature makes sense only when intermingled 
with  representations  of  a  given  anthropological  tradition  or  perspective.  His 
conclusion  presents  the  following  challenge:  against  dialectic  reason  and 
anthropology, how can intellectuals in Africa think about human nature and for what 
purpose?
On a more  concrete  level, one can observe  the  alternatives offered  by other 
trends. Wiredu, for example, faces African social contradictions empirically (1980). 
Other  theorists  indicate  practical  policies  for  the  implementation  of  strategic 
principles  in  sociocultural  formulas.  The  paradigm  of  renaissance  accounts  for 
theories that essentially affirm the positivity of being oneself. As Chinweizu, Jemie, 
and Madobuike recently showed in their aggressive Toward the Decolonization of 
African Literature (1983), it also means the
181


--- PAGE 182 ---
right to doubt “perennial” and “universal” values. In this sense, there is a correlation 
between  the  ideology of  debates  on  cultural  relativism in  African  literature  and 
concrete policies promoting African languages and celebrating “authentic” traditions 
as meaningful institutions (p'Bitek, 1973)- We are confronted with the difficult issue 
of “retraditionalization” as A. A. Mazrui and M. Tidy call it.
Another obstacle to cultural liberation has been the confusion of the concept of modernization with 
Westernization.  In  fact,  retraditionalization  of  African  culture  can  take  modernizing  forms, 
especially if it becomes an aspect of decolonization. Retraditionalization does not mean returning 
Africa to what it was before the Europeans came . . . But a move towards renewed respect for 
indigenous ways and the conquest of cultural self-contempt may be the minimal conditions for 
cultural decolonization. (Mazrui and Tidy, 1984:283)
But this is just one side of a complex process. Mabika Kalanda posited a strict 
principle: to reappropriate his own cultural consciousness and invent new paradigms 
for his “renaissance,” it is imperative for the African to reevaluate the general context 
of  his  tradition.  He  must  expurgate  it  critically,  since  some  of  its  inherent 
characteristics have predisposed him to slavery, and also explain the African tendency 
towards dependency.
The Bantu global milieu can be characterized as disintegrating and depressing for the individual. Its 
philosophy posits as sacred law dependency, submission, effacement, the mental and therefore 
physical degeneracy of the Bantu. Such a milieu is predisposing to slavery . . . The individual or 
group mental impotency perceived intuitively or even observed in the objective realities leads 
people  unconsciously to  aggressivity towards strangers  who  are  more  advanced  than  we  are. 
(Kalanda, 1967:163)
On the basis of a similar hypothesis, Eboussi-Boulaga later propounded the form 
of a récit pour soi as a critical means for understanding the past and its failures in 
order to be able to act differently in the future (Eboussi-Boulaga, 1977:223).
The paradigms of scientific vocation and developmental applications are probably 
the easiest to analyze.  In the 195os and ig6os, they meant  the Africanization  of 
personnel in universities and research centers. In other words, they sought the transfer 
of intellectual leadership and administrative authority to Africans (see, e.g., Bergh, 
1973; Verhaegen, 1978; Mazrui and Tidy, 1984:299-315). This struggle for scientific 
responsibility rapidly led to myths and theories of the “Africanization of sciences.” 
For several years, Cheikh Anta Diop's influence for example, allowed the hypostasis 
of African civilizations. Concurrently, African Studies centers multiplied, and African 
subjects were introduced into university curricula. For the classical theme “all that is 
European is civilized; all that is African is barbarous” was substituted “all that is 
African is civilized and beautiful.” This intellectual nationalism depended heavily on 
political nationalism. As Hodgkin rightly
182


--- PAGE 183 ---
noted, it “developed furthest in those territories where political nationalism [was] 
most firmly established, [and had] an effect upon practice as well as upon attitudes” 
(1957:175-76).
The major characteristic of the period from 1970 to the 1980s is the relative 
autonomy of the intellectualist side of African nationalism. The failure of dreams of 
independence might account for the redistribution of power. Politicians and managers 
have created acute contradictions between the processes of production and the social 
relations  of  production,  the  “economy”  of  power  and  political  rhetoric  (Iliffe, 
1983:65-87).  The  intellectuals  generally  define  their  mission  in  terms  of  the 
deconstruction of existing systems of economic, political, and ideological control. 
Within the intellectual group there are, as already noted, two major tendencies: the 
first,  increasingly  Marxist-dominated,  emphasizes  strategies  for  economic  and 
political  liberation;  the  second,  the  liberal  tendency,  essentially  focuses  on  the 
implications  of  a philosophy of otherness.  One  might  think that  the  first  group, 
fundamentally, promotes new theories for the Westernization of Africa. On the other 
hand, the second group, seems thus far caught in paradoxes created by the juncture of 
a will for political power and postulates of symbolic analysis. Nevertheless, both 
these  orientations  have  produced  significant  promise  in  present-day  African 
scholarship.  Already,  in  many  fields-anthropology,  history,  philosophy,  and 
theology-the  official  orthodoxy  inherited  from  the  colonial  period  has  been 
challenged. African scholars affirm new alternatives, regional compatibilities, and 
above all the possibility of a new economy between power and knowledge.
The process is most visible, as we have seen, in the domain of Christian theology, 
which  is  also  by  far  the  best  organized  field.  It  faced  major  questions  in  its 
development (Mveng, 1983). First of all, following the “Africanization” myths of the 
nationalist moment in the 1950s, it dealt with the challenge of a critique of Western 
Christianity. The aim at that time was to search for sources of confusion between 
colonialism  and  Christianity  in  order  to  achieve  a  better  comprehension  of 
Christianity and work for the implementation of an African Christianity. The stepping 
stone theory, the adaptation approach, and the incarnation interpretation are the most 
wellknown  solutions  proposed  for  the  promotion  of  an  African  Christianity 
(Bimwenyi, 1981b:263-81). A second question appeared almost immediately: what 
epistemological foundation could be proposed for African theology? Three types of 
visions and strategies have been offered.
We can hardly enter into details of an African reading of the Western experience 
because  of  the  complexity  of  its  purposes.  Nonetheless,  let  us  note  two  main 
methodological points: the choice of a rigorous classical analysis of the Western 
historical  process  of  indigenizing  the  Gospel  and  a  critical  interpretation  of  this 
process, based on the ideological significance of strategic  cultural selections and 
subservient rules and aimed at the explanation of the progressive constitution of the 
Church's doctrine and the development of
183


--- PAGE 184 ---
its liturgy. Bishop Tshibangu's work on the history of theological methods in the West 
(1965, 1980), J. Ntendika's careful studies (1966, 1971) on patristic theology, and 
Kinyongo's exegetical synthesis of the meaning of Jhwh (1970) are good examples of 
the trend. In philosophy, the same tendency to seek a good understanding of the 
Western  practice  of  philosophy,  as  a  useful  step  prior  to  promoting  African 
philosophy, can be observed in several cases. Second Order's orientation, Elungu's 
study of the concepts of space and knowledge in Malebranche's philosophy (1973b), 
Ugirashebuja's analysis of the relationship between poetry and thought in Heidegger's 
work (1977), and Ngindu's presentation of religious knowledge according to La-
berthonière (1978) provide examples.
This  critical  reading  of  the  Western  experience  is  simultaneously  a  way  of 
“inventing” a foreign tradition in order to master its techniques and an ambiguous 
strategy  for  implementing  alterity.  In  theology,  for  instance,  it  is  accepted  that 
“African theologians have nothing to gain by withdrawing into themselves. [By so 
doing]  they  would  condemn  themselves  to  remaining  second-rate  theologians” 
(Tshibangu and Vanneste, 1960:333-52). In 1974, Tshibangu published Le Propos 
d'une théologie  africaine,  a brief  manifesto  which  concentrates  on  linguistic  and 
cultural relativism and upholds the evidence of ethnic understanding and expressions 
of Christianity, along with the fact that there are a variety of systems of thought. 
Tshibangu's  work has  become  a  classic  and  has  had tremendous  influence.  It  is 
already  possible  to  study  the  outcome  of  his  thesis.  There  are  more  and  more 
anthropological  and  linguistic  investigations  of  African  traditions  that  pinpoint 
regions of compatibility and divergence between Christianity and African religions. 
Examples  of  this  are  Bimwenyi's  Discours  théologique  négro-africain  (1981a), 
Hebga's Sorcellerie et prière de délivrance (1982), the book published by Ela and 
Luneau, Voici le temps des héritiers (1981), and Hearing and Knowing (1986) by M. 
A.  Oduyoye.  Rather  than  insisting  on  the  economy  of  cultural  and  religious 
constellations  and  their  possible  compatibility,  this  trend  tends  to  emphasize the 
pertinence of diffraction and its relative value in a regional system of revelation. 
Mulago's Cahiers des religions a fricaines has been the most visible locus and vehicle 
for this project since 1965- Oduyoye sums up the nature of this quest:
We . . . are confronted with this fact: those who were for a long time content to be consumers of 
theology have begun to be producers of theology and it is Christian theology. They are widening the 
panorama o f symbols, heightening the color of issues, and demanding commitment and action. 
(Oduyoye, 1986:76. Emphasis mine)
I asked Tshibangu how, in this project for an intellectual discontinuity and an 
ideological reversal, he could explain the relationship between thought and action. He 
answered by specifying the philosophical frame in which this new discourse evolves 
and the anthropological context of its possibility.
184


--- PAGE 185 ---
Mudimbe: In any case concerning your project, one could wonder whether thought could precede 
action. Surely, this is very scholastic. But people have also said that the most important thing was to 
practice theology; that the specificity, the African character of the discourse would come naturally.
Tshibangu: You are correct in posing the problem of the relationship between thought and action. In 
reality, being, and consequently life, and action that actualizes it precede thought ontologically. But 
thought in turn is implied in the “form” of being that gives it the logical character of cognizability 
and acceptability. In fact the two are correlative and condition each other. In spiritual life, and 
particularly in a community of life such as the Church, life and doctrine condition one another and 
act  one upon the other.  To  date  the question  of African theology is largely one of principle. 
Existentially  concrete  problems  are  perceived  and  felt  specifically  by  African  Christian 
communities. African theology will realize itself effectively by trying in a radical way to answer the 
problems  posed  by the  principles  of  African  culture,  the  evolution  of  African  societies  with 
numerous questions concerning spiritual and ethical problems that are not lacking. [ . . . ] Today 
given the level of awareness of cultural differences, the specificity of cultures is not worked out 
over a long period of time and in a spontaneous way. We know the conditions of the specificity. 
This specificity, however, is based on the fundamental unity of human nature. The question is one 
of determining the framework for the development of this specificity so that it may enrich the total 
realization of the potentialities that nature has granted to a humanity diversified in its historic and 
spatial existence.
Mudimbe: You are a professor of fundamental theology at the Faculté de Théologie Catholique in 
Kinshasa. By temperament and by choice you say that you are preoccupied with epistemological 
questions. For what reason? What exactly are you looking for?
Tsbibangu: I mean by that that I am always preoccupied with the problem of justification. In the 
field of action everything must be grounded, and this demand imposes itself especially when in 
addition one accepts the law of the evolution of things, of institutions, of ideas, of customs. In order 
not to stray, to make mistakes, to act by simple habit or conditioning, it is necessary to reflect on the 
foundation of judgements and attitudes. And I intend to proceed methodologically in this search for 
foundations,  in  order to  propose actions  and  attitudes  that  are  themselves grounded  and well 
justified, intellectually and with  respect  to the  goals that  humans must  follow.  (In Mudimbe, 
1977:18)
A last trend in theology addresses a delicate issue: does it make sense to be 
Christian and African? As the Jesuit priest E. Mveng expressed it more concretely, 
why should an African believe in and promote a Christianity that not only has become 
a product of exportation for Western civilization but also has come to be used as a 
means of racial and class exploitation?
Unfortunately the West is less and less Christian; and Christianity, for a long time, has been a 
product of export for Western civilization, in other words, a
185


--- PAGE 186 ---
perfect tool for domination, oppression, the annihilation of other civilizations. The Christianity 
preached today, not only in South Africa, but by the West as a power and civilization, is far, very far 
from the gospel. The question is therefore posed radically: what can be the place of Third World 
peoples in such a Christianity? And this question is first of all aimed at the official churches. 
(Mveng, 1983:140)
To face this question, another African Jesuit, Eboussi-Boulaga, has put forth for 
consideration his Christianisme sans fétiche: Révélation et domination (1981). It is a 
deconstruction of Christianity. Setting aside dogmas, traditional criteria, and official 
Church  theories,  he  propounds  a  direct  interpretation  of  revelation  as  a  sign  of 
liberation. In this perspective, the time and the dignity of the human being are seen 
and defined as the real place of God's dream for incarnation. As a consequence, 
according to Eboussi-Boulaga, the most important issue for followers of Jesus is the 
liberation of their own faith and its conversion into a practical means for a true 
transformation  of  the  world.  This  conclusion  is  the  postulate  of  theologies  of 
liberation in South Africa (see, e.g., Tutu, 1984; Boesak, 1977, 1984a, 1984b). One of 
the soundest illustrations of this spirit of the Exodus is in J. M. Ela's Le Cri de 
l'Homme Africain: Questions aux Chrétiens et aux Eglises dAfrique (1980). Ela calls 
for a “radical move away from the God of natural theology preached by missionaries” 
and an invocation of the God of Exodus, interested in history and the socioeconomic 
conditions of humans. Strictly speaking, this is a political discourse in the name of 
Christian prophetism.
We have justified slavery, violence and war; we have sanctified racism and split our churches on the 
issue of the preservation of white supremacy. We have discriminated against women and kept them 
servile whilst we hid our fear of them behind claims of “masculinity” and sanctimonious talk about 
Adam and Eve. We have grown rich and fat and powerful through the exploitation of the poor, 
which we deplored but never really tried to stop. All in the name of Jesus Christ and his gospel. 
Now this same gospel speaks to us, and we can no longer escape its demands. It calls us to love and 
justice and obedience. We would like to fulfill that calling, but we do not want to risk too much. The 
Reuben option. The Reuben option: Take a stand, but always cover yourself. (Boesak, 1984b:38)
A hermeneutical school appeared in this context as the site of a more culturally 
oriented research in African theology. I think that Okere's DPhil. dissertation (1971) 
was the first major initiative. However, it is Tshiamalenga (1973, 1974, 1977b, 1980) 
and  Nkombe  (1979)  who have  become  this  school's  most  productive  exponents. 
Okolo made explicit the philosophical choices of the method (1980), drawing new 
propositions from a brief and stimulating text by his former professor, Kinyongo 
(1979). Okere published in 1983 an extract of his DPhil. dissertation concerning the 
foundations of the method. In this work one finds clear guidelines based on the solid 
principle that while “language seems to affect culture and thought at some
186


--- PAGE 187 ---
level,” it does not follow that one can “speak of philosophical and metaphysical 
thought  as  somehow  predetermined  linguistically”  (Okere,  1983:9).  The  most 
convincing studies to date, apart from Okere's unpublished dissertation, have been 
those of Tshiamalenga (e.g., 1974, 1977b, 1980) and Nkombe in his methodological 
propositions (e.g., 1977, 1978b) and his study of metaphor and metonymy in the 
paroemiologic  symbols  of  the  Tetela  language  (1979).  In  terms  of  intellectual 
classification,  it  is  possible  to  distinguish  two  main  trends.  The  first  is  one  of 
ontological hermeneutics, which at least in Kinshasa coincides with the reconversion 
of Tempels and Kagame's legacy to more rigourous modalities of philosophizing (see, 
e.g.,  Tshiamalenga, 1973,  1974,  1980).  The  second  is  more  of  a  psychosocially 
oriented  hermeneutics  which  integrates  lessons  from  phenomenological  methods 
(e.g., Laleye, 1981, 1982; Nkombe, 1979).
The  question  of  the  significance  of  these  new  intellectual  strategies  of 
“conversion” has occurred in other domains. In social sciences, T. K. Buakasa, for 
example, has analyzed the sociocultural determinations of scientific reason, under the 
provocative  title,  Western  Sciences:  What  For?  (1978;  see  also  Okonji,  1975). 
Inspired  by Foucault  and  especially by J. Ladrière's  work  on  the  philosophy of 
sciences, Buakasa reexamines the historicity and architecture. of scientific reason in 
order to introduce techniques for the conversion of African “mentality” in terms of 
scientific reason. Another philosopher, P E. Elungu, accepts the reality of African 
authenticity and the relative autonomy of its sociohistorical experience, but bases his 
proposals for African liberation on a unique condition: a conversion to philosophical 
and critical thinking. According to him, this spirit appears to be the only possible way 
to modernization, insofar as it will mean in African tradition the possibility of a 
rupture  and  subsequently the  emergence  of a scientific  mentality.  This  is  a new 
cultural  environment  characterized  by:  (a)  man's  capacity to  break  with  what  is 
simply given, in the pursuit of that which is essential and specific to him; (b) the 
seizing of this essential specificity in freedom of discourse, and (c) the realization that 
this freedom of discourse is not freedom itself, that this autonomy of discourse is not 
independence. (Elungu, 1976; see also Sodipo, 1975, 1983).
Examining these new rules of the game, one recalls Foucault's objectives for the 
liberation of discourse in The Discourse on Language (in appendix, 1982). Explicit 
references to Western schemata are also noticeable in Hountondji's program on the 
African practice of science, which relies on Althusser, and in Nkombe's research on 
African  symbols  inspired  by  Ricoeur  and  Lévi-Strauss.  But  these  intellectual 
filiations imply methodological and ideological syntheses rather than the capitulation 
of  otherness  (Vilasco,  1983).  Hountondji  presents  the  ambiguous  dream  of 
present-day African philosophers provocatively:
The problem . . . as regards our attitude towards our collective heritage, is how to respond to the 
challenge of cultural imperialism without imprisoning
187


--- PAGE 188 ---
ourselves in an imaginary dialogue with Europe, how to re-evaluate our cultures without enslaving 
ourselves to them, how to restore the dignity of our past, without giving room to a passeistic 
attitude. Instead of blindly condemning our traditions on behalf of reason, or rejecting the latter on 
behalf of the former, or making an absolute of the internal rationality of these traditions, it seems 
more reasonable to me to try and know our traditions as they were, beyond any mythology and 
distortion, not merely for the purpose of selfidentification or justification, but in order to help us 
meet the challenges and problems of today. (1983: 242-43)
To sum up the rules of this deconstruction, I note three major objectives: (a) to 
understand and define the configuration of scientific practice in social and human 
sciences as an ideological locus determined by three major variables-time, space, and 
the (un)conscious of the scientist; (b) to analyze and understand African experiences 
as  formed  on  the  basis  of  a  particular  history  and  as  witnessing  to  a  regional 
Weltanschauung; and (c) to think about and propose reasonable modalities for the 
integration of African civilizations into modernity, this in accordance with critical 
thinking and scientific reason, for the purpose of the liberation of man.
It might be that all of these themes have been made possible by some of the 
consequences of the epistemological rupture, which according to Foucault (1973) 
appeared in the West at the end of the eighteenth century. The hypothesis makes sense 
if one looks at the progressive recession, from the nineteenth century through the 
1930s, of theories about “function,” “conflict,” and “signification,” and at the slow 
emergence of a new understanding of the potentialities of paradigms of “norm,” 
“rule,” or “system.” In theory, this reversal accounts for all ideologies of difference 
(see, e.g., Ricoeur, 1984)However, it is not certain that it fully explains the functional 
arrangement of the “colonial library,” its history and pervasive effectiveness during 
the nineteenth and the twentieth centuries, nor the ambiguous relationships between 
the myths of the “savage mind” and the African ideological strategies of otherness.
Horizons of Knowledge
The  history  of  knowledge  in  Africa  and  about  Africa  appears  deformed  and 
disjointed, and the explanation lies in its own origin and development. As in the case 
of  other  histories,  we  face  what  Veyne  has  called  “the  illusion  of  integral 
reconstitution [which] comes from the fact that the documents, which provide us with 
the answers, also dictate the questions to us” (1984:13). Furthermore the body of 
knowledge itself, whose roots go as far back as the Greek and Roman periods, in its 
constitution, organization, and paradoxical richness, indicates an incompleteness and 
inherently biased perspectives. The discourse which witnesses to Africa's knowledge 
has been for a long time either a geographical or an anthropological one, at any rate a 
“discourse of competence” about unknown societies without their own
188


--- PAGE 189 ---
“texts.” Only recently has this situation been gradually transformed by the concept of 
ethnohistory, which in the 1950S postulated the junction of anthropological topoi with 
those of history and other social sciences, and later on integrated oral tradition and its 
expressions  (poetry,  fixed  formulas, anthroponymy,  toponymy).  In  so  doing,  this 
discourse began constructing simulacra about the relations existing between present 
African social organizations and history. On the whole, the discourse on African 
realities  offers  two  main  characteristics:  on  the  one  hand,  it  is  a  heterogenous 
discourse emanating from the margins of African contexts; and on the other hand, its 
axes as well as its language have been limited by the authority of this exteriority.
The  atmosphere  of  the  1950s  meant  a  new  valorization  in  the  Africanist 
discourse,  namely,  the  promotion  of  another  center:  history  and  its  ideological 
activity. This valorization is well represented in the shift that occurred progressively 
after the 1930s, moving from the anthropological authority and its negation of African 
historicity  to  the  respectability  of  a  possible  historical  knowledge  of  so-called 
traditional societies. This shift is illustrated by Herskovits (1962) and Vansina (1961). 
During the same period, other forms of languages were being derived from the same 
value presuppositions and freeing themselves from the anthropologist's intellectual 
space (see, e.g., Wallerstein, ig6i, 1967). Religious thinking began to conceptualize a 
history and a sociology of what Schmidt called “primitive revelation” (1931) and, as 
in the case of Des prêtres noirs s'interrogent (1956), to seek regional platforms for an 
African Christian theology. With Griaule and Tempels, the reading and interpretation 
of local cultures had already challenged the narrowness of classical ethnography and 
the  gospel  of  its  topoi  and  raised  questions  of  local  rationalities  and  African 
philosophy.
J. Copans insists on the advent of sociology and Marxism as major events which 
characterize this intellectual evolution of Africanism (in Gutkind and Wallerstein, 
1976). “Sociology was not just a new specialization, it constituted a complete break 
on several counts; empirically, as it was taking into consideration the real history of 
African peoples; in scale, as it moved on from the village to national social group 
(from `mini' to `maxi'); theoretically, as a materialistic and historical explanation took 
the place of Griaulian idealism which ignored the realities of colonialism” (1976:23). 
This new Marxist approach was induced in the late 195os by what Copans calls the 
“collapse of anticolonial unity.” This precipitated the appearance of a new theoretical 
field  of  Marxist  analysis:  the  world  economic  market,  struggles  for  political 
liberation, the development of social classes, capitalist economies and imperialisms, 
etc. Thus, after 1956, “Marxist thought found new life” insofar as from a Marxist 
viewpoint  Africa  was  “a  virgin  theoretical  field.”  “The  use  of  concepts  of  the 
imperialist system or modes of production was facilitated by an explanation in terms 
of unstable arrangements and the dynamism of contradictions.” After the ig6os, “the 
characteristics peculiar to neocolonialism led to research into the economic roots of 
exploitation and
189


--- PAGE 190 ---
into the political and revolutionary solutions to the overthrow of exploitation, and so 
to the adoption of a Marxist perspective” (1976:25).
By and  large,  I  agree  with  Copan's  diagnosis,  which  requires  a  dialectic  of 
analogical relations between the historical constructions of the Same and the new 
compliances with and about the Other. In this prospect, Marxism achieves a radically 
new  approach.  It  does  not  Westernize  a  virgin  terrain,  but  rather  confronts 
inattentivenesses, the supporting walls which suppose them, and assembles under the 
roof of the analogue, relations, contradictions, imaginations. In effect, the method 
results in an original type of visibility of differences in terms of theoretical traces of 
taking the place of and representing. Alterity-be it socioeconomic or cultural-becomes 
through  “models”  reenactable  under  the  modalities  of  technical  similarities  of 
relations between the Same and the Other. At the same time, these interpretative 
categories can be classified in the name of their regional context (e.g., Terray, 1969; 
Rey, 1973). The great originality of French Marxists and their African counterparts in 
the  ig6os  resides  in  this.  Beginning  with  G.  Balandier's  propositions  on 
macroperspectives in the field (1955a, 1955b), a new discourse unites what had been 
kept separate and opens the way to a general theory of historical and economic 
derivation as exemplified in the  works of Osende Afana (1967), J. Suret-Canale 
(1958), C. Meillassoux (1964, 1974), and C. Coquery-Vidrovitch (1972).
The centrality of history is thus remarkable in what Marxism expounds in African 
studies.  In  effect,  the  invention  of  an  African  history  coincides  with  a  critical 
evaluation of the history of the Same. One also observes that the possibility of an 
African history seems linked in a relation of necessity to a European questioning and 
redefinition of both what history is not and what it should be. For example, one notes 
that it is during the methodological renewal of the 1950s that Lévi-Strauss, in order to 
celebrate the “savage mind,” relativizes the very concept of history, which as he put 
it, “is a disconnected whole, formed of areas each of which is defined by a frequency 
of its own” (1962:340). He has since been followed by L. de Heusch and students 
who favor the structures of myths as pertinent loci of identity and differences (see 
Heusch, 1971, 1982).
The paradox becomes clearer. The concept of “African history” marked a radical 
transformation of anthropological narratives. A new type of discourse valorizes the 
diachronic dimension as part of knowledge about African cultures and encourages 
new  representations  of  the  “native,”  who  previously  was  a  mere  object  within 
European historicity. Its Marxist version offers the immediacy of objectivity through 
systems-signs of socioeconomic  relations that  permit both good pictures  of local 
organizations of power and production and intercultural comparisons. By means of a 
similar articulation, structuralist postulations, without rejecting the “new historical 
entity”  (see,  e.g.,  Heusch,  1971),  open  up  areas  of  synchronic  investigation, 
emphasizing  the  dialectic  tension  and  balance  between  regional  creativity  and 
universal constraints of the human mind (see, e.g., Heusch, 1985). In sum, Tempels,
190


--- PAGE 191 ---
Griaule, and all the apostles of African otherness have been subsumed in the Marxist 
project  of  a universal  discourse  of  the  Analogue,  as  witnessed  to  by the  neatly 
ambiguous ideology of Présence Africaine between 195o and ig6o. We find Sartre, 
Fanon, Garaudy, and Soviet communist scholars speaking to, and in dialogue with 
Bachelard, Senghor, Césaire, Maydieu, and Tempels. Later on, most visibly in the 
1970s, structuralist methodology, in a new reflection on cultures, renewed questions 
of methods apropos of interpretative discourses on non-Western societies. It thus 
challenged an ethnohistory which tends to forget that “history is ensnared by myth 
which imposes its own sovereignty on kings” (Heusch, 1982:2). Structuralism pro-
posed synchronic precepts for tabulating the forms of myths and cultures within a 
universal frame of relations of similarities and differences (Heusch, 1985).
I  cannot  wholeheartedly  accept  Copans's  analysis  of  the  succession  of 
methodological paradigms from Griaule to the historical materialism applied to the 
African context in the 195os and ig6os nor with respect to the advent of sociology in 
the same period as an epistemological event which would have transformed the entire 
economy of African studies  and the meaning  of its history.  Copans's analysis  is 
slightly misleading because the critical transformation of the 1950s is essentially and 
directly linked to a redefinition of both the object and aim of anthropology. This crisis 
expressed itself in African studies in two ways. One, a critique of and improvement 
upon  Malinowski's  functionalism,  which  with  structuralism  became  a  whole 
embodying effort for reading, commenting upon, and comparing myths and cultures 
independently of primitivist prejudices. As a consequence, Griaule's Conversations 
with  Ogotemmdli,  and  Tempels's Bantu  Philosophy stand  between  the  ghosts  of 
Taylor, Spencer, and Frazer, on one side and the lengthy conversation which has been 
uniting Malinowski, Lévi-Strauss, and de Heusch on the other. Strictly speaking, 
Griaule's or Tempels's idealism does not seem to belong to the past. Rather it still 
marks the oscillations of explanatory frameworks in programs for constituting or 
describing African forms of knowledge. The justification of Christianity seems an 
extreme case. It does not refer to a historical aberration but to a sociological fact: the 
universalization of a faith and a religious ideology appearing in the dispersion of both 
scientific and religious imaginations (see, e.g., Bimwenyi, 1981a).
Perhaps  nothing  has  been  more  significant  than  the  1978  conference  on 
Christianity  and  African  Religions  organized  by  the  Roman  Catholic  School  of 
Theology in Kinshasa. The Belgian scholar B. Verhaegan, who is both a Marxist and 
a Catholic, developed his concerns in terms of “a historical challenge”:
Christian  religions  in  Africa  will  be  marked  by  this  triple  influence:  the  capitalist  mode  of 
production having arrived at worldwide imperialism and having been linked to a colonial past. The 
question that one must pose is the
191


--- PAGE 192 ---
following:  how  colonial  policy  first,  then  imperialist  forces  and  the  organic  structures  of 
independent States influenced and manipulated religion in its content as well as in its forms and 
structures in terms of their own interests? (Verhaegen, 1979:184)
To  face  the  combined  effect  of  these  complementary  factors,  Verhaegen, 
following G. Gutierrezs theology of liberation, proposed three genres of theological 
discourse: a theology o f modernity which will link the search for social justice to the 
promotion  of  “reason,  science  and  progress”;  a  theology o  f  charity which  will 
address the issue of social inequalities and poverty and offer radically new moral 
solutions; and, finally, a theology o f development which will redefine modalities of 
development in terms of local interests (1979:188-89). Verhaegen concluded that
three characteristics will mark the new African theology: it will be contextual, in other words, 
stemming from the life and culture of African people; it will be a theology of liberation because the 
oppression is not to be found only in cultural oppression but also in the political and economic 
structures; it should recognize the place of women as a vital part of the struggle for liberation and 
the struggle against all forms of sexism in the society and in the church. (Verhaegen, 1979:19)
Throughout  the  following  years,  events  and  research  confirmed  Verhaegen's 
analysis. The philosophy of the Bulletin of African Theology (an ecumenical journal 
of  the  Association  of  African  Theologians)  encourages  stands  similar  to  those 
expounded in Verhaegen's 1979 text. It is important to note a collective concern about 
otherness in cultural and spiritual matters and the implicit integration of the “Marxist 
reason” in an idealist perspective on spiritual, economic, and social issues. Thus 
Griaule and Tempels's idealism is still operating, although in a different and discrete 
way. Nevertheless, it is widespread and efficient to the point where one might wonder 
if, in countries having a high percentage of Christians, such as Cameroon and Zaire, it 
is not a determining ideological current, at least in the short run (see, e.g., Ela, 1985).
As to the second point of my slight disagreement with Copans's analysis, it bears 
on the importance of sociology in the reconversion of Africanism in the 1950s. Let us 
begin by noting that the crisis in the field was neither original nor unique. It signified 
a wider malaise well-illustrated in the debate that opposed Sartre and Lévi-Strauss on 
history as a dialectic totality, the universality of categories of reasoning, and the 
significance  of the subject (e.g.,  LéviStrauss,  1962). The concepts of model  and 
structure  progressively  invaded  the  whole  field  of  social  and  human  sciences, 
postulating both an epistemological discontinuity with traditional practices and a new 
understanding of the object of scientific inquiry as well as what its discourse reveals. 
L. Althusser's theory of scientific production (1965) epitomizes this awareness.
192


--- PAGE 193 ---
Commenting upon the tension existing between sociology and history, F Braudel 
could write:
The  vocabulary is  the  same,  or  is  becoming  the  same,  because  the  problematic  is  becoming 
increasingly the same, under the convenient heading of the currently dominant two words model 
and structure .... In fact, whatever the cost, social science must construct a model, a general and 
particular explanation of social life, and substitute for a disconcerting empirical reality, a clearer 
image and one more susceptible to scientific application. (Braudel, 1980:73-74)
Thus, in the very center of human and social sciences, there is now affirmed a 
desire that in a radical manner interrogates the space of knowledge and the foundation 
of discourses expressing it. Lévi-Strauss's critique of sociology and history as two 
dimensions of the same figure, which in its mode of being as well as in its objective 
and  aim is  not  so  different  from the  anthropological  project  about  “primitives,” 
convincingly affirms the importance of new epistemological determinations (see, e.g., 
Lévi-Strauss, 1963:lntro.; 1968:Overture). Following Lévi-Strauss's line of reasoning, 
one  may  observe  that  history,  as  history  of  the  Same,  and  its  privileges  are 
challenged. P Veyne went further, subjecting the being of history to an evaluation and 
demonstrating that “history does not exist” (1984:15-30). On the other hand, he does 
not consecrate sociology. In the name of individual and collective identities in their 
differences  and  similarities,  Veyne  questioned  the  domain  of  sociological 
representations  and  the  validity  of  its  discourse:  “Sociology  is  still  at  a 
pre-Thucydidean stage. Being history, it cannot go further than the probable, the 
likely”  (1984:279).  Comte's “sociology was  a  science  of history `as  a whole,'  a 
science o f history; it was to establish the laws of history, like the `law of the three 
estates,' which is the description of the movement of history taken as whole. But that 
science of history has revealed itself to be impossible” (1984:268). As a consequence, 
sociology no longer has an object, particularly when it claims to be autonomous from 
history.
In my view, it is under this paradoxical sign of a challenged history that new 
horizons  have opened up in  African  studies  and account  for  present-day real  or 
potential  tensions.  M.  Herskovits's  initiatives  in  anthropology,  G.  Balandier's  in 
sociology,  J.  Vansina's  in  history,  J.  Coleman's  search  for  general  paradigms  in 
political science, are contemporaneous with this critical consciousness ensuring a new 
thesis  that  globally  negates  the  pertinence  of  the  inversed  figure  of  the  Same. 
Concretely, they impose on the field of African studies the rejection of grids leading 
to  pathologies  of  societies  and,  after  Tempels  and  Griaule,  those  positing  and 
classifying pathologies of beliefs. The African project of succession also designates 
this same configuration as its locus of creativity. In effect, in the early 1960s, the 
African scholar succeeded the anthropologist, the “native” theologian replaced the 
missionary, and the politician took the place of the colonial commissioner. All of 
them find reasons for their vocations in the dialectic of the Same and the
193


--- PAGE 194 ---
Other. It is strange and significant that they tend to rationalize their missions in 
terms of an encounter between a narcissistic relation to the Self and the dual relation 
with  the  Other  (see,  e.g.,  Nkrumah,  1957;  Senghor,  1962).  Thus  exegeses  or 
commentaries on a newly discovered local rationality appear as Gestalteneinheit; that 
is, a self-sufficient language, accounting for its economy of being and defining itself 
as a historical culture, becomes a frame of social cooperation uniting peoples in 
tolerance, making events intelligible and significant, and controlling the pace of its 
own change (see, e.g., Abraham, 1966:26-29).
In this respect, the new knowledge and its symbols do not destroy completely the 
relevance of the colonial library, nor the idealism of apostles of otherness. It has 
brought about new standards for the collectivization and democratization of historical 
reason and has reformulated residual questions concerning ideological power and 
scientific orthodoxy. Its best and probably excessive illustration is the Africanization 
of diffusionism as actualized by Cheikh Anta Diop (e.g., 1954, 1960a, 1981).
Three main initiatives combined to recapture the whole of African experience and 
witness to it reality. They are the integration of Islamic sources and imaginations into 
the “newly expanded library,” the constitution of a corpus of traditional texts, and a 
critical renewal of the anthropological authority.
The whole conception of African history had to be defined anew on the basis of 
Islamic contributions (Ki-Zerbo, 1972), which affect the classical historical doctrina 
by  bringing  up  new  witnesses  and  documents.  Islamic  narratives  enter  into  the 
episteme. Some African enigmas are now examined with the aid of commentaries and 
descriptions  by  Ibn  Hawkal  (tenth  century),  El  Bekri  (eleventh  century),  Idrisi 
(twelfth century), and Ibn Batuta, Ibn Khaldoun, and Maqrizi (fourteenth century). 
The sociohistorical phenomenon of “Black Islam,” as studied by V Monteil (1980), is 
a  primary  concept  for  some  important  periods  of  history,  and  the  tarikhs,  or 
chronicles, have become valued sources. Islamic sources have always  constituted 
important dimensions for the search and invention of African paradigms (see, e.g., 
Blyden, 1967). Islamic culture has powerfully contributed to the passion of alterity, 
particularly in West Africa, where it still exposes schemas and lessons on social 
harmony and its philosophy (e.g., Ba, 1972; Hama, 1969; 1972; Kane, 1961). But, by 
and large, the Islamic discourse was until the ig6os an ideological interference within 
the ktèma es aei embodied by the colonial library as, for example, represented ad 
absurdum by the life and passion of Tierno Bokar (Ba and Cardaire, 1957; Brenner, 
1984).
The constitution of a corpus of African traditional texts is undeniably one of the 
most important achievements in the field. The most impressive collection remains the 
series of Classiques A fricains created by E. de Dampierre in Paris on the model of 
the Greek and Latin classics of La Collection Budé. Note that since the first years of 
this century,  folklorists have been publishing translations of traditional narratives 
under  the  name  of  “oral  literature”  (see  Scheub,  1971,  1977).  For  years  these 
collections served as professed monuments 
194


--- PAGE 195 ---
to  pericivilized  or  marginal  experiences.  Frobenius's  African  Genesis  (1937),  for 
example, contributed to a scientific curiosity by transferring narratives from their 
original context and language into a European language and conceptual frame. They 
then become formulas for a diffusionist thesis. On the whole, until the 1950s, most of 
the published works were based on similar transference. Narratives were submitted to 
a theoretical order, and rather than accounting for their own being and their own 
meaning, they were mainly used as tools to illustrate grand theories concerning the 
evolution and transformations of literary genres. Kagame's project of promoting an 
indigenous  reading  of  traditional  narratives  has  been-despite  its  internal 
weaknesses-one  of  the  most  serious  and  least  extroverted  approaches  to  African 
genres. By making available some basic texts pertinent to the hypothesis of Bantu 
ontology,  the  Belgian  scholar,  J.  A.  Theuws  (1954,  1983),  makes  a  similar 
contribution.  Narratives  presented  in  the  truth  of  their  language  and authenticity 
become texts of real peoples and not merely the results of theoretical manipulations.
This new perspective has been reorganizing the field for some years now. The 
authority of reading and classifying genres, texts, and literatures from some kind of 
divine position, which does not demand a knowledge of a specific social context, its 
culture, and language, is being progressively replaced by concrete questions bearing 
upon contextual authority and the necessity of linking narratives to their cultural and 
intellectual conditions of possibility. By way of illustration, one naturally turns to the 
magnificent collection of Classiques a fricains published first by Julliard and then by 
A. Colin under the direction of E. de Dampierre. Recently, K. Anyidoho surveyed the 
geography of the field (1985), H. Scheub evaluated the “state of the art” (1985), and 
S. Arnold described changing aspects of African literary studies (1985). Examining 
these  articles,  one  finds  a  resolute  new  message:  African  literature  studies  is 
interested in knowledge and every text is worthy of being considered literature.
This commitment is  in itself  a problem, insofar  as  it  claims  to  apply to  all 
narratives, be they in African or European languages. Diverse texts produced for 
differing purposes and in different economic areas are all lumped together as material 
for one discipline.  At the mercy of scientific  paradigms  and grids, they become 
almost identical memories, reflecting in the same way African social relations of 
production, ideological signals, and cultural geographies. Intellectual histories mix 
with ethnographies, imaginative works in English or French with “oral narratives.” 
The uniformizing dichotomy of modern versus traditional organizes the competing 
values and merits of texts. What this sort of literary criticism does to the actual 
experience and meaning that the text expressed in its original cultural context does 
not seem to concern most students of African literature.
From an anthropology redefining itself come new possibilities and questions. L. 
de  Heusch  has  brought  structuralism  to  African  studies,  rediscovered  Frazer's 
universal mythemes and faced the question of the being of the Analogue.
195


--- PAGE 196 ---
Frazer . . . curiously neglected to point out that the drama of the Passion, reenacted on Christian 
altars, is a universal theme. Christianity's greatness lies in knowing how to present the political 
assassination perpetrated in Judea by the Roman coloniser, as the ultimate sacrifice and in having 
tried  to  build  on  this  schema-at  the  price  of  a  metaphysical  illusion-a  society of  peace  and 
brotherhood. That message can never again be forgotten. Yet a blind man's soft voice, which would 
not have been heard outside Dogon country if Griaule had not been so attentive, also deserves to be 
considered as a profession of sacrificial faith, based on the hope of a more humane, more balanced 
world . . . the sacrifice circulates “a word,” destined for all, says the old Ogotemmêli. (Heusch, 
1985:206)
Disciples of Ricoeur and Gadamer are also proposing ways for conciliating a 
critical consciousness with the authority of regional cultural texts, as in the case of 
Bellman's study on symbol and metaphors in Poro ritual (1984), or Tshiamalenga's 
philosophy  of  sin  in  the  Luba  tradition  (1974),  as  well  as  his  linguistic  and 
anthropological analysis of the ntu vision of the human being (1973). Semiology, as 
an  intellectual  tool  for  examining  social  signs,  and  hermeneutics,  as  means  and 
method of reading and interpreting these social signs, may indicate a future direction 
for African Studies. They address an apparently simple question: how can one unveil 
and describe African experience? Is it just a matter of the methodological association 
of concepts, which when applied well will reveal an empirical reality, or is it a 
problem  concerning  the  explanatory  principles  of  scientific  and  philosophical 
models?
The main problem concerning the being of African discourse remains one of the 
transference of methods and their cultural integration in Africa. However, beyond this 
question lies another: how can one reconcile the demands of an identity and the 
credibility of a claim to knowledge with the process of refounding and reassuming an 
interrupted historicity within representations? Moreover, could not one hypothesize 
that, despite the cleverness of discourses and the competency of authors, they do not 
necessarily reveal la chose du texte, that which is out there in the African traditions, 
insistent  and  discrete,  determining  the  traditions  yet  independent  from  them? 
Colonialism and its trappings, particularly applied  anthropology and Christianity, 
tried to silence this. African discourses today, by the very epistemological distance 
which  makes  them  possible,  explicit,  and  credible  as  scientific  or  philosophical 
utterances, might just be commenting upon rather than unveiling la chose du texte. 
This  notion,  which  belongs  to  hermeneutics,  and  which  according  to  Ricoeur's 
proposition calls for an obedience to the text in order to unfold its meaning, could be 
a key to the understanding of African gnosis. As an African responsibility, this gnosis 
emerged in the gradual and progressive preeminence of history and has marked all 
discourses for intellectual succession.
In history, the ambition of this gnosis has, since the 196os, been embodied in the 
work of such scholars as Ajayi, Ki-Zerbo, Obenga, and others. They brought into a 
dialogue the authority of historical methods and forms of life and societies which up 
to the 1950s were largely considered historically
196


--- PAGE 197 ---
mute.  Against  the  mythologies  of  anthropology,  rightly or  wrongly,  the  critique 
historique faced ideologies of otherness and combined with them in syntheses that 
claimed to represent the stimulation as well as the diachronic circulation of a dynamic 
African history. In effect, the project seems original, yet by the notion of alterity that 
is its motto, if it correctly challenges the colonial libraries, where is its obedience to 
the  text?  Moreover,  which  text  does  it  obey?  Do  not  its  methodological 
presuppositions  and  techniques  determine  both  its  epistemological  origin  and  its 
internal limits as historical discourse? These are classic questions that refer to the 
now  controverted  distinction  between  the  methods  of  history  and 
sociology-anthropology. On the other hand, they permit the blame to be placed on the 
most fruitful propositions only when these are used for what seems to go against the 
established tradition. Wagner recently gave us a useful lesson by noting that the 
“much celebrated `Western history' is in fact invention placed `out of awareness'.” He 
also observes that “the future of anthropology lies in its ability to exorcize `difference' 
and make it conscious and explicit, both with regard to its subject matter and to itself” 
(1981: 158). In a similar vein, Paul Ricoeur could state  that “man's history will 
progressively become a vast explanation in which each civilization will work out its 
perception of the world by confronting all others” (1965:283).
What African history and philosophy have been doing since their inception has 
been to make  the  difference explicit, not always  calculatedly nor for utility but, 
paradoxically (if  one  keeps  in  mind  Wagner's  proposal),  as the  dynamic  side  of 
anthropology.  This  side  witnesses  to  the  explicit  difference  of  an  uninterrupted 
historical  configuration  in  which,  as  Ajayi  once  put  it,  the  colonial  experience 
signifies a brief parenthesis.
Developments  that  gave  rise  in  the  1950s  to  the  contributions  of  American 
cultural anthropology, British social anthropology, and French Marxist anthropology 
are rooted in the history of the discipline and also related to changes that had occurred 
in African and Western societies since the 1920S. Among the most important, as we 
have seen,  are  the  impact of anticolonialist  movements and  African  criticism of 
anthropology. A new discourse appeared, which was not only critical of colonialism 
but of all the dominant colonial culture. But let us note two problems. Despite the fact 
that the liberation movements opposed anthropology as a structural factor of colo-
nization, some pre- and post-independence African policies seem predicated upon the 
results  of  applied  anthropology.  Many  African  leaders,  in  order  to  legitimize  a 
political  process  and  to  establish  the  right  to  differentiate  themselves  from  the 
colonizers,  accepted  such  colonial  anthropological  concepts  as  tribe,  cultural 
particularism, etc. On the other hand, while new politically liberal trends were rapidly 
developing in anthropology, other African leaders referred to early and controversial 
hypotheses.  The  most  illuminating  case  is  Senghor's  system  (1962),  in  which 
anthropologists' speculations are, inter alia, combined with Marxism. Also, African 
personality  ideology  gave  rise  to  the  ambiguous  social  philosophy  of  Nkrumah 
(1970). In the same vein,
197


--- PAGE 198 ---
negritude celebrated anthropologists who allowed Africans to extol the originality of 
their culture, and some of the present-day philosophical trends are still firmly based 
upon anthropology's premises (N'daw, 1983). Even in the Arab world, the advocacy 
of  a  dynamic cultural  perspective  relies  heavily on  a  preliminary critique  of  an 
already given Western orientalism (see, e.g., Laroui, 1967).
These  paradoxes  reveal  that  we  are  dealing  with  ideology.  Modern  African 
thought seems somehow to be basically a product of the West. What is more, since 
most African leaders and thinkers have received a Western education, their thought is 
at  the  crossroads  of Western epistemological filiation and African  ethnocentrism. 
Moreover,  many  concepts  and  categories  underpinning  this  ethnocentrism  are 
inventions of the West. When prominent leaders such as Senghor or Nyerere propose 
to synthetize liberalism and socialism, idealism and materialism, they know that they 
are transplanting Western intellectual manicheism.
The conceptual framework of African thinking has been both a mirror and a 
consequence of the experience of European hegemony; that is, in Gramsci's terms, 
“the dominance of one social bloc over another, not simply by means of force or 
wealth,  but  by  a  social  authority  whose  ultimate  sanction  and  expression  is  a 
profound cultural supremacy.” These signs of a major contradiction are manifest in 
the  increasing  gap between social  classes, and within  each class, of the conflict 
between those who are culturally Westernized Africans and the others. In order to 
understand the structural factors that account for the contradiction, it might be useful 
to analyze the effects of economic levels  as well  as the archaeology of cultural 
ideologies.
At  any rate,  insofar  as  the  African  gnosis  is  concerned,  it seems  that  while 
Tempels, Griaule, Kagame, Mulago, Lufuluabo, and other scholars were drawing 
lessons from Schmidt's heritage and thinking of implementing in theology as well as 
in philosophy and history new policies of exploiting African culture, Malinowski's 
legacy was questioned in toto. Not until the 1970s, was Schmidt's legacy interrogated 
from a  strictly philosophical  point  of  view  through  the  critique  of  Tempels  and 
Kagame. From then on, two methods appeared: one turns towards a critical practice 
of social and human sciences; another, inverting Ein fiihlung into a method of looking 
at oneself, concerns itself with rigorous techniques of converting Schmidt's, Griaule's, 
Tempels's and Kagame's contributions into strictly hermeneutic or anthropological 
practices as defined by such thinkers as Gadamer, Ricoeur, and Lévi Strauss.
Today,  philosophy  and  sociology  journals  and  university  departments  have 
become the loci not only for academic exercises, but also for questioning the meaning 
of political power and interrogating all power-knowledge systems. In the school year 
1968-1969, the  humanist Senghor closed  the University of Dakar to silence this 
questioning. Mobutu of Zaire, in 1971, moved the Department of Philosophy and the 
School of Letters two thousand kilometers from his capital. Ahidjo in Cameroon and 
Houphouët-Boigny in
198


--- PAGE 199 ---
Ivory Coast considered themselves magnanimous for permitting the existence of 
departments of philosophy, history, and sociology they opposed. Kenyatta of Kenya 
felt similarly and his successor closed the University of Kenya at the first social 
disturbance that challenged his political power. These examples provoke a question: 
where does one place philosophy and the social sciences in Africa, if, as a body of 
knowledge and as the practice of essentially critical disciplines, they seem to be 
marginal in the power structure?
Gnosis is by definition a kind of secret knowledge. The changes of motives, the 
succession of theses about foundation, and the differences of scale in interpretations 
that I have tried to bring to light about African gnosis witness to the vigour of a 
knowledge which is sometimes African by virtue of its authors and promoters, but 
which extends to a Western epistemological territory. The task accomplished so far is 
certainly impressive.  On the other hand,  one wonders whether  the discourses  of 
African gnosis do not obscure a fundamental reality, their own chose du texte, the 
primordial African discourse in its variety and multiplicity. Is not this reality distorted 
in the expression of African modalities in non-African languages? Is it not inverted, 
modified  by  anthropological  and  philosophical  categories  used  by  specialists  of 
dominant discourses? Does the question of how to relate in a more faithful way to la 
chose  du  texte  necessarily imply another  epistemological  shift?  Is  it  possible  to 
consider this shift outside of the very epistemological field which makes my question 
both possible and thinkable?
The only answer which can bring us back to reality would consider the condition 
of existence of African gnosis and of its best sign, anthropology, as both a challenge 
and a promise. Perhaps this gnosis makes more sense if seen as a result of two 
processes: first, a permanent reevaluation of the limits of anthropology as knowledge 
in order to transform it into a more credible anthropou-logos, that is a discourse on a 
human being; and, second, an examination of its own historicity. What this gnosis 
attests to is thus, beyond its will for power and its conceptual apparatus, a dramatic 
but ordinary question  about  its  own being:  what  is it and how can it remain  a 
pertinent question mark?
199


--- PAGE 200 ---
Conclusion
THE GEOGRAPHY OF A 
DISCOURSE
Concerning the historians, we must distinguish 
among them to the effect that many have 
composed works on both Egypt and Ethiopia, 
of whom some have given credence to false 
reports and others have invented many tales 
out of their own minds for the delectation of 
their readers, and so may justly be distrusted.
DIODORUS Of Sicily.
African  gnosis,  that  is,  both  the  scientific  and  ideological  discourse  on  Africa, 
presents two main questions. The first concerns the problem of regional rationalities, 
which in its best expressions, Marxist anthropology and structuralism, posits de facto 
the thesis of an original logic or transhistoric thought. This primary rationality should 
be understood as both condition of history and transhistoric  permanence  since it 
cannot be conceived as part of history. On this point, Godelier thinks Lévi-Strauss 
and Marx would agree:
For Lévi-Strauss: “All social life, even elementary, presupposes an intellectual activity in man of 
which the formal properties, consequently, cannot be reflection of the concrete organization of the 
society.” For Marx: `Since the thought process itself grows out of the conditions, is itself a natural 
process, thinking that really comprehends must always be the same, and can only vary gradually 
according to maturity of development, including that of the organ by which the thinking is done. 
Everything else is drivel.” (Godelier, 1977:215)
The second question concerns the concept of history, which in a first approximate 
definition could be described as an intellectual effort of ordering human activities and 
social  events  chronologically.  Specialized  investigations  have  indeed  generated 
important  issues.  I  shall  note  only  two  that  directly  confront  African  gnosis 
discourses.  One  is  the  postulation  that  history  reflects  or  should  translate  the 
dynamics of human needs through time. Thus a particular history could be seen as a 
rhetorical  paradigm,  giving  expression  to  the  reality  of  a  conjunction  of  such 
variables as thought, space, and type of human being. From this postulation, one 
conclusion, which in fact is simply
200


--- PAGE 201 ---
an hypothesis, could be that expounded by José Ortega y Gasset: “Each geographic 
space, insofar as it is a space for a possible history, is . . . a function of many 
variables.” (Ortega y Gasset, 1973:271). A great number of theorists would agree with 
Ortega y Gasset when he claims that “the history of reason is the history of the stages 
through which the domestication of our disorderly imagining has gone. There is no 
other way than to understand how that refining of the human mind has continued to 
be produced” (Ortega y Gasset, 1973:272). Yet common sense indicate a paradox-the 
very  concept  of  history  is  not  transparent.  Against  the  dogmatic  certainties  of 
traditional historians, one would then accept to rethink the concept of history and face 
the challenge presented by the French Ecole des Annales. E Braudel clearly posed the 
basic demands of the problem:
History exists at different levels, I would even go so far as to say three levels but that would be only 
in a manner of speaking, and simplifying things too much. There are ten, a hundred levels to be 
examined, ten, a hundred different time spans. On the surface, the history of events works itself out 
in the short term: it is a sort of microhistory. Halfway down, a history of conjunctures follows a 
broader, slower rhythm . . . And over and above the “récitatif” of the conjuncture, structural history, 
or the history of the longue durée, inquires into whole centuries at a time. It functions along the 
border between the moving and the immobile, and because of the long-standing stability of its 
values, it appears unchanging compared with all the histories which flow and work themselves out 
more swiftly, and which in the final analysis gravitate around it. (Braudel, 1980:74)
The problem of a history that can be thought of as a question mark or, to put it in 
a maore optimistic manner, as a project, is thus directly linked to both the subject and 
the object of history. History is both a discourse of knowledge and a discourse of 
power. To use Foucault's language, history, as well as all human science, has the 
“project of bringing man's consciousness back to its real condition, of restoring it to 
the contents and forms that brought it into being, and elude us within it” (1973:364).
Let us pause to clarify the difficulties brought about by these two main questions 
of African gnosis. First, there is the thesis of a transhistoric thought, which constitutes 
a challenge of all external determinations, including the historical. In effect, in the 
positions of Marx and Lévi-Strauss, thought has no history and could have one only 
as part of a history of matter. Second, the thesis of history as a dynamic of variables 
(Ortega  y  Gasset),  or as  a  theoretical  model  combining  a multi-level  diachronic 
rhythm (Braudel), explicitly or implicitly posits thought as a major factor in the 
evolution of cultures, understood as different historical characters. To perceive the 
silently supposed importance of critical thought's initiatives, one has only to refer to 
the three criteria that according to Braudel (1980:202-5) should be retained for “one 
good  definition”  of  a  civilization.  These  are:  a  cultural  area  or  locus  with  its 
characteristics and its particular coherence, the borrowing of cultural
201


--- PAGE 202 ---
goods as sign of positive exchanges or traffic that never stops, and, finally, refusals, 
the  contrary of  diffusion,  in  which  “each  civilization  makes  its  decisive  choice 
through which it asserts and reveals itself” (Braudel, 1980:203).
Although the two theses are not necessarily contradictory (Braudel claims that he 
stands “shoulder to shoulder with Claude Lévi-Strauss” [1980:205]), their presence in 
African gnosis divides the geography of this discourse into two opposed spaces. On 
the one side, synchronically oriented discourses, generally anthropological, claim to 
unveil the organization of a cultural economy and its regional rationality; on the 
other,  diachronically  motivated  discourses,  such  as  Marxist  history and  political 
ideologies,  present  grids  for  both  interpretation  of  and  action  upon  dialectical 
discontinuities of social systems. This distinction does justice to a controversial yet 
universally  and  dogmatically  accepted  dichotomy  distinguishing  tradition  and 
modernity in African gnosis. What this separation means in terms of pertinence and 
scientific  validity can  be  evaluated  on  the  basis  of  a  simple illustration.  Let  us 
suppose that a social scientist decides to interpret present-day French culture by 
formulating and determining the signs of a tradition using only one source. He uses J. 
Favret-Saada's analysis of cases of witchcraft and possession in a rural sub-culture 
(Favret-Saada, 1977) and opposes them to the signs of a modernity system such as 
those  studied  by M.  Duverger  in  political  science  and  M.  Crozier  in  sociology. 
Nobody would take such a fabula seriously. In effect, major issues are at stake: how 
are these two spaces to be dissociated and on the basis of what criteria? In which 
sense does the socalled traditional arrangement define itself as an autonomous field 
outside of modernity and vice-versa? In which mode of being are the concepts of 
tradition and modernity expressed and formulated within a cultural area?
It could be argued that in African gnosis anthropology, and thus the notion of a 
“native” tradition, preceded the body of diachronically oriented discourses pertaining 
to social relations of production, organization of power, and ideologies. Consequently, 
one ought not forget the procedures by which these discourses were founded nor that 
they  articulated  a  culture  that  contemporary  students  can  interrogate  from  the 
viewpoint of their modernity. Yet I am not convinced by such reasoning. In my view, 
it does not justify the static binary opposition between tradition and modernity, for 
tradition (traditio) means discontinuities through a dynamic continuation and possible 
conversion of tradita (legacies). As such, it is part of a history in the making. J. F 
Romano's and G. Gavazzi's narratives, for example, do not offer a closed totality of 
the  seventeenth-century  Kongo  but  rather  present  systems  of  local  customs, 
sociocultural signs that they believe Christianity could transform for the better.
It is the episteme of the nineteenth and early twentieth centuries that invented the 
concept  of  a  static  and  prehistoric  tradition.  Travelers'  reports  localize  African 
cultures  as  “beings-in-themselves”  inherently  incapable  of  living  as 
“beings-for-themselves.” Theorists such as Spencer and Lévy-Bruhl
202


--- PAGE 203 ---
interpreted and classified these monstrosities as existing at the beginning of both 
history and consciousness. Functionalism, through analyses of primitive otherness, 
offered scientific credibility to the concept of historical deviation between prehistoric 
civilizations and the Western paradigm of history.
Let me clarify two major epistemological propositions. First, at the very heart of 
the  nineteenth-century  European  ambition  of  interpreting  and  classifying  human 
cultures according to a scale, one faces history as a theoretical and abstract vocation, 
which refers to various achievements. To use E de Saussure's concepts, it is strictly 
speaking a sort of langue whose meaning and power are given and actualized in such 
paroles  as  biological  characteristics  of  beings,  evolution  and  organization  of 
language, economic structures of social formation, structuration of religious beliefs 
and practices. These paroles are linked in a relation of necessity to the minds of 
peoples who have put them forth and, by extension, to their culture as a whole. 
History is  not  a  neutral  concept  here.  It  is  a  normative  langue,  a  being,  which 
socializes  the cogito and all its metaphoric  duplications. It subsumes all cultural 
paroles. As such, it identifies with their locus or culture, reflects and expresses itself 
as both a normative in-itself and for-itself. It properly visualizes the Hegelian dream. 
In this sense, and in this sense only, Belgian and French colonizers were not mistaken 
when,  following  Lévy-Bruhl's  famous  dichotomy,  they used  to  postulate  a  clear 
distinction between prelogism and Cartesianism, primitiveness and civilization. Yet 
they were both uncritical and naive in not seeing that such a separation was simply a 
poor transposition of a refusal to face and think the implicit, the unthought, the An 
sick, negated in their own cultural experience by the sovereignty of a history which 
was a mystifying socialization of the cogito. Foucault is perfectly correct when he 
observes  that  “the  modern  cogito  does  not reduce  the  whole  being  of  things  to 
thought without ramifying the being of thought right down to the inert network of 
what does not think” (1973:324). In sum, the discovery of primitiveness was an 
ambiguous invention of a history incapable of facing its own double.
My second epistemological proposition comes from taking the risk of studying 
and evaluating Foucault's proposition that the entire history of the human sciences 
from the nineteenth century onward can be retraced on the basis of three conceptual 
pairs: function and norm, conflict and rule, signification and system.
These constituent models are borrowed from the three domains of biology, economics, and the 
study of language. It is upon the projected surface of biology that man appears as being possessing 
functions-receiving stimuli (physiological ones, but also social, interhuman, and cultural ones), 
reacting to them, adapting himself, evolving, submitting to the demands of an environment, coming 
to terms with the modifications it imposes, seeking to erase imbalances, acting in accordance with 
regularities, having, in short, conditions of existence and the possibility of finding average norms of 
adjustment which permit him to perform his functions. On the projected surface of
203


--- PAGE 204 ---
economics, man appears as having needs and desires, as seeking to satisfy them, and therefore as 
having interests, desiring profits, entering into opposition with other men; in short, he appears in an 
irreducible situation of conflict; he evades these conflicts, he escapes from them or succeeds in 
dominating them, in finding a solution that will-on one level at least, and for a time-appease their 
contradictions; he establishes a body of rules which are both a limitation of the conflict and a result 
of it. Lastly, on the projected surface of language, man's behaviour appears as an attempt to say 
something; his slightest gestures, even their involuntary mechanisms and their failures, have a 
meaning; and everything he arranges around him by way of objects, rites, customs, discourse, all 
the traces he leaves behind him, constitute a coherent whole and a system of signs. Thus, these three 
pairs of function and norm, conflict and rule, signification and system completely cover the entire 
domain of what can be known about man. (Foucault, 1973:357)
Now let us imagine a panoramic view of African gnosis as a spatial configuration. 
From left to right we can follow a chronological order and thus go successively from 
discourses on primitiveness to modernist commentaries on organization of production 
and those on power. The body of texts on the left side supposedly unveils a tradition; 
that on the right side should witness to ruptures, transformations, and challenges 
brought about by the efficiency of colonialism. In between, one notes a confused 
intermediary area. For some theorists, it is a pure blank symbolizing both a geological 
and an archaeological discontinuity between tradition and modernity. For others, this 
middle space is the locus of aberrant expressions of acculturation. At any rate, we 
observe  that  the  content  of  discourses  on  tradition,  that  is  otherness  as  both 
monstrosity and corpus mirabiliorium, has not qualitatively changed since the first 
reports  of  the  sixteenth  and  seventeenth  centuries.  Contrary  to  the  claims  of 
anthropological  textbooks,  one  can  still  integrate  data  and  categories  from most 
present-day studies  into  the  grid  proposed  by Varenius  in  his  165o  Geographia 
Generalis. This proposes a classification based on observations of
(I) the stature of the Natives, as to their shape, colour, length of life, Original, Meat, and Drink, etc., 
(2)  Their  Trafficks and Arts in which  the inhabitants  are  employed,  (3) Their virtues,  Vices, 
Learning, Wit, etc., (4) Their Customs in Marriage, Christenings, and Burials, etc., (5) Their Speech 
and Language, (6) Their State-Government, (7) Their Religion and Church-Government, (8) Their 
Cities and most renowned Places, (9) Their memorable Histories, and (10) their famous Men, 
Artificers, and Inventions of the Natives of all Countries. (In Hodgen, 1971:168)
What makes nineteenth and twentieth century discourses on tradition pertinent is 
not their sophistication and so-called capacity for discriminating cultural features and 
organizing taxonomies, but the epistemological significance of their models and the 
system of  values  these  models  imply and  manifest.  Tempels  (1945) and  Griaule 
(1948) did not discover an African
204


--- PAGE 205 ---
rationality  but  rather  redescribe  clearly  with  new  metaphors  that  which  was  a 
pathological deviation according to Tylor, Durkheim, and Lévy-Bruhl. The shift in 
models does not make the new “invention” necessarily more credible than the first. It 
mostly  postulates  a  different  system  of  values  by  emphasizing  otherness  and 
qualifying it from its localized norms, regional rules, and coherence. Thus it accounts 
for what made it possible, a pluralization of Western social and human sciences.
This  process  and  its  contradictions  are  probably  clearer  in  discourses  on 
modernity, which implicitly or explicitly operate on the basis of a philosophy of 
history  and  study  African  organizations  through  such  metaphors  as  political 
hybridism,  cultural  schizophrenia,  economic  dualism,  etc.,  which  all  refer  to the 
concept of acculturation. The debate on this issue has been exemplified by J. Jahn's 
Muntu (1961). In this book, Jahn bases his argument on Friedell's statement that 
“legend  is  not  one  of  the  forms,  but  rather  the  only  form,  in  which  we  can 
imaginatively consider and relive history. All history is saga and myth, and as such 
the product of the state of our intellectual powers at a particular time: of our capacity 
for  comprehension,  the  vigour  of  our  imagination,  our  feeling  for  reality.”  Jahn 
writes:
The Africa presented by the ethnologist is a legend in which we used to believe. The African 
tradition as it appears in the light of neo-African culture may also be a legend-but it is the legend in 
which African intelligence believes. And it is their perfect right to declare authentic, correct and true 
those components of their past which they believe to be so. (Jahn, 1961:17)
Let us temporarily set aside the plausibility of the thesis. The argument insists on 
reasons for ordering a legend as expounded by Friedell, according to whom “every 
age has a definite picture of all past events accessible to it, a picture peculiar to itself” 
(Jahn, 1961:17). This seems to outline a type of convenience history. It does not, 
however, postulate a priori inclinations as the only foundation and explication of 
historical analyses, nor does it reject methods for verifying and validating historical 
reconstructions. Rather it challenges the silent yet commonly accepted valorization 
principle that transmutes historical genres into human history and claims to explain, 
from the truth of the Western enunciative space of models, the articulation of history 
as an absolute order of both universal power and knowledge. An apt illustration is 
Weber's  indignation  about  some  recent  textbooks:  “The  idea  of  a  sort  of 
politico-social equity in history which would want-at last! at last!-to give Bantu and 
(American) Indian peoples, so outrageously despised up to now, a place at least as 
important  as  to  the  Athenians,  is  quite  simply  naïve”  (in  Veyne,  1984:52). 
Paradoxically, against the so-called scientific ideal of historical activity which founds 
it, Weber's position underscores the pertinence of Jahn's pronouncement: history is a 
relation to values and sets itself on mechanisms of intellectual valorization. As Veyne 
aptly put it, “one does not prefer the Athenians to the Indians in the name of certain 
established
205


--- PAGE 206 ---
values; it is the fact that one prefers them that makes them into values; a tragic 
gesture of unjustifiable selection would serve as a basis for every possible vision of 
history” (1984: 51)
It is clear that as a polemic stance, Jahn's thesis is sound. In its most general 
ambition,  it  posits  two  types  of  doubt:  the  first,  about  the  universalization  of 
modalities for deciphering and interpreting Western diachronic transformations; the 
second, about the principle of transferring categories from one cultural field of human 
experience to another. More specifically, the first is applied to Jaspers's theory of 
history,  according  to  which  the  virtues  of  two  revolutions-the  age  of  reflective 
thought  between  900  and  800  B.C.  and  the  more  recent  age  of  science  and 
technology-endow Western civilization with a unique capacity for both development 
and extension that can only destroy all non-Western cultures. Jahn notes that Jaspers 
“foresees for them no adjustment, but only their extinction or the fate of becoming 
mere  raw  material  to be processed  by technological  civilization”  (1961:13).  The 
second doubt concerns Malinowski's functional theory of cultural change, according 
to which African cultures change by the fact of European pressures and, unable to 
overcome  the  divisive  effects  of  its  own  transformation,  produce  cultural 
monstrosities. To Jaspers's assessment that African cultures are destined to crumble 
and Malinowski's formulation of economic and cultural aberrations, Jahn proposes an 
alternative: a “neoculture” combining the best of European and African experience.
The present and the future . . . will be determined by the conception that African intelligence forms 
of the African past. Neo-African culture appears as an unbroken extension, as the legitimate heir of 
tradition. Only where man feels himself to be heir and successor to the past has he the strength for a 
beginning. (Jahn, 1961:18)
It is now possible to make more explicit the tension Jahn's argument represents. 
On the one hand, we have the body of legends constituted by the colonial library and 
exemplified by primitivist anthropology. It is a constellation in which one accounts 
for differences with theories using functional paradigms and external causes. They 
depict deviations from the normativeness of a history or of a rationality. On the other 
hand,  there is the  new  corpus accepted  by the African  intelligentsia, such as A. 
Césaire, J. B. Danquah, M. Deren, Cheikh A. Diop, A. Kagame, E. Mphahlele, J. H. 
Nketia, L. S. Senghor, etc. Although incomplete and probably a legend itself, the new 
corpus should reflect the authority of local systems of rules, signification, and order. 
Can  we  not  understand  this  chronological  succession,  particularly when  we  pay 
attention to its complexity (from Durkheim to Cheikh Anta Diop, from Levy-Bruhl to 
Tempels  and  Griaule,  from  Frobenius  to  Nkrumah  and  Senghor),  as  a  simple 
modification in strategies of manipulating concepts and metaphors? In effect, orders 
and  grids  of  interpretation  do  not  and  cannot  change  the  reality  they  claim  to 
translate. Yet it is not important insofar as it does not address the major issue explicit 
in Jahn's
206


--- PAGE 207 ---
thesis-that  of  inventing  these  strategies.  Foucault's  questions  on  regroupings  of 
discourses in nineteenth-century Europe are pertinent here:
Is it necessity that links them together, makes them invisible, calls them to their right places one 
after another and makes of them successive solutions to one and the same problem? Or chance 
encounters  between  ideas  of  different  origin,  influences,  discoveries,  speculative  climates, 
theoretical  models  that  the  patience  or  genius  of  individuals  arranges  into  more  or  less 
well-constituted wholes? Or can one find a regularity between them and define the common system 
of their formation? (Foucault, 1982:64)
The cohesion of new strategies appeared in a well defined period between the 
1920s and the 1950s. A reconversion of models gradually ensured new metaphors that 
question African society's supposedly functional pathologies, its aberrant structural 
conflicts, and the so-called poverty of its history and accomplishments.
By way of illustration, here are the three main types of theories I have analyzed. 
(a) African writing, in literature and in politics, proposes new horizons emphasizing 
the alterity of the subject and the importance of the archeological locus. Negritude, 
black personality, and Pan-Africanist movements are the best known strategies that 
postulate  a  major  anthropological  stance:  nobody  is  at  the  center  of  human 
experience, and there is no human who could be defined as the center of creation. (b) 
The  orthodoxy of  functionalism is  progressively splintered.  One  key lies  in  the 
contributions of German anthropology, particularly of Schmidt's diffusionist Viennese 
School which idealizes the concept of philosophia perennis. This gives impetus to 
Tempels's formulation of the hypothesis of a Bantu ontology. At the same time, it can 
be linked to Griaule's revelation: Dogon cosmology justifies and explains its own 
internal procedures of interpreting the universe, of organizing and accounting for the 
world and its past. An “ethnophilosophy” is born. Later on, after the 1960s, it will 
become  an  exacting  philosophical  question  (Hountondji,  1983),  a  hermeneutical 
challenge (Tshiamalenga, 1980), or a proposal for a radical rethinking of both the 
concept of primitive revelation and the foundation of Christian theology (Bimwenyi, 
1981a; Eboussi-Boulaga, 1981; Nothomb, 1965). (c) It is commonplace to say that 
anthropology, by its practical activity of describing “primitive organizations” and by 
its ambiguous programs of controlling them for the sake of colonialism, produced the 
need for an in-depth understanding of synchronic dynamics, which could only lead to 
the  concept  of  African  history.  J.  Vansina's  theory of  oral  tradition  as  historical 
discourse (1961) is just a moment, exemplary but only one stage in the process of 
reinventing the African past, a necessity since the 1920S. Everybody knows that 
when  oral  tradition  was  raised  to  the  ambiguous  respectability  of  a  historical 
document, a critical reading of European models about the African past led Cheikh 
Anta Diop and Ajayi to ask uncomfortable questions about how a
207


--- PAGE 208 ---
truly African history is the history of Africa (Diop, 1954, 1960a; Ajayi, 1969).
The  cohesion  of  these  various  strategies  resides  in the  way they establish  a 
dialogue  between  the  past  and  the  present.  What  distinguishes  them  from  the 
nineteenth-century literature are their  new  models  for producing  knowledge. The 
primitivist strategies, as illustrated in travel sagas and the colonial library, negate the 
possibility of a plural rationality and history; the more recent theories impose them, 
and  would  even  extend  to  the  understanding  of  marginalized  experiences  in  the 
Western culture itself. For example, on which basis can a will to knowledge define 
the  division of reason and madness, normal  and abnormal  sexuality,  correct and 
defective consciousness? (see, e.g., Foucault, 1961; 1975; 1976). To put it simply, 
primitivist  strategies  operate  by  means  of  binary  oppositions  at  the  core  of  a 
paradigmatic history, whereas the more recent theories suppose in their methods an 
absolute  incapacity  for  defining,  vis-à-vis  functional  paradigms,  such  things  as 
cultural margins, morbid consciousness, primitive mentalities, insignificant legends, 
and so on.
It becomes clear that apart from the romantic violence of his thesis, Jahn is 
basically right. History is a legend, an invention of the present. It is both a memory 
and a reflection of our present. M. Bloch and F Braudel say exactly the same thing 
when they present history as an attempt to establish a relation between a conceptual 
framework, a model, and the multi-level rhythms of the past. History's project of 
going beyond the fundamental arbitrariness of the signifier and signified model in 
order to describe a relation of necessity between our understanding and the past 
depends on three systems. These are: (a) the subjectivity of the author, which is so 
evident that P Ricoeur proposed to understand objectivity in history as a good and 
critical usage of one's subjectivity; (b) the collection of tools, techniques, theoretical 
grids, and “libraries” of events and their interpretation; (c) and especially important, 
the epistemological conditions that make the project both thinkable and feasible.
Theories  of  cultural  hybridism, schizophrenia,  and  other  metaphoric  diseases 
(see, e.g., Levine, 1986:159-73) seem, therefore, to be by-products of a normative 
conception of history. They look at and comment upon positivities from the arrogance 
of a Hegelian dialectic and thus fail to witness to concrete temporal and localized 
figures. We know now, thanks to M. Mauss, G. Dumézil, and Lévi-Strauss, that all 
cultural figures determine their own specificity in apparently regional ruptures and 
continuities, whereby the otherness of their being appears as dynamic event, and thus 
history. All temporal pasts expose an otherness of the same ontological quality as the 
otherness  unveiled  by  anthropologists,  be  they  primitivists  or  not.  This  implies 
methodological  challenges.  The  first,  as  proposed  by  Lévi-Strauss,  is 
reconceptualizing  the  complementarity  of  history  and  sociology-anthropology 
(Lévi-Strauss, 1963: Introduction). The second challenge, as
208


--- PAGE 209 ---
stated by Veyne (1984:285), lies in overcoming the restriction of the unities of time 
and space, envisaging a shift from continuous or regional history to a comparative or 
general history. Granted, this is still a dream. Yet, we already have enough evidence 
to understand that acculturation is not an African disease but the very character of all 
histories.  In  the  sequences,  mutations,  and  transformations that  we  can  read,  all 
histories deploy in effect the dispersion of the violence of the Same, which from the 
solid grounding in the present, invents, restores, or endows meaning to the Other in a 
past or in geographically remote synchronic cultures.
Can I affirm that Marxist analysis does not achieve a positive interplay between 
regional formations and general history to the point that such concepts as historical 
deviation, cultural schizophrenia, or economic aberration become pertinent? First of 
all,  let  us  note  that  Marxist  methodology  operates  from  the  supposed  universal 
pertinence  of  its  presuppositions.  Marxism  is,  and  I  am  travestying  A.  Koyre's 
thought,  a  fundamental  and  absolute  science  in  its  own  intellectual  right.  The 
variability of all archaeological regionalities is subsumed in the logic of historical and 
dialectical materialism and can be localized thanks to the rules of this grid. Marxist 
Africanist discourses witness to this. Let us take two examples: the first, theoretical, 
on the question of modes of production and its subsequent concept of articulation; the 
second,  more  concrete,  on  how  intellectual  discourse  should  describe  social 
contradictions and espouse the fate of socialism.
Marx's schemes and remarks on precapitalist modes of production promoted a 
number of categories related to the dominant relation of production: Slave, German, 
Feudal,  Asiatic,  etc.  In  Marxist  exegeses,  modes  of  production  rapidly  became 
structural stages reflecting the historical succession of types of combinations of forces 
and relations of production. After the debate created by the volumes from the Centre 
d'Etudes et de Recherches Marxistes (CERM) on Asiatic modes of production (1969, 
1973), Marxist analysis reworked the historical tempo in a perfectly evolutionist and 
functional  grid  as  an  almost  mechanical  succession  of  modes  of  production 
determined by productive forces and class struggle. Paradoxically, this conception 
goes along with a theoretical claim concerning the plurality of historical experiences. 
It both posits a critique of the concept of a paradigmatic history and promotes the 
principle  of  historical  specificity  Uewsiewicki  and  Letourneau,  1985:4-5).  The 
precolonial  modes  of  production  are,  at  any rate,  supposed  at  the  outset  of  the 
historical canon, and the general argument takes the route from lineage systems to 
capitalist  modes  of  production.  Arranged  in  a  table  (Coquery-Vidrovitch, 
1985:13-16), one sees on one side precapitalist modes. These are defined by two main 
factors: first, in a space where private property does not exist, buying or selling land 
is an impossibility and second, production relations are dependent upon a system of 
lineage relationships. On the other side one sees the capitalist mode, the dominant 
exterior force. In between are  found dependent or precapitalist  modes, generally 
known as
209


--- PAGE 210 ---
peripheral capitalisms. The process of social transformation is isomorphic with the 
society's capacity to innovate and adjust to capitalism. Jewsiewicki's classification of 
dominant  models  facing  the  challenge  represented  by  this  process  and  its 
signification, namely, types of mode of production (e.g., Rey, 1966; Jewsiewicki and 
Letourneau, 1985), particularly those of dependent (e.g., Amin, 1964, 1965, 1967, 
1969)  and  marginal  society  (e.g.,  Meillassoux,  1975),  brings  us  back  to  the 
problematic  articulation  of  binary  oppositions:  primitiveness  versus  civilization, 
tradition  versus  modernity,  lineage  mode  versus  capitalist  mode  of  production, 
underdevelopment versus development.
It could be argued that even materialist models tend to reduce otherness. The 
unfamiliar is subsumed in metaphors, standardized procedures deduce patterns and 
their  meaning  relative  to  Marxist  paradigms.  John  Saul's  magnificent  “socialist 
lesson” (1977) apropos of 1. Kimambo and A. Temu's A History of Tanzania may 
serve as an illustration. From the book's “too straightforward a focus `on the African 
himself,”' he deduces four main dangers. These are: (a) a playing down of “the overall 
imperialist framework within which African initiatives are taken,” which (b) “can 
encourage a blurring of relevant distinctions and differentiations within the African 
community itself”  (c)  “with  the  result  that  the  full  meaning  and  significance  of 
African initiatives is lost and, moreover (d) the accomplishments of Africans . . . are, 
therefore, over-valued, at the expense of a frank discussion of the very challenges 
which remain (the realization of socialism and self-reliance, and the fulfillment of the 
country's productive potential).” In sum, as Saul puts it himself:
The contention (. . .) is that the questions which underlie the Kimambo Temu volume are too 
exclusively those relevant to a nationalist perspective on Tanzania history, at a moment when a 
socialist perspective and a set of socialist questions are increasingly imperative. (Saul, 1977: 138)
Saul's language is one of universal and normative orthodoxy. It does not reject the 
necessity for an obedience to events and facts but explicitly insists on the paramount 
value of socialist imperatives. It does not question the pertinence of Tanzania's history 
as specificity but indicates that narratives about it can be situated within a socialist 
perspective only on well-determined conditions. What Saul's discourse witnesses to is 
the silent yet powerful sovereignty of the Same.
The discourse of orthodoxy has revised its categories since the 1920S policy of 
mise en valeur of colonial territories. However, it still holds the keys to norms and 
rules, thus accounting for African systems and the modalities of their adjustment to 
modernity as represented by either the capitalist or socialist paradigms. Thus, Saul's 
position is part of a more general epistemological process. It belongs to a set of 
models claiming to reflect and explain historical dynamics and establish the validity 
of a method. Here is
210


--- PAGE 211 ---
another  example  which  is  also  a  generalization.  The  African  political  economy 
discourse, with it concepts of and models on diachronic and synchronic structural 
deviations,  economic  dualism,  mechanisms  of  underdevelopment,  technology  of 
transfer, etc., comments upon hypothetical dogmas of transition from tradition to 
modernity, using terms similar to the Durkheimian opposition (1947) between, on the 
one hand, specific and abnormal and, on the other, general and normal.
Structuralist anthropology, a somewhat enigmatic discourse, seems to transcend 
contradictory representations about the interaction between tradition and modernity. 
Rooted in the same  epistemological ground which permitted  the reconversion  of 
African gnosis, it rises above typological models of historical transformations and 
defines itself as both reflection and comment on transhistoricity. More concretely, it 
introduces an obvious evidence, namely that there is more to say about being human 
than mechanized tautologies can offer about a history of the Same. In the name of 
explaining the reality of human fate, the discourse about the Same incessantly repeats 
its own fantasies and the incoherences defining it as normative.
The solidity of the self, the major preoccupation of the whole of Western philosophy, does not 
withstand persistent application to the same object, which comes to pervade it through and through 
and to imbue it with an experiential awareness of its own unreality. For the only remnant of reality 
to which it still dares to lay claim is that of being a “singularity,” in the sense in which astronomers 
use the term: a point in space and a moment in time, relative to each other, and in which there have 
occurred, are occurring or will occur events whose density . . . makes possible its approximate 
definition, always remembering of course that this nodal point of past, present and probable events 
does not exist as a substratum, but only in the sense that phenomena are occurring in it . . . 
(Lévi-Strauss, 1981:625-26)
One could also refer to Veyne's strong critique of a history of the Same that, in 
reality, does not exist despite its ambitions (Veyne, 1984:15-30). Most important, at 
least  in  African  gnosis,  are  the  implications  of  this  new  perspective:  (a)  an 
interrogation about the subject of discourse; (b) a reevaluation of the concept of 
rationality from the viewpoint  of intrinsic properties of categories functioning in 
regional  texts,  myths  and  interpretations;  (c)  a  reconceptualization  of  scientific 
method and the relationships that “scientific knowledge” might have with other forms 
or types of knowledge; and (d) a redefinition of human freedom. These are not small 
issues, and because of their range, structuralism, to use an unfortunate expression of 
M.  P  Edmond,  has  been  perceived  as  a  process  of  de-Westernizing  scientific 
knowledge (Edmond, 1965:43-44).
Let me be frank: twenty years of careful study of structuralism have convinced 
me that although there is an impressive body of good and comprehensive analyses on 
structuralism in which one finds stimulating and highly technical criticisms (e.g., 
Beidelman, 1966; Turner, 1969) and philosophical 
211


--- PAGE 212 ---
challenges (e.g., Ricoeur, 1969), a great number of criticisms of Lévi-Strauss are 
consciously or unconsciously ideological, even, I would say, racially motivated. They 
can often be reduced to the two following statements: Is not structuralism a Jewish 
enterprise  against  the  achievements  of  the  Christian  West?  And,  as  one  of  my 
European students put it, forgetting my origin: “Lévi-Strauss does them too much 
honor.”
Concerning  the  methodology  of  describing  African  cultural  dynamics,  the 
difficult exchange that exists nowadays between J. Vansina and L. de Heusch, T. 
Obenga and his opponents, P Hountondji and his critics, is a sign of the organic 
richness of discourses focusing on the individuality of norms, rules, and systems. 
These discourses show the perilous path of the future. On the other hand, they point 
to the delicate validity of patient translations and interpretations of regional cultural 
economies, such as the work of Lienhardt (1961), Buakasa (1973), Jackson (1982), 
and Izard (1985). This orientation is revealed most explicitly in Bird and Karp's 
collection of specialized studies, Explorations in African Systems of Thought (1980), 
and in Beidelman's study on Kaguru modes of thought (1986). The domain of a 
universal language (langage) or megarationality has been replaced by the criterion of 
experiential authority “inventing” itself as translation and exegesis of institutional and 
well-delineated  languages  (langues)  founded  by concrete  performances  (paroles). 
What one gets is thus a decisive critique of traditional methods of correlating the 
Same to the Other. In B. Barnes's words, these enterprises from within indicate that 
“making a demarcation in actors' own terms is useful for explanatory purposes. Such 
a  demarcation  is  part  of  the  actors'  perception  of  the  situation;  and  action  is 
intelligible  only as a response to that  perception  . . . Making a demarcation  by 
external standards, on the other hand, is useless for explanatory purposes . . .” (1974: 
100). It is obvious that such a method should define itself as a critical system of 
making statements, which could only partially unveil the social and cultural archives 
of a society.
What then should we do with the problem of a transhistoric thought? From the 
rhetorical  margins  of  history,  it  opens  upon  a  paradox:  something  like  the  pure 
reflection of consciousness in a pure language. It enlarges and universalizes regional 
archives and brings them into contact with the analyst's mind, thus inventing in a 
dynamic manner both understanding and history. It is useful “for history to move 
away from us in time or for us to move away from it in thought, for it to cease to be 
internalizable and to lose its intelligibility, a spurious intelligibility attaching to a 
temporary internality” (Lévi-Strauss, 1966:225). This does not constitute the negation 
of the truth of social forms as expressed and generated by the dialectic between 
Leben  (living  and  sharing  with  others)  and  Gemeinsamkeit  (a  permeating 
community).  On the contrary,  a permanent  recapitulation  of this dialectic should 
remain as an endless task of reading, commenting upon the permanent production of 
cultural legends and “une parole pour-soi.”
Foucault once said that he deprived “the sovereignty of the subject of the
212


--- PAGE 213 ---
exclusive  and  instant  right  to  discourse.”  That  is  good  news.  I  believe  that  the 
geography of African gnosis also points out the passion of a subject-object who 
refuses to vanish. He or she has gone from the situation in which he or she was 
perceived as a simple functional object to the freedom of thinking of himself or 
herself as the starting point of an absolute discourse. It has also become obvious, even 
for this subject, that the space interrogated by the series of explorations in African 
indigenous systems of thought is not a void.
213


--- PAGE 214 ---
APPENDIX
ETHIOPIAN SOURCES OF KNOWLEDGE
"If  Abyssinia  had  been  a  colony,  for  example,  the  most  ardent  believer  in  the 
preservation  of  native  culture  would  not  have  advocated  the  recreation  of  the 
pre-Christian religion" wrote L. P Mair (Malinowski and others, 19 3 8:4)In the 
Marxist  Ethiopia  of  today,  a  Canadian  scholar,  C.  Sumner,  has  made  a  major 
contribution to the search for a new outlook on "African philosophy." He thinks that 
"there is an urgent need that philosophy, taught in Ethiopia at a university level, 
should not be entirely alien, but integrate values found at home, in the fertile native 
ground" (Sumner, 1974:3). He has so far made available the following major sources.
(i) The Book of the Wise Philosophers has been known since 1875 thanks to C. 
H. Cornill (Das Buch der Weisen Philosophen nach dem Aethiopischen untersucht, 
Leipzig)  and  A.  Dillmann  (Chrestomathia  Aethiopica,  195o,  Berlin).  It  is  an 
anthology  of  sayings,  most  attributed  to  such  philosophers  as  Socrates,  Plato, 
Aristotle, and Galen. "The majority of the sayings were exhortations and advice, often 
addressed by a wise man to a disciple or to his son" (Sumner, 1974:4). The text used 
is a Geez translation from an Arabic original compiled between 15 1 o and 15 22 by 
Abba Mikael, an Arabic-speaking Egyptian. It is profoundly marked by Greek and 
Christian  influences,  as  shown  in  references  to  Socrates's  life  and  to  platonic 
philosophy and in quotations of early church fathers such as Gregory and Basil.
(2) The Treatise o f Zar'a Yacob and of Walda Heywat. The corpus of these 
seventeenth-century texts was established for the first time in 1904 by E. Littman 
(Philosophia Abessini, Corpus Scriptorum Christianorum Orientalium 18, (i):Paris). 
Sumner's edition (1976, 1978) is the first complete English version (1976:3-59). The 
work comprises two hatdtas, autobiographical meditations. The Zar'a Yacob (seed of 
Jacob) is divided into twenty-five chapters bearing on the author's life, the eternity of 
God, division among believers, the meaning of faith and prayer, the law of God and 
the law of man, Mosaic law and Mohammed's meditation, physical  and spiritual 
work, marriage, and the nature of knowledge. Composed of thirty-five brief chapters, 
the  Treatise  o  f  Walda  Heywat  (son  of  life)  examines  such  topics  as  creation, 
knowledge, faith, the nature of the soul, law and judgement, social life, the use of 
love, virtues and human weaknesses, education, time, and culture.
In his 1904 edition, Littmann noted the intellectual power and originality of these 
works.
214


--- PAGE 215 ---
While the greater part of Ethiopian literature is translated from foreign languages, these two books 
written by Abyssinians are imbued with their own native character . .. However, I would say that 
these flowers could not grow solely from the Ethiopian ground, unless they had been irrigated by 
external waters. (In Sumner, 1976:63)
In 1916, Carlo Conti Rossini hypothesized that the treatises were of European 
origin  and  suggested  the  author  might  have  been  Giusto  D'Urbino,  an  Italian 
missionary. Eventually, the two hatatas came to be considered nineteenth-century 
Italian  works.  Sumner  has  worked  to  prove  the  contrary and  to  reestablish  the 
Ethiopian  origin  of  the  texts  (Sumner,  1976:250-75)However,  in  his  extensive 
analysis, Sumner compares Zar-a Yacob to Mani, Luther, Herbert of Cherbury, René 
Descartes and jean-Jacques Rousseau (1978:65-73). He thinks that "many of the ideas 
developed in the Hatata are similar to, and in some instances identical with, the 
Tractatus de Veritate and the Discours sur la methode. But the convergence would not 
apply  beyond  the  logical  level  of  a  common  rationalistic  approach  and  of 
epistemological investigations" (1978:61).
(3) The Life and Maxims o f Skandes is an Ethiopic version of the wellknown 
text of Secundus, whose roots go back to the first centuries of the Roman Empire. It 
has survived in two lineages: Western (Greek and Latin) and Eastern (Syriac, Arabic, 
and Ethiopic). Sumner reproduces the edition established by Bachmann: Das Leben 
and die Sentenzen des Philosophen Secundus das Schweigsamen (1887, Halle). This 
Geez version belongs to the 1434-1468 literary period and is a translation of an 
earlier Arabic text. The theme of the book is a question: what is the relation between a 
woman's will and her instinctive tendencies? It is also a commentary on the shocking 
maxim that all women are prostitutes. According to Sumner, the Ethiopian version is, 
from a literary viewpoint, original. "The translator very often departs from the Arabic 
original. He both subtracts and adds" (1981:37).
Sumner is preparing two other volumes for publication: The Fisalgwos and Basic 
Ethiopian Philosophical Texts. Greeting the publication of The Book o f the Wise 
Philosophers, L. Nusco, of the then Haile Selassie I University, remarked that the 
book "is not a work of philosophy in the technical sense of the word," adding that 
"such a classification would cause the indignation of all professional philosophers" 
(Sumner, 1974). In his evaluation of the 1976 Addis Ababa Seminar on African 
philosophy, Van Parys asked whether or not these treatises are really Ethiopian, since 
at least the first and the third are translations. His answer is prudent: they are original 
and creatively Ethiopian, but apart from the second, they are not really critical. "It is 
in the comparisons between Arab and Greek on one hand and Ethiopian on the other 
that is found Ethiopian originality. However none of these works show the critical 
spirit that characterizes modern thinking" (Van Parys, 1978:65)
This is possibly a matter of opinion. The body of ancient Ethiopian texts
215


--- PAGE 216 ---
does not conceal its sources. Nevertheless one cannot ignore that some of them, such 
as the books of Zar'a Yacob and Walda Heywat, witness to a regional inspiration. In 
any case, all these texts are somehow "subjects" commenting upon themselves and 
their restlessness. The fact is that, as in the case of most intellectual contributions, 
there is a mystery on two sides: the genealogical reciprocity existing between the 
Ethiopian  versions  and  their  historical  references,  and,  on  the  other  hand,  the 
privileges of their own textuality. In a paper focusing on the ethical aspects of this 
literature, Sumner has emphasized the complementarity of these two aspects:
If we consider together the two expressions of Ethiopian Philosophy: translation, adaptation and 
personal reflection, popular-traditional wisdom and rationalism . . . we come to a few conclusions 
which can be summarized under four headings: centrality, comprehensiveness, richness, theological 
basis. (Sumner, 1983:99)
For Sumner, the notion of centrality is linked to that of moral importance or 
prevalence  that  "characterizes  all  types  of  Ethiopian  thought."  That  of 
comprehensiveness implies that "all aspects, objective and subjective, proximate and 
ultimate, are taken into consideration in the assessment of the norms of morality." The 
concept of richness is a theoretical image expressing connotations and implications 
stemming from "the key word of `heart,' the radiating polarity of `conscience' " in the 
texts. Finally, there is the theological basis, which is radically anthropocentric. About 
the sixteenth-century Book o f the Wise Philosophers and the seventeenth-century 
philosophical  treatises  of  Zdr'a  Yacob  and  his  disciple  Walda  Heywat,  Sumner 
proposes hypotheses that clearly discriminate them from the tradition that produced 
them:
Both are opposed to any kind of religious revelation, and hence are not Christian in any way; they 
are, in that sense, explicitly anti-Christian. And yet their rationalism led them to a clear, pure, 
abstract theism. For the natural light of reason, however opposed to any revealed positive light, is 
nonetheless a penetration of the divine into the creatural. (Sumner, 1983: 100)
Thus, one can provisionally note that textual deviations mean what they silently 
or explicitly negate: the intellectual locus of their possibility. At the same time and 
more important, by their very presence they also indicate a remarkable instance of a 
culturally regional authority in terms of creativity.
216


--- PAGE 217 ---
BIBLIOGRAPHY
ABANDA NDEGUE, M. J. (1970). De la négritude au négrisme. Yaoundé: Clé.
ABLEGMAGNON, F.M. (1957). "Du 'temps’ dans la culture Ewe."  Présence Africaine  nos. 14-15: 
zzz-3z-
—―. (1958). "Personne, tradition et culture." In Aspects de la culture noire. Paris:  Fayard.
—―.. (1960). "L’Afrique noire: La Métaphysique, l’ethique, l'évolution actuelle."  Comprendre 
nos. 21-22:74-82
—―.. (1962). "Totalités et systémes dans les sociétés d’Afrique noire."  Présence  Africaine  no. 
41:13-22.
ABRAHAM, W. E. (1966). The Mind of Africa. Chicago: The University of Chicago  Press.
ADELE JINADU, L. (1976). "The Moral Dimensions of the Political Thought of Frantz  Fanon." Second 
Order 5 (1)
ADOTEVI, S. (1972). Négritude et négrologues. Paris: Plon.
ADOUKOUNOU, B. (1981). Jalons pour une théologie africaine. 2 vols. Paris: Le-thielleux.
AFANA, 0. ([1967] 1976). L'Economie de l’ouest africain. Paris: Maspero.
AGASSI, J. (1963).  Towards an Historiography of Science.  The Hague: North Holland Publishing 
Company.
AGOSSOU, J. M. (1972). Gbet’o et Gbedo'to. Paris: Beauchesne.
—―. (1977). "Pour un Christianisme africain." Cahiers des religions africaines II, 21-22,I.
AGUOLU,  C.  (1975)- "John  Dewey's  Democratic  Conception  and  its  Implication  for  Developing 
Nations." Second Order 4 (2).
AHIDJO, A. (1964)- Contribution à la construction nationale. Paris: Présence Africaine.
—―. (19 69). Nation et développement dans l'unité. Paris: Présence Africaine.
AJAYI,  J.  F.  A.  (1969).  "Colonialism:  An  Episode  in  African  History."  In Colonialism  in  Africa 
1870-1960, L. H. Gann and P. Duignan, eds. vol. I of  The History and Politics of Colonialism, 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
AJAYI, J. F. A. and CROWDER, M. (1972). History of West Africa. London: Longmans.
AJISAFE, A. K. (1924). The Laws and Customs of the Yoruba People.
AKE, C. (1979). Social Science as Imperialism: The Theory of Political Development. Lagos: University 
of lbadan Press.
ALLIER, R. (1925). La Psychologie de la Conversion chez les Peuples non-civilisés. Paris: Payot.
ALMOND, A. G., and COLEMAN, J. s., eds. (1960),  The Politics of Developing Areas.  Princeton: 
Princeton University Press.
ALTHUSSER, L. (1965). Pour Marx. Paris: Maspero. (For Marx, New York: Pantheon).
AMIN, S. (1964). Neo-Colonialism in West Africa. Harmondsworth: Penguin.
—―. (1965). Trois expériences africaines de développement: le Mali, la Guinée et  le Ghana. Paris: 
Presses universitaires de France
—―. (1967). Le Développement du capitalisme en Côte d’lvoire. Paris. Editions de Minuit.
—― (1969). Le Monde d'affaires sénégalaises. Paris: Editions de Minuit.
—― (1973). Le Développement inégal. Essai sur les formations sociales du capitalisme périphérique.  
Paris: Editions de Minuit. (Unequal Development. New York: Monthly Review Press).
217


--- PAGE 218 ---
—― (1974). L’Accumulation à l’échelle mondiale. Paris: Anthropos. (Accumulation on a World Scale: A 
Critique of the Theory of Underdevelopment, New York: Monthly Review, 1974).
—― ( 1979). Classe et nation dans l’histoire et la crise contemporaine. Paris: Editions de Minuit.
AMIN, s.,  and  COQUERY-VIDROVITCH,  C.  (1969).  Histoire  économique  du  Congo,  
188o--1968. Paris: Anthropos.
AMSELLE, J. L. (1979). Le Sauvage à la mode. Paris: Le Sycomore.
ANYIDOHO, K. (1985). "The Present State of African Oral Literature Studies." In  African Literature 
Studies. The Present State/L'Etat Présent,  Arnold, S., ed.  Washington, D.C.: Three Continents 
Press.
APOLLINAIRE, G. (1913). Les Peintres cubistes. Paris: E. Figuière.
APPIAH-KUBI, K., and TORRES, S. (1977). African Theology en Route. New York: Orbis.
ARENDT, H.  (1968). Imperialism: Part Two of the Origins of Totalitarianism.  New York: Harcourt 
Brace Jovanovich.
ARINZE, F. A. (1970). Sacrifice in Ibo Religion. Ibadan.
ARNOLD , s. (1985). "African Literary Studies: The Emergence of a new discipline." In African 
Literature  Studies. The Present State/L'Etat Présent, S. Arnold, ed. Washington, D.C.: Three 
Continents Press.
ARRIGHI,  R.  (1979).  Libération  on  Adaptation.  La  Théologie  africame  s'interroge.  Le  Colloque 
d’Accra. Paris: L’Harmattan.
ASAD, T., ed. (1973). Anthropology and the Colonial Encounter. New York: Humanities Press.
ASHBY, E. (1966). Universities: British, Indian, African: A Study in the Ecology of Higher Education. 
London: Weidenfeld & Nicolson.
ASTIER-LOUTFI, M. (1971). Littérature et colonialisme: L'Expansion coloniale vue dans la littérature 
française. Paris: Mouton.
ATAL, D. (1972). Structures et signification des cinq premiers versets de l’hymne johannique au logos.  
Louvain-Paris: Béatrice-Nauwelaerts.
ATANGANA, N. (1971). Travail et développement. Yaoundé: Clé.
AUGE, M. (1979). Symbole, fonction, histoire. Les interrogations de l’anthropologie. Paris: Hachette.
AWOLOWO, 0. (1947). Path to Nigerian Freedom. London: Faber and Faber. 
—―  (1968). The Peoples' Republic. Ibadan: Oxford University Press.
AYANDELE, E. (1966). The Missionary Impact on Modern Nigeria, 1842-1914. London: Longman.
AZIKIWE, N. (1937). Renascent Africa. New ed. 1969. London: Cass.
—―. (1961). Zik: A Selection from the Speeches. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
AZOMBO-MENDA, S. M., and ANOBO, K.  (1978). Les Philosophes africains par les textes.  Paris: 
Nathan.
BA, A. H. (1972). Aspects de la civilisation africaine. Paris: Présence Africame.
—―. (1976). Jésus vu par un musulman. Dakar-Abidjan: Nouvelles editions africames.
BA, A. H., and CARDAIRE, M. (1957). Tierno Bokar, le sage de Bandiagara. Paris: Présence Africame.
BA, A. H., and DIETERLEN, G. (1961). Koumen. Texte initiatique des pasteurs Peul. Paris: Mouton.
BADIAN, S. (1964). Les Dirigeants africains face à leur peuple. Paris: Maspero.
BAETA, C. G., ed. (1968). Christianity in Tropical Africa. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
BAHOKEN, J. C. (1967). Clairières métaphysiques africaines. Essai sur la philosophie et la religion 
chez les Bantu du Sud-Cameroun. Paris: Présence Africame.
218


--- PAGE 219 ---
BAIROCH, P. (1971). Le Tiers Monde dans l’impasse. Paris: Gallimard.
BAL, W. (1963).  Le Royaume du Congo aux XVe et XVIe sièles. Documents d'histoire.  Léopoldville 
(Kinshasa): Institut National d'Etudes Politiques.
BALANDIER, G. (1955a). Sociologie des Brazzavilles noirs. Paris: A. Colin. 
—― (1955b). Sociologie actuelle de I’Afrique noire. Paris: Presses universitaires de France.
—― (1957). Afrique anibiguë Paris: Plon.
—― (1967). Anthropologie politique. Paris: Presses universitaires de France.
BAMUINIKILE, S. (1971). La Mort et 1'au-delà chez les Baluba du Kasai. Lubumbashi: CEPSI.
BARAN, P. (1957) The Political Economy of Growth. New York: Modern Reader Paperbacks.
BARLEY, N. (1984). Adventures in a Mud Hut. New York: The Vanguard Press.
BARNES, B. (1974). Scientiflc Knowledge and Sociological Theory. London: Routledge & Kegan Paul.
BARRETT, D. B. (1968). Schism and Renewal in Africa. Nairobi: Oxford University Press.
—―. (1970). "A.D. 2ooo-35o Million Christians in Africa." International Review of Missions, 
59 (233):39-54.
—―, ed. (1974). African Initiatives in Religion. Nairobi: East African Publishing House.
BARTHES, R. (1979). The Eiffel Tower and Other Mythologies. New York: Hill and Wang.
BASSE, E.C. (1977). "Itinéraire de Présence Africame: Problème de 1'église en Afrique." Cahiers des 
religions africaines II,21-22,I.
BASTIDE, R. (1961). "Variations sur la négritude." Presence Africaine no. 36.
—― (1967). "Color, Racism, and Christianity." Daedalus 96 (2):312-27.
BATTLE, V. M., and LYONS, C. H. eds. (197o). Essays in the History of African 
Education. New York: Teachers College Press.
BAUDRILLARD, J. (1972) Pour une critique de l’économie politique du signe. Paris: Gallimard.
—―. (1977). Le Mirroir de la production: ou L'Illusion critique du matérialisme historique. Tournai: 
Casterman. (The Mirror of Production. St. Louis: Telos, 1975).
BAYART, J. F. (1979). L'Etat au Cameroun. Paris: Presse de la Fondation Nationale des Sciences 
Politiques.
—― (1983). "La Revanche des sociétés africaines." Politique africaine 1:95-:127,
BEATTIE, J. (1973). "Understanding Traditional African Religion: A Comment on  Horton."  Second 
Order 2, (2).
BEIDELMAN, T. 0. (1966), "Swazi Royal Ritual." Africa 34 (4):373-405.
—― (1986).  Moral Imagination  in Kaguru Modes of Thought.  Bloomington: Indiana  University 
Press.
BEIER, U., ed. (1966). The Origin of Life and Death. London: Heinemann.
BELLMAN, B. L. (1984).  The Language of Secrecy: Symbols and Metaphors in Poro Ritual.  New 
Brunswick: Rutgers University Press.
BERGH, P. VAN DEN. (1973)- Power and Privilege at an African University.  London: Routledge & 
Kegan Paul.
BETTS,  R.  F.  (1975).  The  False  Dawn:  European  Imperialism  in  the  XIXth Century.Minneapolis: 
University of Minnesota Press.
BIGO, P. (1974). L'Eglise et la révolution du tiers monde. Paris: Presses universitaires de France.
BIMWENYI, 0. (1968). "Le Muntu à la lumière de ses croyances en 1'au-delà," Cahiers des religions 
africaines 8:137-51; 9 (1971):59-112
219


--- PAGE 220 ---
—―.  (1981a).  Discours  théologique  négro-Africain.  Problèmes  de  fondements.Paris:  Présence 
Africaine.
—―  (1981b). "
—― L’lnculturation en Afrique et attitude des agents de 1'evangélisation." Aspects du 
catholicisme au Zaire. Kinshasa: Faculté de Théologie Catholique.
BINSBERGEN, W. M. J. VAN. (1981).  Religious Change in Zambia: Exploratory Studies.  London: 
Routledge & Kegan Paul.
BINSBERGEN, W. M. J. VAN, and SCHOFFELFERS, M., eds. (1985).  Theoretical Explorations in 
African Religion. London: Routledge & Kegan Paul.
BIRD, C. s. and KARP, I., eds. (198o).  Explorations in African Systems of Thought  Bloomington: 
Indiana University Press.
BJORNSON, R., and MOWOE, I. J., eds. (1986). Africa and the West. New York: Greenwood Press.
BLACK, M., (1962). Models and Metaphors. New York, Ithaca: Cornell University Press.
BLAIR, D. (1976). African Literature in French. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
BLOCH, M., (1961). Feudal Society. Chicago: The University of Chicago Press.
BLYDEN, E. W. (1862). Liberia's Offering, New York, 1862. (LO) It contains the following texts:
(I) "Hope for Africa," 5-28.
(2) "A Vindication of the African Race," (Liberia, 1857):31-64.
(3) "The Call of Providence to the Descendants of Africa in America," 67-91. 
(4) "Inaugural Address at the Inauguration of Liberia College," 95-123.
(5) "Eulogy on Rev. John Day,"127-149.
(6) "A Chapter in the History of the African Slave-Trade," 153-167.
(7) "A Note to Benjamin Coates on 'The Colonization and Abolition Movements'," 169-181.
—― (1869a). Liberia: Past, Present, and Future. (LPPF) Washington.
—― (1869b). The Negro in Ancient History. (NAH) Washington.
—― (1888).  Christianity,  Islam  and  The  Negro  Race.  (CINR)  London.  New  edition,  1967,  at 
Edinburgh University Press.
—― (1903). Africa and Africans. (AA) London.
—― (1978). Selected letters of Edward Wilmot Blyden, (LET) ed., Hollis R. Lynch. New York: KTO 
Press.
BODUNRIN, P. 0. (1975a). "Values and Objectivity in the Social Sciences." Thought and Practice 2, (I).
—― (1975b). "The Alogicality of Immortality." Second Order 4 (2).
—― (1978). "Witchcraft, Magic and E.S.P." Second Order 7 (1 and 2).
BOELAERT, E. (1946). "La Philosophie bantoue selon le R. P. Placide Tempels." Aequatoria 9:81-90.
BOESAK, A. A. (1977).  Farewell to Innocence: A Socio-Ethical Study on Black Theology and Black 
Power. New York: Orbis.
—―  (1984a). Black and Reformed: Apartheid, Liberation and the Calvinist Tradition.  New York: 
Orbis.
—―  (1984b). Walking on Thorns: The Call to Christian Obedience. Grand Rapids: W, B. Eerdmans 
Publishing Company.
BOHANNAN, P. (1953]198o). "Concepts of Time among the Tiv of Nigeria." In Myth  and Cosmos, 
Middleton, J., ed. Austin: University of Texas Press.
BONTE, P. (1976). "Marxisme et anthropologie: Les Malheurs d'un empiriste." 
L'Homme 16 (4):129-36.
BONTINCK, F. (198o). "Mfumu Paul Panda Farnana (1888-193o) Premier (?) nationaliste congolais." In 
Africa's Dependence and the Remedies, V. Y. Mudimbe, ed. Paris: Berger-Levrault.
220


--- PAGE 221 ---
BOOTH, N. S., ed. (1977). African Religions: A Symposium. New York: Nok.
BOURDLEU, P. (1973)- "The Three Forms of Theoretical Knowledge." Social Science Information -14 
(6):19-47.
BOURGEOIS, A. (1971). La Grèce antique devant la négritude. Paris: Présence Africaine.
BRAUDEL, F., (1980). On History. Chicago: The University of Chicago Press.
BRELSFORD, V. (1935). Primitive Philosophy. London: J. Bale
—―. (1938). "The Philosophy of the Savage." Nada, 15.
BRENNER, L. (1984). West African Sufi: The Religious Heritage and Spiritual Search of Cerno Bokar 
Saalif Taal. Berkeley/Los Angeles: University of California Press.
BROWN, R., ed. (1973). Knowledge, Education and Cultural Change. London: Tavistock.
BRUNSCHWIG, H. (1963). L’Avènement de L’Afrique noire du XIXe Siècle à nos jours. Paris:A. 
Colin.
BUAKASA, T. K. M. (1973). L'Impensé du discours. Kindoki et nkisi en pays Kongo du Zaire. 
Kinshasa: Presses Universitaires du Zaire.
—―. (1978). "Les Sciences de l’occident: Pour quoi faire?"  Philosophie et libération, 
Kinshasa: Faculté de Théologie Catholique.
BüHLMANN, W. (1978). The Coming of the Third Church. New York: Orbis.
—― (1979). The Missions on Trial. New York: Orbis.
—― (1980). All Have the Same God. New York: Orbis.
—― (1982). The Chosen Peoples. New York: Orbis.
BUJO, B. (1975). Morale africaine et foi chrétienne. Kinshasa: Faculté de Théologie Catholique.
BUREAU, R. (1962). "Les Missions en question. La Conversion des cultures." Christus no. 9:34.
BUSIA, K. H. (1951). The Position of the Chief in the Modern Political System of Ashanti. London.
—―. (1962). The Challenge of Africa. London: Pall Mall.
CALVET, J. L. (1972). Linguistique et colonialisme. Paris.
CASTERAN, c., and LANGELLIER, J. P. (1978). L’Afrique déboussolée. Paris: Plon.
CENDRARS, B. (1921). Anthologie nègre. New ed. 1972. Paris: Buchet-Chastel.
CFRM. (1969). Sur le mode de production asiatique. Paris: Editions Sociales.
—― (1973). Sur les sociétés précapitalistes. Textes choisis de Marx, Engels, Lénine. Paris: Editions 
Sociales.
CERTEAU, M. DE. (1969). L'Etranger ou l'Union dans la différence. Paris: Desclée de Brouwer.
—―. (1984). The Practice of Everyday Life. Los Angeles: University of California Press.
CESAIRE,  A.  (195o).  Discours  sur  le  colonialisme.  Paris:  Présence  Africaine  (Discourse  on 
Colonialism. New York: Monthly Review Press, 1972).
—―  (1956). Lettre à Maurice Thorez. Paris: Présence Africaine.
—― (1959-60). "La Pensée Politique de Sekou Touré." Présence Africame no. 29.
CHENU, B. (1977). Dieu est noir. Paris: Le Centurion.
CHILCOTE, R. H. (1981). Dependency and Marxism. Boulder: Westview Press.
CHINWEIZU,  JEMIE,  MADUBUIKE.  (1983).  Toward  the  Decolonization  of  African  Literature. 
Washington, D.C.: Howard University Press.
CHIPENDA, J.  B.  (1977).  "Theological Options in Africa Today." In  African  Theology  En Route, 
Appiah-Kubi and Torres, eds. New York: Orbis.
CHRISTOPHER, A. J. (1984). Colonial Africa. Totowa, New Jersey: Barnes and Noble.
CLARENCE-SMITH, W. G. (1977). "For Braudel: A Note on the Ecole des Annales and the 
Historiography of Africa." History in Africa 4:275-81.
—― (1985). The Third Portuguese Empire 1825-1975: A Study in Economic Imperialism. Manchester: 
Manchester University Press.
221


--- PAGE 222 ---
CLARK, G. (1936). The Balance Sheets of Imperialism. New York: Columbia University Press.
CLIFFORD, J. (1983). "On Ethnographic Authority" Representations 1 (2).
COHEN, R. (1977). "Oedipus Rex and Regina: the Queen Mother in Africa." Africa 47 (I).
COLEMAN, J. S. (1956). Togoland. New York: Carnegie Endowment for International Peace.
—― (1965). Nigeria: Background to Nationalism. Berkeley: University of California Press.
COLEMAN, J. s., and ALMOND, G. A., eds. (196o). The Politics of the Developing Areas. Princeton: 
Princeton University Press.
COLEMAN, J. s., and HALISI, C. R. D. (1983). "American Political Science and Tropical Africa: 
Universalism vs. Relativism." African Studies Review 26 (3/4):25-62.
COLEMAN, J. s., and ROSBERG, C. G. Jr., eds. (1964). Political Parties and National Integration in 
Tropical Africa. Berkeley: University of California Press.
COLLINGWOOD, R. G. (1946). The Idea of History. London: Oxford University Press.
COPANS, J. (1971a). "Pour une histoire et une sociologie des études africaines."  Cahiers d’études 
africaines II, 43. Repr. as "African Studies: A Periodization." In African Social Studies: A Radical 
Reader, P. Gutkind and P Waterman, eds. (New York: Monthly Review Press, 1978).
—― (1971b). Critiques et politiques de l’anthropologie. Paris: Maspero. 
—― (1974). Anthropologie et impérialisme. Paris: Maspero.
COQUERY-VIDROVITCH, C. (1969a). "Anthropologie politique et histoire de IAfrique." Annales 24 
(1):142-63.
—―. (1969b). "Recherches sur un mode de production africaine."  La  Pensée,  no. 
144:61-78.
—―. (1972). Le Congo au temps des grandes compagnies concéssionaires. Paris: Mouton.
—―  (1980). "Analyse  historique et concept  de  mode  de  production  dans  les 
sociétés capitalistes. " L'Homme et la société 55-58, 104-44.
—―  (1984).  "Réflexions  d'historienne."  In  Mode  of  Production:  The  Challenge  of  Africa,  B. 
Jewsiewicki and J. Létourneau, eds. Ste-Foy, Canada: Safi. , and MONIOT, H. (1974). L’Afrique noire 
de 18oo à nos jours. Paris: Presses universitaires de France.
CORDELL, D. D. (1985). Dar al-Kuti and the Last Years of the Trans-Saharan Slave Trade. Madison: 
University of Wisconsin Press.
CORREIA,  J.  A.  (1925).  "Vocables  philosophiques  et  religieux  des  peuples  lbo."  Bibliotheca 
Ethnologica Linguistica AfricanaI.
COSMAO, V. (1979). Changer le monde. Paris: Cerf. 
COUNT, E. w., ed. (195o). This is Race: An Anthology Selected from the International Literature on the  
Races of Man. New York: Schuman.
CRAHAY, F. (1965). "Le Décollage conceptuel: conditions d'une philosophie bantone."  Diogéne,  52, 
61-84.
CURTIN, P. D. (1961). "'The White Man's Grave': Image and Reality, 1780-1850." Journal of British 
Studies -1:94-110.
—― (1964).  Africa Remembered: Narratives by West Africans from the Era of the Slave Trade.  
Madison: University of Wisconsin Press.
—― (1965). The Image of Africa: British Thought and Action 178o-1850.  Madison: University of 
Wisconsin Press.
DAMANN, E. (1964). Les Religions d’Afrique noire. Paris: Payot.
DAMAS, L. G. (1979) "The Last Public Statement of L.-G. Damas."  Hommage Posthume à L. G. 
Damas. Paris: Présence Africaine.
DANQUAH, J. B. (1928). Akan Laws and Customs. 
—― (1968) The Akan Doctrine of God. London: Cass.
222


--- PAGE 223 ---
DAVIDSON, B. (1959). The Lost Cities of Africa. Boston: Little, Brown.
—― (1970). The African Genius. Boston: Little, Brown.
DECRAEMER, W. (1977). The Jamaa and the Church. Oxford: Clarendon.
DELAFOSSE, M. (1922). L’Ame nègre. Paris: Payot.
—―. (1927). Les Nègres. Paris: Rieder.
DELANGE, J. (1967). Arts et peuples d’Afrique noire. Paris: Gallimard.
DELAVIGNETTE, R. (1962). L’Afrique noire et son destin. Paris: Gallimard.
DELEUZE, G., and GUATTARI, F. (1972). L’Anti-Oedipe. Paris: Editions de Minuit.
DELHAISE,  C.  (1909).  "Les  ldées  religieuses  et  philosophiques  des  Waregas."  Mouvement 
géographique 29.
DELOBSON, D. (1932). L'Empire du Mogho-Naba. Paris: Domat Montchrétien.  
—― (1934). Les Secrets des sorciers noirs. Paris.
DENG, F. M. (1972). The Dinka of the Sudan. New York: Holt, Rinehart and Winston.
DEPESTRE, R. (I 98o). Bonjour et adieu à la négritude. Paris: Laffont.
DESCHAMPS, H. (1971). Histoire de la traite des noirs de l’antiquité à nos jours. Paris: Fayard.
—― (1954). Les Religions de I’Afrique noire. Paris: Presses universitaires de France.
DESMOND CLARK, J., and BRANDT, S. A., eds. (1984). From Hunters to Farmers.  Berkeley and Los 
Angeles: University of California Press.
DHOQUOIS, G. (1966). "Le Mode de production asiatique." Cahiers internationaux de sociologie 41, 
83-9 2.
DIA, M. (1957). L'Economie africaine. Paris: Presses universitaires de France. 
—― (1960). Nations africaines et solidarité mondiale. Paris: Presses universitaires de France.
—― (1975)- Islam, sociétés africaines et culture industrielle. Dakar: NEA.
—― (1977-1981). Essais sur I'Islam- 3 vols. 1. Islam et humanisme. 2. Socio-Anthropologie de l'Islam- 
3. Islam et civilisations négro-africaines. Dakar:  Nouvelles editions africames.
DIAGNE, M. (1976). "Paulin J. Hountondji ou La Psychanalyse de la conscience ethno-philosophique." 
Psychopathologie Africaine, 3, X11.
DIAGNE, P.  (1967). Pouvoir politique traditionnel en Afrique occidentale. Essai sur les institutions  
précoloniales. Paris: Présence Africaine.
—― (1972) Pour l'unité ouest-africaine. Micro-Etats et integration economique. Paris: Anthropos.
DIAKHATE, L. (1965). "Le Processus d'acculturation en Afrique noire et ses rapports avec la négritude. 
" Presence Africaine, no. 56.
DIAMOND, S. (1974). In Search of the Primitive: A Critique of Civilization. New Brunswick.
DICKSON, K. A. (1984). Theology in Africa. New York: Orbis.
DIENG, A. L. (1979). Hegel, Marx, Engels et les prolémes de I’Afrique noire. Dakar: Sankoré.
—― (1983). Contribution à l’etude des problémes philosopbiques en Afrique noire. Paris: Nubia.
DIETERLEN, G. (1941). Les Ames des Dogons. Paris: Institut d'Ethnologie.
—― (1971). "Les Cérémonies soixantenaires du Sigui chez les Dogons." Africa 41(I)
DIKE, K. 0 . (1956). Trade and Politics in the Niger Delta, 183o-1885. Oxford: Clarendon.
DIODORUS  SICULUS.  (1935).  An  English  translation  by  C.  H.  Oldfather.  Cambridge:  Harvard 
University Press.
DIOP, A.  (1965).  "Niam M'Paya." Preface to  La Philosophie Bantoue  by P. Tempels. Paris: Présence 
Africaine.
223


--- PAGE 224 ---
DIOP, C. A. (1954). Nations nègres et culture. Paris: Présence Africaine.
—― (1960a). L’Afrique noire précoloniale. Paris: Présence Africaine.
—― (1960b). Les Fondements culturels, techniques et industriels d'un futur etat fédéral d'Afrique 
noire. Paris: Présence Afficaine.
—― (1960c). L'Unité culturelle de l’Afrique noire. Paris: Présence Africaine.
—― (1967). Antiriorite des civilisations nègres. Paris: Presence Africaine.
—―  (1978).  Parente  genetique  de  l’égyptien  pharaonique  et  les  langues  negroafricaines. 
Dakar-Abidjan: Nouvelles éditions africaines.
—―. (1981). Civilisation ou Barbarie. Paris: Présence Africaine.
DIOP, M. (1958).  Contribution  à l’étude des problèmes politiques en Afrique noire.  Paris: Présence 
Africaine.
—― (1972). Histoire des classes sociales dans I’Afrique de I'Ouest. Paris: Mas-pero.
DIRVEN, E. (1978). "Philosopher en Africain." Mélanges de philosophie africaine. Kinshasa: Faculté de 
Théologie Catholique.
DOGBE,  E.  (198o).  Négritude,  culture  et  civilisation.  Essai  Sur  la  finalité  des  faitssociaux. 
Mée-sur-Seine (France): Akpagnon.
DONDERS, J. G. (J985). Non-Bourgeois Theology. New York: Orbis.
DOUGLAS, M. (1963). The Lele of the Kasai. London: Oxford University Press. . 
—― (1970). Natural Symbols. London: Barrie Jenkins.
DUCHET, M. (1971). Anthropologie et histoire an siècle des lumières. Paris: Maspero.
DUGGAN, W. R., and CIVILE, J. R. (1976). Tanzania and Nyerere. New York: Orbis.
DURKHEIM, E. (1912). Les Formes élémentaires de la vie religieuse.  Paris: Alcan.  (The Elementary 
Forms of the Religious Life. New York: Free Press.)
EBOUSSI-BOULAGA, F. (1968). "Le Banton Problématique." Présence Africaine no 66:4-40.
—―. (1977). La Crise du Muntu. Authenticité africaine et philosophie. Paris: Présence Africaine.
—―. (1978). "Pour une catholicité africaine."  Civilisation  noire et église  catholique.  Paris: 
Présence Africaine.
—―. (1981). Christianisme sans fétiche. Revelation et domination. Paris: Présence Africaine.
EDMOND, M. P. ( 1965). "L’Anthropologie structuraliste et l’histoire." La Pensée no. 123.
ELA, J.-M. (1980) Le Cri de l’homme africain. Paris: L'Harmattan. . 
—― (1985)- Ma foi d'africain. Paris: Karthala.
ELA, J.M., and LUNEAU, R. (1981). Voici le temps des héritiers. Eglises d’Afrique et voies nouvelles. 
Paris: Karthala.
ELUNGU, P. F. (1973a). " 'Authenticité' et Culture." Revue zairoise de psychologie et de péagogie 2, 1, 
71-74.
—― (1973b) Etendue et connaissance dans la philosophie de Malebranche. Paris: Vrin.
—―. (1976). "La Philosophie, condition du développement en Afrique aujourd'hui." La Place 
de la philosophie dans le développement humain et culturel du Zaire et de I’Afrique. Lubumbashi: 
Département de Philosophie. . 
—― (1977). "La Philosophie, condition du développement en Afrique aujourd'hui." Présence 
Africaine no. 103:3-18.
—―. (1978). "La Libération africaine et le problème de la philosophie." Philosophie et Libération. 
Kinshasa: Faculté de Théologie Catholique.
—―. (1979). Du Culte de la vie à la vie de la raison. De la crise de la conscience africaine. Doctoral 
thesis. Paris: Université de Paris.
—―.  (1980) "La  Philosophie  africaine hier et aujourd'hui."  Méanges  de  philosophie 
africaine no. 3:9-32. Kinshasa: Faculté de Théologie Catholique.
EMMANUEL, A. (1969). L'Echange inégal. Paris: Maspero.
224


--- PAGE 225 ---
EMMET, D. (1972) "Haunted Universes." Second Order I (I).
EVANS-PRITCHARD, E. E. (1937). Witchcraft, Oracles and Magic among the Azande. London: Oxford 
University Press.
—― (1946). "Applied Anthropology." Africa.
—― (1956). Nuer Religion. London: Oxford University Press.
—― (1962). Social Anthropology and Other Essays. New York: The Free Press. 
—― (1980). Theories of Primitive Religion. Oxford: The Clarendon Press.
EWANDE, D. (1968). Vive le president. La Fête africaine. Paris: A. Michel.
FABIAN, J. (1969). "An African Gnosis." History of Religion 9.
FACELINA, R., and RWEGERA, D. (1978). Africam Theology. Theologie Africaine. Strasbourg: Cerdic 
Publications.
FANON, F. (1952) Peau noire, masques blancs. Paris: Seuil.
—― (1961). Les Damnés de la terre. Paris: Maspero.
—― (1969). Pour la révolution africaine. Paris: Maspero.
FANOUDH-SIEFER, L. (1968). Le Mythe du négre et de I’Afrique noire dans la littérature française  
(de 1800 à la seconde guerre mondiale). Paris: Klincksieck.
FAVRET-SAADA, J. (1977). Les Mots, la mort, les sorts. Paris: Gallimard. (Deadly Words. Cambridge 
University Press, 198o).
FERNANDEZ, J.  W. (1979).  "Africanization, Europeanization, Christianization."  History of Religions 
18 (3).
—― (1982).  Bwiti:  An  Ethnography  of  the  Religious  Imagination  in  Africa.  Princeton:  Princeton 
University Press.
FIELDHOUSE,  D.  K.  (1981).  Colonialism1870-1945:  An  Introduction.  London:  Weidenfeld  and 
Nicolson.
FIELDS, K. (1985). Revival and Rebellion in Colonial Central Africa. Princeton: Princeton University 
Press.
FINNIGAN, R. (1970) Oral Literature in Africa. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
FLEISCHMAN, E. (197o). Le Christianisme 'mis à nu'. Paris: Plon.
FORDE, D., ed. (1[954] 1976). African Worlds. London: Oxford University Press.
FORTEs, m. (1959). Oedipus and job in West African Religion. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
FORTES,  M.,  and  DIETERLEN,  G.,  eds.  (1965).  African  Systems  of  Thought.  London:  Oxford 
University Press.
FOUCAULT, M. (1961). L'Histoire de la folie. Paris: Gallimard. (Madness and Civilization. New York: 
Random House, 1965.)
—― (1966). Les Mots et les Choses.  Paris: Gallimard.  (The Order of Things.  New York: Pantheon, 
1973.)
—― (1969). L’Archéologie du savoir.  Paris: Gallimard.  (The Archaeology of Knowledge.  New York: 
Pantheon, 1982.)
—― (1975). Surveiller et Punir. Paris: Gallimard. (Discipline and Punish. New York: Pantheon, 1977.)
—― (1976). La Volonté de savoir I. Paris: Gallimard. (The History of Sexuality I, New York: Pantheon, 
1978.)
—― (1980).  Power/Knowledge:  Selected  Interviews  and  Other  Writings  1972-1977.  New  York: 
Pantheon.
FOUDA, B. J. (1967). La Philosophie africaine de l’existence. Doctoral dissertation. Lille: Faculté des 
Lettres.
FOURCHE, J. A. T., and MORLIGHEM, H. (1973). Une bible noire. Brussels: Max Arnold.
FRAZER, J. (1922). The Golden Bough. London: MacMillan.
FROBENIUS, H. (1893). Die Heiden-Neger des "agyptischen Sudan. " Berlin: Nitschke und Loechner.
—―  (1899).  "The Origin of African Civilization."  Annual Report  of the Board of Regents  of the 
225


--- PAGE 226 ---
Smithsonian Institution. Washington: Government Printing Office.
—― (1936). Histoire de la civilisation africaine. Paris: Gallimard.
—― (1937). African Genesis. New York: Stackpole Sons.
—― (1940). Le Destin des civilisations. Paris: Gallimard.
FROELICH, J. C. (1964). Animismes, les religions païennes de l’Afrique de louest. Paris: Orante.
—― (1969). Nouveaux dieux d’Afrique noire. Paris: Orante.
FRY, R. (1940). Vision and Design. New York: Penguin.
FU-KIAU,  A.  (1969).  Le  Mukongo  et  le  monde  qui  l’entourait.  Kinshasa:  Office  National  de  la 
Recherche Scientifique.
FULCHIRON, B., and SCHLUMBERGER, C. (198o). Poètes et romanciers noirs. Paris: Nathan.
GEERTZ, C. (1973). The Interpretation of Cultures. New York: Basic Books.
GERARD, A. (1964). "Origines historiques et destin littéraire de la négritude." Diogène 48.
GILBERT, F., and GRAUBARD, S. R.; eds. (1 972).  Historical Studies Today.  New York: Random 
House.
GLELE, M. (1981). Religion, culture et politique en Afrique noire. Paris: Prèsence Africaine.
GODELIER, M. (1970). Stir les sociètès prècapitalistes. Paris: Editions Sociales.
—― (1973). Horizons, trajets marxistes en anthropologie. Paris: Maspero.
—― (1977). Perspectives in Marxist Anthropology. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
GOODY, J. (1968). Literacy in Traditional Societies. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
—― (1977). The Domestication of the Savage Mind. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
GOROG, V., and CHICHE, M. (1981).  Littérature orale d’Afrique noire. Bibliographie analytique. 
Paris: Maisonneuve et Larose.
GRAET-JOHNSON, J. c. de. (1954).  African Glory: The Story of Vanished Negro Civilizations.  New 
York: Praeger.
GRAFT-JOHNSON, J. W. DE. (1928).  Towards Nationhood in West Africa.  New ed. 1971. London: 
Cass.
GRAVRAND, H. (1962). Visage africain de l’église. Une experience au Sénéjgal. Paris: Orante.
GREGOIRE, H. B. (18o8). De la littérature des nègres. Paris: Maradan.
GRIAULE, M. (1948).  Dieu d’eau. Entretiens avec 0gotemmêli.  Paris: Chêne. (Conversations with 
Ogotemmêli. Oxford University Press, 1965.)
—― (1950). "Philosophic et Religion des Noirs." Présence Africaine 8-9:30712.
—― (1952.)- "Le Savoir des Dogon." journal de la société des africanistes 22,27-42.
GRIAULE, m. and DIETERLEN, G. (1965). Le Renard pâle. Paris: Institut d'Ethnologie. . 
—― (1976). "The Dogon of the French Sudan." In African Worlds,  D. Forde, ed. London: 
Oxford University Press.
GRIMAL, H. (1965). La Dicolonisation 1919-1963. Paris: A. Colin.
GUERNIER, E. (1952). L’Apport de I’Afrique à la pensée humaine. Paris: Payot.
GUISSE, Y. M. (1979). Philosophie, culture et devenir social en Afrique noire.Dakar: Nouvelles éditions 
africaines.
GUNDER-MANK,  A.  (1969).  Capitalism  and  Underdevelopment  in  Latin  Americav   New  York: 
Monthly Review Press.
GUTKIND, P. c. w., and WALLERSTEIN, I., eds. (1976).  The Political Economy of Contemporary 
Africa. Beverly Hills: Sage.
226


--- PAGE 227 ---
GYEKYE, K. (1973). "Al-Ghazali on Causation." Second Order 2 (1). . 
—― (1975). "Philosophical Relevance of Akan Proverbs." Second Order 4 (2).
HAEFFNER, G. (1978). "Philosophie Afrika." Stimmen der Zeit 103.
HAILEY, M. (1970). "Colonial Government through Indirect Rule: The British Model." In The African 
Reader: Colonial Africa, W. Cartey and M. Kilson, eds. New York: Vintage Books.
HALLEN,  B.  (1976). "Phenomenology and the Exposition of African Traditional Thought."  Second 
Order 5 (2).
HALLEN, B., and SODIPO, J. 0. (1986). Knowledge, Belief and Witchcraft: Analytica lExperiments in 
African Philosophy. London: Ethnographica.
HALLER, J. H. (1971).  Outcasts from Evolution: Scientific Attitudes of Racial In-feriority.  Urbana: 
University of Illinois Press.
HAMA, B. (1968). Essai d'analyse de l’éducation africaine. Paris: Présence Africaine.
—― (1969). Kotia-Nima. I. Rencontre avec I'Europe; 2. Rencontre avec I'Europe; 3. Dialogue avec 
POccident. Paris: Pr6sence Africame.
—― (1972a). Le Retard de l’Afrique. Essai philosophique. Paris: Présence Africaine.
—― (1972b). Cet 'autre'de l'homme. Paris: Présence Africaine.
HAMMOND, D., and JABLOW, A. (1977).  The Myth of Africa.  New York: The Library of Social 
Science.
HANNA S. (1 963). Wbo are the Copts?. Cairo: Costa Tsouma.
HARIK, E. m., and SCHILLING, D. G. (1984).  The Politics of Education in Colonial Algeria and 
Kenya. Athens, Ohio: University Center for International Studies.
HASTINGS, A. (1979). A History of African Christianity 1950-1975. Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press.
HAUSER, M. (1982). Essai sur la poétique de la négritude. Lille: Université de Lille III.
HAZOUME, G. L. (1972). Ideologies tribalistes et nation en Afrique: le cas daboméen. Paris: Présence 
Africaine.
HAZOUME,  P.  (1937).  Le  Pacte  du  sang  au  Dahomey.  Paris:  Travaux  et  Mémoires  de  l'Institut 
d'Ethnologie.
—―. (1938). Doguicimi. Paris: Larose.
HEADRICK, D. (1981). The Tools of Empire. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
HEBGA,  M.  (1958).  "Plaidoyer  pour les logiques de I'afrique  noire."  Aspects  de  la culture noire 
104-116. Paris.
—―. (1976). Emancipation d’églises sous-tutelle. Essai sur Pere post-missionnaire. Paris: Présence 
Africaine.
—― (1979). Sorcellerie, chimère dangereuse? Abidjan: Inades.
—― (1982). "Eloge de 1'ethnophilosophie." Présence Africaine, no123.
HEBGA, m., ed. (1963). Personnalité africaine et catholicisme. Paris: Présence Africaine.
HERDECK, E. D., ed. (1973).  African Authors: A Companion to Black African Writing  1300-1973. 
Washington, D.C.: Black Orpheus Press.
HERODOTUS.  (1921). Books III and  IV. With an English translation by A. D. Godley.  London: W. 
Heinemann.
HERSKOVITS, M. J. (1962). The Human Factor in Changing Africa. New York: Knopf.
HERSKOVITS, M. J. and HERSKOVITS, F. (1958).  Dahomean Narrative.  Evanston: Northwestern 
University Press.
HERTEFELT, M. D' (1962).  Les Anciens Royaumes de la zone interlacustre méridionale.  Tervuren: 
Musée Royal de L’Afrique Centrale.
HESSE, M. (1963). Models and Analogies in Science. London: Sheed & Ward.
HEUSCH DE, L. (1958).  Le Symbolisme de Pinceste royal en Afrique.  Brussels: Université Libre de 
Bruxelles.
227


--- PAGE 228 ---
—―. (1971). Pourquoi l’épouser et autres essais.  Paris: Gallimard.  (Why Marry Her?  Cambridge 
University Press, 1981).
—―. (1972). Le Roi Ivre.  Paris: Gallimard.  (The Drunken King.  Bloomington: Indiana University 
Press, 1982)
—―. (1973). "Le Sorcier, le père Tempels et les jumeaux mal venus." In La Notion de Personne 
en Afrique Noire. Paris: Editions du Centre National  de la Recherche Scientifique.
—― (1982). Rois nés d'un coeur de vache. Paris: Gallimard.
—― (1985). Sacrifice in Africa. Bloomington: Indiana University Press.
HOBSON, J. A. ([1902] 1972). Imperialism: A Study. Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press.
HODGEN, M. T. (1971). Early Anthropology in the Sixteenth and Seventeenth Centuries. Philadelphia: 
University of Pennsylvania Press.
HODGKIN, T. (19 5 7). Nationalism in Colonial Africa. New York: New York University Press.
HOFFMANN, (1973). Le Nègre romantique. Personnage littéraire et obsession collective. Paris: Payot.
HOLAS, P. (1954). Le Culte de Zié. Dakar: Ifan.
—―. (1965). Le Séparatisme religieux en Afrique noire. Paris: Presses universitaires de France.
—― (1968a). Les Dieux de I’Afrique. Paris: Geuthner.
—― (1968b). L'Image du monde bete. Paris: Presses universitaires de France.
HOLDEN, E. (1967). Blyden of Liberia. New York: Vantage.
HOLLIS, m. (1981). "The Limits of Irrationality." In  Rationality,  B. R. Wilson, ed.  Oxford: Basil 
Blackwell.
HORTON, R. (1961). "Destiny and the Unconscious in West Africa." Africa 31 (2): 110-16.
—― (1972). "Spiritual Beings and Elementary Particles." Second Order 1 (1).
—― (1976). "Traditional Thought and the Emerging African Philosophy Department: 
A Comment on the Current Debate." Second Order 6 (1).
—―. (1981). "African Traditional Thought and Western Science." In Rationality,  B. R. 
Wilson, ed. Oxford: Basil Blackwell.
HOUNTONDJI, P. (1970). "Remarques Sur la philosophie africame contemporaine."Diogéne no. 71.
—―. (1977). Sur la philosophic africaine.  Paris: Maspero  (African Philosophy: Myth and Reality. 
Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1983).
—― (1980). "Distances." Recherche, pédagogie et culture 49, 27-33.
—― (1981). "Que pent la philosophie?" Présence Africaine no. -119:47-71.
—― (1982). "Occidentalisme, Elitisme: réponse à deux critiques."  Recherche, pédagogie et 
culture 9, 56.
—―. (1983). "Reason and Tradition." In  Philosophy  and  Cultures,  0.  Cruka, ed.  Nairobi: 
Bookwise Limited.
HOWLETT, J. (1974). "La Philosophie africaine en question." Présence Africaine 91:14-25.
IDONIBOYE, D. E. (1973). "The Concept of 'Spirit' in African Metaphysics." Second Order 2 (I).
IDOWU, E. B. (1962). Olodumare: God in Yoruba Belief London: Longmans.
—― (1965). Towards an Indigenous Church. Oxford University Press.
—― (1975). African Traditional Religion: A Definition. New York: Orbis.
ILIFFE, J. (1983). The Emergence of African Capitalism. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.
ISICHEI, P. A. C. (1975). "Two Perspectives to the Past: History and Myth." Second Order 4 (2).
IYEKI, J. F. (1956). Essai de psychologie du primitif. Leopoldville (Kinshasa): Editions de la Voix du 
Congolais.
IZARD, M. (1985). Gens du pouvoir. Gens de la terre. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
228


--- PAGE 229 ---
JACKSON, M. (1982).  Allegories of the Wilderness: Ethics and Ambiguity in Kuranko Narratives. 
Bloomington: Indiana University Press.
JAHN, J. (1961). Muntu: An Outline of the New African Culture. New York: Grove Press.
—―.  (1965).  Die  Neoafrikaniscbe  Literatur.  Gesamtbibliograpbie  von  den  Anfängen  bis  zur 
Gegenwart. Dusseldorf-Köln: Eugen Diederichs.
—― (1968). A History of Neo-African Literature. London: Faber and Faber.
JEANSON, F. (1949). "Sartre et le monde noir." Présence Africaine no. 7.
JEWSIEWICKI, B. (1980). "L’Histoire en Afrique on Le Commerce des idées usage es." In Les Faux 
Prophètes de l’Afrique, A. Schwarz, ed. Quebec: Presses  de l'Université de Laval.
—―.  (1981).  "Lineage  Mode  of  Production:  Social  Inequalities  in  Equatorial  Central 
Africa." In  Modes of Production in Africa,  D. Grummey and C. C.  Stewart, eds. Beverly Hills: 
Sage.
—― (1985). Marx, Afrique et occident. s.l.: McGill University Center for Developing Area Studies.
JEWSIEWICKI, B., and LETOURNEAU, J., eds. (1985). Mode of Production: The Challenge of Africa. 
Canadian Journal of African Studies 19 (I) special issue.
JEWSIEWICKI, B., and NEWBURY, D. eds. (1985). African Historiographies. Beverly Hills: Sage.
JORDAN, W. D. (1968). White over Black: American Attitudes Towards the Negro 1550-1812. Chapel 
Hill.
JULES-ROSETTE, B. (1975). African Apostles: Ritual and Conversion in the Church of John Maranke.  
Ithaca: Cornell University Press.
—― (1984). The Message of Tourist Art. New York: Plenum Press.
JULY, R. (1964). "Nineteenth Century Negritude: Edward W Blyden." Journal of African History 5 (1).
KABA, L.  (1974).  The  Wahhabiyya:  Islamic  Reform  and  Politics  in  French  West  Africa. 
Evanston: Northwestern University Press.
KAChAMA-NKOY, J. (1963). "De Karl Marx à Pierre Teilhard de Chardin dans la pensée de L. S. 
Senghor  et  Mamadou  Dia."  In  Voies  Africaines  du  Socialisme.Leopoldville  (Kinshasa): 
Bibliothéque de l'Etoile.
KAGAME, A. (1943).  Inganji Karinga  (The Victorious Drums) and (1949-51)  Isoko y’ámajyambere 
(Sources  of Progress). Kabgayi:  Editions  Morales.  (La DivinePastorate.  Brussels:  Editions  du 
Marais, 1952).
—― (1950). Bref aperçu sur la poésie dynastique du Rwanda. Brussels: Editions universitaires.
—― (1952-53). Umuliribya wa Nyiliibiremwa. Astrida: Butare.
—― (1956).  La Philosophie bantu-rwandaise de l’être.  Brussels: Académie Royale des Sciences 
Coloniales.
—― (1968). "La Place de Dieu et de l’homme dans la religion des Bantu." Cahiers des 
religions africaines 4:213-22 and 1969, 5:5-11.
—― (1970).  Introduction aux grands genres lyriques de Pancien Rwanda.  Butare: Editions univer 
sitaires du Rwanda.
—―  (1971).  "L’Ethno-Philosophie  des  Bantu."  In  La  Philosophie  Contemporaine,  R. 
Klibansky, ed. Florence: La Nuova Italia.
—―. (1972) Un abrégé de l’ethno-histoire du Rwanda. Butare: Editions universitaires du Rwanda.
—― (1976). La Philosophie bantu comparée. Paris: Présence Africaine.
KALANDA,  M.  A.  (1967).  La  Remise  en  question.  Base  de  la  décolonisation  mentale.  Brussels: 
Remarques Africaines.
KALILOMBE, P. A. (1977). "Self-Reliance of the African Church: A Catholic Perspective."  In African 
Theology En Route, Appiah-Kubi, K., and S. Torres, eds. New York: Orbis.
229


--- PAGE 230 ---
KALU, 0. U. (1977). "Church Presence in Africa: A Historical Analysis of the Evangelization Process." 
In African Theology En Route, Appiab-Kubi, K., and S. Torres, eds. New York: Orbis.
KANE, C. H. (1961). L’Aventure ambigue. Paris: Julliard.
KANE, M. (1982). Roman Africain et Tradition. Dakar: Nouvelles editions africaines.
KANGAFU, K. (1973). Discours sur l’authenticité. Kinshasa: Presses Africaines.
KANZA, T. (1959 a).  Le Congo à la veille de son independance.  Bruxelles: Les Amis de Présence 
Africaine.
—―. (1959b). Propos d'un Congolais naïf. Bruxelles: Les Amis de Présence Africaine,
KAOZE, S. (1907--1911). La Psychologie des Bantus et quelques lettres. Anastatic reproduction by A. J. 
Smet (1979). Kinshasa: Faculté de Théologie Catholique.
KASHAMURA, A. (1973). Famille, sexualité et culture. Paris: Payot.
KAUMBA, L. (1986). Dimensions de l'identité. Approche phénoménologique de l'univers romanesque 
de Mudimbe. Louvain-La-Neuve: Unpublished Ph.D. dissertation.
KAUNDA, K. D. (1966). A Humanist in Africa: Letters to Colin M. Morris. London: Longmans.
KELLER, A. S.; LISSITZYN, o.; and MANN, J. F. (1938). Creation of Rights of Sovereignty Through 
Symbolic Acts 1400-1800. New York: Columbia University Press.
KENYATTA, J. (1938). Facing Mount Kenya, London: Secker and Warburg. New edition, 1962. New 
York: Vintage.
KFSTELOOT, L. (1965). Les Ecrivains noirs de langue française: Naissance d'une littérature. Brussels: 
Institut de Sociologie.
—― (1968). Nigritude et situation coloniale. Yaoundé: Clé.
KILLINGRAY, D. (1973). A Plague of Europeans. Harmondsworth: Penguin Education.
KIMONI, 1. (1975). Destin de la littérature négro-africaine ou Problématique d'uneculture. Kinshasa: 
Presses universitaires du Zaire.
KINANGA, M. (198 [). "L’Archéologie foucauldienne. Une méthode d'analyse du discours." In Langage 
et philosophie. Kinshasa: Faculté de Théologie Catholique.
KINGSLEY, M. H. (1965). Travels in West Africa. (Abridged version of 1900 edition). London: Cass.
KINYONGO, J. (1970). Origine et signification du nom divin Yahvé. Bonn: Bonner Biblische Beiträge,
—― (1973). L'Etre manifesté. Méditation philosophique sur I'affirmation de soi, la participation et 
l’authenticité au Zaire. Lubumbashi: Synthèse.
—― (1979). "Essai  sur la fondation  épistémologique  d'une  philosophie  herméneutique  en 
Afrique: Le Cas de la discursivité." Présence Africaine no. 109:12-26.
—―.  (1982).  "La  Philosophie  africaine  et  son  histoire."  Les  Etudes  philosophiques 
4:407-18.
KI-ZERBO, J. (1 972). Histoire de I’Afrique d'hier à demain. Paris: Hatier.
—―. (1980). "De L’Afrique ustensile à L’Afrique parternaire." In Africa's Dependence and the 
Remedies, V. Y. Mudimbe, ed. Paris: Berger-Levrault,
KOFFI, N. (1976). "L’lmpensé de Towa et de Hountondji." Paper presented at the International Seminar 
on African Philosophy, Addis-Ababa, Dec. 1976.
—―.  (1977).  "Les  Modes  d'existence matérielle  de  la  philosophie  et  la  question  de  la 
philosophie africaine." Koré, Revue ivoirienne de philosophie et de Culture nos. 5, 6, 7, and 8.
KOFFI, N.,  and ABDOU,  T.  (1980) "Controverses  sur 1'existence  d'une philosophie  africaine." In 
African Philosophy, C. Sumner, ed. Addis-Ababa: Chamber Printing House.
230


--- PAGE 231 ---
KOM, A., ed. (1983).  Dictionnaire des oeuvres littéraires négro-africaines de langue française des 
origines à 1978. Sherbrooke: Editions Naaman.
KOYRE, A. (1968). Metaphysics and Measurement. London: Chapman & Hall.
KRADER, L. (1973). "The Works of Marx and Engels in Ethnology Compared." International Review of 
Social History 18 (2).
KUNST, H. J. (1967). L’Africain dans l’art européen. Cologne: Dumont Presse.
LADRIERE, J. (1979). Foreword to Métaphore et Métonymie dans les SymbolesParémiologiques, by 0. 
Nkombe. Kinshasa: Faculté de Théologie Catholique.
LALEYE, 1. (1970). La Conception de la personne dans la pensée traditionnelleyoruba. Berne: Lang.
—― (1975). La Phlosophie? Pourquoi en Afrique? Une phénoménologie de la question. Berne: Lang.
—― (1981:). "Philosophie et réalités africaines."  Langage et philosophie.  Kinshasa: Faculté de 
Théologie Catholique.
—― (1982). "La Philosophie, L’Afrique et les philosophes africains. Triple malen-
tendu ou possibilité d'une collaboration féconde." Présence Africaine no. 123: 42-62.
LANGER, W. L. (1951). The Diplomacy of Imperialism 1890-1902. New York.
LAROUI, A. (1967). L'Idéologie arabe contemporaine. Paris: Maspero.
LATOUCHE,  s.,  (1982).  "L’lmpérialisme  prècéde  le  développement  du  capitalisme."  Les  Temps 
modernes no. 434:515-38.
LAUDE, J. (1979). L’Art d’Afrique noire. Paris: Chêne.
LAURENTIN, R. (1977). "Données statistiques sur les chrétiens en Afrique." Concilium 126.
LEACH, E. R. (1965). "Frazer and Malinowski." Encounter, no. 25:24-26.
—― (1980). "Genesis as Myth." In Myth and Cosmos, J. Middleton, ed. Austin: University of 
Texas Press.
LEC LERC,.G. (1972) Anthropologie et colonialisme. Paris: Fayard.
LEGUN , (1958). Bandoeng, Cairo, Accra. London: The African Bureau.
LEIRIS, M. (1934). L’Afrique fantôme. Paris: Gallimard.
LEUSSE, H. DE. (1971). Afrique et occident. Heurs et malbeurs d'une rencontre, les romanciers du pays 
noir. Paris: Orante.
LEUZINGER, E. (1962). Afrique. L’Art des peuples noirs. Paris: A. Michel.
LEVINE, V. T. (1986). "Political Cultural Schizophrenia in Francophone Africa." In Africa and the West, 
R. Bjornson and 1. J. Mowoe, eds. New York: Greenwood Press.
LEVI-STRAUSS, C. (1955). Tristes tropiques. Paris: Plon. (New York: Washington Square Press, 1977.)
—― (1958).  Anthropologie  structurale.  Paris:  Plon.  (Structural  Anthropology.  New  York:  Basic 
Books, 1963.)
—―. (1962). La Pensée sauvage.  Paris: Plon.  (The Savage Mind.  Chicago: University of Chicago 
Press, -1966.)
—―. (1964). Le Cru et le cuit, Mythologiques I. Paris: Plon. (The Raw and the Cooked. New York: 
Harper and Row, 1968.)
—― 1966). Du Miel au cendres, Mythologiques II Paris: Plon. (From Honey to Ashes. London: J. 
Cape, 1973.)
—―. (1968). L'Origine des manières de table, Mythologiques III. Paris: Plon. (The Origin of Table 
Manners. New York: Harper and Row, 1979.)
—― (1971). L'Homme nu. Paris: Plon. (The Naked Man. New York: Harper and Row, 19811.)
—― (1973). Anthropologie structurale II Paris: Plon.
LEVY-BRUHL, L. (1949). Les Carnets de Lucien Lèvy-Bruhl. Paris: Presses universitaires de France.
—―. (1963). L’Ame primitive. Paris: Presses universitaires de France.
231


--- PAGE 232 ---
LIENHARDT,  G.  (1961).  Divinity  and  Experience:  The  Religion  of  the  Dinka.  Oxford:  Oxford 
University Press.
LISSOUBA, P. (1975). Conscience du dèveloppement et dèmocratie. Dakar-Abidjan: Nouvelles editions 
africaines.
LOFCHIE, M. F. (1968). "Political Theory and African Politics." Journal of Modern African Studies 6.
LOKADI, L. (1979). Difference entre la généralite II du materialisme dialectique et lagénéralite II du  
matérialisme  historique.  Contribution  a  la critique  de  l’epistimologie  altbussérienne.  Doctoral 
dissertation. Lubumbashi: Faculté des Lettres.
LONDON, 1. D. (1977). "Convergent and Divergent Amplification and its Meaning for Social Science." 
Psychological Reports no. 41:III-23.
LUFULUABO, F. M. (1962). Vers une théodicée bantoue. Paris-Tournai.
—―. (1964a) Orientation préchrêtienne de la conception bantoue de l’etre.  Leopoldville (Kinshasa): 
Centre d'Etudes Pastorales.
—― (1964b). La Notion luba-bantoue de l’etre. Tournai: Casterman.
—― (1966). Perspective théologique bantoue et théologie scholastique. Malines.
LUGARD, F. (1905). A Tropical Dependancy. London: J. Nisbet.
—―. (1965). The Dual Mandate in British Tropical Africa. London: Cass.
LUMUMBA, P. (1963). Le Congo, terre d'avenir, est-il menacé? Brussels: Office de Publicité.
LY, A. (1956) Les Masses africaines et l’actuelle condition humaine. Paris: Présence Africaine.
LYNCH,  H.  R.  (1967).  Edward  Wilmot  Blyden:  Pan-Negro  Patriot  1832-1912.London:  Oxford 
University Press. , ed., (1978). Selected Letters of Edward Wilmot Blyden. New York: KTO Press.
LYONS, R. H. (1975). To Wash an Aethiop White. New York: Teachers College Press.
MACGAFFEY, W. (1981). "African Ideology and Belief: A Survey." African StudiesReview 24 (2/3).
MAFEJE, A. (1976). "The Problem of Anthropology in Historical Perspective: An Inquiry into the 
Growth of the Social Sciences." Canadian Journal of African Studies 10 (2).
MAGUBANE, B. (1968). "Crisis in African Sociology." East African Journal 5 (12).
MAIR, L. (1975). Primitive Government. Gloucester (Mass.): Peter Smith.
MAKARAKIZA, A. (1959).  La Dialectique  des Barundi.  Brussels: Académie Royale des Sciences 
Coloniales.
MALANDA, D. (1977a). La Mentaliti africaine et l’avenir de la science. Kisangani: Editions du base.
—― (1977b). Science et psychologie. Kisangani: Editions du base.
MALINOWSKI, B. and others. (1938). Methods of Study of Culture Contact in Africa. Oxford: Oxford 
University Press.
MALLOWS, W. (1984). The Mystery of the Great Zimbabwe. New York: Norton.
MALULA, J. A. (1976). L'Eglise de Dieu qui est à Kinshasa vous parle. Kinshasa: Saint Paul.
—― (1977). "Inaugural Address." Cahiers des religions africaines 11, 21-22, 1. 
MARTINS VAZ, J. (1970).  Filosofia Tradicional  dos Cabindas. 2 vols.  Lisbon: Agencia Geral do 
Ultramar.
MARX, K. (1975). Pre-Capitalist Economic Formations. New York: International Publishers.
MASSAMBA MA MPOLO. (1976). La Libération des envoûtés. Yaoundé: Clé.
MATACZYNSKI,  D.  A.  (1984).  A Re-examination  of  the  Jamaa:  "Thick  Description."  Thesis  in 
Religion. Haverford College.
232


--- PAGE 233 ---
MAURIER, H. (1974)- "Métholodogie de la philosophie africaine." Cultures et développement 6.
—― (1976). Pbilosophie de I’Afrique noire. St. Augustin bei Bonn: Verlag des Anthropos-Instituts.
MAZRUI, A. A. (11974).  World Culture and the Black Experience  Seattle: University of Washington 
Press.
MAZRIJI, A. A., and TIDY, M. (1984). Nationalism and New States in Africa. London: Heinemann.
MBITI, J. S. (1970). African Religions and Philosophy. New York: Anchor.
—― (1971). New Testament Eschatology in an African Background. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
MBUZE, L. (1974). Révolution et humanisme. Kinshasa: Presses africaines.
—―. (1977). Aux sources d'une révolution. Kinshasa: Presses africaines.
MCV1EIGH, M. J. (1974). God in Africa. Boston: Stark.
—― (1980), "La Notion de la religion dans les théologies chrétiennes." Concilium 156.
MEEK, R. L. (1976). Social Science and the Ignoble Savage. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
MEESTER DE RAVFNSTFIN, P. DE. (1980a). Oú va l’eglise d’Afrique? Paris: Cerf.
—― (1980b) L'Eglise d’Afrique. Lubumbashi: Saint Paul.
MEILLASSOUX, C. (1964). Anthropologie économique des Gouro de la C6te d’lvoire. Paris: Mouton.
—― (1974). L'Esclavage dans l’Afrique pré-coloniale. Paris: Maspero.
—― (1975). Maidens, Meal and Money. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
MELONE, T. (1962). De la négritude dans la littérature négro-africaine. Paris: Présence Africaine.
MEMEL-FOTE, H. (1962). "Rapport sur la civilisation animiste." Colloque sur les Religions, 31-58.
—― (1965)"De  la paix  perpétuelle  dans  la  philosophie  pratique  des  Africains."   Présence 
Africaine no. 55: 15-31
MEMMI, A. (1966).  Portrait du colonisateur précédé du portrait du colonisé.  Paris: Pauvert.  (The 
Colonizer and the Colonized. Boston: Beacon Press)
MICHELET, R. (1945). African Empires and Civilisations. London.
MIDDLETON,  J. (1960).  Lugbara Religion:  Ritual  and Authority Among an East African  People. 
London: Oxford University Press.
—― I ed. (1980 [1963]) Myth and Cosmos. Austin: University of Texas Press.
MILLER, C. L. (1985). Black Darkness: Africanist Discourse in French. Chicago: University of Chicago 
Press.
MOMMSEN, W. J. (1983). Theories of Imperialism. London: Weidenfeld and Nicolson.
MONSENGWO PASINYA, L. (1973). La Notion de nomos dans le pentateuque grec. Rome: Biblical 
Institute Press.
MONTEIL, V. (1980). L'Islam noir. Paris: Seuil.
MOORE, B. (1958). Political Power and Social Theory. Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
MOSELY, A. (1978). "The Metaphysics of Magic." Second Order 7 (1 and 2).
MOURALIS, B. (1981). "Mudimbe et le savoir ethnologique." L’Afrique Iittéraire et artistique 58, I,II2-
25
—― (1984a). "V. Y. Mudimbe et l'odeur du pouvoir." Politique africaine no. 13.
—― (1984b). Littérature et développement. Paris: Silex-ACCT.
MPONGO, L. (1968).  Pour une anthropologie chrétienne du mariage au Congo.  Kinshasa: Centre 
d'Etudes Pastorales.
MPOYI-BWATU, T. (1983). "V. Y. Mudimbe ou Le Rêve du promontoir et le blocage dans l’ascenseur. 
Sur L'Ecart.- Peuples noirs/peuples africains 33.
233


--- PAGE 234 ---
MUBENGAYI, C. L. (1966).  Initiation africaine et initiation cbrétienne.  Kinshasa:  Centre d'Etudes 
Pastorales.
MUDIMBE, V. Y. (1973).  L’Autre Face du royaume. Une introduction à la critique des langages in 
Folie. Lausanne: L’Age d'homme.
—―(1977). "Entretien avec Monseigneur Tshibangu Tshishiku." Recherches, pédagogie et 
culture VI, 32, 16-19. ed, (1980). Africa's Dependence and the Remedies. Paris: Berger- Levrault.
—― (1979). "Le Chant d'un Africain sous les Antonins: Lecture du ‘Pervigilium 
Veneris'."  Africa  et  Roma:  Acta  Omium  Gentium  ac  Nationum  Conventus  Latinis  Litteris  
Linguaeque Fovendis. Rome: ‘l’Erma' di Bretschneider.
—―. (1981a). Visage de la philosophie et de la theologie con temporaines au Zaire. Brussels: Cedaf.
—―. (1981b) "Signes thérapeutiques et prose de la vie en Afrique noire.  Social Sciences and 
Medicine, 15B.
—―. (1982a). "La Pensée  africaine  contemporaine  1954-1980.  Répertoire  chronologique   des 
ouvrages de langue française." Recherche, pédagogie et culture 56, IX, 68-73.
—―. (1982b). L'Odeur du pére. Essai sur des limites de la science et de la vie en  Afrique noire. 
Paris: Présence Africaine.
—―. (1982c) "In Memoriam:  Alexis Kagame (1912-1980)."  Recherche,  pédagogie  et 
culture, 56.
—― (1983a). "An African Criticism of Christianity." Geneva-Africa 21 (2).
—― (1983b). "African Philosophy as an Ideological Practice: The Case of French-Speaking 
Africa." African Studies Review 26, 3-4.
MUDIMBE-BOYI,  M.  (1977).  Testi  e  Immagini.  La  Missione  del  "Congo"  nelle  Relazioni  dei 
Missionari Cappucini Italiani 1645-1700. Dissertation. Lubum-bashi.
MUJYNYA, E. N. C, (1972). L'Homme dans l’univers des Bantu.Lubumbashi: Presses universitaires du 
Zaire.
MULAGO, V. (1955).  L'Union vitale bantu chez les Bashi, les Banyarwanda, et las Barundi face à 
l’unité vitale ecclésiale. Dissertation. Rome: Propaganda.
—― (1959). "La Théologie et ses responsabilités." Présence Africaine no. 27-28.
—― (1965). Un visage africain du christianisme. Paris: Présence Africaine.
—― (1973).  La  Religion  traditionnelle  des  Bantu  et  leur  vision  du  monde.  Kinshasa:  Presses 
universitaires du Zaire.
—―. (1981). "Evangélisation et Authenticité." Aspects du catholicisme au Zaire. Kinshasa: Faculté de 
Théologie Catholique.
MURDOCK, G. P. (1959). Africa: Its Peoples and Their Culture History. New York: McGraw Hill.
MUZOREWA, G. H, (1985). The Origins and Development of African Theology. New York: Orbis.
MUZUNGU, B. (1974). Le Dieu de nos pères. Bujumbura: Presses Lavigerie.
MVFNG, E. (1965). L'Art d’Afrique noire. Liturgie et Langage religieux. Paris: Marne.
—― ( 1972). Les Sources grecques de Phistoire négro-africaine. Paris: Présence Africaine.
—―. (1978). "De la sous-mission à la succession." Civilisation noire et église catholique. Paris: 
Présence Africaine.
—―. (-1983)- "Récents développements de la théologie africaine." Bulletin of African Theology 5, 9.
N'DAW, A. (1966). "Peut-on parler d'une pensée africame?" Presence Africaine no. 5 8:3 2-46.
—―. (1983).  La Pensée africaine. Recherches sur les fondements de la pensée negro-africaine. 
Dakar: Nouvelles éditions africaines.
234


--- PAGE 235 ---
NDUKA, 0.  (1974). "African Traditional  Systems of Thought and Their Implications for Nigeria's 
Education." Second Order  3 (I).
NGIMBI-NSEKA. (1979). "Théologie et anthropologie transcendentale." Revue africaine de théologie 3, 
5.
NGINDU,  A.  (1968).  "La Quatriéme Semaine Théologique de Kinshasa  et la problématique  d'une 
théologie africaine."  La Revue du Clergé Africain 2, 4.
—― (1978). Le Probléme  de la connaissance religieuse d'aprés Lucien Laberthonniére. Kinshasa: 
Faculté de Théologie Catholique.
—― (1979). "La Théologie africaine. De la polémique à l'irénisme critique."  Bulletin of African 
Tbeology,I , (.I).-1 ed. (1985). The Mission of the Church Today. Kinshasa: Saint Paul.
NGOMA, B. (1975). "Pour une orientation authentique de la philosophie en Afrique: l’herméneutique." 
Zaire-Afrique no. 113.
—― (1978). "La Récusation de la philosophie par la société africaine,"  Milanges de philosophie 
africaine 3, 85-100. Kinshasa: Faculté de Théologie Catholique.
NGOUABI,  M  .  (1975).  Vers  la  construction  d'une  société  socialiste  en  Afrique.  Paris:  Présence 
Africaine.
NGUVULU, A. (1971). L'Humanisme négro-africain face au développement. Kinshasa: Okapi.
NJOH-MOUELLE, N. (1970a). De la médiocrité à l’excellence. Yaoundé: Clé.
—― (1970b). jalons. Recherches d'une mentalité neuve. Yaoundé: Clé.
—― (1975). jalons II. L’Africanisme aujourd'hui. Yaoundé: C1é.
NKOMBE, 0. (1977). "Méthode et point de départ en philosophie africaine: authenticité et libération." 
La Philosophie africaine 69-87. Kinshasa: Faculté de Théologie Catholique.
—― (1978a). "Essai de sémiotique formelle: les rapports différentiels." Mélanges de philosophie 
africaine 3:131-48. Kinshasa: Faculté de Théologie Catholique.
—―. (1978b). "Sagesse africaine et lib6ration." Pbilosopbie et Liberation. Kinshasa: Facult6 
de Th6ologie Catholique.
—― (1979) Métaphore et métonymie dans les symboles parémiologiques. L'Intersubjectivité dans les 
proverbes tetela. Kinshasa: Faculté de Théologie Catholique.
NKOMBE, o., and SMET, A. J. (1978). "Panorama de la philosophie africaine contemporaine." Wanges 
de philosophie africaine 3:263-82. Kinshasa: Faculté de Théologie Catholique.
NKRUMAH, K. (1957). Ghana. The Autobiograpby of Kwame Nkrumah. London: Thomas Nelson.
—― (1961). I Speak of Freedom. London: Heinemann.
—― (1962). Towards Colonial Freedom. London: Heinemann.
—― (1963). Africa Must Unite. London: Heinemann.
—― (1965). Neo- Colonialism: The Last Stage of Imperialism. London: Heinemann.
—― (1970). Consciencism. London: Panaf Books.
NORDMANN-SEILER, A. (1976). La Littérature néo-africaine. Paris: Presses universitaires de France.
NOTHOMB, D. (1965). Un humanisme africain. Brussels: Lumen Vitae.
NSOKI, K. (1973). Problématique de la theologie africaine. Dix ans de dibats 1960-1970. Unpublished 
thesis. Louvain University.
NTENDIKA,  J.  (1966).  L'Evolution  de  la  doctrine  du  purgatoire  chez  St.  Augustin.Paris:  Etudes 
augustiniennes.
—― (1971). L'Evocation de I'au-delà dans la prière des morts. Etude de patristique et de liturgie 
latines. Louvain-Paris: Béatrice Nauwelaerts.
235


--- PAGE 236 ---
—―. (1977). "Les Responsabilité du département de philosophie et religions afficaines de la 
Faculté  de  Théologie."  La  Philosophie  africaine  no.  I:9-20.  Kinshasa:  Faculté  de  Théologie 
Catholique,
—― (1977-79). "La Théologie africaine. Bibliographie sélective." Revue africaine de théologie 2, 3, 4, 
and 6
NTEZIMANA, E.; HABERLAND, E; and others (1984). "Dossier: Alexis Kagame." Dialogue (Kigali), 
no. 102:19-81.
NYAMITI, C. (1978). "New Theological Approach and New Vision of the Church in Africa."  Revue 
africaine de théologie 2, (3).
NYEME,  T.  (1975).  Munga.  Ethique  en  milieu  africain.  Gentilisme  et  christianisme.  Ingenbohl: 
Imprimerie du P. Théodose.
NYERERE, J. (1967). Freedom and Unity. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
—― (1968a). Ujamaa. Essays on Socialism. London: Oxford University Press. 
—― (1968b). Freedom and Socialism. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
—― (1973). Freedom and Development. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
NZEGE, A. (1980). Intelligence et guerre. Essai sur la philosophie politique de H. Bergson.  Doctoral 
dissertation. Lubumbashi: Faculté des Lettres.
N'ZEMBELE, L. (1983). "L’Avenir d'une dérision: l’ordre du discours africain. "  Peuples noirs/peuples 
africains, no. 31.
OBBO, C. (1980).  African Women: Their Struggle for Economic Independence.  London: Zed 
Press.
OBENGA, T. (1973). L’Afrique dans L’antiquiti. Paris: Présence Africaine.
—― (1980). Pour une nouvelle histoire. Paris: Présence Africaine.
ODERA, H. 0. (1972) "Mythologies as African Philosophy." East African Journal 9, 10.-1 ed. (1983). 
Philosophy and Cultures. Nairobi: Bookwise Limited.
ODUYOYE, M. A. (1986).  Hearing and Knowing. Theological Reflections oil Christianity in Africa. 
New York: Orbis.
OFORI, P. E. (1977).  Black  African Traditional  Religions and Philosophy: A Select  Survey of the 
Sources from the Earliest Times to 1974. Nendeln: Kto Press.
OGILBY, J. (1670). Africa: being an accurate description of the regions of Aegypt, Barbary, Lybia, and  
Billedulgerid, the land of the Negroes, Guinee, Aetbiopia and the Abyssines  London: Thomas 
Johnson.
OGOT, B. A. (1967). History of the Southern Luo. Nairobi: East African Publishing House.
OKERE, T. (1971). Can There Be an African Philosophy? A Hermeneutical Investigation with Special 
Reference to Ibgo Culture. Thesis. Louvain University.
—― (1978). "The Assumptions of African Values as Christian Values." Civilisation 
noire et église catholique. Paris: Présence Africaine.
—― (1983). African Philosophy. Washington, D.C.: University Press of America.
OKOLO, 0. (1979).  Tradition et destin. Essai sur la philosophie herméneutique de P. Ricoeur, M.  
Heidegger et H. G. Gadamer. Doctoral dissertation. Lumbumbashi: Faculté des Lettres.
—― (1980). "Tradition et destin: horizons d'une herméneutique philosophique afficaine. " Présence 
Africaine no. 114.
OKONJI, M. 0. (1975). "The Decolonization of the Social Sciences in Africa and Traditional African 
Psychology." Thought and Practice 2. (z).
O'LAUGHLIN, B. (1975). "Marxist Approaches in Anthropology."  Annual Review of Anthropology 
4:341-70.
OLIVER, R. (1956). How Christian is Africa? London: Highway Press.
OLUMIDE, L. J. (1948). The Religion of the Yorubas. Lagos.
OMBREDANE, A. (1969).  L'Exploration  de la mentalité des noirs.  Paris: Presses universitaires de 
236


--- PAGE 237 ---
France.
237


--- PAGE 238 ---
O'MEARA, P., and G. M. CARTER, eds. (1986). African Independence: The First Twenty-Five Years. 
Bloomington: Indiana University Press.
OMOYAJOWO, A. (1984). Diversity and Unity: The Development and Expansion of the Cherubim and 
Seraphim Church in Nigeria. New York: University Press of America.
ONYANWIJ, K. C. (1975). "African Religion as an Experienced Reality." Thought and Practice 2 (2).
ONYEWUENI,  1.  C.  (1982).  "A  Philosophical  Reappraisal  of  African  Belief  in  Reincarnation." 
Présence Africaine no. 123.
ORTEGA Y GASSET, J., (1973). An Interpretation of Universal History. New York: Norton.
ORTIGUES, M. C., and ORTIGUES, E. (1973). Oedipe Africain. Paris: U. G. E.
OWUSU, M. (1970). Uses and Abuses of Political Power, Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
—― (1978). "The Ethnography of Africa: The Usefulness of the Useless." American Anthropologist 80 
2):310-34.
PADMORE, G. (1971). Pan-Africanism or Communism. New York: Doubleday.
PARRINDER, G. (1954). African Traditional Religion. London: Hutchinson's University Library.
—― (1958). Witchcraft. London: Penguin.
P'BITEK, 0. (1970). African Religions in Western Scholarship. Nairobi: East African Literature Bureau.
—― (1971). Religion in Central Luo. Nairobi.
—― (1973). Africa's Cultural Revolution. Nairobi: Macmillan.
PERSON, Y. (1968-1975). Samori. 3 vol. Dakar: Institut Fondamental d’Afrique Noire.
PIROTTE,  J.  (1973).  Périodiques  missionaires belges  d’expression française.  Reflets  de cinquante  
annies devolution d'une mentalite. Louvain: Publications Universitaires.
PLINY. (1942). Natural History. An English translation by H. Rackham, Cambridge: Harvard University 
Press.
POMONTI, J. C. (1979). L’Afrique trahie. Paris: Hachette.
POPPER, K. (1949). The Poverty of Historicism. London: Routledge & Kegan Paul.
PORTERES,  R.  (1950).  "Vieilles  agricultures  de  L’Afrique  intertropicale."  Agronomie  tropicale 
5:489-507.
—―  (1962).  "Berceaux agricoles primaires sur le continent africain."  Journal of African History 
3:195-210.
POIJILLON, F., (1976). L’Anthropologie économique: courants et prolémes. Paris: Maspero.
POWELL, E. (1984). Private Secretary (Female)/Gold Coast. New York: St. Martin's Press.
PRATT, V. (1972). "Science and Traditional African Religion." Second Order I:(I).
Prêtres noirs s'interrogent (Des) (1957). Paris: Cerf.
RABEMANANJARA, J. (s.d.). "Alioune Diop, le cénobite de la culture noire." Hommage ,à Alioune 
Diop fondateur de Présence Africaine. Rome: Editions des Amis de Présence Africaine.
RADIN, P. (1927). Primitive Man as Philosopher. New York-London: Appleton.
RALIBERA,  R.  (1959).  "Théologien-Prêtre  africain  et  le  développement  de  la  culture  africaine." 
résence Africaine nos. 27-28.
RANDALL-MACIVER, D. (1906). Medieval Rhodesia. London: Macmillan.
RANGER, T.  (1967). Revolt in Southern Rhodesia 1896-97: A Study in African Resistance.  London: 
Heineman.
—― (1969). The African Churches of Tanzania. Nairobi: East African Publishing House.
238


--- PAGE 239 ---
—―  (1985).  "Religious  Movements  and  Politics  in  Sub-Saharan  Africa."  Review 
essay  for  the  SSRC/ACLS  joint  Committee  on  African  Studies,  ASA  annual 
meeting, New Orleans.
RANGER,  T.  and KIMAMBO, I.,  eds.  (1972).  The Historical  Study of African  Religion.  London: 
Heinemann.
REED, C. A., ed. (1977). Origins of Agriculture. The Hague: Mouton.
RENCONTRES INTERNATIONALES DE BOUAKĖ. (1965). Tradition et modernisme en Afrique 
noire. Paris: Seuil.
—― (1965). Les Religions africaines traditionnelles. Paris: Seuil.
REY, P. P. (1966). "The Lineage Mode of Production." Critique of Anthropology,
3:27-79.
—― (1971). Colonialisme, néo-colonialisme et transition au capitalisme. Exemple de la "comilog" au 
Congo-Brazzaville, Paris: Maspero.
—― (1973). Les Alliances de classes. Paris: Maspero.
RICOEUR,  P.  (1955).  Histoire  et  vérité.  Paris:  Seuil.  (History  and  Truth.  Evanston:  Northwestern 
University Press, 1965.)
—―  (1969).  Le Conflit des interprétations: Essais d'herméneutique.Paris: Seuil  (The Conflict of 
Interpretations. Evanston: Northwestern University Press).
—― (1984). The Reality of the Historical Past. Milwaukee: Marquette University Press.
RIESMAN, P. (1985). "The Person and the Life Cycle: African Social Life and Thought." 
Review essay for the SSRC/ACLS joint Committee on African Studies, ASA annual meeting, New 
Orleans.
RIGBY, P. (1969). Cattle and Kinship among the Gogo. Ithaca: Cornell University Press.
—― (1985). Persistant Pastoralists: Nomadic Societies in Transition. London: Zed.
ROBINSON, R.; GALIAGHER, J.; and DENNY, A. (1961). Africa and the Victorians: The Climax of 
Imperialism in the Dark Continent. New York: St. Martin's Press.
RODEGEM, F. M. (1961). Sagesse kirundi. Tervuren: Musée Royal de L’Afrique Centrale.
—― (1973). Anthologie rundi. Paris: A. Colin.
RODNEY, W. (1981). How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Washington, D.C.: Howard University Press.
ROMANO, G. F. (1648). Breve Relatione del successo della Missione de Frati Minori Cappuccini del 
Serafico P. S. Francesco al Regno del Congo.
 Roma: Sacra Congregatione de Propaganda Fide.
ROMBAUT, M. (1976). La Parole noire. Paris: Editions Saint-Germain-des-Prés.
—―. (1976). Nouvelle po~sie negro-africame. Paris: Editions Saint-Germain-desPr6s.
ROTBERG, R. 1. (1970). Africa and its Explorers: Motives, Method and Impact. Cambridge: Harvard 
University Press.
RUCH, E. A. (1974). "Is There an African Philosophy?" Second Order 3 (2).
SACHS, 1. (1971). La Dicouverte du tiers monde. Paris: Flammarion.
SAGAN, C. (1983). Broca's Brain: Reflections on the Romance of Science.New York: Ballantine Books.
SAHLINS, M. (1976). Culture and Practical Reason. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
SAID, E. (1978). Orientalism. New York: Pantheon.
SANDERS, E. R. (1969). "The Hamitic Hypothesis: Its Origin and Functions in Time Perspective. " 
Journal of African History 10 (4).
SANNEH, L. (1983). West African Christianity: The Religious Impact. New York: Orbis.
SARRAUT, A. (1923). La Mise en valeur des colonies françaises. Paris: Payot.
239


--- PAGE 240 ---
SARTRF, J. P. (1943). L'Etre et le Néant. Paris: Gallimatd. (Being and Nothingness New York: Simon 
and Schuster, 1956.)
—― (1953)- Quest-ce que la littérature? Paris: Gallimard.
—― (1956). Situations V. Paris: Gallimard.
—― (1960). Critique de la raison dialectique. Paris: Gallimard.
—― (1976). Black Orpbeus. Paris: Présence Africaine.
SAUL, J. (1977).  Nationalism, Socialism and Tanzanian history.  In  African Social Studies,  P. C. W. 
Gutkind and P. Waterman, eds. New York: Monthly Review Press.
SCHEBESTA, P. (1963). Le Sens religieux des primitifs. Paris: Marne.
SCHEUB, H. (1971). (1972). Bibliograpby of African Oral Narratives. Madison: University of isconsin 
Press.
—―. (1977). African Oral Narratives, Proverbs, Riddles, Poetry and Song. Boston: Hall.
—―. (1985)- "A Review of African Oral Traditions and Literature."  African  Studies 
Review 26 (2-3):1-72.
SCHILLING, R., ed. (1944). La Veillee de Venus. Peruigilium Veneris. Paris: Collection Budé
SCHIPPER DE LEEUW, M. (1973). Le Blanc vu d’Afrique. Yaoundé: Clé.
SCHMIDT, W. (1931). Tbe Origin and Growth` of Religion. London: Methuen.
—― (1933-49). Die Ursprung der Gottesidee. Munster: Aschendorff.
SCHOLTE, B. (1983). "Cultural Anthropology and the Paradigm Concept: A Brief History of their 
Recent Convergence." In Functions and Uses of Disciplinary Histories, L. Graham, W, Lepenies, 
and P. Weingart, eds. Dordrecht, Boston: D. Reidel.
SCHUMPETER, J. A. (1951). Imperialism and Social Classes. New York: A. M. Kelley.
SCHWARZ, A. (1979). Colonialistes, africanistes et africains. Louiseville-Montréal: Nouvelle Optique. 
, ed. (1980). Les Faux Prophées de l’Afrique ou l’afr(eu)canisme. Quebec: Presses de l'Université 
Laval.
SEBAG, L. (1964). Marxisme et structuralisme. Paris: Payot.
SEIDMAN, A. (1985). The Roots of Crisis in Southern Africa. Trenton: Africa World Press.
SENE, A. (1966). Sur le chemin de la négritude. Cairo: Imprimerie Catholique de Beyrouth.
SENGHOR, L. S. (1961). Nation et voie africaine du socialisme. Paris: Présence Africaine.
—― (1962). Pierre Teilbard de Chardin et la politique africaine. Paris: Seuil.
—― (1964). Liberté I: Négritude et humanisme. Paris: Seuil.
—― (1967a). Négritude, arabisme, et francité. Beirut: Dar At-Kitab Allubnani. 
—― (1967b). Les Fondements de I'africanité ou Négritude et arabité. Paris: Présence Africaine.
—― (1971). Liberté II: nation et voie africaine du socialisme. Paris: Seuil.
—― (1971). "Pourquoi une idéologie négro-africaine?" Présence Africaine no. 82:11-38.
—― (1976a). Pour une relecture africaine de Marx et d'Engels. Dakar-Abidjan: Nouvelles Editions 
africaines.
—― (1976b). "Authenticité et négritude." Zaire-Afrique, no. 102:81-86.
—― (1977). Liberté III: négritude et civilisation de l’universel. Paris: Seuil.
—― (1983). Liberté IV: socialisme et planification. Paris: Seuil.
SETILOANE, G. (1976). Image of God Among the Sotho-Tswana. Rotterdam: Balkema.
SETILOANE, G. M. (1977). "Where Are We in African Theology?" In  African Theology En Route, 
Appiah-Kubi and Torres eds. New York: Orbis.
240


--- PAGE 241 ---
SHAW, T. M. (1985). Towards A Political Economy for Africa: The Dialectics of Dependence. New 
York: St. Martin's Press.
SHELTON, A. J. (1963). "Le Principe cyclique de la personnalité africaine." Présence Africaine nos. 
45-46.
—― (1968). "Causality in African Thought: Igbo and Other." Practical Anthropology, 
15.
SHEPPERSON,  G.  (1960).  "Notes  on  Negro-American  Influences  on  the  Emergence  of  African 
Nationalism." Journal of African History, I, 2.
SHIVJI, 1. (1976). Class Struggles in Tanzania. London: Heinemann.
SHORTER, A. (1977). African Christian Theology. New York: Orbis.
SMET, A. J. (1975a). "Bibliographie sélective des religions traditionnelles de I’Afrique  noire" Cahiers 
des religions africaines, 17-18.
—―. (1975b). Philosophie africaine. Textes cboisis et bibliograpbie selective.2 vol. 
Kinshasa: Presses universitaires du Zaire.
—― (1977a). "Histoire de la philosophie africaine, problèmes et méthodes." La Philosophie 
Africaine, 47-68. Kinshasa: Eaculté de Théologie Catholique.
—― (1977b). "Le Père Placide Tempels et son oeuvre publiée." Revue africaine de theologie I,I.
—―  (1977c).  "La  jamaa  dans  Voeuvre  du  Nre  Placide  Tempels."  Cabiers  des 
religions africaines, 11, 1-22, 1.
—― (1977d). "Histoire de la philosophie africaine, problémes et méthodes." La Philosophie 
Africaine. Kinshasa: Eaculté de Théologie Catholique.
—― (1978a). "Le Concept fondamental de Vontologie bantu." Texte inédit du Pére 
Placide  Tempels.  Melanges  de  pbilosopbie  africaine  3,  149-80.  Kinshasa:  Faculté  de  Théologie 
Catholique.
—― (1978b). "Bibliographie sélective de la philosophie africaine. Repertoire chronologique." 
181-262 . Mé1anges de Philosophie Africaine. op. cit.
—― (1980). Histoire de la Philosophie Africaine Contemporaine. Kinshasa: Faculté de Théologie 
Catholique.
SMITH, P. (1970a) "La Forge de I’intelligence." L'Homme to, 2.
—― (1970b). "La Lance d'une jeune fille." In Echanges et communications. Mélanges 
offerts à Cl. Lévi-Strauss, J. Pouillon et P. Maranda, eds. Paris: La Haye.
—― (1975). Le Récit Populaire au Rwanda. Paris: Classiques Africains.
SNOWDEN,  F.  M.  (1970).  Blacks  in  Antiquity:  Ethyiopians  in  the  Greco-Roman  Experience. 
Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
SODIPO, J. 0. (1973). "Notes on the concept of Cause and Chance in Yoruba Traditional Thought." 
Second Order 2 (2).
—― (1975). "Philosophy in Africa Today." Thougbt and Practice 2 (2.).
—― (1983). "Philosophy, Science, Technology and Traditional African Thought." In Philosophy and 
Cultures, H. 0. Oruka, ed. Nairobi: Bookwise Ltd.
SOUSBERGHE, L. DE. (1951). "A propos de 'La Philosophie bantoue'." Zaire 5:821-28.
SOUTHALL, A. (1976). "Orientations in Political Anthropology." Canadian Journal of African Studies 
10 (2).
—―. (1983). "The Contribution of Anthropology to African Studies." African Studies 
Review 26, (3/4).
SOUZA, G. DE. (1975). La Conception de "vie" cbez les Fons. Cotonou: Editions du Bénin.
SOW, I. E. B. (1977). Psychiatrie dynamique africaine. Paris: Payot.
—― (1978). Les Structures anthropologiques de la folie en Afrique noire. Paris: 
Payot.
SOYINKA, W. (1976). Myth, Literature and the African World. Cambridge: Cambridge University 
241


--- PAGE 242 ---
Press.
242


--- PAGE 243 ---
STAVFNHAGEN, R. (1971). "Decolonializing Applied Social Sciences." Human Organization 30 (4).
SUMNER, c., ed. (1974-1981). Ethiopian Philosophy: 1, 1974, The Book of the Wise Philosophers; 11, 
1974, The Treatise of Zär’a Yacob and of WaIda Haywat; 111, -1978, The Treatise of Zär’a Yacob 
and of WaIda Haywat; IV, 1981, The Life and Maxims of Skandas. Addis-Ababa: Central Printing 
Press.
—― (1980). African Philosophy. Philosophie Africaine. Addis-Ababa: Chamber Printing House.
—― (1983). "An Ethical Study of Ethiopian Philosophy." In Philosophy and Cultures, H. 0. Oruka, 
ed. Nairobi: Bookwise Ltd.
SUNDKLER, B. (1964). Bantu Propbets in South Africa. London: Oxford University Press.
—― (1976). Zulu Zion. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
SURET-CANALE, J. (1958). Afrique noire occidentale et centrale. Paris: Editions Sociales.
TAYLOR, J. V. (1963). The Primal Vision. London: SCM Press Ltd.
TCHIDIMBO, E. M. (1963). L'Homme noir dans Peglise. Paris: Présence Africaine.
TEMPELS, P.  (1945).  La Philosophie  bantoue.  Elisabethville:  Lovania.  (Paris:  Présence  Africaine, 
1949).
—― (1959). Bantu Philosophy. Paris: Présence Africaine.
—― (1962). Notre rencontre I. Léopoldville (Kinshasa): Centre d'Etudes Pastorales.
—―. (1979). Philosophie bantu. Introduction and revision of the Rubbens translation by A. J. Smet. 
Kinshasa: Faculté de Théologie Catholique.
TERRAY, E. (19 69). Le Marxisme devant les socuitis primitives. Paris: Maspero.
THEUWS, J. A. T. (195 1). "Philosophie bantoue et philosophie occidentale." Civilisations, I.
—―  (1954).  "Textes  luba."  Bulletin  trimestriel  du  Centre  d'Etudes  des  Problémes  Sociaux 
lndigénes 27:1-153.
—―  (1983).  Word  and  World.  Luba  Thought  and  Literature.  St.  Augustin:  Verlag  des 
Anthropos-Instituts.
THOMAS, L. V. (1958). "Posivitisme et métaphysique. Réflexions à propos de la culture noire." Aspects 
de la culture noire. Paris: Fayard.
—―. (1960). "Un système philosophique sénégalais: la cosmologie Diola" Présence Africaine nos. 
32-33.
—―. (1982). La Mort africaine. Idiologie funéraire en Afrique noire. Paris: Payot. THOMAS, L. V.; 
LUNEAU, R.; and DONEUX, J. L. (1969). Les Religions d’Afrique noire. Paris: Fayard/Dencoël.
THORNTON, A. P. (1959). The Imperial Idea and Its Enemies. London: Macmillan.
THORNTON, R. (1983). "Narrative Ethnography in Africa 1850-1920: The Creation and Capture of an 
Appropriate Domain for Anthropology." Man 18 (3).
TOBNER, 0. (1982). "Cheikh Anta Diop, l’hérétique." Peuples noirs, peuples africains 30:85-91.
TORT, P., and DESALMAND, P. (1979). Sciences Humaines et Philosophie en Afrique.La Difference 
Culturelle. Paris: Hatier.
TOUPE, S. (1959a). Experience guinéenne et unité africaine. Paris: Présence Africaine.
—― (1959b). Guinée. Prélude à l’independance. Paris: Présence Africaine.
—― (1959c). Republique de Guinje. Conakry: Imprimerie Patrice Lumumba.
TOWA, M. (1971a). Léopold Sédar Senghor: négritude ou servitude. Yaounde: C1é.
—― (1976). Essai sur la problématique philosophique dans I’Afrique actuelle. Yaoundé: C1é.
—―. (1979b). L'Idée d'une philosophie africaine. Yaoundé: C1é.
TRILLES, R. P. ( 1931). Les Pygmées de la forêt équatoriale. Paris: Blond et Gay.
243


--- PAGE 244 ---
TSHIAMALENGA,  N.  (1973).  "La  Vision  ntu  de  l’homme.  Essai  de  philosophie  linguistique  et 
anthropologique." Cahiers des religions africaines 7:176-99.
—―. (1974). "La Philosophie de la faute dans la tradition luba." Cabiers des religions 
africaines 8:167-86.
—―. (1977a). "Qu'est-ce que la 'philosophie africaine." La Philosophie Africaine 1, 33-46. 
Kinshasa: Faculté de Théologie Catholique.
—―.  (1977b).  "Langues  bantu  et  philosophie.  Le  cas  du  ciluba."  La  Philosophie 
africaine 1: 147-5 8. Kinshasa: Faculté de Théologie Catholique.
—―.  (1980).  Denken  und  Sprechen  Ein  Beitrag  zum  Relativitäts  Prinzip  am  Beispiel  einer 
Bantuspracbe (Ciluba). Dissertation. Frankfurt/Main.
—―. (1981). "La Philosophie dans la situation actuelle de I’Afrique." Combats pour un 
Christianisme africain. Kinshasa: Faculté de Théologie Catholique.
TSHIBANGU, T. (1:965). Theologie positive et theologie spiculative.Position traditionnelle et nouvelle 
problimatique. Louvain-Paris: Beatrice Nauwelaerts.
—―. (1974). Le Propos d'une thiologie africaine. Kinshasa: Presses universitaires du Zaire.
—― (1977). "L’Afrique noire et le christianisme." Cahiers des religions africainesII,2122,I
—― (1980). Théologie comme science au XXe, siecle. Kinshasa: presses universitaires du Zaire.
TSHIBANGU, T. and VANNESTE, A. (1960). "Débat sur la théologie africaine."  Revue du Clergé 
Africain 15.
TSHIBANGU, W. M. (1972). Science et superstition chez A. Comte. Ph.D. dissertation. Dijon: Faculté 
des Lettres.
TURGOT, A. R. J. (1913-I923)- Oeuvres de Turgot et documents le concernant, avec une bibliograpbie 
et notes. G. Schelle, ed. Paris, 5 vOls.
TURNBULL, C. M. (1962). The Lonely African. New York: Simon and Schuster.
TURNER, V. W. (1952).  The Lozi Peoples of Nortb-Western Rhodesia.  London: International African 
Institute.
—―. (1964) Schism and Continuity in an African Society. Manchester: Manchester University Press.
—― (1969). The Ritual Process. Chicago: Aldine.
—― (1975). Revelation and Divination in Ndembu Ritual. Ithaca: Cornell University Press.
—―. (1981). The Drums of Affliction: A Study of Religious Processes among the Ndembu of Zambia. 
Ithaca: Cornell University Press.
TUTU, D. (1984). Hope and Suffering. Grand Rapids: W B. Eerdmans.
UGIRASHEBUJA,  0.  (1977).  Dialogue  entre  la  poisie  et  la  pensée  dans  Poeuvre  de  Heidegger.  
Brussels: Lumen Vitae.
VAN CALNEGHAM, R. (1956).  La Notion de Dieu cbez les Balubas du Kasai.  Brussels:  Académie 
Royale des Sciences Coloniales.
VAN LIERDE, J. (-1963). La Pensee politique de Patrice Lumumba. Paris: Présence Africaine.
VAN OBERBERGH, C. (1913). Les Négres de I’Afrique. Bruxelles: A. de Wit.
VAN PARYS, J. M. (1978). "Philosophie en Afrique. Analyse du séminaire sur la philosophie africaine 
dAddis-Abeba.  1-3  December  1976."  Wanges  de  philosophie  africaine.  Kinshasa:  Faculté  de 
Théologie Catholique.
—―. (1981). "Etat actuel de I'activité philosophique en Afrique." Langage et société. Kinshasa: 
Faculté de Théologie Catholique.
VANSINA, J. (1961).  De la tradition orale.  Essai de methode historique.  Tervuren: Musée Royal de 
I’Afrique Centrale.
—―. (1965). Les Anciens Royaumes de la savanne. Kinshasa: Institut de Recherches Econorniques et 
Sociales.
244


--- PAGE 245 ---
—―. (1972a). La Légende du passi: traditions orales du Burundi. BrusselsTervuren: Musée Royal de 
I’Afrique Centrale.
—―. (1972b). "Once Upon a Time: Oral Traditions as History in Africa." In Historical 
Studies Today, E Gilbert and S. R. Graubard, eds.
—―. (1978). The Children of Woot: A History of the Kuba Peoples. Madison: University of Wisconsin 
Press.
—―. (1983). "Is Elegance a Proof? Structuralism and African History. " History  in 
Africa 10:307-48.
VAN WING, J. (1949). "Humanisme chrétien africain." Lumen Vitae 4 (I).
VAUGHAN, A. T. (1982). "From White Man to Redskin: Changing Anglo-American Perception of the 
American Indian." The American History Review 87.
VERGER, P. (1968). Flux et reflux de la traite des négres entre le Golf du Benin et Bahia de Todos os 
Santos du XVe au XIXe siécle. Paris: Mouton.
VERHAEGEN, B. (1974). Introductioni Phistoire immediate. Gembloux: Duculot.
—― (1978). L'Enseignement universitaire au Zaire. Paris: L’Harmattan.
—― (1979). "Religion et politique en Afrique noire." Religions africaines et christianisme 1, 
179-94. Kinshasa: Faculté de Théologie Catholique.
VETO, M. (1962). "Unité et dualité de la conception du mal chez les Bantu orientaux." Cahiers d'Etudes 
Africaines 8.
VEYNE, P. (1984). Writing History. Middletown: Wesleyan University Press.
VILASCO, G. (1983). "Philosophic, anthropologie et culture." In Philosophy and Cultures, H. 0. Oruka 
ed. Nairobi: Bookwise Ltd.
VINCKE, J. L. (1973). Le Prix du pdchj. Essai de psychanalyse existentielle des traditions europjenne et  
Africame. Kinshasa-Lubumbashi: Mont Noir.
WAGNER, J. (1962). Les Poétes noirs des Etats-Unis. Paris: Istra.
WAGNER, R. (1981). The Invention of Culture. Chicago and London: University of Chicago Press.
WALLERSTEIN, I. (1961). Africa: The Politics of Independence. New York: Random House.
—― (1967). Africa: The Politics of Unity. New York: Random House.
—― (1979). The Capitalist World Economy. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
—― (1983). "The Evolving Role of the Africa Scholar in African Studies. " African Studies Review 
26 (3-4):155-61.
WAMBA-DIA-WAMBA, E. (1980). "La Philosophic en Afrique ou Les défis de I’Africain philosophe." 
In  Les Faux Prophétes  de I’Afrique  ou lAfr(eu)canisme,  A.  Schwarz,  ed.  Québec:  Presses  de 
l'Université Laval.
WASSING, R. S. (1969). L’Art de l’Afrique noire. Fribourg: Office du Livre.
WAUTHIER, C. (1964). L’Afrique des Africains. Inventaire de la ngritude. Paris: Seuil.
WEBER, M. (1978). Economy and Society. Berkeley: University of California Press.
WHITE,  H.  (1979).  "Michel  Foucault,"  Structuralism  and  Since.  J.  Sturrock,  ed.  Oxford:  Oxford 
University Press.
WILLAME, J. C. (1971). "Recherches sur les modes de production cynégétique et lignager. " L'Homme 
et la Société -1 9: 101-20.
—―. (1976). "UAutre Face du royaume on Le Meurtre du pére." Genéve-Afrique 15 (1).
WILLIAMS, G. (1967). The Expansion of Europe in the XVIIIth Century. Overseas Rivalry. Discovery 
and Exploitation. New York: Walker & Company.
WILSON, B. R., ed. (1970). Rationality. Oxford: Basil Blackwell.
WIREDU, J. E. (1973). "Logic and Ontology" Second Order 2 (1-2).
—― (1977). "How Not to Compare African Thought with  Western Thought." In 
African Philosophy: An Introduction, R. Wright, ed. Washington: University Press of America.
245


--- PAGE 246 ---
—― (1980). Philosophy and African Culture. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
WITTE, C. M. DE.  (1958).  "Les Bulles pontificales et l’expansion portugaise au XVe siMe."  Revue 
d'histoire ecclésiastique 53.
WOLPE, H., ed. (1980). The Articulation of Modes of Production. London: Routledge & Kegan Paul.
WORLD BANK. (1984). Toward Sustained Development in Sub-Sabaran Africa. Washington, D.C.: The 
World Bank.
WRIGHT, R. (1977). African Philosophyy: An Introduction. Washington: University Press of America.
YAI, 0.  (1977).  "Theory and Practice in African Philosophy: The Poverty of Speculative Philosophy." 
Second Order 6 (2). French version: Presence Africaine (1978) no. 108.
YOUNG, M. C. (1965). Politics in the Congo. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
—― (1982). Ideology and Development in Africa. New Haven: Yale University Press.
ZAHAN, D. (1959). Societis d'initiation bambara. Paris: Mouton.
—― (1963). La Dialectique du verbe chez les Bambara. Paris: Mouton.
—― (1979). The Religion,  Spirituality, and Thought of Traditional Africa.  Chicago: University of 
Chicago Press.
ZOA, 1. (1957). Pour un nationalisme chritien au Cameroun. Yaoundé. Saint Paul.
ZUURE, B. (1932). L’Ame du Murundi. Paris: Beauchesne.
246


--- PAGE 247 ---
INDEX
Abdou, T, 16o sionaries' information as, 64-67;
Abraham, W. E., 39-41, 79 negritude's influence, 85, 86; and philology,
Acculturation, 2.o, 68, 191-92 18; and philosophy, 152, 158, 168; on
Adaptation, theologies Of, 57 primitive philosophies, 143-44; rela-
Adotévi, S., 36-37, 167 tionship to history, 176, 178; structuralist,
Adventures in a Mud Hut (Barley), 21-22 198; Tempels' differentiation from, 137
Afana, Osende, 96 Anyidoho, K., 182
Africa (Schulter), 12 Arabic language: Blyden on, 123, 126
African Allegory (Ripa), 12 Arendt, Hannah: on racism, 108
Africa and the Africans (Blyden), 99, 1oo Aristotelianism, 146, 147
African Empires and Civilizations (Michelet), Arnold, S., 182
88 Art, African, 9-12
African Genesis (Frobenius), 182 Art, European: depiction of Africans, 6-9, 12
African genesis, hypotheses of, 16, 22 Arusha Declaration, 95
Africanism, 9, 166-68, 1176, 179; Blyden's Astronomy, 113-15
attitude toward, 124 Authenticity, 153, 169, 174
AfricanitY, 37, 79 Avénement de l’Afrique noire ..........................L'
African languages, 6o, 1:13, 169; mission- (Brunschwig), 38-39
aries' and anthropologists' knowledge of, Awolowo, 0., 95
65-66 Azikiwe, Nnamdi, 9o, 95, 98, 131
African nation, concept of, 115-16 Azombo-Menda, S. M.: on Senghor, 94
African Personality, 38; Blyden as precursor
Of, 98, 13 '. See also Black personality Ba, A. Hampate, 96
African Studies, 9, 36, 44, 16q, 183 Bachelard, G., 137
Afrique ambiguë (Balandier), 3 8 Baeta, C. G., 55
Aguolo, C., 161 Bahoken, J. C.: on Christianity, 5 6
Ahidjo, A., 185-86 Baker, Sir Samuel, 118
Aj ayi, J. E A., 19 4-9 5 Balance Sheets of Imperialism (Clark), 3
Akambas (people), 15 2 Balandier, Georges, 8o, 88, 89, 166, 177;
Alexander VI (pope), 4 5 Afrique ambiguë, 38
"Alogicality of Immortality, The" (Bodunrin), "Bantou Problematique, Le" (Eboussi
162, Boulaga), 157-58
Alterity. See Otherness Bantu (people), 50, 53-54, 138-39, 169
Althusser, L., 158, 16o, 179 Bantu languages, 145-46
American Colonization Society, 101, 104 Bantu philosophy, 58; Crahay's lecture on,
Amin, S., 5 154, 155-56; Kagame on, 145-52.; Tem
Amo, A. G., 16 2 pels on, 136-42, 144, 151-52
Anglican Church, 119, 55 Bantu Philosophy (Tempels), 5o, 67, 136-42,
Anobo, M.: on Senghor, 94 144, 149, 153, 178; Crahay on, 155; Ka-
Anthropological philosophy. See Eth- game on, 146
nophilosophy Anthology of New Negro Banyarwanda (people), language of, 162
and Malagasy Poetry (Senghor), 8 3-84 Barley, N., 21-22
Anthropology, 16-22, 37, 67-69, 75-78, Barthes, R., 126
184-85; African critique Of, 38; and Af- Basic Ethiopian Philosophical Texts (Sumner,
rican sociology, 166; Blyden compared to ed.), 202
founders of, 119; and Christianity, 56-58; Baumstark, A., 163
commitment to African values, 6o, 88-89; Being, 28, 162.; in Bantu philosophy, 138-41,
concept of primitive philosophy, 135, 142; 147-48; in Western philosophy, 140. See
on distance from Same to Other, 81; and also Ontology
ethnocentrism, 19; Foucault on, 16, 29; im- Being and Nothingness (Sartre), 8 5
pact on black intelligentsia, 88; Lévi- Bellman, B. L., 183
Strauss on, z8-2.9; and marginality, 6; mis- Benedict XV (pope), 53
247


--- PAGE 248 ---
Bible, 123, 12.8; & problem of cultural dif- Certeau, M. de, 51
ferences, 8-9. See also Gospel, the Césaire, Aimé, 2, 36, 83, 141, 158; Discourse
Bilingualiry: of missionaries and an- on Colonialism,90, 91, 153
thropologists, 66-67 Chaillet-Bert, J., 20
Bigo, P.: on marginality, 5 Chain of being, 9, 13, 27
Bimwenyi, 0., x, 19-40, 168 Christianisme sans fétiche: Révélation et
Bird, C, S.: Explorations in African Systems Domination (Eboussi-Boulaga), 173
of Thought,199 Christianity, 20, 152, 170, 17z-73; African
Black Africans: portrayals of, in European response to, 51, 54-64; and anthropology,
paintings, 7-9, 12 56-58; attempts to justify, 178-79; as
Black (Negro) Americans, go, 117, 130; background of African intellectuals, 39-40;
Blyclen on, 98, 104, I05-T071 111, 130, Blyden on, 112, 116, 124-28, 130. See also
132; Nkrumah influenced by, 88 Protestant churches; Roman Catholicism;
Black consciousness: Blyden on, 121 Theology
"Black Islam," 181 Christianity, Islam and the Negro Race
Blackness: Blyden's restrictive meaning, 104, (Blyden), 99-192, 133
132 Christopher, A. J-, 47
Black Orpheus (Sartre), 83-85, 90-91, 92, Civilization: equated with Christianity, lo,
132 49,51,53
Black personality, 87-88, 98, 118-24, 131, Clark, Grover, 3
132, 166; emphasis on, in Christianity, 58, Classics, study of, 123
6o; rhetoric of, 36; as strategy, 194 Classification, 6, 9, 13; in Bantu philosophy,
Black responsibility: Blyden on, iog 138-39,146-47,149
Bloch, M.: on history, 195 Classiques Africains (Dampierre), 181-82
Blyden, E.W, 8o-81, 98-134; Africa and the Clifford, J., 66
Africans, 99, 100; Christianity, Islam and Climate: as barrier to colonization, 105, 107
the Negro Race,99-129, 133; on Black Cogito, 147, 190
Americans, 98, 104, 105-107, 111, 130, Coherence Theory, 67
131; on colonization, 99-107; criticism of Collective memory: myth as, 144
European tradition, I 11-' 4; on education, Collingwood, R. G., 811
99-100, 102-I03; Liberia: Past, Present Colonialism, 1-5, 16, 76, 93, 170, 191; defi
and Future, 99; Liberia's Offering, 99, nition of, I; Marxist theory Of, 3-4; mis
104, 1o6, 122; Negro in Ancient History, sionary role in, 44-47; negritude as resist
99, 100, 109; political theory, 114-18, ance to, 83, 88; Sartre on, 85; Temples'
124, 128-29, 132; Vindication of the portrayal of, 137, 141
Negro Race, 99, 1o8 Colonization, 1-2, 4, 46, 58-59, 62, 64; ben-
Boas, F, 18 efits of, 16-17, 67-68; Blyden on, 99-107,
Bodunrin, P. 0., 162 116, 130; Chaillet-Bert on, 20; definition
Boesak, A. A., 173 of, I
Book of the Wise Philosophers (Sumner, ed.),     Communalism (ujamaa), 91, 95
163,201,203 Community: as defined among the Bantu,
Boulle, P.: Planet of the Apes quoted, I, 5-6, 15o; Islamic, 114-15
24, 28, 35-36, 44, 64, 83, 145, 153 Conflict (in epistemology), 26-27, 82, 190
Bourgeois, A., 69 91
Braudel, F, 18o, 188-89, 195 Conformity, 52, 53
Bricolage, 31, 32 Conquest, ideology of, 69
Brunschwig, H., 38-39 Consciencism, 133
Buakasa, T. K., 174 Consciencism (Nkrumah), 79, 91, 95
Buffon, 72., 119 Consciousness, 17, 26, 157; African, 36, 77-
Bulletin of African Theology, 179 78, 115; black, 77-78, 121; European, 20-
Burgkmair, Hans: Exotic Tribe, 6-7, 8-9 21; historical, 34
Buthalezi: on indigenization, 63 Conversations with 0gotemmêli (Griaule),
141-43, 178
Cahiers des religions africaines (Mulago), 171 Conversion, 44, 47-53, 6o; Blyden on, 112,
Cannibalism: as pagan trait, 49-50 121
Capitalism, 2-3, 165, 196-97 Copans, J., 22, 68, 176-77, 178, 179
Capitein, Jacobus, 162 Coptic church: members in Africa, 54
Carnets de Lucien Levy-Brubl, Les (Levy- Cosmology, 13-15; in Bantu philosophy,
Bruhl), 154-55 146,149
Cavergne de Bongo, La (film), 14 Crahay,F., 1154, 155-57, 159, 162, 166;
248


--- PAGE 249 ---
" 'Décollage' conceptuel," 155-56
Doguicimi (Hazoume), 77
Creation: in Bantu philosophy, 139; in Dogon Donders, J. G., 55
thought, 142 Dowayos (people), 21
Cri de 1'Homme Africain, Le (Ela), 17 3 Drunken King, The (Heusch), 144
Crise du Muntu: Authenticité africaine et phi- DuBois, W E. B., 90, 131
losopbie, La (Eboussi-Boulaga), 153 Dum Diversas (Nicholas V), 45
Criteriology: in Bantu philosophy, 147, 151 Durkheim, E., 28, 68-69, 82
Crowther, Samuel Ajayi, 4 8, 49, 5 0-51, 5 2 Dyongu Seru, 14-15
Cuius regio, illius religio, 45
Cultural anthropology, 184 Eboussi-Boulaga, F., 3 9-40, 41-42, 6o, 157
          58, 167, 169; on Bantu Philosophy, 141;
Damas, Léon, 83, 90 Christianisme sans fétiche, 173; Crise du
Damnés de la terre, Les (Fanon), 85, 92         Muntu, 153; criticism of anthropology,
Dampierre, E. de, 181-82        168; evaluation of Christianity, 51-52.
Danquah, J. B., 78 Economics, 24-26, 170; and colonialism, 2-
Darwin, 18 4, 101-102
Davidson, Basil, 8o, 88, 89, 166 Education: Blyden on, 99-100, 102-IO3,
Décollage, 156-57, 159 120-24
'Décollage' conceptuel: Conditions d'une Edward Wilmot Blyden: Pan-Negro Patriot
philosophie bantoue, Le" (Crahay), 155-56 (Lynch), 130
Deconstruction: of Christianity, 173; in con- Egg of the world, 144
temporary African thought, 164, 165-67, Einfühlung, 136, 144-45, 185
170,174-75 Ela, J. M., 173
Delafosse, M., 136 Elitism, 16o
Demonstration: in missionary discourse, 51, Elungu, P. E., 39-40, 43, 16o-61, 174; study
52-53 of Malebranche, 162, 171
Dependency: African tendency toward, 16g; Empiricism, 163-64, 168
Blyden on, III, 122 Engineering, 31, 32
Depestre, R., 87 English language: use in African education,
Derision: in missionary's discourse, 52-53 102-103
Descartes, 41 Enlightenment, the, 12, 17, 72
De Servitude, Libertati Christianae non Con- Epistemological ethnocentrism, 15
traria (Capitein), 162 Epistemological field, II, 19, 35
Determinism, 31, 73 Epistemological filiation, 19, 185
Development, theology of, 179 Epistemology, 24-28, 81, 179-80, 184, 190
Dia, Mamadou, 92, 96 91; and anthropology, 18-19, 68; of con-
Diachrony, 32, 188-89, 193 temporary African philosophy, 164-75; in-
Diagne, Blaise, 9o fluenced by Sartre, 86; of social sciences,
Dialectical materialism, 196 18, 179. See also Knowledge
Dialectical reason, 34, 86 Essai sur la moeurs (Voltaire), 119
Dickson, K., 58 Essai stir la poétique de la négritude (Hauser),
Dieterlen, G., 13-15 167
Dieu d’eau (Griaule), 67 Essence: in Bantu philosophy, 147, 149
Diffusionism, 18, 181 Ethics: in Bantu philosophy, 146, 149-50;
Diodorus Of Sicily, 70, 71; quoted, 187 and Faith, 51
Diop, Alioune, 86; on Bantu Philosophy, Ethiopia (Abyssinia), 110, 162-63,201-203
137, 1141, 1:53 Ethiopian Christianity, 54
Diop, Cheikh Anta, 78, 79, 165, 169, 181; Ethnocentrism,19, 38, 51, 73, 75, 185; Af-
Nations negres et culture, 89, 96-97; on rican as victim of, ii i o, i r 8; Blyden's focus
truth of African history, 194-95 on, 118-19, 133; in epistemology, 15; in
Diop, Majhemout: on Marxism, 96 judgment of ethnophilosophy, 159
Discourse on Colonialism (Discours sur le             Ethnography and ethnology. See An-
colonialisme) (Césaire), 90, 91, 153 thropology
Discourse on Language (Foucault), 34, 174 Ethnohistory, 176-78
Discourse on the Origin of Inequality (Rous- Ethnophilosophy, 143, 145-53, 162, 194;
seau), 72 critique of, 154-61
Djaît, H., 39-40 Evans-Pritchard, E. E., 65-66, 67-68, 136;
Dogons (people), 141-42; astronomy and "if I were a horse" hypothesis, 73; Social
cosmology, 13-15, 194; mythology, 143- Anthropology and Other Essays, 67-68;
44 Theories of Primitive Religion, 73
249


--- PAGE 250 ---
Ewande, D., 92 Haiti: Blyden on, 116
Existentialism, 166 Hallen, B., 161
Exotic Tribe (Burgkmair), 6-7, 8-9 Hama, Boubou, 96
Exploitation, 46, 58-59 Hammond, D., 49
Exploration, sagas of, 12-13, 16, 20, 69, 103 Ham's curse, 46, 108
Explorations in African Systems of Thought Hantu, 147, 150
(Bird and Karp), 199 Harrison, E, 113
Explorer, 15-16; role Of, 46-47 Hastings, A., 55, 59-6o
Hauser, M., 86-87, 167
Facing Mount Kenya (Kenyatta), 77 Hayford, Casely, 131
Faith: relationship to Truth, 51 Hazoumé, Paul: Doguicimi, 77
Fanon, Frantz, 85, 92-93 Hearing and Knowing (Oduyoye), 171
Favret-Saada, Jeanne, 189; quoted, 135 Hebga, M-, 58-59, 153
Fieldhouse, D. K.,2 Hegel, 17, 43
Fisalgwos, The (Sumner, ed.),202 Hegelian dialectic, 92
Folklore, 138,181 Hegemony, 185
Force: in Bantu philosophy, 138-39, 140-41, Heidegger, 152, 166, 171
146,147,148-49,150 Hemptinne, jean-Fé1ix de, 137
Foucault, Michel, ix, 16, 23, 36, 37, 148; on Hermeneutics, 157, 173-74, 183
discourse, 194, 199-200; Discourse on Herodotus, 70, 71, 110, 120
Language, 34, 174; on European paintings Herskovitz, M., 8o-81, 166, 176
of Blacks, 6, 8; on history, 27-28, 29, 33, Heusch, Luc de, 142, 144, 177, 182-83
188; on knowledge, 24-28, 41, 190-91; Historical materialism, 30, 178
on Same and Other, 33, 34-35, 42-43, 72 Historicity, 20, 29, 34, 38, 161, 177; African,
Fragmente der griechischen Historiker, Die 176; and anthropology, 29, 38; of the
(Jacoby), 70 Same, 82.
Frazer, James, 28, 182-83 History, 176-77, 179-80, 184, 187-88, 190,
Freud, 166 194-96; Blyden on, 113-14, 123; empha-
Friedell: on legend, 192 sis on Africanism, 6o; during the Enlighten-
Frobenius, 16, 19, 81; African Genesis, 182; ment, 17; Foucault on, 27-28, 29; identi-
Ursprung der Afrikanischen Kulturen, 22- fied with Christianity, 51; Lévi-Strauss on,
23 28-29, 3 3-34; récit pour soi as reconstruct-
Fry, R.: on Negro sculpture, II tion of, 42; as saga and myth, 86, 192-93,
Function, 26-27, 82, 190-91 195
Functionalism, 19, 72, 76, 82, 178,190,194 History of Tanzania, A (Kimambo and
Fyfe, C., 106, 133 Temu), 197
Hobson, J. A., 2
Geertz, C., 33 Hodgen, M. T, 8, 10
General grammar: as system of knowledge, Hodgkin, T, 169-70
24-25 Hollis, M., 66-67
Genesis, African, hypotheses of, 16, 22 Homer: on Black peoples, 110,120
Geographia Generalis (Varenius), 10, 191 Horton, R., 79-80
Gestalteneinheit, 181 Hountondji, P. J., 39-40, 43, 158-6o, 174-
Gnosis: definition of, ix, 186 75; on ethnophilosophy, 158-6o, 162; on
Gnosis, African, ix-x, xi, 23, 183-86, 187, myths of Africanity, 37; on philosophical
188-89,191,198,200 tasks, 38, 157, 165; neo-Marxism, 168;
God: in Bantu philosophy, 139, 148, 149, Sur la philosophie africaine, 158
150 Houphouët-Boigny, 185-86
Godelier, Maurice, 30, 187 Human sciences. See Social and human sci-
Goody, J-, 30, 31-33 ences
Gospel, the, 127, 170. See also Bible
Graft-Johnson, J. W. de, 90 Identity, 9, 59, 62, 131
Gravrand, H., 56 Idowu, E. B., 58, 78, 79
Greek writers: on Africa, 69-71; on blacks,                "if I were a horse" hypothesis, 73
110,120 Imana, 148
Griaule, Marcel, 67-68, 176, 178, 179; Con- Imperialism, 2-3, 117, 86
versations with Ogotemmêê, 141-43, 178; Imperialism: A Study (Hobson), 2.
Dieu d’eau, 67; on the Dogon, 13-15, Incarnation, theology Of, 58-6o, 62
141-44,194 Intelligence, principle of: in Bantu philosophy,
Gutkind, P. C. W, 165 150-51
Gyekye, K., 8o International Congress of Black Writers and
250


--- PAGE 251 ---
Artists (1956), 91, Carnets de Lucien Lévy-Bruhl, 154-55;
International Meeting of Black Writers and Evans-Pritchard on, 73; influence on Tem
Artists (1959), 58 pels, 136; Mentalité primitive, 75-76, 135;
Islam (Mohammedanism), 54, 181; Blyden on prelogism, 28, 72, 82; on primitive men-
on, 114-15, 116-17, 124-26, 127-28,             tality, 135-36
130 Liberation, theology of, 173, 179
I Speak of Freedom (Nkrumah), 95 Liberia, 104,109, 116, 122, 130
Liberia: Past, Present and Future (Blyden), 99
Jablow, A.: on pagans, 49 Liberia's Offering (Blyden), 99, 104,1o6,
Jacoby, E, 70 122-23
Jahn, J., x-xi, 166, 192-94, 195 Life and Maxims of Skandes, The (Sumner,
Jamaa "family" (Christian community), 141 ed.), 202
Jaspers, K., 72, 193 Linguistics, 18,24-26, 171; use in research
Jewsiewicki, B., 197 on Bantu philosophy, 145-46, 147, 150
Journal of African Marxists, 96 51. See also Language
Journal of a Mission (Park), 20 Literary movement: negritude as, 83, 85, 86
Journal of an Expedition up the Tshadda 87
Rivers (Crowther), 49 Literature, African, 36, 91, 169
Jules-Rosette, B., 11-12 Littmann, 201-202
Logic: role in Bantu philosophy, 146-47, 151
Kagame, Alexis, 145-52, 154, 159, 1 82; Phi- "Logic and Ontology" (Wireclu), 162.
losophie Bantu comparée, 145; Phi- Logic of classes, 8o
losophie bantu-rivandaise de l’être, 57-58, Lok, John, 71
145 London, I. D., 36
Kalanda, Mabika, 167, 169 Loving: role in Bantu ethics, 15 o
Kaoze, Stephano, 75 Luba Katanga (people), 5o
Karp, I., 199 Lufuluabo, F. M., 58, 148
Kenyatta, Jomo, 77, 186 Lugard, Sir Frederick, 20,102
Kesteloot, L., 90 Lugbara myth, 143
Kimambo, 1., 197 Lumumba, Patrice, 91
Kingsley, Mary H., 10, 114,126, 131 Ly, A.: on Marxism, 91
Kintu, 147, 149 Lynch, Hollis R.: on Blyden, 98-99,119,
Kinyongo, J., 171 127, 130
Ki-Zerboj, 165, 167 Lyons, C. H., 129
Knowing: in Bantu philosophy, 15 0
Knowledge: Ethiopian sources of, 201-203; MacGaffey, W, 64-65, 75
history Of, 175-86; Lévi-Strauss on, 30-33; McVeigh, M. J., 62
relationship to power, 168; relationship to Magic: relationship to science, 30-31
truth, 41. See also Epistemology Makarakiza, A., 58
Koffi, N., 16o Malebranche, 162, 171
Koran: Blyden on, 125 Malinowski, B., 20, 72, 81-83, 178, 185, 193
Kunst, H. J., 6-7, 8 Malula, Joseph-Albert Cardinal, 61-62
Kuntu, 147 Marginality, 4-5, 6, 197
Marx, 29, 166
Laberthonnière, 162, 171 Marxism, 91, 157, 176-78, 179, 196-97;
Ladrière, J., 174 Africanization of, 92-97; anthropology,
Language, 24-26, 3o, 65-67, 156. See also 184, 187; on colonialism, 3-4; Houn-
Linguistics tondji's espousal of, 168; influence on Af-
Languages, African, 6o, 123, 169; mission- rican thought, 88, 90-91, 165, 170; influ-
aries' and anthropologists' knowledge of, ence on negritude, 83, 85-86; Senghor on,
65-67 93-94; on thought, 187, 188-89
Langue,190,199 Maximum Illud (Benedict XV), 53
Leach, E. R.: on myth, 143 Mazrui, A. A., 169
Leopold (king): Blyclen on, 100-101,103 Mbiti, J. S., 5 6, 79, 140, 15 z
Lévi-Strauss, Claude, 36, 37, 42-43, 143, Meek, R. L., 17
177, 179; on history, 28-19, 33-35, 180, Meester de Ravenstein, P. de, 55- 56
195; Mythologiques, 35; Origin of Table Meninas, Las (Velasquez), 6
Manners, 35; on the savage mind, 23, 3 0- Mentalité primitive, La (Lévy-Bruhl), 75-76,
33; on thought, 187, 188-89; Tristes Trop- 135
iques, 33, 35 Metadynamics, 149
Lévy-Bruhl, L., 19, 69, 75-76, 135, 189-90; Metaphilosophy, 16o
251


--- PAGE 252 ---
Metaphysics, 142, 147, 149, 1.58 Neocolonialism, 176
Michelet, Raymond, 88, 89 Neo-Marxism, 166, 168
Mill, John Stuart,101 New Testament Background in an African
Miller, C. L., 69 Background (Mbiti), 152
Mind of Africa, The (Abraham), 79 Ngindu, A., 3 9-40, 4 3, 162, 171
Missionaries, 45-47, 59, 64-67, 81,127-28; Ngouabi, M., 91-92
discourses Of, 44, 47-54 Nicholas V (pope): Dum Diversas, 45
Mobutu, l85 Nietzsche, 41, 42, 43
Model, 179-80, 190, 19,_92 Nkombe, 0., 8o, 173-74
Modernism, 16z Nkrumah, K., 88, 9L, 92-, 1184; compared
Modernity, 5, 51, 89, 189, 192; theology of, with Btyden, 98, 133; Consciencism, 79,
179; versus tradition, 197, 198 91, 95; 1 Speak of Freedom, 95
Modernization, 40, 169, 174-75 Noble savage: myths of, 110, 119
Mohammedanism. See Islam Non-Bourgeois Theology (Donders), 55
Monotheism, 58 Norm, 26, 43, 190-911, 192
Monteil, V., 181 Nothingness: opposed to being, 140
Moslems: views of pagans, 121. See also Is- Ntedinkaj, 164, 171
lam Ntu, 147-49
Mots, la Mort, les Sorts, Les (Favret-Saada): Nusco, L., 202
quoted, 13 5 Nyamuzinda, 148
Mujynya, E. N. C., 147, 148-49 Nyerere, J., 91, 92, 9 4-9 5, 185
Mulago, V., 56, 79, 159; on Bantu philoso
phy, 147-48, 149; Cahiers des religions af- Obenga, T., 39-40, 165, 167
ricaines, 171 Oduyoye, M. A., 5 9, 171
Mulattoes: Blyden on,119 Okere, T., 39-4o, 62, 173-74
Muntu, 147, 157 Olumide, L. J., 78-79
Muntu (Jahn), 192 Onibredane, A., 166
Murdock, G. P., 13 Ontological hermeneutics, 174
Mveng, E., 36, 39-40, 58, 70, 171-73; On                       Ontology, 157-58; African philosophy as,
social and human sciences, 37, 38 151; in Bantu philosophy, 138-41, 146
Mystical participation, law of, 136 49; in Christian theology, 171, 174; in
Myth, 14-15, 30-32, 34, 37; relationship to Dogon thought, 142. See also Being
primitive philosophy, 142-45 Oral literature, 181-82.
Mythologiques (Lévi-Strauss), 35 Oral philosophy, 75
Oral tradition, 161, 176
Nakedness: as pagan trait, 49-50 Order, principle of, 24-25,27
Nationalism, African, 78, 169-70; Blyden as Origin of Language, The (Rousseau), 72.
founder of, 98, 117-18; Blyden on, 117, Origin of Table Manners (Lévi-Strauss), 35
123, 128-29; negritude as element of, 88, Ortega y Gasset, José, 188
89-90 Other, the, xi, 2.2, 34-35, 177, 196; an
Nationalism, European, 115-16, 132, thropotogist as, 33; in European con-
Nations nègres et culture (Diop), 89, 96-97 sciousness, 20-21; right to be, 63; and the
Natural history: as system of knowledge, 24- Same, 80-82-, 96,180-81; in Senghor's
25 philosophy, 94
Natural History (Buffon), 119 Otherness (alterity), 79, 178, 179, 184, 192;
Nduka, 0., 8o in African philosophy, 151, 152, 157; in
Negritude, 38, 83, 86-87, 88, 132-33, 185; contemporary thought, 162, 166-67, 170,
in Bantu vision of world, 79; Blyden as 171; in discourse, 72, 8o-81; and history,
precursor of, 98, 131; in contemporary 190, 195; ideologies for, 86, 87-92.; mis-
thought, 166; emphasis on, in Christianity, sionaries on, 44, 59; ordering of, in Euro-
58, 6o; Horton on, 80; influence on Af- pean art, 9, 12; romantic philosophies of,
rican philosophy, 152, 158; literature of, 132
36, 83, 85, 86-87; Sartre's role in, 83-87;
Senghor on, 92., 91-94; as strategy, 194 Padmore, G., 96
Négritude et négrologues (Adotévi), 167 Paganism, 20, 49-50, 58, 63; Blyden on, 121,
Negro: Blyden on, 111, 114, 118 l24-25, 128
Negro-Americans. See Black Americans Pagans, 47, 48, 49-50, l112,121
Negro in Ancient History, The (Blyden), 99, Pan-African Congresses, 9o
100,109 Pan-Africanism, 88, 131, 133, 194; Blyden
Negro personality, 131. See also Black person- on, 114, 117-18, 130, 133
ality Panafricanism or Communism (Padmore), 96
252


--- PAGE 253 ---
Park, Mungo, 20, 120 Racism, 85; in Blyden's theories, 104-105,
Paroles,190, 199 1o6,119, 129-30
Path to Nigerian Freedom (Awolowo), 9 5 Radin, P., 15 4
P'Bitek, 0., 140 Reason, 51, 136
Peau noire, masques blancs (Fanon), 85, 92 Recherches philosophiques Africaines, 160
Person, Y., 166 Récit pour soi: propounded by Eboussi-
Phenomenological method, use of, 174 Boulaga, 42, 169
Philology, 18, 25-26 Reduction, 51, 66, 68
Pbilosophie Bantu comparée, La (Kagame), Reformation, the, 45
145 Refutation, 51, 52-53
Philosophie Bantu-rwandaise de l’être, La Relatione del Reame di Congo (Pigafetta), 8
(Kagame), 57-58, 145 Relativism, 86, 131, 171; in Blyden's theories,
Philosophy: Crahay's definition of, 156 113-14, 133; in Lévi-Strauss’s thought, 33
Philosophy, African, ix, 38, 41-43, 74, 152; Religion: Blyden on, 120, 124-28. See also
contemporary aspects of, 153-86. See also Christianity; Islam; Religions, African
Bantu philosophy Religions, African, 56, 58, 59-61, 63, 76, 88;
Philosophy, primitive,135-45 Blyden on, 124-25; and Christian the-
Philosophy, Western, 41-43, 154, 159, 161, onlogy, 171; ethnocentric theories on, 73
168; compared with primitive philosophy, 74
135-36, 138, 139, 140, 150;methods used Rembrandt: depiction of blacks, 9
in study of African philosophy, 145-47, Renascent Africa (Azikiwe), 90
152 Revelation, 58, 141, 173
Philosophy and an African Culture (Wiredu), Ricoeur, Paul, 19-2l, 34, 57, 183-84, 195
161,163 Rigaud, Hyacinthe: depiction of blacks, 9
Pierre Teilhard de Chardin et la politique afri- Ripa, Cesare: African Allegory,12
caine (Senghor), 131 Ritual, 14-15, 144
Pigafetta, Filippo, 8 Roman Catholicism, 39-40, 137, 162;
Planet of the Apes (Boulle): quoted, 1, 5-6, Blyden on, 126-27; members in Africa,
24,28,35-36,44,64,83,145,I53 54-55; missionaries, 45-46, 48; perspec-
Plant domestication, African, 13 tive on traditional religions, 58-59, 61-62
Pliny, 70-71 Romano, F. Giovanni, 48-49, 50-51, 52, 53
Political philosophy, 161 Roman writers: on Africa, 69-71; on blacks,
Political power, 16, 36,91, 165, 170, 185 110, 120
Polytheism, 58 Rossini, Carlo Conti, 202
Pour la revolution Africaine (Fanon), 92 Rousseau, I, 72, 119
Power, 8, 51 Rubens, Peter Paul: depiction of blacks, 9
Prelogism, 72, 82, 136, 155 Rule, 26, 43, 190-91, 192, 193
"Présence Africaine," 86, 157, 178
Prêtres noirs’ s interrogent, 56, 176
Primitive Man as a Philosopher (Radin), 154 Sachs, 1., 4
Primitive (savage) mind: Lévi-Strauss on, 30- Sagala: in Dogon cosmology, 13-14, 15
33; Lévy-Bruhl on, 135-36 Sagan, Carl: on Dogon astronomy, 13-15
Primitiveness, 63, 72, 75-76, 82, 108, 191; Salkin, P, 76
Blyden on, iio; as historical invention, Salvation, theology of, 52-54, 66
190, and paganism, 20; versus civilization, Same, the, 20, 22, 177, 198; history of, 28,
197 33, 34-35, 177, 18o; identity of, in Euro-
Primitivism: and African philosophy, 151 pean art, 12; and the Other, 8o-82, 96,
Primitivist strategies, 195 18o-81, 199; and violence, 43, 196
Production: modes of, 196-97; processes of, Sameness, 72, 83
4, 170; relations of, 60, 170, 189, 196 Sartre, J.-P., 83-87, 90-91; Black Orpheus,
Prophetism, 116, 173 83-85, 90-91, 92, 132; Lévi-Strauss on,
Propos d'une theologie africaine, Le 34,35
(Tshibangu), 171 Saul, John, 197-98
Protestant churches, 19, 45, 49, 54, 55, 127 Saussure, F. de, i go
Psychology, 26, 73, 149-50, 166 Savage (primitive) mind: Lévi-Strauss on, 30
33; Lévy-Bruhl on, 135-36
Quakers: in Kenya, 55 Savages, 2-0, 42, 47, 75, 103; Crowther on,
49; Enlightenment views on, 17, 7z; ex-
Race: Blyden on, 110, 114, 115-16, 117, plorers’ discourse on, 13, 16
118-zo, 127, 12-9-30, 131-32; European  Scheub, H., 182
views Of, 107, 108 Schmidt, W.,58, 176, 185, 194; concept of
253


--- PAGE 254 ---
Urmonotheismus, 76, 81; Ursprung der Taboo-laws: in the Bantu community, 150
Gottesidee, 76 Taylor, J. V., 54
Scholastic grids: used in analysis of Bantu Teilhard de Chardin, Pierre, 94
philosophy, 146-50 Tempels, Placide Frans, 48, 50-54, 136-42,
Schuchardt, H., 18 177-78, 179; Bantu Philosophy, 5o, 67
Schulter, Andreas: Africa,12 136-42, 144; on colonization, 67-68; con-
Schumpeter, J. A., 2-3 temporary philosophers on, 153-56, 157
Science, 16, 65, 123, 165; relationship to 58, 159; Kagame on, 145-46
magic, 30-31; role in modernization, 169- Temu, A., 197
70, 174-75 Terra nullius, 45, 46
Science of the abstract, 30, 31-32 Theodicy: in Bantu philosophy, 146, 149
Science of the concrete, 30, 31-32 Theology: contemporary African views, 59
Sculpture, African, II 63, 17-74, 178-79; epistemological de
Second Order, 163-64, 171 bate on, 164-65
Selected Letters of Edward Wilmot Blyden Theories of Primitive Religion (Evans-Prit-
(Lynch, ed.), 98 chard), 73
Self: récit pour soi as way to, 42; relationship Theuws, J. A., 182
to the Other, 181 Thornton, R., 15-16
Semiology, 183 Tidy, M., 169
Senghor, L. S., 43, 86, 184-85; on Blyden, Tiv mythology, 143
98-99, 131; compared with Blyden, 123, Touré, Ahmed Sekou, 91, 92
132; and negritude, 83-84, 85, 88, 92, 93- Tourist art, 11, 12
94 TOwa, M-, 39-40, 43, 157, 158, 16o, 165
Shorter, A., 73-74 Towards Nationhood in West Africa (Graft
Signification, 26-27, 37, 41, 82-, 190-91, Johnson), 90
193, 195 Toward the Decolonization of African Liter-
Sigui ritual: and Dogon cosmology, 14-15 ature (Chinweizu, Jemie and Mudobuike),
Silent philosophy, 152 168-69
Sirius and Sirius B, 13-15 Tradition, 4, 76-77, 169, 189, 191-92; role
Slavery 9, 58-59, 108, 169; Blyden on, too, in ethnophilosophy, 153; versus modernity,
103, 105, 119, 132; under Islam, 114-15 197, 198
Slave trade, 10, 100, 114-15, 119 Traite de metaphysique (Voltaire), 119
Smet, A. J., 74, 136, 141, 160-61 Transhistoric thought, 187, 188-89, 198
Snowden, E M., 69 Travelers' reports, 69-72, 189
Social and human sciences, 17-18, 37, 61, Treatise of Zär'y Yacob and of Walda
79, 176, 179-80; contemporary African Heywat, The (Sumner, ed.), 163, 20I-202,
philosophy on, 164, 165-70, 174-75; 203
Foucault on, 26, 27; Lévi-Strauss on, 28; Tristes Tropiques (Lévi-Strauss), 33, 35
pluralization of, 192. Truth, 41, 475 51, 165; will to, 15, 27, 41, 63
Social Anthropology and Other Essays Tshiamalenga, N., 140, 149, 16o-61, 173
(Evans-Pritchard), 67-68 74,183
Social classes: gap between, 185 Tshibangu, T., 164, 171-72
Socialism, 91-92, 93-95 Turgot, A. R. J., 6
Sociology, 73, 166, 176, 178, 179-8o, 184
Slier: role Of, 46-47
Sodipo, J. 0., 3 9-40, 161 Ugirashebuja, 0., 43, 162, 171
Ujamaa (communalism), 91, 95
Sow, I. E. B., 18, 39-40 Unconscious, 34, 35, 37-38
Spencer, 189-90 Universal civilization: Senghor on, 94
Springer, Bartolomäus, 6-7 Universalism: in Kagame's philosophy, 151
Strain theory: Blyden's ideology as, 131-32
Untu, 79
Structuralism, 19, 35, 177-78, 179-80, 87, Urmonotheismus, 76, 81
198-99
Sumner, C.: editions of Ethiopian treatises, Ursprung der Afrikanischen Kulturen (Fro-
benius), 22-23
163,201-2O3 Ursprung der Gottesidee, Die (Schmidt), 76
Sur la pbilosopbie africaine (Hountondli),
158
Surnaturel et la Nature dans la mentalite Van der Kerken, G., 74
primitive, Le (Lévy-Bruhl), 135 Vanneste, A., 164
Synchrony, 32, 177-78, 189, 194 Van Overbergh, C., 74
Syncretic churches, 54 Van Parys, J. M., 163, 202.
System, 26, 43,190-91 Vansina, J., 39, 8o-81, 166, 176,194
254


--- PAGE 255 ---
Varenius, 10, 191 Weber, M., 17-18, 192
Vatican Council, First: on curse of Ham, 46 Weltanschauungen, xi, 33, 74, 75, 135, 175;
Vaughan, A. T.,129-30 and African philosophy, 154; of the Bantu,
Velasquez, Diego: depiction of blacks, 6, 9 149, 155-56; described by an
Verhaegen, B., 167, 178-79 thropologists, 152
Veyne, Paul, 17-18, 2-3, 83, 18o, 198; on Western Sciences: What For? (Buakasa), 174
history, 192-93, 196, 198 West Indian Blacks: Blyden on, 105, 1117, 130
Vindication of the Negro Race, A (Blyden), White, H., 33
99, 108 Williams, G., 16-17, 46
Vital force. See Force Will to truth, 15, 27, 41, 63
Voltaire, 72, 119 Wiredu, K., 39-40, 161-62, 163, 168
Von Däniken, E., 15 Women: new African theology on, 179
Wagner, R., 27, 67, 184 Yai, 0., 16o
Wakefield, E. G.,101
Wealth, theory of, 24-25 Zoungrana, Paul Cardinal,
255

